NAMOVE ERIT ILLE MIHI and VIRE ECLO^PAI



portrait of Michael Nostradamus MICHAEL NOSTRADAMVS

EX ANTIQVITATE RENASCOR



Gallica quem genuit relinetque Britannica lellus Callinf Herme^s quicquid in
art fuit



THE TRUE PROPHECIES OR Prognostications OF Michael Nostradamus, PHYSICIAN TO
Henry II. Francis II. and Charles IX.

KINGS of FRANCE And one of the best ASTRONOMERS that ever were.

A WORK full of CURIOSITY and LEARNING.

Translated and Commented by THEOPHILUS GARENCIERES, Doctor in Physic Colleg.
Land.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by John Salusbury at the Sign of the Atlas
in Cornhill, 1685.

To his most Honored Friend NATHANIEL PARKER OF Grayes-Inne, Esquire THEOPHILUS de
GARENCIERES, D. Med. Colleg. Land.
Humbly Dedicateth this Book.

Namque erit ille mihi, etc. Virg EccI. 1.

TO THE Courteous Reader.
Reader,
BEfore thou go on further to the perusing of this Work, thou art humbly
entreated by the Author, to forgive him his Anglicisme; for being born a
Forreigner, and having had no body to help him to the polishing of it, for
several reasons, it cannot be expected he should please thine Ears, so much as
he may perhaps do thy Fancy. Every Exotic Plant can hardly become Domestical
under one or two Generations: Besides that, the Crabbedness of the Original in
his own Idiome, can scarce admit a Polite Eloquency in another. The very
Ancient English Language in this refined Age, is become both obsolete and
unintelligible, as we may see in Chaucer, Gower, and others. If you add to
this, that the Authors Nation has been always famous for its Civility to
those that were Strangers to their Language, as not only to abstain from
laughing at them when they spoke amiss, but also in redressing them charitably
to the best of their power. I may probably expect you will measure me with the
same measure, as you would be if you were in my case.

As for the Errataes of the Press, I could not help them, being out of Town
most part of the time that the Book was a Printing; when you meet with any, I
hope your Charitable Pen will either mend or obliterate them, and not lay
another man's fault upon me, who neither for pride nor ostentation undertook
this laborious Work, but that I might give some Satisfaction and Recreation to
the Learned and Curious, who have had a longing for it ever since its Birth.

Farewell.
IN Explicatum a doctissimo sagacissimoque Viro Domino De GARENCIERES FAMOSI
Nostradami Vaticinium.
ABdita qui medici legit praesagia Vatis,
Non valet hoc quisquam pandere carmen, ait.
Falleris, en Medicus merito quoque nomine Vates,
Invia luminibus permeat antra novis.
S^d minus ingenio tantum mirere laborent
Id succisivo tempore fecit opus.
Petrus Cotterean.

Aliud.
PRaeteritos in vate tuo cognoscere casus
Vix licet; ast etiam nota futura tibi.
Si potes e mediis lucem proferre tenebris;
Ipsa metallornm semina te-ne latent?
Nulla tuum fugiunt naturae arcana cerebrum,
Per quem Nostradami Pythica verba patent.
Idem.

Perenni Famae Doctissimi Viri Theophili de Garencieres Doctoris Medici Colleg.
Land. de Interpretatione NOSTRADAMI Fatidici Tetrastichon hoc dicavit.
Dudleyus, dimidia pars ipsius animae.
QUae prinmus fecit, facit illa secundus Apollo,
Conjungens medicis oracula sacra triumphis.
Quis major, rogitas? facile est discerncre noris
Si Latonigenae cessare oracula Phoebi.
By the same, To the Author of this, and a more Excellent Work.
Mystically.
THe God of Arts that gives thee Light, as clear
As his, that thou might be his Agent here
In all his Secrets; courts thee to go on,
Till thou have made thy self another Sun.
Aeternum vivant si vera Oracula Phoebi
Nostradami vivent; and Patris illa mei.;
Petrus.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
BEfore I speak any thing of the Author, or of his Works, I think it convenient
to speak something of my self, and of my intention in setting out this
Translation, with my Annotations.

The Reputation that this Book has amongst all the Europeans, since its first
coming out, which was in the year 1555. and the curiosity that from time to
time the learned have had to see the Mysteries contained in it, unfolded: is a
sufficient warrant for my undertaking.

Many better Pens (I confess) could have performed this work with better
success, but not with greater facility than I, having from my youth been
conversant with those that pretended or endeavered to know something in it.
Otherwise, it would have been impossible for a man of my profession to wade
through it. This Book was the first after my Primmer, wherein I did learn to
read, it being then the Custom in France, about the year 1618. to initiate
Children by that Book; First, because of the crabbidness of the words;
Secondly, that they might be acquainted with the old and absolete French, such
as is now used in the English Law; and Thirdly, for the delightfulness and
variety of the matter, so that this Book in those days was printed every year
like an Almanac, or a Primer for Children. From that time, without any other
Study than reading of History, and observing the events of the world, and
conversing with those that made it their Study, (some of which were like to run
mad about it) I have attained to so much Knowledge, as to bring it into a
Volume.

The Book is written in the Nature of Prophecies, digested into old French
Verses, most of which are very hard to be understood, and others impossible at
all, whether the Author did affect obscurity, or else wanted the faculty to
express himself, which is the cause that it could not be rendered into English
Verses, it being troublesome enough to be understood in Prose, as the Reader
will find. That Is the reason that I have translated it almost word for word, to
make it as plain as I could; as also because the Reader (if curious of it) may
benefit himself in the knowledge of the French Tongue, by comparing the English
and French together. The rest that can be said upon this subject, you shall
find either in the Authors Life, or in the Appology made for him.

And because I have told you before, that many have been like to run mad by
over-studying these, and other Prophecies, give me leave to give you this
advice, that in vain, or at least without any great profit, thou shall bestow
thy time, care, and study upon it: for which I will give thee the chief
reasons, that have dissuaded me from it.

The first is, that the thing it self, which you may think to understand, is
not certain in it self; because the Author disguiseth it in several manners,
sometimes speaking a double sense, as that of the ancient Oracle.

Aio te Aeacida Rontanos vincere posse.

Which is to be understood two ways, and cannot be determinated, till the event
of it be past.

It is true, that the Author does mark so many particular Circumstances, that
when the thing is come to pass, every one may clearly see that he pretended to
Prophecy that particular thing. And besides, he does sometimes deliver the
thing in so obscure terms, that without a peculiar Genius, it is almost
impossible to understand it.

The second is, that though the Prophecy be true in it self, yet no body
knows, neither the time, nor how: For example, he plainly foretells, that
the Parliament of England should put their King to death; nevertheless no body
could tell, nor when, nor how, till the thing was come to pass, nor what King
it should be, till we had seen it.

The third is, that he marketh the times with Astrological terms, viz when such
and such Planets, shall be in such and such Signs; but as those Planets are
often here, and go out of it, and come there again no certain judgment can be
made of it.

The fourth is, that many times he gives some peculiar Circumstances to those
he speaks of, which may be found in others: Thus the Royal first born might
have been applied to Lewis the XIII. to Lewis the XIV. to the first born of
Philip the II. and Philip the III. King of Spain, and to Kings of England,
Father and Son. Nevertheless we find that this word Royal first born, was
intended for Henry IV. Grandfather on his Mothers side, as we shall show
hereafter. This being so, it cannot be expounded, but after the event.

The fifth is, that the knowledge of future things, belongs to God alone, and
no body can pretend by any study, to have a certain acquisition of it in all
its Circumstances.

The sixth is, that the orders of Gods providence, which cause the several
events in all States, will not permit that men should have a public notion of
his designs, sometimes he reveals them to his Servants, or to some particular
man as he pleases, but he will not have them to be known among the common sort
of men.

The seventh, is the experience we have had or many, who pretending to
understand the Author, have made a quantity of false Prophecies, expounding the
Stanza's according to their fancy, as if God had given them the same
understanding that he gave the Author, and what ought to confirm us more in
this point, is, that they have expounded some Prophecies, as if they were to
come to pass, which were past already, by which we see the the darkness of
humane wit, who without authority pretends to bite into the forbidden fruit
of knowledge.

The eighth is, that this knowledge is no way profitable for the Vulgar;
because those things being decreed by God, they shall come to pass without
forceing our liberty, nor hindering the contingency of sublunary things, where
we must observe that the Prophecies which were revealed to men, are many times
conditional, as we see in that of Jona^ against Ninive, but those that they
have left in writing for the times that should come after them, are absolutely
true, and shall infallibly come to pass, as they have foretold them. This no
ways hinders, but God may reveal some secrets of his to private men, for
their benefit, and that of their friends, without imparting it to the Vulgar,
who may be, should laugh at them.

The ninth is, that God has peculiarly reserved to himself the knowledge of
times. Daniel, by a special favor, knew the end of the Babylonian Captivity,
and the time of the Messiah's birth, and yet the interpreters can scarce yet
expound clearly the meaning of the seventy weeks of Daniel, and we see, that
since 1600. years ago, holy men, from age to age, have foretold the proximity
of Doomsday, and the coming of Antichrist.

The tenth is, that the foretelling of future things in this Author, is for the
most part included in business of State, and one might beguilty of a criminal
temerity, if he would discover things that concern us not, and the concealing
of which, is commended by all prodent persons, seeing that we owe respect,
love, and submission, to those that bear rule over us.

For these reasons (dear Reader) I would not have thee entangle thy self in the
pretentions of knowing future things. If you have light concerning them, keep
thine own secret, and make use of it for thy self: Preserve peace, and let the
Almighty govern the World: for he can turn all things to his Glory, and may
when he pleases, raise up some Wits that will make known unto us, what we
desire, without any further trouble to our selves* Before I make an end, I
cannot but acquaint thee for gratitude sake, of my Obligation to several
persons, which have lent me Books, to help me toward the finishing of this
work, as namely that worthy Gentleman, and the Honor of his profession Mr.
Francis Bernard, Apothecary to St. Bartholemews Hospital, and Mr. Philip
Auberton Gentleman, belonging to the Right Honorable the Earl of Bridgwater.

Farewell.
THE LIFE OF Michael Nostradamus, Physician in Ordinary to HENRY the II. and
CHARLES the IX. Kings of France.
MIchael Nostradamus, the most renowned and famous Astrologer, that has been
these many Ages, was born in St. Remy, a Town of Provence, in the year 1503.
upon a Thursday, the 14th of December, about noon. His father was James
Nostradamus, a Notary of the said Town, his Mother was Renata of St. Remy,
whose Grandfathers by the Fathers and Mothers side, were men very skillful, in
Mathematick and Physic, one having been Physician to Renatus, King of
Jerusalem, and Sictly, and Earl of Provence, and the other Physician to John,
Duke of Calabria, Son to the said Renatus, whence comes that our Author says
in his Commentaries, that he has received from hand to hand the Knowledge of
Mathematics, from his ancient Progenitors. After the death of his great
Grandfather by the Mothers side, who first gave him a slight tincture, and made
him in love with the Mathematics, he was sent to School to Avignon. After that
he went to Mount Pelier, to study Philosophy and Physic, till a great Plague
coming, he was compelled to go to Narbonne, Thoulouse, and Bourdeaux, where he
first began to practice, being then about 22 years of age. Having lived four
years in those parts, he went back again to Monpelier, to get his degrees,
which he did with a great deaal of applause. Going to Thoulouse, he past
through Again, where Julius Caesar Scaliger stayed him, with whom he was very
familiar and intimately acquainted, though they fell out afterward; there he
took to wife a very honorable Gentlewoman, by whom he had two Children, a Son
and a Daughter, all which being dead, and seeing himself alone, he resolved to
retire himself into Provence his Native Country. After he had gone to
Marscille, he went to Aix, where the Pa^liament of Provence sits, and was
there kept three years at the City Charges; because of the violent Plague that
raged then in the year 1546. as you may read in the Lord of Launay's Book,
called the Theater of the World, who describes that Plague according to the
informations our Author gave him. Thence he went to Salon de Craux, a City
distant from Aix one days Journey, and in the middle way between Avignon and
Marseille; there he Married his second Wife Anna Ponce Genelle, by whom he had
three Sons and one Daughter, the eldest was Michael Nostradamus, who has
written some pieces of Astrology, Printed at Paris in the year 1563.

The second was Caesar Nostradamus, who has deserved to be numbered among the
French Historians, by reason of the great Volume be has written of Provence.

The third was a Capuchine Friar. Caesar did insert in his History the
propagation of that Order in Provence. The fourth was a Daughter.

Nostradamus having found by experience that the perfect knowledge of Physic
depends from that of Astrology, he addicted himself to it, and as this
science wants no allurement, and that besides his Genius he had a peculiar
disposition and inclination to it; he made such a progress in it, that he has
deserved the Title of the most illustrious one in France, insomuch that making
some Almanacks for recreation sake, he did so admirably hit the conjuncture of
events, that he was sought for far and near.

This success was the cause of an extraordinary diminution of his fame; for the
Printers and Booksellers seeing his same, did print and vent abundance of false
Almanacks under his name for lucre sake, whence it came that his reputation
suffered by it, and was the cause that the Lord Pavillon wrote against him, and
that the Poet Jodele made this bitter Distichon.

Nostra damus cum falsa damus, nam fallere nostrumest,
Et cum falsa damus, nil nisi Nostra damus.
To which may be answered.

Nostra damus cum verba damus quae Nostradamus dat,
Nam quacunque dedit nil nisi vera dedit.
Or thus

Vera damus cum verba damus quae Nostradamus dat,
Sed cum Nostra damus, nil nisi falsa damus.
Nevertheless the Beams of Truth did shine through the Clouds of Calumny; for
he was singularly esteemed of by the Grandees, Queen Katharine of Medicis, who
had a natural inclination to know furture things.

And Henry the II King of France, who sent for him to come to the Court in the
year 1556. and having had private conference with him about things of great
concernment, sent him honorably back again with many gifts. He went from Salon
to the Court upon the 14 of July in the year 1555. and came to Paris upon the
15 of August. As Soon as he was come to Town, the Lord Constable of Montmorency
went to see him at his Inn, and presented him to the King, who received him
with much satisfaction, and commanded that his lodging should be at the Palace
of the Cardinal of Bourbon Archbishop of Sens.

There he was taken with the Gout for ten or twelve days, after which his
Majesty sent him one hundred Crowns in Gold in a Velvet Purse, and the Queen as
much. Their Majesty's desired him to go to Blios to see the Princes their
Children, and to tell them his opinion of them. It is certain that he did not
tell them what he thought, considering the Tragical end of those three Princes,
viz. Francis the II. Charles the IX. and Henry the III.

Having been so much honored at Court, he went back again to Salon, where he
made an end of his last Centuries, two years after he dedicated them to the
King Henry the II. in the year 1557. and in his Luminary Epistle discovers
unto him the future events that shall happen from the Birth of Lewis the XIV.
now Reigning, till the coming of Antichrist.

While he was at Salon he received there the Duke of Savoy, and the Lady
Margaret of France, Sister to Henry the II. who was to Marry the said Duke
according to the treaty of the general Peace made at Cambresis, both
entertained him very familiarly, and honored him often with their presence.
The Duke came in October and the Lady in December.

When Charles the IX. went a progress through his Kingdom, he came into
Provence, and did fail not to go to Salon to visit our Author, who in the name
of the Town went to salute him, and make a Speech, this was in the year 1564.
the 17 of November.

The extraordinary satisfaction that the King and the Queen Mother received
from him was such, that being both at Lion, they sent for him again, and the
King gave him 200 Crowns in Gold, and the Queen almost as much, with the
quality of Physician in Ordinary to the King, with the Salaries and profits
thereunto appertaining. Being come back to Salon he lived about 16 Months
longer, and died upon the 2 of July 1566. in his Climacterical year of 63.
having all his Senses about him: His Disease was a Gout at first, which turned
into a Dropsy; the time of his death it seems was known to him; for a friend
of his witnesses, that at the end of June in the said year he had written with
his own hand upon the Ephemerides of John Stavius those Latin words, Hic prope
mors est; that is, near here is my death, and the day before his death that
friend of his having waited on him till very late took his leave, saying, I
shall see you again to morrow morning, you shall not see me alive when the Sun
rises, which proved true. He died a Roman Catholic, having received all his
Sacraments, and was solemnly buried in the Church of the Franciscan Friars at
Salon, on the left hand of the Church door, where his Widow erected him a
Marble Table fastened in the Wall with this Epitaph, with his Figure to the
Life, and his Arms above it.

The Inscription of his EPITAPH is in imitation of that of Titus Livius, and is
thus.

D. M.

Ossa clarissimi Michaelis Nostradami, unius omnium pene mortalium digni, cujus
Divino calamo totius Orbis ex astrorum influxu futuri eventus conscriberentur.
Vixit annos LXII. menses VI. dies X. Obiit. Salonae CI^ I^LXVI. Anna Pontia
Gemella, conjugi optimo. V. E.

Which may be rendered thus:

Here lies the Bones of the most famous Nostradamus, one who among Men has
deserved by the opinion of all, to set down in writting with a Quill almost
Divine, the future Events of all the Universe, caused by the Celestial
influences; he lived 62 years 6. Months and 10. days, he died at Salon, in the
year 1566.

O Posterity do not grudge at his rest.

Anna Pontia Gemella wishes to her most loving Husband the true Happiness.

He had a Brother named John Nostradamus, famous for several Works that he has
witten, the Catalogue of which is in the Book of Mr. du Maine de la Croix,
Entitled, the Library.

As for our our Author, he has left several Works, among which is a Book of
Receipts, for the preservation of health, Printed at Poitiers, in the year 1556.

Another concerning the means of beautifying the Face and the Body, that was
Printed at Antwerp by Plantin in the year 1557. which he Dedicated to his
Brother John Nostradamus, an Attorney at the Parliament of Aix.

Besides this, he Translated from Latin into French the Paraphases of Galen,
upon the Exhortation of Menedotus, which was Printed at Lion by Antony du
Rhosne, in the year 1557.

But before we conclude, it will not be amiss to give some recreation to the
Reader, by relating a merry passage that happened to Nostradamus being in
Lorrain, for being in the Castle of Faim, belonging to the Lord of Florinville,
and having in cure the Mother of the said Lord; it chanced one day that they
both walking in the Yard, there was two little Piggs, one white, and the other
black, whereupon the Lord enquired of Nostradamus in jest, what should become
of these two Piggs? he answered presently, we shall eat the black, and the Wolf
shall eat the white.

The Lord Florinville intending to make him a Liar, did secretly command the
Cook to dress the white for Supper; the Cook then killed the white, dressed it,
and spitted it ready to be roasted when it should be time; In the mean time
having some business out of the Kitchen, a young tame Wolf came in, and eat up
the Buttocks of the white Pig, that was ready to be roasted; the Cook coming in
the mean time, and fearing least his Master should be angry, took the black
one, killed it, and dressed it, and offered it at Supper. Then the Lord thinking
he had got the Victory, not knowing what was befallen, said to Nostradamus,
well Sir, we are eating now the white Pigg, and the Wolf shall not touch it. I
do not believe it (said Nostradamus) it is the black one that is upon the
Table. Presently the Cook was sent for, who confessed the accident, the
relation of which was as pleasing to them as any meat.

In the same Castle of Faim, he told many that in a little Hill that was near
the Castle, there was a Treasure hidden, which should never be found, if it
were sought with design, but that it should be discovered when the Hill should
be dug for some other intent. There is a great probability in this
prediction, for there was an ancient Temple built upon it, and when they dig
there, many times several Antiquities are found. All France tells several
Histories foretold by the Author, but I am unwilling to write any thing without
good warrant. His Stanza's are sufficient to prove the extraordinary Talent he
had in foretelling future things.

APOLOGY FOR Michael Nostradamus.
CHAP. I.
IT is not unusual for Calumny to follow the best Wits, and those whom God has
endowed with so extraordinary Talent, upon weak and slight grounds. It is not
also unusual for Men to side easier with calumny against innocent persons, then
with those truths that justify them; therefore no body ought to wonder, if
Michael Nostradamus has been so much cried down and defamed by several
Authors, being in the number of those extraordinary persons, whom God had
privileged with that grace so much desired by curious Men, viz. the knowledge
of Future events.

Besides that, there was four things in him, which might have been the grounds
of this diffamation.

The first was the vulgar life which he led in the Roman Catholic Religion,
which seemed to bear no proportion with such an extraordinary favor of God.

The second was his application to judicial Astrology, which is condemned by
many learned Men, and detested by those that pretend to ignorant devotion.

The third was a suspicion brought by his enemies, and many devout persons in
his time, that he was a Negromancer, and had samiliarity with the Augel of
darkness.

The fourth was the obscurity of his Stanza's, which was made worse by the
enormous faults of those that first Copied them, and by the carelessness of the
Printers.

CHAP. II.
How the first Objection has caused the Author to be reputed a false Prophet.

IN consequence of the first Objection, calumny has endeavored to place him
among the false Prophers, because scarce any body can persuade himself, that
there being among the Faithful so many Illustrious persons in Holiness and
Learning, the Holy Ghost would have made choice of a common person, and to
reveal him so many rare secrets, concerning the future Estate of his Church,
and of those Kingdoms that acknowledge her for their Mother, seeing that the
Holy Scriptures show us, that the knowledge of future things (chiefly if it be
extraordinary in its extent) is a special Privilege wherewith God honors
his most faithful Servants.

And to say truth, when the Holy Fathers and the Interpreters of the Scripture
speak of the Prerogatives of the Apostle St. John, they make the chiefest to be
that by which being full of Prophetical Spirit, he foretold the future Estate
of the Church; and in the Old Testament, so many Prophets were so many Miracles
and Prodigies of Holiness, and the only name of Prophet in the Scripture is the
most glorious Title that is given to those that were Gods most faithful
Servants.

If we find in the Scripture that Balaam has Prophesied notwithstanding his
persidiousness, and that the High Priest Cai^phas, notwithstanding his wicked
design of murdering Christ, has also Prophesied; it was only for a few things,
and in such cases where God would singularly show forth his Glory, by those
that would have smothered it.

How can we then believe the same of Nostradamus, who had not so much as an
extraordinary atom of Christian piety, by which he might have been so much
priviledg'd of God, as to know by his Divine Light the future Estate of the
Church, her Persecutions and her Victories from the year 1555. to the end of
the World.

Can it be possible that a Physician, an Astrologer, and one of the common sort
of people should have been chosen of God among so many thousands his betters,
to impart unto him those Graces, which have been the reward of the purity and
holiness of his Apostles, and of the faithfulness of St. John the Evangelist.

This seems altogether improbable to Christian piety.

CHAP. III.
The second Objection has ranked the Author among Dreamers and false
Visionaries.

Some are more moderate in the censuring of this Author, and being unwilling to
call him maliciously a false Prophet, would have him to be a foolish Dreamer,
who believed his own imaginations, and took pleasure in his own fancies, whence
came that Latin Distick of the Poet Jodelle,

Nostra damus cum falsa damus, nam fallere nostrum est,
Et cum falsa damus, nil nisi Nostra damus.
This Distick was so pleasing to the Wits of the times, that without further
inquiry, since that time Nostradamus went for a Dreamer and a doting fool.

This opinion increased more and more by his making of many Almanacks, wherein
every body may see how much he was taken with judicial Astrology; and we see
often in his Stanza's the decision of the times, by the conjunction of the
Planets with the Signs, and by the Eclipses, whence sometimes he does infer
some events that were to happen.

But what did undo him most, was the covetousness of the Printers and
Booksellers of his time, who seeing his Almanacks so well received, did set
forth a thousand others under his name, that were full of lies and fopperies.

From that time the Author went for one of those poor Astrologers, who get
their living by foretelling absurdities; and pretend to read in the Heavens,
that which is only in their foolish imagination.

CHAP. IV.
The third Objection accuses the Author of meddling with the black Art, of
being a Negromancers and a Disciple of the Devil.

IF the precedents have been moderate in their censure; others have been more
severe in delivering their opinion, accusing him to have kept acquaintance with
the Devil, as the Negromancers and other Prestigiators of the ancient times did.

The reason that made them think so is, that seeing so many things come to
pass; just as the Author had foretold; they could not attribute it to the
knowledge of judicial Astrology, nor to Divine Revelation, and consequently
concluded, that it must of necessity come from Satan.

They could not attribute it to judicial Astrology, either because they had no
opinion of it, or that the greatest defensors of that Astrology do agree among
themselves, that it cannot reach so far as to foretell a thousand peculiar
circumstances; which depend purely from the freedom of Men, such as proper
names are, and the like, which nevertheless our Author did foretell.

They could neither attribute it to Divine Revelation, for the reasons alleged
in the first objection; moreover, because he was accused of a thousand
falsities and sopperies, Printed in those Almanacks that went falsely under his
name, whence they concluded that it could not come by Divine Revelation, seeing
that the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Truth.

It follows then (say they) that it must come from the Devil, by the help of
the Black Art; the Lord Florimond de Raimond a very considerable Author, was of
that opinion in his Book of the Birth of Heresies, Chap. 3.

CHAP. V.
The fourth Objection makes him the Head of those Seductors and Impostors,
which are dangerous in a Commonwealth.

AS Fame does increase by continuation of time, so does calumny increase by the
multiplicity of opinions, she was not contented to deflour slightly the Authors
reputation, by making him pass for some sottish Dreamer, and to rank him
amongst the false Prophets, by accusing him to meddle with the black Art, but
must needs also sacrifice him to the infernal Furies, by making him the Prince
of Seductors and Impostors, that ought to be banished out of every
Commonwealth. The fondamental reason of this was the obscurity of his
Stanza's, where there was neither rhyme nor reason; the obscurity did proceed of
abundance of gross fau ts, which the Copisters and Printers have inserted in
them, from the omission of several words, from the changing and altering of
others, and from the addition of some others, which did destroy the sense.

From this great obscurity, calumny draws this argument, to ruin utterly the
Author, charging him to be all at once a false Prophet, a dotish Dreamer, a
Magician, and an infamous Seductor of people.

If God had inspired him what he has written, he would have done it for the
good of his Church and true Believers, seeing he never grants this
Prophetical Grace to any, but to that end as it appears in the Holy
Scriptures.

This being so, what profit can any body draw from him, if the sense of his
Stanza's be so obscure, as not to be understood? and although it should be
granted, that some accidens that have happened in Christendom, may sometimes he
found in his Prophecies, what fruit has the Church reaped of it, seeing that
those accidents that were foretold, were never known, till they had come to
pass, and that there was no avoiding of them?

It cannot therefore be believed, that God should have been the Author of his
Predictions, but rather the subtle Spirit of Satan, with whom he was acquainted
by such like black Arts.

According to those four Objections, the Lord Sponde in the third Volume of his
Annals, made him this Epitaph in the year 1566. Mort^us est hoc anno nugax ille
toto orb famosus Michael Nostradamus, qui se pr^scium and praesagum eventuum
futurorum per astrorum influxum venditavit, sub cujus deincept nomine quivis
homines ingeniosisuas ^ujusmodi cogitationes protendere consueveruent, in quem
valde apposite lusit qui dixit. Nostra damus cum falsa damus, etc. In English.
In the year 1566. died that Tri^ler so famous through all the World, Michael
Nostradamus who boasted while he lived, to know and foretell future things, by
the knowledge he had of the influences of the Planets, under whose name
afterward many ingenious Men have vented their Imaginations, insomuch, that he
that made that Distick, Nostra damus cum falsa d^mus, etc. seems to have very
well said.

CHAP. IV.
Proofs setting forth evidently that Nostradamus was enlightened by the Holy
Ghost.

IN consequence of these objections forged by calumny, Nostradamus name has
been so c^ied down, that I have thought me self oblidged to make his Apology,
to give the greater credit to his Prophecy, the exposition of which I do here
undertake, and to prove, that effectually he was enlightened by the Holy Ghost:
first, by writting the History of his Life, as I have done in he beginning of
this Book; Secondly, by answering to all the said Objections; Thirdly, by
alleging the Elogies given him by several Grave and Authentical Authors.

First, I maintain that he was enlightened by the Holy Ghost, by an unanswerable
reason, drawn out the Theology, but before we discourse of it, let us suppose
that Nostradamus has foretold many things, which absolutely depends from the
free will of men, and cannot be known, neither by judicial Astrology, nor by
Satan himself, such are for exemple the proper names of Persons, which
nevertheless he does in his Prophecies.

He names the Lord of Monluc, the Sprightful Gascon, the Captain Charry, his
Camerade, the Lord de ^a Mole, Admiral of Henry the II. Galleys, Entragues, who
was beheaded by order of Lewis the XIII. the Headsman of the Duke of
Montmorency, named Clerepegne; the Bassa Sinan, destroyer of Hungary; the
Murderer of Henry the III. named Clement; the Attorney David, the Captain
Ampus; the Mayor of the City of Puy in Gelay, named Rousseau, under Henry the
IV. Lewis Prince of Conde, under Francis II. Sixtus V. calling him the Son of
Hamont; Gabrielle d'Estrie; the Lord Mutonis sent to Paris by those of ^ix,
under Charles the IX. the Lord Chancellor of France, named An^ony de Soudis;
the Queen Leuise: Antony of Portugal: the Governor of Cazal under Henry II.

Secondly, The number of things is of the same nature: Nostradamus does often
calculate it; he reckons fourteen Confederates for the service of Henry IV.
in the City of Puy: ten great Ships prosecuting extremely the Admiral in the
Battle of Lepanto: five Ships taken from the Spaniard by those of Diepe, under
Henry II. nine hundred thousands Mores that went out of Spain under Henry IV.
three hundred and fifty thousands killed under Charles IX. and Henry III. three
saved at the taking of a Town in Hungary by the Turks: nine separated from the
company of Seditious, that were to be put to death, three Princes of Turkey
Massacred, and the fourth being the youngest saved; thirty Conspirators upon
London Bridge, against the Majesty of King Charles I. and such like.

Thirdly, We find in these Prophecies, the Prodigies that have no other causes
in nature, then the mere will of God; such as Comets are, the casting of
monstrous Fishes by the Sea upon the Land, the Armies in the Air, the speaking
of Dogs, the birth of Monsters, and such like.

Fourthtly, We find in those Prophecies those actions that are purely
indifferent; for example, that the King of England did appear upon a Scaffold
without his Doublet; that in the place where he was beheaded, another man had
been killed three days before; that Libertat went a Hunting with a Greyhond,
and a Blood-hond; that the two little Royals were conducted to St. Germain,
rather then to any other place, and such like.

Fifthly, We find the Birth of several particular persons that were born after
his death.

Sixthly, The Governments of Places given by the free will of Kings to such and
such.

All these things cannot be known by judicial Astrology, seeing that in Heaven
there is neither Names, nor Numbers nor extraordinary Prodigies: seeing also
that judicial Astrology presupposes the Birth of persons, that one may foretell
their future actions; the same things are also unknown to Satan, for the
Angelical species know nothing of individual things, but under the notion of
possible, and not of future.

Whence I conclude with this irrefragable Argument, that the Author has known
many several things that are not written in the Heavenly Book, nor represented
to him by Angelical Species, therefore he has known them from God himself.

The Author himself in his Epistle to his Son Caesar Nostradamus confesses,
that he has foretold many things by Divine Virtue and Inspiration.

And a little after he says, that the knowledge of those things, which merely
depends from free will, cannot be had either by humane auguries, nor by any
other humane knowledge, nor by any secret virtue that belongs to sublunary
things, but only by a Light, belonging to the Order of Eternity.

This is not a small Argument, to confirm what we have said, and to prove that
the Author has evidently been conscious, that his knowledge came from Heaven,
and that Gods goodness did him that grace; for having rejected and abhorred
other means, that Impostors make use of for foretelling something.

He writteth all these things of himself: First, in his Liminary Epistle to his
Son Caesar, he conjureth him, that when he should go about to study the
foretelling of future things by Astrology, to avoid all kind of Magic,
prohibited by the Holy Scripture, and the Canons of the Church; and to
encourage him the more to it, he relates what happened to him, viz. that
having been Divinely enlightened, and fully persuaded that God only can give the
knowledge of future things, which absolutely depends of the free will of men,
he did burn abundance of Writings, wherein was taught the Art of Prophesying,
and as they were a burning, there came out a great flame, which was like (he
thought) to burn his House all to ashes, by which accident he understood the
falsity of such Writings, and that the Devil was vexed to see his plots
discovered; besides that, he confesleth that being the greatest Sinner of the
World, nevertheless he got that favor from Heaven by a Divine Inspiration; and
because no body should doubt of it, he learnedly expounds wherein consists
that inspired Revelation, he faith that it is, A participation of the Eternal
Divinity, by which we come to judge of what the Holy Ghost imparteth to us; by
that participation of Eternity, the Author does not understand a communication
of the continuance of the Divine being, but a participation of the Divine
knowledge, measured by its Eternity, as the Schools terms it.

Effectively, the Author compares this participation to a glistering flame,
which creates a new day in our understanding, which flame proceeding from Gods
infinite knowledge, who sees and comprehends what is Eternity, does impart
unto us what is enclosed in the volubility of the Heavens.

After this testimony, which wholly destroys the Sinister opinions that men
had of his Prophecies, he shows how Judicial Astrology may agree with the
knowledge of that which proceeds from a Prophetical Spirit.

It is true, faith he, that sometimes God imparteth this Light not only to the
unlearned, and to his Holy Prophets, but also to those that are versed in
Judicial Astrology, making that instrumental for the confirmation of his
inspired truths: As we see that natural Sciences, help the light of the Faith,
and make a certain disposition in the mind fitter then ordinary, to receive
those Divine impressions.

Thus (says he) in the beginning of the Epistle, God did supernaturaly inspire
me, not by any Bacchick fury, nor by Lymphatical motions, as he did the
Sybilles; but by Astronomical assertions; that is to say, that God gave him
that grace, not by any Ecstasy, but by studying those rules, which Astrology
teaches.

The same things he says again a little after in this manner: the Astrologer
being in his Study, and consulting the Astronomical Rules upon the motions of
the Heavens, the Conjunction and several Aspects of the Planets, he guesseth at
some future events, of which being not certain, this Divine Light rises in his
mind, and imparteth clearly to him what he knew before, only Aenigmatically and
obscurely, and in the shade of that natural light.

Sometimes also (says he) this Light comes the first into the Astrologers
mind, and he afterward comparing the thing revealed unto him with the
Astronomical rules, he sees that they do wholly agree together; and this is
the method that he has made use of, to know whether the inspired truths were
agreeing with the Astronomical Calculations; a method that he has made use of
some times, but not always, for he has foretold many things, which he could
not read in the Heavens.

By these testimonies of the Author himself, every one may see how he made use
of Judicial Astrology, and wherefore he studied it so much; how far his
knowledge did extend; the glory he gives to God alone, for his Prophetical
knowledge; what horror he has always had against unlawful means to attain
unto it; how much he did value that Grace, considering his unworthiness; and
the manner how the Lord was pleased to gratify him.

CHAP. VII.
Answer to the first Objection against Nostradamus, which pretends to rank
him among the false Prophets.

LEt us see now what calumny pretends for the obscuring this Prophet of our
days; the knowledge of future things (says she) is a privilege belonging to
the Saints, and to those whom God has endewed with an eminent virtue. I
acknowledge, it is so commonly, and in the ordinary way of Grace, but if God be
pleased to impart that privilege to those that have not attained to that
Degree of Holiness, and that it really appears by the reasons of Theology,
that they have been gratified with it, we are bound to admire his Royal bounty,
which gives when, and to whom he pleases: for example, no body deserves to
be a Marshal of France, but he that has been in several Battles, and at the
taking of many Towns; but if the King be pleased to honor with that Dignity a
Gentleman that never Warred but against the Deer, the Kings goodness is to be
praised, which extends even to those that have not deserved it; it is the
same reason here, it is visibly apparent that Nostradamus has been enlightened
by the Holy Ghost, and yet he has not imitated the life's of those great Saints
of the Church: what can be inferred from thence, but that it was Gods pleasure
to extend his bounty upon his poor Creatures, which is easy to be granted in
this point, because the gift of Prophecy is not a sanctifying Grace, but a
supernatural gift, of which a sinner is capable of, as we see in Balaam,
Caiaphas, and the Sybilles, and much more in a Christian, who observes Gods
Commandments, and endeavors to keep himself in his Grace.

But (says calumny) Christian piety seems to be repugnant to this Divine
disposition, seeing that in Nostradamus time, there were thousands in the
Church of God that were capable of this favor, and to prefer to them a
Physician, an Astrologer, and an Almanack-maker, is a thing that the Wits
cannot apprehend so well, as to frame a good opinion for this Author.

Hold there Reader, do not enter into the Sanctuary of Gods secret Judgments,
you should loose you self, and never find the way out: how many such questions
might I ask you? why did God in former times choose the Family and person of
David, and preferred it to so many others of the Children of Israel: why did
Christ raise Judas to the dignity of an Apostle, preferring him before
Nathaniel, and so many others that lived Holily.

Bring therefore no more such questions, but say with the Scripture, As it
pleased the Lord, so it was done: I will nevertheless give you some
satisfaction in that point. There was two things in the Author which might have
procured that blessing from God.

The first is, that having in his possession those writtings which promised the
knowledge of future things, to which he was much inclined, he slighted and
burnt them, being persuaded that God alone was the Author of this Grace; I do
esteem that action very Heroical in its circumstance, because being enticed by
a vehement curiosity to know future things, and having in his hand the means
that opened the way to it, he did Sacrifice them to God, for which perhaps God
was willing to gratify him with this favor.

The second thing that was in Nostradamus is, that he had naturally a Genius
for the knowing of future things, as himself confesses in two Epistles to King
Henry the II. and to Caesar his own Son, and besides that Genius, the knowledge
of Astrology, did smooth him the way to discover many future events. Having
those two things, he had a greater disposition then others to receive those
Supernatural Lights; and as God is pleased to work sweetly in his Creatures,
and to give some forerunning dispositions to those Graces he intends to
bestow, it seems that to that purpose he did choose our Author to reveal him
so many wonderful secrets.

We see every day that God in the distributing of his Graces carries himself
toward us, according to our humors and natural inclinations, he employeth
those that have a generous and Martial heart for the defense of his Church and
the destruction of Tyrants; he leads those of a melancholic humor into
Colleges and Cloisters, and cherishes tenderly, those that are of meek and
mild disposition; even so, seeing Nostradamus inclined to this kind of
knowledge, he gave him in a great measure the grace of it.

CHAP. VIII.
Answer to the second Objection, which would have him pass for a Doctor.

WE shall not have much to say to these more moderate persons, seeing that we
have already given the reason of it, viz. the covetousness of the Booksellers
and Printers, who made use of the Authors name, for the better sale of their
false Almanacks, therefore if Jodelle the Poet grounded upon this opinion, made
that Satirical Distick.

Nostra damus cum falsa damus, nam fallere nostrumest,
Et cum falsa damus, nil nisi Nostra damus.
We answer him,

Nostra damus cum verba damus quae Nostradamus dat,
Nam quacumque dedit nil nisi vera dedit.
Or thus

Vera damus cum verba damus quae Nostradamus dat,
Sed cum Nostra damus, nil nisi falsa damus.
CHAP. IX.
Answer to the third Objection, which accuses him of the Black Art, and of
Negromancy.

THe more does Calumny lift up her self against this great man, the weaker are
her arguments, like the smoke which is so much the easier dissipated, as it
ascends higher.

Her reason is impertinent in this distrubutive argument, he has known those
things (says she) which he could not know by the Planets, and he had them not
from God, therefore he had them from Satan.

And we answer this argument in the same way, he has known those things which
he could not know by the Planets, nor by Satan, therefore he had them from God;
this Argument is concluding, but that of calumny halteth, for it ought to have
proved that he had not his knowledge from God, and that all those things he
has known may be known to Satan, which two things we have manifestly proved to
be false, therefore if the Lord Florimond de Raimond was alive, I believe he
would correct what he has written against him.

CHAP. X.
Answer to the fourth Objection, of Calumny, which brandeth our Author with the
title of Chief of the Seductors and Impostors.

THe Weapons of this Medusa are sharper in this point then in others, therefore
our Buckler accordingly must be of the best mettle and temper.

We cannot deny but Nostradamus has affected obscurity, himself acknowledges
it in his two Epistles, in that to Caesar his Son, he says, he has done it,
not only because of the times wherein he lived, but also by reason of those
that were to follow, in the times wherein he lived the Case was as it is now,
Veritas odium parit, and this hatred in powerful men is prejudicial to those
that speak the Truth, he was also cautious in that, by reason of the times
following; for if he had plainly declared what he meant, the Wits would have
laughed at it, and would not have believed those strange revolutions that came
to pass, and which our Author had foretold. In his Epistle to Henry the 11 he
tells him, that he does purposely make use of obscure terms to express his
mind, for the reasons before alleged.

Now Calumny faith, that this affectation of obscurity is a sign that God was
not the Author of his Knowledge, seeing that by this obscurity they have proved
unprofitable to the Church.

I answer first, that the consequence is false; for the Holy Prophets have
spoken so obscurely, that a great part of what they had Prophesied was not
known till after it had come to pass.

I answer secondly, that although Prophecies were not understood till after the
fulfilling thereof, it does not follow that they were unprofitable; because by
their fulfilling in due time, we gather, that he who revealed them was the true
God, Lord of times and Eternity, and therefore being the God of Israel, and of
the Christians, he ought to be worshipped. By this principle Cyrus and Alexander
knew the true God, Cyrus by having seen the Prophecies of Isaiah, and Alexander
those of Daniel.

Therefore as the Prophecies of the Saints have not been fruitless, though not
understood till they were fulfilled, even so we must not infer that
Nostradamus's Prophecies have been useless, though they have remained in
obscurity so long a while.

Besides, there is no doubt but Nostradamus having Prophesied so many several
things that are come to pass, but that hereafter when the Heathen shall see it
they shall glorify God, and shall acknowledge a true Religion, as did Cyrus,
who many Authors believe to have obtained Salvation.

I answer in the third place, that God permits ordinarily that Prophecies
lie long in the dark, and then raises the Spirit of some men to expound them,
as he did that of Daniel to interpret the 70 Weeks of the Babylonian Captivity,
Prophesied by Jeremiah, to encourage the faithful three ways.

First, in showing them, that if the first Prophecies have been punctually
fulfilled, the rest will likewise come to pass, seeing the same God has
dictated them.

Secondly, in unfolding to them the future wonders, of which they shall be
partakers.

Thirdly, in giving warning how they may attain to them, and show those
accidents that might be an hindrance. Thus God did permit, that for the space
of 100. years Nostradamus Prophecies should lie in darkness, and be contemned,
but after that time God will raise some body to interpret them, whence the
faithful seeing so many things foretold come to pass so exactly, will encourage
one another, by seeing so many wonderful prodigies, of whom they shall be Eye
Witnesses.

As for my part I have undertaken this Work, only to authorize the wonders that
shall be seen in our days, and to invite the Christian Princes to the same
design.

The conclusion of this discourse is, that our Medusa Calumny, must needs
retreat in her dens, and that we ought to forgive those Authors that have
spoken so ill of our Author, seeing they wanted the Intelligence of his
Prophecies, and that the Church did suspend the authorizing of them.

CHAP. XI.
Some difficulties against what we have said, drawn out of Nostradamus his own
Epistles.

WE have (thanks be to God) sheltered this famous man from the backbiting of
Calumny, but that we may clear wholly the Heaven of this reputation, we add
this Chapter more for the clearing of some words that are in his Epistles,
which seem to contradict some of those things we have said; the Author in his
Epistles to his Son Caesar, after he had said that God had disposed him to
receive thy impression of supernatural lights, not by a Bacchans furor, nor by
a Lymphatical motion, but by Astronomical assertions, he says in the same
Epistle toward the end; That sometimes in the Week being surprised by a
Lymphatick humor, and making his Nocturnal studies (weet by his calculations,
he made Books of Prophecies, each one containing a hundred Astronomical
Stanza's, which he endeavored to set out something obscurely. from which words
it might be gathered, that he made his Prophecies by a Lymphatical Spirit, and
by the only judicial Astrology.

And in the Epistle to King Henry the II. he seems to confess, that this
Prophecy is nothing but a natural Genius, which he had by Inheritance from his
Ancestors.

To these difficulties I answer, supposing first that anciently those were
called Lymphaticks, who were mad for Love; because the first that was observed
among the Ancients to be mad with that passion, threw himself into the water,
which in Latin is called Lympha, whence all those that were afterward
transported with the excess of any passion, either of Love, Melancholy, Choler
or Envy, have been called Lymphaticks.

So that in this place a Lymphatical motion is nothing properly but a deep
Melancholy, which separating us from all Earthly things, does transport the
mind to extraordinary thoughts either good or bad.

This being suposed, I say that the Author confesses, that his retreat,
solitariness, nocturnal Watchings, and Melancholy, have disposed him much to
the receiving of that Heavenly flame, which is the cause of Vaticination and
Prophecy.

And because he did often spend the whole nights in this study, this Nocturnal
retreat caused in him a retirement from all worldly things, at which time he
felt a Divine elevating Virtue, that raised his understanding to those Divine
Knowledges.

And because this elevating Virtue was caused in him by Divine operation, he
does attribute always his Prophecies to God alone; and by reason that this
elevation has some resemblance with that of the Lymphaticks, he says, that
sometimes he did Lymphatise not properly speaking, but by resemblance.

So that it is true, our Author did not receive his Prophecies by Lymphatical
motion, or Bacchant fury, but from God himself, who did work in him while he
observed his Astronomical assertions; and it is also true, that he felt this
Divine operation by a kind of a Lymphatical motion.

Concerning what he says to Henry the II. it is certain he makes use of that
Language as much by a motive of Truth to conceal that Grace which he had
received from God, as of Hnmility.

By a Motive of Truth, because effectually; because all the Nostradamus's had
some tincture of Prophecy, and his Son the Capucin acknowledges it himself.

By a Motive of Humility; because acknowledging himself to be a miserable
sinner, and seeing that this gift of Prophecy was not ordinarily granted but
unto Saints. He chooses rather to attribute his Prophecies to his Genius, than
otherways to procure a Fame and Authority to his predictions.

In confirmation of what we have said, That he was often in that transport,
many years before his death he made the Stanza of the Century, in which is
contained all the great Works of the Philosophers, and foretells, that a
great Divine shall attain to the perfection of that great Work, which Divine is
called, the Divine Verb, turning into French the Word (...), which signifies
Divine Word or Verb. Nevertheless he never wrought himself at that Work, but
got his li^ing Honorably by his practice of Physic, by which we may see; that
he did write some things which himself understood not, unless they were such
general ones, as might be read in the Heavens.

CHAP. XII.
Elogies given to Nostradamus by several Authentical Authors.

IF several Authors either by envy or ignorance have defamed our Author, others
of no small repute have taken his defense in hand.

D' Aurat one of the most excellent Poets of France, living at the same time as
Nostradamus, made a few explications of his Prophecies, which as the report
goes, did please the Readers. I am sorry I could not get them, it would have
been some ease to me; for it is easier to add than to invent. The first Volume
of the Lord la Croix du Main, makes honorable mention of him, the same says,
that his Motto was Faelix Oviam prior Aetas, Happy the first Age that was
contented with their Flock, showing by that, what esteem he had of frugality
and sincerity of manners, and what aversion he had against the Vices of his
Age, the unruliness of manners, and consenage of men. Ronsard the Prince of the
French Poets sings his praises: The Lord Boucher in that great Volume,
entitled the Mistical Crown, in favor of the future Croisade, does vindicate
our Author from Calumny, and expounds some of his Prophecies pretty happily.

I will not relate here what his Son Caesar Nostradamus writes modestly of him
in his History of Provence, under Lewis the XII. Henry the II. and Charles the
IX. his Evidence may be suspected, because of the Consanguinity.

One of the greatest Wits of this last Age, who desires to be nameless, gives
him this Character.

First, That God Almighty has chosen Michael Nostradamus among the common sort
of Christians, to impart unto him the knowledge of many prodigious and
extraordinary future things.

Secondly, He maintains, that after the Apostles and Canonical Prophets, he
is the first of all in three things in his certainty and infallibility, in the
generality and in the quantity. As to the first, he does not doubt but the
Abbot Joachim ought to give him place; for though he has foretold somethings
that have come to pass, he has written a hundred others which are mere
fopperies.

Thirdly, He maintains that the Emperor Leo in his prophetical Tables is far
below him; for he does only aim at those things which regard the Eastern
Empire, as Theophrastus. Paracelsus has done for the Western.

Concerning the quantity of things, he maintains, that none of the others can
dispute it with him; for Nostradamus has made above a thousand stanza's (if we
had them all) each of which contains two or three prophetical Truths, some of
which regard the East, others the West, others some private Kingdoms and States
others private and particular things. and all with Truth and certainty.

CHAP. XIII.
What these Stanza's Prophecy of.

THe Author in his Epistle to King Henry the II. says, that he treatech of
things which were to happen in many Cities and Towns of Europe, and of a part
of Asia and Africa.

And to say Truth, I have found nothing in them concerning the East or West,
Jappan or China.

He treats chiefly of France as of his Native Kingdom, and of his own
Country Provence, and that which is next to it, viz. Piemont.

He speaks amply of the Popes, and of Italy, Turkey and England: As for the
Empire Spain, and Suedeland, he does moderately speak of them. Concerning
Aethiopia and Africa there is some nine or ten Stanza's.

In all those places he foretells many things, not only general for every
State but also particular and individual for several persons. He also
foretells many supernatural prodigies in the Heavens, the Air, the Sea, and
the Land.

He has inserted among his Prophecies four Horoscopes, the first of the
Grandfather of the Lord l' Ainier in the Province of Anjou; the second of one
called Urnel Vaucile; the third of one Cosme du Jardin; and the fourth of one,
whom he names not, but describes him by his stature.

CHAP. XIV.
Since what time these Prophecies began.

IT is certain that they began in January 1555. because he dedicated the first
seven Centuries to his Son Caesar the first day of March in the said year, and
consequently they were made before that time, and we cannot allow less than two
Months to an Author for the making of 700. Stanza's: Nevertheless for a greater
manifestation of his prophetical spirit, I have not found any of his Prophecies
that did come to pass before the first of March 1555.

As for the Eight, Ninth and Ten Century, there is reason to believe, that the
effect of them does not begin before the 27 June 1558. which is the date of his
Liminary Epistle to Henry the II. Nevertheless he says in the same Epistle,
that in a writing by it self he will set down the exposition of his Prophecies,
beginning the 14 of March 1557. and in the Epistle to Nostradamus his son, he
says in general that he has composed Books of Prophecies, each one containing
one hundred Stanza's, without specifying whether he spoke of the seven that he
dedicated to him, or of all the others.

As for my part, I believe he had made them all in the year 1555. but that he
had not yet examined the three last Centuries, according to the Calculation of
his Astronomical assertions, as he seems to indicate often in his Epistle to
Henry II. and to say the truth, I have found some Stanza's, which were
fulfilled before the year 1558. though very few.

As for the extent of his Prophecies, it is certain, that it is to the end of
the World, as I shall make it appear in the explication of the 48, the 49, and
56. Stanza's of the first Century, and the 72, 73, and 94. of the tenth, and
all according to the Holy Scripture.

All these things being premised, we shall proceed to the explication of the
Prophecies, setting first the Authors Luminary Epistle to his Son.

THE PREFACE TO Mr. Michael Nostradamus HIS PROPHECIES, Ad Caesarem Nostradamum
Filium vita and Felicitas.
THy late coming, Caesar Nostradamus, my son, has caused me to bestow a great
deal of time in continual and nocturnal watchings, that I might leave a
Memorial of me after my death, to the common benefit of Mankind, concerning the
things which the Divine Essence has revealed to me by Astronomical
Revolutions; and since it has pleased the immortal God, that thou are come
late into this World, and can not say that thy years that are but few, but
thy Months are incapable to receive into thy weak understanding, what I am
forced to define of futurity, since it is not possible to leave thee in
Writing, what might be obliterated by the injury of times, for the Hereditary
word of occult praedictions shall be locked up in my breast, considering also
that the events are definitely uncertain, and that all is governed by the power
of God, who inspired us not by a Bacchant fury or Lymphatick motion, but by
Astronomical affections. Soli numine Divino afflati praesagiunt and Spiritu
Prophetico particularia: Although I have often foretold long before what has
afterward come to pass, and in particular Regions, acknowledging all to have
been done by Divine Virtue and Inspiration, being willing to hold my peace by
reason of the injury, not only of the present time, but also of the future,
and to put them in Writing, because the Kingdoms, Sects, and Regions shall be
so Diametrically opposed, that if I should relate what shall happen hereafter,
those of the present Reign, Sect, Religion and Faith, would find it so
disagreeing with their fances, that they would condemn that which future Ages
shall find and know to be true; considering also the saying of our Savior,
Nalite Sanctum dare canibus ne conculcent pedibus and conversi discumpant vos,
which has been the cause that I have withdrawn my tongue from the Vulgar, and
my Pen from Paper. But afterward I was willing for the common good to enlarge
my self in dark and abstruse Sentences, declaring the future Events, chiefly
the most urgent, and those which I foresaw (what ever humane mutation happened)
would not offend the hearers, all under dark figures more then Prophetical, for
although, Abscondisti haec a sapentibus and prudentibus, i. e. potentibus and
Regibus enucleasti ea exiguis and tenuibus, and the Prophets by means only of
the immortal God and good Angels, have received the Spirit of Vaticination, by
which they foresee things, and foretell future events; for nothing is perfect
without him, whose power and goodness is so great to his Creatures, that though
they are but men, nevertheless by the likeness of our good Genius to the
Angels, this heat and Prophetical power draws near us, as it happens by the
Beams of the Sun, which cast their influence both on Elementary and not
Elementary bodies; as for us who are men, we cannot attain any thing by our
natural knowledge, of the secrets of God our Creator. Quia non est nostrum
nosse tempora nec momenta, etc.

Besides, although there is, or may come some persons, to whom God Almighty
will reveal by impressions made on his understanding some secrets of the
future, according to the Judicial Astrology, as it has happened in former
times, that a certain power and voluntary faculty possessed them as a flame of
fire, so that by his inspiration, they were able to judge of Divine and Humane
things: for the Divine works that are absolutely necessary, God will end. But
my son, I speak to thee too obscurely; but as for the secrets that are received
by the subtle Spirit of fire, by which the understanding being moved, does
contemplate the highest Celestial Bodies, as being active and vigilant to the
very pronunciation without fear, or any shameful loquacity: all which proceeded
from the Divine Power of the Eternal God, from whom all goodness flows. Now
my son, although I have inserted the name of Prophet here, I will not attribute
to my self so sublime a Title, for qui Propheta dicitur body olim vocabatur
videns, and Prophets are those properly (my Son) that see things remote from
the natural knowledge of Men; but put the case, the Prophets by the means of
the perfect light of Prophecy, may see as well Divine things as Humane, (which
cannot be seeing the effects of future predictions) do extend a great way, for
the secrets of God are incomprehensible, and the efficient power moves afar
off the natural knowledge, taking their beginning at the free will, cause those
things to appear, which otherwise could not be known, neither by humane
auguries, or any hidden knowledge or secret virtue under Heaven, but only by
the means of some indivisible Eternal being, or Comitial and Herculean
agitation, the causes come to be known by the Celestial motion. I say not
therefore my Son, that you may not understand me well, because the knowledge of
this matter cannot yet be imprinted in thy weak brain, but that future causes
afar off are subject to the knowledge of humane Creatures, if (notwithstanding
the Creature) things present and future were neither obscure nor hidden from
the intellectual seal; but the perfect knowledge of the cause of things, cannot
be acquired without the Divine Inspiration, seeing that all Prophetical
Inspiration received, has its original principle from God the Creator, next,
from good Luck, and afterward from Nature, therefore cases indifferently
produced or not produced, the Prophecy partly happens where it has been
foretold, for the understanding being intellectually created, cannot see occult
things, unless it be by the voice coming from the Lymbo, by the means of the
thin flame, to which the knowledge of future causes is inclined; and also my
Son I entreat thee not to bestow thy understanding on such fopperies, which
dry up the Body and damn the Soul, bringing vexation to the Senses; chiefly
abhor the vanity of the execrable Magic, forbidden by the Sacred Scriptures,
and by the Canons of the Church; in the first of which is excepted Judicial
Astrology, by which, and by the means of Divine Inspiration, with continual
supputations, we have put in writing our Prophecies. And although this occult
Philosophy was not forbidden, I could never be persuaded to meddle with it,
although many Volums concerning that Art, which has been concealed a great
while, were presented to me; but fearing what might happen, after I had read
them, I presented them to Vulcan, who while he was a devouring them, the flame
mixing with the Air, made an unwonted light more bright then the usual flame,
and as if it had been a Lightning, shining all the house over, as if it had
been all in a flame; therefore that henceforth you might not be abused in the
search of the perfect Transformation, as much selene as folar, and to seek in
the waters uncorruptible metal; I have burnt them all to ashes, but as to the
judgment which comes to be perfected by the help of the Celestial Judgment,
I will manifest to you, that you may have knowledge of future things, rejecting
the fantastical imaginations that should happen by the limiting the
particularity of Places; by Divine inspiration, supernatural, according to the
Celestial figures, the places, and a part of the time, by an occult, property,
and by a Divine virtue, power and faculty, in the presence of which the three
times are comprehended by Eternity, revolution being tied to the cause that is
past, present, and future, Quia omnia sunt Nuda and aperta, etc. therefore my
Son, thou may not withstanding thy tender brain comprehend things that shall
happen hereafter, and may be foretold by celestial natural lights, and by the
Spirit of Prophecy; not that I will attribute to my self the name of a Prophet,
but as a mortal man, being no farther from Heaven by my sense, then I am from
Earth by my Feet, possum errare, falli, decipi; I am the greatest Sinner of the
World, subject to all humane afflictions, but being supprised sometimes in the
week by a Prophetical humor, and by a long Calculation, pleasing my self in my
Study, I have made Books of Prophecies, each one containing a hundred
Astronomical Stanza's, which I have joined obscurely, and are perpetual
Vaticinations from this year to the year 3797. at which some perhaps will
frown, seeing so large an extention of time, and that I treat of every thing
under the Moon, if thou live the natural Age of a Man, thou shall see in thy
Climat, and under the Heaven of thy Nativity the future things that have been
foretold, although God only is he who knows the Eternity of his Light,
proceeding from himself; and I say freely to those to whom his incomprehensible
greatness has by a long melancholic inspiration revealed, that by the means
of this occult cause Divinely manifested, chiefly by two principal causes,
which are comprehended in the understanding of him that is Inspired and
Prophecyeth, one is that he clears the supernatural Light in the person that
foretells by the Doctrine of the Planets, and Prophecyeth by inspired
Revelation, which is a kind of participation of the Divine Eternity, by the
means of which the Prophet judges of what the Divine Spirit has given him by
the means of God the Creator, and by a natural instigation, viz. that what is
predicted is true, and has taken its original from above, and such light and
small flame is of all efficacy and sublimity, no less then the natural light
makes the Philosophers so secure, that by the means of the principles of the
first cause, they have attained the greatest depth of the profoundest science;
but that I may not wander too far (my Son) from the capacity of thy sense, as
also, because I find that Learning would be at a great loss, and that before
the universal Conflagration shall happen so many great Inundations, that there
shall scarce be any Land, that shall not be covered with water, and this shall
last so long, that except Aenographies and Topographies all shall perish, also
before and after these Inundations in many Countries there shall be such
scarcety of rain, and such a deal of fire, and burning stones shall fall from
Heaven, that nothing unconsumed shall be left, and this shall happen a little
while before the great conflagration; for although the Planet Mars makes an end
of his course, and is come to the end of his last Period, nevertheless he shall
begin it again, but some shall be gathered in Aquarius for many years, others
in Cancer also for many years, and now we are governed by the Moon, under the
power of Almighty God; which Moon before she has finished her Circuit, the Sun
shall come, and then Saturn, for according to the Celestial Signs, the Reign
of Saturn shall come again, so that all being Calculated, the World draws near
to an Anaragonick revolutoin, and at this present that I write this before 177.
years, three Months, eleven Days, through Pestilence, Famine, War, and for the
most part Inundations, the World between this and that prefixed time, before
and after for several times shall be so diminished, and the people shall be so
few, that they shall not find enough to Till the Ground, so that they shall
remain fallow as long as they have been Tilled; although we be in the seventh
Millenary, which ends all and brings us near the eight, where the Firmament of
the eighth Sphere is, which in a Latitudinary dimention is the place where the
great God shall make an end of the revolution, where the Celestial Bodies
shall begin to move again. By that Superior motion that makes the Earth firm
and stable, non inclinabitur in seculum seculi, unless his will be
accomplished, and no otherwise; although by ambiguous opinions exceeding all
natural reasons by Mahometical Dreams, also sometimes God the Creator by the
Ministers of his Messengers of fire and flame shows to our external senses, and
chiefly to our eyes, the causes of future Predictions, signifying the future
Event, that he will manifest to him that Prophecyeth for the Prophecy that is
made by the Internal Light, comes to judge of the thing, partly with and by the
means of External Light, for although the party which seems to have by the
eye of understanding, what it has not by the Loesion of its imaginative sense,
there is no reason why what he foretells should come by Divine Inspiration,
or by the means of an Angelical Spirit, inspired into the Phophetick person,
anointing him with vaticination, moving the fore part of his fancy, by diverse
nocturnal apparitions, so that by Astronomical administration, he Prophecyeth
with a Divine certitude, joined to the Holy prediction of the future, having no
other regard then to the freedom of his mind. Come now my Son, and understand
what I find by my revolutions, which are agreeing with the Divine Inspiration,
viz. that the Swords draws near to us now, and the Plague and the War more
horrid then has been seen in the Life of three Men before, as also by Famine,
which shall return often, for the Stars agree with the revolution, as also he
said visitabo in virga ferrea iniquitates eorum and in verberibus percutiam
eos, for the Mercies of God shall not be spread a while, my Son, before most of
my Prophecies shall come to pass; then oftentimes shall happen sinister storms,
(Conteram ergo (said the Lord) and confringam and non miserebor) and a thousand
other accidents that shall happen by Waters and continual Rains, as I have more
fully at large declared in my other Prophecies, written in soluta oratione,
limiting the places, times and prefixed terms, that men coming after, may see
and know that those accidents are certainly come to pass, as we have marked in
other places, speaking more clearly, although the explication be involved in
obscurity, sed quando submovenda erit ignorantia, the case shall be made more
clear; making an end here, my Son, accept of this Gift of thy Father Michael
Nostradamus, hoping to expound to thee every Prophecy of these Stanza's,
praying to the Immortal God, that he would grant thee a long Life in Felicity.

From Salon this 1. of March 1555.
THE TRUE PROPHECIES OR PROGNOSTICATIONS OF Michael Nostradamus, Physician to
HENRY II. FRANCIS II. And CHARLES IX. Kings of FRANCE, and one of the most
excellent Astronomers that ever were.
CENTURY I.
I. French.
EStant assis, de nuit secrette estude,
Seul, repose sur la selle d'airain,
Flambe exigue, sortant de solitude,
Fait proferer qui n'est a croire vain.
English.
Sitting by Night in my secret Study
Alone, resting upon the Brazen Stool,
A slight flame breaking forth out of that solitude,
Makes me utter what is not in vain to believe.
ANNOTATION.

IN this Stanza, Nostradamus expresses those Humane dispositions which he made
use of to be favored of God, for the knowledge of future things, to the
benefit of the Public.

The first Disposition, was the tranquillity of Mind, when he says, Sitting by
night; Because a troubled Mind cannot see clearly the Things it is busy about,
no more than tossed Waters can distinctly represent the Objects that are
opposed to them. Thus we read in the Scripture, that the Prophet Elishah, being
transported with Zeal against Joram King of Israel; and nevertheless willing to
consult God concerning the event of the War against the Moabites, called for a
Minstrel, that the Harmony of the Instrument might quiet his Mind, as it did
happen. And it came to pass when the Minstrel played, that the Hand of the Lord
came upon him, 2 Kings chap. 3. ver. 15.

The Author in his Dedicatory Epistle to his Son Caesar, calls this
Tranquillity of Mind, A long Melancholic Inspiration; because the Melancholic
Humor and Mind sequestreth a Man from the concerns of worldly things, and
makes him present to himself, so that his Understanding is not darkened by a
multitude of Species that troubles its Operation.

The Second Disposition, was, the Silence of the Night; For Man who is
compounded of Body and Soul, does notably intricate himself in External things
by the commerce of the Senses with the Objects; which obliges him to withdraw
himself from visible things, when he intends to apply himself to some serious
Study. And as the silence of the Night causes in the Universe a cessation of
noises and clashings in Business, Visits and Colloquies, the Mind is then more
at rest. Besides that, Night covering with her Darkness our Hemisphere, our
Senses are less distracted, and our Internal Faculties are more united to serve
the Operations of the Understanding.

Therefore the Author in his two Liminary Epistles, makes often mention of his
continual Nocturnal Watchings, of his Sweet Smelling nocturnal Studies, and of
his Nocturnal and Prophetical Calculations.

The Third Disposition, was Solitariness; that is, having no other Conversation
then that of his Books, being retired in his Study, Alone. For it seems that
God commonly makes use of Solitariness when he does impart himself to Men, and
reveals them his Oracles: And the Sybils were chosen to be Prophets, as much
for their Solitariness, as for their Chastity.

The Author says, that with those three Dispositions he raised himself to the
knowledge of future things; which is signified by those words, Resting upon the
Brazen Stool. Servius in his Commentaries upon Virgil, speaking of this Brazen
Stool, says two things of it. The First, that this Stool was a Table set upon
a Trevet, called by the Greeks (...), and by the Latins Tripus. The Second is,
that the Sybils, or the Priests of the Delphick Temple of Apollo, got upon that
Table, when they went about to pronounce their Oracles. Pliny, in his 33. Book,
Chap. 3. says, that they called those Tables Cortinas, and that some were made
of Brass for the use aforesaid.

From the use of that Brazen Trevet is come the Proverb, Ex tripode loqui. When
one speaks like an Oracle. Thus the Author willing to express, that being in
his Stu^y in the solitariness of the Night, he raised himself to the Knowledge
of Future things, to write them, and transmit them to Posterity; he says, He
was sitting or resting upon the Brazen Stool.

Thus raising himself, and taking his Pen in hand to write what he should
learn, he says in the Third Verse, that A slight Flame, or small Light did
insinuate it self in his understanding, by whose splendour and brightness he saw
future things.

The Author in his Epistle to Caesar his Son, expounds always this
Prophetical Light, by the comparison of a shining Flame, and calls it rather
a Flame than a pure Light, because this Light does not only discover the
Mysteries, but more-over it lightens in us a certain Heat and Prophetical
Power, as himself terms it; as if we should say a Sacred Enthusiasm, even
(says he) as the Sun coming near us with his Light, not only darteth upon all
Elementary things the brightness of his Beams, but withal infuseth in them a
certain quickening heat, which causes the Vegetables to grow, and upholdeth the
Being of all other natural things; Even so (says he) this good Genius, as the
Ancients term it; or as we Christians say, that Divine Spirit of Prophecy
coming near our understandings, not only imports a Light to them, but
moreover a certain heat and Prophetical Power, which strenghteneth them in the
knowledge of the aforesaid things, and causes them to breath out, as by a
Sacred Enthusiasm some Prophetical Verses.

Which happens to them (says the Author) coming out of Solitude, that is to
fay, when their Spirit stoopeth down, and by degrees comes down from that
sublime Region and high elevation, taking the Pen to write down the future
time. Therefore he with his dispositions participating of that slight flame,
coming out of his solitude, began to write and to utter, What is not in vain to
believe.

The things that the Author has written, shall not be unprofitable as we have
proved already, and the time will come, when by the means of Divine Providence
the Church shall receive the fruit thereof, at which we ought not to wonder,
seeing that God says of himself in Isaiah Chap. 48. Ver. 17. I am the Lord thy
God, which teaches thee to profit.

The Author foretells many wonders, of which we ought to be certain by the
verification of those that are already past, seeing that it is the same Spirit
that showed them all.

The same Prophecies are also profitable, in that every where the Author
condemns Seditious and Rebellious persons, and Prophecieth the Churches
Victory over her Enemies.

They are also profitable for particular Men that understand the meaning of
them, for by it they may provide for their own business, according to the
storm, undertaking nothing but upon sure grounds, following always the best
party, and disposing themselves to patience, when the calamities are general,
and involve together the guilty and guiltless. Therefore our Author says well,
A slight flame breaking forth out of that solitude, makes me utter what is not
in vain to believe.

II. French.
La Verge en main, mise au milieu des Branches,
De l'Onde je mouille and le Limb and le Pied,
En peur j'escris fremissant par les manches;
Splendeur Divine: le Divine prez s'assied.
English.
With Rod in hand, set in the middle of the Branches,
With water I wet the Limb and the Foot,
In fear I writ, quaking in my sleeves,
Divine splendour! the Divine sits by.
ANNOT.

Amongst the customs, the Ancients observed, before they pronounced their
Oracles; one was to take a Tuffie Branch of Laurel, and with it dipped in water,
to sprinkle the edges and Columns of the Table, that was upon the Brazen
Trevet, by which ceremonies they procured credit to their Oracles.

The Author willing to let us know, that his Verses were not only a simple
writing, ing, but also Prophetical and full of Oracles, does represent them to
us by this Metaphore of the Ancients, when they did amuse the people with their
ambiguous, and many times fallacious Oracles.

Being then sitting and quiet in his solitariness; coming out of that great
devotion of mind, animated by the virtue of his good Genius, he puts first
the Rod into his hand, that is the Pen, and puts it in the middle of the
Branches, putting it between his Fingers. Secondly he dippeth this Rod into
Water, dipping his Pen in his Ink; with this Pen dipped in Ink, he wetteth the
Limb and the Foot, writing upon his paper from one end to the other, and from
the top to the bottom.

Which we must understand by this word Lymbe, which is a Latin word, signifying
the long and narrow pieces of stuff, which women wore at the bottom of their
Petticoats, therefore the Latins called them Lymbos, from the Latin Verb
Lambo, which in matter of cloths signifies, to leek or sweep; and because
those pieces of cloth were in the bottom of their Garments, the word has been
afterward employed to signify the brims of some things, so that the Lymbs of
a sheet of paper, are the two margines, and the top and the bottom, as if it
were the four ends of a Quadrangular Figure.

The third Verse shows the internal disposition of the Author, after he has
described his external one; that disposition was a Sacred quaking, which
putting his heart into a palpitation, caused his hands and arms to shake, as if
he had been taken with some fit of an Ague. This quaking is the disposition
which the good Genius causes in Prophets, that they may be humbled, and not be
puffed up with pride, when they come near the Majesty of God, as we read in
Daniel, St. John, and the 4th. of Esdras. Therefore the Author says:

In fear I write, quaking in my sleeves. And because the Divine spirit after he
has cast down those, to whom he will impart himself, does afterward quiet
them; the Author therefore adds, that a Divine splendour did sit by him.

III. French.
Quand la littiere du tourbillon versee,
Et seront faces de leurs Manteaux couvers,
La Republique par gens nouveaux vexee,
Lors blancs and rouges jugeront a l'envers.
English.
When the litter shall be overthrown by a gust of wind,
And faces shall be covered with Cloaks,
The Commonwealth shall be troubled with a new kind of men,
Then white and red shall judge amiss.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses signify that a great tempestuous wind was to happen, in
which a litter should be overturned, and every one should muffle his face in
his Cloak, for the sierceness of the wind.

And that presently after the Commonwealth should be troubled with new Sects
and Opinions, which may be understood of the beginning of Reformation by Luther
and Calvin, which was about that time.

The last Verse by the white and red signifies here (as it does thorough all
the Book) the French and the Spaniards, because the French wear white Scarfes,
and the Spaniards red ones: and consequently the troubles and jars that
happened presently between those two Nations.

IV. French.
Par l'Univers sera fait un Monarque,
Qu'en paix and vie ne sera longuement,
Lors se perdra la Piscature Barque,
Sera regie en plus grand detriment.
English.
In the World shall be one Monarch,
Who shall be not long alive, nor in peace,
Then shall be lost the Fishing Boat,
And be governed with worse detriment.
ANNOT.

That Monarch was Henry the II. King of France, who did not Reign long, but was
unfortunately slain, running at Tilt against the Earl of Montgomery, (as we
shall see hereafter) and almost during all his Reign had Wars with Charles the
V. Emperor, and his Son Philip the II. King of Spain; the said Emperor in
that time did sack Rome, took the Pope Clement the VII. prisoner, which is
signified here; as also in several other places by the loss of the Fishing
Boat; the Roman Church being often compared to a Ship or Boat.

V. French.
Chassez seront fans fair long combat,
Par le Pais seront plus fort grevez,
Bourg and Cite auront plus grand debat,
Carcas, Narbonne auront coeurs esprouvez.
English.
They shall be driven away without great fighting,
Those of the Country shall be more grieved,
Town and City shall have a greater debate,
Carcas, Narbonne shall have their hearts, tried.
ANNOT.

Herein is nothing mystical, the meaning is that some of the Protestant party
intending to take or vex the Cities of Carcassone and Narbonne in Languedoc,
shall be easily repulsed, and shall afterward fall upon the Country round
about, which shall suffer for.

VI. French.
L'oeil de Ravenne sera destitue,
Quand a ses pieds les aisles sailliront;
Les deux de Bresse auront constitue,
Turin, Verceil, que Gaulois fouleront.
English.
The eye of Ravenna shall be forsaken,
When the wings shall rise at his feet,
The two of Brescia shall have constituted,
Turin, Verceil, which the French shall tread upon.
ANNOT.

This is a confirmation of the fourth Stanza, concerning the loss of the Pope,
Clement the VII. who is called here the eye of Ravenna, because he is Lord of
that famous City, which was once an Exarchat of the Empire.

The wings that shall rise at, or against his feet, shall be those of the
Eagle, which are the Arms of the Emperor.

The two of Brescia were the Governor and Proveditor of Venice in that place,
who would at that time have endeavored to seize upon Turin and Verceil, the
two chiefest Towns of Piemont, but were prevented by the French.

VII. French.
Tard arrive, l'execution faite,
Le Vent contrare, Lettres au chemin prinses,
Les Conjurez quatorze d'une Sect,
Parle Rousseau seront les entreprinses.
English.
One coming too late, the execution shall be done,
The Wind being contrary, and Letters intercepted by the way,
The Conspirators fourteen of a Sect,
By the Red-hair'd Man the undertaking shall be made.
ANNOT.

The sense of the whole is this, there shall be fourteen Conspirators of one
mind, and their Ringleader, a Red-haired man, who shall be put to death,
because their Reprieve could not come timely enough, being hindered by cross
winds, and Letters intercepted. I could find no particular things in History
concerning this.

VIII. French.
Combien de fois prinse Cite Solaire
Seras, changeant les Loix barbares and veins,
Ton mal s'approche, plus seras tributaire,
Le grand Adrie recouvrira tes veins.
English.
How often taken O solar City,
Shall thou be? changing the barbarian and vain Laws,
Thy evil grows nigh, thou shall be more tributary,
The great Adria shall recover thy veins.
ANNOT.

It is hard to judge what he means by the Solar City that shall be so often
taken.

As by Adria, it is certain he means Venice, that was so called anciently,
because of its situation in the Adriatic Sea.

IX. French.
De l'Orient viendra le coeur punique,
Fascher Adrie, and les hoirs Romulides,
Accompagne de la class Libique
Trembler Melites, and proches Isles vuides.
English.
From the East shall come the African heart,
To vex Adria, and the Heirs of Romulus,
Accompanied with the Libian feet,
Melites shall tremble, and the Neighboring Islands be empty.
ANNOT.

This was a clear and true Prognostication of that famous Invasion made upon
Maltha, by the grand Signor Solomon the magnificent, in the year of our Lord
1565. and just ten years after the writing of this Prophecy, wherein that
Island, and some of the Neighboring ones were wholly depopulated by the Turks,
to the terror of Venice, called here Adria, and of all the Islands of the
Adriatic Sea. For the better understanding of this, the Reader must observe,
that Punicas in Larin signifies Africa, so that the African heart signifies
the help the Turk had from Tunis, Tripoly, and Algier, Cities seated in Africa,
and under the Turkish Dominion; by which not only Maltha (which in Latin is
Melita) but Venice and Rome were put into a great fright; the conclusion of
this Siege was, that after six weeks time, and the loss of 26000. Men, the
Turks were constrained shamefully to retire. Vide the Turkish History. French.

X. French.
Sergens transmis dans la Cage de Fer,
Ou les Enfans septains du Roy sont pris,
Les vieux and Peers sortiront bas d'Enfer,
Ains mourir voir de son fruit mort and cris.
English.
Sergeants sent into an Iron Cage,
Where the seven Children of the King are,
The old Men and Fathers shall come out of Hell,
And before they die shall see the death and cries of their fruit.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy signifies, that some Sergeants or Executioners shall be sent
into a Prison, to put to death seven Children, servants of a King that were
Imprisoned there, and that some old Men their Fathers, shall see their death,
and hear their cries.

XI. French.
Le mouvement de Sens, Coeur, Pieds, and Mains,
Seront d'accord, Naples, Leon, Sicile,
Glaives, Feux, Eaux, puis au Noble Romans,
Plongez, Tuez, Morts, par cerveau debile.
English.
The motion of the Sense, Heart, Feet and Hands
Shall agree, Naples, Leon, Sicily,
Swords, Fires, Waters, then to the noble Romans,
Dipped, Killed, Dead, by a weak-brain.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses signify the concord that shall be among the Spanish
dominions, expressed here by Sense, Heart, Feet, and Hands. After which, the
Romans or those of Rome, shall be evilly entreated, being drewned, killed, and
put to death by a weak brain. I guess this to have come to pass, when the
Emperor Charles the V. his Army sacked Rome, under the command of the Duke of
Bourbon, who was killed at the Assault; and of the Prince of Orange, who
permitted licentiousness to his Soldiers, and suffered them to commit more
violence, than ever the Goths or Vandales did, and therefore is called here
weak brain. This Prince of Orange was of the House of Chalon, after which came
that of Nassau.

XII. French.
Dans peu ira fauce brute fragile,
De bas en haut esleve promptement,
Puis en estant desloyal and labile,
Qui de Verone aura gouvernment.
English.
Within a little while a false frail brute shall go,
From low to high, being quickly raised,
By reason that he shall have the Government of Verona,
Shall be unfaithful and slippery.
ANNOT.

This foretells of a wicked person, who in a short time shall be from a low
degree exalted to a high one, by reason that those that have the Government of
Verona, shall be unfaithful and slippery. That person seems to be some Pope,
who from a low degree shall be exalted to that dignity, by the unfaithfulness
and slipperiness of the Venetians, who are now Lords of the City Verona in
Italy,

XIII. French.
Les exiles, par ire, haine intestine,
Feront au Roy grand conjuration,
Secret mettront ennemis par la mine,
Et les vieux siens, contre eux sedition.
English.
The banished, by choler, and intestine hatred
Shall make against the King a great conspiracy,
They shall put secret enemies in the mine,
And the old his own against them sedition.
ANNOT.

Although this Prophecy seems to be indefinitely spoken, because in every
Country or Kingdom where there is banished people, they most commonly plot
against their King and Country; nevertheless I find two remarkable Histories
to make this good, one in France, and the other in England. That of France is
thus.

The Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Duke of Guise his Brother, being in great
favor with Henry II. the Queen Mother promoted them in the beginning of the
Reign of Francis II. his successor, so that the Cardinal was made Lord high
Treasurer, and the Duke General of the Armies, to the prejudice of the
Constable of Montmorency. Those two favorites, fearing the persecution that is
raised by envy, did remove all the great ones from the Court, whether they were
commanded to do so, or whether they had any other pretenses.

The Princes of Conde, and of la Roche sur yon, were sent into Flanders to
Philip 11. Conde, to confirm the alliance between the two Crowns, and la Roche
sur yon to carry the Order of France.

Diana of Poitiers Duchess of Valentenois, was banished from Court, and
compelled to surrender to the Queen all the Jewels she had extorted from the
King, besides the Castle of Chenonceaux, which the Queen took for her self.

The Marshal St. Andrew was likewise banished from the Court. The King of
Navarre was in Bearn.

The Constable took also his leave, and surrendered to the King the Seal of his
Office. On the other side, the Protestants began to stir notably, having on
their part many Princes, as that of Conde, of Porcien, Gaspard, of Coligny,
Admiral of France, d'Andelot, and the Cardinal of Chastillon his brothers,
Magdalene of Mailly, their Sister, Lady of Roye, the King of Navarre. All these
discontented persons, and the Protestants made a great conspiracy under
pretense of Religion, and of freeing the King from the tyranny of the Guisians.

They did by Choler, the Protestants because they had been so ill used, in the
time of Francis I. and Henry II. and lately by the Guisians. And the
discontented, for to pull down their power, it was also by an intestine hatred,
because the Constable could not brook to be dispossessed of his Office of great
Master, which was given to the Duke of Guise; and the others to see themselves
from the management of Affairs, and the Protestants by the spirit of a Contrary
Religion.

Their conspiracy tended to expel the Guisians, and to seize upon the Queen,
the King, and his Brothers.

To compass their end, they secretly sent some trusty persons of their own, who
nevertheless feigned to be their Enemies; insomuch that the King of Navarre
sent them word, that he would be always of their party, though apparently he
took the Courts part.

But the old his own, says the fourth Verse, that is to say, the Kings old
friends shall raise Sedition against them, which happened in the year 1650.
when the Guisians having discovered the conspiracy that was made at Nantes, the
1. of February 1560. whose chief Ringleader was the Lord La Renaudie; they
presently got the King out of Blois, and carried him to Amboise, caused the
Town to be fortified, and set strong Guards upon all the passages.

The day appointed for the execution of the conspiracy at Blois, was the 10th
of March: But the King being got to Amboise, the Conspirators went thither in
such great numbers, and under such specious pretenses, that had they not been
betrayed, no body would have suspected them. All the Suburbs and the Country
Towns thereabouts were full of them. the Prince of Conde, the Admiral,
d'Andelot, and his Brother the Cardinal, were all there.

Then the Guisians began to fall to work, and to set upon the Conspirators on
all sides.

Abundance were taken, some in the City, some in the Suburbs, others in the
Country round about.

Most of these were slain before they could come to Town, or be carried to
Prison. And their process was so short that they were hanged in their Boots and
Spurs.

The Scouts did every where kill those they met withal. To conclude, it proved
a very Bloody Tragedy.

La Renaudie the Chief of the Conspirators, was met with by the Lord Pardaillan
a Gascon. At the first approach La Renaudie killed him; but himself was killed
by Pardeillan's Servant, and his dead body brought and hanged at Amboise.

The second History is concerning England, which palpably makes this Prophecy
good, if we make reflection upon what has happened in this last Century of
years, concerning banished people that have conspired against their King and
Country, as we may see through all the Life of Queen Elizabeth, and by that
famous Plot of the Gun-powder-Treason in King James's time, which must be
understood here by the Mine,

XIV. French.
De gens esclave, chansons, chants, and requests,
Captifs par Princes, and Seigneurs aux prisons,
A l'aduenir par Idiots sans testes,
Seront receus par divins oraisons.
English.
From slavish people, Songs, Tunes and requests,
Being kept Prisoners by Princes and Lords,
For the future by headless Idoits,
Shall be admitted by divine prayers.
ANNOT.

This is a prognostication of the beginning and increase of the Protestants in
France, who began to sing their Psalms in French, and from time to time
presented their request for tolleration. The Author being a zealous Papist
calls them Idiots, and that notwithstanding the persecution that should be
against them, being put in Prison by Princes and Lords, they should at last be
admitted by reason of their often praying to God.

XV. French.
Mars nous menace par la force bellique,
Septante fois fera le sang respandre,
Auge and ruin de l'Ecclesiastique,
Et par ceux qui d'eux rien ne voudront entendre.
English.
Mars threatens us of a Warlike force,
Seventy times he shall cause blood to be shed.
The flourishing and ruin of the Clergy,
And by those that will hear nothing from them.
ANNOT.

The Author having premonished us in his Preface, that God having imparted to
him the knowledge of many future things, he was curious to know if his Divine
Majesty had written the same thing in the Celestial Book, as concerning the
States, Empires, Monarchies, Provinces and Cities, and he found that it was
even so as it had been revealed to him, so that the Book of Heaven, written
with Gods own hand, in so many shining Characters, might serve to studious men
for a light and a Torch to discover very near the common estate of the world.

He then having learned from God in his solitariness, the prosperities and
afflictions of the Clergy, from the beginning of the year 1555. to the end of
the world; he found that there was an agreement between his prophetical
Knowledge, and the motion of the Heavenly Bodies; because having made the
Systeme of the years after 1550. he found that Mars was in a dangerous Aspect
to the Ecclesiastical estate, and found that this Planet by its position did
presage a long, bloody and horrid Catastrophe in the world, by which the
Ecclesiastical estate should suffer much.

To make good this prediction, the Author does assure us in his Preface, that
he had considered the disposition of this Planet, not only in the year 1555.
but also in the years following, and joining together all that he had found in
his Ephemerides, he found that this Planet did on all sides presage most bloody
actions. Although, says he, the Planet of Mars makes an end of its course,
and is come to its last Period: nevertheless it will begin it again, but some
gathered in Aquarius for many years, and others by long and continual years.

As if he would say that his prediction ought not to be rejected; because Mars
ended his course, and comes to its late period; for it would take again its
Exaltation and Dominion with a worse conjunction, having his Astronomical
dignities, with the Conjunction of other Planets in the Sign of Aquarius during
many years, and in the Sign of Cancer for many years more.

Which makes the Author conclude, that within the space of 177. years, three
months and eleven days, the world shall be afflicted with Wars, Plagues,
Famines and Innundations, that scarce any body shall be left to Till the
Ground. By which prediction we learn that those evils began in the year 1555.
the first of March, which is the date of the Authors Book, and shall last till
the second of June 1732. abating the ten days of the Gregorian Calender.

During which time, he says, that Mars threatens us with bloody Wars that
shall be reiterated 70 times.

This word seventy does not signify a determinate number, but a great number
indeterminated according to the Phrase of the Scripture, which by the number of
seven signifies many times, and by that of seventy incomparably many times
more. Thus the Scripture says, that the just man falls seven times in one
day, that is many times, and our Savior says to St. Peter, that we ought to
forgive our Enemies, not only seven times, but seventy times seven; that is
innumerable times.

We have found the truth of this Prophecy to this very day. 1. In France, by
the Wars between Henry II. and Charles V. and Philip II. 2. By the Wars of
Charles IX. against the Protestants, wherein so much blood was spilt on both
sides. 3. By Henry III. against the same Protestants, and factions of his time,
and then against the Parisians and others of their league. 4. Between Henry IV.
and those of the league in his revolted Kingdom. 5. By the Wars of Lewis XIII.
against the Protestants, against the Duke of Savoy, in the Valteline, in
Piemont, in Lorrain, in Alsatia, in Catalonia, in Franche-Conty, in Flanders,
and for the defense of Portugal, which have been continued by his successor
Lewis XIV. now Reigning.

Italy did also find the truth of this prophecy, by the Wars between Paul IV.
and the Spaniard, between Pius V. and the Turks, between Clement VIII. and the
Duke of Ferrara, between the Emperor and the Duke of Mantua, between Urban
VIII. and the Duke of Parma, between the Venetians and the Florentines, by the
revolt of the Kingdom of Naptes, under the conduct of the Duke of Guise.

England has had its share of it under Queen Elizabeth, by the revolt of
Yorkshire, and some other Provinces, by the Spanish fleet of 88.

By the death of Queen Mary, by the revolt of the Kingdom against Charles I.
And by the horrid perfidiousness of Cromwell.

Germany has made it good by the War against the Turks, the Protestants and
the Swedes.

Poland has done the same against the Russians, Tartars, Turks, Cassaks and
Swedes.

And Venice against the Turk, for the Islands of Cyprus and Candia, the Battle
of Lepanto, and the Wars of Dalmatia.

This Mars besides presageth two contrary things, one is the Auge or
Exaltation, the other the ruin of the clergy: where it is to be observed, the
Auge in terms of Astrology signifies mounting or ascending, and comes from
the Latin verb augere, which signifies to augment or increase. This
augmentation and ruin of the Clergy is made good by the several changes that
have been in the Ecclesiastical estate, in France, England, Low Countries,
Denmark, Swede, Poland, Hungary, Valachia, Transylvania, Moldavia, Dalmatia,
Geneva, Switzerland, etc.

The fourth Verse says. By those that will hear nothing from them: that is by
the Protestants that will hear nothing from the Roman Catholics.

XVI. French.
Faux a l'Estang, joint verse la Sagittaire,
En son haut Auge de l'Exaltation,
Peste, Famine, mort de main Militaire,
Le Siecle approcher de renovation.
English.
The Since to the Fish Pond, joined to Sagittarius
In the highest Auge of the Exaltation,
Plague, Famine, Death by a Military hand,
The age grows near to its renovation.
ANNOT.

The sense of all this is, that when a Meadow that was a Fish Pond before,
shall be Mowed, the Sign of Sagittarius being in its Auge or ascendant, then
shall Plague, Famine, and War Reign, and that age (which a Century of years
shall be near its end and renovation viz. of another Century.)

XVII. French.
Par quarante ans l'Iris n'apparoistra,
Par quarante ans tous les jours sera veu,
La Terre aride en siccite croistra,
Et grand deluge quand sera apparceu.
English.
During forty years the Rainbow shall not appear,
During forty years it shall be seen every day.
The parched Earth shall wax dryer and dryer,
And great Floods shall be when it shall appear.
ANNOT.

The Interpretation of this is easy, and signifies nothing else but that
during 40. years the Rainbow shall not be seen, and during that time there
shall be an exceeding great drought upon the Earth, and that for 40. years
after the Rainbow shall be seen every day, which shall cause great floods and
innundations.

XVIII. French.
Par la discord, negligence Gauloise,
Sera passage a Mahomet ouvert,
De sang trempe la Terre and Mer Senoise,
Le Port Phocen de Voiles and Nefs couvert.
English.
Through the discord and negligence of the French,
A passage shall be opened to Mahomet,
The Land and Sea of Sienna shall be bloody,
The Phocen Haven shall be covered with Sails and Ships.
ANNOT.

In the year 1559. Sultan Solomon called Leonclavius, according to the alliance
made between him and Francis I. King of France, was desired by Henry II. his
Son to send him some succors: Whereupon he sent some of his Galleys to scour
the Tyrrhenean Sea (otherwise the Sea of Tuscany) to give a diversion to the
Spanish forces in Italy, while the King by the means of the Marshal of Brissac,
should continue his Conquests in the Piemont and Milanese.

All what this Turkish Fleet did, was to plunder and overrun the Island of
Elbe, and to attempt Piombino without effect; and because these places were
seated upon the Sea of Sienna, called in Latin Mare Tirrhenum, the Author says
that both the Land and Sea of Sienna shall be died with Blood, and at that time
the Heaven of Marseilles, which was called by the Ancients, Port- Phocen was
full of Sales and Ships, as well to go into the Island of Corse, as for other
designs. This History makes good that Stanza which says, that through the
discord and negligence of the French, a passage shall be opened to Mahomet,
wherein it is to be observed that the Marshal of Brissac doing wonders for the
King in Piemont, his virtue got him abundance of enviers and enemies in the
Kings Council, which was the cause of a great discord among them, by the
diversity of opinions, and this diversity was the cause of a prodigious
negligence in sending to him relief, as Turpin witnesses in his History of
Naples, and Paradin in the continuation of his History.

By this discord and negligence, a passage was opened to Mahomet, his Fleet
going freely upon the Mediterranean Sea (...)ar the Coasts of France. And the
reason of it was, because this discord and negligence did compel Henry the II.
to ask succors of Solomon, that the Spaniard might be compelled to divide his
Forces in sending some to the Sea-Towns, and so should not be so strong in
Piemont; and thus must be understood the French discord and negligence, in the
first and second Verse. As for the many Sails and Ships that were then in the
Haven of Marseilles, to go into the Island of Cersica, the following Stanza's
are full of predictions concerning it.

XIX. French.
Lors que Serpens viendront circuir l'Air,
Le sang Troien verse par les Espagnes,
Par eux: grand nombre en sera fait tare,
Chef fuit, cache aux Marets dans les saignes.
English.
When Serpents shall come to encompass the Are,
The Trojan blood shall be vexed by Spain,
By them, a great number shall perish,
Chief runs away, and is hid in the rushes of the Marshes.
ANNOT.

By the Serpents, the Author being a Roman Catholic, means the Protestants,
who then began to appear numerous in the Reigns of Francis the I. and Henry the
II. in whose time the Admiral Coligny was the chief among them, for his great
seats in War.

These Serpents or Protestants begun to encompass the Are, that is to say, the
Church and the Altar, which in Latin is called Ara.

And that happened when the Trojan-blood was vexed by Spain. By the
Trojan-blood, the Author means the French blood, according to the vulgar
opinion, that the French are descended from the Trojans. The French were then
vexed by the Spaniards, at the Battle of St. Laurence, and at the taking of St.
Quentin, and other places in the Year 1557.

The third Verse says by them, that is by the Protestants a great number shall
perish, that is to say, a great number of French. Among whom the Admiral of
Chatillon having done what was possible to be done at the defense of St.
Quentin, and seeing the Town taken, run away with three more, and hid himself
among the Rushes that are in the Boggs about the Town, where he was found, and
carried Prisoner to the Duke of Savoy, who received him very honorably,
according to his valor and deserts.

Observe that the word Saignes here signifies in old Proven al a Marish.

XX. French.
Tours, Orleans, Blois, Angers, Renes and Nantes,
Cites vexee par soudain changement,
Par Langues estranges seront tendues Tents,
Fleuves, Darts, Rennes, Terre and Mer tremblement.
English.
Tours, Orleans, Blois, Angers, Renes, and Nantes,
Cities vexed by a sudden change,
By strange Languages Tents shall be set up,
Rivers, Darts, Rennes, Land, and Sea shall quake.
ANNOT.

All the Cities mentioned in the first Verseare seated by the River of Loire,
and are threatened here of a sudden change, and that some strangers shall set up
their Tents against them, and chiefly at Rennes, there shall be an Earthquake
felt both by Sea and Land.

XXI. French.
Profonde argile blanch nourrit rocher,
Qui d'un abysme istra l'acticineuse,
En vain troublez ne l'oseront toucher,
Ignorant estre au fond terre argileuse.
English.
A deep white clay feeds a Rock,
Which clay shall break out of the deep like milk,
In vain people shall be troubled not daring to touch it,
Being ignorant that in the bottom there is a milky clay.
ANNOT.

It is a Rock in the middle of the Sea, whose Roots are fed by a white clay,
which is at the foot of this Rock, in the bottom of the Sea, and therefore
called deep.

This clay being softened, and dissolved by the Seawater, shall appear upon the
superficies of it like milk about the Rock. Those that shall see this wonder,
being ignorant that in the bottom there is a milky clay, shall in vain be
troubled at it, and shall not dare to touch it.

XXII. French.
Ce qui vivra and n'aura aucun sens,
Viendra le Fer a mort son artifice,
Autun, Chalons, Langres and les deux Sens,
La Guerre and la Glass fera grand malefice.
English.
That which shall live, and shall have no sense,
The Lion shall destroy the art of it,
Autun, Chalons, Langres, and both Sens,
The War and the Ice shall do great harm.
ANNOT.

This is a great Riddle, which was never found out till now; and had I not been
born in the Country where the History did happen, it might have been unknown
to this day, and buried in oblivion.

In the year of the Lord 1613. which was that of my Birth. There was in the
Town of Sens a Tailors Wife named Columba Chatry, who presently after her
marriage conceived, and for the space of 28. years persuaded her self to be
with Child, had all the signs of it in the beginning of her impregnation, and
having The Hist^^^ of a (...) o^ p^trified child.
gone her complete time, she begun to feel the pains of a woman in Labor, with
great gripings in the Guts. The Urine was suppressed for a while, but at last
it broke out with a strong current. This quantity of water not coming so much
out of the Bladder as was supposed, as from the womb, by the breaking of the
Membrane, called Amnion, seeing that with those serous excrements, she avoided
some conjealed blood. After that her breast begun to fall, and the Child had
little or no motion, her pains being less than they were, which caused no small
admiration to the Midwifes, who expected a safe deliverance. For the space of
three years after, this woman kept her Bed, and was brought to Deaths door,
complaining of gripings and a hard swelling, which she desired all the
Physicians and Chyrurgeons to feel, having lost all appetite, but that little
which she recovered by the use of sharp things, as Verjuice, Lemmons, etc. she
was wont to say to her Neighbors, that she bare a Child that should be the
cause of her death. After she was dead, her Husband got two experienced
Chyrurgeons to open her body, who having opened the belly, and taken away the
Peritonaeum, saw the Womb of several colors, as the flesh that is about the
head and neck of a Turky-cock, but as it were of a Horny substance. They begun
to make an incision in it with a Rasour, but finding it resisted the edge, they
begun to use their Incision knives with all their strength; at last one of them
by chance hit the Scull, and after that some Ribs, and then the Shoulder bone,
by which, knowing that there was bones contained in that lump, with greater
strength they made a deeper Incision, and having parted the edges of the womb,
saw in the bottom of the womb a Child, wrapped in the membrane, called
Allantoides; at which the Chyrugeons wondering, sent for the Physicians to have
their opinion in a thing that is almost beyond belief; in the mean time people
flocking thither from all parts, and troubling the Chyrurgeons in their
operation; they thought good to take away with their Instruments all that Lump,
as a Tree from its Roots, and to carry it home, that they might with more time
and leisure examine the whole Anatomy of it. In that hasty pulling out of the
Child, they had no time to observe what Chorion it had, what umbilical Vessels,
and what connection there was of the Allantoides with the Womb, and with the
Child, chiefly about the right hip, the Buttocks, and the Backbone being all
grown solid together.

The situation of the Child was almost Spherical, the face leaning upon the
breast, and the Nostri^s upon the Knees; the bones of the Head were but thin,
but very hard, and shining like Horn; the skin of the Head was hairy in many
places; the head did hang so much upon the left arm, that the Ear, and part of
the skull had given way to the Shoulder Bone; the Elbow was bent toward the
Shoulder stretching only his hand, which was so close shut, and the fingers
sticking so fast to the Palm of it, that although they did appear distinct one
from another, never theless it was all but one and the same stone; the right
arm did strerch its hand toward the Navel, which unadvisedly was broken by the
wrist, and left in the Mothers Belly; the left Thigh, Knee and Leg were on the
top of the right ones, with which they were so entangled, that the left heel,
and the sole of the foot were planted upon the right foot, who seemed to have
given place to them, and were almost inseparably joined; for all such hardness
of the matter, the body was not less than that of other Children of the same
age, but kept a perfect fullness and proportion all the internal parts, as the
Brains, the Heart, the Liver, had their natural shape, and were not altogether
so hard as the external parts, so that to this very day this little body
defieth all kind of corruption.

This Child was kept in my time by one Mr. Michel a Surgeon of Sens, who
kindly showed it to all the strangers that came far and near to see it. The
Fame of it was so great, that Doctor Mayerne coming from Switzerland to
England, took his way through Sens to see it, and would have persuaded King
Charles I. to buy it, as himself told me; since that I hear it was fallen into
the hands of the Venetians. In this History there is two observable wonders.
One, that the Child dying in the Womb, did not corrupt, and so cause the death
of its Mother. The other, by what virtue or power of the body this child was
petrified, seeing that the Womb is a hot and moist place, and therefore more
subject to putrefaction. Those that will satisfy themselves with the reasons
of it, and the truth of the History, may read Johannes Alibosius Physician of
Sens, who was an eye witness of it, and Sennertus in his book of Sympt. qum
seminis in utero accidunt.

Now this accident being so rare, and without parallel, our Author thought fit
to foretell it, and to cover it in abscure terms, that he might not appear
ridiculous in so admirable an eveut. When therefore he says, That which shall
live and shall have no Sense, he means this (...) or child petrified, which
had a Life while it was in the Mothers belly, being tied to it by the several
Vessels and connexions, known to Anatomists, and yet was senseless in that it
was petrified. When in the second verse he says, The Iron shall destroy the
art of it, he means that it should be spoiled by the rasour, in the two last
verses he says, that the Towns of Autun, Chalons, Langres, and Sens the Town
in which this did happen should that same year suffer much damage by Hail and
Ice, which did come to pass, as many persons may justify in that Country, that
are alive to this day.

XXIII. French.
Au mois troisiesme se levant le Soleil,
Sanglier, Leopard, aux champs Mars pour combatre,
Leopard less au Ciel estend son oeil,
Un Aigle autour du Soleil voit sesbatre.
English.
In the third month at the rising of the Sun,
The Boar and Leopard in Marth camp to fight;
The Leopard weary, lift his eyes to to Haven,
And sees an Eagle playing about the Sun.
ANNOT.

This signifies a particular accident, viz. that in the third Month, which is
that of March, at the rising of the Sun, the Boar and the Leopard, that is, two
persons of quality hidden under these names, shall go into the fields to fight
a Duel. The Leopard one of them being weary, shall lift up his eyes to Heaven,
calling upon God, and thereupon shall see an Eagle playing about the Sun, that
is, shall get the Victory, of which the Eagle is the Emblem.

XXIV. French.
A Cite nevue pensif pour condamner,
Loisel de proie au ciel se vient offrir,
Apres Victoire a Captifs pardonner
Cremone and Mantoue grands maux auront ouf^ert.
English.
In the new City for to condemn a Prisoner,
The Bird of pray shall offer himself to Heaven,
After the Victory, the Prisoners shall be forgiven,
After Cremona and Mantua have suffered many troubles.
ANNOT.

This name of new City is appropriated to several ones in every Country. The
French have many Villeneufuas, the Germans many Newstads, the Italians and
Spaniards many Villanovas, so that it is hard to guess which of them the Author
means. The missing of this door makes the rest of the Prophecy so obscure,
that I had rather leave it to the liberty of the Reader, than to pretend a true
explication of it. I shall only say, that Cremona and Mantua are two famous
Towns in Italy, which are here threatened.

XXV. French.
Perdu, trouve cache de si long siecle
Sera Pasteur demy-Dieu honor,
Ains que la Lune acheve son grand Siecle,
Par autre vents fera deshonore.
English.
Lost, found again, hidden so great a while,
A Pastor as Deme-God shall be honored;
But before the Moon ends her great Age,
By other winds he shall be dishonored.
ANNOT.

The Prophecy is concerning the body of a famous Churchman, which was lost,
and shall be fonnd again, and worshipped as a Demy-God, but before the Moon has
run her great age, which is of 13 Months, it shall be vilified and dishonored.

XXVI. French.
Le grand du Foudre tomb d'heure diurne,
Mal and predit par Porteur populaire,
Suivant presage tomb d'heure nocturne,
Conflit Rheims, Londres, Etrusque Pestifere.
English.
The great Man falls by the Lightning in the day time,
An evil foretold by a common Porter;
According to this foretelling another falls in the night,
A fight at Rhemes, and the Plague at London and Tuscany
ANNOT.

This is concerning some great man, who being premonished by a common Carrier
not to travel upon a certain day, did slight the advice, and was stricken by
Lightning in the day time, and another in the night; at the same time there was
a fight at Rhemes, and the Plague at London and in Tuscany, which in Latin is
called Etruria.

XXVII. French.
Des soubs le Chesne Guyen du Ciel frappe,
Non loin de la est cache le Thresor,
Qui par long Siecles avoit este grappe,
Trouve mourra, l'oeil creve de ressor.
English.
Under the Oak Guyen stricken from Heaven,
Not far from it is the Treasure hidden,
Which has been many Ages a gathering;
Being found he shall die, the eye put out by a spring.
ANNOT.

The sense of it is, that somebody (who is named here Guyen) being under an Oak
shall be stricken with the lightning, and that near that place there is a great
Treasure, that has been many years a gathering, and that he who shall find it
shall die, being shot in the eye with a Fire-lock.

XXVIII. French.
La Tour de Bouk craindra fuste Barbare,
Un temps, long temps apres Barque Hesperique,
Bestial, gens meubles tous deux feront grand tare,
Taurus and Libra, quelle mortelle pique?
English.
The Tower of Bonk shall be in fear of a Barbarian Fleet,
For a while, and long after afraid of Spanish shipping,
Flocks, peoples, goods both shall receive great damage,
Taurus and Libra, O what a deadly feud.
ANNOT.

The Tower of Bouk is a strong place seated by the Rhosne, where it enters
into the Mediterranean Sea; it is said here that it shall be in fear of a
Barbarian Fleet, and after that of a Spanish one, and that both the Spaniard
and the French shall have great losses in Cattle, People and Goods, and this
shall happen when the Sun shall be in the Signs of Taurus and Libra.

XXIX. French.
Quand le Poisson, Terrestre and Aquotique,
Par forte vague au gravier sera mis,
Sa form estrange suave and horrifique,
Par Mer aux murs bien tossed les Enemies.
English.
When the Fish that is both Terrestrial and Aquatick;
By a strong Wave shall be cast upon the Sand,
With his strange fearful sweet horrid form,
Soon after the enemies will come near to the Walls by Sea.
ANNOT.

This signifies no more but that after, a Fish, Terrestrial and Aquatick, that
is which, lives in Land and Water, called by the Greeks (...), shall be cast
upon the Sand by a storm, then a little while after, that Town which lies near
to that place where the Fish was cast, shall be Besieged by her Enemies, who
shall come by Sea.

XXX.
La Nef estrange par le tourment Marin,
Abordera ptes le Port incognu,
Nonobstant signs du rameau palmerin.
Apres mort, pille, bon advis tard venu.
English.
The Outlandish Ship by a Sea storm,
Shall come near the unknown Haven,
Notwitstanding the signs given to it with Bows,
It shall die, be plundered, a good advice come too late
ANNOT.

It is a Foreign Ship which by a storm shall be driven to an unknown Harbor,
and notwithstanding the signs that shall be made to it with Branches, by those
that are upon the Land to beware of the entrance of the Harbor, it shall be
cast away, and plundered; thus a good advice shall come too late.

XXXI. French.
Tant d'ans les guerres, en Gaul dureront,
Outre la course du Castulon Monarque,
Victoire incerte trois grands couroneront,
Aigle, Coq, Lune, Lion Soleil en marque,
English.
So many years the Wars shall last in France,
Beyond the course of the Castulon Monarque,
An uncertain Victory three great ones shall Crown,
The Eagle, the Cock, the Moon, the Lion having the Sun in its mark
ANNOT.

That is, the Wars shall last so long in France after the death of one King of
Spain, till three great ones shall challenge an uncertain Victory, these three
great ones are the Emperor designed by the Aigle, the King of France by the
Cock, and the Turk by the Moon, and this shall happen when the Sun is in the
sign of the Lion. I suppose that came to pass in the time of Charles the V.
Henry the II. and Soliman. For the Turk had no great odds upon the Emperor,
nor he upon the King of France.

XXXII. French.
La grand Empire sera tossed translate,
En lieu petit qui bien tossed viendra croistre,
Lieu bien infime d'exigue Comte,
Ou au milieu viendra poser son Scepter.
English.
The great Empire shall soon be translated,
Into a little place which shall soon grow afterward.
An inferior place of a small County,
In the middle of which he shall come to lay down his Scepter
ANNOT.

This is concernig the same Charles the V. Emperor, who about three years
before his death, being weary of the World, resigned his Dominions of Spain and
of the Low Countries, to his Son Philip the II. and his Empire to his Brother
Ferdinand, and retired himself into a Monastery of Castile, called l'Escurial,
which after his death, was much enlarged and beautified by his Son Philip: and
that is the meaning of our Author when he says: Into a little place which
shall soon grow afterward,
An inferior place of a small County,


For this Escurial being seated in a Desert place of a County of Spain, called
Castilia, which the Spanish vanity calls a Kingdom, (whose Use, Fruit, or
Revenues, the said Charles only reserved for his maintenance) is now by the
Spaniards accounted to be the eight wonder of the World.

XXXIII. French.
Pres d'un grand Pont de plain spacieuse,
Le grand Lion par force, Cesarees,
Fera abatre horse Cite rigoureuse,
Par effroy ports luy seront reserrees.
English.
A great Bridge near a spacious Plain,
The great Lion by Caesarean Forces,
Shall cause to be pulled down, without the rigorous City,
For fear of which, the Gates shall be shut to him.
ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that a great Captain, Commander of the Imperial
Forces, shall cause a Bridge that was built near a spacious Plain to be thrown
down. The City near the Bridge being terrified at it, shall shut up their Gates
against him.

XXXIV. French.
L'Oiseau de proye volant a la Fenestre,
Avaunt conflict, fait au Francois parure,
L'un bon prendra, l'autre ambigue sinistre,
La party foible tiendra pour bonne augure.
English.
The Bird of Prey flying to the Window,
Before Battle, shall appear to the French;
One shall take a good omen of it, the other a bad one,
The weaker part shall hold it for a good sign.
ANNOT.

It is a Hawk which in presence of two Armies ready to give Battle, shall fly
to a window and perch upon it, in the presence of them all, one of the Armies
shall take it for a good sign; and the other, for an ambiguous and sinister
one. In Conclusion, the weaker party shall get the Victory.

XXXV. French.
Le Lion jeune le vieux surmontera,
En champ bellique par singulier Duelle,
Dans Cage dor Loeil il lui crevera,
Deux plays une puis mourir mort cruelle.
English.
The young Lion shall overcome the old one,
In Martial field by a single Duel,
In a Golden Cage he shall put out his Eye,
Two wounds from one, then he shall die a cruel death.
ANNOT.

This is one of the Prophecies that has put our Author in credit, as well for
the clearness as for the true event of it.

Caessar No stradamus our Authors son, in his History of Provence, writes that
by this Stanza his father intended to foretell the manner of Henry the second's
death.

The French Histories relate that this great Prince desiring to honor the
Nuptial of his Daughter Elizabeth, married to Philip II. King of Spain, did
appoint a Tournament to be kept in St. Anthony's street in Paris, where himself
would be one of the Defendants against all comers, and for that purpose chose
for his companions and associates Don Alfonso d'Este Duke of Ferrara, and
Francis of Lorrain, Duke of Guise.

The Tornament being almost ended, in which the King had showed much Valor
being mounted upon a Horse of the Duke of Savoy, Philibert's, Emanuel his
Brother in Law, this Duke entreated the King to leave off, because he had got
the Victory; and the weather was hot, and the night drawing on: But this
Martial King would need break one Lance more, and commanded the Captain
Gabriel de Lorges to be called, a young and valiant Lord and Captain of the
Scottish Guard. Being come, the King commanded him to run against him, which he
refused a great while; but the King waxing angry, he obeyed, and set Spurs to
his Horse, he did hit the King in the lower part of his Beaver, the Lance was
broken into shivers, and the mean stump lifting up the Beaver, a splinter got
in, and wounded the King a little above the right Eye, where finding the Bone
too hard, it went very deep under the said Eye, and broke some Veins belonging
to the Membrane, called Pia Matter.

The blow was so violent that the King bended his head toward the lists, and
fell, into a Swound, being presently disarmed, they perceived the splinter of
the Lance in his Eye, and his face all bloody. He lived ten days after, and
died with great Convulsions, because the Sinews were offended, whereupon he
suffered grievous Torment.

His death was also foretold by Luke Gaurick a great Astrologer, who being
constrained by the Queen Catharine of Medicis, to tell her by what kind of
death her Husband should end his days, told her it should be in a Duel, which
made him to be hissed at, Kings being exempted of those accidents.

According to this Narrative the Author calls the King an old Lion, and the
Captain Lorges, since Earl of Montgomery, the young Lion; because both fought
like Lions. The young Lion overcame the old one in Martial field, and in a
fight of one against one, and consequently a Duel.

He overcame him by putting his Eye out in a Golden Cage, that is, in his
Gilded Helmet.

Of which Wound there came another, because the blood of some broken Veins,
creeping into the Brains by the vehement agitation of the head, caused an
Impostume there, which could not be remedied: therefore the Author says two
Wounds from one, that is, one wound made two: and the King died of a cruel
death, as we have said before.

XXXVI. French.
Tard le Monarque se viendra repentir,
De navoir mis a Mort son Adversaire,
Mais viendra bien a plus haut consentir,
Que tout son sang par Mort fera deffaire.
English.
The Monarque shall too late repent,
That he has not put to death his Adversary;
But he shall give his consent to a greater thing than that,
Which is to put to death all his Adversaries Kindred,
ANNOT.

The words of this are plain, though it be questionable whether the thing is
come to pass already, or not.

XXXVII. French.
Un peu devant que le Soleil sabsconse
Conflict done, grand peuple dubieux,
Profligez, Port-Marin ne fait responce,
Pont and Sepulcher en deux estranges lieux.
English.
A little before the Sun sets,
A Battle shall be given, a great people shall be doubtful
Of being foiled, the Seaport makes no answer,
A Bridge and Sepulcher shall be in two strange places.
ANNOT.

The two first verses I believe are concerning the Battle of Saint Denis, which
was fought in the Evening hard by Paris, and where the Constable of Montmorency
was killed, which made that great people of Paris to be doubtful. The other two
Verses I leave to the interpretation of the Reader.

XXXVIII. French.
Le Sol and l'Aigle Victeur paroistront,
Response vain au vaincu lon asseure,
Par Cor ne cris, harnois narresteront,
Vindicte paix, par Mort lacheve a l'heure.
English.
The Sun and the Eagle shall appear to the Victorious,
A vain Answer shall be made good to the vanquished,
By no means Arms shall not be stopped,
Vengeance makes Peace, by death he then accomplisheth it
ANNOT.

This Stanza being full of Figures and Equivoques, I will not interpose my
Judgment in it, lest I undertake too much, and perform too little.

XXXIX. French.
De nuit dans le lit le supresme estrang'e,
Pour avoir trop suborne blond esleu,
Par trois l'Empire snbroge Exancle,
A mort mettra, Carte ne Packet leu.
English.
By night in the bed the chief one shall be strangled.
For having 100 much suborned fair Elect,
By three the Empire subrogate Exancle.
He shall put him to death, reading neither Card nor Packet.
ANNOT.

The Author has purposely obscured this Prophecy in the third Verse, to take
away the Knowledge of it from the Reader; because the parties concerned were
then alive, viz. Philip II. King of Spain, who caused his only son Don Carlo to
be strangled in his bed, for suspicion of being too familiar with his wise
Elizabeth of France, and Daughter to Henry II. The last Verse says, that he
was so implacable, that he would read neither Card nor Packet, that is, no
requests.

XL. French.
La tourbe fausse dissimilant folly
Fera Bizance un changement de loix,
Istra d' Egypt qui veus que l'on deslie,
Edict, changant Monnoys and alloys.
English.
The false Troup dissembling their folly,
Shall make in Bizance an alteration of Laws.
One shall come out of Egypt who will have united
The Edict, changing the Coin and allay.
ANNOT.

There is two things in this Prognostication, the first that in Bizance, which
is Constantinople, a Troop of tumultuous persons gathered together, and
dissembling their folly, shall cause an alteration in the Laws.

The other, that some Bassa come out of Egypt, shall persuade them at
Constantinople to alter their Coin, and the allay of it.

XLI. French.
Siege a Cite and de nuit assaille,
Peu eschapez non loing de Mer conflict,
Femme de joye, retour fills, de faillie
Poison and Lettres cache dedans le plic.
English.
A Siege laid to a City, and assaulted, by night
Few escaped, a fight not far from the Sea,
A woman swoundeth for joy to see her son returned;
A poison hidden in the fold of Letters.
ANNOT.

After the taking of Vulpian, the French came to Montcalvo, and in the night
surprised it by Scalado, and Paradin says, that not a drop of Blood was shed
on either side.

The Town being taken, the Citadel did hold out a good while, and at last did
surrender, Don Arbre, who was in the place of the Marquis of Pescaire, and of
the Duke of d'Alva, knowing that the besieged had not made a sufficient
resistance, caused the Captain, and eleven more of the chief ones to be hanged;
because the place was of consequence, and those within had not made a
sufficient resistance.

The Author says in the first Verse, Siege was laid to a City, that is, it was
resolved to besiege Montcalvo, as the Martial of Brissac had advised. In the
execution it was assaulted by night, in the taking few escaped; for they were
all taken, and yielded to the Victorious. There were none killed or wounded,
all were taken, except few who ran away, and carried the news to the Spaniards.

At the same time a fight not far from the Sea, that is, at the same time there
was another Battle by the Sea, between the Spaniards and the Pope, as we shall
show hereafter.

The third and fourth Verses are concerning a particular accident, which
happened presently after the taking of Montcalvo, which is, that a woman seeing
her Son come back safe, fell in a swound, or died for joy, because knowing the
danger wherein he was, she had lost all hopes of ever seeing him. This fellow
had brought Poison in a Letter to give to one that had not rewarded him
according to his desire. His wickedness being discovered, his Master put him in
Prison, whence he escaped, and came back again to Montcalvo; the Author
speaks of the same in another place, which we shall set down in its order.

XLII. French.
Les dix Calendes d' Avril de fait Gothique,
Resuscite encor par gens malins,
Le feu estaint, assemblee Diabolique,
Cherchant les Os de Damant and Psellin,
English.
The tenth of the Calends of April, Gothik account,
Raised up again by malicious persons,
The fire put out, a Diabolical assembly,
Shall seek for the Bones of Damant and Psellin.
ANNOT.

The tenth of the Calends of April is the 23. of March, Gothik account
signifies the old account of the Calendar, before the reformation of it by
Pope Gregory the XIII. which old account is called here Gothik, because it is
kept still by the Nothern Nations, which do not acknowledge the Pope, as
Sweden, Denmark, Holland, England, etc. at that time says our Author, a
Magician shall be raised up by malicious persons; which fire or tumult being
put out, that Diabolical assembly will go about to seek the bones of two famous
Magicians, viz. Damant and Psellin that were dead before.

XLIII. French.
Avaunt qu'aviene le changement d'Empire,
Il adviendra un cas bien merveilleux,
Le Champ mue, le Pilier de Porphyre,
Mis, translate sur le Rocher Noileux.
English.
Before the change of the Empire comes,
There shall happen a strange accident,
A field shall be changed, and a Pillar of Prophyry,
Shall be transported upon the Chalky Rock.
ANNOT.

This will not seem incredible to those that have read the English Chronicles,
who relates that in a County of England (I think it is Herefordshire) there was
an Earthquake, which transposed a large piece of ground in another place, with
the Trees that were in it, and if I remember well, half a Chapel, those that
have the Books may examine the truth of the History, and satisfy themselves
better.

XLIV. French.
En bref seront de retour Sacrifices,
Contrevenans seront mis a Martyr,
Plus ne seront Moins, Abbez ne Novices,
Le Miel sera beaucoup plus cher que Cire.
English.
Within a little while Sacrifices shall come again,
Opposers shall be put to Martyrdom;
There shall be no more Monks, Abbots, nor Novices,
Honey shall be much dearer then Wax.
ANNOT.

This is a true Prophecy of the miserable condition of the Church and Clergy in
our Forefathers times, and chiefly of Henry the II. in France, and Henry the
VIII. in England, when in the beginning of the Reformation there was such a
confusion of opinions, and such unsettledness in Ecclesiastical Government,
that sometimes the Popish party prevailed, and put to death the Opposers; at
another time the Protestants, who drove away the Monks, Abbots and Novices, as
is expressed here, and proved true in Henry the VIII. time. As for what he
says, that Honey shall be much dearer than Wax. It is to be understood of the
downfall of the Romish Religion, who makes use of Wax Candles and Tapers in
their superstitious ceremonies, as if he would say, that the Romish Religion
being down, Wax shall be cheap, and Honey dear.

XLV. French.
Secteur de Sects, grand pain au Delateur,
Best en Theater, dress le jeu Scenique,
Du fait antique ennobly l'Inventeur,
Par Sects, Monde confus and Schismatique.
English.
Follower of Sects, great troubles to the Messenger,
A Beast upon the Theater prepares the Scenical play,
The Inventor of that wicked fact shall be famous,
By Sects the World shall be confounded and Schismatik.
ANNOT.

The Author being a Papist, is probable that in this Prophecy he aimed at
Luther, after whose coming the world has been full of Sects and Schisms.

XLVI. French.
Tout aupres d' Auch, de Lectoure and Mirande,
Grand feu du Ciel en trois nuits tombera,
Chose adviendra bien stupende and mirande,
Bien peu apres la Terre tremblera.
English.
Near Auch, Lectoure and Mirande,
A great fire from Heaven shall fall three nights together,
A tbing shall happen stupendous and wonderful,
A little while after, the Earth shall quake.
ANNOT.

Auch, Lectoure and Miranda are three Towns in Guyenna, a Province of France,
the chief City whereof is Bourdeaux. The rest is easy.

XLVII. French.
Du Lac Leman les Sermons fascheront,
Des jours seront reduits par des Sepmaines,
Puis mois, puis an, puis tous defalliront,
Les Magistrates damneront leurs Loix veins.
English.
The Sermons of the Leman Lake shall be troublesome,
Some days shall be reduced into weeks,
Then into months, then into year, then they shall fail,
The Magistrates shall condemn their vain Laws.
ANNOT.

The Leman Lake, in Latin Lacus Lemanus, is the Lake of Geneva, therefore it is
palpable, that by this Prophecy, the Author aims at Calvin, and his
Successors, who began the Reformation in that Town. I leave the rest to the
Readers Judgment, it is enough I have opened the door.

XLVIII. French.
Vingt ans du Regne de la Lune passez,
Sept mil ans autre tiendra sa Monarchy,
Quand le Soleil prendra ses jours laissez,
Lors accomplit and fine ma Prophecy.
English.
Twenty years of the Reign of the Moon being past,
Seven thousands years another shall hold his Monarchy,
When the Sun shall reassume his days past,
Then is fulfilled, and ends my Prophecy.
ANNOT.

All this signifies no more, but that the Authors Prophecies extend to the end
of the world.

XLIX. French.
Beaucoup, beaucoup avaunt tells menees,
Ceux d'Orient par la virtue Lunaire,
L'An mil sept cens feront grands emmenees,
Subjugant presque le coin Aquilonaire.
English.
A great while before these doings,
Those of the East by the virtue of the Moon,
In the year 1700. shall carry away great droves,
And shall subdue almost the whole Northern corner.
ANNOT.

I desire Posterity to take special notice of this Stanza, that in case it
should come to pass, our Author may be admired for the specification of the
time, which is so punctually set down, here that it admits no ambiguity. The
plain meaning is, that the Turks, which he calls those of the East. By the
virtue of the Moon, which is their Ensign and Badge, shall in the year 1700.
carry away abundance of people, and shall subdue almost the whole Northern
Country, which to them is Russia, Poland, Hungary, Sweden, Denemark, etc.

L. French.
De l'Aquatique triplicity naistra,
Un qui fera le Jeudy pour sa feste,
Son Bruit, Loz, Regne and puissance croistra,
Par Terre and Mer, aux Orients tempeste.
English.
From the Aquatick triplicity shall be born,
One that shall make Thursday his Holiday,
His Fame, Praise, Reign, and Power shall grow,
By Land and Sea, and a Tempest to the East.
ANNOT.

The meaning is, that at that time, as (such conjunction of Planets shall be,
which he calls here Aquatick triplicity, there shall be born upon a Thursday
a famous man, such as he describes here, who shall be a foe and a terror to
the Turks, signified here by the Orients.

LI. French.
Chef d' Aries, Jupiter and Saturn,
Dieu Eternel quelles mutations!
Puis apres long siecle son malin temps return,
Gaul and Italy quelles emotions?
English.
Heads of Aries, Jupiter and Saturn,
O Eternal God, what changes shall there be!
After a long age his wicked time comes again,
France and Italy, what commotions?
ANNOT.

This signifies, that when Jupiter and Saturn shall be in conjunction in the
head of Aries, that then shall be great commotions in France and Italy.

LII. French.
Les deux malins de Scorpion conjoint,
Le grand Seigneur meurtry dedans sa salle,
Peste a l'Eglise par le nouveau Roy joint,
L' Europe basse, and Septentrionale.
English.
The two malignants of Scorpion being joined,
The grand Seignor murdered in his Hall,
Plague to the Church by a King newly joined to it,
Europe low, and Septentrional.
ANNOT.

This third position of the Celestial bodies foretells the death of the great
Turk, who should be murdered in his own Chamber, as happened to Sultan Osman,
who was strangled in his Chamber, by the command of Daout Bassa great Vizeir,
about the year 1622. vide the Turkish History.

The rest of the Prophecy is concerning a King, who being newly joined to the
Church, (I suppose of Rome) shall bring much mischief to it, and in his time
Europe shall be brought very low, and in a manner confined to a corner of the
North, which has relation to the foregoing 49. Stanza, which see in its place.

LIII. French.
Las, qu'on verra grand peuple tourmente,
Et la Loy Saint en totale ruin,
Par autres Loix toute la Chrestiente,
Quand d'Or, d'Argent trouve nouvelle Mine.
English.
Alas, how a great people shall be tormented,
And the Holy Law in an utter ruin;
By other Laws, all Christendom troubled,
When new Mines of Gold and Silver shall be found
ANNOT.

This is a true Prophecy of the mischiefs that have happened in the World by
the finding of the Mines in America; first to the Indians themselves, called
here a great People, by the cruelty of the Spaniards, and then to all
Christendom besides, by the evils that this Idol Mammon has brought into it.

LIVE. French.
Deux revolts faits du malin facigere,
De Regne and Siecles fait permutation,
Le mobil sign a son endroit s'Ingere,
Aux deux egaux and d'Inclination.
English.
Two revolts shall be made by the wicked Link-carrier,
Which shall make a change of the Reign and the Age,
The moveable Sign does offer it self for it,
To the two equals in inclination.
ANNOT.

This obscure Stanza must be interpreted thus.

Two revolts shall be made by the wicked Link-carrier; that is, Paris which is
the Link-carrier of France, and whose example the rest of the Towns follow,
shall revolt twice, the first revolt was against Henry III. in the time of the
Barricadoes, the second against Henry IV. his successor.

Which shall make a change of the Reign and the Age: This happened when the
house of Valois was extinguished. and the house of Bourbon came in, and that is
the change of the Reign. The change of the Age, was, because this did happen
about the end of the year 1599. and the beginning 1600. which was a change of
Age.

The moveable sign offers it self for it: That is, the position of the Heavens
was such as to forward these accidents.

To the two equals in ambition: That is, to Henry III. and Henry IV. who both
intended, and went about to reduce Paris to obedience.

LV. French.
Soubs lopposite climat Babilonique,
Grande sera de sang effusion,
Que Terre, and Mer, Air, Ciel sera inique,
Sects, Faim, Regnes, Pestes, Confusion.
English.
In the Climat opposite to the Babylonian,
There shall be a great effusion of Blood.
Insomuch that the Land, and Sea, Air and Heaven shall seem unjust
Sects, Famine, Reigns, Plague, Confusion.
ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult here, but what Climat is that is opposite to the
Babylonian, of which every body may satisfy himself by perusing the Globe.

LVI. French.
Vous verrez tossed ou tard fair grand change,
Horreurs extremes and vindications,
Que si la Lune conduite par son Ange,
Le Ciel sapproche des inclinations.
English.
You shall see soon or late great alterations
Extreme horrors and revenges,
The Moon leaden by her Angel,
The Heaven draws near its inclinations.
ANNOT.

I conceive there is some things omitted, and corrupted by the Press in this
Stanza, which renders it so difficult, therefore I had rather leave it to the
decision of the impartial Reader, than venture my opinion upon it.

LVII. French.
Par grand discord la trombe tremblera,
Accord rompu, dressant la test au Ciel,
Bouche sanglante dans le sang nagera,
Au Sol la face ointe le loit and Miel.
English.
By great discord, the Trumpet shall sound,
Agreement broken, lifting the head to Heaven,
A bloody mouth shall swim in blood,
The face turned to the Sun anointed with Milk and Honey.
ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain, and I cannot believe that there is any great
mystery hidden under these words.

LVIII. French.
Trenche le ventre, naistra ave deux festes,
and quattre bras, quel qu'ans entiers vivra,
Jour qu'Aquilare celebrera ses festes,
Fossan, Thurin, chef Ferrare fuiera.
English.
Slit in the belly, shall be born with two heads,
And four Arms, it shall live some years,
The day that Aquilare shall celebrate his Festivals,
Fossan, Thurin, chief Ferrare shall run away.
ANNOT.

In the first Verse the Author speaks of a Monster that had two heads, and
four Arms, and the Belly slit, that is to say, it was a female.

His Son Caesar in his History of Provence, says, that in the Town of Senan in
Provence, a Child was born with two heads, and that it was foretold by some
that were skilful in Astronomy, by which words I guess he spoke of his Father,
since the Astrologers cannot foretell the birth of a particular Monster, and
therefore Nostradamus only was able to do it in those days.

He faith in the same place, that it was born in February 1554, and was brought
to Salon to be showed to his Father, and thence was carried to Claudius Earl of
Savoy Governor of Provence, who commonly had his residence at Salon.

He makes no mention if he had four Arms, nor what Sex it was of, it may be
that being in swaddling cloths, no body took notice of the Arms or Sex.

The Author Prophecieth that it should live some years, it may be two or three,
and that is was preserved to see, whether in time it should have the use of its
Senses, of the Tongue, and understanding of its two Heads, to see whether there
were two Souls, or only one, and to say the Truth. I think that in such an
accident both Heads ought to be Baptized. that in case there should be two
Souls, both should partake of the blood of Christ, for their Eternal Salvation.

I do not find in the same History how long it lived, it being a thing not much
material to History. In the third Verse he marketh, The day that Aquilare shall
celebrate his Festivals; and in the fourth he says that Fossan, Thurin, chief
Ferrare shall run away.

To understand this, one must suppose here that the Town of Cazal is called
here the chief of Ferrare; because it is the chief City of Montferrat, and as
Paradin says, is called Cazal St. Bas, a handsome and strong place, honored
with many Nobles and ancient Families, as of the Earls of St. George and of
Biandratte.

Secondly, We must suppose that in the year 1554. the Lord Figuerol, Lieutenant
to the Governor of Milan did command in that place. Of this Figuerol I find in
the Author of the four Volumes of the States and Empires, (when he speaks of
Spain) that the House of Figueroas was the root of that of Aquilar, which has
several branches, out of which came the Duke of Feria, and the Marquess of
Pliego, so that Figuerol and Aquilar is the same thing.

If it be objected that Figueroas and Figuerol are not the same, Paradin
teaches us, that this Figuerol was bred up amongst the Genoeses, and the
corrupted Italian of Genoa may have named the Captain Figuerol in stead of
Figueroas.

Thirdly, We must suppose here that Cazal was taken in the night that is
between Shrove-Tuesday and Ash Wednesday, and that from Shrove-Sunday to that
day there were great rejoycings, because of a famous Marriage that was made
between two persons of quality, where the Lord Figuerol was one of the chief
persons invited.

Fourthly, That these rejoycings were the occasion of the taking of Cazal;
because the Lord Salvaison Governor of Verrue hearing of this Feast, resolved
to be among them, though with a different intention. He had before hand made
himself sure of one Fontarole, who under pretense to sell fruit, went up and
down the Town to spy what was a doing.

Fifthly, The resolution of surprising Cazal was agreed upon, and the time
appointed to be the night between Shrove-Twesday and Ash Wednesday, when the
Governor, Inhabitants and Soldiers should be buried in sleep, weary of
debaucheries committed the day before.

Sixthly, This resolution was so happily put into execution, that Figuerol
hearing the noise of the French being in Town, came out of his house, having
only his night Gown upon him, and a Halbert in his hand, to quiet those whom he
only thought to be some drunken persons; but hearing the cry of France,
Fraence, he presently retired into the Castle, with all those that were come to
the Nuptials.

Seventhly, The Marshal of Brissac coming about seven of the Clock in the
Morning, caused the Tower of Cazal to be assaulted, which was taken with a
considerable loss of the French, and after that the Castle which held out 12
days.

All this being supposed, mark what the Author ^aith in the third Verse.

The day that Aquilare shall celebrate his Festivals, that is, the day that
Figuerol of the house of Aquilare shall celebrate his Festivals, not only one
Festival, but his Festivals, that is of three days.

Fossen, Thurin, says the fourth Verse, Chief Ferrare shall run away.

Fossen, Thurin, does not signify two Towns, but one only; for although
Fossen and Thurin be two Towns, of which Fossen in the time of the Wars in
Italy under Henry 11. belonged to the Spaniard, and Thurin to the French. These
two Towns signify but one, which is that of Fossen, to which to distinguish it
from Marseilles, he gives the Epithete of Thurin, so much as to say, that he
speaks of Fossen a Town of Piemont, the chief Town of which is Thurin, and
not of Fossen, which the Author takes often for Marseilles.

Which the Author makes plain, when he says in the singular number, that
Fossen, Thurin, chief Ferrare shall run away, to show that it is only one Town
of which he speaks, otherwise if he had intended to speak of two, he would
have put it in the plural number, which is more manifest by the History,
wherein we learn that Fossen belonged to the Spaniards, and Thurin to the
French, and consequently, being of contrary parties, they could neither follow,
nor fly from a Town which belonged to one of them.

If any one should object, that the sense of the fourth Verse is, that the
Chief Ferrare shall fly or follow these two Towns, the preceding reason is
repugnant to that sense; because a Town that is of one party, cannot be friend
to two ^owns, one of which is of its party, and the other of the contrary.

The reading of this work shall convince every body, that the Author sets
down sometimes two Towns for one, to distinguish them from others, as he names
Paul Mansol, to distinguish that Town of St. Paul, which is three Leagues from
the Rbosne, over against Pont St. Esprit, from that St. Paul which is in
Provence.

Now that Fossen in Piemont shall run from Cazal the chief City of Montferrat;
because that being taken by the French, Fossen could not expect but perpetual
damages from it.

But why? will you say, does the Author speak rather of Fossen, than of other
places that held for the Spaniards? I answer, because Fossen was the strongest
place that the Spaniards had in Piemont, and which could not be taken by the
French, though her neighbor Saviliane was, as we shall show hereafter.

In the Vulgar impression of this Stanza, there is two saults, one is, that in
the first Verse it puts Aquileya, which is a Town that is not in Italy, truth
it is, that there is Aquilee a little above Venice, but this has no
correspondency with Fossen, Thurin, nor the Chief of Ferrara.

In the fourth Verse the impression sets down shall follow, which makes
nonsense, and therefore I put shall run away, which is a word in French near
the other, and makes a complete sense, to which agrees the birth of that
Monster in February, and the taking of Cazal in the Month of March. In that
year, John Statius sets Shrove-Twesday upon the 16 of February, and
consequently we must say, that the Town was not taken that year 1554. for the
Citadel was taken 12 days after, which should have been the 19 of February, and
notwithstanding the History marks that it was taken upon the 14 of March.

Therefore we must conclude, that it was taken the year following 1555. and to
say truth, in that year Ash Wednesday was the 27. of February; in that day the
Town was taken, and two days after the Tower of Cazal; after which the Citadel
was besieged the second of March, and the first Saturday of Lent, and was taken
twelve days after, which was the 14. of March, which convinces me that Cazal
was taken in the year 1555. upon the 27. of February, and therefore that this
Stanza is wholly Prophetical.

LIX. French.
Les exilez deportez dans les Isles,
Au changement d'un plus cruel Monarque,
Seront meurtris and mis dans les Scintilles,
Qui de parler ne seront este parques.
English.
They banished that were carried into the Islands,
At the change of a more cruel Monarque,
Shall be murdered, and put in the sparks of fire,
Because they had not been sparing of their tongues.
ANNOT.

This is very plain, and signifies no more, but that some persons that were
banished into Islands, and could not hold their tongues; upon the coming of a
Monarque, more cruel than his Predecessor, shall be murdered, and burnt.

LX. French.
Un Empereur naistra pres d' Italy,
Qui a l'Empire sera vendu bien cher,
Diront avec quels gens il se ralie,
Qu'on trouvera moins Prince que Boucher.
English.
An Emperor shall be born near Italy,
Who shall cost dear to the Empire,
They shall say, with what people he keeps company!
He shall be found less a Prince, than a Butcher.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is for the future; for since Nostradamus's time till now, such
an Emperor was not heard of, that was born near Italy, that cost the Empire so
dear, and proved more a Butcher, than a Prince.

LXI. French.
La Republique miserable infelice,
Sera vastee du nouveau Magistrate,
Leur grand amas de l'exil malefice,
Fera Suede ravir leur grand contract.
English.
The miserable and unhappy Commonwealth
Shall be wasted by the new Magistrate;
Their great gathering from exiled persons,
Shall cause Swedeland to break her Contract.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses foretell what has happened to England under the
Government of a Commonwealth, and how their new Magistrate Cromwell made a
havoc of them. The third and fourth Verses, mention what great sums they
exacted from those of the Kings party, and how for that cause Swedeland
foresook their friendship.

LXII. French.
La grande perte las que feront les Lettres,
Avaunt le Circle de Latona parfait,
Feu, grand Deluge, plus par ignares Sceptres,
Que de long siecle ne se verra refait.
English.
Alas what a great loss shall learning suffer,
Before the Circle of the Moon be accomplished,
Fire, great flood, and more by ignorant Scepters,
Then can be made good again in a long age.
ANNOT.

Here the Author bemoaneth the loss of one eminent person in Learning, be like
of Julius Scaliger, who lived in his time, and was once his intimate friend,
the two last Verses that great miseries, as Fire and Flood shall happen by the
ignorance of Princes.

LXIII. French.
Les Fleaux passez, diminue le Monde,
Long temps la Paix, Terres inhabitees,
Seur marchera par le Ciel, Terre, Mer and Onde,
Puis de nouveau les Guerres suscitees.
English.
The Scourges being past, the World shall be diminished,
Peace for a great while, Lands inhabited,
Every one safe shall go by Heaven, Land and Sea,
And then the Wars shall begin a fresh.
ANNOT.

This foretells a great tranquillity every where, and after that, Wars again:

LXIV. French.
De nuit Soleil penseront avoir veu,
Quand le Pourceau demi homme on verra,
Bruit, Chant, Bataille au Ciel battre apperceu,
Et bestes brutes a parler on orra.
English.
They shall think to have seen the Sun in the night,
When the Hog half a man shall be seen,
Noise, Singing, Battles in Heaven shall be seen to fight,
And brute beasts shall be heard to speak.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is full of prodigies that are to happen, and for that in the last
Verse, it is no great wonder, for many brute beasts have spoken, speak now a
days, and shall speak hereafter.

LXV. French.
Enfant sans mains, jamais veu si grand Foudre,
L'Enfant Royal au jeu d'esteuf bless,
Au puy brisez, fulgures allant moudre,
Trois sur les champs par le milieu troussez.
English.
A child without hands, so great Lightning never seen,
The Royal Child wounded at Tennis,
Bruised at the Well, Lightnings, going to grind,
Three shall be stricken by the middle.
ANNOT.

The meaning of all this is, that when a child shall be born without hands,
there shall be fearful Lightning; a Royal child shall be hurt at Tennes, and by
that Lightning some shall be bruised by a Well, and in a Mill, and three in the
Field shall be killed.

LXVI. French.
Celuy qui lors portera les nouvelles,
Apres un peu il viendra respirer,
Viviers, Tournon, Montferrand and Pradelles,
Gresle and tempeste les fera souspirer.
English.
He that then shall carry the news,
A little while after shall draw his breath,
Viviers, Tournon, Montferrant, and Pradelles,
Hail and storm shall make them sigh.
ANNOT.

This Stanza has a connection with the foregoing, for the two first Verses
signify, that he who shall carry the news of that fearful Lightning, and of
the mischief done by it, shall have much ado to recover his breath.

In the last two Verses, the Towns are named which shall suffer most by that
storm, and chiefly by the Hail and the Wind.

French. LXVII.
La grand famine que je vois approcher,
Souvent tourner puis estre universelle,
Sigrande and longue qu'on viendra arracher,
Du Bois racine, and I'Enfant de mamelle.
English.
What a great famine do I see drawing near,
To turn one way, then another, and then become universal,
So great and long, that they shall come to pluck
The root from the Wood, and the child from the breast.
ANNOT.

The words and sense of this are plain, and foretell a great famine, which
being first in one Country and then in another, shall at last become general,
and last so long, that people shall pluck the Roots from the Trees, and the
children from the breast to feed upon.

LXVIII. French.
O quel horrible and malheureux tourment,
Trois innocens qu'on viendra a livrer,
Poison suspect, mal guard tradiment.
Mis en horreur par Bourreaux enyvrez.
English.
O to what a horrid and unhappy torment,
Shall be put three Innocents!
Poison shall be suspected, evil Keepers shall betray them,
They shall be put to horror by drunken Executioners.
ANNOT.

This is very plain concerning three innocent persons, who shall be delivered
up by their unfaithful keepers, and shall be put to great torments by drunken
Executioners, which torments shall be suspected to come by poison.

LXIX. French.
La grand Montagne ronde de sept Stades,
Apres Paix, Guerre, Faim, Inondation,
Roulera loing, abisuant grand contrades,
Mesmes antiques, and grand Fondation.
English.
The great Mount in compass seven Stades,
After Peace, War, Famine, and Innundation,
Shall tumble a great way, sinking great Countries,
Yea ancient Buildings, and great Foundation.
ANNOT.

A Stade comes from the Greek word (...), because Hercules did overrun so much
ground at one breath; but what space of ground the Author means by seven
Stades, is unknown to me. The rest of the Prophecy may very well be
appropriated to the last fearful eruption of Mount Aetna, which sunk so many
Towns and Buildings, and the relation of which is so handsomely and truly made
by the most honorable the Earl of Winchelsey, who was an eye witness to it, in
his return from his Embassy at Constantinople.

LXX. French.
Pluye, Faim, Guerre en Perse non cessee,
La foy trop grande trahira le Monarque;
Par la finie en Gaul commencee,
Secret augure pour a un estre parque.
English.
The Rain, Famine, War, in Persia being not ceased,
Too great credulity shall betray the Monarque;
Being ended there, it shall begin in France,
A secret Omen to one that he shall die.
ANNOT.

The meaning of the two first Verses, is, that while the Rain, Famine, and War
shall be in Persia, a Monarque shall be betrayed by his credulity. The third
Verse signifies that this Rain, Famine and War being ended in Persia, it shall
begin in France. And the fourth Verse, that this shall be an Omen to a great
Person of his approaching death.

LXXI. French.
La Tour Marine troisfois prise and reprise,
Par Espagnols, Barbares, Ligurins,
Marseille and Aix, Arles par ceux de Pise,
Vast, feu, fer, pille, Avignon des Thurins.
English.
The Sea-tower three times taken and retaken,
By Spaniards, Barbarians, and Ligurians,
Marseilles and Aix, Arles by those of Pisa,
Wast, fire, Iron, plunder, Avignon of Thurins.
ANNOT.

It is hard to guess what this Sea Tower is, which was taken and retaken three
times; first by the Spaniards, next by the Barbarians, and then by the
Ligurians, that is, either the Genoeses, or those of Ligorne, unless he means
the Pignon de Velez in Africa, first taken by Charles the V. upon the
Barbarians, then retaken again by them, taken again by the Spaniards, by the
help of the Genoeses. In the third Verse Marseille, Aix, and Arles, are
threatened by those of Pisa, that is the, Florentines, of being ruinated by Fire
and Sword, and to be plundered, as also Avignon by those of Pitmont.

LXXII. French.
Du tout Marseille des habitans changee,
Course and poursuite jusques pres de Lion,
Narbon, Tholoze par Bourdeaux outragee,
Tuez, Captifs presque d'un Milion.
English.
Marseille shall wholly change her Inhabitants
These shall run and be pursued as far as Lion,
Narbon, Tholoze shall wrong Bourdeaux,
There shall be killed and taken prisoner almost a Milion.
ANNOT.

Marseilles is a Sea-Town in Provence, Narbon, and Tholoze are Cities of
Languedoc, and Bourdeaux is the chief Town in Gascony; the rest is easy to be
understood.

LXXIII. French.
France a cinq parts par neglect assaillie,
Tunis, Argier, esmeus par Persiens,
Leon, Seville Barcelonne faillie,
N'aura la chasse par les Venetiens.
English.
France by a neglect shall be assaulted on five sides,
Tunis, Argier shall be moved by the Persians,
Leon, Sevil, Barcelone shall be missed,
And not be pursued by the Venetians
ANNOT.

This Stanza is concerning as many Countries, as there are Verses: the first is
France, which by neglect and carelessness of her in Inhabitants, shall be
assaulted on five several sides. The second is concerning Tunis and Argier,
Cities of Barbary, which shall be stirred and moved (I suppose) to rebel. The
third regards Leon, Sevil, Barselona, Cities in Spain, and the fourth the
Venetians.

LXXIV. French.
Apres sejourne vogueront en Empire,
Le grand secours viendra verse Antioche,
Le noir pil crespe tendra fort a l'Empire,
Barbe d'Airain se rostira en broche.
English.
After a stay, they shall Sail toward an Empire,
The great succors shall come toward Antioch,
The Black Hair Curled, shall aim much to the Empire,
The Brazen Bread shall be roasted on a Spit.
ANNOT.

There is no difficulty in this, but in the last Verse, which I had rather
leave to the judgment of the judicious Reader, than to offer any thing that
might make me ridiculous.

LXXV. French.
Le Tyran Sienne occupera Savone,
Le fort gaigne tiendra class Marine,
Les deux Armees par la marque d' Ancone,
Par effrayeur le chef sen examine.
English.
The Tyrant Sienna shall occupy Savona;
The Fort being won, shall hold a Fleet,
The two Armies shall go in the mark of Ancona,
By fear the chief shall be examined.
ANNOT.

For the explication of this Stanza, you must understand that Sienna is a City
in Italy, now under the Dominion of the Duke of Tuscany, who shall occupy
Savona, a City now under the Dominion of the Commonwealth of Genoa; the rest
is plain enough.

LXXVI. French.
D'un nom farouche tell profere sera.
Que les trois Soeurs auront Fato le nom,
Puis grand peuple par langue and fait dira,
Plus que null autre aura bruit and renom.
English.
By a wild name one shall be called,
So that the three Sisters shall have the name of Fato,
Afterward a great people by Tongue and Deeds, shall say,
He shall have fame and renown more than any other.
ANNOT.

By the three Sisters, he means the three Destinies, viz. Clotho, Lachesis,
and Atropos, which the Poets have fained to Spin every man's destiny, which he
calls here Fato, from the Latin word Fatum. The rest may be interpreted as
well by the Reader, as by my self.

LXXVII. French.
Enter deux Mers dressera promontoire,
Qui puis mourra par le mors du Cheval,
Le fire Neptune pliera Voile noire,
Par Calpre, and Class aupres de Rocheval.
English.
Between two Seas shall a Promontory be raised,
By him, who shall die by the biting of a Horse,
The proud Neptune shall fold the black Sail.
Through Calpre, and a fleet shall be near Rocheval.
ANNOT.

I could not find what he means by Calpre, nor by Rocheval, which I suppose
to be the proper names of places, when he says, that proud Neptune shall fold
the black Sail; he makes an allusion to the History of Theseus, Son of Aegeus
King of Athens, who being sent with other Children into Candia, to become a
prey to the Minotaure, his Father sent the Ship with black Sails, as in a case
of Mourning, charging Theseus, that if he came back again safe he should put on
white Sails, but coming in sight of Athens, Theseus for joy forgot to put on
the white Sails, so that his Father Aegeus thinking he had miscarried, cast
himself from a Rock into the Sea, so that he saying that Neptune shall fold the
black Sail, he means, that there shall be joyful news.

LXXVIII. French.
D'un chef vieillard naistre sens habete,
Degenerant par scavoir and par Arms,
Le chef de France par sa Soeur redoute,
Champs divisez concedez aux Gensdarmes.
English.
An old head shall beget an Idiot,
Who shall degenerate in Learning and in Arms,
The head of France shall be feared by his sister,
The fields shall be divided, and granted to the Troopers.
ANNOT.

The sense of this is so plain, that any body may make his interpretation of it.

LXXIX. French.
Bazas, L'Estoure, Condom, Auch Agine,
Esmeus par Loix, querelle and Monopole,
Car Bourd, Tholose, Bay, mettra en ruin,
Renouveler voulant leur Tauropole.
English.
Bazas, l'Estoure, Condom, Auch, Again,
Being moved by Laws, quarrels and Monopoly,
For they shall put to ruin Bordeaux, Tholose, Bayonne,
Going about to renew their Tauropole,
ANNOT.

This Key of the sense of this Stanza lies in the last word Tauropole, which
is compounded of the Latin word Taurus a Bull, and of the Greek word (...),
that is, to sell; so that the meaning of it is, that those Cities mentioned
shall rise in Rebellion against the Monopolites, and those that shall lay a Tax
upon Cattle.

LXXX. French.
De la sixiesme claire splendeur Celeste,
Viendra Tonnerre si fort en la Bourgongne,
Puis naistra monstre de treshideuse best,
Mars, Avril, May, Juin, grand charpin and rogne.
English.
From the sixth bright Celestial splendor,
Shall come very great Lightning in Burgundy,
After that shall be born a Monster of a most hideous beast,
In March, April, May, June shall be great quarelling and muttering.
ANNOT.

The first Verse is of a most dark and abstruse sense, in which I confess my
ignorance, unless he meant from the sixth of the seven Planets, the rest is
plain enough.

LXXXI. French.
D'humain troupeau neus seront mis a part,
De Jugement and Conseil separez,
Leur sort sera divise en depart,
Kappa, Theta, Lambda, mors, bannis egarez.
English.
Nine shall be set aside from the human flock,
Being divided in Judgment and Counsel,
Their fortune shall be to be divided,
Kappa, Theta, Lambda, dead, banished, scattered.
ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult here, but what he means by Kappa, Theta, Lambda,
which are three Letters of the Greek Alphabet.

LXXXII. French.
Quand les Colomnes de Bois grande tremblee,
D' Aufter conduite, couverte de rubriche,
Tant videra dehors grande assemblee,
Tremble Vienne, and le Pais d' Austriche.
English.
When the wooden Columns shall be much shaken,
By Auster, and covered with rubbish,
Then shall go out a great assembly
And Vienne, and the Land of Austria shall tremble.
ANNOT.

Auster, in Latin is the Southwind. Vienna is the chief City of Austria,
belonging to the Emperor of Germany.

LXXXIII. French.
L'Agent estrange divisera butins,
Saturnc and Mars son regard furieux,
Horrible, estrange, aux Thoscans and Latins,
Grees qui seront a frapper curiux.
English.
The stranger Agent shall divide booties,
Saturn in Mars shall have his aspect furious,
Horrid, and strange to the Tuscans and Latins
The Grecians shall be curious to strike.
ANNOT.

By the Tuscans are meant the people under the Dominion of the Duke of
Florence; and by the Latins, those under the Pope.

LXXXIV. French.
Lune obscurie aux profondes tenebres,
Son friar pass de couleur ferrugine,
Le grand cache long temps soubs les tenebres,
Tiedera Fer dans la Pluie sanguine.
English.
The Moon shall be darkened in the deepest darkness,
Her brother shall pass being of a ferrugineous color,
The great one long hidden under darkness,
Shall make his Iron lukewarm in the bloody Rain.
ANNOT.

This signifies, that when the Moon shall be totally Eclipsed in the night,
and that all the next day her Brother the Sun shall be seen of a ferrugineous,
(that is an Iron like color) then shall a great one that was hidden arise, and
do great feats of Arms with the death of many men.

LXXXV. French.
Par la responce de Dame Roy trouble,
Ambassadeurs mespriseront leur vie,
Le grand ses Freres contrefera double,
Par deux mourront, hain, ire, and envy.
English.
A King shall be troubled by the answer of a Lady,
Ambassadors shall despise their lives,
The great one being double in mind shall counterfeit his Brothers,
They shall die by two, anger, hatred, and envy.
ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult here, but the last Verse, which yet will be plain
enough, if you make these three words anger, hatred, and envy not co-herent
with the foremost, but subsisting by themselves; as if one should say, there
shall be anger, hatred, and envy.

LXXXVI. French.
La grande Roine quand se verra vaincue,
Fera exces de Masculin courage,
Sur le Cheval, Fleuve passera nue,
Suite par Fer, a Foy fera outrage,
English.
When the great Queen shall see her self vaniquished,
She shall do a deed of a Masculine courage,
Upon a Horse, she shall pass over the River naked,
Followed by Iron, she shall do wrong to her Faith.
ANNOT.

It is some great Queen, who seeing her self vanquished, shall swim naked on
Horseback over a River, being followed by those that would have either killed
or taken her, and after that shall forfeit her faith, but whether it be to her
Husband, Friends, or Relations, is not expressed.

LXXXVII. French.
Ennosigee feu du Center de Terre
Fera trembler autour de Cite Neuve,
Deux grands Rochers long temps feront la guerre,
Puis Arethuse rougira nouveau fleuve.
English.
Ennosigee, fire of the Center of the Earth,
Shall make quake about the New City,
Two great Rocks shall a great while War one against the other,
After that, Arethusa shall color red a new River.
ANNOT.

Ennosigee is a Greek word (...), in Latin Terrae quassator, from (...) moveo,
and (...) Terra, and is an Epithete of Neptune. The meaning then of this Stanza
is, that the Sea shall make the Earth quake, and fire come out of the Earth
about Naples, which in Greek is called Neapolis, that is, a New City.

Arethusa is a Fountain in Sicily, which a little way from its Spring, grows
into a River. The rest is left to the interpretationof of the Reader.

LXXXVIII. French.
Le Divin mal surprendra un grand Prince,
Un peu devant aura femme espousee,
Son appuy and credit a un coup viendra mince,
Conseil mourra pour la test rasee.
English.
The Divine sickness shall surprise a great Prince,
A little while after he has married a woman,
His support and credit shall at once become slender,
Council shall die for the shaven head.
ANNOT.

By the Divine sickness, he means the falling sickness, called by the Greeks
Epilepsia, and by the Latins Morbus Sacer. By the shaven head, he means some
Ecclesiastical person of the Romish Religion; the construction of the whole is
easy.

LXXXIX. French.
Tous ceux d' illerde seront dans la Moselle,
Mettant a mort tous ceux de Loire and Seine,
Le course Marin viendra pres d' Hautevelle,
Quand Espagnols ouvrira toute vein.
English.
All those of Illerde shall be in the Mosel,
Putting to death all those of Loire and Seine,
The Sea course shall come near Hautevelle,
When the Spaniard shall open all veins.
ANNOT.

By Illerde he means the City of l'sle in Flanders, the Mosel is a River that
runs through Lorrain, the Loire and Seine are two other Rivers of France,
the first of which passes at Orleans, and the second at Paris; the two last
Verses are too hard for me to interpret.

XC. French.
Bourdeaux, Poitiers, au son de la Campane,
A grande class ira jusqu'a Langon,
Contre Gaulois sera leur Tramontane,
Quand Monstre hideux naistra pres de Orgon.
English.
Bourdeaux, Poitiers, at the sound of the Bell,
With a great Navy shall go as far as Langon,
Against the French shall their Tramontane be,
When an hideous Monster shall be born near Orgon.
ANNOT.

Tramontana, in Italian, is the North Wind. Orgon, is the name of a Town in
Gascony, the rest of the construction is not difficult.

XCI. French.
Les dieux seront aux humains appearance,
Ce quils seront auteurs de grand conflict,
Avaunt ciel veu serain, Espee and Lance,
Que verse main gauche sera plus grande affliction.
English.
The Gods shall make it appear to Mankind,
That they are the Authors of a great War;
For the Heaven that was Serene, shall show Sword and Lance,
Signifying, that on the left hand the afflication shall be greater.
ANNOT.

He foretells here some Prodigies that shall be in the Air, as Swords and
Lances after fair weather, which shall be forerunners of great Wars, and
chiefly in those Countries that shall be situated on the left hand of these
Prodigies.

XCII. French.
Soubs un la paix, par tout sera clemence,
Mais non long temps, pille and rebellion,
Par refus Ville, Terre and Mer entamee,
Morts and Captifs le liers d'un Million.
English.
Under one shall be peace, and every where clemency,
But not a long while, then shall be plundering and Rebellion,
By a denial shall Town, Land and Sea be assaulated,
There shall be Dead and taken Prisoners the third part of a Million.
ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain.

XCIII. French.
Terre Italique des Mons tremblera,
Lion and Coq non trop confederez,
en lieu and peur l'un l'autre saidera,
Seul Catulon and Celtes moderez.
English.
The Italian Land of the Mountains shall tremble,
The Lion and the Cock shall not agree very well together,
Shall for fear help one another,
The only Catulon and Celtes shall be moderate.
ANNOT.

By the Lion he understands the English, because of their Arms, and by the
Cock the French, called in Latin Gallus, which signifies a Cock; Catulen is
the Spaniards, as if he should say Castilian; the Celtes are the Dutch of the
Low Countries.

XCIV. French.
Au Port Selyn le Tyrant mis a Mort,
La liberte non pourtant recouvree,
Le nouveau Mars par vindict and remort,
Dame par force de frayeur honoree.
English.
In the Port Selyn the Tyrant shall be put to death,
And yet the liberty shall not be recovered,
The new Mars by vengeance and remorse,
Lady by excess of fear honored.
ANNOT.

By the Port Selyn, is meant Constantinople, because of several Emperors of
the Turks that have been of that name, therefore the intention of this
Prophecy, is, that one of the Turkish Emperors shall be put to death at
Constantinople, which for all that, shall not recover her liberty. The new
Mars, be like he is so called, that shall put him to death by vengeance without
remorse. The Lady by excess of fear honored, may be applied to the present
great Sultaness, Mother to this present Emperor of the Turks, who has
hitherto made her self very considerable by a great party, which she has
raised against her Son, to prevent him from putting his Brothers to death,
(...) is usually practiced in that Court.

XCV. French.
Devant Moustier trouve enfant besson,
D'Heroik sang de Moi^e and vetustique,
Son bruit per Sect, Langue, and puissance Son,
Qu'on dira fort esleve le Vopisque.
English.
Before the Minister shall one twin be found,
From Heroik blood, of a Monk and Ancient,
His fame by Sect, Tongue, and Power shall be sounded,
So that they shall say the Vopisk is much raised.
ANNOT.

The meaning of the whole is, that a Twin shall be found before a Church, begot
by a Monk, of Illustrious and Ancient Family, and shall become very famous. So
that they shall say the Vopisk is much raised. Vopiscus in Latin, is, that one
of the Twins, which comes to perfect Birth.

XCVI. French.
Celuy qu'aura la charge de destruire,
Temples and Sects changez par fantaisie,
Plus aux Rochers, qu'aux vivans viendra nuire,
Par langue ornee d'oreille rassasie.
English.
He that shall have charge to destroy,
Churches and Sects, changed by fancy;
Shall do more harm to the Rocks, than to the living,
By a smooth tongue filling up the Ears.
ANNOT.

As the words of this Stanza are plain, so is the sense most obscure, and so to
be left to the Readers private Judgment.

XCVII. French.
Ce que fer, flamme, na sceu parachever,
La douce langue au conseil viendra fair,
Par respos, song le Roy fera resuer,
Plus l'Ennemy en feu sang militaire.
English.
What neither Iron nor Fire could compass,
Shall be done by a smooth tongue in the Council,
In sleep a dream shall make the King to think,
The more the Enemy in fire and Military blood.
ANNOT.

The sense of this is plain, though the words be something untowardly expressed.

XCVIII. French.
Le Chef qu'aura conduit peuple infiny,
Lion de son Ciel: de moeurs and langue estrange,
Cinq mill en Crete and Thessalie finy,
Le Chef fuiant sauve en la Marine Grange.
English.
The Captain that shall lead an infinite deal of people
Far from their Country, to one of strange manners and Language,
Five thousand in Candia and Thessalia finished,
The Head running away, shall be safe in a Barn by the Sea.
ANNOT.

It is some great Commander that shall lead a multitude of people into a
strange Country, far from their own; suppose Candia and Thessalia, where the
said Commander shall be compelled to runaway, and to save himself in a Barn by
the Sea side.

XCIX. French.
Le grand Monarque qui fera compagnie,
Avec deux Rois unis par amity,
O quel souspir fera la grand mesgnie,
Enfans, Narbonne alentour, quel pity!
English.
The great Monarch shall keep company,
With two Kings united in friendship;
O what sights shall be made by their followers!
Children, O what pity shall be about Narbon.
ANNOT.

This Stanza requires no interpretation more, than what every one will be
pleased to give himself.

C. French.
Long temps au Ciel sera veu gris Oiseau,
Aupres de Dole and de Tuscane Terre,
Tenant au Bec un verdoiant remeau,
Mourra tossed Grand, and finira la Guerre.
English.
A great while shall be seen in the Air a gray Bird,
Near Dola and the Tuscan Land,
Holding in his Bill a green bough;
Then shall a great one die, and the War have and end.
ANNOT.

Dola is a Town in Burgundy: The Tuscan Land, is that which belongs to the
Duke of Florence.

THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY II.
I. French.
Verse Aquitaine par insults Britanniques,
De par eux mesmes grandes incursions,
Pluyes, Celees, feront terroirs iniques,
Port Selyn fortes fera invasions,
English.
Toward Gascony by English assaults,
By the same shall be made great incursions,
Rains, Frosts, shall mar the ground,
Port Selyn shall make strong Invasions.
ANNOT.

THree Prophecies are contained in this Stanza, the first that the English
shall make an incursion in Gascony; the second, that there shall be a great
dearth by Rains and Forsts; the third, that the Turks shall make great
Incursion.

II. French.
La test glue fera la test blanch,
Autant de mal que France a fait leur bien,
Mort a l' Anthene, grand pendu sus la branche,
Quand prins des siens, le Roy dira combien.
English.
The Glue-head shall do the white head
As much harm, as France has done it good,
Dead at the Sails yard, a great one hanged on a Tree,
When a King taken by his own, shall say, how much?
ANNOT.

I did never find that word of Glue-head before in any Author, and I believe if
Cotgrave were alive again, it would puzzle him to give the interpretation
thereof.

The third and fourth signify, that one shall be hanged on the Sails-yard, and
another on a Tree, when a King shall be taken by his own Men, and shall say how
much? that is, how much money shall l give you to set me free.

III. French.
Par la chaleur Solaire sur la Mer,
De Negrepont, les Poissons demi cuits,
Les Habitans les viendront entamer,
Quand Rhode and Genes leur faudra le Biscuit.
English.
By the heat of the Sun upon the Sea
Of Negrepont, the Fishes shall be half broiled,
The Inhabitants shall come to cut them up,
When Rhodes and Genoa shall want Biscake.
ANNOT.

Negrepont is an Island of the Archipelago near Morea, anciently called Eubaea.
Rhodes is another Island, and Genoa a City in Italy, by the Sea side. The rest
is plain.

IV. French.
Depuis Monac jusqu'aupres de Sicile,
Toute la plage demoura desolee,
Il ny aura Fauxbourgs, Cite, ne Ville,
Que par Barbares pillee foit and volee.
English.
From Monaco as far as Sicily,
All the Sea coast shall be left desolate,
There shall not be Suburbs, Cities, nor Towns,
Which shall not be pillaged and plundered by Barbarians.
ANNOT.

Monaco is a Town seated by the Seaside in Italy, between Provence and Genoa.
This Prophecy has been once already fulfilled, when the famous Pyrate
Barbarossa, being sent by the grand Seignor, to help the French King against
the Emperor Charles the V. in his return home, plundered all that Coast, and
carried away an innumerable multitude of people into slavery.

V. French.
Quand dans Poisson, Fer and Lettre enfermee,
Horse sortira qui puis fera la Guerre,
Aura par Mer sa class bien ramee,
Aparoissant pres de Latin Terre.
English.
When in a Fish, Iron and a Letter shall be shut up,
He shall go out, that afterward shall make War,
He shall have his Fleet by Sea well provided,
Appearing by the Roman Land.
ANNOT.

The words and the sense are plain.

VI. French.
Aupres des Ports and dedans deux Citez,
Seront deux Fleaux and onc n'aperceu un tell,
Faim, dedans Peste, de Fer horse gens boutez,
Crier secours au grand Dieu immortel.
English.
Near the Gates and within two Cities,
Shall be two Scourges, I never saw the like,
Famine, within Plague, people thrust out by the Sword,
Shall cry for help to the great God immortal.
ANNOT.

This needs no Interpretation.

VII. French.
Enter plusieurs aux Isles deportez,
L'un estre nay a deux dens en la gorge,
Mourront de Faim, les Arbres esbroutez,
Pour eux neuf Roy, nouvel Edict leur forge.
English.
Among many that shall be transported into the Islands,
One shall be born with two Teeth in his mouth,
They shall die of hunger, the Trees shall be eaten,
They shall have a new King, who shall make new Laws for them.
ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needs no explication.

VIII. French.
Temples Sacrez, prime facon Roman,
Rejetteront les goffes Fondemens,
Prenant leurs Loix premieres and humaines,
Chassants non tout, de Saints le cultement.
English.
Churches Consecrated, and the ancient Roman way,
Shall reject the tottering Foundations,
Sticking to their first humane Laws,
Expelling, but not altogether the worshipping of Saints.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy, is concerning the beginning of the Reformed Religion, when the
Roman Church rejected it, yet nevertheless, for shame they left off many of
their fopperies, for ever since they never appeared so great Worshippers of
Saints as before.

IX. French.
Neuf ans le Regne le maigre en paix tiendra,
Puis il cherra en soif fi sanguinaire,
Pour luy grand peuple sans Foy and Loy mourra,
Tue par un beaucoup plus debonaire.
English.
Nine years shall the lean one keep the Kingdom in Peace,
Then he will fall into such a bloody thirst,
That a great people shall die without Faith or Law,
He shall be killed by one milder than himself.
ANNOT.

It is a lean man that shall keep in Peace the Kingdom, for the space of nine
years, and then shall become cruel; so that he shall put to death many people
without Law, or regard of his promise.

X. French.
Avaunt long temps le tout sera range,
Nous esperons un siecle bien senestre,
L'Estat des masks and des sculs bien change,
Peu trouveront qui a son rang vueille estre.
English.
Before it be long, all shall be set in order,
We look for a sinister Age,
The state of the Visards and of the alone shall be changed,
They shall find few that will keep their ranks,
ANNOT.

All the difficulty of this consists in what he means by the Visard and
alone, for my part, I believe he aims at the Popish Clergy and Monks; the
first by reason of their Hypocrisy, the other by reason of their solitariness.
The rest is plain.

XI. French.
Le prochain, fills de l' Aisnier parviendra,
Tant esleve jusqu'au au Regne des fors,
Son aspre gloire un chasun la craindra,
Mais les enfans du Regne jettez horse.
English.
The eldest Son of l'Aisnier shall prosper,
Being raised to the degree of the great ones,
Every one shall fear his high glory,
But his children shall be cast out.
ANNOT.

This is an Horoscope, for the Interpretation of which we are beholding to, Mr.
Mannessier of Amiens, who says that the Father of the Lords l' Aisniers writ
to Nostradamus his friend, to know his childrens fortune, who sent him those
four Verses for an answer, by which it is evident that the eldest should be an
eminent Man, as it fell out, being one of the chiefest men in the Province of
Anjou, and one of the chiefest instruments to make Peace between Louis the
XIII. and his Mother Mary of Medicis, after the Battle of Pont de Ce.

The fourth Verse says, that some of his other Children should be expelled the
Kingdom, as it happened by reason of a false report raised against one of them,
which compelled him to retire into Portugal till the truth was known, as it was
afterward to his great repute and honor.

XII. French.
Yeux clos ouverts d'antique faitaisie,
L'habit des seuls sera mis a neant,
Le grand Monarque chastiera leur frenzy,
Ravir des Temples le Thresor par devant.
English.
Eyes shut, shall be open by an antic fancy,
The cloths of the alone shall be brought to nothing.
The great Monarck shall punish their frenzy,
For having ravished the Treasure of the Temple before.
ANNOT.

I can fasten this upon no body, but upon some Monks, which are called here The
alone, because of their solitary life, who shall be punished by a King, for
having robbed the Church.

XIII. French.
Le corpse sans ame plus n'estre en sacrifice,
Jour de la mort mis en Nativite.
L'Esprit Divin fera l'ame foelice,
Voiant le Verb en son Eternite.
English.
The body without the soul shall be no more admitted in Sacrifice,
The day of the death shall be put for the Birthday,
The Divine Spirit shall make the Soul happy,
By seeing the Word in its Eternity.
ANNOT.

The first Verse seemed to Prophecy the Reformation of Religion, and the change
of opinion concerning the Lords Supper, which should be no more a Sacrifice (as
the Roman Church calls the Mass) of a body without a soul, but only a
commemoration of the Lords death, as the second Verse confirms, saying, The
day of the death shall be put for the Birthday, seeing, that by the
commemoration of that death, we are renewed into a newness of life, and as it
were born again. The last two Verse are easy.

XIV. French.
A Tours, Gien, Gargeau, seront yeux penetrans,
Descouvriront le long de la grande Sereine,
Elle and sa Suite au Port seront entrans,
Combat poussez Puissance Souveraine.
English.
At Tours, Gien, Gergeau, shall be piercing eyes,
Who shall discover along the great Siren,
She and her Attendans shall enter into the Port,
By a fight shall be thrust out the Sovereign Power.
ANNOT.

Tours, Gien, and Gergeau are Cities upon the River of Loire, which is called
here the great Siren, because of the length of its course, the meaning then is,
that those Cities shall be watchful, and stand upon their guard, and shall
fight against a King, which if it has already come to pass in the Civil Wars,
or shall happen hereafter, I cannot affirm.

XV. French.
Un peu devant Monarque trucide,
Castor, Pollux, en nef astre crinite,
L'Airain public, par Terre and Mer vuide,
Pisa, Ast, Ferrare, Turin Terre interdite.
English.
A little before a Monarch be killed,
Castor, and Pollux shall appear, and a Comet in the Ship;
The public brass, by Land and Sea shall be emptyed,
Pisa, Ast, Ferrare, Turin, Countries forbidden.
ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that a little before a Monarck be killed, Castor and
Pollux two Meteores so called, as also a Comet in that constellation of the
Heavens, called the Ship of Argos, and the Public Brass, that is, the Canons
by Land and Sea shall be emptied, and these Towns of Italy, viz. Pisa, Ast,
Ferrare, Turin, shall be excommunicated by the Pope.

XVI. French.
Naples, Palerme, Sicile, Syracuse,
Nouveaux Tyrants, fulgures, feu Coelestes,
Force de Londres, Gand, Bruxelles, and Sufe,
Grand Hecatombe, Triomphe, fair Festes.
English.
Naples, Palermo, Sicily, Syracusa,
New Tyrants, Lightnings, Celestial fires,
Army from London, Ghent, Bruxelles, and Suse,
A great Hecatomb, Triumphs, and Feasts.
ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult but the word Hecatomb, which is a Greek word
signifying a Sacrifice of an hundred Oxen.

XVII. French.
Le Camp du Temple de la Vierge Vestale,
Non esloigne d' Ethene and Monts Pyrenees,
Le grand conduit est chassee dans la Male,
North gettez Fleuves, and Vignes mastinees.
English.
The Camp of the Temple of the Vestal Virgin,
Not far from Ethene and the Pyrenean Mountains,
The great Conduit is driven in the Clock-bag,
Rivers overflown in the North, and the Vines spoiled.
ANNOT.

There is so many faults in the impression of this, and so hard to be
rectified, that I had rather leave it to the liberty of the judicious Reader,
then make my self ridiculous in not giving him satisfaction.

XVIII. French.
Nouvelle Pluie, subite, impetueuse,
Empeschera subit deux excercites,
Pierre, Ciel, Feux, fair la Mer pierreuse,
La mort de sept, Terre and Marin subites.
English.
A new Rain, sudden, impetuous,
Shall suddenly hinder two Armies,
Stone, Heaven, fire, shall make the Sea stony,
The death of seven shall be sudden upon Land and Sea.
ANNOT.

The first two Verses signify, that a sudden and impetuous Rain shall hinder
two Armies from fighting.

The two last Verses foretell several Prodigies, the which happening, seven
persons shall suddenly die upon the Sea and Land.

XIX. French.
Nouveaux venus, lieu basty sans defense,
Occuper place pour lors inhabitable,
Prez, Maisons, Champs, Villes prendre a plaisance,
Faim, Peste, Guerre, arpent long labourable.
English.
New comers shall build a place without fence,
And shall occupy a place that was not then habitable,
They shall at their pleasure take Fields, Houses and Towns.
There shall be Famine, Plague, War, and a long arable field.
ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needs no Interpretation.

XX. French.
Freres and Soeurs en diverse lieux captifs,
Se trouveront passer pres du Monarque,
Les contempler ses deux yeux ententifs,
Des plaisant vont, Menton, Front, Nez les marquis.
English.
Brothers and Sisters shall be made slaves in diverse places,
And shall pass before the Monarck,
Who shall look upon them with attentive eyes,
They shall go in heaviness, witness their Chin, Forehead and Nose.
ANNOT.

This is obvious to the meanest capacity.

XXI. French.
L'Ambassadeur envoie par Biremes,
A my chemin incogneus repoulsez,
De Sell renfort viendront quatre triremes,
Cords and Chains en Negrepont troussez.
English.
The Ambassador that was sent in Biremes,
In the midleway shall be repulsed by unknown Men,
From the Salt to his succors shall come four triremes,
Ropes and Chains shall be carried to Negrepont.
ANNOT.

Bireme is a Galley that has two ranges of Oars, Trireme, is one that has
three ranges. The meaning then of this is, that an Ambassador shall be sent in
a Galley with two ranges of Oars, and that he shall be met in his way by
unknown men, that is, Pirates; there shall come to his succors from the Salt,
that is, from the French four Triremes, that is four Galleys, every one having
three ranges of Oars, but they shall all be carried to Negrepont, an Island
belonging to the Turk.

XXII. French.
Le Camp Ascop d'Europe partira,
Sadioignant proche de l'Isle submergee,
D' Arton class Phalange partira,
Nombril du Monde plus grand voix subrogee.
English.
The Camp Ascop shall go from Europe,
And shall come near the drowned Island;
From Arton shall go an Army by Sea and Land,
By the Navel of the World a greater vice shall be substituted.
ANNOT.

The Author has darkened this Stanza with so many barbarous words, as Camp
Ascop, drowned Island, Darton, Navel of the World, that it is very like either
he did not understand himself, or would not be understood by others.

XXIII. French.
Palaces Oiseaux, par Oiseau dechasse,
Bien tossed apres le Prince parvenu,
Combien qu'hors Fleuve ennemy repoulse,
Dehors saisy, trait d'Oiseau soustenu,
English.
Palais Birds, driven away by a Bird,
Soon after that, the Prince is come to his own;
Although the enemy be driven beyond the River,
He shall be seized upon without, by the trick of the Bird.
ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that many Courtiers (called here Palace Birds) shall
be justled out of favor by another principal Bird, that is a great Courtier,
as soon as the Prince shall come to his own.

The two last Verses seem to foretell that the said principal Courtier shall
seize upon the Prince, notwithstanding that some succor shall come to his
help, which shall be beaten back beyond the River.

XXIV. French.
Bestes farouches de faim Fleuves traner,
Plus part du Champ encontre Ister sera,
En Cage de Fer le grand fera traisner.
Quand rien enfant de Germain n'observera.
English.
Wild Beasts for hunger shall swim over Rivers,
Most part of the field shall be near Ister,
Into an Iron Cage he shall cause the great one to be draw^
When the Child of German shall observe nothing.
ANNOT.

Ister is a River, German is a proper name of some considerable person, whose
Son shall not observe or take notice when that eminent person mentioned here,
shall be drawn into an Iron Cage.

XXV. French.
La Guard estrange trahira Forteresse,
Espoir and umbre de plus haut marriage,
Guard deceue Fort prins dedans la press,
Loire, Saone, Rhosne, Gar, a Mort outrage.
English.
The Garrison of strangers shall betray the Fort,
Under the hope and shadow of a higher Match,
The Garrison shall be deceived, and the Fort taken in the crowd,
Loire, Saone, Rhosne, Gar, shall do harm to Death.
ANNOT.

There is no difficulty but in the last Verse, where you must observe that
Loire, Saone, Rhosne, and Gardon, which for the Verses sake is contracted into
Gar; are Rivers of France, which are threatened here of overflowing, and causing
the death of many people.

XXVI. French.
Pour la faveur que la Cite fera,
Au grand qui to st perdra Camp de Bataille,
Le sang d'ans Pau le Thesin versera,
De fang feux, mors, noyez de coup de taille.
English.
Because of the favor the City shall show,
To the great one, who soon after shall loose the Battle,
The Thesin shall pour blood into the Pau,
Of blood, fire, dead, drowned, by Edgeling.
ANNOT.

This is plain, if you observe that the Thesin is a River of Italy, and the Pau
another, into the which the Thesin runs.

XXVII. French.
Le Divin Verb sera du ciel frappe
Qui ne pourra proceder plus avaunt,
Du refferrant le secret estoupe
Quon marchera par dessus and devant.
English.
The Divine Word shall be struck by Heaven,
So that he shall proceed no further,
The secret of the close Keeper, shall be so closed up,
That people shall tread upon, and before it.
ANNOT.

By the Divine Word, you must not understand the second person of the Trinity,
or else all this Stanza would be absurd; but you must understand a Divine or
Theologian, called in Greek (...), which signifies a Divine Word. The meaning
therefore of it, is, that a Theologian shall be struck by Heaven; that is,
shall die, so that he shall proceed no further in his work, which I suppose by
the two last Verses, was the Philosophers stone; for in the two last Verses he
says, that the secret of the close keeper, that is, of him that wrought
secretly, shall (by his death) be so closed up, that people shall tread on, and
before it.

XXVIII. French.
Le penultiesine de Surnom de Prophet,
Prendra Diane pour son jour and repos
Loing vaguera par Frenetique test,
Et delivrant un grand peuple d'Impos
English.
The last, but one of the Surname of the Prophet,
Shall take Diana for his day and his rest,
He shall wander far by reason of his Frenetick head,
Delivering a great people from impositions.
ANNOT.

This is concerning a false Prophet, which is called here the last but one of
that Surname, who shall make Diana (that is Monday which is dedicated to Diona)
his Sunday or Sabbath day, and so wandering to and fro in a Frenctick manner,
shall persuade many people to pay no Taxes.

XXIX. French.
L'Oriental sortira de son Siege,
Passer les Monts Apennins, voir la Gaul
Transpassera le Ciel, les Eaux and Neige,
Et un chacun frappera de sa Gaul.
English.
The Oriental shall come out of his Seat,
Shall pass over the Apennine Mountains, and see France,
Shall go over the Air, the Waters and Snow,
And shall strike every one with his Rod.
ANNOT.

It is an Eastern Prince, who leaving his Country, shall come over the
Apennine Mountains, which divide Italy, and come as far as France, destroying
all before him.

XXX. French.
Un qui les Dieux d' Annibal infernaux,
Fera renaistre, effrayeur des Humains,
Onc plus d'horreur ne plus dire journaux,
Qu'avint viendra par Babel aux Romans.
English.
One that shall cause the infernal Gods of Hannibal
To live again, the terror of Mankind,
There was never more horror, not to say ill days,
Did happen, or shall, to the Romans by Babel.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was concerning Charles V. Emperor, who sacked Rome, took the
Pope Prisoner, and filled it with more horror and slaughter than Hannibal did,
though a Heathen.

XXXI. French.
En Campanie le Cassilin fera tant,
Quon ne verra que d'Aux les Champs couvers,
Devant apres la pluye de long temps,
Hormis les arbres rien lon verra de verts.
English.
In Campania the Cassilin shall so behave himself,
That nothing shall be seen but Fields covered with Garlic,
Before, and after it, shall not Rain for a good while,
Except the Trees, no Green shall be seen.
ANNOT.

This has a dependence upon the foregoing Stanza; for Campania is the Province
wherein Rome is seated, and Cassilin, called Campania di Roma, is the same as
Castillan, because Charles V. was not only Emperor, but also King of Spain,
the chief Province of which is Castilia: therefore the Author describes here
the misery and devastation of Campania di Roma, by the Castilian, who left
nothing in the ground, but Garlic, which is their most delicate food, and
nothing Green but the Trees.

XXXII. French.
Lait Sang, Grenovilles, escouldre en Dalmatie
Conflit done, peste pres de Balene,
Cry sera grand par toute Esclavonie,
Lors naistra Monstre pres and dedans Ravenne.
English.
Milk, Blood, Frogs shall reign in Dalmatia,
A Battle fought, the Plague near Balene,
A great cry shall be through all Sclavonia,
Then shall be born a Monster, near and within Ravenna.
ANNOT.

Dalmatia and Selavonia, are Countries joining to the Adriatic Sea, belonging
to the Venetians. Ravenna is a City in Italy, the rest needs no
interpretation.

XXXIII. French.
Dans le torrent qui descend de Verone,
Par lors qu'au Pau guidera son entree,
Un grand Naufrage, and non moins en Garonne,
Quand ceux de Genes Marcheront leur contree.
English.
In the torrent which comes down from Verona,
About the place where it falls into the Pau,
A great Shipwreck, and no less in Garonna,
When those of Genoa shall go into their Country.
ANNOT.

Verona is a City in Italy, belonging to the Venetians, through the middle of
which runs a River called Add, which falls into the River Pau, about
which place there shall be a great Shipwrak; as also another in the River of
Garonna, which passes at Bordeaux, the time that the Author marketh, is when
those of Genoa shall go into their Country, that is to say, when some Ships of
Genoa shall come to Bordeaux.

XXXIV. French.
L'Ire insensee du Combat furieux,
Fera a Table par Freres le Fer luire,
Les departir, bless, curieux,
Le fire duel viendra en France nuire.
English.
The mad anger of the furious fight,
Shall cause by Brothers the Iron to glister at the Table,
To part them one wounded, curious,
The fierce Duel shall do harm after in France.
ANNOT.

It is the short History of two Brothers, who fought at the Table, whereby one
that was curious to part them was wounded, they afterward fought a Duel, in
whose imitation many since have been fought, to the great harm of the French
Gentry.

XXXV. French.
Dans deux Logis de nuit le feu prendra,
Plusieurs dedans estoufez and rostis,
Pres de deux Fleuves pour seur il adviendra,
Sol, l'Arc, and Caper, tous seront amortis.
English.
The fire shall take by night in two Houses,
Many shall be stifled and burnt in it;
Near two Rivers it shall for certain happen
Sun, Arc, Caper, they shall all be mortified.
ANNOT.

By Sun, Arc, Caper, he means the Sun being in the Signs of Sagitarius and
Capricornus.

This Prophecy was fulfilled about 90. years ago in the City of Lion, seated
upon two Rivers, viz. the Rhosne and the Saone, for about that time several
Merchants coming to the Fair, some went to lodge at the Silver Head, in the
street de la Grenete, where being in an upper room, as they were talking of
their businesses, and passing the time merrily, the fire took in the Kitchen
where was abundance of Oil, which did burn so suddenly and so violently, that
the lower part of the House was presently consumed. Those Merchants that were
in the upper room toward the street, begun to look for their Clock-bags, that
were locked up in a Trunk; but while they were busy about opening the Trunk,
the Staircase fell, and the fire got into their Room, then begun they to cry
for help through the Windows. They would willingly have thrown themselves down
the Windows, but they were barred with Iron, so that they could not save
themselves, the House being a fire on all sides; Moreover, the neighbors
taking more care of their own Houses, then of those Strangers, did run every
one to his own concerns, so that they all miserably perished. Parradin in his
3. Book of the History of Lion, Chap. 22.

XXXVI. French.
Du grand Prophet les Lettres seront prinses,
Enter les Mains du Tyran deviendront,
Frauder son Roy seront ses entreprinses,
Mais ses rapines bien tossed le troubleront.
English.
The Letters of the great Prophet shall be intercepted,
They shall fall into the hands of the Tyrant,
His undertakings shall be to deceive his King,
But his extortions shall trouble him soon.
ANNOT.

It is some eminent Churchman, whose Letters shall be intercepted, by which he
intended to betray his King, therefore his actions shall be called in question,
and being found guilty of extortion, he shall suffer for it.

XXXVII. French.
De ce grand nombre que l'on envoiera,
Pour secourir dans le fort assiegez,
Peste and Famine tous les devorera,
Horsmis septante qui seront profligez.
English.
Of that great number which shall be sent,
To succor the besieged in the Fort,
Plague and Famine shall devour them all,
Except seventy that shall be beaten.
ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needs no explication.

XXXVIII. French.
Des Condamnez sera fait un grand nombre,
Quand les Monarques seront conciliez,
Mais l'un deux viendra si mal encombre,
Que guere ensemble ne seront raliez.
English.
There shall be a great number of condemned men,
When the Monarchs shall be reconciled,
But one of them shall come to such misfortune,
That their reconciliation shall not last long.
ANNOT.

The words and sense of this are easy to be understood.

XXXIX. French.
Un an devant le conflict Italique,
Germains, Gaulois, Espagnols pour le Fort,
Cherra l'Escole maison de republique,
Ou horsmis peu, seront suffoquez morts.
English.
One year before the Italian fight,
Germans, French, Spaniards for the Fort,
The School-house of the Commonwealth shall fall,
Where, except few, they shall be suffocated, and dead.
ANNOT.

It seems there should be a Battle between the Italians, Germans, French,
Spaniards for a Fort, which I suspect to have been that of Serizoles, wherein
all those Nations were engaged, and that one year before that Battle, the
public house of a Commonwealth should fall, and kill abundance of people; But
of this I could find nothing in History.

XL. French.
Un peu apres non point long intervalle,
Par Mer and Terre sera fait grand tumulte,
Beaucoup plus grande sera pugne Navalle,
Feu, Animaux, qui plus feront d'Insulte.
English.
A little while after, without any great distance of time,
By Sea and Land shall a great tumult be made,
The Sea fight shall be much greater,
Fire and Beasts which shall make greater insult.
ANNOT.

This has a Relation to a foregoing Stanza, and likewise is not hard to be
understood.

XLI. French.
La grand Estoile par sept jours bruslera,
Nuce fera deux Soleils apparoir,
Le gros mastin toute nuit hurlera,
Quand grand Pontife changera de terroir.
English.
The great Star shall burn for the space of seven days,
A Cloud shall make two Suns appear,
The big Mastif shall houl all night,
When the great Pope shall change his Country.
ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that those three Prodigies, contained in the first
three Verses, shall appear when a Pope changes his Country.

XLII: French.
Coq, Chiens, and Chats de sang seront repeus,
Et de la play du Tyran trouve Mort,
Au lict d'un autre, Jambes and Bras rompus,
Qui n'avoit peu mourir de cruel Mort.
English.
A Cock, Dogs, and Cats shall be fed with Blood,
And with the wound of the Tyrant found dead
In the bed of another, with Legs and Arms broken,
Who could not die before by a cruel Death.
ANNOT.

These words signify, that a great man or Tyrant shall be found dead in
another man's Bed, having his Legs and Arms broken, the body of which shall be
devoured by these three kinds of Creatures, a Cock, a Dog, and a Cat. The last
Verse signifies that this Tyrant had escaped a cruel Death.

XLIII. French.
Durant l'estoile cheuelue apparente,
Les trois grand Princes seront faits ennemis,
Frappez du Ciel, Paix, Terre tremulente,
Arne, Tibre, undans Serpent sur le board mis.
English.
During the hairy apparent Star,
The three great Princes shall be made Enemies,
Struck from Heaven, Peace, quaking Earth,
Arne, Tyber, full of Surges, Serpent cast upon the Shore.
ANNOT.

In the year 1556. upon the first day of March appeared a blazing Star which
lasted three Months, and in that year the three great Princes were made
Enemies, viz. Paul IV. Pope, Henry II. King of France, and Philip II. King of
Spain, about the breaking of the Truce by Henry II.

The Affairs not succeeding according to the Pope's, and the King of France's
desire, they made Peace with the Spaniard the 14th of October 1557. and because
it was an effect of Gods Providence, which moved the Pope's, and the Kings
hearts; the Author says, they were struck from Heaven.

After this Peace the Author mentions an Earthquake, which is very likely
considering the overflowing of the Tyber, which followed immediately.

The night after, that Peace was proclaimed at Rome, on a Tuesday the Tyber did
so overflow his Banks, that the inundation was thought the greatest that ever
was, yea greater than that which happened in the year 1530. under Clement VII.

There were ten or twelve Mills carried away, all the Vine-yards along the
Tyber, from Pontemole to St. Peter's Church, were buried under the Sands, that
the water carried.

Abundance of Houses fell to the ground. In Rome many Gardens and houses of
pleasure were destroyed, the loss of the Wines, Hay, Wood, and Corn could not
be valued.

In Florence the River of Arne did more mischief than the Tyber at Rome. the
History of the Genealogy of the house of Medicis, made by Peter de Boissat,
mentions, that in some places of the City of Florence, the water overflowed
to the height of eight Fathoms, and covered all the valley of Arne.

The damage was yet greater at Empoly, a Town in Tuscany, where, of three
thousand people, there escaped but eighteen.

But to return to Tyber, its waters being retired into their Channel, left so
much mud, where it had overflowed, that no body could walk upon it, and upon
that mud near the Tyber, was a Serpent seen of a prodigious bigness, which was
killed by the Country people.

This is the Authors meaning in the last Verse, Arne, Tyber, full of Surges,
Serpent cast upon the Shore.

In the third Verse he says, those three Princes were struck or moved from
Heaven to make Peace, that is, from God; every one considering that this War
was only for their mutual destruction.

The Vulgar impression puts in the fourth Verse, Pan, Tyber, in stead of
Arne, Tyber, which is a visible fault; for the History mentions only the
inundation of those two Rivers in Italy, it may be that the likeness of those
words, Pau and Arne, is the cause of the mistake; as also because the name of
Pau, which is the biggest River in Italy, is more famous in History than that
of Arne, which is the River that passes through Florence.

XLIV. French.
L'Aigles poussee entour de Pavillons.
Par autre oiseaux d'Entour sera chassee,
Quand bruit de Timbres, Tubes, and Sonaillons,
Rendront le sens de la Dame insensee.
English.
The Eagle flying among the Tents,
By other Birds shall be driven away,
When noise of Cymbals, Trumpets, and Bells,
Shall render the sense to the Lady that was without it.
ANNOT.

It is an Eagle driven from the Tents by other Birds, when a mad Lady shall
recover her senses by the noise of Cymbals, Trumpets, and Bells.

XLV. French.
Trop le Ciel pleure l' Androgyn procree,
Pres de Ciel sang humain respandu,
Par mort trop tard grand peuple recree,
Tard and tossed vient le secours attendu.
English.
The Heaven bemoanoth too much the Androgyn born,
Near Heaven humane blood shall be split,
By death too late a great people shall be refreshed,
Late and soon comes the succors expected.
ANNOT.

Androgyn, is one that is Male and Female, from the Greek word (...), which
signifies a Male, and (...), which signifies a Female; the meaning then of
the first Verse is, that some great persons, suppose a King and Queen, which he
calls Heaven, by reason of their exaltation above the common sort of people,
shall bemoan too long one of their Children, that was, or shall be born Male
and Female.

The second Verse is easy to be understood, if you take Heaven in the same
sense that we have said. The last two Verses are plain.

XLVI. French.
Apres grand troche humain, plus grand sapreste,
Le grand Moteur les siecles renouvelle,
Pluye, Sang, Lait, Famine, Fer and Peste,
Au Ciel veu feu courant longue estincelle.
English.
After a great humane change, another greater is nigh at hand,
The great Motor renews the Ages,
Rain, Blood, Milk, Famine, Sword, Plague,
In the Heaven shall be seen a running fire with long sparks.
ANNOT.

Troche in Greek is a Pulley, the meaning therefore of the Author, that after a
great mutation, God shall renew the Ages, and according to his promise shall
create a new Heaven, and a new Earth.

By those prodigies related in the two last Verses, it seems the Author
intends to speak of the last day, and of the forerunners of it.

XLVII. French.
L'Ennemy grand viel, deult, meurt de poison,
Les Souverains par infinis subjugues,
Pierres pleuvoir cache soubs la Toison,
Par mort Articles en vain sont alleguez.
English.
The great and old Enemy grieveth, dies by Poison,
An infinite number of Sovereign's conquered,
It shall rain stones, they shall hide under Rocks,
In vain shall death allege Articles.
ANNOT.

This has a relation to the foregoing Stanza, and is as it were the second
part of it. For as the foremost speaks of the last day, so does this of
Doomsday.

First, he says that the great and old Enemy grieveth and dies by Poison,
that is the Devil who shall be cast into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone. The
second Verse signfieth, that all the Kings of the Earth shall be subdued by him
that is Lord of Lords and King of Kings. The third Verse expresses, the
anguish of the reprobate, when they shall cry to the Rocks, hide us, and to the
Mountains, fall upon us. And the fourth Verse says, that Death shall allege
in vain, the Articles she made with the Devil, and his Angels.

XLVIII. French.
La grand Copy qui passera les Monts,
Saturn, Aries, tournant au Poisson Mars,
Venins cachez sous testes de Moutons,
Leur chef pendu a fill de Polemars.
English.
The great Army that shall pass over the Mountains,
Saturn, Aries, Mars, turning to the Fishes,
Poisons hidden in Sheeps heads,
Their Captain hanged with a thread of Polemars.
ANNOT.

Paradin relates in his History, that after the Duke of Alba had relieved
Vulpian with Victuals, which was done from the 22, of July to the first of
August, a Captain of the Emperors Army named la Trinite, went out of
Valfrenieres the same first day of August, to plunder the Country of Piemont.

He had 400 Horses, and 500 Foot: The news being brought to the Marshal of
Brissac, he sent out a great number of Horses, who did utterly destroy their
Foot, so that but thirty escaped, to carry the news to Valfrenieres.

The Spanish Horse, seeing the French in such a fury, ran away, and got some to
Ast, some to Alexandria.

After that, the Spaniards seeking to revenge themselves, took a Castle three
miles from Cazal, called Frezene, or Fr^cinet du Pau, where they hanged up the
Captain, put to the sword all the Italians, and sent all the French to the
Galleys.

This proceeding being not according to the Laws of Arms, we may believe, that
the victorious discovered a malicious craft of the vanquished, who had left
some Sheeps-heads poisoned, to revenge themselves of the victorious, which
obliged the Spaniards to serve so the Captain, the Italians and the French; and
because the French were not so ill used, as the Italians, we may judge that the
Italians were the chief contrivers of this business.

Therefore the Author foreseeing this, says, that the great Army of the
French, which shall go over the Mountains, shall come to this mischief, because
of the poison that was hidden in the Sheeps heads.

The Vulgar impression erreth much in putting Salmons, for Muttons; for every
body knows that the Salmons do not come into the Mountains of Montferrat, and
that in the Month of August it is not a meat fit for Soldiers, therefore in
stead of Salmons, we have put Muttons, or Sheep.

The Captain was hanged with a thread of Polemars, that is, with a Match, of
which, I am persuaded, that one certain Polemars was the Inventor.

The Author says in the second Verse, that the time when this accident
happened, was, when Saturn was in Aries, the Vulgar impression puts Are in
stead of Aries, but that is false, therefore set down Aries. Saturn was in that
Sign in the year 1555. from the 20th of February, to the 14th of July, where
from the 12th degree and four Minutes, he began to retrograde in the same Sign
of Aries. till the 18th of November, so that Saturn was almost all that year in
Aries.

He says also that Mars was going back to Pisces; because in that same year,
Mars that was gone out of the Sign of Pisoes from the 19 of March 1554. was
retrograding to come back again into it upon the 20th of January 1556.

Thus the Author means, that this accident should happen in the year that
Saturn should be in Aries, and Mars should be near the Sign of Pisces.

And to say truth, in the Month of August, Mars was in the Sign of Scorpio;
upon the 23 of September, he entered into that of Sagitarius; the third of
November, into that of Capricornus; the 12th of December into that of Aquarius;
and the year following, viz. 1556. into that of Pisces; so that Mars was
returning into Pisces, which is the end of its particular motion.

By this Astrological and Historical discourse we correct the Vulgar
impression, which puts turning from Pisces, Mars, instead of which, we put,
turning to Pisces, Mars, which we do by changing only from, into to, and
shows us how careful we ought to be in the explication of these Stanza's,
when the time is prefixed to us by Astronomical calculations.

The Authors Phrase does confirm us in this correction, when he uses this word
turning, which signifies the motion that tends toward its end, and not the
motion that comes from its end.

XLIX. French.
Les conseillers du premier Monopole,
Les Conquerans seduits par la Melite,
Rhodes, Bisance pour leur exposant pole,
Terre faudra les pour-suivans de fuite.
English.
The advisers of the first Monopoly,
The Conquerors seduced by the Melite,
Rhodes, Bizance, for exposing their Pole,
The ground shall fail the followers of runaways.
ANNOT.

All the difficulty of this lies in the signification of the word Pole, which
in Greek signifies a City. The word Monopoly is Vulgar, and signifies when
one or few would engross all the Trade of a Town. The rest is so obscure, that
I had rather leave it to the liberty of the Reader, than break my Brains about
it, considering chiefly that I am going to bed, the precedent Stanza having
exhausted all my Spirits, and so farewell till to morrow.

L. French.
Quand ceux d' Hainault, de Gand, and de Bruxelles,
Verront a Langres le Siege devant mis,
Derrier leur flancs seront guerres cruelles,
La play antique sera pis qu' Ennemis.
English.
When these of Hainault, of Gand, and of Bruxelles,
Shall see the Stege laid before Langres,
Behind their sides shall be cruel Wars,
The old wound shall be worse then Enemies.
ANNOT.

Hainault is a Province of the Low Countries, and Gand the chief Town in
Flanders, and Bruxelles the chief Town of the Dukedom of Brabant.

Langres is a City in France, in the Province of Champagne, which is called the
Maiden Town; because it was never besieged. The rest is easy.

LI. French.
Le sang du just a Londres fera fault,
Bruslez par feu, de vingt and trois, les Six
La Dame antique cherra de place haute,
De mesme sect plusieurs seront occis.
English.
The blood of the just shall be wanting in London,
Burnt by fire of three and twenty, the Six,
The ancient Dame shall fall from her high place,
Of the same Sect many shall be killed.
ANNOT.

Leaving unto the impartial Reader his liberty to judge of this Prophecy, we
for our part understand by it the impious and execrable murder, committed upon
the person of our last most gracious Sovereign King Charles I of blessed
memory, to whose expiation it seems our Author attributes the conflagration
of London. By that proportion of three and twenty, the Six, is to be understood
the number of Houses and Buildings that were burnt, which is about the
proportion of three in four, and comes near to the computation, as also by
that three twenties and Six, may be understood the year 66. By the ancient Dame
that shall fall from the high place, is understood the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, which in the time of Paganism was dedicated to Diana, meant here by the
title of an ancient Dame, the fall from her high place, has relation both to
the sumptuousness and height of her building, as also to her situation, which
is in the most eminent place of the City.

By this Verse, Of the same Sect many shall be killed, is signified the great
number of other Churches even the number of 87 (which he intimates here by the
name of the same Sect, that should be involved in the same woeful conflagration.

LII. French.
Dans plusieurs nuits la Terre tremblera,
Sur le printemps deux efforts feront suitte,
Corinthe, Ephese aux deux Mers nagera,
Guerre sesmeut par deux vaillants de Luitte.
English.
During many nights the Earth shall quake,
About the Spring two great Earthquakes shall follow one another,
Corinth, Ephesus shall swim in the two Seas,
War shall be moved by two great Wrestlers.
ANNOT.

Corinth is a City of Grecia, and Ephesus one of Asia; the rest is plain.

LIII. French.
Le grande Peste de cite maritime,
Ne cessera que Mort ne soit vengee,
Du just sang par prix damn fans crime,
De la grande Dame par feinte noutragee,
English.
The great Plague of the Maritime City,
Shall not cease till the death be revenged
Of the just blood by price condemned without crime,
Of the great Dame not fainedly abused.
ANNOT.

This is a confirmation of the LI. Stanza and foretells the great Plague we
have had here in the year 1665. which he says shall not cease till the death
of the Just blood, meaning King Charles the I. be avenged who was as is here
expressed, condemned without crime, and sold for a Price.

By the great Dame unfainedly abused, he means the sumptuous Cathedralof St.
Paul, which was polluted and made a Stable by those profane wretches.

LIVE. French.
Par gent estrange and Nation lomtaine,
Leur grand Cite, apres eau fort troublee,
Fille sans trop different de domaine,
Prins chef, serreure, navoir este riblee.
English.
By a strange people and remote Nation,
The great City near the water shall be much troubled,
The Girl without great difference for a portion,
Shall take the Captain, the Lock having not been pick.
ANNOT.

In the explication of this mystical Stanza, I believe every body may be as
wise as I.

LV. French.
Dans le conflit le grand qui peu valoit,
A son dernier fera cas merveilleux,
Pendant qu' Adrie verra ce qu'il failloit,
Dans le Banquet poignarde l'orgueilleux.
English.
In the fight the great one who was but little worth,
At his last endeavor shall do a wonderful thing.
While Adria shall see what was wanting,
In the Banquet he shall stabb the proud one.
ANNOT.

This is concerning some eminent person, who having showed no great valor in a
Battle, shall nevertheless in a Banquet be so bold as to stab a person of
quality, that was proud.

This accident must happen somewhere about Venice, because he says that Adria,
which is taken for Venice shall look on.

LVI. French.
Que Peste and Glaive n'a sceu definer,
Mort dans les pluies, sommet du Ciel frappe,
L'Abbe mourra quand verra ruiner,
Ceux du Naufrage, l'Escueil voulant graper.
English.
He whom neither Plague, nor Sword could destroy,
Shall die in the Rain being stricken with Thunder,
The Abbot shall die when he shall see ruined,
Those in the Shipwreck, striving to catch hold of the Rock,
ANNOT.

There is two accidents contained in this Stanza, the first is in the two first
Verses, where he says that some considerable person, who had escaped the
Sword, and the Plague shall be stricken by the Thunder, and die in a great
shower of Rain.

The second is, in the two last Verses, where he says, an Abbot shall perish
by Shipwreck, thinking to save himself by holding the Rock.

LVII. French.
Avaunt conflit le grand tombera,
Le grand a mort trop subite and plainte,
Nay miparfait, la plus part nagera,
Aupres du Fleuve, de sang la Terre teinte.
English.
Before the Battle the great one shall fall,
The great one to death too sudden and bewailed;
One shall be born half perfect, the most part shall swim,
Near the River the Earth shall be dyed with blood.
ANNOT.

The words are plain enough, but of the sease every one may think what he
pleases.

LVIII. French.
Sans pied ne main, dent aigue, and forte,
Par Globe au fort de Port and laisne nay,
Pres du portail, desloial le transporte,
Seline luit, petit grand emmene.
English.
Without foot or hand, sharp and strong tooth,
By a Globe, in the middle of the Port, and the first born,
Near the Gate shall be transported by a Traitor,
Seline shines, the little great one carried away.
ANNOT.

The sense of the whole is this, that an Infant begot by some person of quality
shall be exposed in the night time, the Moon shining, which he calls Seline,
from the Greek word (...), which signifies the Moon.

LIX. French.
Class Gauloise par appuy de grand Guard,
Du grand Neptune and ses tridens Soldats,
Ronger Provence pour soustenir grand band,
Plus Mars, Narbon, par Javelots and Dards.
English.
The French Fleet by the help of the great Guard,
Of great Neptune and his Tridemary Soldiers,
Shall gnaw Provence by keeping great company,
Besides, Mars shall plague Narbon by Javelins and Darts.
ANNOT.

Here be two things designed in this Stanza one is concerning Provence, which
shall be eaten up by Soldiers, and the other concerning the City of Narbon,
which shall be Besieged, or the Citizens fall out among themselves.

LX. French.
La foy Punique en Orient rompue,
Grand Jud. and Rhosne, Loire and Tag changeront,
Quand du Mulet la faim sera repeue,
Class espargie, Sang and Corpse nageront.
English.
The punick faith broken in the East,
Great Jud. and Rhosne, Loire and Tag. shall be changed,
When the Mules hunger shall be satisfied,
The Fleet scattered, Blood and Bodies shall swim.
ANNOT.

The Punick Faith in Latin Punica fides, a false Faith, was so called from the
Carthaginians, called in Latin Paeni, which was an unfaithful Nation.

I do not know what he means by great Jud. as for Rhosne, Loire and Tag, they
are three Rivers, the two first in France, the last is the River of Lisbone,
called in Latin Tagus. The rest is easy.

LXI. French.
Again, Tonneins, Gironde and la Rochelle,
O sang Troien mort au Port de la fleche,
Derrier le Fleuve au Fort mise leschelle,
Points, feu, grand meurtre sur la bresche.
English.
Again, Tonneins, Gironde and Rochelle,
O Trojan blood death is at the harbor of the Arrow,
Beyond the River the Ladder shall be raised against the Fort,
Points, fire, great murder upon the breach.
ANNOT.

Again and Tonneins are two Towns in Gascony, Gironde is a River that passes in
that Country, the sense therefore of the whole is, that there shall be great
Wars, and fightings in those Towns, as also upon that River, which happened in
the time of the civil Wars in France, as every body may read in the Annals, and
also in the Commentaries of the Lord of Monluck.

LXII. French.
Mabus puis tossed alors mourra, viendra,
Des gens and bestes un horrible desfaite,
Puis tout a coup la vengeance on verra,
Sang, Main, Soif, Faim, quand courra la Comete,
English.
Mabus shall come, and soon after shall die,
Of people and beasts shall be an horrible destruction,
Then on a sudden the vengeance shall be seen,
Blood, Hand, Thirst, Famine, when the Comet shall run.
ANNOT.

Here is nothing hard but who should be this Mabus, at last I found by
transposition of Letters that he means Ambus, which was the name of the
Heads man that be headed the Duke of Montmorency at Thoulouse, how miraculous
therefore appears our Author, who did not only foretell general things, but
also particular accidents, even the names of the persons that were to be born a
hundred years after.

LXIII. French.
Gaulois, Ausone bien peu subiuguera,
Pau, Marne and Seine fera Perme l'Urie,
Qui le grand Mur contre eux dressera,
Du moindre au Mur le grand perdra la vie.
English.
The French shall a little subdue Ausonne,
Pau, Marne, and Seine shall make Perme l'Urie,
Which shall raise a great Wall against them,
From the less to the Wall the great one shall loose his life.
ANNOT.

Ausonne is always taken by the Author for the City of Bordeaux, because
Ausonius a famous Latin Poet was born there, the rest is so obscure, and the
text so corrupted, that I had rather leave it to the liberty of the Reader,
then to become ridiculous, by not acknowledging my ignorance.

LXIV. French.
Seicher de faim, de soif, gent Genevoise,
Espoir prochain viendra au defaillir,
Sur point tremblant sera Loy Gebenoise,
Class au grand Port ne se peut accueillir.
English.
Those of Geneva shall be dried up with hunger and thirst,
A near hope shall come when they shall be fainting,
The Gebenna Law shall be upon a quaking point,
The Navy shall not be capable to come into the Port.
ANNOT.

Here you must observe that Gebenna in Latin signifies Geneva, and therefore
this whole Stanza is concerning the City of Geneva.

LXV. French.
Le park enclin grande calamite,
Par l' Hesperie and Insubre sera,
Le Feu en Nef, Peste, and Captivite,
Mercure en l'Ar, Saturn fenera.
English.
The Park enclineth to great calamity,
Which shall be through Hesperia and Insubria,
The Fire in the Ship, Plague, and Captivity,
Mercury in Aries, Saturn shall wither.
ANNOT.

Though the words be plain, nevertheless the sense is very obscure, and chiefly
as I suppose by the faults of the impression, all what I can tell you here, is,
that Hesperia in Latin, is Spain, and Insubria, is Savoy.

LXVI. French.
Par grand dangers le Captif eschape,
Peu de temps grand a fortune changee,
Dans le Palais le peuple est attrape,
Par bonne augure la Cite assiegee.
English.
The Prisoner escaped through great danger,
A little while after shall become great, his fortune being changed,
In the Palace the people shall be caught,
And by a good Sign the City shall be besieged.
ANNOT.

All this is plain, both in the words and the Sense.

LXVII. French.
Le blond au nez forche viendra commettre,
Par le Duel and chassera dehors,
Les exiles dedans fera remettre,
Aux lieux marins commettans les plus forts.
English.
The fair one shall fight with the forked Nose,
In Duel, and expel him out,
He shall re-establish the banished,
Putting the stronger of them in Muritine places.
ANNOT.

Both the Sense and the words are plain.

LXVIII. French.
De l'Aquilon les efforts seront grands,
Sur l'Occean sera la Port ouverte,
Le Regne en l'Isle sera re-integrand.
Tremblera Londres par voiles descouvertes.
English.
The endeavors of the North shall be great,
Upon the Ocean the gate shall be open,
The Kingdom in the Island shall be re-established,
London shall quake, for fear of Sails discovered.
ANNOT.

This is a very remarkable one, which has been fulfilled since the happy
restoration of his sacred Majesty King Charles II. now Reigning: For the
endeavors of the North, (viz. the Dutch) have been very great. The Ocean; like
a gate, has been open to all kind of Armies, to play their pranks upon. His
Majesty, and Kingdom, have been happily restored.

LXIX. French.
Le Roy Ganlois par la Celtique dextre,
Voiant discord de la grand Monarchy,
Sur les trois parts fera fleurir son Scepter,
Contre ta Cappe de la grand Hierachie.
English.
The French King, by the Low Countries right hand,
Seeing the discord of the great Monarchy,
Upon three parts of it, will make his Scepter to flourish,
Against the Cap of the great Hierarchy.
ANNOT.

This signifies, that the French King, through the discord that is in the
Spanish Monarchy, shall cause his Scepter to flourish upon three parts of the
Netherlands; notwithstanding the assistance of the King of Spain, who is called
here the Cap of the great Hierarchy; that is, the great defender of the Popedom
ann Popery.

LXX. French.
Le Dard du Ciel fera son estendue,
Morts en parlant, grande execution,
La pierre en larbre la fiere gent rendue.
Brait Humain, Monstre purge expiation.
English.
The Dart of Heaven shall make his circuit,
Some die speaking, a great execution,
The stone in the tree, the fierce people humbled,
Humane noise, a Monster purged by expiation.
ANNOT.

All this Stanza signifies nothing but a fearful Thunder and Lightning, called
here, the Dart of Heaven, that shall do a great deal of mischief; for as he
says, some shall die speaking, there shall be a great execution, the
Thunderbolt shall stick in the Tree, the people that was fierce, shall be
humbled. and a Monster purged by expiation, that some notorious wicked person
shall be consumed by that Celestial fire.

LXXI. French.
Les exiles en Sicile viendront,
Pour delivrer de faim la gent estrange,
Au point du jour les Celtes luy faudront,
La vie demeure a raison Roy se range.
English.
The banished persons shall come into Sicily,
To free the foreign Nation from hunger,
In the dawning of the day the Celtes shall fail them,
Their Life shall be preserved, the King shall submit to reason.
ANNOT.

It is hard to judge what he means by that Foreign Nation, which shall be
relieved in Sicily, by the banished, nor what King is that which shall submit
to reason; let it be left to every body's private judgment.

LXXII. French.
Armee Celtique en Italy vexee,
De toutes parts conslit and grande perte,
Romans fuis O Gaul repoulsee,
Pres du Thesin, Rubicon pugne incerte.
English.
The French Army shall be vexed in Italy,
On all sides fighting, and great loss,
The Romans run away, and thou France repulsed,
Near the Thesin, by Rubicon the fight shall be doubtful,
ANNOT.

A French Army shall be distressed, if not destroyed in Italy. The Romans, that
is, those under the Pope, that shall take their part, shall be put to flight,
and this battle shall be fought by the River Thesin. Another shall be fought by
the River Rubicon, whose event shall be doubtful, that is to say, it shall
hardly be known who got the victory.

LXXIII. French.
Au Lac Fucin de Benacle Rivage,
Pres du Leman au port de Lorguion,
Nay de trois Bras praedit Bellique Image,
Par trois courones au grand Endymion.
English.
At the Fucin Lake of the Benacle Shore,
Near the Leman, at the Port of Lorguion,
Born with three Arms, a Warlike Image,
By three Crowns to the great Endimion.
ANNOT.

There is a Lake in Italy called Lacus Fucinius; the Lake of Geneva is called
Lacus Lemanus; the meaning then of this obscure Stanza, is, (if I understand
any thing) that a Monster shall be born with three Arms, near one of those
Lakes, which shall be a sign of great Wars: what he means by the three Crowns
to the great Endymion, is unknown to me.

LXXIV. French.
De Sens, d' Autun viendront jusques au Rhosne,
Pour passer outre verse les Monts Pyrenee,
La gent sortir de la Marque d' Ancone,
Par Terre and Mer Suivra a grand trainees.
English.
They shall come from Sens and Autun, as far as the Rhosne,
To go further to the Pyrenean Mountains,
The Nation come from the Mark of Ancona,
By Land and Sea shall follow speedily after.
ANNOT.

Sens and Autun are two Cities in France, the Pyrenean Mountains, are those
which divide France from Spain.

LXXV. French.
La voix ouie de l'Insolit oiseau,
Sur le Canon du respiral estage,
Si haut viendra du froment le boisseau,
Que l'homme d'homme sera Antropophage.
English.
The noise of the unwonted Bird having been heard,
Upon the Canon of the highest story,
The Bushel of Wheat shall rise so high,
That man of man shall be Antropophage.
ANNOT.

This is a prediction of a mighty Famine, wherein men shall eat up one another,
when an unwonted Bird shall be seen and heard to cry, being perched upon one of
the biggest pieces of Ordinance.

Antropophage is a Greek word, signifying a Man-eater, from (...), homo, and
(...), comedens, of which sort of men there be too many already.

LXXVI. French.
Foudre en Bourgongne avec cas portenteux,
Que par engine oncques ne pourroit fair,
De leur Senate Sacriste fait boiteux,
Fera Scavoir aux ennemis l'affaire.
English.
Lightning in Burgundy, with mavelous accidents,
Which could never have been done by art,
Of their Senate Sacriste being lamed,
Shall make known the business to the enemies.
ANNOT.

The Senate or Parliament of Burgundy, sits at Dijon, among them there is
always a Churchman, that is one of the Judges, to see that nothing be done to
the prejudice of the Church. I suspect that it is he, that is called here
Sacriste, and who shall reveal the business to the Enemies. The two first
Verses need no explication.

LXXVII. French.
Par Arcs, Foeux, Poix, and par feux repoussez,
Cris hurlemens sur la minuit ouys,
Dedans sont mis par les rempars cassez,
Par Canicules les Traditeurs fuis.
English.
Being repulsed with Bows, Fires, and Pitch,
Cries and howlings shall be heard about midnight,
They shall get in through the broken Walls,
The betrayers shall run away through the Conduits.
ANNOT.

It is a Town Besieged, where after a repulse given to the Besiegers, they
shall get in by the Treason of some within, who shall run away through the
Conduits or Channels of the Town.

LXXVIII. French.
Le grand Neptune du profond de la Mer,
De sang punique and sang Gaulois mesle,
Les Isles a sang pour le tardif ramer,
Plus luy nuira que loccult mal cele.
English.
The great Neptune in the middle of the Sea,
Having joined African and French blood,
The Islands shall be put to the Sword, and the slow rowing
Shall do them more prejudice, than the concealed evil.
ANNOT.

To understand this, you must know that Henry the II. King of France, having
renewed his Alliance with the Grand Seignior Sultan Solomon, he asked him
succors for to take Nice, which he pretended to belong to the Earldom of
Provence. To that purpose the Marshal of Brissac went from Court with the Kings
Army in the year 1557. to set upon Nice, Savona, and Genoa, and so to hinder
the Spaniard from coming by Sea in Piemont, and the Milanese. The Turk sent him
a good Fleet, consisting of 105. Galleys, and 14. Galliots.

The French Fleet consisted of 26 Galleys, of which the great Prior was
Admiral, who went with them from the Castle of Tf, the 9. of June 1558.

Being at Sea, and not knowing where the Turkish Fleet was, he went to and fro
to seek it out, at last he found it pillaging and plundering the Island of
Minorica. The Turks had already taken the chief Town, where 800. Turks were
killed, which so incensed the rest, that they set the Town on fire; then going
up and down the Country, they took 5000. Prisoners, and if the Lords of Carces
and Vence. had not stayed them, they would have ruinated the whole Island.

Then forsaking the Island, they joined with the French, but the perfidious
Bassa being bribed by the Genoeses, and those of Nice, went slowly to work, and
at last retreated without doing any thing for the French. This is the relation
of Caesar Nostradamus, in his History of Provence under Henry the II. and
according to this the Author says, that the great Neptune in the middle of the
Sea, shall join French and African blood. Neptune signifies the Mediterranean
Sea.

The Islands shall be put to the Sword, by the taking of Minorica, after which
the Turks being brided, went slowly to work, and in conclusion did nothing of
consequence.

The third and fourth Verse adds, that this Bassa's slow rowing, shall do them
more prejudice then the concealed evil; that is, shall do more damage to the
French by his hidden design of the Bassa of not serving the French; because
this slowness of the Bass^ spoiled the French activity, lessened their
provisions, and at last discouraged them; whereas if the Turks had not come,
the French Galleys alone were able to take Nice.

LXXIX. French.
La Barbe crespe and noire par engine,
Subjuguera la gent cruelle and fiere,
Le grand Cheyren ostera du longin,
Tous les Captifs par Seline Baniere.
English.
The frizled and black Beard by fighting,
Shall overcome the fierce and cruel Nation,
The great Cheyren shall free from Bands,
All the Captives made by Selyne Standard.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the year 1571. upon the seventh day of October,
when that famous Battle of Lepanto was fought between the Christians and the
Turks, the General of the Christians being Don Juan of Austria, whom he calls
here the frizled and black Beard.

In this Battle the Christians lost 7566. men, and the Turks about 32000.
besides 220. Ships of all sorts, and all the Christian slaves released that
were in them. By the Selyne Banner is understood that of the great Turk, whose
name at that time was Selyne. By the great Cheyren is understood Henry the II.
King of France, who redeemed many slaves, for Cheyren by transposition of
Letters is Henry.

LXXX. French.
Apres conflit du laese l'Eloquence,
Par peu de temps se trame Saint repos,
Point l'on admet les grand a delivrance.
Des ennemis sont remis a propos.
English.
After the Battle, the eloquency of the wounded man,
Within a little while shall procure a holy rest,
The great ones shall not be delivered,
But shall be left to their Enemies will.
ANNOT.

After the Battle of St. Laurence, the Prisoners taken by the Spaniard were the
Constable of France, the Dukes of Montpensier, of Longneville, the Marshal S.
Andr^, Ludovic Prince of Mantua, the Rhingrave Colonel of the Germans, the Earl
of la Rochefoucaud, and several other persons of quality.

They were Prisoners from the 10th of August 1557. to the third of April 1559.
that is, one year and eight Months; during which time the Pope's Nuncios,
Christierne Duchess Dowager of Lorraine, the Constable, and Marshal St. Andre
endeavored to make the peace.

Among them the Constable was chief, and Philip the II. King of Spain gave him
leave to go to and fro upon his Paroll; and of him it is our Author speaks in
the first Verse; After the Battle the eloquency of the wounded man, that is
after the Battle of Saint Laurence, where the Constable of Monmorency was
wounded in the hip. His eloquency procured the peace, which was concluded in a
short time, for had it not been for the death of Queen Mary of England, that
happened upon the 15 of November 1558, it should have been concluded three
Months after the conference that was begun in the Abbey of Cercamp near Cambray.

The third Verse says, that the great ones shall not be delivered, because
during the Treaty of Peace, Philip the II. would not hearken to take any
Ransom, but they were kept Prisoners till the Peace. It is the meaning of the
fourth Verse, when it says, but shall be left to the Enemies will, viz. the
Spaniards who gave them liberty after the Peace.

French. LXXXI.
Par feu du Ciel la Cite presqu'aduste,
L'Urne menace encor Dencalion,
Vexee Sardaigne par la punique fuste,
Apres le Libra lairra son Phaeton.
English.
By fire from Heaven the City shall be almost burnt,
The Waters threatens another Deucalion,
Sardaigne shall be vexed by an African Flect,
After that Libra shall have left her Phaeton.
ANNOT.

All is plain but the last Verse, the sense of which is, that the things before
spoken, shall happen when the Sun is newly come out of the sign of Libra.

LXXXII. French
Par faim la proye fera Loup prisonier,
L'Assaillant lors en extresme detresse,
Lesnay ayant au devant le dernier,
Le grand neschape au milieu de la press.
English.
By hunger, the prey shall make the Wolf prisoner,
Assaulting him then in a great distress.
The eldest having got before the last,
The great one does not escape in the middle of the crowd.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses signify, that an hungry Wolf seeking for a Prey, shall
be caught in some trap, where being almost famished, the Prey shall assaule
him. The last two Verses being obscure and not material to any thing I have
neglected them.

LXXXIII. French.
Le gros Traffic d'un grand Lion change,
La pluspart turn en pristine ruin,
Proye aux Soldats par play vendange,
Par Jura Mont, and Sueve bruine.
English.
The great Trade of a great Lion altered,
The most part turns into its former ruin,
Shall become a Prey to Soldiers and reaped by wound,
In Mont-Jura, and Suaube great Foggs.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning the City of Lion in France, which is a Town of an
exceeding great Trade, and is threatened to suffer an alteration, and a decay by
War.

The last Verse is concerning a great Mist or Fogg, which shall be upon
Mont-Jurs and in Suabeland.

LXXXIV. French.
Enter Campaign, Sienne, Pise and Ostie,
Six mois neuf jours ne pleuvra une gout,
L'Estrange Langue en Terre Dalmatie,
Courira sus vastant la Terre toute.
English.
Between Campania, Sienna, Pisa and Ostia,
For six Months and nine days there shall be no rain,
The strange Language in Dalmatia' s Land,
Shall overrun, spoiling all the Country.
ANNOT.

All those places mentioned, in the first Verse are seated in Italy; the Author
says that in that Country it shall not rain for the space of six Months and
nine days, which if it be past, or to come, I know not.

The two last Verses signify, that a strange Nation shall come into Dalmatia,
and overrun and spoil all that Country.

LXXXV. French.
Le vieux plein barbe soubs le statut severe,
A Lion fait dessus l'Aigle Celtique,
Le petit grand trop outre persevere,
Bruit d'Arme au Ciel, Mer rouge Ligustique.
English.
The old plain beard under the severe Statute,
Made at Lion upon the Celtique Aigle,
The little great persevereth too far,
Noise of Arms in the Sky, the Ligustrian Sea made red.
ANNOT.

I could scrape no sense out of the first three Verses; the last signifies,
that a noise of Arms shall be heard in the Skies, and that the Ligustrian Sea,
which is that of Genoa, shall be made red with blood, when the former prodigy
has appeared.

LXXXVI. French.
Naufrage a class pres d'Onde Adriatique,
La Terre tremble emeue sur l'Air en Terre mis
Egypt tremble augment Mahometique,
L'Heraut soy render a crier est commis.
English.
A Fleet shall suffer Shipwreck near the Adriatic Sea,
The Earth quaketh, a motion of the Air comes upon the Land,
Egypt trembles for fear of the Mohammedan increase
The Herald surrendering shall be appointed to cry.
ANNOT.

In the two first Verses is foretold a great storm by the Adriatic Sea, in
which a Fleet shall be dispersed, and many suffer Shipwreck.

The two last Verses relate the great fear Egypt was in, when the great Turk
Sultan Selyn went to conquer it.

The last Verse is concerning a Herald, which was surrendered to the contrary
party, and by them was appointed to perform that office in their behalf.

LXXXVII. French.
Apres viendra des extremes Contrees,
Prince Germain dessus Throsne d'Ore,
La servitude and les Eaux rencontrees,
La Dame serve son temps plus n'adore.
English.
After that shall come out of the remote Countries,
A German Prince upon a gilded Throne,
The slavery and waters shall meet,
The Lady shall serve, her time no more worshipped.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning Gustavus Adolphus King of Swedeland, who is called
German Prince, because his Ancestors came out of Germany, he came out of a
remote Country, that is Swedeland, he came upon a gilded Throne, that is a
Ship gilded, he shall make slavery and waters meet, because as soon as he was
Landed he began to conquer, and to subdue that Lady (viz. Germania) that was no
more worshipped since as she was before.

LXXXVIII. French.
Le Circuit du grand fait ruineux,
Le nom septiesme du cinquiesme sera,
'Dun tiers plus grand l'estrange belliqueux,
De Ram, Lutece, Aix ne garentira.
English.
The circumference of the ruinous building,
The seventh name shall be that of the fifth,
From a third, one greater, a Warlike man,
Aries shall not preserve Paris nor Aix.
ANNOT.

The Circumference of that ruinous building, was the French league against
Henry III. and Henry IV. which numbers being joined together, make seven,
mentioned in the second Verse.

By the strange Warlike man, in the third Verse, is understood Henry IV.
because he was not born in France, but in Navarre, and therefore called a
stranger, who subdued both Paris and Aux, seated under the constellation of
Aries. If you had not rather, by the name of the Ram, or Aries, understand the
Duke of Mayenne, who who was head of the league.

LXXXIX. French.
Un jour seront amiss les deux grands Maistres,
Leur grand pouvoir se verra augmente,
La Terre neufue sera en ses hauts estres,
Au sanguinaire le nombre raconte.
English.
One day the two great Masters shall be friends,
Their great power shall be increased,
The new Land shall be in a flourishing condition,
The number shall be told to the bloody person.
ANNOT.

We must suppose here three Kings of Europe, two of which shall become friends,
and by their agreement, the new Land, that is, either the Plantations, or the
Trade either in the East or West Indies, shall flourish, their prosperities
shall be related and told to the third King, who shall be a bloody and cruel
man.

XC. French.
Par vie and mort change Regne d' Hungry,
La loy sera plus aspre que service,
Leur grand Cite d'Urlemens plain and cry,
Castor and Pollux ennemis dans la Lice.
English.
By Life and Death the Kingdom of Hungary shall be changed.
The Law shall be more severe than the service.
Their great City shall be full of howling and crying,
Castor and Pollux shall be enemies in the List.
ANNOT.

There shall happen a great change in the Kingdom of Hungary, caused by the
birth of one, and the death of another.

The meaning of the second Verse is, that it will be more tolerable to go to
War, than to Law.

The last verse signifies, that this dissension shall happen between two
Brothers; because Castor and Pollux were such.

XCI. French.
Soleil levant ungrand feu lon verra,
Bruit and clarte verse Aquilon tendans,
Dedans le rond mort and cris Jon orra,
Par Glaive, Feu, Faim, mort les attendans.
English.
At the rising of the Sun a great fire shall be seen,
Noise and light tending toward the North,
Within the round death and cries shall be heard,
Death by Sword, Fire, Hunger watching for them.
ANNOT.

These are Prodigies that shall be seen, a little before that a great Calamity
shall happen,

XCII. French.
Feu couleur d'or, du Ciel en terre veu,
Frappe du haut nay, fait cas merveilleux,
Grand meurtre humain, prinse du grand Neveu,
Morts de spectacles, eschape lorgueilleux.
English.
A fire from Heaven of a Golden color shall be seen,
Stricken by the high born, a wonderful case,
Great murder of Mankind, the taking of the great Neven,
Some dead looking, the proud one shall escape.
ANNOT.

This is a continuation of the former, relating more Prodigies that are to
happen.

XCIII. French.
Aupres du Tybre bien pres la Lybitine,
Un peu devant grand Inondation,
Le chef du nef prins, mis a la sentine,
Chasteau, Palais en conslagration.
English.
Near the Tyber, going toward Lybia,
A little before a great Innundation,
The Master of the Ship being taken shall be put into the Sink.
And a Castle and Palace shall be burnt.
ANNOT.

This is plain.

XCIV. French.
Grand Pau, grand mal par Gaulois recevra,
Vain terreur au Maritin Lion,
Peuple infiny par la Mer passera,
Sans eschaper un quart d'un Million.
English.
Great Pau shall receive great harm by the French,
A vain terror shall seize upon the Maritine Lion,
Infinite people shall go beyond Sea,
Of which shall not escape a quarter of a Million.
ANNOT.

The first Verse signifies that the Country about the Pau, (which is the
greatest River in Italy) shall receive great damage by the French.

The second, that the Maritine Lion, viz. the Hollanders shall fear in vain.
The third and fourth are plain.

XCV. French.
Les lieux peuplez seront inhabitables,
Pour Champs avoir grande division,
Regnes livrez a prudents incapables,
Lors les grands Freres mort and dissension.
English.
The populous places shall be deserted,
A great division to obtain Fields,
Kingdoms given to prudents incapable,
When the great Brothers shall die by dissension.
ANNOT.

This needs no interpretation.

XCVI. French.
Flambeau ardant au Ciel soir sera veu,
Pres de la fin and principe du Rhosne,
Famine, Glaive, tard le secours pourveu,
La Perse turn envahir Macedoine.
English.
A burning shall be seen by night in Heaven,
Near the end and beginning of the Rhosne,
Famine, Sword, too late succors shall be provided,
Persia shall come against Macedonia.
ANNOT.

This is easy.

XCVII. French.
Romain Pontife guard de taprocher,
De la Cite que deux fleuves arrouse,
Ton sang viendras aupres de la cracher,
Toy and les tiens quand fleurira la Rose.
English.
Roman Pontife take heed to come near
To the City watered with two Rivers,
Thou shall spit there thy blood,
Thou and thine, when the Rose shall blossom.
ANNOT.

Although there may be many Cities watered with two Rivers, yet I know none
more famous than Lions in France, where two famous Rivers, the Rhosne and the
Saone meet together, and I believe this is the place that our Author
forewarneth the Pope to come to, for fear of his death, and that of his
attendants.

XCVIII. French.
Celuy du sang resperse le visage,
De la Victime proche du Sacrifice,
Venant en Leo, augure par presage,
Mis estre a mort alors pour la fiance.
English.
He that shall have his face bloody,
With the blood of the Victim near to be sacrificed,
The Sun coming into Leo shall be an Augury by presage,
That then he shall be put to death for his confidence.
ANNOT.

I suppose this to be spoken of a Jewish Priest, who going about to practice
the Ceremonial Law, in a Country where it is forbidden, shall be put to death
for his bold confidence.

XCIX. French.
Terroir Romain qu'interpretoit Augure,
Par gent Gauloise par trop sera vexee,
Mais Nation Celtique craindra l'heure,
Boreas, class trop loing l'avoit poussee.
English.
The Roman Country in which the Augur did interpret,
Shall be too much vexed by the French Nation,
But the Celtique Nation shall fear the hour,
The Northwind had driven the Navy in too far.
ANNOT.

Since the Reign of Henry the II. King of France, the Historians do not mention
that the Country about Rome has been troubled by the French Armies. It was
only in the time of Paul the IV. who was assisted by the French Troops, under
the conduct of the Lord Strozy, and Captain Monluc, therefore this Stanza
belongs to the time of that Kings Reign.

And indeed what he foretells here, came to pass in the year 1556. for the
Country about Rome was vexed by the French Nation, who went about then to take
the places, which the Duke of Alba had taken from the Pope, and thereby caused
those disorders, which commonly are incident to War.

The second Verse says, the Country shall be too much vexed, and not a
little, because Monluc, whom the Author calls the quick Gascon, did
continually torment the Enemies, which could not be done without a great
prejudice to the Country; Moreover, his Troops being for the most part
Gascons, and consequently active men; the Soldiers did more harm than ordinary.

In the first Verse he says, that this Country about Rome was marked by an
Augury, to be the place upon which the sad effect of the Augury should fall,
which proved true; for the first of March 1556. appeared a Blazing Star, which
did presage to that Country of Rome, its disaster.

Roman Country in which the Augur did interpret, that is to say, which the
Augur did signify, and presage should be vexed by the French Nation.

Afterward the Author says, that the same French Nation, or Celtique, shall
fear the hour when Boreas should drive to far the Fleet, that is to say, shall
fear much, when the Baron de la Guard was so troubled with the storm (as we
have said) and in truth it was Boreas, or the Northwind, that drove him into
St. Florents road.

C. French.
Dedans les Isles si horrible tumulte,
Rien on n'orra qu'une bellique brigue,
Tant grand sera des predareurs l'Insult,
Qu'on se viendra ranger a la grand ligue.
English.
In the Islands shall be so horrid tumults,
That nothing shall be heard but a Warlike surprise,
So great shall be the insult of the Robbers,
That every one shall shelter himself under the great League.
ANNOT.

This is plain, if by the the great League, you understand the soundest and
most powerful party.

THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY III.
I. French.
APres Combat and Bataille Navale,
Le grand Neptune a son plus haut beffroy,
Rouge adversaire de peur de viendra pasle,
Mettant le grand Occean en effroy.
English.
After the fight and Sea Battle,
The great Neptune in his highest Steeple,
The red adversary shall wax pale for fear,
Putting the great Occean in a fright.
ANNOT.

I find no my stical sense in this, unless by the red adversary he should
understand the Pope, because clothed in Scarlet. Therefore I leave the
explication to the judgment of every particular Reader.

II. French.
Le Divin Verb donra a la substance,
Compris Ciel, Terre, or occult au lait mystique,
Corpse, Ame, Esprit, ayant toute puissance,
Tant sous ses pieds comme au Siege Celique.
English.
The Divine Word shall give to the substance,
Heaven and Earth, and Gold hid in the mystical milk,
Body, Soul, Spirit, having all power,
As well under his feet, as in the Heavenly Seat.
ANNOT.

I desire the judicious Reader, and chiefly if he be given to the Hermetick
Philosophy, to take a special notice of this Stanza, for in it is contained the
secret of the Elixir or Philosophers Stone, more clearly and plainly then in
the Tabula Smaragdina of Hermes, which to make appearent, we shall expound it
Verse by Verse.

The Divine Word shall give to the substance; by the Divine word you must not
understand the second person of the Trinity, but a Doctor in Divinity or a
Theologian, called in Greek (...) or Divine word, who shall be an Adeptus, a
Disciple of Hermes, and one that shall attain to the secret of the Philosophers
stone.

That man shall give to the substance, that is, to Gold; Heaven and Earth, and
gold hid in the mystical Milk. Heaven and Earth, that is all the Celestial and
Terrestrial qualities, lurking in the Gold, which is hid in the mystical milk,
that is in the Azoth, or Mercury of the Philosophers.

Body, Soul, Spirit, having all Power, that is, the three principles, of which
the Philosophers say their stone is compounded, viz. Body, Soul, and Spirit.

Having all Power, that is, having the power to transmute all Metals into its
kind; as also having all the powers from above and below, as Hermes says,
Pater ejus est Sol, Matter vero Luna, and Terra nutrix ejus.

Which is confirmed by the last Verse, As well under his feet, as in the
Heavenly Seat.

III. French.
Mars and Mercure, and Largent joint ensemble,
Verse le Midy extreme siccite,
Au fond d' Asie on dira Terre tremble,
Corinthe, Ephese lors en perplexite.
English.
Mars and Mercury, and Silver joined together,
Toward the South a great drought,
In the bottom of Asia shall be an Earthquake,
Corinth and Ephesus shall then be in perplexity.
ANNOT.

After the Author has in the foregoing Stanza expressed the mystery of the
Philosophers stone, he seems to give here a receipt, though Sophistical, for
the relief of the Inquisitors, and as it were a Viaticum, for them to subsist
till they can attain to the perfection, as Basilius, Valentinus has done since
to his disciples.

He says then, that with Mars, that is, Iron, Mercury and Silver joined
together, some thing may be done, if you beware of a drought in the South; that
is, in the middle of the operation; and this is concerning the two first
Verses. Those that shall desire to be better and further informed, may come to
me, and they shall have all the satisfaction I can afford them.

The two last Verses have no relation to the first two, and foretell only a
great Earthquake in Asia, by which, those two Towns, Corinth and Ephesus,
shall be in great perplexity.

IV. French.
Quand seront proches le defaut des Lunaires,
De l'un a lautre ne distant grandement,
Froid, siccite, dangers verse les frontieres,
Mesme ou l'Oracle a pris commencement.
English.
When the want of the Luminaries shall be near,
Not being far distant one from another,
Cold, drought, danger toward the Frontiers,
Even where the Oracle had his beginning.
ANNOT.

The word near, shows that the two Eclipses, one of the Sun and the other of
the Moon, shall be near one another.

The Ephemerides of John Stadius, teach us, that in the year 1556 in the Month
of November, these two Eclipses did meet. That of the Sun upon the first of
November, at 17 hours (as the Astrologers reckon) and 53 Minutes. That of the
Moon at 12 hours and 43 Scruples; and thus the two last Verses are plain.

Concerning the other two: Belleforest teaches us two things; the first, that
the same year was extraordinary dry, in so much that from April to October it
did not rain, but only upon the Eve of St. John the Baptist, and that the
Vintage was made in August, the Wine proving excellent. The second is, that in
the Month of December began a horrid Frost, which lasted a great while. Thus
there was Cold and drought.

Concerning the dangers toward the Frontiers, Belleforest says, that toward
Pickardy the Spaniard began to break the truce, making inrodes about Abbeville,
St. Spirit of Rule, la Chapele, Rozoy, Thierasse, and Aubenton.

When complaints were made of it, they alleged their necessity and want of
Victuals; which did oblige the Lord Admiral to permit the Soldiers
retaliation; and in this manner, there was danger toward the Frontiers.

As for the Town where the Oracle (that is, our Author) had his beginning or
birth, whether it be that of St. Remy or Salon de Craux. The dangers that were
there, proceeded from the Civil Wars between the Protestants and the Roman
Catholics.

V. French.
Pres le de defaut des deux grands luminaires,
Qui surviendra enter l' Avril and Mars,
O quel cherte! mais deux grands debonnaires,
Par Terre and Mer secourront toutes parts.
English.
Near the Ecclipses of the two great Luminaries,
Which shall happen between April and March,
O what a dearth! but two great ones bountiful,
By Land and Sea shall succor them on all sides.
ANNOT.

There shall happen two great Ecclipses between March and April, one of the
Sun, and the other of the Moon; then shall be a great dearth, but the afflicted
shall be relieved by the two powerful Princes of a good Nature.

VI. French.
Dans Temple clos le foudre y entrera.
Des Citadins dedans leur fort grevez,
Chevaux, Boeufs, Hommes, l'Onde mur touchera,
Par faim, soif, soubs les plus foibles armez.
English.
Into a close Church the lightning shall fall,
The Citizens shall be distressed in their Fort,
Horses, Oxen, Men, the Water shall touch the Wall,
By hunger, thirst, down shall come the worst provided.
ANNOT.

This is plain.

VII. French.
Les fugitifs, feu du Ciel sur les Piques,
Conflit prochain des Corbeaux sesbatans,
De Terre on cry, aid, secours Celiques,
Quand pres des murs seront les combatans.
English.
The runways, fire of Heaven upon the Pikes,
A fight near hand, the Ravens sporting,
They cry from the Land, succors O Heavenly powers
When near the walls shall be the fighting men.
ANNOT.

The first Verse signifies. that there shall be some Fugitives, upon whose
Pikes the Lightning shall fall:

The second, that when a multitude of Ravens shall be sporting, a great fight
shall be near hand.

The third, that there shall be a great exclamation and prayers, when the
Soldiers shall come near the wall to give an affault.

VIII. French.
Les Cimbres joints avecques leurs voisins,
Depopuler viendront presque l' Espagne,
Gens ramassez, Guienne and Limosins,
Seront en ligue and leur feront Compagne.
English.
The Cimbres joined with their neighbors,
Shall come to depopulate almost all Spain,
People gathered from Guienna and Limosin,
Shall be in league with them, and keep them Company.
ANNOT.

The Cimbres and Teutons were a Northern people, viz: the Swedes and Danes, who
came once out of their Country to sack Rome, and were overcome by Marius, near
the Town of Orange, in a place where his Triumphal Arch is seen to this day.
The rest is easy.

IX. French.
Bourdeaux, Rouan and la Rochelle joints,
Tiendront autour la grand Mer Occeane,
Anglois Bretons, and les Flamans conjoints,
Les chasseront jusque aupres de Rouane.
English.
Bourdeaux, Rouan, and Rochel joined together,
Will range about upon the great Ocean,
English Brittans, and Flemings joined together,
Shall drive them away as far as Rouane.
ANNOT.

By mentioning Bourdeaux, Rouan, and Rochel, the Author understands the whole
Naval forces of France, which (he says) shall be defeated, by the English,
Britains, and Hollanders, and pursued as far as Rouane, which is a Town at the
head of the River Loire, from whence it runs down for the space of 500 Miles
to Nantes, and a while after discharges it self into the Ocean:

X. French.
De sang and faim plus grand calamite,
Sept fois sapreste a la Marine plage,
Monech de faim, lieu pris, captivite,
Le grand mean, Croc, enserre en cage.
English.
Of blood and famine, what a great calamity!
Seven times is ready to come upon the Sea Coast,
Monech by hunger, the place taken, captivity,
The great one carried away, Croc, shut up in a Cage,
ANNOT.

Monech or Monaeo is a Town and Principality belonging to the Family of the
Grimaldi of Genua, and is seated by the Sea side, between Provence and Genoa;
that place is threatened here with many afflictions, as is plain in this Stanza.

XI. French.
Les Armees battre au Ciel longue saison,
L'Arbre au milieu de la Cite tomb,
Vermin, Rogne, Glaive en face tison,
Lors le Monarque d' Adrie succombe.
English.
Armies shall fight in the Air a great while,
The Tree shall fall in the middle of the City,
Vermin, Scabs, Sword, firebrand in the face,
When the Monarck of Adria shall fall.
ANNOT.

The three first Verses contain several prodigies, that shall happen before the
death of the Duke of Venice, or rather (because he is no Monarck) before the
fall of that Monarchy or Commonwealth.

XII. French.
Par la tumeur du Heb. Po. Tag. Tibre de Rome,
Et par lestang Leman and Aretin,
Les deux grands chefs, and Citez de Garonne,
Prins, Morts, Noiez. Partir humain butin.
English.
By the swelling of Heb. Po. Tag. Tiber of Rome,
And by the Lake Leman and Aretin,
The two great Heads, and Cities of Garonne,
Taken, Dead, Drawned. The human booty shall be divided.
ANNOT.

Heb. is the River Hebrus in Thracia, Po, is the great River of Italy, Tag. is
Tagus the River of Lisbonne; the rest is plain.

XIII. French.
Par Foudre en Arche Or and Argent fondu,
De deux Captifs l'un l'autre mangera,
De la Cite le plus grand estendu,
Quand submergee la Class nagera.
English.
By Lightning shall gold and silver be melted in the Arch,
Of two Prisoners one shall eat up the other,
The greatest of the City shall be laid down,
When the Navy that was drowned shall swim.
ANNOT.

The words and the sense are plain.

XIV. French.
Par le Rameau du vaillant personage,
De France infirm, par le Pere infelice,
Honeurs, Richesses, travail en son viel Age,
Pour avoir creu le conseil d'homme nice.
English.
By the Bow of the valliant men,
Of weak France, by the unfortunate Father,
Honors, Riches, labor in his old age,
For having believed the council of a nice man.
ANNOT.

Every body may understand this as well as I do.

XV. French.
Coeur, vigueur, gloire, le Regne changera,
De tous points contre, ayant son adversaire,
Lors France enfance par mort subjuguera,
Un grand Regent sera lors plus contraire.
English.
Heart, vigor, and glory shall change the Kingdom
In all points, having an adversary against it,
Then shall France overcome Childhood by death,
A great Regent shall then be more adversary to it.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses seem to have foretold of the late Tyrant Cromwell.

The two last Verses may be applied to France, when the Infan of Spain Don
Balthazar died, etc.

XVI. French.
Un Prince Anglois Mars a son coeur du Ciel,
Voudra poursuivre sa fortune prospere,
Des deux duelles l'un percera le fiel,
Hay de luy, bien aim de sa Mere.
English.
An English Prince Mars has his heart from Heaven,
Will follow his prosperous fortune,
Of two Duels one shall pierce the gall,
Being hated of him, and beloved of his Mother.
ANNOT.

By this Stanza is promised to England a Martial Prince, who shall have his
heart from Heaven, and with all endeavors follow his prosperous fortune, which
is a remarkable and commendable part in a man.

By the last two Verses, it seems that this Prince shall have a Son, who
shall fight two duels, for one of which his Father shall be angry and hate him,
but his Mother shall love him for it.

XVII. French.
Mont Aventine brusler nuit sera veu,
Le Ciel obscur tout a un coup en Flandres,
Quand le Monarque chassera son Neveu,
Lors gens d'Eglise commettront les esclandres.
English.
Mount Aventine shall be seen to burn in the night.
The Heaven shall be darkened upon a sudden in Flanders,
When the Monarch shall expel his Neven,
Then Churchmen shall commit scandals.
ANNOT.

Mount- Aventine is one of the seven Mountains in Rome. The rest is plain.

XVIII. French.
Apres la pluye de lait assez longuette,
En plusieurs lieux de Rheims le Ciel touch,
O quel conflit de sang pres deux sapreste,
Pere and Fills Rois, noseront approach.
English.
After a pretty long rain of Milk,
In many places of Rhemes the lightning shall fall,
O what a bloody fight is making ready near them,
Father and Son, both Kings, shall not dare to come near.
ANNOT.

Rhemes is a City in France. The rest is easy.

XIX. French.
En Lucques sang and lait viendra pleuvoir,
Un peu devant changement de Preteur,
Grand Peste and Guerre, Faim and soif fera voir,
Loin ou mourra leur Prince Recteur.
English.
In Luca it shall rain Blood and Milk,
A little before the change of the Magistrate,
A great Plague, War, Hunger and Thirst shall be seen,
A great way off, where their Prince Ruler shall die.
ANNOT.

Luca at present is a strong Town, and a little Commonwealth by it it self in
Italy, governed by their own Magistrate: That Town is threatened here to see
those prodigies mentioned, a little before the change of their Government,
besides a great Plague and dearth; as also the death of their chief Magistrate,
who shall die far off that Country.

As for the raining Milk and Blood, they are Prodigies that have appeared often
before, and therefore not incredible, as those that are Versed in History may
justify: and although the reasons may be drawn from natural causes, yet wonld
they be too tedious if I should insert them here.

XX. French.
Par les Contrees du grand flevue Betique,
Loin d' Ibere, au Royaume de Grenade,
Croix repoussees par gens Mahometiques,
Un de Cordube trahira a la fin Contrade.
English.
Through the Countries of the great River Betis,
Far from Iberia, in the Kingdom of Granada,
Crosses beaten back by Mohammedan people,
One of Corduba shall at last betray the Country.
ANNOT.

The great River, called in Latin Betis, and in Spanish Guadalquivir, is the
River of Sevilia, the most famous Town in Spain for Trade. This River runs
through most of the Spanish Dominions, and discharges it self into the Ocean
about the mouth of the Straights, over against Barbary, upon which Coast of
Spain lies the Kingdom of Granada, the chief City of which is Corduba, in
Spanish Cordua. This Kingdom was of time almost immemorial, occupied and
inhabited by the Moors, till they were expelled and driven back into Barbary,
by Ferdinand and Isabella, King and Queen of Castilia, The rest is easy.

XXI. French.
Au Crustamin pres Mer Adriatique.
Apparoistra un horrible poisson,
De face human and de corpse aquatique,
Qui se prendra dehors de l'Hamecon.
English.
In the Crustamin near the Adriatic Sea,
An horrid Fish shall appear,
Having a man's face, and a fishes body,
Which shall be taken without a hook.
ANNOT.

I suppose this Crustamin to be some place so called, near the Adriatic Sea.

As for Fishes with an humane face, we have several examples of them. Ambrosius
Paraeus relates diverse, and in his works has inserted the Pictures of them.

1. When Mena was Governor of Egypt, and walked by the Nilus side, he saw a
Seaman rising out of the River, having an humane shape as far as the Navel,
and with a grave look and fair hairs, intermixed with white ones, bony Breast,
and distinct Arms, the rest of the body was like a Fish. Three days after in
the Morning appeared another Sea monster like a woman: those two Monsters
appeared so long, that every body had time to consider them.

2. Rondeletius says, that in our age was taken a Fish in the Sea of Norway,
which every body presently called a Monk, because of the resemblance.

3. In the year 1531. was seen a Sea Monster, covered with Scales, which for
the resemblance was called a Bishop, Rondeletius and Gesuerus have the Picture
of it.

4. In the year 1523. was seen in Rome a Fish about the bigness of a Child of
five years old, that had humane shape to the Navel, except the ears: So that
all those things related of Tritons, Nereides and Sirens seem not altogether
fabulous, and we may conclude with Pliny. Vera est valgi opinio, quicquid
nascatur in part naturae ulla, and in Mari esse, praeterque multa quae nusquam
alibi, lib. 9. cap. 2.

XXII. French.
Six jours lassaut devant Cite done,
Livree sera forte and aspre Bataille,
Trois la rendront, and a eux pardonne,
Le rest a feu and sang trauche taille.
English.
Six days shall the assault be given to the City,
A great and fierce Battle shall be fought,
Three shall surrender it, and be pardoned,
The rest shall be put to fire and Sword, cut and slasht.
ANNOT.

Some famous City must be here understood, which the Author has not named. The
same shall be assaulted for six days continually, and in conclusion shall be
surrendered or betrayed by three men, who shall be pardoned, and all the rest
put to Fire and Sword. Most men that have knowledge in History, interpret this
of the City of Magdebourg in Germany, that was destroyed with Fire and Sword by
the Earl of Tilly, General for the Emperor against Gustavus Adolphus, King of
Swedeland. For the like devastation and cruelty was never heard of in Europe.

XXIII. French.
Si France pass outre Mer Liquistique,
Tu te verras en Isles and Mers enclos,
Mahomet contraire plus Mer l' Adriatique,
Chevaux and Asnes tu rongeras les os.
English.
If France goes beyond the Ligustick Sea,
Thou shall see thy self enclosed with Islands and Seas.
Mahomet, against thee besides the Adriatic Sea,
Of Horses and Asses thou shall gnaw the bones.
ANNOT.

This is concerning the miseries which the French were to suffer in the Island
of Corsica, till the peace was concluded in the year 1559. The Author directs
his speech to the French Fleet that went to Corsica in the year 1555.

He says in the first Verse, If France goes beyond the Ligustik Sea; that is,
if thou go to Corsica, which is beyond the Ligustik Sea toward Africa. Thou
shall see thy self enclosed with Islands and Seas: that is, thou shall be
constrained to keep within those two Towns which thou have there, without going
out either by Land or Sea; not by Sea for want of Ships, nor by Land the
Garrisons being weak, because the King had then so much business that he could
not suffice all.

Moreover the Author adds that Mahomet shall be contrary; not that he was an
Enemy to France, but because he was then Master of the Adriatic Sea; so that
the Venetians, which were then friends to the French, could not succor them.

And thus the news of the peace being brought, the French dideat their Horses
and Asses, and there was never a peace so well come as to the French that were
in Corsica.

XXIV. French.
De l'Entreprise grande confusion,
Perte de gens Thresor innumerable,
Tu ny doibs fair encore tension,
France a mon dire fais que sois recordable.
English.
From the undertaking great confusion,
Loss of people and innumerable Treasury,
Thou ought not yet to tend that way,
France endeavor to remember my saying.
ANNOT.

This is annexed and has relation to the precedent, therefore needs no other
interpretation.

XXV. French.
Qui au Royaume Navarrois parviendra,
Quand la Sicile and Naples seront joints,
Bigorre and Lands par Foix lors on tiendra,
D'Un qui d' Espagne sera par trop conjoint.
English.
He that shall obtain the Kingdom of Navarre,
When Sicily and Naples shall be joined,
Bigorre and Lands then by Foix shall beheld
Of one who shall too much be joined to Spain.
ANNOT.

Bigorre is a Town in Gascony, the Lands is a desert Country about Bourdeaux
wherein nothing grows but Pine-Trees, Foix is a Country of Gascony, called
the County, of Foix. The rest is easy.

XXVI. French.
Des Rois and Princes dresseront simulachres,
Augures, creux eslevez aruspices:
Corn victime doree, and d' Azur and de Nacre,
Intrepretez seront les extispisces.
English.
Some Kings and Princes shall set up Idols,
Divinations, and hollow raised Divinators,
Victim with gilded Horns, and set with Azur and Mother of Pearl
The looking into the Entrals shall be interpreted.
ANNOT.

I can find nothing in this but a description of the Heathens sacrifices in
ancient times, where they brought the Victim; that is, the beast that was to be
sacrificed, trimmed in a gallant manner, having the Horns gilded, and set with
Azureand Mother of Pearl, and after the Entrals were taken out, by the
inspection of them they practiced their Soothsaying. This inspection of Entrals
was called by the Latins Extispicium, from the word Exta which signifies
Entrals, and specto which signifies to look.

XXVII. French.
Prince Libique puissant en Occident,
Francois d' Arabe viendra tant enflammer,
Scavant aux Lettres sera condescendent,
La Langue Arabe en Francois translater.
English.
A Libian Prince being powerful in the West,
The French shall love so much the Arabian Language,
That he being a Learned man shall condescend,
To have the Arabian tongue translated into French,
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is de Futuro, and is concerning a Libian Prince (now Libia is a
Kingdom of Africa) who shall be a powerful man in the West, and being a lover
of learning, shall condescend to have the Arabian Language translated into
French, because the French at that time shall be much in love with it.

XXVIII. French.
De Terre foible and pauvre parentale,
Par boute and paix parviendra a l'Empire,
Long temps regner une jeune femelle,
Qu'oncques en Regne nen survint un si pire.
English.
One weak in Lands and of poor Kindred,
By thrusting, and peace shall attain to the Empire,
Long time shall Reign a young woman,
Such as in a Reign was never a worse.
ANNOT.

The words are so plain, that every body may interpret them.

XXIX. French.
Les deux Neveux en diverse lieux nourris,
Navale pugne, Terre peers tombez,
Viendront si haut eslevez aguerris,
Venger l'Injure ennemis succombez.
English.
The two Nephews brought up in diverse places,
A Sea fight, fathers fallen to the Earth,
They shall come highly educated, and expert in Arms,
To avenge the injury, their enemies shall fall down under them.
ANNOT.

This is concerning two Nephews, who shall be educated in diverse places, and
grow expert in Arms, their Fathers shall be killed, but those Nephews shall
come, and having fought at Sea, shall revenge the injury done to them,
overcoming their enemies.

XXX. French.
Celuy qu'en luitte and fer au fait Bellique,
Aura port plus grand que luy le prix,
De nuit au lit six luy feront la pique,
Nud sans harnois subit sera surprins.
English.
He who in Wrestling and Martial affairs,
Had carried the prize before his better,
By night Six shall abuse him in his bed,
Being naked, and without harness, he shall suddenly be surprised.
ANNOT.

Many attribure this to the Earl of Montgomery in France, who having run a tilt
against Henry II. unfortunately killed him, for which, and for being of the
Protestant party, he was afterward beheaded, though quarter had been given him.

XXXI French.
Aux champs de Mede, d' Arabe, and d' Armenie,
Deux grands Copies trois fois sassembleront,
Pres du Rivage d' Araxes la mesgnie,
Du grand Soliman en Terre tomberont,
English.
In the fields of Media, Arabia, and Armenia,
Two great Armies shall meet thrice,
Near the Shore of Araxes, the people
Of great Solomon shall fall down.
ANNOT.

This signifies no more, but the loss of three famous Battles on the Turks
side, against the Persians.

The first that I find after the coming out of these Prophesies, is the Battle
of Sancazan, seven miles from Tauris, and hard by the River Araxes, where 20000
Turks were slain, without any considerable loss of the Persians; this was in
the time of Amurath the III. Emperor of the Turks, and son to Selymus the
second. The other two Battles I could not make good, because I want the
supplement of the Turkish History, as also because they have not yet happened.

XXXII. French.
Le grand sepulcher du peuple Aquitanique,
S'aprochera aupres de la Toscane,
Quand Mars sera pres du coin Germanique,
Et au terroir de la gent Mantuane.
English.
The great grave of the Aquitanick people,
Shall come near Tuscany,
When Mars shall be in the German corner,
And in the Territory of the Mantuan people.
ANNOT.

The Lord of Thou says in his History, that the Cardinal Caraffa got by the
King of France's permission, out of Corsica, several Troops of Gascons, and
brought some with them, to the number of about 2000 which were quartered about
Rome. Many of them were among the Troops of the Duke of Guise, being allured
thither by the reputation of their Countreyman Captain Monluc.

The Author foretells, that they shall find their Graves near Tuscany,
because the Territory of Rome joyneth to that Province.

Then in the 3 and 4 Verse he specifieth the time by two marks; one is, when
Mars shall be near the German corner; the other, when he shall be in the
Territory of the Mantuan people, and the War was then in that Territory; for
the Duke of Ferrara to show he would not stand still, sent his son Alphonso
d'Este to make incursions there, and to take some places.

Moreover the War was then near the German corner, which is Lorrain, when Henry
II. besieged Thionville in the year 1558. Paradin shows, that Mars was in the
German corner two years before, since about the end of the year 1555: the Duke
of Nevers by an extraordinary endeavor in the middle of the Winter, did
relieve Mariembourg: and the following years the French Garrisons kept the
fields to avoid surprises. And in the year 1557. when the Duke of Guise fought
in Italy, the Duke of Savoy brought his Army against Mariembourg; so it proved
true that Mars, viz. the War was in the German corner; for that Town is in the
borders of Germany, and was in that corner till the taking of Thionville.

XXXIII. French.
En la Cite ou le loup entrera,
Bien pres de la les ennemis seront,
Copy estrange grand pais gastera,
Aux Monts des Alps les amiss passeront.
English.
In the City wherein the Wolf shall go,
near that place the enemies shall be,
An Army of strangers shall spoil a great Country,
The friends shall go over the Mountains of the Alps.
ANNOT.

The two last Verses make me think that this Prophecy was fulfilled in the
time of Henry II. King of France, because the French being then friends to the
Pope, went over the Alps to serve him.

This Stanza might also be applied to Lewis 13, who caused his Army to go
beyond the Alps, but that word Friends is more convenient to the time of Henry
II. because the French went then over the Alps in quality of friends to serve
the Pope.

According to this conjecture, the Wolf which signifies the Spaniard, came
anno 1556. into many Towns, which the Duke of Alba took, as we have said in
another place, and because among those Towns Neptune was one of the most
considerable, being seated by the Sea side near Rome: I believe that by this
word City he means that Town which belonged to the Colonese.

And to say truth, the French were then very near it, to endeavor the relief
of it.

Afterward came the Duke of Guise's Army, whis is named by the Anthor, an Army
of strangers, because the French and Germans are strangers to Italy. This Army
shall spoil a great Country; for in that year it went through all Italy, and
where an Army passes, nothing but ruin can be expected.

XXXIV. French.
Quand le defaut du Soleil lors sera,
Sur le plein jour le Monstre sera veu,
Tout autrement on l'Interpretera,
Cherte na guard, null ny aura pourveu.
English.
When the Eclipse of the Sun shall be
At noon day, the Monster shall be seen,
It shall be interperted otherways,
Then for a dearth, because no body has provided against it.
ANNOT.

The sense of this is, that when the Sun shall be Eclipsed at noon, a Monster
shall be born, which shall presage a dearth, though no body will believe it,
because they were unprovided against it.

XXXV. French.
Du plus profond de l'Occident d' Europe,
De pauvre gens un jeune enfant maistra,
Qui par sa langue seduira grande troop,
Son bruit au Regne d'Orient plus croistra.
English.
Out of the deepest part of the West of Europe,
From poor people a young child shall be born,
Who with his tongue shall seduce many people,
His fame shall increase in the Eastern Kingdom.
ANNOT.

This needs no explication.

XXXVI. French.
Ensevely non mort Apoplectique,
Sera trouve avoir les mains mangees,
Quand la Cite damnera l'Heretique,
Qu'avoit leur Loix ce leur sembloit changees.
English.
One buried, not dead, but Apoplectical,
Shall be found to have eaten up his hands,
When the City shall blame the heretical man,
Who as they thought had changed their Laws.
ANNOT.

Many persons (according to Histories being only in a fit of Apoplexy) have
been buried for dead, and being afterward taken out of the ground, have been
found to have eaten up their hands, as I my self have seen one dug out of
Saint Bartholomews Churchyard, about the time that the City of London began to
be weary of Cromwels devices and Tyranny, yet I would not here definitively
assert, he was the man here pointed at by the Title and Epithete of Heretical
man, unless it were in the point of government.

XXXVII. French.
Avaunt l'assault l'Oraison pronouncee,
Milan prins l'Aigle, par embusche deceus,
Muraille antique par Canons enfonsee,
Par seu and sang a mercy peu receus.
English.
Before the assault the Prayer shall be said,
An Eagle shall take a Kite, they shall be deceived by an Embuscado.
The ancient wall shall be beaten down with Canons,
By fire and blood, few shall have quarter.
ANNOT.

The sense of this is easy.

XXXVIII. French.
La gent Gauloise and Nation estrange,
Outre les Monts, morts pris and profligez,
Au mois contraire and proche de vendange,
Par les Seigneurs en accord redigez.
English.
The French Nation, and another Nation,
Being over the Mountains, shall die, and be taken,
In a month contrary to them, and near the vintage,
By the Lords agreed together.
ANNOT.

Two kind of Nations were led into Italy by the Duke of Cuise to succor the
Pope, viz. French and Germans, meaning by the Germans all those that use the
German Tongue, as Switzers, etc.

The Author says, these two Nations were led beyond the Mountains, because
they went beyond the Apennine Alps, to come down into the Champion Country of
Italy, where some of them died by the Sword, others by famine and sickness;
others lost their liberty, being made prisoners of War, others were exposed to
the inconveniences that attend a ruined Army: He adds, that these accidents
shall befall them in a Month near the Vintage, that Month is September: He
calls it Contrary, because the Grapes being ripe, the starved Soldiers did
eat abundance of them, and so fell into a bloody flux. The Pope's Tenants made
use of this Stratagem to ruin that Army.

The Spaniard had his revenge the year following; for the Duke of Guise having
missed his design, and being stepped before Civitella, and incensed that the Pope
did not keep his word with him, he resolved to go back again into France, and
so the Pope did by the means of the Commonwealth of Venice, and of the Duke of
Florence, it was concluded and signed with the 23 of September.

This is the Authors meaning in the 4 Verse, that all the misfortune which
befell the French, was by reason of that peace; for the Pope disbanded his
Troops, consisting most of French and Switzers, the greatest part of whom fell
into the hands of their enemies, and of the Country people, others died of
sickness: It is true, that the Duke of Guise brought his own Army back without
much loss, but the Author speaks here of the Guise and Switzers, that were in
the Pope's service, under the command of Marshall Strozzy, Monluc, Cardinal
Caraffa, and others.

The time of this peace agrees with the Prophecy; for it was concluded on the
23 of September, which is a Month near the Vintage.

XXXIX. French.
Les sept en trois Mois en concord,
Pour subjuger les Alps Apeninnes,
Mais la tempeste and Ligure couarde,
Les profligent en subites ruins.
English.
The seven shall agree together within three Months,
To conquer the Apennine Alps,
But the tempest, and coward Genoese,
Shall sink them into sudden ruins.
ANNOT.

There shall be seven persons, who shall be three Months in making an agreement
to go beyond the Apennines, but they shall be hindered by a tempest, and by the
cowardliness of the Genoeses.

XL. French.
Le grand Theater se viendra redresser,
Les dez jettez and les rets ia tendus,
Trop le premier en glaz viendra lasser,
Par arc prostrais de long temps ia fendus.
English.
The great Theater shall be raised up again,
The Dice being cast, and the nest spread,
The first shall too much in Glass.
Beaten down by Bows, who long before were split.
ANNOT.

This must be put among Insolubilia de Alliaco.

XLI. French.
Bossu sera esleu par le Conseil,
Plus hideux Monstre en Terre napperceu,
Le coup volant luy crevera un oeil,
Le traistre au Roy pour fidele receu.
English.
Crook-back shall be chosen by the Council,
A more hideous Monster I never saw upon Earth.
The flying blow shall put out one of his eyes,
The Traitor to the King, shall be admited as faithful.
ANNOT.

This needs no explication.

XLII. French.
L'Enfant naistra a deux dents en la gorge,
Purres en Tuscie par pluie tomberont,
Peu d'ans apres ne sera Bled ny Orge,
Pour saouler ceux qui de faim failleront.
English.
A Child shall be born with two Teeth in his mouth,
It shall rain stones in Tuscany,
A few years after there shall be neither Wheat nor Barley
To feed those that shall faint for hunger.
ANNOT.

Those two Prodigies mentioned in the two first Verses, do presage a great
Famine that shall ensue a few years after.

XLIII. French.
Gens d'alentour du Tar, Lot, and Garonne,
Gardez les Monts Apennins de passer,
Vostre tombeou pres de Rome and d' Ancone,
Le noir poil crespe fera Trophee dresser.
English.
People that live about the Tar, Lot, and Garonne,
Take heed to go over the Apennine Mountains,
Your Grave is near Rome and Ancona,
The black frisled hair shall dress a Trophy of you.
ANNOT.

The Tar, the Lot, and the Garone, are three Rivers of Gascony, the Inhabitants
of which are forewarned not to go over the Apennine Mountains, or else they
shall meet with their Graves near Rome and Ancona. This has relation to the 38
Stanza, and to the interpretation thereof, therefore vide.

XLIV. French.
Quand l'Animal a l'Homme domestique,
Apres grands peines and sauts viendra parler,
Le foudre a vierge sera si malefique,
De Terre prinse and suspendue en l'Air.
English.
When the Beast familiar to Mankind,
After great labor, and leaping shall come to speak,
The Lightning shall be so hurtful to a Virgin,
That she shall be taken from the Earth, and suspended in the Air.
ANNOT.

It is a Dog that shall come howling and leaping to his Mistresses friends;
because she was killed and suspended in the Air by the Lightning.

XLV. French.
Les cinq estranges entrez dedans le Temple,
Leur sang viendra la Terre prophaner,
Aux Thoulousain sera bien dur exemple,
D'un qui viendra ses loix exterminer.
English.
The five strangers having come into the Church,
The blood shall profane the ground,
It shall be a hard example to those of Thoulouse,
Concerning one that came to break their Laws.
ANNOT.

I suppose these five strangers to be five Commissioners, for the altering
something in the Government of Thoulouse, who shall be all killed in a Church,
and the ground profaned by their blood, according to the Romish opinion.

XLVI. French.
Le Ciel (de Plancus la Cite) nous presage,
Par clercs insignes and par estoiles fixes,
Que de son change subit saproche lage,
Ne pour son bien, ne pour ses malefices.
English.
The Heaven foretells concerning the City of Plancus,
By famous Clerks, and fixed Stars,
That the time of her sudden change is near hand,
Neither because of her goodness, or wickedness.
ANNOT.

The City of Plancus is Lion, because he was the Founder of it. That City is
threatened here of a sudden change, caused neither by her goodness or
wickedness, but by a certain position and aspect of the fixed Stars, which
makes it fatal.

XLVII. French.
Le vieux Monarque dechasse de son Regne,
Aux Orients son secours ira querre,
Pour peur des Croix ploiera son Enseigne,
En Mitylene ira par Mer and par Terre.
English.
The old Monarch being expelled out of his Kingdom,
Shall go into the East to get succors,
For fear of the Crosses be shall fold up his Colors,
He shall go into Mitylene by Sea and Land.
ANNOT.

Mitylene is an Island of the Archipelago, belonging to the Turk.

XLVIII. French.
Sept cens Captifs attachez rudement,
Pour la moitie meurtrir, done le sort,
Le proche espoir viendra si promptement,
Mais non si tossed qu'une quinziesme mort.
English.
Seven hundred prisoners shall be tied together,
To murder half of them, the lot being cast,
The next hope shall come quickly,
And not so quickly, but fifteen shall be dead before.
ANNOT.

By the next hope, he means the reprieve. The rest is clear.

XLIX. French.
Regne Gaulois tu seras bien change,
En lieu estrange est translate l'Empire,
En autre moeurs and Lois seras range,
Rouan and Chartres te feront bien du pire.
English.
French Kingdom thou shall be much changed,
The Empire is translated in another place,
Thou shall be put into other manners and Laws,
Rouan and Chartres shall do the worse they can to thee.
ANNOT.

Rouan is the chief City of the Province of Normandy, and Chartres the chief
City of that of Beausse.

L. French.
La Republique de la grande Cite,
A grand rigueur ne voudra consentir,
Roy sortir horse par Trompette Cite,
L'Eschelle au Mur la Cite repentir.
English.
The Commonwealth of the great City,
With great harshness shall not consent,
That the King should go out being summoned by a Trumpet,
The Ladder shall be put to the Wall, and the City repent.
ANNOT.

It is hard to know what he means by the great City wherein there is a
Commonwealth, whether it be Venice, Genoa, Geneva, Luca, or some of the Cities
of Switzerland; but it seems that a King shall take shelter in it, who shall
be summoned by a Trumpet to come out, but the City will not suffer it, for
which the said City shall be sealed, and repent.

LI. French.
Paris conjure un grand meurtre commettre,
Blois le fera sortir en plein effer,
Ceux d' Orleans voudront leur Chef remettre,
Angers, Troyes, Langres, leur feront un mes fait.
English.
Paris conspireth to commit a great murder,
Blois will cause it to come to pass,
Those of Orleans will set up their head again,
Angers, Troyes, Langres will do them a mischief.
ANNOT.

The Prophecy contained in the two first Verses came to pass in the time of
Henry the III. King of France, when the Parisians did rebel against him, and
made Barricadoes in the streets, thinking to have taken him, who was compelled
to run away for his life, and fly to Chartres. This rebellion was raised and
somented by Henry of Lorraine Duke of Guise, whom the King afterward caused to
be murdered, with his brother the Cardinal of Lorraine, at the Convention of
the three Estates kept at Blois.

Orleans, Angers, Troyes, Langres, are remarkable Cities in France.

LII. French.
En la Campaign sera si longue pluye,
Et en l' Apoville si grande siccite,
Coq verra l'Aigle l'aisle mal accomplie,
Par Lion mise sera en extremite.
English.
In Campania shall be so long a rain,
And in Apulia so great a drought,
The Cock shall see the Eagle with his wing disordered,
And by the Lim brought to extremity.
ANNOT.

Campania, and Apulia are two Provinces of the Kingdom of Naples.

The last two Verses of the Prophecy came to pass about the years 1630 and
1631. when Gustavus Adolphus King of Swedeland, called here the Lion, brought
the Empire (signified by the Eagle) to extremity; the King of France signified
by the Cock, looking upon, and underhand assisting him.

LIII. French.
Quand le plus grand emportera le prix,
De Nuremberg, d'Ausbourg, and ceux de Basle
Par Agripine Chef de Frank fort repris,
Traverseront par Flandres jusqu'en Gale.
English.
When the great one shall carry the prize,
Of Nuremberg, Ausbourg, and Basil,
By Agrippina the Chief of Frankfort shall be taken,
They shall go through Flanders as far as France.
ANNOT.

Nuremberg, Ausbourg, and Basil are Cities of Germany.

By Agrippine is understood the City of Cologne, called in Latin Colonia
Agrippina, from the Founderess of it Agrippina, Mother of the Emperor Nero, or
from M. Agrippa favorite of Augustus Caesar.

LIVE. French.
L'un des plus grands fuira aux Espagnes,
Qu'en longue play apres viendra seigner,
Passant Copies par les hautes Montagnes,
Devastant tout, and puis apres regner.
English.
One of the greatest shall run away into Spain,
That shall cause a wound to bleed long,
Leading Armies over the high Mountains,
Destroying all, and afterward shall Reign.
ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needs no interpretation.

LV. French.
En l'an qu'un oeil en France Regnera,
La Cour sera en un bien fascheux trouble,
Le grand de Blois son amy tuera,
Le Regne mis en mal and doubt double.
English.
In the year that one eye shall Reign in France,
The Court shall be in a very hard trouble,
The great one of Blois shall kill his friend,
The Kingdom shall be in an ill case, and double doubt.
ANNOT.

The meaning of the first Verse is, when a King having but one eye shall Reign
in France.

Blois is a City in France upon the River Loire.

LVI. French.
Montauban, Nismes, Avignon and Besier,
Peste, Tonnerre and Gresle a fin de Mars,
De Paris Pont, de Lion Mur, Monpelier,
Depuis six cens and sept vingt, trois parts,
English.
Montauban, Nismes, Avignon and Besier,
Plague, Lightning and Hail at the end of March,
The Bridge of Paris, the Wall of Lion, and Monpelier, shall fall,
From six hundred and seven score, three parts.
ANNOT.

Montauban is a Town in Gascany, Nismes and Besiers are Towns in Languedoc;
Avignon is a Town in France belonging to the Pope, which shall suffer these
damages by Lightning at the end of March.

LVII. French.
Sept fois changer verrez gens Britanique,
Teints en sang en deux cens nonante an,
France non point par appuy Germanique,
Aries double son Pope Bastarnan.
English.
Seven times you shall see the English to change,
Died in blood, in two hundred ninety year,
Not France, by the German support,
Aries doubleth his Bastarnan Pole.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses concern England; the third France; the fourth marketh the
time by the motion of the Sign of Aries, which shall be favorable to France.

We shall leave the two first Verses to be interpreted by the English Nation,
which is most concerned in it, and come to the last two, which concern France.

The third Verse says that France shall not change as England, by reason of
the help it shall have from Germany, which has been made good already for
these hundred years, notwithstanding the Wars between Henry II. and the
Spaniard; the Conspiracy of the Protestant party against Francis the II. at
Amboise; the civil Wars under Charles the IX. the League under Henry III. and
Henry IV. the Foreign Wars under Lewis XIII. and Lewis XIV. now Reigning.

The Authors meaning by these words, but France not, is, you shall not see
France change seven times in two hundred ninety years, as the British nation,
and then he gives the reason of it, by German help, that is to say, that
France shall have help from Germany.

The fourth Verse says, that during those two hundred ninety years, Aries
doubleth his Bastarnan Pole, to understand this, we must suppose first that the
Sign of Aries rules over France, Palestine, Bastarnia, etc.

Secondly, we must learn from Ptolomy and other Geographers, that Bastarnia
contains the people that are toward Sarmatia or Poland, which were called by
the Ancients, the people of Admone, Sidane, Roxolane, and by others Peucins,
from the Island Pe^ce, which is in Istria.

Thirdly, we must suppose, that the Sign of Aries has two Poles, the first is
that of the Aequinoctial Line, and the second, that of the Eccliptick, because
the Sign of Aries begins just in the Line of the Equator, and afterward
stretches toward the North. Now it is so that the place where its extension
ends in the Eccliptical Line of the Sun, is called by the Author the
Bastarnan Pole.

It is a Pole since in the constellations of Heaven, we call Poles, the two ends
or extremities of them, and in the constellations of the Zodiac, we call the
first Pole that which is next to the Equator, and the second Pole that which
stretches toward the North, or toward the South in the Eccliptical Line.

In this sense, the first Pole of the Sign of Aries, is that which has its
first degree in the Equator; the second is, that which stretches toward the
North in the Eccliptick, and this last Pole is called Bastarnan, because it is
Vertical to Bastarnia, as the Astrologers set down their Climates, Kingdoms,
Provinces and Towns under the twelve Signs.

Fourthly, We must suppose that this word to double, may signify three things.

1. In Sea-mens terms; it signifies to go beyond some place, as to double the
Cape of bona Speranza, which is called in Italian, Tramontare; that is, to go
beyond.

2. It signifies to do twice the same thing, as Jacob did double his service
for Rachel, etc. 3. In matter of traveling; it signifies to go twice as far as
is requisite.

To double, in this place cannot be understood in the first sense; because the
constellations never stretched out of their compasses, though the Stars of which
they are compounded, have their peculiar motions.

To understand this, we must know that the Stars of the Firmament have their
peculiar motions from West to East, upon the Pole of the Eccliptick, and that
they go that way a matter of one Degree, in the space of about 100 years, and
consequently the Stars do retrograde every year in the Eccliptick from West to
East 52 Seconds. Ptolomeus holds this opinion, but other renowned Astrologers
give them more: For my part I am of Tychobrahe's opinion, who allowed them one
Degree of retrogradation in 70 years and 7 Months, and consequently 51 Seconds
every year.

According to this Doctrine the Star that is in the Horn of Aries, was observed
by Tymocharis in 2d Degree; 150 years after, Hipparchus observed it in the
first; 265 years after, Ptolomeus saw it in the 6 Degree; 740 years after,
Albathognius observed it in the 18 Degree; 304 years after, Alphonsus King of
Spain, found it in the 6 Degree; 265 years after, Copernicus did observe it to
be in the 27 Degree and two Minutes; 61 years after, Tychobrahe saw it in the
27 Degree, and above 37 Minutes; so that in the space of 61 years it had gone
35 Minutes.

By this Doctrine we see that the whole constellations do not go beyond their
Poles, though the Stars that Compound them change their Poles every year of 51
seconds.

To double, then here cannot be taken in the first sense, nor in the third
sense, for the first reason, it must then be in the second sense; and thus
Aries doubleth his Bastarnan Pole; that is, Aries makes twice his Pole, which
answers to Bastarnia.

If you ask how it comes to pass that Aries doubleth this Pole, and in what
place of Heaven we set this Bastarnan Pole. I answer to the first, that Aries
doubleth his Pole, when one of those 13 Stars comes to that point, which is a
Northern or Western Pole to that sign in the Eccliptick. As to the second: I
answer, that the place ought to be its last Degree, viz. the end of the 30
Degree.

Why? (will you say) did the Author mark that difference of the sign of Aries,
rather than that of Taurus, or of another?

I answer, that it was in favor of France; because Aries does govern in
France, and if it has been favorable to it, when it came first to the
Bastarnan Pole, it will be so too when it doubleth the same Pole, seeing that
it will have the same position and Aspect. Now we see, that in the space of
these 100 years, France was not overcome, much less shall it be hereafter,
seeing that the Stars do promise its exaltation for a long continuance.

If I were a great Astrologer, I should observe exactly by this that within the
space of 290 years. Aries shall double his Cape Bastarnan, and consequently
Aries should come to that Pole just in the year 1845. which is according to
that we have said

LVIII. French.
Aupres du Rhin des Montagnes Noriques,
Naistra un grand de gens trop tard venu,
Qui defendra Sarmates and Pannoniques,
Qu'on ne scaura quil sera devenu.
English.
Near the Rhine, out of the Norick Mountains,
Shall be born a great one, though too late come,
Who shall defend the Polonians and Hungarians,
So that it shall not be known what is become of him.
ANNOT.

This is plain.

LIX. French.
Barbare Empire par le tiers usurp,
La plus grand part de son sang mettre amort,
Par mort senicle par luy quart frappe,
Pour peur que sang par le sang ne soit mort.
English.
A Barbarian Empire shall be usurped by a third person,
Who shall put to death the greatest part of his Kindred,
By death of old age, the fourth shall be stricken by him,
For fear that blood should not die by blood.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain, I acknowledge my Ignorance in the last two.

LX. French.
Par toute Asia grande proscription,
Mesme en Mysie, Lydie, and Pamphilie,
Sang versera par dissolution,
D'un jeune noir remply de felony.
English.
Through all Asia shall be a great proscription,
Yea in Mysia, Lydia, and Pamphilia,
Blood shall be spilled by the debauchness
Of a young black man, full of felony.
ANNOT.

Mysia, Lydia, and Pamphilia, are Countries of Asia.

LXI. French.
La grande band and sect Crucigere,
Se dressera en Mesopotanie,
Du proche Fleuve compagnie legere,
Qui tell Loy tiendra pour ennemie.
English.
The great troop and sect wearing a Cross,
Shall rise up in Mesopotamia,
Near the next River shall be a light company,
Which shall hold that law for enemy.
ANNOT.

It is an Army of Christians (be like Armenians) that shall rise in Mesopotamia
against whom shall an Army of Turkish Horseman come, who did live by the next
River.

LXII. French.
Proche del Duero par Mer Cyrene close,
Viendra percer les grands Monts Pyrenees,
La main plus court and sa percee gloses
A Carcasonne conduira ses menees.
English.
Near the Duero closed by the Cyrenian Sea,
Shall come to pierce the great Pyrenean Mountains,
The shorter hand and his pierced gloss,
Shall in Carcassone lead his plot.
ANNOT.

The Cyrenian Sea, is that Sea which is by the Province of Cyrene. The Pyrenean
Mountains part Spain from France. Carcassonne is a Town in France near unto
Spain. The rest passes my understanding.

LXIII. French.
Romain pouvoir sera du tout a bas,
Son grand Voisin imiter les vestiges,
Occultes haines civiles, and debats,
Retarderont aux boufons leur folies.
English.
The Roman power shall be quite put down,
His great Neighbor shall follow his steps,
Secret and civil hatreds and quarrels,
Shall stop the Buffons folly.
ANNOT.

The first Verse signifies, that the Pope's Authority shall be put down.

The second, that his great neighbor, that is the Empire shall follow his
steps; that is, be put down too. The two last Verses are plain.

LXIV. French.
Le Chef de Perse remplira grand Olchade,
Class trireme contre gent Mahometique,
De Parthe and Mede and pillar les Cyclades,
Repos long temps au grand Port Jonique.
English.
The Head of Persia shall fill a great Olchade,
A Fleet of Galleys against the Mohammedan Nation,
From Parthia and Media they shall come to plunder the Cyclades,
A long rest shall be on the Jonique Port.
ANNOT.

I could not find what he means by Olchade. The second Verse is plain.

Parthia and Media are two Kingdoms depending from that of Persia. The Islands
of Cyclades are in the Aegean Sea, and are so called because they are like a
Garment about the City of Delos, for (...) in Greek signifies a round garment
of a woman.

The Jonique Sea is that Sea in Grecia, which is about Athens and Corinth, etc.

LXV. French.
Quand le Sepulcher du grand Romain trouve,
Le jour apres sera esleu Pontife,
Du Senate gueres il ne sera prouve,
Empoisonne, son sang au Sacre Scyphe.
English.
When the Sepulcher of the great Roman shall be found,
The next day after a Pope shall be elected,
Who shall not be much approved by the Senate,
Poisoned, his blood in the Sacred Scyphe.
ANNOT.

This seems to foretell the finding out of the Sepulcher of some famous Roman,
and that the next day after a Pope shall be Elected, who being not well
approved of by the Conclave, shall be poisoned in the Chalice, which is the
Communion Cup that the Roman Catholics use at Mass, signified here by the
Latin word Soyphus.

LXVI. French.
Le grand Baillif d' Orleans mis a mort.
Sera par un de sang vindicatif,
De mort merit ne mourra, ne par sort,
De pieds and mains mal, le faisoit captif.
English.
The great Bailif of Orleans shall be put to death,
By one of a revengeful blood,
He shall not die of a deserved death, nor by chance,
But the disease of being tied hand and foot, has made him prisoner.
ANNOT.

The Bailif of Orleans is a great Officer, for he is there Lord Chief Justice,
and of all the precincts. It seems that this man shall be put to death, by
one of a revengeful blood, not that he had deserved it, or come to it by
chance, but because he shall be tied hand and foot, and die in prison.

LXVII. French.
Une nouvelle Sect de Philosophes,
Mesprisant mort, or, honneurs and richesses,
Des Monts Germains seront fort limitrophes,
A les ensuivre auront appuy and presses,
English.
A new Sect of Philosophers shall rise,
Despising Death, Gold, Honors and Riches,
They shall be near the Mountains of Germany,
They shall have abundance of others to support and follow them.
ANNOT.

This is properly said of the Anabaptists in Germany, in the time of John de
Leyden, and now of the Quakers in England, and elsewhere.

LXVIII. French.
Peuple sans Chef d' Espagne and d'Italie,
Morts, profligez dedans le Cheronese,
Leur dict trahy par legere folly,
Le sang nager per tout a la traverse.
English.
A people of Spain and Italy without a Head,
Shall die, being overcome in the Cheronese,
Their saying shall be betrayed by a light folly,
The blood shall swim all over at random.
ANNOT.

Cheronese is a Land or ground unmanured; the rest is plain.

LXIX. French.
Grand exercite conduit par jouvenceau,
Se viendra render aux mains des ennemis,
Mais le vieillard nay au demi pourceau,
Fera Chalon and Mascon estre amiss.
English.
A great Army led by a young man,
Shall yield it self in the hands of the enemies,
But the old man born at the sign of the halfe-Hog,
Shall cause Chalon and Mascon to be friends.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain,; as for the third Verse, I could not find who
that Old man should be, that shall be born at the sign of the half-Hog.

Chalon and Mascon are two Cities in France, the first in Champagne, the last
in Burgundy.

LXX. French.
La grand Bretagne comprise d' Angleterre,
Viendra par eaux si haut a inondre,
La Ligue nevue d' Ausone fera gerre,
Que contre eux ils se viendront bander.
English.
Great Britany comprehended in England,
Shall suffer so great an Inundation by Waters,
The new League of Ausone shall make Wars,
So that they shall stand against them.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is divided in two parts. The first two Verses foretell a great
Innundation, that was to happen in England.

The last two speak of a league and insurrection, that shall be at Bordeaux,
which is here called Ausone, from a famous Latin Poet, named Ausonius, who was
born in that City.

As to the first part, after much seeking and enquiry: I found the truth of it
in a Latin book, called Rerum in Gallia, Belgia, Hispania, Anglia, etc.
gestarum anno 1607. Tomi septimi Liber secundus conscriptus a Nicolao Gotardo
Artus Dantiscano, where the History is related thus.

About the end of January 1607. the Sea-broke out so violently in England, that
after the breaking of Fences and Dikes, it caused very great damages to the
Inhabitants. The greatest mischief was done in Somersetshire, where the water
did overflow, ten Leagues in length, and two in breadth, twelve foot high in
the most eminent places. This sudden Innundation brought a fearful alarm to the
Country people; some of them going to their Plough, were fained to run back to
their houses, where they found their enemies at their doors, viz. Death and
Water, who without distinction swept them away. In a little time, the Towns
appeared like Islands, encompassed on all sides, and presently after were
swallowed up, so that the tops of the Trees were scarce seen. This new Flood
covered so the Towns of Hansfield, in the same County, those of Grantham,
Kenbus, Kingston, and Briandon, with several Farms built in the Champion
Country, that none of the Buildings could be seen. If you add to this the
devastation of the places, the quantity of Corn, Fruit, and Grass that was
lost, the misery shall be so great, as not to be expressed. During this fearful
quarrel between the Water and the Land, an exceeding great number of people
died of all Ages, and Sexes, it would avail them nothing to get into the upper
Stories and Roofs of houses, nor upon the highest Trees; for the imperious
Waters did so swell and rage, that the Foundations of the houses, and roots of
the Trees were loosened, so that both fell to the Ground, or rather into the
Water. The people seeing no way to escape, resolved to die patiently. No body
could without great grief see the Oxen and Sheep drowning; for there was such a
numerous quantity of them, that a far off one would have thought them to be
Rocks in the Sea, but seeing them swiming, and hearing them bleating and
bellowing, one would have thought them to be a storm and hissing of winds. A
rich Farmer, and father of seven Children, being involved in the Flood, and
much astonished at this accident, nevertheless thinking the danger less then it
was, went about to save some of his best Goods; but seeing the Waters to
increase, he forsook all, and went to save one of his Children, whom he loved
best; but the Waters followed him so close, that all he could do, was to get
upon the Roof of his house. Among the Children there was a little one sleeping
in a Cradle, which being made of close boards, did swim upon the Waters about
three Miles, and was taken up alive, and sound. The Hay cocks did swim like
Ships upon the Waves, the Pigeons and Pigs were upon the Sheaves that the
Water carried away: The Coneys being driven out of their holes, had leapt upon
the backs of the swiming Sheep. A certain Shepherd being about to gather his
Sheep into their Fold, was followed by the Flood, ran for his life, and climbed
upon a high Tree, where seeing his Sheep bleating in the water, he began to
tear his hair, to smite his breast, to lift up his hands and his eyes to
Heaven, and when his Sheep had all perished, and himself endured an extreme
cold and hunger, he was at last taken up in a Boat that was sent to save the
distressed.

But here we must talk of Bristol, which is one of the chiefest Cities in
England, by reason of the Haven, which brings thither abundance of Merchants,
from several Nations. The same day of that Inundation, the Sea breaking into a
great Channel, did presently overflow the Country with such quickne^s and
violence, that it covered the Valleys, and the smaller Hills, in so much that
nothing but an utter ruin was expected; many whole houses were turned upside
down, and carried away with the Flood. The Barns full of Corn, Hay, and Straw,
were overthrown, and the Cattle carried away, besides abundance of people of
all sorts. The Merchants of London and Bristol, and the rest of the
Inhabitants, besides the loss of Provisions, suffered an inestimable one in
their Commodities, which they had provided for the Fair, that was then near
hand, the most part of them being carried away by the Flood, and the rest so
spoiled, that the owners could not tell what to do with them: A Gentleman
dwelling between Barnstable and Bristol, and two Leagues off from the Sea,
being gone abroad in the Morning to oversee his grounds, did look toward the
Sea, ran back again to his house, to bring this sad news to his Wife and
Servants, while they were endeavoring to pack up the most precious of their
Goods, the Water came about the house of fast, that they altered their
resolution, and bethought themselves only to save their lives; the servants
busied themselves about tying the Goods together, thinking the Water could not
have carried them away: As for the Gentleman, he went with his Wife and
Children to the top of the house, and got upon the rafters of the Roof.
Although nothing appeared to them but the Image of death; nevertheless some
hope and desire of escaping, made the Gentleman come down to save a little
Trunk, wherein his papers of greatest concernment were. Being come down from
the Rafter, he laid hold of the Trunk, and fastened it to a Manger; while he
was busy about it, the Waves of the Sea did so beat against that house, that
it fell down to the Ground. The Wife, Children, and Servants were swallowed up
in the ruin. The Gentleman laid hold on a Rafter, and was carried away with it
above half a League further, to a Mountain, where he set his foot upon dry
Ground, being half dead with fear and grief, and bewailing the loss of his
Wife, Children, and Servants, he spyed the little Trunk and the Manger, which
he drew to Land, and that was all he saved, besides his Life.

Another Gentleman living thereabouts, and newly married, was resolved that day
to go to the next Town, and make merry with some friends, whereupon he bid his
man make his Horse ready, and himself went to put on his Boots; after he had
put on one, and whilst he held the other in his hand, the Waters came so
fiercely into that house, that they compelled the half Booted Gentleman to run
away for his life, in an upper Chamber, but he was followed so close by that
merciless Element, that he was fained to get upon the top of the Roof, to save
his life, and to ride upon the upper Rafter, but the house and Roof melting by
the violence of the Waves, this new Knight was carried by the violence of them
toward the Town where he intended to make merry, and there was saved with much
ado,

It happened at the same time near Markand, in the Duchy of Norfolk, that two
Thieves, going about to steal some Cattle, while they were driving of them,
perceived in the Morning the Justice of God following them; it was the Water,
which having overtopped the Dikes, threatened the takers of being taken, and
compelled them to save themselves with all speed. From their wickedness did
arise a great good; for to the next Town they went, and bid the Sexton to Ring
the Bell, and to cry Water, Water: The Inhabitants being for the most part
asleep, did not know what to do in such an Alarm: Some climbed into the
Church's Steeple; others thinking there were Thieves went about to fence and
defend their houses; others hearing of a Flood, laughed at it, and said, that
those who brought this News, deserved to be punished; but presently they
altered their Languages, and their laughing was turned into a fearful mourning,
every one flying to save himself, his Wife, and Children, and whatsoever they
could pack up of their most precious Goods. Some thinking to have more wit than
others, went about to divert the Current of the Water from their houses; but
seeing there was no remedy, they went with their Wives and Children to the
tops of their houses, in a lamentable fright.

But when the Water came to seize upon the houses, wherein there were some
Playing, some Drinking, others already Drunken, a great part of them were
drowned, others ran to a Hill near the Town, where they spent the rest of that
night, and the day following with great lamentations.

The next day they saw their houses half under Water, and many people, who
from the windows and Steeples cried for help; others endeavored to save
themselves upon Boards and Rafters; the Horses tied to the Manger were all
suffocated. The Cattle in the fields, were by this time driven to the Mount
called Truhill, and for all that, were not out of danger; for the Mountain was
encompassed with Water to such a height and depth, that without Boats there
was no access to it; chiefly because of the Thickets and Bushes. Thus so much
Cattle was about to perish, had not some Shepherds brought Boats loaded with
provisions for Men and Beasts, til the Waters retired again, and the Dikes
were made good.

LXXI. French.
Ceux dans les Isles de long temps assiegez,
Prendront vigueur force contre ennemis,
Ceux par dehors morts de faim profligez,
En plus grand faim que jamais seront mis.
English.
Those in the Islands that have been long besieged,
Shall take vigor and force against their enemies,
Those without shall die for hunger; being overcome,
They shall be put in greater famine then they were before.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy came to pass, when the Spaniards Besieged Leyden in Holland, for
the Dutch broke the Dikes, whereby the water came upon them so fast, that they
were more besieged and starved then those of the Town, and their Army wholly
destroyed. Read Cardinal Bentivoglios his History of the Low Countries, as also
Strada:

LXXII. French.
Le bon Vieillard tout vif Ensevely,
Prez du grand Fleuve par faux soupcon,
Le nouveaux vieux de richesse ennobly,
Prins en chemin tout l'or de la Rancon.
English.
The good old man shall be buried alive,
Near the great River by a false suspicion,
The new old one made noble by his riches,
The gold of his ransom shall be taken in the way.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is divided into two parts: the two first Verses are concerning
an old man that shall be buried alive near a great River, upon a false
suspicion.

The latter two are concerning a young man, who shall assume unto himself the
name of a noble Family, and so make himself noble by his riches, but being
afterward taken prisoner, the money that was sent for his Ransom, shall be
taken in the way.

LXXIII. French.
Quand dans le Regne parviendra le boiteux,
Competiteur aura proche Bastard,
Luy and le Regne viendront si fort rogneux.
Qu'ains quil guerisse son fait sera bien tard.
English.
When the lame man shall attain to the Kingdom,
He shall have a Bastard for his near competitor,
He, and his Kingdom shall be so scabby,
That before he be cured it will be late.
ANNOT.

The words and the sense are plain.

LXXIV. French.
Naples, Florence, Fayence and Imole,
Seront en terms de tell fascherie,
Que pour complaire au malheureux de Nole,
Plaint d'avoir fait a son Chef moquerie.
English.
Naples, Florence, Fayenza, and Imola,
Shall be put into so much distress,
For being complaisant to the unhappy one of Nola,
Who was complained of for having mocked his Superior.
ANNOT.

Naples, Florence, Fayenza, Imola, and Nola are all Cities in Italy; the rest
is plain.

LXXV. French.
Pau, Verone, Vicence, Saragousse,
De Glaive atteints, Terroirs de sang humides,
Peste si grande viendra a la grand gousse,
Proche secours and bien long les remedes,
English.
Pau, Verona Vicenza, Saragossa,
Shall be hit by the Sword, the Country shall be moist with blood,
So great a plague and so vehement shall come,
That though the succors be near, the remedy shall be far off.
ANNOT.

By Pau here are understood the Towns that are seated upon that River.

Verona, Vicenza, are two Cities in Italy, belonging to the Venetians.
Saragossa is a City in Sicily.

LXXVI. French.
En Germany naistront diverses Sects,
Saprochant fort de l'heureux Paganism,
Le coeur captif and petites receptes,
Feront retour a payer le vray disme.
English.
In Germany shall diverse Sects arise,
Coming very near the happy Paganism,
The heart ^^ptivated and small receivings,
Shall open the gate to pay the true Tithes.
ANNOT.

The first and second Verses have been verified sufficiently.

By the two ^ast Verses he means that the heart of every one shall be in
fear, so that they shall come to an agreement, in which the true Tithes shall
be paid, and every one come to his own again.

LXXVII. French.
Le tiers climat soubs Aries comprins,
L'An mil sept cens vingt sept en Octobre,
Le Roy de Perse par ceux d' Aegypte prins,
Conflict, mort, perte, a la Croix grand opprobre.
English.
The third Climat comprehended under Aries,
In the year 1700. the twenty seven of October,
The King of Persia shall be taken by those of Egypt,
Battle, death, loss, a great shame to the Christians.
ANNOT.

Here be three notable things to be observed: one is the plain and punctual
specification of the time, in which the Prophecy shall come to pass, viz. the
^7. ^^ October in the year 1700. The second is, that the King of Persia shall
be taken by those of Agypt. The third is, the shame and confusion that the
Christians shall suffer for the same.

LXXVIII. French.
Le Chef d' Escosse avec six d' Allemagne,
Par gents de mer Orientaux captif,
Traverseront le Calpre and Espagne,
Present en Perse au nouveau Roy craintif.
English.
The Chief of Scotland with six of Germany,
Shall be taken prisoners by Seamen of the East,
They shall go through the Calpre and Spain,
And shall be made a present in Persia to the new fearful King.
ANNOT.

By the Calpre is understood the Capzor promontory, which is at the mouth of
the Streights, by and beyond which these Prisoners will be carried into Persis
for a present to the King, who then shall be some fearful person.

LXXXI. French.
Le grand criard sans honte audacieux,
Sera efleu Governeur le d'Armee,
La hardiesse de son contentieux,
Le pont rompu, Cite de peur pasmee
English.
The great bawler proud without shame,
Shall be elected Governor of the Army,
The floutness of his Competitor,
The Bridge being broken, the City shall faint for fear.
ANNOT.

Paradin says, that in the year 1558. the Lord of Bonnivet being dead, the
King of France did choose Francis of Vendosme, Vidame of Amiens, to succeed the
said Bonnivet, in the Office of Colonel of the French Foot. This Vidame is
noted by all Historians, for a rash proud man, that had a good opinion of
himself, and found fault with all the commands of the Marshal of Brissac, then
General of the Army.

The King in consideration of his Birth, and that he was a good Soldier, gave
him the place of the Lord Bonnivet, according to what the Author says, The
great Bawler, etc. shall be elected Governor in the Army. If you ask in what
Army he was elected Governor? the third Verse answers, in the Army of his
Competitor, that is, the Marshal of Brissac, who did chide him severely for
disobeying his commands, and was like once to have killed him.

The fourth Verse proved true at the taking of Queiras, where the Bridge,
through which the succors came to relieve the Town, being broken, the Town
grew so fearful, that it surrendered it self to the Marshal of Brissac.

LXXXII. French.
Erins, Antibe, villes auteur de Nice,
Seront vastees fort par Mer and par Terre,
Les Sauterelles Terre and Mer vent propice,
Prins, morts, troussez, pillez, sans loy de guerre.
English.
Erins, Antibe, and the Towns about Nices,
Shall be destroyed by Sea and Land,
The Grashopers shall have the Land, the Sea, and Wind favorable,
They shall be taken, killed, thrust up, plundered, without Law of War.
ANNOT.

Erins and Antibe are Towns of Provence, bordering upon Nice, which is a Town
of Piemont, all that Coast is threatened here to be ruined by the Grashopers,
that is, the Turks, which fell out about the year 1558. for the King of France
having called the Turks to his succors against Charles V. Emperor, they came
and took Nice in the behalf of the French, where they committed unheard
cruelties, as also upon all that Coast.

LXXIX. French.
L'Ordre fatal sempiternal par chaisne,
Viendra tourner par order consequent,
Du Port Phocen sera rompue la chain,
La Cite prinse, l'ennemy quant and quant.
English.
The fatal and eternal order by chain,
Shall come to turn by consequent order,
Of Port Phocen the chain shall be broken,
The City taken, and the enemy presently after.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy regards only the City of Marseilles, which is the most famous
Port Town that the French have upon the Mediterranean Sea, and which was
anciently a Greek Colony, peopled by the Phocen Seas. This City is threatened
here to have the chain of her Port broken, and to be taken by her enemies, and
the said enemies to be a little while after taken in it.

LXXX. French.
Du Regne Anglois le digne dechasse,
Le Conseiller par ire mis a feu,
Ses adherans iront si bas tracer,
Que le bastard sera demi receu.
English.
From the English Kingdom the worthy driven away,
The Councellor through anger shall be burnt,
His partners shall creep so low,
That the bastard shall be half received.
ANNOT.

This is one of those Prophecies that concern the English Nation, and which by
its event, has made this Book and the Author thereof famous, for nothing can
be more plain to the meanest capacity, then the sense and words of these four
Verses.

By the first, is meant the Kings most excellent Majesty Charles II. now
Reigning, who being the true Heir to the Kingdom, and most worthy to rule, was
driven out of the Kingdom by a rebellious rout of his Subjects.

The second Verse expresses, the punishment inflicted upon the Counselors and
Abettors of so heinous a crime, who were most of them hanged, drawn and
quartered, their entrals burnt.

The third Verse, signifies the low estate of the Abettors of that pernicious
Council.

The fourth Verse, is understood that bastard Faction, which was like to
supplan^ Cromwell, upon the division of the Army.

LXXXIII. French.
Les longs cheveux de la Gaul Celtique,
Accompagnez d'Estranges Nations,
Mettront captif l'Agent Aquitanique,
Pour succomber a leurs intentions.
English.
The long hairs of the Celtian France,
Joined with foreign Nations,
Shall put in prison the Aquitanick Agent,
To make him yield to their intentions.
ANNOT.

The Celtan France is that part of France included between the River Loire, and
that of Seheld in Flanders. they are called here the long hairs; because in
ancient time they used to wear long hairs.

LXXXIV. French.
La grand Cite sera bien desolee,
Des habitans un seul n'y demoura,
Mur, Sex, Temple, and Vierge violee,
Par Fer, Feu, Peste, Canon, peuple mourra.
English.
The great City shall be made very desolate.
Not one of the Inhabitants shall be left in it,
Wall, Sex, Church, and Virgin ravished,
By Sword, Fire, Plague, Canon, people shall die.
ANNOT.

This is concerning the Town of St. Quentin, which was taken by the Spaniards
in the year 1557. upon the 27 of August, and 17 days after the Battle of St.
Laurence, it was taken by assault, and all the Inhabitants put to the Sword.

LXXXV. French.
La Cite prinse par tromperie fraud,
Par le moyen d'Un bean jeune attrape,
Assaut done, Raubine pres de Laud,
Luy and touts morts pour avoir bien trompe.
English.
The City shall be taken by cheat and deceit,
By the means of a fair young one caught in it,
Assault shall be given, Raubine near Laud,
He, and all shall die, for having deceived.
ANNOT.

It is a City that shall be taken by the cheat and deceit of a young fair man,
who himself shall be taken in his craft.

The difficulty lies in the third Verse, viz. what he means by Raubine and
Laud. I could find nothing by transposition of Letters: therefore I suppose
the Author had a mind to reserve the exposition to himself, and to one that
should be clearer sighted than I.

LXXXVI. French.
Un chef d' Ausonne aux Espagnes ira,
Par Mer, fera arrest dedans Marseilles,
Avaunt sa mort un long temps languira,
Apres sa mort on verra grand merveille.
English.
A chief man of Ausone shall go into Spain
By Sea, he shall stay at Marseilles,
He shall languish a great while before his death,
After his death great wonders shall be seen.
ANNOT.

Here is nothing obscure but the word Ausone, by which is meant-the City of
Bourdeaux, so named by the Author every where, for having brought forth that
famous Latin Poet, and Counsul of Rome, Ausonius.

LXXXVII. French.
Class Gauloise naproche de Corsegne,
Moins de Sardaigne tu ten repentiras,
Tretous mourrez frustrez de laid Greigne,
Sang nagera, captif ne me croiras.
English.
French Fleet do not come near unto Corsica,
Much less to Sardinia, thou shall repent of it,
All of you shall die frustrate of the help Greigne,
Blood shall swim, being Captive thou shall not believe me.
ANNOT.

The Baron of la Guard coming from Rome, where he had carried the Cardinals of
Tournon and Lorrain, received order to go into Corsica, to relieve with
ammunition the two Towns, that the French kept still in possession in that
Island, Glass and Sr. Boniface, which after the general peace made at Cambray,
anno 1559. were restored to the Commonwealth of Genoa. when he was coming near
the Island, there arose such a storm, that they were constrained to go as near
land as they could, viz. in St. Florents, till the storm was over.

At the same time, by reason of the said storm, eleven Ships loaded with six
thousand Spaniards, going for Italy, took shelter in the same place, a good way
off from the said Baron.

At the first, the Spanish Ships did not spy the French Galleys, but the Baron
de la Guard discovered the Spaniards, and bid his Galleys to set upon them. Two
of the Spanish Ships were taken, in which were 1200. or 1500: Spaniards, part
of which were drowned, and the rest made slaves.

The Baron chased the rest, but the storm so scattered them, that the nine
escaped.

Before this encounter the Genoese Captain, Andrew d'Oria, took all the Island
from the French, Anno 1553. and kept it ever since, by sending continual
supplies. On the other side, the King of France sent supplies by the Lord of
Terms, to those that were retired in the Island of Glass.

One time among the rest, about the latter end of the year 1555. there was sent
a notable supply from the French, to which the Author speaks now in these
terms.

French fleet do not come near unto Corsica, nor Sardinia, which is another
Island near Corsica. The third Verse gives the Reason of it; ye shall die,
being frustrated of the help Greigne. Greigne is the Provencal Language, which
was the Maternal one of our Author, signifies a Galley: The sense therefore is
this, you shall be frustrate of the help of the Galleys, that are under the
command of the Baron de la Grade, who carried unto you men, money, and
ammunition; because he shall be then in pursuit of the Spanish fleet, that were
scattered by a storm.

In the mean time Blood shall swim in the fight of the Baron de la Guard, and
thou, poor Prisoner in that Island, Thou shall not believe me; those slaves
were they, which went in the year 1555. And the Author saying, Thou shall not
believe me, shows, that being very famous in Provence, for his Prophecies,
the General of the Army had asked him concerning the success of his Journey,
and that he did warn him not to undertake it; but having an express command
from the King, his Master, he would need go. Therefore he says, Poor prisoner
thou shall not believe me. We find in this work many examples of those, who
went to consult with the Author concerning the success of their undertakings,
as did the Earl of Sommerive, before the besieging of Bagnole, to whom he
answered, that he should leave the Trees loaded with a new kind of fruit, that
is to say, of the Rebels, whom he caused to be hanged on Trees.

LXXXVIII. French.
De Barcelone par Mer si grande Armee,
Toute Marseille de frayeur tremblera,
Isles saisies, de Mer aid fermee,
Ton traditeur en Terre nagera.
English.
There shall come from Barcelona by Sea so great a fleet,
That Marseilles shall quake for fear,
The Islands shall be seized, the help by Sea shut up,
Thy Traitor shall swim to Land.
ANNOT.

Barcelona is a Town in Spain, upon the Mediterranean Sea; Marseilles is
another in France, upon the same Sea. The rest is easy.

LXXXIX. French.
En ce temps la sera frustree Cypre,
De son secours, de ceux de Mer Aegee,
Vieux trucidez mais par Mesles and Lipre,
Seduit leur Roy, Roine plus outragee.
English.
At that time Cyprus shall be frustrated
Of its succors, of those of the Aegean Sea,
Old ones shall be killed, but by Mesles and Lipre,
Their King shall be seducted, and the Queen more wronged.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain, the two last have need of an Oedipus.

XC. French.
Le grand Satyr and Tygre d' Hircanie,
Don present a ceux de l'Occean,
Un chef de Class istra de Carmanie,
Qui prendra Terre au Thyrren Phocean.
English.
The great Satyr and Tiger of Hircania,
Shall be a gift presented to those of the Ocean,
An Admiral of a fleet shall come out of Carmania,
Who shall Land in the Thyrren Phocean.
ANNOT.

By the great Satyr and Tiger of Hircania, is meant, the King of Persia, who is
also King of Hircani a, abounding with Tigers.

That King of Persia shall be made a gift to those of the Ocean; that is, shall
be either drowned in it, or do some wonderful things upon it.

Carmania is a Province in Asia, belonging to the Turk.

The Thyrren Phocean is the City of Marseilles in France, so called by the the
Author in this Book; because it was a Colony of the Phocenses in Greece; it is
also called Thyrren, because it is seated upon the Tyrrhenean Sea, as Virgil
says, -- -- Thyrrenum navigat Aequor.

XCI. French.
L'Arbre qu'estoit par long temps mort seiche,
Dans une nuit viendra a reverdir,
Son Roy malade, Prince pied attache,
Craint d'ennemis fera Voiles bondir.
English.
The Tree that had been long dead and withered,
In one night shall grow green again,
His King shall be sick, his Prince shall have his foot tied,
Being feared by his enemies, he shall make his Sails to rebound.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are Metaphorical, and are to be understood of a
considerable person, who having been for a long time despised and under a
cloud, shall on a sudden rise again and be in repute. The two last Verses are
intelligible enough.

XCII. French.
Le monde proche du dernier periode,
Saturn encor sera tard de retour,
Translat Empire devers Nations broad,
L'oeil arrache a Narbon par Autour.
English.
The world being near its last period,
Saturn shall come yet late to his return,
The Empire shall be translated into broad Nations,
Narbon shall have her eye picked out by a Hawk.
ANNOT.

The meaning of the first and second Verses is, that the world shall be at an
end, before (...) nath performed his whole course, which (if I do not mistake)
is thought by the Astronomers to be of 36000. years.

The third Verse signifies, that before the end of the world, the Empire shall
be translated or possessed by a black Nation, for broad in old French
signifies black, whence it comes that to this day they call a handsome black
woman, une belle Broad, that is a fair black woman.

Narbon is a famous City in Languedoc, and the seat of an Arshbishop.

XCIII. French.
Dans Avignon tout le Chef de l'Empire,
Fera arrest, pour Paris desole,
Tricast tiendra l' Annibalique ire,
Lion par change sera mal console.
English.
In Avignon all the Chief of the Empire,
Shall stay, by reason of Paris being desolate,
Tricast shall stop the Annibalik anger,
Lion by change shall be ill comforted.
ANNOT.

The first and second Verse signify, that the Pope once more shall keep his
seat in Avignon, which is a Town in France belonging to the Pope, and where
formerly they kept their See, for the space of above an hundred years. As for
the word Tricast, there must be a foul error in the impression or else; I must
confess I understand it not. By the Annibalik anger, is meant those of Barbary,
where Annibal was born. Lion is a famous Town in France, where is kept the
greatest trading for Bills of Exchange.

XCIV. French.
De cinq cens ans plus compte l'on tiendra,
Celuy qu'estoit l'ornement de son temps,
Puis a un coup grande clarte donra,
Que pour ce Siecle les rendra tres-contens.
English.
For five hundred years no account shall be made,
Of him who was the ornament of his time:
Then on a sudden he shall give so great a light,
That for that age he shall make them to be most contented.
ANNOT.

The words and the sense are plain.

XCV. French.
Lu Loy Morique on verra defaillir,
Apres un autre beaucoup plus seductive,
Boristhenes premier viendra faillir,
Par dons and langue une plus attractive,
English.
We shall see the Morish Law to decline,
After which, another more seducing shall arise,
Boristhenes shall be the first that shall fall,
By gifts and tongue that Law shall be most seducing.
ANNOT.

This foretells the declining of the Mohammedan Religion, after which another
Religion shall be set up worse then the Mohammedan. The first decay of it shall
begin in Scythia, a Kingdom belonging to the King of Persia, through which
runs the River Boristhenes.

XCVI. French.
Chef de Fossan aura gorge coupee,
Par le Ducteur du Limier and L'curier,
Le fait patre par ceux du Mont Tarpee,
Saturn en Leo 13. de February.
English.
The Chief of Fossan shall have his throat cut,
By the Leader of the Hunt and Greyhond,
The fact committed by those of the Tarpeian Mountain,
Saturn being in Leo the 13. of February.
ANNOT.

Fossan is a City in Piemont, belonging to the Duke of Savoy, the Chief man of
Governor of which is threatened here to have his throat cut by some soldiers,
either of Rome, or belonging to Rome, signified here by the Tarpeian Mountain,
upon which the Capitol was built, and this fact to the committed by one that
shall be a famous Huntsman; upon the 13 of February, Saturn being then in the
Sign of Leo.

XCVII. French.
Nouvelle Loy, Terre neuve occuper,
Verse la Syrie, Judee and Palestine,
Le grand Empire, Barbare corruer,
Avaunt que Phebe son Siecle determine.
English.
A new Law shall occupy a new Country,
Toward Syria, Judea and Palestina,
The great Barbarian Empire shall fall down,
Before Phoebe makes an end of her course.
ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain.

XCVIII. French.
Deux Royal Freres si fort guerroieront,
Qu'entreux sera la guerre si mortelle,
Qu'un chacun places fortes occuperont,
De Regne and vie sera leur grand querelle.
English.
Two Royal Brothers shall War so much one against the other,
That the War between them shall be mortal,
Each of them shall seize upon strong places,
Their quarrel shall be concerning Kingdom and Life.
ANNOT.

This needs no interpretation.

XCIX. French.
Aux Champs Herbus d' Alein and du Varneigre,
Du Mont Lebron proche de la Durance,
Camps des deux parts conflict sera si aigre,
Mesopotamie defaillira en France.
English.
In the Meadow Fields of Alein and Varneigre,
Of the Mountain Lebron near the Durance,
Armies on both sides, the fight shall be so sharp,
That Mesopotamia shall be wanting in France.
ANNOT.

Alain and Vernaigre are two small Towns in France, seated by the Mountain
Lebron, near the River called Durance, where the Author says there shall be
such a sharp fight, that Mesopetamia shall be wanting in France, to understand
this you must know, that Mesopotamia is a Country between two Rivers from the
Greek words (...), which signifies middle, and (...) which signifies a River,
the meaning then of the Author is, that the Battle so sharp, the ground shall
be wanting to bury the dead.

C. French.
Enter Gaulois le dernier honor,
D'homme ennemy sera victorieux,
Force and terreur en moment explore,
D'Un coup de trait quand mourra l'envieux.
English.
He that is the least honored among the French,
Shall be Conqueror of the man that was his Enemy,
Strength and terror shall in a moment be tried,
When the envious shall be killed with an Arrow.
ANNOT.

This is plain.

THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY IV.
I. French.
SEra du rest de sang non espandu,
Venice quiert secours estre done,
Apres avoir bien lon temps attendu,
Cite livree au premier Cor son.
English.
There shall be a remnant of blood unspilt,
Venice shall seek for succors,
After having long waited for it,
The City shall be surrendered at the first sound of the Trumpet.
ANNOT.

This to my judgment is concerning the Siege of Candia, in which the Venetians
for the space of about twenty years desired and expected succors from the
Christian Princes, which came so slowly, that the City was fained to surrender
upon honorable terms, which is the meaning of the first Verse, There shall be a
remnant of blood unspilt.

II. French.
Par mort la France prendra voyage a fair,
Class par Mer, marcher Monts Pyrenees,
Espagne en trouble marcher gent militaire,
Des plus grands Dames en France emmenees.
English.
By reason of a death, France shall undertake a Journey,
They shall have a Fleet at Sea, and march toward the Pyrenes,
Spain shall be in trouble by an Army,
Some of the greatest Ladies in France carried away.
ANNOT.

The whole sense of this is, that by reason of some bodies death, France shall
make war against Spain by Sea and Land, and put Spain in great trouble.

The fourth Verse says, that some of the greatest Ladies in France shall be
carried away, but the question is, whether by the Spaniards, or (which is more
probable) by their own Husbands going to war against Spain.

III. French.
D' Arras and Bourges de Brodes grands enseignes,
Un plus grand nombre de Gascons battre a pied,
Ceux long du Rhosne saigneront les Espagnes,
Proche du Mont ou Sagunte sassied.
English.
From Arras and Bourges many colors of black men shall come,
A greater number of Gascons shall go on foot,
Those along the Rhosne shall let Spain blood,
Near the Mountain where Saguntus is seated.
ANNOT.

Arras and Bourges are Cities of France. As for brodes, we have said before
that it signify brown men, such as are the Gascoins, inhabiting the Province
of Aquitania near Spain.

Saguntus is a City in Spain, that was destroyed by the Romans.

IV. French.
L'Important Prince fasche, plaint and querelle,
De rapts and pille par Coqs and par Libiques,
Grand and par Terre, par Mer infinis Voiles,
Seule Italy sera chassant Celtiques.
English.
The considerable Prince vexed, complains and quarelleth,
Concerning rapes and plunderings done by the Cocks and Libiques
Great trouble by Land, by Sea infinite Sails.
Italy alone shall drive away the French.
ANNOT.

This considerable Prince was Philip the II. King of Spain, who was vexed to
see the Cocks, that is the French, and Libiques that is the Turks joined
together, under Barbarossa to commit so many Rapes and violences upon his
subjects.

V. French.
Croix Paix, soubs un accomply Divin Verb,
L' Espagne and Gauls seront unis ensemble,
Grand clade proche and combat tresacerbe,
Coeur si hardy ne sera qui ne tremble.
English.
The Cross, shall have peace, under an accomplished Divine Word
Spain and France shall be united together,
A great Battle near hand, and a most sharp fight,
No heart so stout but shall tremble.
ANNOT.

We have said before that by Divine Word, we must not understadd the second
person of the Trinity, but a Divine or Theologian, called in Greek (...), which
also signifies Divine Word. Therefore the meaning of the first Verse is, that
under the Government of some eminent Divine, (be like a good Pope) the Cross
shall have peace, that is, the Christian Religion shall be in Peace, and
persecution shall cease. The last three Verses are plain.

VI. French.
D'Habits nouveaux apres faite la treuve,
Malice, trame, and machination,
Premier mourra qui en fera la preuve,
Couleur Venise, insidiation.
English.
After the new Clothes shall be found out,
There shall be malice, plotting and machination,
He shall die the first that shall make trial of it,
Under color of Venice, shall be a conspiracy.
ANNOT.

Everybody may be as wise as I in the interpretation of this.

VII French.
Le fills mineur du grand and hay Prince,
De Lepre aura a vingt and grande tache,
De dueil mourra triste and mince,
Et il mourra la ou tomb chair lache.
English.
The younger Son of the great and hated Prince,
Being twenty years, old shall have a great touch of Leprosy,
His mother shall die for grief, very sad and lean,
And he shall die of the disease loose flesh.
ANNOT.

This is easy to be understood, if we remember that Charles IX. King of
France, younger son to Henry II. died of a foul disease, and his Mother
Catharine of Medicis died of grief.

VIII. French.
La grand Cite dassaut prompt repentin
Surpris de nuit, gardes interrompus,
Les Excubies and veilles Saint Quentin,
Trucidez gardes, and les Portails rompus.
English.
The great City shall be taken by a sudden assault,
Being surprised by night, the Watch being beaten,
The Court of Guard and Watch of Saint Quentin
Shall be killed, and the Gates broken.
ANNOT.

This great City was the City of St. Quentin in Picardy, taken by assault by
Philip the II. Anno 1557.

IX. French.
Le Chef du Camp au milieu de la press,
D'un coup de flesche sera bless aux cuisses,
Lors que Geneve en larmes and destresse,
Sera trahie par Lozanne and Souisses.
English.
The Chief of the Camp in the middle of the crowd,
Shall be wounded with an Arrow through both his thighs,
When Geneva being in tears and distress,
Shall be betrayed by Lozane and the Switzers.
ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain.

X. French.
Le jeune Prince accuse faucement,
Mettra le camp en trouble and en querelles,
Meurtry le chef par le souslevement,
Scepter appaiser, puis guerir escrouelles.
English.
The young Prince being falsely accused,
Shall put the Camp in trouble, and in quarrele,
The chief shall be murdered by the tumult,
The Scepter shall be appeased, and after cure the King's Evil
ANNOT.

This Prophecy must needs be concerning England or France; for there is but
those two Kings that challenge the cure of the King's Evil.

XI. French.
Celuy quavra couvert de la grand Cappe,
Sera induit a quelque cas patrer,
Les douze rouges viendront souiller la nappe,
Soubs meurtre, meurtre se viendra perpetrer.
English.
He that shall be covered with a great Cloak,
Shall be induced to commit some great fact,
The twelve red ones shall Soil the Table-cloth,
Under murder, murder shall be committed.
ANNOT.

Every one may interpret this as well as I, provided that by the twelve red
ones, he understands twelve Cardinals.

XII. French.
Le Camp plus grand de route mis ensuite,
Gueres plus outre ne sera pourchasse,
Ost recampe and legion reduite,
Puis horse, des Gauls du tout sera chasse.
English.
The greatest Camp being in disorder, shall be routed,
And shall be pursued not much after,
The Army shall incamp again, and the Troops set in order
Then afterward, they shall be wholly driven out of France,
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning an outlandish Army that shall invade France, and
though numerous, yet shall be put to flight, and shall not be much pursued:
therefore it shall incamp again, and collect and gather again its Troops, and
afterward shall be wholly driven out of France.

I am much mistaken if this Prophecy came not to pass, when the Duke of Parma
at the head of a Spanish numerous Army came into France in favor of the
League; for Henry IV. met him at the siege of Roven, beat him off, and suffered
him to retire quietly, and as the common saying is, made him a Golden Bridge,
to retreat into the Low Countries again.

XIII. French.
De plus grand perte nouvelles rapportees,
Le rapport fait le camp sestonnera,
Bands unies encontre revoltees,
Double Phalange, grand abandonnera.
English.
News being brought of a great loss,
The report divulged, the Camp shall be astonished,
Troops being united and revolted,
The double Phalange shall forsake the great one.
ANNOT.

This has a connection with the precedent; for while the Prince of Parma was
busied in France, news was brought to his Camp, that the Hollanders had taken
Antwerp, which discouraged his whole Host, and made him retire with all speed.

The Word Phalange signifies a Battailion or part of an Army, which being
expressed here by the word double Phalange, signifies, that both Horse and
Foot deserted the Duke of Parma upon the hearing of this news.

XIV. French.
La mort subite du premier personage,
Aura change and mis un autre au Regne,
Tossed, tard venu a si haut and basage,
Que Terre and mer faudra que lon le craigne.
English.
The sudden death of the chief man,
Shall cause a change, and put another in the Reign,
Soon, late come to so high a degree, in a low age,
So that by Land and Sea he must be feared.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain.

The two last signify, that a youth shall come to the Kingdom, soon, that is,
by ^^n of the sudden death of the chief man, and late; because being but young,
he (...)gn so long, that he shall be famous, and feared by Sea and Land.

XV: French.
D'ou pensera fair venir famine,
De la viendra le rassasiement,
L'oeil de la Mer par avare canine,
Pour de l'un lautre donra Huile, Froment.
English.
Whence one thought to make famine to come,
Thence shall come the fullness,
The eye of the Sea through a doggish covetousness,
Shall give to both Oil and Wheat.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled at the famous Siege of Ostend, which lasted three
years and three Months; for the Hollanders that brought relief to the Town, did
for covetousness sell the ammunition to the Spaniards that besieged it, for
which complaint being made by the States to the Prince of Orange, Maurice of
Nassaw, as also that they did the like to Newport, which he had besieged; he
replied smartly, do you not know that your Country men would Sail into Hell,
were it not for fear to have their Sails burnt.

XVI. French.
La Cite franche de liberte fait serve,
Des profliges and resueurs fait azyle,
Le Roy change a eux non si proterue,
De cent seront devenus plus de Mill.
English.
The free City from a free one shall become slave,
And of the banished and dreamers shall be a retreat,
The King changed in mind, shall not be so froward to them.
Of one hundred they shall become more than a thousand.
ANNOT.

Here you must observe that the Author being a Papist, speaks this concerning
the City of Geneva, which he says from a free City became a slave, when it
shook off the Duke of Savoy's domination, and became a retreat to the
Protestants, whom he called the banished and dreamers.

In the third Verse, by the King changed in his mind that shall not be so
froward to them, he means, Henry IV. who having changed the Protestant
Religion, to be a Roman Catholic, did undertake their protection against the
Duke of Savoy their Prince.

Hence follows the explication of the fourth Verse, when he says, that of
one hundred they shall become more than a thousand; for in few years the
Protestants became so numerous, that they drove the Roman Catholics wholly out
of the Town, and so have remained to this day Masters of it.

XVII. French.
Changer a Beaune, Nuis, Chalons, and Dijon,
Le Duc voulant amender la barree,
Merchant pres Fleuve, Poisson, bec de plongeon,
Verra la queue: Port sera serree.
English.
There shall be a change at Beaume, Nuis, Chalons, Dijon,
The Duke going about to raise Taxes,
The Merchant near the River shall see the tail
Of a Fish, having the Bill of a Cormorant: the door shall be shut.
ANNOT.

Beaune, Chalons, and Dijon, are Cities in France, Nuis is a Town in Germany
near the Rhyne, three or four Leagues below Colen.

For the rest, every one may make his own interpretation, for it is hard to
guess who this Duke should be, or that Fish either, that shall have a
Cormorants Bill after whom the door shall be shut.

XVIII. French.
Les plus Lettrez dessus les faits Coelestes,
Seront par Princes ignorans reprouvez,
Punis d'Edict, chassez comme scelestes,
Et mis a mort la ou seront trouvez.
English.
The most Learned in the Celestial sciences,
Shall be found fault with, by ignorant Princes.
Punished by proclamation, chased away as wicked,
And put to death where they shall be found.
ANNOT.

This is plain, and signifies no more then a persecution against the
Professors of Heavenly sciences, such as are Astrologers, Astronomers, etc.

XIX. French.
Devant Rouan d' Insubres mis le Siege,
Par Terre and Mer enfermez les passages,
D' Hainaut, de Flandres de Gand and ceux de Liege,
Par leurs levees raviront les Rivages.
English.
Before Rouan a Siege shall be laid by the Insubrians.
By Sea and Land the passages shall be shut up,
Those of Hainaut, Flanders, Ghent, and Liege,
With their Troops shall plunder the Seashore.
ANNOT.

This is still concerning the Duke of Parma's Army, when he came into France
against Henry the IV. in favor of the League, for his Army wherewith he
Besieged Rouen, was compounded of all those Nations; the greatest part of which
were Italians, called here Insubrians, from the Latin word Insubria, which
signifies the Countries of Savoy and Piemont.

XX. French.
Paix uberte long temps on ne louera,
Part tout son Regne desert la fleur de Lis,
Corpse mort d'Eau, Terre on apportera,
Sperants vain heur d'estre la ensevelis.
English.
Peace and plenty shall not be long praised,
All the time of his Reign the Flower de Luce shall be deserted,
Bodies shall die by water, Earth shall be brought,
Hoping vainly to be there Buried.
ANNOT.

This only foretells a great Famine and Inundation in France, signified here
by the Flower de Luce.

XXI. French.
Le changement sera fort difficile,
Cite Province au change gain fera,
Coeur haut, prudent mis, chasse Inhabile,
Mer, Terre, Peuple, son estat changera.
English.
The change shall be very hard,
The City and Country shall gain by the change,
A high prudent heart shall be put in, the unworthy expelled,
Sea, Land, People shall change its condition.
ANNOT.

This needs no Interpretation.

XXII. French.
La grand Copy qui sera dechassee,
Dans un moment fera besoing au Roy,
La Foy promise de loing sera faucee,
Nud se verra en piteux desarroy.
English.
The great Army that shall be rejected,
In a moment shall be wanted by the King.
The faith promised a far off shall be broken,
So that he shall be left naked in a pitiful case.
ANNOT.

This is plain.

XXIII. French.
La Legion dans la Marine class,
Calcine Magnes, Souphre and Poix bruslera,
Le long repos de l'asseuree place,
Port Selin chercher, feu les consumera.
English.
The Legion in the Maritine Fleet,
Calcineth Magnes, shall burn Brimstone and Pitch,
The long rest of the secure place,
They shall seek Port Selyn, but fire shall consume them.
ANNOT.

Here we must observe four things, the first is, that Calais is called by the
Author, The long rest of the secure place, Because then viz. in the year 1555.
it was yet in the power of the King of England, and had been quietly before,
for the space of 287. years, that is, from the year 1347. till the year 1555.
and was so still, till the year 1557. when the Duke of Guise took it, whence we
gather that it was a secure place that had enjoyed so long a rest.

The second is, that those of Diepe did watch for the Spaniards, in the passage
between Dover and Calais, therefore the Author says, They shall seek Port
Selyn, Selyn Port or Harbor is always taken by the Author for an Harbor in
the Ocean.

The third is, that the great fight between the French and the Spaniards was by
fire, so that most part of the Ships on each side were burnt, and the Spanish
and French Soldiers die cast themselves into the Sea, to save their lives in
their enemies Ships, where they were slain.

The fourth is, that those of Diepe being extraordinary skilsul in Sea Fights
had made great quantity of artificial fires, to cast into the Spanish Ships,
but the Ships grapling one with another, they were burnt on both sides.

Upon those four circumstances the two first Verses say, that the Legion in the
Fleet Galcineth magnes, that is Loadstone burnt, and shall burn Pitch and
Brimstone, to make Artificial fires.

The third and fourth Verse say, that this Sea Legion shall seek an Harbor in
the Ocean, which shall be a secure place, by a long rest, that is Calais. She
will seek that Selyn Harbor to shelter her self, because Calais did then
belong to the English, but by reason of the narrowness of the Sea, the French
watched for the Spaniards there, and to show that they sought only for Calais
to meet the Spaniards, they carried the Spanish Ships which they took into
Diepe, and not into Calais.

The French Impression has a fault here, putting Port Hercle instead of Port
Selyn, which is a manifest error, for the taking of Port Hercle by the
Florentines the 14. of June 1^^5. was by a Land Army, besides, that Port Selyn
is always taken by the Author for a Port in the Ocean.

XXIV. French.
Ouy soubs Terre Saint Dame voix feinte,
Human flamme pour Divine voir luire,
Fera des soeurs de leur sang Terre tainte,
Et les Saints Temples par les impurs destruire.
English.
Under ground shall be heard the fained voice of a Holy Dame,
An humane flame to see a Divine one,
Shall cause the ground to be died with the sisters blood,
And the Holy Temples to be destroyed by the wicked.
ANNOT.

Every one may understand this as well as I.

XXV. French.
Corpse sublimes sans fin a l'oeil visibles,
Obnubiler viendront par ces raisons,
Corpse, front compris, sens and chef invisibles,
Diminuant les Sacrees Oraisons.
English.
The Celestial bodies that are always visible to the eye,
Shall be darkened for these reasons,
The body with the forehead sense and head invincible,
Diminishing the Sacred Prayers.
ANNOT.

This is of the same nature as the foregoing.

XXVI. French.
Lou grand Cyssame se levera d'abelhos,
Que non lauran don te siegen venguddos,
Denuech lenbousq, lun gach dessous las treilhos,
Ciutad trahido per cinq lengos non nudos.
English.
The great swarm of Bees shall rise,
And it shall not be known whence they come,
Toward the Ambush the Jay shall be under a Vine,
A City shall be betrayed by five tongues not naked.
ANNOT.

The Author having made this Stanza in the Provencal Language, that was his
Mother Tongue, which has very little relation to the rest of the French
tongue, has put me to some trouble to understand it; at last I found the
meaning to be this, that when a great swarm of Bees shall light on some place,
and it shall not be known whence they came, then shall be seen a Jay under a
Vine, and a City shall be betrayed by five several Nations.

XXVII. French.
Salon, Mansol, Tarascon, de Sex, Larc,
Ou est debout encor la Pyramide,
Viendront livrer le Priuce Denemark,
Rachat honny au Temple d' Artemide.
English.
Salon, Mansol, Tarascon, Desex, the arche,
Where to this day stands the Pyramid,
Shall come to deliver the Prince of Denmark,
A shameful ransom shall be paid in the Temple of Artemis,
ANNOT.

Salon, Mansol, Tarascon, Desex, are Towns in Provence and Languedo.

By the Arch, here is meant the Triumphal Arch of Caius Marius, which he
erected after the defeat of the Cimbres and Teutons, and remains to this day
in that Province, within two or three Leagues off the Town of Orange.

Artemis is an Epethete of Diana, so called (...), a secando acrem.

XXVIII. French.
Lors que Venus du Sol sera couvert,
Soubs la splendeur sera la form occulte,
Mercure au feu les aura descouvert,
Par bruit Bellique sera mis a l'Insulte.
English.
When Venus shall be covered by the Sun,
Under the splendour of it shall be an occult form,
Mercury in the fire shall discover them,
And by a Warlike rumor shall be provoked.
ANNOT.

If this Book comes ever into the hands of Hermes's Disciples, I shall desire
they would consider diligently this Stanza, and the three following; for they
are all concerning the Elixir of the Philosophers, or the making of the
Philosophers stone. To begin with this:

When Venus shall be covered by the Sun.

This is the Astral point, so much sought after by the Philosophers, for the
beginning of their work, without the knowledge of which they cannot begin their
work, or come to any good.

Under the splendour of it shall be an occult form, that is, under that
conjunction lies a great mystery.

Mercury in the fire shall discover them, viz. the Mercury of the Philosophers,
made by Celestial fire.

And by a Warlike rumor shall be provoked; that is, the Planet of Mercury shall
be provoked to mix his variable and changable disposition with theirs, by his
Aspects, Oppositions, Conjunctions, etc. It is not possible to speak more
plainly.

XXIX. French.
Le Sol cache, eclipse par Mercure,
Ne sera mis que pour le Ciel second,
De Vulcan Hermes sera faite Pasture,
Sol sera veu pur, rutilant and blond.
English.
The Sun shall be hid and eclipsed by Mercury,
And shall not be set but for the second Heaven,
Hermes shall be made a prey to Vulcan,
And after that the Sun shall be seen pure, shining and yellow.
ANNOT.

Here I must lead the Reader with Ariadnes Thread, that he may extrecate
himself out of this Laby^inth.

The Sun shall be bid and Eclipsed by Mercury; that is, Gold shall be Eclipsed
and dissolved by the Philosophers Mercury, which is the Key and foundation of
all the work.

And shall not be set but for the second Heaven; that is, shall not be used
till you come to the second part of the work, which is that of the Furnace.

Hermes shall be made a prey to Vulcan; that is, the matter and composition of
the Elixir, shall be put upon the fire in a Furnace.

And after that the Sun shall be seen pure, shining, yellow; that is, in
conclusion after projection made, thou shall see pure, shining, and Yellow Gold.

XXX. French.
Plus d'unze fois Luna Sol ne voudra,
Tous augmentes and baissez de degree,
Et si bas mis que peu d'Or on coudra,
Qu'apres faim, peste, descouvert le secret,
English.
The Moon will not have the Sun above eleven times,
Then both shall be increased and lessened in degree,
And put so low, that a little Gold shall be sowed up,
So that after hunger and plague, the secret shall be discovered.
ANNOT.

The Moon will not have the Sun above eleven times; that is, the Moon of the
Philosophers will not imbibe their Sun above Eleven times.

Then both shall be increased and lessened in degree; that is, both shall be
increased in quality, and lessened in quantity.

And put so low that a little Gold shall be sowtd up; that is, the powder of
projection, or Philosophers stone shall be so small in Bulk, that one may sow
it about him, and hide it in his Cloths.

After famine and plague the secret shall be discovered; that is, somebody
shall die, with famine or plague, about which the secret shall be found and
discovered.

XXXI. French.
La Lune au plain de nuit sur le haut Mont.
Le nouveau u Sophe d'Un seul cerveau la veu,
Par ses Disciples estre immortel semond,
Yeux au Midy, enfin, mains corpse au feu.
English.
The Moon at full by night upon the high Mount,
The new Sophe with one only Brain has seen it,
Invited by his Disciples to become immortal,
His eyes to the South, conclusion, his hands and body to the fire.
ANNOT.

Sophe in Greek signifierh a wise man or Philosopher, who shall find the
Philosophers stone, when the Moon shall come to the full in the night upon a
high Mount. His Disciples shall persuade him to make himself immortal, they
being persuaded that the Elixir cures all diseases.

The last Verse says, His eyes to the South, his hands and body to the fire;
that is, this Chemist or Adeptus, shall retire into some Southern Country to
work.

I cannot omit here that a conceited Chemist in Paris, whose name was Haumont,
in English, Highmount, could not be dissuaded but our Author spoke of him in
this Stanza, and that he could not die till he had got the Philosophers stone,
but to other matters.

XXXII. French.
Es lieux and temps chair au poisson donra lieu,
La loy commune sera faite au contraire,
Vieux tiendra fort puis oste du milieu,
Le Panta, Choina Philon mis fort arriere.
English.
In places and times, flesh shall give place to fish,
The common Law shall be made against it,
The old man shall stand fast, then being taken away
The Panta, Choina, Philon, shall be set aside.
ANNOT.

Panta, Choina, Philon, are three Greek words, (...), which signify in Latin,
omnia inter amicos communia, and in English, all things are common among
friends. The rest is easy.

XXXIII. French.
Jupiter joint plus Venus qu'a la Lune,
Apparoissant de plenitude blanch,
Venus cachee soubs la blancheur Neptune,
De Mars frappee par la gravee branche,
English.
Jupiter being more joined to Venus then to the Moon,
Appearing in a full whiteness,
Venus being hid under the whiteness of Neptune,
Stricken by Mars through the ingraved branch.
ANNOT.

These terms being Astronomical and Astrological, it is hard to guess at the
Authors mind.

XXXIV. French.
Le grand mean captif d'estrange Terre,
Dor enchaine au Roy Cheyren offert,
Qui dans Ausonne, Milan perdra la Guerre,
Et tout son Ost mis a Feu and a Fer,
English.
The great one brought Prisoner from a far Country,
And chained with Gold, shall be presented to the King Chyren,
Being then at Ausone. Milan shall loose the War.
And all its Host shall be put to fire and sword.
ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that when a great one from a far Country, shall be
brought Prisoner chained with gold, and presented to a King called Henry (for
Cheyren by transposition of letters is Henry) who then shall beat Bordeaux:
Milan shall loose a great Army.

XXXV. French.
Le feu esteint, les vierges trahiront,
La plus grand part de la band nouvelle,
Ponldre a feu les seuls Rois garderont,
Hetrusque and Corse, de nuit, gorge alumelle,
English.
The fire being put out, the Virgins shall betray,
The greatest part of the new troup,
Gunpowder, Lance, shall keep only the Kings,
In Hetruria and Corfica by night throats shall be cut.
ANNOT.

Hetruria is the Country of Tuscany now under the Duke of Florence, and
Corsica is an Island in the Mediterranean sea belonging to the Genoese. The
rest is plain.

XXXVI. French.
Les jeux nouveaux en Gaul redressez,
Apres Victoire de l' Insubre Campaign,
Monts d' Hesperie, les grands liez troussez,
De peur trembler la Romagne and l' Espagne.
English.
The new plays shall be set up again in France,
After the Victory obtained in Piemont,
Mountains of Spain, the great ones tied, carried away,
Romania and Spain shall quake for fear.
ANNOT.

This is a Prognostication of the rejoicing that should be in France, after the
winning of that famous battle of Serizoles in Piemont, against the Armies of
the Emperor and the King of Spain.

XXXVII. French.
Gaulois par saults Monts viendra penetrer,
Occupera le grand Mont de l' Insubre,
Au plus profond son Ost fera entrer,
Genes, Monech pousseront class rubre.
English.
The French by leaping shall go over the Mountains,
And shall seize upon the great Mount of the Savoyard,
He shall cause his Army to go to the furthermost,
Genoa, and Monaco shall set out their red Fleet.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning Henry the IV. King of France, who went over the
Alps and conquered the Duke of Savoy's Country, because he would not restore
the Markdom of Saluces. Genoa and Monaco are Cities near Savoy.

XXXVIII. French.
Pendant que Duc, Roy, Roine occupera,
Chef Bizantin captif en Samothrace,
Avaunt lassault l'un l'autre mangera,
Rebours far suivra du sang la trace.
English.
While the Duke shall busy the King and the Queen,
A great man of Constantinople shall be prisoner in Samothracia,
Before the assault one shall eat up the other,
Rebours shod shall trace one by the blood.
ANNOT.

The three first Verses are plain, as for the fourth, either it is falsely
Printed, or I must confess I understand it not.

XXXIX. French.
Les Rhodiens demanderont secours,
Par le neglect de ses hoirs delaissee,
L'Empire Arabe ravalera son course,
Par Hesperie la cause redressee.
English.
The Rhodiens shall ask for succors,
Being for saken by the neglect of her Heirs,
The Arrabian Empire shall slack his course,
By the means of Spain the case shall be mended.
ANNOT.

By the Rhodians are understood the Knights of Maltha, because they dwelt first
at Rhodes.

By the second Verse it is said, it was the neglect of her Heirs, that is of
the Heirs of Rhodes the Knights of Maltha, who being careless of themselves,
were besieged by Solomon, which constrained them to ask succors of all the
Christian Princes, which came very slowly, at last Dom Garcia Viceroy of Sicily
relieved them, and drove away the Turks that had suffered great loss, therefore
the Author says in the third Verse, The Arabian Empire shall slack his course.

XL. French.
Les Forteresses des Assiegez serrez,
Par poudre a feu profondez en abysme,
Les proditeurs seront tous vifs serrez
Onc aux Sacristes navint si piteux schism.
English.
The strong places of the Besieged shall be straightned,
By Gunpowder they shall be plonged into a pit,
The Traitors shall be shut up alive,
Never did happen so pitiful a schism to the Sacristes
ANNOT.

By the Sacristes, he understands the Clergy of the Roman Religion.

XLI. French.
Gynique Sex captive par Hostage,
Viendra de nuit custodes decevoir,
Le Chef du Camp deceu par son language,
Lairra la gente, sera piteux a voir.
English.
Gynical sex being captive by Hostage,
Shall come by night to deceive her keepers,
The Chief of the Camp being deceived by her Language,
Shall leave her folks, a thing pitiful to behold.
ANNOT.

Gynical Sex is a woman from the Greek word (...), which signifies a woman.

The meaning then of this Stanza is, that a woman being given in Hostage, and
made prisoner, shall deceive her keepers, and among the rest, the chief Captain
who shall forsake his Troops and run away with her.

XLII. French.
Geneve and Langres par ceux de Chartre and Dole,
Et par Grenoble captif au Montlimar,
Seysset, Lausane, par fraudulente dole,
Les trahiront pour Or soixante mark.
English.
Geneve and Langres by those of Chartres and Dole,
And by one of Grenoble captive at Montlimar,
Seisset, Lozanne by a fraudulent deceit,
Shall betrary them for thirty pounds weight of Gold.
ANNOT.

All those Towns are in France, the sense is plain.

XLIII. French.
Seont ouis au Ciel les Arms battre,
Celuy an mesme les Divins ennemis,
Voudront Loix Saints injustement debatre,
Par Foudre and guerre bien croians a mort mis.
English.
There shall be heard in the Air noise of Weapons,
And in that same year the Divines shall be enemies,
They shall unjustly put down the Holy Laws,
And by the Thunder and the War true believers shall die.
ANNOT.

There is no obscurity in this.

XLIV. French.
Deux gros de Mende, de Rhodez, and Milland,
Cahors, Limoges, Castre, malo sepmano,
De nuech l'intrado, de Bmrdeaux an cailhau,
Par Perigort au toc de la Campano,
English.
Two great ones of Mende, of Rhodez and Milliaud,
Cahors, Limoges, Castres an evil week,
By night the entry shall be from Bourdeaux one cailhau,
Through Perigort at the ringing of the Bell.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is half French and half Provencal language.

All the Cities named here, Mende, Rhodez, Milliaud, Cahors, Limoges, Castres,
Bourdeaux, Perigort, are Cities of France, bordering upon Provence, which is
the Country wherein our Author was born.

The meaning of it is, that all those Cities shall rise against the Collectors
of the Kings Taxes, and shall set upon them by the sound of the Bell, which is
already come to pass, and may come to pass yet.

XLV. French.
Par conflict, Roy Regne abandonera,
Le plus grand Chef faillira au besoing,
Morts, profligez peu en rechapera,
Tous destrenchez un en sera tesmoin.
English.
By a Battle the King shall for sake his Kingdom,
The greatest Commander, shall fail in time of need,
They shall be killed and routed, few shall escape,
They shall be cut off, one only shall be left for a witness.
ANNOT.

This is a Prognostication of a great Battle, by the loss of which a King shall
forsake his Kingdom, his chief Commander having deserted him in time of need.
The slaughter shall be so great, that none shall be left but one for a witness.

XLVI. French.
Bien defendu le fait par excellence,
Guard toy Tours de ^a proche ruin,
Londres and Nantes par Rheims fera defense.
Ne passes outre au temps de la bruine.
English.
The fact shall be defended excellently well
Tours beware of thy approaching ruin,
London and Nantes by Rhemes shall stand upon their defense,
Do not go further in foggy weather.
ANNOT.

Tours is the chief City of a Province in France, called Touraine, which is
commended here for having resisted excellently well; but is forewarned to look
to her self after that, and to beware of her approaching ruin.

XLVII. French.
Le noir farouche quand aura essaye,
Sa main sanguine par feu, fer, arcs tendus,
Trestout le peuple sera tant effraye,
Voir les plus grands par col and pieds pendus.
English.
The wild black one, after he shall have tried,
His bloody hand by fire, Sword, bended Bows,
All the people shall be so frighted,
To see the greatest hanged by the neck and feet.
ANNOT.

It is a description of a Tyrant, who after he shall have tried his bloody hand
by Fire, Sword, and bent Bows, shall cause his chies men to be hanged by the
neck and feet. Since the Author did write there had been such a Tyrant in the
world, namely, John Basilides, great Duke of Russia, in the year 1572: Read
Panl Osburne in his Life.

XLVIII. French.
Planure Ausone fertile spacieuse,
Produira taons, and tant de sauterelles,
Clarte solaire deviendra nubilense,
Ronger le rout, grand peste venir delles.
English.
The Plain about Bourdeaux fruitful and spacious,
Shall produce so many Hornets and so many Grasphopers,
That the light of the Sun shall be darkened,
They shall crap all, a great plague shall come from them.
ANNOT.

I cannot find in History that this has yet happened, since the writing of
these Prophecies, therefore I reckon it de future.

XLIX. French.
Devant le peuple sang sera respandu,
Qui du haut Ciel ne viendra esloigner,
Mais d'un long temps ne sera entendu,
L'Esprit d'un seul le viendra tesmoigner.
English.
Before the people blood shall be spilt,
Who Shall not come far from the high Heaven,
But it shall not be heard of for a great while,
The Spirit of one shall come to witness it.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning some just person, that shall be murdered openly:
His blood shall cry to Heaven, but shall not be heard for a good while, till at
last is shall be discovered by some body.

L. French.
Libra verra regner les Hesperies,
De Ciel and Terre tenir la Monarchy,
D' Asie forces null ne verra peries,
Que sept ne tiennent par rang la Hierarchy.
English.
Libra shall see Spain to Reign,
And have the Monarchy of Heaven and Earth,
No body shall see the forces of Asia to perish,
Till seven have kept the Hierarchy successively,
ANNOT.

Libra is one of the twelve signs of the Zodiac, which is favorable to Spain,
so that the meaning of this is, that Libra shall see Spain to Reign.

And besides that, to have the Monarchy of Heaven and Earth; that is, to have
the command of the Pope, and of the best part of Europe. So that no Asian or
Turkish forces shall receive damage by the Christians, till seven Popes of the
Spanish faction have Reigned successively, and one after another.

LI. French.
Un Duccupide son ennemy poursuivre,
Dans entrera empeschant la Phalange,
Hastez a pied si pres viendront poursuivre,
Que la journee conflite aupres du Gange.
English.
A Duke being earnest in the pursuit of his enemy
Shall come in, hindering the Phalange,
Hastened on foot shall follow them so close,
That the day of the Battle shall be near Ganges.
ANNOT.

A Phalange, in Latin Phalanx, is a Squadron of Soldiers, which word was
anciently proper only to the Macedonians. Ganges is a River in India.

LII. French.
En Cite obsesse aux murs hommes and femmes,
Ennemis horse, le chef pressed a soy render,
Vent sera fort encontre les gens darmes,
Chasfez seront par chaux, poussiere and cendre.
English.
In a besieged City, men and women being upon the walls,
The enemies without, the Governor ready to surrender,
The Wind shall be strong against the Soldiers,
They shall be driven away by lime, dust, and ashes.
ANNOT.

This is a peculiar and remarkable accident, wherein the besiegers of a City
shall be driven away from their enterprise, by Lime, Dust, and Ashes, scattered
and dispersed against them by a mighty wind.

LIII. French.
Les fugitiss and bannis revoques,
Peers and Fills garnissant les hauts puits,
Le cruel pere and les siens suffoquez,
Son Fills plus pire submerge dans le puits.
English.
The runnaways and banished men being recalled,
Fathers and Sons garnishing the high wells,
The cruel father and his retinue shall be suffocated,
His Son being worse, shall be drowned in the Well.
ANNOT.

The words are plain, out of which every one may make his own sense:

LIVE. French.
Du nom qui onc ne fut au Roy Gaulois,
Jamais ne fut un Foudre si craintif,
Tremblant l' Italy, l' Espagne, and les Anglois,
De femmes estrangeres grandement attentif.
English.
Of the name that a French King never was,
There was never a Lighting so much feared,
Italy shall tremble, Spain and the English,
He shall be much taken with women strangers,
ANNOT.

This fortelleth that when a French King shall have a name that never any of
his Predecessors had, he shall be so much feared as that Italy, Spain, and
England shall tremble, and that besides he shall be much given to women.

LV. French.
Quand la Corneille sur Tour de Brique jointe,
Durant sept heures ne fera que crier,
Mort presagee, de sang Statue teinte,
Tyran meurdry, aux Dieux peuple prier.
English.
When the Crow upon a Tower made of Brick,
For seven hours shall do nothing but cry,
Death shall be foretold, and the Statue died with blood,
Tyrant shall be murdered, and the people pray to the Gods.
ANNOT.

This extraordinary Prodigy of a Crow crying for seven hours together upon a
Brick Tower, foretells that some notorious Tyrant shall be put to death, and
his statue sprinkled with blood, and withal, that the people either for joy or
fear shall be much given to prayer.

LVI. French.
Apres Victoire de rabieuse Langue,
L'Espirit tempte, en tranquil and repos,
Victeur sauguin par conflict, fait Harangue,
Roustir la Langue, and la Chair and les Os
English.
After the Victory got over a raging tongue,
The mind that was tempted, shall be in tranquillity and rest,
The bloody Conqueror by Battle shall make a Speech,
And roast the tongue, the flesh, and the bones.
ANNOT.

It is a Conqueror who having been much railed at by his enemies, shall in
conclusion after he has overcome them, take a severe vengeance of them.

LVII. French.
Ignare envy au grand Roy supportee,
Tiendra propos deffendre les escrits,
Sa femme non femme par un autre tentee,
Plus double deux ira au fort de cris.
English.
Ignorant envy being supported by the great King,
Shall talk of prohibiting the writtings,
His wife no wife, being tempted by another,
Shall more then they two prevail by crying.
ANNOT.

Some ignorant envious person being in favor with the King, shall go about to
suppress learning, but the Kings wife no wife, that is his Concubine, shall
persuade him to the contrary, and shall prevail.

LVIII. French.
Soleil ardent dans la gosier color,
De sang humain arrouser Terre Etrusque,
Chef seille d'eau, mener son fills filer,
Captive Dame conduite Terre Turque.
English.
Burning Sun shall be poured into the throat,
This human blood shall wet the Hetrurian ground,
The chief pale of water, shall lead his son to Spin,
A captive Lady shall be carried into the Turkish Country.
ANNOT.

By burning Sun must be understood melted gold, which shall be poured into ones
throat, in the Hetrurian ground, that is in Tuscany.

By the chief Pale of water is to be understood, some Water-bearer, who shall
make his son an Eunuch to make benefit ont. The fourth Verse is plain.

LIX. French.
Deux assiegez en ardante ferveur,
De soif estaints pour deux plains Tasses,
Le fort lime and un vieillard resueur,
Au Genois, de Nizza monstrera trace.
English.
Two besieged, being in a burning heat,
Shall die for thirst, want of two Bowls full,
The Fort being filed, an old doting man,
Shall show to the Genoese the way to Nizza.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain. The two last Verses signify that an old
doting man shall show to the Genoeses the way how to take Nizza, a Town hard by
them, by filing some Iron Grates, by which they shall get into the Town.

LX. French.
Les sept enfans en Hostage laissez,
Le tiers viendra son enfant trucider,
Deux par son fills seront d'estoc percez,
Genes, Florence les viendra seconder.
English.
The seven Children being left in Hostage,
The third shall come to kill his child,
Two by their sons shall be run through,
Genoa and Florence shall second them.
ANNOT.

The words being so plain, every body may give as good an interpretation as I.

LXI. French.
Le vieux mocque and prive de sa place,
Par l'Estranger qui le subornera,
Mais de son filz mange devant sa face,
Le Friar a Chartres. Orl. Ronen trahira.
English.
The old man shall be baffled and deprived of his place,
By the stranger that shall suborn him,
But of his son shall be eaten before his face,
The Brother at Chartres. Orl. shall betray Rouen.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is divided into two parts. The first part runs from the first
Verse to the middle of the fourth. The meaning is, that an old man shall be
baffled and deprived of his place by a stranger that shall suborn him, but that
strangers sons brother shall be eaten up before his face in the Town of
Chartres; what he means by eaten up, is hard to guess, whether it be by
poverty, suits at Law, Envy, Lice, etc.

The Hemisthikion of the last Verse, Orl. shall betray Rouen, signifies, that
Orleans shall betray Rouen.

LXII. French.
Un Coronel machine ambition,
Se saisira de la plus grande Armee,
Contre son Prince feinte invention,
Et descouvert sera soubs sa ramee.
English.
A Colonel devises a plot by his ambition,
He shall seize upon the best part of the Army,
Against his Prince he shall have a fained invention,
And shall be discovered under the Harbor of the Vine.
ANNOT.

I never saw the last Tyrant Cromwell better painted to the life, then in the
three first Verses.

As for the fourth, it is certain that his intention among his Camerades was
first discovered by him unto them at the Star Tavern in Coleman-street, which
is the place that the Author calls the Harbor of the Vine.

LXIII. French.
L'Annee Celtique contre les Montagnars,
Qui seront sus and pris a la pipee,
Paisants irez pulseront tossed faugnars,
Precipitez tous au fill de l'Espee.
English.
The Celtique Army shall go against the Highlanders,
Who shall stand upon their guard, and be taken with Bird-lime twigs,
The Peasant being angry, shall roll down the stones,
They shall be all put to the edge of the sword.
ANNOT.

This is a description of the attempt made by the French upon Savoy, which
Country lies in the Mountains of the Alps, therefore called here
Highlanders; where the Peasants being incensed for the loss of their goods and
the ruin of their Country, rolled stones from the top of the Mountains
against the French Army, which could not hinder them from being destroyed; this
came to pass under Henry the IV. King of France, in the year 1662.

LXIV. French.
Le' defaillant en habit de Bourgeois,
Viendra le Roy tenter de son offense,
Quinze Soldats la pluspart Villageois,
Vie derniere and chef de sa chevance.
English.
The guilty, in a Citizens habit,
Shall come to tempt the King concerning his offense,
Fifteen Soldiers the most part Country men,
The last shall be his life, and the best part of his Estate.
ANNOT.

This signifies that a great man having committed an offense against the King,
shall come to him in a mean habit, to sue for his Pardon, and shall be carried
away by fifteen Soldiers, the most part Country fellows; and in conclusion he
shall have his life saved, and the best part of his Estate.

LXV. French.
Au deserteur de la grand Forteresse,
Apres qu'aura son lieu abondonne,
Son adversaire sera si grand provesse,
L'Empereur tossed mort sera condamne.
English.
After that the desertor of the great Fort,
Shall have forsaken his place,
His adversary shall do so great feats,
That the Emperor, shall soon be condemned to death.
ANNOT.

This is plain.

LXVI. French.
Soubs couleur feinte de sept testes rasees,
Seront formez diverse explorateurs,
Puits and Fontains de poison arrousees,
Au Fort de Genes humains devorateurs.
English.
Under the fained color of seven shaven heads,
Shall diverse spies be framed,
Wells and Fountains shall be sprinkled with poison,
In the Fort of Genoa shall be humane devourers.
ANNOT.

The three first Verses belong to the same sense; viz. that seven men shall be
spies, under pretense to be Priests or Monks, (which is the meaning of the
shaven heads) and shall poison the Wells and springs.

The last Verse signifies that in the Fort of Genoa, their shall be devourers
of men, that is, Usurers and Extortioners, which is no new thing in that Nation.

LXVII. French.
L'An que Saturn and Mars esgaux combust,
L'Air fort seiche, longne trajection,
Par feux secrets d'ardeur grands lieux adust,
Peu pluye, Vent chauds, Guerres, Incursions.
English.
In the year that Saturn and Mars shall be fiery,
The Air shall be very dry, in many Countries,
By secret fires, many places shall be burnt with heat,
There shall be scarcity of Rain, hot Winds, Wars, in-roads.
ANNOT.

This is the Prognostication of a mighty dry season, and other accidents that
shall happen when Saturn and Mars shall be in a fiery disposition, which
whether it be by Opposition, Conjunction, Aspect, etc. Let the Astrologers
judge.

LXVIII. French.
En l'an bien proche non esloigne de Venus,
Les deux plus grands de l' Asie and d' Affrique,
Du Rhinc and Ister qu'on dira sont venus,
Cris, pleurs a Malthe, and cost Ligustique.
English.
In a year that is to come shortly, and not far from Venus,
The two greatest ones of Asia and Africa,
Shall be said to come from the Rhine and Ister,
Crying, and tears shall be at Maltha and in the Ligurian shore.
ANNOT.

The Rhine is a River in Germany, Ister is another in the Country of Istria,
belonging to the Venetians.

By the first Verse, I conclude that this Prophecy came to pass a little while
after the Author wrote this Book, when the grand Segnor Solomon besieged
Maltha, and put in fear all the Ligurian Coast, which is that of Genoa.

LXIX. French.
La Cite grande les exilez tiendront,
Les Citadins morts, meutris and chassez,
Ceux d' Aquilee a Parme promettront,
Monstrer l'entree par les lieux non tracez.
English.
The banished shall keep the great City,
The Citizens being dead, murdered and expelled,
Those of Aquileia shall promise to Parma,
To show the entrance by unknown paths,
ANNOT.

Aqueleia and Parma are two Cities in Italy. The rest is easy.

LXX. French.
Bien contigu des grands Monts Pyrenees,
Un contre l'Aigle grand copy, adresser,
Ouvertes veins, forces exterminees,
Que jusqu'au Pau le chief viendra chasser.
English.
Near the great Pyrenean Mountains.
One shall raise a great Army against the Eagle,
Veins shall be opened, forces driven out.
So that the chief shall be driven as far as the Pau.
ANNOT.

By the Eagle here is understood the Empire; because his Ensign is an Eagle.

LXXI. French.
En lieu d'Espouse les Filles trucidees,
Meurtre a grand fault, ne sera superstile,
Dedans le puis vestues inondees,
L'Espouse esteinte par haut d'Aconite.
English.
Instead of the Bride, the Maid shall be killed,
The murder shall be a great fault, none shall be surviving,
In the Well they shall be drowned with their Clothes,
The Bride shall be extinguished by an high Aconite.
ANNOT.

This is a Prophecy of a Tragical Nuptial, where all the Maids shall be
drowned with their Clothes in a Well, insomuch that none shall survive, and the
Bride shall be poisoned, and die by Aconite, which is one of the most poisonous
herbs that is, witness Juvinal. Luridaterribiles^miscent asonita novercae.

LXXII. French.
Les Artomiques par Again and Lectoure,
A saint Felix feront leur Parliament,
Ceux de Bazas viendront a la malhoure,
Saisir Condon and Marsan promptement.
English.
The Artomiques through Again and Lectoure,
Shall keep their Parliament at Saint Foelix,
These of Bazas shall come in an unhappy hour,
To seize upon Condon and Marsan speedily.
ANNOT.

By the Artomiques he means the Protestants; because they take the Communion
with leavened Bread, which in Greek is called Artos.

Again, Lectoure, saint Foelix, Bazas, Condon and Marsan, are Cities of Gascony.
The rest is plain.

LXXIII. French.
Le neveu grand par force prouvera,
Le peche fait de Coeur pusillanime,
Ferrare and Ast le Duc esprouvera,
Par lors qu'au soir sera le Pantomime.
English.
The great nephew by force shall provoke,
The sin committed by the pusillanimons heart,
Ferrara and Ast shall make trial of the Duke,
When the Pantomime shall be in the evening.
ANNOT.

To understand the whole sense of this, we must first know what is meant by the
particular terms.

The great Nephew is the Brother or Sisters son of some great person, who by
force shall discover the Treason or Cowardice, committed by some pusillanimous
or fearful man,

Ferrara and Ast are two towns in Italy, shall make a trial of a Duke, by being
either taken or assaulted.

When the Pantomine shall be in the evening; that is, when the Comedy shall be
acted; for Pantomime in Greek signifies a Comedian.

LXXIV. French.
Du lac Leman and ceux des Brannonices,
To us assemblez contre ceux d' Aquitaine,
Germans beaucoup encores plus Sovisses,
Seronts des faits avec ceux du Maine.
English.
From lake Leman, and from the Brannonues,
They shall be gathered against those of Aquitania,
Great many Germans, and many more Switzers,
Shall be routed together with those of Maine.
ANNOT.

Lake Leman, is the Lake of Geneva. The Brannonices are those of Sens, so
called; because they took Rome under the Conduct of their Captain Brennus, and
afterward built Brenona, a Town belonging since to the Venetians, who calls it
Verona.

Aquitania is that Province of France, called now Gascony. Maine is a Province
in France. The rest needs no explication.

LXXV. French.
Pressed a combattre fera defection,
Chef adversaire obtiendra la victoire,
Larriere guard fera defension,
Les defaillans morts au blanc terretoire,
English.
One being ready to fight, shall faint,
The chief of the adverse party shall obtain the victory,
The rearegard, shall withstand it out,
Those that fall away shall die in the white Terretory,
ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult here, but what he means by the white Terretory,
whether it be positive, or Allegorical, I leave the judgment of it to the
Reader.

LXXVI. French.
Les Nictobriges par ceux de Perigort,
Seront vexez tenants jusques au Rhosne,
L'Associe de Gascons and Bigorre,
Trahir le Temple le prestre estant au Prosne.
English.
The Nictobriges by those of Perigort,
Shall be vexed as far as the Rhosne,
The associate of the Gascons and Bigorre,
Shall betray the Church while the Priest is in his Pulpit.
ANNOT.

Nictobriges in Greek signifies a people living in a dark and moist Country.
Perigort and Bigorre are two Towns in France. The rest is plain.

LXXVII. French.
Selyn Monarque, l' Italy pacifique,
Regnes unis, Roy Chrestien du monde,
Mourant voudra coucher en Terre Blesique,
Apres Pirates avoir chasse de L'onde.
English.
Selyn being Monarch, Italy shall be in peace,
Kingdoms shall be united, a Christian King of the world,
Dying, shall desire to be buried in the Country of Blois,
After he shall have driven the Pirates from the Sea.
ANNOT.

Selyn is the name of a Turkish Emperor, the meaning therefore of this, is,
that under the Reign of one Selyn a Turkish Emperor, Italy shall be in peace,
and all the Christian Princes united.

LXXVIII. French.
La grand Armee de la pugne civil,
Pour de nuit Parme a l'Estranger trouvee,
Septante neuf meurtris dedans la Ville,
Les estrangers passez tous a l'Espee.
English.
The great Army belonging to the Civil War,
Having-found by night Parma possessed by Strangers,
Shall kill seventy nine in the Town,
And put all the Strangers to the Sword,
ANNOT.

Parma is a City in Italy. The rest is plain.

LXXIX. French.
Sang Royal fuis, Monheurt, Mars. Aiguillon,
Remplis seront de Bourdelois les Lands.
Navarre, Bigorre, points and Aiguillons,
Profonds de faim, vorer de Liege, Glandes,
English.
Royal blood run away from Monheurt, Marsan, Aiguillon,
The Lands shall be full of Bourdeloir,
Navarre, Bigorre, shall have points and Pricks.
Being deep in hunger, they shall devour the Cork and Akorns.
ANNOT.

Monheurt, Marsan, Aiguillon, are Towns in Gascony.

Lands is a desert Country, wherein nothing grows but Pine-trees,
Bourdelois are those of Bourdeaux.

Navarre is a Kingdom, and Begorre a Province joining to those Lands, or
Pinetrees Country.

LXXX. French.
Pres du grand Fleuve, grand fosse, terre egeste,
En quinze parts l'eau sera divisee,
La Cite prinse, feu, sang, cris, conflict mettre,
Et la plus part concern au collisee.
English.
Near the great River, a great pit, Earth dug out,
In fifteen parts the Water shall be divided,
The City taken, fire, blood, cries, fighting,
And the greatest part concerns the Collisee.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled, when Rome was taken and sacked by Charles Duke of
Bourbon, and Philibert of Chalon Prince of Orange, Generals of the Emperor
Charles the V. with such cruelties, as never was committed by the bloody Goths
and Vandales, and to show that the Author intended Rome, is apparent by two
instances. The first is by the great River, which is the Tyber, which though
not very great in its Channel and depth, yet is very great, yea, the greatest
in Europe by its fame. The other is the word Colisee, which is that famous Arch
of Tratan in Rome, remaining yet to this day.

LXXXI. French.
Pont on fera promptement de nacelles,
Passer l'Armee du grand Prince Belgique,
Dans profondres, and non loing de Bruxelles,
Outrepassez detrenchez sept a picque.
English.
A Bridge of Boats shall suddenly be made,
To pass over the Army of the great Belgic Prince,
In deep places, and not far from Bruxelles,
Being gone over, there shall be seven cut with a Pike.
ANNOT.

This is concerning the Siege of Antwerp by the Prince of Parma, Governor of
the Low Countries for the King of Spain, who having besieged, caused a Bridge
of Boats to be made upon the River Scheld, to hinder the succors of the
Hollanders, who by that means were constrained to surrender it.

LXXXII. French.
Amas sapproche venant d' Esclavonie,
L'Olestant vieux Cite ruinera,
Fort desolee verra sa Romanie,
Puis la grand flamme estaindre ne scaura.
English.
A great troop gathered, shall come from Sclavonia,
The old Olestant shall ruin a City,
He shall see his Romania very desolate,
And after that, shall not be able to quench that great flame.
ANNOT.

That great troop from Sclavonia shall be the Venetians, because they possess
most part of that Country. The old Olestant is their Duke, because he is not
chosen unless he be very old, by Romania is understood what the Venetians
possess in that Country.

LXXXIII. French.
Combat nocturne le vaillant Captain,
Vaincu fuira, peu de gens proflige,
Son peuple esmeu, sedition non vain,
Son propre fills le tiendra assiege.
English.
In a fight by night, the valliant Captain,
Being vanquished shall run away, overcome by few,
His people being moved, shall make no small mutiny,
His own son shall besiege him.
ANNOT.

This needs no interpretation.

LXXXIV. French.
Un grand d' Auxerre mourra bien miserable,
Chasse de ceux qui soubs luy ont este,
Serre de chains, apres d'un rude cable,
En l'an que Mars, Venus and Sol mis en Este.
English.
A great man of Auxerre shall die very miserably,
Being expelled by those that have been under him,
Bound with Chains, and after that with a strong Cable,
In the year that Mars, Venus, and Sol shall be in a conjunction in the Summer.
ANNOT.

Auxerre is a City of France, distant from Paris 40. leagues to the Southward.

LXXXV. French.
Le Charbon blanc du noir sera chasse,
Prisonier fait, mean au Tombereau,
More Chameau sus pieds entrelassez,
Lors le puisne fillera l'Aubereau.
English.
The white Coal shall be expelled by the black one,
He shall be made Prisoner, carried in a Dung-cari,
His feet twisted upon a black Camel,
Then the youngest, shall suffer the Hobby to have more thread.
ANNOT.

The first Verse is altogether Allegorical and Metaphorical, therefore I leave
it to the judgment of every Reader. I shall only deliver my opinion upon the
whole: I take it to be some white Prince, that shall be overcome by a black
one, put in a Dungcart, after that, tied upon a black Camel, and then the
younger son of that black Prince shall give the prisonner a little more liberty.

LXXXVI. French.
L'An que Saturn en eau sera conjoint,
Avecques Sol le Roy fort and puissant,
A Rheims and Aix sera receu and oingt,
Apres Conquestes meurtrira innocens.
English.
In the year that Saturn in Aquarius shall be in conjunction
With Sol, the King being strong and powerful,
Shall be received and Anointed at Rheines and Aix,
After Conquest he shall murder innocent persons.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is remarkable for the things that it foretells, viz. that in
the year that Saturn shall be in conjunction with sol in the Sign of Aquarius:
a King of France shall be anointed both at Rhemes and Aix, for Rheme^ is a
City in France, where the Kings use to be Anointed and Crowned, and Aix is
another in Germany, where the Emperors use to be so. But the last Verse is
ominous, where he says, that after his Conquests he shall murder innocent
persons.

LXXXVII. French.
Un fills de Roy tant de Langues apprins,
A son Aisne au Regne different,
Son Pere beau au plus grand fills comprins,
Fera perir principal adherent.
English.
A son of a King having learned diverse Languages,
Shall fall out with his elder Brother for the Kingdom,
His father in Law being more concerned with his elder son,
Shall cause the principal adherent to perish.
ANNOT.

One King shall have two Sons, the eldest shall succeed him in the Kingdom, the
youngest having been well brought up and educated, shall raise troubles,
against the King his Brother; but he shall be destroyed by the means of his own
Father in Law.

LXXXVIII. French.
La grand Antoine du nom de fait sordide,
De Phtyriase a son dernier ronge,
Un qui de plomb voudra este cupide,
Passant le port d'Esleu sera plonge,
English.
The great Antony by name, but in effect sordid,
Of Phtyriasis shall at last be eaten up,
One that shall be covetous of Lead,
Going upon Port d'Esleu shall fall into the Water.
ANNOT.

Phtyriasis in Greek is the disease called by the Latins Morbus pedicularis,
when one is devour(...) by Lice, as were Herodes, Sylla, Pherecydes, and Philip
II. King of Spain. etc.

As for Port d'Esleu, the question is, whether it be the proper name of a
place, or the name of a man, that shall throw another in the water.

LXXXIX. French.
Trente de Londres secret conjureront,
Contre Leur Roy, sur le pont l'Entreprise,
Les Satellites la mort desgouteront,
Uu Roy esseu blond and natif de Frize.
English.
Thirty of London shall secretly conspire
Against their King, upon the Bridge the Plot shall be made,
These Satellites shall taste of death,
A King shall be elected, fair, and born in Friezeland.
ANNOT.

Here may be alleged that passage of Scripture, There is nothing so secret
but shall be revealed; for here is plainly told the number of those wicked
persons, who conspired against their lawful Sovereign King Charles I. of
blessed memory, as also the place where the Plot was first laid; for it is well
known that they used to assemble at the Bear at the Bridge foot:

XC. French.
Les deux copies au murs ne pourront joindre,
Dans cet instant trembler Milan, Thesin,
Faim soif, doutance si fort les viendront prendre,
Chair, pain, ne vivres nauront un seul boucin.
English.
The two Armies shall not be able to join by the Walls,
At that instant Milan and Thesin shall tremble,
Hunger, thirst and fear shall so seize upon them,
They shall not have a bit of meat, bread, nor victuals,
ANNOT.

Milan is a City in Italy, and Thesin is the River that passes by it.

XCI. French.
Au Duc Gaulois contraint battre au Duelle,
La nef de Mole, Monech naprochera,
Tort accuse, prison perpetuelle,
Son Fills regner a vant mort taschera.
English.
A French Duke compelled to fight a Ducl,
The Ship of Mole shall not come near Monaco,
Wrongfully accused shall have a perpetual Prison,
His son shall endeavor to Reign before his death,
ANNOT.

To understand this Stanza, we must suppose four Histories, Paradin relates
the first, which is, that the French and Spanish Armies having their Winter
quarters in the Dukedom of Milan, Anno 1555.

The Marquess of Pescaire, sent word to the Duke of Nemours, by a French
Gentleman, that he and three more desired to break a Lance with him upon the
borders of Ast.

The Duke accepted the challenge, without giving notice to the Marquess of
Brissac, then General of the French Army, who was very angry at it,
nevertheless he advised the Duke to go, but not with a Guilt and light Armor,
but with a wrong one, such as became a Cavaliero, which he did not do, nor the
other three that went with him: whence it came, that the Lord Class a French
man, running against Malespine, was wounded to death in the shoulder;
nevertheless one of the seconds to the Duke of Nemours, the Lord Moncha killed
upon the place Caraffa, Nephew to Pope Marcel II. and the Lord Manoa, one of
the Duke of Nemours party, falling from his Horse a little wounded, broke his
neck.

As for the Duke of Nemours, he ran twice against the said Marquess, without
hiting one another, but at the third time they both brake their Lances, without
doing any harm. Thus, the French Duke was compelled to fight a Duel.

We have the second History from Turpin, and many others, which is, that the
Marquess of Masseran, having put himself into the King of France's service, in
hopes to have the Government of Bielais; and proving a Traitor, the Marshal of
Brissac, who had discovered his perfidiousness, resolved to take him in his
house of Gaillany, which he had fortified to secure his retreat after his
Treason,

The Lord de Terms was commanded to do it, which he did so dexterously, that
he took him into his house after dinner, and then compelled him presently to
surrender the Castle of Jamaglia, the Marquess obeying, sent thither presently
his son Claudius, to put it into the hands of the Lords de la Mante, and of
Villars.

These two viewing the Castle, to observe the places that might be fortified,
and going from room to room, heard a lamentable voice, crying. Have mercy upon
me. They caused presently the Prison doors to be opened, and found a poor
Gentleman of Vercelle, whom the Marquess had detained there 18 years, for
endeavoring to serve an execution against him, in the Duke of Savoy's behalf.

And it is remarkable that his Imprisonment was all this while concealed, so
that no body ever heard of it, in so much that his friends suspecting he had
been killed by one of his enemies, they prosecuted him so hard, that after much
tortering, he confessed what he had not done, and was consequently put to death
in the presence of the said Marquess of Masseran, who knew the Country. Thus
we see one wrongfully accused that was executed, and this Gentleman's
Imprisonment, which was to be perpetual.

After this, they carried the poor Gentleman almost all naked, and being
nothing but skin and bones, to the Lord of Terms, who caused him to be
clothed, and gave him Money to go back to his friends.

The third History is, that the Duke of Nemours Son was one of the chief
ringleaders of the League against Henry IV, and did what he could before he
dyed to get the Kingdom of France, endeavoring first to make himself Sovereign
Prince of Lion, Forest, and Beaucolois.

The fourth History is, that at the latter end of the year 1555. the Lord la
Mole, carrying to Rome the Cardinals of Tournon and Lorrain, went directly to
the Island of Corsica, whence he drew some Forces, which he joined to his, and
to those of Monluc, and would not Land at Monaco for some reasons, but went
directly to Civita Vecchia; By this we understand that Verse of the Stanza. The
Ship of the Mole shall notcome near Monaco.

XCII. French.
Test trenchee du vaillant Captain,
Sera jettee devant son adversaire,
Son corpse pendu de la Class a l'Antenne,
Confus fuira par rames avent contraire.
English.
The head cut off the valliant Captain
Shall be thrown down before his adversary,
His body hanged at the Sails Yard,
Confused, they shall fly with Oars against the Wind.
ANNOT.

These words are plain enough, though no body can tell whether the thing is
past already, or shall come to pass hereafter.

XCIII. French.
Un Serpent veu proche du lict Royal,
Sera par Dame nuict chien n'abageronts
Lors nastre en France un Prince tant Royal,
Du Ciel venu tous les Princes verront,
English.
A Serpent shall be seen near the Royal bed,
By a Lady in the night, the Dogs shall not bark,
Then shall be born in France a Prince so Royal,
Come from Heaven all the Princes shall see it,
ANNOT.

This seems to be an allusion to the Birth of Alexander the great; for it is
said, that when his mother Olympia proved with Child of him, there was seen in
her Bed, and about her Bed a great Serpent, which was the presage of his future
greatnes^: therefore our Author also will have, that when such a Prodigy shall
appear in France, that then shall be born such a Prince as he mentions here:
the circumstances are, that this Serpent shall be seen by a Lady in the night
time, and that the Dogs of the house shall not bark at him.

XCIV. French.
Deux grand, freres seront chassez d' Espagne,
Laisne vaincu soubs les Monts Pyraenaecs,
Rougis Mer, Rhosne, sang Leman, d' Alemagne,
Narbon, Blyterre, d' Agath contaminees.
English.
Two great Brothers shall be driven from Spain,
The elder of them shall be overcome under the Pyrenean Mountains
Bloody Sea, Rhosne, Blood Leman of Germany,
Narbon, Bliterre of Agath pol^uted.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are easily understood by those that know the Pyrenean
Mountains, to be those that part Spain from France. The two last Verses
signify there shall be bloody Wars in those places; the Rhosne is a swift
River of France, that passes through the City of Lions; Leman is the Lake of
Geneva, and Narbon is a City of Languedock.

XCV. French.
Le Regne a deux laisse bien peu tiendront,
Trois ans sept mois passez feront la guerre,
Les deux vestales contre rebelleront,
Victor puisnay en Armorique Terre.
English.
The Kingdom being left to two, they shall keep it but a little while,
Three years and seven months being past, they shall make War,
The two Vestals shall rebel against them,
The youngest shall be Conqueror in the Armorick Country.
ANNOT.

This signifies, that a Kingdom shall be left to two, who shall keep it but a
little while, about the space before mentioned.

By the two Vestals that shall rebel, are to be understood two Nuns, who having
Interest in the state by their nearness of blood, shall challenge a title in
the Kingdom. The last Verse signifies, that the youngest that contended for the
Kingdom, shall overcome the eldest, in the Province of Gascony.

XCVI. French.
La soeur aisnee de l'Isle Britannique,
Quinze ans devant le friar aura naissance,
Par son promis moyenant verifique,
Succedera au Regne de Balance.
English.
The eldest Sister of the Britain Island,
Shall be born fifteen years before her Brother,
By what is promised her, and help of the truth,
She shall succeed in the Kingdom of Libra.
ANNOT.

This signifies, that the Princess born so long after her Brother, shall be
married to a King of France, which is understood here by the Kingdom of Libra;
therefore the last King Lewis the XIII. was called the Just, because born under
the Sign of Libra

XCVII. French.
L'An que Mercure, Mars, Venus retrograde,
Du grand Monarque la ligne ne faillit,
Esleu du peuple Lusitant pres de Pactole,
Qu'en Paix and Regne viendra fort enveillir.
English.
When Mercury, Mars and Venus shall retrograde,
The Line of the great Monarch shall be wanting,
He shall be elected by the Lusitanians near Pactole,
And shall Reign in Peace a good while.
ANNOT.

This signifies the late change of state in Portugal, when they threw off the
Spanish yoke, and chose a King amongst themselves, John the IV. Duke of
Branganza, Father to the present Queen of England; for by the Lusitanians are
meant the Portugals, so called from their Countries name Lusitania; Pactoles is
the River that runs by Lisbonne, otherwise called Tagus, in Greek (...) from
the Sands.

XCVIII. French.
Les Albanois passeront dedans Rome,
Moyennant Langres demipiler affubles,
Marquis and Duc ne pardonnes a l'homme,
Feu, sang, morbilles point d'eau, faillir les ble's.
English.
The Albanians shall pass through Rome,
By the means of Langres covered with half Helmets,
Marquess and Duke shall spare no man,
Fire, blood, small Pox, Water shall fail us, also Corn.
ANNOT.

The meaning is, that when the people of Albania lying between the Venetian
Territories, and Grecia, shall come to Rome, by the means of a Bishop of
Langres, who is a Duke and Peer of France; being covered with half Helmets, a
kind of a Cap that they wear in War; then shall be fire, blood, small Pox, and
want of Corn.

XCIX. French.
L'Aisne vaillant de la fille du Roy,
Repoussera si profond les Celtiques,
Qu'il mettra Foudres, combien en tell arroy,
Peu and loing puis profond es Hesperiques.
English.
The valliant eldest son of the daughter of the King,
Shall beat back so far those of Flanders,
That he will cast Lightnings, O how many in such orders
Little and far, after shall go deep in Spain.
ANNOT.

This is scarce to be understood of any body, but the present King of France
Lewis the XIV. who was the elder son, and born of Queen Ann, Daughter to the
King of Spain, who by his valor and fortune made last year such progress in
the Conque^ of Flanders, that it has caused admiration in every body, insomuch
that if he do the like this year, it may be propably suspected, he will
afterward go deep into Spain according to the contents of this Prophecy.

C. French.
Du feu Celeste au Royal edifice,
Quand la lumiere de Mars defaillira,
Sept mois grand Guerre, mort gent de malefice,
Rouen, Eureux au Roy ne faillira.
English.
Fire shall fall from the skies on the Kings Palace,
When Mars' s light shall be Ecclipsed,
A great War shall be for seven months, people shall die by witchcraft.
Rouen, and Eureux shall not be wanting to the King.
ANNOT.

The meaning is, that when Mars is Ecclipsed, the Lightning shall fall on some
of the King of Frances Palaces, then shall be a great War, for the space of
seven Months, and many shall die by witchcraft; and Rouen the chief City of
Normandy, and Eureux another of the (...) Province, shall stick fast to the
Kings Interest.

THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY V.
I. French.
Avaunt venue de ruin Celtique,
Dedans le Temple d'eux parlementeront,
Poignard coeur d'un monte au coursier and picque,
Sans fair bruit le grand enterreront.
English.
Before the coming of the ruin of Flanders,
Two shall discourse together in the Church,
Dagger in the heart by one, on Horseback and Spurring,
Without noise they shall bury the great one.
ANNOT.

This is a further specification of the whole ruin of Flanders, before which
it shall happen, says our Author, that two shall talk together in the Church,
and one shall stabb the other with a Dagger, and then take Horse, and fly, the
dead one being buried without Pomp or Ceremony.

II. French.
Sept conjurez au Banquet seront luire,
Contre les trois le Fer horse de Navire.
L'un les deux classes au grand fera conduire,
Quand par le mail dernier au front luy tire.
English.
Seven Conspirators at a Banquet shall make their Iron glister
Against three, out of a Ship:
One shall carry the two Fleets to the great one,
When in the Palle-malle the last shall shoot him in the forehead.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses foretell a Conspiracy of seven against three, one of
which seven shall carry both Fleets to some eminent person, at which time he
shall be shot in the forehead by the last of the seven.

III. French.
Le Successeur de la Duche viendra,
Beaucoup plus outre que la Mer de Toscane,
Gauloise branche la Florence tiendra,
Dans son Giron d'accord nautique Rane.
English.
The Successor to the Dukedom shall come,
Far beyond the Tuscane Sea,
A French branch shall hold Florence
In its Lap, to which the Sea-frog shall agree.
ANNOT.

By the two first Verses is meant a lawful Successor to the Duke of Tuscany who
shall come to recover the said Dukedom, which shall then be in the possession
of the French.

It is hard to guess what he means by the Sea-frog, unless it be some
considerable Prince at Sea, which shall then be in League with the French.

IV. French.
Le gros Mastin de Cite dechasse,
Sera fasche de l'estrange Alliance,
Apres aux Champs avoir le Cerf chasse,
Le Loup and l'Ours se donront defiance.
English.
The great Mastif being driven from the City,
Shall be angry at the strange Alliance,
After he shall have hunted the Heart in the Fields,
The Wolf, and the Bear shall defy one another.
ANNOT.

By the strange Alliance is meant that which Cromwell had with France, to the
prejudice of his Majesty of England, who is here meant by the Mastif, a
Creature, for which England has been famous.

By the Wolf and the Bear are meant the French King and the Switzers, or those
of Savoy.

V. French.
Sous ombre faincte d'oster de servitude,
Peuple and Cite l'usurpera luy-mesme,
Pire fera par fraus de jeune pute,
Livre au Champ lisant le faux prcesme.
English.
Under the fained shadow of freeing people from slavery,
He shall usurp the people and City for himself;
He shall do worse by the deceit of a young Whore,
For he shall be betrayed in the field reading a false proem.
ANNOT.

The two first are plain, and may be referred to the foregoing Stanza
concerning Oliver.

The last Verses are plain, and I leave them to the judicious Reader.

VI. French.
Au Roy l' Augur sur le chef le main mettre,
Viendra prier pour la Paix Italique,
A la main gauche viendra changer le Scepter,
De Roy viendra Empereur pacifique.
English.
The Augur shall come to put his hand upon the Kings head,
And pray for the Peace of Italy,
In the left hand he shall change the Scepter,
Of a King he shall become a peaceful Emperor.
ANNOT.

Although the Augur In Latin signifies one that tells events of matters by
the flying voices, or sitting of Birds, yet it is taken also (as here) for a
Prelat or Clergyman, who shall put his hand upon a Kings head, and pray for the
peace of Italy, and shall put a Scepter in his hand, and install him Emperor,
what King this should be, is easy to be conjectured by the Author, being a
Frenchman, and setting down a King without any Epithet, and this Prophecy is
a confirmation of one before of the same nature.

VII. French.
Du Triumuir seront trouvez les os,
Cherchant profond Thresor aenigmatique,
Ceux d'alentour ne seront en repos,
Ce concaver Marbre and plomb Metallique,
English.
The bones of the Triumuir shall be found out,
When they shall seek for a deep and aenigmatical Treasure,
Those there about shall not be in rest,
This concavity shall be Marble and Metallic Lead.
ANNOT.

I suppose none so ignorant in the Roman History, but knows, that there was a
combination between Octavius Caesar, M^rcus Antonius, and Lepidus, to make
themselves Masters of the Roman Empire, and to divide it amongst themselves,
this Plot being made by three, was made by the Triumuiri; the meaning then is,
that when they, shall go to seek for a Treasure, they shall find the bones of
one of those three persons, and in that cavity that they shall have dug,
they shall find Marble and Lead.

VIII. French.
Sera laisse le feu vif, mort cache,
Dedans les Globes horrible espouventable,
De nuict a class Cite en poudre lasche,
La Cite a feu, l'ennemy favorable.
English.
The fire shall be left burning, the dead man shall be hid,
Within the Globes terrible and fearful,
By night the Fleet shall shoot against the City,
The City shall be on fire, the enemy shall be favorable unto it.
ANNOT.

The two Verses signify, that fire shall be hid within Globes, I suppose them
to be Granado's, or a Mine.

The two last Verses signify, that the Fleet in the Harbor, or near it, shall
set the City on fire, and that they shall come out of the Fleet to help to
quench the fire, and so shall the enemy be favorable.

IX. French.
Jusques au fond la grand Arche Malue,
Par chef Captif l'amy anticipe,
Naistra de Dame front, face chevelue,
Lors par astuce Duc a mort attrape
English.
To the bottom of the great Arch Malue,
By a Captain that is a Prisoner, the friend shall be anticipated,
One shall be born of a Lady with a hoary face and forehead,
Then by craft shall a Duke be put to death.
ANNOT.

The meaning of the first is unknown to me: I leave it to the Reader.

The sense of the last is as obvious to the meanest capacity, as the two
precedent are obscure.

X. French.
Un chef Celtique dans le conflict bless,
Aupres de Cave, voiant, siens mort abattre,
De sang and plays and d'ennemis press,
Est se couru par incogneus de quattre.
English.
A General of Flanders wounded in Battle,
Near a Cellar, seeing death to overthrow his people,
Being much oppressed with blood, wounds and enemies,
Is succored by four unknown.
ANNOT.

This needs no further interpretation, than that it seems to be near its
event.

XI. French.
Mer par solaires seure passera
Ceux de Venus tiendront toute l' Afrique,
Leur Regne plus Saturn n'occupera,
Et changera la part Asiatique.
English.
By solaries she shall pass secure,
Those of Venus shall hold all Africa,
Saturn shall hold their Kingdom no longer,
And shall change the Asiatick part,
ANNOT.

This is so obscure in words and sense, that I can judge no more than that it
signifies a great change in Africa and Asia, which I suppose is already come to
pass by Taffaletta.

XII. French.
Au pres du lac Leman sera conduite,
Par garse estrange Cite voulant trahir,
Avaunt son meurtre a Ausbourg la grand suite,
Et ceux du Rhin la viendront envahir,
English.
Near the Leman lake shall be a Plot,
By a strange Whore to betray a City,
Before she be killed her great retinue will come to Ausbourg,
And those of the Rhine shall come to invade her.
ANNOT.

We have said often before, that the Leman Lake is that of Geneva. The rest is
so manifest, that it needs no interpretation.

XIII. French.
Par grand fureur le Roy Romain Belgique,
Veexer voudra par phalange Barbare,
Furent grinslant chassera gent Lybique,
Depuis Pannons iusque Hercules la bare.
English.
Through great anger the Roman Belgic King,
Shall come to vex with Barbarian Troops,
Gnashing with fury, he shall draw away the Lybian people,
From the Pannons as far as Hercules.
ANNOT.

By the Roman Belgic King, is understood Philip the second King of Spain;
because he was made King in Flanders, by his father Charles V.

The second Verse signifies the diverse Nations that his Army was composed of.

In the third, by the Lybian people are understood the Jews, which he drove
away from Spain into Africa

The Pannous are the people of Hungary, called Pannones, and the meaning that
he drove them out as far as Hercules Pillar, at the mouth of the Straits,
signifies the great expulsion he made of them, which were about the number of
200000.

XIV. French.
Saturn and Mars en Leo Espagne captifue,
Par chef Lybique au conflict attrape,
Proche de Malte, Herede Prinse vive,
Et Romain Scepter sera par Coq frappe
English.
Saturn and Mars being in Leo, Spain shall be captive,
By a Lybian General taken in the Battle,
Near Malta, an Heirse shall be taken alive,
And the Roman Scepter shall be stricken by the Cock.
ANNOT.

By the Cock is meant the King of France. The rest is plain.

XV. French.
En navigant Captif prins grand pontife,
Grand apres faillir les clercs tumultuez,
Second esleu absent son bien debife,
Son favory Bastard a mort tue.
English.
In Sailing a Pope shall be taken Captive;
After which, shall be a great uproar amongst the Clergy,
A second absent elected, consumes his goods,
His favorite Bastard shall be killed.
ANNOT.

These Verses signify no more, but that a Pope going by water, shall be taken
Prisoner, for which, all the Clergy shall be in disorder, and elect a new one,
who shall consume his Goods, and shall have a favorite Bastard, that shall be
killed.

XVI. French.
A son haut prix plus la larme Sabaee,
D'humaine chair par mort en cendre mettre,
L'Isle Pharos par Croisars perturbee,
Alors qua Rhodes paroistra dur espectre.
English.
The Sabaean Tear shall be no more at its high price,
To turn humane flesh by death into ashes,
The Island Pharos shall be troubled by Croisars,
When at Rhodes shall a hard Phantasm appear.
ANNOT.

The Sabaean Tear, is Frankincense, so called; because it is the Gum of a Tree
that grows in that Country, whence the Poet says.

India mittit ebur, molles sua thura Sabaei.

The meaning therefore of the two first Verses, is, that Frankincense shall be
no more so dear as it has been; because it shall be no more used, in enbalming
and burning of dead bodies.

The third verse says, the Island Pharos (which is that little Island that
lies before the Harbor of Alexandria) shall be troubled by Croisars, that is,
Christians, when there shall appear a Phantasme, or a Vision shall be seen at
Rhodes.

XVII. French.
De nuit passant le Roy pres d'une Andronne,
Celuy de Cipres and principal de guerre,
Le Roy failly la main fuit long du Rhosne,
Les conjurez liront la a mort mettre.
English.
The King going along by night near an Andronne,
He of Cyprus and chief of the War,
The King having missed the hand, runs away along by the Rhosne,
The Conspirators shall put him to death there.
ANNOT.

I could not find what he means by Andronne, therefore I believe it is a
barbarous and forged word, which the Author has foisted in, to make the first
Verses rhyme with the word Rhosne; in the third Verse, which is a famous River
in France

XVIII. French.
De duel mourra l'infelix proflige,
(...) victrix l'Hecatombe,
Prist^^e ^oy franc edict red^ge,
Le mur and Prince septiesme ira au tomb.
English.
The unhappy being overcome, shall die for grief,
His Victrix shall celebrate the Hecatomb,
The former Law and free Edict shall be brought again,
The wall and seventh Prince shall go to the Grave.
ANNOT.

Victrix is a Latin word, and the Feminine Gender of Victor, and signifies a
woman that is victorious: Hecatomb is a sacrifice, wherein an hundred Oxen are
killed.

XXIX. French.
Le grand Royal d'Or, d'Airain augmente,
Rompu la pache par jeune, ouverte guerre,
Peuple affige par un chef lamente,
De sang barbare sera couverte Terre,
English.
The great Golden Royal, being increased with Copper,
The agreement being broken by a young man, there shall be open War,
People afflicted by the loss of a General lamented,
The ground shall be covered with barbarous blood.
ANNOT.

By the great golden Royal, is understood (if I mistake not) a King rich in
Gold and Silver, who being joined with one rich in Copper, shall make open War
against one that shall have broken his agreement.

Quaere: Whether this came not to pass when Gustaphus Adolphus King of Sweden
and rich in Brass, being helped by the French Gold and Silver,; was not the
General so much lamented, after he had almost ruined the Emperous, whom he did
challenge to have broken his word, and had covered the ground with German and
Swedish blood.

XX. French.
De la les Alps grand Armee passera,
Un peu devant naistra monstre vapin,
Prodigieux, and subit tournera,
Le grand Toscan a son lieu plus propin.
English.
Beyond the Alps shall a great Army go, and
A little before shall be born a Vapin Monster,
Prodigious and suddenly the great Toscan
Shall return to his nearest place.
ANNOT.

What the Author means by Vapin, is unknown to me, as for the wrod propin, it
is a diminutive of the Latin word propinquns, by the figure of Rhetoric,
called Tmesis.

XXI. French.
Par le trespass du Monarque Latin,
Ceux quil aura par Regne secourus,
Le feu livra divise le butin,
La mort public aux hardis accourus.
English.
By the death of the Latin Monarque,
Those that he shall have succored in his Reign.
The fire shall shine, the booty shall be divided,
The stout comers in shall be put to public death.
ANNOT.

Every body may judge of this as well as I, therefore to trouble my self it
should be to no purpose.

XXII. French.
Avaunt qu'a Rome grand aye rendu l'Ame,
Effrayeur grande a l'Armee estrangere,
Par escadrons l'embusche pres de Parme.
Puis les deux rouges ensemble feront chere.
English.
Before that a great man yeildeth up his Soul at Rome,
The Army of strangers shall be put into a great fright,
By Squadrons the ambush shall be near Parma.
After that, the two red ones shall make good cheer together.
ANNOT.

Here is nothing difficult, but what he means by the two red ones, for my
part I suppose them to be two Cardinals.

XXIII. French.
Les deux contens seront unis ensemble,
Quand la pluspart a Mars seront conjoints,
Le grand d' Affrique en effrayeur and tremble
Duumuirat par la chasse desjoint.
English.
The two contented shall be united together,
When the most part shall be joined to Mars,
The great one of Africa shall be in fear and terror,
Duumuirat shall by the pursuit be disjointed.
ANNOT.

This signifies, that two powerful Princes shall join together, to make War
in Africa, which shall be much terrified at it, but this Duumuirat, that is,
this agreement of two Princes shall be broken off, and disjoined.

XXIV. French.
Le Regne and Roy soubs Venus esleve,
Saturn aura sur Jupiter Empire,
La Loy and Regne par Jupiter leve,
Par Saturnins endurera le pire.
English.
The Kingdom and King being raised under Venus,
Saturn shall have power over Jupiter,
The Law and Reign raised by Jupiter,
Shall be put to the worse by the Saturnins.
ANNOT.

I shall leave this to be expounded by those that have more skill in Astronomy
then I have.

XXV. French
Le Prince Arabe, Mars, Sol, Venus, Lion,
Regne d'Eglise par Mer succombera,
Devers la Perse bien pres d'un Million,
Bizance, Aegypte, Ver. Serp. invadera.
English.
The Arabian Prince, Mars, Sol, Venus, Leo,
The Kingdom of the Church shall be overcome by Sea
Toward Persia Very near a Million,
Byzance, Egypt, Ver. Serp. shall invade.
ANNOT.

This is of the same nature as the foregoing, therefore I leave it to the same
expositors.

XXVI. French.
La gent esclave par un heur Martial,
Viendra en ha ut degree tant eslevee,
Changeront Prince, naistra un Provincial,
Passer la Mer, copy aux Monts levee.
English.
The Slavish Nation shall by a Martial luck
Be raised to so high a degree,
That they shall change their Prince, and elect one among themselves,
They shall cross the Sea with an Army raised in the Mountains.
ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needs no interpretation.

XXVII. French.
Par feu and arms non loin de la Mar negro,
Viendra de Perse occuper Trebisonde,
Trembler Pharos, Metelin, Sol alegro,
De sang Arabe d' Adrie couvert l'Onde.
English.
By Fire and Sword not far from the black Sea,
They shall come from Persia to seize upon Trebisonde,
Pharos and Methelin shall quake, Sun be merry,
The Sea of Adria shall be covered with Arabian blood.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy foretells clearly and plainly, that the Persians shall come to
invade the Turkish dominions, a part of which is the Empire of Trebisond, and
that Pharos and Meshelin two Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, shall quake for
fear.

As also that the Adriatic Sea, which is that Sea that belongs to the
Venetians shall be covered with Turkish blood, at which the Author is so
jocund, as with an exclamation he inviteth the Sun to be merry, and rejoice at
it.

XXVIII. French.
Le bras pendu and la jambe liee,
Visage pasle, au sein poignard cache,
Trois qui seront jurez de la meslee,
Au grand de Genes sera le Fer lasche.
English.
The arm hanging, and the leg bound,
With a pale face, a Dagger in the bosom,
Three that shall be sworn to the fray,
To the great one of Genoa the Iron shall be darted.
ANNOT.

This manifestly foretells a conspiracy of three men against the Duke of
Genoa, one of which three men, under the show of a sore Arm, and an impotent
Leg, shall carry a Dagger in his bosom, with which he shall stabb the said Duke.

XXIX. French.
La liberte ne sera recouvree,
L'Occupera noir, fire, vilain inique;
Quand la matiere du Pont sera ouvree,
D' Hister, Venise faschee la Republique.
English.
The liberty shall not be recovered,
It shall be occupied, by a black, fierce, and wicked villain;
When the work of the Hister- Bridge shall be ended,
The Venetian Commonwealth shall be vexed.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is divided into two parts, the first of which is comprehended in
the two first Verses, viz. that the liberty of some politic body (he names
not which) shall not be recovered, but shall be seized upon, by a black, fiere,
and wicked villain.

The second part is contained in the two last Verses, wherein be says, that
the Commonwealth of Venice shall be in trouble, when the Bridge made over the
River Hister shall be finished.

XXX. French.
Tout a l'entour de la grande Cite,
Seront Soldats logez par Champs and Villes,
Donner l'assaut Paris, Rome incite,
Sur le Pont sera faite grand pille.
English.
Round about the great City,
Soldiers shall lie in the Fields and Towns,
Paris shall give the Assault, Rome shall be attached;
Then upon the Bridge shall be great plundering.
ANNOT.

This is concerning the taking and sacking of Rome, by the Duke of Bourbon,
General of Charles V. Forces, therefore he says that Paris shall give the
Assault, because the said Duke of Bourbon was a Frenchman.

XXXI. French.
Par Terre Attique chef de la sapience,
Qui de present est la Rose du Monde,
Pont ruin and sa grand preeminence,
Sera subdite and naufrage des Ondes.
English.
In the Country of Attica which is the head of wisdom,
And now is the Rose of the World,
A Bridge shall be ruinated with its great preeminence,
It shall be subdued, and made a wrack by the Waves.
ANNOT.

He foretells the destruction of a famous Bridge in the Country of Attica,
of which Athens is the chief City, and because it was always famous for
learning, he calls it here the head of Wisdom; and that Wisdom, the Rose of
the World.

XXXII. French.
Ou tout bon est, tout bien Soleil and Lune,
Est abundant, sa ruin s'approche,
Le Ciel s'advance a changer ta fortune,
En mesme estat que la septiesme Roche.
English.
Where all well is, all good O Sun and Moon,
Is existent, his ruin draws near,
The Heaven is making have to change thy fortune,
Into the same case as the seventh Rockis.
ANNOT.

By this dark Stanza, the Author seems to foretell the woeful condition of a
Country that was happy before, but shall fall to ruin, I suspect he intended
France, because being a Frenchman he did not name it, for I think there was
never such a change in the world as was in that Kingdom, in the time of the
Civil Wars between the Roman Catholics, and the Protestants.

XXXIII. French.
Des principaux de Cite rebellee,
Qui tiendront fort pour liberte r'avoir,
Detrencher masles, infoelice meslee!
Cris, hurlemens a Nantes pitieux voir.
English.
Of the chief men in a rebelled City,
Who shall stand out to recover their liberty,
The Males shall be cut in pieces, O unhappy quarrel!
Cries and houlings, it shall be pity to see at Nantes.
ANNOT.

The Author applies this Prophecy to the City of Nantes in Britany, but want
of Books that treat of the History of that Country; I could neither satisfy
my self, nor the Reader, if this has come to pass already or not.

XXXIV. French.
Du plus profond de l'occident Anglois,
Ou est le chef de l'Isle Britanique,
Entrera class en Garonne par Blois,
Par Vin and Sell saux cachez aux barriques.
English.
From the deepest Westerly part of England,
Where the chief of the Britain Island is,
A Fleet shall come into the Garonne by Blaye,
By Wine and Salt fire shall be hidden in Barrels,
ANNOT.

There is a notable and sensible error in the French Copy, and without
reforming it, the sense is not only obscure, but also impossible; for instead
of Blois, which the Author has put here, I suppose to make the rhyme good, it
must be written Blaye, which is a sea Town of the mouth of the River Garonne,
and Blois is a mid-Land Town, upon the River Loire, about a hundred Leagues
distant from the other.

The rest signifies no more, but that there shall be some Warlike stratagem
made use of by the French (understood here by the names of Wine and Salt) in
putting fire into Barrels.

XXXV. French.
Par Cite franche de la grand Mer Seline,
Qui port encor l'estomach la pierre,
Angloise class viendra soubs la bruine,
Prendre un rameau de grand ouverte guerre.
English.
By a free City of the Selyne Sea,
Which carries yet the stone in the Stomach,
An English Fleet shall come under a fog,
To take a branch of great open War.
ANNOT.

What should the Author mean by the free City of the great Seline Sea that
carries yet the stone in the stomach, is hard to guess; for my part I believe
it to be Venice. First, because by the Seline Sea, he always understands the
Mediterranean; because the great Turks name in our Authors time was Selyn, who
was Master of the greatest part of it. Secondly, there is no other free City so
considerable as this. Thirdly, by the stone in the Stomach, may be understood,
the Pillars that are in the Piazza of St. Ma^k, and as it were in the Center of
Venice, as the stomach is in the Body. The sense therefore is this, as I take
it, that a considerable Fleet shall come to Venice, or rather to Molamocco,
which is the Harbor, and there take a branch of great open War, that is, to
be either against the Venetians, or against the Turk in their behalf.

XXXVI. French.
De Soeur le friar par fimulte feintise,
Viendra mesler rosee en Mineral,
Sur la placente done a vieille tardive,
Meurt le goustant, sera simple rura!
English.
The Brother of the Sister, with a fained dissimulation,
Shall mix Dew with Mineral,
In a Cake given to a slow old woman,
She dies tasting of, the deed shall be simple, and Country I ke.
ANNOT.

This foretells a notable poisoning that shall be done by a Brother upon his
sister, which, because she died not fast enough, according to his mind: and
therefore called her slow, he would set her forward with a poisoned Cake, the
Poison was Mineral, and therefore Arsenick or sublimate, mixed with Manna,
called here Dew; because Manna is nothing but a Dew, condensed upon the Bark of
a certain Tree; the Conclusion is, that the woman shall die eating of it,
though the meat seemed to be simple and rural.

XXXVII. French.
Trois sens seront d'un vouloir and accord,
Qui pour venir au bout de leur attainte,
Vingt mois apres tous eux and leurs records,
Leur Roy trahy simulant haine, feinte.
English.
Three hundred shall be of one mind and agreement,
That they may compass their ends,
Twenty months after by all them and their partners,
Their King shall be betrayed, by dissembling a fained hatred.
ANNOT.

The difficulty of meeting in any Country three hundred men of one mind, has
persuaded me that our Author writ this for England; but by reason there has
been since a general pardon, I will keep my mind to my self.

XXXVIII. French.
Ce grand Monarque qu'au mort succedera,
Donnera vie illicite and lubrique,
Par nonchalance a tous concedera,
Qua la parfin faudra la loy Salique.
English.
The great Monarch that shall succeed to the great one,
Shall lead a Life unlawful, and lecherous,
By carelessness he shall give to all,
So that in Conclusion the Salique Law shall fail.
ANNOT.

This has a Relation to the precedetn Stanza, therefore, etc.

XXXIX. French.
Du vray rameau de fleur de Lis issu,
Mis and loge heritier d' Hetrurie,
Son sang antique de longue main tissu,
Fera Florence florir en l'Armoirie.
English.
Issued out of the true branch of the City,
He shall be set for Heir of Hetruria,
His ancient blood waved by a long while,
Shall cause Florence to flourish in the Scutcheon.
ANNOT.

This is only in commendation of the Family of the Medicis, and of their
Alliance with the Crown of France; for Catharine of Medicis, wife to Henry II.
was Queen of France when our Author lived.

XL. French.
Le sang Roial sera si tresmesle,
Contraints seront Gaulois de l' Hesperie,
On attendra que term soit coule,
Et que memoire de la voix soit perie.
English.
The Royal blood shall be so much mixed,
The French shall be constrained by the Spaniards,
They shall stay till the term be past,
And the remembrance of the voice be over.
ANNOT.

This only signifies a strict Union between the French and the Spaniards, by
several Alliances.

LXI. French.
Nay soubs les ombres and journee nocturne,
Sera en Regne and bonte Souveraine,
Fera renaistre son sang de l'antique Urne,
Renouvelant siecle d'Or pour l'airain,
English.
Being born in the shadows and nocturnal time,
He shall be a Sovereign in Kingdom and bounty,
He shall cause his blood to come again from the ancient Urn,
Renewing a golden Age instead of a brazen one.
ANNOT.

This foretells the greatness and goodness of a Prince that shall be born in
the beginning of the night.

XLII. French.
Mars esleve en son plus haut befroy,
Fera retraire les Allobrox de France,
La gent Lombarde fera si grand effroy,
A ccux de l'Aigle comprins soubs la Balance.
English.
Mars being elevated in its higher Steeple,
Shall cause the Allobrox to retreat from France,
The people of Lombardy shall be in so great fear
Of those of the Eagle comprehended under Libra.
ANNOT.

The Allobrox are the people of Savoy. Those of the Eagle comprehended under
Libra, are the subjects of the Empire that use the French tongue.

XLIII. French.
Le grand ruin des sacrez ne sesloigne,
Provence, Naples, Sicile, Seez and Ponce,
En Germany au Rhin and la Coloigne,
Vexez a mort par tous ceux de Mogunce,
English.
The great ruin of the sacred things is not far off,
Provence, Naples, Sicily, Sez and Ponce,
In Germany toward the Rhyne and Colen,
They shall be vexed to death by those of Moguntia.
ANNOT.

He foret(...)th the troubles that were to be shortly in those Countries for
Religion.

XLIV. French.
Par Mer le rouge sera prins the Pirates,
La paix sera par son moyen troublee,
L'une and l'auare commettra par faincte act,
Au grand Pontife fera l'Armee d'oublee.
English.
By Sea the red one shall be taken by Pirates,
The peace by that means shall be troubled,
He shall commit anger and coveteousnefs by a feigned action,
The High Priest shall have a double Army.
ANNOT.

By the red one is understood some Cardinal that shall be taken by Pirates, for
which the peace shall be in danger to be broken, the same Cardinal shall by a
feigned action be guilty of choler and covetousness, and for his recovery and
the defending the Rites of the Church, the Pope shall have a double Army
granted to him.

XLV. French.
Le grand Empire fera tossed desole,
Et translate pres d' Arduenne silve,
Les deux batards par l'aisne decolle,
Et Regnera Aenodarbnez de milve.
English.
The great Empire shall soon be made desolate,
And shall be translated near the Forest of Arden,
The two Bastards shall have their heads cut off by the eldest son,
And he that shall reign, shall be Aenodarbnez nosed.
ANNOT.

By the great Empire is meant that of Germany, which he says shall be
translated near the Forest of Ardens, which is near the borders of France. Two
Bastards shall be beheaded by command of the elder Brother of the House, and he
that shall Reign shall have a reddish beard, and a Hawks nose.

XLVI. French.
Par Chapeaux rouges querelles and nouveaux schisms,
Quand on aura esleu le Sabinois,
On produira contre luy grands sophismes,
Et sera Rome leslee par Aibanois.
English.
By red Hats, quarrels and new schisms,
When the Sabin shall be Elected,
Great sophismes shall be produced against him,
And Rome shall be endamaged by the Albanois.
ANNOT.

By red Hats are understood Cardinals of Rome, who shall raise great quarrels
and schisms, when a Pope of the Country of the Sabins which is near Rome)
shall be Elected, against whom many things shall be objected, and that Rome
shall be endamaged by the Albanians, which are a Warlike people, and for the
most part subject to the Commonwealth of Venice.

XLVII. French.
Le grand Arabe marchera bien avaunt,
Trahy sora par le Bisantinois:
L'Antique Rhodes luy viendra au devant,
Et plus grand mal par Austre Pannonois.
English.
The great Arabian shall proceed a great way,
He shall be betrayed by the Bisantines,
The ancient Rhodes shall come to meet him,
And a greater evil by a South wind from Hungary.
ANNOT.

By Bisantine is understood the great Turk, Master of Constantinople, formerly
called Bysantium.

XLVIII. French.
Apres la grande affliction du Scepter,
Deux ennemis par eux seront defaicts:
Classes d' Affrique aux Pannons viendra naistre,
Par Mer and Terre seront horribles Faicts.
English.
After the great afflictions of the Scepter,
Two enemies shall be overcome by themselves,
A Fleet of Africa shall be born to the Hungarians.
By Sea and Land shall be horrid facts.
ANNOT.

The words of this Stanza are plain, though the sense be something obscure.

XLIX. French.
Null de l' Espagne, mais de l'antique France,
Sera esleu pour le tremblant nacelle,
A l'ennemy sera faicte fiance,
Qui dans son Regne sera peste cruelle.
English.
None out of Spain, but of the ancient France,
Shall be Elected to govern the tottering Ship.
The enemy shall be trusted,
Who to his Kingdom shall be a cruel plague.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses foretell a schism in the Church of Rome, understood by a
tottering Ship, and that a French man shall be Elected Pope to remedy it.

The two last Verses are easy to be understood.

L. French.
L'An que les Freres du Lys seront an Aage,
L'Un d'euz t^endra la grand Romanie:
Trembler les Monts ouvert Latin passage,
Bache marcher contre Fort d' Armenie,
English.
In the year that the Brethren of the Lillies shall be at Age,
One of them shall hold the great Romanie:
The Mountains shall tremble, the Latin passage shall be opened,
A Bassha shall march against the Fort of Armenia.
ANNOT.

By the Brethren of the Lillies are meant the Heirs of the Crown of France; the
rest is plain.

LI. French.
La gent de Dace, d' Angleterre, and Polone,
Et de Boesme feront nouvelle ligue,
Pour passer outre d' Hercules la Colonne,
Barcins, Thyrrans dresser cruelle brigue.
English.
The people of Dacia, England, and Poland,
And of Bohemia shall make a new League,
To go beyond Hercules Pillars,
Barcins and Thyrrens shall make a cruel plot.
ANNOT.

By Barcins he means those of Carthage, which is now Tunis, and by the
Thyrrens, those that live near that Sea.

LII. French.
Un Roy sera qui donra l'opposite,
Les exilez eslevez sur le Regne,
De sang nager la gent cast hyppolite,
Et florira long-temps sous tell enseigne.
English.
A King shall be, who shall be opponent
To the banished persons raised upon the Kingdom,
The chaste Hippolite Nation shall swim in blood,
And shall flourish a great while under such an Ensign.
ANNOT.

Here is Demorritus's Well where the truth may be, but I cannot find it

LIII. French.
La Loy du Sol, and Venus contendans,
Appropriant l'Esprit de Prephetie:
Ne l'un ne l'autre ne seront entendus,
Par Sol tiendra la Loy du grand Messi^.
English.
The Law of the Sun and Venus contending,
Appropriating the spirit of Prophecy,
Neither one nor the other shall be heard,
By Sol the Law of the great Messiah shall subsist.
ANNOT.

This is of the same obscurity with the foregoing one.

LIVE. French.
Du pont Euxine, and la grand Tartarie,
Un Roy sera qui viendra voir la Gaul,
Transpercera Alane and l' Armenie,
Et dans Bisance Lairra sanglante Gaul.
English.
From the Euxin Sea, and great Tartaria,
A King shall come to see France,
He shall go through Alanea and Armenia,
And shall leave a bloody rod in Constantinople.
ANNOT.

This is so plain, that it needs no interpretation.

LV. French.
De la felice Arabie contrade,
Maistra puissant de la loy Mahometique,
Vexer l' Espagne, conquestre la Grenade,
Et plus par Mera la gent Ligustique.
English.
Out of the Country of Arabia the happy,
Shall be born a powerful man of the Mohammedan Law,
Who shall vex Spain and conquer Grenada,
And by Sea shall come to the Ligurian Nation.
ANNOT.

The Ligurian Nation are those of Genoa.

LVI. French.
Par le traspas du tres-vieillard Pontife,
Sera esleu Romain de bon aage,
Qui sera dit que le siege debiffe,
Et long tiendra and de picquant courage.
English.
By the death of the very old High Priest,
Shall be a Roman elected of good age,
Of whom it shall be said, that he dishonors the Seat,
And shall live long, and be of a fierce courage.
ANNOT.

The sense and the words are plain.

LVII. French.
Istra du Mont Gaulsier and Aventine,
Qui par le trou advertira l'Armee,
Enter deux Rocs sera prins le butin,
De Sext. Mansol faillir la renommee.
English.
One shall go out of the Mountains Gaulsier and Aventine,
Who through a hole shall give notice to the Army,
Between two Rocks the booty shall be taken,
Of Sext. Mansol shall loose his renown.
ANNOT.

The Mountains of Gaulsier and Aventine are two of the seven Mountains of Rome,
out of which, it seems, one shall go out to give notice to the Army without,
and the Booty of the Pope, called Sextus, shall be taken.

But what he means by Mansol, I am ignorant.

LVIII. French.
De l'Aqueduct d' Uticense, Gardoing,
Par le Forest and Mont inaccessible,
Emmy du pont sera tache ou poing,
La chef Nemans qui tant sera terrible.
English.
From the Conduit of Uticense and Gardoing,
Through the Forest and unaccessible Mountain,
In the middle of the Bridge shall be tied by the Wrist,
The chief Nemans, that shall be so terrible.
ANNOT.

By the Conduit of Gardoing, he means that of the River Gardon, that passes by
Nismes, where there is a famous Conduit.

But what he means by the chief Nemans, I cannot find.

LIX. French.
Au chef Anglois a Nismes trop se^our,
Devers l' Espagne au secours Aenobarbe,
Plusieurs mouront par Mars ouvert ce jour,
Quand en Artois faillir estoile en Barbe.
English.
The chief English shall stay too long at Nismes,
A red haird man shall go to the succors of Spain,
Many shall die by open War that day,
When in Artois the Star shall fail in the Beard.
ANNOT.

All the difficulty lies in the last Verse: for my part I believe he means
by it a bearded Comet, such as the Latins call Cometa barbatus.

LX. French.
Par test raze viendra bien mal essire,
Plus que sa charge ne port passera,
Si grand fureur and rage fera dire,
Qua feu and sang tout Sex tranchera.
English.
By a shaven head shall be made an ill choice,
That shall go beyond his commission,
He shall proceed with so great fury and rage,
That he shall put both Sexes to fire and Sword.
ANNOT.

By a shaven head must be understood a Priest of the Romish Religion; because
they all have their heads shaven.

LXI. French.
L'Enfant du grand nestant a sa naissance,
Subjugera les hauts Monts Apennins,
Fera trembler tous ceux de la balance,
Depuis Monts Feurs jusques a Mont Senis.
English.
The Child of the great man that was not at his birth,
Shall subdue the high Apennine Mountains,
Shall make all those under Libra to quake,
From Mount Feurs, as far as Mount Senis.
ANNOT.

The Apennine Mountains, are those that divide Italy in two parts.

Those under the Sign of Libra are the people of France. Feurs is a City in
France, in the Province of Forest. Mount Senis is a high Mountain in Savoy.

LXII. French.
Sur les Rochers sang on verra pleuvoir,
Sol Orient, Saturn Occidental,
Pres d' Orgon Guerre, a Rome grand mal voir,
Nefs parfondrees, and prins le Tridental.
English.
It shall rain blood upon the Rocks,
The Sun being in the East, and Saturn in the West,
War shall be near Orgon, and great evil at Rome,
Ships shall be cast away, and the Trident be taken.
ANNOT.

I could not find what he means hy Orgon. As by the Trident being taken, I
suppose he means a ship called Neptune, because Neptune is always painted
with a Trident.

LXIII. French.
De vain emprise l'honneur indue plainte,
Galliots errants par Latins froid, faim vagues,
Non loin du Tybre de sang la Terre teinte,
Et sur humains seront diverses plagues.
English.
Honor brings a complaint against a vain undertaking,
Galleys shall wander through the Latin Seas, cold, hunger, Waves,
Not far from Tyber the Earth shall be died with blood,
And upon Mankind shall be several plagues.
ANNOT.

Tyber is the River of Rome, the rest are several prodigies that shall come to
pass

LXIV. French.
Les assembles par repos du grand nombre,
Par Terre and Mer conseil contremande,
Pres de l' Autonne, Genes, Nue, de lombre,
Par Champs and Villes le Chef contrebande.
English.
The gathered by the rest of the great numbers,
By Land and Sea shall recall their Council,
Near Autonne, Genes, and Nue of the shadow,
In Fields and Towns the Chief shall be one against another.
ANNOT.

This passes my understanding.

LXV. French.
Subit venu l'effrayeur sera grande,
Des principaux de l'affaire caches:
Et Dame Embraise plus ne sera en veue,
Et peu a peu seront le grands faches.
English.
One coming upon a sudden shall cause a great fear,
To the Chief men that were hidden and concerned in the business,
And the Lady Ambraise shall be seen no more,
And by little and little the great one shall be angry.
ANNOT.

What he means by the Lady Ambraise, I cannot find, the rest is easy.

LXVI. French.
Sous les antiques edifices Vestaux,
Non esloignez d' Aqueduct ruin,
De Sol and Lune sont les luissans metaux,
Ardente Lamp Trajan d'or burine.
English.
Under the ancient edifices of the Vestals,
Not far from an Aqueduct ruinated,
Are the bright metals of Sun and Moon,
A burning Lamp of Trajan of engraven gold.
ANNOT.

Monsieur Catel in his second Book of Languedoc Chap. V. says, that there was
a famous Aqueduct, which the Romans builded from the River Gar to the Town of
Nismes, which at present is ruinated.

Secondly, Near the Town there was a famous Temple dedicated to Diana, where
there is a Spring of water so great, that it seems rather a Lake then a
Fountain.

Thirdly, I find that the Emperor Adrian caused a Temple to be built in the
honor of Plotina Trajan's wife.

Fourthly, He relates that Jean Poldo found in the Town of Aix a Marble with
this inscription: Plotina Trajanis uxor, summa honestate and integritate
fulgens, sterilitatis defectu sine prole fecit conjugem, qui ejus opera
Adrianum adoptatum in Imperio Successorem habuit, a quo in beneficii memoriam
Nemausiaede sacra maximo Sumptu, sublimique structura, ac Hymnorum cantu
decorata, post mortem donata est: That is to say, Plotina, Trajans wife, famous
for her honesty and integrity, was barren and left no Children to her Husband,
which she perceiving, entreated the Emperor to adopt Adrian for his Son, and
to make him his Successor in the Empire, which being come to pass, the new
Emperor in acknowledgement of such a benefit, did build her a Temple of a
magnificent Structure, and caused it to be Consecrated with Music after her
death.

Fifthly, The said Author says, that this Marble was taken out of that Temple,
when the River of Gardon did so overflow, as we have said.

By all this we see, that there was a Temple of Vestals at Nismes, Diana the
Maid being their chief Patroness, which is made now a Nunnery, called la
Fontaine. There is also to be seen the Temple of Plotina, Trajans wife, built
by Adrian his Successor. And as it was the manner of the Ancients to put some
of those inextinguishable Lamps in their Graves; it is very likely, there was
one of them in this Temple, and because it should be known whose Grave it was,
he caused Trajans name to be Engraven in the foot of the said Lamp.

Let us explain now the Stanza: Under the Ancient Vestal buildings of the
Temple of Diana, not far from the ruined Aqueduct, which carries the water
from the River Gar to Nismes, shall be found shining metals of Sol and Luna,
that is, Meddals of gold and silver, with a burning Lamp of gold, wherein the
name of Trajan was Engraven. Histories make mention of several burning Lamps in
this manner, that have been found still burning in the ground, and not
consumed, though they had been there above 500. years; certainly the Oil of it
must have been incombustible, and could be extracted out of nothing but gold,
quia nil dat quod non habet.

LXVII. French.
Quand Chef Perouse n'osera sa Tunique,
Sens au convert tout nud s'expolier:
Seront prins sept faict Aristocratique,
Le Pere and Fills morts par poine te an collier.
English.
When the Chief of Perouse shall not dare without a Tunick,
To expose himself naked in the dark,
Seven shall be taken for setting up Aristocracy,
The Father and the Son shall die by pricks in the Collar.
ANNOT.

Perouse is a City in Italy; the rest is plain.

LXVIII. French.
Dans le Danube and le Rhine viendra boire,
Le grand Chameau, ne sen repentira:
Trembler le Rhosne and plus fort ceux de Loire,
Et pres des Alps Coq le ruinera.
English.
In Danubius and the Rhine shall come to drink,
The great Camel, and shall not repent;
The Rhosne shall tremble, and more those of Loire,
And near the Alps the Cock shall ruin him.
ANNOT.

This foretells a great incursion of the Turks into Germany, insomuch that
they shall water their Camels in the Rivers of Danubius, and of the Rhyne, to
the great terror of France, wherein those Rivers of Rhosne and Loire are.

But the last Verse, says the Cock; that is, the French, shall overcome and
ruin the Turks, near the Mountains of the Alps.

LXIX. French.
Plus ne sera le grand en faux sommeil,
L'Inquietude viendra prendre repos,
Dresser Phalange d'Or, Azur, and vermeil,
Subjuguer Affrique and ronger jusqu' aux os.
English.
The great one shall be no more in a false sleep,
The restlessness shall take rest,
He shall raise an Army of Gold and Azure,
He shall conquer Africa and gnaw it to the bones.
ANNOT.

This is concerning some great Prince, who shall raise a powerful Army, and
conquer Africa with it.

LXX. French.
Les Regions subietes a la Balance,
Feront trembler les Monts par grande Guerre,
Captifs tout sex, avec toute Bizance,
Qu'on criera a l'Aube Terre a Terre.
English.
The Regions under the sign of Libra,
Shall make the Mountains quake with great War,
Slaves of all sexes, with all Bizance,
So that in the dawning of the day, they shall cry to Land to Land.
ANNOT.

This foretells the destruction of Constantinople, anciently called
Byzantium, by those that live under the Sign of Libra, that is, the Europeans,
and chiefly the French.

LXXI. French.
Par la fureur d'un qui attendra l'eau,
Par la grand rage tout l'exercite esmeu,
Charge des Nobles a dixsept Bateaux,
Au long du Rhosne tard Messager venud.
English.
By the fury of one staying for the Water,
By his great rage the whole Army shall be troubled,
There shall be seventeen Boats full of Noblemen
Along the Rhosne, the Messenger shall come too late.
ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain.

LXXII. French.
Pour le plaifir d'Edict voluptueux,
On meslera la poison dans la Loy,
Venus sera en course si vertueux,
Qu'obfusquera du Soleil tout alloy.
English.
By the pleasure of a voluptuons proclamation,
The poison shall be mixed in the Law,
Venus shall be in so great request,
That it shall darken all the allay of the Sun.
ANNOT.

By a Proclamation, favoring or promoting Licentiousness, poison shall be
mixed in the Law, and leachery so much countenanced, as it shall obscurate the
allay of the Sun, that is, piety so much commended in the Gospel, to all those
that will fight under Christ's Banner.

LXXIII. French.
Persecutee sera de dien l'Eglise,
Et les Saints Temples seront expoliez,
L'Enfant la mere mettra nud en chemise,
Seront Arabes au Polous ralliez,
English.
The Church of God shall be persecuted,
And the holy Temples shall be spoiled,
The Child shall turn out his Mother in her Smock,
Arrabians shall agree with the Prolonians.
ANNOT.

The Author could not be mistaken in this Prophecy; for the Church of God
shall always be persecuted, the Apostle confirms it, when he says, that all
those that will live piously in christ, must suffer persecution: As for the
spoiling of Churches, and other barbarous actions, it has been seen so often
in France, in the time of the Civil Wars for Religion, that it needs no
confirmation.

The last Verse concerning a peace between the Turks and the Polonians, was
fulfilled in the year 1623. when Sigismundus King of Poland, by his Ambassador
the Duke Sbarasky, and by the mediation of the English Ambassador, concluded a
Peace with the great Turk Mustapha, the Articles of which you may read at large
in the Turkish History.

LXXIV. French.
De sang Trojen naistra coeur Germanique,
Qui deviendra en si haute puissance,
Horse chassera gent estrange Arabique,
Tonrnant l'Eglise en pristine preeminence.
English.
Of Trojan blood shall be born a German heart.
Who shall attain to so high a power,
That he shall drive away the strange Arrabian Nation,
Restoring the Church to her former splendour.
ANNOT.

It seems to signify, that by Alliance made between a German Emperor, and a
Daughter of France, which derive their Pedigree from the Trojans, a Prince
shall be born of so stout and valiant a heart, as shall drive away all the
Turkish power out of Germany, and shall restore the Church to her former
splendour.

LXXV. French.
Montera haut sur le bien plus a dextre,
Demourra assis sur la pierre carree,
Verse le midy pose a la senestre,
Baston tortu en main, bouche serree.
English.
He shall go up upon the good more on the right hand,
He shall stay sitting upon the square stone,
Toward the South; being set, on the left hand,
A crooked stick in his hand, and his mouth shut.
ANNOT.

I do acknowledge my Ignorance in this.

LXXVI French.
En lieu libere tendra son Pavillon,
Et ne voudra en Citez prendre place,
Aix, Carpentras, Lisle, Volce, Mont Cavaillon,
Par tous ces lieux abolira sa trace.
English.
He shall pitch his Tent in the open air,
Refusing to lodge in the City,
Aix, Carpentras, Lisle Volce, Mont Cavaillon,
In all those places, he shall abolish his trace.
ANNOT.

Aix, Carpentras, Lisle Volce, Mont Cavaillon, are Cities of Provence:

LXXVII. French.
Tous les degres d'honneur Ecclesiastique,
Seront changez en Dial Quirinal,
En Martial, quirinal, Flaminique,
Puis un Roy de France le rendra Vulcanal.
English.
All the degrees of Ecclesiastical honor,
Shall be changed into a Dial Quirinal,
Into Martial, Quirinal, Flaminick;
After that, a King of France shall make it Vulcanal.
ANNOT.

All what I can say upon this, is, that Dialis in Latin is a Priest of
Jupiter, and Quirinal is a Priest of Romulus, Martial Flamen is a Priest of
Mars, Vulcanal is a Priest of Vulcan, let the ingenious Reader make of all
these the best construction he can.

LXXVIII. French.
Les deux unis ne tiendront longuement,
Et dans treize ans au Barbare Satrape,
Aux deux costez feront tell perdement,
Qu'un benira la Barque and sa cappe.
English.
The two united shall not hold long,
Within thirteen years to the Barbarian Satrape,
They shall cause such loss on both sides,
That one shall bless the Boat and its covering.
ANNOT.

The word Satrape is a Persian word, signifying one of the Grandees at Court.
By the last Verse is meant, one that shall save his life and make his escape,
by the means of a covered Boat or Barge.

LXXIX. French.
La sacree Pomp viendra baisser les aisles,
Par la venue de grand Legislateur,
Humble haussera, vexera les rebels,
Naistra sur Terre aucun Aemulateur.
English.
The sacred Pomp shall bow down her wings,
At the coming of the great Lawgiver,
He shall raise the humble and vex the rebellious,
No Emulator of his shall be born.
ANNOT.

This seems to have a relation to the birth of Christ, or Christmas Day.

LXXX. French.
L' Ogmion grande Bizance approchera,
Chassee sera la Barbarique ligue,
Des deux Loix l'une unique lachera,
Barbare and France en perpetuelle brigue.
English.
The Ogmion shall come near great Bizance,
And shall expel the Barbarian League,
Of the two Laws, the wicked one shall yield,
The Barbarian, and the French shall be in perpetual jar.
ANNOT.

By the word Ogmion, every where in his Book, the Author means the King of
France, who according to his words shall come near Constantinople, and shall
break the Barbarian League, and of the two Laws, that is, the Christian and the
Mohammedan, the Mohometan shall yield to the other.

LXXXI. French.
L'Oyseau Royal sur la Cite solaire,
Sept mois devant fera nocturne augure:
Mur d'Orient cherra Tonnerre esclaire,
Sept jours aux Ports les ennemies a l'heure.
English.
The Royal Bird upon the solar City,
Seven Months together shall make a nocturn angury,
The Eastern Wall shall fall, the Lightning shall shine,
Then the enemies shall be at the Gate for seven days.
ANNOT.

By the Royal Bird is meant an Eagle, which for seven days together shall be
observed upon some Eastern City, and shall be taken for a presage, that the
Eastern Wall of that City shall fall by Lightning, at which time the enemies
shall be at the Gate for seven days together.

LXXXII. French.
Au conclud pache horse de la Forteresse,
Ne sortira celuy en desespoir mis:
Quand ceux d' Arbois, de Langres, contre Bresse,
Auront mis Dolle bouscade d'ennemis,
English.
Upon the agreement made, out of the Fort,
Shall not come he that was in despair,
When those of Arbois, of Langres, against Bresse,
Shall have put in Dolle an Ambuscado of foes.
ANNOT.

The sense is, that according to the Articles or agreement made between the
Besieger of a Fort, and the Governor of it, the said Governor by despair will
not come out, and this shall happen, when those of Arbois and Langres, shall be
against those of Bressia, and shall have put an Ambuscado in the City of Dolle.

LXXXIII. French.
Ceux qui auront entreprins subvertir,
Nompareil Regne, puissant and invincible,
Feront par fraud, nuicts trois advertir,
Quand le plus grand a Table lira Bible.
English.
Those that shall have undertaken to subvert
The Kingdom that has no equal in power and victories,
Shall cause by fraud, notice to be given for three nights together,
When the greatest shall be reading a Bible at the Table.
ANNOT.

What place is meant by the unparalleled Kingdom, the Author has hid as well
from me as the Reader.

LXXXIV. French.
Naistre du Gouphre and Cite immesuree,
Nay de parens obscurs and tenebreux:
Qui la puissance du grand Roy reveree,
Voudra destruire par Rouen and Eureux.
English.
One shall be born out of the Gulf and the unmeasurable City,
Born of Parents obscure and dark,
Who by the means of Rouen and Eureux,
Will go about to destroy the power of the great King.
ANNOT.

Without doubt by this Gulf and unmeasured City the Author means Paris, by
reason of its greatness, and the multitude of its Inhabitants.

LXXXV. French.
Par les Sueves and lieux circonvoisins,
Seront en guerre pour cause des nuees:
Gammares, locustes and cousins,
Du Leman fautes seront bien desnuees.
English.
Through Swedeland and the Neighboring places,
By reason of the Clouds shall fall to War,
The Lobstars, Grass-hopper and Gnats,
The faults of Leman shall appear very naked.
ANNOT.

By Leman is meant the City of Geneva, the rest needs no further
interpretation.

LXXXVI. French.
Par les deux restes, and trois bras separez,
La grand Cite sera par eaux vexee:
Des Grands d'entre eux par esgarez,
Par test Perse Byzance fort pressee.
English.
Divided in two heads and parted into three arms,
The great City shall be troubled with Waters,
Some great ones among them scattered by banishment,
By a Persian head Byzance shall be sore oppressed.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy contains three things, the first is an Inundation by which
Paris is threatened, for without doubt he means here that City, at the head of
which the River Seine is divided in two heads, and makes an Island where the
Cathedral Church and the Palace are situated, and then parted into three
branches, one of which runs by the Church of the Augustines, the other by
the Quay of la Megisserie, and the third passes under the great Hospital; this
City then is threatened here of an Inundation, to which it is very subject, by
reason of the lowness of her situation, and the confluence of several Rivers
that meet at the head of it. The second part of the Prophecy hinteth that at
that time, some great ones of that City shall be banished; and the third, that
Constantinople, which was anciently called Byzantium; or rather the great Turk
by a figure of Rhetoric, called Synecdoche, shall be much oppressed by the
Persians.

LXXXVII: French.
L'An que Saturn horse de servage,
Au franc terroir sera d'eau inonde,
De sang Troien sera son marriage,
Et sera seur d' Espagnols circonde.
English.
In the year that Saturn out of stavery,
In the free Country shall be drowned by water,
With Trojan blood his marriage shall be,
And for certain he shall be hedged about with Spaniards.
ANNOT.

By Trojan blood is understood the French Nation, the meaning therefore is,
that in the year that a great Inundation shall be in France, then shall a
notable marraige be made, by which the French shall be hedged about, or fenced
by Spaniards.

LXXXVIII. French.
Sur le Sablon par un hideux Deluge,
Des autres Mers trouve Monstre Marin,
Proche de lieu sera fait un refuge,
Tenant Savone esclave de Turin.
English.
Upon the sand through an hideous Deluge,
Of other Seas, shall be found a Sea Monster,
Near to that place shall be made a Sanctuary,
Which shall make Savone a slave to Turin.
ANNOT.

When by the overflowing of the Neighboring Seas, a Sea Monster shall be cast
upon the Sand, near to that place shall be built a Fort, that shall make Savona
a slave to Turin.

Savona is a Town by the Sea side, belonging to the Genose, Turin is the chief
City of Piemont, belonging to the Duke of Savoy.

LXXXIX. French.
Dedans Hongrie par Boheme, Navarre,
Et par Banieres feintes seditious,
Par fleurs de Lis paix portant la bar,
Contre Orleans fera esmotions.
English.
In Hungaria, through Bohemia and Navarre,
And by banners fained seditious,
Through flower de Luce the Country that wears the Bar,
Against Orleans shall make commotions.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is divided into two parts; the two first Verses foretell the
troubles that were to happen in Hungaria, Bohemia, and Navarre for Religion
sake. The two last ones were fulfilled, when the Prince of Conde, who in his
Arms wears the flower de Luce with the Bar, did seize upon Orleans for the
Protestant party.

XC. French.
Dans les Cyclades, en Corinthe, and Larisse,
Dedans Sparte tout le Peloponese,
Si grand famine peste far faux conisse,
Neuf mois tiendra and tout le Cherronesse.
English.
In the Cyclades, in Corinthe, and Larisse,
In Sparta, and all Peloponesus,
There shall be so great a famine and plague by false arts,
That shall last nine months in Chersonesus.
ANNOT.

Cyclades are the Islands in the Aegean Sea; Corinth, Larissa, Sparta,
Peloponesus and Chersonesus, are Countries of Grecia.

XCI. French.
Au grand march qu'on dit des mensongers,
De tout Torrent and Champ Athenien,
Seront surpris par les Chevaux legers,
Des Albanois, Mars, Leo, Sat. au Versien.
English.
In the great Market called of the Liars,
Which is all Torrent and Athenian Field,
They shall be surprised by the light Horse,
Of the Albanese, Mars in Leo, Saturn in Aquarius.
ANNOT.

When Mars shall be in the sign of Leo, and Saturn in that of Aquarius, then
the Country of Athens shall be overrun by light Horseman of Albania.

XCII. French.
Apres le siege tenu dixsept ans
Cinq changeront en tell revolu term,
Puis sera l'un esleu de mesme temps,
Qui des Romans ne sera trop conform.
English.
After the seat possessed seventeen years,
Five shall change in such a space of time;
After that, one shall be elected at the same time,
Who shall not be very conformable to the Romans.
ANNOT.

The meaning is, that when a Pope shall have sat in the Chair, for the space of
17 years, within the same space of 17 years, five others shall be elected; and
after them another, that shall not be well approved of by the Roman Clergy, and
Nobility. If my memory does not fail me, this is come to pass already; but
wanting the Popes Chronology, I could not make it good.

XCIII. French.
Soubs le terroir du rond Globe Lunaire,
Lors que sera dominateur Mercure,
L'Isle d' Escosse fera un Lumenaire,
Que les Anglois mettra a desconfiture.
English.
Under the Territory of the round Lunary Globe,
When Mercury shall be Lord of the ascendant,
The Island of Scotland shall make a Luminary,
That shall put the English to an overthrow.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy must of necessity be past; for since the union of both Kingdoms
under one King, such a thing has not happened, nor is it likely it should be
hereafter.

XCIV. French.
Translatera en la grand Germany,
Brabant and Flanders, Gand, Bruges and Bologne,
La trefue fainte le grand Duc d' Armenic,
Assaillera Vienne and la Coloigne.
English.
He shall translate into the great Germany,
Brabant, Flanders, Gand, Bruges, and Bullen,
The truce fained, the great Duke of Armenia,
Shall assault Vienna and Colen.
ANNOT.

It is concerning an Emperor that shall add all those Countries to the Empire
of Germany,

XCV. French.
Nautique rame invitera les umbres,
Du grand Empire lors viendra conciter,
La mer Aegee des lignes des Encombres,
Empeschant land Tirrhene de fletter.
English.
The Sea Oar shall invite the shades,
Of the great Empire, then shall it come to stir,
The Aegean Sea, with lines of Encumbers,
Hindering the Tirrhene Sea to roll.
ANNOT.

This is either Mistical or Metaphorical, or I understand it not.

XCVI. French.
Sur le milieu du grand monde la Rose,
Pour nouveaux faits sang public espandu,
A dire uray on aura bouche close,
Lors au besoing viendra tard lattendu.
English.
The Rose shall be in the middle of the great world,
Blood shall be publicly spilt for new deeds;
To say the truth, every one shall stop his mouth,
Then at the time of need shall come long looked for.
ANNOT.

The words are plain, out of which every one may make what construction he
pleases.

XCVII. French.
Le na difforme par horreur suffoque,
Dans la Cite du grand Roy habitable,
L'edit severy des captifs revoque,
Gresle and Tonnerre, Conden inestimable.
English.
The deformed born shall through horror he suffocated,
In the habitable City of the great King,
The severe Proclamation against banished shall be recalled,
Hail and Thunder shall do inestimable harm at Condon.
ANNOT.

Condon is a Town in France; the rest is plain.

XCVIII. French.
A quarante huit degree Climacterique,
A fin de Cancer si grande secheresse,
Poisson en Mer, Fleuve, Lac cuit hectique,
Bearn, Bigorre, par feu Ciel en detresse.
English.
At the Climacterical degree of eight and forty,
At the end of Cancer, shall be such a drougth,
That Fish in the Sea, River, and Lake shall be boiled to a consumption,
Bearn and Bigorre by Heavenly fire shall be in distress.
ANNOT.

Bearn and Bigorre are two Provinces of France; the rest is plain;

XCIX. French.
Milan, Ferrare, Turin and Aquilee,
Capne, Brundis vexez par gent Celtique,
Par le Lion and Phalange Aquilee,
Quand Rome aura le chef vieux Britannique.
English.
Milan, Ferrara, Turin, and Aquileia,
Capne, Brundis, shall be vexed by the French,
By the Lion and troop of Aquileia,
When Rome shall have an old Brittanick Head.
ANNOT.

The Cities here mentioned are all in Italy.

C. French.
Le bouteseu par son feu attrape,
Du feu du Ciel a Tartas and Coming,
Foix, Aux, Mazere, haut vieillard escape,
Par ceux de Hess, de Saxe and de Turinge.
English.
The incendiary shall be overtaken by his own fire,
Heavenly fire shall fall at Tartas and Cominge,
Foix, Auch, Mazerre, a tall old man shall escape,
By the means of those of Hessia, Saxony, and Turinge.
ANNOT.

Tartas, Cominge, Foix, Auch, Mazere are Towns in France. Hessia, Saxony, and
Turinge are Provinces of Germany.

THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY VI.
I. French.
AUtour des Monts Pyrenees grand amas,
De gent estrange secourir Roy nouveau,
Pres de Garonne du grand Temple du Mas,
Un Romain Chef le craindra dedans l'Eau.
English.
About the Pyrenean Mountains there shall be a great gathering
Of strange Nations to succor a new King;
Near Garonne and the great Temple of Mas,
A Roman Captain shall fear him in the Water.
ANNOT.

The Pyrenean Mountains are those that part Spain from France; Garonne is the
River that runs at Bourdeaux, it seems then, that upon that River a Roman
Captain shall stand in much fear of the new King before mentioned.

II. French.
En la cinq cens octante plus and moins,
On attendra le fiecle bien estrange,
En l'an sept cens and trois (cieux en tesmoins,)
Regnes plusieurs un a cinq feront change,
English.
In the year five hundred four score more or less,
There shall be a strange Age,
In the year seven hundred and three (witness Heaven,)
Many Kingdoms, one to five shall be changed.
ANNOT.

What strange age it was in the year 1580. every one may satisfy himself by
History. As for the year 1703. our Author says there will be great wonders,
chiefly there shall many changes be in Kingdoms, insomuch, that one shall be
divided into five.

III. French.
Fleuve qu'esproune le nouveau hay Celtique,
Sera en grande de l'Empire discord:
Le jeune Prince par gent Ecclesiastique,
Le Scepter oste Corone de concord,
English.
The River that makes trial of the new born Celtick,
Shall be at great variance with the Empire,
The young Prince shall be an Ecclesiastical person,
And have his Scepter taken off, and the Crown of concord.
ANNOT.

This River is the River of Rhyne, because the ancient French when they had a
King newly born, they used to put him upon a Target, to make him swim upon that
River, to try whether by his swimming he was lawfully begotten or no; the
meaning therefore is, that this new born Celtique or French King shall be at
variance with the Empire, and that in his young years the Clergy shall take his
Scepter and Crown from him.

IV. French.
Fleuve Celtique changera de Rivage,
Plus ne tiendra la Cite d' Agripine,
Tout transmue horsmis le viel Language,
Saturn, Leo, Mars, Cancer en rapine.
English.
The River of the Low Countries shall change her Shore,
It shall touch no more the City of Agrippina,
All shall be transformed, except the old Language,
Saturn, Leo, Mars, Cancer in Rapine.
ANNOT.

This is a strange prediction, if it should prove true, that the Rhine should
change its course, and should touch no more the City of (...)n, which is here
called Agrippina; because its name in Latin is Colonia Agrippina, being a
Colony of the Romans, built by M. Agrippa, son in Law to Augustus; others say
by Agrippina, Mother to the Emperor Nero.

The last Verse signifies no more than an unfortunate position and Aspect of
the two Planets, Saturn and Mars, and of the two Signs, Leo and Cancer.

V. French.
Si grand famine par une pestifere,
Par pluye longue le long du Pole Artique.
Samarobryn cent lieux de l'Hemisphere,
Vivront sans loy exempt de politic.
English.
So great a famine with a plague,
Through a long Rain shall come along the Artick Pole,
Somarobryn a hundred Leagues from the Hemisphere,
Shall live without Law, exempt from policy.
ANNOT.

The two last Verses foretell a great Plague and Famine that shall come from the
North, by the means of the long Rain.

Samarobryn he calls a people, that shall be a hundred Leagues from our
Hemisphere, and shall live without Law and Policy.

VI. French.
Apparoistra verse le septentrion,
Non loing de Cancer l'estoille chevelue,
Suze, Sienne, Boece, Erelrion,
Mourra de Rome grand, la nuict disperue.
English.
Toward the North shall appear,
Not far from Cancer a blazing Star,
Suza, Sienna, Boece, Eretrion,
There shall die at Rome a great man, the ^ight being past.
ANNOT.

Here he foretells the apparition of a Commet that shall be vertical to the
Cities here named, and not far from the Sign of Cancer, at which time a great
person shall die at Rome, about the dawning of the day.

VII French.
Norvege and Dace, and l'Isle Britannique,
Par les unes fre^^s seront vexees,
Le chef Romain issu du sang Gallique,
Et les copies aux forests repousees.
English.
Norvegia, and Dacia, and the British Island,
Shall be vexed by the Brothers united.
The Roman Captain issued from French blood,
His Forces shall be beaten back to the Forest,
ANNOT.

The difficulty lies in the word Brothers, which I suppose to be the United
Provinces. The rest is plain,

VIII. French.
Ceux qui estoient en regne pour scavoir,
Au Royal change deviendront a pauvris,
Uns exilez sans appuy, Or navoir,
Lettrez and lettres ne seront a grand pris.
English.
Those that were in esteem for their learning,
Upon the change of a King shall become poor,
Some banished, without help, having no Gold,
Learned and learning shall not be much valued.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is clear enough, and here the Author has said nothing, but
what does commonly happen.

IX. French.
Aux Temples Saints seront faits grands scandales,
Comptez seront peur honneurs and louanges,
D'un que lon grave d'Argent, d'Or les Medals,
La fin sera en tourmens bien estranges.
English.
To the holy Temples shall be done great scandals,
That shall be accounted for honors and praises,
By one, whose medals are graven in Gold and Silver,
The end of it shall be in very strange torments.
ANNOT.

Here the Reader must understand that the Author was a Roman Catholic, and
therefore calls Holy Temples, the Churches of the Romish Religion, which in
the beginning of the Civil Wars in France, were much abased by those of the
Protestant Religion, then called Huguenots, whose chief was Henry King of
Navarre, who was the only man amongst the Protestant party, that could have
Money and Medals coined to his stamp, as being King of Navarre. But the last
Verse of this Prophecy proved too true, when upon St. Bartholomews day, the 24
of August, in the year 1572. the general Massacre of the Protestants was made
through France.

X. French.
Un peu du temps les Temples des Couleurs,
De blanc and noir des deux entremislee,
Rouges and jaunes leur embleront les leurs,
Sang, terre, peste, faim, feu, eau as^ollee.
English.
Within a little while the Temples of the Colors,
White and Black shall be intermixed,
Red and Yellow shall take away their Colors,
Blood, earth, plague, famine, fire, water shall destroy them.
ANNOT.

By the Temples of the Colors White and Black, I suppose he means that of
Peace, and of War; by the Red and Yellow, may be meant the Empire of the
Sweads, who shall be at variance together; and by their long War shall bring
the Plagues here mentioned, as it came to pa^s in the Wars of Germany, between
the Emperor and Gustavus Adolphus, King of the Sweads.

XI. French.
Les sept rameaux a trois seront reduits,
Les plus aisnez seront surprins par morts,
Fratricider les deux seront seduits,
Les Conjures en dormant seront morts.
English.
The seven branches shall be reduced to three,
The eldest shall be surprised by death,
Two shall be said to kill their Brothers,
The Conspirators shall be killed, being asleep.
ANNOT.

It is apparent, that he speaks of seven Brethren, that shall be reduced to
three, whereof the eldest son shall be surprised by death, and two of the rest
shall be said to have murdered their Brother, the Conspirators shall afterward
be killed in their sleep.

XII. French.
Dresser Copy pour monter a l'Empire,
Du Vatican le sang Royal tiendra,
Flamens, Anglois, Espagne aspire,
Contre l' Italy and France contendra.
English.
To raise an Army, for to ascend unto the Empire,
Of the Vatican, the Royal blood shall endeavor,
Flemings, English, Spain shall aspire,
And shall contend against Italy and France.
ANNOT.

This prediction signifies no more, but that there shall be a great commotion
among the Nations, of Europe, concerning the election of a Pope, which is
called here the Empire of the Vatican; because the Vatican is the Popes Palace
in Rome.

XIII. French.
Un dubieux ne viendra loing du regne,
La plus grand part le voudra soustenir,
Un Capitole ne voudra point quil regne,
Sa grande Chair ne pourra maintenir.
English.
A doubtful man shall not come far from the Reign,
The greatest part will uphold him,
A Capitol will not consent that he should Reign,
His great Chair he shall not be able to maintain.
ANNOT.

What should that doubtful man be, whom our Author does mention here, is not
easy to be understood; but it seems that it shall be some body pretending to
the Popedom, who shall have a great party for himself, and yet for all that
shall be excluded, and not able to keep his Seat; so that this Prophecy is but
the second part of the foregoing; for they have both a relation together. The
Capitol anciently was the Citadel of Rome, and now is the place where the
Courts of Judicature meet, called Campidoglio.

XIV. French.
Loing de sa Terre Roy perdra la Bataille,
Prompt, eschape poursuivy, suivant pris,
Ignare pris soubs la doree maille,
Soubs feint habit, and l'Ennemy surpris.
English.
Far from his Country the King shall loose a Battle,
Nimble, escaped, followed, following, taken,
Ignorantly taken under the gilded Coat of Mail,
Under a feigned habit the enemy taken.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the year 1578. when Don Sebastian King of
Portugal, went into Africa, to help and succor Muley Hamet, against Muley
Maluc, that had expelled him out of the Kingdom of Fez and Morocco, and there
fought that famous Battle of Alcasserquibir, wherein his whole Army was routed,
and himself slain by the Moors, and his body afterward sold to the King of
Spain for a 100000. Crowns.

XV. French.
Dessous la Tomb sera trouve le Prince,
Qu'aura le pris par dessus Nuremberg:
L' Espagnol Roy en Capricorn mince,
Feinct and trahy par le grand Untitemberg.
English.
Under the Tomb shall be found the Prince,
That shall have a price above Nuremberg,
That Spanish King in Capricorn shall be thine,
Deceived and betrayed by the great Vutitemberg.
ANNOT.

We hear of no Prince that had that advantage upon Nuremberg, but only
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, who took it. The last two Verses signify no
more, then that the King of Spain shall be wasted at the time when the Sun is
in Capricorn.

XVI. French.
Ce que ravy sera du jeune Milve,
Par les Normans de France and Picardy,
Les noirs du Temple du lieu de Negrisilve,
Feront aux Berge and feu de Lombardie.
English.
That which shall be taken from the young Kite,
By the Normans of France and Picardie,
The black ones of the Temple of the place called black Forest.
Shall make a Rendezvous and a fire in Lombardie.
ANNOT.

The meaning is, that what the Normans and those of Picardie shall save from
the hand of a young conquering Prince, the same shall be employed in building a
Temple in the black Forest, which is that part of the Forest of Arden, that
lies near Bobemia, and another part of it to build a House in Lombardie.

XVII. French.
Apres les livres bruslez les Asiniers,
Contraints seront changer d'habits diverse:
Les Saturnins bruslez par les meusniers,
Horse la pluspart qui ne sera convers.
English.
After the Books shall be burnt, the Asses,
Shall be compelled several times to change their Clothes,
The Saturnins shall be burnt by the Millers,
Except the greater part, that shall not be discovered.
ANNOT.

This seems to foretell a persecution of ignorant men against the learned,
after which shall happen a confusion amongst the ignorant persons, who shall be
forced to disguise themselves.

The last two Verses seem to be of the same sense, for by the Saturnins I
understand studious people, and by the Millers rude and unlearned persons.

XVIII. French.
Par les Physiques le grand Roy delaisse,
Par sort non art de l'Ebrieu est en vie,
Luy and son Genre au Regne hault pouse,
Grace donnee a gent qui Christ envy.
English.
The great King being for saken by Physicians,
Shall be kept alive by the Magic and not by the art of a Jew,
He, and his kindred shall be set at the top of the Kingdom,
Grace shall be given to a Nation that envieth Christ.
ANNOT.

This in plain words signifies no more, but that a King shall be desparately
sick and forsaken by his physicians, and shall recover by the help of a Jew,
for which fact those of that Nation shall be reestablished in his Country.

XIX: French.
La vraye flamme engloutira la Dame,
Que voudra mettre les Innocens a feu,
Pres de l'aussaut l'exercite s'enflamme,
Quand dans Seville monstre en Boeuf sera veu.
English.
The true flame shall swallow up the Lady,
That went about to burn the guiltless,
Before the Assault the Army shall be encouraged,
When in Seville, a Monster like an Ox shall be seen.
ANNOT.

Seville is the chiefest City of Andalusia a Province in Spain; the rest is
plain.

XXI. French.
L'Union feinte sera peu de duree,
Les uns changes reformez la plus part.
Dans les Vaisseaux sera gent enduree,
Lors aura Rome un nouveau Leopart.
English.
The feigned union shall not last long,
Some shall be changed, others for the most part reformed,
In the Ships people shall be penned up,
Then shall Rome have a new Leopard.
ANNOT.

When the things contained in the three first Verses shall come to pass, then
Rome shall have a new Pope, expressed here by the word Leopard from the
variousness, that is, in his Pontifical Garments.

XXI. French.
Quand ceux du Pole Artique unis ensemble,
En Orient grand effrayeur and crainte,
Esleu nouveau soustenu le grand tremble,
Rodes, Bisance de sang Barbare taincte.
English.
When those of the Artick Pole shall be united together,
There shall be in the East a great fear and trembling,
One shall be newly Elected, that shall bear the brunt,
Rodes, Bisance, shall be ay'd with Barbarian blood.
ANNOT.

This foretells an union between the Europeans, or Nations of the North
against the Eastern people, or Turks, and that the Christians shall make choice
of such a General, that shall make the East quake, and get such Victories,
whereby Rhodes and Constantinople shall be dyed with Turkish blood.

XXII. French.
Dedans la Terre du grand Temple Celique,
Neveu a Londres par paix feinte meurtry,
La Barque alors deviendra Schismatique,
Liberte feinte sera au corn and cry.
English.
Within the ground of the great Celestial Temple,
A Nephew at London by a fained peace shall be murdered,
The Boat at that time shall become Schismatical,
A fained liberty shall be with Hue and Cry.
ANNOT.

I think that by the great Celestial Temple, he means that of St. Paul, in
which, or in the ground about it, shall be murdered a Nephew by his Uncle,
which shall cause great divisions and diffensions in the City, compared here to
a Boat, and that a dissembled or fained liberty shall be proclaimed.

XXIII. French.
Despit de Roy, numismes descriez,
Peuples seront esmeus contre leur Roy,
Paix fait nouveau, Saints Loix empirees,
Rapis onc fut en si piteux arroy.
English.
The despite of a King, and Coin being brought lower
People shall rise against their King,
Peace newly made, Holy Laws being made worse,
Rapis was never in such a great disorder.
ANNOT.

The first thing here to be observed, is the word Rapis, which is the Anagramme
of Paris, which he says was never in such a trouble before, as it shall be
when the people shall rebel against the King for hatred, and because he shall
have put low the price and intrinsical value of Coin and Money; he foretells
also that there shall be a new Peace made, and that the Holy Laws shall be much
impaired.

XXIV. French.
Mars and le Scepter se trouvera conjoint,
Dessoubs Cancer calamiteuse guerre,
Un peu apres sera nouveau Roy oingt.
Qui par long temps pacifiera la Terre.
English.
Mars and the Scepter, being conjoined together,
Under Cancer shall be a calamitous War,
A little while after a new King shall be anointed,
Who for a long time shall pacify the Earth.
ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that when the Planet of Mars shall be in conjunction
with the constellation he calls here the Scepter, that then shall be a very
calamitous War. the two last Verses are plain enough of themselves.

XXV. French.
Par Mars contraire sera la Monarchy,
Du grand Pescheur en trouble ruineux,
Jeune, noir, rouge prendra la Hierarchy,
Les proditeurs iront jour bruineux.
English.
By Mars contrary shall the Monarchy
Of the great Fisherman, be brought into ruinous trouble,
A young, black red shall possess himself of the Hierarchy,
The Traitors shall undertake it on a misty day.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning a certain Pope, signified here by the word of
great Fisherman; because in his Seal is graven a Fisherman, and therefore in
all his Bulls and Expeditions, it is always written, Datum Romae sub sigillo
piscatoris: this Pope then it seem(...) shall be brought to ruin, and another
it seems shall succeed him, having here three Epithetes, viz. Young, Black,
and Red, which signifies, that against the common election of Popes, he shall
be elected young, and shall be Black in his complexion, and Red in Clothes,
viz. a Cardinal. Hierarchy is a Greek work, signifying Dominion over the
Church. The last Verse needs no explication, being plain enough of it self.

XXVI. French.
Quattre ans le siege quel que peu bien tiendra,
Un surviendra libidineux de vie,
Ravenna, and Pise, Verone soustiendront,
Pour eslever la Croix de Pape envy.
English.
Four years he shall keep the Papal seat pretty well,
Then shall succeed one of a libidinous life,
Ravenna, Pisa, shall take Verona's part,
To raise up the Popes Cross to Life.
ANNOT.

This Prediction seems to have not only a relation to the foregoing, but also
a connection; for the Author still handles the matter of the Popedom, and
says, that after that Pope shall have Reigned four years, there shall succeed
one that shall be notorious for debauchedness and lechery, and that those Towns
he mentions here (which are all in Italy) shall take the Popes part.

XXVII. French.
Dedans les Isles de cinq fleuves a un,
Par le croissant du grand Chyren Selin,
Par les bruynes de l'air fureur de l'un,
Six eschapez, chachez fardeaux de lin.
English.
In the Islands from five Rivers to one,
By the increase of great Chyren Selin,
By the Frost of the Air one shall under furious,
Six shall escape, hidden within bundles of Flax.
ANNOT.

Chyren by transposition is taken for Henry, and Selin for a King called so;
because it is the name of a Turkish Emperor: So that by this Stanza I suppose
he means Henry II. his Master, King of France. The rest is plain.

XXVIII. French.
Le grand Celtique entrera dedans Rome,
Menant amas d'exilez and bannis,
Le grand Pasteur mettra a mort tout homme,
Qui pour le Coq estoient aux Alps unis.
English.
The great Celtique shall enter into Rome,
Leading with him a great number of banished men,
The great Shepherd shall put to death every man,
That was united for the Cock near the Alps.
ANNOT.

Because this word Celtique is often repeated in this Book, it would not be
amiss to satisfy the Reader of the meaning of it; it is properly the Nation of
the Flemings, and some others of the Low Countries as far as the Mase and the
Rhyne, which anciently were called Galli Celtae. by the great Shepherd, is
meant the Pope, and by the Cock is meant the French Naion. The rest is easy.

XXIX. French.
La Veufve Saint entendant les nouvelles,
De ses rameaux mis en perplex and trouble,
Qui sera duit appaiser les querelles,
Par son pourchas des Razes fera comble.
English.
The holy Widow hearing the News
Of her Branches put in perplexity or trouble,
That shall be skillful in appeasing of quarrels,
By his purchase shall make a heap of shaven heads.
ANNOT.

By the holy Widow, is meant the City of Rome, which is called in Italian, Rome
la santa, because of the blood of so many Martyrs that has been shed there,
for the maintenance of the Christian Religion, he calls it a Widow; because
at that time there will be no Pope elected, and there shall be a kind of
interregnum, as it always happens when a Pope is dead, until the new one be
elected. What he calls here Branches, are the Clergy men, and the shaven
heads the Priests.

XXX. French.
Par l'apparence de feinte Sainctete,
Sera trahy aux ennemis le siege,
Nuit qu'on croioid dormir en seurete,
Pres de Brabant marcheront ceux de Liege.
English.
By the appearance of a feigned holiness,
The siege shall be betrayed to the enemies,
In a night that every one thought to be secure,
Near Brabant shall march those of Liege.
ANNOT.

Brabant is one of the seventeen Provinces, and Liege is a great City upon the
River os Maze. The rest is not difficult.

XXXI. French.
Roy trouvera ce quil desiroit tant,
Quand le Prelat sera repris a tort,
Response au Duc le rendra mal content,
Qui dans Milan mettra plusieurs a mort.
English.
A King shall find what he so much longed for,
When a Prelate shall be censured wrongfully,
An answer to the Duke will make him discontented,
Who in Milan shall put many to death.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is too indefinite, to admit of a particular sense; for there be
so many Prelates, so many Kings, so many Dukes, that it is not easy to fix
upon any particular one, and therefore we must leave this Stanza in
Democritus's Well.

XXXII French.
Par trahison de verges a mort battu,
Puis surmonte sera par son desordre,
Conseil frivole au grand captif sentu,
Nez par fureur quand Berich viendra mordre.
English.
By Treason one shall be beaten with rods to death,
Then the Traitor shall be overcome by his disorder,
The great Prisoner shall try a frivilous Counsel,
When Berich shall bite another nose through anger.
ANNOT.

The words are so plain, that every one may make his own interpritation of them.

XXXIII. French.
Sa main derniere par Alus sanguinaire,
Ne le pourra par la Mer garentir,
Enter deux fleuves craindra main militaire,
Le noir l'Ireux le fera repentir.
English.
His last hand bloody through Alus,
Shall not save him by Sea,
Between two Rivers he shall fear the military hand,
The black and Choleric one shall make him repent.
ANNOT.

This seems to be concerning a bloody man, that had killed one Alus, and
fought to save himself by Sea; but was taken between two Rivers, and put to
death by the command of one that was a black and Choleric man.

XXXIV. French.
De feu volant la machination,
Viendra troubler le Chef des Assiegez,
Dedans sera tell sedition,
Qu'en desespoir seront les profligez.
English.
The device of flying fire
Shall trouble so much the Captain of the Besieged,
And within shall be such mutiny,
That the Besieged shall be in despair.
ANNOT.

It is a Fort or Town besieged by an Enemy, who shall torment the besieged so
much with Bombs and Grenades, and other flying fire, that they shall despair
to es^^pe.

XXXV. French.
Pres de Rion and proche Blanchelaine,
Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, La Vierge,
Mars, Jupiter, le Sol ardra grand plain,
Bois and Citez, Lettres cachez au Cierge.
English.
Near Rion going to Blanchelaine,
Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, Virgo,
Mars, Jupiter, Sol shall burn a great Plain,
Woods and Cities, Letters hidden in a wax Candle.
ANNOT.

The meaning of it is, that when by the virtues and meetings of the said
Constellations, a great plain shall be burnt by Rion (which is a City in
Auvergne) that then Letters shall be found hidden in a wax Candle.

XXXVI. French.
Ne bien ne mal par bataille terrestre,
Ne parviendra au confins de perouse,
Rebeller pise, Florence voir mal estre,
Roy nuit blessesur mulet a noire house.
English.
Neither good nor evil by a Land-fight,
Shall reach to the Borders of Perusa,
Pisa shall rebel, Florence shall be in an ill case,
A King being upon his Mule shall be wounded in the night time.
ANNOT.

Perusa, Pisa, and Florence are Cities in Italy; the rest is plain.

XXXII. French.
L'oeuvre ancienne se parachevera,
Du toit cherra sur le grand mal ruin,
Innocent fait, mort on accusera,
Nocent cache taillis a bruine.
English.
The ancient work shall be finished,
From the tiling shall fall upon the great one an evil ruin,
The innocent declared to be so, shall be accused after his death,
The guilty shall be hidden in a wood in a misty weather.
ANNOT.

By the first Verse is understood an ancient building, which shall be finished
and brought to perfection, I suppose it to be the Louvere, which has been a
building in the Reign of seven Kings. But before it be thoroughly finished, some
ruin shall fall upon a great man and kill him; one declared innocent of the
fact shall be accused of it after his death, and he that shall be guilty of it
shall escape by hiding himself in a VVood in misty weather.

XXXVIII. French.
Aux profligez de Paix les ennemis,
Apres avoir l' Italy superee,
Noir sanguinaire, rouge sera commis,
Feu, sang verser, eau de sang coloree.
English.
To the vanquished the enemies of peace,
After they shall have overcome Italy,
A bloody black one shall be committed,
Fire and blood shall be powerd, and water colored with blood.
ANNOT.

A bloody black man shall be put into the hands of the vanquished, by those
that were enemies to peace, after they have conquered Italy, whence shall
proceed sire and blood, and water colored with blood.

XXXIX. French.
L'Enfant du Regne par Paternelle prinse,
Expolier sera pour delivrer,
Aupres du Lac Trasym en la Tour prinse,
La troop hostage pour trop fort s'enyvrer.
English.
The Child of the Kingdom, through his Fathers imprisonement,
Shall be deprived of his Kingdom for the delivering of his father,
Near the Lake Trasymene shall be taken in a Tower,
The troop that was in Hostage, being drunk.
ANNOT.

The Lake Trasymene in Italy, is that near which Annibal got that famous Battle
upon the Romans. The rest is as plain as the words can bear.

XL. French.
Grand de Mogonce pour grande soif esteindre,
Sera prive de sa grand dignite,
Ceux de Cologne si fort le viendront plaindre,
Que le grand Groppe au Rhin sera jette.
English.
The great one of Ments for to quench a great thirst,
Shall be deprived of his high dignity,
Those of Colen shall bemoan him so much.
That the great Groppe shall be thrown into the Rhine.
ANNOT.

This foretells the fall of an Archbishop of Ments, in Latin Moguntia, who
is the first Ecclesiastical Elector, and shall be deprived of his dignity by a
covetous and powerful Prince to satisfy his covetousness, at which those of
Colen his neighbors shall be so incensed, that they shall throw that covetous
person into the Rhine.

XLI French.
Les second Chef du Regne Dannemark,
Par ceux de Frize and l'Isle Britannique,
Fera despendre plus de cent mill mark,
Vain exploiter voyage en Italique.
English.
The second head of the Kingdom of Dannemark,
By those of Friezeland, and the British Island,
Shall cause to be spent above 100000. Mark,
Vainly endeavoring a journey into Italy.
ANNOT.

This signtfieth only a conjunction of the Dutch, Danish, and English Forces,
to attempt something in Italy, which shall prove fruitless, and cost a great
deal of Money.

XLII French.
A l' Ogmion sera laisse le Regne,
Du grand Selin, qui plus fera de fait,
Par l' Italy estendra son enseigne,
Regira par prudent contrefait.
English.
Unto l'Ogmion shall be left the Kingdom,
Of great Selyn, who shall do more then the rest,
Through Italy he shall spread his Ensigns,
He shall govern by a prudent dissimulation.
ANNOT.

We have said before, that when ever the Author speaks of Ognion, he means
the King of France, the meaning therefore of this whole Stanza is, that Henry
the II. Son to Francis the I. whom he calls here great Selin, shall do more in
Italy then his Predecessors had done, which proved true, and he governed his
Kingdom with a prudent dissimulation.

XLIII. French.
Long temps sera sans estre habitee,
Ou Siene and Marne autour vient arroufer,
De la Thamise and Martiaux tentee,
Deceus les gardes en evidant repousser.
English.
A great while shall be unhabited,
Where Seine, and Marne comes to water about,
Being attempted by the Thames and Martial people,
The Guards deceived in thinking to resist.
ANNOT.

By the two first Verses, he means without doubt the City of Paris, for it is
watered by those two Rivers the Seine and Marne, that join together at the head
of it, but how this City should become unhabited is the great question, and
chiefly by the means here alleged, viz. of the English signified by the
Thames, and other Martial people, the Guards deceived in thinking to repulse
the enemy.

XLIV. French.
De nuict par Nantes l'Iris apparoistra,
Des Arcs Marins susciteront la pluye:
Arabique Goulfre grand class parfondra,
Un Monstre en Saxe naistre d'Ours and Truye.
English.
By night in Nantes the Rainbow shall appear,
Sea Rain-bows shall cause Rain;
The Arabian Gulf shall drowned a great Fleet,
A Monster shall be in Saxony from a Bear and a Sow.
ANNOT.

Nantes is a City in France, Iris is the Rainbow, Saxony is a Province in
Germany; the rest is plain.

XLV French.
Le Governeur du Regne bien scavent,
Ne consentir voulant au faict Royal:
Medite class par le contraire vent,
Le remettra a son plus desloyal.
English.
The Governor of the Kingdom being learned,
Shall not consent to the Kings will:
He shall intend to set out a Fleet by a contrary Wind,
Which he shall put into the hands of the most disloyal,
ANNOT.

This signifies that the Governor or Viceroy of a Kingdom shall refuse to
consent to his Kings Deeds; the rest needs no interpretation.

XLVI. French.
Unjuste sera en exil Anvoye,
Par pestilance aux confins de non seggle,
Response au rouge le fera desvoye,
Roy retirant a la Rane and a l'Aigle.
English.
A just person shall be banished,
By plague to the Borders of Non seggle,
The answer to the red one shall make him deviate,
Retiring himself to the Frog and the Eagle,
ANNOT.

I cannot find what he means by Non-seggle; by the Eagle he means the
Emperor, and by the Frog the King of France, for before he took the Flower de
Luce, the French bore three Frogs.

XLVII. French.
Enter deux Monts les deux grands Assemblez,
De laisseront leur simulte secret,
Bruxelle and Dolle par Langres accablez,
Pour a Maline executer leur peste.
English.
Between two Mountains the two great ones shall meet,
They shall forsake their secret enmity.
Brusselle and Dolle shall be crushed by Langres,
To put their plague in Execution at Maline.
ANNOT.

Brussel is a Town of Brabant, and so is Maline; Dolle is one of Burgundy, and
Langres another of France.

XLVIII. French.
La sainctete trop faincte and seductive,
Accompagne d'une langue diserte,
La Cite vieille, and Parme trop nastive,
Florence and Sienne rendront plus deserts.
English.
The fained and seducing holiness,
Accompanied with a fluent tongue,
Shall cause the old City, and too hasty Parma,
Florence and Sienna to be more desert.
ANNOT.

I know not what he means by the old City, unless it be Rome, by reason of its
antiquity.

XLIX. French.
De la party de Mammer grand Pontife,
Subjuguera les confins du Danube,
Chasser les croix, par fer raffe ne riffe,
Captifs, Or, bagues, plus de cent mill Rubles.
English.
From the party of Mammer high Priest,
They shall subdue the borders of Danubius,
They shall expel crosses, by Sword topse-turvy,
Slaves, Gold, Jewels, more than 100000. Rubles.
ANNOT.

Some parties of the Popes side, shall subdue those bordering upon Danubius,
and drive away the Priests, turn all things topse-turvy, make slaves, and take
a booty above the value of 100000. Rubles. A Ruble is a piece of Gold of the
great Mogul, worth two or three pound sterling.

L. French.
Dedans le puis seront trouvez les os,
Se l'inceste commis par la Marastre,
L'estat change, en fera bruit des os,
Et aura Mars ascendant pour son astre.
English.
In the Well shall be found the bones,
Incest shall be committed by the Stepmother,
The casa being altered, there shall be great stir about the bones.
And she shall have Mars for her ascending Planet.
ANNOT.

It is the strange wickedness of a woman, that shall incestuously be got with
Child by her Son in Law, and when she is delivered, shall kill her Child, and
throw him into a Well; a while after the water beginning to corrupt, a search
shall be made of the cause, and then the Child's Bones shall be found, which
shall cause a great stir, and for to know this wicked woman, he says, that the
Planet of Mars shall be the ascendant in her Horoscope.

LI. French.
Peuple assemble voir nouveau spectacle,
Princes and Roys par plusieurs assistans,
Piliers faillir, murs, mais comme miracle,
Le Roy sauve and trente des instans.
English.
People assembled to see a new show,
Princes and Kings, with many assistants,
Pillars shall fail, walls also, but as a miracle,
The King saved, and thirty of the standers by.
ANNOT.

The words of this prediction are plain and easy, and signify no more than
what often happens, and may happen yet, viz. that where a concourse of people
shall be to to see a new show, the Pillars and walls of the Building shall
fall, and people perish by the ruin, (as if it were by a Miracle) the King and
thirty of the spectators shall be preserved.

LII. French.
En lieu du grand qui sera condamne,
De prison horse, son amy en sa place,
L'espoir Troyen en six mois joinct, mort ne,
Le Sol a l' Vurne seront prins fleuves en glace.
English.
Instead of the great one that shall be condemned
And put out of Prison, his friend being in his place,
The Trojan hope in six months join, still born,
The Sun in Aquarius, then Rivers shall be frozen.
ANNOT.

By the Trojan hope, is meant a King of France, who after he has been married
a Months, shall have a Child still born.

LIII. French.
Le grand Prelat Celtique a Roy suspect,
De nuict par course sortira horse du Regne,
Par Duc fertile a son grand Roy Bretagne,
Bisance a Cypres, and Tunis insuspect.
English.
The great Celtique Prelate suspected by his King,
Shall in have by night go out of the Kingdom
By the means of a Duke the fruitful Britanie,
Bisance by Cyprus, and Tunis shall be unsuspected.
ANNOT.

The great Celtique Prelate, was the Cardinal of Lorrain, Brother to the Duke
of Guizse, who being suspected by the King, went away by night to Rome.

By fruitful Britain, is understood the province of that name in France,
which by the means of the Duke of Mercure, her Governor shall be unsuspected
by the King.

LIVE. French.
Au point du jours au second chant du Coq,
Ceux de Tunes, de Fez, and de Bugie,
Par les Arabes captif le Roy Maroq,
L'an mil six cens and sept, de Liturgy,
English.
At the break of day, at the second crowing of the Cock,
Those of Tunis, and Fez, and Bugia,
By means of the Arabians, shall take Prisoner the King of Morocco
In the year 1607. by Liturgy.
ANNOT.

By Liturgy, I suppose he means under pretext of Religion. The rest is easy
to be understood.

LV French.
Au Chelme Duc, en arrachant l'esponce,
Voile Arabesque voir, subit descouverte:
Tripolis, Chio, and ceux de Trapesonce,
Duc prins, Marnegro, and la Cite deserte.
English.
The Chelme Duke, in pulling a sponge,
Shall see Arabian Sails suddenly discovered:
Tripolis, Chios, and those of Trapesan,
The Duke shall be taken, Marnegro and the City shall be desert.
ANNOT.

Chelme is a German word, that signifies a Rogue. By Marnegro, is meant the
Black Sea, or Nigropont. By pulling a Sponge, I suppose the great quantity of
Spunges that stick to the Rocks in that Sea.

Tripolis, Chios, and Trapezon, are places in the Turkish Dominions.

LVI. French.
La crainte Armee de l'ennemy Narbon,
Effroyera si fort les Hesperiques,
Parpignan vuide par l'aveugle d' Arbon,
Lors Barcelon par Mer donra les piques.
English.
The feared Army of the enemy Narbon,
Shall so much terrify the Spaniards,
That Parpignan shall be left empty by the blind d'Arbon,
Then Barcelon by Sea shall give the Chase.
ANNOT.

A great Army gathered about Narbon, shall so much terrify the Spaniards, that
Parpignan a Town of theirs shall be desolate, and left empty by the Governor,
here called the blind d'Arbon, then Barcelon, which is a Sea-Town in Catalonto,
belonging to the Spaniards shall come to its succors, and chase the enemy by
Sea.

LVII. French.
Celuy qu'estoit bien avaunt dans le Regne,
Ayant Chef rouge proche a la Hierarchy,
Aspre and cruel, and se fera tant craindre,
Succedera a sacree Monarchy.
English.
He that was a great way in the Kingdom,
Having a red head and near the Hierarchy,
Harsh and cruel, shall make himself so dreadful,
That he shall succeed to the Sacred Monarchy.
ANNOT.

This is a person of great quality, and near of blood to a King, who being a
Cardinal, cruel and dreadful, shall be Elected Pope, I suppose Clement the VII.

LVIII. French.
Enter les deux Monarques esloignez,
Lors que le Sol par Selin clair perdue:
Simulte grande enter deux indignez,
Qu'aux Isles and Sienne la liberte rendue.
English.
Between the two Monarchs that live far one from the other,
When the Sun shall be Ecclipsed by Selene,
Great enmity shall be between them two,
So that liberty shall be restored to the Isles and Sienne.
ANNOT.

Here is nothing difficult but the word Selene, which is the Moon from the
Greek (...).

The meaning is, that at such a time when the Sun is Ecclipsed by the Moon,
Sienn^ and the Islands about it shall be at liberty.

LIX. French.
Dame en fureur par rage d'adultere,
Viendra a son Prince conjurer non dire,
Mais bref cogneu sera le vitupere,
Que seront mis dixsept a Martyr.
English.
A Lady in fury by rage of an Adultery,
Shall come to her Prince and conjure him to say nothing,
But shortly shall the shameful thing be known,
So that seventeen shall be put to death.
ANNOT.

The sense of this Stanza and the words are plain.

LX. French.
Le Prince horse de son Terroir Coltique,
Sera trahy, deceu par interpret,
Rouen, Rochelle, par ceux de l' Armorique,
Au Port de Blavet deceux par Moin and Prestre.
English.
That Prince being out of his Celtick Country,
Shall be betrayed and deceived by an Interpreter,
Rouen, Rochel, by those of Gascony,
At the Port of Blavet shall be deceived by Monk and Priest.
ANNOT.

We have said many times before, what is meant by the word Celtique. The Port
of Blavet is that of the River of Bordeaux.

LXI. French.
Le grand Tapis plie ne monstrera,
Fors qu'a demi la pluspart de l'Histoire,
Chasse du Regne aspre loin paroistra,
Au fait Bellique chacun le viendra croire.
English.
The great Carpet folded shall not show,
But by half the greatest part of the History,
The driven out of the Kingdom shall appear sharp afar off,
In Warlike matters every one shall believe him.
ANNOT.

This needs no interpretation.

LXIL. French.
Trop tard tous deux les fleurs seront perdues,
Contre lay loy Serpent ne voudra fair,
Des ligueurs forces par gallops confondu s,
Savone, Albingue, par Monech grand martyr.
English.
Both the flowers shall be lost too late,
Against the Law the Serpent will do nothing,
The forces of the Leaguers by gallops shall be confounded,
Savone, Albingue, by Monech shall suffer great pain.
ANNOT.

The two first verses are too mistical for me; the third signifies, that by
gallops; that is, by Troops of Horses, the Leaguers, viz. those that held the
party of the League, shall be routed by the Kings Cavalry. The fourth, that
Savone and Albingue, two Towns of the Genoeses, shall be put to much trouble by
those of Monech and Monaco, another Town near them, belonging to the Prince of
Monaco, a Genoese of the house of Grimald.

LXIII. French.
La Dame seule au Regne demuree,
L'unique esteint premier au lict d'honneur,
Sept ans sera de douleur eplevree,
Puis longue vie au regne par bonheur.
English.
The Lady shall be left to reign alone,
The only one being extinguished, first in the Bed of Honor.
Seven years she shall weep for grief,
After that she shall live long in the Reign by good luck
ANNOT.

The second and fourth Verses persuade me, that this Stanza came to pass in the
time of Catharine of Medicis, wife to Henry II. because she lived long, and the
King died in the bed of Honor, and thus he says, that she was left to Reign
alone; because her four Sons were all little ones, so that she alone was Regent
in France.

The second Verse says, The holy one being extinguished, first, in the Bed of
Honor.

By this word the only one, the Author means not the only Son, but the only
one living, such as Henry II was to her, who was extinstuished in the Bed of
Honor, and died of the wound he received at Tilting.

The third Verse says, that after his death, her mourning lasted seven years,
that is, from the first of August 1559. to the first of August 1566. because
that all those 16 Months that Francis II. she had nothing but continual sorrow,
by the conspiracy of Amboise, the secret practices of the King of Navarre, and
Prince of Cond^ his Brother, by the insurrection of the Protestants, when
Charles IX. visited his Kingdom, Anno 1556. after which she put off her
mourning.

The fonrth Verse signifies, that she should be long lived; for she lived
above 60 years, He says also, that she was Regent by great luck, that is,
great luck for her self, but not for the Kingdom, for it was most unhappy in
her time.

LXIV. French.
On ne tiendra pache aucun arreste,
Tous recevants iront par tromperie,
De trefue and paix, Terre and Mer proteste,
Par Barcelone class prins d'industrie.
English.
No agreement shall be kept,
All those that shall admit of it deal falsely,
There shall be protestations made by Land and Sea,
Barcelone shall take a Fleet by craft,
ANNOT.

This is a description of the sad and calamitous estate of France, in the time
of the Civil wars, when no agreement could be kept on the Roman Catholics
side, witness the several Peaces that were made and broken, the Massacre of
Vassa, and that infamous perfidy committed by them on St. Bartholomews day,
being the 24 of August, Anno 1572.

LXV. French.
Gris and bureau demi ouverte guerre,
De nuit seront assaillis and pillez,
Le bureau prins passera par la serre,
Son Temple ouvert, deux au plastre grillez.
English.
Between the Gray and sad Gray shall be half open War,
By night they shall be assaulted and plundered,
The sad Gray being taken, shall be put in Custody,
His Temple shall be open, two shall be put in the Grate.
ANNOT.

This Stanza affords us a commical History, which is, that about the year
1601. when there sprang up in France a Kind of Friars, who bosted themselves to
be the true observers of the Rule of St. Francis, and that the Cordeliers and
Capushines did not keep it so exactly, but they had need of a great
reformation; the King Henry IV. granted them a Convent at Beaufort, and upon
his example many other places desired them, they went to possess themselves of
the house of la Blamet, near Angiers; but the Cordeliers being loath to be
dispossessed by these new comers, called Recollets, did besiege them by main
force, broke open the Gates, scaled the VValls, the besieged did not defend
themselves by words or exorcismes, but with good Stones and Flints, so that if
the people had not come, the fray would not have ended without murder, some of
them were put in Prison, others kept in Custody: this is the meaning of the
Author, when he says, There will be half an open War between the Gray and the
sad Gray; for the Cordeliers have a Gray habit, and the Recollets a sad Gray.

LXVI. French.
Au fondement de nouvelle sect,
Seront les os du grand Romain trouvez,
Sepulcher en Marbre, apparoistra converte,
Terre trembler en Auril mal enfeuvez.
English.
At the foundation of a new sect,
The Bones of the great Roman shall be found,
The Sepulcher shall appear covered with Marble,
The Earth shall quake in April, they shall be ill buried.
ANNOT.

The meaning is, that when they shall go about to make a foundation of a house,
for a new Sect of Friars; they shall find the bones of a famous Roman in a
Marble Sepulcher, and that in April the Earth shall quake, whereby many shall
be swallowed up.

LXVII. French.
Au grand Empire par viendra tout un autres,
Bonte distant plees de felicite,
Rege par un issu non loing du peautre,
Corruer Regnes grande infelicite
English.
To the great Empire quite another shall come,
Being farther from goodness and happiness,
Governed by one of base parentage,
The Kingdom shall fall, a great unhappiness.
ANNOT.

This needs no Interpretation.

LXVIII. French.
Lors que Soldats fureur seditieuse,
Contre leur Chef seront denuit fer livre,
Ennemy d' Albe doibt par main furieuse,
Lors vexer Rome and principaux seduire.
English.
When the seditious fury of the Soldiers,
Against their Chief shall make the Iron shine by night,
The enemy d'Albe shall by a furious hand
Then vex Rome, and seduce the principal one.
ANNOT.

The Lord de Thou does judiciously observe, that the Pope being unacquainted
with things belonging to War, as to Money, Victuals, and Ammunition, was easily
persuaded by Cardinal caraffa to make war against Spain, for without being
provided o^ all these things, he put his Armies into the Field, nec satis
perpendens quam a pecunia, milite ac caeteris rebus ad bellum necessariis
imparatus intempestive arma sumeret.

In the 15. Book of his History: the Duke of Urbin had commission to raise 6000
Foot and 300. Horses in the Dukedom of Spoleto, and in Mark of Ancona. John
Caraffe the Popes Nephew was made General of the Army, and being but Earl of
Mortor, was Created Duke of Palliano, by the confiscation of the goods of Mark
An^ony Colonna. Camillo Ursini was made General of the Forces in Rome, and in
the Territory thereof; Blasius of Monluc, the Mars of his time, and by birth a
Gascon, was sent by the King to help (with his advice and courage) the Romans,
who are always fitter for the Breviary, then for the Sword.

Besides these Forces raised within the Church Dominions, Charles Caraffa
gathered all the Bandittes of Naples and Florence, and raised some Regiments of
Switzers that came to succor the Pope.

With these Troops the Pope seized upon the most important places and persons
belonging to the Spanish party, as the Coloneses and the Vitelly.

These asked succors of the Emperor Charles the V. who presently commanded
Ferdinand of Toledo Duke of Alba to succor them. He was then tasked in the
Piemont and Milanes, to resist the French that were then under the conduct of
the Marshal of Brissac

To conclude his design the better, he wrote many Letters to the Pope and the
College of Cardinals, full of respect and submission, desiring them to
moderate their passion against the Spanish party, but the Pope being angry by
several reports, answered him, complaining of many things, which made the Duke
resolve to the war, and to be there in person.

He took his occasion as a prudent Captain, when the news was brought to him
that the Popes Forces were in mutiny against their General for want of pay, and
made a great tumult in the night, hearing that he was approaching with a great
train of Artillery. Bzovius says, that the Earl of Montor regarded more his
profit then the Popes Interest, and kept back a great part of the money that
was to pay the Soldiers, whence proceeded this tumult, which helped much the
Duke of Alva's business.

This is the explanation of the two first Verses of this Stanza, concerning the
mutiny of the Soldiers that were in the Popes service, during which mutiny the
enemy d' Alba did not fail to vex Rome; this word the enemy d' Alba does not
signify the enemy of the Duke of Alba, as if one should say in Latin Hostis
Albanus. He did then vex Rome; for in a short time he took Ponte Corvino,
Frusino Anagnia, Marino, Lavaci, Pr^^neste, Tivoli, Ostia, Neptuno, Alba
Vico-Varro, Monte Fortino, and almost all the places of the Roman Territory.

This did streighten Rome so much, that the General Camillo ursini made several
Trenches within the VValls of Rome, instead of preserving the outworks, as
Montlu^ would have persuaded him to do; the alarums were so great at Rome, that
Montlu^ was fain to encourage the Romans, and to make a Warlike Speech to
them, which is inserted in his Works.

Moreover, the same Duke began to seduce the Principals of Rome by his friends
that he had in it, but particularly by the cheat that he put upon the Pope; for
his design being to prevent the French Forces, and to surprise the Pope, he
resolved to go straight to Rome, and to bring his design the better to pass, he
sent Pyrrbus Coffrede to the Pope, to see if there was any way of agreement, to
the end that upon this porposition the Pope should mistrust nothing. In the
mean time the Duke of Alba was coming near Rome, at which the Pope was so
angry, that he put this Ambassador in Prison, where he was kept till the
conclusion of the Peace; in this sort were the principal men of Rome seduced,
having no thought of the Spaniards approaches, this is the relation of the Lord
de Thou, Lib. 16.

LXIX. French.
La grand pity sera sans long tarder,
Ceux qui donnoient seront contraints de prendre
Nuds affamez, de froid, soif, soy bander,
Passer les Monts en saisant grand esclandre.
English.
What a great pity will it be to re-long,
Those that did give shall be constrained to receive,
Naked, famished with cold, thirst, to mutiny,
To go over the Mountains making great disorders.
ANNOT.

The words of the first Verse, before it be long, is the Key of the Stanza,
because we infer from thence it was shortly to happen, as in truth it did at
the latter end of the year 1556. when the Duke of Guise came into Piemont to
join with the Marshal of Brissac. Then the troops of the Marshal seeing those
of the Duke better paid then they were, forsook the Marshal, the History says
there was above 1500. of them, and that the Marshal paid the Soldiers of his
own money to stay them.

The great pity was, when he had no more to give, he was compelled by the
Kings order it self, and against his own inclination to raise some moneys upon
the Countries. Secondly, to take some Towns and give the plunder to the
Soldiers. Thirdly, to permit the Soldiers to pillage the Country.

The Author was willing to foretell this, because there was never a man more
strict in keeping the Martial discipline, then this General was.

The Marshal of Brissac being thus abused, some of his troops forsook him to
follow the Duke of Guise, being for the most part naked and starved with cold,
hunger and thirst, which makes the Author to specify hunger, cold and thirst;
want having compelled them to disband, they went over the Mountains, not of
Piemont, but the Apennines of Montferrdt, and whatsoever thing they found was a
Fish for their Net.

LXX. French.
Un Chef du Monde le grand Chei^en sera,
Plus outre, apres aim, craint, redoute,
Son bruit and los les Cieux surpassera,
Et du seul titre Victeur fort content.
English.
A Chief of the World the great Cheiren shall be,
Moreover, beloved afterward, feared, dreaded,
His same and praise shall go beyond the Heavens.
And shall be contented with the only title of Victor.
ANNOT.

We have said already before, that the Author by the word Cheyren means
Henry the II. his Master, by transposition of Letters, who as he says was
contented with the bare title of Victorieux, when he had undertaken the
protection of the German Princes against the Emperor Charles the V.

LXXI. French.
Quand on viendra le grand Roy parenter,
Avaunt quil ait du tout l'Ame rendue,
On le verra bien tossed apparenter,
D' Aigles, Lions, Croix, Courone de Rue.
English.
When they shall come to celebrate the obsequies of the great King,
A day before he be quite dead,
He shall be seen presently to be allied
With Eagles, Lions, Crosses, Crowns of Rue.
ANNOT.

In the general Peace made Anno 1559. two Marriages were concluded, one of
Elizabeth of France, daughter to Henry II. King of France, with Philip II. King
of Spain, which was Celebrated at Paris with an extraordinary magnificence, in
the presence of the Duke of Alba, the Prince of Orange, and the Earl of Egmont,
who came to fetch the Princess.

In the Celebrating of these Nuptials happened the unfortunate death of Henry
II. This brought such a sadness to the Court, that the second match which was
between Margaret of France, Daughter to Francis I. and the Duke of Savoy was
Celebrated without solemnity.

We must add to this, that the Duke wears in his Coat of Arms some Eagles,
some Lions, some Crosses, and a Crown of Rue; by this we understand this
Stanza, which says, that the King being mortally wounded, every one was
preparing himself to render him the last duties, which the Author calls to
Parante, from the Latin word Parentare, which signifies to Celebrate the
Funeral duties of a man. Thus the second Verse says, before the day that he
yields up his Soul, in have was the Marriage Celebrated, between the Lady
Margaret of France, and the Duke of Savoy, who bears for his Arms some
Eagles, some Lions, some Crosses, and a Crown of Rue.

LXXII. French.
Par fureur feinte devotion Divine',
Sera la femme du grand fort violee,
Judges voulants damner tell Doctrine,
Victime au peuple ignorant immolee.
English.
By a feigned fury of Divine inspiration,
The wife of the great one shall be ravished,
Judges willing to condemn such a Doctrine,
A Victinto shall be sacrifised to the ignorant people.
ANNOT.

Of this fact and others as bad, have been seen strange examples, formerly done
by those called Enthousiastes, who have committed horrible villainies, under
pretense of divine inspiration, some commiting Incests, others rapes, others
murders, as may be seen at large in the History of John de Leiden, and other
desperate Anabaptists, too tedious to be inserted here; I shall only relate
here a little remarkable History, in confirmation of this, to discover the
Wiles of the spirits of error, transformed into an Angel of Light.

The 7 day of February 1526. two Brothers, Thomas and Leonard Schyker, living
near the Town of St. Gal in Switzerland, did assemble together with some other
Anabaptists, in their fathers house, where they passed the most part of the
night in discourses, making of faces, and relating of Visions, which every one
said he had seen. The next day, upon break of day; Thomas did lay hold on his
Brother Leonard, and dragged him in the middle of the company, bid him kneel in
the presence of his Father and Mother, and of all the rest there present, and
as all the rest of the Company bid him take heed to do any thing amiss; he
answered, that there was no need to fear, and that in this business, nothing
could be done against the Will of the Father; thereupon he drew his Sword, and
cut off the head of his Brother, who was on his knees, all besotted before this
murderer. All the rest being astonished, and besides their wits for this
furious blow, and lamenting the dead, Thomas ran toward the Town with a
fearful Countinance, as a Phanatick besides himself, without Shoes; and having
no Clothes but his Shirt and Breeches. At that time the Bu^g-master of St Gal
was Joachim Vadian, a wise and learned person, before whom the said Thomas
stood, crying a loud with a fearful Countenance, that the day of Judgment was
near; saying besides, that strange things had come to pass, (without telling
what) that the will of his Father was done for his part. The Burg-master after
he had reprehended him very much for his madness, and insolent carriage,
commanded a Cloak to be put upon him, and to lead him home softly back again.
But in the mean time, news was brought of his detestable murder, whereupon he
was apprehended, examined, convicted, and executed. The like has been done
many times for Rapes and Incests: What is particular here, is, that our Author
says, that the Judges being willing to punish such Villainies, yet that unhappy
accident shall fall, that an innocent person shall be put to death (belike)
instead of the guilty, to please the people.

LXXIII. French.
En Cite grande en moyne and artisan,
Pres de la port logez and aux murailles,
Contre modene secret, Cave disant,
Trahis pour fair sous couleur d'espousailles.
English.
In a great City a Monk and an Artificer,
Dwelling near the Gate, and the Walls,
Near an old woman, it is a secret saying Cave,
A Treas^n shall be plotted under pretense of a Marriage.
ANNOT.

Paradin makes mention, that in the year 1552. a Monk deceived the Marshal of
Brissac, making him believe that he would put him in possession of the Town of
Quizres, if he would give him so much for reward. The Marshal used all the
Caution possible, not to be deceived by that Imposter, who took Money on both
sides, viz. the French and the Spaniards; nevertheless the Monk played the Knave
with him, and the undertakings proved prejudicial to the French, though not
considerably by reason of the precaution of the said Marshal.

The same Author writes, that in the year 1555. the 17 of August, the Spaniard
had designed to retake Cazal, the same way that the French had surprised it.
First, they had got a Widow in the Town, who received the undertakers in her
house, which was near the Gate, and the Wall. Secondly there was a Marriage to
be made between two persons of quality, where great Cheer and rejoycings were
to be. Thirdly they got a woman that carried Herbs to sell in the Town, and
under the Herbs the Letters were hidden. The Author says likewise, that there
was a Monk and a Tradesman, that lodged at this Widows house, those two actors
in this business, viz. the Monk said Tradseman, said secretly to the woman that
sold Herbs, Cave, which signifies take heed, they said these words secretly
near Matrone, that is, they whisperd in her ear Cave. Their design was to
betray the Town, under pretense of a Marriage, but it did not succeed; because
the Letters in the woman's Basket were intercepted, the Vulgar impression has a
fault in the third Verse, where there is Modene instead of Matrone, and another
in the fourth Verse, when instead of Treason, they have put for betrayed. The
History obliges us to correct it, as we have done.

LXXIV. French.
Le dechasse au regne tournera,
Ses ennemis trouvez des conjurez,
Plus que jamais son temps triomphera,
Trois and septante a mort trop asseurez.
English.
The expelled shall come again to the Kingdom,
Her enemies shall be found to be the Conspirators,
More than ever his time shall triumph,
Three and seventy appointed for death.
ANNOT.

This is a clear and express prediction of the happy restoration of his sacred
Majesty, and our dread Sovereign Charles II. now Reigning, who after a long
exile is come again to enjoy his own Kingdom, and to flourish more than ever he
did before, by these seventy appointed to death, are meant the Judges and
murderers of his Father, who with some few others of the same gang made about
that number, and some of which have paid their shot by the hand of public
Justice, others have prevented their shame by dying before hand, others have
been their own Executioners, and those that remain, lead a life worse then
death it self; so true it is that vengeance dances the round.

LXXV. French.
Le grand Pilot sera par Roy mande,
Laisser la class pour plus haut lieu atteindes,
Sept ans apres sera contrebande,
Barbare Armee viendra Venise craindre.
English.
The great Pilot shall be sent for by the King,
To leave the Fleet, and be preferred to a higher place,
Seven years after he shall be countermanded,
A Barbarian Army shall put Venice to a fright.
ANNOT.

This needs no further explanation.

LXXVI. French.
La Cite antique d' Antenoree forge,
Plus ne pouvant le Tyran supporter,
Le manche feint au Temple couper gorge,
Les siens le peuple a mort viendra bouter.
English.
The ancient City founded by Antenor,
Being not able to bear the Tyrant any longer,
With a fained haft, in the Church cut a throat,
The people will come to put his servants to death.
ANNOT.

The City founded by Antenor (who was Companion and came into Italy with
Aeneas) is Padua, a University of the Venetians, of which it is said here, that
being no longerable to bear a Tyrant, the said Tyrant shall be murdered in the
Church with a knife hidden in a haft, and all his Men and Servants killed by
the people of the Town.

LXXVII. French.
Par la victoire du deceu fraudulente,
Deux classes une, la revolte German,
La Chef meurtry and son fills dans la Tente,
Florence, Imole pourchassez dans Roman.
English.
By the deceitful victory of the deceived,
One of the two Fleets shall revolt to the Germans,
The Chief and his Son murdered in their Tent,
Florence, Imole persecuted in Romania.
ANNOT.

The three first Verses are plain. Florence and Imole are two Cities of Italy,
seated in the Province of Romania.

LXXVIII. French.
Crier victoire du grand Selin croissant,
Par les Romans sera l'Aigle clame,
Ticin, Milan, and Gennesny consent,
Puis par eux mesmes Basil grand reclame
English.
They shall cry up the victory of the great Selins half Moon,
By the Romans the Eagle shall be claimed,
Ticin, Milan and Genoa, consent not,
Then by themselves the great Basil shall be claimed.
ANNOT.

The first Verse foretells some conquests of the Turks, whose Arms is the
half Moon. The second Verse signifies, the Romans shall move the Emperor to
succor them, which is the Eagle. Ticin, Milan and Genoa shall refuse to give
help, and afterward they shall call the great Basil (which in Greek signifies
the great King, from (...)) to their help.

LXXIX. French.
Pres de Tesin les habitants de Logre,
Garonne and Saone, Seine, Tar, and Gironde:
Outre les Monts dresseront promonitoire,
Conflict done, Pau franchi, submerge onde.
English.
Near the Tesin the Inhabitants of Logre,
Garonne and Soane, Seine, Tar and Gironde,
Shall erect a promontory beyond the Mountains,
A Battle shall be fought, the Po shall be passed over, some shall be drowned
in it.
ANNOT.

Tesin is the River that passes by Milan, Garonne, Soane, Seine, Tar, and
Gironde are Rivers of France. Po is the greatest River of Italy.

LXXX. French.
De Fez le Regne parviendra a ceux d' Europe,
Feu leur Cite, and Lame tranchera,
Le grand d' Asie Terre and Mer a grand troop,
Que bleux, pars, Croix a mort dechassera.
English.
The Kingdom of Fez shall come to those of Europe,
Fire and Sword shall destroy their City,
The great one of Asia by Land and Sea with a great troop,
So that blews, greens, Crosses to death he shall drive.
ANNOT.

This is a strange Prophecy if it prove true, viz. that the Kingdom of Fez
(which is in Africa) shall be taken by those of Europe, and the Town put to
Fire and Sword, after which the great one of Asia (meaning the great Turk)
shall come by Land and by Sea with an innumerable Army, and shall drive and
destroy all before him.

LXXXI. French.
Pleurs, cris and plaincts, heurlemens, effrayeur,
Coeur inhumain, cruel, noir and transy:
Leman, les Isles de Gennes les majeurs,
Sang espancher, tochsain, a null mercy.
English.
Tears, cries and complaints, b^wlings, fear,
An inhumane heart, cruel, black, astonished,
Leman, the Islands the great ones of Genoa,
Shall spill blood, the Bell shall ring out, no mercy shall be given.
ANNOT.

This foretells bloody Wars only, and needs no interpretation.

LXXXII. French.
Par les Deserts de lieu libre and farouche,
Viendra errer Neveu du grand Pontife,
Assomme a sept avec lourde souche,
Par ceux qu'apres occuperont le Scyphe.
English.
Through the Deserts of a free and ragged place,
The Nephew of the Pope shall come to wander,
Knocked in the head by seven with a heavy Club,
By those who after shall obtain the Scyphe.
ANNOT.

This signifies that the Nephew of a Pope shall be driven away, and shall
wander in a desert place, where he shall be knocked in the head by seven men,
one of which shall afterward enjoy the Papacy; for Scyphe is a Latin word,
signifying a Cup or Chalue, such as the Romish Priests say Mass with, and take
the Sacrament.

LXXXIII. French.
Celuy qu'aura tant d'honneurs and caresses,
A son ent^ee en la Gaul Belgique,
Un temps apres sera tant de rudesses,
Et sera contre a la fleur tant bellique.
English.
He that shall have had so many honors and welcoms,
At his going into Flanders,
A while after shall commit so many rudenesses,
And shall be against the warlike flower.
ANNOT.

This is positively concerning the Duke of Alencon, Brother to Henry III. King
of France, who having been sent for by the States of the Low Countries, and
received with much honor to be their General and Governor against the
Spaniard, did most unworthily break his trust, and being come to Antwerp, he
was so ravished with the beauty and riches of the Town, that he seized upon it
for himself, but was beaten out by the Citizens, and most of his men killed.

The fourth Verse says. He shall be against the warlike flower; that is, his
action shall be against Military Honor, and common practice of Honorable
Soldiers.

LXXXIV. French.
Celuy qu'en Sparte Claude ne veut regner,
Il fera tant par voye seductive,
Que du court, long, le sera arraigner,
Que contre Roy fera sa perspective.
English.
He that Claudius will not have to reign in Sparta,
The same shall do so much by a deceitful way,
That he shall cause him to be arraigned short and long,
As if he had made his prospect upon the King.
ANNOT.

I believe the words of Claudius and Sparta here are Metaphorical, and the
Author was unwilling they should be known.

The sense is, one shall be hindered from Reigning by another, whom he shall
accuse of Treason against the King.

LXXXV. French.
La grand Cite de Tharse par Gaulois,
Sera d'estriute captifs tous a Turban,
Secours par Mer du grand Portugalois,
Premier d'este le jour du sacre Urban.
English.
The great City of Tharsis shall be taken by the French,
All those that were at Turban shall be made slaves,
Succors by Sea from the great Portugals,
The first day of the Summer, and of the installation of Urban.
ANNOT.

Here are two difficulties in this Stanza; the first is, what the Author means
by the great City Tharsis; the second is in the last Verse, what he means by
the Installation of Urban, I believe he means no more then the election of a
Pope, whose name shall be Urban.

LXXXVI. French.
Le grand Prelat un jour apres son song,
Interpret au rebours de son sens,
De la Gascogne luy surviendra un Monge,
Qui fera eslire le grand Prelat de Sens.
English.
The great Prelate the next day after his dream,
Interpreted contrary to his sense,
From Gascony shall come to him a Monge,
That shall cause the great Prelate of Sens to be elected.
ANNOT.

Monge is a Barbarous word, that has no relation to any Language in the world,
(that I know) unless it signifies a Monk. Sens is a fine City, about threescore
Miles beyond Paris, toward the South, and the Seat of an Archbishop, who it
seems shall be elected into some eminent place, the next day after he that
was in it shall dream a dream, that shall be interpreted contrary to the sense
and meaning of it.

LXXXVII. French.
L'election faicte dans Francfort,
N'aura null lieu, Milan s'opposera,
Le sien plus proche semblera si grand fort,
Qu'oute le Rhin Marais les chassera.
English.
The election made at Francford,
Shall be void, Milan shall oppose it,
He of the Milan party shall be so strong,
As to drive the other beyond the Marshes of the Rhine.
ANNOT.

The Election of Francford is concerning an Emperor; for there they are
elected, Crowned. The rest is plain.

LXXXVIII. French.
Un Regne grand demourra desole,
Aupres de l' Hebro se feront assemblees,
Monts Pyrenees le rendront console,
Lors que dans May seront Terres tremblees.
English.
A great Kingdom shall be left desolate,
Near the River Hebrus an assembly shall be made,
The Pyrenean Mountains shall comfort him,
When in May shall be an Earthquake.
ANNOT.

This needs no interpretation, but what any one may give that knows where
the River Hebrus is,

LXXXIX. French.
Enter deux cymbes pieds and mains attachez,
De miel face oingt and de laict substante,
Cuespes and mouches feront amor fachez,
Poccilateurs faucer, Scyphe tente.
English.
Between two Boats one shall be tied hand and foot,
His face anointed with Honey, and he nourished with Milk,
Wasps and Bees shall make much of him in anger,
For being treacherous Cup-bearers, and poisoning the Cup.
ANNOT.

This is a description of the punishment which the Persians use to afflict upon
poisoners; for they were put between two Troughs, which are here called Boats,
from their likeness to them, with their face only uncovered, which was daubed
with Honey, that the Wasps and Bees might be drawn to it and torment them, they
were fed with Milk, which if they refused to do, and had rather dye than be so
tormented, then did the Tormenter prick their Eyes with Needles to force them
to their diet, and so were they left, till the Vermin eat them up. We have an
example of this in the Life of Artaxerxes King of Persia.

XC. French.
L'honnessement puant abominable,
Apres la faict sera felicite,
Grand excuse, pour n'estre favorable,
Qu'a paix Neptune ne sera incite.
English.
The stinking and abominable defiling
After the secret shall succeed well,
The great one shall be excused for not being favorable,
That Neptune might be persuaded to peace.
ANNOT.

By the two first Verses it seems that some abominable action, after its
effect shall succeed well; the two last signify, that a great person shall be
excused for not permitting the Fleet to be at peace.

XCI. French.
Le conducteur de la guerre Navale,
Rouge effrene, severe horrible grippe,
Captif eschape de l'aisne dans la baste,
Quand il naistra du grand un Fills Agrippe.
English.
The leader of the naval forces,
Red, rash, severe, horrible extortioner,
Being slave, shall escape, hidden amongst the Harnesses,
When a Son named Agrippa, shall be born to the great one.
ANNOT.

This needs no Interpretation, the words being so plain.

XCII. French.
Princess de beauty tant venuste,
Au chef menee, le second faict trahy,
La Cite au Glaive poudre face aduste,
Par trop grand meurtre le chef du Roy hay.
English.
A Princess of an exquisite beauty,
Shall be brought to the General, the second time the fact shall be betrayed,
The City shall be given to the Sword and fire,
By two great a murder the chief Person about the King shall be hated.
ANNOT.

The only difficulty lies in what City he does mean.

XCIII. French.
Prelat avare, d'ambition trompe,
Rien ne fera que trop cuider viendra,
Ses Messagers, and luy bien attrape,
Tout au rebours voir qui les bois fendra.
English.
A covetous Prelate, deceived by ambition,
Shall do nothing but covet too much,
His messengers and he shall be trapt,
When they shall see one cleave the Wood the contrary way.
ANNOT.

This needs no Annotation.

XCIV: French.
Un Roy ire sera aux sedifragues,
Quand interdicts seront harnois de guerre,
La poison taincte au succre par les fragues,
Par eaux meurtris, morts, disant, serre, serre.
English.
A King shall be angry against the Covenant-breakers,
When the Warlike Armor shall be forbidden,
The Poison with Sugar shall be put in the Strawberries,
They shall be murdered and die, saying, close, close.
ANNOT.

The words are plain.

XCV. French.
Par detracteur calomnie puis nay,
Quand istront faicts enormes and martiaux,
La moindre part dubieuse a l'aisne,
Et tossed au Regne seront faicts partiaux.
English.
The youngest Son shall be calumniated by a slanderer,
When enormous and Martial deeds shall be done,
The least part shall be left doubtful to the
Eldest and soon after they shall be both equal in the Kingdom.
ANNOT.

This lacks no interpotation.

XCVI. French.
Grand Cite a Soldats abandonnee,
Onc ny eut mortel tumult si proche,
O quelle hideuse calamites approach,
Fors une offense n'y sera pardonnee.
English.
A great City shall be given up to the Soldiers,
There was never a mortal tumult so near,
Oh! what a hideous calamity draws near,
Except one offense nothing shall be spared.
ANNOT.

This is concerning the taking of the Town of St. Quentin in 1557. because the
Author says, no tumult was like this, so near the year 1555, when our Author
writ.

He calls it great City; because it is one of the most considerable in
France, therefore it was besieged by the King of Spain with 37000. men, and
12000. Horses and 8000. English. The plunder was given to the Soldiers; for it
was taken by assault.

There was never a mortal tumult so near; for the Soldiers taking revenge upon
the Inhabitants, and Garrison, put all to the Sword; the Admiral having much
ado to save himself.

In consequence of this our Prophet cries. O what a fearful calamity; because
the taking of this Town joined with the loss of St. Laurence did almost ruin
France. He adds, except one offense nothing shall be forgiven; that is, the
Town should be afflicted in all respects, except that it should not be burnt.
The taking of this Town was upon the 27 of August, 17 days after the Battle of
St. Laurence.

The loss was so great to France, that the King was fained to call the Duke of
Guise back from Italy, and Charles V. hearing this news, asked presently if his
Son Philip was not in Paris, as much as to say, it was a thing he ought to have
done.

But God permitted that the King of Spain went another way, and in the mean
time, the King of France strengthened himself, and the Duke of Guise took from
the English, Calais, Guines, and the County of d'Oye. The Spanish History
says, that Philip had forbidden to touch any old people, Children and
Ecclesiastical persons, but above all St. Quentins relics.

XCVII. French.
Ginq and quarante degrez ciel bruslera,
Feu approcher de la grand Cite neuve,
Instant grand flamme esparse sautera,
Quand on voudra des Normans fair preuve.
English.
The Heaven shall burn at five and forty degrees,
The fire shall come near the great new City,
In an instant a great flame dispersed shall burst out,
When they shall make a trial of the Normans.
ANNOT.

This signifies some extraordinary lightning under five and forty degrees,
which is about the Southern part of France.

It is not easy to guess what he means by the great new City, unless it be
one in the Authors Country, called Villa Nova.

The last Verse seems to intimate, that this shall happen when an Army of
Normandy shall be raised.

XCVIII. French.
Ruin aux Volsques de peur si fort terribles,
Leur grand Cite taincte, faict pestilent:
Pillar Sol, Lune, and violer leur Temples,
Et les deux Fleuves rougir de sang coulant.
English.
A ruin shall happen to the Volsques that are so terrible,
Their great City shall be dyed, a pestilent deed:
They shall plunder Sun and Moon, and violate their Temples,
And the two Rivers shall be red with running blood.
ANNOT.

The Volsi were a warlike people of Italy joining to Rome, which makes me
believe that by the great City he means Rome, which was plundered and sacked
by the Duke of Burgondy and the Prince of Orange, Generals of the Emperor
Charles V.

XCIX. French.
L'Ennemy docte se tournera confus,
Grand Camp malade, and de faict par embusches.
Monts Pyrenees luy seront faicts refus.
Roche du Fleuve descouvrant antique ruches.
English.
The learned enemy shall go back confounded,
A great Camp shall be sick, and in effect through ambush,
The Pyrenean Mountains shall refuse him.
Near the River discovering the ancient Hives.
ANNOT.

The words are plain, though the sense be too obscure, and I shall not
endeavor to give an interpretation, when every one may make one himself.

C French.
Fill de Laure, asyle du mal sain,
Ou jusqu'au Ciel se void l' Amphitheatre:
Prodige veu, ton mal est fort prochain,
Seras captive, and des fois plus de quatre.
English.
Daughter of Laura, Sanctuary of the sick,
Where to the Heavens is seen the Amphitheatre.
A prodigy being seen, the danger is near,
Thou shall be taken captive above four times.
ANNOT.

This is an ingenious Stanza, concerning the City of Nismes in Languedoc,
famous for its Amphitheatre built by the Romans, and remaining to this day,
which Town he calls Daughter of Laura, because the Lady Laura, Mistress to
the famous Poet Petrache was born thereabout; he also calls it Sanctuary of
the sick, for the salubrity of the air.

The meaning of the two last Verses is, that when a prodigy shall be seen, viz.
Civil War in France, it shall be taken above four times, as it has happened by
one party or other.

Legis cautio contra ineptos Criticos.
Qui legent hos versus, mature censunto:
Prophanum vulgus and inscium ne attrectato:
Omnesque Astrologi, Blenni, Barhari procul sunto,
Qui aliter faxit, is rite sacer esto.
THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY VII.
I. French.
L'Ar^ du Thresor par Achilles deceu,
Aux procrees sceu le Quadrangulaire,
Au fait Roial le comment sera sceu,
Corpse veu pendu au Sceu du populaire.
English.
The bow of the Treasure by Achilles deceived,
Shall show to posterity the Quadrangulary,
In the Royal deed the Comment shall be known,
The body shall be seen hanged in the knowledge of the people.
ANNOT.

By the bow of the Treasure, is understood the Marshal d' Ancre, Favorite to
the Queen Regent of France Mary of Medicis, who was first complained of, for
his maleversations by Achilles de Harlay President of Paris, whence followed
his death being Pistolled in the Quadrangle of the Louvre, by the command of
Lewis XIII. and his body afterward dragged through the streets, and hanged
publicly by the people upon the new Bridge.

II. French.
Par Mars ouvert Arles ne donra guerre,
De nuit seront les Soldats estonnez,
Noir, blanc, a l'Inde dissimulez en terre.
Soubs la feinte ombre traistre verrez sonnez.
English.
Arles shall not proceed by open War,
By night the Soldiers shall be astonished,
Black, white. and blew, dissembled upon the ground.
Under the fained shadow you shall see them proclaimed Traitors.
ANNOT.

Arles is a considerable City in France; the rest is plain.

III. French.
Apres de France la victoire Navale,
Les Barchinons, Salinons, les Phocens,
Lierre d'or, l'Enclume serre dans balle,
Ceux de Toulon au fraud seront consents.
English.
After the Naval victory of the French,
Upon those of Tunis, Sally, and the Phocens,
A golden Juy the Anvil shut up in a pack,
Those of Toulon to the fraud shall consent.
ANNOT.

This foretells a Naval victory to the French against the Turks, by the means
of a Granado, called Anvil, that shall be shut up in a Barrel by a plot, to
which those of Toulou shall be privy.

IV. French.
Le Duc de Langres assiege dedans Dole,
Accompagne d' Authun and Lionnois,
Geneve, Auspourg, ceux de la Mirandole,
Passer les Monts contre les Anconois.
English.
The Duke of Langres shall be besieged in Dole,
Being in company with those of Autun and Lion,
Geneva, Auspourg, those of Mirandola,
Shall go over the Mountains against those of Ancona.
ANNOT.

Langres is a City in France, whose Bishop is a Duke and a Peer of the Kingdom
Dole is a City in Burgundy, so is Autun and Lion, Geneva is a City by Savoy,
Auspourg, another in Germany, Mirandola is a Country in Italy, so is Ancona.

V. French.
Vin sur la Table en sera respandu,
Le tiers naura celle quil pretendoit,
Deux sois du noir de Parme descendu,
Perouse and Pise fera ce quil cuidoit.
English.
Wine shall be spilt upon the Table,
By reason that a third man shall not have her whom he intended,
Twice the black one descended from Parma,
Shall do to Perusa and Pisa what be intended.
ANNOT.

Perusa, Pisa, and Parma, are three Cities in Italy.

VI. French.
Naples, Palerme, and toute la Sicile,
Par main Barbare sera inhabitee,
Corsique, Salerne and de Sardaigne l'Isle,
Faim, peste, guerre, fin de maux intemptee.
English.
Naples, Palermo, and all Sicily,
By barbarous hands shall be depopulated,
Corsica, Salerno, and the Island of Sardania.
In them shall be famine, plague, war, and endless evils.
ANNOT.

Naples is a City in Italy, Palermo is a City in the Island of Sicily. Corsica,
an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, belonging to the Genoese; Salerno is a Town
in Italy; Sardinia an Island in the Mediterranean. The Reader may easily make
an interpretation of the rest.

VII. French.
Sur le combat des grands chevaux legers,
On criera le grand croissant confond,
De nuit tuer Moutons, Brebis, Bergers,
Abysmes rouges dans le fosse profond.
English.
At the fight of the great light Horsemen,
They shall cry out, confound the great half Moon,
By night they shall kill Sheep, Ewes, and Shepherds,
Red pits shall be in the deep ditch.
ANNOT.

By the great half Moon, is understood the Turk.

VIII. French.
Flora fuis, fuis le plus proche Romain,
Au Fesulan sera conflict done,
Sang espandu les plus grands pris en main,
Temple ne Sex ne sera pardonne.
English.
Flora fly, fly from the next Roman,
In the Fesulan shall be the fight,
Blood shall be spilt, the greatest shall be taken,
Temple nor Sex shall be spared.
ANNOT.

Fesulan is a Country in Italy. Flora is the Goddess of Flowers, the rest is
easy.

IX: French.
Dame en l'absence de son grand Captain,
Sera priee d'amour du Viceroy,
Feinte promise and malheureuse estreine,
Enter les mains du grand Prince Barroy.
English.
A Lady in the absence of her great Captain,
Shall be entreated of love by the Viceroy,
A^fained promise, and unhappy new years gift,
In the hand of the great Prince of Bar.
ANNOT.

Bar is a principality joining to Lorrain, which Henry IV. King of France gave
for a Portion to his Sister Catharine, when she married the Duke of Lorrains
Son. The rest is plain.

X. French.
Par le grand Prince limitrophe du Man's,
Preux and vaillant chef de grand exercite,
Par Mer and Terre de Galois and Normans,
Cap passer Barcelonne pille l'Isle.
English.
The great Prince dwelling near the Man's,
Stout and valiant, General of a great Army
Of Welchmen and Normans by Sea and Land,
Shall pass the Cape Barcelone, and plunder the Island
ANNOT.

Man's is a City in France, chief of the Province called le Main. The rest is
plain.

XI French.
L'Enfant Roial contemnera la Mere,
Oeil, pieds blessez, rude inobeissant,
Nouvelle a Dame estrange and bien amere,
Seront tuez des siens plus de cinq cens.
English.
The Royal Child shall despise his Mother,
Eye, feet wounded, rude disobedient,
News to a Lady very strange and bitter,
There shall be killed of hers above five hundred.
ANNOT.

This was fulfilled about the year 1615. when Lewis XIII. King of France, being
then about 15 years of age, by the persuasion of some Grandees about him, made
War against his own Mother Mary of Medicis then Regent of the Kingdom,
whereupon was fought between them the Battle du pont de say, where above five
hundred on the Queens side were slain, whereupon it was a good Jest of the
Prince of Guimena, who being required by the Queen Anna of Austria, to lay his
hand upon her side; and to feel her Child (now Lewis XIV.) stirring, after he
had felt; now I know, said he, he is a true Son of Bourbon; for he begins to
kick his Mother.

XII. French.
Le grand puisnay fera fin de la guerre,
En deux lieux assemble les excusez,
Cahors, Moissac, iront loing de la serre,
Rufec, Lectoure, les Agenois rasez
English.
The great younger Brother shall make an end of the War,
It two places he shall gather the excused,
Cahors, Moissac, shall go out of his clutches,
Ruffec, Lectoure, and those of Again shall be cut off.
ANNOT.

Cahors, Moissac, Ruffec, Lectonre, Again, are all Cities of the Province of
Guyenne in France.

XIII. French.
De la Cite Marine and tributaire,
La test^ raze prendra la Satrapie,
Chasser sordide qui puis sera contraire,
Par quatorze and tiendra la Tyranny.
English.
Of the City Maritine and tributary,
The shaven head shall take the Government,
He shall turn out a base man who shall be against him,
During fourteen years he will keep the tyranny.
ANNOT.

This is positive concerning the Cardinal of Richelieu, who made himself
Governor of Havre de Grace, called here the Maritine City, and there kept his
Treasure, and tyrannised for the space of about fourteen years.

XIV. French.
Faux exposer viendra Topographie,
Seront les Urnes des Monuments ouvertes,
Pulluler Sects, saint Philosophy,
Pour blanches noires, and pour antiques vertes.
English.
They shall expound Topography falsely,
The Urnes of the Monuments shall be open,
Sects shall multiply, and holy Philosophy
Shall give black for white, and green for old.
ANNOT.

This is a perfect description of our late miserable estate in England, when
there was such multiplicity of Sects, and such a Profanation of sacred things.

XV. French.
Devant Cite de l' Insubre Country,
Sept ans sera le Siege devant mis,
Le tres-grand Roy fera son entree.
Cite puis libre horse de ses ennemis.
English.
Before a City of Piemont,
Seven years the Siege shall be laid,
The most great King shall make his entry into it,
Then the City shall be free being out of the enemies hand.
ANNOT.

This needs no interpretation.

XVL. French.
Entree profonde par la grande Roine faite,
Rendra le lieu puissant inaccessible,
L'Armee de trois Lions sera defaite,
Faisant dedans cas hideux and terrible.
English.
The deep entry made by the Queen,
Shall make the place powerful, and inaccessible,
The Army of the three Lions shall be routed,
Doing within an hideous and terrible thing.
ANNOT.

A Queen shall cause such a deep Trench to be made before a Town, that it shall
be impregnable, and the Army of Lions, that is either Generals, or of a Prince
that shall bear three Lions in his Arms, shall be routed.

XVII. French.
Le Prince rare en pity and clemence,
Apres avoir la paix aux siens baille,
Viendra changer par mort grand cognoissance,
Apres grand repos le regne travaille.
English.
The Prince rare in pity and Clemency,
After he shall have given peace to his Subjects,
Shall by death change his great knowledge,
After great rest the Kingdom shall be troubled.
ANNOT.

This positively concerns Henry the IV. King of France, who after he had by
many Battles and dangers given peace to his Kingdom, was by a Murderer snatched
away, and the Kingdom put into new troubles, by the war that the Princes had
among themselves.

XVIII. French.
Les Assiegez couloureront leurs paches,
Sept jours apres feront cruelle issue,
Dans repoulsez, feu, sang, sept mis a l'hache,
Dame captive qu'avoit la paix issue.
English.
The Besieged shall dawb their Articles,
Seven days after they shall make a cruel event,
They shall be beaten back, fire, blood, seven put to death,
The Lady shall be Prisoner who endeavored to make peace.
ANNOT.

This needs no interpretation.

XIX. French.
Le Fort Nicene ne sera combatu,
Vaincu sera par rutilant metal,
Son fait sera un long temps debatu,
Aux Ci^adins estrange espouvental.
English.
The Fort Nicene shall not be fought against,
By shining metal it shall be overcome,
The doing of it shall be long and debating,
It shall be a strange fearful thing to the Citizens.
ANNOT.

Nice is a Town in Piemont, situated by the Sea side, now whether this Prophecy
came to pass in the time of the Wars between France and Savoy, or shall come to
pass hereafter, it is more then I can tell. As for winning of it by glistering
Metal, it is no new thing or practice, witness Philippus of Macedon, who said
no City was impregnable, wherein might enter an Ass loaded with gold.

XX. French.
Ambassadeurs de la Toscane langue,
Avril and May Alps and Mer passer,
Celuy de Veau exposera l'harangue,
Vie Gauloise en voulant effacer.
English.
The Ambassadors of the Tuscan tongue,
In April and May, shall go over the Alps and the Sea,
One like a Caif shall make a speech:
Attempting to defame the French customs.
ANNOT.

The sense and the words are plain.

XXI. French.
Par pestilente inimitie Volsicque,
Dissimulee chassera le Tyran,
Au Pont de Sorgues se fera la trafique,
De mettre a mort luy and son adherent.
English.
By a pestilent Italian enmity,
The dissembler shall expel the Tyrant,
The bargain shall be made at Sorgues Bridge,
To put him and his adherent to death.
ANNOT.

There is no difficulty in this.

XXII French.
Les Citoiens de Mesopotamie,
Irez encontre amiss de Tarragone,
Jeux, Ris, Banquets toute gent endormie,
Vicaire au Prone, pris Cite, ceux d' Ausone.
English.
The Citizens of Mesopotamia,
Being angry with the friends of Tarragone,
Plays, laughter, feasts, every body being asleep,
The Vicar being in the Pulpit, City taken by those of Ausone.
ANNOT.

By the Citizens of Mesopotamia, is understood a people that live between two
Rivers, from the the Greek words (...) and (...), the rest is easy. We have
said before, that by Ausone the Author understands the City of Bourdeaux, which
he called Ausone, from the Poet and Consul of Rome Ausonius who was born there.

XXIII. French.
Le Roial Scepter sera contraint de prendre,
Ce que ses Predecesseurs voient engage,
Puis a Laigneau on fera mal entendre,
Lors qu'on viendra le Palais saccager.
English.
The Royal Scepter shall be constrained to take
What his Predecessors had morgaged;
After that, they shall mis-inform the Lamb,
When they shall come to plunder the Palace.
ANNOT.

This is obvious to every body's capacity.

XXIV. French.
L' Ensevely sortira du tombeau,
Fera de chaisnes lier le fort du pont,
Empoisone avec oeufs de Barbeau,
Grand de Lorrain par le Marquis du pont.
English.
The buried shall come out of his Grave,
He shall cause the fort of the Bridge to be tied with Chains,
Poisoned with Barbels hard Row,
Shall a great one of Lorrain be by the Marquis du pont.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is divided in two parts. The first two Verses talk of a man
that shall be taken out of his Grave alive. The two last speak, that a great
man of Lorrain shall be poisoned by the Marquis de pont, in the Row of a
Barbel, which according to Physicians, is a dangerous meat of it self, and
chiefly if it be Stewed, the Poisoner himself seems to be no other than a
Duke of Lorrain, or one of his Sons; for he styles himself N. Duke of Lorrain,
Prince of Bar, and Marquis du pont.

XXV. French.
Par guerre longue tout l'exercite espuiser,
Que pour Soldats ne trouveront pecune,
Lieu d'Or, d'Argent cair on viendra cuser,
Gaulois Aerain, sign croissant de Lune.
English.
By a long War, all the Army drained dry,
So that to raise Soldiers they shall find no Money,
Instead of Gold and Silver, they shall stamp Leather,
The French Copper, the mark of the stamp the new Moon.
ANNOT.

This makes me remember the miserable condition of many Kingdoms, before the
West Indies were discovered; for in Spain Lead was stamped for Money, and so in
France in the time of King Dagobert, and it seems by this Stanza, that the
like is to come again, by reason of a long and tedious War.

XXVI. French.
Fustes Galees autour de sept Navires,
Sera livree une mortelle guerre,
Chef de Madrid recevra coups de vires,
Deux eschapees and cinq menez a Terre.
English.
Fly-boats and Galleys round about seven Ships,
A mortal War there shall be,
The chief of Madrid shall receive blows of Oars,
Two shall escape, and five carried to Land.
ANNOT.

Paradin says in his History, that in the year 1555. toward the end of
August, those of Diepe had permission from the King to fight a Fleet of the
Spaniards, which was coming into Flanders, and brought Men, Money, and several
Merchandises. They went to Sea, and after much searching, they discovered the
Fleet, wherein were 22 great Ships.

The Diepois had but 19 men of War, and five or six Pinnaces, with which they
set upon them between Calais and Dover. The fight was very bloody, almost all
the Ships grapled one with another, and being so close together, represented a
Land fight.

The French at last did their utmost endeavor against the Admiral, which was
succored by six other Ships, of which two were taken with the Admiral, and
carried to Diepe; this is the Authors meaning, when he says, Fly-boats and
Galleys about seven Ships. He names the Admiral Chief of Madrid; that is,
chief Spaniard, which received blows of Oars, whose Ship was taken, and four
more of his Company, which were brought to Diepe. In this agree the Historians
on both sides.

XXVII. French.
Au coin de Vast la grand Cavalerie,
Proche a Ferrare empeschee au Bagage,
Pomp a Turin front tell volerie,
Que dans le fort raviront leur hostage.
English.
In the corner of Vast the great Troop of Horse,
Near Ferrara, shall be busied about the baggage,
Pomp at Turin, they shall make such a robbery,
That in the Fort they shall ravish their hostage.
ANNOT.

I could not find what he means by this place Vast, which being the Key of
all the rest, I could proceed no further, but am constrained to go to bed, and
leave this for to night, among Insolubilia de Alliaco.

XXVIII. French.
Le Captain conduira grande proye,
Sur la Montagne des ennemis plus proche,
Environne par feu fera tell voye,
Tous eschapez, or trente mis en broche.
English.
The Captain shall lead a great Prey
Upon the Mountain, that shall be nearest to the Enemies,
Being encompassed with fire, he shall make such a way,
That all shall escape, but thirty that shall be spitted.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain.

The meaning of the last two is, that the said Captain being encompassed with
Fire, shall make himself such a way, that all his men shall escape, but thirty
that shall be spitted by the enemies.

XXIX. French.
Le grand Duc d' Albe se viendra rebeller,
A ses grands peers fera le tradiment,
Le grand de Guise le viendra debeller,
Captif mean and dress monument.
English.
The great Duke of Alba shall rebel,
To his Grandfathers he shall make the Plot,
The great Guise shall vanquish him,
Led Prisoner, and a Monument erected.
ANNOT.

Ferdinand of Toledo, Duke of Albo in Spain, a faithful servant of Charles V.
and Philip II. his Son, after he had made several proofs of his Valor, and
prudence in the affairs of Piemont and Milaness, was commanded to go to Naples
and Rome, to succor the Colonesse, and others of the Spanish party; to obey
this command, the Author says, He went about to rebel, not against his Prince,
but his Grandfathers, viz. the Pope and the Cardinals, upon which the Senate of
Venice wrote to him, desiring that he would not trouble the Pope, seeing that
all his Predececessors had fought for him, as the Lord of Thou says in his
sixteenth Book; but he answered, that it was the Pope himself that was the
cause of it, and that he was bound to oppose him.

During that rebellion to his great fathers, as the Author calls it, the
great de Guise, came with his Troops, and compelled him to a diversion, and to
let alone Marshal Strozzy, the Cardinal Caraffa, Captain Montluc, Camillo
Ursini, Captain Charry, and others; so that all the Country about Rome was
freed, and thus the Author says, the great de Guise shall come to quell him.

The fourth Verse adds two things, that a Prisoner was carried away, and that
a Monument was erected. History makes no mention of the Prisoner, unless it
were that Captain Montluc, having taken by assault the Town of Pianea or
Corsmian, by a sink which he broke; the Captain Gougues a Gascon being a
Prisoner of War in the Town, with many others, and hearing the cries of
France, France, persuaded his Comrades to fall upon their Keepers, and to kill
them with their own weapons and this Prisoner that was taken at Montisel, was
brought back again into France, as well for his known Valor, as for his
Warlike deliverance, and since that made himself famous in Florida.

As for the Monument erected, makes me think he means the Constable of
France, who was taken Prisoner at the Battle of St. Quentin, and by the
Monument, he means the Escurial, which Philip the II. caused to be built in
memory of that Victory, which obliged Henry the II. to call back again in all
have the Duke of Guise with all his Forces, or else France had been in danger
to be lost.

XXX. French.
Le sac sapproche, feu, grand sang espandu,
Pau grand Fleuve, aux Bouviers l'entreprise,
De Genes, Nice apres long temps attendu,
Fossan, Thurin, a Savillan la prise.
English.
The plundering draws near, fire, abundance of blood spilt,
Pau a great River, an enterprise by Herdsmen;
Of Genes, Nice after they shall have staid long,
Fossan, Thurin, the prize shall be at Savillan.
ANNOT.

The plundering draws near, here the Author speaks of things that should
happen in his days. He writ this the first of March 155^, and History
mentions that from the first of March 1555. till the beginning of 1559. the
plundering of Piemont in Italy was very great, since the taking of Cazal by the
French, for there was nothing but continual fightings, taking and retaking
Towns, Skirmishes and Battles, and most of them by the River Pau, the greatest
of Italy. The rest of the second Verse and the beginning of the third says,
that the undertaking of Genoa shall be by the Herdsmen, by whom he means the
Turks, who being called by the French to help them in the taking of Nice, made
an action fit for Herdsmen and villainous Traitors, doing nothing, because they
had been brided by the Genoeses.

This was done after the French had stayed long for this infi^el, who
endeavored to delude the French, and take all for himself; and this is the
meaning of, After Nice had stayed long, In the mean time the Spaniards
increased their Victories, as the fourth Verse witnesses to the taking of
Fossan, Thurin, and Savillan.

Fossan is a Town of Piemont, which that it might be distinguished from
Marseilles, which the Author often calls Fossen or Phocen, he puts in the
Epithete of Thurin, to signify he means Fossan in Piemont.

He says that Fossan of Piemont shall have the taking toward Savillan, that
is, this Fossan which belongs to the Spaniards, will take some Towns near
Sivillan.

XXXI. French.
De Languedoc, and Guienna plus de dix
Mill, voudront les Alps repasser.
Grans Allobroges marcher contre Brundis,
Aquin and Bresse les viendront recasser.
English.
From Languedoc and Guienna more then 10000.
Would be glad to come back over the Alps.
Great Allobroges shall march against Brundis,
Aquin and Bresse shall beat them back.
ANNOT.

Languedoc and Guienne are two Provinces in France, from whence many Soldiers
shall be raised to go into Italy, but being distressed, shall wish to come back
again over the Alps. By the great Allobroges, I understand those of Savoy and
Pitmont, who shall go against Brundis, in Latin Brundusium; but shall be
beaten back by Aquin and Bresses, Cities belonging to the Venetians.

XXXII. French.
Du Mont Royal naistra d'une Casane,
Qui Duc, and Compte viendra tyranniser,
Dresser Copy de la march Millane,
Favence, Florence d'or and gens espuiser.
English.
Out of the Royal Mount shall be born in a Cottage,
One that shall tyranise over Duke and Earl,
He shall raise an Army in the Land of Millan,
He shall exhaust Favence and Florence of their gold.
ANNOT.

This needs no Interpretation.

XXXIII. French.
Par fraud Regne, forces expolier,
La class obsesse, passages a l'espie,
Deux faincts amiss se viendront r'allier,
Esueiller haine de long temps assoupie.
English.
By fraud a Kingdom and an Army shall be spoilt,
The Fleet shall be put to a strait, passages shall be made to the spies,
Two feigned friends shall agree together,
They shall raise up a hatred that had been long dormant.
ANNOT.

The words are plain.

XXXIV. French.
En grand regret sera la gent Gauloise,
Coeur vain, ledger croira temerite,
Pain, sell, ne vin eau venin ne cervoise,
Plus grand captif, faim, froid, necessite.
English.
In great regreet shall the French Nation be.
Their vain and light heart shall believe rashly.
They shall have neither Bread, Salt, Wine, nor Beer,
Moreover they shall be Prisoners, and shall suffer hunger, cold, and need.
ANNOT.

The words are plain, and the only question is whither this distress threatened
here to France is past or to come.

XXXV. French.
La grand poche viendra plaindre pleurer,
D'avoir esleu, trompez seront en l'Aage,
Gu^ere avec eux ne voudra demeurer,
Deceu sera par ceux de son langage.
English.
The great Pocket shall bewail and bemoan,
For having Elected one, they shall be deceived in his Age,
He shall not stay long with them,
He shall be deceived by those of his own language.
ANNOT.

The great Pocket which is the Key of this Stanza being obscure, forces me to
leave the rest unperfect.

XXXVI. French.
Dieu, le Ciel tout le Divin Verb a l'Onde,
Port par rouges sept razes a Bizance,
Contre les oingts trois cens de Trebisonde,
Deux Loix mettront, and horreur, puis credence,
English.
God, Heaven, all the Divine Word in water,
Carried by red ones, seven shaved heads at Bisantium,
Against the anointed three hundred of Trebisond,
They shall put two Laws, and horror, and afterward believe.
ANNOT.

This seems to foretell that the Sacrament according to the Roman Church,
shall be carried by Cardinals and seven Priests to Constantinople, against
which three hundred of Trebison shall dispute, who shall compare the two Laws
with horror, and afterward believe.

XXXVII. French.
Dix envoyez, chef de nef mettre a mort,
D'un adverty, en class guerre ouverte,
Confusion chef, l'un se picque and mord,
Leryn, Stecades ness, cap dedans la nerte.
English.
Ten shall be sent to put the Captain of the Ship to death,
He shall have notice by one, the Fleet shall be in open War,
A confusion shall be amongst the Chief, one pricks and bites,
Leryn, Stecades nefs, caps dedans la nerte.
ANNOT.

The three first Verses are plain; as for the fourth I believe it to be the
Language of the Antipodes, for I think no man can understand it.

XXXVIII. French.
L'Aisne Roial sur courfier voltigeant,
Picquer viendra si rudement courir,
Gueule lipee, pied dans l'Estrein pleignant,
Train, tire, horriblement mourir.
English.
The eldest Royal prancing upon a Horse,
Shall spur, and run very fiercely
Open mouth, the foot in the Stirrup, complaining,
Drawn, pulled, die horribly.
ANNOT.

This foretells of the eldest Son of a King, who prancing upon his Horse,
shall Spur and run so fiercely, that his foot being entangled in the Stirrup he
shall be dragged and pulled, and die a fearful death.

In the year 1555. upon the 25. of May, this came to pass in the person of
Henry of Albret, the second of that name, King of Navarre.

This Prince Henry II. the eldest Royal riding upon a horse did spur him so
hard, that he ran away with him, so that he perceiving the danger he was in,
pulled the Bridle so hard that the horse's mouth was broken; the pain did not
stop the horse, but contrariwise, he grew the more untoward, that Henry fell
down, and in falling one of his feet hung in the stirrup, so that he was drawn,
and died a horrid death, This I found in the History of Naples.

XXXIX. French.
Le conducteur le l'Armee Francoise,
Cuidant perdre le principal Phalange,
Par sus pave de l' Avaigne and Ardoise,
Soy parfondra par Gennes gent estrange.
English.
The leader of the French Army,
Thinking to rout the chiefest Phalange,
Upon the Pavement of Avaigne, and Slate,
Shall sink in the ground by Gennes, a strange Nation.
ANNOT.

It seems that a French General, thinking to rout and overcome the chiefest
strength of his enemy, and going upon a brittle Pavement, made of Slate, shall
sink in the ground not far from Genoa, which he calls a strange Nation to the
French.

XL: French.
Dedans tonneaux horse oingts d'huile and graisse,
Seront vingt un devant le port fermez,
Au second guet feront par mort prouesses,
Gaigner les ports and du quet assommez.
English.
With Pipes anointed without with Oil and Grease,
Before the harbor, one and twenty shall be shut,
At the second Watch, by death, they shall do great feats of Arms,
To win the Gates, and be killed by the Watch.
ANNOT.

The words and sense of this Stanza are plain.

XLI. French.
Les os des pieds, and des mains enferrez,
Par bruit maison long temps inhabitee,
Seront par songs concavant deterrez,
Maison salubre and sans bruit habitee.
English.
The bones of the feet and of the hands in shackles,
By a noise a house shall be a long time deserted,
By a dream the buried shall be taken out of the ground,
The house shall be healthful, and inhabited without noise.
ANNOT.

I have found the truth of this Stanza upon the place, in my going to Lion, it
was my fortune to lie at a Town four Leagues on this side of it, called
Lapacodier, where this Story was told me to have happened few days before.

It chanced that a Company of Foot was to lie in the Town, and distressed for
quarter, they enquired why such a house was empty, and were told it was not
inhabited by reason of a noise heard there every night. The Captain of the
Troop resolved, since he feared not the living, not to fear the dead, and
thereupon lay in the house that night, where Beds were provided for him, and
about half a Dozen of his stoutest Soldiers; so they laid down their weapons
on the Table, and began to be merry at Cards and Dice, expecting the event. The
door being fast locked, about twelve and one they heard as though some body
knocked at the door, one of the Soldiers by the Captains command, with a Pistol
in his hand, and a Candle, opened the door, then appeared to them a Phantasm,
in the shape of an old man, loaded with Chains, that made a great noise, this
Phantasm beckened to the Captain at the Table to come to him, the Captain also
rising, beckened to the Phantasm to come to him, this lasted for a while, till
the Captain resolved to go to him, and so taking a Candle in one hand, and a
Pistol in the other, bid his Soldiers follow him hand in hand with their Arms,
then taking the Phantasm by the hand, which was exceeding cold, he led them
into the Cellar, and through many turnings, till at last the Phantasm vanished,
and the Candles went out, then were they constrained to remain there till day
light, when perceiving where they were, and having taken notice of the Place
where the Phantasm left them, they went out, and related the story to the
Townsmen; so afterward they dug in that place, where they found a kind of a
Trunk, and the bones of a man in it shackled, they buried the body in a
Churchyard, and no noise was heard afterward in that house, this came to pass
about 1624.

XLII. French.
Quand Innocent tiendra le lieu de Pirre,
Le Nizaram Sicilian se verra,
En grands honneurs, mais apres il cherra,
Dans le bourbier d'une Civil guerre.
English.
When Innocent shall hold the place of Peter,
The Sicilian Nizaram shall see himself
In great honors, but after that he shall fall
Into the dirt of a Civil war.
ANNOT.

Nothing can be more plain and true than this Prophecy, and those that deny
it, may also deny the light of the Sun, but to make it more evident, we will
examine it Verse by Verse.

When Innocent shall hold the place of Peter; that is, when one named Innocent
shall be Pope, as he was that preceded the last.

The Sicilian Nizaram shall see himself in great honors; that is, the Sicilian
Nizarim, for Nizaram, is the Annagramme of Mazarin, letter for letter, who was
born in Sicily, shall see himself in great honors, as he did; for he was then
in his greatest splendour.

But after that he shall fall into the dirt of a Civil War; As every one knows
he did, having put in Prison the Prince of Conde, the Prince of Conty, and the
Duke of Congueiulle, can any thing be more plain, and yet when I read this
forty years ago, I took it to be ridiculous.

XLIII. French.
Lutece en Mars, Senateurs en credit,
Par une nuict Gaul sera troublee,
Du grand Craesus l'Horoscope predit,
Par Saturnus, sa puissance exillee.
English.
Lutetia in Mars, Senators shall be in credit.
In a night France shall be troubled,
The Horoscope of the great Craesus foretells,
That by Saturn his power shall be put down.
ANNOT.

Lutetia in Latin is the City of Paris, after the death of Henry IV. the
Parliament of Paris began to prick up their ears, and to go about to call the
great ones to account, amongst whom was the Marquess d' Ancre, favorite of the
Queen Regent, that had gathered great riches, and therefore is called here
Craesus, our Author says, that his power shall be put down by Saturnus, which
must here be understood mistically, which proved true, for by the Kings
command, then Lewis XIII. he was shot with three Pistols in the Louvre.

LXIV. French.
Deux de poison saisis nouveaux Venus
Dans la cuisine du grand Prince verser,
Par le souillard tous deux au fait cogneus,
Prins qui cuidoit de mort l'aisne vexer.
English.
Two newly come being provided with poison,
To pour in the Kitchen of the great Prince,
By the Cooks Boy the fact shall be known,
And he taken, that thought by death to vex the elder.
ANNOT.

This came to pass in the time of Henry IV. who was poisoned at Melan, by two
unknown men, who were discovered by the Cooks Boy in the doing of it, and were
both taken, the History is at large in Peter Matthew his Historiographer, which
I could not insert here for the satisfaction of the Reader; because I could not
get the Book, the Reader may satisfy himself upon the place.

Other Stanzas, taken out of twelve, under the seventh Century, out of which
eight have been rejected, because they were found in the foregoing Centuries.
LXXIII. French.
REnfort de Sieges manubis and maniples,
Changez le sacre and pass sur le pronsne,
Prins and captifs n'arreste les prez triples,
Plus par fonds mis eleve, mis au Trosne.
English.
Recruit of Sieges, spoils and prizes,
Corpus Christi day shall be changed, and the pronsne slighted,
They shall be taken and made Prisoners, do not stay in the threefold Field.
Moreover, one put in the bottom shall be raised to the Throne.
LXXX. French.
L'Occident libre les Isles Britanniques,
Le recogneu passer le bas, puis haut,
Ne content triste Rebel corss. Escotiques,
Puis rebeller par plui and par nuict chaut.
English.
The West shall be free, and the British Islands,
The discovered shall pass low, then high,
Scottish Pirates shall be, who shall rebel,
In a rainy and hot night.
LXXXII. French.
La stratageme simulte sera rare,
La Mort en voye rebelle par contree,
Par le retour du voyage Barbare,
Exalteront la potestante entree.
English.
The stratagem and grudge shall be scarce,
Death shall be in a rebellious way through the Country,
By the return from a Barbarian travel,
They shall exalt the Protestant entrance.
LXXXIII French.
Vent chaut, conseil, pleurs, timidite,
De nuict au lict assailly sans les Arms:
D'oppression grand calamite,
L' Epithala(...)-converty pleurs and larmes.
English.
Hot wind, council, tears, fearfulness,
He shall be assaulted in his bed by night without Arms,
From that oppression shall be raised a great calamity,
The Epithalamium shall be converted into tears.
ANNOT.

The reason why I have put no Annotations to these, as I have done to the rest,
is, because according to my judgment, and that of the most Learned, they are
spurious.

TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
BEfore you Read the following Epistle, I would have you be warned of a few
things: One is, that according to my opinion, it is very obscure and
intelligible in most places, being without any just connection, and besides the
obscurity of the sense, the crabbedness of the expression is such, that had not
the importunity of the Bookseller prevailed, I would have left it out, but
considering the respect due to Antiquity, the satisfaction we owe to curious
persons, who would perhaps have thought the Book imperfect without it, we let
it go, trusting to your Candor and Ingenuity.

Farewell.
THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY VIII. IX. and X.

That had not been Printed before, and are in the same Edition of 1568.

TO THE Most Invincible, most High, and most Christian King of France HENRY the
Second; Michael Nostradamus his most obedient Servant and Subject, wishes
Victory and Happiness.
BY reason of that singular observation, I had O most Christian and Victorious
King, since my Face, who had been cloudy a great while, did present it self
before your immeasurable Majesty. I have been ever since perpetually dazzled,
continually honoring and worshipping that day, in which I presented my self
before it, as before a singular humane Majesty; now seeking after some
occasion, whereby I might make appear the goodness and sincerity of my heart,
and extend my acquaintance toward your most Excellent Majesty; and seeing that
it was impossible for me to declare it by effects, as well because of the
darkness and obscurity of my mind, as for the enlightening it did receive from
the face of the greatest Monarch in the World; I was a great while besore I
could resolve to whom I should Dedicate these three last Centuries of my
Prophecies, which make the complete thousand, and after I had a long time
considered, I have with a great temerity made my address to your Majesty, being
no ways dainted by it, as the grave Author Plutarch related in the Life of
Lycurgus, that seeing the offerings and gifts that were Sacrificed in the
Temples of their Heathen Gods, durst not come thither no more, least the people
should wonder at the costs and charges. Notwithstanding, seeing your Royal
Splendor joined with an incomparable Humanity, I have made my address to it,
not as to the Kings of Persia, of whom to come near, it was forbidden, but to a
most Prudent and Wise Prince I have Dedicated my Nocturnal and Prophetical
Supputations, written rather by a natural instinct, and Poetical furour, then
by any rules of Poetry; and most part of it written and agreeing with the
Years, Months and Weeks, of the Regions, Countries and most part of the Towns
and Cities in Europe; touching also some thing of Africa, and of a part of
Asia, by the change of Regions that come near to those Climats, and compounded
of natural faction. But some body may answer (who has need to blow his Nose)
the Rhyme to be as easy to be understood, as the intelligence of the sense is
hard and difficult, and therefore O most humane King, most of the Prophetical
Stanza's are so difficult, that there is no way to be found for the
Interpretation of them; nevertheless being in hope of setting down the Towns,
Cities, and Regions, wherein most of those shall happen, especially in the year
1585. and in the year 1606. beginning from this present time, which is the 14.
of March 1557. and going further to the fulfilling of those things, which shall
be in the beginning of the seventh Millenary, according as my Astronomical
Calculation, and other Learning could reach, at which time the adversaries of
Christ and of his Church shall begin to multiply; all has been composed and
calculated in days and hours of Election, and well disposed, and all as
accurately as was possible for me to do. And the whole Minerva libera and non
invita, Calculating almost as much of the time that is come, as of that which
is past, comprehending it in the present time, and what by the course of the
said time shall be known to happen in all Regions punctually as it is here
written, adding nothing superfluous to it, although it be said; Quod de futuris
contingentibus, non est determinata omnino veritas. It is very true Sir, that
by my natural instinct given me by my Progenitors, I did think I could foretell
any thing; but having made an agreement between this said instinct of mine, and
a long Calculation of Art, and by a great tranquillity and repose of mind,
emptied my Soul of all care and carefulness, I have foretold most part of these
ex tripode aeneo, though there be many who attribute to me some things that are
no more mine, then what is nothing at all. The only Eternal God, who is the
searcher of men's hearts, being pious, just, and merciful, is the true Judge of
it, whom I beseech to defend me from the calumny of the wicked men, who would
as willing calumniously inquire for what reason all your ancient Progenitors
Kings of France have healed the disease called the King's Evil, and some other
Nations have cured the biting of venomous Beasts; others have had a certain
instinct to foretell things that are to come, and of several others, too
tedious to be here inserted; notwithstanding those in whom the malignancy of
the wicked spirit shall not be suppressed by length of time; after my decease
my work shall be in more esteem, then when I was alive; nevertheless if I
should fail in the supputation of times, or could not please some, may it
please your most Imperial Majesty to forgive me, protesting before God and his
Saints, that I do not intend to insert any thing by writing in this present
Epistle, that may be contrary to the true Catholic Faith, in conferring the
Astronomical Calculation, according to my learning; for the space of times of
our Fathers that have been before us, are such, submitting my self to the
correction of the most Learned, that the first man Adam was before Noah, about
one thousand two hundred forty two years, not computing the time according to
the supputation of the Gentiles, as Varro did, but only according to the
Sacred Scriptures, and the weakness of my wit in my Astronomical Calculations.
After Noah and the universal Flood about a thousand and fourscore years came
Abraham, who was a supreme Astrologer, according to most men's opinion, and did
first invent the Chaldaean Letters; after that came Moses, viz. some five
hundred and fifteen or sixteen years after, and between the time of David and
Moses have passed about 570. years. After which between the time of David and
that of our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, have
passed (according to some Chronographers a thousand three hundred and fifty
years. Some body may object, that this supputation is not true; because it
differs from that of Eusebius. And from the time of humane redemption, to
that of the execrable seduction of the Saracens, have passed six hundred and
four and twenty years, or thereabouts. From that time hitherto, it is easy to
collect what times are past, if my supputation be not good among all Nations;
becau e all has been calculated by the course of the Celestial bodies, joined
with motion, infused in me at certain loose hours, by the motion of my ancient
Progenitors; but the injury of the time (most excellent King) requires, that
such secret events should not be manifested, but by an enigmatical Sentence,
having the only sense, and one only intelligence, without having mixed with it
any ambiguous or amphibological calculation, but rather under a Cloudy
obscurity, through a natural infusion, coming near to the Sentence of one of
the Thousand and two Prophets, that have been since the Creation of the World,
according to the supputation and punical Chronick of Joel. Effundam spiritum
meum super omnem, and carnem and prophetabunt filii vestri and siliae vestrae:
But such a Prophecy did proceed from the mouth of the Holy Ghost, who was the
Supreme and eternal Power, which being come with that of the Celestial bodies,
has caused some of them to foretell great and wonderful things; as for my part
I challenge no such thing in this place, God forbid, I confess truly, that all
comes from God, for which I give him thanks, honor, and praise, without
having mixed any thing of that divination, which proceeds a Fato, but only of
that which proceeds a Deo and Natura, and most of it joined with the motion
and course of the Celestial Bodies; inso much that seeing as in a burning
Glass, and through a Cloudy Vision, the great and sad events, the prodigious
and calamitous accidents, that shall befall the Worshippers, first of God, and
secondly, those that are Earthly propped up, with a thousand other calamitous
accidents, which shall be known in course of time; for God will take notice of
the long barrenness of the great Dame, who afterward shall conceive two
principal Children: But being in danger, she that shall be added to her by the
temerity of age, running a danger in the 18, and not able to go beyond the 36,
shall leave behind her three females, and he shall have two that never had any
of the same father, the differences between the three Brothers shall be such,
and then shall they be united and agreed, insomuch that the three and four
parts of Europe shall quake: by the lesser in years shall the Christian
Monarchy be upheld and augmented, Sects shall rise, and presently be put down
again, the Arabians shall be put back, Kingdoms shall be united, and new Laws
made. Concerning the other Children; the first shall possess the furious
Crowned Lions, holding their Paws upon the Escutcheons. The second, well
attended, will go so deep among the Lions, that the second way shall be open,
all trembling and furious going down, to get upon the Pyrenaean Mountains. The
ancient Monarchy shall not be transferred, the third innundation of humane
blood shall happen, and for a good while Mars shall not be in Lent. And the
Daughter shall be given for the preservation of the Church, the Dominator of it
falling into the Pagan Forces of the new unbelievers, she shall have two
Children, one from faithfulness, and the other from unfaithfulness, for the
confirmation of the Catholic Church; and the other, who to his confusion and
late repentance, shall go about to ruin her. There shall be three Regions by
the extreme differences of the leagues, viz. the Roman, the German, and the
Spanish, who by a Military hand shall make diverse Sects, forsaking the 50 and
52 degrees of altitude, and all those of remote Regions shall do homage to the
Regions of Europe, and of the North of 40 Degrees Altitude, who by a vain
fright shall quake, after that those of the West, South, and East shall quake
because of their power, insomuch that what shall be done, cannot be undone by
Warlike power. They shall be equal in Nature, but much different in Faith.
After this, the barren Dame of a greater power then the second, shall be
admitted by two people, by the first obstinate that had power over the others;
by the second, and by the third, that shall extend his Circuit of the East of
Europe, as far as the Hungarians, vanquished and overcome, and by a Maritine
Sail, shall make his excursions into the Trinarrian and Adriatic Sea, by his
Mirmidons, and Germany shall fall, and the Barbarian Sect shall be wholly
driven from among the Latins. Then the great Empire of Antichrist shall begin
in the Attila, and Xerxes to come down with an innumerable multitude of people,
insomuch that the coming of the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the 48 Degree,
shall transmigrate, driving away the abomination of the Antichrist, who made
War against the Royal, who shall be the great Vicar of I. C. and against his
Church, and his Kingdom, per tempus, and in occasion temporis. and before this
shall precede a Solar Eclipse, the most dark and obscure that was since the
Creation of the World, till the death and passion of I. C. and from him till
then, and it shall be in the Month of October, when such a great Translation
shall be made, that every body will think that the weight of the Earth, shall
have lost its natural motion, and be swallowed up in perpetual darkness. In the
Spring before and after this, shall happen extraordinary changes, mutations of
Kingdoms, and great Earthquakes, with pullulation of the new Babylons
miserable daughter, increased by the abomination of the first Holocaust, and
shall last only 73 years and 7 Months, then from that Stock she that had been
long time barren, proceeding from the fifth Degree, who shall renew all the
Christian Church, and then shall be a great Peace, Union and Concord, between
one of the Children of the wandering and separated foreheads by diverse Kingdoms,
and such Peace shall be made, that the Instigator and Promoter of Military
function, by diversity of Religions, shall be tied to the bottom of the deep,
and the Kingdom of the Rabious, who shall countefeit the wise, shall be united.
And the Countries, Towns, Cities and Provinces, that had deserted their first
ways to free themselves, captivating themselves more deeply, shall be secretly
angry at their liberty and Religion lost, and shall begin to strike from the
left, to turn to the right, restoring the holiness beaten down long before with
their former writing; so that after the great Dog, shall come forth the biggest
Mastif, who shall destroy all that was done formerly, then Churches shall be
built up again as before, the Clergy shall be restored to its former state, and
shall begin to Whore, and Luxuriate, and to commit a Thousand Crimes. And being
near unto another desolation, when she shall be in her higher and more sublime
dignity, there shall rise powers and Militaty hands, who shall take away from
her the two Swords, and leave her only the Ensigns, from which by the means of
the crookedness that draws them, the people causing it to go straight, and
not willing to submit unto them by the end opposite to the sharp hand that
touches the Ground, they shall provoke till that a branch shall proceed from
the barren, which shall deliver the people of the World from that meek and
voluntary slavery, putting themselves under the protection of Mars, depriving
Jupiter of all his honors and dignities, for the free City established and
seated in another little Mesopotamia. And the chief Governor shall be thrust
out of the middle, and set in the high place of the Air, being ignorant of the
conspiracy of the Conspirators, with the second Thrasibulus, who long before
did manage this thing, then shall the impurities and abominations be objected
with great shame, and made manifest to the darkness of the darkened light, and
shall cease toward the end of the change of his Kingdom, the chief men of the
Church shall be put back from the love of God, and many of them shall
apostatise from the true faith, and from the true Sects, the middlemost of
which by her worshippers, be a little put into ruin; the first, wholly in all
Europe, and most part of Africa undone by the third, by the means of the poor
in Spirit, who by madness elevated, shall through libidinous luxury, commit
adultery. The people will rise and maintain it, and shall drive away those that
did adhere to the Legislators, and shall seem by the Kingdoms spoiled by the
Eastern men, that God the Creator has loosed Satan from his Infernal Prison,
to cause to be born the great Dog and Doham, who shall make so great and
abominable a fraction in the Churches, that the Red nor the White, without Eyes
and without Hands, shall not judge of it, and their power shall be taken a way
from them. Then shall be a greater persecution against the Church than ever
was, and in the mean time shall be so great a Plague, that two parts of three
in the world shall fail, insomuch that no body shall be able to know the true
owners of fields and houses, and there shall happen a total desolation unto the
Clergy, and the Martial men shall usurp what shall come back from the City of
the Sun, and from Molita, and the Staechades Islands, and the great Chain of
that Port shall be open, which takes its denomination from a Sea Ox, and a
new incursion shall be made through the Sea Coasts, willing to deliver the
Castulan Leap from the first Mohammedan taking, and the assaulting shall not
altogether be in vain, and that place where the habitation of Abraham was,
shall be assaulted by those, who shall have a respect for the Jovials. And that
City of Achem, shall be encompassed and assaulted on all sides, by a great
power of Armed men; their Sea Forces shall be weakened by the Western men, and
to that Kingdom shall happen great desolation, and the great Cities shall be
depopulated, and those that shall come in, shall be comprehended within the
vengeance of the wrath of God, and the Sepulcher held in so great veneration,
shall remain a great while open to the universal Aspect of the Heavens, Sun and
Moon, and the sacred place shall be converted into a Stable for small and great
Cattle, and put to profane uses. O what a calamitous affliction shall be then
for women with Child, and chiefly by the principal Easterly head, being for the
most part moved by the Northern and Westerly men, vanquished and put to death,
beaten, and all the rest put to flight, and the Children he had by many women,
put in Prison, then shall be fulfilled the Prophecy of the Kingly Prophet. Ut
andiret gemitus compeditorum, ut solveret filios interemptorum, what great
oppression shall be made then upon the Princes and Governors of Kingdoms, and
especially of those that shall live Eastward and near the Sea, and their
Languages intermixed very sociably. The Language of the Arabians and Latins by
the African communication, and all the Eastern Kings shall be driven away,
beaten and brought to nothing, not altogether by the means of the strength of
the Kings of the North, and by the drawing near of our age, by the means of
three secretly united, seeking for death by ambushes one against another. And
the renewing of the Triumvirate shall last seven years, while the fame of such
a sect shall be spread all the world over, and the Sacrifice of the Holy and
immaculate Host shall be upheld: And then shall the Lords be two in number
victorious in the North against the Eastern ones, and there shall be such a
great noise and Warlike tumult, that all the East shall quake for fear of those
two Brothers, not Northern Brothers. And because, Sir, by this discourse, I put
all things confusedly in these predictions, as well concerning the event of
them, as for the account of the time which follows, which is not at all, or
very little conformable to that I have done before, as well by Astronomical
way, as other of the sacred Scriptures which cannot err, I could have set down
to every quatrain the time in which they shall happen, but it would not please
every body, much less the interpretation of them, till, Sir your Majesty has
granted me full power so to do, that my Calumniators may have nothing to say
against me. Nevertheless reckoning the years since the Creation of the World to
the Birth of Noah have passed 1506. years, and from the Birth of Noah to the
perfect building of the Ark near the universal Flood have passed 600. years,
whither solary, or lunary, or mixed, for my part according to the Scriptures, I
hold that they were solary. And at the end of those 600. years Noah entered
into the Ark, to save himself from the Flood, which Flood was universal upon
the Earth, and lasted a year and two months; and from the end of the Flood, to
the birth of Abraham did pass the number of 295. years; and from the birth of
Abraham to that of Isaac did pass 100. years, and from Isaac to Jacob 60.
years; and from the time that he went into Egypt till he came out of it, did
pass 130. years; and from the time that Jacob went into Egypt till his
posterity came out of it did pass 430. years; and from the coming out of Egypt
to the building of Salomon's Temple in the fourth year of his Reign did pass
480. years; and from the building of the Temple till Jesus Christ, according to
the supputation of the Chronographers, did pass 490. years; and so by this
supputation, which I have gathered out of the Holy Scriptures, the whole comes
to about 4173. years, eight Months more or less. But since the time of I. C.
hitherto, I leave it because of the diversity of Opinions. And having
calculated these present Prophecies according to the order of the Chain, which
contains the revolution, and all by Astronomical Doctrine, and according to
my natural instinct, and after some time, and in it comprehending since the
time that Saturn shall turn to come in on the 7 of the Month of April, till the
25 of August; Jupiter from the 14 of June to the 7 of October; Mars from the 27
of April till 22 of June, Venus from the 9 of April to the 22 of May; Mercury
from the 3 of February till the 24 of the same; afterward from the 1 of June
till the 24 of the same; and from the 25 of September till the 16 of October,
Saturn in Capricorn, Jupiter in Aquarius, Mars in Scorpio, Venus in Pisces,
Mercury within a Month in Capricorn, Aquarius in Pisces, Luna in Aquarius, the
Dragons head in Libra, the Tail opposite to her sign according to a Conjunction
of Jupiter and Mercury, with a quadrin Aspect of Mars to Mercury, and the head
of the Dragon shall be with a Conjuction of Sol and Jupiter: the year shall be
peaceful without Eclipse, and in the beginning of that year shall be a greater
persecution against the Christian Church than ever was in Africa, and it shall
last till the year 1792. at which time every body will think it a renovation of
Age. After that the Roman people shall begin to stand upright again, and to put
away some obscure darknesses, receiving some of its former light, but not
without great divisions, and continual changes. Venice after that with great
strength and power shall lift up her Wings so high, that she will not be much
inferior to the strength of the old Rome, and in that time great Bizantine
Sails, joined with the Ligustiques, by the Northern help and power shall give
some hinderance, whereby those of Crete shall not keep their faith, the Arches
built by the ancient Martial men, will keep company together with Neptun's
Waves. In the Adriatic shall be a great discord, what was united shall be
parted asunder, and what was before, and is a great City, will go near to become
a house, including the Pempotan, and the Mesopot amia of Europe to 45, and
others to 41, 42, and 37. And in that time, and Country, the Infernal power
shall rise against the Church of I. C. with the power of the Enemies to his
Law, which shall be the second Antechrist, who shall persecute the said Church
and its Vicar by the means of the power of Temporal Kings,, who through their
Ignorance shall be seduced by Tongues more sharp than any Sword in the hands of
2 mad man. The said Reign of Antichrist shall not last but till the ending of
him, born by Age, and of the other in the City of Plancus, accompanied by the
Elect of Modone, Fulcy by Ferrara, maintained by Adriatic Liguriens, and the
proximity of the great Trinacria, and after that shall pass over the Mount
Jovis. The Gallique Ogmyon followed with such a number, that even from afar off
the Empire of the great Law, shall be presented to him, and then, and after
shall be profusedly spilled the blood of the Innocent by the Nocent, raised on
high; then by great Floods the memory of those things contained by such
Instruments, shall receive an innumerable loss, as also shall learning toward
the North by the Divine Will, Satan bound once more, and an universal Peace
shall be among men, and the Church of I. C. shall be free from all tribulation,
although the Azosrains would fain mix among it the Honey of their pestilent
seduction, and this shall happen about the seventh Millinary; so that the
Sanctuary of I. C shall be no more trodden down by the unbelievers that shall
come from the North, the world being near to some conflagration, although by my
supputations in my Prophecies, the course of the time goes much further. In
the Epistle that within the late years I have dedicated to my Son Caesar
Nostradamus, I have openly enough declared some things, without
prognosticating. But here (Sir) are comprehended many great and wonderful
events, which those that come after us shall see. And during the said
Astrological supputation, conferred with the sacred Scripture, the persecution
of the Clergy shall have its beginning from the power of Northern Kings, joined
with the Eastern ones; that persecution shall last Eleven years and a little
less, at which time the chief Northern King shall fail, which years being
ended, shall come in his united Southern one, who shall yet more violently
persecute the Clergy by the Apostatical seduction of one that shall have the
absolute power over the Militant Church of God: And the Holy people of God and
keeper of his Law, and all order of Religion shall be grievously persecuted and
afflicted, insomuch that the blood of the true Ecclesiastical men shall float
all over, and unto one of those horrid Kings this praise shall be given by his
followers to have spilt more humane blood of the Innocent Clergymen, than any
body can do Wine, and the said King shall commit incredible crimes against the
Church; humane blood shall run through public streets and Churches, as water
coming from an impetuous Rain, and the next Rivers shall be red with blood, and
by another Sea fight the Sea shall be red, insomuch that one King shall say to
another, Bellis rubuit navalibus aequor. After that in the same year, and those
that follow, shall happen the most horrid Plague, caused by the precedent
famine, and so great tribulations as ever did happen since the first foundation
of the Christian Church through all the Latin Regions; some marks of it
remaining in some Countries of Spain. At that time the Northern King hearing
the complaint of the people of his principal title, shall raise up so great an
Army, and shall go through the straights of his last Ancestors and Progenitors,
that he will set up all again in their first state, and the great Vicar of the
Cope, shall be restored in his former estate, but desolate and altogether
forsaken, and then shall the Sancta sanctorum be destroyed by Paganism, and the
old and New Testament be thrust out and burnt, after that shall Antechrist be
the infernal Prince, and once more for the last all the Kingdoms of Christendom
and also of the unbelievers shall quake for the space of 25 years, and there
shall be more grievous Wars and Battles, and Towns, Cities, Castles and other
buildings shall be burnt, desolate, and destroyed with a great effusion of
Vestal blood, Married Women and Widows ravished, sucking Children dashed
against the Walls of the Towns, and so many evils shall be committed by the
means of the Infernal prince Satan, that almost the universal world shall be
undone and desolate, and before these events many unusual Birds shall cry
through the Air, Huy, Huy, and a little while after shall vanish away: And
after that time shall have lasted a good while, there shall be renewed a
Kingdom of Saturn and Golden Age. God the Creator shall say, hearing the
affliction of his people, Satan shall be put, and tied in the bottom of the
deep, and there shall begin an universal peace between God and men, and the
Ecclesiastical power shall be in its greater force, and Satan shall be left
bound for the space of a thousand years, and then shall be loosed again. All
these Figures are justly fitted by the sacred Scripture, to the visible
Celestial things, viz. Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, and others joined with them,
as more at large may be seen in some of my Stanza's. I would have calculated it
more deeply, and compared one with the other, but seeing (most excellent King)
that some stand ready to censure me, I shall withdraw my Pen to its Nocturnal
repose. Multa etiam O Rex potentissime pr^clara, and sane in brevi ventura, sed
omnia in hac tua Epistola inne^tere non possumus, nec volumus, sed ad
intelligenda quedam facta, horrida fata pauca libanda sunt, quamvis tanta sit
in omnes tua amplitudo and humanitas homines, deosque pietas, ut solus
amplissimo and Chris^ianissimo regis nomine, and ad quem summa totius
Religionis authoritas deferatur, dignus esse videare. But only I shall beseech
you O most Merciful King, through your singular and prudent goodness, to
understand rather the desire of my Heart, and the earnest desire I have to obey
your most excellent Majesty, since my Eyes were so near your Royal splendour,
than the greatness of my work can deserve or require.

From Selin this 27 June, 1558. Faciebat Michael Nostradamus, Salonae Petreae,
Provinciae.

THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus.
CENTURY VIII.
I. French.
PAu, Nay, Loron, plus feu qu'a sang sera,
Laud nager, fuir grands aux Surrez,
Les Agassas entree refusera,
P ampon, Durance, les tiendront enserrez.
English.
Pau, Nay, Loron, more in fire then blood shall be,
Lauda to swim, great ones run to the Surrez,
The Agassas shall refuse the entry,
Pampon, Durance shall keep them enclosed.
ANNOT.

The Prophecies of this, and of the remaining Centuries being for the most part
so obscure, as no man is able to make any sense of them, the judicious Reader
must not expect from me, what no man else can do; let him suffice if I give him
as much light as I can, and leave the rest to his own judgment and industry.

Pau is the chief Town of the Province of Bearn, in the Kingdom of Navarre,
where Henry the IV. King of France and Navarre was born. Nay and Loron are
barbarous words, so are Surrez, Agassas and Pampon. Durance is a River of
France.

II. French.
Condon and Aux, and autour de Mirande,
Je voy du Ciel feu qui les environne,
Sol, Mars, conjoint au Lion, puis Marmande,
Foudre, grand guerre, mur tomber dans Garonne.
English.
Condon and Aux, and about Mirande,
I see a fire from Heaven that encompasseth them,
Sol, Mars, in conjunction with the Lion, and then Marmande,
Lightning, great War, Wall falls into the Garonne.
ANNOT.

Condon, Aux, Mirande, and Marmande are Towns in the Province of Guyenne and
Languedoc, Garonne is the River of Bourdeaux.

III French.
Au fort Chasteau de Vigilanne and Resviers,
Sera serre les puisnay de Nancy,
Dedans Turin seront ards les premiers,
Lors que de dueil Lion sera transy.
English.
In the strong Castle of Vigilanne and Resviers,
Shall be kept close the youngest son of Nancy,
Within Turin the first shall be burnt up,
When Lion shall be overwhelmed with sorrow.
ANNOT.

Vigilanne and Resviere being falsely written here, it must be set down Veillane
and Riniere, which are two strong Castles, the first being seated in Piemont,
and the last in Burgundy.

Nancy is the chief Town of Lorrain, and Turin of Piemont, Lion is a famous
City in France, so that the sense of this Prophecy seems to be, that the
youngest Son of Nancy, (that is of Lorrain) shall be kept close Prisoner in
those two Castles of Veillane and Riniera, and that the chief men of Turin
shall be burnt, when the City of Lion shall be oppressed with sorrow.

IV. French.
Dedans Monech le Coq sera receu,
Le Cardinal de France apparoistra,
Par Logarion Romain sera deceu,
Foiblesse a l'Aigle, and force au Coq croistra:
English.
Within Monech the Cock shall be admitted,
The Cardinal of France shall appear,
By Logarion, Roman shall be deceived,
Weakness to the Eagle, and strength to the Cock shall grow.
ANNOT.

Monech is false written here, it must be Monaco, which is a Principality and
Town in Italy by Genoa, belonging to the House of the Grimaldi, wherein the
French were admitted by the policy of Cardinal Richelieu, during the Wars
between France and Spain.

Logarion is a Barbarous name, by which he means some body unknown to us.

By the Eagle is meant the Emperor, who was very low at that time, and by the
Cock, the King of France, who was very powerful, where it is to be observed,
that by the Eagle the Emperor is always understood, because it is his Arms,
and by the Cock is meant the King of France, because a Frenchman is called in
Latin Gallus, which also signifies a Cock.

V. French.
Apparoistra Temple luisant orne,
La Lamp and Cierge a Borne and Bretueil,
Pour la Lucerne le Canton destourne,
Quand on verra le grand Coq au Cercueil.
English.
A shining adorned Temple shall appear,
The Lamp and wax Candle at Borne and Bretueil,
For Lucerne the Canton turned of,
When the great Cock shall be seen in his Coffin.
ANNOT.

Borne and Bretueil are two particular places, the first is one of the four
Baronies of the River Mase, viz. Petersem, Steen, Horn, Borne, the other is a
little Town in Britany.

Lucerne is one of the Cantons of Switzerland. We have said before what is
meant by the great Cock, viz. the King of France. Let the Reader make up the
rest, according to his fancy.

VI. French.
Charte fulgure a Lion apparente,
Luysant, print Malte, subit sera estainte,
Sardon, Mauris traitera decevante,
Geneve a Londres, a Coq trahison feinte.
English.
A thundering light at Lions appearing,
Bright, took Maltha, instantly shall be put out,
Sardon shall treat Mauris deceitfully,
To Geneva, London, and the Cock a fained treason.
ANNOT.

Maltha is an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, famous for the Knights that
inhabit it, and take their name from thence. Sardon and Mauris are barbarous
words.

VII. French.
Verceil, Milan donra intelligence,
Dedans Tycin sera faite la pay,
Courir par Seine eau, sang, feu par Florence,
Unique choir d'hault en bas faisant may.
English.
Verceil, Milan shall give intelligence,
In the Tycin shall the Peace be made,
Run through Seine water, blood, fire through Florence,
The only one shall fall from top to bottom making may.
ANNOT.

Verceil and Milan are two Cities in Italy, the Tycin, or rather Thesin is a
River of the same Country; Seine is the River that runs at Paris. Florence
is a famous City in Italy, and may a barbarous word, foisted up to patch up
his Rhyme.

VIII. French.
Pres de Linterne dans des tonnes sermez,
Chivas fera pour l'Aigle la menee,
L'Esleu casse, luy ses ges enfermez,
Dedans Turin rapt espouse emmenee.
English.
Near Linterne, enclosed within Tuns,
Chivas shall drive the plot for the Eagle,
The Elect cashiered, he and his men shut up,
Within Turin, arape, and Bride carried away.
ANNOT.

Linterne is a small Town in Italy; by Tuns are meant wooden Vessels, such as
they put Rhenish wines and others in.

Chivas is a Town in Piemont, and Turin the chief Town of the said Country.

IX. French.
Pendant que l'Aigle and le Coq a Savone,
Seront unis, Mer, Levant and Hongrie,
L'Armee a Naples, Palerme, Marque d' Ancone,
Rome, Venise, par barbe horrible cry.
English.
Whilst the Eagle and the Cock at Savona,
Shall be united, Sea, Levant, and Hungary,
Army at Naples, Palermo, Mark of Ancona,
Rome, Venice, cry because of a horrid beard.
ANNOT.

By the Eagle is meant the Emperor, and by the Cock the King of France; the
rest is easy.

X. French.
Punateur grande sortira de Lausane,
Qu'on ne scaura l'origine du fait,
L'on mettra horse toute la gent loingtaine,
Feu veu au Ciel peuple estranger deffait.
English.
A great stink shall come forth out of Lausane,
So that no body shall know the of spring of it,
They shall put out all the Forreiners,
Fire seen in Heaven, a strange people defeated.
ANNOT.

Lausane is a City situated in Savoy, by the Lake of Geneva, but now as I take
it in the possession of the Switzers.

XI. French.
Peuple infiny paroistre a Vicence,
Sans force seu brusler la Basilique,
Pres de Lunage des fait grand de Valence,
Lors que Venise par morte prendre pique.
English.
Infinite deal of people shall appear at Vicence,
Without force, fire shall burn in the Basilick,
Near Lunage the great one of Valence shall be defeated,
When Venice by death shall take the pique.
ANNOT.

Vicenza is a Town in Italy, under the dominion of the Venetians. Basilick is
the name of the biggest sort of Canons or pieces of Ordinance. As for Valence
there is three Cities of that name, one is Spain, the second in France, and the
third in Italy; instead of Lunage, it must be Lignago which is a Town in Italy.

XII. French.
Apparoistra aupres du Bufalore,
L'haut and procere enter dedans Milan,
L'Abbe de Foix avec ceux de Saint Maure,
Feront la fourbe habillez en vilain.
English.
Near the Bufalore shall appear,
The high and tall, come into Milan,
The Abbot of Foix with those of Saint Maure,
Shall make the trumpery being clothed like rogues.
ANNOT.

Bufalore is a barbarous word; Foix is a Country in France, and St. Maure a
little Town in the said Country.

XIII. French.
Le croise Friar par amor effrenee,
Fera par Praytus Bellerophon mourir,
Class a mil ans, la femme forcenee,
Beu le breueage, tous deux apres perir.
English.
The crossed Brother through unbridled love,
Shall cause Bellerophon to be killed by Praytus,
Fleet to thousand years, the woman out of her wit,
The drink being drunk, both after that, perish.
ANNOT.

Bellerophon and Praytus are two supposed and fictitious names.

XIV. French.
Le grand credit, d'or, d'argent l'abundance,
Aveuglera par Libide l'honneur,
Cogneu sera d'adultere l'offence,
Qui parviendra a son grand deshonneur.
English.
The great credit, the abundance of Gold and Silver,
Shall blind honor by lust,
The offense of the Adulterer shall be known,
Which shall come to his great dishonor.
ANNOT.

This is easy to be understood; for it is frequently seen, that Honor is made
blind by lust, and chiefly if that lust be propped up with credit; and
abundance of Gold and Silver,

XV. French.
Verse Aquilon grands efforts par hommasse,
Presque l' Europe, l'Univers vexer,
Les deux Eclipses mettra en tell chasse,
Et aux P'annons vie and mort renforcer.
English.
Toward the North great endeavors by a manly woman,
To trouble Europe, and almost all the world,
She Shall put to flight the two Eclipses,
And shall reinforce life and death to the Pannons.
ANNOT.

By the Pannons is meant the Hungarians. The rest is easy.

XVI French.
Au lieu que Hieson fit sa nef fabriquer,
Si grand Deluge sera and si subite,
Qu' on n'aura lieu ne Terre sattaquer,
L'onde monter Fesulan Olympique.
English.
In the place where Jason caused his Ship to be built,
So great a Flood shall be, and so sudden,
That there shall be neither place nor Land to save themselves,
The Waves shall climb upon the Olympic Fesulan.
ANNOT.

Jason was Son to King Aeson, who built a Ship called Argos, in which he went
to Colchos, to Conquer the Golden Fleece.

Fesulan here is to be understood of some high and eminent place, which
therefore he calls Olympic, from Olympus a high Mountain in Grecias The
place where Jason builded his Ship.

XVII. French.
Les bien aisez subit seront desmis,
Le monde mis par les trois freres en trouble,
Cite Marine saisiront ennemis,
Faim, feu, sang, peste, and de tous maux le double.
English.
Those that were at ease shall be put down,
The world shall be put in trouble by three Brothers,
The Maritine City shall be seized by its enemies,
Hunger, fire, blood, plague, and the double of all evils.
ANNOT.

It is not easy to tell what them three Brothers have been, or shall be, nor
that Maritine or Sea City, therefore we leave it to the liberty of every ones
judgment, the words being plain enough.

XVIII French.
De Flore issue de sa mort sera cause,
Un temps devant par jeusne and vieille bueyre,
Car les trois lis luy feront tell pause,
Par son fruit sauve comme chair crew mueyre.
English.
Issued from Flora shall be the cause of her own death,
One time before, through fasting and old drink,
For the three Lillies shall make her such a pause,
Saved by her fruit, as raw flesh dead.
ANNOT.

This is one of those, wherein the Author would not be understood, and may be
did not understand himself.

XVIX. French.
A soustenir la grand cappe troublee,
Pour l'esclaireir les rouges marcheront,
De mort famille sera presqu'accablee,
Les rouges rouges, le rouge assommeront.
English.
To maintain up the great troubled Cloak,
The red ones shall march for to cler it,
A family shall be almost crushed to death,
The red, the red, shall knock down the red one.
ANNOT.

This seems to carry no other sense than a conspiracy of the Cardinals,
called here by the name of the Red, the Red against the Pope, who is called the
Red one.

XX. French.
Le faux message par election feinte,
Courir par Urbem rompue pache arreste,
Voix acheptees de sang chappelle teinte,
Et a un autre qui l'Empire conteste.
English.
The contract broken, stops the message,
From going about the Town, by a fained election,
Voices shall be bought, and a Chapel died with blood,
By another, who challenges the Empire.
ANNOT.

This was so falsely printed, and so preposterously set in order, that I had
much ado to pick out this little sense of it, which amounts to no more, than
that by reason of an agreement broken, the Messenger, that went to publish a
saigned election (it seems of the Empire) shall be hindered, and that one of
the Competitors to the said Empire, shall be killed in or near a Chapel, that
shall be soiled by his Blood.

XXI. French.
Au port de Agde trois fustes entreront,
Portant infection avec soy, pestilence,
Passant le pont mil milles embleront,
Et le pont rompre a tierce resistance.
English.
Three Galleys shall come into the harbor of Agde,
Carrying with them infection and Pestilence,
Going beyond the Bridge, they shall carry away thousands,
At the third resistance the Bridge shall be broken
ANNOT.

Agde is a Sea Town in France upon the Mediterranean Sea, which is threatened
here of three Galleys, that shall come into the Harbor of it, and shall bring
with them infection and Plague; and besides carry away thousands of Captives,
by which it seems, that these should be Turkish Galleys, till at last upon
the third resistance of the Townsmen the Bridge shall be broken.

XXII. French.
Gorfan, Narbonne, par le Sell advercir,
Tucham, la Grace Perpignan trahie,
La ville rouge ny voudra consentir,
Par haute Voldrap, Gris vie faillie.
English.
Gorsan, Narbonne, by the Salt shall give notice,
To Tucham, the Grace Perpignan betrayed,
The rek Town will not give consent to it,
By high Woldrap, Gray, life ended.
ANNOT.

This is another, wherein my best skill fails me; for take away Narbonne,
which is a City of France, in the Province of Langucdoc, and Perpignan, which
is another in the County of Roussilon near Spain. The rest are either barbarous
words or nonsensical to me.

XXIII. French.
Lettres trouvees de la Reyne les Coffres,
Point de subscrit, sans aucun nom d'Autheur,
Par la police seront cachez les offres,
Qu'on ne scaura qui sera lamateur.
English.
Letters found in the Queens Coffers,
No superscription, no name of the Author,
By policy shall be concealed the offers,
So that no body shall know who shall be the lover.
ANNOT.

This needs no great explication, being pretty plain, and foretells only
that a Queens Trunks shall be opened, wherein many love Letters shall be found
without subscription, with many great offers, which by policy being suppressed,
or no notice taken of. The lover was never known.

XXIV. French.
Le Lieutenant a l'entree l'huis,
Assommera le grand de Perpignan,
En se cuidant sauver a Montpertuis,
Sera deceu Bastard de Lusignan.
English.
The Lieutenant shall at the doors entry,
Knock down the great one of Perpignan
And the Bastard of Lusignan shall be deceived,
Thinking to save himself at Montpertuis.
ANNOT.

The words and the sense are clear, though the meaning is hard to be understood:

XXV. French.
Coeur de l'Amant ouvert d'amour furtive,
Dans le ruisseau sera ravir la Dame,
Le demi mal contrefaira laseive,
Le Pere a deux privera corpse de l'Ame.
English.
The Lovers heart being by a stolen love,
Shall cause the Dame to be ravished in the Brook,
The lascivious shall counterfeit half a discontent,
The Father shall deprive the bodies of both of their souls.
ANNOT.

This signifies nothing but a Lover, who meeting in or by a Brook, his
Mistress shall enjoy her, for which she shall fain a little discontent, as if
she had been ravished against her will, but her jealous Father not contented
therewith, shall kill them both, which is an ordinary Italian trick.

XXVI. French.
De Carones trouvez en Barcelonne,
Mys descouvers, lieu terrouers and ruin,
Le grand qui tient ne voudra Pampelone,
Par l'Abbaye de Montferrat bruine.
English.
The Carones fond in Barcelona,
Put discovered, place soil and ruin,
The great that hold will not Pampelona,
By the Abbaye of Montferrat, mist.
ANNOT.

Barcelona is a Town of a Province in Spain, called Catalonia. Pampelona is the
chief Town of the Kingdom of Navarre. Montferrat is an Abbaye in the Mountains
of Catalonia; the rest is insignificant.

XXVII. French.
La voye Auxelle l'un sur l'autre fornix,
Du muy de fer horse mis brave and genest,
L'Escrit d'Empereur la Phoenix,
Veu en celuy ce qu'a null autre nest.
English.
The way Auxelle, one Arch upon another,
Being brave and gallant put out of the Iron vessel,
The writing of the Emperor the Phoenix,
In it shall be seen, what no where else is.
ANNOT.

I can find nothing in this worth interpretation.

XXVIII. French.
Les Simulachres d'or and d'argent enflez,
Qu'apres le rapt, Lac au feu furent jettez,
Au descouvert estaints tous and troublez,
Au Marbre escripts, prescripts interjettez.
English.
The Images sweld with Gold and Silver,
Which after the rape were thrown into the Lake and fire,
Being discovered after the putting out of the fire,
Shall be written in Marble, prescripts being intermixed.
ANNOT.

It seems that this gold and silver Idols having been stolen, were afterward
thrown into a Lake and a fire, which fire being put out, those Idols were
found, and the memorial engraven in Marble.

XXIX. French.
Au quart pilier ou l'on sacre a Saturn,
Pat tremblant Terre and Deluge fendu,
Soubs l'edifice Saturnin trouvee Urne,
D'or Capion, ravy puis tossed rendu.
English.
At the fourth Pillar where they sacrifice to Saturn,
Cloven by an Earthquake and a Flood,
An Urne shall be found under that Saturnian building,
Full of Capion gold stolen, and then restored.
ANNOT.

This foretells, that at the fourth Pillar of a Temple that was dedicated to
Saturn, which Pillar shall be split by an Earthquake and a Flood, there shall
be found an Urne, (which is an Earthen Vessel, wherein the ancient Romans used
to keep the ashes of their dead friends) full of gold, that shall be carried
away, and then restored.

XXX. French.
Dedans Tholose non loin de Beluzer,
Faisant un puis loing Palais d'espectacle,
Thresor trouve un chacun ira vexer,
Et en deux locs tout aupres des Vesacle.
English.
Within Tholose not far from Beluzer,
Digging a Well, for the Palace of spectacle,
A treasure found that shall vex every one,
In two parcels, in, and near the Basacle.
ANNOT.

Tholose is the chief City of Languedoc, Beluzer is a private place within its
precinct, Spectacle is insignificant, and is only foisted in, to Rhyme with
Basacle, which is a place in Tholose, where there is abundance of Water-mills,
that make a hideous and fearful noise.

XXXI. French.
Premier grand fruit le prince de Pesquiere,
Mais puis viendra bien and cruel malin,
Dedans Venise perdra sa glory fiere,
Et mis a mal par plus joyve Celin.
English.
The first great fruit the Prince of Pesquiere,
But he shall become very cruel and malicious,
He shall loose his fierce pride in Venice,
And shall be put to evil by the younger Celin
ANNOT.

Pescaire is a Town in the Kingdom of Naples, belonging to the noble Spanish
Family of Avalos, of which it seems one shall prove cruel and malicious; but
he shall be killed in Venice by one young Celin, by which formerly, and in
other places the Author understands the Turk.

XXXII. French.
Guard toy Roy Gaulois de ton Nepveu,
Qui fera tant que ton unique filz,
Sera meurtry a Venus faisant voeu,
Accompagne de nuit que trois and six.
English.
Take heed O French King of thy Nephew,
Who shall cause that thine only Son
Shall be murdered making a vow to Venus,
Accompanied with three and six.
ANNOT.

This is a plain warning to a French King to beware of his Nephew, who
accompanied with nine others, shall cause his Son to be murdered when he went
about some venereal employment.

XXXIII. French.
Le grand naistra de Verone and Vicence,
Qui portera un surnom bien indigne,
Qui a Venise voudra fair vengeance,
Luy mesme prins homme du guet and sign.
English.
The great one of Verona and Vicenza shall be born,
Who shall bear a very unworthy surname,
Who shall cndeavour at Venice to avenge himself,
But he shall be taken by a Watchman.
ANNOT.

Verona and Vicenza are two famous Cities in Italy, under the dominion of the
Venetians; the rest is easy.

XXXIV. French.
Apres victoire du Lion au Lion,
Sur la Montagne de Jura Secatombe,
Delues, and Brodes septiesme milion,
Lion Ulme a Mausol mort and tomb.
English.
After the Victory of the Lion against the Lion,
Upon the Mountain Jura Secatomb,
Delues, and Brodes the seventh Million,
Lions, Ulme fall dead at Mausol.
ANNOT.

The Mount Jura is in Switzerland; Lion is a great City in France; and Ulme
another in Germany; the rest is either barbarous or insignificant.

XXXV. French.
Dedans l'entree de Garonne and Blaye,
Et la Forest non loing de Damazan,
De Marsaves gelees, puis gresle and Bize,
Dordonois gele par erreur de Mezan.
English.
Within the entrance of Garonne and Blaye,
And the Forest not far from Damazan,
Of Marsaves frosts, then Hail and North wind,
Dordonois frozen by the error of Mezan.
ANNOT.

Garonne is the River that runs at Bourdeaux, and Blaye is the Port Town
that lies at the mouth of it: I should think that instead of Dordonois, it
should be Printed Dordone, which is another River thereabouts, and is here
threatened to be frozen.

XXXVI. French.
Sera commis contre Oinde a Duche
De Saulne, and Saint Aubin, and Beloeuvre,
Paver de Marbre, de tours loing pluche,
Non Bleteran resister and chef d'oeuvre.
English.
A Dukedom shall be committed against Oinde,
Of Saulne, and Saint Aubin, and Beloeuvre,
To pave with Marble, and of Towers well picked,
Not Bleteran to resist, and masterpiece.
ANNOT.

I confess my Ignorance, and should be glad that a better Oedipus than I would
undertake this.

XXXVII French.
La forteresse aupres de la Thamise,
Cherra par lors, le Roy dedans serro,
Aupres du pont sera veu en chemise,
Un devant mort, puis dans le fort bar.
English.
The strong Fort near the Thames
Shall fall then, the King that was kept within,
Shall be seen near the Bridge in his Shirt,
One dead before, then in the Fort kept close.
ANNOT.

The Dream be to them that hate thee, and the Interpretation thereof to thine
Enemies, Dan. 4, v. 10.

XXXVIII. French.
Le Roy de Blois dans Avignon regner,
Un autrefois le peuple emonopole,
Dedans le Rhosne par murs fera baigner,
Jusques a cinq, le dernier pres de Nole.
English.
The King of Blois in Avignon shall Reign
Another time the people do murmur,
He shall cause in the Rhosne to be bathed through the Walls,
As many as five, the last shall be near Nole.
ANNOT.

This foretells that a King of France shall take Avignon, which is a City in
France belonging to the Pope. And that some of the people beginning to murmur
and mutiny, he shall cause five of them to be thrown over the Walls into the
Rhosne, which is a swift River that passes by. Nole must be some place
thereabouts.

XXXIX. French.
Qu'aura este par Prince Bizantin,
Sera to llu par Prince de Tholose,
La foy de Foix, par le chef Tholentin,
Luy faillira ne resusant l'espouse.
English.
What shall have been by a Bazantin Prince,
Shall be taken away by the Prince of Tholose,
The faith of Foix by the chief Tholentin,
Shall fail him, not refusing the Spouse.
ANNOT.

I can understand nothing else by Prince Bizantin, but some Prince of the house
of Gonzagne, who derive their pedigree from that of the Palaeologues, formerly
Emperors of Constantinople, called in ancient time Bizantium. As for the
Prince of Tholose, there having been none this two or three hundred years since
that Country was devolved to the Crown of France; but the King himself, I
suppose he must be understood here; so that the sense of this Prophecy, (if
any be) is, that the King of France shall take something from the Duke of
Mantua, who is the head of the Gonzagues, as he has done formerly several
times.

By the faith of Foix, is understood the late Duke of Rohan, who descended from
the house of Foix, and who did war against the said Duke of Mantua at that
time, when the King of France, Lewis XIII. would not suffer his Brother the
Duke of Orleans to Marry the Princess Mary, Daughter of the Duke of Nevers, of
the house of Gonzague, and lately Queen of Poland.

XL French.
Le sang du just par Taur and la Dorade,
Pour se vanger contre les Saturnins,
Au nouveau Lac plongeront la Mainade,
Puis marcheront contre les Albanins.
English.
The blood of the just by Taur and Dorade,
To avenge themselves against the Saturnins,
In the new Lake shall sink the Mainade,
Then shall go forth against the Albanins.
ANNOT.

Here the Author has kept his mind to himself, as for my part, being ignorant
of his barbarous words, I had rather leave the sense of this to the judgment
of the Reader, than by an incongruous and far fetched interpretation make my
self ridiculous.

XLI. French.
Esleu sera Renard ne sonnant mot,
Faisant le Saint public, vivant pain d'orge,
Tyranniser apres tant a un cop,
Mettant le pied des plus grands sur la gorge.
English.
A Fox shall be elected that said nothing,
Making a public Saint, living with Barley bread,
Shall tyrannise after upon a sudden,
And put his foot upon the Throat of the greatest.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy seems to regard particularly the Pope, who having played the
Hypocrite before his Election, eating nothing but Barley bread, that he might
be reputed a Saint, shall after his Election tyrannise upon a sudden, and
trample upon the Throat of the greatest Monarchs, as they have done formerly,
and would do yet if they could.

XLII. French.
Par avarice, par force and violence,
Viendra vexer les siens chess d' Orleans,
Prez Saint Memire assaut and resistance,
Mort dans sa Tente, diront quil dort leans.
English.
By avarice, by force and violence,
Shall come to vex his own chief of Orleans,
Near Saint Memire assault and resistance,
Dead in his Tent, they will say he sleeps there.
ANNOT.

The construction of this must be thus made. The Chiefs of Orleans, (which is a
famous Town in France) shall come to vex their own (I suppose) Citizens And
near that place called Saint Memire, shall be a fight, where one of those chief
ones shall be killed, or die in his Tent, and shall be denied under pretense of
being asleep:

XLIII. French.
Par le decide de deux chooses Bastars,
Nepveu du sang occupera le Regne,
Dedans Lectoure seront les coups de dards,
Nepveu par peur pleira l'Enseigne.
English.
By the decision of two things, Bastards,
Nephew of the Blood shall occupy the Kingdom,
Within Lectoure shall be strokes of Darts,
Nephew through fear shall fold up his Ensign.
ANNOT.

I think that instead of decision it should be division, and then the sense is
easily made up, thus; that through the division of two Bastards, the Nephew of
the Blood shall occupy the Kingdom, which Nephew afterward in a fight at
Lectoure, (which is a strong Town in Gascony) shall be put to the worst, and
compelled to fold up his Ensigns.

XLIV. French.
Le procree naturel d' Ogmion,
De sept a neuf du chemin destourner,
A Roy de longue and amy au my hom,
Doit a Navarre fort de Pau prosterner.
English.
The natural begotten of Ogmyon,
From seven to nine shall put out of the way,
To King of long, and friend to the half man,
Ought to Navarre prostrate the fort of Pau.
ANNOT.

A man needs a good pair of Spectacles to see through all this, what I
understand in it is that this Bastard of Ogmyon, by whom he means the King of
France, ought to submit the Fort of Pau to Navarre, and good reason too; for
Navarre is the Kingdom, and Pau only the chief Town of one Province of it,
called Bearn.

XLV. French.
La main escharpe and la jambe bandee,
Louis puisne de Palais partira,
Au mot du guet la mort sera tardee,
Puis dans le Temple a Pasques seignera.
English.
The hand on a Scarf, and the leg swadled,
The younger Lewis shall go from Palais,
At the Watch word his death shall be protracted,
Then afterward at Easter he shall bleed in the Temple.
ANNOT.

The Prince of Conde, whose name was Lewis, and the youngest of the Children of
Charles of Bourbon, the first Duke of Vendosme, father to Anthony of Bourbon,
King of Navarre, went away from the Court in the time of Francis the second
King of France, and came into Bearn to the King his Brother. He was summoned
many times by Francis II. to come to Court; but finding his name to be amongst
those that intended to suprise Lion, he durst not venture.

Nevertheless he was persuaded by his Uncle the Cardinal of Bourbon, and came
to the Court at Orleans. It is easy to believe that he fained himself to be
hurt by a fall from his Horse, or that really he was so; having his Arm in a
Scarf, and his Leg swadled up, in which posture he came to testify his
obedience to the Kings commands.

In this posture of a wounded man, whether really and fictitiously he came from
Palais, which by mistake is printed Calais; the Printer being ignorant, that in
Bearn, where the Prince had sheltered himself, there is a Castle called Palais,
which was the place that the Prince used to live in.

Being come to Court he was presently arrested, arraigned and condemned to
death. Nevertheless the Kings sickness proving mortal, the execution was
suspended, and his life saved. After that the Prince sought all o^casions to
revenge himself, and began about Easter in April following. It was not by an
open Rebellion against the King, but under pretense to maintain the Protestant
Religion: therefore the Author says, that this life saved shall bleed in the
Temple; because the Princes pretext was the Temple and the Church; that is
Religion. Hence the fourth Verse is clearly understood. Rests the third
Verse, which says, that his life was differred till the Watch word; because
the Queen seeing the King her Son upon his death bed, caused secretly the
execution of the Sentence to be differred, that she might make use of the King
of Navarre, and of the Prince his Brothers favor, against the house of Guise,
for the obtaining of the Regency.

Moreover I observe, that in the year 1562. the Prince of Conde began openly to
rebel, surprising the City of Orleans the 29 of March, which was Easter day
that year, which shows the truth of the fourth Verse.

XLVI. French.
Pol Mensolee mourra trois lieues du Rhosne,
Fuis les deux prochains Tarare destrois,
Car Mars fera le plus horrible Throsne,
De Coq and d'Aigle, de France friar trois.
English.
Paul Mensolee Shall die three Leagues from the Rhosne,
Avoid the two straights near the Tarare;
For Mars shall keep such a horrible Throsne,
Of Cock and Eagle, of France three Brothers.
ANNOT.

By this Pol Mensolee, he means some proper name. Tarare is a great Mountain
near the City of Lions, that has two principal ways to go through, which here
he calls Straights; for indeed they are very dangerous for Thieves and
Murderers. The rest is but a threating of War between the Emperor and France,
when there shall be three Brothers in France.

XLVII. French.
Lac Trasmenien portera tesmoignage,
Des conjurez ferrez dedans Perouse,
Un Despolle contrefera le^sage,
Tuant Tedesque de Stern and Minuse.
English.
Trasmenian Lake shall bear witness
Of the Conspirators shut up in Perugia,
A Despolle shall counterfeit the wise,
Killing Tedesque of Stern and Minuse.
ANNOT.

I think that the Impression is false here; for instead of Despolle, which is a
barbarous word, and signifies nothing, I would have it in French Despoville,
in English robbed of all; so that Trasmenian Lake is that Lake in Italy not far
from the Town of Perugia, where Hannibal gave that notable overthrow to the
Romans, and killed above 20000. of them, with their consul Flaminius.

That man whom he calls here robbed of all, shall kill some Germans; for
Tudesco in Italian, is a German, the two last words are barbarous.

XLVII. French.
Saturn en Cancer, Jupiter avec Mars,
Dedans Fevrier Caldondon, Salvaterre,
Sault, Castalon, assailly de trois parts,
Pres de Verbiesque, conflict mortelle guerre.
English.
Saturn in Cancer, Jupiter with Mars,
In February Caldondon, Salvaterre,
Sault, Castalon, assaulted on three sides,
Near Verbiesque, fight and mortal War.
ANNOT.

The multiplicity of barbarous and insignificant words, makes this incapable of
any construction, if any body will exercise his wit thereupon, I shall
willingly lend him my ear.

XLIX. French.
Satur au Boeuf, Jove en l'Eau, Mars en fleche,
Six de Fevrier mortalite donra,
Ceux de Tardaigne a Bruges si grand breche
Qu'a Ponterose chef Barbarin mourra.
English.
Satur in Ox, Jupiter in water, Mars in arrow,
The sixth of February shall give mortality,
Those of Tardaigne shall make in Bruges so great a breach.
That the chief Barbarin shall die at Pontrose.
ANNOT.

Satur in Ox; that is, Saturn in Taurus, Jupiter in Water; that is, Jupiter in
Aquarius; Mars in arrow, is Mars in Sagitarius; when these things shall happen.
The sixth day of February shall bring a great mortality. Tardaigne is a
fictitious name, unless he intended Sardaigne. Bruges is a Town in Flander,
Ponterose is some place, where he says, that the chief Barbarin shall die, the
chief Barbare was the Pope Urban the eighth; but because I do not know the
particularities of his death, and the place of it. I cannot make the rest good.

L. French.
La Pestilence lentour de Capadille,
Un autre faim pres de Sagunt sapreste,
La Chevalier Bastard de bon senille,
Au grand de Thunes fera trancher la test.
English.
The Plague shall be round about Capadille,
Another famine comes near to that of Sagunce,
The Knight Bastard of the good old man,
Shall cause the great one of Tunis to be beheaded.
ANNOT.

The difficulty here, is what is meant by that word Cappadille, for my part I
think he means Italy, for some times the Italians use by way of admiration to
say Capoli, or Capadillo. Sagunce is a Town in Spain, which for the love of the
Carthaginians withstood the Romans a great while, till they were brought to an
extremity of famine, and then set fire in their Town.

LI. French.
Le Bizantin faisant oblation,
Apres avoir Cordube a soy reprinse,
Son chemin long, repos, pamplation,
Mer passant proye par la Cologne a prinse.
English.
The Bizantin, making an offering,
After he has taken Cordua to himself again,
His way l ng, rest, contemplation,
Crossing the Sea has taken a prey by Cologne.
ANNOT.

This is an express delineation of Charles the V. Empire, who at the latter end
of his days retired into a Monastery, reserving unto himself for his
subsistence the revenue of the Kingdom of Castille, expressed here by Cordua,
which is a City of Spain.

LII. French.
Le Roy de Blois dans Avignon Regner,
D' Amboise and Seem viendra le long de Lindre.
Ongole a Poitiers Saints aisles ruiner,
Devant Bony:
English.
The King of Blois shall Reign in Avignon,
He shall come from Amboise and Seem, along the Linder,
A Nail at Poitiers shall ruin the Holy Wings,
Before Bony.
ANNOT.

The first Verse and the interpretation is easy.

Amboise is a Town in France upon the River of Loire.

The two last Verses being inperfect, admits of no interpretation, only to let
the Reader know that Poitiers is a very great City in France, and Capital of
the Province of Poitou.

LIII. French.
Dedans Boulogne voudra laver ses fautes,
Il ne poura au Temple du Soleil,
Il volera faisant chooses si hautes,
En Hierarchy n'en fut onc un pareil.
English.
He shall desire to wash his faults in Bulloin,
In the Church of the Sun, but he shall not be able,
He shall fly doing so high things,
That the like was never in Hierarchy.
ANNOT.

There is two Towns called Bolloin, one is in Italy, the other in France, the
last is that which is meant here; for Cardinal Richelieu who is the man that
did so high things, and the like of which was never in Hierarchy (that is in
the Clergy) a little before his death had vowed if he recovered his health to go
in Pilgrimage to Bulloin, where there is a famous Temple for Miracles, (as they
say) dedicated to our Lady, which is called here the Sun, by an allusion to
that passage of the Revelation: And there appeared a Woman clothed with the
Sun; but the said Cardinal was prevented by death.

LIVE. French.
Soubs la couleur du traite marriage,
Fait magnanime par grand Chiren Selin,
Quintin, Arras, recouvrez au voyage,
D' Espagnols fait second banc Macelin.
English.
Under pretense of a Treaty of Marriage,
A Magnanimous act shall be done by the great Cheiren Selin,
Quintin, Arras recovered in the journey,
Of Spaniards shall be made a second Macelin Bench.
ANNOT.

This is a Prognostication concerning a King of France, meant here by the great
Cheiren Selin, who under pretense of a Treaty of Marriage, shall recover in his
journey these two Towns Saint Quintin and Arras, for the Shambles are called in
Latin Macellum. Quodilimactentur pectora quae mercatoribus venundantur.

LV. French.
Enter deux Fleuves se verra enserre,
Tonneaux and caques unis a passer outre,
Huit Pont rompus chef a tant enferre,
Enfans parfaits sont jugulez en coultre.
English.
Between two Rivers he shall find himself shut up,
Tuns and Barrels put together to pass over,
Eight Bridges broken, the chief at last in Prison,
Complete children shall have their throat cut.
ANNOT.

It is an accident that has often happened to a Commander of an Army, to find
himself either by his own oversight, or by the policy of his enemies, shut up
between two Rivers, having upon neither of them a Bridge at his command; as it
did happen once to the Prince of Conde, the Grandfather of this, in the time of
the Civil war for Religion, who was forced by it to dissolve his Army, and bid
every one shift for himself, so that they almost all escaped by several small
parties, some going one way some another, at such time it is an ordinary shift
to make use of empty Vessels and Caskes to make a Bridge, as our Author does
mention here.

LVI. French.
La band foible la Terre occupera,
Ceux du haut lieu feront horribles cris,
Le gros troupeau d'estre coin troublera,
Tomb pres D. nebro descouvert les escrits.
English.
The weak party shall occupy the ground,
Those of the high places shall make fearful cries,
It shall trouble the great flock in the right corner,
He falls near D. nebro discovers the writings.
ANNOT.

I dare not comment upon this, for fear it should be said of me, what was said
of the Gloss of Accurtius; obscura per obscurius.

LVII. French.
De Soldat simple parviendra en Empire,
De Robe court parviendra a la longue,
Vaillant aux Arms, en Eglise ou plus pire,
Vexer les Prestres comme l'eau fait l'esponge.
English.
From a simple Soldier he shall come to have the supreme command,
From a short Gown he shall come to the long one,
Vaillant in Arms, no worse man in the Church,
He shall vex the Priests, as water does a Sponge.
ANNOT.

I never knew nor heard of any body to whom this Stanza might be better
applied, then to the late Usurper Cromwell, for from a simple Soldier, he be
came to be Lord Protector, and from a Student in the University he became a
graduate in Oxford, he was valliant in Arms, and the worse Churchman that could
be found; as for vexing the Priests, I mean the Prelatical Clergy, I believe
none went beyond him.

LVIII French.
Regne en querelle aux freres divise,
Prendre les Arms and les nom Britannique,
Tiltre Anglican sera tard advise
Surprins de nuit, mener a l'air Gallique.
English.
A Kingdom in dispute, and divided between the Brothers,
To take the Arms and the Britannick name,
And the English title, he shall advise himself late,
Surprised in the night and carried into the French air.
ANNOT.

This prognosticateth a great division in England between Brothers, about the
Title and Kingdom of England, insomuch, that in conclusion one shall be
surprised by night, and carried away into France.

LIX. French.
Par deux fois haut, par deux fois mis a bas,
L'Orient aussi l'Occident foiblira,
Son adversaire apres plusieurs combats,
Par Mer chasse au besoin faillira.
English.
Twice set up high, and twice brought down,
The East also the West shall weaken,
His adversary after many fights,
Expelled by Sea, shall fail in need.
ANNOT.

This foretells of some considerable person, who shall be twice set up, and
brought down again. The second Verse is pronounced after the manner of the old
Oracles, as ^iote Aeacida Romanos vincere posse,

For no body can tell here whither the East shall weaken the West, or
otherways. The last two Verses are easy.

LX. French.
Premier en Gaul, premier en Romanie,
Par Mer and Terre aux Anglois and Paris,
Merveilleux faits par cette grand mesgnie,
Violant, Terax perdra le Norlaris.
English.
The first in France, the first in Romania,
By Sea and Land to the English and Paris,
Wonderful deeds by that great company,
By ravishing, Terax shall spoil the Norlaris.
ANNOT.

The first in France is the King, the first in Romania is the Pope, who it
seems shall join together by Sea and Land, and come against Paris, who shall
call the English to its help, insomuch, that strange deeds shall be done by
that great company. As for Terax, it seems to be the proper name of some man,
who by ravishing a woman called here the Norlaris, shall spoil her and cause
sad consequences. Norlaris by transposition of Letters is Lorrain.

LXI. French.
Jamais par le decouvrement du jour,
Ne parviendra au sign Sceptrifere,
Que tous Sieges ne soient en sejour,
Portant au Coq don du Tag a misere.
English.
Never by the discovering of the day,
He shall attain to the Sceptriferous sign,
Till all his seats be settled,
Carrying to the Cock a gift from the Tag to misery.
ANNOT.

This signifies that one pretending to a Kingdom, shall never attain to it by
often removing his place, until all his seats be settled, that is, until his
wandering be ceased. And a gift brought by him to the King of France from
Portugal, signified here by the Tag, which is the River of Lisbon the Capital
City of it, from which gift shall proceed misery.

LXII. French.
Lors qu'on verra expiler le Saint Temple,
Plus grand du Rhosne, and sacres prophaner:
Par eux naistra pestilence si grande,
Roy fait injuste ne fera condamner.
English.
When one shall see spoiled the Holy Temple,
The greatest of the Rhosne, and sacred things profaned,
From them shall come so great a pestilence,
That the King being unjust shall not condemn them.
ANNOT.

The greatest Temple of the Rhosne, is that of the City of Lion, which is
seated upon that River of Rhosne, which when it shall be robbed and spoiled,
then shall come a horrid Pestilence, which our Author attributes to the
injustice of the King then Reigning, who shall neglect to punish those
Sacriledges.

LXIII. French.
Quand l'adultere bless sans coup aura,
Meurdry la femme and le fills par depit,
Femme assomee l'Enfant estranglera,
Huit captifs prins sestoufer sans respit.
English.
When the Adulterer wounded without a blow,
Shall have murdered the wife and son by spite,
The woman knocked down, shall strangle the child,
Eight taken prisoners, and stifled without tarrying.
ANNOT.

This is the description of a sad Tragedy, which to understand, you must join
all the Verses together, and make it one sense. The Adulterer wounded without a
blow, is one that shall get a disease, (suppose the Pox) his wife finding fault
with it, he shall murder her, and her Son; she not being quite dead shall
strangle another Child (which it seems she had by this Adulterer) and for
this fact eight shall be taken prisoners and immediately hanged, by which you
must suppose the fact to be done in France, for there they Judge and Hang
immediately, whereby in England they must stay till Sessions-time.

LXIV French.
Dedans les Isles les enfans transportez,
Les deux de sept seront en desespoir,
Ceux de terrouer en seront supportez,
Nompelle prins, des ligues fuy l'espoir.
English.
In the Islands the Children shall be transported,
The two of seven shall be in despair,
Those of the Country shall be supported by,
Nompelle taken, avoid the hope of the League.
ANNOT.

This seems to have a great relation to our late unhappy troubles in England,
when the Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Gloucester were transported into the
Isle of Wight, which are the two of the seven, (for the Queen has had seven
children) and the Kings Majesty and his Highness the Duke of York, were driven
into the Low-Countreis, being in a manner in despair of ever coming again, and
those Countries were much the better for the harboring of them; in the last
Verse by Nompelle I understand Anagrammatically Monpelier, which being taken,
there is no more hope in the League, as it did happen in the time of Henry the
IV. King of France, who never saw the League or Covenant quite routed, till
that Town was taken; for it is familiar enough to those kind of Prophets to
make an (...), and join things past, to those that are to come, to darken the
Readers understanding, and as the Scripture says, Us videntes non videant.

LXV French.
Le vieux frustre du principal espoir,
Il parviendra au chef de son Empire,
Vingt mois tiendra le Regne a grand pouvoir,
Tyra^^, cruel en delaissant un pire.
English.
The old man frustrated of his chief hope,
He shall attain to the head of his Empire,
Twenty months he shall keep the Kingdom with great power,
Tyrant, cruel, and leaving a worse one.
ANNOT.

The words of this Prophecy are plain enough, and because I cannot learn in
History that such things have come to pass yet, therefore I reckon it among
those de future.

LXVI. French.
Quand l'Escriture D. M. trouvee,
Et Cave antique a Lamp descouverte,
Loy, Roy, and Prince Vlpian esprouvee,
Pavillon, Royne and Duc soubs la couverte.
English.
When the writing D. M. shall be found,
And an ancient Cave discovered with a Lamp,
Law, King, and Prince Ulpian tried,
Tent, Queen and Duke under the rugge.
ANNOT.

In the year 1555. Ferdinand Alvaro of Toledo Duke of Alba, being sent by
Charles the V. into Italy to resist the French, arrived in June at Milan, and
having gathered together, all his Forces, Besieged the Town St. Jago, but Henry
II. King of France sending some succors by the Duke of Aumale, he raised up
his siege, and put his Army into Garrisons. The Duke of Alba leaving the Field
in this manner, the Duke of Aumale besieged Vulpian, wherein were 1000.
soldiers in Garrison, under the command of Caesar of Naples, besides the
Inhabitants. Never was a place so suriously assaulted, and so manfully
defended, so that the French were many times beaten back; but at last after 24
days siege the Duke of Aumale did gloriously take it.

The Author foretelling the time of this victory, said it was when the writing
D M. in big letters was found, that is to say, about the II. of September after
the Equinox, because in the Ephemerides, the Meridional descension of the
Planets, and chiefly of Sol, Venus, and Mercury is marked with these two
Letters D. M. which descension comes to pass after the Equinox of Autumn
toward the end of September. At the same time was discovered an ancient Cave,
wherein was found one of those Lamps, that cannot be put out, and burns
continually without any addition of Oil, by an invention that is lost. Such
another was found in the time of Alexander the VI. and Adrian the VI.

The Town of Vulpian was at that time tried by a King and a Prince, viz. Henry
the II. and the Duke of Aumale Prince of Lorrain, and Brother to the Cardinal
of Lorrain, and to the Duke of Guise.

The Author adds, that besides these three things, viz. the finding of the
letters D. M. The Cave discovered the siege of Vulpian; there happened a fourth
one, viz. that a Queen and a Duke should consult together in a Summer House,
about the important affairs of the Kingdom. To understand this, we must suppose
that Pope Paul the IV. willing to secure his own person and the Ecclesiastical
State against the Spanish faction, and that of the Colonese, did seize upon
many places belonging to the said Colonese, and knowing besides that the
Spaniards being of the Coloneses party, would not fail to come upon him, he
disposed the King of France to come to his succors, so that the Queen having a
particular confidence in the Duke of Guise, did consult with him about this
business in some Summer House, which the French call a Pavillon,

LXVII. French.
Par. Car. nersaf, a ruin grand discord,
Ne l'un ne l'autre n'aura election,
Nersaf du peuple aura a mour and concord,
Ferrare, Collonne grande protection.
English.
Par. Car. Nersaf, to ruin great discord,
Neither one nor the other shall be Elected,
Nersaf, shall have of the people love and concord,
Ferrare, Colonna, great protection.
ANNOT.

It is very hard to say what the Author means by these disjunctives Par. Car.
Nersaf, all what can be gathered by what follows, is, that there shall be a
great variance and strife about an Election, (I suppose of a Pope as it uses
to be) and that Nersaf shall have the good will of the people, and yet none of
them shall be Elected.

As for the fourth Verse, it is to be noted first that Ferrara is a strong Town
in Italy belonging to the Pope, and Colonna is the ^^me of the chief Family in
Rome, now whether Ferrara shall be a protection to Colonna, or Colonna to
Ferrara, we leave it to the Reader to judge, because the Verse has a double
sense.

LXVIII. French.
Vieux Cardinal par le jeune deceu,
Horse de sa charge se verra desarme,
Arles ne monstres double fort apperceu,
Et l' Aqueduct and le Prince embaume.
English.
An old Cardinal shall be cheated by a young one,
And shall see himself out of his employment,
Arles do not show, a double fort perceived,
And the Aqueduct, and the embalmed Prince.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are very plain, the two last not so; therefore observe
that Arles is a City in France, in the Country of Danphine or Provence, famous
for antiquity, which is forwarned here not to show its Forts, nor its
Aqueducts, (which are buildings to convey water, nor its embalmed Prince, which
it seems lies thereabout buried. The Author has deprived here the Author of
the reasons for why?

LXIX. French.
Aupres du jeune se vieux Ange baiser,
Et le viendra surmonter a la fin,
Dix ans esgaux aux plus vieux rabaisser,
De trois deux l'un huitiesme Seraphin,
English.
Near the young one the old Angel shall bow,
And shall at last overcome him,
Ten years equal, to make the old one stoop,
Of three, two, one, the eight a Seraphin.
ANNOT.

This is the description of a grand Cheat, when an old man called here Angel,
shall stoop before a young one, whom he shall overcome at last, after they have
been ten years equal. The last Verse is Mistical, for there is four numbers,
three, two, one, which make six; and eight, which he calls Seraphin, whether
by allusion to that Quire of Angels, which some call the eight, or whether to
the Order of St. Francis, who calls it self Seraphical, is not easy to
determine.

LXX. French.
Il entrera vilain, meschant, infame,
Tyrannisant la Mesopotamie,
Tous amiss fait d'Adulterine Dame,
Tetre horrible noir de Physiognomie.
English.
He shall come in villaen, wicked, infamous,
To tyranise Mesopotamia,
He makes all friends by an adulteress Lady,
Foul, horrid, black in his Physiognomie.
ANNOT.

Mesopotamia is a Greek word, signifying a Country between two Rivers; and
though there be many Countries so seated, yet to this day, it properly
belongs to that Country, that lies between the two famous Rivers Tigris and
Euphrates near Babylon; the rest is easy.

LXXI. French.
Croistra le nombre si grand des Astronomes,
Chassez bannis and livres censureq
L'An mil six cens and sept par sacrez glomes,
Que null au sacres ne seront asseurez.
English.
The number of Astronomers shall grow so great,
Driven away, bannished, Books censured,
The year one thousand six hundred and seven by sacred glomes,
That none shall be secure in the sacred places.
ANNOT.

The sense of this is clear, viz. that about the year 1607. the number of
Astronomers shall grow very great, of which some shall be expelled and
banished, and their Books censured and suppressed: the rest is insignisicant to
me.

LXXII. French.
Champ Perusin O l'Enorme deffaite,
Et le conflict tout aupres de Ravenne,
Passage sacra lors qu'on fera la seste,
Vaincueur vaincu, Cheval mange L'avenne.
English.
Perugian Fi^l^, O the excessive rout,
And the fight about Ravenna,
Sacred passage when the Feast shall be celebrated,
The victorious vanquished, the Horse to cat up his Oats.
ANNOT.

Perugia is a City in Italy, and so is Ravenna, by which it seems there shall
be a notable Battle fought, as was once before in the time of Lewis the XII
King of France between Gaston de Foix his Nephew, and Don Raimond de Cardonne
Viceroy of Naples, for there the French got the Battle; in conciusion of
which, the said Gaston de Foix pursuing a Troop of Spaniards that were
reti^ing, was unfortunately killed, and so the victorious were vanquished.

LXXIII. French.
Soldat Barbare le grand Roy frapera,
Injustement non eslogine de mort,
L'Avare Mere du fait cause sera,
Conjurateur and Regne en grand remort.
English.
A Barbarous Soldier shall strike the King,
Unjustly, not far from death,
The covetous Mother shall be the cause of it,
The Conspirator and Kingdom in great remorse.
ANNOT.

These words are so plain that they need no interpretation.

LXXIV. French.
En Terre neuve bien avaunt Roy enter,
Pendant subjects luy viendront fair accueil,
Sa parfidie aura tell rencontre,
Qu'aux Citadins lieu de feste and recueil.
English.
A King being entered far into a new Country,
Whilst his Subjects shall come to welcome him,
His perfidiousness shall find such an encounter,
That to the Citizens it shall be instead of feast and Welcome.
ANNOT.

The sense of this seems to be, that a certain King being far got into a new
conquered Country, where he shall deal perfidiously with his Subjects, that
then he shall meet with such an accident, as to his Citizens shall be instead
of feast and welcome

LXXV. French.
Le Pere and fills seront meurtris ensemble,
Le Presecteur dedans son Pavillon,
La Mere a Tours du fills ventre aura enfle,
Cache verdure de fueilles papillon.
English.
The Father and Son shall be murdered together,
The Governor shall be so in his Tent,
At Tours the Mother shall be got with child by her son,
Hide the greenness with leaves Butter-flye.
ANNOT.

There is nothing hard here but the last Verse, whereby it is signified, that
after such an incest of the Mother with the Son in the City of Tours (which is a
Town in France) the fruit of it shall be secretly buried, and green Turfs laid
upon the place, and Leaves upon them, to take away the knowledge of it.

LXXVI. French.
Plus Macelin que Roy en Angleterre,
Lieu obscur ne par force aura l'Empire,
Lasche, sans foy, fans loy, seignera Terre,
Son temps s'aproche si presque je souspire.
English.
More Macelin then King in England,
Born in obscure place, by force shall reign,
Of loose disposition, without faith, without Law, the ground shall bleed,
His time is drawing so near that I sight for it.
ANNOT.

Macelin, is a Butcher or cruel man, from the Latin word Macellum, which
signifies the Shambles, it is without contradiction that by this Prophecy is
plain concerning the late tyrant Cromwell, and his unlawful Government.

LXXVII. French.
L'Antechrist bien tossed trois annichilez,
Vingt and sept ans durera sa guerre,
Les Heretics morts; captifs exilez,
Sang corpse humain eau rougie, gresler Terre
English.
By Antichrist three shall shortly be brought to nothing,
His War shall last seven and twenty years,
The Heretics dead, Prisoners banished.
Blood, humane body, water made red, E^rth hailed.
ANNOT.

What he means here by Antichrist is not easy to determine, for he cannot
mean the Pope, himself being a Papist, nor the great Antichrist, whose Reign,
according to the Scripture, shall last but three years and a half, it is more
likely then that this Stanza has coherence with the precedent, and that by it
he means Henry the VIII. who for the space of about 27 years before he dyed,
did handle something roughly the Clergy and Clergymen.

LXXVIII. French.
Un Bragamas avcc la langue torte,
Viendra des dieux rompre le Sanctuaire,
Aux Heretics il ouvrira la port,
En suscitant l'Eglise Militaire.
English.
A Bragamas with his crooked Tongue,
Shall come and break the Gods Sanctuary,
He shall open the Gates unto Heretics,
By raising the Militant Church.
ANNOT.

Bragamas is the same thing that we call now Bragadocio. By the Gods Sanctuary,
he means the Temples of the Romish Religion, who are reputed Sanctuaries, and
are full of Images, which they worship as Gods, praying and offering Incense to
them.

LXXIX. French.
Qui par fer pere perdra, nay de Nonnaire,
De Gorgon sur la fin sera sang perferant,
En Terre estrange fera si tout de taire,
Qu'il bruslera luy mesme and son entant.
English.
He that by Iron shall destroy his Father, born in Nonnaire,
Shall in the end carry the blood of Gorgon,
Shall in a strange Country make all so silent,
That he shall burn himself and his intent.
ANNOT.

Nonnaire and Gorgon are two barbarous words, as for the sense of that and the
rest, he that shall be able to read the words, shall be as wise as my self.

LXXX. French.
Des innocens le sang de Vefue and Vierge,
Tant de maux faits par moiens ce grand Roge,
Saints simulachres trempez en ardant cierge,
De frayeur crainte ne verra null que boge.
English.
The blood of the innocent Widow and Virgin,
So many evils committed by the means of that great Rogue,
Holy Images, dipped in burning wax Candles,
For fear no body shall be seen to stir.
ANNOT.

What he means by the great Rogue is not obvious, but the main drift of this
Stanza seems to be, to foretell the abuses that should be offered to the
Popish Images by the Protestant party, as it was done in the time of the Civil
Wars of France, and a little while after our Author had written his Prophecies.

By the great Rogue, he means some chief Commander of the Protestant party,
that were in those days, as the Prince of Conde, the Admiral of Castilon, or
his Brother Dandelot.

LXXXI. French.
Le neuf Empire en desolation,
Sera change du Pole Aquilonaire,
De la Sicile viendra l'emotion,
Troubler l'Emprise a Philip tributaire.
English.
The new Empire in desolation,
Shall be changed from the Northern Pole,
The commotion shall come from Sicily,
To trouble the undertaking, tributary to Philip.
ANNOT.

This threatens the Empire that now is in Germany, of a great desolation, and
to be removed from its place, and threatens also the Island of Sicily of a
fearful commotion, which shall trouble the undertakings of Philip, that is,
King of Spain, because they usually are called by that name.

LXXXII. French.
Ronge long, sec, faisant du bon valet,
A la par fin n'aura que son congie,
Poignant poison and Lettres au colet
Sera saisy, eschape, en dangie.
English.
Long gnawer, dry, cringing and fawning,
In conclusion shall have nothing but leave to be gone,
Piercing poison and Letters in his Collar,
Shall be seized, escape, and in danger.
ANNOT.

The words of this are easy to be understood, but not who should be that man
to whom he gives these four famous Epithetes of Long-gnawer, dry, cringing and
fawning.

LXXXIII. French.
Le plus grand voile horse du port de Zara;
Pres de Bizance fera son entreprise,
D'Ennemy perte and l'amy ne sera,
Le tiers a deux fera grand pille and prise.
English.
The greatest Sail out of the Port of Zara,
Near Bizance shall make his undertaking,
There shall be no loss of foes or friends,
The third shall make a great pillage upon the two.
ANNOT.

By Zara I suppose that the Venetians are meant, who have a very strong Town of
that name, situated in Dalmatia. Bizance is Constantinople, as we have said
before; now whether this Prophecy was fulfilled when the Venetians took the
Island of Tenedos, some 20 years ago, which is not far from Constantinople, or
whether it is to come, I dare not assert.

LXXXIV. French.
Pattern aura de la Sicile cry,
Tous les aprests du Gouphre de Trieste,
Qui s'entendra jusques a la Trinacrie,
De tant de voiles, fuy, fuy, l'horrible peste.
English.
Pattern shall have out of Sicily a cry,
All the preparations of the Gulf of Trieste,
That shall be heard as far as Trinacry,
Of so many Sails, fly, fly, the horrid plague.
ANNOT.

It has been impossible for me to make any sense of this, and therefore I
believe that it is falsely printed, and that instead of Pattern, it should be
Palerme, which is the chief Town in Sicily. Trinacry is Sicily it self, so
called, quod tria habeat, (...) seu promontoria.

LXXXV. French.
Enter Bayonne and a Saint Jean de Lux,
Sera pose de Mars la promottoire,
Aux Hanix d'Aquilon, Nanar hostera Lux,
Puis suffoque au lit sans adjoutoire.
English.
Between Bayonne and Saint John de Lux,
Shall be put down the promoting of Mars,
From the Hunix of the North, Nanar shall take away Lux,
Then shall be suffocated in his bed without help.
ANNOT.

Bayonne is a Town in France, upon the stontiers of Spain, and Saint John de
Lux is the utmost frontiere of France, that way, (that being supposed) he
says, that about Saint John de Lux, the promoting of the war shall be set
down; that is, that peace shall be made, as it was about seven or eight years
ago between France and Spain, and the Marriage concluded between the King and
the Infanta. The two last Verses are nonsensical, and only set down to make up
the rhyme.

LXXXVI: French.
Par Arnani, Tholose, and Villefranque,
Band infinie par le Mont Adrian,
Pass Riviere, hutin par pont la planque,
Bayonne entrer tous Bichoro criant.
English.
By Arnani, Tholose, and Villefranche,
An infinite deal of people by the Aprian,
Cross Rivers, noise upon the Bridge and plank,
Come all into Bayonne crying Bichoro.
ANNOT.

Arnani, Tholose, and Villefranche are Towns of a Province in France called
Languedoc. Mont Adrian is a Mountain thereabout, and Hutin is an old French
word, signifying noise and strife, the sense then of this Prophecy is, that by
those Towns and Mountains, shall pass an infinite multitude of people, with a
great noise and strite, and shall come and enter into Bayonne, every one crying
in that Country Language Bichoro, which is as much as to say, Victory.

LXXXVII. French.
Mort conspiree viendra en plein effet,
Charge donnee and voyage de mort,
Esseu, cree, receus, par siens desfait,
Sang d'innocence devant soy par remort.
English.
A conspired death shall come to an effect,
Charge given, and a journey of death.
Elected, created, received, by his own defeated,
Blood of Innocence before him by remorse.
ANNOT.

There is no mistical sense in this, and the words are plain, although of
crabbid construction.

LXXXVIII. French.
Dans la Sardaigne un noble Roy viendra,
Qui ne tiendra que trois ans le Royaume,
Plusieurs couleurs avec soy conjoindra,
Luy mesme apres soin sommeil Matrirscome.
English.
A noble King shall come into Sardinia
Who shall hold the Kingdom only three years,
He shall join many Colors to his own,
Himself afterward, care, sleep matrirscome.
ANNOT.

Sardinia is an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, now in the possession of the
Spapaniard, since he took the Kingdom of Naples, the three first Verses are
something intelligible, the last is altogether impossible and barbarous.

LXXXIX. French.
Pour ne tomber enter mains de son oncle,
Qui ses enfans par regner trucidez,
Orant au peuple mettant pied sur Peloncle,
Mort and traisne enter Chevaux bardez.
English.
That he might not fall into the hands of his Uncle,
That had murdered his Children for to rule,
Taking away from the people, and putting his foot upon Peloncle,
Dead and drawn among armed Horses.
ANNOT.

This signifies that an Uncle shall murder his Nephews Children, that he may
Reign, and that the said Nephew shall withdraw, and save himself from the said
Uncle. The rest is altogether obscure, if not absurd.

XC. French.
Quand des croisez un trouve de sens trouble,
En lieu du sacre verra un Boeuf cornu,
Par vierge porc son lieu lors sera double,
Par Roy plus order ne sera soustenu.
English.
When of the crossed, one of a troubled mind,
In a sacred place shall see a horny Ox,
By Virgin Pork then shall his place be double,
By King no henceforth, order shall be maintained.
ANNOT.

By the crossed is understood some order of Knighthood, who for the most part
wear that Badge, one of which being mad, and seeing in a Church a Horny Ox
come, by a Virgin Hog shall be kept from harm, or rescued by a Hog or Sow that
was a Virgin, and it seems crossed the said Ox, that he should not gore the
Knight, that then such order of Knighthood shall be no more maintained nor
upheld by the King of that Country, wherein such thing shall happen.

XCI. French.
Parmy les Champs des Rhodanes entrees,
Ou les croisez seront presques unis,
Les deux Brassiers en Pisces rencontrees,
Et un grand nombre par Deluge punis.
English.
Through the Fields of the Rhodanes comings in,
Where the crossed shall be almost united,
The two Brassiers met in Pisces,
And a great number punished by a Flood.
ANNOT.

Rhodanus in Latin is the River of Rhosne, which comes from Switzerland, and
passing through the Lake of Geneva, runs to Lion, it seems then that in
those Fields that are about that River there, will be a fearful inundation,
when the Brassiers (or rather Croziers, which is a constellation so called)
shall meet in Pisces, which is one of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

XCII. French.
Loin horse du Regne mis en hazard voyage,
Grand Ost duyra, pour soy l'occupera,
Le Roy tiendra les siens captif, ostage,
A son retour tout Pais pillera.
English.
Far from the Kingdom a hazardous journey undertaken,
He shall lead a great Army, which he shall make his own,
The King shall keep his prisoners, and pledges,
At his return he shall plunder all the Country.
ANNOT.

These obscure words signify no more but that a King shall send a great Army
far from his Kingdom, the Commander of which Army shall make the Army his own,
which the King hearing, shall seize upon the Commanders Relations, and keep
them Prisoners and Hostages, for which the said General being angry, shall at
his return spoil the Country.

XCIII. French.
Sept mois sans plus obtiendra prelature,
Par son decez grand schism fera naistre
Sept mois tiendra un autre la Preture,
Pres de Venise paix union renaistre.
English.
Seven months and no more, he shall obtain the Prelacy,
By his decease he shall cause a great Schism,
Another shall be seven months chief Justice,
Near Venice peace and union shall grow again.
ANNOT.

By this Prophecy three things are foretold, the first is of a Pope that shall
fit but seven months, at whose death there will be a great Schism; the second
is of a great Governor or Chief Justice, such as were called by the ancient
Romans Praetores, shall be in authority also but seven months; and the third,
that hard by Venice all these differences shall be composed, and peace made
again.

XCIV. French.
Devant la Lac ou plus cher fut get,
De sopt mois and son Ost desconfit,
Seront Hispans par Albanois gastez,
Par delay perte en donnant le conflict.
English.
Before the Lake wherein most dear was thrown,
Of seven months, and his Army overthrown,
Spaniards shall be spoiled by Albaneses,
By delaying; loss in giving the Battle.
ANNOT.

It is very difficult, if not impossible to tell what our Author means by the
Lake, wherein the most dear was thrown, and lost his Army. The Albaneses are a
Nation between the Venetians and Greece, now for the most part subject to the
said Venetians.

XCV. French.
Le Seducteur sera mis dans la Fosse,
Et estache jusques a quelque temps,
Le Clerc uny, le Chef avec sa Cross,
Pycante droite attraira les contems.
English.
The Deceiver shall be put into the Dungeon,
And bound fast for a while,
The Clerk united, the head with his Crosierstaf,
Pricking upright, shall draw in the contented.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain, the two last Verses not so, which seems to
foretell of a great union among the Clergy, which shall draw to them those that
were peaceably affected.

XCVI. French.
La Synagogue sterile sans null fruit,
Sera receue enter les Infideles,
De Babylon la fille du poursuit,
Misere and triste luy trenchera les Aisles.
English.
The Synagogue barren, without fruit,
Shall be received among the Infidels,
In Babylon, the daughter of the persecuted,
Miserable and sad shall cut her wings.
ANNOT.

A Synagogue is a place where the Jews assemble for Divine Worship, as the
Christians do in Churches or Temples, the said Jews Synagogue is threatened here
to be unfruitful and barren, and chiefly in Babylon, by the means of a woman,
daughter of one persecuted; belike of some of their own tribe, whom the rest
did persecute.

XCVII. French.
Au sins du Var changer le Pompotans,
Pres du Rivage, les trois beaux enfans naistre,
Ruin au peuple par Aage competans,
Regne au Pais changer plus voir croistre.
English.
At the ends of the Var to change the Pompotans,
Near the Shore shall three fair Children be born,
Ruin to the people, by competent Age,
To change that Countries Kingdom, and see it grow no more.
ANNOT.

The first Verse being made of insignificant words, as Var and Pompotans cannot
be understood; the other three does foretell of three handsome Children, that
shall be born near the Shore, which when they have attained a competent Age,
shall change the Kingdom of that Country, and suppess it.

XCVII. French.
Des gens d'Eglise sang sera espanche,
Comme de l'eau en si grande abundance,
Et de long temps ne sera retranche,
Veue au Clerc ruin and doleance.
English.
The blood of Churchmen shall be spilt,
As water in such abundance,
And for a good while shall not be stayed,
Ruin and grievance shall be seen to the Clerk.
ANNOT.

This is easy to be understood, which foretells a very great persecution to
the Clergymen, viz. Papists, of which Religion our Author was, if this be not
already past in the Civil Wars of France, that were made for Religion, in the
beginning of Reformation, where abundance of Clergymen did perish on both
sides.

XCIX. French.
Par la puissance des trois Rois temporels,
En autre lieu sera mis la Saint Siege,
Ou la substance de l'Esprit corporel,
Sera remis and receu pour vray Siege.
English.
By the power of three Temporal Kings,
The Holy See shall be put in another place,
Where the substance of the Corporeal spirit,
Shall be restored, and admitted for a true seat.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is very remarkable, for the thing it foretells, viz. a
translation of the Sea of Rome, that is, the Popedom into another place by
three Temporal Kings, and not only that, but it seems by the sense of the
last two Verses, that these will keep the Ecclesiastical authority to
themselves.

C. French.
Pour l'abundance de l'Arme respandue,
Du haut en bas, par le bas au plus haut,
Trop grande foy par jeu vie perdue,
De soif mourir par abondant defaut.
English.
Through the abundance of the Army scattered,
High and low, low and high,
Too great a belief a life lost in jesting,
To die by thirst, through abundance of want.
ANNOT.

The sense of this is, that by reason of a great Army that shall be much
scattered, and occupy a great deal of room, water will be so scarce, that some
shall die for thirst, it is that he calls here, To die by thirst, through
abundance of want.

Other Stanza's heretofore Printed, under the VIII. CENTURY.
I. French.
SEront confus plusieurs de leur attente,
Aux habitans ne sera pardonne,
Qui bien pensoint perseveret l'attente,
Mais grand loisir ne leur sera done
English.
Many shall be confounded in their expectation,
The Citizens shall not be forgiven,
Who thought to persevere in their resolution,
But there shall not be given them a great leisure for it.
ANNOT.

This is plain, and needs no interpretation.

II. French.
Plusieurs viendront and parleront de Paix,
Enter Monarques and Seigneurs bien puissans,
Mais ne sera accord de sipres,
Que ne se rendent plus qu'autres obeissans.
English.
Many shall come and shall talk of Peace,
Between Monarchs and Lords very powerful,
But it shall not be agreed to it so soon,
If they do not show themselves more obedient then others.
ANNOT.

We are just now at the Eve of this Prophecy, when so many Princes and
Potentates do busy themselves about a Mediation between the two Crowns of
France and Spain, etc.

III. French.
Las quelle fureur, helas quelle pity,
Il y aura enter beaucoup de gens,
On ne vit onc une tell amity,
Qu'auront les Loups a courir diligens.
English.
Ha! what fury, alas what pity,
There shall be betwixt many people,
There was never seen such a friendship,
As the Wolfs shall have in being diligent to run
ANNOT.

It is indeed a great fury and pity to see how wicked people, and chiefly
Usurers and false dealers, (understood here by the name of VVolfs) are diligent
in doing mischief, and to make good the old Proverb, Homo homini ^upus, there
being no other Creature but the Wolf that devours those of his own kind.

IV. French.
Beaucoup de gens viendront parlementer,
Aux grand Seigneurs qui leur feront la guerre,
On ne voudra en rien les escouter,
Helas! si Dren n'envoie Paix en Terre.
English.
Many folks shall come to speak,
To great Lords that shall make War against them,
They shall not be admitted to a hearing,
Alas! if God does not send Peace upon Earth.
ANNOT.

This carries its sense with it, and is plain.

V. French.
Plusieurs secours viendront detous costez,
De gens lointains qui voudront resister,
Ils seront tout a coup bien hastez,
Mais ne pourront pour cette heure assister.
English.
Many helps shall come on all sides,
Of people far off, that would fain to resist,
They shall be upon a sudden all very hasty,
But for the present they shall not be able to assist.
ANNOT.

This seems to point at this present conjuncture of affairs, where there is
so many buisying themselves about the relief of Flanders, of which I see no
great likelihood.

VI. French.
Las quel plaisir ont Princes estrangers,
Guard toy bien qu'en ton Pais ne Vienne,
Il y auroit de terribles dangers,
Et en maintes Contrees, mesme en la Vienne,
English.
Ha! what pleasure take Foreign Princes?
Take heed least any should come into thy Country,
There should be terrible dangers,
In several Countries, and chiefly in Vienna.
ANNOT.

There is two Towns called Vienna's, one is in Germany, in the Province of
Austria, and is the Emperors Seat, the other in France, a metter of twenty
miles beyond Lion, the rest is easy.

THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY IX.
I. French.
DAns la maison du Traducteur de Boure,
Seront les lettres trouvees sur la Table,
Borgne, roux blanc, chenu tiendra de course,
Qui changera au nouveau Connestable.
English.
In the House of the Translator of Boure,
The Letters shall be found upon the Table,
Blind of one eye, red white, hoary, shall keep its course,
Which shall change at the coming of the new Constable.
ANNOT.

It is not easy to understand what he means by the Translator of Boure,
unless it be some mean and pitiful fellow, that lived by Translating things
from one language into another, because the French use to call a man that is
inconsiderable, un homme du boure, that is a man of Flocks, and so much the
more I am of this opinion, because of the scurvy Epithetes, he attributes to
the same person, by which he might easily be known as of blind of one eye, red,
white, beary, etc.

II. French.
Du haut du Mont Aventin voix ouye,
Vuidez, vuidez de tous les deux costez,
Du sang des ro^ges sera l'Ire assouvie,
D' Arimin, Prato, Columna debotez.
English.
From the top of Mount Aventin, a voice was heard,
Get you gone, get you gone on all sides,
The Choler shall be fed with the blood of the red ones,
From Arimini and Prato, the Colonnas shall be driven away.
ANNOT.

Mount Aventine is one of the seven Mountains of Rome, from the top of which
our Author says that a voice was heard crying and repeating, get you gone, and
the reason is, because choler and anger shall feed upon the blood of the
Cardinals, understood here by the name of red ones.

Arimini and Prato are two Cities in Italy.

The Colonna is the chiefest and ancientest family of Rome.

III French.
Le magna vaqua a Ravenne grand trouble,
Conduits par quinze enserrez a Fornase,
A Rome naistra deux Monstres a test double,
Sang; feu, deluge, les plus grands a l'espase,
English.
The Magna vaqua great trouble at Ravenna,
Conducted by fifteen, shut up at Fornase,
At Rome shall be born two Monsters with a double head,
Blood, fire, Flood, the greater ones astonished.
ANNOT.

This word of Magna vaqua is either falsely printed, or altogether barbarous and
insignificant, and so is that of Fornase, which makes the two first Verses
incapable of translation; the other are easy.

IV. French.
L'An ensuivant descouverts par Deluge,
Deux chefs esleus, le premier ne tiendra,
De fuyr ombre a l'un deux le refuge,
Saccagee case qui premier maintiendra
English.
The year following being discovered by a Flood,
Two Chiefs elected, the first shall not hold,
To fly from shade, to one shall be a refuge
That house shall be plundered which shall maintain the first.
ANNOT.

Our Author means, that the year after the former Prophecy is come to pass,
this shall also be fulfilled, whereby two Chief Commanders shall be chosen, the
first of which shall not stand, but shall be compelled to run away, and to seek
his security in the open Fields, and that house that did uphold the first shall
be plundered.

V. French.
Tiers doigt du pied au premier semblera,
A un nouveau Monarque de bas haut,
Qui Pise and Luiques tyran occupera,
Du precedent corriger le defaut.
English.
The third toe of the foot shall be like the first,
To a new high Monarch come from low estate,
Who being a Tyrant shall cease upon Pise and Luica,
To correct the faults of him that preceded him.
ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that some body pretending to mend the Government of
those two places that are in Italy, shall tyrannically make himself Master of
them.

VI. French.
Par la Guyenne infinite d' Anglois,
Occuperont par nom d'Angle Aquitaine,
Du Languedoc. I. palm Bourdelois,
Quils nommeront apres Barboxitaine.
English.
There shall be in Guyenna an infinite number of English,
Who shall occupy it by the name of Angle Aquitaine,
Of Languedoc, I by the Land of Bourdeaux,
Which afterward they shall call Barboxitaine.
ANNOT.

Here is foretold a famous invasion, that shall be made by the English upon
that part of France called Guyenne, and in Latin Aquitania, of which Bourdeaux
is the chief City, insomuch, that the English afterward shall call that
Country Angl'Aquitaine.

VII. French.
Qui ouvrira le Monument trouve,
Et ne viendra le serrer promptement,
Mal luy viendra and ne poura prouve,
Si mieux doibt estre Roy Breton ou Normand.
English.
He that shall open the Sepulcher found,
And shall not close it up again presently,
Evil will befall him, and he shall not be able to prove
Whether is best a Britain or Norman King.
ANNOT.

The sense of this is perspicuous.

VIII. French.
Puisnay Roy fait son pere mettre a mort,
Apres conflict de mort tres in honest,
Escrit trouve soupcon, doura, remort,
Quand loup chasse pose sur la couchete.
English.
A younger King causes his father to be put
To a dishonest death, after a Battle,
Writing shall be found, that shall give suspicion and remorse,
When a hunted Wolf shall rest upon a truckle bed.
ANNOT.

The words and sense are plain.

IX. French.
Quand Lamp ardente de feu inextinguible,
Sera trouvee au Temple des Vestales,
Enfant trouvee, feu, eau passant par crible,
Nismes eau perir, Tholon^e chcoi^ les Halles.
English.
When a Lamp burning with unquenchable fire,
Shall be found in the Temple of the Vestals,
A Child shall be found, Water running through a Sieve,
Nismes to perish by Water, the Market-hall shall fall at Toulouse.
ANNOT.

The ancient Vestals, were a Kind of Religious Virgins in the ancient Romans
time, who if they did forfeit their honor, were buried alive in a Cave, with a
little Bread and Water, and a Lamp burning, our Author would have, that when a
Lamp shall be found lighted with an unquenchable fire, in that place where then
their Temple was, that then Nismes (which is a City of Languedoc, shall perish
by Water, and the Market-hall of Toulouse shall fall, whether such a Lamp may
be contrived as to burn with an unquenchable fire, is too long and tedious a
discourse to be disputed here.

X. French.
Moine, Moinesse d'Enfant mort expose,
Mourir par Ourse and ravy par verrier,
Par Foix and Panniers le Camp sera pose,
Contre Tholose, Carcas, dresser forrier.
English.
Monk and Nun having exposed a dead Child,
To be killed by a she Bear, and snatched away by a Glazier,
The Camp shall be set by Foix and Panniers,
And against Toulouse, Carcas shall raise a Harbinger.
ANNOT.

Foix and Panniers are two Towns in Languedoc, and so are Toulouse and
Carassonne, called here Carcas, for the abbreviation of the Verse, the sense
then of this prophecy is, that when the two first Verses shall come to pass,
that then an Army shall lie about those Towns, and Carcassonne shall be against
Thoulouse.

XI. French.
Le just a tort a mort l'on viendra mettre,
Publiquement, and du milieu estaint,
Si grande Peste en ce lieu viendra naistre,
Que les Jugeans fouyr seront contraints.
English.
The just shall be put to death wrongfully,
Publicly, and being taken out of the midst,
So great a Plague shall break into that place,
That the Judges shall be compelled to run away.
ANNOT.

Many understand this of the late King, and last Plague.

XII. French.
Le tant d'argent de Diane and Mercure,
Les simulachres au Lac seront trouvez,
Le Figulier cherchant argille neuve,
Luy and les siens, d'or seront abreuvez.
English.
The so much Silver of Diana and Mercury
The Statues shall be found in the Lake,
The Potter seeking for new clay,
He and his shall be filled with Gold.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning a Potter, who seeking and digging for new Clay,
shall find in a drained Lake the Statues of Diana and Mercury all of silver,
besides other great riches; seeing this Prophecy is not come to pass yet (that
I know) it will not be amiss, for the divertisement of the Reader, to relate
here a notable and authentical History of a Potter that has much ressemblance
with this, and will be a convincing Argument, that Mines grow in the Earth as
Turfs do, and as Virgil says of the golden branch: Uno avulso non deficit
alter.


It is written by Doctor de Rochas, Physician to the present Chancellor of
France, who was upon the place, and an eye witness of the circumstances of it,
having also an interest in it, in the behalf of his Father, who was overseer of
the Mines in that Province, therefore I shall relate it in his own words, as
they are in his Book of Mineral Waters.

In Provence near Thoulon, is a Mountain called Carquairene, at the foot of
which and near the brim of the Sea, there dwelled a Potter with all histools
about A notable History.
him; It chanced that on a day as he went to fetch Wood in that Mountain, to
bake his wares, he heard a voice of a little Kid, which some Shepherd had left
behind them unawares, and was fallen in a little hole that answered to natural,
great and deep Caves; this man seeing no Shepherds about him, thought presently
it was a strayed Kid, therefore he followed the cry with his ear so directly,
that he came by the orifice of that hole, where he heard and saw the Kid, which
he resolved to carry away with his Wood, therefore he took the Cords that were
at his Mules Saddle, and that he used to bind his Load with, and with the help
of them, and of some big pieces of VVood he got down, where, he did observe
round about him many other Caves, contiguous and separated from this, which his
curiosity caused him to view, and found in the chief of these Caves a great
quantity of stones heaped upon one another, and of a substance and color of
Brass, and among the rest there was one that came forth out of the Rock, about
the bigness, shape, and length of a man's arm, when it is stretched out; he did
apparently judge that the weight and brittleness of that matter had caused
those stones to fall down, and that the same that he saw come out of the Rock
in this manner, was already loose and like to fall; this man finding himself
among such an abundance of rich Lingots, which fortune did offer him, did not
know the value of them, but did like the Cock of Aesop which left the precious
Pearl to take the Corn of Wheat; thus this Jason took very little of this
Golden Fleece, and only a small piece, which he broke from a bigger with one of
his Tools, and employed all his industry to carry away his Kid, which at last
with much ado he got out, and carried upon his Mule, believing certainly that
this provision would be more profitable to him and his Family, then the yellow
stone which he had in his pocket, weighing about five pounds, and which he
intended to give to a Tinker of Thoulon, his Gossip and good friend, in hope
that for the same he might be presented with a bottle of Wine, to keep company
to his Kid; and accordingly the next morning by break of day he went to
Thoulon, and stayed in the Shop of his friend, who did look with admiration
upon so resplendent Brass; a Goldsmiths who lodged over the way, and observed
the splendour of that Divine metal, drew near, and presently would have
bargained for it, with a great deal of transportation and alteration. The
Potter asked him only twenty pence, which the Goldsmiths would have given him
presently, but the Tinker making sign to him to retract his words, he put his
lingot in his pocket again, with protestation that he would not part with it,
unless he had something that were worth the pains of going where he had it; in
conclusion, after many contestations and disputes, the Potter who did suspect
that it might be gold, would not sell nor deliver it under the sum of thirty
Crowns, which the Goldsmiths paid him presently, and which he carried away with
more joy, then if he had been possessor of greater riches; the Goldsmiths on
the other side, who thought that his profit would be above a hundred pounds
sterlings, did refine this stone, that was about five pound weight, out of
which he drew four pound weight, of very good and pure gold, the rest was a
kind of dross, that made it thus brittle; one ought not to think that the Mine
is all of the same perfection, but it purifieth it self, according as nature
thrusts it out of the Rock, as we see that Rubies and Emeralds are purer,
then the Rock from whence they come. This Goldsmiths having found such fortune,
and being resolved to make the best use of it, went to the Lord Scaravaque,
then Governor of the Town, and imparted unto him this new discovery, that he
might have his afsistance and favor in it, and that under his power and
authority he might follow and wait upon this precious business without being
disturbed by any body, to which the Governor did so much the easier consent,
that this Tradesman did obli^ge himself to give him the best part of the profit
that should arise from thence, and that should exceed any Travels into the
Indies or Peru.

In the mean time the Potter was not asleep, the Goldsmiths money had stirred
his appetite, and the charm of this witchcraft that works generally upon all
spirits, did put him upon new hopes. He went into the Mountain with his wife,
and with the help of a rope Ladder, which he had provided, and some Iron tools,
wherewith he had loaded his Mule, he went down into the Caves, and with much
endeavor did at last break that piece, that came out of the Rock like a man's
arm, because all the other that were tumbled upon the ground, were so big and
heavy that he could not remove them, when he had broken it down, though it were
about fourscore and two pounds weight, nevertheless with the help of his wife
and of his Ropes and Ladder he got out again, and stopped the hole with a large
stone, and some Earth, upon which he planted some small Bushes so ingeniously,
that this hole could never be found out again.

The Lord Scaravaque who was most imptaient, to conquer like another Jason this
Golden Fleece, and who was set on by the persuasions of the Goldsmiths, sent
for the Potter, under pretense to employ him in the making and furnishing of
some Tiles and other small commoditeis that depended on his art. The Potter
obeyed presently, drawn by the hopes to sell his wares well, and mistrusting
nothing at all what they would ask him. As soon as he came, the Governor asked
him and persuaded him with the best and most flattering words he could, to tell
where he had the yellow stone that he sold to the Gold smith? The Potter who
more and more began to know the value of this rare Treasure, invented presently
a lie, to free himself of the importunity of them that would have deceived him;
therefore with an ingenuity, as simple as artificial he answered, he had found
it upon the brim of the Sea, where may be some Ship had been cast away, or the
Waves had cast it upon the shore.

The Governor answered that this could not be, and therefore threatened him of
violence, and to send for all that he had in his House, which put the fellow
into a great perplexity, because of the other stone that should be found there,
therefore he chose rather to give it them out of his good will, then to put
himself in danger of loosing all, and perchance of being abused to boot,
without any more ado, he ingenuously confessed he had another piece of the same
stuff as the former in his House, which he had likewise found in the same
place, which he was ready to put into their hands, provided he might have his
share of it, and be suffered to get his livelihood peaceably. The Lord
Scaravaque did promise him all what he desired, and gave him some men to keep
him company, with command to bring him back again, and to take special care he
should not make an escape. At last this poor man came back again with that
piece, which did more inflame the passion that the Governor had to know the
place whence came that rich treasure; but neither for prayers, promises, or
threats he would never reveal it, which did oblige the Governor to shut him up
close in a Chamber, where nevertheless they gave him Victuals and made ready a
Bed, but he refused both, and by an extraordinary sadness, gave show that some
notorious mischance was waiting on him, which proved true, for he was found
dead in the Morning; which did put the Lord Scaravaque in a grief
unexpressible, to see himself deprived by this accident, of the fruit that his
hopes had made him conceive. He had recourse to the Potters wise for this
discovery, but she could never attain to it, whatsoever exact searches she
could make: yea, and after she was married again with a young man, who had
spent in that search most of his time. The Lord Scaravaque and other persons of
quality have employed all their skills and endeavors, but all their industry
and charges have been without effect, as well as of many others, who attempted
the same; about that time my Father who was overseer of the Mines in Provence,
having received the news of a business of such consequence, that did concern
his place, went presently unto that Mountain, to see if he could discover those
wonders, I was then in his company, as also that woman, viz. the Potters wife,
who carried us in several places for many days, without any success at all,
although she gave noti^e that she could here the Waves of the Sea, when she was
in the Cave with her first Husband, so that all our endeavors proved fruitless
and unprofitable, because my Father fell sick, which made us forsake our quest,
which is of such a consequence as not to be neglected.

During the time of our painful visiting that Mountain, I did consider the
particularities of that rich Mountain, and observed that the top of it was
almost all Az^r, which tokens are the beams of that golden Sun and are the
hairs of that fair goodness, under whose feet all things submit; in a word, are
the true and infallible signs that underneath are Mines of Gold and Silver. And
as I have directed all my thoughts many times to find out the means to compass
so excellent a work, whose profit would surpass all what the Indies furnish
unto strangers, and that with so much less charges and danger, that there is no
need of Ships or Fleet to cross over the Sea, from one Pole to the other, nor
fight against any enemies: at last I have attained to a certain knowledge*
which puts me in hope, and makes me promise and engage my word, that at
least I shall find a thread of that golden Mine, which may chance to lead us to
the Center of all these Treasures, but the Royal Authority being necessary to
prop up this design, it belongs to his Majesty to take what course he
thinks best for this, and to me to obey, execute his will. This digression
which is an assured experiment, (that is a certain truth, is not come into this
discourse, but only to prove that Mines grow by augmentation, in converting
into their own nature the more subtle parts of the Neighboring Earth. Thus far
Doctor de Rochas.

XIII. French.
Les Exilez autour de la Sologne,
Conduits de nuict pour marcher en l' Auxois,
Deux de Modene truculent de Bologne,
Mis discouverts par feu de Burancois.
English.
The banished about Sologne,
Being conducted by night to go into Auxois,
Two of Modena, the cruel of Bolonia,
Shall be discovered by the fire of Burancois.
ANNOT.

Sologne is a Province in France, between the Perch and the Main. Auxois is a
Country in the South of France, so called of its chief Town called Auch, the
seat of an Archbishop. Modena is a Town in Italy, and Bolonia another not far
from it. Buranceis is a part of the Province of Dauphini. The meaning then of
this Prophecy is, this being known, the Reader may easily find out the rest of
the sense.

XIV. French.
Mis en planure chauderon d'Infecteurs,
Vin miel en huile and bastis sur Fourneaux,
Seront plongez sans mal dit malfacteurs,
Sept. fum. extaint au Canon des Borneaux.
English.
A Dyers Kettle being put an a Plein,
With Wine, Honey and Oil, and built upon Furnace,
Shall be dipped, without evil, called Malefactors,
Seven. fum. put out at the Canon of Borneaux.
ANNOT.

This has a relation to the punishment, which in some parts of France and
Flanders is inflicted upon false Coiners, which are commonly boiled in Oil, in
a great Kettle, such as our Author here says belong to Dyers. The Author then
will have that the time shall come, when seven of that gang shall be so
punished together in a Plain, where a great Kettle shall be set for that
purpose upon a Furnace.

XV. French.
Pres de Parpan les rouges detenus,
Ceux du milieu parfondrez menez loing,
Trois mis en pieces, and cinq mal soustenus,
Pour le Seigneur and Prelat de Bourgoing.
English.
Near unto Parpan the red ones detained,
Those of the middle sunk and carried far off,
Three cut in pieces, and five ill backed,
For the Lord and Prelate of Burgoing.
ANNOT.

Parpan is either a barbarous or fained name, by the red ones, he has hitherto
understood some Cardinals, the Reader may expound the rest according to his
fancy.

XVI. French.
De Castle Franco sortira l'assemblee,
L'Ambassadeur non plaisant fera Schism,
Ceux de Riviere seront en la meslee,
Et au grand Goulphre desnieront l'entree.
English.
Out of Castle Franco shall come the Assembly,
The Ambassador not pleased, shall make a Schism,
Those of Riviere shall be in the medley,
And shall deny the entry of the great Gulf.
ANNOT.

Castle France is a Town in Piemont; Riviere is a strong Castle in Burgundy,
but what he means by the great Gulf, is more then I can tell.

XVII. French.
Le tiers premier, pis que ne fit Neron,
Vuidez vaillant que sang humain respandre,
Redifier fera le Forneron,
Siecle d'or mort, nouveau Roy grand esclandre.
English.
The third first, worse then ever did Nero,
Go out valliant, he shall spill much humane blood,
He shall cause the Forneron to be builded again,
Golden Age dead, new King great troubles.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy points directly at our Authors Master Charles the IX. King of
France, whom he calls he the third first, because he was the third son to
Henry II. and came to be King, using more cruelties then ever Nero did, for he
was the cause of the Massacre of the Protestants in France in the year 1572.
where above a hundred thousand people were murdered. Forneron is a barbarous
word, put here to make a Verse, and to rhyme with Neron. At that time he says
the Golden Age was dead, and upon the coming of a new King, who was Henry III.
great tumults did happen, and great Wars, as is to be seen in the French
History.

XVIII. French.
Le Lys Dauffois portera dans Nancy,
Jusques en Flanders Electeur de l'Empire,
Neufve obturee au grand Montmorency,
Horse lieux pronez delivre a cle%e pain.
English.
Dauffois shall carry the Lilly into Nancy,
As far as Flanders the Elector of the Empire,
New hinderance to great Montmorency,
Out of proved places, delivered to a clear pain.
ANNOT.

Although the words and sense of this Prophecy be most obscure, nevertheless we
shall endeavor as much as we can to render them something intelligible to the
Reader.

By the first Verse is to be understood that Dauffois, or rather Dauphinois,
which is the Title of the Kings of France eldest Son shall carry the Lilly,
which is the Arms of France into Nancy, the chief Town in Lorrain, which came
to pass in the time of the last King Lewis the XIII.

By the second Verse is understood the Elector of Triers, who was taken by the
Spaniards in his own Town, and carried prisoner to Bruxelles.

By the third and fourth is expressed the ill luck of the Duke of Montmorency,
who having taken part with the Duke of Lorrain, and the Duke of Orleans the
Kings Brother, was routed in a Battle, taken prisoner, and afterward beheaded
at Thoulouse.

XIX. French.
Dans le milieu de la Forest Mayenne,
Sol au Lion la Foudre tombera,
Le grand Bastard issu du grand du Maine,
Ce jour Fougeres point en sang entrera.
English.
In the middle of the Forest of Mayenne,
Sol being in Leo the Lightning shall fall,
The great Bastard begot by the great du Main,
That day Fougeres shall enter its point into blood.
ANNOT.

Fougeres is either the name of a Town in little Britanny, or that of a Noble
House, the words are very plain, therefore I leave the sense to every ones
capacity.

XX. French.
De nuit viendra par la Forest de Rennes,
Deux parts Voltorte Herne, la pierre blanch,
Le Moine noir en gris dedans Varennes,
Esleu Cap. cause tempeste, feu, sang tranche.
English.
By night shall come through the Forest of Rennis,
Two parts Voltorte Herne, the white stone,
The black Monk in gray within Varennes,
Elected Cap. causes tempest, fire, blood cutteth.
ANNOT.

Rennes is the chief Town of little Britanny; the second Verse being made of
barbarous words, is impossible to be understood. The third and fourth Verse
signifies, that when a black Monk in that Town of Varennes shall put on a gray
suit, he shall be elected Captain, and cause a great tempest or broils by fire
and blood.

XXI. French.
Au Temple hault de Blois sacre Salonne,
Nuict Pont de Loire, Prelat, Roy pernicant:
Cuiseur victoire aux marests de la Lone,
D'ou Prelature de blancs abormeant?
English.
At the high Temple of Blois sacred Salonne,
In the night the Bridge of Loire, Prelat, King mischievous.
A smarting Victory in the Marsh of Lone,
Whence Prelature of white ones shall be abortive.
ANNOT.

There is a mistake in the first Verse, for instead of Salonne, it must be
written Soulaire, which is a Priory and Church at the top of Blois, all the
rest signifies that in one night these shall happen, viz. that the Bridge, the
Prelat, and a pernicious King with a smart victory shall perish, whence the
Prelature, that is the place of Command upon the white ones, viz. Canons and
Prebends in their Surplices) shall be void and empty.

XXII. French.
Roy and sa Cour au lieu de la langue halbe,
Dedans le Temple vis a vis du Palais,
Dans le Jardin Duc de Montor and d' Albe,
Albe and Mantor, poignard, langue, en Palais.
English.
King and his Court in the place of langue halbe,
Within the Church over against the Palace,
In the Garden Duke of Montor and Albe,
Albe and Mantor, dagger, tongue and Palate.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is very obscure, for, first no body can tell what he means by
langue halbe, which is the foundation of all the rest of the sense; Secondly,
what this Duke of Montor and Mantor should be, which has been unknown in the
Histories hither to; and thirdly, what construction and sense can be made of
these disjunctives: Albe, Mantor, Dagger, Tongue, Palate, Therefore i will leave
it free to every bodies opinion to make his construction.

XXIII. French.
Puisnay jouant au fresch dessous la tonne,
Le haut du toit du milieu sur la test,
Le Pere Roy au Temple Saint Solonne,
Sacrifiant sacrera fum de feste.
English.
The youngest Son playing under the tun,
The top of the House shall fall upon his head,
The King his Father in the Temple of Saint Soulaine,
Sacrificing shall make festival smoke.
ANNOT.

By this is meant, that the youngest Son of a King, shall be knocked in the
head, while he is a playing under a tun; his Father being at the same time in
the Temple of Saint Soulaine at Mass.

XXIV. French.
Sur le Palais au Rocher des Fenestres,
Seront ravis les deux petits Roiaux,
Passer Aurelle, Lutece, Denis cloistres,
Nonnain, Mollods avaler verts noiaux.
English.
Upon the Palace at the Rock of the Windows;
Shall be carried the two little Royal ones,
To pass Aurele, Lutece, Denis Cloisters,
Nonnain, Mollods to swallow green stones of fruit.
ANNOT.

These two or three last Stanzas have been concerning the City of Blois, to
which it seems that this has also relation, for he says that two little
Royal Children shall be carried at the top of the Castle, and shall be conveyed
beyond Aurelle (which is Orleans in Latin Aurelianum) Lutece, which is Paris;
S. Denis Cloisters, which is beyond Paris, and a Nunnery besides, where it is
like they shall be left to eat green stones of fruit, which is not easy to be
understood, no more then the word Mollods.

XXV. French.
Passant les Ponts, venir prez de Roziers,
Tard arrive plustost quil cuidera,
Viendront les noves Espagnols a Beziers,
Qui icelle chasse emprinse cassera.
English.
Going over the Bridge, to come near the Rose-trees,
Come late, and sooner then he thought,
The new Spaniards shall come to Beziers,
Who shall cashiere this new undertaken hunting.
ANNOT.

Beziers is a City in Languedoc; the rest may be construed by the meanest
capacity.

XXVI. French.
Nise sortie sur nom des Lettres aspres,
La grande Cappe fera present non sien,
Proche de Vultry aux murs des vertes capres,
Apres Plombin le vent a bon e^cient.
English.
A silly going out, caused by shardp Letters,
The great Cap shall give what is not his,
Near Vultry by the Walls of green Capers,
About Piombino the wind shall be in good earnest.
ANNOT.

This signifies that there shall be a silly surrendering of a Town, caused by
sharp and threatening Letters that shall be sent into it. By the great Cap he
uses to understand the Pope, who he faith shall give what is not it, as he
has done many times Vultry, in Latin Velitrum, and Piombino are two Cities in
Italy, which are threatened here with mighty winds.

XXVII. French.
De bois la guard vent clos ront Pont sera,
Haut le receu frappera le Dauphin,
Le vieux Teccon bois unis passera,
Passant plus outre du Duc le droit confin.
English.
The Fence being of Woo^, close Wind Bridge shall be broken,
He that is received high, shall strike at the Dolphin,
The old Teccon shall pass over smooth Wood,
Going over the right confines of the Duke.
ANNOT.

The first Verse signifies that a wooden Bridge shall be broken by a close
wind, as did happen to the Millers Bridge, and the Birds Bridge in Paris.

The second Verse seems to foretell the conspiracy of the Mareshal of Biron,
against Henry IV. his Dolphin and Estate.

The third and fourth, the Wars and Conquest which the said King (whom he
called old Teccon, made upon the Duke of savoy, who had corrupted the said
Marshal of Biron.

XXVIII. French.
Voile Symacle, Port Massiliolique,
Dans Venise Port marcher aux Pannons,
Partir du Goulfre and sinus Illirique,
Vast a Sicile, Ligurs coups de Canon.
English.
Symaclian Sail, Massilian Port,
In Venice to march toward the Hungarians,
To go away from the Gulf and Illirick Sea,
Toward Sicily, the Genoeses with Cannon shots.
ANNOT.

What he means by Symaclian Sail, is not easy to determine; Massilian Port
is that of Marseilles in France, called in Latin Massilia, the sense of this
Prophecy then if any be, is, that a great Fleet shall go from thence to Venice,
to carry succors to the Hungarians, who it seems shall be much distressed at
that time by the Turks, and that Sicily and Genoa shall add to this Fleet a
considerable succor of Men, and Warlike Munition.

XXIX. French.
Lors que celuy qu'a null ne done lieu,
Abandonner voudra lieu prins non pris,
Feu, Nef, par saignes, bitument a Charlieu,
Seront Quintin, Bales repris.
English.
When he that gives place to no body,
Shall forsake the place taken, and not taken,
Fire, Ship, by bleeding bituminous at Charlieu,
Then Quintin and Bales shall be taken again.
ANNOT.

He that gives place to no body is the Pope; as for the last Verse, I had
rather read St. Quintin and Cales, which are two considerable Towns in France,
then otherwise.

That place taken, not taken was the City of N^yon in Picardy, which was taken
by the Spanish Cavalry, clothed after the French Mode, which stratagem
deceived the Citizens and Soldiers that defended it: so he says taken, because
it fell into the hands of the Spaniards, and not taken, because it was by a
stratagem or deceit.

XXX. French.
Au Port de Puola and de St. Nicolas,
Perir Norn^ande au Gou^^^e Phanatique,
Cap de Bizance rues crier Helas!
Secours de Gaddes and du grand Philippique.
English.
At the Harbor of Puola and of St. Nicolas,
A Norman Ship shall perish in the Phanatick Gulf,
At the Cape of Byzantium the streets shall cry Alas!
Succors from Cadis and from the great Philippe.
ANNOT.

Puola is for Paulo here, and by it is understood the Port of Malta, which
being Besieged by the Turks, Philip the II. King of Spain, sent an Army to
relieve it, which made those of Byzantium (which is Constantinople) cry alas,
etc.

XXXI. French.
Le tremblement de Terre a Mortara,
Cassich, St. George a demi perfondrez,
Paix assoupie la guerre esuaillera,
Dans Temple a Pasques abysmes enfondrez.
English.
There shall be an Earthquake at Mortara,
Cassich, St. George shall be half swallowed up,
The War shall awake the sleeping pace,
Upon Easterday shall be a great hole sunk in the Church.
ANNOT.

Mortara is a Town in Italy, by Cassich and St. George he means two other
places.

XXXII. French.
De fin Porphire Profond Collon trouvee,
Dessoubs la laze escrits Capitolin,
Os, poil retors, Romain force prouvee,
Class agiter au Port de Methelin.
English.
A deep Column of fine Porphyry shall be found,
Under whose Basis shall be Roman writings,
Bones, hairs twisted, Roman force tried,
A Fleet a gathering about the Port of Methelin.
ANNOT.

Porphir^ is a kind of hard red Marble speckled with white spots, which is very
scarce, and chiefly in great pieces; our Author then faieth that a great Colomn
of that stuff shall be found, and about the Basis of it some words in Roman
Characters, and that about that time a great Fleet shall be a gathering at the
Port of Methelin, which is an Island in the Archipelago, belonging now to the
Turks; as for the third Verse, I cannot tell what to make of it.

XXXIII. French.
Hercules Roy de Rome and Dannemark,
De Gaul trois Gayon surnomme,
Trembler l' Itale and l'un de Saint Marc,
Premier sur tous Monarque renommee.
English.
Hercules King of Rome, and Denmark,
Of France three Guyon surnamed,
Shall cause Italy to quake and one of St. Marck,
He shall be above all a famous Monarch.
ANNOT.

All these intricated words and sense foretell that, when a King of Denmarck
named Hercules shall be made King of the Romans, that then Italy and Venice it
self shall stand in great fear of him; and that he shall be as great a Prince
or Monarch as ever was in Europe; and that very likely, for by his dignity of
King of the Romans he consequently shall attain to the Empire.

XXXIV French.
Le part solus Mary sera Mitre;
Retour conflict passera sur la tuille,
Par cinq cens un trahir sera tultre,
Narbon and Saulce par coutaux avons d'huile.
English.
The separated Husband shall wear a Miter,
Returning, Battle, he shall go over the Tyle,
By five hundred one dignified shall be betrayed,
Narbon and Salces shall have Oil by the Quintal.
ANNOT.

The first Verse signifies, that some certain man who was married; shall be
parted from his wife, and shall attain to some great Ecclesiastical Dignity.

The second Verse is, that in coming back from some place or entreprise, he
shall be met and fought with, and compelled to escape over the Tyles of a House.

The third Verse is, that a man of great account shall be betrayed by five
hundred of his men.

And the last, that when these things shall come t^ pass, Narbon and Salcer,
which are two Cities of Languedoc, shall reap and make a great deal of Oil.

XXXV. French.
Et Ferdinand blonde sera descorte,
Quitter la fleur suivre le Macedon,
Au grand besoing defaillira sa routte,
Et marchera contre le Myrmidon.
English.
And Ferdinand having a Troop of fair men,
Shall leave the flower to follow the Macedonian,
At his great need his way shall fail him,
And he shall go against the Myrmidon.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy ought to be understood of an Emperor of Germany, whose name
shall be Ferdinand, who being accompanied with many Germans, that for the most
part are fair haired people shall come and War against Gracia, which is
expressed here by the names of Macedon and Myrmidon, the first of which is a
Country, and the last ^ Nation, both in Graecia.

XXXVI. French.
Un grand Roy prins enter les mains d'un jeune,
Non loin de Pasques confusion, coup cultre:
Perpet. cattif temps que foudre en la Hune,
Trois Freres lors se blesseront and meurtre.
English.
A great King taken in the hands of a young one,
Not far from Easter, confusion, stroke of a knife,
Shall commit, pitiful time, the fire at the top of the Mast,
Three Brothers then shall wound one another, and murder done.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the year 1560. when Antony of Bourbon King of
Navarre, and his Brother Lewis of Bourbon Prince of Conde, coming to King
Francis W. at Orleans, upon the 29. of October, the Prince of Conde was put in
prison, and the King of Navarre arrested. The Lord And^ew Fauyn in his History
of Navarre, says, that the opinion of the Council was, that the Prince of
Condee should be beheaded, for having been the chief of the conspiracy at
Amboise, and the King of Navarre should be stabbed in the Kings Chamber by the
King himself, assisted by others for that purpose. The Lady of Montpensier gave
notice of it to the King of Navarre, who being sent for by the King, charged
expressly Cattin his waiting man and an old servant of his Father to take a care
and preserve his bloody shirt after his death, till his son came to Age, to
revenge it upon the murderers God be thanked this came not to pass, for the
King having called him, and going about to provoke him with ^oul words, he
answered so meekly and humbly, that the Kings anger was appeased, where upon
the Duke of Guise going out of the room, said, O what a cowardly Prince is
this. These things are expressed in the first and second Verse, when he says
that a great King should be put in Prison by a young one, because Antony of
Bourbon, though he was not a great King in Lands, yet he was a great one in
courage and prudence. And it was not far from Easter, since it was but five
months before, viz. from the beginning of November, to the sixth of April 1591.
which was Easterday, the Author puts in this circumstance, because the next
Easter after, the King of Navarre was made General of France under the Queen
Regent.

He adds the blow of a Knife, as we have showed; he also says a lasting bad
time, which proved very true, moreover, he says, what lightning in the Hune o^
Topmast, because King Francis died presently after. In the fourth Verse he
says, that three Brothers shall be hurt and killed, those three Brothers were
Antony of Bourbon King of Navarre, killed at the Siege at Rouen, the Cardinal
of Bourbon, and Lewis of Bourbon Prince of Conde, killed at the Battle of
^arnac.

XXXVII. French.
Pont and Molins en December versez,
En si haut lieu montera la Garonne:
Murs, Edifice, Thoulouse renversez,
^u on ne scaura son lieu coutant matrone.
English.
Bridges and Mills in December overturned,
In so high a place the Garonne shall come,
Walls, Building, Thoulose overturned,
So that none shall know its place, so much Matrone.
ANNOT.

Here is foretold a prodigious inundation of the River Caronne, in the month of
December, by which the Walls, Building, and the City of Thoulouse is threatened
to be overturned. The last word of all is barbarous, and added to make up the
rhyme.

XXXVIII. French.
L'Entree de Blaye par Rochelle and l' Anglios,
Passera outre le grand Aemathien:
Non loing d' Again attendra le Gaulois,
Secours Narbonne deceu par entretien.
English.
The coming in at Blaye by Rochel and the English,
Shall go beyond the great Aemathien,
Not far from Again shall expect the French,
Help from Narbonne deceived by entertainment.
ANNOT.

For the better understanding of this, the hard words must first be made plain;
Blaye is a City upon the River Garonne, and the Port-Town to Bourdeaux; Rochel
is a City upon the same Coast; Again is a City in Gascony not far frm Bourdeaux,
and Narbonne is a City in Languedoc, by the Mediterranean Sea; Aemathian was
formerly the Country of Macedonia, wherein Julius Caesar and C. Pompeius
fought their last Battle in the Pharsalian Fields, and therefore says the
Latin Poet Lucanus: Bella per Aemathios plusquam civilia campos.

These things being considered the sense is, that there shall be an Invasion
made by the English, to whom those of Rochel shall join, upon the Town of
Blaye, which shall proceed as far as Age^, and that thereabout will be a bloody
Encounter between the English and French, beyond that which was fought in the
Aemathian Fields, and that the succors that should come from Narbonne to the
French, shall be deluded and hindered by the speech and discourse of some.

XXXIX. French.
En Arbissella, Vezema and Crevari,
De nuit conduits pour Savenne atraper,
Le vif Gascon, Giury, and la Charry,
Derrier Mur vieux and neuf Palais grapper.
English.
In Arbissella, Vezema and Crevari,
Being conducted by night to take Savona,
The quick Gascon, Giury and the Charry,
Behind old Walls and new Palace to graples.
ANNOT.

Arbissella is a Town situated by the Seaside above Savona, going toward
Genoa. Vezema and Crevari are in the Inland Country, and a li^t^e further
remoted from the Sea then Arbissella. The quick Gascon was Blasius of Monluc,
one of the Valliantest men of his time, who came from a single Soldier to be
Marshal of France. Guiry and la Charry were two of his Companions. This Stanza
does Prophetically foretell two things, one is, the design that the Marshal of
Brissac, then Governor of Piemont had upon Savona: the other, the taking of
Pianca by Blasius of Monluc, as to the first, the Lord of Villars writes in
his Memorials, that the Lord Damzay sent advice to the King, that the taking of
Savona was more probable then any other design, which signifies that the
Marshal of Brissac had of a long time eyed that Town, and therefore he sent by
night some Troops into those three little Towns, to see if they could surprise
Savona, but the design did not succeed: The Histories only mention that the
Marshal of Brissac went from Court in the year 1557. with a design to take
Savona; but this Stanza speaks of the same design 1556.

At the same time in the year 1556. the 29. of June Blasius of Monluc, as he
relates in his Commentaries, did surprise the Town and Fort of Piance, called
in Latin Cor^in^^^^^, he had with him the Captain la Charry the Captain
Bartholomew of ^ezero, and the son of Captain Luzzan. At first the French were
beaten back, but the valliant Mo^lu^ did encourage them again by his example,
going the first in, and saying only, follow your Captain.

Which having said, he thrust himself under the Gate, where three or four men
might stand sheltered by the planks of the Fort, and having his Sword in the
left hand, and his dagger in the right, he began to break and cut the Brick and
made a hole, which opening by degrees, he thrust his arm through, and pulled
the gap so strongly, that he caused all the Wall to fall down upon himself,
without being hurt by it. This is the meaning of the Author in the fourth
Verse, when he says, the quick Gascon was behind the Wall; In prosecution of
this, the Switzers did beat down the rest of the Wall, and all came into the
Town crying, France, France, Monluc ran presently to the Fort, and with the
help of His men took it, that is the meaning of the Author, when he says, old
and new Palace to graple. The old Palace was adjoining to the Marketplace of
the Town, in which the French were prisoners with the Captain Gourgues, to the
number of fifty or sixty tied two and two, and so kept by twenty Soldiers,
whom they did kill as we have said. The new Palace was the Fo^t. The Author
used that ancient word grapper, which in the (...) languague signifies, to
pull down with ones hands, and in the contrary sense, to shut and plaster so
well some thing, that there will be a necessity of the help of the hands to
open what was shut up.

XL. French.
Pres de Quentin dans la Forest Bourlis,
Dans l'Abbaye seront Flamands tranchez,
Les deux puisnez de coups my estourdis,
Suitte appressee and gardes tous hachez.
English.
Near Quentin in the Forest Bourlis,
In the Abbey the Flemmings shall be slashed,
The two younger sons half a stonished with blows,
The followers oppressed, and the Guards all cut in pieces.
ANNOT.

This is a peculiar accident that happened before the taking of the Town of
Saint Quentin by the Spaniard in the year 1557 and fell out thus. News being
come to the King of France, that the pow^rful Army of the Spaniard was gone to
Besiege St. Quentin, he made all imaginable diligence to succor it; the
Spaniards to hinder the relief had seized upon an ancient Abbey of the
Vermandois, which is in the next Forest, that was anciently called the Forest
Bourlis, and is at present called the Forest of the Abbay Vermandois, called
in Latin Augusta Veromanduorum, builded by an ancient Hungarian Captain called
Vermandig. In process of time it was all ruinated, and only one Abbey left,
wherein was the Episcopal See, which afterward was transferred into the City
of Noyon. After the ruin of this Town, that of St. Quentin next to it became
the chief City of Vermandois; It was named St. Quentin, because the Emperor
Dioclesian having sent St. Quentin a Roman Senator to be Governor of it, he
did convert the Inhabitants to the Christian Faith, and after he himself did
suffer there Martyrdom.

In that Abbey a great many Flemmings had i^tranched themselves, but the French
going to relieve the Town, did force their Trenches and Fortifications, and in
the heat of the fight the two younger Sons of the Captain being armed Cap a
pee, though they were not killed, yet were astonished with blows they did
receive upon their heads, their followers and Guards being all cut in pieces.

XLI. French
Le grand Chyren soy saisir d' Avignon,
De Rome Lettres en miel plein d'amertume,
Lettre, Ambassade partir de Chanignon,
Carpentras pris par Duke noir, rouge plume.
English.
The great Cheyren shall seize upon Avignon,
Letters from Rome shall come full of bitterness,
Letters and Embassies shall go from Chanignon,
Carpentras taken by a black Duke with a red Feather.
ANNOT.

This did happen lately, viz. some five or six years ago, when the Duke of
Crequy Ambassador at Rome was affronted by the Corses, which are the Popes
Guard: for which the King of France demanded reparation, and seized upon
Avignon, till the Pope granted him that all the said Corses should be banished,
and a Pyramid erected in Rome to the perpetual infamy of that Nation.

XLII. French.
De Barcelonne, de Gennes and Venise,
De la Sicile pres Monaco unis,
Contre Barbare class prendront la vise,
Barbar poulse bien loing jusqu'a Thunis.
English.
From Barcelona, from Genoa and Venice,
From Sicily near Manaco united,
Against the Barbarian the fleet shall take her aim,
The Barbarian shall be driven back as far as Thunis.
ANNOT.

The sense of these words is very plain and signifies only, that there will
be an union and League between these Towns, viz. Barcelona, Genoa, Vinice, and
the Kingdom of Sicily against the Turks, whom they shall encounter near Monaco,
and put them to flight, and follow them as far as Tunis.

XLIII. French.
Proche a descentre l'Armee Crucigere,
Sera guettee par les Ismaelites,
De tous costez battus par nef Raviere,
Prompt assailies de dix Galeres d'eslite.
English.
The Crucigere Army being about to Land,
Shall be watched by the Ismaelites,
Being beaten on all sides by the Ship Raviere,
Presently assaulted by ten chosen Galleys.
ANNOT.

By the Crucigere Army is understood the Christian Army, because the word
Crucigere signifies one that bears a Cross, from the two Latin words Crux
and gero; the Ismaelites are the Turks, who boast themselves to be descended
from Ismael, the son of Abraham and Agar, the meaning of this is, that the
Christians going about to attempt some landing place, the Turks shall watch
them, and set upon them by Land and Sea, in which Sea fight he mentions only
ten choice Galleys, and a notable Ship called Raviere, (if it be not false
printed) I am much of an opinion that this came to pass when Philip the II.
King of Spain made an attempt upon Algeirs, by his Admiral Andre d'Oria, who
had to do with the Moors upon the Land, ready to receive him, and some part of
their Fleet that watched him, but cross and contrary winds caused him to return
re infecta.

XLIV. French.
Migrez, migrez de Geneve tretous,
Saturn d'Or en Fer se changera,
Le contre Raypoz exterminera tous,
Avaunt l'advent le Ciel signs fera.
English.
Go forth, go forth out of Geneva all,
Saturn of gold, shall be changed into Iron,
They against Raypos shall extermine them all,
Before it happens, the Heavens will show signs.
ANNOT.

This is a Prophecy concerning Geneva, out of which he warns every one to
come; his reason is, that the golden Age of that Town shall be changed into an
Iron one; and that there shall be one against Raypos, that shall extermine them
all, before which there shall appear some signs in Heaven. Now the Author being
a rank Papist, it is to be supposed that he warns out of Geneva all those of
his Faith, because of Called here against Raypos.
the coming of Calvin, whom he foresaw was to come into that Town, and to
change the Government thereof, and to extermine them all, which is to be
understood, in point of Religion, as for what prodigies did precede that
change; I had no time to consult Authors upon it, the judicious Reader may
chance to find them in those that have written of this matter.

XLV. French.
Ne sera soul jamais de demander,
Grand Mendosus obtiendra son Empire,
Loing de la Cour fera contremander,
Piemont, Picard, Paris, Tyrhen le pire.
English.
He shall never be weary of asking,
Great Mendosus shall obtain his dominion,
Far from the Court be shall cause him to be countermanded,
Piemont, Picardy, Paris, Tyrhen the worse.
ANNOT.

By Mendosus, is Anagrammatically to be understood Vendosme; but who is that
shall never be weary of asking, or whose Dominion Vendosme shall have, or what
is meant by the last two Verses, passes my understanding.

XLVI. French.
Vuidez fuyez de Thoulouse les rouges,
Du Sacrifice fair expiation,
Le Chef du mal dessoubs l'ombre des courges,
Mort estrangler carne omination.
English.
Get you gone, run away from Thoulouse ye red ones,
There shall expiation be made of the Sacrifice,
The chief cause of the evil under the shade of gourdes,
Shall be strangled, a presage of the destruction of much flesh.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy does only and properly belong to the City of Thoulouse; and by
it are warned all the red ones, that is, all those that usually wear Red or
Scarlet Gowns, as those of the Parliament and the Capitols to come out of it,
because says he, i here shall an expiation be made of the Sacrifice, meaning
that there shall be a great slaughter among the Citizens, as it did happen at
several times, the first Anno 1563. another time when the first President
Durauti, and several other of the red Gowns were put to death, etc. The two
last Verses signify, that the chief contriver of this uproar shall be
strangled, and many others besides him.

XLVII. French.
Les soubsignez d'indigne deliverance,
Et de la multe auront contre advis,
Change Monarque mis en perrille pence,
Serrez en cage se verront vis a vis.
English.
The underwritten to an unworthy deliverance,
Shall have from the multitude a contrary advice,
They shall change their Monarch and put him in peril,
They shall see themselves shut up in a Cage over against,
ANNOT.

This is plainly to be understood of those Traitors, that delivered and signed
the death of King Charles the I. of blessed Memory, against the sense and
advise of at least three parts of four of the Nation, and who afterward saw
themselves for the most part shut in Prison for this fact, and brought to a
shameful end.

XLVIII. French.
La grand Cite d'Occean Maritime,
Environnee de Marests en Crystal,
Dans le Solstice hyemal and la prime,
Sera tentee de vent espouvental.
English.
The great Maritime City of the Ocean,
Encompassed with Chrystaline Fens,
In the Winter Solstice and in the spring,
Shall be tempted with fearful wind.
ANNOT.

By the great Maritime City of the Ocean, Encompassed with Crystaline Fens, is
ot be understood the City of London, for as for that of Venice, it is situated
upon the Mediterranean or rather Adriatic Sea: London then is threatened here
of a fearful wind, which whether the Author means for the time that is past
now, and that shall come hereafter I know not, sure I am, that I have within
this fifteen years seen two such winds in London, as I never saw the like any
where else; the first was that day that Olivier the Usurpator died, the other
was about six or seven years ago, caused by the lightning that fell in
Hereford-shire, and did mix with a Western wind and came as far as London,
carrying the tops of houses, and doing then for above 10000, pounds damage.

XLIX. French.
Gand and Bruxelles marcheront contre Anvers,
Senate de Londres mettront a mort leur Roy,
Le Sell and Vin luy seront a l'envers,
Pour eux avoir le Regne or desarroy.
English.
Gand and Bruxelles shall go against Antwerp,
The Senate of London shall put their King to death,
The Salt and Wine shall not be able to do him good,
That they may have the Kingdom into ruin.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy taken with all its circumstances, and the subject it treats
of, is the most remarkable of all those that ever Nostradamus was Author of,
for here we see a concatenation of circumstances linked together, to make it
true to any bodies eyes, for first the number of this Stanza being 49.
signifies the year wherein the King died, for although by the English account,
who begin their year at the 25. of March, it may be said it was in 48, because
it did happen upon the 30th. of January, yet according to the general account
of the most part of the World, the year begin upon the first day of January, so
that the King dying on the 30th. of January, it may be said it was in the year
1649.

The first Verse signifies, that at that time there was no good intelligence
between the Cities of Flanders and Brabant, as I remember very well that there
was not, but upon what score, I have forgotten.

The second Verse is plain to any body that can either read or hear it.

The third Verse by the Salt and Wine, understands France, who was then in
War with the Spaniard, and in some divisions among themselves, so that they
could not take the Kings part as to relieve and free him by force, but sent
Ambassadors to mediate a composure of the difference.

The fourth Verse intimates that by reason of the said Wars that were in
France, the said murdering Parliament had liberty to do what they lifted for
the bringing the Kingdom into ruin.

L. French.
Mensodus tossed viendra a son ha(...)t Regne,
Mettant arriere un peu le Norlaris,
Le rouge blesme, le masle a l'interregne,
Le jeune crainte and frayeur Barbaris.
English.
Mensodus shall soon come to his high Government,
Putting a little aside the Norlaris,
The red, pale, the Male at the interreigne,
The young fear, and dread barbarism.
ANNOT.

Mensodus is the Anagramme of Vendosme, by which is meant Antony of Bourbon
Duke of Vendosme, brother to the then Prince of Conde, and father to Henry IV.
Norlaris is the Anagram of Lorrain; now any body that understands any thing
in History, knows what dissension and seud there was between the House of
Bourbon, and that of Lorrain in the time of Francis the II. for the House of
Bourbon, though next to the Royal blood, was the least in favor, and those of
the House of Lorrain did Govern all, and had so far prevailed as to have got
the Prince of Conde into their hands, and had him condemned to have his head
cut of, which would have been executed, had not the King that very day fallen
sick of the disease he died of. Now this being understood our Author will have
that Mensodus, which is Vendosme shall lay aside the Norlaris, that is Lorrein.
By the red pale is meant the Cardinal of Lorrain, brother to the Duke of Guise,
who grew pale at this. By the male at the interreigne is so obscure, that we
leave it to the judgment of the Reader.

LI French.
Contre les rouges Sects se banderont,
Feu, eau, fer, cord, par paix se minera,
Au point mourir ceux qui machineront,
Fors un que monde sur tout ruinera,
English.
Against the red, Sects shall gather themselves,
Fire, water, iron, rope, by peace it shall be destroyed,
Those that shall conspire shall not be put to death,
Except one, who above all shall undo the World.
ANNOT.

The name of red Sects, may very well be applied to the Protestants of France,
against whom in those days it seemed that fire, Water, Iron and Rope had
conspired, for they were put to death by each one of those fatal instruments
for their Religion sake. This is a lively expression of the unhappy Massacre of
the Protestants in France upon St. Batholomews day 1572.

The two last Verses signify, that all the Contrivers of that Council, were of
opinion at first to proceed some other way, but only the Duke of Guise, who was
the principal actor in it, and whom our Author says, did undo the world; for
he was the cause of mischief, not only then, but afterward.

LII. French.
La paix sapproche d'un cost and la guerre,
Oncques ne fut la poursuite fi grande,
Plaindre homme and femmene sang Innocent par Terre,
Et ce fera de France a toute band.
English.
Peace is coming on one side, and War on the other,
There was never so great a pursuing,
Man, Woman shall bemoan, Innocent blood shall be spilt,
It shall be in France on all sides.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the Reign of Charles the IX. in the year 1558.
when the peace was treated of, and concluded the year after 1559. the War on
the other side begun to appear by the raising of the Protestants, who begun
publicly their opinion in the time of Francis the II. and Charles the IX.

There was never seen such a prosecution of War and of Peace together; for
there was never an estate more embroiled in Wars than that of Charles the IX.
was, nor where Peace was more sought after; for there was nothing but Wars and
treaties of Peace, Men and Women did complain on all sides, for the wrong and
damages they received from both parties, the Protestants believing to do God a
good service in destroying Images, and killing Priests and Monks. And the
Papists on the other side thinking to make a sweet Sacrifice unto God, in
practicing the same cruelties upon the Protestants, and so in all corners of
France every one did set himself to do evil.

LIII. French.
Le Neron jeune dans les trois Cheminees,
Fera de Pages vifs pour ardoir ietter,
Heureux qui loin sera de tells menees,
Trois de son sang le feront mort guetter.
English.
The young Nero in the three Chimneys.
Shall cause Pages to be thrown to be burnt alive,
Happy shall he be who shall be far from this doing,
Three of his own blood shall cause him to be put to death.
ANNOT.

A young Tyrant called here Nero, shall cause some Pages to be burnt alive in
three Chimneys, and afterward himself shall be put to death by three of his
own blood, this fact savoureth so much of bestial cruelty, that I cannot belive
any Christian Prince can ever be guilty of it.

LIVE. French.
Arrivera au port de Corsibonne,
Pres de Ravenne, qui pillera la Dame,
En Mer profonde legate de Vlisbone;
Soubs Roc cachez raviront septante ames.
English.
There shall come into the Port of Corsibonne,
Near Ravenna, those that shall plunder the Lady,
In the deep Sea shall be the Ambassador of Lisbonne,
The hidden under the Rock shall carry away seventy Souls.
ANNOT.

The Port of Corsibonne, must of necessity be that of Ancona; first because
there is no Port of the former name near the City of Ravenna. Secondly, because
Ancona is near Ravenna.

By the Lady is meant the Chapel or Church of our Lady of Loretto, which is
threatened here to be plundered by some Turks or Pirates, enticed thereunto by
the manifold riches that are said to be therein.

The third Verse speaks of a Portugues Ambassador, who it seems shall be
drowned or buried in the main Sea.

The fourth Verse gives warning of some Robbers and Pirates, very like to be
Turks, who being in Ambuscado, and shrouded among the Rocks by the Sea side,
shall carry away seventy Souls.

LV French.
L'Horrible guerre qu'en Occident s'appreste,
L'An ensuivant viendra la Pestilence,
Si fort terrible, que jeune, viel, ne best,
Sang, feu, Mercu. Mars, Jupiter en France.
English.
An horrid War is a preparing in the West,
The next year shall come the Plague,
So strangly terrible, that neither young nor old, nor beast shall escape
Blood, fire, Mercu. Mars, Jupiter in France.
ANNOT.

That word a preparing in the first Verse, signifies that he speaks of a
time, wherein War was a making ready, when he was a writing.

The West, of which our Author speaks, is not formerly the West which is
Spain, but is the West respectively to his Country of Provence, which is
Picardy, Lorrain, and the Country of Mets, in all these Places that are
VVesterly from Provence, there was great Wars in the year 1557 in Picardy in
the year 1558. at Calais and Thionville, and at last from the middle of that
year to the end of it, were seen two great Armies of both Kings, which
threatened a horrid slaughter, had not God Almighty provided against it by the
treaty of Peace of the 3d. of April 1559 the year following, which was 1559.
there did happen what he foretells, viz. the Plague so strangely terrible to
Young, Old, and Beasts, etc.

And in those quarters there was nothing but Fire and Blood; that is, Massacres
and ruins of all sorts, then did Rule in France, the three Planets of Jupiter,
Mars and Mercury, Jupiter and Mercury, for the peace that was then concluded,
and Mars for the War that was then on foot.

The History of Provence mentions, that that Pestilence was called by the
Physicians, Febris erratica, by which within the space of five or six Months,
died almost an infinite number of people.

LVI. French.
Camp pres de Noudam passera Goussanville,
Et a Maiotes laissera son enseigne,
Convertira en instant plus de mill,
Cherchant le deux remettre en chain and legne.
English.
A Camp shall by Noudam go beyond Goussanville,
And shall leave its Ensign at Maiotes,
And shall in an instant convert above a thousand,
Seeking to put the two parties in good understanding together.
ANNOT.

These three words of Noudam, Gaussanville, and Maiotes are three little
inconsiderable Country Towns, situated near one another; the meaning then of
it is, that an Army near Noudam, shall go through Goussanville; and shall in an
instant convert, that is, draw to his party above a thousand of the contrary
party, the business being about the procuring of a good understanding and amity
between two great ones.

LVII. French.
Au lieu de Drux un Roy reposera,
Et cherchera Loy changeant d'Anatheme,
Pendant le Ciel ^itresfort Tonnera,
Portee neufve Roy tuera soy mesme.
English.
In the place of Drux a King shall rest himself,
And shall seek a Law changing Anatheme,
In the mean while the Heaven shall Thunder so strongely,
That a new gate shall kill the King him self.
ANNOT.

Drux is a City in Normady, near which Henry the IV. got a memorable victory:
It is said that in that place a King shall rest himself, and shall endeavor to
change Religion; but at that time it shall Thunder and Lighten so much, that by
the fall of a new ga^^, the King himself shall be killed.

LVIII. French.
Au cost gauche a lendroit de Vitry;
Seront guettez les trois rouges de France,
Tous assommez rouge, noir non meurdry,
Par les Bretons remis en asseurance.
English.
On the left hand over against Vitry,
The three red ones of France shall be watched for,
All the red shall be knocked dead, the black not murdered,
By the Britains set up again in security.
ANNOT.

What is meant here by the three red ones of France is hard to decide, whether
they be Cardinals or Judges; because both wear commonly Scarlet Gowns, or some
Noblemen clothed in Scarlet; but it seems by this that there shall be a
lying in wait for four men, three of which shall be clothed in Red, and one in
Black, those in Red shall be knocked down dead, but he in Black shall not, and
this is to be done on the left hand, over against Vitry, which is a City in
Champagne.

LIX French.
A la Ferte prendra la Vidame,
Nicol tenu rouge quavoit produit la vie,
La grand Loyse naistra qui fera clame,
Donnant Bourgongne a Bretons par envy.
English.
In the Ferte the Vidame shall take
Nicol, reputed red, whom life has produced,
The great Lewis shall be born, who shall lay claim,
Giving Burgundy to the Britains, through envy.
ANNOT.

This Stanza wanting both quantity in the Cadence of the Verse, and Connection
in the sense, shows that it is either falsely printed, or else the Author had
no mind it should be understood; we shall only say, the Ferte is a Town in
Champagne. Vidame is a Lords Title in France, of which there are but four of
that sort, and are called in Civil Law Vicedominus, who by his first
Institution, was temporal Judge of the Bishop; the first of those Vidames, or
Vicedomini in France, is that of Amiens, the second of Chartres, the third of
Rhemes, and the fourth of Gerberon.

LX. French.
Conflict Barbare en la Cornere noire,
Sang espandu trembler la Dalmatie,
Grand Ismael mettra son promontoire,
Ranes trembler, secours Lusitanie.
English.
A Barbarian fight in the black Corner,
Blood shall be split, Dalmatia shall tremble for fear,
Great Ismael shall set up his promontory,
Frogs shall tremble, Portugal shall bring succor.
ANNOT.

This Prochecie foretells diverse accidents in several places, without
determination of any precise time; as for example, I understand by that
Barbarian conflict, near the black Corner, to be some famous Battle among the
Infidels themselves, some were about the Black Sea; then he says, that
abundance of Blood shall be split, and Dalmatia shall tremble, which is a
Province belonging to the Venetians, and bordering upon Gracia; by great Ismael
he understands the great Sophy of Persia, whose name has been often so. By
the Frogs it is not easy to know whether he means France or Spain, for both
abound in that kind of Insects.

LXI. French.
La pille faite a la Cost Marine,
Incita nova and parens amenez,
Plusieurs de Malthe par le fait de Messine,
Estroit serrez seront mal guerdonnez.
English.
The plunder made upon the Sea Coast,
Incita nova and friends brought up,
Many of Maltha, for the fact of Messina,
Being close kept, shall be ill rewarded.
ANNOT.

It seems that this Plunder made upon the Sea Coast, shall be about Messina,
by the Maltheses, who afterward shall rue for it, being taken Prisoners, and
severely punished.

As for the expression Incita nova, it is a barbarous derivation of the Latin,
to signify the stirring of new troubles.

LXII. French.
Au grand de Cheramonagora,
Seront croisez par rangs tous attachez,
Le Pertinax Oppi, and Mandragora,
Raugon d' Octobre le tiers seront laschez.
English.
To the great one of Cheramonagora,
Shall be crossed by Ranges, all tied up,
The Pertinax Oppi, and Mandragora,
Raugon the third of October shall be set loose.
ANNOT.

The word Cheramonagora, is either altogether barbarous and insignificant, or
must be derived from these three Greek words, (...) manus, (...), solus, and
(...), duco, and so it may signify one that leads along by the hand, in
which sense may be understood the King of France, who alone leads his people
by the hand, without any help of Council.

The second Verse signifies the Oppositions he shall meet with among his
Neighbors, combined together to hinder him.

By Oppi, he means here Opium the Juice of Poppies, which he calls here
Pertinax; because of its pertinacious quality in procuring sleep, as also
Mandragora.

By Raugon, he means some other soporiferous Herb; so that it seems that
those three things shall be given upon the third of October to some body, it
seems to that Cheramonagora, by whom some understand the King of France,
others Oliver the last usurpator.

LXIII. French.
Plaintes, and pleurs, cris, and grands hurlemens,
Pres de Narbonne, a Bayonne and en Foix,
O quels horribles, calamitez, changemens,
Avaunt que Mars revoluquelquesois.
English.
Complaints and tears, cries, and great howlings,
Near Narbonne, Bayonne and in Foix,
O what horrid calamities and changes,
Before Mars has made sometimes his revolution.
ANNOT.

Narbonne, Bayonne, and Foix are Towns of Languedoc, a Province in France; the
rest is easy.

LXIV. French.
L' Aemathien passer Monts Pyrene^s,
En Mars Narbon ne fera resistance,
Par Mer and Terre fera si grand menee,
Cap n'ayant Terre seure pour demeurance.
English.
The Aemathian shall pass by the Pyrenean Mountains,
In March Narbon shall make no resistance,
By Sea and Land he shall make so much ado,
Cap. shall not have safe ground to live in.
ANNOT.

The Aemathian properly should be the Macedonian, but by it is understood here
the Spaniard, whose Country is on one side fenced by the Pyrenean Mountains;
the rest is plain.

LXV. French.
Dedans le coing de Luna viendra render,
Ou sera prins and mis en Terre estrange,
Les fruits immeurs seront a grand esclandre,
Grand vitupere, a l'un grande louange.
English.
He shall come into the corner of Luna.
Where he shall be taken and put in a strange Land,
The green fruits shall be in great disorder,
A great shame, to one shall be great praise.
ANNOT.

This Stanza has relation and connection to the precedent, and by it ought to
eb understood, that the said Aemathian or Spaniard shall come as far as the
corner of Luna, wherein he shall be taken and sent into a strange Country, at
which time the green Fruits and Grass shall be much damaged, for which one of
the parties shall receive great shame, and the other great praise. But what he
means by the Corner of Luna, I must leave the judgment of it to the Reader,
for I do ingeniously confess that I neither know City nor Country of that name.

XLVI. French.
Paix, union, sera and changement,
Estats, Offices, bas hault, and hault bien bas,
Dresser voiages, le fruit premier, torment,
Guerre cesser, civils process, debats,
English.
Peace, union, shall be, and mutation,
States, and Offices, low high, and high low,
A journey shall be prepared for, the first fruit, pains,
War shall cease, as also, civil suits, and strifes.
ANNOT.

This is easy to be understood, many interpret it of the downfall of Rome, at
which time all quarrels both of Religion and States would be laid aside, if the
world were all of one mind.

LXVII. French.
Du haut des Monts a lentour de Dizere,
Port a la Roche Valent. cent assemblez,
De Chastean-Neuf, Pierrelate, en Donzere,
Contre le Crest, Romans soy assemblez.
English.
From the top of the Mountains about Dizere
Gate at the Rock Valence, a hundred gathered together,
From Chasteau-Neuf, Pierrelate, in Douzere
Against the Crest, Romans, shall be gathered.
ANNOT.

This is a peculiar Prophecy for the Provinces of Dauphine and Languedoc, in
which all the Towns and Rivers here mentioned are situated.

LXVIII. French.
Du Mont Aymar sera noble obscurcie,
Le mal viendra au joint de Saone and Rhosne,
Dans bois cachez Soldats jour de Lucie,
Qui ne fut onc un si horrible Throsne.
English.
From Mount Aymar shall proceed a Noble obscurity,
The evil shall come to the joining of the Saone and Rhosne,
Soldiers shall be hid in the Wood on St. Lucy's day,
So that there was never such an horrid Throne.
ANNOT.

There is a notable fault in the impression of the first Verse of this Stanza,
for instead of Mount Aymar, it must be Montlimar, which is a Town in Provence
or Languedoc, situated by the River Rhosne, the sense therefore of this, is,
that from Montlimar shall proceed some notable and obscure design, and that
shall reach as far as Lions, which is the City where the Saone and the Rhosne
meet, and that for that purpose, there shall be hidden a great many Soldiers
in a Wood on St. Lucy's day, which is the 13th. of December.

LXIX. French.
Sur le Mont de Bailly and la Bresse,
Seront cachez de Grenoble les fires,
Outre Lion, Vien. cula si grand gresle,
Langoult en Terre n'en cessara un tiers.
English.
Upon the Mount of Bailly, and the Country of Bresse,
Shall be hidden the fierce ones of Grenoble,
Beyond Lions, Vienna, upon them shall fall such a hail,
That lauguishing upon the ground, the third part shall not be left.
ANNOT.

The Mount Bailly, and the Country of Bressia, are by Savoy, in which place
(our Author says) the fierce ones; that is, stout men of Grenoble, the chief
Town of Dauphine, shall be hidden, and that such a Hail shall fall upon them,
as not one third part shall be left.

LXX. French.
Harno is trenchans dans les flambeaux cachez,
Dedans Lion le jour du Sacrement,
Ceux de Vienne seront tretous hachez,
Par les Cantons Latins, Mascon eront.
English.
Sharp Weapons shall be hidden in burning Torches,
In Lions the day of the Sacrament,
Those of Vienna shall be all cut to pieces,
By the Latin Cantons, after the example of Mascon.
ANNOT.

This foretells a notable Treason that shall be acted at Lions, upon the
Sacraments day, otherwise called Corpus Christi day, upon which the Roman
Catholics are wont to make a Procession with the Sacrament about the Town,
with abundance of burning Torches, of fearful bigness, insomuch that some (as
at Angeirs) require 20 or 24 men to carry them, in those Torches (our Author
says) shall Weapons be hidden, by means of which the fact shall be committed.
The rest is easy.

LXXI. French.
Au lieux Sacres, animaux veus a Trixe,
Avec celuy qui nosera le jour,
A Carcassonne pour disgrace propice,
Sera pose pour plus ample sejonr.
English.
In the Sacred places, Animals shall be seen at Trixe,
With him that shall not dare in the day,
In Carcassonne for a favorable disgrace,
He shall be set to make a longer stay.
ANNOT.

Whether the Author did understand himself here I know not, I am sure I do not;
Carcassonne is a City of Languedoc, and Trixe is a barbarous word.

LXXII. French.
Encor seront les Saints Temples pollus,
Et expilez par Senate Tholosain,
Saturn deux trois Siecles revolus,
Dans Auril, May, gens de nouveau Levain.
English.
Once more shall the Holy Temples be polluted,
And depredated by the Senate of Thoulouze,
Saturn two three Ages finished,
In April, May, people of a new Leaven.
ANNOT.

This is, when the Planet Saturn has finished twice three Ages; that is, 600
years from the time that this Prophecy was written, then the Senates of
Thoulouze, being men of a new Leaven (meaning being Protestants) shall cause
the Romish Churches to be polluted and depredated in the Months of April and
May.

LXXIII. French
Dans Foix entrez Roy Cerulee Turban,
Et regnera moins evolu Saturn,
Roy Turban Blanc, Bizance coeur ban,
Sol, Mars, Mercure, pres la Hurne.
English.
In Foix shall come a King with a Blew Turbant,
And shall Reign before Saturn is revolved,
Then a King with a White Turbant shall make Bizance to quake,
Sol, Mars Mercury, being near the top of the Mast.
ANNOT.

Foix is a Country of France, near Gascony, where the Author says, a King
with a Blew Turbant shall come, and shall govern less then an Age, that is 100
years, after which another King with a White Turbant shall come, and shall
Conquer Bizance (which in Latin is Constantinople) the Blew or Green Turbant
is attributed to the great Turk, and the White one to the King of France, by
whom the Turks have a Prophecy, their Monarchy shall be subverted.

LXXIV. French.
Dans la Cite de Fertsod homicide,
Fait and fait multe Boeuf arant ne macter,
Retour encore aux honneurs d' Artemide,
Et a Vulcan corpse morts ^epulturer.
English.
In the City of Fertsod one murdered,
Causes a Fine to be laid for killing a plowing Ox,
There shall be a return of the honors due to Artemide,
And Vulcan shall bury dead bodies
ANNOT.

What is that City of Fertsod, is hard to guess, there being none of this name
in Europe that I know. The rest of the words are plain, though the sense be
abst^uce enough, therefore we shall leave them to the liberty of the Reader.

LXXV: French.
De l' Ambraxie and du pais de Thrace,
Peuple par Mer, Mal, and secours Gaulois,
Perpetuelle en Provence la Trace,
Avec vestiges de leur Coustumes and Loix.
English.
From Ambraxia, and from the Country of Thracia,
People by Sea, Evil, and French succors,
The Trace of it shall be perpetual in Provence,
The footsteps of their Customs and Laws remaining.
ANNOT.

What Country this Ambraxia should be, is yet unknown, for my part I take it
to be a forged word, as for Thracia it is a Country between Hungary and Greece.

Observe here that Evil is not an Epithete, to either People or Sea, but a word
of admiration by it self, as malum in Latin, which is called vox admirantis.

LXXVI. French.
Avec le noir Rapax and sanguinaire,
Yssu du peaultre de l'inhumain Neron,
Emmy deux Fleuves main gauche Militaire,
Sera meurtry par Join Chaulveron.
English.
With the Black and bloody Rapax,
Descended from the paultry of the inhumane Nero,
Between two Rivers, on the left Military hand,
He shall be murdered by Join Caulveron.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy portendeth the death of a black, bloody, and ravenous man
(which in Latin is Rapax) who shall be murdered between two Rivers, by one
whose proper name shall be Join Chaulveron.

LXXVII. French.
Le Regne prins le Roy conviera,
La Dame prinse a mort jurez a sort,
La vie a Royne Fills on desniera,
Et la pellix au fort de la consort.
English.
The Kingdom being taken, the King shall invite,
The Lady taken to death,
The Life shall be denied unto the Queens Son,
And the Pellix shall be at the height of the Consort.
ANNOT.

You must observe, that there is a word false printed, which is Pellix, instead
of which should be Pellex, which in Latin signifies a Whore or Concubine.

The sense therefore of this is, that a certain King having taken another
Kingdom, shall put the Queen of it to death, as also her own Son, after which,
he shall make his Concubine Queen.

LXXVIII. French.
La Dame Grecque de Beauty laydique,
Heureuse faite de process innumerable,
Horse translatee au Regne Hispanique,
Captive prinse mourir mort miserable.
English.
The Grecian Lady of exquisite Beauty,
Made happy from innumerable quarrels,
Being translated into the Spanish Kingdom,
Shall be made a Prisoner, and die a miserable death.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is concerning the Lady Elizabeth of France, Daughter to Henry the
II. and Sister to Charles the IX. who being promised first to Don Carlo Infant
of Spain, was afterward Married to his Father Philip the II. at which the
young man being vexed and discontented, began to raise combustions in the
State, for which, and his too much familiarity with his Mother in Law, he was
strangled by his Fathers command, and she poisoned.

LXXIX. French.
Le Chef de Class par fraud, stratageme,
Fera timides sortir de leurs Galeres,
Sortis meurdris chef renieux de Cresme,
Puis par l'Embusche luy rendront les salaires
English.
The Commander of a Fleet by fraud and stratagem,
Shall cause the fearful ones to come forth of their Galleys,
Come out murdered, chief renouncer of Baptism,
After that by an Ambuscado they will give him again his salary
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are plain, the third signifies, that these fearful ones
being come out of their Galleys, part of them shall be murdered, and among them
the Captain, a renouncer of his Baptism, or Renegado, and the rest afterward
by an Ambuscado, shall requite in the same Coin those that had used them so.

LXXX French.
Le Duc voudra les siens exterminer,
Envoyera les plus forts, lieux estranges,
Par tyranny Bize and Luc ruiner,
Puis les Barbares sans Vin feront Vendanges.
English.
The Duke shall endeavor to exterminate his own,
And shall send away the strongest of them into remote places,
He shall also ruinate Bize and Luc,
The Barbarians shall make Vintage without Wine.
ANNOT.

There is a great fault in the impression of the French Copy in this Stanza,
which makes the sense altogether inexplicable, it must then in stead of Bize
and Luc, be written Pise and Lucques, which are two Towns in Italy, near the
Duke of Florence's Dominions; one of these Towns, viz. Pisa he has taken
already, and from a Commonwealth made it subject to himself; the other though
several times attempted by him, has preserved its liberty to this day. The
last Verse signifies, that after this is come to pass, the Barbarians, that
is, the Florentins shall make Vintage without Wine; that is, shall plunder and
spoil at their pleasure.

LXXXI. French.
Le Roy ruse entendra ses Embusches,
De trois quartiers Ennemis assaillir,
Un nombre estrange Larmes de coqueluches,
Viendra Lamprin du traducteur faillir.
English.
The crafty King shall hear of his Ambuscadoes,
And shall assail his Enemies on three sides,
A strange number of Friars, men's Tears,
Shall cause Lamprin to desert the Traitor.
ANNOT.

The only difficulty here is to know who that Lamprin should be, who shall be
diverted from following a Traitor (which he means here by the French word
Traducteur) and shall be diverted from it by the Tears of Friars, which are
meant here by the ancient French word Coqueluches, which signifies a Friars
Cool or Capuchon.

LXXXII. French.
Par le Deluge and pestilence forte,
La Cite grande de long temps Assregee,
La Sentinelle and Guard de main morte,
Subite prinse mais de null outragee.
English.
The great City having been long Besieged,
By an Innundation and violent Plague,
The Sentinal and Watch being surprised,
Shall be taken on a sudden, but hurt by no body.
ANNOT.

This is very plain, if by the great City you understand Paris, who is subject
to frequent Innundations and Plagues.

LXXXIII. French.
Sol Vingt de Taurus, si fort terre tremblera,
Le grand Theater remply ruinera,
L'Air, Ciel, and Terre, obscurcir and troubler,
Lors l'Infidele Dieu, and Saints voguera.
English.
The Sun being in the 20th of Taurus, the Earth shall so quake,
That it shall fill and ruinate the great Theater
The Air, the Heaven, and the Earth shall be so darkened, and troubled,
That the unbelievers shall call upon God, and his Saints.
ANNOT.

This famous Earthquake having not yet happened in Europe, it is like to
happen within few years, for our Authors Prophecies (by his own confession) do
not extend further than the year 1700.

LXXXIV. French.
Roy expose parfaira l'Hecatombe,
Apres avoir trouve son Origin,
Torrent ouvrir de Marbre and Plomb la Tomb,
D'un grand Romain d'Enseigne Medusin.
English.
The King exposed shall fulfill the Hecatombe,
After he has found out his Offspring,
A Torrent shall open the Sepulcher, made of Marble and Lead,
Of a great Roman, with a Medusean Ensign,
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is divided into two parts,: The first two Verses are concerning
a King, who shall perform the Funeral Rites and Ceremonies to his Parents, when
he is come to the knowledge of them, having been exposed for lost before.

The two last Verses are concerning an ancient Sepulcher of a Roman, that shall
be dug up and found out by a Torrent, and the Arms of the said Roman shall
be something like the head of Medusa, whose Hairs were Serpents, and was so
fearful to behold, that by seeing of it, the beholders were turned into stones.

LXXXV. French.
Passer Guenne, Languedoc, and le Rhosne,
D' Again tenants, de Marmande and la Reole,
D'Ouvrir par foy parroy, Phocen tiendra son Throne,
Conflict aupres Saint Pol de Manseole.
English.
They shall pass over Gascony, Languedoc, and the Rhosne,
From Again keeping Marmande, and the Reole,
To open the Wall by Faith, Phocen shall keep his Throne,
A Battle shall be by St. Paul of Manseole.
ANNOT.

The whole of this Prophecy signifies no more, but that an Army shall pass
through all these places, and that at last there will be a Battle sought by
that place, called St. Paul de Manseole.

LXXXVI. French.
Du Bourg la Reyne parviendront droit a Chartres,
Et feront pres du Pont Antony pose,
Sept pour la paix cauteleux comme Martres,
Feront entree d'Armee a Paris clause.
English.
From Bourg la Reyne they shall come straight to Chartres,
And shall make a stand near Pont Antony,
Seven for Peace as crafty as Martres,
They shall enter in Paris besieged with an Army.
ANNOT.

Bourg lai Reyne is a little town within six Miles of Paris, Chartres is the
chief City of the Province Beausse, Pont Antony is a little Town between them
both, so that the sense of the whole is this, that seven men, crafty like
Martres (which are those Russia Foxes that afford the richest Furs, called
Martres Zibellines) shall go from Bourg la Reyne to Chartres, making a little
stay at Pont Antony, and then shall come with an Army into Paris, which shall
be besieged at that time, I believe this Prophecy is come to pass already in
the time of the Civil Wars of France; but for want of the History I could not
quote the time.

LXXXVII. French.
Par la Forest du Touphon essartee
Par Hermitage sera pose le Temple,
Le Duc d' Estampes par sa ruse inventee,
Du Montlehery Prelat donra exemple.
English.
By the Forest Touphon cut off,
By the Hermitage shall the Temple be
The Duke of Estampes by his inventea trick,
Shall give example to the Prelat of Montlehery.
ANNOT.

Here is a fault in the Impression, for instead of Touphon, it must be written
Torsou, which is a Forest some 30 Miles from Paris toward Beausse, near which
is seated the Town of Montlebery, in the the said Forest is seated an
Hermitage, and not far from thence the City of Estampes, which carries the
Title of Duchy; so that the sense of it is this, that this Forest being cut
off (as it is now for the most part) in the place where that Hermitage was,
shall be built a Church or Convent, as it is now Coelestins friars, called
Marcoussy, and that the said Hermitage shall be taken from the jurisdiction of
the Town of Montlehery, under which it was before.

LXXXVIII. French.
Calais, Arras, secours a Theroanne,
Paix and semblant simulera l'escoute,
Soulde d' Allobrox descendre par Roane,
Destornay peuple qui defera la routte.
English.
Calais, Arras, shall give succors to Theroanne,
Peace or the like, shall dissemble the hearing;
Soldiers of Allobrox shall descend by Roane,
People persuaded, shall spoil the March.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy did happen in the time of Henry the II. King of France, about
the year 1559.

The last Verse says, that those two Towns Calais and Arras gave succors to
(...)roane, that is to the Country where Theron^nne was seated, which was
destroyed by Charles the V. Emperor. This Country was called Ponthieu, of
which Therouenne was the chief Town.

The second Verse does determine the time where about this came to pass, when
he says, peace or the like shall dissemble the hearing; because in the year
1556. in the beginning of February there was a Truce for five years between the
two Crowns of France and Spain, concerning the Low Countries, and this Truce
signified not much, nor was well cemented, so that the Author says, Peace or
the like shall dissemble the hearing; that is, shall fain not to hear that the
Cardinal Caraffa did endeavor in France to have the Truce broken.

The third Verse is obscure, because of a fault in the Impression, wherein they
have put Rouane instead of Noanne, that is Hannone by transposition of letters,
but that being corrected, the Verse is clear, supposing that Philibertus
Emanuel Duke of Savoy was General of the Army, against France in the
Low-Countreis, and wandering about to do some notable exploit, he came down
through the Province of Hainault, called in Latin Hannonia, and came to
Mariembourg, as if he would have Besieged it, but after some light skirmishes
he laid Siege to Rocroy, and this is the meaning of the third Verse, when he
says, Soldiers of Allobrox shall descend by Noanne, that is, Soldiers in the
Army of the Duke of Savoy, which in Latin is Allobrox, came down to
Mariembourg, and turned back again to Rocroy.

The fourth Verse mentions what did happen at the Siege of Rocroy; that place
being not yet very well fortified; the King was unwilling to put any of his
best Soldiers therein, but the Duke of Nevers undertook the defense of it,
which he did really and gloriously perform, in so much, that the Duke of Savoy
was compelled to raise up the Siege, and going back toward St. Quentin, he
took Vervins by storm, and gave the booty of it to his Soldiers, who took
heart upon it, having been much discouraged before by the resistance of the
Duke of Nevors. This is the sense of the fourth Verse, People persuaded shall
poil the march; that is, the people of Recroy persuaded to hold out by the
courage and presence of the Duke of Nevers, spoiled the march that the Duke of
Savoy had propounded to himself, insomuch, that raising the Siege he went to
Vervins, and from thence to St. Quentin.

LXXXIX. French.
Sept ans Philip fortune prospere,
Rabaifsera des Barbares l'effort,
Puis son midy perplex rebours affair,
seune Ogmion abysmera son fort.
English.
Philip shall have seven years of prosperous fortune,
Shall beat down the attempt of the Barbarians,
Then in his Noon be shall be perplexed and have untoward business,
Young Ogmion shall pull down his strength.
ANNOT.

This Stanza was made concerning Philip the II. King of Spain, who for the
first seven years that he came to his Crown, had prosperous fortune, did brave
exploits against the Barbarians, and chiefly in the person of his Brother Don
Juan of Austria, who got the memorable Battle of Lapantho against the Turks,
but in the middle of his Noon, that is of his Age, fell into great perplexities
and cross businesses, being constrained to put his only son Don Carla to
death, and to poison his wife, and after that never prospered, when young
Ogmion (that is Henry IV. King of France) came to the Crown.

XC. French.
Un Captain de la grand Germany,
Se viendra render par simule secours,
Au Roy des Roys, aid de Pannonie,
Que sa revolte fera de sand grand course.
English.
A Captain of the great Germany,
Shall come to yield himself with a fained help,
Unto the King of Kings, help of Hungary,
So that his revolt shall cause a great bloodshed.
ANNOT.

Pannonia in Latin is Hungary, there is nothing hard in this, unless it be
what he means by the King of Kings, whether it be the great Turk or the
Emperor.

XCI. French.
L'Horrible peste Perynthe and Nicopole,
Le Chersonese tiendra and Marceloine,
La Thessalie naistera l' Amphipole,
Mal incogneu and le refus d' Antoine,
English.
The horrid pestilence shall seize upon Perynthe and Nicopolis,
The Chersonese and Marceloine,
It shall waste Thessalia and Amphipolis,
An unknown evil and the refusal of Antony.
ANNOT.

There is several faults in the impression here, for instead of Perynthe, it
must be Corinthe. For Marceloine, it must be Macedoine: the substance of the
whole is, that there shall be a great plague in all these Countries of Asia.
The refusal of Antony is foisted here to make up the rhyme with Macedony.

XCII. French.
Le Roy voudra dans Cite neufve entrer,
Par ennemis expugner l'on viendra,
Captif libere, faulx dire and perpetrer,
Roy dehors estre, loin d'ennemis tiendra.
English.
The King shall desire to enter into the new City,
With foes they shall come to overcome it,
The Prisoner being free, shall speak and act falsely,
The King being gotten out, shall keep f^r from enemies.
ANNOT.

The sense of all these words so ill jointed, is no more but that a certain
King sna^l desire to enter into a new City, and there they shall come and
Besiege him, where he shall both act and speak deceitfully to get his liberty,
which he having obtained, shall keep far from his foes.

XCIII. French.
Les ennemis du Fort bien esloignez,
Par Chariots conduits le Bastion,
Par sur les Murs de Bourges esgrongnez,
Quand Hercules battra l' Haemathion.
English.
The enemies being a good way from the Fort,
Shall upon Wagons be conducted to the Bulwark,
From the top of Bourges Walls they shall be cut less,
When Hercules shall beat the Haemathion.
ANNOT.

Bourges is the chief City of a Province in France called Berry.

There is nothing difficult in this, but only what he means by Hercules
beating the Aemathion, unless by Hercules he means the French, and by
Aemathion the Spaniard.

XCIV. French.
Foibles Galeres seront unis ensemble,
Ennemis faux, le plus fort en rempart,
Foible assailies Wratislavie tremble;
Lubeck and Mysne tiendront Barbare part.
English.
Weak Galleys shall be united together,
False enemies, the strongest shall be fortified,
Weak assaults, and yet Breslaw quaketh for fear,
Lubeck and Misne shall take the part of the Barbarians.
ANNOT.

Breslaw, Lubeck and Misne, are three Cities of Germany; the rest is plain.

XCV. French.
Le nouveau fait conduira l'exercite,
Proche apame jusque aupres du Rivage,
Tendant secours de Melanoise eslite,
Duc yeux prive, a Milan fer de Cage.
English.
The new man shall lead up the Army,
Near Apame, till near the Bank,
Carrying succors of choice Forces from Milan,
The Duke deprived of his eyes, and an Iron Cage at Milan.
ANNOT.

Apame is a barbarous word, at least I cannot tell what language it is, the
rest is plain enough, and signifies that a Duke shall be deprived of his eyes,
and shall be put in an Iron Cage at Milan.

XCVI. French.
Dans Cite entrer exercite desniee,
Duc entrera par persuasion,
Aux foibles ports clam Armee amenee,
Mettront feu, mort, de sang effusion.
English.
The Army being denied the entrance of the City,
The Duke shall enter by persuasion,
To the weak Gates, clam the Army being brought,
Shall put all to fire and sword.
ANNOT.

Clam here is in Latin praeposition, signifying secretly; the rest is easy:

XCVII. French.
De Mer Copies en trois parts divisees,
A la second les Vivres failliront,
Desesperez cherchant Champs Elisees,
Premiers en breche entrez victoire auront.
English.
A Fleet being divided into three parts,
The victuals will fail the second part,
Being in despair they will seek the Elyfian Fields,
And entering the breach first, shall obtain victory.
ANNOT.

A Fleet being divided into three parts, the second division shall fall into
want of victuals, for which being desperate, they shall attempt the Town of the
enemy, and shall enter it by the breach, and get the victory.

XCVIII. French
Les affligez par fault d'un seul taint,
Contremenant a party opposite,
Aux Lygonois mandera que contraint,
Seront de render le grand chef de Molite.
English.
The afflicted want of one only died,
Carrying against the opposite part,
Shall send word to those of Lion, they shall be compelled,
To surrender the great chief of Molite.
ANNOT.

This is the most nonsensical thing that is in all the Book, for neither the
words nor the connection is intelligible, therefore it being so much out of the
common road of our Author, I am apt to believe that it was at first very falsely
printed, and that those that came after, were loath to alter it for the respect
of antiquity.

XCIX. French.
Vent Aquilon fera partir le Siege,
Par murs jetter cendres, chaulx, and poussiere,
Par pluye apres qui leur sera bien piege,
Dernier secours encontre leur Frontiere.
English.
The North wind shall cause the Siege to be raised,
They shall throw ashes, lime, and dust,
By a rain after that shall be a trap to them,
It shall be the last succors against their Frontiere.
ANNOT.

Here is described a notable stratagem of a Besieged Town, who against rainy
weather cast so much ashes, lime and dust, that the rain coming thereupon, it
made such a mire, as the Besiegers were not able to assault it.

C. French.
Navale pugne nuict sera superee,
Le feu, aux Naves a l'Occident ruin,
Rubriche neuve, la grand nef coloree,
Ire a vaincu, and victoire en bruine.
English.
In a Sea Fight, night shall be overcome,
By fire, to the Ships of the West ruin shall happen,
A new stratagem, the great Ship colored,
Anger to the vanquished, and victory in a Mist.
ANNOT.

He foretells of a Sea Fight in the night, wherein by the light of the
burning Ships night shall be overcome, the Ships that came from the West shall
be worsted, and by a stratagem of a great Ship painted in colors, anger shall
remain to the vanquished, and the victory shall be got in a Mist.

THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY X.
I. French.
Al'Ennemy, l'ennemy for promise,
Ne se tiendra, les captifs retenus,
Prins preme mort and le rest en chemise,
Donnant le rest pour estre secourus.
English.
To the enemy, the enemy faith promised,
Shall not be kept, the prisoners shall be detained,
The first taken, put to death, and the rest stripped,
Giving the remnant that they may be succored.
ANNOT.

These words are plain, though the sense be a little intricated, and the
contents being of small concernments, deserve no further explanation.

II. French.
Voile Gallere Voile nef Cachera,
La grand Class viendra sortir la moindre,
Dix Naves proches le tourneront poulser,
Grand vaincue, unies a soy joindre.
English.
The Galley and the Ship shall hide their Sails,
The great Fleet shall make the little one to come out,
Ten Ships near hand, shall turn and push at it,
The great being vanquished, they shall unite together.
ANNOT.

These are some particularities of a Sea fight between a great Fleet and a
small one, wherein he says, that some had hid their Sails, belike they were
unwilling to come out of the Harbor and to fight; but he says, that the great
Fleet will compel the little one to come out; but ten great Ships will come to
help the little Fleet, and after the great one has been overcome, will join
themselves to the little Fleet.

III. French.
En apres cinq troupeau ne mettra horse,
Un fuitif pour Penclon laschera,
Faux murmurer secours venir par lors,
Le Chef le Siege lors abandonnera.
English.
After that, five shall not put out his flock,
He Will let loose a runnaway for Penelon,
There shall be a false rumor, succors shall come then,
The Commander shall for sake the Siege.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is either nonsensical or falsely printed, and what he means by
Penelon, is utterly unknown.

IV. French.
Sur la minuit conducteur de l'Armee,
Se sauvera subit esvanovy,
Sept ans apres la fame non blasmee,
A son retour ne dira oncq ouy.
English.
About midnight the leader of the Army,
Shall save himself, vanishing suddenly,
Seven years after his fame shall not be blamed
And at his return he shall never say yea.
ANNOT.

This is plain of a General of an Army, who shall for sake his Army, and save
himself, and yet seven years after when he comes back, his reputation shall be
as clear, as if he never had committed such an error.

V. French.
Albi and Castres feront nouvelle ligue,
Neuf Arriens, Lisbonne, and Portuguez,
Carcas. Thoulouze, consumeront leur brigue
Quand chef neuf monstre de Lauraguez.
English.
Albi and Castres shall make a new league,
Nine Arriens, Lisbonne, and Portuguez,
Carcas. Thoulouse, shall make an end of their confederacy,
When the new chief shall come from Lauragais.
ANNOT.

Albi, Castres, Carcassonne, and Thoulonse, are Cities of Lang^edock, which our
Author says, will enter into a confede racy among themselves, and join with
Lisbon and the Portuguez, and this shall happen when the general of the Army,
shall be one born in Lauragais, which is another of the same Province.

VI. French.
Gardon a Nismes eaux si haut desborderont,
Qu'on cuidera Deucalion renaistre,
Dans le Colosse la pluspart fuiront,
Vesta Sepulcher feu esteint apparoistre.
English.
Gardon at Nismes, waters shall overslow so high,
That they will think that Deucalion is born again,
Most of them will run into the Colossus,
And a Sepulcher, and fire extinguished, shall appear.
ANNOT.

Near Nismes there is the River called Gardon, which comes from St. Romans,
and discharges it self into the Rhosne at Beaucaire, there is to be seen in
that City abundance of Antiquitez, which the Goths had built 1150. years
before; there is also many Roman Antiquities, as an Amphitheater, so well
builded that neither the Goths nor the Saracens, nor Attila, nor Charles
Martel, with all their power, could not utterly demolish it. The Author names
it Colossus, because its building appeared like a Colossus for solidity.

There is also an ancient Temple which is called the Fountain, builded as a
Quadrangle, and supported by two rows of great Pillars, which at present is a
Church of Nuns.

This being supposed, the River of Gardon did overflow so much, that its
Waters joining with that of a Flood that happened there the ninth of September
1577. every one thought that Dencalion had been born again. The Author says
this; because in the fables of the ancients. Deucalion is thought to be the
Author of the Flood which Ovid mentions. During this Flood which was like to
overflow the Town, as well as the Country, many did retire themselves into
that Amphitheater.

And in that ancient Temple of the Fountain, the Waters overthrowing a great
many old buildings did discover abundance of Antiquities, and amongst the rest
one of those Lamps that burns always, in the Sepulcher of a Vestal, which
went out as soon as it felt the fresh Air.

In confirmation of this, the History of Provence says, that the storm began
about five of the Clock in the Morning, and lasted till Eight of the Clock at
night, and that these waters did uncover abundance of Antiquities that were
hidden 1100. years before, as Pillars, Portico's, Med^ls, Jasper stones, and
serpentine-stones, pieces of broken Vessels, Epitaphs, lodging Rooms, and
Caves, and all other things that use to be found in the ruins of a Palace.

There was also heard in the Air Dogs barking, Pillars of fire, Armed men
fighting, and were seen two suns in the Clouds of the Color of Blood, all
which were the sad presages of the Civil Wars of France presently after, and
chiefly that of Provence.

The ninth Century in the ninth stanza, speaks almost the same, and shows
that Nismes shall perish by Water.

VII. French.
Le grand conflict qu'on appreste a Nancy,
L' Aemathien dira tout je soubmets,
L'Isle Britane par Vin Sel^en solcy,
Hem. mi. deux Phi. long temps ne tiendra Mets.
English.
A great War is preparing at Nancy,
The Aemathien shall say I submit to all,
The British Island shall be put in care by Salt and Wine,
Hem. mi. two Phi. shall not keep Mets long.
ANNOT.

Nancy is the chief City of Lorrain, and by the Aemathien is understood the
French, the British Isle is England, which is said here, shall come into great
distress by Salt and Wine, because the Country abounds in those two
Commodities. The last Verse I do not understand, save that Mets is a great City
in Lorrain.

VIII French.
Index and Poulse parfondera le front
De Senegalia le Comte a son Fills propre,
La Myrnamee par plusieurs de plain front,
Trois dans sept jours blessez more.
English.
Index and Poulse shall break the forehead,
Of the Son of the Earl of Senegalia,
The Myrnamee by many at a full bout,
Three within seven days shall be wounded to death.
ANNOT.

Senegalia is a Town in Italy, all what can be gathered out of the obscurity of
this Stanza, is, that the son of the Earl of that Town shall have his forehead
broken, and within seven days after, three more shall be wounded to death.

IX. French.
De Castilon figuieres jour de brune,
De semme infame naistra Souverain Prince,
Surnum de chausses per hume luy posthume,
On^ Roy ne fut si pire en sa Province.
English.
Out of Castilon figuieres upon a misty day,
From an infamous woman shall be born a Sovereign Prince,
His surname shall be from Breeches, himself a posthume,
Never a King was worse in his Province.
ANNOT.

Castilon figuieres is a petty Town in Provence, in which he says that a
Severaign Prince shall be born of an infamous Woman, and shall be a posthume,
which in Latin signifies one that is born after his Fathers death; he says
also that his name shall be derived from Breeches, and that never a King was
worse in his Country, whether by worse, he means in manners or fortune, I
know not.

X. French.
Tasche de murdre, enormes Adulteres,
Grand ennemy de tout le genre humain,
Que sera pire qu'ayeulx. Oncles ne Pere,
En fer, feu, eau, sanguin and inhumain.
English.
Endeavor of Murder, enormous Adulteries,
A great enemy of all mankind,
That shall be worse then Grandfather, Unvle, or Father,
In Iron, fire, water, bloody and inhumane.
ANNOT.

This Stanza as well as the next has relation to the precedent, making mention
what a wicked person shall that Posthume be of which he spoke before.

XI. French.
Dessoubs Jonchere du dangereux passage,
Fera passer le posthume sa band,
Les Monts Pyrens passer horse son bagage,
De Parpignan courira Duc a Tend.
English.
Below Joncheres dangerous passage,
The posthume shall cause his Army to go over,
And his Baggage to go over the Pyrenean Mountains,
A Duke shall run from Perpignan to Tend.
ANNOT.

This is still concerning the same posthume or Bastard, who shall cause his
Army to pass at Jonchere, and his Bagage to go over the Pyrenean Mountains,
which parts Spain from France, and that upon the fear of him a Duke shall run
from Perpignan, which is the chief City of R^ussillon to Tend, which is a
little Town in Provence.

XII. French.
Esleu en Pape, d'Esleu sera mocque,
Subit soudain, esmeu prompt and timide,
Par trop bon doux a mourir provoque,
Crainte estainte la nuit de sa mort guide.
English.
Elected for a Pope, from Elected shall be baffled,
Upon a sudden, moved quick and fearful,
By too much sweetness provooked to die,
His fear being out in the night shall be Leader to his death.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the person of the Cardinal Santa Severina, who
in the Conclave of Cardinals after the death of Pope Innocent IX was Elected
Pope, and presently after was baffled by the same Cardinals, and Clement the
VIII. chosen in his place, for which the other a little while after died for
grief.

XIII French.
Soubs la pasture d'animaux ruminans,
Par eux conduits au ventre Herbi-polique,
Soldats cachez, les arms bruit menants,
Non loin tentez de Cite Antipolique.
English.
Under the pasture of Beasts chewing the cud,
Conducted by them to the Herbi-polique belly,
Soldiers hidden, the Weapons making a noise,
Shall be attempted not far from Antipolick City,
ANNOT.

The sense of this is, that some Soldiers disguised like Herds-men, shall lead
Oxen into a place where were hidden before Weapons in the Grass, but the
Weapons making a noise by their clashing they shall be discovered, not far from
a place that he calls here Antipolique, purposely to rhyme with Herbipolique
in French, which word Herbipolique signifies a Town of Pasture.

XIV. French.
Urnel, Vaucile, sans conseil de soy mesmes,
Hardy, timide par crainte prins vaincu,
Accompagre de plusieurs putains, blesme,
A Barcelonne aux Chartreux convaincu.
English.
Urnel, Vaucile, without advice of his own,
Stout and fearful, by fear taken and overcome,
Pale, and in company of many Whores,
Shall be convicted at Barcelone by the Charterhouse.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is an Horoscope, which the Author made upon that Gentleman named
Urnel Vaucille, and signifies that the said man should find himself in such
perplexity that he could not be able to take advice what to do, and that fear
should make him hide himself, to be apprehended, in a place where he should be
taken.

When he was taken, he was presently convicted of those crimes that he was
accused of: therefore the Officers of Justice did conduct him to the
Charter House of Barcelone, which is four miles from the said Town, in a place
called Campoalegre, for the beauty and situation of it, to that place many
Whores did accompany him to receive the punishment they had deserved, therefore
the Author says that he went thither pale, as foreseeing the terror of the
punishment he was to undergo.

XV. French.
Pere Duc vieux d'ans and de soif charge,
Au jour extreme fills desniant l'esguiere,
Dedans le puis vif, mort viendra plonge,
Senate au fills la mort longue and legere.
English.
A Father Duke, aged and very thirsty,
In his extremity, his son denying him the Ewer,
Alive into a Well, where he shall be drowned,
For which the Senate shall give the son a long and easy death.
ANNOT.

It is a Duke very aged who shall die of a Dropsy, or of some other burning
disease, which will make him very thirsty, the Physicians shall forbid any
water to be given him, therefore this Duke shall press his son very much to
give him the Ewer, that he may drink his fill, but his son refusing, the Father
shall fall into such a rage, that being alone he will go and throw himself into
a Well, where he shall be drowned.

This unhappy death will be the cause of much murmuring, and the Senate or
Parliament of that place will make enquiry after it, by which enquiry the son
will be found guilty, therefore for his punishment, he shall be condemned to a
long and easy death, as to live all his days in some Monastery.

XVI. French.
Heureux au Regne de France heureux de vie,
Ignorant sang, mort, fureur, rapine,
Par non flatteurs seras mis en envy,
Roy desrobe, trop de foy en cuisine.
English.
Happy in the Kingdom of France, happy in his Life,
Ignorant of blood, death, fury, of taking by force,
By no flatterers shall be envied,
King robbed, too much faith in Kitchen.
ANNOT.

This is a prognostication of a King of France, who though happy in his Reign
and Life, and being given to no great vices, as blood, fury, or taking by
force, yet shall be much envied and robbed by his Subjects, and chiefly by
those he ^rusteth about his Kitchen.

XVII. French.
La Reyne Ergaste voiant sa fille blesme,
Par un regret dans l'estomach enclos,
Cris lamentables seront lors d' Angolesme,
Et au germain marriage forclos.
English.
Queen Ergaste seeing her Daughter pale,
By a regret contained in her Breast,
Then shall great cries come out of Angolesme,
And the Marriage shall be denied to the Cousin German.
ANNOT.

It is unknown what Queen he means by the name of Ergaste; the rest is easy.
Angolesme is a City of Gascony or Languedoc.

XVIII. French.
Le rang Lorrain fera place a Vendosme,
Le haut mis bas, and le bas mis en haut,
Le fills d' Hamon sera esleu dans Rome,
Et les deux grands seront mis en defaut.
English.
The House of Lorrain shall give place to Vendosme,
The high pulled down, the low raised up,
The son of Hamon shall be Elected into Rome,
And the two great ones shall not appear.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses of this Prophecy were fulfilled in the time of Henry the
third King of France, in whose time the Duke of Guise, and House of Lorrain
were grown so powerful in France, that they drove the King from Paris, and
assumed themselves a rank and authority over the Princes of the Blood, so that
the King was forced to cause them to be slain, after which Henry IV. who was
King of Navarre and Duke of Vendosme took his place again as first Prince of
the Blood.

The two last Verses are too obscure to be interpreted, and I believe were
only forced by our Author to make up his Rhyme, as he has done in several
other places.

XIX. French.
Jour que sera pour Roine saluee,
Le jour apres le salut, la Priere,
Le compte sait raison and valbuee,
Par avaunt humble oncques ne fut si siere.
English.
The day that she shall be saluted Queen,
The next day after the Evening Prayer,
All accounts being summoned and cast up,
She that was humble before, never was one so proud.
ANNOT.

It is a woman (be like of a small Fortune) who coming to be a Queen by her
humility, the next day after Evening Prayer she shall appear so proud, as the
like was never seen.

XX French.
Tous les amiss qu'auront tenu party,
Pour rude en lettres mis mort and saccage,
Biens publiez par six, grand neanty,
Onc Romain peuple ne fut tant outrage.
English.
All the friends that shall have taken the part
Of the Unlearned, put to death and robbed,
Good sold publicly by proclamation, a great man seized of (...),
Never Roman people was so much abused.
ANNOT.

The sense of this is, that a great man that took part with all those that were
unlearned shall be put to death, and their goods praised and sold publicly,
upon which goods another great man shall seize, and this is to be done in Rome.

There is fault in the Impression of the third French Verse, for instead of
fix it must be fisc, and instead of Neanty it must be Nancy.

XXI. French.
Par le despit du Roy soustenant moindre,
Sera meurdry luy presentant les bagues,
Le Pere and Fills voulant Noblesse poindre,
Fait comme a Perse jadis firent les Magues.
English.
To spite the King, who took the part of the weaker,
He shall be murdered, presenting to him Jewels,
The Father and the Son going to vex the Nobility,
It shall be done to them as the Magi did in Persia.
ANNOT.

This is a King who with his son taking the peoples part against the Nobility
shall be killed, in presenting to him Jewels, and he and his son shall be dealt
with all as the Magi, that is the Grandees of Persia used to do with their
Kings, whom they were wont to murder, or depose.

XXII. French.
Pour ne vouloir consentir au divorce,
Qui puis apres sera cogneu indigne,
Le Roy des Isles sera chasse par force,
Mis a son lien qui de Roy n'aura sign.
English.
For not consenting to the divorce,
Which afterward shall be acknowledged unworthy,
The King of the Island shall be expelled by force,
And another subrogated, who shall have no mark of a King.
ANNOT.

This is plain concerning England and the late calamities thereof, when our
gracious King for not consenting to the wicked factions of the Parliament then,
and that have been acknowledged so since, was expelled by force, and an
Usurpator that had not the least sign of a King sat in his place.

XXIII. French.
Au peuple ingrat faites les remonstrances,
Par lors l'Armee se saisira d' Antibe,
Dans larc Monech feront les doleances,
Et a Freius l'un l'autre prendra ribe.
English.
The remonstrances being made to the ungrateful people,
At that time the Army shall seize upon Antibe,
In the River of Monaco they shall make their complaints,
And at Freius both of them shall take their share.
ANNOT.

This signifies that at the same time that the remonstrances shall be made to
an ungrateful people; the Army shall seize upon the Town of Antibe, which is a
Sea Town between France and Italy, and that there shall be great complaints at
Monaco, which is another Sea-Town near it, and at the place called Freius, both
parties shall either agree, or divide their shares.

XXIV. French.
Le captif Prince aux Itales vaincu,
Passera Gennes par Mer jusque a Marseille,
Par grand effort des forens survaincu,
Sauf coup de feu, barril liqueur d'Abeille.
English.
The captive Prince vanquished in Italy,
Shall pass by Sea through Genoa to Marseilles,
By great endeavors of foreign forces overcome,
But that a Barrel of Honey shall save him from the fire.
ANNOT.

A Prince vanquished in Italy, and taken Prisoner shall come through Genoa to
Marseilles, where he shall be once more overcome by strangers, but that a
Barrel of Honey shall save him from being burnt. This is the sense of the words
as near as I can judge, the judicious Reader may make what construction he
pleases upon them.

XXV. French.
Par Nebro ouvrir de Brisanne passage,
Bien esloignez el tago faramuestra,
Dans Pelligouxe sera commis l'outrage,
De la grand Dame assise sur l' Orchestra.
English.
By Nebro to open the passage of Brisanne,
A great way off, el tago fara muestra,
In Pelligouxe the wrong shall be done,
Of the great Lady sitting in the Orchestra.
ANNOT.

Here once more I lost my Spectacles, and could not see through, therefore I
had rather be silent then coin lies, I shall only tell you, that Orchestra in
Latin is the seat wherein noble Personages sit at the beholding of Stage Plays.

XXVI. French.
Le successeur vengera son Beau friar,
Occuper Regne soubs ombre de vengeance,
Occis obstacle son sang mort vitupere,
Long temps Bretagne tiendra avec la France.
English.
The Successor shall avenge his Brother in Law,
Shall hold by force the Kingdom, upon pretense of revenge,
That hinderance shall be killed, his dead blood ashamed,
A long time shall Brittany hold with France.
ANNOT.

This is plain enough of it self, without any interpretation.

XXVII. French.
Charle cinquiesme and un grand Hercules,
Viendront le Temple ouvrir de main bellique,
Une Colonne, Jules and Ascan reculez,
L' Espagne, clef, Aigle neurent onc si grand pique.
English.
Charles the Fifth, and one great Hercules,
Shall open the Temple with a Warlike hand,
One Colonne, Julius and Ascan put back,
Spain, the Key, Eagle were never at such variance.
ANNOT.

Charles the V. was the Emperor, and that great Hercules was Henry the II.
King of France, whom he calls Hercules, because he was King of France, and
the Author names often in his Stanza's the Kings of France Hercules or
Ogmions, because that great Captain of the Antiquity left his name glorious in
the Gauls, whence the ancient Historians have given him the name of Hercules
Gallicus. Henry the II. also was not only an Hercules by being King of France,
but also a great Hercules, because of his Warlike humor, and for his great
feats in Arms.

To open the Temple, signifies to make War, because the Romans in ancient time
were wont to shut the Temple of Janus in time of Peace, and kept it open during
the War. Caesar Augustus did shut that Temple once in his time, which was never
done before but twice, the first under Numa Pompilius, the second after the
overcoming of Charthage.

XXVIII. French.
Second and tiers qui font prime Music,
Sera par Roy en honneur sublimee,
Par grass and maigre presque a deny etique,
Rapport de Venus faux rendra deprimee.
English.
Second and third that make prime Music,
Shall by the King be exalted to honor,
By a fat one, and a lean one, one in consumption,
A false report of Venus shall pull her down.
ANNOT.

Notwithstanding the obscurity of this sense, and the bad connection of the
words, we may perceive that by this Stanza is meant, that a King having two
Mistresses shall exalt them in great honor, till by a report made by a fat
woman and a lean one, that is in a consumption, that the said Ladies prove
unfaithful to the King, he will depress them as low as they were before.

XXIX. French.
De Pol Mansol dans Caverne caprine,
Cache and pris extrait horse par la barbe,
Captif mean comme best mastine,
Par Begourdans amenee pres de Tarbe.
English.
From Pol Mansol in a Goats Den,
Hidden and taken, drawn out by the beard
Prisoner, led as a Mastiff,
By Begourdans shall be brought near to Tarbe.
ANNOT.

Here and in some other places of this work is to be observed, that the Author
does sometimes put two Towns instead of one, that he may distinguish it from
others of the same name, as here he calls Pol Mansol to distinguish the Town
of St. Paul, which is three Leagues from the Rhosne, over against the Town of
Pont St. Esprit, from that which is in the lower parts of Provence.

The sense therefore of this Stanza is, that this Begourdans (a proper name of
a man) shall pull out another by the beard, that was hidden in a Goats Den, and
shall lead him captive as far as Tarbe, which is another Town of Provence.

XXX. French.
Nepveu and sang du St. nouveau venu,
Par le surnom soustient arcs and couvert,
Seront chassez mis a mort chassez nu,
En rouge and noir convertiront leur vert.
English.
Nephew and blood of the Saint newly come,
By the surname upholdeth Vaults and Covering,
They shall be driven, put to death, and driven out naked.
They shall change their red and black into green.
ANNOT.

Here I confess to be at a loss, as may be a wiser man then I.

XXXI. French.
Le Saint Empire viendra en Germany,
Ismaelites trouveront lieux ouverts,
Asnes viendront aussy de la Caramanie,
Les soustenans de Terre tous couverts.
English.
The Holy Empire shall come into Germany,
The Ismaelites shall find open places,
Asses shall also come out of Caramania,
Taking their part, and covering the Earth.
ANNOT.

By the Ismaelites he means the Turks, who brag to be descended from Ismael.
Caramania is a Province of Turkey, so that the sense of this Stanza is, that
there shall be a great Invasion of the Turks into Germany, and that those of
Caramania with their Asses shall come to their help, and shall be in such
numbers, as that the Earth shall be covered with them.

XXXII. French.
Le grand Empire chascun en devoit estre,
Un sur les autres le viendra obtenir,
Mais peu de temps sera son Regne and estre,
Deux ans aux Naves se pourra soustenir.
English.
The great Empire, every one would be of it,
One above the rest shall obtain it,
But his time and his Reign shall last little,
He may maintain himself two years in his Shipping.
ANNOT.

This is plain enough without interpretation.

XXXIII. French.
La faction cruelle a Robe longue,
Viendra cacher soubs les pointus Poignards,
Saisir Florence, le Duc and le Diphlongue,
Sa discouverte par Immeurs and Flagnards.
English.
The cruel faction of long Robe,
Shall come and hide under the sharp Daggers,
Seize upon Florence, the Duke and the Diphlongue,
The discovery of it shall be by Country fellows.
ANNOT.

This is the Prognostication of a conspiracy against the Duke and City of
Florence, by those of the long Gown, which shall be discovered by Country
fellows, that live in places without Walls.

XXXIV. French.
Gaulois qu'Empire par Guerre occupera,
Par son Beau-frere mineur sera trahi,
Par Cheval rude voltigeant trainera,
Du fait le friar long temps sera hay.
English.
A Frenchman who shall occupy an Empire by War,
Shall be betrayed by his Brother in Law a Pupil,
He shall be drawn by a rude prancing Horse,
For which fact his brother shall be long hated.
ANNOT.

This foretells of a Frenchman, who shall by War obtain an Empire or Kingdom,
and shall be betrayed by his Brother in Law a Pupil, whom afterward he shall
treacherously cause to mount a fierce prancing Horse, who shall throw him down
and drag him, for which the said King shall be hated long after.

XXXV. French.
Puisne Roial flagrant d'ardant libide,
Pour se jouir de cousine German,
Habit de femme au Temple d' Artemide,
Allant murdry par incogneu du Marne.
English.
The Kingly youngest son heated with burning lust,
For to enjoy his Cosen German,
Shall in woman's apparel go to the Temple of Artemis;
Going, shall be murdered by unknown du Marne.
ANNOT.

This is concerning the younger son of a King, who being extremely in love with
his Cosen German, shall disguise himself in a woman's apparel, and shall go so
disguised to the Temple of Artemide, (that is of some Church Dedicated to the
Virgin Mary) to meet her, but in going, shall be murdered by an unknown man
named du Marne.

XXXVI. French.
Apres le Roy du Sud guerres parlant,
L'Isle Harmotique le tiendra a mespris,
Quelques ans bons rongeant un and pillant,
Par tyranny a l'Isle changeant pris.
English.
After that the King of the South shall have talked of Wars,
The Harmotick Island shall despise him,
Some good years gnawing one and plundering,
And by tyranny shall change the price of the Island.
ANNOT.

The two first Verses are concerning Philip the II. King of Spain, who is
called here the King of the South, whom after his vain and frustrated Invasion
of 88. the Harmotique Island (that is England) shall deride, and he after that
shall have some good years, that is of Peace, still pillaging and plundering
his Subjects, and shall change the price of England, that is, make it of a
higher value, and more flourishing then ever it was before, as it did prove in
Queen Elizabeth's time.

XXXVII. French.
Grande assemblee pres du Lac du Borget,
Se rallieront pres de Montmelian,
Passants plus outre pensifs feront projet,
Chambray, Morienne, combat Saint Julian.
English.
A great assembly of people near the Lake of Borget,
Will go and gather themselves about Montmelian,
Going beyond, they shall make an enterprise,
Upon Chambery, Moriene, and shall fight at St. Julian.
ANNOT.

This Lake of Borget is in Savoy, as also Montmelian Chambery, Moriene, and St.
Julian; the meaning of it then is, that a great Army shall be gathered about
that Lake, which shall go through Chambery, Moriene, and Montmelian, and shall
fight at St. Julian.

XXXVIII. French.
Amor alegre non loin pose le Siege,
Au Saint Barbar seront les Garnisons,
Ursins, Hadrie pour Gaulois feront plaige,
Pour peur rendus de l'Armee, aux Grisons.
English.
Cheerful love does lay Siege not far,
The Garrisons shall be at Saint Barbar,
Ursini, Hadria shall be sureties for the French,
And many for fear shall go from the Army to the Grisons.
ANNOT.

The first two Verses are inexplicable; the two last signify that there shall
be an Army of Frem, with whom Hadria (that is Venice) and the Ursini the
noblest Family in Italy shall take part, insomuch, that many of the contrary
party shall run for fear to the Grisons, which is a Nation dwelling in the
Valteline and other Countries there about, between the Venetians and the
Switzers.

XXXIX. French.
Premier fills veufve malheureux marriage,
Sans nuls enfans deux Isles en discord,
Avaunt dixhuit incompetant Aage,
De l'autre pres plus bas sera l'accord.
English.
Of the first son a widow, an unhappy match,
Without any Children, two Islands at variance,
Before eighteen an incompetant Age,
Of the other lower shall be the agreement.
ANNOT.

Although the words be intricate, nevertheless the sense is plain, concerning
Francis the II. King of France, who being married young, and before he was 18.
years of Age, to Mary Stuart Queen of Scotland, died presently after, and left
her a widow, and also England and Scotland (which he calls here two Islands)
at variance among themselves; of the last Verse the sense is very obscure, and
has relation to what did happen afterward to the said Mary Queen of Scots and
Dowager of France.

XL French.
Le jeune nay au Regne Britannique,
Qu'aura le Pere mourant recommande,
Iceluy mort Londre donra topique,
Et a son fills le Regne demand.
English.
The young man born to the Kingdom of Britanny,
Whom his Father dying shall have recommended,
After his death London shall give him a topic,
And shall ask the Kingdom from his son,
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is plain, concerning his Majesty King Charles II. now Reigning,
who having been recommended by his dying Father to his Subjects, presently
after his death they turned tail, and took the Kingdom from him for a good
while.

XLI. French.
En la frontiere de Caussade and Charlus,
Non gueres loing du fond de la valee,
De Ville Franche Music a son de Luths,
Environnez Combouls and grand myrtee.
English.
Upon the Frontiere of Caussade and Charlus,
Not far from the bottom of the Valley,
Of Ville Franche there shall be Music of Lutes,
Great dancing and great company of people met together
ANNOT.

Caussade, Charlus, and Villefranche are little Towns in Provence, not far one
from another; the rest is easy.

XLII. French.
Le Regne humain d'Angelique geniture,
Fera son Regne, paix, union tenir,
Captive guerre demi de sa closture,
Long temps la paix leur fera maintenir.
English.
The humane Reign of an Angelical brood,
Shall cause his Reign to be in peace and union,
Shall make War, captive shutting it half up,
He shall cause them to keep peace a great while.
ANNOT.

This is only a foretelling of some Gallant Prince, who shall maintain his
Subjects in great peace and tranquillity.

XLIII. French.
Le trop bon temps, trop de bonte Roiale,
Faits and desfaits prompt, subit, negligence,
Ledger croira faux, despouse loiale,
Luy mis a mort par sa benevolence.
English.
The time too good, too much of Royal bounty,
Made and unmade, nimble, quick, negligence,
Fickle shall believe false of his loyal Spouse,
He shall be put to death for his good will.
ANNOT.

This is concerning another King, who through his too much goodness, simplicity
and negligence, shall make and unmake those about him, and being fickle, shall
believe false reports, made concerning his own wife; and at last by his to much
goodness, shall be put to death.

XLIV. French.
Par lors qu'un Roy sera contre les siens,
Natif de Blois subjuguera Ligneres,
Mammel. Cordube, and les Dalmatiens,
Des sept puis l'ombre a Roy estrennes and Lemures,
English.
At that time that a King shall be against his own,
One born at Blois shall subdue the Ligures,
Mammel. Cordua and the Dalmatians,
After that the shadow of the seven shall be to the King a newyears gift and
Hoggoblins.
ANNOT.

Blois is a City in France; Ligures are the Genoeses, in Latin called Ligures;
as for Mammel I cannot tell what to make of it; Cordua is a City of Spain, and
the Dalmatians is a Nation near the Adriatic Sea, and under the Venetians; I
leave the interpretation of the last Verse to the ingenious Reader.

XLV. French.
Lombre du Regne de Navarre non vray,
Fera la vie de sort illegitime,
La veu promis uncertain de Cambray,
Roy d' Orleans donra mur legitime.
English.
The shadow of the Reign of Navarre not true,
Shall make the life of illigitimate chance,
The uncertain allowance from Cambray,
King of Orleans shall give a lawful Wall.
ANNOT.

The Reign or Kingdom of Navarre is called not true, because the King of Spain
does possess it, and not the King of France, who is the lawful King thereof, as
also in regard of the Kings of France, and before of Jane of Albret, and Antony
of Bourbon.

This Kingdom being not true in regard of the said ones, the title and quality
is called here shadow. The Author says that the quality of the King of Navarre
shall make the life of illigitimate chance, because after the death of Francis
the II Catherine of Medicis being not opposed in the Regence by Antony of
Bourbon King of Navarre, she was willing to gratify him in what she could.

And because his Brother Lewis Prince of Conde had been condemned to death, and
not executed, it was a fair occasion for her to show the King of Navarre how
much she did defer to him. Therefore twelve days after the death of King
Francis, he was freed out of Prison, and was admitted to justify himself under
the King of Navarre's Bail.

Thus the shadow of the Kingdom of Navarre not true, did cause the life of a
Prince to be saved, but that life was illegitimate, and that Kingdom not true
by chance, that is, by accident, because of the death of King Francis.

Leaving off the third Verse to be explained after the fourth; King (says the
Author) shall give Orleans for legitimate, because Cha les the IX. who during
the life of Francis the II. did bear the title of Duke of Orleans, did succeed
his Brother; thus the Verse says that Orleans shall give a King for legitimate.

Now for the third Verse, you must suppose that by the Treaty at Madrid 1526.
and after this by that of Cambray, the King Francis the I. did part with the
Sovereignty of Flanders, and of all the Low-Countreis in favor of Charles the
V. Emperor, it is of that uncertain allowance of Cambray, of which the Author
talks here, and says, that in that time viz. of the death of Francis the II.
that allowance shall be uncertain, because Francis the I. having no power of
himself to renounce the rights and dependence of the Crown of France, the
Parliament that was assembled then, would have made void that allowance without
breaking the Peace, declaring that the Kings of France ought to preserve the
right they had upon the Low-Countreis, and to require them again upon any
occasion, and upon that France did not refuse the Election which the
Low-Courtreis made of the Duke of Alencon for their Sovereign Prince and Duke
of Brabant.

XLVI. French.
Vif sort mort de l'or vilain indigne,
Sera de Saxe non nouveau Electeur,
De Brunsvick mandra d'amour sign,
Faux le rendant au peuple seducteur.
English.
The living receives his death from Gold, infamous slut^
Shall be of Saxony not the new Elector,
From Brunswick shall come a sign of love,
Falsely persuading the people that he is a seductor.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning an old Elector of Saxony, who being in health
before, shall die suddenly, being poisoned in a golden Cup by a woman, whom he
calls here infamous slut.

And that from Brunswick (a Country adjacent to Saxony) shall come a
Messenger, upon pretense of Love, who shall persuade the people that the said
Elector was a Seducer.

XLVII. French.
De Bourze Ville a la Dame Guyrlande,
L'on mettra sus par la trahison faite,
Le grand Prelat de Leon par Formande,
Faux Pellerins and Rauisseurs deffaite.
English.
From Bourze City belonging to the Lady Garlant,
They shall impose by a set treason,
The great Prelate of Leon by Formande,
False Pilgrims and Ravishers destroyed.
ANNOT.

I believe that there is a fault here in the impression, and that instead of
Bourze it must be Bourges, which is a famous City in France, and Capitol of the
Province of Berry, for I do not know any Town in Europe called Bourze. What he
means by the Lady Garlant is unknown. I believe also that instead of Leon it
should be Lion, which is another famous City, and the first Archbishopric of
the said Kingdom. Formande is a barbarous word, and I believe put in only to
make up the Rhyme, as he has done in several other places, as much then as can
be gathered out of the sense is this, that from that City Bourges, which
usually is a Dowry for a Queen of France, which is called here Garlant, shall a
treason be hatched against the Archbishop of Lion, which I suppose came to pass
in the time of Henry the III. when Peter of Pinac Archbishop of the said Lion,
being accused by the Deputies of Bourges for siding with the League, escaped
narrowly to be killed, when the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal his brother
were. Queen Catherine of Medicis the Kings Mother having then the said Province
and Town of Bourges for her jointure.

The last Verse has no relation to the three foremost, and has its
interpretation by it self, which is plain enough.

XLVIII. French.
Du plus profond de l' Espagne ancienne,
Sortants du bout and des fins de l' Europe,
Trouble passant aupres du Pont de Laigne,
Sera deffaits par band sa grand troppe.
English.
From the utmost part of old Spain,
Going out of the extremities of Europe,
He that troubled the travelers by the Bridge of Laigne,
Shall have his great Troop defeated by another.
ANNOT.

Every Traveller knows that Castille (which is taken here for Spain) is
divided into two parts viz. Castilia la Vecchia, and Castilia la Nuova, our
Author then says that out of Castilia la Vecchia, which is situated at the
further end of Europe on that side, shall come a band of men, who shall destroy
the Thieves that robbed and vexed the Travelers by the Bridge of Laigne, which
it seems was an infamous place for robbing.

XLIX. French.
Jardin du Monde aupres de Cite neufve,
Dans le chemin des Montagnes cavees,
Sera saisi and plonge dans la Cuve,
Beuvant par force eaux Soulphre envenimees.
English.
Garden of the World, near the new City,
In the way of the dug Mountains,
Shall be seized on, and thrown into the Tub,
Being forced to drink Sulphurous poisoned waters.
ANNOT.

This word Garden of the World, does signify a particular person, seeing that
this Garden of the World was seized on and poisoned in a Tub of Sulphurous
water, in which he was thrown.

The History may be this, that Nostradamus passing for a Prophet and a great
Astrologer in his time, abundance of people came to him to know their Fortunes,
and chiefly the Fathers to know that of their Children, as did Mr. Lasnier, and
Mr. Cotton, Father of that renowned Jesuit of the same name, very like then
that Mr. du Jardin having a son did ask Nostradamus what should become of him,
and because his son was named Cosmus, which in Greek signifies the World, he
answered him with these four Verses

Garden of the World, for Cosmus of the Garden, In his travels shall be taken
hard by the New City, in a way that has been dug between the Mountains, and
there shall be thrown into a Tub of poisoned Sulphurous water to cause him to
die, being forced to drink that water which those rogues had prepared for him.

Those that have learned the truth of this History, may observe it here. This
ought to have come to pass in the last Age, seeing that the party mentioned was
then born when this Stanza was written, and this unhappy man being dead of a
violent death, there is great likelihood, that he was not above forty years old.

There is another difficulty, to know which is that new City, there being many
of that name in Europe, nevertheless the more probable is, that there being
many Knights of Maltha born in Provence (the native Country of our Author) it
may be believed that by the new City he means the new City of Maltha called
la Valete, hard by which there is paths and ways dug in the Mountains, which
Mountains are as if it were a Fence and a Barricado against the Sea, or else
this Cosmus might have been taken by Pirates of Algiers, and there in the new
City of the Goulette be put to death in the manner aforesaid.

L. French.
La Meuse au jour Terre de Luxembourg,
Descouvrira Saturn and trois en Lurne,
Montaigne and plain, Ville, Cite and Bourg,
Lorrain Deluge, trahison par grand hurne.
English.
The Maes by day in the Land of Luxembourg.
Shall discover Saturn, and three in the Lurne,
Mountain and plain Town, City, and Country Town,
A Lorrain flood, treason by a great hurne.
ANNOT.

The Maes is a River that runs through a part of Lorrain and Luxembourg; as
for the words Lurne and hurne I do not understand them, neither do I think they
are to be found in all the French Language, both obsolete and modern; all what
I can gather out of this, is, that a great overflowing of the River Maes, shall
be both in Luxembourg and Lorrain, insomuch that three Leaden Mines (which is
meant here by Saturn) shall be discovered, and after that, a great Treason
shall happen in the said Lorrain.

LI. French.
Des lieux plus bas du Pais de Lorraine,
Seront des basses Allemagnes unis,
Par ceux du Siege Picards, Normans, du Maine,
Et aux Cantons se seront reunis.
ANNOT.

The sense of this is, that the lower Lorrain and Germany being united
together, shall have War with the other three Nations, of Picards, Normans, and
Manceaux, which having Besieged a Town, shall constrain the Lorrainers and Low
germans, to unite themselves with the Cantons of Switzerland.

LII. French.
Au lieu ou Lay and Scelde se marient,
Seront les Nopces de long temps mamee,
Au lieu d' Anvers ou la grappe charient,
Jeune vieillesse conforte intammee.
English.
In the place where Lay and Scelde are united,
Shall the Nuptials be, that were long a doing.
In the place of Antwerp where they draw the grape,
The young unspotted will comfort the old Age.
ANNOT.

There is fault in the Impression, for instead of Lay it must be Lis, which is
a River that runs through Flanders, and discharges it self into the Scelde,
which is the River that passes at Antwerp, the sense therefore of this
Prophecy is, that in the place where the River of Lis joyneth with the Scelde,
there shall the Nuptials be consummated that were long a doing, and the place
of Antwerp, where they unload the Wines, there shall a young unspotted Lady
Marry, and comfort an old man.

LIII. French.
Les trois Pellices de loing s'entrebattront,
La plus grand moindre demeurera a l'ecoute,
Le grand Selin n'en sera plus patron,
Le nommera feu, pelte, blanch, route.
English.
The three Concubines shall fight one with another a far off,
The greatest less shall remain watching,
The great Selin shall be no more their Patron,
And shall call it fire, pelte, white, route,
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning the Turkish Empire, where three of the great Turks
Concubines, which in Latin are called Pellices, shall make War one against
another, the great Turk himself favoring neither party.

LIVE. French.
Nee en ce Monde par Concubine furtive,
A deux hault mise par les tristes nouvelles,
Enter Ennemis sera prinse Captive,
Et amenee a Malines and Bruxelles.
English.
Born in this world from a stolen Concubine,
Set up at two heights by the sad news,
Shall be taken Prisoner among the Enemies,
And brought to Malines and Bruxelles.
ANNOT.

This is concerning some Lady of quality, born of a Concubine, who shall be set
up by reason of some sad news that shall be brought, and afterward shall be
taken Prisoner, and carried to Malines and Bruxelles, two Cities of the
Low Countries.

LV. French.
Les malheureuses Nopces celebreront
En grande joye mais la fin malheureuse,
Mary and Mere Nore desdaigneront,
Le Phibe mort, and Nore plus piteuse.
English.
The unhappy Nuptials shall be celebrated,
With great joy, but the end shall be unhappy,
Husband and Mother shall scorn Nore
The Phybe dead, and Nore more pitiful.
ANNOT.

If by Phybe we understand the Admiral of Chastillon, and by Nore, Queen
Margaret of Valois, the rest will be easy. For in the year 1572. a Match was
made between Henry the IV. then King of Navarre, chief of the Protestant party,
and Margaret of Valois, Sister to Charles the IX. to this Wedding were the
chief of the Protestant party invited, who were there Massacred, and among the
rest Gaspard of Coligny, Lord of Chastillon, and Admiral of France, whom he
calls here Phybe. And when he says, that Husband and Mother shall scorn
Nore, he shows the slight Opinion and regard that the Queen Mother had for
her Daughter, and Henry the IV. for his Wife, whom he after repudiated.

LVI. French.
Prelat Roial soy baissant trop tire,
Grand Flux de Sang sortira par sa bouche,
Le Regne Anglicque par Regne respire,
Long temps mort vif en Tunis comme souche.
English.
Royal Prelate bowing himself too much,
A great flood of Blood shall come out of his mouth,
The English Reign by Reign respited,
A great while dead, alive in Tunis like a Log.
ANNOT.

A Prelate, is a man of eminent dignity in the Church, the Royal Prelate must
be a Churchman of the Royal Blood, who bowing himself too much, shall fall into
an Haemorhagie or Flux of Blood at his Mouth. The third Verse signifies, that
the Kingdom of England shall be relieved from some distress by another Kingdom
or Prince that had been a Slave a great while at Tunis, and lain there, dead
alive like a Log of Wood.

LVII French.
Le subleve ne cognoistra son Scepter,
Les enfans jeunes des plus grands honnira,
Oncques ne fut un plus ord cruel estre,
Pour leur Espouses a mort noir bannera.
English.
The exalted shall not know his Scepter
He shall put to shame the young Children of the greatest,
Never was one more dirty and cruel,
He shall banish to Black death their Spouses.
ANNOT.

This is concerning a great Tyrant, who being exalted to the dignity of a King,
shall not know how to govern; but shall slight and put to shame the Children of
the greatest Nobility, and shall banish their Wives out of the Land; this has
a relation to the late Tyrant Cromwell.

LVIII. French.
Au temps du dueil que le Selin Monarque,
^uerroiera le jeune Aemathien,
Gaul bransler, pericliter la barque,
Tenter Phocens au ponant entretien.
English.
In the time of mourning, when the Monarch Selin,
Shall make War against the young Aemathien,
France shall quake, the Ship shall be in danger,
Phocens shall be attempted, the business shall be in the West.
ANNOT.

You must observe here, that by Aemathien the Author means the King of
France, as he does in many other places; and by Selin, he means the great
Turk, because such was the name of him that lived in his time, this being
presupposed the meaning of this is, that the great Turk shall fight against the
King of France, and shall attempt Phocens, which is Marseilles, as being a
Colony of the old Phocenses in Graecia, which shall cause all France to quake,
and the Ship to be in danger, which is Paris, who bears a Ship for its Arms.

LIX. French.
Dedans Lion vingt and cinq d'une haleine,
Cinq Citoyens Germains, Bressans, Latins,
Par dessous Noble conduiront longue train,
Et descouvers par abboy de Mastins.
English.
In Lions five and twenty of a breadth
Five Citizens Germans, Bressans, Latins,
Under Noblemen shall conduct a long Train,
And shall be discovered by the barking of Mastiffs.
ANNOT.

The Marshal of St. Andre, Governor of Lion being absent, the Protestants
undertook the taking of it, at the solicitation of some principal Lords at
Court, among whom were named the Prince of Conde, and the Vidame of Chartres,
Francis of Vendosme, Knight of the Order. The Abbot of Savigny, who did supply
the place of the Governor, and was named Antony of Albon, since that
Archbishop of Arles, having discovered this Conspiracy, went to surprise the
undertakers, but as he was going upon the night of the 5 of September, he met
with some of the confederates upon the Bridge of Saone, which made him retreat
with some loss.

The next day having gathered moreForces, he took three of them that were
strangers and young, the rest escaping, those three were hanged the next
Saturday, which was the 7 of that Month.

The Marshal being come to Town, there was Execution made upon some of the
Inhabitants, to the number of 4 that were hanged.

After that there were informations made concerning the Authors and Abettors of
the said conspiracy, and many other Citizens and strangers were put to Prison,
and besides them the Vidame of Chartres, who was carried to Paris, and put into
the Bastille, and after that in the Tournelles, where he died before his
process was ended, the 23 December 1560.

It is what our Author says in this stanza; in the first Verse he says, that
there were five and twenty of a breadth, of whose five and twenty there was
five Citizens of the Town, and the rest were Germans, Bressans and Italians, of
these Citizens 4 were hanged, and three of the strangers.

Those 25 undertakers, of which the Author says, that under Noblemen they
shall conduct a long Train; that is, that under the support and favor of many
Noblemen, they would undertake a thing that should not end so soon as it proved
afterward; for although this enterprise did fail, yet was the beginning of
horrid combustions that followed afterward.

This enterprise it seems was discovered by barking of Mastiffs.

The Apology for the City of Lion treats at large of this, and names all
those conspirators, who for the most part were of Germany and Geneva.

LX French.
Je pleure Nice, Monaco, Pise, Genes,
Savone, Sienne, Capoue, Modene, Malthe,
Le dessus sang and glaive par estrenes,
Feu, trembler Terre, eau, malheureuse nolte.
English.
I bewail Nice, Monaco, Pisa, Genoa,
Savona, Sienna, Capoua, Modena, Maltha,
Upon them blood and sword for a new years-gift,
Fire, Earthquake, water, unhappy nolte.
ANNOT.

All these Cities are situated by the Mediterranean Sea, and most of them upon
that part of it, which is called the River of Genoa, and are threatened here by
all the plagues above mentioned,; as for the word nolte it is a barbarous one,
forced here to make up the Rhyme in French.

LXI. French.
Betta, Vienne, Comorre, Sacarbance,
Voudront livrer aux Barbares Pannone,
Par picque et feu, enorme violence,
Les conjurez d'escouverts par Matrone.
English.
Betta, Vienna, Comorre, Sacarbance,
Shall endeavor to deliver Pannone to the Barbarians,
By Pike, and fire, extraordinary violence!
The Conspirators discovered by a Matron.
ANNOT.

It seems that there will be a conspiracy of some men out of all the above
mentioned Cities, to surrender Hungary (which in Latin is called Pannonia) to
the great Turk, but that conspiracy shall be discovered by a Matron, that is, a
grave ancient Woman.

LXII. French.
Pres de Sorbin pour assaillir Hongrie,
L'Heraut de Bude le viendra advertir,
Chef Bizantin, Sallon de Sclavonie,
A Loy d' Arabes les viendra convertir,
English.
Near Sorbin, to invade Hungary,
The Herald of Buda shall come to give them notice of it,
Chief Bizantin, Sallon of Sclavonia,
Shall come to turn them to the Arabian Religion.
ANNOT.

This seems to have a relation to the precedent, and that near that place he
calls Sorbin, preparations shall be made to Invade Hungary, but they shall
have notice of it by some body of Buda.

He that is called here Chief Bizantin, is the great Turk or his grand Vizir,
who has his abode in Constaninople, anciently called Bizantium.

LXIII. French.
Cydron, Ragusa, la Cite au Saint Hieron,
Reverdira le medicant secours,
Mort fills de Roy part mort de deux Heron,
L' Arabe, Hongrie, feront un mesme course.
English.
Cydron, Raguse, the City of Saint Hieron,
Shall make green again the Physical help,
The Kings Son dead, by the death of two Herons,
Arabia and Hungary shall go the same way.
ANNOT.

The meaning of this is, that when those three Cities named in the first Verse
shall have need of succors, and that a Kings Son shall die in flying two
Herons, then shall Arabia and Hungary be under the same Master.

LXIV. French.
Pleure Milan, pleure Lucques, Florence,
Que ton grand Duc sur le Char montera,
Changer le Siege pres de Venise s'advance,
Lors que Colonne a Rome changera.
English.
Weep Milan, weep Lucques, and Florence,
When the great Duke shall go upon the Chariot,
To change the Siege near Venice he goes about,
When Colonne shall change at Rome.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy seems to portend the change of the Sea of Rome in some place
near to Venice, and this is to happen when the great Duke of Tuscany shall
ascend upon a Triumphant Chariot, and that the House of Colonne (which is the
more powerful in Rome) shall take his part.

LXV. French.
O vaste Rome ta ruin s'aproche,
Non de tes Murs, de ton sang, and substance,
L'aspre par lettres sera si horrible coche,
Fer pointu mis a tous jusques au manche.
English.
O great Rome thy ruin draws near,
Not of thy Walls, of thy blood and substance,
The sharp by Letters shall make so horrid a notch,
Sharp Iron thrust in all to the have.
ANNOT.

This is a confirmation of the foregoing Prophecy, by which it is said that the
destruction of Rome shall not be in her Walls, blood or substance, but only by
Letters or Doctrine that shall put quite down the Roman Religion.

LXVI. French.
Le Chef de Londres par Regne l' Americh,
L'Isle d' Escosse tempiera par gelee,
Roy, Reb. auront un si faux Antechrist,
Que les mettra tretous dans la meslee.
English.
The Chief of London by Reign of America,
The Island of Scotland shall catch thee by a frost,
King and Reb. shall have so false an Antichrist,
As will put them altogether by the ears.
ANNOT.

I conceive this Prophecy can be appropriated to no body better then Oli.
Cromwell, who is called here the Chief of London by Reign of America, that is,
by Reign of confusion, whose projects and treasons were all brought to naught,
by the victorious Mars of the ever renowned General Monck, who came with his
Army from Scotland to London in the VVinter time, he is called also a false
Antichrist, because he was an enemy to King and Reb. that is Respublica or
Commonwealth.

LXVII. French.
Le tremblement si fort au mois de May,
Saturn, Caper, Jupiter, Mercure au Boeuf,
Venus aussy, Cancer, Mars en Nonnay,
Tombera gresle lors gresse qu'un oeuf.
English.
The Earthquake shall be so great in the month of May,
Saturn, Caper, Jupiter, Mercury in the Bull,
Venus also, Cancer, Mars in Nonnay,
Then shall fall Hail bigger then an Egg.
ANNOT.

The meaning is, that when all these Celestial bodies shall be so disposed,
that there will be a fearful Earthquake and Hail.

LXVIII. French.
L'Armee de Mer devant Cite tiendra,
Puis partira sans fair longue allee,
Citoyens grande proye en Terre prendra,
Retourner class reprendre grand emblee.
English.
The Fleet shall stand before the City,
Then shall go away for a little while,
And then shall take a great troop of Citizens on Land,
Fleet shall come back and recover a great deal.
ANNOT.

It seems here he speaks of two Fleets, one of which shall stand a little
while before a Town, and carry a great many Citizens away, but that the other
Fleet shall come in the mean time, and redeem them.

LXIX. French.
Le fait luysant de neuf vieux esleve,
Seront si grands par Midy Aquilon,
De sa soeur propre grandes alles leve,
Fuyant meurdry au buisson d' Ambellon.
English.
The bright actions of new old exalted,
Shall be so great through the South and North,
By his own Sister great forces shall be raised,
Running away he shall be murdered near the bush of Ambellon.
ANNOT.

The question here is, whether this neuf vieux in French or new old in English
be the proper name of a man, or be a Metaphor, to express a young man of an
ancient Family, when the Reader has satisfied himself upon that, the rest is
easy enough.

LXX. French.
L'oeil par objet fera tell excroissance,
Tant and ardente que tombera la Neige,
Champ arrouse viendra en decroissance,
Que le Primat succombera a Rhege.
English.
The eye by the object shall make such an excressency,
Because so much, and so burning shall fall the Snow,
The Field watered shall come to decay,
Insomuch that the Primat shall fall down at Rhege.
ANNOT.

All this is nothing but an extraordinary great Snow that shall fall about
Rhegio a City of Italy, whereby the Fields shall be drowned and fall to decay;
insomuch, that the chief men, called here Primate shall fall to poverty.

LXXI. French.
La Terre and l'Air geleront si grand eau,
Lors qu'on viendra pour Jendy venerer,
Ce qui sera jamais ne fut si beau,
Des quattre parts le viendront honorer.
English.
The Earth and the Air shall freeze with so much water,
When they shall come to worship Thursday,
That which shall be never, was so fair,
From the four parts they shall come to honor him,
ANNOT.

This signifies an exceeding great frost, which shall happen on a Holy
Thursday, where the ground and sky shall be so clear, that men may come from
the four parts (viz. of the Earth) without trouble for to worship.

LXXII. French.
L'an mil neuf cent nonante neuf, sept mois,
Du Ciel viendra un grand Roy d'effrayeur,
Resusciter le grand Roy d' Angoumois,
Avaunt apres, Mars Regner par bonheur.
English.
In the year a thousand nine hundred ninety nine, and seven months,
Frem Heaven a great terrible King,
To raise again the great King of Angoulesme,
Before and after, Mars shall Reign luckily.
ANNOT.

He that is called here King of Angoulesme was Francis the I. as gallant a
Prince as ever France had, who before he was King went by the title of Duke of
Angoulesme, the rest is easy.

LXXIII. French.
Le temps present avecque le pass,
Sera juge par grand Jomaliste,
Le Monde tard de luy sera less,
Et desloial par le Clerge juriste.
English.
The time present, together with the past,
Shall be judged by a great Jovialiste,
The World shall at last be weary of him,
And he shall be thought unfaithful by the Canon Law Clergy.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy concerns merely Francis Rabelais, who was the greatest
Jovialist, that is, Merry-man that ever was, and did so lash and censure the
abuses of every profession, and chiefly of the Clergy, that to this very day he
goes among them for an Atheist, and a Prophaner of Sacred and Civil things.

LXXIV. French.
An revolu du grand nombre septiesme,
Apparoistra au temps jeux d' Hecatombe,
Non esloignez du grand age milliesme,
Que les entrez sortiront de leur Tomb.
English.
The year of the great number seven being past,
Shall be seen at that time the sports of Hecatombe,
Not far from the great age thousand,
That the Buried shall come out of their Graves.
ANNOT.

Hecatombe signifies a Sacrifice, wherein a hundred beasts were killed.

The sense therefore is this, that when the year a thousand seven hundred is
past, that such sport of Hecatombe shall be seen again, not far from the sixth
Millenary, when the day shall rise, for it is a common opinion among the
Learned, that as God Created the World in six days, and rested the seventh, so
when the World has lasted six thousand years, for a thousand years before God
are as one day, there shall be an Eternal Sabbath and a Resurrection, both of
the just and unjust.

LXXV. French.
Tant attendu ne reviendra jamais,
Dedans l' Europe, en Asia apparoistra,
Un de la ligne yssu du grand Hermes,
Et sur tous Rois de Orient croistra.
English.
So long expected shall never come
Into Europe, in Asia shall appear,
One come forth of the line of the great Hermes,
And shall grow above all the Kings in the East.
ANNOT.

All is plain, but only this, whether he takes Hermes as a King of Egypt, or
as the Father of the Hermetick Philosophers.

LXXVI. French.
Le grand Senate decernera la Pomp
A un qu'apres sera vaincu chasse,
Des adhaerans seront a son de trompe,
Biens publiez, ennemy dechasse.
English.
The great Senate will decree a Pomp,
To one who after shall be vanquished and expelled,
The goods of his partners shall be
Publicly sold, and the enemy shall be driven away.
ANNOT.

What Senate and particular man he means, is the only difficulty in this.

LXXVII. French.
Trente adhaerans de l'Ordre des Quirettes,
Bannis, leurs biens donnez ses adversaires,
Tous leurs bienfaits seront pour demerites,
Class espargie, delivrez aux corsaires.
English.
Thirty associated of the Order of Quirettes,
Banished, their goods shall be given to their adversaries,
All their good deeds shall be imputed to them as crimes,
The Fleet scattered, they shall fall into the hands of Pirates.
ANNOT.

I could not find any man or Author that knew what is meant here by Quirettes,
which is only the difficulty of this Stanza.

LXXVIII. French.
Subite joye en subite tristesse,
Sera a Rome aux graces embrassees,
Dueil, cris, pleurs, larm, sang, excellent liesse,
Contraires bands surprises and troulsees.
English.
Sudden joy shall turn into a sudden sadness,
At Rome to the embraced graces,
Mourning, cries, weeping, tears, blood excellent joy,
Contrary Troops surprised and carried away.
ANNOT.

There is nothing difficult here, but what he means by Embraced graces, for
my part I believe them some new married Couples, who in the middle of their
jollity shall fall into these disasters.

LXXIX. French.
Les vieux chemins seront tous embellis,
L'on passera a Memphis somentrees,
Le grand Mercure d' Hercule fleur de lys,
Faisant trembler Terre, Mer, and Contrees.
English.
The old ways shall be made all fair,
There shall be a passage to Memphis Somentrees,
The great Mercury of Hercules Flower de luce,
Making the Earth, the Sea, and the Countries to quake.
ANNOT.

This word Somentress, being altogether barbarous, is the reason that neither
sense nor construction can be made of all these words.

LXXX French.
Au Regne grand, du grand Regne Regnant,
Par force d'armes les grands Ports d'airain,
Fera ouvrir le Roy and Duc joignant,
Port demoly, nef a fonds jour serain.
English.
In the great Reign, of the great Reign Reigning,
By force of Arms the great Brass Gates,
He shall cause to be open, the King being joined with the Duke,
Haven demolished, Ship sunk on a fair day.
ANNOT.

The words and the sense are plain, though the parties be unknown.

LXXXI. French.
Mis Tresor Temple, Citadins Hesperiques,
Dans iceluy retire en secret lieu,
Le Temple ouvrir, les liens fameliques,
Repris, ravis proye horrible au milieu.
English.
A Treasure put in a Temple by Hesperian Citizens,
In the same hid in a secret place,
The hungry bonds shall cause the Temple to be open,
And take again and ravish, a fearful prey in the middle.
ANNOT.

This is concerning a Treasure hid by Spaniards (called here Hesperian
Citizens) in a Church, which the people of a Town being poor, and almost
starved, caused to be open, and did ransack it, but in the middle of it they
found a strange prey, but what it was God knows.

LXXXII. French.
Cris, pleurs, larmes viendront avec couteaux,
Semblant faux donront dernier assaut,
L'entour parques planter profons plateaux,
Vifs repoussez and meurdris de plain saut.
English.
Cries, weeping, tears, shall come with daggers,
With a false seeming they shall give the last assault,
Set round about they shall plant deep,
Beaten back alive, and murdered upon a sudden.
ANNOT.

This seems to have a relation to the Scalado of Geneva, of which you shall
have a full account in the 69 Stanza, of the twelfth Century.

LXXXIII. French.
De batailler ne sera done sign,
Du Parc seront contraints de sortir horse,
De Gasp. l'entour sera cogneu l'enseigne,
Qui fera mettre de tous les siens a mort.
English.
There shall no sign of battle be given,
They shall be compelled to come out of the Park,
Round about Gasp. shall be known the Ensign,
That shall cause all his own to be put to death.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the year 1556. by the Marshal of Brissac in
Piemont, when he took the Town of Vignal by assault, where 1200. Neapolitans
were put to the Sword, who were called the braves of Naples; because they were
all very gallantly habited, and the Governor being wounded, cast himself
desperately into a Well, whence the Marshal caused him to be taken up, and to
be cured of his wounds.

In this conflict there was no sign of Battle given; because it was done by the
rashness of a Soldier, Bastard of a Bastard of the house of Boissy, who
without expecting the command of the General, went alone upon the breche, and
after he had (...)o^ against the Enemies, drew his Sword, and did fight a great
while hand to hand without being wounded.

Some of his Companions seeing his valor, did follow him, and others came to
to their help, and these carried along with them all those that were appointed
to give the assault; insomuch that by a kind of Warlike emulation, all did
carry themselves so valliantly, that after a long and stout resistance, they
routed the Enemies, and put all the Garrisons to the Sword.

It is what the Author says in the first and second Verse, seeing that those
that were appointed to give Battle, every one in his Regiment or Squadron, were
compelled by emulation to come out of their Park; that is, from the Precinct of
place wherein they were. The third Verse adds, that round about the Ensign of
Gasp. shall be known; that is, in the assault the Captain of that place, named
Gaspar Pagan, was remarked to fight valliantly every where the French did
assault, which the Marshal of Brissac seeing, as also the forwardness of his
men commanded the general assault to be given. The Captain seeing the Town
taken, though he had above twenty wounds, for marks of his Valor, yet by that
despair threw himself into a Well, near which the Marshal passing, heard his
voice, and caused him to be drawn out, and cured of his wounds.

This Captain being resolved to perish in this assault, did cause all his own
to be put to death, as the fourth Verse says. The History of this Town was
famous, for which the Marshal of Brissac did present Gifts to the most Valiant,
and among the rest to this Bastard, after he had put him in jeopardy of his
life, for having violated the Military Orders in a matter of such concernment.
That Town of Vignal is situated upon a Mountain of the Country of Montferrat,
of a difficult access, where no pieces of Ordinance can be brought up, but by
the help of Men's Arms; after the taking of it, the Marshal did cause it to be
raised even to the ground, because it could not be useful to the French, that
had many other places to keep, and might have been very beneficial to the
Spaniard.

LXXXIV. French.
Le Naturel a si haut, haut non bas,
Le tard retour fera marris contens.
Le Recloing ne sera sans debats,
En emploiant and perdant tout son temps
English.
The Natural to so high, high not low,
The late return shall make the sad contented,
The Recloing shall not be without strife,
In employing and loosing all his time.
ANNOT.

The Recloing, being a forged word, without signification, and being the Key of
all this Stanza, no body can tell what to make of it.

LXXXV. French.
Le vieil Tribun au point de la Trehemide,
Sera press Captif ne delivrer,
Le vueil non vueil, le mal parlant timide,
Par legitime a ses amiss livrer.
English.
The old Tribun, at the point of the Trehemide,
Shall be much entreated not to deliver the Captain,
They will not will, the ill speaking fearful,
By legitimate shall deliver to his friends.
ANNOT.

The old Treban is an old Captain or Governor of a Town, who shall be much
entreated not to deliver at the end of the Trehemede (that is, three Months)
one that he kept prisoner, but will they or not, he shall lawfully deliver him
to his friends.

LXXXVI. French.
Comme un Gryphon viendra le Roy d' Europe
Accompagne de ceux d'Aquilon,
De rouges and blancs conduira grande Troop,
Et Iront contre le Roy de Babylon.
English.
As a Griffin shall come the King of Europe,
Accompanied with those of the North,
Of red and white shall conduct a great Troop,
And they shall go against the King of Babylon.
ANNOT.

This is concerning the King of Swedeland, Gustavus Adolphus, who is called
here the King of Europe; because he lived in a part of it, and because he was
one, if not the most gallant Prince of his time, who with a great Army of his
Subjects, named here those of Aquilon, invaded Germany, and made War against
the Emperor, whom he calls here the King of Babylon, either because he is a
great favourer of the Roman Church, or because the Empire, by reason of so many
Sovereign Princes in it is like a Babel and confusion.

The great Troop of Red and White, where his own Soldiers, whom he
distinguished by their several habits, Clothing them with several Colors, to
breed an emulation among them, there being the Red Regiment, the White, the
Blew, the Yellow, the Green. etc.

LXXXVII. French.
Grand Roy viendra prendre port pres de Nice,
Le grand Empire de la mort si en fera,
Aux Antipodes posera son genisse,
Par Mer la Pille tout esvanouira.
English.
A great King shall land by Nice,
The great Empire of death shall interpose with it.
He shall put his Mare in the Antipodes,
By Sea all the Pillage shall vanish.
ANNOT.

A great King shall land hard by Nice, which is a Sea Town in Savoy, but he
shall have a great loss of his men by death, and the Sea shall swallow all his
plunder.

LXXXVIII. French.
Pieds and Cheval a la second veille,
Feront entree vastiant tout par Mer,
Dedans le Port entrera de Marseille,
Pleurs, cris and sang, onc null temps si amer.
English.
Foot and Horse upon the second Watch,
Shall come in destroying all by Sea,
They shall come into the Harbor of Marseilles,
Tears, cries and blood, never was so bitter a time.
ANNOT.

This is so clear that it needs no interpretation.

LXXXIX. French.
De Bricque en Marbre seront les Murs reduits,
Sept and cinquante annees pacifiques,
Joye aux humains reneve l'aqueduct,
Sante, grands fruits, joye and temps mellifique,
English.
The Walls shall be turned from Brick into Marble,
There shall be peace for seven and fifty years,
Joy to mankind, the Aqueduct shall be built again,
Health, abundance of fruit, joy and mellifluous time.
ANNOT.

After so many calamities Prognosticated by the Author, he promises here seven
and fifty year of a golden Age, but when? he makes no mention.

XC. French.
Cent fois mourra le Tyran inhumain,
Mis a son lieu scavant and debonnaire,
Tout le Senate sera dessoubs sa main;
Fasche sera par malin tcmeraire.
English.
The inhumane tyrant shall die a hundred times,
In his place shall be put a Learned and mild man,
All the Senate shall be at his command,
He shall be made angry by a rash malicious person.
ANNOT.

This Prognostication is easy to be understood, only it is indeterminate, and
specifieth neither time nor persons.

XCI. French.
Clerge Romain l'an mil six cens and neuf,
Au chef de l'an fera Election,
D'un gris and noir de la Campaign yssu,
Qui oncques ne fut si malin.
English.
The Roman Clergy in the year a thousand six hundred and nine,
In the beginning of the year shall make choice
Of a gray and black, come out of the Country,
Such a one as never a worse was.
ANNOT.

Wanting the Chronology of the Popes, I have not set down who that Pope was,
then whom our Author says there never was a worse, but the time being so
punctually prefixed, it will be an easy matter for the Reader to find out
satisfaction in this point:

XCII. French.
Devant le Pere l'Enfant sera tue,
Le Pere apres enter cords de jonc,
Genevois peuple sera esvertue,
Gisant le Chef au milien comme un tronc.
English.
The Child shall be killed before the Fathers eyes,
The Father after shall enter into ropes of rushes,
The people of Geneva shall notably stir themselves,
The Chief lying in the middle like a log.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is twofold, the two first Verses foretell of a man that shall
have his son killed before his eyes, and himself afterward shall be strangled
by a rope made of Rushes.

The two last Verses are concerning the people of Geneva, who (as he faith)
shall lustily bestir themselves, while their Captain, Chief, or Commander shall
carelessly lie like a log.

XCIII. French.
La Barque neuve recevra les Voiages,
La and aupres transfereront l'Empire,
Beaucaire, Arles, retiendront les Hostages,
Pres deux Colomnes trouvees de Porphyre.
English.
The new Ship shall make journeys
Into the place, and thereby where they shall translate the Empire,
Beaucaire, Arles, shall keep the Hostages,
Near them shall be found two Columns of Porphyry.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning three things, the first is of a considerable new
Ship, that shall sail several times into a place where the Empire shall be
translated.

The second is concerning two Towns of Languedot, Beaucaire, and Arles, who
shall not surrender the Hostages that they had.

The third is concerning two Columns of Porphiry that shall be found there
about.

XCIV. French.
De Nismes, d' Arles, and Vienne contemnet,
Nobeyront a ledict Hesperique,
Au Labouriez pour le grand condamner,
Six eschapez en habit Seraphique.
English.
From Nismes, d'Arles and Vienna contempt,
They shall not obey the Spanish Proclamation,
To the Labouriez for to condemn the great one,
Six escaped in a Seraphical habit.
ANNOT.

It seems that those three aforenamed Towns will resuse to obey a Spanish
Proclamation, that would compel them to condemn a great man; as for Labouriez
it is a barbarous and non-sensical word.

The last Verse signifies, that six shall escape, clothed in Franciscan
habits, called here Seraphical, because the Franciscans believe that a Seraphin
did appear to St. Francis their Patron, from whence their Order is called by
many the Seraphical Order.

XCV. French.
Dans les Espagnes viendra Roy trespuissant,
Par Mer and Terre subjugant au Midy,
Ce mal fera rabaissant le croissant,
Baisser les aisles a ceux de Vendredy.
English.
A most potent King shall come into Spain,
Who by Sea and Land shall make great Conquests toward the South,
This evil shall beat down the horns of the new Moon,
And slack the Wings of those of Friday.
ANNOT.

A great and potent King shall come out of Spain, who by Sea and Land shall
make great Conquest toward the South, that is Barbary, which shall be a great
prejudice to the Turkish Empire, who has for his Arms a new Moon; And slack
the wings of those of Friday, that is, of the Turks, because they keep the
Friday for their Sabbath. This Prophecy was fulfilled by Philip the II. King of
Spain, who drove away all the Moors out of the South part of it, and took a
great many places in the Coasts of Barbary.

XCVI. French.
Religion du nom des Mers viendra,
Contre la Sect fills Adaluncatif,
Sect obstinee deploree craindra,
Des deux blessez par Alph and Aleph.
English.
Religion of the name of the Seas shall come,
Against the Sect son Adaluncatif,
Obstinate Sect deplorate shall be afraid,
Of the two wounded by Aleph and Aleph.
ANNOT.

I confess my ignorance in the intelligence of this Stanza.

XCVII. French.
Triremes pleines tout aage captifs,
Temps bon a mal, le doux pour amertume,
Proye a Barbare trop tossed seront hastifs,
Cupide de voir plaindre au vent la plume.
English.
Triremes full of Captives of all Age.
Time good for evil, the sweet for bitter,
Pray to the Barbarian, they shall be too hasty,
Desirous to see the feather complain in the wind.
ANNOT.

Triremes are Galleys with three benches of Oars, the rest is much of the
nature of the former.

XCVIII. French.
La splendeur clairea Pucelle joieuse,
Ne luira plus, long temps sera sans Sell,
Avec Marchans, Ruffiens, Loups, odieuse,
Tous pesle mesle monstre universel.
English.
The clear splendor of the merry Maid,
Shall shine no more, she shall be a great while without Salt,
With Merchants, Ruffans, Wolves, odious,
All promiscuously, she shall be an universal Monster.
ANNOT.

This is concerning a famous beauty, who in her latter age shall prostitute her
self to all comers.

XCIX French.
A la fin le Loup, le Lion, Boeuf and l'Asne,
Timide dama seront avec Mastins,
Plus ne cherra a eux la douce Manne,
Plus vigilance and custode aux Mastins.
English.
At last the Wolf, the Lion, Ox and Ass,
Fearful Do, shall be with the Mastiffs,
The sweet Manna shall no more fall to them,
There shall be no more watching and keeping of Mastiffs.
ANNOT.

This is a Prognostication of a general peace all Europe over.

The sweet Manna shall no more fall to them, signifies that the Europeans
shall be fed no more with Manna, as the Jews were in the Desert, but shall pass
to the Land of Promise, that is of peace and quietness.

C. French.
Le grand Empire sera par l' Angleterre,
Le Pempotan des ans plus de trois cens,
Grandes Copies passer par Mer and Terre,
Les Lusitains n'en seront pas contens.
English.
The great Empire shall be in England,
The Pempotan for more then three hundred years,
Great Armies shall pass through Sea and Land,
The Portugueses shall not be contented therewith.
ANNOT.

This is a favorable one for England, for by it the Empire, or the greatest
Dominion of Europe is promised to it, for the space of above three hundred
years, at which the Portugueses or Spaniards shall much repine.

THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY XI.
IX. French.
MEysinier, Manthi, and le tiers qui viendra,
Peste and nouveau insult, enclos troubler.
Aix and les lieux fureur dedans mordra,
Puis les Phocens viendront leur mal doubler.
English.
Meysinier, Manthi, and the third that shall come,
Plague and new attempt shall trouble them enclosed,
The fury of it shall bite in Aix and the places there about,
Then they of Phocens shall come and double their misery.
ANNOT.

These are names of particular persons that are here threatened of the Plague,
as also the City of Aix Capital of Province, and the Country about it, and
after that the City of Marseilles named here Phocens, because they are a Colony
of the old Phocenses in Greece.

XCVII. French.
Par Ville Franche, Mascon en desarroy,
Dans les Fagots seront Soldats cachez,
Changer de temps en prime pour le Roy,
Par de Chalon and Moulins tous hachez.
English.
By Ville Franche, Mascon shall be put in disorder,
In the Faggots shall Soldiers be hidden,
The time shall change in prime for the King,
By Chalon and Moulins they shall be all hewed to pieces.
ANNOT.

Ville Franche is a Town five Leagues from Lion; and Mascon another about the
same distance from Ville Franche, and Chalon from Mascon, and Moulins from
Chalon.

The meaning of it is this, that there shall be an attempt from Ville Franche
upon Mascon, by Soldiers hidden in Faggots, that shall be cut off by the
succors of those Cha^ons and Moulins; which like did happen in the time of the
Civil Wars in France, between the King and the League, when the Towns stood one
against another, but because I can find nothing of it in the History, I suspend
my further judgment therein.

THE PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus. CENTURY XII.
V. French.
FEu, flamme, faim, furt, farouche fumee,
Fera faillir, froissant fort, foy faucher,
Fills de Deite! toute Provence humee,
Chasse de Regne, enrage sans crocher.
English.
Fire, flame, hunger, theft, wild smoke,
Shall cause to fail, brusing hard, to move Faith,
Son of God! all Provence swallowed up?
Driven from the Kingdom, raging mad without spitting.
ANNOT.

The curiosity of the Author in striving to begin all his words, in the two
first Verses has made the sense of this Stanza so obscure, that I believe no
body ever did or shall truly understand it, all what can be gathered out of
it, is great threatening of several calamities, that were to happen upon
Provence his native Country, as it did a little while after his death, by the
Civil Wars for Religion.

XXIV. French.
Le grand secours venu de la Guyenne,
S'arrestera tout aupres de Poitiers,
Lion rendu par Montluel en Vienne,
Et saccagez par tous gens de Mestiers.
English.
The great succors that came from Gascony,
Shall stop hard by Poitiers,
Lion surrendered by Montluel and Vienna,
And ransacked by all kinds of Tradesmen.
ANNOT.

The words and sense of this are plain.

XXXVI. French.
Assault farouche en Cypre se prepare,
La larme a l'oeil de ta ruin proche,
Bizance Class Morisque si grand tare,
Deux differens le grand vast par la Roche.
English.
A cruel assault is preparing in Cyprus,
Tears in my eye, thou art near thy ruin,
The Fleet of Constantinople and the Morick so great damage.
Two differents the great wast shall be by the Rock.
ANNOT.

A cruel Assault is preparing, signifies the shortness of the time in which it
was to happen, for our Author Prophesied 1555. and Cyprus was taken by the
Turks in the Month of August 1571. Selymus the II. fifth Emperor of the Turks,
where the perfidiousness of the Bassa Mustapha that Besieged it is remarkable,
for having the Town delivered him upon Articles; First, that the Inhabitants of
the City yet alive should enjoy their lives, liberty, and goods, with free
exercise of Christian Religion, that the Governor Bragadinus with the rest of
the Captains and Soldiers might in safty depart with Bag and Baggage, and at
their departure take with them five pieces of Ordinance, and three Horses,
which soever it should please them to make choice of, and that the Turks should
safely conduct them into Crete, finding them both Victual and Shipping; yet all
these matters agreed upon, and commenced into Writting, as also by solemn Oaths
on both side confirmed; the prefidious Basla nevertheless caused Bragadinus to
have his Ears cut off, then caused him to be set in a Chair, and his skin to be
flain off from him quick, his head to be cut from his dead body, and upon the
point of a Spear to be set upon a high place, his skin also stuffed with Chaff,
he caused to be hanged up at the Yards Arm, and so to be carried about.

IV. French.
Deux corpse un chef, champs divisez en deux,
Et puis respondre a quattre non ouys,
Petits pour grands a pertius mal pour eux,
Tour d' Aigues foudre, pire pour Eussovis.
English.
Two bodies, one head, fields divided into two,
And then answer to four unheard ones,
Small for great ones, open evil for them,
The Tower of Aigues beaten by Lightning, worse for Eussovis.
ANNOT.

Out of this crabbid Stanza we shall pick what we can, and leave the rest to
the judgment of the judicious Reader. First,

The two bodies, one head may be understood either a Monster that was so, as it
did happen once in Italy, as Pareus witnesses; or of the union of the two
Kingdoms of France and Navarre, under Henry the IV. or of England and Scotland
under King James.

The Tower of Aiguemortes was stricken with the Lightning, a while after our
Author had put out his Prophecies.

V. French.
Tristes Conseils, desloiaux, cauteleux,
Aduis meschant, la loy sera trahie,
Le peuple esmeu, farouche, querelleux,
Tant Bourg que Ville toute le paix haie.
English.
Sad Councels, unfaithful, malicious,
Ill advice the Law shall be betrayed,
The people shall be moved, wild and quarrelsome,
Both in Country and City the peace shall be hated.
ANNOT.

This is plain.

VI. French.
Roy contre Roy, and le Duc contre Prince,
Haine enter iceux dissension, horrible,
Rage and fureur sera toute Province,
France grand guerre and changement terrible.
English.
King against King, and Duke against a Prince,
Hatred between them, horrid dissension,
Rage and fury shall be in every Province,
Great War in France, and horrid changes.
ANNOT.

This is a true picture of the miseries of the Civil Wars in France, when
Charles the IX. King of France, was against Henry King of Navarre, and the Duke
of Guise against the Prince of Conde.

VII. French.
L'accord and pache sera du tout rompue,
Les amitiez pollues par discord,
L'haine euvieille, toute foy corrompue,
Et l'esperance, Marseilles sans concord.
English.
The agreement and contract shall be broken in pieces,
The friendships polluted by discord,
The hatred shall be old, all faith corrupted,
And hope also, Marseilles without concord.
ANNOT.

This is a second part of the foregoing.

VIII. French.
Guerre and debats, a Blois guerre and tumulte,
Diverse aguets, adveux inopinables,
Entrer dedans Chasteau Trompette, insulte,
Chasteau du Ha qui en seront coulpables.
English.
War and strifes, at Blois war and tumult,
Several lying in wait, acknowledgment unexpected,
They shall get into the Chasteau Trompette by assault,
And into the Chasteau du Ha, who shall be guilty of it.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning the Civil Wars of France between the King and the
League.

He says, at Blois War and tumult; because the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal
his Brother were both killed there, at the convention of Estates by the Kings
command, which he calls here acknowledgment unexpected, because the Kingdom
did own the fact.

The last two Verses are concerning the two Castles or Fortresses of Bourdeaux,
who in those days were sometimes by one party, and sometimes by another.

LXV. French.
A tenir fort par fureur contraindra,
Tout coeur trembler, Langon advent terrible,
Le coup de pied mill pieds te rendra,
Girond. Garon. ne furent plus horribles.
English.
He shall by fury compel them to hold out,
Every heart shall tremble, Langon shall have a terrible event,
The kick shall return to thee a thousand kicks,
Girond. Garon. are no more horrid.
ANNOT.

The two last Verses seem to have a relation to the foregoing Stanza, and to
import, that the Governor of Bourdeaux shall compel them to hold our, and
because Langon, a Town 20 or 30 Miles distant from Bourdeanx, was of the
contrary party, and did annoy sometimes those of Bourdeaux, it is threatened
here to have a thousand kicks for one.

Gironde and Garonne are the two Rivers of Bourdeaux.

LXIX. French.
Eiovas proche, esloigner Lac Leman,
Fort grand apprests, retour confusion,
Loin des Nepueux, du feu grand Supelman,
Tous de leur suyte.
English.
Eiovas near, yet seems to be far from the Lake Leman,
Very great preparatives, return confusion,
Far from the Neveux of the late great Supelman,
All of their train.
ANNOT.

This is a notable one, directly foretelling the Enterprise or Scalado made by
the Duke of of Savoy, upon Geneva: for the better Intelligence of which, we
shall first give the sense word for word, and then set down the whole History
as a piece of Cabinet, that the Reader after so much tedious and crabbid
reading, may have some field to spatiate and recruit it self.

Eiovas near, Eiovas by Anagram is Savoy, or the Duke of it, who at that time
was near Geneva; yet seems far from the Lake Leman, which is the Lake that
passes through Geneva, called in Latin Lacus Lemannus. Very great
preparatives; because at that time he made great preparations to Scale the
Walls of Geneva Return, because he was forced to retire. Confusion; because he
was confounded in his undertaking. Far from the Neveux of the great Supelman;
that is, an action much unworthy the Kindred of Henry the IV. called here great
Supelman, to whom he was Allied. All of their Train; that is, all that were
with him in that undertaking, did partake of his return and confusion. Now the
History is thus.

About the latter end of the year 1600. the Duke of Savoy having done before
all his endeavors to take the City of Geneva by force, did resolve at last to
have it by craft, and stratagem. He did frame a design full of Courage,
Understanding, and Conduct, as well as of misfortune; it was long a hatching
without being discovered, and although it was known that he caused Ladders to
be made, and that he bought every where men of courage and resolution, and had
a great number of them alread^ at Chambery, well paid and maintained, waiting
for the ripeness of the design, though Ignorant of it. No body could believe
that it was against those of Geneva; because at that time he did treat with
them of the manner of living friendly, and of the liberty of Trade, having sent
to them for this purpose a few days before the President Rochette, to treat and
advise of a manner of living friendly together, for the ease of the people.
They did so much hearten and relish his propositions and promises, that
although Cities of such condition, do not lightly believe them that have been
their Enemies, nevertheless they trusted to that, and grew careless of their
own preservation, thinking that there was nothing more powerful for their
security than the treaties of peace between France, Spain, and Savoy, in which
they thought themselves included, under the name of the confederate with the
Cantons of Switzerland; insomuch that the Dukes Subject; went thither so
familiarly, that the day before this Execution some Gentlemen that knew
something of the design, being come into the Town to buy some Horses, said they
would come again the next day to conclude the Bargain, and others had kept the
same Language for other Wares, so fully persuaded were they of a success,
though Heaven, who laugheth at the thoughts of the proud, had resolved to
humble and abase them.

The Governor of Lion had presently notice that the Duke of Savoy was coming
on the side of the Mountain, and carried with him scaling Ladders, of which he
sent notice to the King, and provided what was necessary for the defense of
Lion, although the same Advice said it was not for France; yet all this could
not hinder the Execution which was in the mean time a doing. D'Albigny
Lieutenant General of the Duke in those Countries he had on this side of the
Mountains, had made the Troops to pass, and for that purpose had assigned them
of their Quarters in the Towns of Geneva, in several places, that they might
not be so soon discovered. The Randezvous was at a place called Chambery, the
time of the Execution was reserved to the prudence of the Leader. The time was
not according to the precept of the Parthians, who ever fought by night, nor of
the Lacedaemonians, who undertook nothing but in the time of the full Moon; for
it was one of the darkest and longest nights of all the year, the Troops began
their March about six of the Clock. Brignolet Governor of Bonnes, a small Town
in Fossigny, distant three Leagues from Geneva, was the man that had
contributed most of his own for the performance of this design, whom he thought
so certain, that he said he would die to the world, if he did not live in
Geneva. D'Albigny had set up Watches upon all the passes, to stop all
Travelers, for fear notice should be given of their coming; and of that of the
Duke of Savoy, to whom the Execution had been represented so sure and certain,
in that he should be there himself to reap the Honor and profit of it, and to
end the Triumph that his Grandfather had begun. He came over the Mountains with
five Gentlemen only in his Company, and the same day came to Tremblures* a
Village distant from Geneva about three Miles; and for all that they could not
hinder, but an unknown Trooper did ride as far as the New gate, and asked to
speak to him that commanded there, bidding him look to themselves, because the
duke of Savay, wished them no good, and so retreated galloping. This News was
brought to Blondel, the fourth Syndic of the Town, and who had the charge of
the Guard that year; he answered, he would provide for that. Another came
afterward, and told him that the Dakes Forces were about the Town, but knew
not upon what design, and that himself was at Bonne; he answered, that they
were not Birds, and could not fly, Mistrust is not always to be commended; but
too much confidence in such business, is exceedingly dangerous.

Those that were to do the Execution, and to get up first upon the Ladders,
went along by the River of Albe, that the noise of the Waters might hinder the
Sentinals to hear them, Two things did happen, that were an ill Omen for them,
they saw in the Skies unusual fires, a Hare did many times cross their way, and
gave them a false Alarm, and as many things being considered in the night time,
do trouble the imagination, and that fear makes one think that Bushes are
Squadrons, and Thistles Pikes, as it did happen once at the Siege of Paris by
the E^rgundians. They did discover about Eleven of the Clock some Posts, to
whom the Cloth-workers of Geneva use to nail their Stuffs to dry them. Those
that went foremost would have Charged them, thinking they had been an Ambuscado;
from thence they went all along the Rhosne to the Meadow of Plain Palais.
Brignolet, and those that were ordained for the Scalado followed d'Albigny, who
led them down into the Town-Ditch, on the side of the Corraterie, without being
discovered by the Sentinals, although the Ducks that were in the Ditch, did
(for to awake those of Geneva) what the Geese did at Rome against the French.
They went over the Ditch upon Hurdles for fear to sink in the Mire, and did set
up three Ladders of a wonderful invention; because they could be easily carried
upon Mules, and they could be folded into so many pieces, that they could reach
the highest wall that is; and besides that, so strong and firm, that no Ladder
of one piece could be more; they had besides that provided Hatchets, Hammers,
Pincers, and other such Tools, to cut Iron Chains, break Locks, draw Nails and
Bars, they had besides several Petardoes and Petardo-Masters. Fortune, who has
a great power in such undertakings, did fail them in their need, after she had
brought them to the middle of the City, and made them masters of the streets
for above two hours.

By one of those Ladders went up about two hundred men, Brignolet was the
first, followed by d'Attigna^ and Sonas, and did carry himself more valliantly
and prudently; having got over the Wall, he su^prized the Sentinal, and drew
from him the Watchword, and his Life, then threw him over into the Ditch, and
stood in his place to stay for the Round, that he might do as much to him, as
he did when it came near him to give him the Watchword. D'Albigny, and one
Father Alexander a Scotchman, and a Jusuite, were at the Ladders foot,
encouraging those that went up. The Boy that carried the Lanthorn saved
himself, and gave notice to the Court de Guard of what had betallen his Master,
at which the Court de Guard was not much moved. This was a doing between One
and Two of the Clock, expecting that of four, at the which they had proposed to
make their greater attempt, and in the mean while to give time to the succor
to draw near, and to the day to break* because all Warlike Executions done by
night, carry always some confusion with them. No body had gone to bed in the
Town with a thought to be awakened so soon, they rested upon the assurance of
the Peace. The undertakers had a whole hours time to get up, and as much before
they met with any opposition. It d'Albigny had been Within to husband that time
better than did Sonas, Brignolet, and d Attignac, they might have cried, the
Town is won. About half an hour past two of the Clock, a Sentinal that was in
the Mints Tower, having heard some noise in the Ditch, shot off his Gun to give
the Alarm, which compelled Brignolet to discover himself, charging all that was
in the Court de Guard of the Newgate, that he might Plant the Petard, and make
way for the main Body that was in Plain Palais. They got very well the Court de
Guard, but against the Rule of War, which commondeth to kill all, they let one
escape that had so much wit as to get up, and to let down the Port-Cullis, to
frustrate the effect of the Petard. The Town was at that time full of Cries and
horrid Houlings, of which the Savoiards should have made their profit, and
increased their courage, as it did weaken that of the Townsmen, that knew not
where to run, some crying one way, some another. The undertakers lost
themselves in the appearance of so happy a success, those that were without
should have given the Alarm at some other Gate, to divide the Forces of the
Town, those that were within made no use of their Hatchets, Hammers and
Pincers, they forgot to set some Houses on fire; the spirit of astonishment
seized upon them, having in their thoughts the Sack and Plunder of the Town,
more than the perfection of their Conquest; they made only use of a certain
croaking like Frogs, as the Turks use the Bret, Bret, to animate and rally
themselves. Brignolet being compelled to discover himself, marched toward the
New Gate, distant from that place about 200. Paces, and there was wounded, and
died a little after; the Fight began in the dark, and the Court de Guard was
dispersed, one Soldier hearing them call for the Petard, got upon the Gate,
and cut the Rope that held the Port-Culis, and shut up the Petard between the
Port-Culis, and the Gate which they went about to break open, with their
Hatchets and Hammers, at the first resistance the Petards Master was killed.
The Order is such at Geneva, that in all extraordinary accidents, every Citizen
knows the place of his Randezvous, and there goes with his Arms, and the
Town House is never destitute of Soldiers.

In the mean time the Magistrate cries, He that loves me let him follow me.
Some Country Fellows of the Neighboring Towns, who kept their Watch by turns,
being led by some Captains and Citizens, did present themselves at the New
Gate, where they were stoutly received, and beaten back, and yet the first shot
of theirs killed the Petard-Master, who was much troubled with his Tools. This
first Charge would not have driven them back, if the body of the Citizens had
not come, and Charged them so furiously, that they lost all their Courage;
Necessity which strengthens even those that want Courage, did so animate the
Citizens to their defense, that the undertakers were fained to give back. The
more nimble went again to their Ladders, which proved useless; because the
Canon that was Planted in the Fort of Loye, near the Ditch, had broken them; so
that they left four and fifty dead upon the place, and upon the Curtain of the
Corraterie, and thirteen that were taken alive. If the Town had had Soldiers
in readiness to make a Sally in that And^b^tism, the night being sometimes
favorable to such expeditions, those that were at Plain Palais, would not have
retreated in so good an Order.

There were thirteen taken alive, among whom were the Baron of Attignac, the
Lord Sonas, the Lord Chaffardon, upon promise of their Lives, and to be
Prisoners of War, or else they had preserved an Honorable death to all the
promises, to be spared in laying down their Arms; among them was d'Attignac,
who fought valiantly, and gave his Order of St. Maurice to his man, bidding him
save himself, being resolved to die with his Sword in his hand.

The Lords of Geneva would not use them as Prisoners of War; but as Thieves and
Robbers come into the City over the Walls. They said that the Duke was too
generous a Prince for so wicked and perfidious an action: there was several
Opinions concerning their Sentence of Death, the more moderate would have them
be put to Ransom, others would have them be kept Prisoners, that they might
serve for exchange, if some of the Town were taken in the continuation of the
War; but the more violent did stir the people, in representing unto them the
loss of their Religion, the ravishing of their Wives and Maids, the Massacre,
the Sack and Plunder of the Town, and their perpetual slavery, and the
complaints of the Widows and Children of those that had been killed, were so
much considered, that the more moderate Opinions did not appear injust, but in
how much they tended to Death. They were Condemned to be Hanged, which is
thought the most Ignominious Death: they desired to have their Heads cut off as
Gentlemen, which was granted, but it was after they were Hanged. Fifty nine
were found killed and wounded, who had all their Heads cut off. In the Ditch
there were some Arms found, thirty dead, and four wounded, all their Heads were
cut off, and set with the rest upon the Gallows. Of the Citizens of the Town
there were seventeen found dead, most of them killed by their Companions in the
dark. Their Names were John Canal, one of the Lords of the Council, Lewis
Baudiere, John Vandel, Lewis Galatin, Peter Cabriol, Mark Cambiagua, Nicolas
Ba^gueret, James Mercier, Abraham de Baptista, Daniel Humbert, Martin de Bolo,
Michael Monard, Philip Potier, Francis Bouzesel, John Buignet, James Petit,
Gerrard Muzy, and about twenty wounded. The Sunday after Dinner, about two of
the Clock, 67 Heads, as well of those that were killed, as of those that were
Hanged, were fastened upon the Gallows, and the Bodies thrown into the Rhosne.
The next Tuesday there was a solemn Fasting day kept, and they began to publish
every where the wonders of this Deliverance.

Here follows the Copy of their Letter, to the Governor of Lion.
My Lord,
You have known before this by many of your Letters, how his Highness of Savoy;
notwithstanding he knew, and had confessed that we were included in the Peace
made in the year 1600 between his Royal Majesty of France, and him; has
neverthless diverse times oppressed us, by detaining our Rents, prohibiting of
Trade, other violences and extorsions, refusing to hearken to the just and
pressing remanstrances, which his Majesty has made him several times in our
behalf; but has also contrived many defigns to surprise us in time of Peace.
Now it is so, that for the encompasing his pernicious design, the Lord
d'Albigny, Saturday last, the Eleventh of this Month, did bring before our
Town, on the side of Plain Palais, about two Thousand men, Horse and Foot, all
choice men, and has caused to pass about 200. of them over our Ditch, by the
Corraterie, and having set up Ladders one within another, hatb caused them to
come into our Town about three of the Clock in the Morning, upon Sunday the
Twelfth of this Month, encouraging them himself, b^ing in the Ditch; so that
being come down into the Town, some went toward our New Gate to force it open,
and give entrance to their Companions, who were in the ^lain of Plain Palais,
others went toward the Mint Gate, that they might by this means come into the
middle of the Town. But i^ has pleased God to look upon us with his favorable
Eye, and to give such a Heart to the Citizens, that they beat them back, and
killed the best part of them taken upon the place, the rest has been taken,
and since that Hanged by our Order, the rest threw themselves down from the
wall; so that we hear, many of them are either dead or grievously wounded. It
is a wonderful deliverance of our God, for which we are particularly bound to
Praise him. But as it is probable, that the said Lord d'Albigny will continue
his ill designs, by so much the more that we hear his Highness is not far from
us, we do entreat and request by all our affection, that you would be pleased
to consider what prejudice the taking of this place would be to his Majesty,
and to continue us your favor, and assist us with our wise and prudent advise,
etc.

Many did judge of the success of this enterprise by the beginning, and were
more forward to write, than to perform well. The King had notice that the Duke
was Master of the Town, and the manner of doing was represented with so much
felicity and facility, that there was less reason to doubt of it than believe
it. The Truth was not known, but by the advice of the Governor of Lion, which
came before any discourse that the Town did publish after its deliverance:

The Duke went Post back again over the Mountains, and left his Troops within
three miles of Geneva in three places, at Tournon, Fossigny, and Ternier, he
caused his Ambassadors to say to the Lords of Be^ne, that he had not made that
enterprise to trouble the Peace of the Cantons; but to prevent l'Esdiguieres to
seize upon it for the King of of France, who should have been so powerful a
Neighbor, as would have given them great occasion of fears and jealousies.

The success of this undertaking made it appear, that God will not have those
Treaties to the assurance of which his name has been called for a Witness, to
be violated, whatsoever appeararance or pretext of Religion there be.

Thus Gentle Reader thou see by all these Circumstances the Truth of our
Authors Prognostication.


LXXI. French.
Fleuves, Rivieres, de mal seront obstacles,
La vielle flame d'ire non appaisee,
Courir en France, cecy come d'Oracles,
Maisons, Manoirs, Palais, sect rasee.
English.
Brooks and Rivers shall be a stopping to cvil,
The old flame of anger being not yet ceased,
Shall run through France, take this as an Oracle,
Houses, Manors, Palaces, Sect shall be raced.
ANNOT.

This has a perfect relation to the miseries that followed the general
Massacre of the Protestants in France in the year 1572. when the Rivers were a
stop to the cruelty of the Persecutors, and when so many Houses, Manors and
Palaces belonging to those of the reformed Religion were demolished, and to
signify the certainty thereof, he says in the third Verse, take this as an
oracle.

To the Curious READER.
Gentle Reader,
THou shall take notice, that in this place the covetousness of Booksellers and
Printers, has in the modern Copies vented new Prophecies, which they call
Prognostications, drawn out of those of Michael Nostradamus, which are so
absurd and nonsensical, that they have been rejected, both by his Son, and the
best Wits of this age; therefore I would not soil the Paper with them, for fear
to put such a course List upon so fine a Cloth, but shall proceed on to give
you the rest of those Prophecies, which truly and undoubtedly belong to our
Author.

Wonderful Prognostications for the Age 1600. Gathered out of the Notes of Mr.
Michael Nostradamus, Physician to King CHARLES the IX. and one of the most
excellent Astronomers that ever were. PRESENTED To the Most Victorious and
Merciful PRINCE HENRY the IV. King of FRANCE and NAVARRE, at Chantilly the
Constable of Montmorency's House the 15th of March 1605.
By Vincent Seve of the Town of Beaucaire in Languedoc.
To the King.
Sir,
HAving some years ago recovered certain Prophecies, or Prognostications, made
by the lately Deceased Michael Nostradamus, from the hands of Henry Nostradamus
his Nephew, which he gave me before his death, and which I have kept secret
till now, that I saw they treated of the affairs of your Estate, and
particularly of your Person and Successors, as your self may see if you please
to take the pains to look upon, and wherein you shall find things wor^^y of
admiration. I have taken the boldness (though unworthy) to present them to you,
transcribed in this little Book, no less wonderful then the other two which he
made, for in it he has treated of what shall happen in this Age 1600, not so
obscurely as he has done formerly, but by aenigmes, specifying so clearly the
things he speaks of, that one may certainly judge of them, as of things that
are already come to pass. Being therefore desirous that your Majesty should
have the first notice thereof, I thought to discharge my duty in this as one of
your most obedient and faithful Subjects, which I entreat your Majesty would be
pleased to agree, obliging so not only the body of one of your faithful
Subjects already yours, but also the Soul who shall continue to pray for the
health and prosperity of your Majesty, and of all those that have relation to
it, as one that is, and shall ever be,

SIR, Your most humble, most obedient and faithful Servant and Subject, SEVE.
From your Town of Beaucair^ in Languedoc.
OTHER PROPHECIES OF Michael Nostradamus For the Years of this Age 1600.
1. French.
SIecle nouveau, alliance nouvelle,
Un Marquisat mis dedans la Nacelle,
A qui plus fort des deux l'emportera,
D'un Duc, d'un Roy, Gallere de Florence,
Port de Marscille, Pucelle dans la France
De Catherine Fort Chef on rasera.
English.
New Age, new Alliance,
A Markdom put into a Boat,
Who shall be the strongest of the two to carry it,
Of a Duke or of a King, Galley of Florence,
In the Port of Marseilles, a Maid in France,
Of the Fort Catherine the Head shall be demolished.
ANNOT.

By New Age is meant the Age 1600. to the end of the Century, each age
containing a hundred years.

The new Alliance was the match between Henry the IV. and Catherine of Medicis,
made and celebrated that year.

A Markdom put into a Boat, was the Markdom of Saluces in Italy, which the Duke
of Savoy had surrepticiously taken from the Crown of France, in the time of the
Civil Wars, and would not restore it, for which there was great Wars between
the King of France and the Duke of Savoy, till at last they agreed that the
Duke of Savoy should give in exchange of it the Country of Brescia; and this
is the sense of the second, third, and half the fourth Verse.

Galley of Florence in the Port of Marseilles, a Maid in France, signifies the
arrival of Mary of Medicis in the Galleys of France, and her Landing in the
Port of Marseilles.

Of the Fort Catherine the head shall be demolished; the Duke of Savoy to
plague and bridle those of Geneva, upon whom he has had always pretentions,
had built a strong Fort two leagues from Geneva, called the Fort St. Catherine,
which did so annoy the Town, that they made their addresses to Henry the IV.
who was then in War with the Duke of Savoy, representing to him that they were
not able to relieve his Army with Victuals, because of the said Fort, whereupon
Henry the IV. took it, and demolished it to the ground.

II. French.
Que d'or, d'argent fera de pendre,
Quand Comte voudra Ville prendre,
Tant de mill and mill Soldats,
Tuez, noiez, sans y rien fair,
Dans plus forte mettra pied terre,
Pigme'e aid des Censuarts.
English.
How much Gold and Silver shall be spent,
When Earl shall go about to take a Town,
So many thousands and thousands of Soldiers,
Killed, drowned, without doing any thing,
In a stronger he shall put his foot on ground,
A Pygmie helped by the Censuarts.
ANNOT.

This Stanza and the next are concerning the Town of Ostend, which was Besieged
by the Archduke, and defended by the States of Holland, under the conduct of
Earl Maurice of Nassaw.

In a stronger he shall put his foot on ground, signifies that Earl Maurice
during the said Siege, took the Sluys another Town of the Spaniards, thought
stronger then Ostend. A Pygmie helpeld by the Censuarts, signifies that Prince
Maurice whom he calls here a Pygmie in comparison of the Archduke, was
helped by the French and English, whom he calls here Censuarts, to rhyme with
the word Soldats in the foregoing Verse.

III. French.
La Ville sans dessus dessoubs,
Renversee de mill coups,
De Canons, and forts dessous Terre,
Cinq ans tiendra, le tout remis,
Et lasche a ses ennemis,
L'eau leur fera apres la guerre.
English.
The Town shall be upside down,
Overthrown by a thousands shot,
Of Canons, and Forts under ground,
Shall hold five years, all shall be returned,
And surrendered to the enemies,
Water after that shall make War against them.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is as well as the former concerning the Town of Ostend, which
after three years Siege instead of five (which is falsely printed here) was
surrendered to the Archduke, and presently after like to be drowned by the Sea.

IV. French.
Du rond d'un Lis naistra un si grand Prince,
Bien tossed and tard venu dans sa Province,
Saturn en Libra en exaltation,
Maison de Venus en descroissante force,
Dame en apres masculin soubs l'Escorce,
Pour maintenir l'heureux sang de Bourbon:
English.
From the round of a Lilly shall be born a great Prince,
Soon and late come into his Province,
Saturn in Libra being in exaltation,
The House of Venus in a decreasing strength,
A Woman afterward and a Male under the Bark,
To maintain the happy blood of Bourbon.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was concerning Lewis the XIII. King of France, son of Henry the
IV. who was born under the Sign of Libra, and therefore called the Just; the
rest is easy.

V. French.
Celuy qui la Principaute,
Tiendra par grande cruante,
A la fin verra grand Phalange,
Par coup de feu tresdangereux,
Par accord pourroit fair mieux,
Autrement boira suc d'Orenge.
English.
He that the Principality,
Shall keep by great cruelty,
At last shall see a great Army,
By a fire blow most dangerous,
He should do better by agreement.
Otherways he shall drink juice of Orange.
ANNOT.

This is concerning a Governor of the Principality of Orange, under the
authority of a Prince, which Governor having been long in possession of that
Government, and the Prince being busy in the Wars of the Netherlands, the said
Governor played Rex in his absence, so that the Prince was forced to have him
made away privately.

VI. French.
Quand de Robin la traistreuse entreprise,
Mettra Seigneurs and en peine un grand Prince,
Sceu par la Fin, chef on luy tranchera,
La Plume au vent, amye dans Espagne,
Post attrape estant en la Campaign,
Et l'Escrivain dans l'eau se jettera.
English.
When the treacherous plot of Robin,
Shall put many Lords and a great Prince in trouble,
Being known by la Fin, his head shall be cut off,
The Feather in the Wind, friend to Spain,
Post overtaken in the Country,
And the Scrivener shall cast himself into the Water.
ANNOT.

Two notable Histories are contained in this Stanza, the first is of the
Marshal of Biron; the second is of Nicolas, High Secretary to the Lord
Villeroy, who himself was chief Secretary of State to Henry the IV. and because
they are curious ones, and not to be met every where, we shall set them down:

The first four Verses are concerning the Duke of Biron, who by transposition
of letters is called here Robin; this man by his Military Valor and
experience, had from a private Gentleman ascended to the highest degrees of
honor and preferment, that his condition was capable of, for though he were
not forty years old, he had attained unto the greatest dignities of the
Kingdom; being fourteen years old, he was made Colonel of the Switzers in
Flanders; a little while after he was made Marshal of Camp, and after Marshal
General: he was admitted Admiral of France in the Parliament of Tours, and then
Mareshal of France in that of Paris; at the Siege of Amiens he was sole
Lieutenant of his Majesty, though there were many Princes of the Blood in the
Army, and to complete his greatness, he was made Peer of France, and the Barony
of Biron erected into a Dukedom, not contented with all that, he said, he would
not go to the retaking of the rest of the Towns in Picardy, unless his Statue
were erected in Brass before the Louvre; and in conclusion, that he had rather
die upon a Scaffold, undertaking some great matters, then to live idle in his
own House, and always among these Bravadoes, he did mix some bold and dangerous
words, which he would have every body to approve of.

When he saw that after the Siege of Amiens the War was at an end, that Britany
was reduced, and that all the Swords were sheathed for a good while, he thought
that having no more occasion to exercise his valor, he should grow out of
credit, and that he should have no more that power, by which he plaised the
King, and do without fear all what he did without Justice. The fire of that
great courage finding no work without, began to work within, that burning
desire of being always the first, did fill his head with flames and smoke of a
great design, he complained of the King, and of the unequal reward of his
deserts and services, did publish his discontents, adding threatenings to his
complaints, and spoke of the King with little respect, that his most intimate
friends did judge his words insolent and dangerous.

It is true it was the vice of his nature, but there were also some of Fortune,
for finding himself filled with all the prosperities, that a moderate man might
wish for in his condition, he found that men loose themselves by too much
happiness. He began then to lend his Ears unto flatterers, and when they told
him that he was the greatest Captain in France, he answered that he would die
upon a scaffold, or he would go beyond the condition of a single Gentleman,
that the goodness of his sword should give him what Fortune had denied; and the
Astrologers to whom he gave great credit, had foretold him in ambiguous terms,
that nothing could hinder him from being a Sovereign, but the blow of a sword
given by a Bargundian, and though all his life time he had showed but little
Devotion and Zeal to Religion, yet from that time that he prepared his soul to
the motion of his ambition, he fained himself very devout and zealous, and
began to wear beads, that the Baron of Lux had given him in a Tennis-Court, and
to declare himself an irreconcilsable enemy to the Protestants, seeking every
where some discontented Spirits, whom he did encourage with the hopes of a
profitable change.

La Nocle Lord of la Fin was then for the troubles of Prevence, and for the
quarrel he had with (...) Esdigvieres, retired into his House, threatened of ill
usage by the King, enemy to some great ones, loaded with debts and Suits in
Law. The discontented meet always, either by design or by chance. The Duke of
Biron who knew that he had been deeply engaged in the business of the late Duke
of Alencon, that he had Negotiated with the Ministers or the King of Spain, and
of the Duke of Savoy, during the Siege of Amicns, that he was full of
discontents, thought that such a one was seeking for a Master. They spoke
together and mixed their grievances, propounding to seek out of the Kingdom
what they could not find within, and to contract an intelligence with the Duke
of Savoy; thus after so many examples of unavoidable dangers, the Duke of Biron
did venture upon a Journey full of Rocks and Shelves, under the conduct of one
who was yet wet with the Shipwreck he had lately made.

The Duke went into Flanders, for the execution of the Treaty of Vervins, where
one Picote of Orleans spoke to him, and inspired into him strange desires of
raising his Fortune, with those that knew and admired his deserts. The Duke of
Biron did hearken to him, and told him he would be glad to hear him some other
time upon that subject. From that time forwards the Spaniards thought
themselves sure of him, and grew confident, either to have him, or to destroy
him: a French Gentleman, who because of the Civil Wars was retired into
Flanders, and had some employment in the Archdukes Court, gave the first
intelligence of it to the King, who took it kindly, but sent him word that the
Duke of Biron had too much courage and honesty to harbor such a wickedness;
being come back again from Flanders the King wished him to Marry, but he showed
that his inclinations tended to some other party, then that which was offered
unto him, and though he made show to court the Daughter of my Lady Luce, he
nevertheless intended to have the natural Sister of the Duke of Savoy, of which
the Knight Breton had spoken to him. La Fin had in charge from the Duke of
Biron, to do all what he could for his satisfaction. Picote had made a Journey
into Spain, only to know and receive the propositions. Farges a Monk of the
Order of Fifteaux, went into Savoy, and from thence to Milan to receive Orders
how to pluck of this Plant out of France. Things went very slowly; for the
Spaniards do not easily believe the words of the French, unless they be with
great effects of rebellion and change; but the Duke of Savoy being at Paris,
did wholly put out the Flower de Luces he had in his Heart, and did dispose him
to disturb the King so much at home, that he should have but little time to
dispute him the Markdom of Suluces, upon that hope the Duke of Savoy neglected
the Execution of the treaty of Peace made at Paris, the War was proclaimed, and
the Duke of Biron took the chief places in Bresse. Being at Pierre Chastel in
the beginning of September, La Fin came to him, and by his order made two
Journeys to St. Claude, where Roncas was. The King had notice of it, but
thought it better to dissemble it than to surprise a man he loved in his
infidelity, he thought enough to bid him come into Savoy, and to rid himself of
La Fin. He did believe that what the King said to him out of his affection,
proceeded from fear, and kept company still with La Fin, and never went to see
the King, but with great many attendants, refusing to take his lodging near
his, that he might have more liberty; he persuaded the King being at Annessy,
that he did desire to discover some passages, and therefore desired to have
some guides of the Country, but it was to send safely Renaze, La Fin's
Secretary to the Duke of Savoy, to give him intelligence in what state the
Kings Army was, and to bid d'Albigny retreat, who otherwise had been defeated.
This was about the time that the Duke of Biron did entreat the King to bestow
the Government of the Citadel of Bourg on him, whom he should name. It is the
Nature of the great ones that serve Princes to believe they deserve all, and to
become more dangerous than Enemies if they are refused what they ask for. The
King did declare, that he would bestow the place upon de Boisses. This denial
did so trouble the mind of the Duke of Biron, and put him upon such a strange
and diabolical resolutions, that he resolved one Morning, being yet in his Bed
at Chamo^t, to kill the King, as it is expressed in the depositions of La Fin
and Renaze, but this took no effect, himself afterward did abhor the thought
of it. La Fin also went from the Army to conclude the Bargain with the Duke of
Savoy, and the Earl of Fuentes, he treated first with the Duke of the Spanish
Ambassador at Yuree, afterward at Thurin with Roncas, where also came Picote,
bringing the answers of the Council of Spain, upon the propositions of the Duke
of Biron, with order to confer with La Fin, and to persuade him to make a
Journey into Spain. He said plainly, that the King of Spain was resolved to
have the Duke of Biron at any rate. The Duke of Savoy and the Earl of Fuentes
appointed a day to be at Some with La Fin and Picote; there the minds of every
one were clearly expressed and understood.

La Fin, who was acquainted with all his secret Councels, told the King, that
the Marriage of the third Daughter of the Duke of Savoy, was the sodder and
cement of all the treaty, with a promise of five hundred thousand Crowns, and
all the rights of Sovereignty in Burgundy.

While La Fin treated in Italy the capitulation of the Duke of Biron, the
treaty of Peace was concluded at Lions.

The Duke of Biron had been always against this Peace; when he saw that it was
concluded, and that the King had heard something of his dealings with La Fin,
he fained to be very penitent of it, and asked the King forgiveness in the
Cloister of the Franciscan Friars at Lions, and entreated him most humbly to
forgive the evil intentions that the denial of the Citadel of Bourg had put
into his mind. The King did forgive him, and told him, that he was glad he had
trusted to his clemency, and in the affection he bore to him, of which he would
always give him such tokens, that he should never have occasion to doubt of it.
Leaving the King, he met with the Duke of Espernon, and told him, that he would
impart unto him as unto his best friend, the best fortune that ever he had in
his life, which was, that he had discharged his Conscience to the King, and
that he had forgiven him all what was past. The Duke of Espernon told him, that
he was glad of it, but that it was necessary he should have his pardon in
writing; for such faults could not be so easily blotted out. What, said he,
upon what can I rely better than upon the Kings word; if the Duke of Biron
wants an abolition, what shall others do? So they parted, one thinking that
his Lions Courage ought not to be used so meanly; the other wiser, remembering
that a Lion is never so well tamed, but one time or another he will prove still
a Lion, and at last biteth the hand of him that has wronged him so fiercely,
that he is for ever avenged of him. The Duke of Espernon had reason to advise
him to take an abolition in writing, and the Duke of Biron was not too blame to
trust to the Kings Word, who certainly would have forgiven that fault, if he
had done nothing since to renew the Memory of it. But here is once more to be
observed a passage that contains all the signs of an implacable Spirit The
Duke of Biron being sent for by the King to receive his commands, and the
effects of his clemency, went from Bourg, and came to lie at Vimy. From thence
he wrote a Letter to La Fin that was at Milan, and then went to Lions, where he
was received by the King as the prodigal Son, he stayed some time at Lions, and
went to Vimy again, from whence he wrote another Letter to La Fin by Farges. As
soon as he came to Bourg, he sent to Bosco, cousin of Roncas to advance the
business. This negotiation did continue at Some between the Duke of Savoy, the
Earl of Fuentes, and La Fin. The Earl of Fuentes carried La Fin to Milan, and
being desirous to be better informed, upon some points, and finding La Fin not
so firm in his answers, he thought it not good to trust him wholly with the
secret, and resolved to rid himself of him, therefore he sent him back, and
entreated him to see the Duke of Savoy in his way. He had the good fortune to
go by the way of the Grisons, and so through Basle, Porentru, and Besancon, for
Renaze his Secretary, that went through Savoy, was there Arrested and made
Prisoner. The work nevertheless went on; Alphonsus, Casal, and Roncas, did
continue it with the Baron of Lux, and in the mean time the Duke of Biron played
his part, having sent an express into Spain, though he were then with the King,
who loath to loose him, kept him near, carried him to see the Frontier Towns,
and sent him Ambassador into England, where he saw the head of the Earl of
Essex, a late example of justice upon those who will be feared by their
Masters, and abuse their favor. At his return he made a Journey into Gascony,
where he was visited and honored by the Nobility of the Country, as a Prince;
and being come to Dijon, he went into Switzerland, to make an end of the
renewing of the Alliance between the King and the Switzers, where he continued
still his practices with the Earl of Fuentes, to whom he sent his secretary,
under pretense to send his Pages into the Garrisons of Palma, for the
Venetians. Being come back from Switzerland, he came not to the King to give an
account of his negotiation, excusing himself upon the convocation of the
Estates in the Province. The King, that had some notice of these broils by
Combelles, was infinitely desirous to speak with La Fin to know the truth of
it. La Fin, who was highly incensed, that the Baron of Lux would have all the
fruit of this negotiation, and that Renazee is kept Prisoner in Savoy, sent
Cerezat to the Duke of Biron to let him know that he could be no longer his
Servant, if his Secretary was not fet at liberty, and that he could no longer
defer to go to the King, desiring also to know what he should say upon the
things that were past. He slighted the first of these propositions, and spoke
of Renazee as of one that was not to be reckoned among the living; concerning
the other, he told Cerezat that he was of opinion he might go to the Court with
a small train, and that he should prepare himself at the first to receive ill
language and contempt from the King, which he should sweeten by entreating him
to believe, that the Journey he had made into Italy had no other design than to
visit our Lady of Loretta: And that passing through Milan and Thurin he had
been charged to propound the Marriage between him and the third Daughter of
Savoy, to which he would not hearken, because the King would take care to
provide for him. He did entreat and adjure Cerezat to tell La Fin, that he
should rid himself of all those that travailed with him, and chiefly of a
Curate, and that he should secure his Papers, if he had not rather to burn
them. In a word, to consider, his life, his fortune, his honor, were in his
Hands.

La Fin came to Court at the end of Lent, and saw the King at the Wine Press of
Fountainblea^, and after that at the mid way. He spoke first to the King, after
to Villeroy, and after to the Chancellor in his house at Fontainbleau, and with
Rhosny in the For^est, and with Sillery in the Wine Press; all with horror saw
the writings, and heard his designs. The King could hardly believe such a
wickedness; for who could have believed that he, who had driven the Spaniard
from the Frontiers of Picardy, would let him in again by that of Burgundy? that
he who had a hundred times beaten and defeated them, could contract a
friendship with them, and conspire with them against the service of his Prince,
and the love of his Country? that he who hated them to death, would have
trusted his life in their Hands? He had showed himself so much their Enemy,
that seeing his Father would not charge the Prince of Parma in an advantageous
place, said aloud, that if he were King for 24 hours, he would cause the head
of the Marshall of Biron to be cut off. He pronounced against his Father the
Sentence that was to be executed once upon him.

La Fin showed the King so many true and undeniable tokens of this conspiracy,
that he was fained to believe more than he desired. He told him all what did
pass in his Journeys to the Duke of Savoy, and the Earl of Fuentes concerning
the Duke of Biron, saying, that for his part he would have been glad that the
War had continued, that he might have benifitted himself therein; but finding
that his sacred person was not excepted, and that there were cruel designs made
against it, either to kill him, or to carry him prisoner into Spain, he was
resolved to give him notice of it, choosing rather to disoblige the Servant
than the Master. The King full of clemency and goodness, was extremely sorry to
see such an unnatural conspiracy: Nevertheless he said, that if the Con
pirators did their duty, and gave him means to prevent the designs of his
Enemies, he would forgive them. If they remember what they owe me, I will not
forget what I owe them; they shall find me as full of clemency, as they are
void of affection: I would not have the Duke of Biron to be the first example
of my Justice, and to be the cause that my Reign, which hitherto has been like
an Air, calm and pure, should upon a sudden be disturbed with Clouds and
Lightning, and so made a resolution, that if the Duke of Biron should tell him
the truth, he would forgive him, his Council was of the same advice, provided
he would show himself thenceforth as forward for his service against his
Enemies, as he had been earnest to do mischief.

Out of many Papers that la Fin put into the Kings hands, there were seven and
twenty picked out, which only spoke of him; the King being unwilling to
discover the rest of the Conspirators, and intending that the punishment of one
should serve for example to all the rest.

The Chancellor kept those Papers with such care, that he caused them to be
sowed in his Doublet, that no body might have a sight of them till it was time.
The Baron of Lux was yet at Fountainbleau, when la Fin came thither.

The King told him that he was very well pleased, that la Fin had spoken to him
so honorably and wisely of the Duke of Biron, and that he was confident now,
that the intentions of the Duke of Biron were righteous and sincere. The Baron
of Lux did not perceive the Kings anger, so much the more dangerous that it was
hidden; he went back again to Dijon very well pleased, that the things were
always in the same state. La Fin did write to the Duke of Biron that he had
satisfied the King concerning his actions, and had told him only what might
serve for his justification. The King did manage this business so prudently,
that the success of it was fortunate, he was well informed of all the Dukes
designs, and desired to hear them out of his own mouth, that he might have
occasion to forgive him, for that purpose he sent to him the Lord d'Escures,
bidding him to come, because he had a mind to trust him with the Army that he
was raising upon the Frontiers, he excused himself, and said that the enemy
being so near, it would be a shame to him to turn his back, and that the States
of the Province were convented at Dijon, and therefore could not for sake
neither the Frontiers nor the States. The Vidame of Chartres made a Journey to
him, and assured him that his Uncle la Fin had said nothing to his prejudice.

The persuasions of the President Janin were more powerful for flattering the
Duke in his humor, he also made him sensible of the Kings power and anger in
case of refusal; his friends gave him contrary advices, and desired him not to
stir, and to make his peace afar off; the Bastille is a repairing said they,
and the common talk is, that it is for such one as less thinks upon it: the
King has been heard say, that they cut heads in England, and that some shall
compel him upon that example to change his wonted Clemency into a just
severity: in conclusion, they advise him to mistrust all things, and to beware
of those that persuaded him to come; others did assure him of the contrary, and
that his coming should dissipate all mistrusts, suspicions and jealousies.

The Duke of Biron holds here the Wolf by the ears, for let him come or not,
there is danger; by not coming he accuses himself, and the King swore he would
fetch him himself; and in coming, his conscience was a witness against him,
that the same fault can hardly be forgiven twice. He sees la Fin retired into
his House and living in peace, and has so good an opinion of his own Valor,
that he thinks no body so bold as to seize upon him. The discourses of
reason, the discerning of the truth, serve no more to a wicked and passionate
man, then the Wings serve to a Bird, when they are clogged with Bird-lime. But
now we talk of Birds, there were several ill Omens of his journey, one Bird of
Prey called a Duck was found in his Closet, no body knowing which way it was
come in; he commanded it to be carefully kept and looked to, but as soon as the
Duke was upon his journey the Bird died. Presently after the Horse that the
Archduke had given him, called the Pastrave, became mad, and killed himself,
so did another that was given him by the Duke of Florence, another that the
Duke of Lorrain had given him, fell into a consumption. He came to
Fountainbleau when he was no more expected, and the King was resolved to get on
Horseback and to fetch him. As his Majesty went about six of the Clock into the
great Garden, he was heard to say unto the Lord of Sonvray, he will not come,
he had no sooner ended the words, but the Duke appeared among seven or eight,
he drew near, and being yet a pretty way off, he made three great Congies, the
King did embrace him, and the first words he spoke to the King, were about the
delaying of his coming. The King heard but few words of it, and took him by the
hand to walk, and to show him his buildings; as he passed from one Garden into
another, the Duke of Espernon took occasion to salute him, and to whisper him
in the ear, that in his coming he had believed his courage more, then the
Council of his friends.

In all the discourse he had with the King, there was observed a great coldness
in the Kings face, and a great deal of fire in the Dukes words. The King told
him of the evil way which he had taken, the end of which could be nothing but
ruin, despair and confusion. The Duke answered that he was not come to ask
forgiveness, nor to justify himself, with many other frivolous and impudent
words, which the Kings presence and his own duty ought to have restrained. The
time of dinner being come, he asked the Duke of Espernon to dine with him,
because his Train was not yet come; this was the first fault of his carriage,
for he ought to dine at the Table of the great Master, and to harbor in no
other House then that of the King, seeing his own was not open.

After dinner they came to see the King, who having walked one turn or two
about the dinning-room, entered into his Closet, bidding two or three to go in
with him, and saying nothing to the Duke of Biron, who was at the corner of the
Bed near the Chair, taking notice that he was not looked upon as formerly.

The Marquess of Rhosny went into the Closet, passing by the Duke of Biron
without taking notice of him, and after he had stayed there about half an hour,
he came and saluted the Duke of Biron, and told him the King asked for him;
there he was exhorted not to conceal what time would ere long discover, and of
what he was so well informed, that the desire he had to know it from himself,
was merely because no body else should take notice of it. The Duke of Biron who
thought that la Fin had revealed nothing, stood still upon the protestations of
his own innocence, beseeching the King to do him justice, of those who went
about to oppress him with unsufferable calumnies, or to permit him to do
himself reason. The King carried him to the Tennis-court, where the Duke took
upon him to order the match, and said that the Duke of Espernon and himself
would hold it against the King and the Earl of Soisson, the Duke of Espernon
answered presently: you play well, but you do not make your matches well; which
was observed by the King and the standers by. Supper time being come, he did
sup at the Table of the great Master, to repare the fault he had done in the
morning. Every one did perceive that he was not contented, for he eat little or
nothing, and no body spoke to him, every one holding him already for a
castaway. The King in the mean while was walking in his Chamber, meditating
some great resolution, and he was heard to say these words, be must either bow
or break.

That evening past away so quietly, that many thought it would be a Thunder
with much noise and little hurt. The King commanded the Earl of Soissons to go
to the Duke of Biron, and to do his best to break the hardness of his heart,
and to draw the truth out of him; he went and entreated him to satisfy the
King in what he desired to know from him, and to be afraid of the Kings
displeasure and indignation. The Duke of Biron for answer told him, that the
King could not complain but of the good services he had done to him, and that
he himself had great occasion to complain of the King who mistrusted him after
so many trials and experiments of his faithfulness, and that he should never
have more of him then he had at his first coming; the Earl of Soissons, seeing
his obstinacy, left him.

The next day early the King walking in the little Garden, sent for the Duke of
Biron, and spoke to him a great while, thinking to overcome his obstinacy, and
to give him means to escape the danger he was running into; he was seen a great
while with his Hat off, his eyes lifted up to Heaven, smiting his breast, and
making great protestations to uphold his innocence; there appeared then in the
Kings face a great deal of anger, and in that of the Duke of Biron a great deal
of fire and violence, all his words were nothing but threatenings, lightnings,
ruins, and Hell against those that had spoken ill of him; from thence he went
to dinner, and met with a man who brought him a Letter, to advise him to look
to himself, he showed it to the Captain of his Guards, and made slight of it,
and said, he would be beholding to his valor for his life, and not to a
flight; all the afternoon the King stayed in the Gallery, and spoke four hours
to the Lord of la Curee; the Queen being present and speaking never a word; the
King was in a great perplexity of mind, before he could resolve himself. The
Lords of Vileroy, Sillery and Geure were seen often to go to and fro, which
made some suspect, that it was to begin by the execution in so great a crime;
but the King was against that, such proceedings had been blamed in his
Predecessor, he would have every body to know that he had authority and power
enough to exterminate his enemies, according to the Laws.

The resolution was taken to have him arrested, and also the Earl of Auvergne,
the King would not have them to be taken in the Castle, but in their own
Lodgings; the Duke of Biron, who was in some suspicion of it, and had prepared
himself to what he could, neither prevent nor hinder, did imagine that there
was no fear of any thing in the Kings Chamber, and that all the danger should
be at the going out, and therefore by time had provided himself with a short
Sword, with which he promised to make himself room through all dangers. They
represented to the King, that if he were Arrested any where but in the Castle,
it could not be done without bloodshed, and that it was no matter where the
Lion was taken, so that profit might arise of his prize.

It was perceived that in the same Gallery the King sent for Vitry and Pralin,
two Captains of his Guards, and gave them the order he would have to be
observed for the execution of his commands, and then called for his Supper. The
Duke of Biron was at supper in the Lord Montignys Lodging, where he spoke more
highly and bravely then ever of his Deserts, and of the friends he had made
lately in Switzerland; then began to fall upon the praises of the late King of
Spain, extolling his Piety, Justice and liberality; Montigny stopped him, saying,
that the greatest commendation that could be given to his memory, was, that he
had put his own Son to death, for endeavoring to trouble his Estate; this word
stopped those of the Duke of Biron, who answered only with his eyes, and thought
upon it with some amazement. After supper the Earl of Auvergne and the Duke of
Biron came to the King, who was walking in the Garden, the King making an end
of his walk did invite the Duke of Biron to play at Cards, they went into the
Queens Chamb^r; the Earl of Auvergne passing by the Duke of Biron told him
softly, we are undone; the Game begun at the primara, the Queen was one of the
Gamsters, the Duke of Biron another, and two more. The King went into his
Closet, divided between two contrary passions; the love he had formerly for the
Duke of Biron, the knowledge he had of his valor, and the remembrance of his
services, excluded all thoughts of his Justice; on the other side, the fear of
troubles in his Estate, the hor^id effects of so unnatural a conspiracy did
accuse his Clemency of cruelty, if he went about to prefer the particular good
to the public, he prayed to God to assist him with his Holy Spirit, to appease
the troubles of his soul, and to strengthten him with a Holy resolution, that
he might do what was for the good of his people, upon whom he Reigned by his
only Grace; his prayer being ended, all the difficulties that troubled his soul
vanished away, there remained only a firm resolution, to put the Duke into the
hands of Justice, if he could not draw the truth out of him; the Game went on
still, the King took sometimes the Queens Cards, expecting the appointed time.
The Earl of Auvergne was gone to his Lodging, the King sent for him, and walked
in the Chamber, while the Duke thought upon nothing but his play. De Varennes
Lieutenant of his Troop faining to take up his Cloak, whispered him softly that
he was undone; this word did trouble him so much, that he neglected his play,
and oversaw himself, the Queen gave him notice of it; the King did bid them to
give over playing, and commanded every one to retire, he went into his Closet,
and took the Duke of Biron with him, whose good and bad fortune depended from
an answer pleasing his Majesty, who bid him once for all to tell what he had
done with the Duke of Savoy and the Earl of Fuentes, assuring him, that his
clemency should be greater than his fault. The Duke of Biron answered the King
more proudly than eyer, that it was to pross an honest man too much, that he
never had any other design, but what he had told him already. Would to God it
were so, said the King. You will not tell me: Farewell, good night.

As he went out of the Closet, and had passed the Chamber door, he met Vitry,
who with his right hand seized upon the Hilt of his Sword, and with his left
upon his right Arm, saying, The King ^ath commanded me to give him an account
of your Person, give up your Sword. You jeer, said the Duke. No my Lord, he
has so commanded me. The Duke of Biron answered. I pray thee let me speak to
the King. No my Lord, the King is gone to Bed. He saw the Duke of Monbazon, and
desired him to entreat the King, that he might surrender it into his own Hands.
The King sent word to Vitry to obey his commands. The Duke was fained to suffer
his Sword to be taken from him; saying. My Sword that has done so many good
services! Yes my Lord, give me your Sword, said Vitry. To me, said the Duke,
that have served the King so well, that my Sword should be taken from me, my
Sword that has made an end of the War, and given Peace to France, that my
Sword, which could not be taken by my Enemies, should be taken away by my
Friends. All these complaints availed nothing; he ungirted his Sword with his
left hand, and gave it to Vitry, looking about if he could seize upon any
other, out care was taken for that.

When he saw all the Guards in order in the Gallery, he thought he should have
been Massacred upon the place, and cried to them, fellow Soldiers give me a
little time to pray to God, and let me have some Firebrand or Candlestick in my
hand, that I may have the Honor to die desending my self. He was answered,
that no Body would offend him, that his best defense was to obey the King, who
commanded to lead him to Bed, you see said he, how the good Catholics are
used. He was carried into the Arms Closet, where he neither slept nor lay down,
but past the night in blasphemies against God, and reviling words against the
King.

Pralin was staying for the Earl of Auvergne at the Castle Gate, and when he
offered to go out to his lodging; stay my Lord, you are the Kings Prisoner. The
Earl astonished, answered I, I? and Pralin answered, yes my Lord, you, I Arrest
you by the King, and make you his Prisoner, give up your Sword, take it said
the Earl it never killed any thing but Boars, if you had given me notice of
this, I should have been in Bed and asleep two hours ago.

The next day about dinner time the Duke of Biron sent word to the King, that
if he did not take care of the Province of Burgundy, it would be lost, because
the Baron of Lux would let in the Spaniards as soon as he should have notice of
his detention. The King was very much offended at this message, and said, see
the impudence and boldness of the Duke of Biron, who sends me word that
Burgundy is lost, if I do not look to it. His obstinacy has undone him, if he
would have confessed the truth of a thing that I have under his hand, he should
not be where he is. I wish I had paid 200000. Crowns, and he had given me the
means to forgive him. I never loved any man so much, I would have trusted him
with my Son and my Kingdom. It Is true, he has served me well, but he cannot
deny but that I have saved his life three times; I rescued him once from the
hands of the Enemy at Fontain Francoise, so wounded and astonished with blows,
that as I played the part of a Soldier to save him, I was also fained to make
that of a Captain to make the retreat; for he told me he was not in a case to
do it.

The Saturday next the prisoners were carried to Paris by water, and put into
the Bastille in several Chambers. The Duke of Biron was put into that, called
of the Saints famous, for the Prison of the Constable of Saint Paul, executed
in the time of Lewis the XI. and the Earl in the Chamber above him.

The care, the order and vigilance, with which he was guarded, did put him in
some amazement; for his Guards waited on him without Arms, and served him with
a Knife without a point, which made him say, that it was the way to the Grave
(the place of Execution.) But when he knew that the Hangman of Paris was a
Burgundian, he remembered that La Brosse an Astrologer had foretold him
sometimes, seeing his Horoscope, which he fained to be that of one of his
friends, that he should be beheaded, and Caesar a Magician, that a blow of a
Burgundian given behind, should hinder him to attain the Kingdom

The Archbishop of Bourges went to see him, and endeavored to settle his
Conscience, and to dissuade him from some Atheistical opinions that he had:
Villeroy and Sillery went also to see him, and by the Kings Command, and at his
request.

Few days after, the King being at St. Mourder Fossez, the Lords la Force, the
Earl of Roussy, Brother in Law to the Duke of Biron, Saint Blancard his
Brother, Chasteau-neuf, Themines, Salignac, St. Angel, Longuac, Friends and
Kinsmen of the Duke of Biron, went and cast themselves at the Kings feet, to
implore his Mercy, and that he would be pleased to moderate the severity of his
Justice, requesting that the same clemency which he had showed to many others
that had as grievously offended him, would at least save his life, and confine
him into such a place, where he might do no harm, that their whole Kindred
might not be branded with Insamy, and have a regard to his Fathers service and
his, which though they were not equal to his offense, yet at least to consider,
that he was only guilty for his intention.

The King bid them rise, and told them, that their requests were not
displeasing to him. That he would not be like his Predecessors, who would not
suffer any body to intercede for those that were guilty o high Treason. The
King Francis II. would never give a hearing to the Wife of the Prince of Conde
my Uncle. Concerning the clemency you would have me show to the Duke of Biron;
it should not be clemency but cruelty, if it were only my particular Interest,
I would forgive him, as I do now with all my heart; but my Kingdom and my
Children, to whom I owe much, are concerned in it; or they might reproach me
hence forwards, that I have tolerated an evil which I might have prevented; my
Life, that of my Children, and the preservation of my Kingdom, are concerned in
it. I will leave it to the course of Justice, you shall see what Judgment
shall be given: I will contribute what I can to his Innocence, I give you leave
to do the same till he be found guilty of high Treason; for then the Father
cannot intercede for the Son, nor the Son for the Father; the Wife for the
Husband, nor the Brother for the Brother. Do not become odious to me for the
love you bear him: As for the note of Infamy, there is none but himself. Have
the Constable of St. Paul, from whom I derive my Pedigree, and the Duke of
Nemours, of who I am Heir (both beheaded) left any note of Infamy upon their
Posterity, should not the Prince of Conde my Uncle have been beheaded the next
day, if King Francis the II. had not dyed? Therefore ye that are Kinsmen to the
Duke of Biron, cannot be noted with Infamy, if you continue in your
faithfulness, as (I assure my self) you will. And I am so far from depriving
you of your Offices, that if any new one should fall, I would bestow them upon
you: I am more sorry for his fault than you can be; but to conspire against me
that am his King and Benefactor, is a crime that I cannot forgive, without
losing my self, my Wife, my Son, and my Estate, I know you to be so good French
men, that you would not have the last, and shall take Patience for the first.
Thus the King dismissed him, and sent his Commission to the Court of
Parliament, to decide the business. The Process was framed in the Bastille, by
the Lords of Achilles de Harlay, first President in the Court of Parliament of
Paris, Nicolas Potier second President, Stephen Fleury, and Philibert of
Thurin, Counselors in the same Court. They asked him if he did not write in
Ciphers, he denied it, then were showed unto him several Letters, written and
sealed with his own hand, which did witness his Intelligences with the Spaniard
and the Duke of Savoy, and contained advices that he gave of the wants that
were in the Kings Army; How little Money he had to maintain the War, and to
satisfy the Switzers of the discontent of the French Nobility, and how several
French Troops might easily be defeated, and that to divert the Kings forces it
was necessary to invade Provence, and did much press upon the 50000. Crowns,
and the 4000 men promised, or else said, all is lost. Some of these things he
confessed, and did so entangle and contradict himself, that the Commissioners
had pity on his indiscretion.

He was asked what opinion he had of La Fin; he said he took him for an honest
Gentleman, his Friend and Kinsman, his Evidnces being read to him, and himself
brought face to face, he did with the most horrid Imprecations and Blasphemies
in the World deny them, and charged La Fin with the most horrid Crimes that can
be Imagined, calling still God for a Witness of his Innocence: La Fin stood
firm in the confirming of his Evidence, and did more particularly declare the
whole conspiracy. The Duke answered, that if Renaze were there he would tell
the contrary, Renaze, who had a little while before escaped his Prison in
Piemont, was brought before him, and confirmed all what La Fin had said.

Next to that was brought one of the Kings waiting men, who witnessed, that
having lain in his Chamber by the Kings command, the first night of his
Imprisonment he had adjured him, by several offers and promises of rewards, to
give notice to his secretaries to be out of the way for some days, and to tell
the Earl of Roussy his Brother in Law, that he should send presently to Dijon,
to give the same advice to those that were left there, and above all, that if
they were examined; they should all constantly deny that ever he did write in
Ciphers.

Thus the business having been thoroughly examined, it remained only to proceed
unto Judgment; but the Prisoner being a Peer of France, (the King having
erected the Baroay of Biron into a Dukedom) by the Laws the Prisoner could not
be judged, but by his Peers, which being summoned, and not appearing, the Court
of Parliament being authorized by the Kings Commission, proceeded to Judgment.

The 23 of July 1602. the Chancellor, with the Maisses and Pontcarre, Privy
Counselors, went to the Parliament, where all the Chambers were assembled
together. There he made known the Kings intention, in a business, wherein the
good of the Kingdom was so much concerned, and represented on one part the
quality of a Person, commendable for his services; but on the other, the
soulness of the Crime, for the Judgment of which the King did rely upon the
integrity and prudence of the Court. The Kings Attorney, and Soliciter, having
represented to the Court, that the Peers summoned, gave no appearance, and that
the Prisoners petition (who asked for Council, was not to be received. The
Court proceeded to examine the Evidences, whereupon they sat three times, after
which the Prisoner was brought from the Bastile, by Montigny Governor of
Paris, and Vitry, Captain of the Kings Guards, in a close Barge, covered with
Tapistry, and followed by two other Barges full of Soldiers, and Switzers. He
entered into the Palace, through the Garden of the first President, and rested
himself in one of the Chambers, where he was offered a Breakfast.

The time being come, he was to be heard, the Recorder went and called him into
the Guild Hall, where when he saw one Hundred and twelve Judges before his
face, he was some thing daunted, and was made to sit within the Bar upon a
joint stool; where he sat in such a posture, as stretching forth his right
foot, and having his Cloak under his arm, and his left hand upon his side, he
kept the right one free, either to stretch it forth to Heaven, or to smite his
breast, when occasion served. The Chancellor did so frame his discourse, that he
never named him by his name, nor that of his qualities.

Of many evidences there was five chiefly urged against him.

The first to have been conversant with one Picotee, born in Orleans, and
refugied in Flanders, to keep intelligence with the Archduke, and to have give
him 150. Crowns for two journeys to that end. The second to have treated with
the Duke of Savoy, three days after his arrival to Paris without the Kings
leave, and to have offered him all assistance and service against any person
whatsoever, upon the hope or promiss of marrying his third daughter. The third
to have kept intelligence with the said Duke in taking of the City of Bourg and
other places, giving him advice how he might defeat the Kings Army, and destroy
his person, with many other circumstances to that purpose. The fourth to have
sent by Renazee a note to the Governor of the Fort of Saint Catherine,
promising to bring the King before the said Fort, so near that he might be
either killed or taken, telling what cloths he himself would wear, and what
Horse he would ride, that he might be distinguished.
To have sent several times la Fin to treat with the Duke of Savoy, and the
Earl of Fuentes against the Kings service.

These are the first confessions and acknowledgements that the Prisoner made
before the Commissioners in the Bastille, but now he thinks, he may as
lightly deny them, as he had unadvisedly before confessed them.

Upon the first Article he answered, that Picote being once his Prisoner, had
offered his service for the reduction of the Town of Seurre in Burgundy, and
that the King had approved of it, that it is true he had given him the said
sum, but it was as a reward for his pains and charges in this negotiation,
which sum he has charged upon the Kings account, with some other small ones,
laid out by him for the King; that since the reduction of the said Town he had
not seen Picote but in Flanders, when he went thither Ambassador for the
confirmation of the Peace, where the said Picotee came to him with many others,
entreating him he would be pleased to mediate with the King, for the liberty of
returning into their Country, and enjoying their Estates, and that he did wish
them to go to the Lords Belieure and Sillery, who would prescribe them what
orders they were to follow in this business, and never had any other
conversation with Picote.

Upon the second, That he could not have treated with the Duke of Savoy three
days after his arrival at Paris, seeing that himself did not come there but a
formighafter, and that la Fin came but after him, that all his discourses with
him were in public and before witnesses, and therefore could not be suspected;
that Roncas had sometimes mentioned to him the Marriage of the third daughter
of the Duke, and that he did impart it to the King; that his Majesty having
sent him word by la Force his Brother in Law, that he did not approve of it, he
never thought of it since; that the intelligence he is accused to have kept
with the Duke of Savoy, is confuted enough by what he did, for when the King
had commanded him to wait and keep company to the Duke in his return from
France, and to show him the strongest places upon the Frontiers of Burgundy, he
did humbly excuse himself to the King of it, saying, that he foresaw well
enough that the Duke would not keep the Treaty of Peace, and that it would be a
great grief to him to make War against a Prince, with whom he should have kept
company, and made good cheer; and that he did advise the Baron of Lux to let
him see only the weaker places, that he might not know the strength of the
Country.

Upon the third, That if he had kept correspondence with the Duke of Savoy, he
would not have undertaken the taking of Bourg, almost against the Kings will,
without any other help then of those that were ordinarily with him; that of
forty Convoys that were brought to relieve the Town, he had routed thirty
seven, and the other three entered in his absence; that the King knows very
well he was offered 200000. Crowns to let the succors enter into the Citadel
of Bourg; that although his Majesty had commanded him in the time of a Truce
made with the Duke of Savoy, to let those of the Citadel of Bourg have every
day 400. Loafs of Bread, 50. bottles of Wine, half an Ox, and six Sheep, he
did only let them have fifty bottles of Wine and one Sheep, by which means the
Town was surrendered within the time promised* that if he had had any evil
design against the King and Kingdom, he would not so freely and willingly put
the Town into the hands of him that is now Governor of it; that the Governors
of Places that were in the Duke's service, and are now in that of the King, can
witness whether he showed them any favor; that for his giving advice to the
Duke to defeat the Regiment of Chambauld, he will prove that Chambauld did not
come into the Army, but one Month after the time mentioned in his Calumny;
besides that, this advice was without appearance of reason, for from
Chambaula's quarters to his, there was at least six days journey, and as much
to go to the Duke, and as much to come back, besides the time required for the
marching of the Forces; therefore all that was a mere invention of la Fin.

Upon the fourth, That he entreated his Majesty to call to memory, that he was
the only man who dissuaded him to go and view the Fort, representing unto him
that there was in it ^xtraordinary good Gunners, and that he could not view it
without great danger, and upon that he offered the King to bring him the next
day the Platform of it, and to take it with 500. Musquettiers, and that
himself would be in the Head of them.

Upon the fifth, That it was true all the evil he had done was in two Months
time that la Fin had been with him, during which, he did hearken and write more
then he ought: but that with the same he had written, he had so long served the
King, that it was enough to prove the sincerity of his intentions; that the
refusal of the Citadel of Bourg, which he thought the King had promised him,
had put him into such a discontent, that he found himself in a capacity to
hearken to any thing, and to do any thing; that if he had been a Protestant, it
may be the place should have been refused him no more then it was to de
Boaisse, who was such an one, as he told the King himself at Lion; that la Fin
had also once told him, that the King speaking of him, and of his Father, said,
that God had done well for to take him out of this world when he was killed,
for he was a very chargeable and unprofitable servant; and for the Son, it was
not all Gold that shined; that these words had so much incensed him, that he
could have found in his heart to be all covered with blood. Upon that the
Chancellor asked him of what blood he meaned? he answered, of my own: desiring
not to live any longer, after he had heard such reproaches, as blemished the
services of his Father and his onw; that nevertheless his anger and discontent
went never so far, as to attempt upon the King; that his fault was only in
words, and it may be little in Writting; that his Majesty seeing with how much
ingenuity he did acknowledge his fault, had forgiven him all what was past, in
the presence of the Lords Villeroy and Sillery, and that if since that time he
was found to have done any thing amiss, he would blame his Judges of Injustice,
if they did not condemn him to death, that if he had done nothing amiss since,
he thought the Kings pardon to be sufficient for what was, and if there was
need to ask for it again, his knees were as supple and ply able as ever.

But a Letter, which he had written to la Fin since the pardon of Lion, and the
Birth of the Dolphin, did spoil all, for it was a manifest evidence of the
continuation of his ill designs, and the Chancellor having produced it, he
answered, he would never deny his hand, but that Imbert and Renazee Domestic
Servants to la Fin could counterfeit it; that though he might have had some ill
thoughts, he had always well done; that although the King would not forgive him
this fault, it was not in the power of men to condemn him jus^ly for single
words, which were contradicted by the effects; that his consolation was in his
misfortune, his Judges were not ignorant of the services he had done to the
Kingdom, which he had Sealed with five and thirty wounds; that his body whose
life and death was in the disposition of their Justice, had not a vain but had
bleeded for their service, and to restore them into their places, from whence
the League had driven them; that the hand which had written the Letters
produced against him, was the same that had done contrary to what it did write;
that he had written and spoke more then he ought, but that it could not be
proved he had ever ill done; that there was no Law that punished with death the
lightness of a single word or motion of the thoughts; that anger and discontent
had made him capable of saying and doing any thing, but that his reason had not
given leave to say or to do, ought but what deserves to be commended; which
words were as carefully considered, as he repeated them often with several
Oaths and Imprecations.

Upon that the Chancellor having asked him why then he did not open himself
more to the King, who desired him with great affection to do it at
Fountain-bleau, seeing he knew in his conscience to have done nothing against
his duty since his pardon. There he cut himself in his answer, and said he
thought la Fin had revealed nothing of what was between them, and that he had
lately assured him so with Oaths and fearful imprecations, that he would never
have thought la Fin had been such a damnable man, as to reveal that which with
so many deep Oaths and Imprecations they had promised to keep secret between
themselves; that having propounded the question to a Monk of the Order of
Minimes at Lion, whether he might with a safe conscience reveal what was
between t^em, and what he had promised with Oath to la Fin to keep secret,
because he suspected that la Fin would deceive him, and tell all to the King,
and so ruin him. The Minime had answered, that seeing they had no more
intention to put in execution the things they had projected, he was not to
reveal them, and if la Fin did it, he should go to Hell, and himself to Heaven;
that he did so firmly believe this, that although the Archbishop of Bourges had
visited him in Prison, and alleged many reasons to the contrary, yet his soul
was so settled in that belief, that he thought it was only the part of an
Atheist to swear with int^ntion to deceive.

Upon this he begun to accuse la Fin of the most execrable crimes that a man is
capable of, saying that he made use of Renazee for Sodomy that he was a Witch,
and had ordinary communication with the Devils, that he had so be witched him
with enchanted Waters and Wax Images, that spoke, that he was constrained to
submit himself to all his will; that he never spoke to him but whispering, and
in unknown words, and after he had kissed him in the left eye, and he could not
deny but he had showed him a Wax Image, speaking and saying, Rex impie
morieris, thou shall die ungodly King, and called him continually his Master,
Lord, Prince and King; that he was a false Coiner, and had persuaded him man^
times to attempt upon the King, but that he would never hearken to it; that the
quality of the Accusators was to be considered, who not only were partners, but
instigators of the Fact; that certainly the Duke of Savoy was his mortal enemy,
for having since his pardon left of all his intelligences with him, and seeing
that after a long detention he had released Renazee, to come and to be a
witness against him; that the King had forgiven him at Lion, and that upon his
acknowledging many times to the King, that the refusal of the Ciradel of Bourg
had very much incensed him, his Majesty did comfort him with these words:
Marshal never remember Bourg, and I will never remember what is past, that in
22 Months after he had not offended, that if he had continued his ill designs,
he might have done it easily in England and Switzerland. That above 100.
Gentlemen shall be Witnesses of his first Embassy, and for the second, he
desires no other Witnesses than the Kings Ambassadors themselves, that if they
would be pleased to consider how he was come, and in what what case he had left
the Province of Burgundy, it was impossible to have an ill opinion of his
designs; for there was not one Soldier in all the Country, and at his going
away he gave no other charge to the Commanders and Captains, than to serve the
King faithfully, that every one dissuaded him to come to Court, and in the way
he received many Letters to that purpose, that he was come upon the Kings word,
trusting upon his own Conscience and Innocence. If the King be not pleased to
consider my services (said he to the Court) and those assurances he has given
me of his Mercy, I acknowledge my self guilty of Death, and do not expect my
life from his Justice, but from yours, (my Lords) who will remember better than
he what dangers I have undergone for his service. I confess I had a mind to do
ill, but I never proceeded to effects: It would be a hard matter if I should be
the first in whom thoughts should be punished; Great offenses require great
ciemency. I do implore that of the King, and nevertheless I am the only one in
France, that is made an example of his severity, and that can have no hope in
his clemency, which he never denied to those that had done worse: However I
trust more in you my Lords, than I do in the King, who having heretofore looked
upon me with his Eyes of love, looks upon me now with those of his anger, and
thinks it a Virtue to be cruel unto me, and a Vice to exercise upon me the
act of clemency.

Thus pleaded the Prisoner, with so much eloquency and boldness, that if his
Judges had not seen evidently the truth of the fact, under his own Hand and
Seal, the respect of his first condition might have persuaded them to believe
his Innocence, and to take compassion of his ruined fortune.

The Court did hear him as long as he would speak, with so much patience, that
never a man had the like audience. The Prisoner spoke so much, that his last
reasons were found contrary to his first, his allegations did not show his
Innocence; for the Ambassadors themselves which he took for Witnesses of his
carryage in Switzerland, did report many words of his, which showed his anger
and passion. Besides the King had not given his word, that he might come in
safety, and those Letters which he alleged for his justification, did prove
the continuation of his treacherous designs, seeing that he had sent la Fin and
Hebert, to Turin and Milan, since the pardon, He could not then expect but
Justice, in a case where neither passion nor favor could alter Judgment:
Nevertheless he showed himself much satisfied with his answers, and therefore
being come back again to the Bastille, he passed the rest of that day, and the
two next, to relate unto his Guards the questions of the Court, and his answers
therereunto, counterfeiting the gesture and the words which he Imagined the
Chancellor had spoken after his going away, though that grave and venerable old
man neither said nor did any thing, but what was becoming to his Age and
quality, having showed himself as full of compassion, as the prisoner was of
his vanity; for when he was nearer to death he thought less upon it, and
thinking himself the only man capable of commanding an Army, he found some
fault in those that were thought capable of it, saying, that one was unhappy in
his undertakings, the other was not respected by the Soldiers, such a one was
a brave man, but he wanted experience, and another that has both was a
Potestant. To conclude, he did so please himself with his own praise and
deserts, that he thought no body could come near him, and that he was so useful
to the Kingdom, that it would be a great Crime to think to undo him.

He had spoken so long the 27 of the Month, that there was no time left to
gather the Voices: The Chancellor therefore went into the Palace the 29
following to gather the Voices of the Judges. Fleury the reporter of the
Process, did conform his opinion to the conclusions of the Kings Attorney, all
the rest agreed to it, either by Words or by Signs, and all the proofs
necessary for the verification of a Crime meeting in this case, as his Answers,
Confessions, Writings, Letters, Instructions; and Evidence of Witnesses not
reproached; It was found, that the unnatural Conspiracy against the State, the
detestable attempt upon the Kings Person, makes him guilty of high Treason in
the first and second degree.

He confesses he had evil intentions, it is enough, the Laws do punish the
Councels, the resolutions, and the effects; for if the Traitor be not
prevented, time may give him the opportunity to accomplish his Design and Will,
and the Will of a Subject in point of State, does depend immediately upon that
of the Prince. He says moreover, that without the Kings Mercy he is undone,
and that if he would have put in Execution the ill designs that were propounded
to him against his Majesty, he should have been gone long ago: Did he ever give
notice of them to the King or to any body else. If the Prisoner had brought to
pass his intent, we might have said, farewell State, farewell Justice, it is
too late to believe the Conspiracy against Princes, when they are murdered by
the Conspirators.

He has well served the King, it is true; but his Offices and Dignities did
call him to that Duty, he has had notable rewards for it, and from the time
that he has showed himself so unfaithful, he has diminished the luster of
his deserts. His deserts had made him capable of the first dignities of the
Kingdom, but the merit of them is vanished away, by the greatness of his Crime.

And what is the State beholding to him, if after he has contributed so much
for its restoration, he goes about to turn up side down the Foundation of it,
and to betray it to the Enemies, It is nothing to begin well unless you end
well, the actions are judged by the end: Those that have deserved best of the
States, are the most severely punished when they fall into Sedition and
Rebellion. There is many sheets of Paper in the Hands of the Court, containing
in them one hundred advices given to the Enemy, the least of which is capable
to make him guilty.

The Prisoners quality is not considerable in this case; Justice is blind to
all distinctions, and rather considers the offense according to the quality
of the offender; Crimes of high Treason are not considered by things past, but
by things present and that are to come; we must not put in an account what he
has done, but what he had a mind to do. The quality of a Duke and Peer of
France, of Knight of the Kings Order, of Marshal, does not exempt him from the
Law, and from being judged as an Enemy to the State, and to the Majesty of the
Prince, seeing he would have troubled the State, and attempted upon the Kings
person. Who in France besides is more obliged to the King? the greater then is
the Obligation, the greater the ingratitude. God forbid that the respect of the
quality should stop the course of Justice: a Limb must be cut off to save all
the body.

But his offense has been forgiven: The pardon cannot extend but to the things
that are confessed; but he acknowledges himself that he has not told all,
therefore he has confessed as little as he could, his onw confessions Witness,
he only asked forgiveness, that he might continue his Crimes with more
security: Besides he would not acknowledge his fault to the King, for all the
King promised to forgive him, and lately he told the Court, he did not believe
that la Fin had revealed what was secret between them; and thought he would
have kept his word, which he had confirmed with so many Oaths, and that if he
had doubted of it, he would have cast himself at his Majesty's Feet as readily
as he, and asked him forgiveness, It follows then that there was some thing
left behind that was not confessed: Thus he accuses himself, thinking to
excuse his fault; besides, he mistaketh himself thinking to persuade the Court,
that since the pardon he has done nothing amiss, for the Pardon was in January
1600. and here be Letters of September last, by which he recalleth la Fin,
tells him, he will think no more upon the Vanities that were past since, God
was pleased to have given the King a Dolphin. It is apparent then that he has
employed la Fin at least since the Pardon, till the birth of the Dolphin, and
la Fin maintains that there was a note quite to the contrary, and that they
did continue their intelligences and practices unknown to the King. That the
Duke did recall him, fearing he should discover the Conspiracy, when a man
continues in his faults and abuses his Pardon, the last fault pays for all.

Besides, the Court has not seen that Pardon, he oughted to have produced it
in writing under the Kings Hand and Seal, and to forgive him once more, would
put him into such a condition, as to contrive always Treasons against the
State; the remedy of a present evil is not to be neglected upon the hope of an
uncertain good; he is in a case to be no more useful; nothing can be expected
from his courage but revenge; he that can bring no profit by his virtue and
faithfulness, must do it by being made an exemple.

Such were for the most part the reasons of the Court, according to which, and
to the conclusions of the Attorney General, the Chancellor did pronounce
Sentence of death against the Prisoner; some were of opinion that la Fin should
be arrested, as one that could not justify himself, for having concealed such
a damnable Conspiracy, till he saw that the Spanish affairs went to wrack. The
Chancellor did moderate these opinions, representing that the Conspiracy was
not yet wholly discovered, and that such things would hinder the rest of those
that knew some thing of it to reveal it; that a man that saves the Kings
Person and his Estate, ought rather to berewarded then punished. And in
confirmation of this, the King sent Letters to la Fin, by which he assured him,
that such a service done to him and his Kingdom, should never prove his ruin.

The Court stayed only for the Kings intention upon the execution of the
Sentence, which Sillery had carried to St. Germain. The Scaffold was ready to
be set up in the place of Greve, but the execution might have proved dangerous,
in the middle of so much people of different humors and tempers; and already
there was a rumor, as if some body should throw him a Sword, with which he
should make himself a passage, or else have died with a blow less shameful then
that of the Hangman; upon his friends entreaty the execution was ordered to be
done in the Bastille.

The next day about noon, the people knowing that the Sentence was past, went
some to the Greve, thinking that the execution should be done there, others to
St. Antony street, to see the Prisoner pass by; he saw from his Chamber that
multitude, and guessed that he was to be the Spectacle of those Spectators;
here the anguish of the Grave began to beset him, and drawing a consequence
from the shadow of death, that the body was not far of; he sent Baranton a
Scottish Gentleman to entreat the Marquess of Rhosny to come to see him, or if
he could not come, to sue for his Pardon to the King. He sent him answer, he
could do neither, and that he was extremely sorry for his misfortune, that if
he had believed him at his coming to to Court, he should have confessed what
the King did desire to know of him, for by concealing of it, he did hinder the
King to give him his life, and all his friends to sue for it.

The next day last of July 1602. the Chancellor, the first President, Sillery,
three Masters of Requests, some Officers of the Chancery, Rapin Lieutenant of
the short Gown, his Lieutenant, Daniel Voi^in Register of the Court of
Parliament, six Sergeants, and seven or eight more went to the Bastille, about
ten of the Clock in the morning, as soon as they were come in the Chancellor
commanded that the Prisoners Dinner should be carried, without giving him
notice of his coming, and in the mean time he and the first President made a
List of those whom they would have to be present in that action. Some
Presidents, three Masters of Requests, three Auditors, six Sergeants of the
Parliament, the Lieutenant Civil, the Kings Attorney at the Chastelet, Rapin
and his Lieutenant, the Knight of the Watch, the Prevost of the Merchants, four
Aldermen, four Counselors of the City, and some few others, to the number of
fifty.

About noon the Prisoner looking through the Grates of his Chamber Windows,
perceived the Wife of Rumigny, Caption of the Castle, weeping with her hands up
and guessed that those Tears were drawn by the compassion of his Fortune. Hewas
confirmed in his opinion, when he saw the Chancellor followed by the Sergeants,
Rapin and his Lieutenant, and some others go through the Bastilles Yard into
the Chapel, then he began to cry aloud, O my God I am a dead man, ah, what
injustice it is to put an Innocent Person to death, thereupon he entreated
Rumigny to tell his Brothers, Sisters and Kindred, that they should not be
ashamed of his death, because he was Innocent of that he was accused.

The Chancellor commanded he should be brought down into the Chapel, where as
soon as he saw the Chancellor, are you come, said he, to pronounce me my death:
The Chancellor saluted him, then put on his Hat, the Prisoner stood bare
headed, and began to speak first. Ah my Lord Chancellor, is there no pardon? is
there no Mercy? such and such (whom he did name one after another) have
committed such offenses and yet have been pardoned. What? you that look like an
honest man, have you suffered that I should be so miserably condemned? ah! my
Lord, if you had not told the Court that the King would have me to die, they
would not have condemned me so. My Lord, my Lord, you could have hindered that
evil, and you have not done it, you shall answer for that injustice before all
the rest of the Judges that have condemned me, and saying so, he stroke the
Chancellor upon the Arm. Ah! what a great service the King does this day to the
King of Spain, to rid him of such an Enemy as I was, might I not have been kept
within four Walls, till some occasion had offered where I might have been
useful? Ah my Lord, have you forgot my fathers love to you so much, as not to
give notice to the King of what I say, and what damage he suffers in loosing
me. I am yet as willing as ever to do service to the Kingdom, you could let him
know so much, he has so good an opinion of you, I am sure he would believe
you: A Messenger could quickly go thither ^ud back again, what shall a thousand
Gentlemen my Kinsmen say? does he think that a ter my death they can do him any
service? and what if I had been guilty, would I have come upon those false
assurances that President Janin that great Cheat gave me, when he told me, that
businesses were so ill managed in France, that it was fit I should see the
King and tell him of it, who at my persuasion would settle them in bettter
order: I have neglected all the advices of my friends to hearken unto his
persuasions. I have trusted to that cursed Traitor la Fin, who writ to me that
I could eome in all safety, and that he had told the King nothing but of the
Marriage that was propounded to me with a daughter of Savoy, that the King
would receive me with all Kindness. What then? the goings to and fro of many,
the reasons of those who advised me to come, and the Kings Letters, were they
all baits to catch me: I am well served to have trusted to much upon his Word,
I could have sought and got other securities, if I had not trusted to my
Innocence; I am come upon the confidence of my integrity since his pardon. Ah!
does he not know that he has forgiven me; I have h^d some evil designs, I have
hearkened, I have written, I have spoken, I confessed them all at Lion, he did
assure me never to remember it, and did exhort me that from hence forwards I
should commit nothing that might compel me to have recourse to his clemency:
Nevertheless I am now accused of things that are blotted out by his pardon; I
have not offended him since, unless it be in that I desired War rather than
Peace, because my humor is not peaceable, had not the King at that time reason
to approve of it? if this Crime deserves death I fly to his clemency, I
implore his Mercy. The Queen of England told me, that if the Earl of Essex
would have humbled himself, and asked forgiveness, he should have obtained it:
I do, being Innocent, what he would not do being guilty. Ah! shall all Mercy be
put out for me; those that have done worse have found Grace and Mercy: I
perceive what it is, I am not the more guilty but the most unhappy, and the
King, who has been so sparing of his Subjects lives, has a mind to be
prodigal of mine.

To conclude, he forgot another of what might be said by a Soul pierced with
grief, spite, anger, and violent threatening, in exclamations and revilings
against the King and his Parliament, in reproaches against the Chancellor, that
he had more contributed to his condemnation than to his absolution, in words
that are not fit to be spoken nor related.

His words ran so falt that the Chancellor could not stop them: Nevertheless he
took occasion to tell him, his passion suggested him many things without
appearance of reason, and against his own jadgment, that no body had known his
deserts better than he, and that he could have wished his faults had been as
unknown as dissembled, that the knowledge of them had been so visible and
apparent, that his Judges had more ado to moderate his punishment than to
inflict it. That S^ntence was given upon the proofs of several attemps he had
made against the Kings Person and his Estate, and for having kept intelligence
and correspondency with the Enemies of the Kingdom, of which he had been found
guilty, that if he had concealed the truth in the answers to his accusations,
he should now reveal it being so near to his end, and that for these causes the
King did ask his Order of Knighthood, and his staff o^ Marshal of France, with
which he had formerly honored him: He pulled the Order out of his Pocket and
put it into the Chancellors hands, Protesting and Swearing upon the Salvation
of his Soul, that he never had broken the Oath he made in receiving it; that
(it is true) he had desired War more than Peace; because he could not preserve
in Peace, the reputation he had got in War, as for the Staff, he never carried
it: Nevertheless by the Oath that the Knights of the Holy Ghost take, they are
bound to take no Pension, Wages nor Money from foreign Princes, and to engage
themselves in no bodies service but the Kings, and faithfully to reveal what
they shall know to be for or against the Kings service.

After that the Chancellor exhorted him to lift up his thoughts from Earth to
Heaven, to call upon God, and to hear patiently his Sentence.

My Lord (said he) I beseech you do not use me as other men; I know what my
Sentence bears, my accusations are false, I wonder the Court would Condemn me
upon the Evidence of the most wicked and detestable man that is alive; he never
came near me without Witchcraft, nor never went from me till he had bewitched
me, he did bite my left ear off, and made me drink enchanted waters, and when
he said, that the King had a mind to rid himself of me, he called me his King,
his Benefactor, his Prince, his Lord, he has communication with the Devils,
and has showed me a Wax Image, speaking these words in Latin, Rex impie
morieris, ungodly King thou shall die. If he has had so much power by his
Magic, as to make an inanimate body to speak, it is no wonder that he should
make my Will conformable to his.

Here the Chancellor stopped him, and told him, that the Court had well
considered his answers, and his Letters, that he ought not to find fault with
his Sentence, that it had done him the same Justice as a Father should do to
his son, if he had offended in the like manner. He had scarce spoken these
words when the other answered, what Judgment? I have been heard but once, and
had no time to tell the fiftieth part of my justification; if I had been heard
at large, I could have made it clearly appear that la Fin is such a one as I
say; what Judgment upon the Evidence of a Bougerer? of a Rogue that has
forsaken his Wife, of a treacherous and perfidious man, that had Sworn so many
times upon the Holy Sacrament, never to reveal what was between us, of a Knave
that has so often counterfeited my Hand and Seal: It is true, I have written
some of those Letters that were showed me, but I never intended to put them in
Execution: and the rest are falsified: Is there not many that can counterfeit
so well the Hand and Seal of others, that themselves can scarce distinguish
them. It is well known that the Lady Marchioness of Vernevil has lately
acknowledged that to be her own hand, which she had never written. My Heart and
my Actions have sufficiently countervailed the faults of my Hand, and of my
Tongue. Besides, the King has forgiven me, I do implore his Memory for a
Witness. You say I have been found guilty to have attempted upon the Kings
Person; that is false, that never came into my mind, and I knew nothing of it
till that la Fin did propose it to me before St. Katherines Fort, six or seven
days after the Siege, if I had been thus minded, I could have easily brought it
to pass; I was the only man that hindered the King to go before the Fort: If my
services had been taken into consideration, I should not have been thus
condemned: I believe that if you had not been present, the Parliament would not
have judged me so rigorously; I wonder that you, whom I thought to be prudent
and wise, have used me so cruelly; it would have been more honorable for your
quality and old age to implore for me the Kings Mercy, than his Justice. There
is Dungeons here where I might have been kept bound hand and foot; I should
have at last that comfort to pray for those who should have got me that favor
from the King. If I had been but a single Soldier, I should have been sent to
the Galleys; but because I am a Marshal of France, I am thought to be as
dangerous a man to the State, as I have been useful heretofore. My life is
sought after, I see there is no Mercy for me; the King has often forgiven
those, who not only intended to do evil, but had done it; this Virtue is now
forgotten, he gives occasion now to the World to believe, that he never used
clemency or forgiveness. but when he was afraid. I was of opinion, that if I
had killed one of his Children he would have forgiven me. Is it not pity that
my Father should have run so many dangers, and at last died in the field to
keep the Crown upon his Head, and that now he should take my head off my
Shoulders, is it possible he should forget the services I have done him? does
he not remember the conspiracy of Mantes, and the dangers he should have been
in if I had taken the Conspirators part? Has he forgotten the Siege of Amiens,
where I have been so often among the fire and Bullets, neglecting my own life
to preserve his, I have not a Vein but has been open to preserve his own
Blood, I have received five and thirty wounds to save his life; he shows now
that he never loved me but when he had need of me, he takes away my head, but
let him beware that the Justice of God does not fall upon his. My Blood shall
cry for revenge for the wrong that is done me to day, I call the King of Spain
and the Duke of Savoy to Witness, if I know any thing what is laid to my
charge. La Fin himself did show me sometimes a Catholic List of about
fourscore Gentlemen, who received Pension from the King of Spain, I had never
so much curiosity as to read it; let him be put to the rack he shall tell many
particularities of it; the King within a litttle while shall perceive what he
gets by my death; I sshall at last die a good Catholic, and constant in my
Religion, I believe that is the cause of my death.

The Chancellor seeing that all his discourses were full of passion, vanity and
repetitions, and void of reason, and were like an impetuous Torrent that cannot
be stopped, and that all his words were nothing but reproaches against the King
and the Court of Parliament, blasphemies against God, and execrations against
his Accusers; said that his business called him away, and that in his absence
he would leave him two Divines to comfort him, and to dispose his soul to leave
quietly this World, for the enjoying of a better.

As the Chancellor was going out, the Prisoner begged of him that he might have
the liberty to make his Will, because he did owe much, and much was owing to
him, and he desired to satisfy every body. The Chancellor answered, that the
Recorder Voisin should stay with him to write his Will under the Kings good
pleasure. And as the Chancellor spoke to Voisin, the Prisoner turning to
Roissy, Master of Requests, asked him if he were, one of those that had
condemned him: my Father has loved you so much, that though you were one, yet
should I forgive you. Roissy answered, my Lord, I pray God Almighty to comfort
you.

They went out, and he with a quiet mind and free from passion, did dictate his
Will in what form he would, with the same Garb, as if he had been making a
Speech at the head of an Army; he remembered his friends and servants, and did
not forget the Baron of Lux, whom he loved above all the rest. He left eight
hundred Livers a year to a Bastard of his, whom he begot of a woman that he
left with Child of another, to which child he left a Manor near Dijon that had
cost him six thousand Crowns, he disposed all the rest of his Debts, and
answered modestly, and without confusion to all the Notes and Bills that were
brought him about his affairs. Took three Rings off his fingers, and entreated
Baranton to give them to his Sisters, two to the Countess of Roussy, and the
other to that of Saint Blancard, desiring they would wear them for his sake; he
distributed in Alms about 200. Crowns that he had in his Pocket, fifty to the
Capuchines, fifty to the F^eillants, fifty to the Minimes, and the rest to
several poor people.

The Will being made, the Recorder put him in mind how my Lord Chancellor had
told him he was condemned to death, and that according to the ordinary forms of
the Law, he must have his Sentence read to him; that this action required
humility, therefore willed him to kneel before the Altar, leaving off hence
forth all thoughts of this World, to think upon the Father of Mercies; he
kneeled with the right knee upon the first step of the Altar, and heard it read
as follows:

Seen by the Court, the Chambers being assembled together, the Process
extraordinarily made by the Presidents and Counselors, appointed by the King
under his Letters Patents, dated the 18 and 19 of June, at the request of the
Kings Solicitor General, against the Lord Charles of Gontault of Biron, Knight
of both Orders, Duke of Biron, Peer and Marshal of France, Governor of
Burgundy, Prisoner in the Castle of Bastille, accused of high Treason,
Informations, Interrogations, Confessions and denials, Confrontations, and
Witnesses, Letters, Advices, and Instructions given to the Enemies, and
acknowledged by him, and all what the Solliciter General has produced,
Sentence of the 22 of this Month, by which it was ordered, that in the absence
of the Peers of France summoned, it should be further proceeded to Judgment
Conclusions of the Kings Solicitor, the accuser being heard and interrogated,
all things being duly considered, has been concluded, that the said Court has
declared, and declares the said Duke of Biron, attainted and convicted of high
Treason, for the conspiracies by him made against the Kings Person and Estates,
Proditions and Treaties with his Enemies, when he was Marshal of the Army of
the said King, for reparation of which Crime, the said Court has deprived, and
depriveth him of all his Estates, Honors and Dignities, and has condemned,
and condemns him to be beheaded upon a Scaffold, which for that purpose shall
be erected in the place of Greve, has declared, and declares, all and every
one of his Goods, moveable or unmovable, in whatsoever places situated and
seated, to be acquired and con^iscated to the King, the Manner of Biron,
deprived for ever of the Title and Dukedom and Peerage, and altogether all his
other Goods* immediately holden from the King, reunited to the Crown again.
Done in Parliament the last day of July 1602. Signed in the Original by de
Belieure, Chancellor of France, Councellor in the Court, Reporter of the
Process.

He was not moved at these words, attainted and convicted of high Treason, but
at these, against the Person of the King, he fell into a rage, and Swearing as
he had done many times before, and shall do hereafter with great Oaths and
Imprecations, there is no such thing, said he to the Recorder, it is false,
blot out that; he was also very angry, hearing that he was to be executed in
the place of Greve, thinking that for several respects he was to be
distinguished from the common sort of people, and Swore again, that he would
not go thither, and that he had rather to be torn in pieces by wild Horses, and
that it was not in the power of all those that stood by to carry him thither,
then he was a little appeased, when Voisin told him, that the King had done him
that favor to change the place of Execution, and that it was to be done in the
Bastille. The confiscation of his Goods, and the revenues of the Dukedom of
Biron to the Crown, was the last point of the Sentence that vexed him. What?
said he, does the King intend to grow rich out of my poverty? The Lordship of
Biron cannot be confiscated, I only possessed it by substitution of my
Brethren, what shall my Brethren do, the King ought to have been satisfied with
the loss of my life,

The Sentence being pronounced, Voisin did exhort him again to renounce all the
vanities of the world, to take no other care but of the Salvation of his Soul,
which was to be first by reconciling himself to God Almighty, and that there
was two Divines for that purpose, and that according to the usual forms of
Executions, he would be pleased to suffer himself to be bound* That word of
Execution did seem so horrid to him, that he fell into a new rage, Swearing,
that he would never permit so infamous a person to touch him, otherwise than
with the Sword, and that he had rather be hewn in pieces. To keep him from
falling into a further despair, Vois(...) left him, with his Divines, viz.
Garnier Almonec, and Confessor to the King, and after that Bishop of
Montpelier, and Magnan, Curate of St. Nicolas in the fields at Paris, who began
to talk boldly to him of his death, and to disvest himself of all his thoughts,
as he had done of his Goods, and to take no other care than that of his Soul,
whereupon he fell into a passion again. Let me alone (said he) it is I that
must think upon my Soul, you have nothing to do with it, I had no need of you,
you shall not be troubled to hear my confession; what I speak aloud is my
confession, I have been these eight days a confessing my self, and the last
night, me thought I saw the Heavens opened, and that God lent me his Hand; my
Keepers heard me laugh for joy in my sleep. The Divines did not loose Courage
for all that, but more and more entreated him to consider, that he was no more
what he had been before, that within one or two hours he should be no more,
that he must change to be for evermore, that his Soul was ready to appear
before the fearful Throne of the living God, to be rewarded with a more happy
life than that he had hitherto passed, or be condemned to an Eternal pain, and
that in comparison of that which he was to suffer now, it was no more than the
slight pricking of a Pin, and having in some measure appeased him, they left
him to examine his Conscience, while Voisin went to give notice of his refusing
to be bound; the Chancellor doubted whether he should be compelled to it; the
first President said, that it was dangerous to let him loose; Sellery having
learned of Voisin that the Prisoner was at that time very quiet, said, that if
they went about to bind him, he would break all the bonds of Patience, and
should never be brought to Execution but in a rage and despair; according to
that opinion he was left free in his body, that he might be the more free in
^^is thoughts.

Which were more to the World, and to the settling of his affairs, than to the
saving of his Soul, which he had neglected all his life time, and showed
himself utterly ignorant of the principles of his Religion, for which he said a
little before, he was put to death, and those that were present related, that
his Prayers made him appear more a Soldier than a Christian; he prayed in
commanding, and commanded in praying.

His Confession being ended, he walked in the Chapel with one hand upon his
side, and with the other holding the strings of his Shirt, did unbutton and
button again his Doublet. Vois(...) being come back told him, that the
Chancellor and the first President were very glad to hear of his Patience, and
of his constant resolution to die. He talked much of the Money he had at Dijon,
of the worth of his Jewels, and of what was owing to him, and what himself did
owe, he desired that some Sums of Money should be paid to certain Gentlemen,
that had no Obligation for it: But still he broke forth into exclamations
concerning his Innocence, and execrations against la Fin, asking if it should
not be lawful for his Brothers to prosecute him, and to cause him to be burnt.

Upon this, those that kept him during his Imprisonment, came to take their
leave of him, every one having his left hand upon the handle of his Sword, and
Tears in his Eyes, he moved them to compassion by the sight of his present
condition, and exhorted them to serve the King faithfully, against whom he had
said he had done nothing amiss, and complained that he could find no Mercy at
his Hands, entreated them to pray to God for him, and to oblige them to that,
distributed among them all his Clothes and linen, and Watches; he desired also
the Knight of the Watch to tell the King, that his Servants knew nothing of his
Affairs, that the Earl of Auvergne was not to be questioned upon that account:
He entreated much one exempt of the Guards to go to the said Earl, and tell him
he had laid nothing to his charge, and that he went to die without any grief,
but of the loss of his friendship, and that the shortness of his life would not
give him leave to show in effect how much he was his servant. The Earl sent him
word, that he did accept of his farewell, as of an intimate friend; and that he
remained behind to lament all the days of his life the loss he suffered in him,
entreated him to leave him his Bastard Son, to have him brought up with his own
Children After this the Prisoner saw a Gentleman belonging to the Duke of
Mayene, and entreated him to tell his Master, that if ever in his life he had
given him some occasion not to love him, that he prayed to believe that he
would die his servant, as also of the Duke of Aiguillon, and Earl of Sommerive
his Children; he likewise entreated Arnaut, Secretary to the Marquess of
Rhosny, to remember his last commendations to his Master, and desire him to
remember not so much him that went to die, as his Brethren whom he left behind,
that he had him in opinion of a good and useful servant to the King, and
repented much he had not believed his Council.

About three of the Clock the Chancellor and the first President went up again
into the Chapel, and finding him in a good disposition, did fortify his
resolution by their discourses, and desiring to know more particularities from
his own mouth, sent all the standers by away, except the Divines and the
Recorder: They did exhort him to consider, that the days of man are limited,
that the end of his days depended from the Providence of the Almighty, who
would take him out of this world before some great and long misery should make
him weary of it* He answered, no, no my Lords, do not trouble you about
comforting me and strengthening me against the fear of death, I have not been
afraid of it these 20 years; you have given me 40 days to study it, but I could
not believe that having not been in the power of my Enemies to take away my
life, I should be so miserable as to loose it by the consent of my friends;
having said this they left him, and took their leaves of him with Tears in
their Eyes, he would not suffer them to depart till they had received a new
Protastation of his, that he never had attempted any thing against the King,
Swearing, that if he would have done it, the King should not have been alive
three years ago.

As they were going out of the Bastille with Sillery, he sent the Knight of the
Watch to entreat the Chancellor, that his Body might be buried at Eiron, in the
Sepulcher of his Ancestors, and that he would desire the King to give to his
younger Brother some Office in the house of the Dolphin, and showing by his
Countenance, Carryage, and Words, to care as little for death as one that is a
great way from it* gave cause to suspect, that he was not out of hope to obtain
his pardon from the King, o(...) to escape by some extraordinary means.

The Divines did exhort him to keep nothing back of what might serve for the
discharging of his Conscience, and to consider, that they could give him
absolut(...) on for no more than what he did confess. Although, said he, the
King causes me to die unjustly, nevertheless I have served him with so much
affection and obedience, and I have near my death so much good will and
affection for him, that if I knew any thing against his Person or State, I
would tell it freely, and upon that whispered some things to his Confessors,
which Voisin did presently write.

Being about five of the Clock, Baranton was sent to tell him it was time to
go; let us go said he, seeing I must die, and desired he would charge his
Brothers from him, to remain faithful to the King, and not to go to Court, till
time had blotted, or at least le(...)ened the shame of his death. He kneeled
before the Altar, and having ended his Prayer, he desired the Company to pray
for him.

Coming out of the Chapel, he met the Executioner, who offered to follow him,
and he thinking it was to bind him; keep off, (said he) and do not touch me
till it be time; I shall go willingly to die without troubling any body; but it
shall never be said that I am dead like a Slave, or a Thief, and swore by God
that if he came near him he would strangle him. The Divines exhorted him going
down the stairs to resist those impaciencies and temptations of the Devil, who
striveth most to deviate the Soul from her Salvation, when as he has most need
of the Divine assistance to withstand his assaults, remonstrating also unto
him, that all his violences and passions could not hinder the Soul to depart
from a place where she was but a Tenant at Will. He hearkened to them, and
saying three times ah, ah, ah, ra^sing his voice at every one, he said, is
there no Mercy in the world, I see to day, that all the world has forsaken me.

He came into the Yard, and seeing the Lieutenant of the City, in whose house
the King had put la Fin, to secure him from all attempts, My Lord Lieutenant
(said he) I am very much your friend, take heed to have any thing to do with
that Witch and Magician that lies at your house, if you meddle with him he
will undo you.

The Sc^^ffold was set up in the corner of the Yard, over against the Garden
gate, six foot high, and seven long, without any Ornament ordistinction. He
kneeled upon the first step; lifted up his Eyes to Heaven and made a short
Prayer, like a Soldier, and went up as courageously as if he had gone to an
assault, clad in a Gray Taffety Suit, with a black Hat on his Head, but as soon
as he saw the Executioner, he looked furiously upon him, and bid him staud
aside till he were ready to receive the last stroke: He threw his Hat, his
Handkarchief, and Doublet to the first that would take it, nevertheless one of
the Executioners men was nimbler than all the rest, and looking upon the
Soldiers that kept the Gate armed., with Muskets and Firelocks. Ah! said he,
mucst I die? is there no pardon? if at least some of those good fellows would
shut me (opening his Breast) he should oblige my very much, what pity is it to
die so miserably, and of so shameful ablow, then directing his speech to the
Spectators, he said, I have put my Soul into such a state as she ought to be to
appear before the race of Almighty God, but I pity that of the King* who
causes the to die unjustfy: I have erred I confess, but I never attempted any
thing against the Kings Person, he should have been dead ten years ago if I
would have believed the evil Council that was given me concerning that. the
trouble and distress of his Soul was so great, that a little while before he
said three years, and now he says ten; the Divines having settled him a little
once more, he received their absolution.

The Executioner then presented unto him a Frontler, but it proved to him a new
wound, an increase of grief, and swore if he touched him any other way than with
the Sword he would strangle him, and thereupon he asked again for his own
Handkarchief to make use of it, his hollow and ghastly Eyes showed he was not in
his right mind. Voisin entreated him to be patient, and to raise his thoughts
to the place where his Soul was to go, and to be attentive to the reading of
his Sentence. He was unwilling to hear the repetition of his Crimes, and to
have occasion to exclaim again against the Iniquity, of those that had
condemned him, against the Kings cruelty, as he called it, that would not grant
him his pardon, and that this was to make him feel death before death. (...)
Voisin answered, that it could not be done otherwise. He answered, that every
body knew for what reason he was there and then as if it were by consession, he
said, well, read, and thereupon held his Peace till Voisin came to these words,
for having attempted against the Kings Person; for then he fell into a passion
again, as he had done before, and said, that it was false, that this never came
into his mind, that as God was his Judge, he would be for ever deprived of his
Grace if it were true, that since two and twenty Months he had done nothing
against the Kings service, that it is true he had written some Letters, but
that the King had forgiven him, protesting and calling the Spectators to
Witness, that it was the truth what he spoke, as he would answer it before God,
and spoke so many words, and so fast, that neither he nor the Sheriff could be
understood.

The Sentence being read, the Divines did admonish him to leave all Earthly
thoughts, to implore the assistance of Heaven, and to resign his Soul to the
Eternal providence of the Almighty, and his Body to what the Law had ordained
of it, he made some Prayer to God, and bound his Eyes with his own
Handkarchief, and asked the Executioner in what place he was to put himself,
the Executioner pointing with his finger, said, there my Lord; he pulled off
his Handkarchief in a rage, and where is that there, said he? thou see I am
blind fold, and thou show me as if I could ^ee^; he bound himself again, and
bid the Executioner to dispatch quickly: The Executioner told him he ought to
kneel, for fear he should do something amiss. No, no, said he, I shall not
stir, if thou can not do it at one blow do it at thirty, he was entreated
again to kneel, which he did, and spoke these Imperious words, dispatch,
dispatch, then rose up again, and untied his Handkarchief, and by casting his
Eyes upon the Executioner, made the people believe, that either he had a mind
to seize upon the Sword, or that he was terribly afrighted by the approaches of
Death, and began again his former complaints, is there no pardon? must I die so
miserably? after so many services. The Executioner entreated him to suffer his
hairs behind to be cut off; he began to swear again fearfully, that if he
touched him otherwise than with the Sword, he would strangle him. The Divines
told him that he was too careful of his Body, he would hear no more of that,
but fell into a rage, and swore, that he would not be touched by so Infamous a
Person as long as he was alive, that if they did provoke him too much, he would
strangle half the Company, and oblige the other half to kill him, those that
were upon the Scaffold went down and left him with the Executioner, who
repented himself heartily that he had taken the care of him unbound.

The Divines went up again upon the scaffold, and desired him for the love of
God to resolve to step over that pass, which was necessary for every man to do,
and with some few other words, whispered into his ears, did calm him a little,
and made him resolve to undergo the Execution, after he had made many
complaints, and showed great fears of dying. A strange thing that as stout and
valiant a man as ever was born, who had so many times cast himself amongst the
greatest dangers, without any fear or apprehension, as if there was no death
for him, should show himself now so fearful at the coming of it; we may judge
by this, that the apprehension of death is incomparably greater when it comes
upon a cold blood, and those that know what his Surgeon was wont to say,
shall less wonder at it; for he said, that the Duke of Biron used to wonder at
himself, that being not afraid of the thrust of a Sword, nevertheless he was
very timorous at the pricking of a Launcet, when he had occasion to be let
blood: Whereupon we must confess, that the greatest courage, and most undaunted
stoutness of a man, is nothing in comparison of human Natures weakness.

The Divines judging him to be out of fear, gave him his last absolution, he
kneeled again, and cried aloud three times, My God, my God, my God, have Mercy
upon me, then turning to the Executioner, he took the headband that he had in
his hand, and entreated Baranton to do him that last courtesy as to list up his
hairs behind, which Baranton did, and the Duke himself did tie the Handkarchief
about his Eyes. The Divines seeing him in that good disposition, did assure him
that he was ready to go to Heaven, and to see God, and to enjoy his Glory. Yes,
said he, Heaven is open to receive my Soul, and so stooped his neck for the
Executioner to do his office. The Executioner considering, that he had untied
himself three times before, and might do so again for the fourth, thought
fitting to entertain him with fair words, to desire his forgiveness, and to put
him in mind of saying his last Prayer, in the mean time he beckened to his man,
who was at the foot of the Scaffold, to reach him the Sword, which no sooner
was in his hand, but the Duke of Birons Head was off his Shoulders, it fell
from the Scaffold to the ground, and was thrown again by the Executioners man
upon the Scaffold, the Body was stripped to its Shirt, and wraped in a Sheet, and
the same day bur^ed, about nine of the Clock at night, i^ St. Paul's Church,
without any show or Ceremony. Thus ended the Tragical History of the Duke of
Biron.

Now follows the two last Verses of this Prophecy.

A Post overtaken in the Country,
And the Scrivener shall cast himself into the water.
Which as we have said before, were concerning Nicolas (...)ste, Secretary to
the Lord Villeroy, chief Secretary of State. The History therefore is thus.

The French Ambassador at Madrid, complained once to Henry a he IV. he was so
ill informed, and so late of Affairs, that the King of Spains Ministers knew
them before him: The King was a great while troubled before he could discover
the spring of that infidelity, at last it came out in this manner. Vi^leroy
that great O^acle of France, and the most confident secretary to the King, had
among his servants one Nicolas l'Oste, born at Orleans, in whom he did confide
so much the more, because his Father had been the most part of his life in his
service.

The Lord Rocbepot going Ambassador into Spain, Oste desired to be admitted
into his Family, to serve him as his secretary, that he might the better fit
himself for public employment. Villeroy's commendation got him easily that
employment, by which in a few Months he became so capable of the Spanish Tongue
an manners, that no body could have distinguished him from a natural Spaniard.
The Ambassador having sworn in the name of the most Christian King the treaty
of Peace made at Veruins, the King of Spain presented him with a rich Chain of
Jewels, and with six other of Gold, valued at 150. Crowns a piece, to bestow
upon as many o^ his own servants as he should think fit.

The pride and pre^umption of this young man was such as to persuade him he
deserved one of them, and chiefly because one of his fellows was thought worthy
of it, but his Master did not think so, and thus he was neglected.

Thus en^y and jealousy were the Windows by which the Devil crept into his
Soul; the vanity, lying, pride, and debauchery gave him a full admittance, he
had spent all his Money to buy the love of a Courtisane, and wanted means to
follow that course which he had no mind to leave off. His Masters neglecting of
him, had extraordinarily vexed him, but he comforted himself that he knew his
secrets, and that in revealing them to the King of Spains Ministers he shot two
Birds with one shot; for he should avenge himself of that contempt he had
received, and should have a way to continue his amorous expenses. With that
intention he made himself known to Don Franchese one of the Secretaries of
State, and told him what means he had to serve the King of Spain, and to show
him proofs of that service and affection he had vowed to him long before, by
imparting to him all the Letters that the Ambassador did both send and receive
from the King his Master.

Don Franchese heard this proposition as from a young man, whose Brains were
not well settled, or perhaps did abhor such infidelity, therefore told him
coldly, that the Catholic King was in so good amity with the most Christian
one, that he desired to know no more of his business, than what his Ambassador
should tell him.

L'Oste did not despond for all this, but went to Don Ydiaques another
Secretary of State, who knowing how important it is for a Prince to know the
secrets of his Neighbors, and that the slighting of such an offer would be
prejudicial to the King his Masters service, did hearken unto this Traitor,
approved of his design, and exhorted him to persevere in the good affection he
showed to the King of Spains service, promised to acquaint the King with it,
and to procure him such a reward, as he should have reason to be satisfied with.

The Council agreed that l'Oste should be encouraged, and Don Ydiaques,
presented him to the Duke of Lerma, to whom he showed the Alphabet of Ciphers,
with which his Master writ his Letters into France, had sent. The Duke exhorted
him to continue his good Will, gave him 1200. Crowns for an earnest of the
Bargain, with a promise of as much for a yearly pension, besides a considerable
gratification he was to expect from the King

Since that time the French Ambassador received no Letters but they were
presently imparted to the Spanish Council: But the Lord la Rochepot being
called back into France, l'Oste lost the convenience of prosecuting his
Treasons, and consequently the hopes of his promised reward, therefore sought
means to come again into his first Masters, that is Villeroy's service, but he
was a while kept back from it by reason of a difference between his Mother and
Villeroy, about some rest of Accounts; but l Oste had rather take that loss
upon him than to be deprived of that occasion. The Ambassador himself gave him
a large Testimony of his ability and faithfulness, and was Instrumental for his
readmission into that service.

Thus being re-established, he became more diligent and sedulous than ever
before, and not only writ more Letters than any of his fellows, but also
offered them his service to help them, that he might have a more perfect
knowledge of all transactions, and so impart them to the Spaniard, and so
visited and conferred with Taxis the Spanish Ambassador at Paris, and after
that with his successor, Don Baltazar de Cuniga, with so much cunning and
secrecy, that the Council of Spain received his Letters, before des Barreaux
the French Ambassador at Madrid, could receive those of the King.

Des Barreaux sent word to the King, that when he propounded any thing,
according to his Majesty's command, to the Council of Spain, he found them
always preadvised, and could not find out by what means; certainly said the
King, there must he some in my Council that keep a strict intelligence with the
Spaniard, and I can not tell whom to suspect. Providence does often draw good
eff^cts out of the worse causes, and permits that the wicked should disclose
one another wickedness, as a Nail drives out another. Lost had revealed
himself familiarly to one Raffis, formerly Secretary to the Lord Lansac, a
fugitive into Spain, for many Treasons, and exempted from pardon; but the
Spaniard had begun to cut him short of his former Pensions, since the Treason
of the Baron of Fontanc^^es, Governor of Dornavenest in Brittanny, in which
the said Raffis had been a principal Actor, though in vain, so that since, the
Council of Spain looked upon him as an unprofitable servant, and withdrew their
Pension.

Raffis finding himself near a great want and misery, thought this occasion
might be a means to prevent it, and to procure his return into his native
Country, by doing so great a service to his Prince; therefore he went to one
of the French Ambassadors most faithful servants, and told him his grief, for
having had a share in so many Treasons and Rebellions in France, which he
acknowledged God had into his particular protection, that he was resolved to
blot out the memory of them by a notable service done to the King and Kingdom,
but that could not be, unless he had first obtained pardon for all his former
misdemeanors.

This being told to the Ambassador, he heard Raffis, who told him in general
that the King was betrayed, and his most secret Council bewrayed, but that he
could not name the Traitor, no not to his Majesty himself, before he had his
pardon: that being done, he would wholly withdraw himself from those who^^ he
knew certainly to be enemies to the Kingdom. The Ambassador sent an express to
the King to give him notice of it. The King sent him full power to treat with
Raffis, with promiss to ratify whatsoever he should promiss to Raffis; Raffis
could not make good his accusation, but by two Letters written by Lost, to a
great friend of his, named Blas, which Letters he knew to be in a Box of Blas,
who lodged with him; therefore upon some pretext or another, they found means
to send Blas ^s far as l' Escurial. In his absence Raffis and Descardes
Secretary to the Ambassador, broke open the Box, and took out the Letters, by
which Lost did much magnify the liberalities of Spain, as being above his
desert and expectation; with this proofs and the Ambassadors Letters, Raffis
fained to go to a Monastery near Madrid, and there make his devotions upon
Palm Sunday, as he was wont to do, but he went directly to Bayone, where he met
with Discardes upon a set day. Blas came back after Palm Sunday, and finding
his Box open, and his companion run away, he suspected the matter, and gave
notice of it to the Spanish Ministers, who presently dispatched two Courriers
to the Spanish Ambassador at Paris, to give him notice that a man was gone from
Madrid; who would discover Lost and his practices, therefore he should give
him notice of it, and bid him look to himself, and that in case he should be
taken, to keep secrecy.

Descardes and Raffis came to Paris the Wensday after Easter, and carried
themselves with all faithfulness in this occasion, but not with all the
prudence that could have been desired. Villeroy was going the same day to lie
at his own House, between Paris and Fountain-bleau, where the Court was then;
they met with him at Juvisy, and waited on him as far as Villeroy, but told him
nothing of the occasion of their coming by the way, till they presented him
with the Ambassadors Letters, which was a notable fault, for he would certainly
have neglected all other business to secure his man, who was then doing his
devotions at the Charter House of Paris.

The next day Villeroy was the first that told the King of the coming of
Raffis, and of the perfidiousness of his own servant. As he was going back to
his Lodging, notice was given him that two Spanish Courtiers were arrived at
the Post House; he commanded one of the Commissioners of the Post House, that
he should cause them to withdraw into a Room, and that no body should speak
with them; he charged also Descardes, that he should spy the coming of Lost,
that he should keep him close company, and send him presently notice of his
arrival. The Commissioner and Descardes did commit here another great fault,
for Lost being come to the Post House about noon, this silly Commissioner told
him that there were arrived two Spanish Courtiers who asked for him, that they
had Letters for him, and more then that, suffered him to go into their Chamber
and see them, he saluted them, and one of them whispered him in the ear that he
was undone if he did not save himself presently, and that Raffis had discovered
him; fear and astonishment with his guilty conscience, persuaded him easily to
look to himself.

Nevertheless, he settled his countenance the best he could, he went out with
an intention to take his Horse again, which he had sent before, and so save
himself; Descardes and Raffis perceived him, Descardes came and saluted him,
and thinking perhaps that he was strong enough to give an account of him,
neglected to send word to Villeroy, who was then in his Closet with the Bishop
of Chartres; Descardes presence was a great thorn in Loste's foot, to be rid of
him, he said he was going to his Master, who stayed for him; Descardes offered
to accompany him: he answered, he had not dined, and that believing it was past
Dinner time at home, he would go into some Cabaret to look for a Dinner, the
other answered I have not dinned neither, we shall dine together. Lost found
another excuse, and said my Boots hurt me, I pray give me leave that I may go
and pull them off; Descardes answered, he must needs drink with him. Thus
arguing together, they came to Villeroy's Lodging, where Descardes thinking to
have him sure, left him in the Room, not knowing that the Spanish Courtiers had
talked with him, and came near the Closet to give notice of it to Villeroy; but
as soon as he saw himself rid of Descardes, he went down into the Stable, and
finding his Horse yet Sadled he Mounted, and with all speed rid to Paris;
Villeroy in the mean time having notice that his man was come, he commanded
they should bring them in; but he was not to be found, nor his Horse neither,
no body knowing which way he was gone. Villeroy told the King that his man was
escaped, they sent after him on all sides, and Villeroy particularly sent all
his Servants after into all the ways. Lost coming to Paris about nine of the
Clock at night, went to take counsel of the Spanish Ambassador; and before
day, went out habited like a Spaniard, with the Ambassadors Steward, and took
his way toward Meaux, with an intent to get into Luxembourg by Post.

That every one might endeavor the apprehending of that Traitor, it was spread
abroad that one of Villeroy's Secretaries had attempted upon the Kings Person,
and notice was given of his Stature, Age, Clothes and Horse. The Sheriffs of
every Country were in quest, and all Post Masters were forbidden to let out
any Horses, but that of Meaux had notice of it too late; Lost was got on
Horseback already, but as soon as he began to gallop, his Horse fell to the
ground, and was an ill Omen to the Rider; he got up again, and showed so much
fearfulness in his Countenance, that the Postillion himself thought he had
committed some notorious villainy, which he did run for. Being come home, he
gave notice of it to his Master, who suspecting him to be the man enquired off,
he gave notice of it to the Sheriff, who presently made after him at the second
Ferry of la Ferte soubs Jouare, where he was Crossing the River; the Sheriff
cried after the Ferry man to come back, but the fear of his life, which the two
run aways put him into, prevailed upon him, above the Sheriffs commands, being
got over, and judging that their Posthorses should be quickly overtaken by
those of the Sheriff, they forsook them and the Postillon; and trusted to their
heels in the darkness of the night among the Bushes and Brambles that are upon
the River Marne. The Sheriff scattered his men all about, caused fires to be
made, and raised up all the Country people thereabout; the Spaniard ran over
the Champion Country, and Lost went from Bush to Bush, and whether
accidentally or wilfully he fell into the River Marne, where he was drowned;
the next day his Hat was found between two posts, and his body two days after
not far from that place.

Thus you may plainly see the full event of those two famous Prophecies,
contained in this sixth Stanza.

VII. French.
La Sangsue au Loup se joindra,
Lors qu'en Mer le bled defaudra,
Mais le grand Prince sans envy,
Par Ambassade luy donra,
De son bled pour luy donner vie,
Pour un besoing s'en pourvoira.
English.
The Leech will join it self to the Wolf,
When in the Sea Corn shall be wanting,
But the great Prince without envy,
By Embassy shall give him,
Of his Corn to give him life,
Of which in his need he shall make provision.
ANNOT.

By the Leech is understood the Spaniard. By the Wolf is meant the French, by
reason of the multitude of those Creatures in that Kingdom; the meaning
therefore of this Prophecy is, that there should be a great famine in Spain,
wherein the Spania (...) should be constrained to make his application to the
French for relief of Corn, which should be granted him. This happened in the
year 1665 for you must understand that most of these last Prophecies were to be
fulfilled in the Reign of Henry IV.

VIII. French.
Un peu devant l'ouvert commerce,
Ambassadeur viendra de Perse,
Nouvelle au Franc Pais porter,
Mais non receu vain esperance,
A son grand Dieu sera l'offense,
Feignant de le vouloir quitter.
English.
A little before that Trade shall be open,
An Ambassador shall come from Persia,
To bring news into France,
But he shall not be received, O vain hope!
To his great God shall the offense be,
Faining that he would leave him.
ANNOT.

In the year 1608. the year before the Truce was concluded between the Spaniard
and the Hollanders, by which all free Commerce was opened through Europe. The
King of Persia being then in War with the great Turk, sent an Ambassador to all
the Christian Princes, and chiefly into France, to move them to make a
diversion in so fit a time, but he could prevail nothing, and went back again
re infecta, which he thought to be a great injury done to his Prophet Mahomet.

IX. French.
Deux Estendars du cost de l' Auvergne,
Senestre pris, pour un temps prison regne,
Et un Dame enfant voudra mener,
Au Censuart, mais discouvert l'affaire,
Danger de mort, murmr sur la Terre,
Germain, Bastille, Friar and Soeur prisonier.
English.
Two Standards in the County of Auvergne,
The left one taken, for a while Prison shall reign,
And a Lady shall endeavor to carry a child
To the Censuart, but the plot being discovered,
Danger of Death, murmur upon Earth,
Own Brother, Bastille, Brother and Sister prisoners.
ANNOT.

This Stanza being most obscure and difficult, cannot be understood so well by
parcels, as by laying down the whole Synopsis of it, which I do the more
willingly, because I think it will be delightful to the Reader, and that the
whole being known, the meaning of every particular will easily be understood.

Charles the IX. King of France, the last of the House of Valois left only one
natural Son, called the Earl of Auvergne, who had a Sister by the Mothers side,
that was called Henrietta de Balzac Duchess of Verneuil, once Mistress to Henry
the IV, by whom she had upon promiss of marriage one Son, at this time Duke of
Vernueil, and Governor of Languedoc; but this promiss being made void by Act
of Parliament, Henry IV. married Mary of Medicis, by which he had issue Lewis
the XIII. and other children: now upon the discontent of the Marshal of Biron,
the Duchess of Verneuil, the Earl of Auvergne her Brother, and their party
joined with him for the promoting of the Duke of Verneuil's interest to the
Crown, whereupon the King sent for the Earl of Auvergne, who was then in his
County a hundred Leagues from Paris; but the Earl trusting more the good will
of the Citizens of Clermont in Auvergne who loved him, then to the Kings
Clemency, neglected to come, whereupon the King sent again the Lord d' Escures,
with a pardon for what was past; he promised to come when he should see his
pardon Signed and Sealed in good form; the King was offended at his proceeding,
and took it very ill that a Subject of his would capitulate with him, who
intended to deal plainly and sincerely; the King nevertheless past that over
for many considerations, one of them was that the Earl was of the blood of
France, and brother by the Mother to one that had been his Mistress; besides
that he was a Prince endowed with many good qualities, most of which did
Sympathise with those of the King, thus the King sent him his Pardon as well
for what was past, as for the present, but with this proviso that he should
come; for all this, he did not stir out of Clermont; the King seeing that, did
resolve to have him at any rate: there was several propositions made for to
take him: at Hunting, at running of the Ring, at some Banquet, in the Fields,
in the City; all these ways might be suspected by the Earl, but a new one was
found out, of which he himself was the Author; the Troop of the Duke of
Vendosme was preparing for to Muster, the Earl entreated d' Eurre Lieutenant of
the said company, that it might be in the Fields by Clermont toward Nonnain,
because he intended to take revenge in the behalf of a Lady, upon the
Inhabitants of that place. The King sent directions and orders to d' Eurre, how
he should govern himself in that action, and gave him for Associates, la
Boulaye, Lieutenant of the Marquess of Vernueil's Troop, and Nerestan Colonel
of a Foot Regiment. By the Kings advice they imparted the business to the
Viscount of Pont du Chasteau, to the Baron of Canillac and some others, that
had authority in that Province, and were devoted to the Kings service, and all
keeping religiously the Laws of silence. The 12 of November the Troop met at
the Rendezvous; the Earl came thither by times with two only of his followers,
thinking that the Troop should not be ready so soon, and so he should have
pretext either to go back to Clermont, or to go on further to visit his
Mistress. The prudence and diligence of those that managed the business did
prevent him, and begot a suspicion in him, for he was seen to truss up his
Cloak and to try whither his sword did not stick to the Scabbard. D' Eurre went
to him, and having complemented him rode on his left hand, while the Troop was
setting in order; Nerestan came to salute him on the other side, and rode on
his right hand, being followed by three stout Soldiers, habited like Lackeys,
and appointed for this action. The Viscount of du Pont du Chasteau and his
brother rode out of the Troop and encompassed him on all sides. One of the
Soldiers laid hold on the Horses Bridle; d' Eurre at the same time laid hold
on his Swords Hilt, saying, my Lord, we are commanded by the King to give him
an account of your person, and we entreat you to submit unto his Majesty's good
pleasure, that we may have no occasion to use you otherways then we desire.
Maison-ville and Li^erne who were his two followers drew their Swords, thinking
to make him way to escape, but some shot spent upon them, made them presently
retire and run away. He was put upon a Trumpeters Nag as far as Briare, and
thence conducted to Montargis in a Coach, and afterward by water to Paris and
put in the Bastille.

By this History, and the explication of the word Censuart, which is an ancient
word derived from the Latin word Censor) and taken here for the Kingly office,
the whole Prophecy is easily understood, and obvious to the meanest capacity.

X. French.
Embassadeur pour une Dame,
A son Vaissau mettra la rame,
Pour prier le grand Medecin,
Que de l'Oster de tell peine,
Mais a ce s'opposera Roine,
Grand peine avaunt qu'en voir la fin.
English.
An Ambassador for a Lady,
Shall set Oars to his Ship,
To entreat the great Physician,
To take her out of such pain,
But a Queen shall oppose it,
A great deal of trouble before the end of it.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning Mary Stuart Queen of Scots put in Prison by Queen
Elizabeth, who is called here the opponant Queen, to the Embassy that the said
Queen of Scots sent for relief to the King of France, called here the great
Physician.

XI. French.
Durant le Siecle on verra deux ruisseaux,
Tout un terrouer inonder de leurs eaux,
Et submerger par Ruisseaux and Fontaines,
Coups, and Monfrein Beccoyran and Alais,
Par le Gardon bien souvent travaillez,
Six cens and quattre, Ales and trente Moines.
English.
In this Age two Rivolets shall be seen,
To overflow a whole Country with their waters,
And to drown by Rivolets and Fountains,
Coups, and Monfrein, Beccoiran and Alais,
By the Gardon often troubled,
Six hundred and four Alais, and thirty Monks.
ANNOT.

An Age is the space of one hundred years, the meaning therefore of this is,
that within the Age following, his Prophecies namely as he says after, in the
year 1664. there shall be great Inundation in Languedoc, caused by the
overflowing of two small Rivers, besides that of Gardon, which Inundation shall
drown these following places, Coups, Monfrein, Becoyran and Alais, besides, and
Abbey wherein there was 30. Monks, but of this I could find nothing in the
History, therefore those that live about those places must make it good.

XII. French.
Six cens and cinq tres grand nouvelle,
De deux Seigneurs la grand querelle,
Proche de Gevaudan sera,
En une Eglise apres l'offrande,
Meuttre commis, prestre de mande,
Tremblant de peur se sauvera.
English:
In six hundred and five shall be great news,
The quarrel of two great Lords,
Shall be near Gevaudan,
In a Church after the Offering,
A murder committed, the Priest shall ask,
And quaking for fear, shall save himself.
ANNOT.

This (like the former) is a particular accident, of which the public History
takes no notice; it seems that in the year 1665. in Gevaudan, a Province of
France near Langnedoc, there was a great quarrel between two Lords who meeting
at Church, did about the time of the Offering set one upon another, and one of
them was killed, whereupon the Priest being terrified, ran away.

XIII. French.
L'aventurier, six cens, and six ou neuf,
Sera surpris par fiel mis dans un Oeuf,
Et peu apres sera horse de puissance,
Par le puissant Empereur General,
Qu'ou Monde nest an pereil ny esgal,
Don't un chascun luy rend obeissance.
English.
The adventurer, six hundred, six or nine,
Shall be surprised by Gall put into an Egg,
And a little while after shall be out of power,
By the potent Emperor General,
To whom in the world there is not his like or equal,
Wherefore every one yields obedience to him.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was concerning the Duke of Savoy and Henry the IV. for about
that time mentioned by the Author, after the death of Marshal de Biron, who
sided with the Duke of Savoy (which death is called here Gall put into an Egg;)
the Duke of Savoy refused to perform the treaty concerning the restitution of
the Marquisate of Saluces, wherefore Henry the IV went and subdued most of his
Country, and compelled him to give the Province of Bresse instead of the said
Marquisate.

XIV. French.
Au grand Siege encor grand forfaits,
Recommenceant plus que jamais,
Six cens and cinq sur la verdure,
La prise and reprise sera,
Soldats es Champs jusqu' en froidure,
Puis apres recommencera.
English.
At the great Siege yet great misdemeanors,
Beginning again more than ever,
Six hundred and five about the Spring,
The taking and retaking shall be,
Soldiers in the fields till Winter,
And after that shall begin again.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is about the same subject as the precedent. By the great Siege
here is meant the Siege of Montpelian, the strongest place in Savoy, which
Henry the IV. took, and by it compelled the Duke of Savoy to an agreement. The
rest is ^a^^^.

XV. French.
Nouveau esleu Patron du grand Vaisseau,
Verra long temps briller le grand flambeau
Qui sert de Lamp a ce grand territoire,
Et auquel temps Armees soubs son nom,
Jointes a celles de l'heureux de Bourbon,
Levant, Ponant, and Couchant sa memoire.
English.
The new elected Master of the great Ship,
Shall a great while see the great light shine,
Which serves for a Lamp to this great Territory,
And at which time Armies under his name,
Joined with those of happy of Bourbon,
East, West, and North his memory shall be.
ANNOT.

The three first Verses are concerning Clement the VIII. who was elected Pope
about that time, and was Instrumental to make a Peace between the King of
France and the Duke of Savoy, and was Pope a good while.

By the great Ship is meant the Church, of which he is called Master. The rest
is easy.

XVI. French.
En Octobre Six cens and cinq,
Pourvoieur du MonstreMarin,
Prendra duSouverain le cresme
Ou en six cens and six en Juin,
Grand joye aux Grands and au Commun,
Grand faits apres ce grand Baptesme.
English.
In October six hundred and five,
The Purveyor of the Sea Monster,
Shall take the unction of the Sovereign,
Or in six hundred and six in June,
Great joy shall be to the Great ones, and to the Commons,
Great feats shall be after this great Baptism.
ANNOT.

In the year 1606. the 14 of September, instead of which the Printer has put
October, the Dolphin of France, Lewis the XIII. son to Henry the IV. was
Christened with his two Sisters at Fountainbleau, and because the Ceremonies
were extraordinary, and our Author calls this a great Baptism, it will not be
amiss for the satisfaction of the curious Reader, to give here succinctly a
description of it.

In the great quadrangle of the Castles Yard, was erected a great Theater, all
spread and hanged with most rich Carpets and Hangings, in the middle of which
Theater was a square of thirty foot on each side, with rails about it, all
covered with Carpets, in the front of it was erected an Altar, adorned with the
Ornaments belonging to the Order of the Holy Ghost, behind the Table was a
Footstool of three steps, spread with Carpets, and in the middle of the
Footstool was a kind of a Stand, covered with a Silver Cloth, upon which were
the Fount, covered with a most exquisite Towel, and a Canopy over it, on both
sides of the Altars were two Scaffolds for two Quires of Music, and a little
lower on the right hand a Bench covered with Carpets for the Prelates to sit,
among which were three Archbishops, nine Bishops and three Abbots, on the left
hand were the Lords of the Council, and before the Altar was the Cardinal of
Gondy, encompassed with Almoners and Chaplains, and a great multitude of
Spectators seated upon Benches, in form of a Theater, round about the Theater
were the guard of Switzers, having every one a Torch in his hand

The Dolphin and his Sisters were in their Chambers upon Beds of State, with
their Robes lined with Hermines, and were brought to the quadrangle, the
waiting Gentlemen going before with Torches in their hands, with the Bed
Chamber men, and Gentlemen of the Chamber, five Drums, Waits, and Trumpeters,
Heralds, and the Knights of the Holy Ghost, with the three Honors; in the
first, for the youngest Daughter, the Ewer, the Basin, the Pillow, the Wax
Taper, the Chrisme, the Saltseller, were carried by the Baron, Son to Marshal
de la Chastre, by the Lords Montigny, la Rochepot, Chemerand, Liencourt,
Fervacques, and the Lady was carried by the Marshal of Bois Dauphin, followed
by Charles Duke of Lorrain Godfather, and of Don Juan de Medicis, Brother to
the great Duke of Tuscaky, representing Christian, Daughter to the Duke of
Lorrain, and Wife of the great Duke. After that followed the Duchess of Guise,
the Countesses of Guiche, of Saulx, the Marchioness Monlaur, and other Ladies.

The Marshals of Laverdin, and of la Chastre, the Dukes of Silly, of Monbazon,
of Espernon, of Esguillon did the same office for the elder Lady. The Lord of
Ragny carried her for Diana Duchess of Angoulesme, who did represent the
Infanta, Clara, Eugenta, Eusabella, Archidutchess or Austria, followed by the
Duchess of Rohan, Montmorency, Mayenne.

The third Honor for the Dolphin was carried by the Earl of Vaudemont, the
Knight of Vendosme his elder Brother, the Duke of Mensier, the Earl of
Soissons, and the Prince of County, all three Princes of the Blood, and the
Dolphin was carried by the Lord Souvray his Governor, in the room of the
Prince of Conde, first Prince of the Blood, who because of his sickness could
do him no other service then to hold him by the hand. The Duke of Guise carried
his Train, and the Cardinal of Joyouse followed him, representing the Pope Paul
the V. then followed Eleonor Wife to Vincent Duke of Mantua, and the Princess
of the Blood, all richly attired.

The Dolphin being brought upon the Table of the quadrangle, the Cardinal of
Gondy appointed for this Ceremony, came near him, and having heard him answer
pertinently to the questions asked by the Almoner according to the usual forms,
and to say the Lords Prayer and the Creed in Latin, he was exercised,
appointed, and by the Cardinal of Joyouse Legate, named Lewis.

The Ladies were afterward brought upon the Table, and the eldest, named
Elizabeth by the Duchess of Angoulesme, representing the Archidutchess her
Godmother, without any Godfather:

The youngest was named by Don Juan of Medicis (representing the great
Duchess) Christierne.

At Supper the King was waited upon by the Princess of his Blood; the Prince of
Conde served for Pantler, the Prince of Compty for Cupbearer, the Duke of
Monpenfier for Squire Carver, the Earl of Soissons for high Steward, the Duke
of Guise and the Earl of Vaudemont waited upon the Queen, and the Duke of Sully
waited upon the Legate. The Godfathers sat, and after them the Princesses,
Ladies and Lords of high quality, at the great Ball the Duke of Lorrain did
precede by the Kings order, for the only consideration that he was Godfather.

The next day there was a running at the Ring, and at night the Duke of Sully
caused an artificial Castle to be assaulted with an innumerable quantity of
Squibs, Chambers, Canon shots, and other Fire Works, but never any thing was
seen more incredible or wonderful, then the beauty, ornament and luster of the
Princesses and Ladies of the Court; The Eyes could not steadfastly behold the
splendour of the Gold, nor the brightness of the Silver, nor the glittering of
Jewels; the Princes and Lords did out vie one another who should be most richly
attired, among the rest the Duke of Espernon had a Sword valued at 30000.
Crowns, and upon the Queens Gown were 32000. Pearls, and 3000. Diamonds.

XVII. French.
Au mesme temps un grand endurera,
Joyeux, malsain, l'an complet ne verra,
Et quelques uns qui seront de la feste,
Feste pour un seulement, a ce jour,
Mais peuapres sans fair long sejour,
Deux se donront l'un l'autre de la test.
English.
At the same time a great one shall suffer,
Joyful, sickly, shall not see the year complete,
And some others who shall be of the feast.
A ^east for one only at that day,
But a little while after without long delay,
Two shall knock one another in the head.
ANNOT.

This Stanza has relation to the precedent, for about the time of, or a little
before that famous Christning died Pope Leo the IX. formerly called Cardinal of
Florence, who did not live a whole year in the Papacy, and is called here
Joyful, Sickly, because though infirm, he did much rejoice in the obtaining of
it; those others that were of the Feast, were some Cardinals of his party, who
died also within the same year.

The two last Verses signify the differences that happened between Paul V. his
Successor, and the Commonwealth of Venice presently after his death.

XVIII. French.
Considerant la triste Philomele,
Qu'en pleurs and cris sa plainte renouvelle,
Racourcissant par tell moyen ses jours,
Six cens and cinq elle en verra l'yssue,
De son tourment, ia la toil tissue,
Por son moien senestre aura secours.
English.
Considering the sad Philomela,
Who in tears and cries renews her complaint,
Shortning by such means her days,
Six hundred and five shall see the end,
Of her torment, then the Cloth Woven,
By her finister means shall have help.
ANNOT.

This sad Philomela was Henrietta of Balzac Daughter to Francis of Balzac,
Marquess of Entragues, and Mistress to Henry the IV. who being found guilty of
a Conspiracy against the State, was confined to the Abbey of the Nuns of
Beaumont lez Tours, where she was seven Months, after which the King taking
pity of her, passed a Declaration, wherein in respect of his former Love, and
of the Children that he had by her, he forgave her all what was past, did
abolish and suppress for ever the Memory of the Crime that she was accused off,
and did dispense her from appearing before the Parliament, who in her absence
did Register her Letters of Pardon the 6. of September 1605. Thus Reader you
may see how punctual was our Author in his Prognostications.

XIX. French.
Six cens and cinq, six cens and six and sept,
Nous monstrera jusques l'an dixsept,
Du boutefeu l'Ire, haine and envy,
Soubs l'Olivier d'assez long temps cache,
Le Crocodil sur la Terre a cache,
Ce qui estoit mort sera pour lors en vie.
English.
Six hundred and five, six hundred and six and seven,
Will show us unto the year seventeen,
The anger of the boutefeu, his hatred and envy,
Under the Olive Tree a great while hidden,
The Crocodile upon the ground has hidden,
What was dead, shall then be alive.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is so difficult, signifies nothing but the confusions that have
happened in France from the year 1605. to the year 1917. which would be too
tedious and prolix here to relate, the Reader may see them in the French
History.

XX. French.
Celuy qui a par plusieurs fois,
Tenu la Cage and puis les bois,
Rentre a son premier estre,
Vie sauve peu apres sortir,
Ne se scachant encor cognoistre,
Cherchera subject pour mourir.
English.
He that has many times,
Been in the Cage and in the Woods,
Comes again to his first being,
And shall go out a little after with his life safe,
And not able yet to know himself,
Shall seek a subject to be put to death.
ANNOT.

This is yet concerning the Earl of Auvergne half Brother to the Duchess of
Verneuil, who for his misdemeanors having been put several times in the
Bastille, and set free again, nevertheless was attempting still some new thing,
which might have endangered his life.

XXI. French.
L'Autheur des maux commencera Regner,
En l'an six cens and sept sans espargner,
Tous les subjects qui sont a la Sangsue,
Et puis apres s'en viendra peu a peu,
Au franc Pais rallumer son feu,
S'en retournant d'ou elle est issue.
English.
The Author of evils shall begin to Reign,
In the year six hundred and seven, without sparing,
All the subjects that belong to the Leech,
And afterward shall come by little and little,
To the free Country to kindle again his fire,
Going back again from whence it came.
ANNOT.

The Author being a zealous Roman Catholic, calls here the Hollanders the
Authors of evils, who in the year 1607. and 1608. made a grievous War, and had
several successes against the Spaniard, with the help of the French and
English, till the year 1609. when by the mediation of the French and English
Ambassadors, the Truce was concluded at Antwerp, between the Archduke and the
States of the United Provinces, the Articles of it to the number of 38. were
solemnly proclaimed and published the ninth of April, and ratified by the King
of Spain in the Month of July next ensuing.

XXII French.
Cil qui dira descouvrisant l'affaire,
Comme du mort, la mort pourra bien fair,
Coups de Poniards par un qu'auront induits,
Sa fin sera pis qu'il n'aura fait fair,
La fin conduit les hommes sur la Terre,
Guete par tout, tant le jour que la nuit.
English.
He that shall say discovering the business,
How of the dead, can make a death well,
Strokes of a Dagger by one that has been induced to it,
His end shall be worse then he has caused to be done,
The end leads all men upon the Earth,
Espied every where, as well by day as by night.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is wholly abstruse and Enigmatical, therefore I will not pretend
to expound it, but leave the interpretation to those that have more time and
leisure then I.

XXIII. French.
Quand la grand Nef, la prove and Gouvernail,
Du franc Pais, and son Esprit vital,
Descueils and flots par la Mer secovee,
Six cens and sept and dix coeur assiege,
Et des reflux de son corpse affiege,
Sa vie estant sur ce mal renovee.
English.
When the great Ship, the Prow, and Rudder,
Of the French Country, and her vital Spirit,
Being tossed by Baks and Waves,
Six hundred and seven, and ten, a heart beset,
And by the ebbing of his body afflicted,
Her life being upon this, evil knotted again.
ANNOT.

This Stanza signisieth the great troubles that were in France from the year
1610. in which Henry the IV. died, to the year 1617. in which the Marshal d'
Ancre was killed.

This man was named Concino Concini a Florentine born, who in a little time was
grown very great, and from a base extraction had ascended to the dignity of
Marshal of France, by the favor of the Queen Regent Mary of Medicis, and grew
so rich, that he offered to the King to maintain at his own charge 6000. foot,
and 800. Horses for four Months together; he had made himself Master of many
strong Places in Picardy and Normandy, went about to buy the Government of
several Provinces, did dispose of the Kings Exchequer at his pleasure, and
spent vast sums of money at his Masters charge. His insolences were the cause
of his ruin, when he thought least of it; for he threatened every one with
words and deeds, so far as to say, that he would cause them to eat up their
fingers, that should oppose his Will, and so caused many Officers and Soldiers
of the contrary party to be put to death. The King Lewis the XIII. was
particularly informed of the unsufferable pride and misdemeanors of this
Marshal, and that his design was to keep up the War in France, to continue his
Authority and Power; therefore the King commanded Vitry, the Captain of his
Guards, to apprehend him. This was a difficult thing, because that the Marshal
(besides his Menial servants) had always twelve Guards wearing his Livery, that
were desperate fellows; there was also another difficulty, because no body
could tell, when or at what time he would come to the Louvre; nevertheless at
last he came to it, upon the 24. of April 1617. attended with a great Train and
his Guards; the great Gate was opened to him, and presently shut again, Vitry
drew near to him, and holding his staff to him, said, I arrest you in the Kings
name, upon these words the Marshal stepped back, as if it were to make
resistance, saying, Me? whereupon those that were with Vitry shot three Pistols
at him, one did hit him in the Heart, the other in the Head, and the third in
the Belly, so that he fell down dead immediately upon his left side, a certain
Lord that was on his right hand speaking with him, fell down also without any
hurt, but his followers seeing him dead run away.

This death was the cause of great alterations in the public Government. The
body of the said Marshal was buried at St. Germain de l'Auxerrois, but the
people dug it out, and dragged it to the new Bridge, where they hanged it by
the feet upon a Gibbet, having cut off his Nose, his Ears and his privy parts,
then they took him down, and dragged him through the Town, and afterward burnt
it. Thus did perish he that was worth about two Millions of Pounds Sterling,
and pretended to make his house perpetual and Sovereign. The new Officers that
had governed the State from the 24 of November to the 24 of April 1617. were
arrested in their houses, and the old ones put in again, and the Princes called
back again to the Court.

XXIV. French.
Le Mercurial non de trop longue vie,
Six cens and huit and vingt, grand malady,
Et encor pis danger de feu and d'eau,
Son grand amy lors luy sera contraire,
De tells hazards se pourroit bien distraire,
Mais bref, le fer luy fera son Tombeau.
English.
The Mercurial not too long lived,
Six hundred and eight and twenty, a great sickness,
And what is worse a danger of fire and water,
His great friend then shall be against him,
He might well avoid those dangers,
But a little after, the Iron shall make his Sepulcher.
ANNOT.

This is concerning Lewis the XIII. King of France, who fell dangerously sick
of the Plague at Lions, about the year 1628. after that went with his Army into
Savoy, where he escaped many dangers of fire and water. As for the Verse it
must not be understood, as if he had been killed, but that the cares he took
about his Armies should shorten his days. The fourth Verse is to be understood
of the Lord Bellingham, then favorite to the King, who forsook him in his
sickness, for which he was afterward disgraced, and could never come into
favor again.

XXV. French.
Six cens and six, six cens and neuf,
Un Chancelier gros comme un Boeuf
Vieux comme le Phoenix du Monde,
En ce Terroir plus ne luira,
De la Nef doubly passera,
Au Champs Elysiens fair ronde.
English.
Six hundred and six, six hundred and nine,
A Chancellor big as an Ox,
Old as the Phoenix of the World,
Shall shine no more in this Country,
Shall pass from the Ship of forgetfulness,
Into the Elysian Fields to go the round.
ANNOT.

Six and nine joined together makes 15. the meaning of this therefore is, that
about the year 1615. should die the Chancellor of France, who was then Nicolas
Brulart Lord of Sillery a very corpulent man.

XXVI. French.
Deux freres sont de l'ordre Ecclesiastique,
Don't l'un prendra pour la France la pique,
Encor un coup si l'an six cens and six,
N'est afflige d'une grand malady,
Les Arms en main jusques six cens and dix,
Gueres plus loing ne s'estendant sa vie.
English.
Two Brothers are of the Ecclesiastical Order,
One of which shall take up the Pike for France,
Once more, if in the year six hundred and six,
He be not afflicted with a great sickness,
The Weapons in his hands till six hundred and ten,
His Life shall reach not much further.
ANNOT.

In the year 1606. there was two Brothers of the House of Joyeuse, one called
Francis Cardinal of Joyeuse, and the other a Capuchin Friar, the rest of the
Brothers being dead without issue; Father Angel got a dispensation from the
Pope to go out of his Covent, and to Marry, that the Family might not be
extinguished, and so turned Courtier and Soldier again, till he had got a
Daughter, who was afterward married to the Duke of Guise; after that,
remembering his Vows, he turned Capuchin again, and a little while while after
died, coming from Rome to Paris.

XXVII. French.
Celeste feu du cost d'Occident,
Et du Midy courir jusqu'au Levant,
Verse demi morts sans point trouver racine,
Troisiesme Age a Mars le Belliqueux,
Des Escarboucles on verra briller feux,
Age Escarbouclc, and a la fin famine.
English.
A Celestial fire on the West side,
And from the South shall run to the East,
Warm, half dead, and incapable to find Roots,
The third Age to Mars the Warrior,
Out of Carbuncles fires shall be seen to shine,
The Age shall be a Carbuncle, but in the end famine.
ANNOT.

This signifies nothing but the troubles that were all France over, from the
year 1620. to the year 1628. when Rochel was taken, and the great famine that
was in the year 1626.

XXVIII. French.
L'An mil six cens and neuf ou quatorziesme,
Le vieux Charon fera Pasques en Caresme,
Six cens and six par escrit le mettra,
Le Medecin de tout cecy s'estonne,
A mesme temps assign en person,
Mais pour certain l'un deux comparoistra.
English.
In the year a thousand six hundred and nine or fourteen,
The old Charon shall Celebrate Easter in Lent,
Six hundred and six shall put it in writing,
The Physician wondereth at all this,
At the same time being Cited in person,
But for certain, one of them shall appear.
ANNOT.

This signifies that about the time mentioned by the Author, some great one
should be very sick in Lent, and should eat flesh, which is called here to
Celebrate Easter in Lent; and that his Physician wondering at it should fall
sick himself, and that without fail, one of them two should die.

XXIX. French.
Le Griffon se peut apprester,
Pour a l'ennemy resister,
Er renforcer bien son Armee,
Autrement l'Elephant viendra,
Qui d'un abord le surprendra,
Six cens and huit, Mer enflammee.
English.
The Griffin may prepare himself,
To resist the Enemy,
And to strengthen his Army,
Otherways the Elephant shall come,
Who on a sudden shall surprise him,
Six hundred and eight, the Sea shall be inflamed.
ANNOT.

By the Griffin was meant the Hollanders, who were warned here to beware of the
Elephant, that is, the Spaniard, and to strengthen their Army for fear of being
surprised.

The last Verse signifies, that in the year 1608. there should be a notable
Seafight, which was then frequent enough between the said Hollanders and
Spaniard.

XXX. French.
Dans peu de temps Medicin du grand mal,
Et la Sangsue d'ordre and rang inegal,
Mettront le feu a la branche d Olive,
Post courir d'un and d'autre cost,
Et par tell feu leur Empire accoste,
Se rallumant du franc finy salive.
English.
Within a little while the Physician of the great disease,
And the Leech, of order and rank unequal,
Shall set fire to the branch of Olive,
Posts shall run to and fro,
And with such fire their Empire acquainted,
Shall kindle again with the French finished spittle.
ANNOT.

By the Physician of the great disease is meant the King of France; and the
Leech the King of Spain, so that it is foretold here, how they shall set fire
to the branch of Olive, that is, shall break the Peace and fall to War, which
in the year 1636. when upon the imprisoning of the Archbishop of Triers by the
King of Spain, because he had put himself under the French Protection, the King
of France sent an Army of 40000. men in the Low Countries, to come with the
Prince of Orange at Mastrioht, which quarrel has continued till the Marriage
of the King of France with the Infanta of Spain, Daughter to Philip the IV. The
last Verse is forced in, only to make up the time.

XXXI. French.
Celuy qui a les hazards surmoute,
Qui fer, feu, eau, na jamais redoute,
Et du Pais bien proche du Basacle,
D'un coup de fer tout le Monde estonne,
Par Crocodil estrangement done,
Peuple ravy de voir un tell spectacle.
English.
He that has overcome the dangers,
That has never feared Iron, Fire nor Water,
And of the Country near the Basacle,
By a stroke of Iron (all the World being astonished,)
By a Crocodile strangely given,
People will wonder to see such a spectacle.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy may admit of two Interpretations; the first, that Henry the IV.
who was born in the Province of Bearn, not far from Thoulonze, the chief City
of Languedoc, wherein there is a place upon the River called Basacle, where the
Mills are, who was stobbed with a knife by Francis Ravillac in the year 1610.

The other is of the last Duke of Montmorency, who being Governor of
Languedoc, took up Arms against the King, in the behalf of the Duke of Orleans,
for which he was beheaded at Thoulouse at the solicitation of Cardinal
Richclien, which happened about the year 1632.

XXXII. French.
Vin a foison tres-bon pour les Gendarmes,
Pleurs and soupirs plaintes, cris, and alarmes,
Le Ciel fer ses Tonnerres pleuvoir,
Feu, eau, and sang le tout mesle ensemble,
Le Ciel de Sol en fremit and en tremble,
Vivant na veu ce quil pourra bien voir.
English.
Plenty of Wine, very good for Troopers,
Tears, and sighs, complaints, cries, and alarums
Heaven shall cause its Thunders to rain,
Fire, water and blood, all mixed together,
The Suns Heaven, quaketh and shakes for it,
No living man has seen what he may see then.
ANNOT.

This great plenty of Wine happened in the year 1634. at which time there was
in France such plenty of Grapes, that half of them perished for want of Vessels
to put them in, and I remember very well, that then whosoever would bring a
Poinchon Vessel, which is the third part of a Tun, might have it filled with
Grapes for half a Crown, and that being my self at that time at a Town of
Burgundy, called Beaune, where the best Wine of France grows, four of us had
one Pottle of Wine English measure for one half penny. The rest signifies no
more but the miseries that happened in Germany, by the Wars that the King of
Sweden brought in about the same time.

XXXIII. French.
Bien peu apres sera tres-grand misere,
De pou de Bled qui sera sur la Terre,
De Dauphine, Provence and Vivarois,
Au Vivarois est un pauvre prefage,
Pere du fills sera Antrophophage,
Et mangeront Raeine and gland du Bois.
English.
A little after shall be a great misery,
Of the scarcity of Corn that shall be upon the ground,
Of Dauphine, Provence, and Vivarois,
In Vivarois is a poor presage,
Father of Son shall be Antropophage,
And shall eat Roots and Acorns of the Wood.
ANNOT.

This came to pass when the Duke of Rohan headed the Protestant party, and made
those Provinces the seat of the Civil Wars in France, about the year 1640. or
1642.

XXXIV. French.
Princes and Seigneurs tous se feront la guerre,
Cousin Germain, le Friar avec le Friar,
Finy l'Arby de l'heureux de Bourbon,
De Jerusalem les Princes aimables,
Du fait commis enorme and execrable,
Se ressentiront sur la bourse sans fond.
English.
Princes and Lords shall war one against another,
Cousin German, the Brother against the Brother,
The Arby finished of the happy Bourbon,
The Princes of Jerusalem so lovely,
Of the enormous and execrable fact committed,
Shall ressent upon the bottomless Purse.
ANNOT.

This foretells of the Wars that were to be between the Princes and Lords a
little after the death of Henry the IV. when the Marshal d'Ancre took upon him
the administration of affairs by the favor of the Queen Regent Mary of Medicis.

XXXV. French.
Dame par mort grandement atristee,
Mere and tutrice au sang qui la quittee,
Dame and Seigneurs faits enfants Orphelins,
Par les Aspics and par les Crocodiles,
Seront surpris forts bourgs, Chasteaux and Villes,
Dieu tout puissant les guard des malins.
English.
A Lady by death greatly afflicted,
Mother and Tutor to the Blood that has left her,
Ladies and Lords made Orphans,
By Asps and by Crocodiles,
Shall strong holds, Castles and Towns be surprised,
God Almighty keep them from the wicked.
ANNOT.

That great Lady afflicted by death, and Mother and Tutor to the Blood that
left her was Mary of Medicis, Wife to Henry the IV. who after the death of her
Husband was much troubled in her regency by her own Son Lewis the XIII. and
several great Lords of his party whence did follow the Battle of Pont de Ce.

XXXVI. French.
La grand rumeur qui fera par la France,
Les impuissans voudront avoir puissance,
Langue emmiellee and vrais Cameleons,
De boutefeus, allumeurs de chandelles,
Pyes and Geais, rapporteurs de nouvelles,
Don't la morsure semblera Scorpions.
English.
The great rumor that shall be through France,
The impuissants would fain have power,
Honey Tongues, and true Camelions,
Boutefeux, and lighters of Candles,
Magpies and Jays, carriers of news,
Whose biting shall be like that of Scorpions.
ANNOT.

This has a relation to the precedent, and expresses further the misery of
those times.

XXXVII. French.
Foible and puissant seront en grand discord,
Plusieurs mourront avaunt fair l'accord,
Foible ou puissant vainqueur se fera dire,
Le plus puissant au jeune cedera,
Et le plus vieux des deux decedera,
Lors que l'un d'eux envahira l'Empire.
English.
The Weak and powerful shall be at great variance,
Many shall die before they agree,
The weak shall cause the powerful to call him Victor,
The most potent shall yield to the younger,
And the older of the two shall die,
When one of the two shall invade the Empire.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy is not come to pass yet (for all I know) therefore I leave the
interpretation to every ones liberty.

XXXVIII. French.
Par Eau, and par fer and par grand malady,
Le Pourvoieur a l'hazard de sa vie,
Scaura combien vaut le Quintal de Bois,
Six cens and quinze ou le dixneufiesme,
On gravera d'un grand Prince cinquiesme,
L'Immortel nom sur le pied de la Croix.
English.
By Water, by Fire, and by great sickness,
The Purveyor to the hazard of his life,
Shall know how much is worth the Quintal of Wood,
Six hundred and ^ifteen, or the nineteen.
There shall be graven of a great Prince the fifth,
The immortal name upon the foot of the Cross.
ANNOT.

By the Purveyor is meant the King of France, as we have said before.

The great Prince the V. was Paul the V. who was foretold he should die about
the year 1615. 1619.

XXXIX. French.
Le Pourvoieur de Monstre sans pareil,
Se fera voir ainsy que le Soleil,
Montant le long la ligne Meridienne,
En poursuivant l'Elephant and le Loup,
Null Empereur ne fit jamais tell coup,
Et rien plus pis a ce Prince n'avienne.
English.
The Purveyor of the Monster without equal,
Shall show himself like the Sun,
Ascending in the Meridional line,
In persecuting the Elephant and the Wolf.
No Emperor did ever such an act,
I wish nothing worse may happen to that Prince.
ANNOT.

This is a Prophecy of the glorious success that Lewis the XIII. was to have
against the Spaniard in Italy, and the Protestant party at home.

XL. French.
Ce qu'en vivant le Pere n'avoit sceu,
Il acquerra ou par guerre ou par feu,
Et Combatra la sangsue irritee,
Ou jouira de son bien paternel,
Et favory du grand Dieu Eternel,
Aura bien tossed sa Province heritee.
English.
That which while he lived the father did not know,
He shall get it either by Water or by Fire,
And shall fight with the angry Leech,
Or shall enjoy his Paternal goods,
And be favorised by the great Eternal God,
Shall quickly become Heir of his Province.
ANNOT.

This concerns the present King of France Lewis the XIV. who has lately got
by Fire and Sword those Provinces in the Low Countries, to which he laid claim
by his Wives Title, which his father never knew nor attempted.

XLI French.
Vaisseaux Galeres avec leur Estendar,
Sentrebattront pres du Mont Gilbatar,
Et lors sera forfait a Pampelonne,
Qui pour son bien souffrira mill maux,
Par plusieurs fois soustiendra les assaux,
Mais a la fin unie a la Coronne.
English.
Ships and Galleys with their Standard,
Shall fight near the Mountain Gilbatar,
And then shall be endeavored against Pampelonne,
Which for her good shall suffer a thousand evils,
And many times shall resist the assaults;
But at last shall be united to the Crown.
ANNOT.

This Prophecieth the reduction of the City of Pampelona, the chief City of the
Kingdom of Navarre, under the obedience of the King of France and Navarre.

XLII French.
La grand Cite ou est le premier homme,
Bien amplement la ville ie vous nomme,
Tout en alarm, and le Soldat es Champs,
Par Fer and Eau grandement affligee,
Et a la fin des Francois soulagee,
Mais ce sera des six cens and dix ans.
English.
The great City where the first man is,
Fully I name the Town to you,
Shall be alarmed and the Soldier in the field,
Shall be by Fire and Water greatly afflicted,
And at last shall be helped by the French,
But it shall be from six hundred and ten years.
ANNOT.

That great City where the first man is, is Amsterdam, because the first Letter
and the last Sylable of it makes Adam: But of her affliction by Fire and
Water, and of her being relieved by the French in the year 1610. I can find
nothing in the History; those that are better furnished with Books than I am,
may chance to satisfy themselves and others, better than I can do.

XLIII French.
Le petit coin Provinces mutinees,
Par forts Chasteaux se verront dominees,
Encor un coup par la gent Militaire,
Dans bref seront fortement assiegez,
Mais il seront d'un tresgrand soulagez,
Qui aura sait entree dans Beaucaire.
English.
The little corner, Provinces revolted,
By strong Castles, shall see themselves commanded,
Once more by the Military Troops,
Within a little while shall be strongly Besieged,
But shall be helped by a great one,
That has made his entry in Beaucaire.
ANNOT.

This little Corner and Provinces revolted are Holland, and the rest of the
United Provinces, who are threatened here with many troubles, as they did suffer
till the Peace of Munster.

That great man that helped them, was the King of France.

XLIV. French.
La belle Rose en la France admiree,
D'un tres-grand Prince a la fin desiree,
Six cens and dix lors naistront ses amors,
Cinq ans apres sera d'un grand blessee,
Du tract d'Amour elle sera enlassee,
Si a quinze ans du Ciel recoit secours,
English.
The fair Rose admired in France,
Shall at last be desired by a great Prince,
Six hundred and ten, then shall her love begin,
Five years after she shall be wounded,
With the love of a great one she shall be entangled,
If at five years she receives help from Heaven.
ANNOT.

This Prophecy was concerning the Match between Lewis the XIII. and Ann of
Austria Infanta of Spain, who were both Married very young.

XLV. French.
De coup de fer tout le Monde estonne,
Par Crocodil estrangement done,
A un bien grand, parent de la Sangsue,
Et peu apres sera un autre coup,
De guet a pens commis contre le Loup,
Et de tells faits on en verra l'yssue.
English.
All the World being astonished at a blow of Iron,
Strangely given by a Crocodile,
To a great one, kin to the Leech,
And a little while after another blow
On purpose given against the Wolf,
And of such deeds the end shall be seen.
ANNOT.

I think this needs no further explication, then that I have given upon the
31. Stanza.

XLVI. French.
Les Pourvoieux mettra tout en desroute,
Sangsue and Loup, en mon dire escoute,
Quand Mars sera au Sign du Mouton,
Joint a Saturn, Saturn a la Lune,
Alors sera ta plus grande infortune,
Le Soleil lors en exaltation.
English.
The Purveyor shall put all in disorder,
Leech and Wolf do ye hearken to me,
When Mars shall be in the Sign of Aries,
Joined with Saturn, and Saturn with the Moon,
Then shall be thy greatest misfortune,
The Sun being then in its exaltation.
ANNOT.

This is plain, if you remember that by the Purveyor is meant the King of
France, by the Leech the King of Spain, and by the Wolf the Duke of Savoy.

XLVII. French.
Le grand d' Hongrie ira dans la Nacelle,
Le nouveau ne fera guerre nouvelle,
A son voisin, qu'il tiendra assiege,
Et le noireau avec son Altesse,
Ne souffrira que par trop on le press,
Durant trois ans ses gens tiendra range.
English.
The great one of Hungary shall go in the Boat,
The new born shall make a new War
To his Neighbor, whom he shall Besiege,
And the black one with his Highness,
Shall not suffer to be overpressed,
During three years he shall keep his Men in order.
ANNOT.

This is concerning the King of Bohemia, and his War with the Emperor, who is
called here the great one of Hungary, because he is King of it; the black one
with his Highness, is the Pals-grave, who after three years broils was defeated
at the Battle of Prage.

XLVIII. French.
Du vieux Charon on verra le Phoenix,
Estre premier and dernier des fills,
Reluire en France, and d'un chascun aimable,
Regner long temps, avec tous les honneurs,
Qu'auront jamais eu ses Predecesseurs,
Don't il rendra sa gloire memorable.
English.
The Phoenix of the old Charon shall be seen,
To be the first and last of the Sons,
To shine in France, beloved of every one,
To Reign a great while with all the honors,
That ever his Predecessors had,
By which he shall make his glory memorable.
ANNOT.

No doubt but this is meant of some King of France, which is to come

XLIX. French.
Venus and Sol, Jupiter and Mercure,
Augmenteront le genre de nature,
Grande Alliance en France se fera,
Et du Midy la Sangsue de mesme,
Le feu esteint par ce remede extreme
En Terre ferme Olivier plantera.
English.
Venus and So!, Jupiter and Mercury,
Shall augment humane kind,
A great Alliance shall be made in France,
And on the South the Leech shall do the same,
The fire extinguished by this extreme remedy,
Shall plant the Olive Tree in a firm ground.
ANNOT.

By the consent of all Astronomers, those four benign Planets augment
generation.

That great Alliance mentioned here, by which the fire was extinguished, and
the Olive Tree planted in a firm ground, is the Marriage of the present King of
France, Lewis, the XIV. with the Infanta of Spain, by which all differences
were composed, and the Peace firmly settled.

L. French.
Un peu devant ou apres l' Angleterre,
Par mort de Loup mise aussy bas que terre,
Verra le feu resister contre l'eau,
Le rallumant avecque tell force,
Du sang humain, dessus l'humaine escorce,
Fault de pain, bondance de cousteau.
English.
A little while before or after, England,
By the death of the Wolf being put as low as the ground,
Shall sec the fire resist against the water,
Kindling it again with such force,
Of humane blood, upon the humane bark,
That want of bread and abundance of knives shall be.
ANNOT.

The meaning is, that a little while after or before the said match mentioned
in the foregoing: England was or should be brought as low as the ground, and
that there should be abundance of humane blood spilled, and a great decay of
Trade, with Wars, which is that he calls, Want of Bread and abundance of
knives.

LI. French.
La Ville qu'avoit en ses ans,
Combatu l'Injure du temps,
Qui de son Vainqueur tient la vie,
Celuy qui premier la surprit,
Que peu apres Francois reprit,
Par Combats encore affoible.
English.
The City that had in her years,
Resisted the injury of the times,
And owes her life to him that overcame her,
Being the first that surprised it,
Which a little while after Francis took again,
Being yet we^kened with fightings,
LII. French.
La grand Cite qui n'a Pain a demi,
Encor un coup la saint Barthelemy,
Engravera au profond de son Ame,
Nismes, Rochelle, Geneve and Montpelier,
Castres, Lion, Mars entrant au Belier,
S'entrebattront le tout pour une Dame.
English.
The great City that has not bread half enough,
Shall once more engrave
In the bottom of her soul St. Bartholomew's day,
Nismes, Rochel, Geneva and Montpelier,
Castres, Lion, Mars coming into Aries,
Shall fight one against another, and all for a Lady.
ANNOT.

That great City mentioned here, is Paris, which is threatened of another St.
Bartholomew's day, which was fatal to the Protestants in France, for upon that
day in the year 1572. there was a general Massacre made of them through all
France, insomuch, that in Paris alone there was above ten thousand slain.

As for those Towns here named that are to fight about a Lady, I cannot guess
what Lady it should be, unless he means the Roman Church.

LIII. French.
Plusieurs mourront avaunt que Phoenix meure,
Jusques six cens septante est sa demeure,
Pass quinze ans, vingt and un, trente neus,
Le premier est Subjet a malady,
Et le second au fer, danger de vie,
Au seu a l'eau est subjet a trenteneus.
English.
Many shall die before that Phoenix dies,
Till six hundred and seventy he shall remain,
Above fifteen years, one and twenty, thirty nine,
The first shall be subject to sickness,
And the second to Iron, a danger of life,
Thirty nine shall be subject to fire and water.
ANNOT.

By the Phoenix is meant a Pope, because there is but one of that kind at once,
the meaning of the rest is unknow to me.

LIVE. French.
Six cens and quinze vingt, grand Dame mourra,
Et peu apres un fort long temps pleuvra,
Plusieurs Pais Flandres and l' Angleterre,
Seront par seu and par fer affligez,
De leurs Voisins longuement affiegez,
Contraints seront de leur fair la Guerre.
English.
Six hundred and fifteen, and twenty, a great Lady shall die,
And a little after it shall rain for a great while,
Many Countries as Flanders and England,
Shall by fire and Iron be afflicted,
And a good while Besieged by their Neighbors,
So that they shall be constrained to make War against them.
ANNOT.

What that great Lady was, that should die in the year 635. is not easy to
guess, there being many in every Country that died that year. The rest is
easy, and we have seen the truth of it in our days, and may see it hereafter.

LV. French.
Un peu devant ou apres tres-grand Dame,
Son ame au Ciel, and son corpse soubs la lame,
De plusieurs gens regretee sera,
Tous ses parens seront en grand tristesse,
Pleurs and souspirs d'une Dame en jeunesse,
Et a deux grands le dueil delaissera.
English.
A little while before, or after, a very great Lady,
Her soul in Heaven, and her body in the Grave,
Shall be lamented by many,
All her kindred shall be in great mourning,
Tears and sighs of a Lady in her youth,
And shall leave the mourning to two great ones.
ANNOT.

This may be understood of the death of Anna of Austria, Queen of France, who
left in mourning two great ones, viz. her two Sons Lewis the XIV. King of
France, and Philip of Bourbon Duke of Orleans.

Or of the death of the Queen Dowager of England, Henrietta Maria, who also was
much lamented, and left in mourning two great ones, viz. Charles the II. King
of England, and James Duke of York his Brother.

LVI. French.
Tossed l'Elephant de toutes parts verra,
Quand Pourvoyeur au Griffon se joindra,
Sa ruin proche, and Mars qui tousiour gronde,
Fera grands faits aupres de Terre Saint,
Grands Estendars sur la Terre and sur l'Onde,
Si la Nef a este, de deux friar enceinte.
English.
Shortly the Elephant on all sides shall see,
When the Purveyor shall join with the Griffin,
His ruin at hand, and Mars which always grumbleth,
Shall do great feats near the Holy Land,
Great Standarts upon the Earth and the Sea,
If the Ship has been with Child of two Brothers.
ANNOT.

The Elephant is the Emperor, the Purveyor the King of France, the Griffin the
Hollanders; the meaning then is that the Emperor shall go to ruin, when the
French and the Hollanders shall join together.

And that there shall be great Wars and Fightings in the Holy Lands, both by
Sea and Land, when two Brothers of great quality shall go in one Ship.

LVII. French.
Peu apres l'Alliance faite,
Avaunt solemnises la Feste,
L'Empereur le tout troublera,
Et la nouvelle Mariee,
Au Franc Pais par sort liee,
Dans peu de temps apres mourra.
English.
A little after the Alliance made,
Before the Feast be Solemnized,
The Emperor shall trouble all,
And the new Bride,
Being by fate tied to the French Country,
A little while after shall die.
ANNOT.

This is concerning a match that shall be made between the French King, and
some Lady of another Country, which Match shall be disturbed by the Emperor,
and the Bride shall die a little while after her Marriage.

LVIII. French.
Sangsue en peu de temps mourra,
Sa mort bon sign nous donra,
Pour l'accroissement de la France,
Alliances se trouveront,
Deux grands Roiaumes se joindront,
Francois aura sur eux puissance.
English.
The Leech within a little while shall die,
His death shall be a good sign to us,
For the augmentation of France,
Alliances shall be found,
Two great Kingdoms shall join together,
The French shall have power over them.
ANNOT.

The Leech was Philip the IV. the last King of Spain, who died a little while
after he had Married his Daughter to Lewis the XIV. now King of France, by
which Marriage the Peace was made between the two Kingdoms, in the Island of
the Conference, upon the Borders of France and Spain. By his death and that
Match is foretold the increase and happy condition of the Kingdom of France.

FINIS.

