THE PREDICTIONS OF Nostradamus, Before the Year 1558. FORETELLING The Trial
and Death of CHARLES I. The Parliamentary and Protectorian Government. The
Burning of London in Sixty Six. The Great Plague and Dutch War at the same
time. King JAMES'S Departure. King WILLIAM and Qu. MARY'S Reign. The
Humiliation of the King of France by the present Confederacy. The Reformation
of that Kingdom. And the Return of the French Protestants.
Considered in a Letter to a Friend.
AS for Nostradamus's Predictions, I am satisfied from a thorough-examination
of the Principles of Astrology, that it is a very vain thing to build any thing
upon that Art: But there are some of his Rhapsodies that are confined to such
individuating circumstances, as I would fain hear your thoughts, about them. He
has not mentioned England much above 20 times, in his many thousand Verses; and
yet here are near half that number of Predictions which have been fulfilled in
our Age, to the greatest exactness, tho they seem incapable of being fulfilled
above once, by the confining Characters of them. I will endeavor to render
them more literally from the French, than others have done, that there may be
no cavil about the sense of the words.

The Death of Charles I. is determined by these peculiar circumstances, never
known before in the world; viz. The Death of a King of England by a Court of
Justice; and that also by the Parliament; and this also after a time of Civil
War in the Netherlands, as that of Holland and Flanders was, which ended at the
Peace of Munster, 1647. It is also made to be succeeded by the Parliamentary
Government, which no other King of England's Death or Deprivation had after it;
and the French Alliance with the Usurpers is also added to it, just as the
Royal Family was banished out of France.

Centurie 9. Quatraine 49.
Gand and Brusselles marcheuront contre Anvers,
Senate de Londres mettra a mort Ieur Roy;
Le Sell and Vin luy seront a l'envers,
Pour eux avoir le Regne en desarroy.
Against Antwerp, Gant shall Brussels with it bring;
The London Senate put to death their King:
The Salt and Wine shall then against Him be,
For them to have the Realm in Anaroloy.
By the Salt and Wine in the third Verse, is meant France, according to the use
of that same term in Centur. 5. Quatr. 34. and in Centur. 10. Quatr. 7. And it
is known, that the great product of that Kingdom for the King's Revenue, for
Commerce with other Countries, as well as for the chief support of its own
Inhabitants, is their Wine and Salt; but is more especially its character in
distinction from other Countries, which it excels only in these two Commodities.

Gant and Brussels stand for the two general divisions of the Seventeen
Provinces, as it is usual in this Book for Cities to signify Countries.

The plainness of the terms in this Prediction, and the particularizing
circumstances of it fulfilled to exactness, does strangely tempt one to be
confident, that it could be no guess at a venture; and then it does also show
from the first and third Verses of it, that the style of this Author is both
figurative and prophetical, or mysterious.

This would make one very really believe, that the Protectorian Government was
also foretold in the following Quatraine.

Centur. 8. Quatr. 76.
Plus Macelin, que Roy en Angleterre.
Lieu obscur nay par force aura l'Empire;
Lasche sans foy, sans loy seignera terre,
Son temps s'approche si pres que je soupire!
In England, King shall under Butcher truckle,
A mean man force the Realm to him to buckle;
Faithless and lawless he shall bleed the Land:
I sigh to think his time's so near at hand!
Here we have an obscure person taking the Government upon him soon after the
Butchery of a King of England, and forcing the Nation to own him: and that also
against Oaths and Promises, and the Law of the Land; and this also further
determined to the times near Nostradamus. These circumstances show the thing
not capable of happening above once in the world. But when we find it also
fulfilled in the Age next to Nostradamus, how is it possible not to be
confident that these Verses can mean no other thing, but that single event
only? And in this there is neither figurative nor mysterious expressions. The
fixing this to the same time of the King's Death, with which the Parliamentary
Government is joined in the former, does also show, that the Protectorian
Government must be just almost at the same time with that of the Parliament, or
force (as it is said) the Parliament to acknowledge it.

After this encouragement, who would not verily believe, that the burning of
London in Sixty Six was signified in what follows?

Centur. 2. Quatr. 51.
Le sang du just a Londres fera fault,
Bruslez par foudres de vingt trois les six:
La Dame Antique cherra de place haute,
De mesme sect plusteurs seront occis.
The just man's blood shall guist on London six,
By Lightning burnt of twenty threes the six:
The Ancient Lady shall fall from high place,
And many shall be slain of the same Race.
That which is rendered twenty threes, does in the French signify twenty three,
as well as twenty threes. But the six in the French being plural, determines it
best to Threescore and six; and being used without a Substantive, it does in
common use of speech denote only the date of years; as Six, without any thing
else joined with it, signifies in Seventy six, or Eighty six: and such an use
of Numbers, without any thing numbered, is very frequent in the Predictions
Admirables of Nostradamus. -- The term of Lady in the third Verse must,
according to the use of Prophecy, signify either England, or London, which is
the same; as Babylon and Samaria are put for those Kingdoms, and are called
Women, and Ladies, and Queens. And the character of falling from on high,
joined here with the burning of London, is the same with those of Babylon in
Revelat. chap. 18. together with the Antiquity and Greatness of it. So also in
Isaiah chap. 47. and elsewhere. This prophetical use of these terms does
determine their Application. -- And then the slaughter of many of the same
Sect, or Race, does well fit the Dutch War to the English loss. -- To apply the
Lady to the falling of St. Paul's Church, is without example in the kind, and
is inconsistent with what is said of the Lady in the next Quatraine.

And that the next Quatraine does belong to the same things, appears from the
mention of all the same things in it which are in the former: as that of just
blood to be revenged; The great Lady joined with a City, which by the name of
the City-port is the same with London in the former; and lastly, because it is
the next Stanza to the former, with all the same things in it; as may now here
be seen.

Centur. 2. Quatr. 52.
La Grande Peste de Cite Maritime
Ne cessera, que mort ne soit vengee
Du just sang par pris damn sans crime,
De la Grande Dame par feinte n'outragee.
The City-Ports Great Plague shall not be ended,
Until the death of just blood be avenged:
Gailtless condemned, for gain, upon pretense
To the Great Lady he had done violence.
Here the great Plague in Sixty Six is said to be for the same Crime that the
Fire and War are said to be for in the former Quatraine: And the King's
accusation is here made to be a Charge of Treason against his Country, under
the name of the Great Lady. This is a very determining circumstance: but how
can this signify the profaning of Paul's Church?

These plain Predictions would make one take notice of Nostradamus's claim to
inspiration in his Preface. And these being so very plain, one would expect
something in him about so strange a change as the late Revolution was. Consider
then the following Quatraine, which foretells the election of a King of England
from the Low Countries, upon the loss of a former King; which cannot be
conceived to be capable of being above once fulfilled.

Trente de Londres secret conjureront
Contre leur Roy. Sur le Pont l'entreprize:
Luy Satallites la mort desgouteront.
Un Roy eleu blond natif de Frize.
Thirty of London against their King devise;
On him about the Bridge the Enterprise:
His Guards for's death do with displeasure mourn
Elected King a Dutch -man fair-hair'd born.
The thing being a Prophecy, The Death of a King may be only the loss of State,
and Dignity; as it several times signifies in the Revelations. The Bridge shows
the King's going away by water; the Thirty of London agree well with the 29
Lords mentioned in the Gazette, December. 11.-88. at Guildhall; the Secret
Conspiracy is the term that Nostradamus and all Papists would give to that
meeting.

The Queens Succession seems also to be plainly foretold,

Centur. 4. Quatr. 96.
La Soeur aisnee de l'Isle Britannique
Quinze ans devant le friar aura naissance,
Per son promis moyennant verifique
Succedera au Regne de Balance.
The eldest Sister of the British Throne,
Fifteen years older than her Mothers Son,
On promised terms fully unto agreed,
Unto the Balance-Kingdom shall succeed.
The determining Characters of this Prediction are, 1. The eldest Daughter of
England. 2. Born 15 years before a Brother, that is, the Duke of Cambridge,
Anno 77. 3. Her admittance to the Throne upon condition, or a Bill of Rights
first declared. 4. Succession as a Sovereign Queen. 5. With the Title of
France, as Balance or Libra signifies here, and in Quatraine 42, 61, 70. of
Century the fifth. And Orange is also in France; why not then a Kingdom to be
hoped for there? That the Salique Law shall be abrogated in France, is this
Author's mind in Quatr. 38. Centur. 5.

And the present King of France's Humiliation in Orange by the present
Consederacy, seems fairly promised from hence.

Predictions Admirables 5.
Celuy qui la Principaute
Tiendra par grande cruaute,
A la fin verra grande Phalange,
Par coup de feu tres dangereux.
Par accord pourra fair mieux,
Autrement boira suc d'Aurange.
He who the Principality
Shall keep with cruel Tyranny,
At last shall see a dreadful Troop,
Most dangerous for him to give fire,
Better b'agreement to retire,
Else juice of Orange he shall soop.
Orange in the last Verse fixes the Principality in the first Verse to that
only. And never was there such a Tyrant in it, as now; nor ever so dreadful a
Troop of Confederates against him.

This is still further confirmed by these following Predictions.

Centr. 6. Quatr. 1.
Autour des Monts Pyrenees grand amas
De gent estrange secourir Roy nouveau
Pres de Garonne, du grand Temple du Mas
Un Romain Chefle craindra dedant l'Eau.
About the Pyrenaean Hills, great Bands
TO assist a new-made King from Foreign Lands,
Hard by the Garonne, the great Temple near,
A Roman Chief Him in the Sea shall fear.
The Garonne in the third Verse determines the signification of About the
Pyrenaeans to any part of South-France Eastward. And the Roman Chief must then
be the King of France.

With this agrees Quatrain 9. Centur. 3.
Bourdeaux, Rouen, and la Rochelle joints
Tiendront autour la grand Mer Oceanes;
Angleis, Bretons, and les Flamans conjoints,
Les chasseront jusques aupres de Rou^annes.
Bourdeaux and Roan and Rochell joined shall be,
To keep the Coasts of the great Ocean Sea:
Dutch, English, and French Britains all-united,
Shall chase them to Rouannes sore afrighted.
In the following Quatraines we have the Reformation of the Kingdom of France
about this time.

Centur. 5. Quatr. 51.
La gent de Dace, d' Angleterre, and Polonne,
Et de Boeme feront nouvelle ligue
Pour passer outre d' Hercules la Colonna
Barcins, Tyrrhens dresser cruelle brigue.
The English, with the Poles, and men of Dace,
And the Bohemians, shall agree to pass
Hercules Pillars by a new-made league,
Spaniards and Tuscans drive on the fierce Intrigue.
Quatr. 52. Ibid.
Un Roy sera, qui donra l'opposite
Les Exils elevez dessus le Regne
De sang nager la gent cast Hippolyte
Et florira long temps sous tell enseigne.
To this a King shall opposition make,
The Exiles into the chief places take:
In blood, Hippolyt -like, the Chaste Tribe lay,
And long time shall he flourish in that way.
The Opposition mentioned in the last Quatraine, does necessarily tie it to
that before it; and the Confederacy in the first Quatraine had never any thing
like it in the world, but the present Confederacy against the King of France
and the Turk: It is a Confederacy from all parts of Europe, East, West, North,
and South. And from thence it appears, that by passing Hercules Pillars, must
be meant the Latin use of that phrase; that is, To go to the end of the world;
which joined with a great Confederacy, must signify in Prophecy a very great
design of Conquest. For, that it is not to go to America, appears from the
situation of some of these Countries. The King mentioned in the second
Quatraine, against whom this Confederacy is, must be a Romish King, who has
Monks and Friars in his Kingdom, as the Chaste Tribe or People must signify:
And then the King must be the King of France: for there is no other Romish
Prince excepted out of this Confederacy, but He. Barcins, or Barcelonians,
stand for Spaniards, as one City is generally used in this Book for the whole
People of that Nation. So also may Tuscans stand for Italians. Thus then do we
see all here tied to this present juncture. And then the raising the Exiles
above all, must signify the advancement of the exiled French Protestants to
govern that Kingdom; and the Chaste Tribe slain, must be the Monks and Friars,
for rebelling against the Change: This is well expressed, by likening it to the
Case of Hippolytus, who was torn in pieces for refusing to lie with his
Mother-in-law; the true Church being but the Mother-in-law to those people, who
will be pressed to enter into her Bosom and Embraces, but will judge it to be
Spiritual Adultery. This agrees well with the 7000 to be slain upon the
Ascension of the Witnesses in the 11th chap. Revelations, ver. 13. Upon this
Reformation of France, the King is said to flourish a long time in this way;
which intimates, that the Conversion shall be lasting.

From a reflection upon the late Revolution, compared with the other changes of
the State of England within these hundred years, we may observe the fulfilling
of what follows, contrary to all examples of the neighboring Countries round
about us.

Centur. 3. Quair. 57.
Sept so is verrez changez gens Britanniques
Taints en sang en deux cens nonante ans.
In ninety and two hundred years, you will see,
England seven times with blood will changed be.
This Change of England must be either seven Conquests of it by Foreign
Nations, or seven Changes of the Governing Power of it within it self. Seven
Conquests of Foreign Nations is unconceivable and unparalleled for that
compass of years. It must then be seven Changes of the Governing-Power of
England. Nostradamus wrote this in the time of Q. Elizabeth. The first Change
then was to Kings; the next was the Parliament after the Death of Charles I.
Then Protectors; then Kings again: for the bustles after the Protectors were
but a state of Anarchy, and struggles only for the King's return, which began
with Sir George Booth. And besides, the whole interval was so small, not above
one year, and three Scuffles of unsettled Powers only in that time, that none
can account them settled Governments. Wherefore Kings returned were the fourth
Change; and the late change to King and Sovereign Queen is the fifth; and we
see it necessary from thence to have one Change more, and very likely two,
before this Generation passes away. The Blood mentioned with the Changes, may
signify only the trampling down all opposition against it, or the end of the
Plotters against the Government.

Thus you see with how little allowance for Prophecy, or mysteririous
expressions, these things are verified. But what to ascribe the Predicting
Power to, I leave to your self. Nostradamus pretends to Inspiration, as well as
to Astrology; and indeed, as I see many lucky hits from Astrology, without the
least grounds from the force of its Principles: why may there not be the hand
of some unseen Spirits in it, either for good ends, or to draw in some to a too
great trust in unreasonable ways? The famous stories we have of Nickson's, and
other ordinary persons Predictions, which can very hardly be doubted of, do
satisfy us, That men need not be very Wise, not be extraordinarily Holy, to
foretell things truly, where they have no grounds or reasons for it. However, I
hope I have given you some diversion in this, and desire your opinion of all. I
am

Your etc.

LICENSED, May 26. 1691. J. F.

London: Printed for John Cross, and are to be Sold by R. B. in Warwick Lane.
1691.


