NOTES CONFERRED: OR, A DIALOGUE BETWIXT THE Groaning Board, AND A Jesuit:
DEMONSTRATING THE Ambiguous Humor of the one, and CURIOSITY of the other.

LONDON, Printed for R: Shuter, in the Year 1682.

A DIALOGUE betwixt the Groaning-Board, and a Jesuit.
Gentleman. BY your leave Gentlemen, I understand you have that wonderful Plank
to be seen here, that is so noised throughout the whole Town, for Repartee.


Master. O Sir, the Town does too much honor it; Repartee! Alas, see it is but
a board: It has indeed with Hums and Haws, delivered some bold Truths.


Gent. I have a great Curiosity to propose a few Questions to it; which by your
leave, and the good Companies, may be divertive and advantageous, if you permit.


Mast. With all my Heart Sir, there lies the Oracle; First, let me tell you,
that as for matters of State, those things have been demanded, and resolved, to
the satisfaction of all the Town.


Gent. Nay, Sir, if you prescribe me Rules, you wrong my fancy; besides,
Oracles are not always in humor: and many a fair opportunity has been Couched
under Ambiguous Words, and lost for want of an Expositure.


Mast. Ambiguous Words! You think it is a cheat I suppose? Mr. Andrew, clap on
the Irons.


Board. Hooo --


Mast. There Is an Ambitious Hum-drum for you Sir.


Gent. 'T^s so indeed; forbear good Mr. Andrew, whilst I make use of your
Master's Liberty, to propound a few questions to it.


Andrew. With all my Heart, pray Gentlemen expect but little flattery; the
Plank was not bred in London, nor at Barn-Elmes neither.


Gent. Where ever thou was bred, it was not Nature, but Miracle, that gave thee
language; and that thy Inspiration be not lost, or Dully-sing'd away by
Mercinary hands, I do Conjure thee by that power that gave thee Tongue, to tell
me what is the cause of these Elaborate Groans.


Board. O hooo, I know thou art a friend to Rome, I smell thy Beads, I can deny
thee nothing. In Henery 's Days I bore a lofty top: the Workman's envy, and the
Proud Ax ground, my sollid body then divided was, and seasoned, to be Carved
into an Alter: but Henry then declined, and I lay by, till Mary and St. Bonner,
turned me over: 'Twas then that Holy Man devised a Rack, and I thought worthy,
for the Blessed Work; But Mary was not fit for our lewd days, so we resigned
her with our tears to Heaven: the Good Old Man blessed all he had begun. But
Bess being Crowned, poor Bonner was no more: the Consecrated Engine she
destroyed; But Bonner, virtuous Bonner, chose at his Death, rather then leave
the Earth before the Glorious Work of Rome was done, to leave in me a
Transmigrated Soul.


Gent. No more, I durst have sworn he had been in Heaven; I Will have ten
thousand Masses Sung for him.


Board. Ten Thousand, and Ten Thousand, are in vain.


Gent. What an unfortunate man was I, to make this Public? The Bishop I am
sure understood Latin, he could have answered me there.


Board. But you were kinder to this Auditory, then at your Chapel; yet let
them have fair play for their money: and so pray go on Sir, if you desire any
more from me.


Gent. Ave Maria, Plena Gratia.


Board. Ah, ah, ah, forbear good Sir, the Bishop never ordained you his
Chaplain; If you will sing him a good Gentile Mass now, he will laugh at you
when you have done.


Gent. This must be the Devil that answers; I Will fright him out, and torture
him, for making use of the Reverend Bishop's name: there Sir, there is some Holy
Water for you; how like you that?


Board. I, marry Sir, I grant you have reason now; half a pint of this, and two
quarts of Brandy, will make a Capusheen swe^^^ like a Jesuit; Pray how can you
afford this a Gallon.


Gent. O never question the Rates, you shall not want, there is more for you.


Board. Now, now, a little of your Extreme Unction quickly, quickly, and kick
me into Purgatory presently; what have you none? a little from the Lamp, it is
all one, and has served a thousand times.


Gent. Detracting Spirit, 'twas then of the Lamp of the Lady Loretta's, which
has the same operation.


Board. I know it, and begin to feel something like a turn of Reformation.


Gent. Reformation, I am abused, a Bishop of our Church and talk of
Reformation; no, no, this is the Spirit of some Schismatic Lutherine or
Calvinist; but I want not charity, though you do belief; there is more Water.


Board. O hold, good Father, I do confess I was the unfortunate Luther.


Gent. O Sir, are you so? what think you of marrying a professed Nun, and to deny
your faith to serve your pleasure, and then defending Sezeme that has spread
over the Christian World.


Board. A Schism Father, the Monarch said, let Faith defend it self; I looked
upon the Maid with virtuous thoughts, and feared her Innocence might not secure
that part I loved (her Soul) against the Serpentine and bloody Jesuit, your
Patron; Ignatius Lyales did not Head a Schism, but was in open Rebellion sure,
when he proposed ways to his Holiness, for deposing or Murdering of Princes.


Gent. Prithee no more of that, it is all forgiven; Ignatius was to blame, and
Belarmin was Rash, but they are Sainted, i will divert this, speak without
malice, where is St. Coleman now?


Board. Why? with St. Oliver, he says there was a Trick put upon him for his
life, and Swears, There Is no Truth in Man.


Gent. St. VVhitebread, where is he?


Board. St. Peter's and he are comparing of Notes, who most deluded the People.


Gent. St. Pickering, Good Man, where is he?


Board. St. Reveleack and he are hot in Dispute, whether he that attempts, or
he that does the great Act, is most Honorable.


Gent. I am sorry there should be such Bickquerings amongst brave Spirits; but
where is my old Friend St. Plunket?


Board. He stands to it yet, that he is as Innocent as the Child unborn, and
though two of his Impeachers which are there, swore all was true.


Gent. Who are they pray?


Board. St. Bedloe, and St. Turbervile.


Gent. I, those are Saints indeed; you have St. College too, I suppose, pray
what says he?


Board. Why faith, he speaks a great deal of Reason in his Cold fit, he Curses
the Ignoramus Jury, that would not send his Lord and Patroon to him; he swears
he has such a Plot, that M -- th should be King, were he but here.


Gent. Then God preserve his Lordship, said I; Green, Berry, and Hill, how do
they?


Board. Very merry, they laughed when they heard that T -- was Pillar'd, but
said he deserved it, for meddleing with what did not concern him; and as for
Mr. P -- they heartily forgave him. Now Sir, I have this request to you, that
you would give my Master your Receiv against Worms and Maggets, which may
preserve me as well as Joseph's Breeches: I have seen three pair of them, as
fresh as those you ware; and to be friends Merry Andrew, with a hundred or two
of nails of the Cross, I know there is several thousands of them: the Cross it
self, you will grant, is in a thousand pieces, though its all whole in several
places too; The Virgins Milk, nor these, are nothing to the Spanish and Mexicon
Miracles; But now I desire a greater of you, (which is) to leave me without
further trouble, and give Room to Company, which your Impertinence has hindered.


Gent. Farewell Jesuit.


Andrew. How! is he a Jesuit? let us secure him, we shall have Ten Pounds for
Hanging of him.


Master. 'Twere well got, but I question that mightily.


FINIS.

