A DECLARATION OF THE FAITH and ORDER Owned and practiced in the Congregational
Churches IN ENGLAND; Agreed upon and consented unto by their Elders and
Messengers.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultry, 1688.

A DECLARATION OF THE FAITH and ORDER Owned and Practiced in the Congregational
Churches IN ENGLAND.
CHAP. I Of the Holy Scripture.
ALthough the Light of Nature, and the Works of Creation and Providence, do so
far manifest the Goodness, Wisdom and Power of God, as to leave Men
unexcusable; yet are they not sufficient to give that knowledge of God and of
his Will, which is necessary unto Salvation: Therefore it pleased the Lord at
sundry times, and in diverse manners to reveal himself, and to declare that his
Will unto his Church; and afterward for the better preserving and propagating
of the Truth, and for the more sure establishment and comfort of the Church
against the corruption of the Flesh, and the malice of Satan and of the World,
to commit the same wholly unto writing: which makes the Holy Scripture to be
most necessary; those former ways of God's revealing his Will unto his People,
being now ceased.

II.
Under the Name of Holy Scripture, or the Word of God written, are now
contained all the Books of the Old and New Testament; which are these:

Of the Old Testament.
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1
Samuel, 2 Samuel, 1 Kings, 2 Kings, 1 Chronicles, 2 Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, The Song of Songs, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Lamentations, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah,
Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi.

Of the New Testament.
Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, The Acts of the Apostles, Paul's Epistle to the
Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians,
Colossians, 1 Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians, 1 To Timothy, 2 To Timothy, To
Titus, To Philemon, The Epistle to the Hebrews, The Epistle of James, The first
and second Epistles of Peter, The first, second and third Epistles of John, The
Epistle of Jude, The Revelation.

All which are given by the Inspiration of God to be the Rule of Faith and Life.

III.
The Books commonly called Apocrypha, not being of Divine Inspiration, are no
part of the Canon of the Scripture; and therefore are of no authority in the
Church of God, nor to be any otherwise approved or made use of than other
humane writings.

IV.
The Authority of the Holy Scripture, for which it ought to be believed and
obeyed, depends not upon the Testimony of any Man or Church; but wholly upon
God (who is Truth it self) the Author thereof; and therefore it is to be
received, because it is the Word of God.

V.
We may be moved and induced by the Testimony of the Church, to an high and
reverent Esteem of the Holy Scripture. And the heavenliness of the Matter, the
efficacy of the Doctrine, the majesty of the Style, the consent of all the
parts, the scope of the whole, (which is, to give all glory to God) the full
discovery it makes of the only way of Man's Salvation, the many other
incomparable Excellencies, and the entire Perfection thereof, are Arguments
whereby it does abundantly evidence it self to be the Word of God; Yet
notwithstanding, our full persuasion and assurance of the infallible Truth and
Divine Authority thereof, is from the inward work of the Holy Spirit, bearing
witness by and with the Word in our Hearts.

VI.
The whole Counsel of God concerning all things necessary for his own Glory,
Man's Salvation, Faith and Life, is either expressly set down in Scripture; or
by good and necessary Consequence may be deduced from Scripture; unto which
nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new Revelations of the Spirit,
or Traditions of Men. Nevertheless we acknowledge the inward Illumination of
the Spirit of God to be necessary for the saving Understanding of such things
as are revealed in the Word: And that there are some Circumstances concerning
the Worship of God and Government of the Church, common to humane Actions and
Societies, which are to be ordered by the Light of Nature and Christian
Prudence, according to the general Rules of the Word, which are always to be
observed.

VII.
All things in Scripture are not alike plain in themselves, nor alike clear
unto all: yet those things which are necessary to be known, believed and
observed for Salvation, are so clearly propounded and opened in some place of
Scripture or other, that not only the learned, but the unlearned, in a due Use
of the ordinary means, may attain unto a sufficient understanding of them.

VIII.
The Old Testament in Hebrew (which was the Native Language of the People of
God of old) and the New Testament in Greek (which at the time of writing of it
was most generally known to the Nations) being immediately inspired by God, and
by his singular Care and Providence kept pure in all Ages, are therefore
Authentical; so as in all Controversies of Religion the Church is finally to
appeal unto them. But because these Original Tongues are not known to all the
People of God, who have right unto and Interest in the Scriptures, and are
commanded in the fear of God to read and search them; therefore they are to be
translated into the vulgar Language of every Nation unto which they come, that
the Word of God dwelling plentifully in all, they may Worship him in an
acceptable manner, and through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have
hope.

IX.
The infallible Rule of Interpretation of Scripture, is the Scripture it self;
And therefore when there is a question about the true and full sense of any
Scripture, (which is not manifold, but one) it must be searched and known by
other places, that speak more clearly.

X.
The Supreme Judge by which all Controversies of Religion are to be determined,
and all Decrees of Counsels, Opinions of ancient Writers, Doctrines of Men and
private Spirits, are to be examined, and in whose Sentence we are to rest, can
be no other, but the Holy Scripture delivered by the Spirit; into which
Scripture so delivered, our Faith is finally resolved.

CHAP. II. Of God and of the Holy Trinity.
THere is but one only living and true God; who is infinite in Being and
Perfection, a most pure Spirit, invisible, without Body, Parts, or Passions,
immutable, immense, eternal, incomprehensible, almighty, most wise, most holy,
most free, most absolute, working all things according to the Counsel of his
own immutable and most righteous Will, for his own Glory, most loving,
gracious, merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin, the rewarder of them that diligently seek him;
and withal, most just and terrible in his Judgments, hating all sin, and who
will by no means clear the guilty.

II.
God has all Life, Glory, Goodness, Blessedness, in, and of himself; and is
alone, in, and unto himself, All-sufficient, not standing in need of any
Creatures, which he has made, nor deriving any glory from them, but only
manifesting his own glory in, by, unto, and upon them: He is the alone Fountain
of all Being, of whom, through whom, and to whom are all things; and has most
Sovereign Dominion over them, to do by them, for them, or upon them whatsoever
himself pleases: In his sight all things are open and manifest, his Knowledge
is infinite, infallible, and independent upon the Creature, so as nothing is to
him contingent or uncertain: He is most Holy in all his Counsels, in all his
Works, and in all his Commands. To him is due from Angels and Men, and every
other Creature, whatsoever Worship, Service or Obedience, as Creatures, they
owe unto the Creator, and whatever he is further pleased to require of them.

III.
In the Unity of the Godhead there be three Persons, of one Substance, Power
and Eternity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost: The Father
is of none, neither begotten, nor proceeding; The Son is eternally begotten of
the Father; The Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son.
Which Doctrine of the Trinity is the foundation of all our Communion with God,
and comfortable Dependence upon him.

CHAP. III. Of God's eternal Decree.
GOD from all eternity did by the most wise and holy Counsel of his own Will,
freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass: Yet so, as thereby
neither is God the Author of Sin, nor is violence offered to the will of the
Creatures, nor is the liberty or contingency of second Causes taken away, but
rather established.

II.
Although God knows whatsoever may or can come to pass upon all supposed
Conditions, yet has he not decreed any thing, because he foresaw it as future,
or, as that which would come to pass upon such Conditions.

III.
By the Decree of God for the manifestation of his Glory, some Men and Angels
are predestined unto everlasting Life, and others foreordained to
everlasting Death.

IV.
These Angels and Men thus predestined, and foreordained, are particularly
and unchangeably designed, and their number is so certain and definite, that it
cannot be either increased or diminished.

V.
Those of Mankind that are predestined unto Life, God, before the foundation
of the World was laid, according to his eternal and immutable Purpose, and the
secret counsel and good pleasure of his Will, has chosen in Christ unto
everlasting Glory, out of his mere free Grace and Love, without any foresight
of Faith or good Works, or Perseverance in either of them, or any other thing
in the Creature, as Conditions or Causes moving him thereunto, and all to the
praise of his glorious Grace.

VI.
As God has appointed the Elect unto Glory, so has he by the eternal and most
free purpose of his Will foreordained all the means thereunto* Wherefore they
who are elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed by Christ, are effectually
called unto Faith in Christ by his Spirit working in due season, are justified,
adopted, sanctified, and kept by his Power, through Faith, unto Salvation.
Neither are any other redeemed by Christ, or effectually called, justified,
adopted, sanctified, and saved, but the Elect only.

VII.
The rest of Mankind God was pleased, according to the unsearchable Counsel of
his own Will, whereby he extends or withholdeth Mercy as he pleases, for the
glory of his Sovereign Power over his Creatures, to pass by and to ordain them
to dishonor and wrath for their Sin, to the praise of his glorious Justice.

VIII.
The Doctrine of this high Mystery of Predestination, is to be handled with
special Prudence and Care, that Men attending the will of God revealed in his
Word, and yielding Obedience thereunto, may from the certainty of their
effectual Vocation, be assured of their eternal Election. So shall this
Doctrine afford matter of praise, reverence and admiration of God, and of
Humility, Diligence and abundant Consolation to all that sincerely obey the
Gospel.

CHAP. IV. Of Creation.
IT pleased God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for the manifestation of the
glory of his eternal Power, Wisdom and Goodness, in the beginning, to create or
make of nothing the World, and all things therein, whether visible or
invisible, in the space of six days, and all very good.

II.
After God had made all other Creatures, he created Man, Male and Female, with
reasonable and immortal Souls, endued with Knowledge, Righteousness and true
Holiness, after his own Image, having the Law of God written in their Hearts,
and power to fulfill it; and yet under a possibility of transgressing, being
left to the liberty of their own Will, which was subject unto change. Besides
this Law written in their hearts, they received a command not to Eat of the
Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, which whilst they kept, they were happy
in their communion with God, and had dominion over the Creatures.

CHAP. V. Of Providence.
GOD the great Creator of all things, does uphold, direct, dispose, and govern
all Creatures, actions, and things, from the greatest even to the least, by his
most wise and holy Providence, according unto his infallible foreknowledge,
and the free and immutable counsel of his own Will, to the praise of the glory
of his Wisdom, Power, Justice, Goodness and Mercy.

II.
Although in relation to the foreknowledge and decree of God, the first Cause,
all things come to pass immutably, and infallibly; yet by the same Providence
he orders them to fall out, according to the nature of second Causes, either
necessarily, freely, or contingently.

III.
God in his ordinary Providence makes use of Means, yet is free to work
without, above, and against them at his pleasure.

IV.
The Almighty Power, unsearchable Wisdom, and infinite Goodness of God, so far
manifest themselves in his Providence, in that his determinate Counsel
extends it self even to the first Fall, and all other sins of Angels and Men,
(and that not by a bare Permission) which also he most wisely and powerfully
boundeth, and otherwise orders and governs in a manifold Dispensation to
his own most holy ends; yet so, as the sinfulness thereof proceeds only from
the Creature, and not from God, who being most holy and righteous, neither is,
nor can be the author or approver of Sin.

V.
The most wise, righteous and gracious God does oftentimes leave for a season
his own Children to manifold Temptations, and the corruption of their own
Hearts, to chastise them for their former sins, or to discover unto them the
hidden strength of Corruption, and deceitfulness of their Hearts, that they may
be humbled; and to raise them to a more close and constant dependence for their
support upon himself, and to make them more watchful against all future
occasions of sin, and for sundry other just and holy ends.

VI.
As for those wicked and ungodly Men, whom God, as a righteous Judge, for
former sins, does blind and harden, from them he not only withholdeth his
Grace, whereby they might have been enlightened in their Understandings, and
wrought upon in their Hearts; but sometimes also withdraws the Gifts which
they had, and exposes them to such Objects, as their Corruption makes
occasions of sin; and withal, gives them over to their own Lusts, the
Temptations of the World, and the Power of Satan; whereby it comes to pass that
they harden themselves, even under those means which God uses for the softning
of others.

VII.
As the Providence of God does in general reach to all Creatures, so after a
most special manner it takes care of his Church, and disposes all things to
the good thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fall of Man, of Sin, and of the Punishment thereof.
GOD having made a Covenant of Works and Life, thereupon, with our first
Parents and all their Posterity in them, they being seduced by the subtilty and
temptation of Satan, did wilfully transgress the Law of their Creation, and
break the Covenant in eating the forbidden Fruit.

II.
By this Sin they, and we in them, fell from original Righteousness and
Communion with God, and so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled in all the
Faculties and Parts of Soul and Body.

III.
They being the Root, and by Gods appointment standing in the room and stead of
all Mankind, the guilt of this Sin was imputed, and corrupted Nature conveyed
to all their Posterity descending from them by ordinary Generation.

IV.
From this original Corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled and
made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed all
actual Transgressions.

V.
This Corruption of Nature during this Life, does remain in those that are
regenerated; and although it be through Christ pardoned and mortified, yet both
it self and all the motions thereof are truly and properly Sin.

VI.
Every sin, both original and actual, being a Transgression of the righteous
Law of God, and contrary thereunto, does in its own nature bring guilt upon the
sinner, whereby he is bound over to the Wrath of God, and Curse of the Law, and
so made subject to Death, with all Miseries spiritual, temporal and eternal.

CHAP. VII. Of Gods Covenant with Man.
THe distance between God and the Creature is so great, that although
reasonable Creatures do owe obedience unto him as their Creator, yet they could
never have attained the reward of Life, but by some voluntary condescension on
Gods part, which he has been pleased to express by way of Covenant.

II.
The first Covenant made with Man, was Covenant of Works, wherein Life was
promised to Adam, and in him to his Posterity, upon condition of perfect and
personal Obedience.

III.
Man by his Fall having made himself incapable of Life by that Covenant, the
Lord was pleased to make a second, commonly called the Covenant of Grace;
wherein he freely offers unto sinners Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ,
requiring of them Faith in him that they may be saved, and promising to give
unto all those that are ordained unto Life, his holy Spirit, to make them
willing and able to believe.

IV.
This Covenant of Grace is frequently set forth in the Scripture by the name of
a Testament, in reference to the Death of Jesus Christ the Testator, and to the
everlasting Inheritance, with all things belonging to it, therein bequeathed.

V.
Although this Covenant has been differently and variously administered in
respect of Ordinances and Institutions in the time of the Law, and since the
coming of Christ in the flesh; yet for the substance and efficacy of it, to all
its spiritual and saving ends, it is one and the same; upon the account of
which various Dispensations, it is called the Old and New Testament.

CHAP. VIII. Of Christ the Mediator.
IT pleased God, in his eternal Purpose, to choose and ordain the Lord Jesus,
his only begotten Son, according to a Covenant made between them both, to be
the Mediator between God and Man; the Prophet, Priest, and King, the Head and
Savior of his Church, the Heir of all things, and Judge of the World; unto
whom he did from all eternity give a People to be his seed, and to be by him in
time redeemed, called, justified, sanctified, and glorified.

II.
The Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity, being very and eternal God,
of one Substance, and equal with the Father, did, when the fullness of time was
come, take upon him Man's Nature, with all the essential Properties and common
Infirmities thereof, yet without sin, being conceived by the Power of the Holy
Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin Mary of her Substance: So that two whole
perfect and distinct Natures, the Godhead and the Manhood, were inseparably
joined together in one Person, without Conversion, Composition, or Confusion;
which Person is very God and very Man, yet one Christ, the only Mediator
between God and Man.

III.
The Lord Jesus in his Humane Nature, thus united to the Divine in the Person
of the Son, was sanctified and anointed with the holy Spirit above measure,
having in him all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, in whom it pleased the
Father, that all fullness should dwell, to the end that being holy, harmless,
undefiled, and full of Grace and Truth, he might be thoroughly furnished to
execute the Office of a Mediator and Surety; which Office he took not unto
himself, but was thereunto called by his Father, who also put all Power and
Judgment into his hand, and gave him Commandment to execute the same.

IV.
This Office the Lord Jesus did most willingly undertake; which that he might
discharge, he was made under the Law, and did perfectly fulfill it, and
underwent the Punishment due to us, which we should have borne and suffered,
being made Sin and a Curse for us, enduring most grievous Torments immediately
from God in his Soul, and most painful Sufferings in his Body, was Crucified,
and died, was buried, and remained under the Power of Death, yet saw no
Corruption, on the Third day he rose from the Dead with the same Body in which
he suffered, with which also he ascended into Heaven, and there fitteth at the
Right hand of his Father, making Intercession, and shall return to judge Men
and Angels at the end of the World.

V.
The Lord Jesus by his perfect Obedience and Sacrifice of himself, which he
through the eternal Spirit once offered up unto God, has fully satisfied the
Justice of God, and purchased not only Reconciliation, but an everlasting
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven, for all those whom the Father has given
unto him.

VI.
Although the Work of Redemption was not actually wrought by Christ, till after
his Incarnation; yet the Virtue, Efficacy, and Benefits thereof were
communicated to the Elect in all Ages successively from the beginning of the
World, in and by those Promises, Types and Sacrifices wherein he was revealed
and signified to be the Seed of the Woman, which should bruise the Serpent's
head, and the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World, being yesterday and
to day the same, and for ever.

VII.
Christ in the Work of Mediation acts according to both Natures, by each
Nature doing that which is proper to it self; yet by reason of the Unity of the
Person, that which is proper to one Nature, is sometimes in Scripture
attributed to the Person denominated by the other Nature.

VIII.
To all those for whom Christ has purchased Redemption, he does certainly and
effectually apply and communicate the same, making Intercession for them, and
revealing unto them in and by the Word, the Mysteries of Salvation, effectually
persuading them by his Spirit to believe and obey, and governing their Hearts
by his Word and Spirit, overcoming all their Enemies by his Almighty Power and
Wisdom, in such manner and ways as are most consonant to his wonderful and
unsearchable Dispensation.

CHAP. IX. Of Free Will.
GOD has endued the Will of Man with that natural Liberty and Power of acting
upon Choice, that it is neither forced, nor by any absolute necessity of Nature
determined to do good or evil.

II.
Man in his state of Innocence had freedom and power to will and to do that
which was good and well-pleasing to God; but yet mutably, so that he might fall
from it.

III.
Man by his Fall into a state of Sin, has wholly lost all ability of Will to
any spiritual good accompanying Salvation; so as a natural Man being altogether
averse from that good, and dead in sin, is not able by his own strength to
convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto.

IV.
When God converts a Sinner, and translates him into the state of Grace, he
freeth him from his natural bondage under sin, and by his Grace alone inables
him freely to will and to do that which is spiritually good; yet so, as that by
reason of his remaining Corruption, he does not perfectly nor only Will that
which is good, but does also Will that which is evil.

V.
The Will of Man is made perfectly and immutably free to good alone in the
state of Glory only.

CHAP. X. Of Effectual Calling.
ALL those whom God has predestined unto Life, and those only he is pleased
in his appointed and accepted time effectually to call by his Word and Spirit,
out of that state of Sin and Death in which they are by Nature, to Grace and
Salvation by Jesus Christ, inlightning their Minds spiritually and savingly to
understand the things of God, taking away their heart of stone, and giving unto
them an heart of flesh, renewing their Wills, and by his Almighty Power
determining them to that which is good, and effectually drawing them to Jesus
Christ; yet so, as they come most freely, being made willing by his Grace.

II.
This Effectual Call is of Gods free and special Grace alone, not from any
thing at all foreseen in Man, who is altogether passive therein, until being
quickened and renewed by the Holy Spirit he is thereby enabled to answer this
Call, and to embrace the Grace offered and conveyed in it.

III.
Elect Infants dying in Infancy, are regenerated and saved by Christ, who
works when, and where, and how he pleases: so also are all other elect
persons who are incapable of being outwardly called by the Ministry of the Word.

IV.
Others not elected, although they may be called by the Ministry of the Word,
and may have some common operations of the Spirit, yet not being effectually
drawn by the Father, they neither do nor can come unto Christ, and therefore
cannot be saved; much less can men not professing the Christian Religion, be
saved in any other way whatsoever, be they never so diligent to frame their
lives according to the Light of Nature, and the Law of that Religion they do
profess: And to assert and maintain that they may, is very pernicious, and to
be detested.

CHAP. XI. Of Justification.
THose whom God effectually calls, he also freely justifies, not by infusing
righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by accounting and
accepting their persons as righteous, not for any thing wrought in them, or
done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; nor by imputing Faith it self, the
act of believing, or any other Evangelical obedience to them, as their
righteousness, but by imputing Christ's active obedience unto the whole law* and
passive Obedience in his death for their whole and sole Righteousness, they
receiving and resting on him and his Righteousness by Faith; which Faith they
have not of themselves, it is the gift of God.

II.
Faith thus receiving and resting on Christ, and his Righteousness, is the
alone Instrument of Justification; yet it is not alone in the Person justified,
but is ever accompanied with all other saving Graces, and is no dead Faith, but
works by Love.

III.
Christ by his Obedience and Death did fully discharge the Debt of all those
that are justified, and did by the Sacrifice of himself, in the Blood of his
Cross, undergoing in their stead the penalty due unto them, make a proper,
real, and full Satisfaction to Gods Justice in their behalf: Yet in as much as
he was given by the Father for them, and his Obedience and Satisfaction
accepted in their stead, and both freely, not for any thing in them, their
Justification is only of Free Grace, that both the exact Justice and rich Grace
of God might be glorified in the Justification of Sinners.

IV.
God did from all eternity decree to justify all the Elect, and Christ did in
the fullness of time Dye for their Sins, and rise again for their Justification:
Nevertheless, they are not justified personally, until the Holy Spirit does in
due time actually apply Christ unto them.

V.
God does continue to forgive the sins of those that are justified; and
although they can never fall from the state of Justification, yet they may by
their Sins fall under Gods fatherly displeasure: and in that Condition they
have not usually the Light of his Countenance restored unto them, until they
humble themselves, confess their Sins, beg Pardon, and renew their Faith and
Repentance.

VI.
The Justification of Believers under the Old Testament, was in all these
respects one and the same with the Justification of Believers under the New
Testament.

CHAP. XII. Of Adoption.
ALL those that are justified, God vouchsafes in and for his only Son Jesus
Christ to make partakers of the Grace of Adoption, by which they are taken into
the number, and enjoy the Liberties and Privileges of the Children of God,
have his Name put upon them, receive the Spirit of Adoption, have Access to the
Throne of Grace with boldness, are enabled to cry Abba Father, are pitied,
protected, provided for, and chastened by him as by a Father, yet never cast
off, but sealed to the day of Redemption, and inherit the Promises as Heirs of
everlasting Salvation.

CHAP. XIII. Of Sanctification.
THey that are united to Christ, effectually called and regenerated, having a
new Heart and a new Spirit created in them, through the virtue of Christ's
Death and Resurrection, are also further Sanctified really and personally
through the same Virtue, by his Word and Spirit dwelling in them; the dominion
of the whole body of Sin is destroyed, and the several Lusts thereof are more
and more weakened, and mortified, and they more and more quickened and
strengthened in all Saving Graces, to the practice of all true Holiness, without
which no Man shall see the Lord.

II.
This Sanctification is throughout in the whole man, yet imperfect in this
life, there abides still some remnants of corruption in every part, whence
arises a continual and irreconcilable war, the flesh lusting against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh.

III.
In which war, although the remaining corruption for a time may much prevail,
yet through the continual supply of strength from the Sanctifying Spirit of
Christ, the Regenerate part does overcome, and so the Saints grow in Grace,
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God.

CHAP. XIV. Of Saving Faith.
THE Grace of Faith, whereby the Elect are enabled to believe to the Saving of
their Souls, is the Work of the Spirit of Christ in their Hearts, and is
ordinarily wrought by the Ministry of the Word; by which also, and by the
Administration of the Seals, Prayer, and other means, it is increased and
strengthened.

II.
By this Faith a Christian believes to be true whatsoever is revealed in the
Word, for the Authority of God himself speaking therein, and acts differently
upon that which each particular Passage thereof contains, yielding Obedience
to the Commands, trembling at the Threatenings, and embracing the Promises of
God for this Life and that which is to come. But the principal Acts of Saving
Faith are, accepting, receiving, and resting upon Christ alone, for
Justification, Sanctification, and eternal Life, by virtue of the Covenant of
Grace.

III.
This Faith, although it be different in degrees, and may be weak or strong,
yet it is in the least degree of it different in the kind or nature of it (as
is all other Saving Grace) from the Faith and common Grace of temporary
Believers; and therefore, though it may be many times assailed and weakened,
yet it gets the Victory, growing up in many to the attainment of a full
Assurance through Christ, who is both the author and finisher of our Faith.

CHAP. XV. Of Repentance unto Life and Salvation.
SUch of the Elect as are Converted at riper Years, having sometime lived in
the state of Nature, and therein served diverse Lusts and Pleasures, God in
their Effectual Calling gives them Repentance unto Life.

II.
Whereas there is none that does good, and sins not, and the best of Men may
through the power and deceitfulness of their Corruptions dwelling in them, with
the prevalency of Temptation, fall into great Sins and Provocations; God has
in the Covenant of Grace mercifully provided, that Believers so sinning and
falling, be renewed through Repentance unto Salvation.

III.
This Saving Repentance is an Evangelical Grace, whereby a Person being by the
Holy Ghost made sensible of the manifold evils of his Sin, does by Faith in
Christ humble himself for it with godly Sorrow, Detestation of it, and
self-abhorrency, praying for Pardon and strength of Grace, with a purpose and
endeavor by supplies of the Spirit, to walk before God unto all well-pleasing
in all things.

IV.
As Repentance is to be continued through the whole course of our Lives, upon
the account of the body of Death, and the motions thereof; so it is every Man's
Duty to repent of his particular known Sins particularly.

V.
Such is the Provision which God has made through Christ in the Covenant of
Grace, for the Preservation of Believers unto Salvation, that although there is
no sin so small, but it deserves Damnation; yet there is no sin so great, that
it shall bring Damnation on them who truly Repent; which makes the constant
Preaching of Repentance necessary.

CHAP. XVI. Of Good Works.
GOod Works are only such as God has commanded in his Holy Word, and not such
as without the warrant thereof are devised by Men out of blind Zeal, or upon
any pretense of good Intentions.

II.
These Good Works done in Obedience to Gods Commandments, are the Fruits and
Evidences of a true and lively Faith, and by them Believers manifest their
Thankfulness, strengthen their Assurance, edify their Brethren, adorn the
Profession of the Gospel, stop the mouths of the Adversaries, and glorify God,
whose workmanship they are, Created in Christ Jesus thereunto, that having
their Fruit unto Holiness, they may have the End eternal Life.

III.
Their Ability to do Good Works is not at all of themselves, but wholly from
the Spirit of Christ: And that they may be enabled thereunto, besides the
Graces they have already received, there is required an actual Influence of the
same Holy Spirit to work in them to will and to do, of his good Pleasure; yet
are they not hereupon to grow negligent, as if they were not bound to perform
any Duty, unless upon a special Motion of the Spirit, but they ought to be
diligent in stirring up the Grace of God that is in them.

IV.
They who in their Obedience attain to the greatest height which is possible in
this Life, are so far from being able to supererogate, and to do more than God
requires* as that they fall short of much, which in Duty they are bound to do.

V.
We cannot by our best Works merit pardon of Sin, or eternal Life at the hand
of God, by reason of the great disproportion that is between them, and the
Glory to come; and the infinite distance that is between us and God, whom by
them we can neither profit, nor satisfy for the debt of our former Sins; but
when we have done all we can, we have done but our Duty, and are unprofitable
Servants: and because as they are good, they proceed from his Spirit, and as
they are wrought by us, they are defiled and mixed with so much Weakness and
Imperfection, that they cannot endure the severity of Gods Judgment.

VI.
Yet notwithstanding, the Persons of Believers being accepted through Christ,
their good Works also are accepted in him, not as though they were in this Life
wholly unblameable and unreproveable in Gods sight, but that he looking upon
them in his Son is pleased to accept and reward that which is sincere, although
accompanied with many Weaknesses and Imperfections.

VII.
Works done by unregenerate Men, although for the matter of them they may be
things which God commands, and of good Use both to themselves and to others:
yet because they proceed not from a Heart purified by Faith, nor are done in a
right manner, according to the Word, nor to a right end, the glory of God; they
are therefore sinful, and cannot please God, nor make a Man meet to receive
Grace from God; and yet their neglect of them is more sinful and displeasing
unto God.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Perseverance of the Saints.
THey whom God has accepted in his beloved Son, effectually called and
sanctified by his Spirit, can neither totally nor finally fall away from the
state of Grace, but shall certainly persevere therein to the end, and be
eternally Saved.

II.
This Perseverance of the Saints depends not upon their own free Will, but upon
the immutability of the Decree of Election, from the free and unchangeable Love
of God the Father, upon the Efficacy of the Merit and Intercession of Jesus
Christ, and Union with him, the Oath of God, the abiding of his Spirit, and of
the Seed of God within them, and the nature of the Covenant of Grace, from all
which arises also the certainty and infallibility thereof.

III.
And though they may through the temptation of Satan, and of the world, the
prevalency of corruption remaining in them, and the neglect of the means of
their preservation, fall into grievous sins, and for a time continue therein,
whereby they incur Gods displeasure, and grieve his holy Spirit, come to have
their graces and comforts impaired, have their hearts hardened, and their
consciences wounded, hurt and scandalize others, and bring temporal judgments
upon themselves; yet they are and shall be kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Assurance of Grace and Salvation.
ALthough Temporary Believers, and other unregenerate Men may vainly deceive
themselves with false Hopes, and carnal Presumptions of being in the Favor of
God, and state of Salvation, which Hope of theirs shall perish; yet such as
truly Believe in the Lord Jesus, and Love him in sincerity, endeavoring to
walk in all good Conscience before him, may in this Life be certainly assured
that they are in the state of Grace, and may rejoice in the Hope of the Glory
of God, which Hope shall never make them ashamed.

II.
This certainty is not a bare conjectural and probable Persuasion, grounded
upon a fallible Hope, but an infallible Assurance of Faith, founded on the
Blood and Righteousness of Christ, revealed in the Gospel, and also upon the
inward evidence of those Graces unto which Promises are made, and on the
immediate witness of the Spirit, testifying our Adoption, and, as a Fruit
thereof, leaving the Heart more humble and holy.

III.
This infallible Assurance does not so belong to the Essence of Faith, but that
a true Believer may wait long, and conflict with many Difficulties before he be
partaker of it; yet being enabled by the Spirit to know the things which are
freely given him of God, he may without extraordinary Revelation in the right
use of ordinary means attain thereunto: And therefore it is the Duty of every
one to give all diligence to make his Calling and Election sure, that thereby
his Heart may be enlarged in Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, in Love and
Thankfulness to God, and in Strength and Cheerfulness in the Duties of
Obedience, the proper Fruits of this Assurance; so far is it from inclining Men
to looseness.

IV.
True Believers may have the Assurance of their Salvation diverse ways shaken,
diminished and intermitted, as by negligence in preserving of it, by falling
into some special Sin, which wounds the Conscience, and grieveth the Spirit,
by some sudden or vehement Temptation, by God's withdrawing the Light of his
Countenance, suffering even such as fear him to walk in Darkness, and to have
no Light; yet are they neither utterly destitute of that Seed of God, and Life
of Faith, that Love of Christ and the Brethren, that sincerity of Heart and
Conscience of Duty, out of which by the Operation of the Spirit this Assurance
may in due time be revived, and by the which in the mean time they are
supported from utter despair.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Law of God.
GOD gave to Adam a Law of Universal Obedience written in his Heart, and a
particular Precept of not eating the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil, as a Covenant of Works, by which he bound him and all his Posterity to
personal, entire, exact, and perpetual Obedience, promised Life upon the
fulfilling, and threatened Death upon the breach of it, and endued him with
Power and Ability to keep it.

II.
This Law so written in the Heart, continued to be a perfect Rule of
Righteousness after the Fall of Man, and was delivered by God upon Mount Sinai
in Ten Commandments, and written in two Tables; the four first Commandments
containing our Duty toward God, and the other six our Duty to Man.

III.
Beside this Law commonly called Moral, God was pleased to give to the People
of Israel Ceremonial Laws, containing several Typical Ordinances, partly of
Worship, prefiguring Christ, his Graces, Actions, Sufferings and Benefits, and
partly holding forth diverse Instructions of Moral Duties: All which Ceremonial
Laws being appointed only to the time of Reformation, are by Jesus Christ the
true Messiah and only Lawgiver, who was furnished with Power from the Father
for that end, abrogated and taken away.

IV.
To them also he gave sundry Judicial Laws, which expired together with the
state of that People, not obliging any now by virtue of that Institution, their
general Equity only being still of Moral Use.

V.
The Moral Law does for ever bind all, as well justified Persons as others, to
the Obedience thereof; and that not only in regard of the Matter contained in
it, but also in respect of the Authority of God the Creator, who gave it:
neither does Christ in the Gospel any way dissolve, but much strengthen this
Obligation.

VI.
Although true Believers be not under the Law, as a Covenant of Works, to be
thereby justified or condemned; yet it is of great Use to them as well as to
others, in that, as a Rule of Life, informing them of the Will of God, and
their Duty, it directs and binds them to walk accordingly, discovering also the
sinful Pollutions of their Nature, Hearts and Lives, so as examining themselves
thereby, they may come to farther Conviction of Humiliation for, and hatred
against Sin, together with a clearer sight of the need they have of Christ, and
the Perfection of his Obedience. It is likewise of use to the Regenerate, to
restrain their Corruptions, in that it forbids Sin, and the threatenings of it
serve to show what even their Sins deserve, and what Afflictions in this Life
they may expect for them, although freed from the Curse thereof threatened in
the Law. The Promises of it in like manner show them God's Approbation of
Obedience, and what Blessings they may expect upon the Performance thereof,
although not as due to them by the Law, as a Covenant of Works; so as a Man's
doing Good, and refraining from Evil, because the Law encourages to the one,
and deterreth from the other, is no Evidence of his being under the Law, and
not under Grace.

VII.
Neither are the forementioned Uses of the Law contrary to the Grace of the
Gospel; but do sweetly comply with it, the Spirit of Christ subduing and
enabling the Will of Man to do that freely and cheerfully, which the Will of
God revealed in the Law required to be done.

CHAP. XX. Of the Gospel, and of the Extent of the Grace thereof.
THE Covenant of Works being broken by Sin, and made unprofitable unto Life,
God was pleased to give unto the Elect the Promise of Christ, The Seed of the
Woman, as the means of Calling them, and begetting in them Faith and
Repentance: In this Promise, the Gospel, as to the substance of it, was
revealed, and was therein Effectual for the Conversion and Salvation of Sinners.

II.
This Promise of Christ, and Salvation by him, is revealed only in and by the
Word of God; neither do the Works of Creation or Providence, with the Light of
Nature, make discovery of Christ, or of Grace by him, so much as in a general
or obscure way; much less that Men destitute of the Revelation of him by the
Promise or Gospel, should be enabled thereby to attain Saving Faith or
Repentance.

III.
The Revelation of the Gospel unto Sinners made in diverse times, and by sundry
parts, with the addition of Promises and Precepts for the Obedience required
therein, as to the Nations and Persons to whom it is granted, is merely of the
Sovereign Will and good Pleasure of God, not being annexed by virtue of any
Promise to the due Improvement of Men's natural Abilities, by virtue of common
Light received without it, which none ever did make or can so do: And therefore
in all Ages the Preaching of the Gospel has been granted unto Persons and
Nations, as to the extent or straitning of it, in great variety, according to
the counsel of the Will of God.

IV.
Although the Gospel be the only outward means of revealing Christ and Saving
Grace, and is as such abundantly sufficient thereunto; yet that Men who are
dead in Trespasses, may be born again, quickened or regenerated, there is
moreover necessary an effectual, irresistible Work of the Holy Ghost upon the
whole Soul, for the producing in them a new Spiritual Life, without which no
other means are sufficient for their Conversion unto God.

CHAP. XXI. Of Christian Liberty, and Liberty of Conscience.
THE Liberty which Christ has purchased for Believers under the Gospel,
consists in their freedom from the guilt of Sin, the condemning wrath of God,
the rigor and curse of the Law, and in their being delivered from this present
evil World, bondage to Satan, and dominion of Sin, from the evil of
Afflictions, the fear and sting of Death, the victory of the Grave, and
everlasting Damnation; as also in their free access to God, and their yielding
Obedience unto him, not out of slavish fear, but a Child-like love and willing
mind: All which were common also to Believers under the Law, for the Substance
of them; but under the New Testament the liberty of Christians is further
enlarged in their freedom from the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, the whole Legal
Administration of the Covenant of Grace, to which the Jewish Church was
subjected, and in greater boldness of access to the Throne of Grace, and in
fuller Communications of the free Spirit of God, than Believers under the Law
did ordinarily partake of.

II.
God alone is Lord of the Conscience, and has left it free from the Doctrines
and Commandments of Men, which are in any thing contrary to his Word, or not
contained in it; so that to believe such Doctrines, or to obey such Commands
out of Conscience, is to betray true Liberty of Conscience; and the requiring
of an Implicit Faith, and an absolute and blind Obedience, is to destroy
Liberty of Conscience, and Reason also.

III.
They, who upon pretense of Christian Liberty do practice any Sin, or cherish
any Lust, as they do thereby pervert the main design of the Grace of the Gospel
to their own Destruction; so they wholly destroy the end of Christian Liberty,
which is, that being delivered out of the Hands of our Enemies, we might serve
the Lord without fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of
our Life.

CHAP. XXII. Of Religious Worship, and the Sabbath Day.
THE Light of Nature shows that there is a God, who has Lordship and
Sovereignty over all, is Just, Good, and does good unto all, and is therefore
to be feared, loved, praised, called upon, trusted in, and served with all the
Heart, and all the Soul, and with all the Might: but the acceptable way of
Worshipping the True God is instituted by himself, and so limited by his own
revealed Will, that he may not be Worshipped according to the Imaginations and
Devices of Men, or the Suggestions of Satan, under any visible Representations,
or any other way not prescribed in the Holy Scripture.

II.
Religious Worship is to be given to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
to him alone; not to Angels, Saints, or any other Creatures; and since the
Fall, not without a Mediator, nor in the Mediation of any other but of Christ
alone.

III.
Prayer with Thanksgiving, being one special part of natural Worship, is by God
required of all Men; but that it may be accepted, it is to be made in the Name
of the Son by the help of his Spirit, according to his Will, with
Understanding, Reverence, Humility, Fervency, Faith, Love, and Perseverance;
and when with others in a known Tongue.

IV.
Prayer is to be made for things Lawful, and for all sorts of Men living, or
that shall live hereafter, but not for the dead, nor for those of whom it may
be known that they have sinned the Sin unto death.

V.
The reading of the Scriptures, Preaching, and hearing the Word of God, singing
of Psalms, as also the Administration of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, are all
parts of Religious Worship of God, to be performed in Obedience unto God with
Understanding, Faith, Reverence, and Godly Fear: Solemn Humiliations, with
Fastings and Thanksgiving upon special Occasions, are in their several times
and seasons to be used in a Holy and Religious manner.

VI.
Neither Prayer nor any other part of Religious Worship, is now under the
Gospel either tied unto, or made more acceptable by any place, in which it is
performed, or toward which it is directed; but God is to be Worshipped every
where in Spirit and Truth, as in private Families daily, and in secret each one
by himself, so more solemnly in the public Assemblies, which are not carelessly
nor wilfully to be neglected, or forsaken, when God by his Word or Providence
calls thereunto.

VII.
As it is of the Law of Nature, that in general a proportion of time by God's
Appointment be set apart for the Worship of God; so by his Word in a positive,
moral, and perpetual Commandment, binding all Men in all Ages, he has
particularly appointed one Day in seven for a Sabbath to be kept Holy unto him,
which from the beginning of the World to the Resurrection of Christ, was the
last Day of the Week, and from the Resurrection of Christ was changed into the
first Day of the Week, which in Scripture is called the Lord's Day, and is to
be continued to the end of the World as the Christian Sabbath, the Observation
of the last Day of the Week being abolished.

VIII.
This Sabbath is then kept Holy unto the Lord, when Men after a due preparing
of their Hearts, and ordering their common Affairs before hand, do not only
observe an holy Rest all the Day from their own Works, Words, and Thoughts
about their worldly Employments and Recreations, but also are taken up the
whole time in the public and private Exercises of his Worship, and in the
Duties of Necessity and Mercy.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Lawful Oaths and Vows.
A Lawful Oath is part of Religious Worship, wherein the Person swearing in
Truth, Righteousness and Judgment, solemnly calls God to witness what he
asserteth or promises, and to judge him according to the truth or falsehood of
what he swears.

II.
The Name of God only is that by which Men ought to swear, and therein it is to
be used with all holy Fear and Reverence: Therefore to swear vainly, or rashly,
by that glorious or dreadful Name, or to swear at all by any other thing, is
sinful and to be abhorred; yet as in matters of weight and moment an Oath is
warranted by the Word of God under the New Testament, as well as under the Old;
so a lawful Oath, being imposed by lawful Authority in such matters, ought to
be taken.

III.
Whosoever takes an Oath warranted by the Word of God, ought duly to consider
the weightiness of so solemn an Act, and therein to avouch nothing but what he
is fully persuaded is the Truth, neither may any Man bind himself by Oath to
any thing, but what is good and just, and what he believes so to be, and what
he is able and resolved to perform. Yet it is a Sin to refuse an Oath touching
any thing that is good and just, being lawfully imposed by Authority.

IV.
An Oath is to be taken in the plain and common Sense of the Words, without
Equivocation or mental Reservation: It cannot oblige to sin, but in any thing
not sinful, being taken it binds to Performance, although to a Man's own hurt;
nor is it to be violated, although made to Heretics or Infidels.

V.
A Vow, which is not to be made to any Creature, but God alone, is of the like
Nature with a promissory Oath, and ought to be made with the like religious
Care, and to be performed with the like Faithfulness.

VI.
Popish Monastical Vows of perpetual single Life, professed Poverty, and
regular Obedience, are so far from being degrees of higher Perfection, that
they are superstitious and sinful Snares, in which no Christian may entangle
himself.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Civil Magistrate.
GOD the supreme Lord and King of all the World, has ordained Civil
Magistrates to be under him, over the People for his own glory and the public
good; and to this end has armed them with the Power of the Sword, for the
defense and encouragement of them that do good, and for the punishment of evil
doers.

II.
It is lawful for Christians to accept and execute the Office of a Magistrate,
when called thereunto: in the management whereof, as they ought specially to
maintain Justice and Peace, according to the wholesome Laws of each
Commonwealth; so for that end they may lawfully now under the New Testament
wage War upon just and necessary occasion.

III.
Although the Magistrate is bound to encourage, promote, and protect the
Professor and Profession of the Gospel, and to manage and order Civil
Administrations in a due Subserviency to the Interest of Christ in the World,
and to that end to take care that Men of corrupt Minds and Conversations do not
licentiously publish and divulge Blasphemy and Errors in their own Nature,
subverting the Faith, and inevitably destroying the Souls of them that receive
them: Yet in such differences about the Doctrines of the Gospel, or ways of the
Worship of God, as may befall Men exercising a good Conscience, manifesting it
in their Conversation, and holding the Foundation, not disturbing others in
their ways or Worship that differ from them; there is no warrant for the
Magistrate under the Gospel to abridge them of their Liberty.

IV.
It is the Duty of People to pray for Magistrates, to honor their Persons, to
pay them Tribute and other Dues, to obey their lawful Commands, and to be
subject to their Authority for Conscience sake. Infidelity, or difference in
Religion, does not make void the Magistrates just and legal Authority, nor free
the People from their Obedience to him; from which Ecclesiastical Persons are
not exempted, much less has the Pope any Power or Jurisdiction over them in
their Dominions, or over any of their People, and least of all to deprive them
of their Dominions or Lives, if he shall judge them to be Heretics, or upon
any other Pretense whatsoever.

CHAP. XXV. Of Marriage.
MArriage is to be between one Man and one Woman: neither is it lawful for any
Man to have more than one Wife, nor for any Woman to have more than one Husband
at the same time.

II.
Marriage was ordained for the mutual help of Husband and Wife, for the
increase of Mankind with a legitimate Issue, and of the Church with an holy
Seed, and for preventing of Uncleanness.

III.
It is lawful for all sorts of People to marry, who are able with Judgment to
give their Consent. Yet it is the Duty of Christians to marry in the Lord, and
therefore such as profess the true Reformed Religion, should not marry with
Infidels, Papists, or other Idolaters: neither should such as are godly, be
unequally yoaked by marrying with such as are wicked in their Life, or maintain
damnable Heresy.

IV.
Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of Consanguinity or Affinity
forbidden in the Word; nor can such Incestuous Marriages ever be made lawful by
any Law of Man, or consent of Parties, so as those Persons may live together as
Man and Wife.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Church.
THE Catholic or Universal Church, which is Invisible, consists of the whole
number of the Elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into one under
Christ, the Head thereof, and is the Spouse, the Body, the Fullness of him that
fills all in all.

II.
The whole Body of Men throughout the World, professing the Faith of the Gospel
and Obedience unto God by Christ according unto it, not destroying their own
Profession by any Errors everting the Foundation, or unholiness of
Conversation, are, and may be called the visible Catholic Church of Christ,
although as such it is not entrusted with the Administration of any Ordinances,
or have any Offices to rule or govern in, or over the whole Body.

III.
The purest Churches under Heaven are subject both to Mixture and Error, and
some have so degenerated as to become no Churches of Christ, but Synagogues of
Satan: Nevertheless Christ always has had, and ever shall have a visible
Kingdom in this World, to the end thereof, of such as Believe in him, and make
Profession of his Name.

IV.
There is no other Head of the Church but the Lord Jesus Christ; nor can the
Pope of Rome in any sense be Head thereof; but it is that Antichrist, that Man
of Sin, and Son of Perdition, that exalts himself in the Church against
Christ, and all that is called God, whom the Lord shall destroy with the
brightness of his Coming.

V.
As the Lord in his Care and Love toward his Church, has in his infinite Wise
Providence exercised it with great variety in all Ages, for the good of them
that love him, and his own Glory: so according to his Promise, we expect that
in the latter Days, Antichrist being destroyed, the Jews called, and the
Adversaries of the Kingdom of his dear Son broken, the Churches of Christ being
enlarged and edified through a free and plentiful Communication of Light and
Grace, shall enjoy in this World a more quiet, peaceable and glorious Condition
than they have enjoyed.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Communion of Saints.
ALL Saints that are united to Jesus Christ their Head, by his Spirit and
Faith, although they are not made thereby one Person with him, have Fellowship
in his Graces, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Glory: and being united to
one another in Love, they have Communion in each others Gifts and Graces, and
are obliged to the performance of such Duties, public and private, as do
conduce to their mutual good, both in the inward and outward Man.

II.
All Saints are bound to maintain an holy Fellowship and Communion in the
Worship of God, and in performing such other Spiritual Services as tend to
their mutual Edification; as also in Relieving each other in outward things,
according to their several Abilities and Necessities: which Communion, though
especially to be exercised by them in the Relations wherein they stand, whether
in Families or Churches, yet as God offers opportunity, is to be extended
unto all those who in every Place call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Sacraments.
SAcraments are holy Signs and Seals of the Covenant of Grace, immediately
instituted by Christ, to represent him and his Benefits, and to confirm our
Interest in him, and solemnly to engage us to the Service of God in Christ,
according to his Word.

II.
There is in every Sacrament a spiritual Relation, or sacramental Union between
the sign and the thing signified; whence it comes to pass that the Names and
Effects of the one are attributed to the other.

III.
The Grace which is exhibited In or by the Sacraments rightly used, is not
conferred by any Power in them, neither does the Efficacy of a Sacrament depend
upon the Piety or Intention of him that does Administer it, but upon the Work
of the Spirit, and the Word of Institution, which contains, together with a
Precept authorizing the Use thereof, a Promise of Benefit to worthy Receivers.

IV.
There be only two Sacranents ordained by Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that
is to say, Baptism and the Lord's Supper; neither of which may be dispensed by
any but by a Minister of the Word lawfully called.

V.
The Sacraments of the Old Testament, in regard of the spiritual things thereby
signified and exhibited, were for substance the same with those of the New.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Baptism.
BAptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus Christ to be
unto the Party baptized a sign and seal of the Covenant of Grace, of his
ingraffing into Christ, of Regeneration, of Remission of Sins, and of his
giving up unto God through Jesus Christ to walk in newness of Life; which
Ordinance is by Christ's own appointment to be continued in his Church until
the end of the World.

II.
The outward Element to be used in this Ordinance, is Water, wherewith the
Party is to be baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, by a Minister of the Gospel lawfully called.

III.
Dipping of the Person into the Water is not necessary, but Baptism is rightly
administered by pouring or sprinkling Water upon the Person.

IV.
Not only those who do actually profess Faith in, and Obedience unto Christ,
but also the Infants of one or both believing Parents are to be baptized, and
those only.

V.
Although it be a great Sin to contemn or neglect this Ordinance, yet Grace and
Salvation are not so inseparably annexed unto it, as that no Person can be
regenerated or saved without it; or that all that are baptized, are undoubtedly
regenerated.

VI.
The Efficacy of Baptism is not tied to that moment of time wherein it is
administered, yet notwithstanding, by the right Use of this Ordinance, the Grace
promised is not only offered, but really exhibited and conferred by the Holy
Ghost to such (whether of Age or Infants) as that Grace belongs unto,
according to the counsel of God's own Will in his appointed time.

VII.
Baptism is but once to be administered to any Person.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Lord's Supper.
OUR Lord Jesus in the Night wherein he was betrayed, instituted the Sacrament
of his Body and Blood, called the Lord's Supper, to be observed in his Churches
unto the end of the World, for the perpetual Remembrance, and showing forth of
the Sacrifice of himself in his Death, the sealing of all Benefits thereof unto
true Believers, their Spiritual Nourishment, and growth in him, their further
Engagement in and to all Duties which they owe unto him, and to be a Bond and
Pledge of their Communion with him, and with each other.

II.
In this Sacrament Christ is not offered up to his Father, nor any real
Sacrifice made at all for Remission of Sin of the quick or dead, but only a
Memorial of that one offering up of himself by himself upon the Cross once for
all, and a Spiritual Oblation of all possible Praise unto God for the same; so
that the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass (as they call it) is most abominable,
injurious to Christ's own only Sacrifice, the alone Propitiation for all the
Sins of the Elect.

III.
The Lord Jesus has in this Ordinance appointed his Ministers to pray and
bless the Elements of Bread and Wine, and thereby to set them apart from a
common to an holy Use, and to take and break the Break, to take the Cup, and
(they Communicating also themselves) to give both to the Communicants, but to
none who are not then present in the Congregation.

IV.
Private Masses, or receiving the Sacrament by a Priest, or any other alone, as
likewise the denial of the Cup to the People, worshipping the Elements, the
lifting them up, or carrying them about for Adoration, and the reserving them
for any pretended religious Use, are all contrary to the nature of this
Sacrament, and to the Institution of Christ.

V.
The outward Elements in this Sacrament duly set apart to the Uses ordained by
Christ, have such Relation to him Crucified, as that truly, yet Sacramentally
only, they are sometimes called by the name of the things they represent, to
wit, the Body and Blood of Christ; albeit in Substance and Nature they still
remain truly and only Bread and Wine as they were before.

VI.
That Doctrine which maintains a Change of the Substance of Bread and Wine into
the Substance of Christ's Body and Blood (commonly called Transubstantiation)
by Consecration of a Priest, or by any other way, is repugnant not to Scripture
alone, but even to common Sense and Reason, overthrows the Nature of the
Sacrament, and has been, and is the cause of manifold Superstitions, yea, of
gross Idolatries.

VII.
Worthy Receivers outwardly partaking of the visible Elements in this
Sacrament, do then also inwardly by Faith, really and indeed, yet not carnally
and corporally, but spiritually, receive and feed upon Christ Crucified, and
all benefits of his Death; the Body and Blood of Christ being then not
corporally or carnally in, with, or under the Bread or Wine; yet as really, but
spiritually present to the Faith of Believers in that Ordinance, as the
Elements themselves are to their outward Senses.

VIII.
All ignorant and ungodly Persons, as they are unfit to enjoy Communion with
Christ, so are they unworthy of the Lord's Table, and cannot without great Sin
against him, whilst they remain such, partake of these holy Mysteries, or be
admitted thereunto; yea, whosoever shall Receive unworthily, are guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, eating and drinking Judgment to themselves.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the State of Man after Death, and of the Resurrection of the
Dead.
THE Bodies of Men after Death return to Dust, and see Corruption, but their
Souls (which neither dye nor sleep) having an immortal Subsistence, immediately
return to God who gave them, the Souls of the Righteous being then made perfect
in Holiness, are received into the highest Heavens, where they behold the Face
of God in Light and Glory, waiting for the full Redemption of their Bodies: And
the Souls of the Wicked are cast into Hell, where they remain in Torment and
utter Darkness, reserved to the Judgment of the Great Day: Besides these two
Places for Souls separated from their Bodies, the Scripture acknowledges none.

II.
At the Last Day such as are found alive shall not dye, but be changed, and all
the dead shall be raised up with the self-same Bodies, and none other, although
with different Qualities, which shall be united again to their Souls for ever.

III.
The Bodies of the Unjust shall by the Power of Christ be raised to dishonor;
the Bodies of the Just by his Spirit unto honor, and be made conformable to
his own glorious Body.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Last Judgment.
GOD has appointed a Day wherein he will Judge the World in Righteousness by
Jesus Christ, to whom all Power and Judgment is given of the Father; in which
Day not only the Apostate Angels shall be judged, but likewise all Persons that
have lived upon Earth, shall appear before the Tribunal of Christ, to give an
account of their Thoughts, Words and Deeds, and to receive according to what
they have done in the Body, whether good or evil.

II.
The end of God's appointing this Day, is for the Manifestation of the Glory of
his Mercy in the eternal Salvation of the Elect, and of his Justice in the
Damnation of the Reprobate, who are Wicked and Disobedient: For then shall the
Righteous go into everlasting Life, and receive that fullness of Joy and Glory,
with everlasting Reward in the presence of the Lord; but the Wicked who know
not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, shall be cast into eternal
Torments, and be punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his Power.

III.
As Christ would have us to be certainly persuaded that there shall be a
Judgment, both to deterr all Men from Sin, and for the greater Consolation of
the Godly in their Adversity; so will he have that Day unknown to Men, that
they may shake off all Carnal Security, and be always watchful, because they
know not at what Hour the Lord will come, and may be ever prepared to say, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

OF THE INSTITUTION OF CHURCHES, And the ORDER Appointed in them by JESUS
CHRIST.
I.
BY the Appointment of the Father all Power for the Calling, Institution,
Order, or Government of the Church, is invested in a Supreme and Sovereign
manner in the Lord Jesus Christ, as King and Head thereof.

II.
In the Execution of this Power wherewith he is so entrusted, the Lord Jesus
calls out of the World unto Communion with himself, those that are given unto
him by his Father, that they may walk before him in all the ways of Obedience,
which he prescribes to them in his Word.

III.
Those thus called (through the Ministry of the Word by his Spirit) he
commands to walk together in particular Societies or Churches, for their
mutual Edification, and the due Performance of that Public Worship, which he
requires of them in this World.

IV.
To each of these Churches thus gathered, according unto his Mind declared in
his Word, he has given all that Power and Authority, which is any way needful
for their carrying on that Order in Worship and Discipline, which he has
instituted for them to observe, with Commands and Rules for the due and right
exerting and executing of that Power.

V.
These particular Churches thus appointed by the Authority of Christ, and
entrusted with Power from him for the ends before expressed, are each of them
as unto those ends, the seat of that Power which he is pleased to communicate
to his Saints or Subjects in this World, so that as such they receive it
immediately from himself.

VI.
Besides these particular Churches, there is not instituted by Christ any
Church more extensive or Catholic entrusted with Power for the Administration
of his Ordinances, or the Execution of any Authority in his Name.

VII.
A particular Church gathered and completed according to the Mind of Christ,
consists of Officers and Members: The Lord Christ having given to his called
Ones (united according to his Appointment in Church Order) Liberty and Power to
choose Persons fitted by the Holy Ghost for that purpose, to be over them, and
to Minister to them in the Lord.

VIII.
The Members of these Churches are Saints by Calling, visibly manifesting and
evidencing (in and by their Profession and Walking) their Obedience unto that
Call of Christ, who being further known to each other by their confession of
the Faith wrought in them by the Power of God, declared by themselves or
otherwise manifested, do willingly consent to walk together according to the
Appointment of Christ, giving up themselves to the Lord, and to one another by
the Will of God in professed Subjection to the Ordinances of the Gospel.

IX.
The Officers appointed by Christ to be chosen and set apart by the Church so
called, and gathered for the peculiar Administration of Ordinances, and
Execution of Power or Duty which he intrusts them with, or calls them to, to be
continued to the end of the World, are Pastors, Teachers, Elders and Deacons.

X.
Churches thus gathered and assembling for the Worship of God, are thereby
visible and public, and their Assemblies (in what Place soever they are,
according as they have liberty or opportunity) are therefore Church or Public
Assemblies.

XI.
The way appointed by Christ for the calling of any Person, fitted and gifted
by the Holy Ghost, unto the Office of Pastor, Teacher or Elder in a Church, is,
that he be chosen thereunto by the common Suffrage of the Church it self, and
solemnly set apart by Fasting and Prayer, with Imposition of Hands of the
Eldership of that Church, if there be any before constituted therein: And of a
Deacon, that he be chosen by the like Suffrage, and set apart by Prayer, and
the like Imposition of Hands.

XII.
The Essence of this Call of a Pastor, Teacher or Elder unto Office, consists
in the Election of the Church, together with his Acceptance of it, and
Separation by Fasting and Prayer: And those who are so chosen, though not set
apart by Imposition of Hands, are rightly constituted Ministers of Jesus
Christ, in whose Name and Authority they Exercise the Ministry to them so
committed. The Calling of Deacons consists in the like Election and
Acceptance, with Separation by Prayer.

XIII.
Although it be incumbent on the Pastors and Teachers of the Churches to be
instant in Preaching the Word, by way of Office; yet the Work of Preaching the
Word is not so peculiarly confined to them, but that others also gifted and
fitted by the Holy Ghost for it, and approved (being by lawful ways and means
in the Providence of God called thereunto) may publicly, ordinarily and
constantly perform it; so that they give themselves up thereunto.

XIV.
However, they who are engaged in the Work of public Preaching, and enjoy the
public Maintenance upon that account, are not thereby obliged to dispense the
Seals to any other than such as (being Saints by Calling, and gathered
according to the Order of the Gospel) they stand related to, as Pa^tors or
Teachers; yet ought they not ^o neglect others living within their Parochial
Bounds, but besides their constant public Preaching to them, ^hey ought to
enquire after their profiting by the Word, instructing them ^n, and pressing
upon them (whether young or old) the great Doctrines of the Gospel, even
personally and particularly, so far as their strength and time will admit.

XV.
Ordination alone without the Election or precedent consent of the Church, by
those who formerly have been Ordained by virtue of that Power they have
received by their Ordination, does not constitute any Person a Church Officer,
or communicate Office-Power unto him.

XVI.
A Church furnished with Officers (according to the Mind of Christ) has full
Power to administer all his Ordinances; and where there is want of any one or
more Officers required, that Officer, or those which are in the Church, may
Administer all the Ordinances proper to their particular Duty and Offices; but
where there are no Teaching Officers, none may Administer the Seals, nor can
the Church authorize any so to do.

XVII.
In the carrying on of Church Administrations, no Person ought to be added to
the Church, but by the consent of the Church it self; that so love (without
dissimulation) may be preserved between all the Members thereof.

XVIII.
Whereas the Lord Jesus Christ has appointed and instituted as a means of
Edification, that those who walk not according to the Rules and Laws appointed
by him (in respect of Faith and Life, so that just offense does arise to the
Church thereby) be censured in his Name and Authority: Every Church has Power
in it self to exercise and execute all those Censures appointed by him in the
way and Order prescribed in the Gospel.

XIX.
The Censures so appointed by Christ, are Admonition and Excommunication: and
whereas some Offenses are or may be known only to some, it is appointed by
Christ, that those to whom they are so known, do first admonish the Offender in
private: in public Offenses where any Sin, before all; or in case of
non-amendment upon private Admonition, the Offense being related to the Church,
and the Offender not manifesting his Repentance, he is to be duly admonished
in the Name of Christ by the whole Church, by the Ministry of the Elders of the
Church; and if this Censure prevail not for his Repentance, then he is to be
cast out by Excommunication with the consent of the Church.

XX.
As all Believers are bound to join themselves to particular Churches, when and
where they have opportunity so to do, so none are to be admitted unto the
Privileges of the Churches, who do not submit themselves to the Rule of Christ
in the Censures for the Government of them.

XXI.
This being the way prescribed by Christ in case of Offense, no Church Members
upon any Offenses taken by them, having performed their Duty required of them
in this matter, ought to disturb any Church Order, or absent themselves from
the Public Assemblies, or the Administration of any Ordinances upon that
pretense, but to wait upon Christ in the further proceeding of the Church.

XXII.
The Power of Censures being seated by Christ in a particular Church, is to be
exercised only toward particular Members of each Church respectively as such;
and there is no Power given by him unto any Synods or Ecclesiastical Assemblies
to Excommunicate, or by their public Edicts to threaten Excommunication, or
other Church Censures against Churches, Magistrates, or their People upon any
account, no Man being obnoxious to that Censure, but upon his personal
Miscarriage, as a Member of a particular Church.

XXIII.
Although the Church is a Society of Men, assembling for the celebration of the
Ordinances according to the appointment of Christ, yet every Society assembling
for that end or purpose, upon the account of Cohabitation within any Civil
Precincts and Bounds, is not thereby constituted a Church, seeing there may be
wanting among them, what is essentially required thereunto; and therefore a
Believer living with others in such a Precinct, may join himself with any
Church for his Edification.

XXIV.
For the avoiding of Differences that may otherwise arise, for the greater
Solemnity in the Celebration of the Ordinances of Christ, and the opening a way
for the larger usefulness of the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost; Saints
living in one City or Town, or within such distances as that they may
conveniently Assemble for Divine Worship, ought rather to join in one Church
for their mutual strengthening and Edification, than to set up many distinct
Societies.

XXV.
As all Churches and all the Members of them are bound to pray continually for
the Good or Prosperity of all the Churches of Christ in all Pla^^s, and upon
all occasions to further it: (Every one within the Bounds of their Places and
Callings, in the Exercise of their Gifts and Graces) So the Churches themselves
(when planted by the Providence of God, so as they may have opportunity and
advantage for it) ought to hold Communion amongst themselves for their Peace,
increase of Love, and mutual Edification.

XXVI.
In Cases of Difficulties or Differences, either in point of Doctrine or in
Administrations, wherein either the Churches in general are concerned, or or
any one Church in their Peace, Union and Edification, or any Member or Members
of any Church are injured in, or by any proceeding in Censures, not agreeable
to Truth and Order: it is according to the Mind of Christ, that many Churches
holding Communion together, do by their Messengers meet in a Synod or Counsel,
to consider and give their advice in, or about that matter in difference, to be
reported to all the Churches concerned; Howbeit these Synods so assembled are
not entrusted with any Church Power, properly so called, or with any
Jurisdiction over the Churches themselves, to exercise any Censures, either
over any Churches or Persons, or to impose their Determinations on the Churches
or Officers.

XXVII.
Besides these occasional Synods or Counsels, there are not instituted by
Christ any stated Synods in a fixed Combination of Churches, or their Officers
in lesser or greater Assemblies; nor are there any Synods appointed by Christ
in a way of Subordination to one another.

XXVIII.
Persons that are joined in Church Fellowship, ought not lightly or without
just cause to withdraw themselves from the Communion of the Church whereunto
they are so joined: Nevertheless, where any Person cannot continue in any
Church without his Sin, either for want of the Administration of any Ordinances
instituted by Christ, or by his being deprived of his due Privileges, or
compelled to any thing in practice not warranted by the Word, or in case of
Persecution, or upon the account of convenience of Habitation; he consulting
with the Church, or the Officer or Officers thereof, may peaceably depart from
the Communion of the Church, wherewith he has so walked, to join himself with
some other Church, where he may enjoy the Ordinances in the Purity of the same,
for his Edification and Consolation.

XXIX.
Such Reforming Churches as consist of Persons found in the Faith and of
Conversation becoming the Gospel, ought not to refuse the Communion of each
other, so far as may consist with their own Principles respectively, though
they walk not in all things according to the same Rules of Church Order.

XXX.
Churches gathered and walking according to the Mind of Christ, judging other
Churches (though less pure) to be true Churches, may receive unto occasional
Communion with them, such Members of those Churches as are credibly testified
to be Godly, and to live without Offense.

FINIS.

