A COLLECTION OF Twenty-Three PROPHECIES AND Predictions Of the Famous MICHAEL
NOSTRODAMVS, the Learned Astrologer of France, as they Concern and Point at
these Times.

TOGETHER With their Explanations, foretelling many Strange and Wonderful
Things, about to happen in England, France, and Ireland; but more particularly
the Success of Our Arms in the Later Revolution, and what we may farther
expect, with the Miseries Threatening the Kingdom of France, Before the Year One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety One be Over.

This following Prophecy was writ by an English Bard. above One hundred Years
since.

1691
In the year when the Figures turned shall be the same,
Then bloody France look to it, beware your fame,
For all your Cruelties, you then shall pay,
And now Approaches fast the Reckoning Day.
LONDON, Printed and Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, MDCXC.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas the Book of Songs in Folio, set by Signior Pietro Reggio, consisting
of One hundred forty and four Copper Plates, curiously Printed upon Imperial
Paper, was formerly sold for 16 s. it is now proposed to be sold for 7 s. by W.
Whitwood, in Duck-lane, and Mrs Feltham in Westminster Hall.

And at the same Places this Book following.
The History of Justin, taken out of the four and forty Books of Trogus
Pompeius, containing the Affairs of all Ages and Countries in Peace and War,
from the beginning of the World, until the time of the Roman Emperors,
treating of the abderites, forced from their Country by Frogs and Mice: of the
Aborigines, the Abrogation of the Law for Sacrificing Men Alive, the Wars and
Policies of Alexander the Great, with the Account of his Death; of Hanibal,
Antigonus, Cambyses, Scipio, and other Kings, Princes and Captains. Aristotle,
Tutor to Alexander the Great. Artaxerxes had 115 Sons; the Athenians, the
Inventers of Oil, Wine, and the Manufacture of Wool, Babylon builded by
Semiramis, the holy Mysteries of Caeres. Cleopatria married her own Brother
Ptolomy, and the Execrable Murders committed by him. The Cyprian Virgins
provide themselves Dowries, by prostitution of their Bodies. Darius bound by
his own Men in Golden Chains. Naero defiles his own Mother. Joseph preserved in
Egypt from Famine, his Interpretation of Dreams: Micheus Crucified by his own
Father, a Phaenix seen in Egypt, and in what Place the Giants made War against
Heaven, with variety of other Histories Translated into English by Rob.
Codrington, Master of Arts. Sold by W. Whitwood in Duck-lane, Mrs. Feltham in
Westminster Hall.

TO THE READER UPON THESE PROPHECIES.
Reader,
AT first view of the Title Page, you may ask, why we bring upon the Stage at
this time, the Predictions, or Prophecies of one of an Ancient Date, to which,
for your better satisfaction, we Answer, that this famous Astrologer, esteemed
the wisest and most experienced, did not limit them to the scanty space of a
Year, nor to an Age, but gave his Judgment as to what would in all probability
fall out in succeeding Ages, and perhaps to the end of the World; wherefore we
have collected what may be most suitable to the present times, with an
explanation as free as is reasonable or conjectural, in matters so dark and
devious, the which for the better inlightning the understanding of Mankind, we
have set down.

Prophecy 1.
TOurs, Orleance, Blois, Angers, Reus, and Nants City vexed by sudden change,
by strange Languages, Tents shall be set up, Rivers, Darts, Revenues, Land and
Seas shall quake.

Annotation. This seems to threaten the Provinces of France with some
extraordinary change, perhaps a Revolt, or the prevailing Arms of those that
are at present in a War against it, the latter being most conjectural, by the
hint of the two last Verses, or lines of the Prophecy.

Pro. 2.
Towars, Gascony, by English Assaults, by the same shall be m^de great
Incursions, Rains, Frosts shall Mazz the Ground* Port Selyn shall make strong
Invasions.

Explanation. Here the English are promised to make Incursions into the
Province of Gascony, part of the French King's Territories, but the weather in
those Parts shall not be favorable, as also that the Turks about shall be
flushed by Inroad, or Invasion of some Place or Country.

Pro. 3.
Bourdeaux, Rovan, and La-Rochelle Joints will Range About upon the Great
Ocean, English Britains and Flemings join together, shall drive them away as
far as Rouana.

Explanation. This seems to hint at the present times, that the Dutch and
English shall be successful, and obstruct the French, by overpowering them by
Sea, and forcing them into the Rouana, or Rhoan, a City in Normaady, a City
formerly subject to the Crown of England, and may in success of time be happily
regained, as it was wrongfully taken from us, during the York and Lancasterian
War, together with the whole Province, in the Reign of Henry the sixth.

Pro. 4.
The English Prince Mars has his heart from Heaven, will follow his prosperous
fortune.

Explanation. This without doubt points at the present Providence, in our
Miraculous Deliverance, wherein God turned the hearts of the People, as of one
Man, to his present Majesty, making him successful against our devoted Enemies,
to establish him in the Throne, and forward his Undertakings in Victory and
Renown.

Pro. 5.
The Roman power shall be quite put down, his great Neighbor shall follow his
steps, Secret and Civil hatred and quarrels shall stoop the Buffoon folly.

Explanation. This denotes the Popish power in England to be overthrown, and
that the same shall happen in a neighboring Kingdom, perhaps in France, and
that those who keep up fudes and animosities, may see their Errors, and stop
the Buffoons folly, that is, by joining against the common Enemy, and Uniting
with the Interest of the Government.

Pro. 6.
The Change shall be very hard. The City and Country shall gain by the Change.
A high prudent heart shall be put in, the unworthy expelled, Sea, Land and
People shall change its conditions.

Explanation. This may be thought plainly to hint at our Late Revolution, but
we leave further the Issue of Providence, and the Event of our Succeedings,
good for time to time, which we cordially wish may ever be prosperous.

Pro. 7.
Peace and Plenty shall not be long praised in his Reign, the Flower-de-luce
shall be deserted, Bodies shall dye, Death shall be brought, hoping there
vanity to be buried.

Expl. This may denote the shaking of the Kingdom of France in this King's
Reign, by some Insurrections occasioned by Famine or Discontent; as likewise
Inundations, which by a Rappid overflowing, shall carry and hinder some of the
opportunity of being buried in the Earth, though the contrary be desired by
their Friends.

Pro. 8.
The great Army shall be rejected, in a moment shall be wanted by the King, the
faith promised a far off, shall be broken, so that he shall be left naked in a
pitiful case.

Expl. This may seem to hint at the late King's brave promise with the Church
of England that raised him to the Throne, as to the first past, and the French
King's not keeping his promise with him as to secret Intrigues, which
frustrated his purposes, and left him naked in a pitiful case when he was
rejected by his people.

Pro. 9.
Where all well, is all good, a Sun and Moon is Existent, his Ruin draws
near: The Heaven is making haste to change that fortune into the same case, as
the seventh Rock is.

Expl. This seems to hint at the too great Pride of France, thinking to crave
other Nations, when its own Ruin is near at hand, Heaven in its Eternal
decrees, perhaps having designed to Infatuate their councels or devices, which
may be meant by the Rock, signifying a thing insensible, into which their
projects and policies may be changed.

Pro. 10.
In great Regret shall the French Nation be, their vain and light Heart shall
believe rashly; they shall have neither Bread, Salt, Wine nor Beer. Moreover
they shall be P^isoners, and suffer hunger, cold and need.

Expl. This no doubt threatens the French Nation with extraordinary calamity,
as appears by the plain words without the need of any Interpretation than what
the sense may reasonably bear to understanding of the meanest capacity.

Pro. 11.
Many shall come and take of Peace between Monarchs, and Lords very powerful;
but it shall not be agreed too so soon, if they do not show themselves more
obedient than others.

Expl. This may seem to point at the present affairs in public discourses, and
perhaps some negotiations, but the matter as to the Prophecy being plain, there
wants nothing but time to give a further Light into the fulfilling it, and the
Submission of those that stand out in Rebellion and Opposition, to Render us a
peaceful Nation and People.

Pro. 12.
There shall be in Guynea an infinite number of English, who shall occupy it by
the name Angle Acquitaine of Languedock I. by the Land of Bourdeaux, which
afterward they shall call Barboxitain.

Expl. This gives the English hopes of receiving the ancient Rights of this
Kingdom now wrongfully detained by the French.

Pro. 13.
Against the Red Sex shall gather themselves Fire, Water, Iron, Rape, by peace
it shall be destroyed: Those that shall conspire shall not be put to death,
except one, who above all shall undo the work.

Expl. This demonstrates the Inveteracy of the Roman faction against the
Protestants, but that in the end signified here of their error in cruelty, and
turn their fury against the Disturber of Christendom, who may be truly said to
endeavor the ruin of the Christian world.

Pro. 14.
Peace is coming on one side, and War on the other: There was never so great a
pursuing Man, Woman shall bewail the innocent blood that shall be spilt, it
shall be in France, and on all sides*

Expl. This seems to promise happiness to come on one side, and the miseries of
war on the other, as Armies in Rout, etc. signified by the great pursuing, and
the spilling of Blood in France, which which shall be lamented, but whether it
shall be spilt in a Hostile way, or by Execution, the Author leaves doubtful.

Pro. 15.
Foot and Horse upon the second watch shall come in, destroying all by Sea;
they shall come into the harbor of Marseilles, Tears, Cries and Bloods, never
was so bitter a time.

Expl. This signifies some Invasion of France by Sea, Marseilles, being a chief
Sea part of that Kingdom, and perhaps we in a short time happen to leave this
Prophecy fulfilled.

Pro. 16.
Kidery against King, and Duke against Prince, hatred between them, and horrid
dissension, rage and fury shall be in every Province, great war in France, and
horrid changes

Expl. This directly out points Wars, Miseries and Alterations to France,
insomuch, that there shall be rage and fury in every Province.

Pro. 17.
Brooks and Rivers shall be a stopping to evil, the old flame of Anger being
not yet ceased, shall run through France; take this as an Oracle, Houses,
Manors, Palaces, Sects shall be raced.

Expl. Here again are great calamities foretold, to arise from the fury of the
People by Civil war in France, or by an in-aiding Enemy, wherein great spoil
and waste shall be made.

Pro. 18.
He that the Principality
Shall keep by great Cruelty;
At last shall see a great Army,
By Fire blow most dangerously;
He shall do better by Agreement strange,
Otherways he shall drink the juce of Orange.
Expl. What can be more plain than this Relation to the late K. who shed so
much Blood of his Subjects in the West, and other places by the hands of
Hang-men; who at last had a great Army come against him, and not making any
timely Agreement, he fled to France; and being Abdicated by his people, the
Prince of Orange our present Sovereign, was first invested by the Government by
the way of Administration, and soon after proclaimed King.

Pro. 19.
The Purveyor shall put all in disorder, Leech and Wolf do the burden to me,
when Mars shall be in the sign of Aries, joined with Saturn and Saturnith, the
Moon then shall be thy greatest Misfortune, the Sun being then in its
Exaltation.

Expl. By the Purveyor, our Author has all along meant the French King; by the
Leech the Spaniard, and by the Wolf the Savoyard which are threatened with some
Burnings or Ranagements by the French, when Mars shall be in the sign of Aries,
etc. but when this will happen, we must leave to the event of time.

Pro. 20.
The Fleet shall stand before the City, then shall go away for a little while,
and then take a great troop of Citizens on Land; the Fleet shall come back
again, and recover a great deal.

Expl. This points at the last Expedition to Ireland, whereby the help of our
Fleet, the City of Cork, and Town of Kingsale were reduced, and promises a
further Success, and perhaps the Reducing of Limerick by such another
undertaking.

Pro. 21.
O great Rome, thy Ruin draws near, not of thy Walls, of thy Blood and
Substance. The sharp by Letters shall make so horrid a Notch, sharp Iron thrust
in all to the haft.

Expl. This threatens the confounding of the Romish Superstition by the
ingenious and convincing Writings of some eminent Man, who shall press it so
far, that the Papists themselves shall be convinced, and fall off; which may be
signified by the Notch, and the sharp Iron thrust in to the haft.

Pro. 22.
Leutitia in Mars, Senators shall be in Credit. In a Night France shall be
troubled. The Horoscope of the great Craesus foretells, That by Saturn his
Power shall be put down.

Explan. This seems to threaten Lewis the XIV. with sudden Trouble in the
Kingdom, and that in the end his Power shall be put down, by which he has so
long Tyrannized over his own, and the Subjects of other Princes where he has
made Inroads and Invasions.

Pro. 23.
In the Year when the Figures turned shall be the same,
Then bloody France look to it, beware your Fame:
For all your Cruelties you then shall pay,
And now Approaches fast the Reckoning day.
Expl. This is an ancient Prophecy by another hand, and points directly at the
year 1691. which if you observe to turn the 6 downward, it is a 9, if the 9
upward, it is a 6, and for the two ones, turn them which way you please, they
are the same, the like not to be done in many years before; and thus much for
these famous Prophesies.

FINIS.

