THE Lord Chancellors SPEECH IN THE EXCHEQUER, TO BARON THVRLAND At the Taking
of his OATH, 24 Jan. 1672/3.

London, Printed in the Year, 1672.

Mr. Sergeant Thurland,
THe King of his Grace and Favor, has made choice of you to be One of the
Barons of the Exchequer. He designed to place you in a Court of more profit,
though not of more Dignity; but your own Modesty and Virtue has chosen this
Court, where you thought you could serve the King best. And I could not omit to
mention it here to your Honor, it being the greatest instance of a good Man,
That he had rather be found serviceable then rich. His Majesty has had large
proof of your former Services; besides He takes you upon the credit of that
Recommendation, that has justly the best place with Him, I mean His Royal
Brothers.

Some few things it is fit I should here mention to you, and leave with you as
Admonitions, or rather Remembrances. In the first place, you are to maintain
the Kings Prerogative; and let not the Kings Prerogative, and the Law, be two
things with you. For the Kings Prerogative is Law, and the Principal Part of
the Law; and therefore, in maintaining that, you maintain the Law. The
Government of England is so excellently interwoven, that every part of the
Prerogative has a broad mixture of the Interest of the Subject; the ease and
safety of the People being inseparable from the Greatness and Security of the
Crown.

In the next place, let me advise you, that you acquaint your self with the
Revenue; as also with the Ancient Records, Precedents, and Practice of this
Court. For want of which knowledge, I have seen this Court a most excellent
Common Pleas, when at the same time, I could not say so much for it as an
Exchequer.

In the third place, let me recommend to you, so to manage the Kings Justice
and Revenue, as the King may have most Profit, and the Subject least Vexation.
Raking for old Debts; the number of Informations; Projects upon Concealments: I
could not find in the Eleven years experience I have had in this Court, ever to
advantage the Crown. But such proceedings have for the most part delivered up
the Kings good Subjects into the hands of the worst of men.

There is another thing I have observed in this Court, that I shall mind you
of, which is, When the Court hearkens too much to the Clerks and Officers of
it; and are too apt to send out Process, when the Money may be raised by
otherways more easy to the People. I do not say, That the Kings duty should be
lost, or that the strictest course should not be taken, rather then that be:
But when you consider, how much the Officers of this Court, and the
Undersheriffs, get by Process upon small Sums, more then the Kings duty comes
to; and upon what sort of People this falls, to wit, the Farmer, Husbandman,
and Clothier in the Country, that is generally the Collector, Constable, and
Tithingman; and so disturbs the industrious part of the Nation, you think it
fit to make that the last way, when no other will serve.

Give me leave also to mind you of one thing more, which is in your Oath, That
the Kings needs ye shall speed before all other: That is, the business of the
Revenue of the Crown you are to dispatch before all other, and not turn your
Court into a Court of Common Pleas; and let that justle out what you were
constituted for.

In the last place, let me conclude with what concerns all my Lords, the
Judges, as well as you, let me recommend to you the Port, and way of living
suitable to the dignity of your place, and what the King allows you. There is
not any thing gains more Reputation and Respect to the Government, then that
does: And let me tell you, Magistrates as well as Merchants, are supported by
Reputation.

FINIS.

