Abraham in Arms;

OR The first Religious GENERAL WITH HIS ARMY Engaging in A WAR For which he
had wisely prepared and b^ which, not only an eminent VICTORY Was obtained, but
A BLESSING gained also.

Delivered in an Artillery-Election-Sermon, June, 3. 1678.

By S. N.

BOSTON; Printed by John Foster, 1678.

To the Reader
Friendly Reader,
A Desire to gratify my Friends, has made, against my own Judgment, to
consent to the Publication of these Notes, taken by one of the Auditors; to
which I am not able to make that addition, by reason of my inability to write,
through infirmity in my right hand, which God has been pleased to exercise me
with, almost wholly taking away the use of my hand: What is therefore made
public is not mine own Notes, but agreeing in the subst^^ce with what was
delivered: This Argument also prevailed with me to let this come forth; I
thought others more able, seeing this imperfect work to find acceptance with
some, might thereby be provoked to Preach and Print something that might be
more effectual to revive our Military Discipline, and the spirit of Soldiery,
which seems to be in its Wane, in an Age when never more need of it.

The Love I have for this Country, where I drew my first Breath, has made me
Run the Gaunt let by exposing this to the world, hoping that they that fault
it, will endeavor to mend it by some mean or other, and to pray for the
Author, who is a Friend to all of such a spirit,

Samuel Nowell.

Genesis 14.14. And when Abram beard that his Brother was taken captive, he armed
his trained Servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and
pursued them to Dan.


OUR Father Abraham is highly commended in Scripture for two things with
respect to his Family, besides his own Faith and Piety, that the Scripture
gives account of: so we have his care with respect to his Family,

1. To Teach them Piety. Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham, there is none like him in
all the earth, he will command his Family, and his household in the ways of the
Lord.

2. We have his care to instruct them in Military Discipline, appearing in
these words, he armed his trained Servants, such as he had Trained up to be fit
for such a piece of Service as God by his providence called him to: His Trained
or instructed Servants for such a service, prepared for it by instruction or by
Training, which is our usual word for such an end. This labor and care of
Abraham in this work, is much commended, from his success in War, or his
martial Exploit, of which we have an account in this Chapter. And that Abraham
undertakes War, and succesfully, and gets a Blessing by it, Melchizedech's
Blessing in his return out of the Field: we see,

That the highest practice of Piety and practice of War, may agree well in one
person. Religion and Arms may well be joined together; they agree so well
together, that the Lord assumes the name to himself, The Lord is a Man of War,
the Lord is his name. It is the first song that ever was penned to celebrate
Gods praises, in that Song God is magnified for this, as if it were one of his
highest and chiefest Attributes, The Lord is a man of War: The Creation is
overlooked, and the first piece of praise given to God is, The Lord is a Man of
War. Exodus 15.1, 2, 3. I will sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed
gloriously, the horse and his Rider has he cast into the Sea, the Lord is a
Man of War, the Lord is his name.

In this Chapter we have the first mention in sacred Story of any warlike
exploit; not but that there had been war before, as is employed in the beginning
of the Chapter, the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah, had served Chedarlaomer twelve
years, in the thirteenth year they rebelled, in the fourteenth year, he with
three other Kings makes War upon them, and he overcomes them and takes Lot
Captive; and this is the first mention of any Battle fought, and as eminent an
instance of valor in Abraham and his Army, as is in the whole Book of God; for
though Gideon and three hundred men, fought with a great Army, yet there was a
great deal more Stratagem on his part: his pitchers with lamps in them, being
broken in the night put a fright on the enemy; but Abraham fairly won his
battle with dry blows. It is the first exploit of a Christian Soldier, the
first time we read of any Christian Soldier being in arms, or of a religious
Captain with his Army of Religion and arms joined together, this account of
Abraham's arming his own Servants.

In this piece of Story, four things are hinted,

1. The Occasion of Abraham's arming his Soldiers at this time; When Abraham
h^ard that his brother Lot was taken Captive. 2. We have an account of the
General of the Army in this undertaking or War, and that is Abraham. 3. We
have an account of his Soldiers, 1. The number of them, they were three
hundred and eighteen. 2. The Quality of them they were trained men, they had
their arms ready, and skill to make use of them: He presently takes Arms, he
had not arms to seek, nor men to learn how to make use of them; but every thing
was ready, fit to pursue and overtake the enemy. 4. We have the success of it,
with the consequents thereof: the success, he recovers his Brother Lot, beats
the enemy, wins a complete victory takes all the Captives. The Consequents of
it were, 1. He gets a Blessing of Melchizedech for it. Melchizedech that was
eminently a Type of Jesus Christ. God did so far own and encourage Abraham in
this undertaking, that he would not let this action go without a special
Blessing, to encourage Soldiers in a lawful War. He has the special blessing
of Christ; it is more than if an Angel had done it. Melchizedech so eminently
representing Jesus Christ, who is a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedech. 2. His Restoration of the goods and persons to the King of
Sodom; in which he shows as much of nobleness or gallantry of spirit; as in
fighting with Chedarlaomer. The King of Sodom offers Abraham to take the goods,
if he would restore the persons. No says Abraham, I will not take the least
from a thread to a shoe latchet, lest the king of Sodom should say, he had made
Abraham rich. It shows it was not for gain or advantage he had ventured his
life, his spirit was above it. It was not any reward from men that he expected,
but was contented with the blessing of God, that rich blessing which he got. It
was a great piece of praise (but in a bad cause) of Sisera's soldiers, that
came to the waters of Tanach and fought, they took no gain of money: had it not
been in a bad cause, it had been an high commendation of them, but it was in a
wicked Cause, and so they lost the praise which otherwise had belonged to them.
Those soldiers of Jesus Christ, that valued not their lives to the death, will
show themselves to be of the same spirit that Abram was, that will not so much
look at gain, or reward of men, as the advancement of a good Cause.

But to hint something to you from the words,

1. From the occasion of Abraham's taking up arms, When Abram heard his brother
Lot was taken Captive, or his Nephew, he was his brothers son, it was for the
rescue of his Kinsman. To take up arms for the defense of friends and Allies is
lawful. To take up arms for such as are confederate with us, for united
Colonies or Provinces from this example of Abraham and his confederate, that
were engaged in a league, offensive and defensive; So Anar, Eshcol and Mamre
were confederate with him. Though here be not an expression of such a league,
yet there was a great friendship and relation between him and Lot; and through
Abrams wisdom, they parted lovingly, though they did part and could not live
together, therefore Abram engages in a War for the rescue of Lot and his
Family.

1. Hence our late War was justifiable, though the Quarrel was firstly with our
neighbors.

2. Hence consequently, it is lawful by war to defend what we have lawfully
obtained and come by, as our possessions, lands and inheritance here, to which
we have as fair a title as any ever had, since Isreal's title to Canaan. Theirs
was not only a gift of Providence, but of Promise. Ours we can call only a gift
of Providence but yet such as we may lawfully defend. As Jephthah said to the
Children of Ammon, What Chemosh thy God gives thee to possess, will thou not
possess it? So what God has providentially given us, without injury to others,
is that which we may lawfully defend.

There are commonly reckoned three causes of War,

1. For defense of our selves. 2. To recover what has been taken away. 3. To
punish for injuries done.
But to pass by the occasions of the War; through the goodness of God we have
peace. Abram armed his trained servants, or Soldiers, three hundred and
eighteen: the number was small to encounter with four Kings such as they were
Chedarlaomer being supposed to be Nimrods's successor, and Tidal King of
Nations could not be a mean Prince, or have a small number of Soldiers: so
that three hundred and eighteen men must in reason be but a very small handful
or number to encounter with such an Army, an Army heightened with success,
flushed with victory over the five Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah, and those
neibouring cities. They had a great Army for number, in probability though it
be not e^pressed; they had an army that was heightened with success, their
spirit and courage was which makes men abundantly more considerable. Take men
flushed with success they will undertake any thing, though very hazardous. Here
was but a little handful to go out against such an army. But what is it that
a few men will not dare to do, if the Cause, the Courage, the Conduct be but
like that of Abram.

But to note some things from the words, Abram armed his trained Servants:
Abram was eminent in his place, 1. For preparation before War, his servants
were trained men. 2. For his carriage in the business and management of it,
when he undertook it.


I shall speak chiefly to the first of these,

Doctr. That the Training of Soldiers to be fit for War, is a commendable
practice, yea a Duty of great Consequence, or not of the lowest rank. or thus.

Frequent Trainings for the instructing of men in military Discipline that they
may be ready and expert for War, is a commendable practice, yea a Duty which
God expects of all Gods Abraham's in their respective places: that is, by Gods
Abraham's in their respectve places, I mean such as are merely civil Rulers, to
encourage such exercises by their authority and presence, when convenient. Such
as are military officers, it is their duty actually to instruct men; such may
be supposed to represent Abraham, and God does expect it from them, that they
should take care of this part, which Abraham acted so happily to so good end;
And which is the consequent of this second Doctrine, It is the duty of those
that would be accounted of Abraham's Family to learn of them, whom God requires
to teach them the use of their weapons, and order of War. If it be Abraham's
duty to teach, it is the duty of Abraham's servants, those that represent them
to learn of those God sets over them, the use of their weapons, and the order
of War, that they may be expert for War. It is a commendation of a people or
of soldiers to be expert for war, that which the Scripture frequently
mentions, I shall look but to two places, 1. Cron, 12.33, 35, 36. in many
verses of that Chapter, of Zebulun such as went forth to battle, expert for
war, with all instruments of war, fifty thousand that could keep rank. Here was
Training up men to be expert and fit for War. And so in the following verse, of
the Danites, expert for War, twenty eight thousand; of Asher such as went forth
to battle, expert in War, forty thousand. In that Song of Solomon, Cant. 3.7,
8. Behold his bed which is Solomon's, threescore valiant men are about it, of
the valiant of Israel, they all hold swords, being expert in War. Every man
has his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night. It is an high
Commendation of any people, when care is taken by Rulers, and people are
willing to learn, and hearken to Rulers, that they may be instructed to be
expert in war. It is a part of the general Calling, whereto God calls every man
that is capable (not impotent men nor children) but according to that time the
Scripture reckons, from twenty years and upward, all that were ready to go
forth to war. It is not a thing by the by, but that which men should make their
business. It is a duty and praiseworthy piece of skill, to be expert for war.
To be good soldiers is a matter of praise or honor, which made the Apostle
use it in a spiritual sense, therefore my Son endure hardness as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ. 2. Tim. 2.3. It is a strange piece of dotage befallen
this crazy headed Age, that men should not use the sword: the best of men have
done it, and it has been reckoned among their most praiseworthy actions, that
they have used the sword. Of some it is said, that their hands did cleave to
their swords, they were so much in the use of it so happily for the advantage
of the Church. The Apostle to the Hebrews Cap. 11.33.34. when he makes mention
of the Worthyes, he mentions these two together, Who through Faith subdued
Kingdoms, wrought righteousness; they two may well go together: that is
reckoned one of the great works of their Faith; there is not any thing wherein
the glory of the Faith of many Believers did more shine forth, then in the use
of it in War. There is no higher occasion ordinary or outward, wherein we have
a higher opportunity or use for Faith, and so other Graces. A Soldier may be
and should be an holy man and the more fit he is for a Soldier. But that it is
a duty of great Consequence, I shall speak to the Doctrine in these two parts.

1. It is a commendable practice. 2. It is the duty of Gods Abraham's to have a
care of this work to instruct soldiers that they may be fit for War:
1. It is a commendable practice, that may appear in four or five things.

1. In that the Lord himself does claim the honor of it: if it were not an
honorable work, God would not challenge the honor of it, He teaches my hands
to war, and my fingers to fight. Military skill is such a piece of divine
wisdom, that the Lord will not loose the honor of it. If every good and
perfect gift be from him, he does challenge every good and perfect gift as from
him, but peculiarly claims the honor of this gift, of giving Military skill:
God is the Author of it, The Lord is a Man of War, the Lord is his Name. That
the Lord does claim the honor of it, I might show you by induction of
Particulars or by instances. Every thing, every part that belongs to a
Soldier, God challenges or claims as being from him, every thing that is
honorable or praiseworthy,

1. The giving Spirit and Courage to men, of raising up the Spirits of men,
that he claims as being from him. Jer. 5^, 11. Make bright the arrows, gather
the shields; the Lord has raised up the spirits of the Kings of the Medes. He
raises up men's spirits, when they are raised up for war; God has a hand in it.

2. God challenges this, he teaches to make weapons of War and the use of
them. God does not only give spirits to such a work, but teaches the framing
and making of weapons, and has a hand in the whetting and furbishing of them.
He directs the Smith to form or frame weapons for war, Isar. 54.16, 17. to
show that he has the ordering of the use of weapons. Behold I have created the
Smith that blows the coal in the fire, and that brings forth an instrument
for his work. And I have created the Waster to destroy, and no weapon that is
formed against thee shall prosper. God uses it as an Argument to encourage his
people to trust in him, there is no weapon of War, but I do direct to the
making of it. He whets the sword, and furbusheth it to the battle: if I whet my
glittering sword, and my hand take hold on vengeance, Deuteronomy. 32.41. He looks to
the forming of the weapons, He teaches men the ordering of the battle: God
does give that wisdom also to the Sons of men, he teaches them by the order
of his own Host, the Stars: But more especially he provideth a Captain for his
own Host, Josh. 5.14. It came to pass, when Joshua was by Jerecho, he lift up
his eyes and looked, and behold there stood a man over against him with a sword
drawn in his hand; and Joshua went to him and said unto him, Art thou for us or
for our adversaries? And he said nay, but as Captain of the Host of the Lord am
I now come. It was an Angel appeared. When any Host of his is called forth, the
Lord does take care, as he did for Israel, when he intended to possess them of
Canaan he sent his Angel to go along with them; he was invisibly, constantly
with them; for he came to be as Captain of the Lords Hosts. And therefore that
good King encourages the people, the Lord is with us to fight our Battles. He
has a hand in ordering the battle, 2 Chronicles. 32.8. He appears eminently in
the day of Battle, raising the spirits on the one side, and taking it away from
the other. The Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, God
overrules it, gives it where he pleases, It is the Lord of Hosts that
mustereth the Host of the Battle. Isa. 13.4, 5. The noise of a multitude in the
mountains, like as the noise of a great people, a tumultuous noise of the
Kingdoms of nations gathered together: the Lord of Host mustereth the Host of
the Battle, they come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the
Lord, and the weapons of his in dignation. And therefore we have this as a
frequent expression, The Battle is the Lords, and has been used for
encouragement by those that have been Commanders of the People of God, when in
any eminent danger, Be not afraid, for the Battle is the Lords. 1. Sam. 17.47.
That the Battle is the Lords, appears by Gods turning the Battle by such a
small accident as he does frequently: one stone directed right, casts the
day, as it was with the Philistines fighting against Israel. One arrow drawn at
a venture, smote the King of Israel between the joints of the harness, and that
one stroke turns the day. God covers the head in the day of Battle, God
particularly says in every thing, He has a hand in it, in forming weapons,
giving Skill, raising the Spirit. God has a hand in it, and eminently in this,
in Covering the Head in the day of Battle. How near do the Bullets or
instruments of death come, but God covers the head in the day of Battle:
Therefore it is a commendable thing to teach and instruct men to be expert for
War, because God has so great a hand in it, and does claim the honor of it.

2. The wisest of Rulers, and holiest of men, have been still careful about
this duty and work, in the acting of this part, making preparation for War, in
Peace, and in order to it, instructing men in the use of weapons; the holiest,
and best, and wisest of men, have always had a care about it. David made a
Law, he commanded them to teach Israel the use of the bow. 2. Sam. 1.18. By
that weapon the Worthyes of Israel fell, Saul and Jonathan. David made a Law of
it, to teach the use of that particular weapon, that had been so destructive to
the Church of God. Abraham Trains his Servants, Jacob that was so eminent for
holiness, was skillful in the use of his sword and bow; he won a parcel of land
by it, that he gave to Joseph, by Will at his death. Genesis 48. ult. and that he
taught his children the use of it, is apparent by the ill use of it, made by
Simeon and Levi. He had both used it himself, was expert in the use of it, had
won a considerable portion of a country by it, and had taught it his children,
It was apparent they were so ready at it. Solomon, that wise man, though he
enjoyed such peace in his days, that it is said, there was no adversary, nor
evil occurrent, yet none made greater preparation for War then Solomon did: the
Scripture speaks of it as his commendation, to make such preparation for war:
so that the holiest, and wisest of men have still had care about this.

3. The common practice of Nations, in all ages, where the Rulers have been
prudent, have had care of this: and the Scripture brandeth those with infamy
that have failed in it. The men of Laish were secure; in the Book of Judges,
the Danites had not taken up their inheritance, they sent men to Laish, Judge.
18.7. Then the five men departed, and came Laish and saw the people that were
therein therein how they dwelt carelessly after the manner of the Zidonians,
quiet and secure, and had no business with any man, they made no provision for
war, promised themselves peace: these were a people fit for destruction, it was
reckoned their great folly and shame. That that was a means to their
destruction, we may be abundantly furnished from holy Writ, as well as humane
Writing with examples of the care, both of the people of Israel, and other
nations, looking carefully after this matter. The number of Israel, from twenty
years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to War: it implies the
Children of Israel with their Rulers, had regard to this, to know who were
capable to go forth to War. The number of Israel was still taken from their
Muster Rolls; therefore it was committed to the military Officers still to take
the number of the people, Joab the General, and so the inferior officers, were
sent out to take the number of the people, and they were reckoned from twenty
years old and upward, all that were able to go out to War.

4. The irrational creatures, when sent by God in way of Judgment, act as if
they were under Military Conduct, which shows that it is an advantageous thing
to carry on a design. Io^l 2.7. We read of the Catter pillars and the Locusts,
and the Canker-worm, God would send them a great Army, they should be like the
noise of Chariots on the tops of mountains, like the noise of a flame of fire
that devoureth stubble, as a strong people set in battle array, they shall run
like mighty men and climb the wall like men of war, and they shall march every
one on his ways, they shall not break their Rank. God does by it commend
military order to rational persons, when he tells us the irrational creatures
sent by him in way of Judgment, to accomplish such designs as he by his
Providence intends, when they shall march in this manner, it does commend to
us, that Order used in War, Military Discipline, is greatly advantageous; in
that God gives that instinct even to irrational creatures, when he makes use of
them that they come in such a manner.

5. The field or Camp has been famous for the accomplishment of of all sorts
of men; it has ripened parts to that height, that it made many the wonders of
the world in their Age.

II. It is not only a commendable practice, but it is a duty.

1. The Law of nature, which teaches men self-preservation, requires this as
a means for that end. whatsoever is needful for our defense, is a duty, it
requires and enjoynes whatsoever is a means for this end; so that acquaintance
with, or the exercise of our selves in the use of arms, or other parts of
military exercise, may be enforced from that Commandment which requires men to
use all means to preserve life, to defend themselves. it were to no end to make
a law requiring duty, if to our might we should not use the proper means for
our own preservation Let but a Prince never so great, tread upon a worm, and it
will turn; they have that instinct in them to defend themselves. There are our
Rights both as Men, and as Christians, our civil Rights and Libertyes as Men
and our religious Liberties and Rights as Christians; both which we are to
defend with the sword, as far as we are able, or to commit our selves to God in
the way of duty in doing of it. There is such a thing as Liberty and Property
given to us, both by the Laws of God and Men, when these are invaded, we may
defend our selves. God has not given great ones in the world that absolute
power over men, to devour them at pleasure, as great Fishes do the little ones;
he has set Rulers their bounds, and by his Law has determined peoples
libertyes and property. He that rules over men must be just that is should be
so, ruling in the fear of God: therefore Kings are commanded to read the Book
of the Law, because it is a boundary of their authority, as well as of the
peoples liberty. Naboths Vineyard taken away by Ahab in that manner as it was,
was revenged by God on Ahab and Jezebel too. ^f we have that that is our Right
and Due, it is not another being stronger can make our Right Null and void:
therefore that Law that gives us a Right, requires attendance on the work of
this day, that is Martial exercise, in order to the defense of our selves by
Arms, when the providence of God puts us upon it.

2. God by his providence keeps some Nations and people unsubdued, as he did
with Israel of old. he kept some people unsubdued on purpose to teach Israel
War. So the Lord has dealt with us by his Providence here in this wilderness,
these are the Nations which the Lord left to prove Israel by, those that had
not known the Wars of Canaan, only that the generations might know to teach
them War. Judge. 3.1, 2. It was the duty of Israel therefore to learn, that they
might be expert for war; for God left some nations unsubdued on purpose to
teach them war. So the Lord has dealt with us, though he has given us a good
Country, yet not that full possession, but that there are some which our sad
experience has taught us, they have been left to teach us war; and therefore
it is a duty to keep up such military exercises, as may make us expert for War.

3. Our Savior Christ's Command is an Argument that it is a Duty, he that has
not a Sword, let him sell his garment and buy one. Luke 22.36. which does infer
the learning, the use of it, or whatsoever is needful to defend our selves in
troublesome times. It is the duty and wisdom of any people to put themselves
in such a posture as they may be fit to defend themselves: and our Saviors
Command, shows also the use of a sword is as needful as a garment* he that
has not a sword, let him sell his Garment and buy one. Also when our Savior
tells us, in the latter days there shall be Wars and Rumors of Wars, more in
these days than at other times; it is to teach us that wisdom, that we may be
found fitted and prepared to act our parts in our day. Milittary Skill ought to
be taught and learned in the latter days more then at other times.

4. Our Military Strength is, under God, the appointed means, or in the
ordinary way of Providence, is the proper and only means for our preservation;
therefore it is a duty to encourage Soldiers. God can work miracles, but when
ordinary means may be had, he will not work miracles. When Israel came out of
Egypt, God did take the Battle into his own hand. So frighted as they were with
Egypts following of them in a better posture for War then they, so low as
their spirits were brought by hard bondage, God did miraculously fight for
them, and destroy Pharaoh; but when it is otherwise with the People of God,
that they have time to furnish themselves, the Lord does direct us to use them
and they are the only means of our preservation, they are the only walls and
bulwarks of Gods Herititage here. Gods vineyard has no other walls, but only
our Soldiery, that and our Poverty. We have no walled towns, as they have in
other places, our Forts and Castles are contemptible, We have not any bank of
money to hire soldiers: our strength by Sea is small, and for friendship and
favor in the world with any that should help us, is not much, or our friends
lie too far off to help us in time of need; so that we have nothing left us but
only this, First that hedge which God made about Job, 2. As to means it is only
that wall of Bones (as one calls it) better then a wall of Stones, our
Soldiers, which, howsoever it may seem weak to some, yet as when God made the
fear of Jacob and his Family fall on the Nations, not one of them durst to rise
up to disturb Jacob and his Family. The resolution that appeared in Simeon and
Levi, together with the fear of God, begat such an awe and dread of that little
Family on the Country round about. they knew they were resolute men, and would
sell their lives dear; this as a means had a great influence upon all round
about, that none did dare pursue Jacob; but this has been our defense.
Soldiers have been the Wall, the Strength, the Glory of this little
Commonwealth; the name of our military Skill, our readiness and expertness in
military exercises, is that for which we have been famed abroad in other
countries, both among Dutch and French, What the Governor of Manadus saw in
that little time when he was here, gave us no small credit in Holland. What
made the Indians live quietly by us so long? they had hatred to to us many
years before it broke out. What was the reason it did not break out? they saw
we had skill, that Skill in Military Discipline which they understood not: that
was an awe and dread to them, and is at this day, that they dare not meet us on
equal terms.

USE. 1. Hence it is no ways unbecoming a Christian to learn to be a Soldier,
not only a Spiritual Soldier, but in the true proper sense of the letter. To
be a Soldier is a Credit, a praise and a glory, to be a good Soldier; it is
so not only to men, but to us as Christians, to have this added to us, to be
good Soldiers. It was a part of Abraham's praise and glory that he acted the
part of a Soldier so honorably, Nay it is a duty, not a piece of indifferency,
but a point of Duty, a praise worthy part, he that learns and acts his part
honorably. There is such agreement between the Spiritual and temporal Warfare,
that every thing belonging to a Soldier, is made use of to resemble some Grace
or Duty of a Christian, something belonging to a Christian. Nothing of what is
outward* but what may be made some Spiritual and good use of: As Solomon says,
I beheld the Vineyard of the Slothful, and from thence I learned Instruction.
There is nothing belonging to a Soldier, but be sure some spiritual use may be
made of it, all the parts of his Armor, every one does exceedingly well set
out some Grace or duty of a Christian. put on the whole Armor of God, there he
shows how every thing belonging to a Soldier did set forth something which a
good man should learn and have. All his weapons all his motions policy in War
are made use of to instruct a Christian in some act of Religion: the Church
Militant is therefore compared to an Army with Banners, for Order and for
terribleness. Cant. 6.4, 10. Again, John Baptist gives direction to Soldiers
on their address to him, to be content with their wages or hire: every one
would know their duty, their instruction was to be content with their hire; the
work was warrantable, and instruction is given for the better ordering of it.

USE II. Hence they are to blame, that either wholly neglect, or slight over
this work. If this be so becoming a Christian, they are greatly to blame that
do neglect it, or slight it over, do not make conscience of it, in endeavoring
to fit themselves, or to teach others to be expert for War: what we have
suffered by it, is a sufficient Argument to press this; some have their Arms to
seek, when their houses, or the Towns are beset; others are so rusty they
cannot be used: these are uncomely things, the want of Arms, or the unfitness
of them for the work and service God calls to: It is a great evil to have them
defective: Abraham's Soldiers were ready immediately on notice, they had not
their arms to seek, Abraham was not to buy them, they were ready to pursue and
follow the enemy; they were not to Train then, to learn to know their order and
Rank, but were fitted and prepared being Trained before.

USE. III. Of Exhortation to this Duty, that Abraham was so careful about, the
Training of his Servants: under which,

1. I would propound some Considerations yet further to excite and stir up to
it,

2. Some Directions: more particularly, 1. To such as represent Abraham, Rulers
in the Commonwealth, both civil and military.

2. To such as Abraham's Servants inferior Officers and Soldiers.

1. Some Considerations as a means to excite and stir up to this duty to be fit
for War.

1. The highest piece of Service that ever Soldiers were employed in is yet
behind; and is commonly believed not to be very far off: the highest service
that ever was done for the Lord Jesus Christ is yet behind, the destruction of
God and Magog, so the enemies of the Church are called in Scripture; whether it
be Pope or Turk; or whoever else is meant, that shall oppose the advancement of
the Kingdom of Christ: God does intend his Son shall be known and proclaimed
as King of Nations, as well as King of Saints, he will take to him his great
power and reign, and the Kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdoms of
our Lord and of his Christ the Lamb will have followers such as shall not love
their lives to the death, he has work to do in the world, and work that is
even at the door is commonly believed, and therefore we should be exhorted to
be the Servants waiting for our Lord. The Lord Jesus is not coming to send
peace on the Earth, but the Sword; Reformation never went on yet without it;
Look at it in Germany or Holland, or where ever else there has been any
attempt first or last, there has been something of a War for the defense of
it, or for laying the Foundation, the Sword will be drawn upon Christ's account,
and therefore that consideration should stir us up to keep up this military
Skill or Exercises, that we may be the better fitted for it.

2. Our own greatest trials seem to me to be behind, and that for several
Reasons. I apprehend we shall not live quiet long, or at least we have no
Reason to promise our selves that we shall, on these accounts.

1. There are none of the Princes of note in Europe that have any interest in
America, but have long had their Espyals upon us, as I might easily
demonstrate, but the reason of the thing it self is sufficient to convince us
of this, no Merchant but observes another motions and actions, trading and
advantage that he makes, no Husbandman but has his eye on his Neighbor, to
see how he profits by his labor and pains, that he may do the like; So it is
in other things, no Plantation goes on and thrives, but they that have
neighboring plantations are looking or it and observing it, our own daily
observation may be sufficient to make us believe this, there is not a small
Island in America, but the Princes or States of Europe are striving for it, as
we see the other day for Tobage, St. Christophers, etc. if these be looked
after what can we expect?

2. Rome will have no peace with you, and you ought to have no peace with it,
and that Rome's Agents are abroad at work is plain, from that sire-light we
have seen in the world, if the Beasts deadly wound should ever be healed, that
we read of in Rev. 13. we are like to feel the Influence of it, if their
Councels should happen to sway the world, it is a vain thing for us to promise
our selves peace.

3. The sins of New England increase, iniquity does abound, and the Love of
many does wax cold, and therefore trouble will be, usually the sword is one
means, by which God punishes this sin in his people, and therefore probability
yet of more of it.

4. The Inhabitants of the land will not join or mix with us to make one Body,
which is the more likely they are preserved to be thorns in our, sides. When
Hamor and Sechem propounded a firm peace with Jacobs Family, they cry Let us
marry together and make one nation or people: a Policy used by the French at
this day, not far from us; they may think thereby to escape some scourge that
hangs over them; the issue of which we must leave to God. When God intended the
Canaanites to be destroyed, he did forbid Israel to marry with them: they were
to be thorns to them and Israel was to root them out in the conclusion:
therefore frequent trouble, we may probably and rationally reckon of, to meet
with from the heathen. Two Nations in are the womb and will be striving. That
is a second consideration, we must either learn to defend our selves, or
resolve to be vassals. It is a base spirit that of Issachar, a strong Ass
couching between two burdens, he saw that rest was good, and the land it was
pleasant, and bowed his shoulders to bear, and became a Servant to tribute. So
servile are some, that they will pay tribute to heathens, rather then endure a
little difficulty. Low spirited men, let them have Issachars lot, that make his
choice

3. The World, however pride and lust dispose them to quarrel, yet are not
disposed to breed up soldiers, there is such abounding of Intemperance, or
debauching that does wound men's Consciences, and in the day of danger and
trouble will fly in their faces, wounded Consciences will be felt then, as it
was in the case of Joseph's brethren, when they were in distress, they cry, we
are verily guilty concerning our Brother: many humane stories might be
mentioned for the confirmation of this. Take one. A Captain in the Low
Countries challenged Major General Skippon, the Lord Veer hearing of it, told
them, to morrow I intend to assault such a Town, and then I shall see who will
be the best Soldier: accordingly a breach being made in the Wall, this Bravado
was commanded to enter, but would not, saying, I am not fit to dye. Conscience
will fly in men's faces, when they have eminent apprehensions of death. a man
that did not know how to put on his Spur right, if an honest man, was wont to
be accounted a fitter person to make a Soldier, then those that would cry God
damn me at every word, that slight and despise Hell, and eternal Damnation.
Intemperance, Luxury, filthiness, and uncleaness in the world does so debauch
men, they are not like to breed up Soldiers for Christ, to do service for
Christ, he that striveth for Mastery must be temperate in all things. I will
tell you how we breed up Soldiers, both in old England and New, every Farmers
Son, when he goes to the Market Town, must have money in his purse; and when he
meets with his Companions, they go to the Tavern or Alehouse, and seldom
away before Drunk, or well tipled. It is rare to find men that we can call
Drunkards, but there are abundance of Tiplers in New England. This makes Youth
effeminate and wanton, besides the injury to men's Consciences; this does make
men not so bold, The Righteous are bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1.

It has been a question whether Athiesme or Piety have made the better
Soldiers? late experience as well as this of Abraham does teach us, that a
well established Conscience, is better then a seared Conscience to fill a man
with Courage: some fill themselves with drink, to make them forget the fear of
death, but David that was a courageous Soldier, knew no way so fit to animate
his Spirit as to go to the promise of God; to encourage himself in God, fullness
of Corn and wine cannot heighten and raise the spirits of men, so as assurance
of the love of God. Psalm. 4.6, 7. a well established Conscience, Faith in the
promises, is above all such means as the poor simple sinful world uses. That
Atheism cannot do so much as a good Conscience, may appear from two Reasons.

1. Because an Atheist has no assurance of a Reward, whereas a Believer has.
That should make a Believer more courageous, because he is sure of a Reward:
when a man goes to the Battle it is uncertain whether he shall outlive the
Battle, and also it is uncertain whether he shall have the victory; and if
either of these happen, an Atheist has no reward, if he loose the day or loose
his life: but a true Christian is assured of his Reward. He that does what he
does, as service to God we know our labor is not in vain in the Lord; he must
needs be the better spirited for his work.

2. A true Christian is a gainer by Death; it is not so with an Atheist, To me
to dye is gain, Phil. 1 21. Therefore says Solomon, the day of Death is better
then the day of a man's Birth, viz. to the Saints, because there is an end of
all a man's sin and sorrow, and the beginning of his never-ending Joy. He that
fights in the Faith of this, must needs out do one that has no such
expectation: an Atheist reckons of nothing in the world to come, he can
believe for no reward in the world to come, that thinks there is no God; He
cannot be so adventurous in looking Death in the face, as he that knows he
shall be a Gainer by Death. It is Hope that animateth all our work. The heathen
that had not true peace of Conscience, yet had some sense of the natural
Conscience excusing, Non turbidus Auster. etc. Hor.
and do express it in a strange manner. What is it such a man needs to fear?
it is not all the violent storms he can be in or hazard by them: not the
cruelty of Tyrants, nor though the world should rush together. It is but an
Heathen speech, but expresses a strange apprehension they had of the benefit
of peace of natural Conscience: they knew not peace with God. A man that is
whole and sound within, may better look Death in the Face, then any other, from
any other Consideration. The Psalmist expresses it in another manner, Psalm. 1
12.7. He shall not be afraid of evil Tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in
the Lord.

2. To come to some Directions.

1. To such as represent Abraham, Rulers in the Commonwealth, both Civil and
Military; God expects from you that you should act Abraham's part. 1. I would
speak a few words of Encouragement to you. 2. By way of Direction. For
Encouragement.

1. Through the goodness and favor of God, you have a people under you that
have Spirit and Courage enough. that have a large share of that: a great
blessing to this country, a mercy that we have all cause to bless God for:
there has rather been an excess of Courage, then defect or want of it; most of
our losses have been occasioned merely by it. You have men full of activity and
Courage, forward enough, notwithstanding danger. You have a People bred up in
this Country, that have the heart of Lions, 1 Chronicles. 12.8. Or Lion-like men. 1 Chronicles. 11.22. What is said of the Horse, one may by way of similitude apply to
men. He mocks at fear, he is not afraid, neither turns he back from the sword.
Job. 39.22-25. I speak this because I have seen and heard something my self of
the Courage of Soldiers, that has been better and more refreshing then the
greatest Daintyes or Feast could be: to see the hearts of men raised in danger,
rather then cast down with it. The spirits of men to be raised and heightened in
danger, if we had the Mines of Mexico and Peru, it would not be such a mercy
and blessing to the Country as this is.

2. They can endure hardness, that is another thing by way of encouragement to
Rulers, that is a great mercy. A tender, softly, effeminate People is a curse
and misery, when God is pleased to frame a people to be such. And by the way, I
might encourage Rulers, Governors and Parents to train and bring up their
Children in such manner that they may endure Hardness. Tho Isaac was a great
Prince, as the king of the Philistines acknowledged him, yet when he sent away
Jacob, he sent not so much as a Servant with him; he took of the stones, and
made a pillow of them; it was a hard pillow, had no feathers in it; but when he
had the hardest nights lodging, he had the best nights rest. He saw a Vision of
a Ladder reaching to heaven: it was as comfortable a night as ever Jacob had.
Isaac was a Prince, acknowledged by the King of the Philistines, yet he brings
up Jacob in such a manner, that he should not complain of this hardness, to be
sent out alone, to lie in the woods, and have nothing but a stone for his
pillow, to have a piece of bread in his pocket, and water to drink, he did
endure without murmuring and repining. It is probable his Father did not bring
him up deliciously.

One leaving of New England, did commend that to Parents. You do not know what
hardness your Children may be called to.

By way of Advice, two or three words.

1. Require of all the exercise of Trainings, or attendance upon them: That
Rulers should look unto, that they may have Soldiers ready for any Expedition.
There are good Laws, but there needs strictness in the execution of them.

2. Keep up martial Discipline: a Soldier is the worst of creatures that is
not under Discipline, and such as are Commanders should look to that. You know
the praiseworthy example of the Centurion, I say to one go, and he goes, and
to another come, aend he comes, Mat. 8.9. Discipline is the life of the work.
Captains are greatly to blame, that are softly men, and do not hold their
authority in the field. That which would be no fault, or might be winked at at
home, should not be suffered in the Field.

3. Encourage your Horse, those exercises also. Foreign Princes know they can
easily over-master you in Foot, but know not how to over-master you in Horse.
They that have had an aching tooth at this place, have been afraid of this; that
have Foot-Souldiers enough at our backs, yet know not how to match us in Horse.

4. Look with a favorable aspect upon, and afford your presence as much as may
be, at such Meetings as are the work of this day. Encourage Artilery-Trainings.
1. It is a way and means to give encouragement to dilligent and expert Men, by
giving them titles answerable to their activity and skill. In Grammar-Schools,
to be a Captain for a day, makes young Scholars strive at their Books. It is a
way that affords opportunity to put honor and respect upon Men of activity,
as their Diligence, Valor and activity calls for it. The Law of nature
teaches, that the virtuous Skill of any does call for honor. 2. It is a
Nursery for Officers beyond our common Trainings, or a better means to
accomplish those that are Officers, Artilery Meetings consisting in a great
measure of such. It is also a proper means for trying the Skill of Soldiers
beyond what is at other times.

2. A few words to inferior Officers and Soldiers, to such as represent
Abraham's Servants, labor to be good Soldiers, and to that end,
Fellow Soldiers, I would commend a few things, 1. Something to you as
Christian Soldiers. 2. Something to you as Soldiers Literal, or men.

1. Something as Christian-Souldiers, only these two words,

1. Get Armor of proof put on the whole Armor of God, that is the way to make
a good Soldier, to have his complete Armor, Armor for his inward man;
without there be a Guard to that, there will be a Failing: if the Conscience be
wounded, or be not safe, if the Breast Plate of Righteousness be not on, if men
have guilty Consciences, they will find and feel the sad effects of it, when
they come to be in danger, Put on your spiritual Armor, look to that
Breast Plate of Righteousness. I would commend the keeping of a good Conscience:
with that Breast Plate a man may look Death in the Face. When the vitals are
secured, a man that has any Courage or Spirit, will not vallue a scratch in
the arm or leg. If a man have a good Breast Plate and large, sufficient to
defend his Vitals, it will make a man bold; he knows that ordinarily he is
secured as for his life; and he that has any spirit will venture his Limbs.
Take care of your inward man therefore, as you would make good Soldiers. Look
to your inward man, the Heart, that that be well guarded and defended, that you
have a good Breast Plate for the defense of that. Abraham first taught Piety:
Engage God with you, and that would make a very coward fight. For a man to have
his Conscience against him in the day of Battle, is a very sad thing, it
frighteth a man far more than the enemy. God is departed from me, and
answerethme no more, and the Philistines are upon me: That made the Philistines
as bad as so many Devils to him.

2. Be Temperate and endure hardness, do not live as if your great study were
to please the flesh; one that is given to appetite, will never credit the
profession of a Soldier nor himself.

2. A hint or two to you as Soldiers.

1. Be in subjection to Officers, to those God sets over you: to dispute
commands is unbecoming a Soldier, I am a man under Authority, and say to one
go and he goes, says the Centurion, Luke 7.5.

2. Go to, or attend upon Trainings as those that do not reckon it a Task, but
account it your Recreation, and Privilege, as those that have a mind to be
expert in war. The Lord Jesus when he calls out any, they shall not be
bunglers, it will not be long ere the Lord Jesus will call out Soldiers, those
that he will use shall be expert for War, and therefore let us accustom our
selves to this work, that fatal blow at Black-point should make men love
Training; the unreadiness they were in there, they were raw and undisciplined:
let us labor to be expert for War; to be like our General Jesus Christ. The
Lord is a man of War.

Lastly, look to your Arms, that becomes a Soldier to keep them fixed, and to
be expert in the use of them, 2 Samuel 1.18. according to that of David, be
commanded to teach them the use of the Bow.

FINIS

