AN ANSWER TO THE Provincial Letters Published by the JANSENISTS, Under the
Name of Lewis Montalt, Against the Doctrine of the JESUITS And School-Divines:
Made by some Fathers of the Society in FRANCE.

There is set before the Answers in this Edition, The History of Jansenisme,
and at the end, A conclusion of the Work, where the English Additionalls are
showed to deserve no Answer; Also an Appendix, showing the same of the Book
called, A further Discovery of Jesuitisme.

Printed at Paris, in the Year, 1659.

The PREFACE to the READER.
A French man not long since, under the counterfeit Name of Lewis Montalt,
printed Satyricall Libells, which he called Provincial Letters. His main drift
was to establish the Heresy of Jansenius; that is, that Heresy, which denies
Christ to be the Redeemer of all men; and among other Enormities teaches, that
God commands things that are impossible, not only to Sinners, but even to
the Just. This, I say, was his main drift; for this was the occasion of his
writing; with this his first Letters begin, in this he c^iefly labors, and
with this his last Letters end. Yet to cloak this foul design with a pleasing
outside, he often makes Profession of sincere Faith, and of great Reverence to
the Sea Apostolic; and condemns verbally the Five Propositions of Jansenius
censured by the Church as Heretical. Yet this he does so as still to excuse
Jansenius his Doctrine and the Jansenists from Heresy. He would be thought to
drive at nothing, but (the old pretense of Innovatours) a Reform, in correcting
abuses and errors crept into Divinity-Schools, especially among the Jesuits,
and by their means into the Church of Christ. All this he does with Raillery
and Merriment.

The unwary vulgar, glad to make merry at any man's cost, sported with his
Letters; not marking, that whilst they were invited to make a jest of
Charity, it was that they might lose their Faith in earnest. But the Learned,
and all those, who with a sober judgment could ponder things right, were
struck with a horror at these scandalous Libells; and fearing the sad events,
which these profane Railleries did bode, thought themselves obliged in
conscience to suppress them. For this reason these Letters were forbid to be
printed in Paris, and the Parliament of Aix in Provence commanded the Seventeen
first Letters (for the Eighteenth was not then come out) to be publicly burnt
by the Hangman, the 9. of February, in the year 1657. On the 13. of July in
the same year, the Archbishop of Machelen, Primate of the Low Countries, (to
secure his Subjects) gave his Approbation to the Answers of the Provincial
Letters: and a Month after, to wit, on the 13. of August the Vicar General of
Liege did as much. And on the 6. of September then next ensuing, the universal
Pastor of the Church, Pope Alexander the Seventh now sitting* condemned all
the Eighteen Provincial Letters, under the Penalties specified in the Council
of Trent, and the Index of Forbidden Books.

These infamous Letters then, branded with the ignominy of so many Censures,
and banished all Catholic Countries, came for their refuge into England. And
they found a Translatour, who either for his hatred to the Catholic Church,
or private spleen to the Jesuits, or for love of Jansenisme, or for desire of
gain, (for nothing sells better then a Libell) set them out in an English
dress: And that they might the better please those ears, which itch to hear
something against the Jesuits, he baptized them by a new name of the Mystery
of Jesuitisme; it being common to Fugitives that are forced to fly their
Country, to change their name.

And the good Translatour presumed so much of his own Work, that in the Preface
to his first Edition he could not hold from prophesying in his own praises, and
telling us, what a strange Metamorphosis there would follow in the world upon
reading these Letters done by him into English. For speaking of his Book he
says, It must needs work a strange alteration in mankind. What Alteration?
This. The Jesuits hitherto by all men held in esteem for Learning and Virtue,
(if we believe this Translatours Poetical Prophecy) will be looked on
hereafter as the most abominable and despicable thing in the world. Surely this
man takes the Jesuits for an Army of Philistims, which he is to conquer with
the Jaw Bone of an Ass. But Good Mr. Translatour, do you indeed think as you
say? The world has thought the Jesuits men of some worth. The Wisest of our
Age have given them commendation; they have had learned Adversaries, both
Protestants and Catholics, who opposed them so as not to despise them. Their
Industry has traveled through all Sciences, as well as their Charity through
all Nations. Their Books are honored in all Libraries; and their Persons
reverenced in all the Countries, Cities, and Towns, where Catholic Religion is
in esteem. Must all the world now change their judgment? and must they that
have hitherto had a good repute, be looked on hereafter as the most abominable
and despicable thing in the world? But Why? How? by What Means must this
strange Alteration be wrought in Mankind? let us hear.

Quid dignum tanto scret hic promissor hiatu.

The reason is, because a French man, whose Letters this Translatour has done
into English, says so. But who was that French man? A man that by his own
confession is no Churchman, no Priest, no Doctor, no Protestant, no
Catholic. A man, of whom all the good that is known, is that he can write a
Libell well, and challenge others boldly, without ever heeding whether what he
says be true or false, Catholic or Heterodox, sense or nonsense. A man,
that is ashamed of nothing but of himself; for in all his daring Propositions he
dares not say who he is; in all his desperate adventures he will not venture
to show his face.

And shall such a man as this work that strange Alteration in Mankind? Shall a
Libell be able to sway the judgment of the Wise, and balance all that the
Light of Reason can dictate to the contrary? The Catholic Church is full of
men of all ranks and conditions, Rich and Poor, Noble and Ignoble, Religious
and Secular, Soldiers and Gown-men, who from their childhood to the several
ages they are now in, have been familiarly acquainted with the Society, and had
the first Tinctures of Learning and Virtue under them; must they now all change
their judgments, and hereafter count the Society the most despicable and most
abominable thing in the world, because a French Libell turned into English
speaks them to be quite contrary, to what the world knows them, and sees
them to be? Ad populum phaleras. The world, as old as it is, is not yet come to
so doting an age, as to think they must rather believe an infamous Libell, then
their own eyes, their own reason, their own long experience. The effect shows
what spirit animated the Translatour in this Enthusiasme. It Is two years since
the Book has been out, and the world has seen no alteration wrought by this
Work: the Jesuits have not lost one Friend by means of it. Had this
Letter-writer endeavored to keep within compass, and to show us that the
Jesuits are not all such Saints, but that there are some faults in their
lives, and that their Doctrine is not all so Sacred, but that some opinions of
theirs may be impugned, and some reprehended, he might have been believed: and
the Jesuits themselves, though they would have resented it, that their faults
should be blazed about the world without necessity, yet they would have
acknowledged, that they are not impeccable neither in Doctrine nor Manners.
It Is a privilege reserved for Heaven, that no faults can there be found: here
on earth that Community is happiest, which has fewest faults: none are without
all fault. But to tax the Jesuits Doctrine generally as a monstrous Source of
all Irregularities, and their Persons as the most abominable and despicable
thing in the world, that is a mere Paradox, which begets a disbelief, gives it
self the lie, and by saying too much says nothing. Overreaching praises are
laughed at, and too excessive reprehensions are scorned by all wise men.

The Jesuits have many that reprehend them, and so have all those that are
eminent, and seem to overtop others in whatsoever it be. For Glory and Envy are
Twins; one is never borne without the other. Honor should be, but in our Age
Detraction is, the shadow of Virtue, which darkens its Luster: Calumny always
lodges over against Piety, to spy her Actions and defame her Glory. It was a
Fable, that there was a Momus among the Gods in Heaven; but it is not a Fable,
that the Heroes of this world are never without a Momus, to censure what soever
they do. But as the Greek Proverb says, (...), it is easy to play the Momus,
easy to reprehend, but hard to imitate; so I say to these Censorian spirits,
Let them mend what they reprehend. Let them do something like that, which the
Jesuits do; and see, whether they can do it, and not fall into more faults,
then the Jesuits do. Let them employ as many hundred Masters in teaching
Grammar, Poetry, Rhetorique, Arithmetique, Mathematiques, Philosophy, Divinity
Positive and Speculative. Let them trace the Jesuits scattered over the face
of the whole earth, in all the Nations on which the Sun does shine, for to
convert Infidells. Let them Catechize, Preach, Administer Sacraments, visit the
Sick, attend the Hospitals and Prisons, comfort the Poor, direct Souls in all
states: let them write as many learned Books, as the Jesuits do; and then let us
see, whether they can do all this without deserving a Censure oftener then the
Jesuits do. They that reprehend others, ought to be themselves irreprehensible;
at least in that which they censure. And yet this is the Jansenists misfortune,
that they reprehend the Jesuits Books; and scarce have yet set out one (of the
many which they have printed) that is not censured.

But there is difference betwixt censure and censure. The Jansenists censure
the Jesuits Books, and the Catholic Church censures the Jansenists Books. The
Jansenists censure the Jesuits Moral, and the Church censureth the Jansenists
Faith. The Jansenists set out Libells against the Jesuits, and the Church
thundereth Anathema's, in the Popes Bulls, against the Jansenists. So different
are the Censures. Yet this is not all. The grand Difference betwixt the
Censures is, that the Censures, which the Church lays on the Jansenists, fall
on their real Crimes: but the Censures, which the Jansenists give the Jesuits
Doctrine, is grounded on false imputation and mere Calumny. This is clearly
showed in the Book, which here is answered. All the whole Book of the
Provincial Letters, which casts so much dirt on the Jesuits, that the
Translatour calls it The Mystery of Jesuitisme, is a false and groundless
Censure, given by an Heretic to Doctrine, which has the general Approbation
of Schools. When I say an Heretic, I would not have our Protestants of
England think themselves concerned. I understand the Jansenian Heretic, who
dissents as far from the Protestant, as he does from the Catholic. This then
is the aim of these Answers, to show that the Censures, which the Provincial
Letters lay on the Jesuits Doctrine, are groundless Censures, and false
Calumnies, and mere Impostures: and so the Translatour has his Mystery
revealed. It is but a Packet of lying Letters, which he calls the Mystery of
Jesuitisme; he might better have called it the Misery of Jansenisme. For it is
the greatest misery of the world to be reduced to such streits, as that one
cannot say any thing, either for himself or against his Adversary, which is not
false. Now this is the Jansenists case.

This being so (as the Reader will find it so) it appears how unreasonably
the Translatour vomits up so much gall in the end of his Preface, in making a
disgraceful Character of the Jesuits; where he concludes that the Jesuits
are to be looked upon as the Vermin of all Humane Society. I do not desire to
use foul language; yet if I may use this term of Vermin to any Christian, I
conceive it cannot agree with any man so well, as with the Author of the
Provincial Letters. For who is the Vermin of Mankind in matter of Faith, but
he that denies, that Christ is the Redeemer of all men; and so opens a way
to desperation, and neglect o^ Christian duty? This Montalt does. Who in matter
of Learning can be called Vermin, rather then the Writer of Libells against
Learning? who is but a Scold in print, and like a Moth, does but corrode and
disgrace learned Books; or like a Fly sucks at others sores; or like a Serpent,
extracteth poison, where he might have sucked honey. This Montalt does. Who in
civil community can be termed Vermin, but the Detractour? This Montalt is
evidently proved to be; and so was he judged by the Parliament of Aix. Finally
who among all men, noble and ignoble, deserves the name of Vermin, as unfit for
any humane Society, either Christian or Heathen, but the Liar? This Montalt is
convinced to be. Now if the Author of the Provincial Letters deserves these
Titles, his Translatour may judge, what part of these commendations reflects on
him. I will not deal him any part; all I say as to him is, that I am sorry to
see him mislead, and I wish him hereafter a better employment to practice his
pen on, then the translating of condemned Libells.

Now as to the Reader, to give him some short account of this Work, it
contains several Pieces made by the Jesuits in France in Answer to the
Provincial Letters; which though our English Preface-maker despises, yet they
do unanswerably convince the Letter-writer of being an arrant cheat, and of
falsifying Authors. I will not say much of the Particulars, because I have put
to the several Pieces, Prefaces and Arguments, which may direct the Reader.
Some Pieces are added in this Edition, as the History of Jansenisme, the Answer
to the Reply made in Defense of the Twelfth Letter, the Answer to the
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Letter, and another inserted, in the Second English
Edition, betwixt the Seventeenth and Eighteenth: Also the Conclusion of the
Work concerning the Additionalls. These Pieces either not being at all made in
France, or not come to my hands, I have supplied. The rest is taken out of the
French Answer made by some of the Society, with little alterations; which are
noted in the places, where any considerable change is made.

If these Answers seem to have something too much of the Picquant, the Reader
will reflect, that it is necessity, which puts the Author on that strain. The
light of nature teaches, that he that wrongfully impeacheth an innocent
person, gives him right to challenge his Accuser of unjust dealing. It Is no
incivility to call that man an Impostour, a Cheat, a Liar, who by gross
calumnies, and notorious falsities is proved to wrong another man. The Author
of the Provincial Letters begun first, and treated the Jesuits as Sycophants,
as Corrupters of the Doctrine of the Church, as Abettours of all sorts of
Crimes. The Jesuits argue him of falsely calumniating them and their Authors,
of Forging and Imposture, of wrongfully taxing good and solid Doctrine, whilst
in the mean time he venteth Heresies. If this seems hard, he must thank
himself; it is but a just retorting on him those terms, which he unjustly cast
on the Society, and on all School-Divines. This I thought fit to advertise the
Reader of.

All the favor I desire is, that the Learned Reader will show no favor to
either side, but as an equal Judge hear both Parties; and (if he have leisure
to view the Authors) I entreat him to do Truth so much right, as to say what
he finds. For example, the Doctrine of Probability is by the Author of the
Provincial Letters, called an Invention of the Jesuits to palliate crimes,
and give scope to Libertines. The Jesuits answer, that the Doctrine of
Probability is no Invention of theirs; they cite for that Doctrine a great
number of learned Authors, none of them Jesuits, and many of them dead, long
before the Jesuits were in the world. That which here I desire the Learned
Reader to do is, to examine the Authors which the Jesuits produce for this
Doctrine, and as they find them cited, so to pronounce who is the cheat and
who has wronged the other.

This I desire of the learned. For the unlearned, or those that will not take
the pains to look into Books of Divinity, I expect so much reason at their
hands, that they will not prejudicate; but rather credit the Answers here given
them by men of known worth (who cite their Authors, and give their reasons)
then an idle Pamphleter, who brings neither reason nor authority for himself;
but with a presumptuous boldness, professing himself to have no skill in
Divinity, undertakes to censure all Divines.

As for those Readers, who are bred to such Idaea's of Catholic Religion,
that they confound Rome and Babylon, the Pope and Antichrist, Saints and
Idols, Sacraments and Sacriledges, to whom a Jesuit and a Monster are two
words that signify the same thing; for those, I say, I commend them to the Man
in the Moon to cure their Frenzy. When they have either more wit, or less
passion, they will accuse those who lead them into illusion, and abuse their
ignorance to make nonsense of their Faith. This Book hopes no favor, nor fears
no censure from such. It Is not meant for those, that either cannot, or will not
judge right. It Is presented to the impartial Readers, either Protestants or
Catholic; who when they have read it, will (I hope) find satisfaction: for
it is a satisfaction to upright minds to see Impudence put to a just confusion,
and Innocence defended.

THE HISTORY OF JANSENISME.
BEcause it will be necessary for the understanding of this Work, to have some
general Notion of the Transactions in matter of Jansenisme, I have taken some
pains to gather together those things, which I hope will satisfy the Reader.
And for to make the Relation Authentical, I have not taken any thing on report
only, or out of those Authors who have made Invectives against the
Jansenists; but out of the Public Acts known to the whole world, or out of
the Jansenists own Writings. If the things that I set down be scandalous
Enormities, I hope the Reader will judge, that the blame ought not to reflect
on Catholic Religion. In the Primitive Church there were dives Heretics,
Ebionites, Marcionites, Nicolaites, and others, whose Maxims lead men to most
foul Crimes: yet the Primitive Church had not then the less fervor and
sanctity, nor now the less esteem, for their impieties. As that age, so this
and all others are to be judged of, by the piety of the faithful, not by the
impiety of those, whom pride has made Rebels against Christ and his Church.
Had the Jansenists been members of the Catholic Church, they would never have
taught Doctrine against the Church. But by teaching and professing this
Doctrine, exierunt ex nobis, they are gone out, and the Catholic Church
remains no more responsable for their lives or Doctrine, then for Arius,
Nestorius, or any other Heretic. This I thought fit to advertise the Reader
of, that he be not scandalized, and measure the Church by those, who are not of
the Church, but are her declared Enemies.

This premised, I come to the History it self. There are then three Persons,
who may be looked at, as the main Authors and Abbettours of the Heresies,
which are now commonly understood by the name of Jansenisme; of whom the three
following Paragraphs shall treat.

1. Of the Abbot of St. Gygiran, commonly called San-Cyran.
In the Year of our Lord 1638. on the Fifth Day of June, Lewis the Thirteenth,
King of France, granted a Warrant for the apprehending of John du Vergier de
Haurannes, Native of Bayonne, commonly known by the Title of Abbot of St.
Cyran, and Claudius Seguenot an Oratorian Priest. This was done by the King,
upon Information given to his Majesty of the scandalous and false Doctrine,
which these two persons did sow, as well in Paris, as other places of France,
to the perversion of the Catholic Faith, and subversion also (as Monsieur
Marande See his Book entitled, Inconveniens d' Estat procedans du Jansenisme.
proves it) of the State of France. San-Cyran therefore being apprehended,
(for of Seguenot, I intend not to speak) was carried Prisoner to Bois de
Vincennes near Paris, all his Papers being seized on, and strict Information
taken of those who were known to be conscious of his Doctrine; and particularly
of his Disciples, which lived to the number of about Twenty together in the
House of Port-Royall, some six or seven leagues off Paris. This Port-Royall is
a Monastery of Nuns, committed to St. Cyrans direction by the Bishop of
Langres, deceived, as he since professed, by the opinion he had of San-Cyrans
Sanctity: But the Disciples I speak of were men, who in a Quarter joining to
the Nuns Monastery, were brought up, according to the principles of that
Doctrine, which now bears the ^ame of Jansenisme. There is also another House
called Port-Royall, in the Suburbs of St. James at Paris; which sometimes is
meant by Port-Royall in this Treatise; the Nuns whereof, and their Directours,
hold the same strain of Doctrine with the other.

San-Cyran then being Prisoner in the Bois de Vincennes, and the Informations
fully made by the Commissaries and Judges deputed by the King and the
Archbishop of Paris, he was found evidently criminal in diverse points, which
concerned the Catholic Faith, and the Doctrine of Christian Duty. The Judges
inclining to mildness, would not proceed to rigor against him, but by the
Kings advice a Paper was presented to him, containing the Catholic Doctrine
contrary to his Maxims; which if he would have signed and promised to observe,
he had been set free. But the Abbot, notwithstanding he had the impudence to
deny all that, of which by evident witness of irreproachable persons, and by
his own Letters, as likewise of his Friends to him, he was convinced, yet he
would not be brought to sign the Catholic Articles; but chose rather to
remain Prisoner, then by professing the Catholic Faith, to unsay in public
what he had privately taught. Some time after, the King, who now drew toward
an end of his days, resolved to close up his life by a Royal act of Clemency;
which was the freeing of prisoners, and recalling ^xiles from their banishment.
He had very great difficulty to resolve on the liberty of San-Cyran; but being
solicited by many of the Abbots Friends, who undertook for him, that he should
never meddle with writing, or spreading his venomous Doctrine, at length his
Majesty condescended, that this Abbot also, among others, should be set at
liberty. But the King was no sooner dead, but that San-Cyran fell to his old
trade of venting his pernicious Maxims, and laid down the draught of the Book
now called Frequent Communion; which though he never lived to see finished, yet
it came out afterward under the name of Arnauld, a Doctor of Sorbon, of whom
we shall speak in the third Paragraph.

All this relation I have out of the Book called the Progress of Jansenisme,
dedicated to the Chancellor of France by Monsieur Preville, and printed in
the year 1655. In which Book is contained the whole Information made against
San-Cyran, by persons of worth, who were acquainted with him, and who having
answered upon oath to the Interrogotories made by the Justice, did at length
every one of them sign what they had deposed. Now out of this Authentic
Information, (the Original whereof is in Clermont College, and may be seen by
any man that will) I have taken that which I thought sufficient, to set down
what kind of Doctrine this man vented. I conceive all is not yet known. For
San-Cyran above all his other Maxims perpetually inculcated to his Confidents,
That they should be sure to keep secret what he taught them; That if they spoke
of any thing, he would deny it; and that if ever they were examined about it,
they should deny all, even upon oath. His conscience dictated so clearly to him
the malice of his Maxims, that he was ever most unwilling to deliver his
Doctrine by writing; and when he could not avoid writing, he endeavored to be
obscure, and commanded those that received his papers, to burn them as soon as
they had read them. Yet his Friends were not so faithful to him, nor he to
himself, but that many of his Writings and Letters either to him or from him,
were kept, and since discovered: all which make a great part of two Books in
Quarto; and out of them, as concerning San-Cyrans Doctrine take what follows.

First then for himself he teaches, That he has his Mission from God; That
God gives him particular Lights, to know the Interior of men; That he
learneth not his Maxims in Books, but in God; and that his conduct is in all
things according to the interior instincts, which God gives him.

Secondly for the Church and its Members, he maintains, that the Church is
not now the same which Christ planted; That for these six hundred years last
past the Church is quite corrupted in Manners, and not only in Manners, but
also in Doctrine; That God himself destroys the Church; That the Bishops and
Pastors of the Church that now are, are destitute of the Spirit of
Christianity, of the Spirit of Grace, and of the Spirit of the Church: That the
Religious Orders, and other Spiritual men of these times, understand not the
Gospel, nor the ways of Christ; and that he only has the true light of the
Gospel, and perfect Intelligence of the Scriptures; That the Council of Trent
was made by the Pope, and by Schoolmen who have much changed the Doctrine of
the Church; That School Divinity is a pernicious Science, which ought to be
destroyed; That St. Thomas has corrupted Divinity by Humane Reason; That the
Jesuits ought to be destroyed, as most domageable to the Church of God.

Thirdly, for what belongs to the Commandments, he denies, That all just men
have sufficient Grace to keep them. Further he maintains, That every just
person ought to steer his actions according to the interior motions, which God
gives him, though contrary to the exterior Law; and this he maintains even
in Murder; for the committing whereof this interior instinct is warrant
enough. And according to this Doctrine he maintains in his Book called the
Royal Question, That men may lawfully kill themselves, and that many times
they are bound to kill themselves. The Reader will note, that this last Tenent
of killing ones self is not mentioned in the Progress of Jansenisme, as the
rest are; but he defends it in his Book of the Royal Question, as I said. But
I have here set it down for the similitude it has with the precedent point.

Fourthly concerning the Sacraments he teaches, That Confirmation and the
Sacrament of Orders, and Episcopal Consecration, that is the making of a
Bishop, blots out all sins, quoad culpam and poenam, like Baptism: That the
Sacrament of Confirmation is more perfect then Baptism, has more force and
more efficacy, and requires no other dispositions: and therefore that a man in
Mortal Sin has no need of Confession for to receive the Sacrament of
Confirmation. That Venial Sins are not matter sufficient for Absolution: That
perfect Contrition is absolutely necessary for the Sacrament of Penance: That
Absolution is to be deferred a long time, till the Penance be first fulfilled:
That by Absolution the Priest does not forgive sins, but declare them forgiven
by sorrow and penance: That it is not necessary to confess the number or
Species of Mortal sins, if the Contrition be sufficient. That the Holy
Communion has more force to forgive sins, then the Sacrament of Penance; That
the frequenting the Sacraments of Confession and Communion is oftentimes more
hurtful, then profitable; That the calling on the Name of Jesus is as
efficacious, as the receiving of the Holy Eucharist.

These, and many other like these, are the Maxims of San-Cyran; which are
Authentically set down in the Information taken of him, and to be seen in the
Progress of Jansenisme.

Now that which gave this unfortunate man credit, and made all that he said to
be esteemed good and holy, was his Exterior appearance, which seemed to breath
nothing but Sanctity. He was a person of a sad look, stern countenance, austere
carriage, and disposition Hypochondria^all, which the ignorant people
interpreted to be the rigor of Penance; attributing that to a profound
Sanctity, which in him was nothing but either Nature or Hypocrisy. The esteem
which the world held in him, bred in him such a height of pride, as made him
contemn all that was ordinary. His usual saying was, That the ordinary way
was for ordinary people. For himself he dreamed of nothing, and talked of
nothing, but the Ancient times, the Fathers, the Primitive fervor of the
Church, to which he would reduce the World; whose universal Darkness and
Errors he did often bemoan, presuming himself to be the only man able to
redress all that was amiss.

He was so bold as to assever to the Abbot of Prieres, that if he would give
him Fifteen or Twenty young men, who had never received impression from other
Masters, if they would follow his Instructions, in the space of six months, he
would make them complete Divines: And of his Book, called Petrus Aurelius, he
was so vainly conceited, that he said, It was the best Book that had been made
in the Church these six hundred Years past, though it be a condemned Book; in
which, among other gross absurdities, he reaches, That a Priest loses his
Priesthood by committing a mortal Sin: which is one of Wiclif's Heresies, and
as great a foolery, as if one would teach, that a Christian is unchristned by a
mortal sin. Thus his Austerity, which was partly natural, partly affected,
got him the opinion of Sanctity; and that bred in him a pride and arrogance fit
for an Arch Heretic. All this, and much more concerning this Abbot of St.
Cyran, is to be seen in the Information abovementioned.

2. Of Jansenius.
Cornelius Jansenius, of whom the late Heresy took its name, was by birth a
Hollander of Leerdam, but Student of the University of Lovain; where, in the
Year 1619. October. 24. he proceeded Doctor. He was ligued with the Abbot of
San-Cyran, (of whom we have spoken) in a most strict amity, and kept perpetual
correspondence with him, giving him continual account of his affairs, and
making him sole Arbiter of all his Thoughts, all his Studies, and all his
Designs. He oftentimes visited San-Cyran, and conferred with him: he both
helped San-Cyran in furnishing him with matter for his Aurelius; and was also
helped himself by him in his Sermons and public Speeches, which San-Cyran, as
being the abler Preacher, sent him out of France upon every occasion. All this
appears by his Letters to this Abbot, which make up a main part of the Book
called, The Birth of Jansenisme, and were found in the Abbots chamber, when he
was seized on.

Out of the same Letters it also appears, that Jansenius had sucked in all the
poison of that Heretic: for he also de^piseth School-Divines, as Bablers; is
disgusted with St. Thomas no less then St. Cyran; and relisheth nothing but
Antiquity. But above all he hates the Jesuits: against whom he labored almost
perpetually, writing Libells against the Society, (that it is not to be
wondered, if his Disciples follow the same train) carping at their Doctrine,
defending such as apostatized from their Order, incensing and exasperating all
men against them, that possibly he could, and lastly not forbearing even to
censure the Pope himself for having canonized St. Ignatius and St. Xaverius.

Furthermore it appears by the same Letters, that he had no small inclination
to favor Heresy. For of Marcus Antonius de Dominis, one whom all the world
knows of an Archbishop of Spalato to have become an Apostata, and pernicious
enemy of the Church, first in Holland, and afterward in England, he writes,
that his Doctrine was in a manner Catholic, save only where he touched on
the economy of the Church* and shows, how much he was afraid, lest the
University of Lovain should have required him to write against the said
Archbishop. Besides, he speaks very favorably of the Synod of Dort, where,
although rigid Calvinisme was established, yet he fears not to pronounce of
the Doctrine of that Synod, that it was almost all Catholic.

But that which is most of all remarkable, and likewise most apparently
discovered in these Letters, is the Grand Design concerted betwixt Jansenius
and San-Cyran in opposition to the Jesuits, to the School-Divines, and to the
Catholic Church. This design was the reproving of those Catholic Tenants,
which were maintained by the Society, and in effect by the whole Church,
concerning Grace, Free Will, Predestition, etc. To compass this design, it is
manifest, that from the year, wherein he proceeded Doctor even to his dying
day, this man made it his study to read St. Augustine, and interpret the many
hard places of this great Saint in such manner, as to make St. Augustine teach
his own private Heresies.

He knew well enough, that his Work would never please the Pope, as he
oftentimes hinteth in his Letters; wherefore his chief labor was first to keep
it secret, fearing, that if it were discovered, it might be choked in the
womb, and never come to see light. And secondly to dispose men's minds so by
himself and by his Friend San-Cyrans means, that it might find some great
Persons of Authority or Interest, who should favor and maintain it. And in
effect they got what they aimed at. For their secret was not discovered; and
whereas Jansonius died before his Work was printed, being taken away by the
Plague in the second year of his Bishoprique at Ipres, on the 7. of May 1638.
his Book notwithstanding found many Patrons both in Flaunders and in France. In
Flaunders many of the University of Lovain, the Archbishop of Machelen, the
Bishop of Gaunt, and diverse others, stood stiffly for defense of this new
Augustinus (for so he called his book.) In France some Bishops also, many
Gurez, a very considerable part of the Sorbon, with diverse of the Oratorian
Priests of Cardinalll Berull's Institution, did the same. The reasons why these
Persons engaged so far against the Truth, I will not here dive into. I believe
many were deceived by the very Title of the Work. For he calling his Book
Augustinus, they imagined, that a Doctor of Lovain, and Bishop of the
Catholic Church, would not give any thing for St. Augustius Doctrine, but
what was truly his But it is also known, that not a few of these Defenders of
Jansenius had a tooth against the Order of the Jesuits; so as it was more then
probable, that many of them upon that account were easily drawn in, and made to
embrace the defense of the Book, which they esteemed to have given so fatal a
Blow to the Jesuits Doctrine, that one of the Sorbonists called it the Jesuits
Tomb. As for the Oratorians, their special Obligations to San-Cyran and
Jansonius drew them in, before they well knew what was intended. For it was a
plot of Jansenius and San-Cyran, which they had practiced of a long time, to
raise up these Oratorians in opposition to the Jesuits, in hopes (as Jansenius
expresses in his Letters) that they might in a short time get all the Jesuits
Scholars to them; and being but Clergymen at the Bishops Disposal, they
imagined they should carry the universal good will of the Clergy, so that the
Jesuits should at last be quite deserted. This made those poor Oratorians
drink so deep of the Doctrine of San-Cyran and Jansenius, that diverse of their
Books were condemned, as namely Gibieufs and Seguenots; which I do not say to
censure them universally, or the major part of them: but it is certain, that
they were looked on as a party; and many of them becoming Curez did in their
Parishes, as well as many other Curez broach Jansenius's Doctrine, in Flaunders
under the shelter of the University of Lovain and the forenamed Bishops, and in
France under the name of Sorbon, (of which, as I said, a very great part sided
with Jansenius) and also under the favor of some Bishops of France.

This animosity appeared greater; when Pope Urban, who was soon advertised of
these practices, put out his Bull; which he did in March 1642. to suppress
Jansenius his Book: for then many unmaskt themselves, and spoke plain, even
against his Holiness Orders, in defense of Jansenius, though (as Pope Urbans
Bulls speak) Jansenius had renewed condemned Heresies, and had incurred
Excommunication by writing his Book, and treating in it matters forbidden to be
treated of in print, that is, the matters called de Auxiliis, forbid by Paul
the Fifth to be treated of under pain of Excommunication. Pope Urban therefore
sent redoubled Briefs to suppress the rising Faction of the Jansenians, as in
one of his Bulls he terms them. Many submitted to their duty. Yet all Pope
Urbans time the Faction was very strong; and though it decayed something in
Flaunders, yet it strengthened daily in France, where it least ought to have
been received. For whereas Jansenius had writ a most bitter Invective against
the Crown and Kings of France, called Mars Gallicus, it was to have been
expected, that all faithful Subjects of that Crown ought rather to have sided
against Jansenius, then for him. And this Monsieur Marande presses much
against the French Jansenists, in his Book dedicated to the King of France in
the Year 1654. which we formerly mentioned: where a good part of his discourse
tends to show, that Innovations in Religion are promoted by those chiefly,
who aim at Innovation in State.

Things therefore being come to so great a height in France, that now
Jansenisme was formed into a considerable body, which might in time prove
formidable both to the Church and Crown, the Bishops in their general
Assembly, or Synod at Paris, took the matter into their consideration; and
having well examined the Book of Jansenius, they collected Five Propositions
out of it, which seemed to them to deserve a censure. The Propositions were
these.

1. Some of Gods Commandments are impossible to the Just, according to their
present forces, though they have a will, and do endeavor to accomplish them:
and they want the Grace, that renders them possible.

2. In the state of Nature corrupt, men never resist Interior Grace.

3. To merit and demerit in the state of Nature corrupted, it is not necessary
to have the liberty that excludes necessity; but it suffices to have that
liberty which excludes coaction or constraint.

4. The Semipelagians admitted the necessity of Interior preventing Grace to
every Action, even to the beginning of Faith. But they were Heretics in this,
that they would have that Grace to be such, as the will of man might resist it,
or obey it.

5. It is Semipelagianisme to say, that Jesus Christ dyed, or shed his Blood
generally for all men.

These Propositions the Bishops drew out of Jansenius his Book; yet knowing
themselves to be but a National Synod, they would not lay any censure upon
them, but in the Year 1650. sent them to Pope Innocent the Tenth then sitting,
humbly requiring him, that through his Paternall care of the Universal Church,
he would determine what ought to be held; it belonging only to him to define
in this cause. This Letter was signed by eighty five Bishops then present at
the Assembly. The Pope thereupon took the matter into Examination, and deputed
diverse Divines to examine the Propositions, whom he often heard himself, the
Deputies of the Jansenists being also present at Rome, and having liberty to
speak for themselves, as they often did. At length, after two years examination
of the matter, and many Prayers, Fasting, and Supplications to God, Innocent
the Tenth proceeded to censure, and defined the said Five Propositions to be
Heretical, by his Bull given on the last day of May 1653. This Bull is
inserted into the Bull of Pope Alexander the Seventh, which by and by I shall
produce.

But all this was not enough to make many of the Jansenists submit. Upon sight
of the Bull they changed their note; and whereas before they had owned the Five
Propositions to be in Jansenius, but maintained them to be Catholic Tenants,
and the true Doctrine of St. Augustine, now they acknowledged the said Five
Propositions were justly censured by the Pope, but defended, that they were not
in Jansenius; yet whosoever taught them, or wheresoever they were to be found,
the Jansenists professed to condemn them. By this means they thought both to
clear themselves from the censure of defending Heretical Propositions, and
withal still to maintain the Doctrine of Jansenius, as they had done before:
and so all the fault was to redound on the Pope, and the Synod of France, (as
the Jansenists would have it thought) ^^ on those who had informed them wrong,
That the Propositions were in Jansenius, which indeed (said they) were not
there, at least in the sense, in which they were condemned. This Discourse,
though never so frivolous, prevailed with many for their constant maintaining
of Jansenius, so as it was feared, the whole endeavor of the Bishops of
France, and also the Constitution of the Pope, would at length come to nothing.
To prevent this mischief, the Bishops of France, who were yet remaining in
their Assembly at Paris, wrote this following Letter to the rest of the
Archbishops and Bishops, that were absent from the said Assembly, and that it
might be public, caused it to be printed; which for the same reason I have
thought fit here to set down, translated into English.

To the most Reverend and Religious the Lords Archbishops and Bishops of France
their most Respected Brethren, the Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops
residing at Paris Health and Happiness in Christ.
That which long agone happened to S. Augustine and the other Fathers of the
Councels of Carthage and Milevet, those great Maintainers of Divine Grace, now
seems to have happened unto us. They hoped (but in vain) that after a certain
Book of Pelagius had been condemned and anathematized by Pope Innocent the
First, the Pelagians would yield to the Authority of so great a Prelate,
August. Epist. 92, and 95.
and would not dare to trouble the minds of the Faithful by speaking
perversely of Divine Grace. And we hoped also, that those men, who profess
themselves friends and followers of Cornelius Jansenius Bishop of Ipres, after
that his Five Opinions were condemned and anathematized by Innocent the Tenth,
would desist from trouble, or moving any thing more: and wherea^ Pope Innocent
had by his Decree commanded the Winds, we hoped a Calm would follow in the
Church. But it happened quite contrary to what we expected. Nor can we cease
from wondering, how that it is possible, that those men should (after the most
just and holy Constitution, in which our most Blessed Father Innocent the Tenth
has condemned the foresaid Five Propositions in most clear and express terms)
affirm, and even persuade others, two most vain and groundless things. The one
is, that those Five Propositions are not Jansenius's: The other, that they are
not condemned in Jansenius's sense. For can there be any thing more absurd,
then to maintain that, for the refuting whereof there is not required any
reasoning, any enquiry, or any thing else, then merely the reading of the Popes
Constitution; which decideth all the matter. And although these two Allegations
seem such, that they will fall of themselves to nothing, and so might justly be
contemned and neglected; yet we finding them to do hurt to the weak and
ignorant, (for whom in duty we are to provide) that we may take all Scandal
out of the House of God, thought fit to remedy this evil, and prevent in time
this poison, wherewith some are already infected. Which that it might be done
exactly, we the Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops residing in Paris for
Ecclesiastical Businesses, being gathered together, judged that this business
was to be commended to the care of the most Illustrious and most Reverend the
Archbishops of Tours, Ambrun, Roan, and Tolouse, and of the Bishops of Autun,
Montauban, Rennes, and Chartres. Yet this we did so commend to them, that they
should refer unto us what they had read, observed, and thought. They having
looked upon the Popes Constitution, (which alone was enough) and moreover read
Jansenius as much as was necessary, and weighed all diligently, found it plain
and manifest, that the said Propositions are truly Jansenius 's, and that they
are condemned in their true and proper sense, and that very sense, in which
they are delivered and explicated by Jansenius. And when they had showed us
(again gathered together) what they had found, and we found and seen the same,
We Declared, and do hereby Delare, that it is truly and undoubtedly so; and
that these, who defend those Five Propositions, or approve of them, are of the
number of those, whom Pope Innocent the Tenth in that Constitution calls
Contradictours and Rebellious, and whom he will have punished by the
Patriarchs, Archbishops and Bishops with the Censures and Penalties of
Heretics and their Abbettours, expressed in the Canon Law, and by other
opportune remedies, juris and facti, inv^king (if need be) the Secular arm. And
this we all, as much as lies in us, are resolved to do. And we entreat all our
most Loving and Religious Brethren of the Gallican Church, that are absent, to
do the same; that so we may all think the same thing according to Jesus Christ,
unanimously with one mouth glorify God and the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, ^difie the Church of God, and save our selves, and those who hear us,
and are committed to our charge.

JU^IUS, Cardinal Mazarini, President of the Assembly. VICTOR, Archbishop of
Tours. LEWIS, Archbishop of Sens. GEORGE, Archbishop of Ambrun. ANNE DE LEVY DE
VANTADOUR, Archbishop of Bourges, FRANCIS, Archbishop of Roan. PETER,
Archbishop of Toulouse. LEBERON, Bishop of Valence and Die. GILES, Bishop of
Eureaux. LEWIS, Bishop of Autun. DOMINICK, Bishop of Meaux. JOHN, Bishop of
Bayonne. ANTHIMUS DENIS, Bishop of Dole. GABRIEL, Bishop of Nantes. PETER,
Bishop of Montauban. JAMES, Bishop of Toulon. HENRY, Bishop of Rennes.
FERDINAND, Bishop of St. Malo. JAMES, Bishop of Charires. PHILIBERT EMMANUEL,
Bishop of Man's. JAMES DE GRIGNAN, Bishop of St. Paul de Trois Chasteaux.
GILBERY, Bishop of Comenges. BALTAZAR, Bishop and Count of Treguier. CLAUDE,
Bishop of Constances. JAMES, Bishop and Count of St. Flour. HARDWIN, Bishop of
Rhodes. NICOLAS, Bishop of Beauvais. FRANCIS, Bishop of Madaure, and Coadjutor
of Cornovailles. HENRY DE LAVAL, Bishop and Count of Leon. FRANCIS FAURE,
Bishop of Amiens. CHARLES, Bishop of Cesarce, and Coadjutor of Soissoins.
CYRUS, Bishop of Perigueux. LEWIS, Bishop of Toul. LEWIS, Bishop of Grass.
MICHAEL, Bishop of St. Pons de Tomiers. The Abbot of Estree nominated Bishop of
Laon. The Abbot of Servient, nominated Bishop of Carcassonne. Friar JOHN
DOMINICK, nominated Bishop of Glandeves. BERNARD DE MARMIESSH, Agent General
of the Clergy of France, nominated Bishop of Conserans. HENRY DE VILLARS, Agent
General of the Clergy, and Secretary of the Assembly. Given at Paris, March
the 28. 1654.



Here they notify to all the world, that they deputed Eight of their Body,
(Four Archbishops, and Four Bishops) to re-examine the Propositions, and the
places of Jansenius from whence they are taken; which the Deputies having found
to agree in all things, they showed the places to the whole Assembly, who being
fully satisfied of the verity, (though they never doubted of the Popes
Desinition) have given it under their hands, that the Propositions are truly
Jansenius's, and condemned in his sense.

Yet all this was not enough. The proud spirit which bred the Heresy,
maintained it still. Though their discourse had no reason in it, yet their will
had so blinded their understanding, that they would not submit to their Duty.
Pope Alexander therefore, who succeeded Innocent the Tenth, seeing his
Sovereign Authority necessary, in the year 1656. decided the whole matter by
this following Bull.

The Bull of Pope Alexander the Seventh touching the Five condemned
Propositions of Jansenius.
Alexander, Bishop, SERVANT OF THE SERVANTS OF GOD, To all Faithful Christians
Health and Apostolical Benediction.

The Divine Providence having by an inscrutable Dispensation, and without any
merit on our part, raised us to the Sacred Throne of St. Peter, and to the
Government of the whole Church, we have judged it to concern the Duty of our
Pastoral Charge to make it our principal endeavor, by virtue of that Power
and Authority which God has given us, seasonably to provide for the Safety and
Integrity of the Holy Faith, and of its Sacred Decisions. And although such
points as have already been most sufficiently defined by Apostolical
Constitutions, stand not in need of any new Decision, or Declaration, yet in
regard that some Disturbers of the Public Peace are not afraid to call them
in question, or to shake and weaken them by their subtle and captious
Interpretations, We to prevent the further spreading of so dangerous a
Contagion, have thought it sit not to defer any longer, to apply the speedy
remedy of the Apostolical Authority. For indeed our Predecessor Innocent the
Tenth of Happy Memory did, some few years since, set forth a Constitution,
Declaration and Decision in Form and Tenor following.

Innocent, Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God, To all Faithful Christians
Health and Apostolical Benediction. Whereas upon occasion of Printing a Book:
entitled. Augustinus cornelii Jansenii Iprensis Episcopi, among other opinions
of that Author, there arose a Dispute principally in France touching Five of
them, many Bishops of that Realm have very much pressed us to examine those
Five Propositions presented unto us, and to pronounce a certain and clear
judgment on each of them in particular. The Tenor of the said Propositions is
as follows.

1. Some of Gods Commandments are impossible to the Just according to their
present forces, though they have a will, and do endeavor to accomplish them:
and they want the Grace, that renders them possible.

2. In the state of nature corrupt, men never resist Interior Grace.

3. To merit and demerit in the state of Nature corrupted, it is not necessary
to have the liberty that excludes necessity; but it suffices to have that
liberty which excludes Coaction, or Constraint.

4. The Semipelagians admitted the necessity of Interior preventing Grace to
every Action, even to the beginning of Faith. But they were Heretics in this,
That they would have that Grace to be such, as the will of man might resist it,
or obey it.

5. It is Semipelagianisme to say, That Jesus Christ died, or shed his blood,
generally for all men.

We who amidst the manifold cares, which continually exercise our mind, do
make it our principal one, that the Church of God committed to us from above,
being cleansed from the errors of perverse opinions, may safely militate, and
like a ship on a calm sea, when storms and raging billows of all Tempests are
appeased, may securely sail, and at last arrive at the wished Haven of
Salvation; Taking into serious Consideration the importance of the matter, have
caused the Five Propositions presented to us in the terms above expressed, to
be diligently examined one after another by many Doctors of the Sacred Faculty
of Theology, in the presence of sundry Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, for
that purpose specially assembled: whose Suffrages we have ^aturely considered,
upon report thereof made unto us as well by word of mouth, as by writing. And
we have heard the same Doctors largely discoursing on all and every of the
said Propositions particularly, in several Congregations held in our Presence.

And whereas from the beginning of this Discussion we had ordained Prayers, as
well Private as Public, to exhort the Faithful to implore the Divine
Assistance, we again caused the same to be reiterated with greater servour; and
having Our self sollicitously implored the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, at
length by the favor of that Divine Spirit, we have proceeded to the following
Declaration and Decision. The First of the said Propositions, viz. That some of
the Commandments of God are impossible to the Just, according to their present
forces, though they have a will, and do endeavor to accomplish them: and they
want the Grace that renders them possible; We declare it to be Temerarious,
Impious, Blasphemous, Anathematized, and Heretical, and condemn it for such.
The Second, viz. That in the state of Nature corrupt, men never resist
Interior Grace, We declare it to be Heretical, and condemn it for such. The
third, viz. That to merit and demerit in the state of Nature corrupted, it is
not necessary to have the liberty that excludes necessity; but it suffices to
have that liberty, which excludes Coaction, or Constraint, We declare it to be
Heretical, and condemn it for such. The Fourth, viz. That the Semipelagians
admitted the necessity of Interior preventing Grace to every Action, even to
the beginning of Faith. But they were Heretics in this, That they would have
that Grace to be such, as the will of man might resist or obey it, We declare
it to be false, and condemn it as such. The fifth, viz. That it is
Semipelagianisme to say, That Jesus Christ died, or shed his blood, generally
for all men, We declare it it to be False, Temerarious, Scandalous; and being
understood in this sense, That Christ died only for the salvation of the
Predestinate, We declare it Impious, Blasphemous, Contumelious, Derogatory to
Divine Goodness, and Heretical; and as such we condemn it. Wherefore we
command all Faithful Christians of either Sex, that concerning the said
Propositions they neither presume to Believe, Teach, nor Preach otherwise, then
is containd in our present Declaration, and Definition, under the Censures and
Penalties ordained in the Law against Heretics and their Abettours. We
likewise enjoin all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries of
Places, as also the Inquisitours of Heresy, totally to restrain and repress,
by the aforesaid Censures and Penalties, and by other fitting remedies. Juris
and Facti, all Gainsayers and Impugners whatsoever, imploring, if need
require, even the help of the Secular Arm against them. Nevertheless we intend
not by this Declaration and Decision touching the aforesaid Five Propositions,
any ways to approve the rest of the Opinions contained in the said Book of
Cornelius Jansenius. Given at Rome, at St. Marie Major, the last day of May, in
the year of our Lord God 1653. and of our Pontificate the Ninth.

But for so much as some Children of Iniquity (as we have been informed) are
not afraid to maintain, (to the great scandal of the Faithful) that the
aforesaid Five Propositions are not to be found in the forecited Book of the
said Cornelius Jansenius, but are either seigned and forged at pleasure, or
were not condemned in the sense intended by the Author: We, who have seriously
and sufficiently considered what ever has passed concerning this matter (as
having by command of the said Pope Innocent the Tenth our predecessor, while
we were yet but in the Dignity of Cardinal-ship, assisted at all the
Conferences, wherein by Apostolical Authority the same Cause has been
examined with as great diligence, as could be desired) being resolved to remove
and take away all doubts, that might at any time hereafter arise touching the
premises; to the end that all Faithful Christians may be held in the unity of
the same Faith. We, I say, by the Duty of our Pastoral Charge, and upon mature
Deliberation, do confirm, approve, and renew by these presents the
above-recited Constitution, Declaration, and Definition of Pope Innocent our
Predecessor: and we further Declare and Define, That those Five Propositions
were drawn out of the Book of the same Cornelius Jansenius Bishop of Ipres,
entitled Augustinus, as also that they were condemned in the sense intended by
the same Cornelius; and as such we condemn them anew, applying to them the same
censure, wherewith every one of them was particularly branded in the
forementioned Declaration and Definition. And we again condemn and prohibit the
same Book of the so often recited Cornelius Jansenius, entitled Augustinus, and
all other Books, as well Manuscripts, as Printed, or which may hereafter happen
to be printed, wherein the above-condemned Doctrine of the same Cornelius
Jansenius is, or shall be defended, asserted, or maintained. Prohibiting all
Faithful Christians to hold, preach, teach, or expound the said Doctrine,
either by word or writing, or to interpret it either in public or in private,
or to cause it to be printed either openly or in secret; and this under the
Penalties and Censures specified in the Law against Heretics instantly to be
incurred ipso facto, without further Declaration.

Wherefore we enjoin all our Venerable Brethren, Patriarchs, Primates,
Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, Ordinaries of places; Inquisitours of
Heresy, and all other Judges Ecclesiastical, to whom it shall belong, to
cause this abovesaid Constitution, Declaration, and Definition of Pope
Innocent our Predecessor to be observed according to our present
Determination, and to restrain and punish all disobedient and Rebellious
persons, by the aforesaid Penalties, and other remedies Juris and facti, even
by imploring the assistance of the Secular Arm, if it shall be necessary. Given
at Rome, at St. Marie Major the Sixteenth of October, in the year of our Lord
God 1656. and of our Pontificate the second.

This Bull was received with the joy and approbation of all Catholic Princes,
Prelates, and People; notwithstanding in France there remained, and do remain
still to this day, some who could not, or would not be brought back to the
unity of the Catholic Church. The chief of these (as for matter of Action)
are the Disciples of San-Cyran, Inhabitants, or Confederates of Port-Royall,
the Seminary of this Heresy; and underhand diverse mutinous spirits, glad to
embrace any thing that looks like a Faction. Among these one (and as far as I
hear the principal one) is Arnauld; of whom I will now treat.

3. Of Anthony Arnauld.
This man was a Disciple of San-Cyran, and sometimes Directour of those at
Port-Royall. He was made Doctor of Sorbon, before he set forth his Book of
Frequent Communion: I say His, because the Book bears his name, though it
were, at least the Body and Substance of it, made by San-Cyran, as appears by
San-Cyrans own Letter, kept by the Reverend Fathers Minimes at Paris. The
Heretical and condemned Maxims, which this man has taught in his Book of
Frequent Communion, and other Works, are many. Some few I here set down. I have
taken them out of the Answer to the Apology, which Arnauld made for himself in
a Letter to the Queen of France; which Answer was printed in the Year 1644 and
there for every one of these Heretical Tenets, several Texts of Arnaulds are
produced. His Doctrine then is this.

Arnauld's Doctrine taught in his Book of Frequent Communion.
1. That the Church is corruptible in her Manners and Discipline, that is, her
Doctrine of Manners.

2. That there is no other Rule, whereby to know Catholic Verities, but only
Tradition. So the Pope, and Counsels, and Scriptures, and Theological
Demonstration, are excluded from being any rule of knowing Catholic Verities.

3. That St. Peter and St. Paul are two Heads of the Church, which make but one.

4. That the Absolution of the Priest gives not to the Penitent any thing else,
but the Grace of an exterior Reconciliation; but that it is the Canonical
Satisfaction, which gives justifying Grace, and revives the Soul: And that it
is therefore only that Confession is necessary, that the Priest may set a
proportionable Penance.

5. That the practice of Penance for all mortal Sins, (whether public and
scandalous, or private) is, according to the Fathers and Primimitive Church, to
go thus. First you must confess and demand Penance. Secondly the Penance is
given. Thirdly the Penance is to be fulfilled, during a proportionable space of
days, months, or years. Fourthly comes Absolution; which is immediately
followed with the Communion, or receiving of the Blessed Sacrament. And he that
communicates before he has fullfilled his Penance, communicates unworthily.

6. That the manner of doing Penance (or frequenting the Sacrament of Penance)
now adays, is different from what was practiced for the first twelve hundred
years; that it is an abuse, and wonderful blindness.

7. That the practice of Penance which is nowadayes, favors the general
impenitence of the world. In his second Edition he has changed this
Proposition thus. That the Practice of Penance which is now-adayes most common,
is favored by the general impenitence of the world,

All this he has in his Book of Frequent Communion, and the long Preface to
it. This Book, when it first came out, was looked on by many, who judged of it
only by the Title, as a good and pious Work. But the Jesuits at Paris, who
discovered the malice of the above mentioned Maxims, preached and wrote
against it; and at length it was condemned. By this the Jesuits got the ill
will of the Jansenists, and animated Port-Royall against them. Yet all good
Catholics thanked the Jesuits for having stood up for the Church, and hindered
the consequences which were like to have followed, and the errors, into which
many were running unawares.

Many things were writ to and fro. The Jansenists defending Arnauld, and the
Jesuits with other Catholics impugning him. At length Arnauld (who besides
the above mentioned pernicious Maxims, held also for Jansenius) writ a little
Tract called, The Second Letter of Monsieur Arnauld to a Duke and Peer of
France, where he excuses Jansenius, and the Jansenists from Heresy, in the
same manner which the Author of the Provincial Letters afterward held, to
wit, by saying, that the Five Propositions could not be found in Jansenius;
that it was matter of Fact, and not any Theological point, wherein the
Jansenists and others disagreed; and consequently that they could not be called
Heretics. This Letter was after a long Examen of it condemned in the Sorbon;
and Arnauld, refusing to submit, and further protesting against the
Determination of the University, was cashiered the Sorbon, and had his Title of
Doctor taken from him, in the Year 1656. the last of January, as appears by
the Act then passed in Sorbon.

This set the Jansenists in a rage. And whereas hitherto they had defended
themselves with some show of modesty, and pretense of learning and piety, now
they turned to write furious Satyrs (which they call Provincial Letters)
against the Sorbon first, then against the Dominicans; but their main fury they
discharged against the Jesuits, whom they would needs imagine to be the
Authors of all their disgraces: of which they were so sensible, that they
seemed half desperate. For now San-Cyrans wicked Maxims were laid open in the
Information made against him; which Monsieur Preville printed. Jansenius was
condemned (I mean his Book) as Heretical; and the last Pillar of Jansenisme,
Arnauld, was ignominiously turned out of Sorbon.

This is the sum of the History of Jansenisme, as to the main Heads of it.
This the occasion of the Provincial Letters. I suppose the Reader, when he has
read this, will not wonder, that the Jesuits are against the Jansenists
Doctrine: nor will he think strange, that the Jansenists, after having broached
such Impious Doctrine, after having endeavored to corrupt the Articles of the
Catholic Faith, after having showed so much disrespect to the Popes, Bishops,
and whole Catholic Church, should falsify the Jesuits Doctrine, and treat
them with those terms of ig^ominy, of which their Provincial Letters are full.

The first Answer To the Provincial Letters, Which The Jansenists have
published against the Society of Jesus.
Note, that this Answer was made at the coming out of the Ten first Letters, as
a general warning about the Authors Quality and Conditions: the proof of his
Forgeries in particular being reserved to the second Answer, called The
Impostures.
The Argument of this first Answer.
1. THe Author of the Provincial Letters discovered to be an Heretic. 2. His
pitiful shifting off the main Question of Jansenisme, which he was obliged to
defend; and in place of defense, turning to Slanders against the Jesuits. 3.
The wrong he has done the Church, in endeavoring to make pass, in the vulgar
Tongue, under the Name and Authority of the Jesuits, (and thereby giving them
a show of truth amongst the vulgar) many false Opinions, which they never
taught, but the quite contrary. 4. That what he says, is taken (chiefly) out
of a Book condemned long since, and burnt by the Hangman. 5. His citing of
Authors is full of gross untruth and ignorance; scarce ever alleging any of
them in his true meaning. 6. His unworthy handling of Divinity, by impugning
grave Authors, and treating most serious matters only with fleering and
scoffing. 7. His ignorant attributing to the whole Society, that which happily
some one amongst them may have taught, though all the rest have opposed it, and
taught the quite contrary. 8. His gross Metachronisme, or mistake of Times,
making Jesuits to be the first Authors and Inventors of that, which was taught
and received many Ages before there were any Jesuits in the world.

IT cannot be denied, that the Author of those Letters, which are spread abroad
against the Society, and fill the world with so much noise, is a Jansenist: If
notwithstanding it be the work of one single man, and not rather of the whole
party of the Jansenists. I conceive, that if the Author were questioned, and
would answer truly to his name, he must use the same words which that Devil
did, who tormented the miserable wretch that dwelt among the Tombs, and say, My
name is Legion; for we are many. But howsoever, that the Author is a Jansenist,
is manifest: For in his four first Letters he maintains that Doctrine, which
the Pope has condemned under the name of Jansenius his Doctrine: And in the
following Letters he charge the Jesuits with having been the first, that
discovered and impugned those heinous Errors, which make up Jansenius his
Book. The Jansenists had writ many things in defense of the Doctrinal Points of
Jansenius, (now condemned by the Church) but they were answered so briskly,
that they were forced to lay down their arms, and abandon the defense of those
infamous Propositions; which since their being Anathema^^z'd at Rome, have been
a horror to all that have not renounced their Faith, but live under the name of
Catholic. This has forced the Jansenists to change their manner of fighting:
they stand no more upon their Defense, but are b^come Assailan^s. They have
qui^ted the (...) intherto agitated, of the Doctrinal P^in^s of Faith, wherein
they were alway^s worsted; and now they muster up, as their ^^st Reserve,
Accusations, Slanders, Calumnies, tracing in all this proceeding the steps of
their Predecessors, the ancient Heretiqu^s.

The resolution of the Fa^hers of the Society, whom these Letters attaque, was
first not to spare them an inch, wheresoever the Doctrine of Faith should be
questioned; that being the Interest of God: and next to pass by their
Calumnies, and slight their Slanders, since herein none were concerned but they
themselves; who had long since learnt of their Master this Lesson, taught in
the Gospel, Blessed are ye, when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and
speak all that is naught against you untruly for my sake. But since their
patience in suffering, and their modesty in being silent, has made up one part
of the Scandal whereof they stand accused, it is necessary to give some
Antidote to the Readers of those infamous Letters; to the end, that poison,
which has been offered them in the Babylonish Cup of gold, as the Scripture
speaks, that is to say, under the gilt of some fond railing and jeasting words,
have not the sad effect, which those Heretical Wr^ters (true poisoners of men's
Souls) do pretend. And that they may have no better fortune in their Calumnies,
then they met with in their wicked Doctrine, I hold it necessary to desire the
Readers, as well of those Letters, as of this Writing, to consider.

In the first place, the subtle and malicious ways of the Jansenists; who (as
I have already hinted) by a slight, very ordinary with Heretics, have
quitted their post in the sight of the whole world, not giving now the least
Answer to those Reproaches made against them, concerning the falsenesse of
their Propositions challenged to be Erroneous, Scandalous, and Heretical,
which as defendants they ought to have maintained; but reproaching the Jesuits
with the wickedness of their Moral, by that means becoming the Assaulters, and
obliging the others to the Defensive part, in a matter which concerned not the
questions in hand. Thus did the Arians deal with great St. Athanasius, when
finding it impossible to answer the force of his reasons, they laid that care
aside, and became reproachers of his life, obliging him to justify himself
from those horrible Accusations, with which they set upon his innocence;
accusing him for ravishing a woman, and barbarously murdering a man, that he
might cut off his hand to use it in Enchantment. The question was not here,
what Answers the Jesuits have made, concerning sundry Cases of Conscience,
(which have either been proposed to them, or which their Adversaries have
forged at their pleasure, or (to speak yet more truly) which the Enviers of
their Glory and Abilities have maliciously attributed unto them) but of the
Doctrine of Jansenius, and of the five Propositions taken out of that Author,
and condemned as his by the holy See. That the Jesuits have well or ill
answered, or writ on the subject of Duels, Usuries, Restitutions, and other
Cases, which their Adversaries impertinently impose on them, does not hinder
the five Propositions taken out of Jansenius, and presented to the Pope by my
Lords the Bishops of France, from being condemned by the Holy See: Nor does it
hinder those, who now follow the Doctrine of the five Propositions, from being
as much Heretics as the Calvinists of Charenton; or their Benifices (if they
have any) from being vacant, (whether they have charge of Souls, or no) which
they have now lost by Heresy: Nor if the Jesuits should be proved to err in
Morals, is it therefore forbid to say, the Jansenists are excommunicated; and
that those who know them to be Jansenists, cannot in conscience receive the
Sacraments from their hands. Nor does it hinder their Books from deserving the
fire and faggot, as well as their Persons, if the Primitive severity of our Laws
were yet in use, and there were not some hope of their amendment. This the
Readers of those Letters ought to consider, reflecting on the quality of their
Authors; who being Jansenists, are Heretics, and, as such, mortal enemies of
the Jesuits: who have still this advantage, that all those, who are enemies to
the Church, at the same time become theirs; like that which the Roman Orator
once said of himself, 'Twas the happiness of his destiny, that never any became
his Enemy, who was not at the same time an Adversary likewise to the
Commonwealth. This made a great Person of our times, and one who was a scourge
of Jansenism, say, One should give no other answer to those wicked Letters,
then these three words, Jansenists are Heritiques.

In the second place consider likewise, with how little discretion, or
conscience, the Writers of those detestable Letters have cunningly published
and authorized to the whole world certain pernicious Maxims, whilst they
charge the Jesuits for having writ them in their Books. The Jesuits Opinions
whatsoever they were, remained in their own Volumes unknown to any but
Schoolmen and Doctors, to whom such Writings could do no harm, since they are
the Censurers of them: and even in the same Volumes, the Jesuits propose the
different opinions, and the (...) Judgments of Authors, the one being the
Correctour of the other: whereas our Jansenist gathers all that he can make
seem extravagant out of many several places, and puts all together, exposed to
the eyes of ignorant Readers, in the vulgar Language, to persons incapable of
judging betwixt the false and the true, the profitable and dammageble, that
which is to be received, and that which is not; casting a stumbling block in
the blind man's way to make him fall; and opening a Cistern without covering
it, contrary to the prohibition made us in Exodus. I know well enough, the
malice of his intention was to create a Horror of the Jesuits, by the malignity
of the Doctrine which he imposes on them: but let him know, there is great
danger, lest he persuade these untruths and wicked Maxims to many, under the
authority of the Jesuits name; to which the greatest part of the world will
give more credit, then to such petty Buffoons as he is, who has neither sense,
conscience, nor authority. Whereas on the contrary, the Jesuits are in the
universal good opinion of all, except only Heretics, and some others who
malice them; so that thinking to cry down such Doctrines, they render them
probable by the Authority of the Jesuits: who have another manner of repute in
the world, then the Jansenists, whom every body knows to have been condemned as
Heretics; and it is no less known that the Jesuits have been the first, who
opened their eyes against the Errors and Heresies both of Jansenius and the
Jansenists; being of the number of those in the Church, who have most of all
fought against Heresies, Liberti, nisme, and Vice, in their Books, in their
Pulpits and Sermons, in their Disputes and Conversation. Insomuch, as it is
commonly believed, that to be of the same judgment with the Jesuits, is to be
Orthodox; even so far, that many will be easily persuaded to receive for a
lawful Opinion, and for an unblamable Resolution, in respect of their moral
life and conduct, that which they shall understand to be the common opinion,
and universal tenet of the Fathers of that Society. Therefore the Writer of
those pernicious Letters cannot excuse himself, from having brought into the
whole Church of God, and especially into France, a horrible scandal, and which
deserves punishment; slandering learned and virtuous Persons by opprobious
speeches, falsifications, lies, and calumnies; and seducing the ignorant, the
weak and licentious, by a wicked Doctrine. By attributing this Doctrine to the
Jesuits, he has rendered it probable, through the credit these Fathers have
with the greatest part of the word, who will believe it upon their score; and
by casting it in a vulgar Language among the people, he has thrown a stone of
offense; at which the weak will stumble, and the wicked authorize their
unlawful enterprises; through this belief, that they can commit no sin,
whilst they follow the judgment of so many, so knowing, and so virtuous
Persons, as are the Fathers of the Society.

Thirdly, you must know this scraper and patcher up of Calumnies, alleges
almost nothing in his Letters that is new, but makes us read a second time the
work of one of his Brethren, written near twelve years since, against the
Fathers of the Society of Jesus; to which Work, the Author gave this Title, The
Divinity of the Jesuits. Out of this he has taken all the grand reproaches,
which he makes against those Fathers; quoting the very same Authors and Places,
and using the same Forgeries, multiplying his Letters according to the shreads
he picks up, that he may be able to make many Books out of that one: all that
is his, is that now and then he adds the names of two or three Au^hors, not
cited in the former Pamphlet, and withal dilateth himself in the Narrative of a
Romance fit for Jan Potage; that he may render the Jesuits ridiculous to the
Wits of his gang, by such ways of answering, which he attributes to them, as
are childish and foolish, (the best part of his Boyish Dialogues) and which
deserve not to go unpunished. For the rest, he is careful enough not so much as
to mention the three Books, which were then written in answer to that supposed
Moral, taking no notice of the answers which were made to the calumnies it
contained; nor the entertainment that pernicious Book met with, which was a
condemnation to the flames, to be burnt by the hand of the Hangman; and this by
the sentence of one of the wisest, and most August Parliaments in France.

Fourthly, do but cast your eye on his Rhapsody of Passages and Quotations, you
shall find nothing but untruths and calumnies; the Author of it falsifying the
greatest part of those places he alleges, and many times lying most boldly and
impudently: making Authors say that which they never dreamt; croping and
hacking their words, and not producing them entire, to the end, that one may
not understand their true sense; purposely omitting the modifications and
limitations which they use, to render them ridiculous or monstrous in their
opinions: fancying to himself, that having cited the places, quoted the Books,
and written some of the Authors words, every one will credit him, though the
Author of the Moral Divinity has been convicted of falsity in the most of the
self-same Allegations. Do but remember after what manner the Calvinists (who
have as little truth in their Quotations, as they have in their Faith) allege
the holy Scripture, and Sentences of the holy Fathers; that falsehood is
entailed on Heresy; and that the Jansenists have that Character of Error in
their Sect, that it is now become a Proverb in many places, when one would call
one an impudent Liar, to say, That he over-reaches as much as a Jansenist. I
know not what I ought to blame most in these men and their writings, whether
their falseness and impudence in lying, or their malice in inventing calumnies,
or their ignorance in so ill understanding, and so ill alleging of Authors and
their Opinions; or their injustice, in forging crimes where there are none; or
their inveterate hate against the Jesuits, whom they set upon by false and
unreasonable accusations.

Fifthly, reflect on the manner of this Authors writing; who in matters of
Divinity, of Moral, of Cases of Conscience, and Salvation, uses a taunting
foolish style; I will not only say unworthy of a Divine, or an Ecclesiastical
person, but even of a Christian; who ought not to treat holy Things like a
Scoffer or Comedian. He calls himself, as all of that Sect of his do, Disciple
of St. Augustine: Let him find me one place in the writings of that great
Doctor, where he takes upon him the part of a Jeaster, or Buffoon. It Is the
spirit of Heresy, which has nothing in it of serious, but rage and fury; if
yet notwithstanding men swayed with those passions deserve to be termed
serious: It Is the spirit of the ungodly and Blasphemers, which is spoken of in
Job, Imitaris linguam blasphemantium, Thou speak like a Blasphemer: the
Original bears Irrisorum, Thou have the tongue of Jeasters. It is also a kind
of Blasphemy to treat holy things in Rallicry; thus the Devils often endeavor
by their jeastings to put by the force of Exorcismes, speaking like Buffoons,
to stir up the common people to a loose kind of Laughter, the Enemy of
Devotion, and the Ruin of Religion. Yet it is the whole advantage this naughty
Writer has; for having neither solidity, nor science, nor truth, he took his
recourse to his best fort^sse, (which is Fooling) and that alone it is, which
gives utterance to his Work; although his Work found another way of a facil
vent, which was, that many Copies were distributed at the cost and charges of
the whole Party, out of the Alms of Jansenisme. The Wise man advises us, what
entertainment we are to give such spirits and writings, in the 22. of the
Proverbs, Ejt^e derisorem, Drive far from you the Mocker, and Buffoon; he
deserves naught but disdain, both of his Person and his Work: but being also a
Jansenist, we must drive him away with a horror, since that every Jansenist is
an Heretic.

In the sixth place, consider the ill reasoning of this malicious Writer, who
often attributes to the whole Body of the Jesuits, that which none of them has
said, or at most what escaped from some one of their Body, notwithstanding that
all the rest have written against it. Who yet ever saw, that from one
particular a man could conclude an universal? Must we call those the Maxims,
or the Moral of the Jesuits, which were scarce ever said by any one of the
Jesuits? If Gerson Chancellor of the University of Paris have had some
erroneous opinion upon the difference of Venial and Mortal sin, must we
censure that as the Maxim, or the Moral of the Sorbon? Richerius had a
particular Opinion, which was not approved, concerning the sovereign Pastor,
must we therefore blame the whole Faculty? If any of the holy Fathers have had
some opinion, which since his time has not been approved, must we therefore
attribute it to all the holy Fathers? Had this Author but one grain of
sincerity, whilst he accuses one Jesuit for advancing an opinion, which seems
not true to him, why conceals he, that many other Jesuits have taught the
contrary? This Caveat he might have read in the Reply to the Moral Divinity;
which we shall be constrained to make him read in the Second Answer, which will
be made to his Letters, to his Falsities, and to his malicious Dissimulations.
I appeal to any judicious man, what is properly to be called the Jesuits
Doctrine? whether that which only one of that Body shall have said, or that
which many amongst them have taught to the contrary? and if it be not an
insupportable injustice, and which deserves not to escape unpunished,
maliciously to impute to a whole Community, not what the greatest part have
taught, but what only one of them has said? Were it not injustice to impeach
the whole College of the Apostles for Treason, because one of their number
betrayed his Master?

Finally, let any man judge whether it be not a loud calumny and gross foolery
to charge the Jesuits as Introducers, and first Authors, or sole defenders of
opinions, which were taught for many Ages in all the Universities of Europe,
before the Order of the Jesuits was established. They call Opinions and
Maxims of the Jesuits, those very assertions which have been, and are the
opinions of others, and which the greatest part of the Jesuits oppose in their
Writings, as may be seen in the Answer to the Book called Moral Divinity. But
all that is odious must be cast upon the Jesuits: they are used by their
enemies, (such as are commonly Heretics, and the followers of Jansenisme) as
the Primitive Christians were by the Heathens; for as to those it was crime
enough to be a Christian, so to these it is enough to be a Jesuit, to lie under
the lash of every ones censure, when there is power, and impunity. That which
is past by in some Writers, and which is not so much as a light fault in the
Books of others, is in the Jesuits a crime, an attempt against public Order,
an abomination. The Author of the Letters does not reproach the Jesuits with
any one Maxim, Decision, or Answer, which is not either falsely alleged by
that Impostor, or corrupted and disguised, or so separated from its own place,
from its modifications and limitations, that it is no more the same. If any
opinion, that seems to give scope to Liberty, be taught by any of the
Society, it is opposed by many others of the same body: Nay, whatsoever any
particular person of the Society has advanced contrary to the sentiments of
the rest of his Order, that very same has been formerly taught by many
Doctors, out of his Order, in all Universities, and by many famous Writers,
and Masters of the Faculty of Paris, of other Schools, and many times of the
Sorbon it self. This I say, to the end you may know, that what they attribute
to the Jesuits, belongs less to them then to others; and that oftentimes the
Doctrine, which this good Fellow would make pass as ridiculous, false, and
contrary to good manners, is not such in the opinion of many great Doctors,
whose Authority must countervail in Schools. It is these we are bound to
credit, more then Heretics, and people that know neither speculative, nor
positive Divinity; and far more then an ignorant Buffoon, good for nothing, but
to jest and play the Comedian, as is the Author of these Letters; who, as
himself vouches, is neither Divine, nor Casuist, nor Clergyman; and cannot
deny but that he is a ^ansenist, and by a necessary consequence an Heretic,
since all Jansenists are so.

Whence comes it then, that he sets upon the Jesuits, rather then upon other
Writers that teach the same? Hence, that it is the custom of Heretics to be
more against this Body, then against all the rest: It is also a badge of this
Society to be persecuted by all the Wicked; she has been so dealt withal from
her very Cradle, and shall be, so as long as she makes profession of pure
Doctrine, and true Virtue. If this sleeveless Writer had had a zeal for the
Truth, or a just horror of false Doctrine, he would have fought against error,
where ever he had found it, and would have sided with those who maintained
Truth, as the Jesuits do. But it is apparent enough, it was not the love of
Truth made him write, but the hatred of it; under pretense of opposing the evil
Doctrine of the Jesuits, he would revenge himself on them, (although it were to
the prejudice of Truth and his own Conscience, if yet he have any) for their
accusing the Doctrine of Jansenius, which has been condemned as Heretical. But
he has a Bone to pick; he will never persuade the world, that the Doctrine of
the Jesuits deserves condemnation, since it is that which carries on the War
against Heresy, Error, and Libertinisme. Therefore the Judicious laughed at
his Letters, the honest Party detested them, and the Ignorant were scandalized.
On the contrary, the Heretics hugged them, and Libertines adored them,
Buffoons owned their style in them, Port Royal their Characters, and
Iansenists their mode of cavilling, and vainly answering the just reproaches
made to their wicked Doctrine: After all this the Jesuits will not be without
an Answer, the Church without Censures, nor the Magistrates without Punishment,
so soon as this wicked Writer shall have published his Name; in concealing of
which he cannot dissemble his being a Jansenist, and by consequence an
Heretic.

The second Answer. Wherein the Author of the Provincial Letters is convinced
of IMPOSTURE.
The Preface.
THe Author of the Provincial Letters charge the Fathers of the Society of
Jesus, that they have brought into the world opinions in matter of Morality,
which corrupt the manners of Christians. To make good this charge, he
instanceth in many cases, from the beginning of his fifth Letter (where he
enters upon his grand design of impugning the Society) to the end of the
tenth; in all which he will have it clear, that the Society has introduced a
Moral, which breeds corruption of manners in the whole world. To prove this
charge, he ought to make good four things in the instances which he alleges.
The first is, that the Doctrine, against which he inveigheth, is not ancienter
then the Society. For if it were taught in the Church by approved Authors,
before that Religious Order was in being, it is false to charge the Society
with introducing it. Secondly, when he charge them with any Doctrine, he must
cite their words truly, according to the plain sense of the Authors. Thirdly,
the Doctrine wherewith he charge the Society, must be naught and unallowable;
otherwise he does but show his own either ignorance, or malice, and deserves
to be cast out of the Schools, for censuring and deriding good and wholesome
Doctrine. Fourthly, he must show, that the Doctrine which he objecteth to the
whole Order, is not only the private Tenent of one or two single persons in
it, but taught by many, or at least allowed by many, and generally owned by the
Society. For it is false to call that the Doctrine of a Religious Order, which
(though one or two have held) is generally disclaimed by the whole Body.

That these four things ought to be observed, is so unquestionable, that no
rational man will dispute it. I reflect on them, because they are those, by
which the Author of this Answer evidently convinces the Impostor, though he
do no where set down these conditions: And I do defy all the Jansenists, and
all their Cabal, to make these four Conditions good in any one of all the great
number of Cases, which these Letters object. It is easy to object great crimes
to the greatest innocence; it is easy to rail and taunt, when Spleen and
Choler furnish words to Fury: But let them come to the point, and prove what
they say, and then I Will give them leave to boast, and pardon all their
Rhodomontadoes.

The Societies Answer is their Innocence: There is not one objection of all
that are made in this Book, which is rightly made; not one, by which the
Society may be made guilty of corrupt Doctrine. Here are nine and twenty
Impostures laid open; there might have been as many more: but these are enough
to let the world see, that this man deserves no credit, who in six Letters is
convinced of twenty nine Impostures. The whole Machin of the Objections, made
in the Provincial Letters, is mainly built upon the Doctrine of Probable
Opinions; which (though the Church has always allowed) this Letter-writer,
and his Translatour into English (who will needs become his Second) call a
Monster, and Source of Irregularities. I will therefore put that in the first
place, and set the rest of the Answers down, as near as may be, in the same
order, as the Objections (all which are Impostures) do lie in the Provincial
Letters, that the Reader may easily turn to them. I invert the order a little,
in which they are printed in the French; but it is to facilitate the matter.

The First Imposture; which in the French Copy is the twentieth.
THe Doctrine of Probable Opinions is the Source of a Torrent of
Irregularities, Let. 5. page 84. The Casuists scarce ev^r agree; there are few
questions, wherein one does not hold the affirmative, the other the negative,
Let. 5. page 94. And it is this way they palliate Crimes, tolerate Disorders,
and excuse all Vice, Let. 5.

Answer.
This is no new Imposture; for it is one part of the first Propositions in the
Moral Divinity, which is falsely imputed to the Jesuits: and as Father
Caussin says, It Is the Head of that Book, (a weak, yet malignant Head) which
has an influence into the whole Body.

Every one knows, that in Moral Theology, as in other Sciences which are
taught in the Schools, there are two sorts of Maxims. The one, in which all
Casuists generally agree, because either Holy Scriptures, or consent of Fathers
and Doctors have made them certain and evident. The other only probable, and
such as may fall under dispute, and in which opinions of Authors are divided.

For what concerns the first sort of Maxims, no man can deny them without
temerity; and commonly there are none that disagree with the Jesuits in them,
but Heretics. As to the second, it is lawful for any one to pick and choose out
of those several different opinions, which Divines teach, that which squares
best with himself, supposing it be probable; that is, that it be accompanied
with these four conditions, which Suarez a Jesuit has Suarez Disp. 12. de
Bonitat. and Malit. Sect. 6.
given us.

The first is, that it does not strike at those Truths, which are universally
received in the Church. The second, that it does not wound common sense. The
third, that it be grounded on reason, and maintained by some irreproachable
Authority. The fourth, that if it has not the general vote of the Doctors,
at least it be not generally condemned.

This is the Doctrine of Probable Opinions; This, that which the Jansenist
calls, The Source of Irregularities: This, the Stumbling Block of this
Brainsick Man. He is astonished, that in questions of Morals our Authors
should be divided in their Opinions, and that they are so often of contrary
Sentiments in the resolution of Doubts.

We must cure this his Disease with the words of St. Antonine, whom one would
deem to have foreseen his Malady. Quod sint contrariae opiniones inter Doctores
sanctitate and scientia maximos in materia morali, aliquando etiam necessaria
ad salutem, patet per exempla. Nam Beatus Thomas in quarto tenet, quod post
la^sum in mortale, non oportet aliquem statim consiteri sub praecepto, habita
copia Confessoris, nisi in paucissimis casibus, qui ibi ponuntur. Did 17. Et
cum co tenet Richardus, sed Hugo de Sancto Victore, and Beatus Bonaventura sunt
in hoc contrariae opinionis: sanctitas autem, and magnitudo scientiae ipsorum
nota est omni Ecclesiae. Neutra tamen illorum opinio reprobatur; et si Beati
Thomae opinio communius teneatur: quae tamen minus tuta videtur. Raimundus
Decretista in Summa tenet, quod participare cum excommunicutis majori, in
loquela, cibo, and hujusmodi, in casu non concesso, sit mortale universaliter.
Sed Beatus Thomas, Johannes Andreas, and Archidiaconus tenent contrarium, and
illud contrarium communiter tenetur. Et sic exempla innumera possent poni. D.
Antonin. part 1. Tit. 3. cap. 10. de Conscientia,. 10. fol. 63. p. 1. col. 2.
It Is evident, says this Father, by examples, that in the Questions of Morals,
even those sometimes which are necessary to salvation, the opinions of such
Doctors as are most eminent both for sanctity and knowledge, fall out to be
contrary. For St. Th^mas in the fourth Book upon the Master of Sentences,
holds, That a man fallen into mortal Sin, is not obliged by any precept to go
to Confession, so soon as he has opportunity, except in some very few cases,
which he has there set down, Did 17. Richardus also is of the same opinion;
yet Hugo of St. Victor, and St. Bonaventure in that very thing are of a
contrary opinion: and yet their Sanctity and profound Learning is esteemed
through the whole Church. And we know, neither one nor other of these opinions
are rejected; although that of St. Thomas, which appears least secure, is
nevertheless the most common. St. Raimundus Doctor and Canonist, in his Sum,
does maintain, that, generally speaking, it is a mortal Sin to hold commerce
with any one excommunicated with the greater Excommunication, whether it be in
speaking, or eating with him, or any such other action, which is not permitted.
But St. Thomas, Johannes Andreas, and Archidiaconus teach the contrary, and
their opinion is most generally received. Thus we might bring infinite like
examples.

I am confident, our Censurer in reading this will accuse himself for his too
rash Criticisme, and will be sorry to have so lightly condemned the Doctrine of
following probable Opinions; he will be ashamed to have reprehended that
diversity of Opinions in lesuites in questions of Morality, which St. Antonixe
approves of in St. Thomas, in St. Bonaventure, in St. Raymund, and in very many
famous Doctors, out of whom he says, might be brought an infinite number of
examples. He will blush at his having reproached the Society with permitting
that liberty to her Authors, which the Church gives to all Catholic Doctors;
of maintaining their own opinions, and of contradicting one the other in such
points, as she has not yet decided: reserving to her self the power of
censuring those Propositions, which she judges dangerous. In fine, he will be
astonished at his own phantasticalnesse, seeing that which he calls the
Source of their Disorders, and the Basis of their Irregularities, is an
innocent practice permitted by the Church, and observed by all those
Universities, which exercise the best Wits, form the wisest Directours, and
render them capable of governing Consciences.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
It can be no disorder to hold with Divines the Doctrine of Probable Opinions,
but it is a crime to hold with the Iansenists the Doctrine of Heresies. That Is
the Source of Irregularities, of which I am constrained to mind you. You are
convinced to have left the infallible rule of Faith, and instead of repenting
of your error, you would fain blame the Society for holding diversity of
Opinions in Moral Doctrine. Thus did Wicleffe, finding his errors and cheats
discovered, set upon the Doctors of the Canon Law, Decretales cpistolae sunt
Apocryphae, and seducunt a Christi side; and Clerici sunt stulti, qui student
eas. Haec Propositio suit damnata in Concilio Constantinensi. Sess. 8. Propos.
38.
calling all those Fools that studied the Decretals, as being Apocryphal, and
made to divert Souls from the Faith of Jesus Christ. Thus did Calvin, feeling
himself struck with the Thunderbolts of the Church, set upon the Holy Fathers,
the Councils, and particularly upon the Divinity Schools, stuffing his Letters
and scandalous Writings with what Faults soever (either true or false) he could
pick out of the works of Divines. Thus did Jansenius, imitating those two
infamous Arch-heretiques, say, Vnde sactum est, ut quemadmodum in Theoricls,
limits rerum vere divinarum transeundo, non semel in chimaericas abstractiones
inciderunt, ita in practicis Morales, regulas agendorum simplices relinquendo,
quas simplex, and genuina ratio, and Antiqui patres praescripserunt; tam laxas
effecere conscientias, sub praetextu accommodandi sese infirmitatibus hominum,
ut nibil opus sit, nisi secleratiores sieri homines, ut nova aliqua, and
licentiosa regula fabricetur. Jansen, Tom. 2. L. Proaem. cap. 8
That as School. Divines, breaking down the bounds of Sacred Things, do often
fall into fantastical Abstractions; even so the Casuists in the Moral, laying
aside the most simple rule of humane Actions, which the pure light of Reason
and Ancient Fathers have taught us, under pretext of accommodating themselves
to the weakness of men, have given such scope to consciences, that nothing is
now adays required as necessary, to frame a new rule, yet more licentious, of
moral life, then that men become more wicked then now they are.

Confess the truth, Is it not from these Authors, that you took those ill
impressions (which you labor to spread amongst the common people) of
Scholastique and Moral Divinity, to the end, that by rendering them odious to
the vulgar, you might prevail wholly over their weak judgments, without all
danger of punishment; when (by this means) there shall be found no more any
persons of knowledge and ability, to hinder your dispersing the venom of your
pernicious doctrine among them? Truly I am not at all astonished, that you
should declare war against Probable Opinions, since you are Disciple of a
Master, that was a professed enemy of demonstrations, even in Diviniry;
maintaining with most insolent boldness, that a Conclusionem e propositionibus
elicitam, quarum una sidei est, altera evidenter nota, graves Theologi
Haereticam censent: Haeresi vero proximam universi profitentur, and qui eam
pertinaciter asserit, sinc dubio Haereti^us haberi consuevit.
conclusion which is drawn from two Propositions, one of which is of Faith, and
the other evidently known, is esteemed heretical by very great Divines; but
that all generally confess, it borders upon Heresy; and without all doubt, he
who maintains it, most commonly is reputed an Heretic. And in another place,
Quae propositionibus ex verbo Dei recta consecutione fluentibus opponuntur, non
protinus Haeretica sunt, nec Haeresim innuunt; etfi Dei verbo contraria sint,
pertinaciamve demonstrent.
All that which is repugnant to Propositions, which by good consequence are
inferred from the word of God, is not always heretical, nor suspected to be
so, although it be contrary to the word of God, and be maintained with
obstinacy. What do you say now to the temerity of this proposition? you know
the Author of it; I need not name him: neither do I think you will disown it.

After this, what remains to make up the height of extravagancy and
insolency, but to say, as you do, that Propositions of Faith are Pelagian
Heresies, and those who teach them, are undoubtedly held for Heretics? You
have both said it and published it; you have taught, that it is Semi-pelagianisme
to say, Jesus Christ died generally for all men. And to that infamous
Proposition you have added four others, which have been blasted with
Anathema's. You have dared to say, notwithstanding the judgment of the Church,
which condemned them in Jansenius, that you have not found them there, and that
one may yet maintain, Grace is wanting to some just persons, when they sin.
This is that we call teaching the Doctrine of Heretical Opinions. This is the
Source of our contests, and the true cause of your animosity against Jesuits.
Acknowledge your error; disavow that false and pernicious doctrine; receive
wi^h respect, that which was lately determined in the Assembly of Bishops
concerning the Elogy of the Abbot of St. Cyran, and the Heresy of Jansenisme;
and then our difference concerning Probable Opinions will soon be at an end.
Your Cavils concerning Probable Opinions serve but for a hiding hole, whilst
you cannot defend your self; but we must ferret you out, whilst you continue
still obstinate in maintaining the Doctrine of Heretical Opinions.

The second Imposture, French 21.
THat Emmanuel Sa and Filiucius give scope enough, and liberty of Conscience to
Sinners, because they teach, It is lawful to follow the less Probable
Opinion, though it be the less secure. Let 5. Engl. edit. p. 95.

Answer.
I ask this wretched Casuist, whether he believe, there are none but Jesuits
that teach this Doctrine? If he do, he is very ignorant; if he do not, but
knowing the merit of those persons, who maintain it with them, charge
notwithstanding the Jesuits as sole Authors of this opinion, he has a great
deal of passion, and very little judgment. Has Monsieur Du Val, a Sorbonist,
given any scope to Sinners, when he says, It Is sufficient to follow a safe and
probable opinion; and that without any difficulty, a man might leave that which
has more probability. Has Non tenemur foro conscientiae sequi probabiliorem
partem: sed satis est absolute, si sequamur probabilem, quae per^tis and doctis
placet, donec Ecclesia contrarium statuerit, aut prima illa opinio e scholis
Theologorum omnino explosa fucrit. Gamach. 1, 2. tract. 1. page 115.
Monsieur Gamasche, another Sorbonist given liberty of Conscience, in assuring
us, that we are Asserendum est, satis esse tutam and probabilem opinionem
sequi; and probabiliorem posse optime relinqui. Vallius Doctor Parisiensis,
tract. 12 de human. Actibus, art. 13. Sect. Et sic nonnulli.
not bound by any law of Conscience to follow that opinion which has most
probability; but that it is sufficient absolutely, to follow that which is
probable, and approved by learned and able men, till such time as the Church
rejects it, or that it be banished out of all the Schools of Divinity.

If we must allege the Authority of Fathers, dots St. Antonine encourage
Libertinisme, when he teaches that very same Doctrine in these words? They
object to us, that in case a man doubt, he ought to follow the most secure way,
which causes scrupulous persons to take the straitest way. But to that it is
answered, to choose the surest way is a Counsel, and not a Precept* Otherwise
many were obliged to go into Religious Orders, because in them one lives with
more safety, then in the world. It is not then necessary to follow the most
secure, as long as one may follow another way which is safe. For as there are
many ways which lead us to the same Town, although one of them be more safe
then the other; even so is it in our journey to the Celestial City, one takes
this way, another that, Sed ad hoc respondetur, eligere viam tutiorem confilii
est, non praecepti: alias oportet multos ingredi Religionem, in qua tutius
vivitur, quam in saeculo. Non ergo oportet de necessitate eligere tutiorem,
quando etiam alia via eligi potest tuta. Sicut enim diversae viae conducunt ad
unam Civitatem, licet una tutior alia sit; sic ad Civitatem caelestem alius
sic, alius sic vadit, and tute; licet aliquis tutiori modo. St. Antonin. 1.
part. Tit. cap. 10.. 10. fol. 62. p. 2. col 1.
and both safely, although another may take a safer then either? Note that this
Authority concludes a pari, or a simili, from the less security in states of
life, to the less security in probable, that is, safe opinions.

What can the Jansenist say to this? Will he accuse St. Antonine, for giving
liberty of Conscience to Sinners? Will he say that the rules he sets down in
the same place, are contrary both to Scripture, and the Tradition of the
Church, when he affirms, Inter duram and benignam circa praecepta sententiam,
benigna est potius, caeteris paribus, interpretatio facienda^ Quod etiam
asserit Gulielmus. Hujus ratio est, quia praecepta Dei and Ecclesiae non sunt
ad tollendam omnem spiritualem dulcedinem: qualis certe tollitur, quando nimis
scrupulose and timide praecepta interpretantur. St. Antonin. ibid, fol. 62.
page 2. col. 2. in fine.
That between two opinions concerning the Precepts, of which one is more
severe, the other more mild, we must make, and consequently any may follow
(all things else being equal) that interpretation, which is less severe;
because neither the Commandments of God, nor his Church, are made to take away
all spiritual delight; which undoubtedly is done, when one explains their
Precepts with too scrupulous a timidity.

An Advertisement to the Jansenist.
If you were a little less self-conceited then you appear to be, you would have
spared this objection, to have saved your own honor. When that saying escaped
from you, in your Moral Divinity falsely imposed on the Society, 1. Proposit.
de la Theol. Mor.
That the Jesuits permit any thing to Christians, and that they believe all
things to be probable, you should at least have excepted your own Maxims; and
then we should have been less astonished at your complaints, when we had found
out the subject of your griefs. Those Fathers, sure, had much forgot
themselves, that they did not stretch the Science of Probable Opinions even to
Heresies. That spiritual Empite, which in your opinion they have got by these
probabilities, Let. 5.
reaching forth their hand by an obliging and complying conduct to the whole
world, Let. 5. would have been become universal, and without counting the
Lutherans, who persecute them in Germany, the Calvinists in France, and the
Independents in England, all those, who are of your own side between Charenton
and Port-royall, would have been for them; all those Letters you send abroad
into the Provinces, would speak honorably of their Function; all those railing
tongues which decry them, would find nothing but praises and applauses to give
them. Yet they would be very sorry to be in your good esteem, while you
maintain Opinions concerning Faith, so dangerous and unworthy of a Christian,
as those are, which you have already advanced. Truly when I confer that which
your selves broach, with that which you censure in others, I admire how you can
say with so much arrogance, That you search the certain, and not the probable.
You that have scarce any thing written, which is not condemned as scandalous,
Heretical, and pernicious to the salvation of souls; do you believe it the
most safe way to defer Communion till the end of a man's life? to submit secret
sins to public penance? to hold two Heads of the Church, which make but one?
to make your confession, not that you sinned many times, but that Grace failed
you many times? In a word, do you hold it the most certain and secure way, to
follow the Jansenisticall Doctrine, which has troubled the whole Church ever
since your rebellion against the Pope?

The third Imposture. French 22.
THat the Authority of only one good and learned Doctor, according to
Sanchez, renders an opinion probable; which granted, one only Doctor may turn
men's Consciences topsie-turvie, and yet all will be secure. Letter 5. p. 92.
Engl. edit.

Answer.
This judicious Writer confesses in the next page, that he cannot stand to this
rule. What assurance have I, says he, that your Doctors taking so much
freedom to examine things by reason, what seems certain to one, will seem such
to all the rest? Is it possible to find a more ridiculous discourse then this
is? If it be not lawful to examine things by reason, which way would he have a
Doctor examine such things as are not evident in themselves, nor certain by
any principle of Faith, nor determined by any Ecclesiastical or Civil Law,
but are yet only under a simple probability?

To confirm this judgment, which he has made, he tells us the diversity of
Opinions is so great; what then? What can he conclude from that principle? that
therefore we must not examine such things, as are disputable, by force of
argument and reason? Judges are often divided in their opinions of Fact, and of
Right; therefore we must neither mind their advice, nor their reasons.
Certainly this manner of reasoning is very well be fitting a Jansenist.

It may be you will object, that you shall then never be certain of truth, if
consulting Casuists, one tells you it is, and the other tells you it is not.
It Is true; but would you therefore have the Casuists change ^he nature of
things? and make that which is only probable, evident and undoubted?

But at least I would satisfy my Conscience, say you: your Conscience is
secure enough, if so be you follow the advice of some knowing and virtuous
Doctor. You reply again, if it be so, one only Doctor may turn men's
Consciences topsie-turvie. Yes truly, if he be a Jansenist, he may, and fling
you into a precipice. But if he be Orthodox, learned and virtuous, you may rest
secure upon his advice. For if he be learned, he will not be deceived, judging
that probable which is not so: and if he be virtuous, he will have a care not
to deceive you. If you be not yet satisfied, if you will yet talk like a
Jansenist, if you cry out still you cannot be satisfied with this rule, I
answer, it is nevertheless the opinion of Navarre; (who was no Jesuit) whom
the Jansenists in their Works, call one of the most esteemed Casuists of our
time, one who has most reverenced the power both of the Pope and Church; he
cannot be suspected of one side or other; and yet hear what he says in the
fifth Book of his Counsels Respondeo, quod si confessarius est vir eruditus
egregie, and pius insigniter, quales solent esse Magistri, Doctores, and
Confessarii illustrissimae Societatis Jesu, procul dubio, and absque ullo
scrupulo potest, imo and debet credere; adeo quidem ut mea sententa non
credendo, and non se cjus authoritate tranquillando, peccaret. Navarrus lib. 5.
consil. de poenitent. and remiss. consil. 2. page 232. edit. Colon: Anno 1616.
If the Confessor be a man of any great capacity, learning, and noted piety,
such as ordinarily are the Masters, the Doctors, and the Confessors of the
most Illustrious Society of Jesus, the Penitent may believe him without any the
least doubt or scruple; yea, is obliged to do so* and if he do not acquiesce in
his advice, if he do not r^st peaceably being held up by his Authority, in my
opinion he sins.

What* was it not enough that Albertus magnus citatur a Sancto Antonino tit. 3.
part. 1. c. 10.. 10. p. 63. his verbis. Quilibet homo cum salute potest sequi
in Consi^^is quamcunque opinionem voluerit, dummodo alicujus Doctoris magni
opinionem sequatur.
Albertus Magnus should say, Every one without hazarding the loss of his soul,
may follow, in taking counsel, what opinion he pleases, provided that it be
taught by some eminent Doctor.

Was it not enough that St. Antonine should teach with Ulricus in his Sum,
that if a man consult able Divines in any doubtful case, for which he can
find no Authority, to assure him whether it be so or no, he does not sin in
following that counsel they give him, although it be not conformable to truth;
always supposing, he form a good Conscience, and act faithfully; because
morally he has done as much as he could, and God asks no more.

Was it not enough, that the most famous Doctors of Sorbon should have been of
this Opinion? that Non tamen semper habendus est oculus ad multitudinem
dicentium, fed sapientiam cum numero considerabis; quia sicut duos vel tres
debiliores valet unus fortis; sic unus oculatus materiam diligenter inquirens
tres alios inferiores valet. Major in 4. q. 2. in Proleg. and in respon. ad 5.
object. Non nego quin unus possit opinionem multorum castigare.
Major durst say, A man must not count the votes of Doctors, but weigh them;
and that one alone may correct the Opinion of many.

Was it not enough, that Monsieur Dicimus doctorem classicum, magnae
authoritatis and fama, posse opinionem aliquam novam, firmissimis rationibus
roboratam introducere, eamque ita introductam and confirmatam, tuto aliquem
sequi posse. Vallius tract. 19. q. 4. a. 15. p. 116, 117.
Du Val had affirmed, One Doctor that is eminent, and of great reputation in
the Schools is sufficient to introduce a new opinion, if he maintain it with
strong reasons; and that having introduced and confirmed it, one may follow it
with a safe Conscience.

Was not all this enough? would he yet have one of the most esteemed Casuists
of this time (to reward the Jansenists for the praises they give him, and the
value they have of his virtue) declare himself against them in favor of
Catholics, saying (as I have already cited) a Confessor esteemed for his
Piety and Doctrine, such as are ordinarily the Confessors of the Society, may
satisfy the Conscience of a Penitent? Peccator videbit, and irascetur.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
I do not at all doubt, but the Authority of Navarre troubles you sufficiently;
yet that I may a little comfort you in your disgrace, let me mind you, that
Cajetan. in summa. Verb^ Opinio. Idem sen^it Sayrus, libr. 1. Clavis regiae, c.
5. ubi citat Cajetanum.
Cajetan treating this matter observes very wisely, that in matters of Faith it
is not lawful for any man to follow his own particular opinion, without
submitting it to that superior rule, which is the Church his Mother. The
reason is, because we must resolve, and bring to some certain rule our opinion,
which is of it self doubtful, for fear least we make Faith subject to error.

Pray consider the excellency of these words. If you judge it to be a giving
scope to Sinners, to say, One Author alone, if learned and virtuous, may render
an opinion probable, reflect a little on the Authors of your own Sect, and tell
me, whether a particular Doctor can with a safe conscience fetter himself
obstinately to his own opinion, after it is condemned for Heretical by the
Bishops and Pope. Tell me, whether that man be mindeful of Humility and
Sincerity, who asks us, to show him in Jansenius his Book the five Propositions
censured by Innocent the Tenth, even then, when the whole Church assures us
they are there. And if you be of such an indiscreet credulity, that after so
many Bulls and Constitutions, you will needs follow the scandalous Maxims of
that Author, learn of St. Thom. Quodlib. 3. Art. 10.
St. Thomas, that the simplicity of such, as follow the rash and dangerous
opinions of their Masters, will no ways excuse them; because when it is
concerning Faith, we must not lightly adhere to dangerous Novelties. For if we
might, those who followed Arius, would sinde a lawful excuse, in the facility
with which they embraced his errors; and yet nevertheless that too credulous
simplicity was the cause of their destruction and utter ruin.

Undeceive those silly Women, who have suffered themselves to be intrapt by the
Witchcrafts of those deceitful words, under which you have giv^n them the
Poison of a corrupted Doctrine. Tell them, that hereafter they never give their
Directour power over Gods Grace, and over even God himself; and tell them, that
they write no more to you, as the This Letter is one of those were made use of
in the process against the Abbot of St. Cyran, as well as that which follows,
which was written by Monsieur le Maistre, Nephew to Monsieur Arnauld. The
Original is kept in Clermont College, and has been already published in a
Book, entitled, The progress of Jansenisme discovered, the Copies of which
were almost all bought up by the Jansenists as soon as ever it peept out, to
keep the knowledge of it from being public.
Abbess of Port-Royall writ to the Abbot of St. Cyran; I make an end, Father,
by a cessation from all demands, and from all desires, loosing all in a
resignation to whatsoever ye^ shall think fit to command over me, and (if I
durst say it) over God himself; since his approaches to me, and withdrawings
from me depend on your judgment, and on your conduct, to which I vow a perfect
obedience, such as is due from a soul, which miraculously he has rendered yours.

Undeceive those poor solitary people, who are gulled so far as to believe, the
highest point of perfection consists in preferring the opinions of one single
Author, condemned by the voice of the whole Church, before all other lights;
and tell them, that they make no more use of those protestations, which
Monsieur le Maistre made to the same Abbot in one of his Letters, saying thus:
Sir, I have not need of any thing to perform a generous Action, besides the
honor of your Counsel; which is not a Precept, but an Oracle. While you do not
deprive me of that Torch, all other light is superfluous.

Undeceive your own selves; and inst^ad of sacrificing your Pen, your Honor,
and your Soul in defense of a declared Heretic, follow the common opinions,
which have been approved by Catholic Doctors, and the ordina^^ conduct of the
Church; from which an affectation of singularity has unfortunately separated
you.

The fourth Imposture. French 23.
That Father Bauny vili^i^s the Dignity ^f Priesthood, because he teaches, When
the Penitent follows a Probable Opinion, the Confessor is bound to absolve
him, though his judgment be contrary to that of his Penitent: and that to deny
Absolution to a Penitent, who walks according to a Probable Opinion, is a sin
in its own nature mortal: citing to confirm this Opinion, Suarez, Vasquez,
and Sanchez. Letter 5. Engl. Edit. page 97

Answer.
Father Bauny might, if he had pleased, have cited for the same opinion six and
forty Authors, alleged by Sancius, who is no Jesuit, but a very learned
Master of Moral Divinity. He, after having proved by so great a number of
Divines, That a Confessor oug^t to follow the opinion of the Penitent, after
having heard the secret of his sins, adds, that he is astonished, why Sanchez
the Jesuit assures us, that very many of these Authors agree only in this
point, That it is lawful for the Confessor to fellow the opinion of the
Penitent, although it be contrary to his own; and that he cites but few, who
teach, that he is obliged to it; since that all those he does allege,
excepting Rodriguez, and Sa a Jesuit, maintain both the one and the other: and
though they do not express it in formal ^erms, yet the reasons, by which they
show h^ may do it, prove also that he ought: Quo^ies Confessarius potest licite
beneficium Absolution is impendere, ad illud exigendum habet jus justitiae
Poenitens; and express ad id obligari arbitror sub Mortali, side Mortalibus
fit facta Confessio. Nam onus grave esset poenite^tem obligare ad sua detegenda
crimina alii Confessario absque necessitate. Docet Sancius, lib. 1. c. 9. number.
29. Quamvis solum venialiter delinquere Confessarium non proprium existiment
Vasquez, Salas, Sayrus, Montesinus; at constringi Confessarium Absolvere
poenitentem, contra propriam Sententiam, five sit proprius Parochus, sive
alienus, certum reor, Sancius Disp. Select. disp. 33. n. 34. p. 286, and 287.
(...), As often as it is lawful for a C^nf^ss^ur to give Absolution, the
P^nitent has in justice a right to demand it. And for my own part, I think, he
is obliged under pain of Mortal Sin, if the Penitent have confessed any sins
which are Mortal; since that it cannot be but a very great burden to him, to
be obliged to declare again the same Sins to another Confessor without any
necessity. Sancius teaches this in his first Book, chap. 9. number. 29. although
Vasquez, and Salas, (Jesuits) and Sayrus, and Montesinus assure u^, he sins
but venially, if he be only delegated. But I am certainly persuaded, that every
Confessor, whether he be Ordinary or Delegate, is bound against his own
judgment to absolve the Penitent.

Judge by this of the Ability and Truth of the Jansenist, who imputes as a
Crime to Father Bauny the inventing of an Opinion, which forty six Authors,
amongst whom St. Antonine has the first place, have taught before him. If he do
know this Opinion to be so common, and so ancient in the Schools, where is his
Truth? If he do not, where are those imaginary parts, with the which he
flatters himself? But whether he do know it, or he do not, where is his
judg^ment? Ought he to expose himself thus for a laughing stock (through his
rash censures) to learned men, who so easily discover the pride of his heart?

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
It Is no debasing the office of a Priest to oblige him, to cure the wounds of a
sick Person, that casts himself into his hands, then when he both can and
ought. The yoke of Confession is no insupportable yoke, and the government,
which Jesus Christ has given Confessors, is no Tyrannical government. It is a
government of Love, established in Mercy; and which subsists in Sweetness.

But to say, as you do, is to annihilate it wholly. Clarissimum est, Episcopum
peccatorem resurgere non posse per media statui propria; cum hoc ipso, quo
peccator est, statum amittat ex primario jure, nec ampli^s in co sit. Vindiciae
p. 296.

Qu^libet vinculi Castitatis in fractione perimitur Sacerdotium. page 319.
edit. Anno 1646.


That one only Mortal Sin destroys the office of Bishop and Priest. This is
one of the secret Maxims of the Abbot of St. Cyran, that the words of
Absolution are not operative, but declarative only of their effect. Letter of
my Lord the Bishop of Langres to my Lord S. Malo, concerning the Maxims of the
Abbot of St. Cyran.
That the Sentence of the Priest is only a simple declaration of the pardon,
which the Sinner has obtained of Heaven: That it is an inviolable Law, that one
ought to defer Absolution till after the fulfilling of the Penance, and that
the contrary practice, Frequent Communion. p. 628
favors the general impenitence of the world. The fruit of these wicked
Maxims can be no other, but a distaste of the Sacraments; such as those women
find, who abandon themselves to your direction: and such as Mother Agnes of
St. Paul, Abbess of Port-Royall has expressed in one of her Letters in these
terms. This Letter makes one piece of the Process against the Abbot of St.
Cyran.

See the Progress of Jansenisme. p. 81.


I think my heart is hardened, having no feeling of Con^rition, nor
Humiliation, to see my self deprived of the Sacraments: and I could pass my
life thus without being troubled at it. We are at present in the time of the
Confessions of our young Scholars. I remember a good Priest, who you told me,
hears Confession after the manner of the Ancient Church. I know not whether
we may may get him for these young ones, and for some Si^^ers. There are some,
who have not been at Confession these fifteen months. This would amaze a
Confessor, who demands only words, and not dispositions.

The fifth Imposture. French. 8.
THat the Jesuits take away the rigor of Fasting by unlawful Dispensations;
The Minister du Moulin casts a world of reproaches upon the Church about
Fasting, page 343. which Modesty will not suffer me to publish.
because Filiucius proposes this Question. One, who has over-wearied himself
about any thing, as for example, in satisfying a Wench, is he obliged to fast?
Not at all. But how if he have thus over-wearied himself on purpose, to be
thereby dispensed from Fasting? Shall he yet be obliged to fast? Although he
have made such a formal design, yet would he be not obliged to fast? Letter 5.
p. 89.

Answer.
This lascivious Beast resolves to be merry at Filiucius his charge, and darts
at him the blame of these two things; to have asked an ill question, and to
have answered it ill.

For what concerns the first accusation, that is of asking an ill question,
he should have known before he begun to chide, that if Filiucius have
discoursed this matter, he did it following St. Antonin. part 2, tit. 6. cap.
2. fol. 6.
St. Antonine, on whose back this reproach will first fall: following Sylvester
verbo Jejunium.
Sylvester, Master of the Sacred Palace; whose Sum has been both renewed and
enlarged by the command of two great Popes; following Cajetan and Medina,
Cajetan in 1, 2. q. 77. A. 7. ad tertium. Medina in Summ^. declar. 3. pracepti,
fol. 39.
illustrious Interpreters of St. Thomas, with Sancius Disp. Select. disp. 54.
number. 2. p. 535. verbis iisdem quibus Filiucius.
Sancius, and many other famous Angelus. Tabiena, in verbo missa, fol. 45.
Navar. c. 21. n. 334. 45, etc. 12, n. 39. 42. 55.
Authors, who are no Jesuits; yet have thought the Spiritual Physicians of
our Souls ought not to be ignorant of the nature of these crimes: no more then
the Physicians of our bodies, of the most shameful diseases. But to publish
such questions in a vulgar language, to make them the subject of mirth, to so
we them amongst the people, and expose them even to the eyes of Women, I cannot
but say, it is an Action deserves punishment; and which this Writer could never
have committed, but by following one of the greatest Enemies of the Church, and
one of the most improved Scoff^rs France ever had in it. p. 343. of the Roman
Traditions. I do not much wonder, that it is generally believed, the Author of
those Letters spent all his life in writing Romances. For 'twere impossible,
any person of honor should take that matter to make it a subject for
Railleries.

As for the second accusation, of giving an ill answer, the teeth of this
hungry Detractor finding no hold on the doctrine of Filiucius, he cuts and
tears the Text, and after having pulled off this shred, He who over-wearies
himself about any thing, for example, in satissying a Wench, is he obliged to
fast? By no means. But put the case, he have so over-wearied himself, on
purpose to be dispensed from fasting, is he yet obliged to fast? Though he
should have had such a formal design, yet were be not obliged to fast, He
gapes out with an astonishment, as maliclous, as it is ridiculous. What is it
not a Sin not to fast, when a man can do it? And is it lawful to hunt out the
occasions of sinning? Letter 5. page 90. as if thu Father excused a Sinner for
not fasting, when he is able and obliged: Nay, and that he should permit him to
hunt, with a formal design, the occasions of sinning. Where is the shame and
conscience of this Calumniatour? Compare a little this reproach with the
Authors true answer, and see how strangely he corrupts his words.

Objicitur, an qui malo fine laboraret, ut ad aliquem occidendum, vel ad
insequendam amicam, vel quid simile, teneretur ad jejunium? Respondeo, talem
quidem peccaturum ex malo sine; at secut a defatigatione excusaretur a jejunio.
Medina Inst. c. 14. sect. 10. Nisi sierct in fraudem secundam aliquos: sed
melius alii, culpam quidem esse in apponenda causa fractionis jejunii; at ea
posita, excusari a jejunio. Filiucius tract. 27. p. 2. depraecept. jejunii, c.
6. n. 123.
One objects, (says he) a man that should over-weary himself about any wicked
action, such as were killing of an enemy, or pursuing a Wench, or such like,
should he be obliged to fast? I answer with Medina, Institut. cap. 14. sect.
10. That such a man should sin by reason of that wicked action, which he
proposes to commit, but being over-wearied, he should be dispensed from
fasting; unless (according to some Authors) that he so over-wearies himself on
purpose, to be exempt from fasting. But yet there are others that speak better,
that he should certainly sin in putting himself on purpose, into a condition,
which exempts him from fasting, but being once in it, he is no more obliged to
fast. What man of understanding can find any thing to say against this
decision, sustained by the Authorities of St* Propter culpam quamvis sit
infirmus, durante infirmitate, non tenetur jejunare. St. Antonin. 2. part. tom.
6. c. 2. sol. 6. n. I.
Antonin, of Jejunium infirmos non obligat, five sint infirmi ex sua culpa,
sive non. Medina in I, 2. q. 77. A. 4.
Medina, of Licet infirmo ex sua culpa, durante infirmitate, non jejunarc.
Sylvester. verbo Jejunium.
Sylvester, and of so many other Authors? Who can be so ignorant, as to think,
a man that is thrust through the body, is obliged to fast, because he fined in
sighting a Duel? Who can be so impudent, as to dare to accuse a Confessor,
that should dispense with such a man from fasting, of favoring Sinners, and
permitting them to break those Fasts, which they were able to keep: yea, and
even to seek the occasions of sinning? None, but a Jansenist, is capable of
committing so unworthy an Imposture.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
It Is a shame you should have no other Writer to oppose to Divines, but a
Scribler of Letters; and some profane Heads, who like him, are neither
Doctors, Priests, nor Ecclesiastiques. Letter 8. Who would believe such people
understand so much, as what a Fast were? And yet these are your Casuists; these
are the Authors you have picked out to reform the Moral. Is it not a shame you
should with so much injustice reproach the Jesuits the mitigating of Fasts,
that are your selves rather bound to correct, what with so much scandal you
have taught; That amongst all the exterior parts of Ancient Penance, you
retain scarce any, but the depriving men of the Holy Communion of the Body of
the Son of God; which according to Holy Fathers is the most important part,
because it represents the privation of Beatitude: and is the most facil
according to humane nature, all the world being capable of it? See the Preface
to the Book of Frequent Communion. page 19.

Do you know your own Doctrine? Is not that the Fasting and the Abstinence of
the Jansenists? Have you not assured us, there are some souls amongst you, so
sensibly touched by the movings of Grace and the Spirit of Penance, that they
would think themselves happy, in being able to witness to God their regret and
sorrow for having offended him, by deferring their Communion to the very end of
their days. In the same Preface. page 35, 36*

This is your Moral of the new Mode. It Is thus you reestablish the Discipline
of the Church. Oh, that it were but lawful to keep this guide; that were very
commodious indeed; (to use your own words) I mean for those full and fat
Sinners well enough known to your Casuist. But I leave you all these jeastings;
it is fit to be more grave in such serious Disputes.

The sixth Imposture. French 9.
THat the Jesuits excuse such, as deliberately and on set purpose hunt after
the occasions of sinning; because the famous Casuist, Basil Pontius (who was no
Jesuit) teaches, that one may seek after an occasion to sin, directly and for
it self, (primo and per se) when we are carried to it, either for the
spiritual or temporal good of our selves, or our Neighbors: and that Father
Bauny the Jesuit quotes him, and approves his opinion in the Treaty of
Penance. Qu. 4. p. 94 Letter 5. page 91.

Answer.
It is strange, there is not one word of this Calumniatour to be found without
some disguise, or Imposture: Let us therefore force truth out of his hands,
that we may show, how he labors to corrupt its innocence, and fully its purity.

It Is a Question in the Moral, whether Judith were not a little rash, then
when she exposed her self, so as we know she did, to save the Inhabitants of
Bethuly? Whether St. Ambrose did well in going into Stews, to get away some
debauched Woman? And whether many other Saints could discreetly imitate their
zeal, as we find they have done?

St. Ambrose, libr. 3. Offic. cap. 12. justifies Honesta^em secuta est Judith,
and dum eam (...) est, wilitatem invenit.
Judith, because she considered an honest good (says he) in that dangerous
occasion, and searching it, she found a profitable good. And in the second Book
of Virgins, c. 14. speaks thus in her favor, Judith se, ut Adultero placeret,
ornavit; quae tamen, quia hoc Religione, non Amore faciebat, n^m^ ^am Adulteram
judicavit. Been sac^^ssit exemplum.
Judith dressed her self, that she might take the eyes of an Adulterer; and yet
never durst any think her an Adultresse: because 'twas not Love, but Religon,
incited her to do it; and therefore the example which she left us, suc^e^ded
very happily.

If the Authority of this holy Doctor does not satisfy the Jansenist, he may
consult with the Si^ur Da^dilly, and ask him, if in the lives of the Holy
Fathers of the Desert, he have not at large set down the passage of an Hermit,
who went into a Stew under a disguised dress, that he might get away his
Niece, with whom he feigned a design of sinning. For my own part, I do not know
any that are resolved to reprove the conduct of these great Saints, who
voluntarily would expose themselves to danger for the spiritual good of their
Neighbor, as Saint Ambrose did: yea, and for some considerable temporal good,
as Judith. But you ask, if this were lawful for all sorts of people, who have
not the strength, those Saints had, to overcome the danger, yet have the same
reasons to search it.

Suarez a Jesuit, whose name is not unknown to Divines, maintains in the Treaty
of Charity, that those who distrust their own weakness, cannot do it with a
safe conscience, because he that loves danger, shall perish in it, as Holy
Scripture tells us.

The famous Casuist, Basil Pontius, holds the contrary opinion, and assures us,
a Cathol^que may marry an Heretic Woman, if it be ^^r reasons of great
moment, as the Tranqu^llity of a great Kingdom, or the Advancement of Religion;
although it were not without danger, by reason of his own weakness, that he
may be perverted: Dum tamen contra^at cum firmo proposito non labendi,
sidensque de divina misericordia and gratia fore, ut ^ripiatur ab co periculo
fine crimine: Siquidem urgente Dei causa, illud subire periculum non recusat.
Basil. Pont. Append. de Matrimon. Cath. cum Hae^etica. cap. 9. p 894. secund.
edit.
always provided, that in marrying her, his will be resolved to hold constant
to the true Faith; and that he hope, through the immense mercy of God, for
whose sake he exposes himself to this danger, that he shall go through without
falling in^o Heresy.

He grounds this on the Authority of the Canons, which permit Husbands, become
impotent by charms or by nature, to continue in the same lodgings with their
Wives, ob honestatem publicam, although they be in continual danger of
sinning. C. Consult. de frigid, and malesic. and al^bi saepe; and on the
opinion of above fifteen Authors, which the Reader may see in the place I cite;
and whom Father Bauny has followed in his Treaty of Penance. Q. 14.

This is the naked truth: and now you shall see the imposture and treachery of
the Jansenist, which would give subject enough of astonishment, if it were not
so natural to him, that they are inseparable.

First then, to render this Doctrine obnoxious to a severe censure, he explains
it indifferently of all sorts of occasions; as if these Authors thought, that
any one, on never so slight motives, might cast himself into the danger of
offending God: whereas Basil Pontius speaks only of extraordinary cases, where
either the interest of state, or Religion, is concerned. And this Father Bauny,
who follows him, teaches in formal terms, That regularly one ought not to
absolve him, that is in occasion of sinning; because Absolution cannot consist
with a will to sin. Tract. de Poenit. q. 14.

Is there any malice more black, then that of this Detractour?

Secondly, to render the Jesuits odious, he attributes to them that opinion,
because one of them followed it; although their more able Writers, as Suarez,
hold the contrary. Is no^ this a plain sign, that passion has blinded him? In
the third place he would make us believe, that Father Bauny approves that
manner of speaking of Basil Pontius, that one may hunt after a direct occasion
of Sin, primo, and perse, because he approves the opinion of that Author, which
is a mere wrangling: for he may consent to his opinion without approving his
mann^r of speaking; which not being either proper or strict, is capable of an
ill construction, by taking of the word occasion formally, so as it carries a
man to sin; if it were not clearly enough explained in the whole body of the
Dispute, where he pretends only this, that for the good, either of Church or
State, a man may, without sinning, marry an Heretic, and expose himself to the
danger of being perverted by her slatteries, supposing that he be resolved
through the grace of God to resist them constantly. Now to all this, though
Father Bauny do approve the Doctrine, yet is it so false, that he approves the
manner of speaking of Basil Pontius, that he repeats the contrary four times in
the fourteenth question of the Treaty of Penance, that if one should engage
himself in the occasion of sinning upon some just account, that occasion must
not be either pretended, or sought after, by him, who does so expose himself.

Judge by this of the ma^i^e, and the ignorance of his Accuser: o^ his
ignorance, if he do not know the merit of Basil Pontius, who beyond all dispute
is a most learned and judicious Casuist: of his malice, if knowing it, he
desire yet to make him pass, in the opinion of commmon people, for the
broacher of pernicious Doctrines; and of both the one and other together, for
quarrelling with Father Bauny for an opinion not condemned in the Schools;
although it be not universally followed: and instead of opposing it by solid
reasons, employing only his own deceit and lies to disguise the others opinion.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
Without all doubt, being, as you are, declared Heretics, and masked
Calvinists, you are not only in the state of damnation; but you are also
stumbling blocks to weak souls, who can neither keep you company, nor trust
your guidance, without manifest danger of their Salvation. Therefore they are
without excuse, if inconsiderately they abandon themselves to such guides as
you are. I beseech them to believe, it is themselves the Holy Ghost threatens,
when he tells us, He that loves danger, shall perish therein.

The seventh Imposture. French 19.
THat the Jesuits The same reproach is cast upon Catholics by Du Moulin, in
his Book of the Anatomy of the Mass; That our Adversaries reject the Fathers,
and speak of them with contempt. It is the subject of the 22. Chapter of that
Book, page 99.
undervalue the Holy Fathers; that at their appearance St. Augustine, St.
Chrysostom, St. Ambrose, St. Hierome, and the rest vanished out of sight.
Letter 5. page 99. Engl. edit. That the Casuists are come into the world since
their Society; and that they have succeeded the Ancient Fathers. Letter 5. And
in fine, that according to Bauny and Reginaldus, who are Jesuits, one ought
not in matters of Morality to be guided by the Ancient Fathers, but the modern
Casuists. Letter 5. page 98. and Letter 6. page 119. Engl. edit.

Answer.
For what concerns the False Augustine of Jansenius, I grant it; the Jesuits did
labor to make him fly for it, and were extremely glad to see that Book with
disgrace leave Rome, and the whole Church, to go back for Holland, from whence
it came. But for the Ancient Fathers, who among all the Jesuits has made them
vanish?

Is it Father Fronton, who published St. Chrysostom in Greek and Latin, the
works of Saint Basil, the Library of the Greek Fathers, Balsamon and Zonaras on
the Canons, Anthony Melissa, the Sentences of St. Maximus, the Observations on
St. Irenaeus and St. Paulinus, the Ecclesiastical History of Nicephorus
Calliste? to say nothing of the Greek and Latin Edition of St. Gregory
Nazianzen, and of St. Gregory of Nisse.

Is it Father Sirmond, who has set forth since our time the works of Theodoret,
of Hin^mar, of Paschasius Radbertus, of Sidonius Apollinaris, of Ennodius, of
Al^imus Avitus, of Theodulfus, of Facundus, and two and twenty such Volumes
either of the Fathers, or ancient Writers of the Church? besides three volumes
of the Ancient Councels of France.

Is it Father Petaviu^* who has set out St. Epiphaniu^, Synesius, and five
Volumes of Theological Doctrines, which a^ ^ade up only of the thoughts and
words of ^he Fathers?

Is it Father Turrianu^* who has given us the works of more then eight Fathers,
or ancient Ecclesiastical Authors?

Is it Father S^ho^^^^, who has set out the Comentaries of St. Cyr^l on the
Penta^euch, St. Basil, ^^. Isidore, E^^^dius, and the works of fourteen ancient
(...), most of which you may see in the Lib^ar^ of the Fathers, which is
printed ^t Colen?

Do you no^ wonder (...) boldness of this Calumniatou^; who ^ot pe^ceiving,
that reproaching the Jesu^^es with an imaginary undervaluing of the ancient
Fathers, he has given them occasion to produce those glorious marks of the
respect they bear them, and the esteem which they have for their Doctrine?
setting before his eyes the Augustinian Confession of Father Hierosme Torrez,
which shows whether he had read Saint Augustine, the St. John Climacus of
Raderus, the St. Eucher, and St. Paulin of Rosweidus, the Tertullian of La
Cerda, the Eus^bius of Father Viger, the St. Den^is of Lansh^lius, the Chain of
Greek Fathers in six Volumes of Father Cordier, and a prodigious number of
other Authors, who have consumed the best part of their life in the reading,
translating, and the printing of Fathers, and in the interpretation of Holy
Scripture.

Now, pray, do but look on that pretext, which he takes to color his frivolous
accusation; The Fathers, says he, were good for the Morality of their times,
but they are far short of that of ours. It is not therefore to be regulated by
them, but by the new Casuists. Hear the Father Cello^, who as to this point in
the question of the Morals, follows the famous Father Reginaldus, the modern
Casuists are to be preferred before the ancient Fathers, though they were
nearer the times of the Apostles.

I do not accuse this Writer for being the first Impostor, who has darted
against us that reproach; He is but the second. The Author of the Libell of
the Moral Divinity invented it, and that most notorious falsely. For these
words are not to be found, either in the Ecclesiastical Hicrarchy of Father
Cellot, nor in the Preface of Reginaldus, which he alleges. The intent of
Reginaldus, whose thoughts Father Cellot does only refer to, is to instruct
the Reader, of the cause, which carries him to make use of those Modern
Authors, who have taught the Moral; and to that effect comparing them to the
Ancients, who have treated this matter, he says, A man ought principally to
look on the Moderns, who are known to be most learned, and best versed in
reading of those, who were before them; because in many cases the circumstances
of things do so change with succession of ^^mes, that those who have joined to
their Doctrine an exact knowledge of Customs, U^es, and Manners of proceeding
at the present, are to be preferred before other^* which is most wisely
observed. Hereupon the Jansenist, finding the word Ancient Autho^s in the Index
of that Work, imagined h^ spoke of the Ancient Fathers, of whom there is no
mention in that place; and on this begins his process against the Jesuits.
But having lost his Suite before the Parliament of Bourdeaux, where this Libell
was torn in pieces, as we formerly said, the Casuist, who pretends a
reformation, will now again make it appear, and proclaims all over the world,
that we sl^ght the Fathers, and that at our appearance they were seen to
vanish. Letter 5. That the Casuists, who are come into the world with us, have
succeeded them; and after having collected a number of their Names, which make
a noise in his ears, without considering either the rank of Bishops and
Archbishops, which some have had in the Church; or the quality of Doctors,
which their great parts have acquired them in the most famous Universities of
Europe, he asks whether all these people were Christians? And I ask, whether he
be mad, and whether he be not ashamed so to play the fool before Divines? I
ask, what rule of Chronology mak^s this brave Historian muster up, with us and
as men born in our age, the Master of Sentences, Albertus magnus, St. Thomas,
St. Bonaventure, St. Raimond, St. Antonine, Paludanus, Hostiensis, with an
infinite number of other Authors, who methodically taught Moral Divinity a
long time before the Jesuits ever came into the world? I ask, whether it be
not a mark of his great ability to be so ignorant, as not to know the age of
the Sorbon, nor the Casuists, which she has produced since the time, that St.
Lewis gave that house in exchange to one, whose name it carries? Truly he does
us but too much honor, to say, that we have laid the foundation of so
excellent a Science; which is nothing, but a Compendium of Holy Scripture,
Fathers, Councels, and both the Laws, Canon and Civil. But as those
illustrious Authors, whose very names terrify him, had no need of Jesuits to
bring them into the world, so likewise they need them not to defend themselves
from the mockeries of a Momus, as odious for his malice, as despicable for the
little judgment he shows in his writings.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
Whence are your heads grown so weak, that you cannot endure the name of
Casuists? Your infirmity is very dangerous, when the noise of three or four
syllables less agreeable with your ears, is so able to stupisie your brains.
'Twas a lack of judgment to make that ridiculous enumeration of Catholic
Authors, which you have affectedly done about the end of your fifth Letter;
because you have thereby obliged us, to seek in the Catalogue of Heretics the
names of such as as have inspired you with this hatred; and we must ask you,
whether all these Fellows, which ye here see, Luther, Usher, Bucer, Tailor,
Keiser, Groper, Tamber, Whitaker, Herman, Tilleman, Calagan, Hus, Thorp,
Wright, Horst, Schuch, Crau, Whyght, Esch, Hall, Hun, Fryth, Hesch, Pourceau,
Th^raw, Moutard, Naviere, Goniu, Philpot, Testuvot, Jansen, Holden, Hitten,
Suffen, Houvenden, Zanchius, Brandius, Scharpius, if, I say, all these men,
whom the Heretics, either set up in Libraries for their Writers, or in their
Martyrologies as Saints of their Religion, were really Christians.

The eighth Imposture. French 25.
IT is strange to see how the Jesuits reconcile (by the interpretation of some
term) the contrarieties which are between their opinions, and the Decisions of
Popes, Councels, and of Holy Scripture. For instance, Pope Gregory the 14. has
declared, that Murderers (so says our English Translatour, when he ought to
have said Assassins, which term is explicated in the answer to this Imposture)
are unworthy the benefit of taking Sanctuary in Churches, and that they are to
be forced from thence. Whence Escobar page 660 affirms, that those who kill any
one treacherously, ought not to incur the penalty of that Bull. This to you
seems contradictory: but it is reconciled by interpreting the word Murderer.
(or as he should have said, Asassin) Letter 6. p. 104. Engl. edit.

Answer.
Since the censure against Jansenius forced his Disciples to study the Doctrine
of interpreting terms, for to reconcile the contrarieties between their er^ors,
and the constitution of Innocent the tenth, they are grown so conceited, that
they undervalue all Interpreters of Laws, and so clearsighted, that they spy
faults where there are none.

Far be it from me to dispute the glory with them, of knowing better then they
do, how to interpret Bulls, and to give a new sense to Councels and Fathers,
such as is unknown to any but Heretics. All that I will say is only this,
The Moral of the Jesuits stands in no need of such interpretations. If the
Jesuits undertake to explicate the Doctrine of the Fathers, and the Decisions
of Popes and Councels, they will beware, not to take their interpretations, as
Jansenius does the sense of S. Augustine, out of the Comentaries of Calvin and
Luther. They will conform themselves to Authentic, or Doctrinal
Interpretations, such as are received in Schools, and taught by the greatest
Divines.

Its no hard matter to show this, by the very example our Calumniatour brings
concerning the word Asassin in the Bull of Gregory 14. For Escobar says
nothing concerning that Bull, but wh^t he has from very learned Authors. This
accuser had never spok^ as he does, had he had but a little more understanding
and sincerity, then he shows in his censure to have had.

His want of Sincerity is visible in this, that he makes Escobar say, All
those, who treacherously kill any one ought not to suffer the penalty of the
Bull; which (...) is not to be found in the 660. page, which he cites, but
rather the quite contra^y.

H^s want of understanding appears in this, th^^ he believes this D^cision
impugnes the Bull of Cregory the 14. for as much as he declares, T^^t (...) are
unworthy of enjoying Sa^ctuar^^ ^ut L^^^b^r reconciles this contrariety in his
m^^ner of interpreting the word Asassin. If ^^ had said, his D^cision is
contrary to the B^ll, in as much as i^ tak^th away the privilege of Sanctuary,
from those who treacherously murder any, and that Escobar should reconcile
this contrariety in interpreting the word treacherously, he had had a little
more color for his Calumny. But to say he does it by interpreting the word
Asassin, is a fault unpardonable, For by a gross ignorance he confounds those,
who murder a man treacherously with Asassins, who are hired to kill for money:
which are two things as different, as Genus and Species, according to the
Canonists and Divines. From whence it is, that they are distinguished in the
Pop^s Bull, and that Escobar makes two distinct questions in the place he
notes. Proditoric aliquem ^ccidens, ferro, seu venono, caretne Ecclesiae
immunitate? Caret. p 660.

Number Asassini rei gaudent, Ecclesiae privilegie? non gaudent, ex constitut.
Gregor. 14. ibidem.


In the first of which he asks, If he that murders a man treacherously be
d^prived of Sanctuary? and answers, Yes. A Decision quite contrary to that
which is attributed to him. In the second he asks, whether Asassins be capable
of the privilege of Sanctuary? and answers, No: which shows us the great
abilities of the Jansenist, who believe, that under the terms of Law, one
comprehends, by the word Asass^^, all those who murder others treacherously.
Let Us help him a little out of these errors, and blow away the mist which
stifles his wits. What do the Canonists call murdering a man treacherously?
Escobar says, To murder a man treacherously, is to murder him when he has no
reason to suspect it. Therefore he that kills his enemy, is not said to kill
him treacherously, though he set upon him unawares by Ambuscade, or come
behind him.

What is an Asassin, according to the terms of Law? Such a one, says that
Father, as is hired for money to kill a man by Ambuscade, when he thinks not
on it. Therefore he is not called an Asassin, who kills another without any set
price, but only to do his friend a courtesy.

These two Interpretations will not please the Jansenist. He laughs at the
first in his seventh Letter, page 140. Engl. edit. and finds fault with the
second in the beginning of his sixth. But why? he gives us no reason: for it is
evident enough, he can have none but his ignorance in the most common terms of
Law.

For the word treacherously, he need only open the Books of the Casuists, and
Interpreters of Law, to learn the true meaning of it; and since Diana is so
much his friend, I will send him to that Treaty, De Immunitate Ecclesiarum,
with which he begins the first Tome of his Works. He will find there many
Authors able to make him as wise as Bartolus in L. respiciendum. Ambrosinus,
Bonacina, Farinaccius, Peregrinus, Genuensis, and the Pope himself, Clement the
eighth, at whom he may laugh, if he please; provided he do but give us also
leave to laugh at his rashness.

As to the word Asassin, that interpretation, which Escobar gives it, is so
common amongst Divines, that I am astonished, how he can make any doubt, and
cast so frivolous a reproach on so little ground. For even the least versed in
History know, what were the subjects of old de la Montague, commonly known by
the name of The Prince of the Asassins, men resolute in wickedness, and so
obedient to that bloody Villain, that he could send them into any place to kill
his enemies. From whence unfortunately it happened, that even the Christians by
his example took occasion to commit all sorts of Murders. And the least versed
in the Law cannot be ignor^nt, that the Canonists take the word Asassin
analogically, to signify a man prevailed on by the ^ntreaty of another to kill
some one for money.

If the Jansenist will dispute this with me, let him remember what Card*
C^jetan in his Sum tells us, That the word Asassin is equivocall. For first,
it is the proper name of certain Infidels who were casily persuaded to kill
Christians: and Pope Innocent the Fourth in the Coun^el of Lions
excommunicated, not tho^^ Murth^^^rs, (for they were Infidels) but th^se who
made use of them to kill Christians. Est etiam romen vitii* pro quanto apud
quosdam Juristas, s^u vulgariter, dicuntur Asassini, qui pro pecuni^ occidunt
hominem a^ ali^ ujus instantiam. Cajetan in Summ^^, v^rbo Asassi^^.
S^condly* it is the name of the Crime. For according to some Casuists and the
common manner of spe^king, he is called an Asassin, who by the entreaty of any
one kills another for money. These last are not comprehended in the censure of
that Pope, although they very justly deserve both temporal and eternal death.

If this give not our Jansenist light enough, let him further learn of
Bonacina, (whose opinion differs not at all from Escobar) that by the
constitution of Pope Gregory the fourteenth, it is true Asassins are in the
Catalogue of those, who are not to receive protection of Sanctuary. But the
question is, who are meant by the word Asassin, since it may be taken after
three different manners. For first of all, it is the name of certain Saracens,
whom Christians made use of to butcher other Christians; and those Saracens are
not comprised in the Bull. Secondly, Asassin is the name of those Robbers, that
murder on the Highway; for which they are not permitted the Sanctuary of
Churches. In the third place, those who treacherously kill any, when they have
no reason to suspect it, by the command of another, who wrought them to it by
giving, or promising money, or some other recompense. And it is in this sense,
that Probus, Tertio nomen Asassini accipitur tro illis, qui pecunia, aut alio
pretto accepto vel promisso conducti, occidunt bomines incautos, and nihil tale
ab eis praecogitantes. Its Probus, Ancaranns, etc. II etc enim est vulgaris
intelligentia, and interpretatio vecis bujus Asassini, Vulgi autem
interpretitio maxim attendenda est, ut patet exdictis de Legibus. Bonacina,
Tom. 2. Disp. 3. Cirea primum prae^^ptum decalogi, q 7. punct. 6, ^. 4. ^un. ^.
Aucaranus, Imola, Surarez, Menochius, Julius Clarus, Ambrosinus, Decianus,
Mascardus, Covarruvias, Guttieres, Farinacius, Peregrinus, and other
Interpreters do take the word Asissin. Haec enim est vulgark intelligentia and
interpretatio vocis illius Asassini: vulgi autem interpretatio maxim
attendenda est. Thus says Bonacina. And from this Doctrine, he, (as well as
Escobar) infers, Et number. seq. Hine patet primo illum non dici Asassinum, qui
fine pretio, aut fine praevia pretii promissione, atiquem intersivit, ut alteri
rem gratam faciat. Mascardus, Antonius, Gabriel, and alii, quos citat and
sequitur M^n^chius, Peregrinus, Farinacius and Alexander Ambrosinus.
That he who kills a man without receiving any hire, merely to do some other a
courtesy, is not called an Asassin, according to Mascardus, Antonius, Gabriel,
Menochius who alleges many others, Farinacius and Ambresinus.

After therefore that our Jansenist has informed himself by the witness of so
many learned men, better then he did by the Memorandums of Heretics,
concerning the interpreting of the word Asassin in Italy and Spain, where the
Bull of Gregory the fourteenth is received, let him acknowledge, how much it
does import one, that reprehends Doctors, not to be ignorant; and not be an
Impostor, when he cites them to cry down their Doctrine, and set himself up as
a Censurer over them.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
Since you have put me on these questions, which concern Homicide, let me
entreat you to tell me, by what interpretation you can reconcile with natural
and divine Laws the Royal Question of your chief, the Abbot of St. Cyran;
which you have acknowledged in the Apology of the Sieur Calagan, as the first
fruit of his Will. Teach me what sense can be given to these gross Maxims, so
worthy of the Divinity of Jansenisme; That many times a man is bound to kill
himself; ('it is the subject of that Book) That the Law of Charity, which
commands a man to to love himself, is many times more infringed by killing ones
Neighbor, then by killing ones self. page 23. That the want of a propriety
over our own life is no hinderance to a man for killing himself. page 29. That
under the Emperors N^ro and Tibetius, Fathers were bound in conscience to kill
themselves for the good of their Families and Children, and above all to
prevent the cruelty, by which they put them to death, page 62. That the
obl^gation of killing ones self being both one of (...) most important, and
hardest to execute, (...), ^^^essary it should find with men some per^^ct
reason, which by long discourse may a (...) swee^en the bitterness of that
Action. page 91 That all things are pure and clean to ^^ose that are so* page
94. by consequence '^is (...) full with a safe conscience to kill ones (...)
^im^^ a man is obliged to do it. (...) first rules of your severe Moral. If
all the rest, which you make us hope we shall have, be like them, in a little
time we shall see an admirable reformation of Cases of Conscience, which will
make that base Moral of the Casuists, t^o favorable to the love of ones self,
that Source of all Crimes, blush and be ashamed.

The ninth Imposture. French 1.
THe Jesuits favor ambition in rich men, and destroy Du Moulin does likewise
reproach the Church, saying, that she ruineth Charity; but after another
manner. p. 344. By indulgences a man is freed from giving Alms, and say^ng
Prayers which are enjoined him; which is a very great ease. Armill. verbo
Indulgentia. Durand. Did. 20. q. 4.
all pity of the poor, because Vasquez in his Treatise of Alms says, Chap.
fourth, Whatever men lay up out of a design to raise their own fortunes, or
those of their relations, is not called superfluous: for which reason it will
be hard to find any, among those that are worldly minded, that have ought
superfluous; no not even among Kings. Letter 6. page 105. Engl. edit.

The Answer.
To take the words of Vasquez in the disguise this Jansenist has put upon
them, were to think he swept away all obligati^n, the rich have of giving Alms.
But go but to the Source, and you will be amazed to see, that Vasquez teaches
quite contrary to what this Imposture forg^th. Vasquez then in that excellent
Treatise of Alms, endeavors to regulate the Consciences of rich men, and to
let them see, how many reasons oblige their mercy to relieve the poor man's
necessity.

For to proceed clearer, he distinguishes betwixt the secular man, who
enjoys goods of the world, and the Church man, who possesses Ecclesiastical
Benefices. For the Churchman he affirms positively, Quod ex superfluo
tenentur Beneficiarii alere pauperes illud etiam juris divini est. Alias posset
Summus Pontifex dispensare, ut quis ex superfluo consanguineos ditaret: quod
non est credibile. And a little after, In Clerico enim Benificiario, quia pater
est, lex Charitatis obligat de superfluo, in quo excedit obligationem
Saec^larium. Vasquez de Elcemosyna, cap. 4. number. 11.
that he cannot in conscience make use of his Ecclesiastical Revennues, to
enhaunce his own condition, or to enrich his Kindred, He obliges Churchmen to
employ all their overplus in relieving the poor; and he presses this so home,
that he teaches, Ecclesiastici vero, praecipue Episcopi, tenentur pauperes
inquirere, quia sunt pauperum parents; and esse debet illorum cura erga
pauperes. ibidem. number. 14.
they are bound to seek out the poor, and be inquisitive after their wants,
because they are Fathers of the poor.

For Laymen, who are in a flourishing condition, acquired either by industry
or inheritance, he assures them also, that they are obliged to give Alms under
pain of eternal damnation. But then he starteth this question, on what this
obligation of theirs is grounded. Cajetan cited by Vasquez says, this
Obligation is grounded on the superfluities which the rich men have; or in
other terms, that rich men of the world are bound to give Alms, because they
have more then enough, and that this overplus is the portion of the poor.
Vasquez (Sed contra est: quod si est necessarium, quod al^quis mco superfluo
egeat, ut ego tenear erogare illud, ergo non tantum superfluum est ratio dandi
Elcemosynam, sed etiam alterius necessitas. Ratio ergo illius obligationis
illin^ nascitur, quod Charitas postulet, ut mihi superfluum, quod est alteri
necessarium, illi erogem, ne alius indigeat. c. 1. d, 3. n. 21.
rejecting this opinion, says, that this is not all, and that this seems not
to him the full ground of the obligation; because the rich will presently say,
they have nothing superfluous, seeing that even according to Cajetan, worldly
men may make use of their riches to raise themselves by lawful means to a
higher state, Statum, quem licite possunt acquirere; and to procure a charge or
office, supposing they be fitly qualified, Statum quem digne possunt acquirere;
(these are Vasquez his words, which he repeateth thrice. Cap. 1. dub. 3. number.
26. and which this Impostor has suppressed) out of which Doctrine allowed by
Cajetan, it follows, that that is not superfluous, which is but a necessary
means to bring about what wordly men may justly pretend. Vasquez therefore
goes further, that the duty of giving Alms, which he holds to be
indispensable, may have an indispensable ground. This ground he teaches to be
the Ordo ergo Charitatis talis esse debet, etc. vitam enim proximi cum
detrimento vitae meae non teneor tueri; cum detrimento caeterorum teneor: and
sic de reliquis; alias quomodo Charitas Dei manet in nobis? cap. 1. dub. 3.
number. 25.

Secundo, si alicui imminet periculum famae amittendae, tenetur quis cum
detrimento sui status, and rei familiaris superfluae naturae fimilem
necessitatem propellere, ut ordinata sit Charitas.

Terti^, si alicui imminet periculum cadendi a statu suo, tenetur quis ex
superfluo status illi subvenire. Ibidem number. 26.


precept of Charity, which obliges the rich to give Alms, not only out of
their Superfluities, but also out of that which is (in the sense I have now
showed) necessary to them.

Is not this Doctrine just contrary to that, which is imputed to Vasquez? Is it
possible to find a more notorious Imposture? I beseech the Reader to view
Vasquez his Treatise, and to begin with the first Chapter, in which he speaks
of the Obligation, which rich secular men have of giving Alms; and I assure my
self, he will be no less edified at the prudent conduct of this Father, then
astonished at the malice of this Slaunderer.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
I am bound to return good for evil, and truth for falsehood: Therefore I
advertise the Disciples of Jansenius, that all those Alms they receive from
Widows, all those Legacies they make them give in favor of Jansenisme, which
the Pope has condemned, are so many Thefts bordering on Sacrilege: Res
Pauperum non pauperibus dare pars S^crilegii est. Bernard.
because they use that which is given to God against the Church of God: and
that all persons of quality, who maintain this Heretical Party, whether it be
by contributing either of their power or purse, render themselves Accomplices
in their spiritual rebellion, and will perish with them.

The tenth Imposture. French 2.
THat the Jesuits favor Simony, because Valentia, Tom. 3. page 2042. says,
That if a man give a temporal good for a spiritual, and money as the price of
a Benefice, it is an apparent Simony: But if it be given as a Motive, to
persuade the will of the Incumbent to resign it is not Simony; notwithstanding
that he which resignes the Benefice, look upon and expect the money only as
his principal end. And Tanner a Jesuit says the same thing in his 3. Tom.
page 1519. and yet confesses St. Thomas is of a contrary Opinion. Letter 6.
page 115. Engl. edit.

Answer.
Who would not complain of the rashness of Tanner in thus contradicting St.
Thomas, and the forgetfuln^sse of Valentia in palliating Simony? But this is
only a trick of the Jansenist, who follows du Moulin in his Traditions, page
^12. where this Heretic reproaches Card. To^^^ for teaching, That the Pope
may lawfully take money for Indulgences, Absolutions, and Dispensat^^ns,
because he receives it, not as formally selling them, but as a maintenance of
his Greatness, and the Dignity of his Charge. Let us let alone the Calvinist,
and a little discover the cheat of his Scholar.

You must know that all Divines hold two (...) of Simony; the one by Divine,
the other by Positive Law. This distinction supposed, Tanner explicating the
Opinion of Valentia, tells us, if one give money, as the price of a Benefice,
it is against Divine Law; but if it be given as a Motive, to incline the will of
the Incumbent to give up the Benefice, or else as a gratitude, it is not Simony
against Divine Law, (and in this he follows the Opinion of St. Thomas, q. 100.
Art. 1, and 2. ad 4. and Art. 3. ad 2, 3, 4.) but in the same place he adds,
Quod tamen non ^b, ^at, quo minus in casibus a jure expressis incurratur
Simonia sive ea, quam juris positivi superius diximus, sive secundum
praesumptionem externi fori. Tanner Disp. 5. de Religione, q. 8. dub. 3. page
1519. number. 65.
that it is either Simony against Positive Law, or presumed to be so in the
cases expressed in the Law.

Again insisting in the same case, in the following number, he says, That
notwithstanding he who resigns the Benefice should look upon, and expect the
money as his principal end, preferring a Temporal before a Spiritual good,
it were not Simony, (supposing still, that he does not take the money as a
price of his Benefice) because that kind of preferring may be found in all
sorts of sin; for we never sin, but we prefer in effect some Temporal before
our Spiritual good. Yet presently he adds, number. 67. Esto quidem tali
commutatione grave peccatum committatur, ac simul in casibus jure expressis
Simonia, saltem juris positivi incurratur, ut dictum est. Number 65.
That this Act would be a Mortal Sin, and a Simony against Positive Law, as he
had before explained it, number. 65.

Is not this man most extremely wicked, in thus concealing the last part, which
justifies Tanner, and publishing the first, which would persuade the people
(ignorant of School-distinctions) into a belief, that he opens a gate to all
Simonies? What an infamy is it to this Slaunderer, and to all Port-Royall, thus
impudently to pervert the truth? Is this then that, which they call to be
sincere like a Jansenist? That is, to lie with a confidence, and publish
without shame the most notorious untruths? and neither to value the judgment
of wise, nor the reproaches of honest persons, so they may but deceive the
people.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
Let Port Royal know, it is a Simoniacal abuse to buy those mercenary pens with
Benefices, and to give those Benefices as a price for their labor, in
publishing Heresies against Catholic Faith, and Calumnies against a Religious
Order. Such Scriblers are the Pensionaries of Satan, the Father of Lies, and
the first Detractour against God himself.

The eleventh Imposture. French 26.
THat Filiucius advances this excellent Maxim, in favor of wicked Priests,
That the Laws of the Church are in no force, when they are no longer observed.
Cum jam desuetudine abierunt. Letter 6.

Answer.
I am sorry for this poor Casuist, and pity his ignorance; for he does not
know, that the terms he uses, cum jam desuetudine abierunt, are terms of the
Law. Quae leges in veteribus libris positae jam per desuetudinem abierunt,
nullo modo vobis easdem ponere permittimus. L. Deo Authore, c. de veteri jure
enucleando.
If there be any Laws to be found in Ancient Writers, says the Law it self,
which through non observance are abolished, we do not permit you by any means
to reestablish them. And in another place, Rectissime illud receptum esto, ut
leges, non solum suffragio Legislatoris, sed etiam tacito consensu omnium per
desuetudinem abrogentur. L. de quibus. D. de legibus.
It Is a well grounded policy, that Laws should lose their force, not only by
the consent of the Legislatour, but also by tacit disapproving of the people
in not observing them. Our Jansenist knows not this. He does not know, that
the Canons agree with the Civil Laws, and that the Pope, declaring the Law
shall not yield to Custom, excepts that Custom which is reasonable, and the
which time has confirmed by a lawful prescription, nisi sit rationabilis, and
legitime praescripta. Cap. ultim. consensus.

He does not know, what St. Thomas 1, 2. Consuetudo and habet vim legis and
legem abolet, and est legum interpretatrix, q. 97. art. 3. in corp.
tells us, That neither Divine, nor Natural Laws are subject to be changed by
men, because they are grounded on a superior and unchangeable reason. But as
for such as have no other rule, but the will and reason of men, Custom stands
as a Law, abolishes Law, and in fine, is the Interpreter of Law.

He does not know what Cajetan, Cajetanus in 1, 2. q. 97. a. 3. ubi addit. Nor
oportet namque posteros sollicitos esse, an lieite, vel illicite introducta fit
consuetudo, quam sine dubio inveniunt licite observari relicta lege scripta.
Vide and Sylvestrum verb. Consuetudo. Gerson 3. part. tract. de vita
spirituali, lect. 4. Corol. 13. Sotum. 1. de Justit. q. ^. a. 2.
explaining the meaning of St. Thomas, tells us, Although Custom begins by an
infringing the Law, reiterated by many unlawful and criminal Actions, yet
nevertheless having once taken a thorough course, and being perfectly formed,
it abrogates the Law.

He does not know that which Bartolus says, Bartol. in L. de quibus ff. de
leg. q. 1. n. 6.
Law may contradict a Custom, which is but now sprung up; but when it is once
formed by a lawful prescription, there is no more contradicting it, because
the Law has no more force.

He does not know what St. Antonine D. Autonin. 1. part. tit. 16. cap. unico in
fine. Rogationes quoad jejunium, and quoad feriandum ponuntur in praecepto. De
Consecrat. did. 3. Rogationes. Et tamen ab omnibus dicitur praeceptum illud
esse abrogatum per contrariam consuetudinem.
tells us, both of Ecclesiastical and Canon Law, that they lose their force,
when the Church, moved by any just cause, changes them, or permits a
non-observance. For instance, It was formerly commanded to fast on Rogation
days; yet nevertheless through all the world a contrary Custom has prevailed
over that precept, took away the obligation of fasting, and enjoined only
abstinence in the Major part of Christianity.

But that which is most egregiously absurd is, that this learned Civilian, to
find out some ground in Filiucius, on which he might raise his ridiculous
accusation, takes these words, desuetudine abierunt, from a particular
proposition, Filiuc. Tom. 2. tract. 25 a number. 32. ad number. 33.
which this Father advances on the subject of Blasphemers; in which he tells
us, that amongst those penalties set down in the Ancient Testament against this
crime, or established in the Church by the Constitutions of Popes, the one sort
were never received in the Law of Grace, and the other are no more in use, At
vel receptae unquam non sunt, v^l jam desuetudine abierunt. Upon which, this
wise Interpreter making what gloss he pleases, accuses him for favoring in
that particular those wicked Priests, who unworthily presume to approach the
Altar, and makes him Author of this general Proposition, without any the least
restriction, or modification, That the Laws of the Church lose their force,
when they are no longer observed. Who will not laugh at this unreasonable
reproach?

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
That the Laws of the Church lose their force when they are no longer observed,
is a Maxim, which may very well be explained in a good sense; that is, when
the Church, as I have said, by a prudent condescendence takes off the rigor of
the Precept, and yields somewhat to Custom.

But I cannot imagine what way you can justify this, Vindiciae, page 286.
That the Ancient Law drew men on to Sin, Death, and Damnation by it self, per
se quantum in se erat; In the Information given by Monsieur de Lauberdemont;
the Original of which is in Clermont College.
That the just ought precisely to follow the movings of inward Grace, which is
to them as a Law, without looking to any exterior Law, though these inward
movings should contradict the exterior Law. Certainly the Abbot of St. Cyran
had a great deal of reason to say, See the same Information in a Book,
entitled, The Progress of Jansenisme. page 14.
That he never learnt these Maxims out of Books; but also we are not bound to
believe he had them from God, who is Truth it self; or that he guided himself
wholly by the lights, inspirations, and interior sentiments, which he received
from God. It Is not likely that God should have told him, See the same
Information.
That Sacramental Absolution supposes remission of Sins, That it is only a
declarative judgment; That the present Church can no ways be thought a Church
in any other sense, or for any other reason, but because it succeeded in the
place of the true Church; just as if a troubled corrupted matter should fill
the channel of a River, which had been quick and healthful water. Is not it
because you will maintain th^se excellent Maxims, that you are angry at those
who say, The Laws of the Church lose their force, when they are no longer
observed? It may be you are of the same opinion with the Abbot of St. Cyran,
that the present Church is corrupted like a filthy puddle-water, in that she
does not observe ancient Traditions.

The twelfth Imposture. French 12.
THat the Jesuits encourage Servants in domestique frauds and cheats, because
Father Bauny has established this great Maxim, to oblige those who are not
content with their Wages. It is in his Summary, p. 213. and 214. of the sixth
Edition. May Servants, who are not content with their wages, advance them of
themselves by fil^hing and purloining as much from their Masters, as they
imagine necessary to make their wages proportionable to their Services? In some
occasions they may; as when they are so poor, when they come into service, that
they are obliged to accept any prosser that is made to them, and that other
Servants of their quality get more elsewhere. Letter 6. page 123. Engl. edit.

Answer.
The Author of the Libell called Moral Divinity, using the same reproach
against Father Bauny, takes the question, which this Father proposes, for h^s
Decision, and that which he asks for his Answer. This Jansenist (who has
choice of Methods) takes away one part of the Answer, and l^aveth out the
other: and to the end that he may better this Calumny, by a second Imposture he
falsifies the Register of Chastelet in the case of John de Albe, assuring us,
that his Judges did extereamly approve the counsel of Monsieur de Montrouge;
yet nevertheless there was not any one followed it, as as is evident by the
Schedule of the Criminal Chamber, where their advice and judgment on the Suit
is to be seen.

Now that I may take away the scandal this Calumniatour has cast, and justify
Father Bauny, whom he labors to defame by such odious and unjust deceits, I am
constrained in this place to show the conformity of his Doctrine with that,
both of the Holy Fathers and most famous Casuists, that the whole world may
judge, whether it be such as he has most falsely painted it, that is to say,
unlawful, pernicious, and contrary to all Laws, Natural, Divine, and Humane,
such as is able to confound all families, and authorize all domestique frauds
and infidelities. Letter 6. page 125.

It Is certain enough there are but too many wicked Servants, who without cause
complain of their wages, and who by a self-conceitednesse imagining their
Services not sufficiently rewarded, may easily deceive a Confessor, if he
trust to their imagination. And therefore Cardinal Lugo, one of the latest
Jesuit-Authors, who has writ concerning that matter, but one of the first for
Dignity and Knowledge, wisely observes, Quare raro credendum est in h^c part
famulis obt^udentibus defectum justi stipendii. Cur enim alium dominum non
quaerunt? vel non quaesicrunt cum majore stipendio, si invenire facile
poterant? Si autem non poterant, non ergo fuit injustum pretium, quo majus
communiter non potuit inveniri. Card. de Lugo de justit. and jure. disp. 16.
sect. 4. 2. number. 80.
That men should be very backward in giving ear to such kind of complaints.
For they may (says he) find other Masters, who will give them more wages:
therefore why do they not seek out such? and wherefore do they not make it
their business to find them? If they cannot casily get such a Master their
wages are not unjust, because ordinarily they cannot find greater.

So also it is not to be denied, but that there are ill Masters, who misuse the
labor and sweat of their poor servants, whether it be by not paying the wages
they promised, or by taking advantage of their extreme necessities, to make
them serve upon unreasonable conditions, and not giving them what they know is
due in Justice. If then it happen, that a servant in one of these two cases
suffer some extreme prejudice, through the hardness of some unmercifull
Master, and can have no redress, whether it be by not being able to follow his
right by the course of Law, or because the Judges will not easily hearken to
such complaints, though they be never so just, it being inconvenient to have
their ears always open, the Casuists ask, whether he sins in recompensing
himself by his own means, and doing himself justice, when he cannot hope to
have it from others. And they answer, No; supposing he take no more then what
is truly due unto him. Si famulus non est persona potens gratuito donare suas
operas, vel ignorant earum justum pretium, vel novit illud, sed pressus
necessitate donat illas vet partem illarum, non est justa conventio, sed
injusta. Per citata in D. c. novit. Et consequenter, attento quod in foro
exteriori difficile posset assequi honest, and cum pace, servata justa
amicitia, integrum debitum, posset clam subripere id quod deesset ad faciendum
conventionem justam. Navar. lib. 3. Consil. de locato and conducto, Consil. 1.
n. 5.
Navarre is of this opinion in the third Book of his Counsels, where he treats
this whole matter. Corduba Corduba in Summa q. 111. and lib. 1. qq. q 35.
confirms it. Colligo quid fit sentiendum de famulis, qu^ gratia
compensationis, in bonis dominornm, quae ipsi tractant, manus extendunt: Sane
si debitum salarium est liquidum ob pactum expressum vel tacitum, vel
consuetudinem patriae, and talis generis servitiorum, etc. planum est, se posse
compensare, servatis conditionibus supra positis. Non enim ij pejoris
conditionis esse debent, quam caeteri creditores: imo tantum illis magis
licitum esse debebit, quanto magis sine scand^lo se compensare possunt, cum
bona Domini tractant. Petrus a Navaria. libr. 3. de Restitut. c. 1. number. 409.
Peter de Navarr proves it in his third Book of Restitution, as a consequence
drawn from this Maxim, That a Creditour, who cannot get his debt, nor receive
satisfaction for the damage done him, sins not, if he take to himself, by an
occult compensation, some of the goods of his Debtour, which he refuses to give
him, although he be obliged to it: provided that he still observe the
condition, which this Author brings, and which Si autem in judicio non poterat
rehabere suum, vel propter defectum probationis, vel propter tyrannidem vel
potentiam ipsius, tunc etiam nec accipiendo peccavit, nisi aliis scandalum inde
pararetur, secundum Thomam. 2. 2. Ita D. Antonin. 2. part. Tit. 1. c. 15. de
furto, 1.
St. Antonine had prescribed before him in the second part of his Sum; where
he affirms, that a man cannot without sin take another man's goods by a secret
compensation, when the Law is open: yet if a man cannot that way get what is
due, for want of sufficient Testimony, or by reason of the oppression and power
of him, who unjustly keeps it back, then there is no sin in taking it secretly;
provided it be done without scandal, according to St. Thomas in his 2. 2.

It Is this way the Fathers justify the Action of Jacob, who laid before the
Sheep of his Father in law rods artificially peeled; the different colors of
which passed by the imagination of the Mothers to the skins of the Lambs;
because, At ille peregrinus crat, and advena. Ideir^o violentum and fortiorem
indigenam in jus vocare non poterat. Rupert. libr. 7. in Genes. cap. 39.
as Rupertus says, He was a stranger, and therefore could not bring to justice
a powerful man of the same country, and greater then himself: it was then
necessary, that he should employ his cunning in favor of the Daughter against
the Father, that she might enjoy some part of her Fathers goods, which belonged
to her.

It Is this way, that Tertullian excuses the Israelites, who took away the
Spoils of the Egyptians, and by which he assures us, Instincti sunt Hebraei non
ad fraudem, sedad mercedis compensationem, quam alias a deminatoribus exiger^
non poterant. Tertul. lib. 4. cont. Marcion. c. 24.
That they were driven through instinct, not to fraud, but to a just
compensation of their Salary, which they could not by any other means get out
of the hands of their Masters: And that Tostatus teaches, that being unjustly
oppressed, and having no other means, by which they could have justice, they
might themselves of their own private Authority take the goods of the
Egyptians, either openly or secretly, as much as belonged to them, and they had
gained by their service.

In fine, it is this way St. Augustine refuting the Heretic Faustus, who
accused the God of the Old Testament of injustice, in giving them this command,
says, Homines peregrinos labor gratuito injuste vehementer afflixerunt. Digni
ergo erant and Hebraei, quibus talia juberentur; and Aegyptii, qui talia
paterentur. St. Aug. lib. 22. contr. Faustum. cap. 71.

Vide Iraencum, libr. 4. contr. Haereses. cap. 40.


That the Egyptians had unjustly, and by excessive labors oppressed these poor
strangers, and by consequence that the Israelites merited to receive that
order, and the Egyptians to suffer that chastisement.

It is not then Father Bauny who has established this great Maxim, to oblige
servants not contented with their wages; nor could the Jansenist have said it,
but through either some gross ignorance, or some affected malice, since that
Father has only received it from the mouths of Saints, and Masters of the
Ancient Divinity. Bauny notwithstanding, to suppress yet more the liberty of
Servants, adds in the same place these three clauses, which will make the
treachery of his Accuser, (who has left them all out) appear more clear then
the sun at noon.

We must (says he) F. Bauny. page 215, in his S^mmary of Sins, the sixth
Edition.
except three cases. The first is, when such Servants were taken out of mere
pity, and not out of any hope of receiving such service from them, as would
tend to the prosit and commodity of their Masters. The second is, when they
offered themselves without being sought, and that they were taken to service
for their own soliciting and entreaty, rather then for any necessity one had
of them. The third is, when others of the same condition would accept of the
same employment th^se servants have. For seeing the wages, which they receive
from their Masters in that case, have a proportion with their pains, they ought
to be content; and if to increase them they take any thing belonging to their
Master, they do commit a Theft in it.

Now what will the Reader say, after having heard the opinion of Bauny? Will he
not admire the liberty the Jansenists take in disguising the Doctrine of
Authors? Will he not be surprised to see them cheat the public with such
unjust suppositions? And will he patiently suffer, that they should serve
themselves with that cheat, to defame an opinion, (maintained by so many able
Divines, who are not Jesuits, and supported by the Authority of the Fathers)
as a Maxim that is unlawful, pernicious, and contrary to all Laws, Natural,
Divine, and Humane, capable to confound all Families, and to authorize all
domestic Frauds.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
Will you never leave off cheating the world? Do you not see falsehood cannot
long lie hid? and that the confusion, which you think to cast on the forehead
of Innocence, falls back on your own faces? But since the Winters-Tale of John
D' Albe pleases your fancy so much, that you had rather lose your
reputation, then a little laughter, I pray go to the Chastelet, and inform your
selves better of the Judges advice.

The thirteenth Imposture. French 24.
THat the Jesuits have found out a means to justify Murders, and to permit
all the violences men ordinarily commit in maintaining their honor, by the
Method of directing the Intention; which consists in proposing to ones self, as
the end of those Actions, some lawful object: And that it is only to turn a
man's intention from the desire of vengeance, (which is Criminal) to a desire
of defending ones own honor, which according to the Fathers is lawful: Not
but that as much as they can, they would detourn men from unlawful Actions;
but when they cannot hinder a wicked Action, at least they would purify the
Intention. Thus they correct vice by means of the purity of the end. Letter 7.
Answer.
This Imposture smells of Geneva and Du Moulin. Read but the 60, 61, 62, 63.
pages of the Anatomy of the Mass, and you will see how that Minister jests at
the intention of Priests and Bishops, on the subject of our most adorable
Mysteries. Run but over the Catalogue of his Traditions, you will see how he
stretches this Method to Duels, Simonies, Murders, and to all sorts of crimes,
even the most detestable. For example, when page 329. he tells, it is a
Tradition of the Church, that the servant of a Whore may with a safe conscience
carry an undecent message, does he not mean, (to speak like a Jansenist) that
it is only directing her intention, from the Act which is ill, to the gain she
makes of it, since, as he says, she has no other intent but to get a
livelihood? And when page 312. he makes Catholic Doctou^s say, The Pope may
lawfully take money for Indulgences, Absolutions, and Dispensations, because he
does not take it in a way of Selling them, but for the maintaining his
greatness, Does not he show clearly, that without such a diversion it were
Simony? In fine, when page 327. he affirms, that it is the common Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, That he is no Murderer, who through Zeal to our Mother
Holy Church should kill an excommunicated person; that to save a man's honor it
is lawful to kill another; that a Cavalier ought rather to kill, then either
to run away, or be cudgel'd, Does he not set forth that great Method of the
Jansenistical Casuist on the account of Homicide in all its luster?

You see now out of what Well the Jansenist has drawn this reproachful
Imposture against the Divines, upon whom must fall all the sc^ffs and lies,
which Du Moulin can furnish them with: for they have no other arms, then what
this Minister puts in their hands.

It will not be amiss to overthrow these weak Arguments, now we have
discovered the Origin.

It Is a general received Maxim in the Moral, That the Intention renders the
Action good, and the End directs the Intention. Bonum opus intentio facit;
intentionem finis dirigit. St. Aug. in Psalm.
St. Augustine has delivered this in his Comentaries on the Psalms, and all
Divines have approved of it. From whence it comes, that in their Moral
Decisions, when the question is, whether an Action be good or bad, they teach,
that the intention is a very considerable circumstance, Nihil prohibet unius
actus duos esse effectus: quorum alter sit solum in intention, alius vero sit
praeter intentionem. Morales autem actus recipient speciem secundum id quod
intenditur. D. Thom. 2. 2. q. 64 A. 7. in corp.
capable to corrupt even the best works, when it tends to an unlawful object;
and to justify those, which in themselves being not essentially bad, may be in
some cases permitted, if they be done for just causes. The Jansenists, who know
not so much as what it is to have good and sincere intentions, laugh at this
certain rule, and without any respect to the judgments of learned men, labor
with all their tricks to disguise it, that they may deceive the ignorant.

If the Casuists say with Pope Vim vi repellere omnia jura, leg^sque permitunt*
non ad vindictam sumendam, sed ^d (...) propulsandam. C. Significa^^^
Innocent the Third, All Laws, both Divine and Humane, permit resisting force
with force; not with intention to revenge, but to defend ones self, the
Jansenists will laugh at the sacred Canons, and say, they teach by that how to
justify revenge, and correct the vice of the Action by the purity of the end,
in directing the intention.

If the Casuists teach with (...) Tringe^s fur domum, sive suffodien^ (...) and
acc^pto vulnere mort^^^ (...) ^^^rc^ssor non er^t r^us sanguinis. Exodus 2^.
Holy Scripture, That if a thief be taken, breaking the door of a house, or the
wall, and a man kill him, he who did it, is no^ guil^y of the blood he spilt.
The Jansenists laugh at that Law; and being wiser then Moses, who received it
from Heaven, maintain, that it is to open the gate to murder, to preserve a
house by directin^ (...) inten^^on.

If the Casuist^ say with Saint Thomas, Precepta patientiae in his quae contra
nos siunt, sunt in praeparatione animi habenda, sicut Aug. exponit illud
praeceptum Domini. Si quis percusserit te in una Maxil^a, praebe ei and aliam,
ut Scil. Homo fit paratus hoc facere, si opus fuerit. Non tamen semper tenetur
facere actu. and infra.

Tenemur enim habere animum paratum ad contumelias tolerandas, si expediens
fuerit: quandoque tamen oportet contumeliam illatam repellamus. D. Thom. 2. 2.
q. 72. A. 3.


That it is lawful to repel an injury, whether it be to keep down the
insolency of wicked people, or to preserve ones honor and reputation: and that
the Son of God himself is not against it, even when he commands us to suffer
them, and turn the other check to him, who had already struck one; because,
according to St. Augustine, the precept which commands patience, does not
always oblige us to suffer the injurious assaults, which may be put on us, but
mearly to be ready to endure them, when it is necessary. 2. 2. q. 72. Ar. 3. in
corp. The Jansenists will fall a laughing, and say, Thus do the Schoolmen
accomplish all their duties toward God and man: for they content the world in
permitting the Actions, and satisfy the Gospel in purifying the intention.

Now who does not see, that if it be lawful to play the Buffoon in questions of
this nature, to handle matters of Divinity like a Stage Player, and to make
such railleries, as are unworthy of any wise man, pass for solid reasons, not
only the Moral of the Casuists, but even that of Holy Scripture, is exposed
to the impudence of Libertines: neither has the Jansenist said any thing in
this point against the Jesuits, which an Atheist might not have objected to
the Prophets and Apostles.

Moses prohibited usury to the Israelites with any of their own Nation, and
tolerated it with Idolaters: Non faenerabis fratri tuo ad usuram, sed alieno,
Deuteronomy. 23. The Jansenist will teach a Libertine to laugh at that toleration,
saving, This wise Legisl^tour had choice of Methods to enrich his own people
withal, and to justify usury, by directing the intention.

Judith de^ks out her self to surprise an enemy. How innocent soever that
Action was, a Libertine brought up in the School of Jansenisme, would say, She
was a cunning woman, and has taught her Sex to sanctify luxury and pleasure in
purifying the intention.

David, drawing near his end, commanded his son to rid himself of Joab and
Semei, for some just reasons, which Holy Scripture has not set down; a
Libertine would smile and say, David was an excellent Politician, that knew how
to reconcile the Maxims of Conscience with those of State, by directing the
intention.

Samuel by the wonderful judgment of God, appeared to Saul after his death;
(according to the opinion of very many Fathers) a Libertine following the
Moral of the Jansenists, will say, That Prophet certainly was very charitable,
that would help even Witches to gain the wages of their detestable crimes.

I entreat the Reader to take notice, that the reproaches, which this
Calumniatour casts on the most eminent Authors, are much of the same nature
with this I now handle; and to observe also, that a man may abuse this Maxim,
(That the Intention makes the work good or bad) as a man may also abuse the
best Maxims in Morality. But the Jansenist was obliged to prove, that the
Authors, whom he censures, have effectively corrupted it, in perverting it to
wicked ends, from which he is far enough off: since that in all the Letters, in
which he pretends to condemn the Divines, there is not any one reason to be
found, which he makes use of to show their errors; nor any one Author, that he
cites to prove his own opinion. All the arguments of this learned Casuist are
reduced to these two, Raillery and Falsenesse. I have already discovered many
of them, which are as evident and clear as the light: and there are yet some
behind, no less evident then these.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
Pause a little, and bethink your selves; search the bottom of your souls: look
whether your intentions be not corrupted, your designs base, and your thoughts
black and infamous. If you aim at honor, what can you expect from posterity,
but to be listed in the rank of Heretics for your errors? and amongst
Libertines for your sc^ffing at Sacred things? If envy be the motive, which
persuades you to write against us, give us some mark of your Abilities: Reason,
Dispute, Prove your opinions, Impugn our Doctrine, like learned men, with some
powerful Arguments and irreproachable Authorities: We shall take pleasure in a
learned Antagonist. But while you give us nothing but the old patches of a
ridiculous and foolish Minister, we shall bewail your blindness, and give you
nothing but disdain for your labors.

Do you not see, how easy it were for me to let all those profane railleries
fall upon your own heads, with as much justice on my side, as they have
injustice on yours? May not I ask you with reason, whether Jansenius did direct
well his intention, when his mouth spoke so rashly of Letter 21. de Jansen. a
St. Cyran.
the Power Tramoutain; (he means of the Pope) of the ignorance of the Court
of Rome in matters of Faith; and of the Address the same Court had in the
handling the affairs of Machiavel? May I not ask, whether his intention were
good, when he Letter 35. de Jansen. a St. Cyran.
accused the Sovereign Pastor, for having placed St. Ignatius and St. Xaverius
in the number of those Saints, which the Church worshipeth in her public
Ceremonies? And whether the intents of the Abbot of St. Cyran were just, when
he told the Abbot of Prieres, See the Deposition of the Abbot of Prieres
against the Abbot of St. Cyran in the Information of his Process kept in
Clermont College.
One might pardon the faults of the Jesuits, but the Body of them ought to be
ruined, as domageable to the Church; That it is God himself, which destroys
the Church; That the time of its building up is already past; That Bishops,
Ecclesiastiques, and Religious now adays (commonly speaking) are destitute of
the Spirit of Christianity, of the Spirit of Grace, and of the Church: That if
the Religious of his Order were true Children of St. Bernard, they would addict
themselves wholly to the ruin of School Divinity; That St. Thomas himself had
spoiled true Divinity, through humane Reasoning, and the principles of
Aristotle. Pray say, with what Intention can you justify these villainous
Propositions.

The fourteenth Imposture. French 4.
The Reader will be pleased to take notice, that whereas in the French Author
of this Work, neither this Imposture, nor the Answer to it are so clearly set
down, as to give a full understanding either of Lessius his Doctrine, or of
what is objected against him by the Jansenist: I have therefore (to make all
clear) set down the Accusation against Lessius at full, as it is in the seventh
Letter; and in the Answer I have given you Lessius his Doctrine in his own
words; that it may appear how grossly this learned Father is abused by the
Impostor: it is no more, then what the French Author intended, and in effect
performed; although it happened, that by laboring to be short, he became
somewhat obscure, The Imposture then runs thus.

THe Jesuits favor Revenge, because Lessius libr. 2. de Justiti^, cap. 9.
dub. 12. number. 79. says, He who has had a Box on the Ear given him, may not
have the Intention to revenge himself, but he may be permitted that of avoiding
infamy: and to that end may immediately put back the injury, and that with his
sword, (etiam cum gladio) Letter 7. page 135. first edit. and in the page 143.
He who has received a Box of the Ear, may, abstracting from all thoughts of
Revenge, right himself with his sword: and a little after, proceed so far as to
kill him that has given the Box. And page 145. he says, that it is so
generally maintained, (That a man may kill another to prevent a Box on the Ear)
That Lessius libr. 2. c. 9. dub. 12. number. 77. speaks of it as a Tenent made
absolutely Sterling by the unanimous consent of all, in these words, It is
lawful, according to the consent of all Casuists, (ex sententia omnium) to
kill him, who would give a Box on the Ear, or a blow with a Stick, when a man
cannot otherwise avoid it. Again page 147. he brings Lessius, speaking thus.
To conclude this great Lessius, in the same place, ^. 78. shows, that one may
kill another for a simple gesture, or expression of contempt. There are, says
he, several ways to derogate from, and take away a man's reputation, wherein
yet it is but just, a man should right himself, as by giving a man a bang with
a stick, or a Box of the ear, or if a man should affront us by words, or by
Signs, (Sive per signa) And in the page 148. Lessius says, in the place before
cited, Heed must be taken, that the practice of this Maxim prove not
prejudicial to the State; for then it is not to be permitted; tunc enim non
est permittendus. etc.

Answer.
Here Lessius is accused to savor Revenge by four Assertions. First, That one
may kill him, who has given a Box of the Ear. Secondly, That to prevent a Box
of the Ear, he says, all Casuists tea^h, you may kill him that would give it
you. Thirdly, That one may kill another, not only for a Box of the Ear, but
also for reproachful words, and even for a simple gesture, or sign of
contempt. Fourthly and lastly, That though all this ^e true in conscience, yet
if it prove prejudicial to the State, then it is not to be permitted.

Now to this Jansenists utter ignominy, let us see his Impostures. For the
first then it is sta^k false, that Lessius says, One may kill him who has
given you a Box of the Ear. I will set the whole passage down. His words th^n
are these lib. 2. de Justit. cap. 9. dubit. 19. number. 79. If when you have given
a Box of the Ear, you cease, or fly away, many Doctors think, that if the man,
that has received the Box of the Ear be noble and honorable, that then he may
presently strike again, or pursue him that has given the blow, and give him as
many blows or wounds, as may be thought necessary to repair his honor. So
says Navarr. cap. 15. n. 4. Henriquez de Irregularitare, c. 10. where he
cites many for this Opinion; among the rest, Jason, Corduba, Mantius, Penna,
Clarus, Cajetan, and Antonine. The same says Peter de Navarr. libr. 2. c. 3.
number. 380. And he cites for this Opinion Mercatus. Victoria also holds the
same Opinion. Relect. de jure Belli. number. 5. where he says, That he that has
received a Box of the Ear, may presently return a blow, even with his Sword, not
for to take revenge, but to avoid infamy, and ignomiay. All these he cites
word for word, as I have set them down: where by the way I desire the Reader to
reflect, that of these twelve Authors, eleven were not of the Society, some
were before the Society, and all are generally est^emed in the Schools.

After Lessius has thus cited these Authors, h^ b^ings in the five following
Paragraphs, their reasons, by which he says, Probari potest haec sententia,
this Opinion may be proved; then immediately after, number. 80. he gives his own
Opinion thus, For these reasons this Opinion is speculatively probable, yet in
practice it seems not easily to be allowed; first, for fear of hatred,
revenge, and excess. For if St. Augustine for these causes does hardly allow
one to kill another, for defense of his own life, how much less would he allow
it in this case for defense of ones honor? Secondly, for the danger of
fighting and Murder; and he who should kill in such a case, would be punished
in exterior Judicature.

Now tell me what a gross Imposture is this, to make Lessius Author of that
which he does not teach? Nay, which he impugneth? What a cheat to attribute to
him the words of Victoria, Etiam cum gladio? and to make the whole Society
culpable of favoring Revenge, because Lessius cites the words of Victoria a
Dommican, which this Fellow conceiteth to favor Revenge? In fine, what a loud
untruth is it to say, That Lessius teaches in this place, that you may kill
him that has given you a Box of the Ear, when it is not so much as questioned
in this place, whether you may kill him, but whether you may strike, or wound
him! and when never an Author, here cited, allows that you may kill him.
Finally, when Lessius allows not the very st^iking, or pursuing him, for fear
of excess, and killing him. Had not, thinkyou, all those men of honor in
Paris, who saw this passage in Lessius, a great deal of reason to judge the
author of so unworthy an Imposture, to be a man of no c^edit, but a mere
Calumniatour?

But you will say, Lessius says it is speculatively probable, that one may
return the blow; therefore Lessius teaches this opinion of these authors. I
answer first, that though he did teach the opinion of these authors, yet he
could not be challenged to teach, that one may kill in this rencontre; for none
of them, as here they are cited, teaches, That one may kill in this case.
Secondly, I answer that he does not teach even this Opinion. To make my answer
clear, I must tell you a short passage. A man having his arm gangrened, and
being advised to cut it off to save his life, sent for four able Chyrurgeons to
give their opinion. The three first were of opinion, that the Patient must have
his arm cut off and they gave many reasons for their opinion. The fourth spoke
thus to the Patient, The three, who have given their opinion for the cutting
off your arm, have reasoned well, and I hold their opinion speculatively
probable, but for my part I would not easily allow, that in practice you should
cut off your arm. When this fourth man had given his opinion in these words, he
gave diverse reasons, why the arm should not be cut off. Now I ask you, whether
this fourth man were of opinion, that the Patient should cut off his arm? Every
one will answer, that certainly he was not: and I answer the same of Lessius.
Certainly he teaches not that one may strike or wound another for a Box of the
Ear, much less that he may kill; but the quite contrary, he allows not to
strike or wound, for fear of killing, and for the other reasons he alleges.
How then can any man dream, that he teaches one may kill him?

Now as to the second Assertion, that Lessius is charged with, that to prevent
a Box of the Ear, one may kill him that would give it you; and that in the place
cited, n. 77. he teaches this to be sure ex sententia omn^um, in the opinion
of all, (which our English Translatour says, is to make it absolutely sterling
by the unanimous consent of all) to this I will not answer, that those words ex
sententia omnium are not in Lessius in the place cited, and so consequently not
sterling, but of base alloy, and false coin. Lessius indeed uses those words,
or rather cites Petrus Navarrus, who use^h them, in the following number, for
another business. But in this number he neither has the words, nor the sense
of the words. But I will not insist on this; it is too small a falsity to be
taken notice of among so many notorious Impostures. To come then to the point.
Lessius in the place cited teaches, That a man of Honor may resist an
Invasor, that would either cudgel or box him, and that he may kill him that
sets upon him, if he cannot otherwise defend himself from being bastinado'd
or buffeted: and this he teaches, after Sotus, Navarr, Sylvester, Ludovicus
Lopez, Gomez, and Clarus, whereof none are Jesuits. Now that for which I
complain of the Jansenist here, is first, That he would have it thought the
Jesuits invented, or mainly spread this opinion, when in the place he cites,
his own eyes are witnesses, that it is the opinion of so many others before
Lessius wrote. Secondly, I complain of his want of wit, that he would tax this
opinion, which is a good one. For what? Would you have a Gentleman cudgelled
and kicked in the Ken^el, for fear that if he should keep off some insolent
ribauld, he might at length be forced to draw his Sword, and perhaps whilst he
defends himself, be forced to kill his injurious Invasour? For he must not
kill him if can avoid it, says Lessius. His words are, Fas est viro honorato
occidere invasorem, qui fustem vel ^olaphum nititur impingere, ut ignominiam
inferat, si ali^er haec ign^minia vitari nequit. These are his words. What is
here to be reprehended? It is not to be understood, that as soon as you see a
man lift up his cudgel against you, you may presently pistol him. No, but if
you cannot, neither with fair words, nor threats, nor thrusting him off, nor
any other way keep your self from his cudgel, you are not bound to stand still,
and let your self be cudgel'd, and perhaps killed too; but you may lawfully
defend your self from him, that thus sets upon you, though in the strife his
death should follow your just defense. That this is the meaning of all the
Divines, who teach this case, is evident; and as for Lessius, his words make
his meaning clear: for he concludes thus, Si aliter haec ignominia vitari non
potest: If this ignominy of being box'd or cudgelled, cannot otherwise be
avoided. This Doctrine I will give the Translatour leave to call Sterling, but
not in derision. And if he be a Gentleman, I assure my self, he will be sorry
for having quarrelled with Lessius for this opinion; and be angry with those,
who engaged him to employ a good pen in so ill a cause.

The third assertion, wherewith Lessius is taxed in this matter, is that he
teaches, That one may kill another for reproachful words, and even for a
simple gesture, or sign of contempt. The place quoted is in the same Book and
Chapter, and the same Dubitation already cited, and number. 78. where Lessius
indeed treats this matter. But Lessius is notoriously wronged by the
Jansenist; for he does not teach what is imputed to him, but clean contrary. He
begins that numb^^^^us. It is to be noted, that ones honor m^^ di^ers ways
be set upon, in which ^^ se^me^h granted, that one may defen^ himself (He does
not say with what (...)) First, if you en^eavour to strike one with a Stick, or
to give (...) Box of the Ear, of which I have already (...) ^^^ondly, if you be
con^umelious to one, (...) or signs, Here is also right for a defense. For
Peter de Navarr. says, libr. 2. c. 3. number. 376. That it is lawful, ex
sentontia omnium, in the opinion of all, to kill him that is contumelious to
you. Thus does Lessius state the question in the beginning of that number 78.
Then he says, That he finds not this (which Navarr says) expressed in
Authors, though it seems, that it may be gathered out of them. Then he goes
on, and according to his custom brings the reasons, which may be brought for
this opinion of Navarr, and the qualifications of it; and in fine, concludes
thus. This opinion is not to be followed. For it must be enough in a
Commonwealth, to repress verbal injuries with words, and to chastise them
with a legal revenge, that is* that punishment which the Law allows. With
what face then can this Jansenist make the world believe, that Lessius
teaches, a man may kill another for con^umelious words, or even for signs,
when he decideth positively to the contrary? Lessius brings the reasons for
Navar's opinion, and then decideth the question against them. So St. Thomas,
when he proves there is a God, first brings the reasons, that Atheists may
allege; then he disproveth those reasons, and decideth against Atheists. How
gross must (think you) his ignorance be, that would judge out of this
proceeding, that St. Thomas was an Atheist? just as gross is this Jansenists.

The fourth thing laid to Lessius his charge in this matter, is, that he says,
That heed must be taken, that the practice of this Maxim (he would have it
understood of Revenge in the cases alleged) prove not prejudicial to the
State; for then it is no^ to be permitted, tunc enim non est permittendus etc.
as though Lessius thought, that in all th^se cases there were no fear of sin,
but that all the fear were, left the State should be interess^d.

I answer, That Lessius has no such words, neither in the place cited, which
is number. 78. (for to that we are referred in the seventh Letter, page 148) nor
in any plac that belongs to these questions. True it is, that in another
matter he has words, which are not altogether contrary to th^se, though very
unl^ke these. So that here the Jansenist has ^he (...) of a double ch^at, both
to have cited false, and to have p^rverted Lessius his words, and appli^d them
to a contrary question. I need say no more; yet for the Readers satisfaction, I
will let him see the impudence of this Ignoramus.

Lessius then, after having treated the questions hitherto touched in this
answer to the present Imposture, goes on, and in the number 81. puts the
case in these words; The fourth manner of wronging ones honor, is, if one
should go about to defame you with your Prince, Judge, or honorable Persons,
by false accusations, and that you have no way left to defend your fame, but
the death of him that thus wrongeth you. When he has put the case, he brings
the opinion of Navarr, and Bannes, which he allows not of; and having set
down the reasons, by which their opinion might be proved, he concludes in the
number 82. thus. This opinion also is not to be allowed in practice; because it
would give occasion to many secret Murders, to the great annoyment of the
Commonwealth. For in the right of defense it is always to be considered, that
the use of it tend not to the ruin of the Commonwealth; for then it is not to
be permitted. Besides, though this opinion were speculatively true, (which he
does not allow) yet in practice it would scarce ever have place. For, etc. Here
are some of the words, which the Jansenist makes Lessius say. Lessius does not
say, Heed must be taken, that the practice of this Maxim prove not
prejudicial to the State; for then it is not to be permitted: but he says, in
the right of defense it is always to be considered, that the use of that right
rend not to the ruin of the Commonwealth; which is a very good Maxim. For no
private man can have right to defend himself by the public ruin; and if that
which seems my right, destroy the public, then I have no right. For
example, I have right to defend my house from being plucked down; yet if my
house stand so advantageously for the enemy, that by means of i^ they may take
the City, I have then no right to keep my house standing: and so in other
cases. And this is that which Lessius says. But whatsoever this Maxim be, to
pervert the words, and apply them to a wrong matter, contrary to the Authors
direct expression, and plain meaning, is a most notorious ^ourbe. Lessius
therefore never taught, that one may (...) him, who has used some sign of
ignominy, nor him that has used reproachful language; no, nor he allows not
so much as to strike, or wound him, that has given you a bang with a stick, or
a Box of the Ear: all this is falsely laid to his charge, and most falsely imputed
to the Jesuits upon his account.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
I entreat the Jansenists, and all those that either favor that Faction, or
are mislead either by the Authority of those that wish ill to the Society, or
by the protestations of sincerity made so solemnly in the Provincial Letters,
that they would be pleased, after having read this Imposture, and the Answer to
it, to turn to the end of this Book, where I have inserted the whole passage of
Lessius, which I would be glad, every one should read. That by this they may
judge what credit this man deserves; who after he had been challenged with
these falsities, and told, that many men of honor in Paris had seen Lessius,
and discovered his cheat, notwithstanding in his Thirteenth Letter braves it
out, and will needs maintain, that he has cited right, and followed Lessius
his mind, notwithstanding his many notorious forgeries. And in his Eleventh
Letter makes this Protestation, I may say as in the presence of God, that
there is nothing, that I detest more, then to do truth the least violence; and
that I have ever been extremely careful, not only not to falsify, (that were
horrid) but even not to alter, or distract, in the least, the sense of any
passage. So that if I durst presume, upon this occasion to make use of the
words of St. Hilary, I might safely say with him, If we advance things that are
untrue, let our discourses be reputed infamous.

How false this Protestation is, and how justly the infamy (which he wishes)
does fall on his Writings, the Reader will plainly see, if examining Lessius
his words, he reflect first, That Lessius never uses those words, Etiam cum
gladio, but only cites them in Victoria. Secondly, That Lessius follows in
Practice, that is in effect and indeed, the contrary opinion to Victoria,
though he allow (not to Victoria's particular expressions, but) to the twelve
Authors cited, so much as to say, their reasons make their opinion
speculatively probable. Thirdly, That Lessius does not teach, that one may kill
for contumelious words, or signs of contempt, but the quite contrary, in the
very place which the Jansenist alleges. Fourthly, That the Maxim, Heed must
be taken, that the practice of this Maxim prove not prejudicial to the State;
for then it is not to be permitted, is notoriously altered and distracted (to
use his own words) from the sense of the passage. The Jansenist cites it out
of number. 78. and Lessius has not it there, but something not quite unlike it in
number. 82. The Jansenist by the tenor of his discourse applies it to the cases
of killing for a Box of the Ear, or opprobious speeches, or signs of contempt;
and to that end quoteth the number 78. that it may seem a caution, annexed to
those opinions, treated in that number. And Lessius has no such thing there;
but in the number 82. in the decision of a question, which the Jansenist
himself in his thirteenth Letter, acknowledges to be of a quite different
nature. Nor will it avail the Jansenist to endeavor to prove, that Lessius,
holding an opinion probable in speculation, holds also, that it is probable
in practice, as he does in his 13. Letter. For that were to prove that Lessius
does hold that probable in practice, which he evidently does not hold probable
in practice. That which the Jansenist ought to have done, was to show, that he
had cited Lessius right; which is matter of fact, and to be attested by Lessius
his own words, (if there were any such) not by the Iansenists Chymerical
consequences from speculative to practical, nor from other authors opinions.
This that I have done to clear Lessius, I might also do to vindicate the other
authors, whom the Iansenist wrongeth as evidently, as Molina, Vasquez,
Sanchez, Filiucius, and others; but that would be to make a great volume: and I
conceive the Reader will be satisfied by this one example, that this Iansenists
protestation of sincerity, and citations of authors are utterly false. Turn to
the end of the Book, and read Lessius; where I have put all at large.

The fifteenth Imposture. French 11.
THat the Jesuits favor Duels, because Father Layman assures us, That if a
Soldier in the Army, or a Cavalier at the Court, be so engaged, that he is
likely to lose his honor, or fortune, if he do not accept of the challenge, he
cannot see, why that man should be condemned, who does so accept of it merely
to defend himself. Letter 7.

Answer.
A Jansenist will always be cheating, if we have not a great care of him. How
many Impostures are there in this one passage? which he has so falsified, that
there is no part of it uncorrupted. Does Layman teach, That he, who is
challenged, may accept of the Duel, l^ft h^ be accused of Cowardice? It Is an
Imposture. Sententia communis est, ordinary non licere provocato ad Duellum id
acceptare, quia nemo prudentum tibi vitio vertet, quod legem Dei observes,
hominisque occidendi periculum, absque justa necessitatis causa non ad^as:
imprudentium autem and vanorum hominum judicia in re gravi attendenda non sunt.
Layman, libr. 3. part 3. cap. 3. number. 3.
The common opinion, says he, is, that ordinarily it is not lawful to accept
of it, because no wise man will ever blame a man for observing the commandment
of God, and for not exposing himself without a just necessity to the danger of
killing another: for in things of this nature we must not at all value the
opinion of vain hair-branied people.

Does he teach, that if a Soldier in the Army, o^ a Cavalier at the Court,
find himself so engaged, that he be in danger of losing his Honor or Fortune,
if he do not accept the challenge, he s^es not how you can condemn him, for
accepting of it to defend himself? It is an Imposture. He says only, that
Navarr is of that opinion. Does he approve that opinion in Navarr? Imp^sture.
He only says, (that which Mensieur Du Val, a Doctor of the So^bon, Tract, de
Charitat. has said since, for the esteem which he makes of Navarr) he dare not
condemn it. Si in casu rarissimo co loco res sita sit, ut miles in bello, vir
equestris in Aula Regia, officio, dignitate, ducis aut principis savore ob
ignaviae suspicionem excidere debeat, nisi identidem provocanti se fistat, non
audeo damnare eum, qui merae defensionis gratia paruerit, juxta Navarri
doctrinam. cap. 15. n. 3, 4. Hae^ Layman, lib. 3. part. 3. c. 3. n. 3.
If it happen, says he, by any accident, which is most rare, (in casu
rari^simo) that a Souldie^ in the Army, or a Cavalier at Court, were certain to
lose his office, his dignity, and the favor of his Prince, if he do not fight
with him, by whom be has often been challenged, by that means giving subject to
be thought a Coward, I dare not condemn such a one, who following the Doctrine
of Navarre, should have accepted the challenge in that rencontre, purely and
simply to defend himself. Where is the truth of this Jansenist Translatour?
Layman says, he dare not condemn him that follows Navarre, in accepting a
challenge; and the Jansenist makes him speak absolutely, that he does not see,
how one can condemn him for accepting it, as if 'twere Laymans, and not Navarrs
opinion, whose name this Impostor has suppressed. Layman says, I dare not
condemn him, and the Jansenist makes him say, I do not see how one can condemn
him Layman shows clearly, that he approves not of such a Duel; yet the respect,
which he bears to Navarre, who was no Jesuit, keeps him from daring to condemn
it: The Jansenist, without naming Navarre, makes him give his vote to approve
it, and that he sees not, how any can condemn him for it. Layman excusing
Navarre, says, This case is most rare, and it scarce ever happens. The
Jansenist (who never lies, as he says himself) cuts off these words, to
persuade, that he speaks of ordinary Duels; and to crown this Imposture with a
deceit, as great as his falsenesse, he translates these words qui merae
defensionis gratia paruerit juxta doctrinam Navarri, he who accepts the Duel
to defend himself, on purpose smothering not only the name of Navarre, (which
would have showed it was not Layman's opinion) but also the force of the words
merae defensionis; which would have manifested, such a rencontre, in the
opinion of Navarre, is not so truly a Duel, as a mere defense, which the light
of Nature teaches a man.

You see now the Jansenists manner of reforming the Moral; you see the holy
Doctrine of Port Royal, which holds it lawful to lie, when it is to establish
the Truth; to accuse falsely, when it is to kindle Christian Charity; to corrupt
the words and sense of Authors, when one would find unjust and extravagant
Decisions; to correct and most impiously to jest at Sacred things, thereby to
restore the severity of Evangelical Maxims to its ancient vigor.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
Does not the hand of this Writer, who pretends such horror of spilling blood,
fear to renew those Heresies, which most inhumanely have drawn it out of all
the veins in France? Does it not fear the borrowing of the Moral of
Heretics, which has been so fatal to this Kingdom? Is it not at all afraid
of being reproached with the Politic of Holden, approved by two Jansenists,
though wisely suppressed by one of the greatest persons of our age?

The sixteenth Imposture. French 13.
THat Father Molina the Jesuit assures us, It Is lawful to kill a man for six
or seven Ducats, though he, who has taken them, fly for it. It is in the
fourth Tome, Tract. 3. Disp. 1^, n. 6. Letter 7. page 151. Engl. Edit.

Answer.
It would make the Reader laugh, if I should but only confer the words of
Molina with the Translation of the Jansenist; but with a laughter of
indignation against the Impostor.

The question is concerning a thief, who runs away after having committed a
theft; and it is asked, whether it be lawful to run after him, and kill him, if
one cannot otherwise stop him, or get back what he took? What does Father
Molina answer in the place alleged by this Calumniatour? If the thing Quando
res non sit magni valoris, ut si esset solum valoris 3, aut 4, aut 5.
Ducatorum, consentit Sotus, ar. 8. citato, consentiunt and alii, non licere
fugientem intersicere. Quando vero esset magni valoris, exiguaque esset spes
illam post^a recuperandi, affirmat Sotus, Fas in ^o eventu esse illum occidere.
Neque id auderem condemnare; modo priu^ voco admoneretur, nisi rem relinquat,
esse intersiciendum. Semper tamen est consulendum, ne proximus in eo eventu
interficiatur. Molina, Tom. ^. tract. 3. dis. 16. n. 6.
(says he) be of no great value, for example, if it be worth only three,
four, or five Ducats, Souts is of opinion, (and other Authors agree with him
in it) that it is not lawful to kill him that runs away: But if it be
something of great value, and there be little probability of getting it again
afterward, Sotus assures us, it is in such a case lawful to kill him: And I
dare not condemn that opinion; provided, that one forewarn him that runs away,
that unless he leave that which he took, they will kill him. Yet always it is
to be counseled not to kill our neighbor in such a rencontre.

How does the Jansenist translate this passage? For six or seven Ducats it is
lawful to kill a man, although he that took them fly for it. You will ask me,
if it be possible that he should have translated it in that manner? Believe
only your own eyes. Read the very place I have cited. What? Is it lawful to
cheat the world in this fashion, and to jest with so much freedom with the
honor of Religious persons? The Iansenists have no scruple of conscience in
it, out of a belief, with which they slatter themselves, that very few Readers
will take so much pains, as to examine those Texts, which with a formal
intention they falsify to abuse the credulity of the Simple. But I proceed to
allege the falsifications of this wicked Secretary.

The seventeenth Imposture. French 14.
MOlina in the same place says, That he durst not charge that man with any sin,
who kills another, who had taken from him a thing of the value of a Crown, or
less; unius aurei, vel minoris adhuc valoris. Letter 7. page 151. Engl. Edit.

Answer.
This faithless Translatour leaves nothing perfect in the Text, which he
cites; for he has cut off the essential terms; the suppression of which
changes the case, that Molina proposes, and has corrupted the whole thoughts of
that Author.

That I may discover this Imposture Vim vi repellere omnia jura, legesque
permitunt, non ad vindictam sumendam, sed ad propulsandam injuriam. C.
Significasti.
I must remember him, that all Laws permit us to resist violence with violence,
as Innocent the Third tells us, not with intention to revenge our selves, but
with that of defending our selves. It Is by this the Scripture Deuteronomy. 22.
clears him from offending, who kills a Thief, when he is caught breaking
through the walls or door of a House. It Is by this the Law permits us to kill
an armed Robber in the day time. Vide Cujacium ad lib. 3. ff. de Justit and
Jure, Et L. Scientiam. pen. ff. ad Legem Aquiliam.
In fine, it is by this the Canons tell us, one is not to be judged criminal,
for the resisting a violence when one is assaulted; and that Pope Stephen
declares, That he who kills another in defending himself, is not for that
Irregular. Percussio non imputatur, si in continenti vim repellat. C. Sivero.
and Stephan. c. quia te.


Now according to this so common rule, hear a little what Molina will say of
it. If any one would unjustly usurp something of the value of a Crown, or
less, notwithstanding the resistance of the possessour, or Guardian, I durst
not condemn of sin, no nor to any punishment, him, who in defending it should
have killed that unjust Assaultant; provided that he keep the moderation of a
just defense. Be pleased to mind that last clause, Provided, that he keep the
moderation of a just defense, which is essentiail to the proposition of Molina;
because it presupposes, that he who is killed, is the Assaulter, and an unjust
Assaulter; and that he who kills him, cannot any other way resist the violence
which he off^rs, nor the danger, which threatens his person in defending his
goods. Those are the conditions of a just and innocent D^fence, which all
Casuists have established, and which fully justifies the Doctrine of this
Author. To give a familiar example, a Rabbet is but an inconsiderable thing
compared to the life of a man. And yet if an insolent fellow, coming into a
Warren to steal a Rabbet, should force the Warrener, and should set upon him
with Arms, if he should endeavor to hinder that Theft, would you condemn this
man, if he should kill that unjust Assaulter, being not able any other way to
resist his strength, nor to avoid the danger in which he is, of perishing in
that Rencontre? Would you have him run away as soon as he sees a man coming to
him with arms, and abandon that which he is bound to preserve? Or else, that
putting himself in a posture of defense to hinder him, he should let himself be
killed, rather then to commit manslaughter to save his own life? If that be so,
there is no need of Keepers, neither in Forests, Vineyards, nor Warrens; and
it is in vain to give them wages, since they are not permitted to resist one
that comes against them by force.

You see now Molina's opinion, which he had sufficiently explained in the
fourteenth number of the same Dispute, saying, Atque id est plane quod
intenditur, cap. 3. de Homicidio, dum dicitur, Si fine odii meditatione, Te
Tuaque liberando, ejusmodi Diaboli membra interfecis^i, etc. quando enim quis
ita defendit sua, regulariter simul defendit suam propriam personam, quam
peri^ulo exponit. number. 4.
That he who defends his goods, defends at the same time his own person, which
ordinarily he exposes to danger; and that it is in this sense we must understand
the words of the Canon, he alleges, If without any intention or motion of
hatred, in defending your person and goods, you kill those members of the
Devil, etc. you see the reason, why he makes use of the words of the Law, cum
moderamine inculpatae tutelae, to explain himself yet more, and to show he
speaks not here of all kind of Cases, but only of those, in which a man keeps
the moderation of a just defense; that is to say, where a man is in a necessity
either of perishing, or of killing him that unjustly sets upon him.

But now what has the Jansenist done, who foresaw well enough, that if he
should faithfully relate these words, he would find no place to pour out his
Impostures? He has maliciously suppressed these terms, cum moderamine inculpatae
tutelae, which are, as it were, the soul of Molina's Proposition, and which
make out his true sense; and without speaking a word, either of the unjust
violence of the Assaulter, or of the necessity, in which the Defendant is,
either of perishing or killing, he makes him speak peremptorily, that he dare
not condemn a man of any sin, who kills another, that would take from him any
thing of the value of a Crown, or less.

Judge by this of the sincerity of this Calumniatour; and do not expect more
faithfulness in any reproach he shall hereafter cast on the Jesuits, then you
have already found in these Impostures, which we have hitherto discovered.
Indeed I do not wonder, that Monsieur Drelincourt Minister at Charenton, in his
False Pastor newly printed, glories in defending this Cheater, filling his
Additions with Calumnies, which he has taken out of the Letters of this wicked
Secretary. For he could no^ find a more faithful Disciple of Monsieur Du
Moulin, nor one more ready to invent and spread abroad any untruths.

The eighteenth, ninteenth, twentieth, and one twentieth Impostures. French 15,
16, 17, 18.
THat when the Jesuits assure us; It is not lawful to kill a man for
opprobrious words only, it is not because the Law of God forbids it; they go
not upon that ground, they find it lawful in point of conscience, and in
considering only the Truth it self: why then do they forbid it? it is because a
Country would in a small time be depopulated, if all detractours were killed.
Take it from Father Reginaldus, libr. 21. number. 63. page 260. Though this
opinion, that one man may kill another for ill language, want not its
probability in the Theory, yet is the contrary to be followed in the practique:
For a man ought, in the manner of his defense, to consider the prejudice may
happen to the State. Now it is evident, that by killing people after this rate,
there would be too many Murders committed. Lessius says as much in the place
before cited. Heed must be taken, That the Practice of this Maxim proves not
prejudicial to the State; for then it is not to be permitted. Tunc enim non
est permittendus. Filiucius adds to the former reason another of no small
weight, Tract. 29. number. 51. That a man would be punished by the hand of
Justice, for killing people on that account. Letter 7. page 148, 149.

Answer.
One would think, this man had set himself to cheat the world by lying, without
any fear of punishment. For in this one reproach he has at once committed four
of the most infamous Impostures possible to be imagined. The first, which is
the most universal, concerns all Authors that are Jesuits, who maintain that
with a safe Conscience a man cannot kill a Calumniatour. For this Iansenist
imputes to them, Letter 7. p. 148.
That according to their opinion, It is lawful to kill for opprobrious words
only; and that if they do condemn it, it is not because the Law of God forbids
it, for they go not on that ground; but it is a Politic, and not a Religious
Prohibition.

To this it is sufficient to confute him (without bringing many Authors, who
would give him the he) if I but tell him, that Vasquez and Suarez are Jesuits,
and that both of them teach it unlawful to kill a Calumniatour. Let him hear
how they speak, and if he have any Grace left, doubtless he will blush for
having so rashly aspersed them. Non licet illum occidere, quem s^io certo
depositurum falsum apud Judicem, quia ille non potest dici Invasor. Licet enim
contra jus faciat, non tamen contra ordinem juris. De ratione autem Aggressoris
est, ut contra jus and ordirem j^ris injuriam inferat: and ita in hoc ^as^ qui
o^cideret hunc, peccaret contra Charitatem, and contra Justitiam, tenereturque
ad restitutionem, Vasquez Tract. de restitut. c. 2. 1. d 7 n. 24.
It is not lawful, says Vasquez, to kill a man, whom I certainly know will
depose a falsity before the Judge, because one cannot properly call him an
Assaulter. For although he offend against the Law, yet he does not offend
against the order of the Law. Now to be an Assaulter it is necessary, that the
injury he does me, be both against Law, and against the order of Law: By
consequence he that should kill a man in that case, would sin against Justice,
and against Charity: and should be obliged to Restitution.

Calumny is not (says Suarez) to be Calumnia non propulsatur vi, sed
manifestatione veritatis. Quod si haec possibilis non est, nequaquam licet
transgredi ad media inordinata, quae vere non sunt media; sed patienter ferenda
est mors, non secus ac si innocens probaretur nocens per falsos testes. Suarez
de Charitat. disp. 13. de Bello, ult. number. 5. Non potest reus sic falso
accusatus occidere suum accusatorem; ergo nec licet idem tentare per D^^llum.
Suarez. ibidem n. 6.
resisted by force, but by manifesting the truth. If it be impossible to be
proved, it is yet no ways lawful to use means which are against order, and so
not truly means. But we must patiently suffer death, as an innocent person
convicted by false witness.

I ask now the Reader, whether after this he can patiently endure to hear it
imputed to the Jesuits, That they hold it lawful, to kill for opprobrious
words only; and that if they do forbid it, the prohibition is only
political, and not conscientious.

The second Imposture concerns Father Reginaldus, whose Text he has clipped, and
insists only on one part, and even that he has also most malsciously
corrupted. For he mak^s him say, A man ought in the manner of his defense to
consider the projudice may happen to the State, whereas that Author says,
Sententia negans in praxi sequenda est; quia in jure defensionis semper
considerandum est, ne us^^ illius vergat in perniciem Reipublicae. Nee dubium
est quin sequendo affirmantem praebeatur occasio multis caedibus occultis cum
magn^ Reipublicae perturbatione. Accedit, quod si infamia jam sit illata, ca
non extinguitur per mortem infamantis: sin inferenda, plerunque non constat,
possitne alia ratione impediri, quam occisione infamaturi. Sic non est liberum
co genere defensionis uti. Reginald. loc. citat.
The negative opinion is to be held in practice, because in the right every one
has to defend himself, care is to he had, that the use thereof tend not to the
ruin of the State. Now why does he change the word right, if it be not,
because it would have clearly shown, the opinion of Reginaldus is, That
although a particular person should have right to make use of that kind of
defense, considering it simply and in it self, yet neverth^lesse it is
unlawful and criminal, even by Gods Law, because of the murders and
disorders, which it would cause in the State.

In which I cannot but wonder at the blindness of our Calumniator, who knows
well enough, that according to Reginaldus, this manner of defending ones self,
tends to the ruin of the State; nevertheless he affirms, That he does not
forbid it, because it is contrary to the Law of God; as if it were lawful by
the Laws of God to confound the State; as if God, who prohibites the violating
of a particular man's right, did not prohibit the ruin of the common right; as
if it were a more criminal action to permit murder, because in permitting it,
one exposes only one man's life, then because one exposes a million of men's
lives at once; and in fine, as if there were any stronger reason to prove this
violent way of defending ones self to be against the Law of God, then because
it would introduce murders and disorders in States.

The third Imposture sets upon Lessius, and makes him say simply, We ought to
have a care, the using this Maxim prove not prejudicial to the State. Will
this ch^at, who is grown gray in his malice, never deal honestly? Why does he
not sincerely cite the words of this Author? Why does he not say, That Lessius
condemns the using of this Maxim, because of the inconveniences may arrive?
Does he not know, that the circumstances and dangerous consequences of an
Action are sufficient to render it criminal before God, when in its own object
it were not really so? What consequences can one imagine more dangerous, and
more capable to corrupt an action, and render it mortal, then those which
Lessius brings to reject the practice of this, that is, the infinity of unjust
murders, which it would cause in the State?

This opinion (says he) ought not to be permitted in the practique, for the
inconveniences which may follow. Men would easily persuade themselves, that
they were accused out of Calumny, and that they have no way to clear
themselves, but by the death of the Calumniatour: And so many unjust murders
would be committed in a State. Will you acknowledge the true Doctrine of this
Father, which you have suppressed? and are you not sufficiently convinced of that
falsenesse by these so manifest proofs?

The fourth Imposture concerns Filiucius, who is reprehended by this Writer,
for maintaining that Doctrine of the Jesuits, which forbids killing, not for
opprobrious words only, but even for the most heinous Calumnies, and most
unjust Accusations. He alleges for a reason, That one may be punished by the
hand of Justice, for killing people upon that account. I would gladly know,
what ^ffence that Father had committed, if he should have made use of that
reason. Does the Jansen^st believe, Judges never punish Murderers, but on
Politic acc^unts, and not upon Maxims of Conscience and Religion? ^s not the
Law of God thought on at the Bar? Have not the ^udges of life and death the
Commandments of God before their eyes? Is the Religion of their Court so
suspicious, that he judges the Jesuits to be criminal, for having grounded
their opinion on the legal Sentences? Let me entreat him once more to tell me,
why he has added this Raillery to the former, I told you, Father, that all you
can do, will amount to nothing, if you have not the Judges on your side? Does
he think these Fathers hold it dishonorable to regulate their conduct by the
justice of Laws, and the sentences of the Court? But that which is yet more
ridiculous in this passage is, that in the place he cites, Filiucius indeed
speaks of the penalties, which the Judges order against Murders, but says
nothing of Murders, which are committed for Calumnies. It Is in the following
Number that he treats of it; and where he brings two reasons, wholly different
from those, which this Iansenist attributes to him. I put them in the margin,
that all the world may see, how God confounds Calumniatours, and how he suffers
them, whilst they atta^que the reputation of others, so to blind themselves,
that they become a reproach and laughing stock to the whole world.

We must hold, says Practice contrarium est sequendum: tum quia si fama sublata
est, non recuperatur per mortem detractoris. Si non est sublata, fere semper
aliis modis impediri potest: tum quia aperiretur via caedibus, and major a mala
sequerentur in Republica, ut fatetur Lessius 1. 11. 82. Filiucius, Tract. 29.
c. 3. n. 52.
Filiucius, the contrary opinion in the Practique; because if the Calumniatour
have already taken away your reputation, you cannot restore it by taking away
his life. if he have not yet done it, there are commonly many other ways to
preserve it. And besides all this, 'twould open a gap to Murders, and greater
evils would happen by it in the State.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
I cannot tell, why you should be so offended with the Judges; or what reason
you find to dislike the Jesuits sticking to their sentences in the Decision
of the Morals. For indeed they have hitherto been very indulgent toward you,
and with a great deal of patience suffered your disorders. What ever it be, you
must take away the scandal, which you have given to the public, in saying
falsely, That the Jesuits find it lawful in conscience to kill a man for
opprobrious words only, and that they forbid it merely for politic respects,
and to have the Judges on their side. Whereas I do assure all Catholics,
there is not any one Divine, whether Jesuit or other, that will suffer one to
kill another for simple Calumnies. It Is true, some famous Authors who are no
Jesuits, have thought it lawful to kill a Calumniatou^, when he se^s upon
both honor and l^^^, with such powerful and unjust inventions, that there is
no way of escaping but by his death. It Is the opinion of Bannes, of Mayor, of
Peter de Navarr, of Monsieur Du Val, that ornament of the Sorbon, and of
Cardinal Richelieu, as you may perceive by Father Caussins Answer to the
Moral Divinity, and by another Answer of a Divine of the Society. But this is
so extraordinary a case, that it scarce ever happens. Notwithstanding the most
knowing Authors that are amongst the Jesuits, as Suarez, Vasquez, Lessius,
Reginaldus, Filiucius, etc. do unanimously oppose this Doctrine, because of the
dangerous consequences which it would draw after it: and if in opposing it they
use a modesty, it is because that opinion has not yet been condemned by the
Pope, nor by the Church, (who have power to do it:) and that although they do
not approve the opinion of these famous Doctors, yet they know the respect,
which they owe to their persons.

For your part, who unjustly condemn this proceeding, and who would render them
criminal, because they are not so heady, as those of your party, nor so
insolent, as to attribute to themselves the Authority of the Pope and of the
Church, you ought rather to study to correct the wicked Doctrine of the Abbot
of St. Cyran, who was so bold as to dare to teach, a man may kill his
neighbor, when the inward Spirit moves him to it, although the outward Law
forbid it. When you please, you may see both the proof and the practice, in the
second page of the Information that was given against him by the command of the
late King, in the Year 1638. The Original is in the College of Clermont.

The two and twentieth Imposture. French 3.
THat the Jesuits encourage Banquerupts, because Lessius affirms, A man that
turns Banquerupt may, with a safe conscience, retain as much of his own goods,
as is requisite to maintain his Family in an honorable manner, (ne indecore
vivat) notwithstanding that it was gotten unjustly, and by manifest crimes.
Letter 8. page 168.

Answer.
This Disciple of the Calvinists learnt this reproach in the Traditions of his
Master, page 334. Du Moulin casts the same reproach on the Church, page 334.
A man, says he, that had taken by force, or fraudulently, another goods, is
not obliged to restitution, if be cannot do it but by prejudicing his honor.
Navarr Consil. lib. 3. de Statu Monach. Consil. 3.
only changing the name of Navarr into Lessius. But he has put on it such a
vizard, and so many Impostures, that it is evident he has now no credit to
lose, but by a public disclaim has renounced all title to honor. I will
here show you Lessius his Doctrine, most excellent and worthy to be considered,
especially in this corrupted age.

This Father in his second Book de Justit. and Jure, cap. 16. disp. 1. first
teaches, That a man reduced to extreme necessity, and not being able to pay his
Creditours without loosing both his own and his childrens lives, is not obliged
to pay; always presupposing, that he cannot by any other lawful means support
them. Secondly, That he that is brought low in his estate, if he be in any
great necessity, and near an extremity, is not obliged to pay his debts, till
better fortune come. Si ad eas angustias tua culpa sis redactus, v. g. ludis,
comessationibus, superfluis sumptibus, tunc non mer eris dilationem, neque
debitorum ex contractu, neque ex delicto. Tibi enim imputare debes, quod jam
fine status amissione non possis satisfacere. Lessius, lib. 2. cap. 16. d. 1.
n. 28.
In the third place, That he who has ruined his fortune by vaste expenses, by
play, and by debauchery, ought not to excuse himself from satisfying his
Creditours under pretext, that he cannot do it without falling from his
condition; because it is his own fault, and by consequence he deserves not any
forbearance: which is to be marked, Quod est notandum pro quibusdam Nobilibus,
qui debita fine fine contrahunt, ut supra conditionem sui status expendant.
Lessius, ibidem. number. 28.
(says that Father) because there are many Gallants, who desiring to appear
above their condition, cont^act vaste debts without number. Fourthly, That
those who have enricht themselves by unjust means, and raised their estate by
usury and extortion, may not keep back their ill gotten goods, under color,
that they are necessary for them to live honorably withal, according to their
present condition.

But that they are obliged to return them without any delay, and to clear their
debts, though it be with the loss of their fortune, and the Splendor of their
Families; and more especially when their thefts are publicly known: Quod est
valde notandum pro multis hoc tempore, qui magnis fraudibus repent divites and
magni evadunt. Non enim possunt differ restitutionem usque ad mortem: Sed
tenentur statim restituere, etiam cum demissione status male acquisiti. Lessius
l. 2. de Justit. c. 16. Dub. 1. n. 29.
which is greatly (says he) to be noted, because of these disordered times; in
which we see many grow rich in an instant, making themselves great fortunes
built up of crimes, deceits, and injustices. For such must not think they shall
be acquitted for having restored on their Deathbeds; they are bound in
conscience to satisfy as speedily as may be, and to reduce themselves to that
first condition, in which they were before they raised their Families, and were
mounted to those eminent offices by such heinous crimes. Pray do but compare
this Fathers true Doctrine to that which is imputed to him* and tell me, with
what face, but that of a Jansenist, one could have uttered such notorious
falsities? Tell me, has Du Moulin himself ever falsified and corrupted the
sense of Catholic Authors with more foul play then this? In fine tell me, is
it possible to read these words stuffed full of deceit and malice without just
indignation, How now, Father, by what strange Charity will you have these goods
rather rest in his hands, that has got them together by Rapine and Extortion,
in order to his honorable subsistence, then that they should be scattered
among his Creditours, to whom they of right belong, and whom by this means you
reduce to Beggary? page 168.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
What a strange kind of Charity is this of the Jansenists, that they can
practice in secret, what they so much condemn in public; applying the
restitutions, which they cause to be made, not to the Creditours, whom they
bring thereby into poverty, but to the reproach of Religion, and scandal of
true Believers! Know it is false, that Lessius and the Jesuits teach unjustly
to deceive Creditours; but it is too well known to be the practice of the
Jansenists; and that they could not subsist as they do, nor make such prodigal
expenses, if they were not helped by those accursed practices.

The twenty third Imposture, French 5.
THat the Jesuits favor corruption of Judges, The same Slander Du Moulin
lays on the Church. A false witness that has taken mon^y to bear false
witness, is not obliged to restore. Tolet, lib. 5. c. 59. number. 6.
because their principal Authors, as Molina, Reginaldus, Filiucius, Escobar,
and Lessius, do all unanimously by a fantastical Decision teach, That a Judge
is obliged to return what ever he has received for doing justice, unless it
were given him as a liberality: but he is never bound to restore what he
received from one, in whose favor he gave an unjust sentence. Letter 8. page
178.

Answer*
This man attributes to us that vice, which reigns most in himself; and
being very fantastical, will believe all the world must be like him. Bu^ all
those Writers he mentions, do not unanimously teach that Doctrine, which he
makes them speak; they rather unanimously convince him of false dealing, and of
little understanding.

Of false dealing, forasmuch as he suppresses that, which Molina says, Tom. 1.
Tract. 2. Disp. 88. Fol. 366. and 368. That a Judge sins by receiving a
present, for three reasons. First* because it is forbidden by the Laws.
Secondly, because they break their oath. And thirdly, because they give
scandal, and by that suffer themselves more easily to be corrupted.

Of false dealing, in saving according to these Authors, A Judge is not bound
to restore a present made him as a liberality; and yet Filiucius tells us, Quia
ut plurimum s^unt cum peccato, id^o, jure optimo, lege positiv^ prohibita sunt
^jusmodi munera: and est potestas in princi^e obligandi ad restitutionem, etiam
in foro conscientiae. Filiuc. Tract. 31. number. 211.
Tract. 31. number. 211. If they receive more then what is regulated by the Law,
then rightly do the Laws condemn them, and the Prince has power to oblige them
in conscience to Restitution.

Of false dealing, in saying according to the same Authors, A Judge is never
bound to restore that which he has received from one, in whose savor he gave
an unjust sentence; whil^st Reginaldus in the very place which he cites, lib.
10. number. 185. says the qui^e contrary. For although he speaks not in
particular of a Judge, (which shows the sincerity of this Calumniator) but
only in general of th^^^, who (...) money for any wicked Action; yet (...) he
firmly lays down one general Maxim, which discredits this Imposture: for he
teaches, Si in aliquo casu particulari detur lex, quae inhabilem faciat
delinquentem, tunc facienda est restitutio. Reginaldus, libr. 10. number. 185.
That if the Laws in any particular case render him, who offends in receiving
these kind of presents, incapable of procuring the dominion or possession, he
is bound to restitution.

Of false dealing, in confounding maliciously the Civil and Positive Law with
the Law of Nature; by which equivocation he would make us believe, a Judge
according to these Authors is not obl^ged to restore that, which he took for
giving an unjust sentence: and yet notwithstanding Filiucius and Molina speak
only of the Law of Nature; affirming, That if there were no Positive Law
forbidding them to receive gifts, (S^^lus^ lege Positiva id prohibente) as
Filiucius tells us, Tract. 31. number. 218. The Law of Nature would not bind them
to Resti^ution.

Of false dealing, in not distinguishing the persons, to whom one ought to make
Restitution; to persuade us by this cheat, that these Authors do no way oblige
a Judge, corrupted by gifts, to return the money he received, because they say,
he is not obliged to restore it to him that gave it; smoothering what they
add, that the Law may confiscate it; and that the Confessor in right ought to
oblige his Penitent to give it to the poor, or to him, in whose prejudice he
received it, if he have made him wrongfully lose his Suit.

Of false dealing, in dissembling that, which he ought to have spoken plain;
which is, That according to these Authors, the Judge, who pronounces an unjust
sentence, is bound, both by Natural and Positive Law, to repair the wrong, and
prejudice which he suffers, who is unjustly oppressed.

Now if he offend thus unworthily against sincerity, certainly he will not
offend less against judgment. Is it not absurd, That a man, who pretends to
reform the Moral, thinking to set upon the Jesuits, should headily run, and
shake the Civil Laws, and call that a fantastical Decision, which they set
forth as an inviolable Maxim, viz. Ubi dantis and accipientis turpitudo
versatur, non posse repeti dieimus; veluti si pe^unia detur, ut male judicetur.
L. 3. s. de conduct. obturpem causam.
That one cannot justly demand back that, which one cannot give or receive
honestly: as for example, when one gives a Bribe to a Judge, to make him give
an unjust Sentence? Is it not a ridiculous extravagancy to pretend to be
knowing, and as confident as though he were a Bartolus, and yet not know the
very elements of Law? See Bartol. L. 3. de poe^. Judic.
Solutum ob turpem causam non posse repeti. L. 8. That one may not demand back
what was given on a wicked account; and that he, who received it, deserves to
be degraded from his office with infamy, for suffering himself to be corrupted;
and he who gave it, ought to receive no profit, because he has corrupted the
other. Let us break off here, and give some good counsel to this Calumniator.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
It is very well known, and from good hands, that the Iansenists have labored
to corrupt with money very able Religious Doctors of the Sorbon, to teach
their errors publicly in the Schools. Those Religious had a horror of
committing so black a wickedness: But suppose they had taken the bag offered
them in hand, and had given it to the poor, were they obliged to make
Restitution? And if the Iansenist Doctors, who have received those infamous
Salaries, touched at heart from God, should come to Confession, whether were it
better, that the Confessor obliged them to restore their ill gotten goods to
their Corruptours, or to give them to the Poor, who at first had the best right
to them?

The twenty fourth Imposture. French 6.
THat the Jesuits instruct Du Moulin casts the same reproach upon the Church,
page 335. A Woman that has received money by way of Salary for her wantonness,
is not bound to restore the money; because this Action is not contrary to
justice; no, though she had taken more then her just hire. Thom. 2. 2 q. 32.
Navarr. Tolet etc. But they forget to tell us what is her just hire; and page
402. The rules, says he, what questions Ghostly Fathers are to ask of women,
are too unclean and abominable to be set down here. See the Roman Penitential.
The ninteenth Book of the Decrees of Burchard. Benedict.
Adulterers, Murderers, Soothsayers, and Sorcerers, how they may become
learned and expert in their Art, because their Authors teach, That it is lawful
to keep what ever is gotten by such crimes, and that it is astonishment to see
the works of Religious stuffed with such horrible, such unjust, and such
extravagant Decisions. Letter 8.

Answer.
This disguised Hugonot, who never read the Ancient Fathers, but with Calvin's
eyes, does not read the Modern Casuists, but with those of the Minister Du
Moulin.

Let us take off this Masque of counterfeit Devotion, which he shows so much in
that reproach, stuffed full of extravagancies and injustices. For if he pretend
to be so surprised in finding those horrible, unjust, extravagannt Decisions in
the writings of Religious, how will he be to find them in the writings of the
Saints themselves?

How will he be astonished to read this in St. Thomas, Cum quis dat mere^rici
propter fornicationem, mulier potest sibi retinere quod ei da^um est: sed si
superflue ad sraudem vel dolum extorsisset, tenetur ^id^m restituere.
2. 2. q. 62. Art. 5. ad 2. If one give money to a prostituted Woman to sin
with her, she may keep it: but if she take from him more then she ought, or
else have an intention to cheat him she is bound to restore it to him?

How will he be astonished to read again in his Quod mulier meretricium
exerceat, turpiter ag^^ and contra legem Dei: Sed in co quod accipit, non
injuste agit, nec contra lc^em.
2. 2. q. 32. Art. 7. If a woman prostitute her self, she commits an enormious
act against the Law of God: But if she receives money, in that she ^ffends
neither against Justice, nor against the Law of God?

How will he be surprised to find them in St. Antonine, (who takes the pains
to particularize all these heinous crimes) 2 part, Tit. 2. Cap. 5. De
illicitis isto tertio modo secundum Thomam and Raymundum potest dari
Eleemosyna; potest etiam retineri, nisi superfluum per fraudem and dolum mulier
extorfisset. Ad hoc pertinent lucra facta ex Histrionatu illicito, ex Duello,
ex Torneamento, ex Deliciis factis, ex art Mathematica, seu Divinatoria.
and who in all these cases of Magic, Duels, Murders, Impurities, etc.
advises Confessors to exhort their Penitents to give in Alms those goods they
have got by such detestable crimes: But yet not to oblige them in conscience to
do it, because the acquisition was not unjust, though the means, by which they
got it, be infamous?

How will he be surprised to have these opinions authorized by the Sentences of
Judges, and by the oracles of Law, who clearly decide it, That a Whore sins in
prostituting her self, but yet does not sin in taking what is given her. L. 4.
Sed and quod Meretrix?

How will he be astonished to sinde it in all Divines, Petrus a Navarra, l. 9.
de restitut. c. 2. Navarrus, cap. 17. n. 30. and 35. Cajetan in 2. 2. q. 32. A.
7. and q 62. Art 5. Angelus, verb. concussio. 2. and 5. and verb. restitutio.
Sylvestr verb. restitutio.
who took themselves obliged to instruct Confessors, of the manner they ought
to proceed in toward their Penitents, who but too often are concerned in some
of these sins?

What infamy is it to this Impostor, to impute to the Jesuits, as a new and
astonishing crime, the teaching of that, which is read in the works of so many
excellent men; whose Holiness, and whose Prudence is bowed to by the whole
world? And are these Decisions innocent in all other Authors, and unjust only
in the Jesuits? Are they legitimate, when pronounced by Kings and Emperous?
and detestable, when they are found in the writings of Molina and Lessius? Are
they full of wisdom, because they are in St. Thomas, St. Raymund, and St.
Antonine? and yet extravagant, because the Jesuits learnt them out of these
Doctors?

Let him know, these Decisions, which he attributes to the Jesuits, do
originally belong to the Holy Doctors of the Church: but the injustice and
extravagancy, which he finds, belongs to himself: and that he could not have
learnt that rashness, but of some jearing wicked Parson, to say, that by such
Decisions St. Thomas, and St. Antonine teach Murderers and Sorcerers to be
learned and experienced in their Art.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
It was an an act of wisdom in St Thomas and St. Antonine, to write these
Decisions, which you call extravagant, in a language not common to the people:
but it is a detestable malice in you to have published them in vulgar terms. Yet
after all you have said, the Jansenists only can teach such revilers, as your
self, to become cunning in their art; which they do not do by simple Decisions,
but by great stipends. If it be this infamous trade you live by, I do not
oblige you to restore them that which they give; but you are bound to repair
the scandal you have given the faithful, and the honor you strive to force
from the Jesuits, by these Impostures so full of injustice.

The twenty fifth Imposture. French 7.
THat the Jesuits have choice of Methods to palliate Usury: But that one of
the best, in his opinion, is, the contract Mohatra; by which you may buy
Stuffs, or the like, at a dear rate on Tick, to sell them instantly to the same
person for ready money at a cheaper rate. Letter 8.

Answer.
We must pardon this Writer, if the word Mohatra seems new to him, and if he
believe, that never any but Escobar used it. Letter 8. page 165. His ignorance
must excuse him; it is not long since he was a maker of Romances, (as report
goes:) therefore no wonder, if he wanted time and leisure to read such Books,
as treat of Contracts and Usury.

Yet is he not to be excused, neither for corrupting what he does know, nor for
censuring what he does not know. He finds fault with the Father Escobar, for
having assigned certain expedients, by which this contract may be permitted;
Letter 8. and in that is either extremely ignorant, or else very presuming.
Ignorant, if he do not know, that in censuring that Author, he declares himself
at the same time against Navarr, one of the most famous Casuists of our time;
against Sylvester, Master of the Sacred Palace; against Peter Navarr, an
excellent Divine; against Bonacina, whose name is eminent in Schools; and
against many others, whom it is not needful to set down. Very presuming, if
knowing it, he be yet so rash, as to reprehend and make them submit to his
censure. Let him know, what Bonacina tells us in his Treaty of Contracts. Disp.
3. q. 2. p. 3. n. 20. page 725. where having proposed this difficulty, Octava
difficultas est, utrum labe usurae careat contractus, quo venditur res, credita
pecunia, pretio rigoroso; and po^^ea eadem statim redimitur, numerata pecunia,
medio vel insimo pretio?
Whether a man can without Usury sell dear and on trust, and at the same time
buy it again with ready money at a cheaper rate? He resolves it thus.
Respondeo, per se loquendo carere labe usur^. Ita Navarrus. cap. 23. number 91.
Petrus Navarrus, l. 3. c. 2. n. 170. Rebel. l. 9. q 7. n. 7. Salonius 2. 2 q
78. A. 2. contr. 7. Armilla verb. Usura, n. 19. Sylvester verb. Usura. 2.
quaesit. 2. Et ratio est, quia in utraque venditione res venditur justo: ergo
utraque venditio licita est, and non usuraria. Haec Bonacina. Tractat. de
Contract. Disp. 3. q. 2. p. 3. n. 20. p. 725.
I answer (says he) that considering the nature of the Contract, it is exempt
from the spot of Usury; and it is the opinion of Navarr. cap. 23. number. 91. Of
Petrus Navarrus, lib. 3. c. 2. n. 170. Of Rebellus, l. 9. q 7. n. 7. Of
Salonius, 2. 2. q. 78. A. 2. contr. 7. Of Armilla, verb. Usura. number. 19. Of
Sylvester verb. Usura, 2. q. 3. Of Reginaldus, l. 25. number. 296. The reason is,
because they buy and sell again at a just price; so by consequence both the one
and the other is lawful, and without the least Usury.

After all this I could be content to suffer the presumption of this vain and
ignorant head, if he did but faithfully allege the Doctrine of those Authors,
who seem to him worthy of reprehension. But in earnest his Impostures and
Lyings are unsupportable. For if he do seriously believe the Doctrine of the
Jesuits to be wholly corrupt, what should skare him from telling it in the
proper terms? why should he mangle that which he relates? Does he think all
eyes bewitched, like those of the Jansenists? and that they see nothing, but
what he has a mind to show them, and never perceive what he hides by
Leger-demain from them?

Pray, do but see in what manner he clips off some of Lessius his words, and
confounds those of Escobar. Escobar, says he, sets down certain expedients to
render it lawful, even though he, who sells and buys again, looks on his
profit as his principal design: provided only, that when he sells, he exceed
not the highest prices of Stuffs in that kind; and that when he buys again, he
fall not below the lowest, and that there be no agreement before hand, either
in express terms, or otherwise. But Lessius de Justit. l. 9. c. 21. d. 16.
says, That though there were such an agreement, a man is never obliged to make
restitution of the prosit: unless it be by way of charity, in case he, of whom
it is exacted, be in want; yet with this proviso, that he who received it, can
restore it without inconvenience to himself. This is all that can be said of
these Authors.

You cheat, Jugler; this is not all that can be said, nor all that you ought to
say. For you ought to have said, That Escobar in the same place you ci^e,
teaches according to Molina the Jesuit, Molina Tom. 2. d. 310. requirit
ulterius, quod merces non vendantur ex intemione in^imo pretio reemendi. Porro
Salas id non obstare asserit, Escobar in the place quoted by the Calummatour.
That this coutract is not lawful, unless the Merchant that sells the wares,
be without any intention to buy them again at a cheap^rate: but Salas indeed
says this is not necessary. Now tell me truly, what sincerity is there in your
Translation?

You should have said, that according to Lessius, and in the very place by you
alleged, or rather corrupted, Adverte tamen, hunc modum contrahend^ s^pe non
car^re culpa in Mercatore, qui ex composito it a vendit, ut pretio infimo
redimat. Nam prom^ peceare potest contra charitatem, ^t si cogat miserum
hominem cmere me^ces, quibus non ^get, cum posset illi facile and absque suo
incommodo mutuum dare. Secundo peceare potest praebendo malum exemplum. Nam
contractus ille habet speciem mali and suspicionem usurae. Tertio seipsum and
alios infama^do. Non tamen tenetur ad restitutionem, ut inquit Navarrus: quod
intellige, non teneri exjustitia; sed sieri potest, ut teneatur ex charitate,
ut si alter ^it pauper, and grave sit illi tale detrimentum; cum ipse sit causa
talis incommodi gravis, teuetur illud ^movere ex charitate, cum commode potest.
When a Merchant sells wares, on condition to buy them again at a lower price,
he is likely to fin in the commerce. For first he may give a great wound to
Charity; as for example, by constraining some poor miserable person to buy
those stuffs or wares with great prejudice, he himself, in the mean time, not
knowing what to do with them; whereas without any inconvenience he could lend
him the money. Secondly, h^ may sin by the scandal which he gives; because
this commerce carries some s^ew of ill, and some suspiciou of Usury. In the
third place, by drawing both on himself and his a public in famy. All this
with one bite you have torn o^^.

In ^ine, you ought to have said, That if Lessius, condemning whosoever makes
this Contract to be guilty of sin, do not oblige them by any precept of justice
to make restitution, in this he only follows the judgment of Navarre, whose
name you have smoothered; and does it only, that he may make the duty of this
obligation to ^ise from the precept of Charity, no ways inferior to that of
Justice, in case that he, who buys, be in poverty, and that he, who ^ells,
canrestore it with out inconveniencing himself.

Is this your manner of abusing the patience of wise men? Is it only to say
three or four words of Italian or Spanish, (the Contract Mohatra, Barata,
Stocco) to prove all the Moral of the Jesuits Heathenish? Letter 5. Or can
you believe, a wise man will be satisfied with your insipid jestings, which can
only drum in weak heads, and cheat the heedlesse?

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
This Calumniating Jansenist may tell us, when he pleases, the other Methods,
he says, we have to teach worldly people, how to enrich themselves without
usury. But I assure him beforehand, we shall never approve that of the
Jansenist Priest; who invented the last year a way to open the Chest in
Churches, and made an assay on that in St. Medericks; nor that of that famous
Di^ectour, who long since found the Art of stealing Cabinets, and of making
himself rich in a moment, by the full sum of nine hundred thousand livers.
This Method is far more commodious then the Mohatra of the Spaniards, and the
Stocco of the Italian. All the world can tell us there are none so dexterous as
the Jansenists, when it concerns getting of money. But yet let them never hope,
those unlawful courses can eve^ fall into the approbation of Casuists.

The twenty sixth Imposture. French 10.
THat Father Bauny, a Jesuit, teaches, That young Maids have a right to dispose
of their Virginity without their parents consent, because he speaks thus in his
Summary of Sins, page 148. When that is done with the Daughters consent,
although the Father have cause enough to complain, it does not follow, that the
said Daughter, or he, to whom she prostituted her self, have done him any
wrong, or violated justice as to him. For the Daughter is in possession of her
virginity, as much as she is of her body, and may do what she will with it,
except only killing, or dismembring her self. Letter 9.

Answer.
Father Caussin, in his answer to the Moral Divinity, refuting this Imposture,
reproaches the Author of that Libell for his forgetfulness, in taking the
Commandment, which regards Chastity, for the seventh, although the Catholics
count it but the sixth: yet had he but reflected, that it is in that rank the
Calvinists place it, and the Minister Du Moulin, from whom he learned it,
calls it the seventh, in his Catalogue of Roman Traditions, page 328. he
would have seen his faithful Scholar had but too good a memory to remember
the Doctrine of his Master, though he wanted judgment to make use of it. It Is
in the same place, I mean in the Traditions concerning the seventh Commandment,
Thou shall not commit Adultery, page 329. where this Lay-Casuist of Port-Royall
found a mould for this Calumny. For amongst a great many Railleries, with which
Du Moulin fills up that Chapter, he says, It Is a Tradition of the Church, That
a Daughter, who shall commit Whoredom, after twenty five years, cannot for that
be di^inherited nor dispossessed of her portion; and on that he cites those
Orthodox Doctors, to laugh and jear at their opinion. The Jansenist, who
adores any thing that does but come from Geneva, endearing the Calvinists,
adds the reason of this Maxim, Because the Daughter, says he, is in
possession of her Virginity, as much as she is of her body; and when she
prostitutes her self, although her father have subject to complain, yet she
does him no wrong, neither does she violate justice as to him, and thereupon he
q^otes the Jesuits. The words which Du Moulin alleges, are of Navarr, lib. 4.
Consil. de cond. appos. Consil. 2. Those words, which the Jansenist b^ings, are
of Bannes Caeterum existimo, quod mulier est domina s^^ corporis, etc. Bannes
loc. citat.

Nam si virgo contra patris volunta^^m nupserit, valet matrimonium, nec ten^tur
quicquam ipsa restituere patri, nec vir illius. ergo etiam qui admisit stuprum
cum illa volente, non peccat con^ra Jus^^tiam, sed contra Cast^^atem. Bannes
^^^dem.


in 2. 2. q. 62. dub. 7. Concl. 1. and have been inserted into the fifth
Edition of Father Ba^ny: (for they are not to be found in the first) yet the
interpretation, which both the Calvinist and Jansenist gives them, could not
spring but from the invention of both those two Heretics, who by an horrible
wickedness accuse these Divines for teaching, That a young Maid, who
prostitutes her self, does not absolutely sin, because she is in possession of
her body; whereas they only say, That she does not sin against Justice, though
she sins against Chastity, which is one part of Temperance.

Do but only read that which Bannes tells us, in the place above cited; and
that which Father Bauny teaches after him, and you will evidently discover the
cheat of this Imposture, and render it more visible then the sun at noon. After
that Bannes had said, A Daughter, who prostitutes her self, violates Chastity,
but is not therefore obliged to make restitution to her Father; no nor he, who
disflowred her: because, though she offends him sensibly enough, yet the
virginity which she lost, is a personal good, belonging to her self, and not
to her father, who has only the care, not the possession. Bannes, I say, after
he had advanced that Doctrine, adds, That when he said, She does no wrong to
her Father, he speaks only of what concerns Praedicta conclusio intelligenda
est quantum ad laesionem integritatis, and damna temporalia consecuta. At vero
quantum ad honorem ablatum ab ipso patre dicimus, quod stuprator ten^tur
restituere illum honorem Patri, quantum fucrit possibile, in codem genere, ad
arbitrium. viri ^oni. Bannes ibidem.
the violating her virginity, and the temporal prejudice which happens to him:
but as to the infamy, which falls on the Father, he teaches, That he, who
committed that villainy, is bound to repair his Honor, by what way soever some
discreet person shall think most convenable. If he cheated her with promises of
Marriage, or by frighting her, then he is bound to give a portion, and even to
disinterest the Father, as well as the Daughter.

Father Bauny, in the 148. page of his Sum, does exactly follow Bannes. For
after he had said, If the sin of the Daughter be unknown, then he, to whom she
abandoned ^er self, is exempted from restoring upon that account; he asks this
question following, If there lie no obligation on him in regard to the Father,
for reparation of that injury, which he received in the person of his Daughter?
and answers, Not any: because, though he have sufficient cause to comp^ain; yet
as to him there is no injury done against justice. But at the same time he
teaches, If he did dec^ive her by promises of Marriage, he ought to be bound to
marry her: And if he do refuse it, pretending he had no intention to oblige
himself, he ought not to be absolved, page 149. And if he had stolen her away
without the consent of her Parents, although she her self did consent, he
affirms, That both the one and the other are obliged to declare that
circumstance to their Confessors, because (says he) in this there is an Act
of injustice; seeing that none against their will (especially if it be just and
prudent, as in this case is that of Fathers, Tutors and Guardians) can without
injury be deprived of that, which they have in charge, or belongs to them; as
is a Daughter in regard of her Father, Tutor, or Guardian. It Is then an
injustice in the said Daughter to suffer her self to be carried away, concludes
Rosella, etc. Sylvester, q. 6. concl. 2. of which she is as much obliged to
accuse her self, as he that took her away. page 153.

By what is said, any judicious person may perceive, that Bauny does not take
from a Father the power, which he has over his Daughter, but only that he
distinguishes between the right of the one, and the p^ss^ssion of the other;
because the honor of the Daughter is a Jewel in the keeping of the Father, but
not in his possession; the custody belonging to him, and the possession to her.
From whence it follows, That he who steals away a Daughter with her own
consent, violates the right of her Father, and sins against justice; if he do
not steal her away, he sins only against chastity, in taking that away, which
she ought to have preserved above her life: But if she consent, if her sin be
concealed, and her honor covered, he does no way violate justice as to the
Father, neither is he obliged to pay what he is damnified.

This is the Doctrine of Bauny, which is that likewise of Petrus de Navarre,
lib. 2. de Restitut. c. 3. n. 419. Of Bannes in 2. 2. q. 62. dub. 7. concl. 1.
Of Soto in 4. did. 18. q. 2. A. 4. Of Grassius, l. 2. Decision. c. 70. n. 13.
Of Megala, in 1. p. l. 5. c. 11. n. 10. op. 4. and of many other Casuists, who
are not of our Society.

You see now, what reason this Calumniatour has to say, the Jesuits propose
the most extravagant and the most obscene questions that can fall into a man's
imagination. Letter 9. page 205. and yet for all this, it is one of the most
ordinary questions the Schools treat of, and scarce any Divine, who does not
follow in this the opinion of St. Thomas in 2. 2. Now although their opinions
are divided, and that some hold, That though the Daughter do prostitute her
self, yet the justice is notwithstanding violated as to her Fathers regard; yet
nevertheless I have not heard of any, that would dare to say, That the
contrary Opinion was not probable.

By this you may see the ignorance of this Calumniatour, who relates this
question as extravagant, though indeed there be nothing more ordinary in the
Schools; and who condemns it as obscene, though there be no obscenity in it,
but what his lascivious imagination mixeth to corrupt it.

An Advertisement to the Jansenist.
Since you will undertake to reform the Moral, you should do well to read the
Book of Holy Virginity, an Original of one of your most eminent persons; and
there you will find Propositions both extravagant and obscene. I will not
publish them; not to save you from that confusion, which you have but too well
merited; but because I will not offend the eyes of my Readers; and therefore
content my self only to give you a Memorandum, of what censure the Sorbon gave
on the page 59. Haec doctrina, qua dicit aequalitatem efficientiae inter actum
generandi, qui exerceretur in statu innocentiae, and inter Sacramentorum
nostr^rum efficientiam, est scandalosa, temeraria, and Sacramentis ^ovae legis
contumeliosa.
of that detestable Book.

The twenty seventh Imposture.
THat it is a Drollery, where the spirit of man insolently sports with the love
of God, to dispute (as all Divines do) when a man is obliged to have an actual
affection for God, and declare their different opinions thereon. Letter 10.
page 237.

Answer.
If this Fool had only pretended to oppose a particular opinion, I would
pardon his Foppery; and if he had wanted respect only for one Divine, I could
tolerate his insolency: But he is run to the very extremity of folly, and
has chosen for his opposers the whole School of Divinty, striving to make that
pass for a ridiculous amusement, and unworthy of a wise man, which in
Controversia est non parvi momenti inter Doctores, de tempore quo tenetur
peccator Conteri. Cajetan in Summa, verb. Contritio.
Cajetans opinion is a question of the greatest importance, being concerning an
indispensable rule of our Salvation, most seriously to be considered, and most
difficult to be resolved; since the most learned Divines are divided in their
Opinions. One tells us, we are bound to look up to God by a certain moving of
Love, as soon as we begin to have the use of reason; as St. Thomas. Another
tells us, we must do it on every Holy Day; those days being therefore
dedicated to the Worship and Service of God; as Soto. Another, that this
Precept binds to make an interior act of Love, at the least once a year; as
Monsi^ur Du Val. Another, as often as we communicate; as Bannes: Another, as
often as God inspireth the Thought into us; as St. Anto^in. To desire to
terminate all these differences, were to aim at an impossibility: to choose a
good side is an act of wisdom; but indiscreetly to find fault with, and to use
the famous Doctors, as if they were Drolls, because they writ on this subject,
it is a want of judgment, and a drowning of ones self in the sight of all the
wise men of the world, without being pitied by any.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
If you would learn to Droll, and to play insolently with the Love of God and
your Neighbor, I would counsel you to read the first Letters of your Master,
the Abbot of St. Cyran. It Is an Original; it is an Antique; and I will show you
some excellent features of it, by which you may guess at the Genius of their
Author. He writes to Monsieur D' Andilly, and makes use (as he says himself)
of the most pure part of Piety, of Religion, and of the love of God, to assure
him of his affection.

Being desirous, The Letter of the Abbot of St. Cyran to Monsieur D' Andilly
Counselor to the King in his Counsel of State, from Poictiers 25. Sept.
1620. The Original is in Clermont College, and also printed in the Progress
of Jansenisme, page 123.
says he, once for all, to tell you with some expression equal to the depth of
my thoughts, in what manner I have dedicated my self to you, I have in that
essay done contrary to those excellent Penitents, who find a difficulty in
beating down their imaginations; I not being able to elevate mine to that pitch
my acknowledgements would carry them: which has been the cause, that in the
strife between my heart and spirit. (whose conceptions never reach my
inclinations) I chose rather to be silent a while, (expecting the turning and
meeting of those purified spirits, which help to form high imaginations) then
by endeavoring to say something, to say it with a diminution and prejudice to
the Source of my passions. But finding time slip away, and my self obliged to
give an account of the condition of that friend, (whom you have so often
recommended to me, and who has nothing of Feminine in him, besides virtue) I
have taken a pen; and as if I would have writ in spilling ink on the paper, I
have writ at one dash all that which follows. -- Sir, That you may be assured
of me, I will tell you in such manner, as if I gave you my Pa^^l: (and I wish
it may render me guilty before God, if ever I violate or transgress it) that
you shall always find my actions stronger; what do I say then my words? yea,
then my conceptions. What do I say, then my conceptions? yea, then my
affections and internal movings. For all those have something in them of the
body, and by consequence are not sufficient to give testimony of a thing that
is spiritual. So that I would not have you judge me, but by what is more
perfect, and which has no alloy of those things that are mixed with flesh,
blood, sumes, and imperfections; because my love to you rests in the center
of my heart before it opens, and dilating and stretching it self to you,
produces certain spirits, conceptions, imaginations and passions, which are
most excellent. I feel them as an aff^ctionate weight within me, and which I
dare neither bring forth, nor disclose, for fear I expose a Saint-like holy
fruit, (I had rather call it by that name, then any other) to my senses, to my
imaginations, to my passions; which tarnish immediately, and like clouds veil
the best productions of the soul. Insomuch that to give my self to you in as
much purity, as is imaginable, I will not do it either by imaginations, by
conceptions, by passions, by affections, by letters, nor by words; all these
being inferior to that which I feel in my heart, and which is so far elevated
above all other things, that granting to the Angels (in my Philosophy) the
knowledge of that which is exterior, and swims (to say so) above my heart,
there is none but God can dive into the bottom and center. Even I my self, that
offer you it, see scarce any thing that I can call by a name. I know nothing,
but that vast unlimited, yet certain and unmovable propension I have to love
and honor you; the which I shall be careful enough not to limit by any thing
since I would persuade my self, that I am in the infinity of a Radical (I had
almost said Substantial) Love, having respect to something Divine, and to God,
in whom Love is Substance. For I pretend, that my Love to you is infused into
the substance of my heart, into the very Center and Quintessence of my soul:
which being infinite, both in time, and in your virtue of acting, as he is, of
whom the soul is an image, I may boldly say, I am capable to operate toward
you with Love, as God does toward men. For I have always more power to act
and love efficaciously, then I could be thought to have by my actions. In this
there is nothing incredible, if a man know, it is for love of your excellent
virtues, that I make this so admirable vow. Can any one find fault with me in
offering you the Center of my Heart, you being, as you are, one self same thing
with God? Can any complain, that I express the inclinations I have for you, in
a language unknown to the greatest part of the world, which will laugh at it as
strange and barbarous; because they know not, what it is to to love God and man
after so high a manner? It was very necessary, that the Abbot of St. Cyran
should come into the world to teach us this unknown Language; and that he
should have Disciples to persuade us, That this is the Language of the Ages of
the Primitive Church, of Fathers and Councels, to kindle again that Sacred
fire, which the negligence of Pastors, and the slacknesse of Casuists, in these
500. last years had suffered to go out; and to teach us, what it is to love God
and men after so high a manner. What do you say to this Badinage, this profane
Foolery?

The twenty eighth Imposture. French 28.
THat the Jesuits violate the great Commandment, on which depend all the Law
and the Prophets: That they affirm, the love of God is not necessary to
Salvation. Letter 10. page 242. Engl. Edit.

Answer.
Who does this Calumniatour mean to oppose? Who does he talk of? Who does he so
violently complain of? Certainly he never read Divines. 'Twere impossible he
should publish so notorious an untruth, and so much against their honor, if he
had read them.

But according to his custom, he has without any ground yielded to the
Ministers of Charenton, God in the Tables of the Law neither commands Faith
nor Charity, Thom 1, 2. q. 10. a. 4. and 2. 2. q 79. a. 2. and 2. 2. q. 44. ar.
4.

Navarr. Manual. c. 11. in the Traditions of Du Moulin, page 341, 342.


who accuse Saint Thomas and Navarr for destroying the whole precept of the
Love of God: Only he is himself an abominable Falsi^ier, if he dare affirm,
after having read Divines, That they teach, The Act of Charity is not necessary
to Salvation. I will not allege out of the infinity of Authors, who establish
this necessity, any one who is not a Jesuit; because it is under ^^eir name he
wounds the reputation of the others* They speak then thus.

Cardinal Lugo Praceptum de diligendo Deo est omnino de jure naturae, and
obligaret, secluso quolibet Dei decreto, ut omnes concedunt. Disp. 7. de P^nit.
Sect. 12. n. 250.
The Precept of loving God is absolutely of the Law of Nature; nay, if there
were no decree of God, all Divines notwithstanding do agree in this, That a man
were bound to it.

Suarez Di^o primo, omnibus hominibus impositum esse hoc praec^ptum. Constat
Deuteronomy. 6. Diliges Deum Dominum tuum, etc. Et Matthew. 10. and 22. Hoc est primum
and maximum manda^um. Infra, Ratio conclusionis est, quia hujusmodi d^lectio
est medium necessarium ad salutem: om^ia ^utem talia media cadu^t sub
praeceptum. Suare^. Tract. de Charitat. Disp. 5. Sect. 1.
in the first place I say, This Precept binds all men. It is evident by the
Text in the sixth Chapter of Deuteronomy, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart. And by that in St Matthew, This is the first, and the greatest
of all the Commandments. Now the reason of this Conclusion is, That this love
is a necessary means to Salvation; and all means of this nature fall under the
Precept.

Valentia Cum quaerimus, quomodo and quando praeceptum de dilection^ Dei
obliget, pro certo ponimus illud extare: id enim constat manifest, tum ex
scriptura, tum ex ratione. Et infra. Dico primo obligare istud praeceptum, ut
Deum diligamus, non quomodocunque, sed tanq^ am ultimum finem, at que ad^o
sum appretiative, seu quod idem est, super omnia: non autem sum intensive.
Valentia, Tom. 3. Disp. 3. q. 19. punct.
When we ask, after what manner, and at what time the commandment of the love
of God obliges us, we take it for granted, that there is one; that being
evident both by Scripture and Reason. And a little further. In the first place,
I say, we are obliged to love God by this precept, not with a common love, but
as our last end, and by consequence with a love of sovereign esteem and
preference before all things.

Molina. Mihi persuadco, nos tencri sub culpa lethali, praecepto Charitatis
Dei, subvenire ac nos opponere, quando honor and gloria Dei and Christi
periclitarentur, id effi^tendo quod profuturum ad id speraremus, etiam cum
periculo nostro. Molina, Tract. 5. de Justitia, Disp. 59. page 3167. n. 7. Et
infra, page 3167. n. 7. Id vero non tollit, quod de Dei Charitatc sit peculiare
aliquod praeceptum, tanquam de re D^o debita, and tanquam de Medio ad Deum
vitamque sempiternam obtinendam necessario.
I am verily persuaded, that we are obliged by the precept of Divine Charity,
under pain of Mortal Sin, if there be any danger that the honor and glory of
God and Christ Jesus should be hazzarded before men, to step in, and oppose our
selves, and even with the peril of our lives to do all that we can hope may be
any ways serviceable. -- A little further. This does not hinder, but that
there is a particular commandment for the love of God, as a thing which is due
unto him; and as a necessary means to enjoy God, and obtain life everlasting.

Becanus. Praeceptum diligendi Deum, est duplex. 1. Generale, quod in toto
Decalogo continetur, cujus obligatio est observare legem Dei. 2. Particulare,
quod positive obligat ad actum Charitatis: five hic actus sit dilectio Dei,
five detestatio pec^ati, ut est offensa Dei. Hoc ergo posteriore oritur
specialis obligatio Contritionis. Becanus de Sacramentis. Cap. 35. quaest. 6.
number. 4.
There are two precepts, which command the love of God. The first is General,
and comprehended in the Decalogue, which obliges us to observe his Law. The
second Particular and Positive, which obliges us to make an act of Charity,
whether it be in acertain motion of love to God, or in a detestation of sin,
because it offends God. Now from this last precept proceeds that particular
obligation we have of being contrite.

Thomas Sanchez. Constat extare praeceptum de dilectione Dei, Deu. 6. and
Matthew. 22. Ratio est, quia actus dilectionis est ad salutem necessarius. 1.
Joan. 3. Qui non diligit, manet in morte. At de omnibus ad salutem necessariis
extat praeceptum. Sanchez libr. 2. Moral. cap. 35. number. 1.
It Is certain there is a precept commanding us to love God. The reason of it
is, because that act of loving God is necessary to salvation, according to St.
John, He that loves not, shall remain in death. Now all things which are
necessary to salvation, are commanded us.

Layman. Praeceptum hoc de diligend^ Deo primum and maxium dicitur, Matthew. 22.
quia est de excellentissimae virtutis primario actu, ^oque inprimis necessario
ad salutem. Nam Charitas est, inquit Sanctus Aug. in ^p. Joan. tract. 5. c. 3.
sine qua nibil prodest, quodc^nque habueris; quam si solam habeas, sufficit
tibi, Layman, libr. 2. Tract. 3. cap. 2. number. 2.
This precept, which concerns the love of God, is called in St. Matthew. 6. 22.
The first, and the greatest of all the Commandments, because it concerns the
first act of the most excellent virtue, and that which is most necessary to
salvation. For as St. Austin tells us, If we want Charity, all other things are
worth nothing; and if we have that, it alone is sufficient.

Azorius. Praeceptum Charitatis in sacris literis continetur, non uno in loco,
sed pluribus ac diversis. Primum, Deuteronomy. 6. deinde, Matthew. 2^. tum, Marci II.
postremo, Lucae 10. quibus in locis hisce verbis dictum est nobis, Diliges
Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo. Azor. libr. 9. Instit. Moral. cap. 4.
In many places of Holy Scripture we may find a command for Charity. First, in
the sixth Chapter of Deuteronomy. afterward in the 22. of Matthew. in the 11. of Mark,
and lastly. in the tenth of St. Luke. For in all these places it is said, Thou
shall love thy Lord thy God with all thy heart.

Tanner. Praeceptum de diligendo Deo habet se per modum principii omnibus noti.
Tannerus, Tom. 3. Disp. 2. de Spe and Charitate, quaest. 4. dub. 4. number. 62.
The Commandment of loving God is ranked amongst those, which are known to the
whole world.

Castro-Palao. Latum esse speciale mandatum de diligendo Deo, tenent cum D.
Thoma omnes ejus expositoros. Castro-Palao, Tom. 1. q. de Spe and Charitate,
Disp. 1. p. 2.
All Interpreters of St. Thomas agree with that Holy Doctor in this, that
there is a particular precept obliging us to love God.

Maldonatus. Respondeo, hoc tanquam certum statui, nos non nisi bona nobis
velle debere; and non aliter nosmetipsos, quam propter Deum amaturos esse, cum
Deum ex toto cord, ex tota auima, and totis viribus diligere jubeamur: quod si
facimus, non possumus nos diligere aliter quam oportet. Propterea jubemur
proximum eodem modo diligere. Maldonatus in cap. 22. Matthew. verse. 39.
I answer, we presuppose as a certain Maxim, that we ought not to wish any
thing, but good, to our selves, and that we do not love our selves otherwise
then for the love of God; since that we are commanded to love God with all our
heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength. If we do thus, we cannot
love our selves, but as we should. Therefore we are command to love our
neighbor, as our selves.

Cardinal Bellarmin. Scriptura Divina non solum praedicat dilectionem esse
donum Dei, sed etiam praecipit, ut diligamus Deum: ac certe non praecipit, ut
diligamus Deum ex habitu infuso, sed ut diligamus Deum ex toto cord. Leges
enim de actibus dantur, non de habitibus. Bellarmin. Tom. 4. l. 6. de Gratia
and libero Arbitrio. c. 7. page 892.
Holy Scripture does not only tell us, That Charity is the gift of God, but it
commands us also to love him. Now certainly it does not command us to love him
by any infused habit, but with all our heart: for Laws command the Acts, not
the Habits.

I should make a volume, if I would set down all the Authors of the Society,
who teach, That there is a particular precept injoyning the love of God. I say,
a Particular. As for the general precept comprehended in all the commandments
of God, never any Catholic doubted of it. And therefore in that the Iansenist
shows alike both his ignorance and his m^lice, thus confounding the different
precepts of Divine Love, with a certain shuffling, mixing and winding them one
into the other: whereas he should have distinguished them; that he might show us
what it is he dislikes, and give us by that a Testimony of his ability.

He ought to have said, there is a negative Commandment, which always has a
binding power over us, and which forbids the doing any thing, that may
prejudice the Love of God, and cast us out of the State of Grace; and that
there is not any one Author found, which will oppose this. But also there is
an affirmative precept, which according to Divines does not always bind us,
but only a^ some certain times; and that it is concerning this they dispute,
and question at what time it does oblige us.

He ought to have distinguished two affirmative Precepts; one of which is in
the Law of Nature, the other in the Positive Law: and have observed by the way,
thereare some Authors, who are not Jesuits, that have believed, a man might
fulfill the precept of Charity merely by natural love, but in this they were
opposed by the whole world.

He ought to have said, that there is one Positive Precept, which is commonly
called General, that binds us to an observance of all Gods Commandments, and
this is acknowledged by all faithful Catholics. And another particular,
which binds us to make certain formal Acts of the Love of God: which Sancius
in select. disputationibus. Disp. 1.
Sancius (who is no Jesuit) seems to deny, citing (though not right) for
confirmation of his opinion, St. Bernard, St. Augustine, Maldonatus, and Vasquez
quaest. 90. A. 1. Dub. 4. n. 41. Merito ergo diximus, esse pr^ceptum
dilectionis. Et paulo post. Sanctus Thomas tantum docet esse Charitatis
praeceptum, quod ego non nego: sed quando obliget, non explicat.
Vasquez. But Monsieur Du Val in his Treaty of Charity Du Vallius. Tract. de
Charitate.
refutes him, and has very perfectly explained St. Bernards meaning. For the
others it is no hard matter to justify them; since Vasquez in the very same
place he alleges, professes the quite contrary opinion: and Maldonatus speaks
only concerning the General Precept; which he does not distingush from the
ten Precepts of the Decalogue.

You see now what the Jansenist should have said, (had he dealt sincerely with
us) instead of his declaiming with so much heat against the Casuists: which
outrage he had never committed, had he but had more commerce with
School-Divines, and less with Heretics. For I defy him to show even any one
Jesuit, who teaches, That the Love of God is not necessary to Salvation. I do
not only speak of that effective Love, consisting in a perfect observance of
all Gods Laws, but also of that affective Love, as St. Bernard calls it, which
consists in the interior act of supernatural Divine Love. Neither indeed
durst he set upon any particular person, unless it were Antony Sirmond, with
whom he wrangles upon a conditional proposition, which he takes in a wrong
sense, and which yet does not destroy the great commandment; unless it be
destroying of it, to explain it after the same manner the Son of God himself
explained it in the Gospel, when he assured us, That he loves him, who keeps
his words. Which gave occasion to that famous Chancellor of the University of
Paris to say, Gerson i^ Opus^ulo Tripartito.
That the Law which binds us to love God with all our hearts, is conveniently
accomplished by men, if their works execute his Commandments.

Thus See Fath. Caussin in his answer to the Mo^al Divinity.
have eight Councels of France explicated the Precept of Charity; which
explication has been inserted into the Ritualls of Paris, Thoul, and Bourges,
by the Authority of the Prela^^s, to the end that it might be proposed to the
people, as the most pro^itable to the edi^ication of souls. And it is following
them that Father Sirmond said, (...) of the Defense of Virtue. page 23.
That we are bound under a grievous penalty to love God with an incomparable
love of an inestimable value, so great, that we never equal any thing with
him, nor ever v^luntarily stagger between his service and the creatures, being
u^certain to which of them to give our selves: much less, that we never pre^er
any thing before him, or suffer our selves in any important occasion to run to
any thing contrary to his will.

Is this ranversing the Gospel, and destroying the great commandment of the
Law? Is this ^^ying, The Love of God is not necessary to Salvition, as the
Jansenist says he does? He is so (...) from that opinion, that he professes
the cont^ary, That the ^ormal act of loving God is neces^^r^ by an absolute
necessity, by an indispensable necessity, by a necessity at least su^passing
that of Prec^pt, as all Divines acknowledge.

If a man, says he, were dying out of the state of Grace, unless Charity
assisted him, it is indeed then in effect necessary, and that necessitate
medii, (by a necessity of means) which is more then the necessity of Precept.
Whence it appears, that when he disputes, whether or no we are obliged to
produce interio^r acts of the love of God by the necessity of Precept, he
speaks only of that Divine Law, which Divines call Positive, not of that
which they call Natural; because it is grounded on natural Principles. And
yet he does not deny even the precept of Positive Law, but professes to explain
the meaning of St. Thomas, which he thinks to be doubtful and uncertain;
affirming, That it is not evident this Holy D^ctour acknowledged this
particular precept of the love of God; which he cannot say of the Natural
Precep^, because a little before he told us his opinion concerning the natural
Obligation every man has to add (...) himself toward God, so soon as he
begins to have the use of reason, to the end he may (...) the first fruits of
his heart to him.

But suppose he should absolutely deny the Positive Precept, as long as he
agrees with all Divines concerning the Natural Law, why will you quarrel with
him on a subtilty, which is never used but in School Disputes, and of which the
vulgar people are no ways capable? What prejudice can this Doctrine bring to
Christians, as long as they still know, they are bound by an indispensable
necessity to love God? What matter is it to the faithful, whether they be
bound by a Positive Law, or a Natural? By a necessity of means (necessitate
medii) or a necessity of Pr^^^pt? Will all the Gospel be destroyed for this?
Must we needs make such a noise for a distinction, which does not yet free us
from the obligation of loving God; but which contrarily grounds this obligation
on the essential principles of all reasonable creatures? Yet if this Doctrine
be to be condemned, why does not the Jansenist condemn it in its Source? Why
does ^e not set upon St. Bernard, who distinguishes these two sorts of Love;
the one Est Charitas in actu; est and in effectu. Et de illa quidem, quae
operis est, puto datam esse legem hominibus, mandatumque formatum. Nam in
affectu quis ita habeat, ut mandatur? Ergo illa mandatur ^d meritum, ista ut
praemium datur. Et infra -- Quomodo ergo jubenda fuit, quae implenda nullo modo
erat? St. Bern. Sermon 50. in Cantica.
effective, the other affective? And who assures us, the first is commanded us,
but not the second. If there be a good sense to be given his words, as Monsiour
Du Vall in his Treaty of Charity shows th^r^ is, why must that be holy in the
works of St. Bernard, and criminal in the writings of Father Sirmond?

Yet if we do but reflect on the drift of the Book, which he clamours against
with such passion and animosity, it will be no hard matter to find, what it is
which nettles this unjust Accuser. For the Author of that work, in his first
Treatise, aims at nothing, but the maintaining the merit and excellency of
vows, which was vilisied by an injurious Comment on the Book of Holy Virginity,
censured some years before in Sorbon. And in the second part, which is that we
speak of, Father Sirmond impugneth an error of certain absurd Heads, who under
pretense of going to God only by Love, cannot endure a man should help himself
with Hope and Fear; as if it were unworthy of a Christian to exercise those
virtues, they being full of self-love, imperfections, and sins. In which error
those men follow the spirit of Luther, who teaches, That all Moral Virtues,
and all the good works we do before we have Charity, are sins. A Proposition,
which was Censura Sorbonica. Anni 1521.
condemned in the Year 1521. on the fifteenth of April, as false, rash, capable
of frighting sinners from the amendment of their lives, and in fine tasting
somewhat of Heresy. (Falsa, temerarie asserta, peccatorum ab emendatione
retractiva, and sapiens haeresim.)

You see what it is, that displeases the Casuist of Port-Royall, in Father
Antony Sirmond: but not daring to tell it, and on the other side engaging
himself stoutly for the Interests of Calvin and Luther, whose opinions he
a^mires; he pretends this Father cannot be a Champion for those virtues,
unless he declare himself an enemy to Charity; nor maintain the other
commandments without violating that of the Love of God. Let us give him some
good advice on this Subject.

An Advertisement to the Jansenists.
To satisfy you, I have shown you, what Love of God it is, which according to
all Divines is necessary to salvation. Now to bring you out of those errors,
into which you run, give me leave a little to teach you, what Love it is not:
and this according to the judgment of able Persons.

It is not at all necessary to give ones whole heart to a creature, and to love
it, as much as God himself. This is a little ^oo much for a Directour of
Consciences. When you over-looked the Christian and Spiritual Letters of the
Abbot of St. Cyran, you ought for the honor of your Sect, to have reformed
that Complement you make him write to a certain Nun. See the Christian and
Spiritual Letters, w^i^h Monsieur D' Andilly published under the name of the
Abbot of St. Cyran: which are far more polisht, then those which are kept in
Cle^m^nt College, written by the Abbots own hand, as you may easily judge by
what follows.
I am now, more then ever, assured of your great love to God; and it is that
which redoubles mine to you, rendering me as much yours, as I am his; who never
shares any thing, but gives all he loves, as I give all my whole heart to you.
Letter 49. You will confess, these words might have been left out; and that
they are not very necessary to Salv^tion.

It is not at all necessary, in being Christianly charitable, to be more
transported then those, who fall into rage, into drunkenness, and into a
passion of sensual love. Those are the expressions of that great Abbot of St.
Cyran writing to Monsieur D' Andilly.

This is the first Letter of those which are kept in Clermont College, written
by tho Abbot of St. Cyran to Monsieur D' Andilly the 25. of Sept. 1620.
A man must be passionate, (as we are) for that invisible beauty, (says he)
before he be able to speak, or have the least knowledge of it. This Love
therefore is interdicted your Court, because they never heard, That that
passion, which troubles and stifles their wits, illuminates ours: and that (as
in Religious Orders, which are nothing, but certain Fraternities of men living
and dying together) perfection consists in Charity; even as 'twas only a
mutual affection, which bound together that famous Squadron of Greeks, and
rendered them invincible. The knowledge of the things of God springs up only
out of the Love we have of him. All the wits on earth, how sharp and knowing
soever they be, can never understand any thing in our Caball, unless they be
first initiated into those Mysteries, which as Orgies were the Sacifices of
Bacchus; where the Heathens did run about like mad men, and tear and cut
themselves.
Holy Orgies, render their spirits more transported one toward another; like
those who fall into madness, into drunkenness, and into the passion of
carnal Love. Three faults, by which our Master in his Books illustrates that
unspeakable perfection those have, who unite, or make themselves one with him,
by a certain amorous Devotion; which has different movings, worthily
illustrated by those of the Sun: which have an uniformity in their disformity;
which has something looking like spots, which we may exemplisie by those we see
in the body of the Moon; which has disorders, like those of the four seasons,
which are the same in their variety; of which motions the violent (which are
those of Winter) introduce again the beauty of the Spring: which is a Sally of
my pen you ought to welcome. In fine, it is not necessary to take God and
Monsieur D' Andilly for one and the same thing, as that same Abbot did; and to
think ones self happy in the union of these two: nor is it necessary, that the
passion one has for an illust^ious Solitary Person of Port Royal, should be
always in an eminent height, from whence there is no possible descent: Nor is
it necessary to salvation to say, That God loves that person by us with an
infinite love; which we cannot explicate, but by Letters as strangely placed,
as the Characters of the Sibylls, and as hard to understand, as Hebrew: which
the first Hebrews never learnt but by Cabal.

This admirable Love belongs only to the Heads of your Sect. A man must be of
your Cabal to be perfect in it. I am confident, there are very few Wits can
write a Language so high, as is that, which himself admires in one of his
Letters, very carefully kept in Clermont College. Hearken a little, how he
speaks of that Love, which flames in his Breast: for he deserves, that all the
World should understand him.

Saint Cyran's mad Raptures in expressing himself to his Neighbor Monsieur D'
Andilly.
Me thinks, says he, on one side, that the Characters of Friendship are as
estimable as Letters; and on the other side having been surprised, about eleven
a clock, by him, for whom I write; and having neither a good Pen, nor good Ink,
which are two wants, into which I often fall. I had then a certain inability to
write better; which is more excusable between two Friends, then in any other
thing not bounded by the simple will, as true Love is; which laughs at those
powers and effects, of which other dignities boast: and finding my self bound
by that powerful Language which your Letter speaks, it is no strange thing, if
being desirous to reform you in your style, and rank you with my own, that is,
with that of the enamoured of God, who only Contemplate and Act without
speaking, I am become as obscure in the expression of Conceptions, as in
Letters. For it was not my pen, which was the instrument of my haste, so much
as the ardent desire I had, which made me hasten, more then either the time or
my hand, to tell you, that I did not take your vulgar and common fashion of
speaking, although it was extremely well deduced, by which you engage your self
to me in occasions for my Friend, without remembering you, that that which I
have got on you through your voluntary donation, to prevent all time, and all
occasions, and all the power, which you could ever acquire; and rend^ing my
self, as at the very point of a Temporal E^ernity, wh^re our friendship did
begin, the Master of the ground gave me a right to all the fruit: and because
it is impossible, while I write to you, that I should not feel a burning fire
in my Spirits, which elevates me, and makes me soar very high, I have taken
occasion from thence to begin a Discourse, which I admire in its root, and
which you have had cause to contemn in its branches and leaves, for the little
grace I gave those words I made use of to express it; which gave me the
knowledge, that I never before had, of the admirable Secrets of our Master; the
which not being able, but imprudently, to tell to any other but your self, and
not being able to make them come out of that my Spirit, but with the same
precipitation of the Spirit of God, which compells me violently to tell you
them, think whether you had rather I should lose them by writing them slowly,
or dictating them to a Servant, who dishonours them, and cools them with a
greater certainty; then if I should cast them as informed seeds, falling from
heaven, upon your Spirit, by Letters as ill ranged, as were those of the
Sibyls, when they writ in their fury the Oracles of the Gods; It Is what
(probably) this Monsieur D'Andilly has done in the Christian and Spiritual
Letters of this Abbot.
to the end you may repolish them, and give them by your Holy and Sublime
Thoughts that perfection they desire. It Is, sincerely, the only cause of the
haste I make, that by my own disorder I may appear so much the more united to
you, as I pretend to be, using the same disorder, with God: which is not so
great, but that if you do me the honor to preserve my blotted paper, I should
hope, that amongst your discourses it would help you for entertainment in those
hours, which you would dedicate to God, to give him an account of the riches,
which he gives those who love him in all hours. You will see, that being there
is nothing so hard to read as Hebrew, and that the first Hebrews never learnt
it but by Cabal and Tradition, it is not far from the excellence of Divine
Affection, which ties me to you, to labor to understand that which I would
say, when I write in the language of God. All the rest being but a shadow, and
a fraudulent disguize, of which I am as much an enemy, as I find my self
blessed in the union of God and you, which I conceive to be the same thing.

The twenty ninth Imposture. French 29:
THat it is a new Opinion, and particular to the Jesuits, that Attrition, which
is grounded on the fear of punishment, is sufficient with the Sacrament. Letter
10. Engl. Edit. page 231.

Answer.
If this Calumniatour offend through malice, he deserves a severe censure to
rectify him: and if through ignorance, he has need of a Master, which may give
him more certain knowledge, then Port-Royall has done. Let us carry him to
Sorbon. He will find there a Censure by the most able Doctors against them,
who maintain with him, That Attritiou is not sufficient with the Sacrament; and
a charitable Lesson by the most eminent Writers of that Faculty, which will
enlighten his judgment perfectly on the Subject of Attrition and Contrition,
in which he is yet very ill instructed. I will make him confess all the
errors, he has run into on this Subject in his Tenth Letter, merely by
opposing the Doctrine of these Authors to that of the Jansenists.

The Jansenist believes, it is a particular Opinion of the Jesuits, That
Attrition only is sufficient with the Sacrament. Yet Monsi^ur Gamasche a
Sorbonist, to undeceive him, assures us, That it is a common Opinion of Divines,
and ordinarily received in the Schools. Doctrina communis, ac vulgo recepta.

The Jansenist tells us, That the Jesuits have had so great a power over men's
spirits, That, excepting Divines themselves, there are scarce any, who do not
believe, that that which is now held concerning Attrition, was held from the
beginning as the only belief of the Faithful. Caeterum communis ac vulgo
recepta aliorum doctrina est, sufficere Attritionem simpliciter cum Sacramento
ad Justificationem: etiamsi cognita illa ^uerit in genere Attritionis. Ita enim
d^cent Paludanus in 4. did. 19. q. 1. A. 2. Adrianus de Confessione, q. 5. B.
Antoninus 3. p. tit. 14. c. 19. Sylvester verb. Confessio. Roffensis Art. 5.
contr. Lutherum. Canus Relect. de Poenit. 5. p. ad. 2. Estque manifest
sententia D. Thomae. Gamachaeus in 3. p. de Poenit. Sacramento. c. 9. p. 550.
Monsieur Gamasche, to undeceive him, will tell him, he need not exclude
Divines out of the number of those, who think, that which is now held
conce^ning Attrition, was ever not the only belief of the Faithful, but the
judgment of the greatest persons; since it is the opinion of Paludanus, of
Adrianus, of St. Antonine, of Sylvester, of Roffensis against Luther; of Canus,
and (above all) of St. Thomas, who was clearly of this opinion, Estque
manifest sententia D. Thomae.

The Jansenist was displeased at the Abbot of Boisic, for maintaining in his
second part, page 50. That it is a very Catholic Doctrine, and which is very
near matter of Faith, and very consonant with the Council of Trent, (thus this
Abbot speaks, whose terms ought not to be changed) That Attrition alone, yea,
and grounded only on the pains of Hell, which excludes the will of sinning, is
a sufficient disposition to the Sacrament of Penance; and that as to the
contrary opinion, they will not condemn it altogether of Heresy, but yet they
will tax it of error and rashness. Monsieur Du Vall on the other side t^l^s
us, That the Council of Trent, Sess. 14. cap. 14. has declared, Quinto:
Sessione 14. c. 14. Attritionem ^^^ctam Sac^amento Poenitentiae ad remissionem
pe^catorum su^^icere; quod ^isi nondum tarquam de side sit definitum, a
declaratione tam^^ Concilii est ita fidei proximum, ^^ q^i contra s^n^it,
graviter err^t. Du Vallius T. 2. Tract. de Discipli^a Ecclesiasti^^, q. 7. page
802.
That Attrition with the Sacrament is sufficient for the remission of sin: and
that although it be not a decided and resolved point of Faith, yet it is so
near being one, that since the Declaration that Council made, it is a most
notorious error to dispute it.

If he be not content with the witness of one Doctor, let him consider the
Censure which the So^bon made against the Interpretation of the Book of Holy
Virginity, which Monsieur Isam^^rt relates in his Treaty of Penance in th^se
words, Quae tradidit de Attritionis insufficienti^, and contritionis, and
perfectae charitatis absolut^ necessitate ad recipiendum Sacramentum
poenitentiae, damnavit qu^qu^ Facultas, and censuit has propositiones esse
quietis animarum perturbativas, communi, and omnino tutae praxi Ecclesiae
contrarias, efficaciae Sacramenti poenitentiae imminutivas, and insuper
temerarias and erroneas. Ysambert. de poenit. disp. 14. A. 6. in ^ine.
The faculty has also condemned that which he teaches concerning the
insufficiency of Attrition, and the absolute necessity of Contrition, grounded
on the motive of perfect Charity, for the receiving the Sacrament of Penance,
etc. And she judged those Propositions capable to disquiet the peace of
Consciences, contrary to the sure and ordinary practice of the Church, tending
to the prejudice of the efficacy of that Sacrament of Penance; and moreover
that it is rash, and very erroneous.

The Jansenist is displeased wi^h that which Valentia teaches, That Contrition
is not necessary for the obtaining the principal effect of the Sacrament, but
on the contary, that it is rather an hinderance. The faculty of Paris, to
satisfy that scruple which troubles him, has declared, that the contrary
opinion of Fath. Seguenot weak^^s the efficacy of the Sacrament of Penance, in
this, that Contrition justifies the sinner, and restores the first Grace, which
is the principal effect of that Sacrament; and which it could never produce,
if Contrition were a disposition absolutely necessary: which was the reason,
That Monsieur Gamasche in the place above cited said, That if Attrition was not
a sufficient Disposition, the Sacrament of Penance could be no longer
Sacramentum mortuorum, the Sacrament of the dead, nor the power of Priests, (to
speak properly) the power of the Keys, but only a declarative power of the
remission of si^s, which is one of the secret Maxim^s of the Jansenists. This
manner then of speaking cannot ^ffend any wise man; nor is it more strange to
say, That the Contrition, which pr^cedes the Sacrament of Penance, hinders it
from producing its principal ^ff^ct, (ob^^at quo minus sequatur effectus) then
to say, That Contrition justifies the sinner, and restores him life. For it is
the same thing as if he should say, the first Physic, which recovers a sick
person, hinders the second from restoring health, and saving him from the
danger, out of which he is already happily delivered.

The Jansenist will wonder, that Fagondez and Granado should dare to say, That
Contrition is not necessary in the point of death; because if Attrition with
the Sacrament were not sufficient at the hour of death, it would follow, that
Attrition were not sufficient with the Sacrament. But he speaks not truly.
These Authors do not say absolutely, That Contrition is not necessary, even at
a man's death. They say indeed with Monsi^ur Du Vall, (whom I cite to sweeten
that gall which lies in hi^ heart) Primus casus, quando quis in evidenti
periculo versatur, and conscius sibi est alicujus peccati mortalis, si desint
Confessarii, tenetur concipere Contrition^m, quae quidem ^ontinet, vel
virtualiter, vel formaliter, amo^em D^i super omnia. -- Subdit post al^^t^m
rationem. Dixi, Si non adsit copia Confessatii. Quia si adsit, cum sufficiat
Attritio cum Sacramento, Attritio aut^m tantum exigat, secundum multos,
displicentiam peccati, prout reatu^ damnationis ater^ae, aut jacturam regni
coelestis inducit, non necessario exigit amorem D^i super omnia. Du Vallius
Tract. de Charitate, q. 20. page 687. col. 1.
That Contrition is necessary at ones death, if a man be in mortal sin, and
cannot have a Priest to confess to: But if a man can have one, th^n Attrition
being sufficient with the Sacrament; and on the other side it being not
necassary, according to the opinion of very many, that it should be grounded on
other motives, then the fear of pains, or the loss of heaven, it does not
bind a man necessarily to produce an act of the Love of God by preferring ^im
before all things.

I know well enough, that Monsieur Gamasche is of a contrary opinion, as well
as Suarez, Sanchez, and Comitolus Jesuits; and that he teaches with them, That
although Attrition be sufficient with the Sacrament, nevertheless a man is
obliged at that definitive moment, on which depends an Eternity, to make his
salvation certain by all means, not only necessary, but possible; and
consequently to force ones self ^ervently to produce acts of sincere
Contrition; if it be only, says he, Gamachaus loco jam citato.
to arrive at a true Attrition; which many times is only imaginary in great
sinners. Yet if this Divine has the knowledge of a Doctor to maintain his
opinion, he has not the rashness of a Jansenist to condemn that of others; and
contents himself to reason like a Scholar, without jesting like a Buffoon, to
bring solid proofs without any Vizards, or Impostures, to oppose vigorously, to
defend himself skilfully, yea, and to conquer with a modesty; but far from
insulting with an insolency, to hide the shame of his being overcome.

The Jansenist will think it strange to find Casuists, that hold, Attrition may
be holy and sufficient for the Sacrament, although it be not supernatural. He
is a little too hot in his ^eal. I am confident he would be more moderate, had
he but read Leander and Monsicur Gamasc^e: f^^ they would have taught him, That
it is not the opinion of those, whom he thinks he fights against, but of
Citantur pro h^c opinione Dominicus Soto and Navarrus a Gamachaeo, Tract de
Poenitent. Sacrament, cap. 9. Citantur reliqut a Leandro, Tom. 1. Tract. 5. de
Sacrament. Poenit. Disp. 1. ^. 47. * Sua^ez disp. 20. sect. 2. number 8. Molina,
in Concordia, ^isp. 14. in fine. Granados, disp. 3. number. 4. Vasqu^z q. 92. a.
2. de unico. Ci^antur hi omnes, and alii plures a Leandro, loco sup^a citato,
Dominicus Soto, of Navarr, of Bona ina, of Canus, of Ledesma, of Victoria, of
Caprcolus, of Richardus, of Caj^tan, of Sylvester: which * Suarez a J^suit
refutes; which Vasquez a Jesuit disapproves; which Father L' Amy a Jesuit
condemns, even in that very place which his Calumniatour alleges; which
Granado a Jesuit rejects; which Molina a Jesuit judges not safe in Faith, and
in effect, which does not come under the common approbation of Divines, if it
be not explicated of that Attrition, which is natural in its self, and
supernatural in its principle, and in its circumstances; forasmuch as it
proceeds from the movings of an interior Grace, and that it is accompanied
with Hope, with the fear of God, and with Faith.

In fine the Jansenist will scarce be able to suffer, that the Abbot of Boisic
should call the obligation, which he would lay on us, even at this time, to
make an act of perfect Contrition as a disposition to the Sacrament of Penance,
a burdensome and difficult obligation. I will entreat him to listen to an
ancient Doctor of the Sorbon. Tartarctus D^ct^r Parisiensis, in ^. did. ^,
quaest. ult.. deinde Doctor.
I put the case, says he, that a man have committed ten sins, and that some
while after acknowledging his fault he should say, I have sinned, and should
begin to detest his sins, but with so little fervor, that the detestation were
not meritorious, even in the least proportion; but that he should have a
regret, though but a weak one, for having so offended. I ask in this case
whether his sins be forgiven him, in regard of that detestation? And I answer,
No; they are not ^ because it is not in that degree of intention, which God has
ordained for that effect. After this suppose this man meet a Priest, and go to
Confession, then we must not say, his sins are not forgiven him, quia hoc esset
nimis durum in side, because to say so would be too hard in Faith: and
therefore I say his sins are pardoned; because the power of the Sacrament, and
of the Keys, do supply what is wanting in that interior moving.

It is in the sense this Doctor speaks, that the Abbot of Boisic has said,
That notwithstanding there is nothing more useful, nor more tending to
Salvation, then the practice of Contrition, yet the act being one of the most
difficult, which charity can practice, (unum ex difficillimis, quae Charitas
praestare potest) as Jansenius himself confesses) it would be very Jansen. Tom.
3. lib. 5. Cap. 33.
burdensome to oblige us to it under pain of Damnation, when ever we confess;
and to make that Disposition necessary to the Sacrament of Penance, which is
contrary to the Declaration of the Council of Trent, the Censure of Sorbon,
and the common opinion of Divines, either Ancient or Modern, as Monsieur
Gamasche tells us.

An Advertisement to the Jansenist.
Since you continue so constant in telling us, That perfect Contrition is
absolutely necessary to the Sacrament of Penance, and that Attrition is not
sufficient, notwithstanding that the Proposition in the judgment of the Sorbon
is both rash and erroneous, tell me also, if you be resolved to defend those
other Maxims of your Sect concerning this Sacrament? Do you agree with the
Abbot of St. Cyran in the opinion. Monsieur de Langres witnesses as much in
the Letter he writ touching the Doctrine of this Abbot.


That this Sacrament does not remit Sins?

That Absolution is not operative, but merely declarative, of the pardon
granted?

That Venial sins are not sufficient matter for the Sacrament of Penance?

Do you believe with Monsieur Arnauld, In his Book of Frequent Communion. page
326, 327. ibid. page 521.
That the Absolution of the Priest is then only real, when it follows the
sentence of the invisible Judge: That we ought not to lose any by our Pastoral
Authority, but those, whom our Master has raised up by a quick^^ing Grace: That
sometimes exterior Penances may be so great, that they may supply the want of
inward Repentance?

Are you of the same opinion with Monsieur Maignard, who was once Curate of St.
Croix in Roven, and Disciple of the Abbot of St. Cyran, In a Letter which he
writ to the Abbot of St. Cyran: which is in the Memorandums that were used in
the Process of that Abbot.
That in the Sacrament of Penance it is not necessary to confess the number of
Mortal Sins, nor those Circumstances which change the nature of the Sin,
supposing the Contrition to be such as is required?

Do you believe with Monsieur D' Andilly, in the Christian and Spiritual
Letters, which he published under the name of the Abbot of Saint Cyran, See the
first Edition.
That we cannot make an available Confession of our Sins, if the Soul has not
first been renewed by Grace. page 228. Let. 26. That the Confession of Venial
Sins came into common practice in the Church, but very lately: forasmuch as
during the first thousand years and more, for the wiping out of Venial Sins,
those just persons, who committed them, thought it sufficient to choose of
themselves some light Penances, before they went to assist at the Holy
Sacrafice of the Mass, page 265. Let. 32. That Confession was the last remedy,
which was practiced in the Church, for the washing away of Venial Sins, all
the others being more ancient, page 769. Let. 92.

Do you believe with the Translatour of the Book of Holy Virginity, Disciple of
the Abbot of St. Cyran, page 134. Censura Sorbonae Haec doctrine, qua ait ex
ordine and nature a rei requiri, quod sit publica confessio, est nova, falsa,
and periculosa. Censura Sorbonae jam citata. Quae tradit de Attritionis
insufficieutia, and Contrittionis ex perfect a charitate absolut a necessitate
ad recipiendum Sacramentum Poenitentiae, and quae addit and approbat de
Absolutione, quod ^ihil aliud sit, quam declaratio Juridica peccati jam
remissi, damnavit quoque facultas, and ^^nsuit has propositiones esse qui^tis
animarum perturbativ^s, communi and omnino tutae praxi Ecclesi^ contrarias,
efficaciae Sacramenti Poenitentiae imminutivas, and insuper temerarias and
^rroneas.
That both the order and nature of the thing requires, that Sacramental
Penance should be performed in public. And page 129, and 130. That whosoever
should say, Absolution is nothing but a judicial Act, by which the Priest does
only declare, not simply, but with the Authority, and in the place of Jesus
Christ, that the Sins are forgiven, he would propose nothing, neither against
the Council, nor against Ancient Divines. And in page 129. That true
Contrition, which is an act of Charity, is absolutely necessary for the
obtaining the Grace of the Sacrament of Penance; and that it being certain,
this sort of Charity reconciles a man with God, and puts him in his grace and
favor before he has received the Sacrament in effect, there rests nothing
for Absolution to do?

In ^ine, do you believe, that the Abbot of St. Cyran had any great Contrition
for his Sins, and that he was perfectly disposed, when he confessed himself to a
Priest, only to oblige him to a secrecy, in those wicked Maxims he had told
him; which he laughed at afterward, telling it to the Abbot of Prieres?

Here follows the sincere Deposition of that Abbot, who is yet living, in a
very high opinion both for his Knowledge and Honesty.

After that, the said St. Cyran told him a certain story, which he said past
betwixt him and another Ecclesiastical Person, to whom he had also discovered
the foresaid Maxims: And that fearing, lest the said Ecclesiastique should
relate them to the Bishop of Poitiers, or to some other, he stopped him presently
upon the way, where they were talking of these matters, and desired him to hear
his Confession, even in that very place and time: to which the said
Ecclesiastique consented, though declaring his astonishment at the suddenness
of the resolution. He made his Confession, and declared in it, That he
acknowledged he ^ad offended in proposing the said Maxims; and then demanded
his Absolution: the which, he said, he did to oblige the said Ecclesiastique to
keep the said Maxims as a secret under the seal of Confession; which otherwise
he could not have been secret in. When he told this, he laughed so heartily,
that the Deponent never saw him laugh so much before: at which was present
Barcos his Nephew, who likewise laughed at the same story. I do not know,
whether this be the joy Penance brings to your solitary Persons: But I dare
assure you, it is not that, which the true Conversion of Sinners causes in
Heaven. Medi^ate of this seriously, and do not think so much of others, as to
forget your selves.

An ANSWER to those Letters, in which the JANSENIST endeavors to clear
himself from the precedent IMPOSTURES.
A Word to the Reader concerning the Subject of the following Letters.
AFter that the Author of the Provincial Letters had vented his malice
against the Jesuits, and run through their Moral in his fifth, sixth, seventh,
eighth, ninth, and tenth Letters, the Jesuits laid open to the world in the
precedent Impostures, his gross ignorance, his falsenesse in alleging
Authors, and his groundless Calumnies; and withal taxed him and his party of
many Enormities, and especially of Heresy. Upon this the Author of the
Provincial Letters (as it behoved him) undertook to make good what he had writ,
and to clear himself and his Party from Heresy. This is the aim of all his
Letters from the eleventh to the eighteenth. On the contrary the aim of these
Answers is to show, that he has not made good any thing, but that he remains
still ^nd^r the same Censures. This the Reader will be pleased to take notice
of; otherwise he may wonder to find some things in these last Provincial
Letters, which are answered only cursorily, and by the by, or perhaps not at
all. They are not omitted, because they are unanswerable: No, they might easily
be answered, and have been answered in former writings; But the reason, why
they are here omitted, is, because they are impertinent, and do not belong to
the present purpose, which is only to examine the Imp^stures, and see, whether
they be true ^r no.

That there, which the Reader shall find fully done, is, that the twenty nine
Impostures, (taken out of those six Letters, where the Secretary of Port.
Royal undertakes to tax the Moral of the Society) all stand still palpable
Impostures; and are not at all defended, but rather made more notorious by the
Jansenists endeavoring a defense. And they standing so, the Fathers of the
Society have their intent; which was to declare, that the Doctrine of the
Society is falsely calumniated, being in its self, as it lies in their
approved Authors, good and solid Doctrine: and only made to appear bad by the
false Citations and Forgeries of the Jansenists; who are convinced not to have
cleared themselves, either of Imposture or Heresy.

And this of it self is a sufficient Answer to all the rest. For as a convinced
Perjure cannot cast any man in Law by his Oath; so a convinced Detractour
(especially in so many, and so malicious Calumnies) ought not in reason to be
believed in any new slanders, which he forgeth against those, whom he takes
for his enemies, and who have convinced him.

An Answer to the Jansenists Eleventh Letter.
Argument.
1. THat the Author of the Provincial Letters makes no Answer to the main
points he stood accused of: which were of contemning Sorbon, contemning all the
Bishops of France in their Synod, contemning the Popes Authority. Also of
holding Intelligence with Geneva and Du Moulin, and being himself a Jansenian
Heretic, and the like. 2. By the way his foolish Postscript is taken notice
of; and his clipping the words of Father Garasse, in favor of Geneva. 3. That
he gives no satisfactory Answer, why he took his Letters out of a Libell burnt
by the Hangman. 4. That he answers not any of the charges laid against him
for falsifying Authors, though many of these, and all the precedent Letters
were out in print, long before he wrote his Eleventh Letter. 5. His defense of
Raillery (the Theme of all this Letter) is but an abridgement of a Treatise,
the Jansenists formerly writ against those, who laughed at their Illuminates.
6. How unworthy a boldness it is in him to say, That in Raillery he imitates
the Saints, and God himself. 7. An Antithesis, or Contrecomparison of that
Irony, which the Fathers sometimes use against public vice, and his Railing
with false Calumnies at those, whom he ought to respect. 8. His Rules of
Raillery broke by himself, and his Accusation of some Jesuits Speeches
retorted on himself.

SIR
I Have attentively read over your Eleventh Letter; in which (though written
for your vindication) I have not observed any thing, but what turns to your
dishonor, and produces an effect clean contrary to what you aim at. For so
defective it is, that of the many Reproaches, which the Jesuits have with
reason fastened upon you, you only touch that of Raillery, which is the least
of the crimes you are charged with. Nay, I find it in truth so weak a piece,
that instead of washing away that stain, it makes you even to condemn your
self, and renders you yet further culpable.

You could not be ignorant, Sir, that those Fathers accused you of reviving, in
your first Letters, the errors of Jansenius, condemned by the whole Church; of
sporting your self insolently with the Censure of Sorbon, which did but follow
that of the Pope and Bishops. Whence comes it then you answer not that
Accusation, but because the Crime is so manifest to the whole world, that you
cannot clear your self; and is besides so pleasing to you, that you have no
will to repent of it?

You know they have convinced you of Correspondence and Collusion with Geneva;
clearly proving the conformity of your Impostures and Calumnies, with those
which Du Moulin published in his Traditions against the Roman Church. You
cannot pretend, that you had not heard of this, till you were closing up your
Letter; in regard the writing which convinces it, was made public a whole
month before, though you would not take notice of it. Why have you not
explained your self touching a point so tender, and of such great concernment?
You had a fair occasion for it, when you spoke Garass* in his Summary, page 510.
of the Name of Jesus thus commonly figured, ^^S where you make Father Garassus
say, That some have taken away the Cross, leaving only the Characters thus,
^^S, which is a Jesus dismounted. For there needed no more, but the addition of
his following words, which end his period and conceit, viz. making, as it
were, by a mystery, from all Antiquity the Arms of the City of Geneva. You
would better have illustrated that Authors pretended impiety, by informing us,
That the dismounted Jesus makes the Arms of your dear Geneva; and consequently,
that he accuses your good friends the Calvinists, of having been the Thieves
that robbed it of its Cross. Confess the truth; should you not have cited that
passage entire, and not have cut off an end of it, which is essential to its
perfection? Why feared you not the blame that is laid upon you, for falsifying
and changing the sense of such Authors, as you have a mind to decry? But
because you durst not so much as point out the place, from whence you derived
your Doctrine.

Moreover, Sir, the Jesuits had taxed you, that your Letters were but a heap
of Old Impostures, already published in that Libell of the Moral Th^ology,
which was torn in pieces at Bourdeaux by an Ordinance of Parliament, in the
year 1644. And yet, without making the least mention of that infamous writing,
as though you intended a probationall Essay of the Skill you have learnt in Du
Moulins School, (where you have served, as it were, an Apprentiship to improve
your self in the Art of Raillery and Slander) you would softly wipe away that
shame by saying, They complain of your repeating what had formerly been said
against them. Should you not have dealt more heartily with us? and have freely
told us the reason, why you thought it not ^it, it should be buried in the
infamy of its punishment? And were you not also bound to inform us at the same
time, by what authority you have made your self the universal Corectour, or
rather Corruptour of the Moral; you who are neither Doctor, Priest, nor
Eccles^^stique? Wherefore is it, that of all the Casuists quoted by Du Moulin
touching the Opinions you imp^gn with him, (as Navarr, St. Antonine, and St.
Thomas) you only attaque the Jesuits? and with what artifice, suppressing the
names of those, do you disguise, falsify, and corrupt their Doctrine, so as no
man can know it to be theirs?

These are the Crimes you had been charged with, before the last Answer of the
Jesuits, containing your Impostures; and which, without doubt, you would never
have dissembled, but that you found it impossible, to make any passable reply
to it. Wherefore, Sir, I take your silence for a forced avowment of the truth
of those Accusations, and declare, that I shall henceforth look upon you as no
other, then one of Calvin's Disciples, blasted by the censure of the Pope; as a
Detractour, condemned by the Sentence of Parliament; and as a Scoffer, decryed
in the judgment of all wise men.

It Is true, Sir, you glory in this last Title, and employ the greatest part of
your Letter in setting forth the praise of Raillery; insomuch, that you will
needs persuade us, that the Saints were Scoffers like your self, and that God
acted the part of a Derider from the beginning of the world, and continues yet
every day to do so, in the moment which is most dreadful to Sinners, viz. that
of Death.

But, Sir, to speak no more then the truth, you abuse the Scripture with great
boldness, and much contemn the judgment of your Readers; since you dare
affirm, that you scoff not in your Letters, but by the example of the greatest
Saints, nay, of God himself.

What, Sir, think you men obliged to believe you upon your bare word? Can you
fancy, that having invented a thousand falsities, published a thousand
calumnies, falsisied a thousand passages to find matter for your profane
derisions, men should hold you for a Saint? and that your scandalous Letters,
which are but the scraps of expiring Calvinisme, should pass for Copies,
whereof you glory to have found the Original in God himself?

Tell me, Sir, whether you believe that God, to mock the Casuists at the point
of death, will (like you) laugh at their names? and whether at the sound of
these that follow, Letter 5.
Villalobes, Koninck, Llamas, Akokier, Dealkoser, Dellacruz, Veracruz, Vgolin,
Tambourin, etc. (whose clashing sillables are so apt to surprise, and move such
wise men as your self to laughter) whether, I say, he will ask with amazement,
If all these men be Christians?

Will he make an affected scrutiny into the contract Mohatra, the four living
creatures of Escobar, the story of John D' Alba, and a thousand other
Scurrilities, wherewith you have stuffed the censure of so many Divines, who
doubtless deserve to be treated with more modesty by a secular person?

Will he jear at Potentia proxima, at sufficient Grace, at the Fulminations and
Anathema's of the Church? Will he on these Authors impose crimes they were
never guilty of? Decisions they never advanced? corrupted Texts, dismembered
passages, and resolutions forged at pleasure, to make them seem ridiculous?

Will he scoff, Letter 9.
as you do, at Devotions toward the Mother of God? For instance, to salute the
holy Virgin when you meet with any of her Images? to say the short Beads of the
ten Pleasures of the B. Virgin? to pronounce of ten the Name of Mary? to desire
the Angels to do her reverence on our behalf? to wish we could build her more
Churches, then all Christian Monarchs put together have done? to bid her good
morrow every morning, and good night every evening: to say every day an Ave
Maria in honor of the heart of Mary?

You remember, Sir, that upon all these Subjects it is, that you display the
fairest draughts and touches of that Holy Raillery you intend to consecrate by
your Writings?

But, Sir, do not blind your self so far, as to believe, that such excesses
and transports as these, will be taken for the Raptures of the Saints, and the
Ecstasies of the Prophets; who to cry down vice, reprove it sometimes with a
laughter of indignation: you are at a greater distance from the conduct of
those Worthies, then is darkness from daylight.

The Fathers treated Heretics as ridiculous persons, and you that are
accused, convicted, and condemned of Heresy, will make a mockery of Sorbon and
Catholic Divines. The Fathers rebuked public disorders, and real crimes;
which they endeavored to render not only odious, but contemptible, by the
touches of a stinging Irony: whereas you forge such as are merely false, and
which you feign at pleasure, to revenge your self of those that withstand your
disorders, and the pernicious Maxims of your Sect. The Fathers employed their
Raillery like ^alt, which must be used with discretion; their Writings are full
of solid ratiocinations, generous and high conceptions, strong and convincing
arguments; but their words of mockery are rarely met with. Whereas on the
contrary, your Letters are stufe full with false Texts, false citations, and
false reproaches accompanied with a perpetual Sycophancy, without so much as
one observable ratiocination, or one only conception worthy of a Divine.

How comes it then to pass, you will have men take your conduct for that of
those great Saints; which is so contrary to the spirit that governs you? One
may well compare your works to Calvin's Antidote; where that Heretic makes the
Fathers of the Council of Trent to speak just as you make the Jesuits, in
silly childish language, to excite the laughter and contempt of the Readers:
but you shall never pass for a Prophet, unless it be with those, who for the
hatred they have conceived against the Jesuits, seek out Masters to deceive
them; and will believe (against the conviction of their own cons^iences) that a
lie is truth, when it slatters their passion, or wounds the Honor of those
Religious.

Put off, Sir, put off that Masque of Justice and Charity, wherewith you cover
your detractions; men discern you through it: they know the motive that induces
you to revenge; they understand your designs; this extraordinary animosity, so
dissonant to the spirit of Christianity, is but too too visible: It Is not the
zeal of Religion that gives you such violent motions, but the regret you have
for not having been able to overthrow it: It Is not the love of Truth, but the
despair you are in, by seeing your ^rrors convinced, and your Hypocrisy
detected.

To what purpose so many passages of the Saints, to prove that there are
innocent Railleries; since it has already been clearly shown you, that those
you use are criminal? Why employ you Scripture to tell us there are charitable
mockeries, since yours are envenomed with hatred? Why in fine, bring you
examples of the Fathers of the Church, since being a declared Heretic, you
are consequently an enemy of those Fathers, and of the Church?

You should rather have remembered, Sir, how the Holy Ghost in the Scripture,
and the Fathers in the Counsels, do treat those that arm themselves with
scoffs and injurious reproaches, as you do, to disturb the peace of Gods
children, and fight against Orthodox Maxims; you should have considered that
the wise man in the Proverbs, Proverbs 22. 10.
commands us to cast out the Scorner, that is to say, Heretics, as Venerable Bede Ejice Hereticum, quem corrigere non potes, de Ecclesia, and cum illi
libertatem praedicandi abstuleris, Catholicae paci auxilium praes^abis.
expounds it, Cast out of the Church, says that Father, the Heretic that you
cannot correct; and when you have taken from him the liberty of preaching, you
shall settle peace among the Catholics. You should have remarked with what
rigor this severe Discipline has been observed in Councels, from whence
opprobrious words and railleries have been always banished. Quicunque
contumeliis vel risibus Concilium per turbaverit, juxta divinum legis edictum,
quo praecipitur, Ejice derisorem, and exibit cum co jurgium, cum omni dedecore
de consessione abstractus a communi caetu secedat, and trium dierum
excommunicationis sententiam ferat. Council. Tole: 11. habetur can. in loco 5.
q. 4.
Whosoever, says the Council of Toledo, shall disturb the Assembly (of the
Fathers) by contumelious speeches, or derisions, let him be cast out of the
Council with infamy, and excommunicated for the space of three days, according
to that Divine Law, Cast out the scorner, and with him you shall banish all
contentions.

Finally, you should have made some profit of S. Bernard's Verbum scurrile,
quod faceti urbanique nomine colorant, non sufficit peregrinari ab ore, procul
and ab aure relegandum. Faede ad ^a^^inno^ moveris, faedius moves. l. 2. de
Cons. c. ^^. Bern.
counsel to a great Pope, to avoid not only nipping and injurious scoffings,
but even those that pass^ in the world for an innocent and pleasing
divertisement. Or of the advice of St. Chrysostom, S. Chrys^^ Tom. 6. p. 595.
Hom. (...). E^ Hom. 17. (...). ad E^h.
who shows by an eloquent discourse he made on that Subject, how much that
jovial humor, which men take for a virtue, is unworthy of a Christian: or of
the frequent invectives made by the Saints against D^^iders, whom they looked
on as enemies of the Cross, and of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

^y this you see, Sir, it is too weak a defense, and too roving an argument to
prove by the Fathers, that there are unblameable Railleries; since it is shown
you by the same Fathers, that there are a far greater number of criminal ones,
which are worthy of the public hate and horror, that all good people have
commonly for them.

Bu^ to make such a sincere and judicious discernm^nt of them, as may instruct
you of what nature those are, wherewith your Letters are ^aught, and what r^nk
they have acquired you among Deriders, believe not me, Sir, but be your own
Judge, if you please, and make use of the rules you have found so rare, that
having publish^ them before, you make no difficulty to put them out afr^sh in
this Letter; which is but an Ab^idg^ment ^f that long answer you made the last
year, in favor of Scoffers on the Subject of your Illuminations.

If it be Page 22. of his first writing.
necessary for the just use of Raill^ry, that it be grounded on truth, and not
on lying, the Jesui^es have already discovered eleven of your Impostures in the
two first Quaternions of the last answer, whereof they promise you a long list:
whereby it will be seen with what a pride of heart, and weakness of
understanding, you boast of having spared them. I will here set down but one of
them, which is the In Eng. 14.
Fourth of those the^ reproach you with; where you attribute to Lessi^s, what
he only reports out of Victoria a famous Divine; that he who has received a
Box o^ the Ear, may instantly repel that aff^ont, even with his sword, etiam
cum gladio. A Proposition, whose practice he disavows in the number following,
in express terms, which I here give you, because they were not cited in the
Answer, that you may not think they were left out on purpose to put the words
of the Number 82. in their room, which were only cited to show their
co^formity wi^h these. Lessius, l. 2. de Just. c. 9. d. 12. n. 79. Ob has
rations haec sententia est speculativ^ probabilis; tamen in praxi non videtur
sacil^ permittenda: primo ob periculum odii, vindictae and excessus. Si enim D.
Augustinus ob has causas aegre admittit, ut quis pro vit^ tuend^ alterum possit
occidere, quant^ minus in tali ca^u ob honor^m tuendum conceder^t? Secundo,
etc. n. 80.
For the reasons I have now given, this opinion is probable in speculation; yet
is it not easily to be permitt^d in practice. First, by reason of the danger of
giving way to hatred, revenge, and excess. For i^ St. Augustine hardly admits,
that one may kill a man to defend his life much less would he grant in this
case, that one may kill a man to defend his honor. See now, Sir, whether you be
grounded upon Truth.

If according to your rules a man ought to conserve Charity in his heart, when
he has a sting under his tongue, for fear of making dangerous and mortal
wounds in lieu of healing them; God alone is the Judge of your intentions, yet
all the world sees but too too plainly, at what your actions drive. It may be
you estend by er^^ur, and not by malice; but neither of both is ^^^us^ble,
since you are not deceived, but because you ^ill not see the truth.

If it be r^quisite that Raillery be Letter 1, 2, 3.
noble, modest, honest, and discreet, to work a good effect, what is there more
abj^ct then that Comedian-like, Ho, Ho! which you sound so often in your
Letters? What more insolent then the language you use of the Doctors of
Sorbon, and of the original of Letter 5.
Casuists? Or what more ^u^ricall and indiscreet, (to say no more) then that
which you impose on Divines touching Fasting, and Magic?

If we ought in since to respect Religion, and never to make sport with holy
things, which is to open a man's mouth against Heaven, as the Scripture speaks,
and to utter the language of the Impious, what is there more holy then Grace,
(which is the rich treasure of the Cross) and Devotion toward the Virgin,
which is the Key that opens it to us? And yet, Sir, after you have jeered both
the one and the other; after you have led Jansenisme, as it were, in triumph
into Sorbon, and Religious houses, to brave the Judges that condemned it, and
deride Grace, as though you had already lost the memory of it, you very soberly
ask, where it is you make sport with holy things? and whether men esteem
Mohatra a thing so venerable, that it is blasphemy to deride it?

O, Sir, where is your sincerity? You that pretend to blame the manner of
avoiding a lie, by speaking one while loud, and another while low; by what
equivocation can you say aloud, you have jested at Mohatra, and whisper, that
you have not derided Grace? By what mental reservation do you glory in
public, that you have played upon the Jesuits, and in secret, that you have
not mocked St. Thomas, St. Antonine, and even the Anathema's of Rome?

Believe me, Sir, Innocence needs not that Hypocritical artifice to defend it
self: you should have expressed it clearly that neither you nor those of your
party do believe, That sufficient Grace, potentia proxima, the Rosary, or the
Popes Censure, are things so venerable, that it is impiety to deride them, or
blasphemy not to speak of them with respect.

When you were rebuked for the insolence of your Railleries touching Mohatra,
and the decisions of the most celebrious Casuists, whom you covertly assail
under the name of Jesuits, who have taught nothing, but what they have learnt
of those great Divines; you were not checked for Impiety, but for playing the
Buffoon; not for Blasphemy, but Imposture. You were not told, that such kind
of R^illery was a Sacrilege; (that relates to your Railleries on the Rosary
and Grace) But you were told, and I tell it you again, That it is unworthy of a
Christian; and that if you be guilty of having used it, you are yet more
culpable in maintaining it, and in setting on the Throne of God what one would
scarcely suffer on a Theater: taking the Saints for warrants of an Action,
which a Person of reputation would blush to own, and which you have not dared
to let pass under your name.

After all this, Sir, can you have the confidence to reproach Father L^ Moin,
with comparing Chastity to the fire of the Sepharius? you who compare your
Saty^icall Buffooneries to the zeal of the Saints, and to the wrath of God? I
take not here in hand the vindication of that Father, who has more then
sufficient weapons to defend himself, and pa^ience more then enough to suffer
you. This is only to tell you; that you are so b^^n^e, that you see not your
own faults, how gross soever they be; and so obstinate in de^^^ction, that
instead of acknowledging your self to blame for having invented so many
calumnies, you daily hatch new ones; which (as contemning them) I omit, till
you have acknowledged those you have hitherto advanc^d.

If the love of Truth could so far prevail over your spirit, as ^o le^d you to
so generous a resolution, I would then perfectly clear up your understanding,
as to the point of Attrition, natural in its Essence, and supernatural in its
Principle. I would satisfy you touching Father Garasse's words, whom you
accuse of having mingled Heresy with Raillery, when he says, That the Humane
Personality was grafted, and set on Horseback on the Personality of the Word;
and when I had removed the suspicion of the first by his own words, Page 649.
and page 628. La second person so^stient hypostati qu^m^nt la nature
human, en sort que la personalite de la nature humain est comme engloutie
honorablement dans la personalite du Verb; comme une goutte d'eau s'anneantit
dans un tonneau de Vin, car ^'est de c^tte comparaison que S. Cyrille se sert,
etc.
and by the Subject he treats of in that place, (where ^e puts this difference
between the will and personality of man in the mystery of the Incarnation) that
in the Compositum, which we call Jesus Christ, there is but one person, (these
are his words) yet one cannot say, there is but one will, to wit, the Divine:
(which is the Here^ie of the Monothelites impugn'd by him in this place) I
would furnish you with means to justify the second your self, by desiring you
to translate into English this Text of St. Paulinus. (o) Hi^ hominem saucium,
praetermissuma praeviis, ne^ curatum, miseratus accessit, and jumento suo, hoc
est, Verb^ incarnatione suscepit.

But if you continue in your blindness; if in that exact Answer, wherewith you
threaten the S. Paulinus ^p. 4.
Jesuits, you justify your self but with reproaches, and defamations; if you
come not to the point of the accusation; if you content your self with common
places, and wranglings upon a circumstance little to the purpose; I will follow
you at the heels, and observe your slips: I will publish your infamy to the
whole world; and if I cannot silence you, (which I pretend not to be able to do
unless you cease to be a Jansenist) I will show you at least, that you merit
no further answer, and that a convinced Calumniator ought not to be listened
to, much less believed.

An ANSWER to the Jansenists twelfth LETTER.
Argument.
1. THat the Jansenist has no reason to take it ill, to be called Jansenian
Heretic, disguized Calvinist, Scoffer, Impostor, and the like; since he has
by his own works drawn these Titles on himself. 2. That it is a frivolous
Argument to say, as he does, I am alone against a whole Religious Order;
therefore I am no Calumniatour. 3. It is as frivolous to prove his Citations
true, by saying. It is not likely, that I would expose my self to the censure
of all by citing false. 4. That he still uses the same Imposture he was
convinced of, in clipping and altering the sense of Vasquez. 5. That he
continues his his Imposture in order to Valentia and Tanner. 6. That his new
Objection of Eradus Billus needs no Answer; that Father having cleared
himself long since. 7. His ignorance in imagining Simony of Positive Right to
be different from Simony in cases expressed in the Law. 8. His evident
falsifying Lessius; and toy of excuse in saying he took it out of Escobar:
whose Book is an Abridgement of many, and cannot give the full sense of
Authors.

SIR
YOu have not kept your word wi^h me; you made me expect an exact Answer, and
have only shuffl^d me off with an evasian: you promised to defend your self,
and now you will have me a witness both of your tergiversation, and causeless
complaints.

I might, Sir, let you fly with confusion, and in disorder, without troubling
my self to run after you; but seeing you witness by your cry, that you are
wounded and grown sensible of the smart, I am glad to understand the cause of
it, and to try if I can comfort you.

You complain first, that you have for a long while been persecuted with
injurious language; and you seem solicitous to inform the world, wherefore you
are treated in that manner. You should do better, Sir, to undeceive your self,
and call to mind that you suffer little in respect of what you have merited;
since having for a long time exercised the patience of others, it is but just
that you practice it your self at last, by enduring those reproaches which
cannot be forborne you, without betraying Religion, and abandoning the innocence
of those you have calumniated. You are much to blame, Sir, to take an act of
justice for an injury; they are not injuries, but truths, that have been told
you to repel your Calumnies: and you know, there are no better weapons to beat
down falsehood and error, (whose Secretary you glory to be) then those of
Truth, which you have rashly withstood.

If one terms you Heretic, it is but after the whole Church has called you so;
which cannot be mistaken: and it is an article of Faith, That Jansenius's
opinions touching Grace, being (as all the world knows) condemned and
fulminated by the Church, all the Jansenists that persist obstinate in their
defense, as you do, are Heretics.

If one say you are a Calvinist disguised, and a Disciple of Du Moulin, it is
but after you have been convicted of it, by the conformity of your Maxims, and
Impostures, with those of that Minister: whereto having made no answer, you
cannot avoid the censure of being either his Scholar, or a Filcher of his
works.

If one reproach you for being a Scoffer, it is indeed a shameful quality for a
Censurer of Morality; but you have drawn it on your self, by those injurious
Satyrs you have learnt in Calvin's School, and which you pretend to sanctify
by the example of the Saints, and of God himself.

In fine, if a man charge you with Gullery and Imposture, it is but after an
Ordinance of Parliament; which yet by blasting and tearing your Book of Moral
Theology, as an infamous and scandalous Libell, has not been able to deter you
from filling your Letters with those old calumnies, no^ from inserting new ones.

By this you see, Sir, that the reproaches cast upon you being just, your
complaints cannot be reasonable; and that being condemned as a Calumniatour by
voice of the Judges, it is but in vain to seek to be treated as Innocent in the
judgment of your Adversaries.

Nevertheless how unjust soever that pretension is, wherewith you flatter your
imagination, I can affirm, that the proofs (whether general or particular)
whereon you think to build your justification, are so extremely ruinous, that
had you not told us you intended an Apology, I should have been persuaded by
your reasons, that you meant to make a public confession of all your
Impostures.

The principal reason, whereby you pretend to show that you are not an
Impostor, and that you cannot be suspected of having cheated the world by
falsifying the passages of the Authors you allege, is, that you are alone,
without force, or any humane assistance against so great a Body. ^ answer, we
must find out a new Logic, such as Aristotle was never acquainted with, to
conclude thence, that you are not an Impostor. But to infer the contrary, and
prove to you, by an invincible consequence, that you are in effect, what you
would not appear to be, there needs no more but to have eyes to read your
Letters, and a little common sense to judge of them.

You are alone, Sir. By what misfortune was that good friend of yours, that
faithful companion of your labors, that Jansenist who never lies, removed
from you? You are alone! Is it possible that you have left to be a Jansenist,
or that there are no more of your Sect in the world but you? such a happy
change were indeed to be wished, but I fear not so soon to be expected. You are
alone! I verily believe you would fain have people pity you; and as for my
self, I have a compassion to see thirty or forty Solitaries extremely busy,
one in culling ou^ Texts, another in paring or lengthening of them, another in
correcting proofs, another in dispersing the sheets, another in reading them at
beds-sides, and crying them up; while you in the mean time, hiding your self,
cry, I am alone, without force, or any humane assistance; therefore I am no
Impostor. This kind of reasoning is very powerful and persuasive.

You add secondly, that it is not likely you should hazard the loss of all,
by exposing your self to be convinced of Impostures; and you rely much on that
proof. But, Sir, since you have blindly cast your self amongst a party of
Heretics; since you have lost Faith by defending of Jansenisme; Charity by an
implacable hatred against them that cry down that Heresy; Religion and Honor
by your profane Railleries against Grace; take it not amiss, if I tell you
that you had not any thing remaining to lose, when you exposed your self to be
convinced of Imposture by assaulting the Jesuits; and that such an enterprise
was the effect of a final despair, which put Calumny into your mouth, having
first stifled the love of Truth in your heart. Besides you are assured (in case
there were any thing remaining after so sad a shipwreck) that so long as you
miscarry not in your design of keeping your self unknown, all the infamy you
deserve, will light upon your Sect; and though the name of Jansenist lie under
the blemish of an e^e^nall ignominy, you foresee your own will be ever safe,
provided you keep always in the da^k.

In fine, the last reason you bring to remove the suspicion of your Impostures,
is, that though it be hard to come to the knowledge of you, it is an easy
matter to discover the falsities you are guilty of, seeing the most simple are
capable of it; and that they who have not studied sufficiently to penetrate
questions of Right, have natural light enough to judge of questions of Fact.

It Is that very thing, Sir, which comforts all good people; and gives them as
much joy, as it yields shame and ignominy to the Jansenists. For they have so
clearly discerned your false dealing by the Impostures they have hitherto
discovered; and the strange falsi^ications they have observed in your Letters,
are so visible to the whole world, that all the sleights of Jansenisme, and all
the false colors wherewith you seek to disguize them by your last sheet, serve
but in lieu of a shadow, to give them a clearer light.

There is nothing easier then to make ^^iall of it; there needs no more but
merely to show you, that in the defense of those you endeavor to palliate, you
ince^^antly fly to the question of Right, wherein you break your promise; and
answer not to the question of Fact, whereby you offend against your duty.
Remember, Sir, those two conditions which you have accepted; and let us see if
you will be as faithful in observing them, as you were bold in receiving them.

The first of your Impostures, you know it, Sir, and confess it your self, is
about Vasquez's opinion touching Alms. I maintain that you have falsi^ied it:
You on the contrary pretend you have rightly reported it. I have therefore
only to show you, in evidence of the weakness of your Answer, that you have
not so much as touched the question of Fact, and that your defense is but a
continual perplexing of the question of Right.

Is it not true, Sir, that in your sixth Letter you accuse the Casuists of
having found out a way to exempt the richest persons from the obligation of
giving Alms, by so interpreting the word superfluous, that it hardly ever
happens, that any one has ought of that kind? And say you not presently after,
that this is done by the learned Vasquez in his Treatise of Alms, cap. 4. What
secular persons lay up to raise their fortunes, or those of their relation, is
not called superfluous. Wherefore it will be hard ever to find any thing
superfluous among secular people, no, not even among Kings.

Is it not true, that you conclude from thence by a consequence no less
injurious to that Author, then it is contrary to his meaning, that to work out
ones salvation, it were as sure a way, according to Vasqu^z, to be guilty of
ambition enough, thereby to have nothing superf^uous, as it is safe, according
to the Gospel, to have no ambition at all, that so one may give alms out of his
superfluity?

Is it not true, that touching this consequence, you have been convinced of two
remarkable falsitics? The first, in having omitted what Vasqu^z says, in
interpreting the word superfluous, that in the opinion even of Cojctan himself,
Lay people may employ their wealth, for the raising of their condition by
lawful courses; (statum quem licite possunt acquirere) and for acquiring
Offices, provided they be worthy of them; (statum quem dig^e possunt acquirere)
and cons^quently that men call not that superfluous, which is nec^ssary for
arriving thereto. The second, in having omitted them out of an injurious design
to corrupt the meaning of that Father, and to infer thence this scandalous
conclusion, That there needs no more, according to Vasqu^z, but to have a great
deal of ambition, whereby to have nothing superfluous. A conclusion full of
Imposture, and which you never durst have attributed to him, had you faithfully
reported his words, which justify the purity of his Doctrine, and discover
your malice: Statum quem licite pos^unt acquirere.

For you cannot be ignorant, that it had been to expose your self to the
contempt of the Wise, and laughter of the people, to maintain against Vasquez,
that it is a sin of ambition to raise ones own, or Kindreds fortunes, by lawful
courses. It was therefore requisite (to give some color to your calumny) to
suppress that Text which stood in your way, and to render your self equally
criminal by dissembling the true Doctrine he establishes, and by ascribing to
him a false consequence, infinitely far from his intention.

I ask you, Sir, from what words of Vasquez you can infer, that according to
his Doctrine, one needs only be ambitious to have nothing superfluous? I ask
you, if this be a good argument, Vasquez assures with Cajetan, that men call
not that superfluous which the rich lay up to raise their condition by lawful
ways: therefore it is as safe, according to Vasquez, to have ambition enough,
that so you may have nothing superfluous, as it is safe, according to the
Gospel, to have no ambition at all, that so you may give alms of your
superfluity? Where does Vasquez say, It Is a sure way to have ambition enough,
that so one may have nothing superfluous? Where do you find that to raise ones
fortune by ways that are just and lawful, is to be ambitious?

Now if it be true, that herein consists a question of Fact; if it be clear,
that these two are the falsehoods you stand accused of; if it be manifest, that
in case you be culpable thereof, as without all contradiction you are, you have
imposed on Vasquez; and finally if it be indubitable, that to discharge your
self of this crime, you were obliged either to excuse or deny it: Is it not
also certain, that you have done neither? But indeed how should you be able to
do it, except you could make impossibility possible? Can you say that these
words, Statum quem licite possunt acquirere are not in the place I cite you?
Can you affirm, that you have quoted them in the sixth Letter? Nay, can you
assure us, that you have mentioned them in the twelfth?

So far you are from clearing your self, that you afresh commit two great and
unpardonable falsities. You aver, that Vasquez obliges not the rich to part
with what is necessary to their condition. This is the first. And that he
teaches that they are not obliged either in justice or charity to give of their
superfluous, much less of that which is necessary, in all the ordinary wants
of the poor, and that they are not bound to give of their necessary, but in
such occasions as seldom or never happen. This is the second.

To dissipate the clouds that blind you, there needs no more but to set
Vasquez his own words before your eyes. Vas^. ^p. de E^ecm. c. 1. d. 1. n. 29.
It Is certain, says this Father in the first Chapter, that it is not only
extreme necessity, that is to say, of approaching death, that obliges us to
give alms, but even many other urgent necessities (mul^ae aliae urgentes
necessitates) and that men ought not to have regard only to their own
superfluity, but to others necessities, which they ought to relieve in such
sort, as we have expl^^ated. Therefore Sir, it is false, that the rich,
according to Vasquez, are not obliged to give of their necessary, but in
occasions which seldom or never happen.

He says, numb. 18. of the same Chapter, Men are not only oblg'd to give
alms, when the necessity of the poor is such, as they are bound to relieve it
out of what is necessary to their condition, and superfluous to their life. For
though they be obliged to it in that occasion, who can deny that they are not
also bound to do it, when one is in danger of being ruined, and that you have
wealth superfluous to your quality? For if Charity oblige you to uphold the
reputation of your neighbor, when you can do it without prejudice of your own;
why shall it not also oblige you to give what is superfluous to your condition,
whereby to hinder the ruin of another? Therefore it is false, that Vasquez
never obliges the rich to part with what is necessary to their condition, nor
with what is superfluous, but in occasions which hardly ever happen.

He says, numb. 13. against Gabriel, Major, and Gerson, who teach that the
rich are not obliged to give alms, but in extreme necessities, That this
opinion is rightly rejected by other Divines, because such necessity is very
rare; it hardly happening that any one is found in that extreme necessity.
(Haec enim vix occurrit) And that the Fathers had done vainly to make such
severe Invectives against rich worldlings, who neglect to succor the poor; and
so easily condemn them to flames, if they were not bound to relieve them, but
in that extreme necessity, which seldom or never happens: (^i tantum tenerentur
in extrema necessitate, quae nunquam aut rarissime occurrit.) Therefore it is
false to affirm that Vasquez teaches, That the rich are not obliged to give
alms, but in occasions so rare, that they scarce ever happen.

That which deceives you, Sir, or rather serves you to deceive others, is the
acu^enesse of this Author, who distinguishes necessary and superfluous in
diverse manners, according to which he regulates the obligation of the rich. For
there is superfluous and necessary in relation to life; superfluous to life,
and necessary to honor; superfluous to honor, and necessary to ones present
condition; superfluous to the present condition, and necessary to that which
one may acquire by lawful ways; and finally there is superfluous, whereof one
has no need, no not for the raising of himself, or his Relations. Now it is of
this superfluous which is unnecessary to ones state and condition, not only
present, but which is lawfully acquirable, (as Vasquez clearly affirms it, and
which you maliciously dissemble by cutting off the word condition) that you
must understand what you cited, That a man is hardly obliged to give alms, when
he is not bound to give it, but out of what is superfluous to his condition,
according to Cajetan 's opinion and his own; because it hardly falls out that
there is any thing superfluous, when it is taken in this manner, no not even
among Kings.

Wherein you ought to have observed, that the opinion he concurs in with
Cajetan, consists only in this, That what the rich lay up to raise their own,
or Kindreds fortunes, is not termed superfluous to their state, though it be
not necessary to their present condition. Notwithstanding which he is much more
severe then Cajetan; who obliges not the rich to give alms to the poor, (except
in their extreme necessity) but of their superfluity, which is neither
necessary for maintaining their own, or Kindreds condition, nor for advancing
it. And in his Treatise of Indulgences, he asserts this obligation, not to
exceed a venial sin; though in his Treatise of Alms he extends it to a
mortal. Whereas Vasquez has far different Sentiments; for he obliges them in
many occasions, besides that of extreme necessity, to give not only what is
superfluous to their condition, but even what is necessary to maintain it,
provided only it be not necessary to life or repu^ation; and that under pain
of mortal sin, as he strongly proves it (in the place I cited) by the
sentence, which the Son of God shall pronounce against them at the day of
Judgment, and by the Doctrine of the Fathers.

But you, Sir, who cruelly dread a distinguo, without making these so necessary
observations, confound all things by a prodigious subversion of Divinity. Yet
you carry it high upon pretense of maintaining Cajetan's Doctrine, and
cunningly make account to escape, by seconding him against Vasquez. Defend your
self. Sir, that excellent Author needs not an Heretics help to dispute out
his difference with an Orthodox Doctor. The point in question is not to know,
which of the two is best grounded in reason; nor whether the obligation of
giving Alms be founded on Justice or Charity; whether the rich be obliged to
give to the poor their superfluity, according to the rules of Cajetan or
Vasquez: whether all that is superfluous belong to the poor in rigor of Justico,
according to the Fathers, or only upon the account of compassion: and whether
the Great Ones of Paris, that might (if they would) forgo those gilded
Coaches, that great train of Lackeys, and those sumptuous houses both in town
and country, be obliged in conscience to restore to the poor, what they
profusely waste in those superfluous expenses* These are questions of Right,
which have been raised in Schools many ages past, and which Divines have not
yet decided. Were we bound to expect an end of them, we should never have done.
The point in question is to know, whether Vasquez says not, That that is not
called superfluous, which Lay People lay up to raise their condition by lawful
ways, (statum quem lici^e possunt acquirere.) And whether you have not
dissembled these last words, to infer a consequence as odious against the
Author, as favorable to the inordinate ambition of Sinners. For if that be
so, who sees not that you are guilty of a most foul Imposture? And since you do
not vindicate your self thereof, who sees not also this accusation to be so
certain, that you durst not so much as contest it. Let us pass to the second.

But first, Sir, give me leave to put you in mind, that in this dispute, I am
only obliged to discover your falsities, we being here upon questions of Fact,
and no other, which you always seem to forget. What is then the question of
Fact touching your second Imposture, which relates to Simony?

Is the point in controversy to justify Valentias Doctrine, which you are
pleased to qualify with the Title of a Dream? Or that of Sanchez, which you
take for a Revelation? No, Sir, this is not the place to dispute of the ground
of the Doctrine, nor to show you the faults you therein commit through
ignorance, but only the falsities you are guilty of through malice.

Am I bound to answer for the Theses of ^aen, and the opinion of F. Eradus
Billus? It Is a business already done, and the world is satisfied long since by
the justification of that Divine, of what Sect his Accuser was, whose Elogium
you make instead of minding your own Apology.

What is then the point of our dispute? It Is only to know, whether it be not
true, that you have used deceit in citing Tanuerus upon the question of Simony,
and whether you be not far from clearing your self of it in your twelfth
Letter, which I refute? seeing you relapse into your first fault, and are
guilty of other greater.

Look to your self, Sir; reflect on your Letter: see how you cite Tannerus, and
reckon, if you please, all the faults I shall note to you. See, say you, his
Doctrine not unlike that of Valentia. There is properly and truly no Simony,
but when a temporal good is received as the price of aspirituall: But when it
is taken as a motive, inclining a man to bestow the spiritual; or as an
acknowledgement of being already bestowed, it is no Simony, at least in point
of conscience. And a little after. --

Stay, Sir, you forget the principal. Thus (adds Tanne^us) teaches Valentia,
after Sylvester, Cajetan, and Navarr, according to the opinion of St. Thomas;
and the reason is drawn from the notion and malice of Simony, which we have
explicated. Which yet in the cases expressed in the Law hinders not the
committing of Simony, be it that which we have termed of Positive Right, or
that which is presumed such in the external Tribunal. This middle piece, by
you cut off, is decisive, and could not be omitted without condemning your
self. You were formerly accused of suppressing it in the second Imposture, and
now while it is actually in question, whether the accusation were true, that
you had left out these words in your sixth Letter, you are so accustomed to
these cheats, that you here suppress them again. You see what it is to acquire
ill habits. But this is not all. For as it commonly happens that one sin begets
another; so having engaged your self to dismember the precedent Text, you
likewise maim the subsequent, perfecting thereby the proof of your own
fraudulent dealing: which I was obliged to prove, if you had not prevented me.
For thus you make Tannerus say. We must affirm the same thing, even though a
man regard the temporal as his principal end, nay prefer it before the
spiritual; though St. Thomas and others seem to say the contrary, while they
affirm that it is absolute Simony to give a spiritual good for a temporal,
when the latter is the end of the former.

It Is true, this Proposition is in Tannerus, but it is as true, that you have
not given it entire; which shows your unsincere practice: for you have lopt off
this ensuing part, which is essential to its decision. Esto quidem tali
commutatione grave peccatum committatur, ac simul in casibus jure expressis
Simonia, saltem juris positivi, incurratur. Although that in this exchange a
man commits a grievous sin; as also a Simony, at least as to Positive Right, in
the cases expressed in the Law.

How comes it to pass. Sir, that being charged with suppressing two so
remarkable parts of one only place of Tannerus, you do not vindicate your
self? Why do you suppress them afresh, as if you had never been accused of it?
Whence is it, that by a ridiculous evasion you complain of being accused for
having only forgotten these two words of Divine Right, which yet are not found
in the whole passage? Does the shame of this discovery so confound your memory,
that it makes you take Divine Right for Positive Right, and two small words for
so many lines? Is it not befaln you as to those, who being hurt complain of the
blow, but show not the place where they received the wound? You have been
convinced of cutting off by the middle two of Tannerus's Propositions at a
blow; of leaving out one part of the Text, to conclude from the other which
remained imperfect, that according to this Author it is neither Simony nor
sin, to give a spiritual good for a temporal, if one give it not as the
price, but only as the motive: And yet in the other part of the same Text,
which you maliciously retrenched, he affirms the clean contrary; that what he
said in the first, (by you cited) according to the sentiments of St. Thomas,
(mark, Sir, exmente D. Thomae) and according to the mind of Cajetan and
Sylvester, (post Sylvestrum and Cajetanum) hinders not a man in the cases
expressed in the Law, from committing Simony, be it that which is termed of
Positive Right, or that which is presumed such in the exterior Court* See what
a palpable Imposture you are guilty of. Can you deny it? See, I have given you
a real wound; Nor were you able to decline the blow: And will you now
dissemble it? affirming, that you are accused of forgetting two words, which
yet are not at all in the whole passage. This is rare indeed.

But not contenting your self with so base an a^^ifice, (to amuze the world)
you intend to show us the excellency of your judgment, while you affirm, that
Tannerus declares not in that place, That it is a Simony as to Positive Right,
because he affirms it not generally, but in the particular cases expressed in
the Law, in casibus jure expressis. I think you are resolved to sacrifice your
self to the laughter of the learned. Had Tannerus affirmed it generally, as you
maintain he ought to have done, he must have been, what you now are, very
little enlightened as to the question of Simony. For it would thence follow,
that there are Simonies in respect of Positive Right, which are not expressed in
the Positive Law. R^concile this contradiction. It would follow against the
opinion of St. Thomas, and all other Divines, that it should be Simony, as to
Positive Right, to give money to have Masses said, though one gives it not as
the price of the Sacrifice, but only by way of acknowledgement or retribution,
(in stipendium) necessary to the maintenance of the Priest that offers it up.
Reconcile this with the practice of all the Parishes of Paris. Many other
absurdities would follow, wherein you shamefully engage your self by reproving
this Author; which I pass over, to tell you, that it is besides the purpose to
dispute, whether Tannerus affirmed in general, or in particular cases only,
that it was a Simony as to Positive Right, It is sufficient to show he has
affirmed it as he ought to do, generally in cases expressed in the Law; and
that you have omitted it, even in the manner he affirmed it. Whence it follows,
that you have falsified his Text by a manifest Imposture, which still remains
upon you; since you cannot deny it before all the world.

After all this you have the courage to propose certain cases of Conscience,
and to ask with your accustomed boldness, whether a Beneficed Man shall be
guilty of Simony, if he dispose of a Benesice worth four hundred pounds a year,
receiving a thousand pound, not as the price of the Benefice, but as a motive
inclining him to give it; and you desire to be answered clearly, without
mention of Positive Right, or presumption of the exterior Tribunal. Repair to
the School, Sir, and all the Divinity Masters will teach you, that setting
aside the Positive Right you^ Qu^re is ridiculous; being just as if one should
ask, whether abstracting from the precept of the Church, it were a sin not to
hear Mass on a Festival day? But you are to blame to think me obliged to read
you Lectures of Divinity; I should too slightly lose a thing no loss precious
then time. I have performed my duty in clearly evin^ing to you, that your
second Imposture remains still as well as the first; and that you must needs be
reduced to a great strait, who are constrained to ask extravagant questions, by
not being able to give any solid Answers.

Wherefore I come to your third Imposture concerning Bankrupts, which needs no
long discourse to clear up the business; being of all the most visible and
gross, to speak in your own terms.

For indeed what can be more gross, then to make Lessius affi^m, That he, who
turn^ Bankrupt, may with a safe conscience retain as much of his own goods, as
is requ^site to maintain his family handsomely, (ne indecore vivat) though
gotten unjustly by crimes notoriously known? Seeing you were advertised in the
Answer to this Calumny, that he is so far from that opinion, that he ^ffi^ms
point blank to the contrary. That in the disorder of these times, wherein we
see many who become rich on a sudden, raising themselves p^odigious fortunes,
built only upon crimes, frauds, and injustices; such people must not imagine
themselves discharged of making restitntion till the hour of death: for they
are hound in conscience to make satisfaction immediately, and to reduce
themselves to the former condition they were in, before they had raised their
Houses, and been advanced to high Offices by such enormious crimes.

You cannot but grant, Sir, that this assertion is diametrically opposite to
that you have charged him with. Wherefore to vindicate your self, you should
have made it evidently appear, that the Doctrine you impute to him, in your
eighth Letter, is found in his writings, and this other not: which seeing you
cannot do, (as it is impossible you ever should) it is most manifest you have
falsely cited him, and cannot exempt your self from that Reproach.

For it contributes nothing to your justification to object this other Text,
which you cite in Latin contrary to your custom. Idem colligitur aperte ex
juribus citatix, maxim quoad ^a bona quae post cessionem acquirit; de quibus
is qui debtor est, ^tiam ex delicto, potest retinere quantum necessarium est,
ut pro sua condition non indecore vivat. Petes, an Leges id permittant de
bou^s quae tempore instantis cessionis habeat? Ita videtur colligi ex
Doctoribus, etc. This only citation is enough to condemn you, and shows your
and cetera to be of the nature of those wherewith Cardinal Perron reproached
that famous Heretic Du Plessis-Mornay, who corrupted the Texts of the
Fathers, as you do these of the Divines.

See here that Doctrine of Lessius in the place alleged rightly delivered,
which will proclaim your fraud.

He here asks the question, whether he that turns Bankrupt, may by that action
free himself from the bond of making restitution? And answers first, that in
point of conscience it excuses him no more then necessity alone would do
without it; because though he breaks, yet no more is allowed him then mere
aliment, and that too by way of compassion; for it is not always granted, but
only when the case seems to deserve it, as is prescribed in the Law, qui
bonis, ^. de cessione bono^um. Now thus he may retain them by the sole Law of
Nature, as also by the Law of Nations.

Secondly he answers, that in the exterior Tribunal Cession, or the act of
breaking, works two effects. The first, That one cannot imprison the Debtour,
which he proves by the L. 1. C. qui bonis cedere possunt. The second, That one
cannot take from him what he acquires after his breaking, if it be necessary
for the maintenance of himself and family, which he shows by the Law, L. is qui
bonis 4. and ult. Instit. de actionibus.

Thirdly, he inserres this Consequence, whose beginning and end you have
maliciously cut off, because they discover your Imposture.

It follows, that he who not by his own fault is constrained to break, if his
Creditours seize on his goods, may retain as much as is necessary for him to
live meanly, according to his condition, (ut tenuiter vivat secundum statum) as
Navarre and others teach; who assert, that one may retain as much as is
requisite to live on without want; that is, as Sylv^ster expounds it, to live
decently, (ne indecenter vivat) The same is clearly inferred out of the Laws I
have cited as to the goods a man acquires after breaking; of which even he that
has contracted debts by some crime, may retain as much as is necessary to
maintain him handsomely: for the Laws speak in general terms. You will ask,
whether the Laws permit the same, as to the goods he had when he was upon the
point of breaking. It seems to be inferrable out of the Law, qui bonis ^. de
cess. bonorum. Where it is said, that he who has turned Bankrupt, ought not to
be deprived of aliment, (non esse fraudandum quotidianis alimentis) which is
but reasonable. (Now, Sir, behold your and cetera) Which is but reasonable,
says this Father, as to the Debtor who inculpably becomes insolvent. Quod
aequitati consentaneum in debitore, qui absque culpa sua non est solvendo.

See you not, Sir, how accusable you are for omitting these words? See you not
the great difference he puts between those that break through some misfortune,
which renders them not criminal, but miserable; and those who engaging
themselves in restitutions by their crimes and injustices, become miserable
after they have made themselves criminal? The innocent Debtour may retain part
of his goods, even of those he had before he became Bankrupt, to live meanly
according to his condition, ut tenuiter vivat secundum statum, to live without
dishonor, ne indecore vivat; (thus you should have translated these words, but
it were an endless work to rectify you) The criminal Debtour, on the
contrary, may retain part of the goods he gets after turning Bankrupt: and this
the Text you allege, specifies; but not of those he had gotten before
Bankrupt, by rapines and public extortions: which you falsely impute to him in
your eighth Letter, and desist not from doing it again in your twelfth,
notwithstanding he affirms the contrary in the place I cite you; asserting that
he is obliged to restore without delay, and to reduce himself to the state he
was in before he advanced his fortune, and had raised his condition by public
and scandalous crimes.

Thus, Sir, you see how you disguize and falsify Authors; how you wrap up your
Impostures in false appearances, and after all, lay the blame on F. Escobar;
who cannot possibly in an Abridgement so clearly unfold the sentiments of those
he alleges. But since you say you have written to him at Valladolid, I need
not think my self responsable for him. Transport the war into Spain, seeing you
have had such ill success with it in France. Fly into a strange country,
since you can no longer subsist in this with honor. Change your French Coin
for Spanish. B^ag that you make war among the Jesusuites: No man will think it
strange, since you do the same in the heart of the Church: but no man also will
envy you that glory, in case he re^lect on the five Propositions of Jansenius,
and the Anathema's of Rome. It is not an action deserving honor to combat with
Religion; it is an Impie^y punishable by all Laws, Divine and Humane: and to
glory in it, is to make a Trophy of ones Crimes, and a Triumph of ones
Ignominy. It is no less honorable to their Society to serve for a Buckler
against Heretics, then it is ignomini^us for you to cast against it the darts
of an envenomed detraction. It will subsist after it has endured your insolent
assaults, because it is founded on the Name of Jesus Christ, who is the
fundamental Stone of that Building; but your Sect will perish, after it has
bred disorder in the Church; and rendering it self guilty of an infinity of
evils, will find nothing in its ruin^s but an eternity of Repentance.

An ANSWER to the Reply made in defense of the Twelfth Provincial Letter.
Argument.
1. THat the Author of this Reply has not excused the Author of the
Provincial Letters from the main crimes objected to him, but left him in the
lurch. 2. Vasquez his Conclusions of Alms set down out of his Treatise of Alms.
3. Out of these Conclusions the Author of the Reply, and the Jansenist, are
evidently convinced of notorious Imposture. 4. Some general Notions of Simony
given. 5. Clear Imposture discovered in forging words in the name of Valentia,
when Valentia has no such words. 6. The Author of the Reply convinced out of
his own words of Imposture, in his trifling discourse against Tanner.

SIR
YOur Friend, the Jansenist, is very little obliged to you; for instead of
helping him out of the mi^e, you have plunged him deeper in. You know, he was
told in the Answer to his Twelfth Letter, that he was justly called Heretic;
since the Church calls him so, for defending the Heretical Propositions of
Jansenius. What Answer do you make? You know he was told, that since (as was
showed in the Impostures) his objections against the Society were generally the
same, which Du Moulin had made against the Church, he could not take it ill to
be called Du Moulins Disciple. What Answer do you make? You know he was told,
that the Title of Impostor and Falsi^ier, was given the Author of the Book of
Moral Divinity, burnt by the Hangman; and therefore he having formed his
Letters on that mould, ought not to count it a wrong done him, that the
Jesuits gave his Letters the Title, which the Parliament of Bourdeoux gave the
Original, from whence they were copied. What Answer do you make? The real
crimes, which your Friend has committed, make him guilty of these Titles, of
Heretic, of Disciple of Du Moulin, of Impostour, etc. What say you for him?
If you will defend him, you must speak here; or else I must tell you, as your
Friend has already been told, That silence in such crimes, as these, argues
conviction.

You tell us, You judge these things said to divert the Author. From what?
That you do not tell us. But ^^e tell you from what. These things were said to
divert the Author from falsifying and abusing learned Writers, which he does
not understand. They were said to divert him from stealing calumnies out of
condemned Libells. They were said to divert him from Heresies. They were said
to divert others from giving credit to a fabulous Slanderer, convinced of so
many gross and ignorant Calumnies. It was this diversion was aimed at, for his
good, and the good of those, whose facil credulity he abuses. He ought to have
cleared himself (had it been possible for him) from these just accusations: and
yet you, who will needs take up the Cudgels in his quarrel, tell us, You are
glad to see his Thirteenth Letter come abroad, without taking any notice of the
Answer to his Eleventh and Twelfth Letters, where these crimes were laid to his
charge. This indeed may help to embolden your Friend, and make him a little
more impudent in belying Authors; since you clap him of the back, and are glad
to see him slight his being convicted; but it will never help to clear him.

But because you express your joy at the sight of the Thirteenth Letter, I
pray tell me, were you glad to see, that whereas in the beginning he undertakes
to answer the Fourth Imposture, (in English the Fourteenth) and with it Seven
more, he notwithstanding never touches one of those Seven? Were you glad to
see, That that very Fourteenth Impostu^e, which he handles, is so pitifully
treated, that it is but reading one short passage of L^ssius. (which I have
inserted in the end of this Book) for to see his Ignominy written in undeniable
Characters? It is no friendly part to be glad, that one, for whom you have a
kindness, says what he cannot prove, and undertakes what he cannot perform:
yet you are glad to see this in your Friend, which another man would be ashamed
of in a Stranger. And perhaps your Friend, the Jansenist, in whose vindication
you write, will be as glad to see your Letter, which is much according to his
palate, full of falsity and errors.

You undertake to show, that he has not wronged Vasquez, nor Valentia, nor
Tanner: Let Us see how you perform it. And to proceed orderly, let us begin with
Vasquez; and first lay down the accusations on both sides, and then come to you.

The Author then of the Provincial Letters speaks thus in his Sixth Letter.
It is said in the Gospel, Give Alms of your superfluity: and yet diverse
Casuists have found out a way, to exempt even the richest persons from this
obligation of giving Alms, -- by interpreting the word superfluity: insomuch
that it seldom or never happens, that any man is troubled with any such
thing. And this is done by the learned Vasquez in this manner. What ever men
lay up out of a design to raise their fortunes, or those of their relation, is
not called superfluous. For which reason it will be hard to find any, among
those that are worldly minded, that have ought superfluous; no not even among
Kings. And a little after he concludes, That it will be as sure a way
(according to Vasquez) for a man that desires to work his Salvation, to be
guilty of ambition enough, that so he may have nothing superfluous, as it is
(according to the Gospel) not to be ambitious at all.

To this the Jesuits answered, That Vasquez taught quite contrary to what the
Jansenist imposed on him. Here was then the question to be decided in the
Twelfth Letter, and in its Answer, viz. Whether the Author of the Provincial
Letters ^ad cited Vasquez right, or no? And you, Sir, who undertake to second
the Jansenist, Author of the Provincial Letters, maintain, that Vasquez is
not wronged, but that he is really Author of the Doctrine, for which he is
cited. I undertake to prove the contrary. Our question must be cleared by
looking into Vasquez, as he lies, in that Treatise of Alms; which consists
of four Chapters. Of these four the first only is that, where he treats the
question in hand, concerning Alms which secular men are bound to give. I shall
therefore draw out from thence all Vasquez his Conclusions concerning this
question; keeping, as near as may be, not only the sense, but the very
expressions of Vasquez.

Vasquez his Conclusions concerning Alms, which Secular Men are bound to give.
First all grant, that the Precept of actually giving Alms is an Affirmative
Precept, which does not oblige at all times. Dub. 3. number. 10.

Secondly all agree, that this Precept obliges (under mortal sin) when our
neighbor is in extreme necessity. Ibid.

Thirdly all seem to agree, (though perhaps some dissent) that no man is bound
to give Alms, when the necessity of the poor is not urgent, but only ordinary.
Ibid.

Fourthly some say, that though you have that which is superfluous, not only
to nature, but also to your state or condition, yet that there is no obligation
of P^ecept for you to give Alms, excepting only, when some poor man is in
extreme necessity. So says Gabriel, Alexander, Major, Gerson. But St. Antonin,
^onrad, and Durand speak dubiously. Ibid. n. 12.

Fifthly notwithstanding this there are other cases, besides those of extreme
necessity, in which a man is bound to give Alms. Ibid. ^. 15.

Sixthly the ground of the obligation, which I have to give Alms, is, That
Charity exacteth, that I should give that which is necessary to another, and
superfluous to me: yet if the necessity be but ordinary, and not urgent, it
seems very hard, to oblige me under mortal sin. ^. 21. But as ex^ream
necessity does oblige, so urgent necessity obliges also. n. 24 As therefore I
am bound under Precept to relieve another man's extreme necessity, out of that
which is superfluous to nature; so it seems to me, that I am bound to relieve
his urgent necessity, out of that which is superfluous to my state.

Seventhly the Secular man is not bound to seek out the persons that are in
necessity, as Prelates are; but to relieve them when they occur. n 25.
Neither is any particular secular man bound to relieve this, or that particular
poor man that does occur, when he may justly suppose, that some other will
relieve this poor man, if he do not. That therefore I be obliged under mortal
sin to relieve this man, I must know that (probably) no body else will. n. 28.

Eighthly the order of Charity m^st go thus. For to conserve the good of my
neighbor with detriment of my own, I must consider whether they be equal, or
unequal. For I am not bound to conserve my neighbors life with loss of my
own life: but I am bound to conserve his life with the loss of other things.
n. 25. If therefore my neighbor be in danger of his life, or in great
sickness, I am bound to help him with that which is superfluous to nature for
me and mine. n. 26. Secondly, if my neighbor be in danger of lo^ing his
reputation, or fame, I am bound to succor him with all that I have superfluous
to the maintenance of my nature. Thirdly, if one be in danger of falling from
h^^ state, or condition, I am bound with that which is superfluous to my state,
to supply him; I say, with that which is superfluous to my state, either
present, or future, which I may lawfully aim at. For as I am not bound to lose
my state, for fear another should lose his; so also I am not bound to lose my
future state, which I may justly aim at, for to prevent the like loss in my
neighbor. This is the express opinion of Navarr and Cajetan. For though
Cajetan think, a man is bound to give Alms out of that which is superfluous,
yet he does not think that superfluous, which is reserved to raise ones state:
So that one will scarce be obliged to give Alms, (understand this in the case
here spoken of, when my neighbor is in danger of losing his state, unless I
relieve him with that which is superfluous to my state, as Vasquez explicateth
himself. number. 32. and as the following words import) either in Cajetans opinion
or mine, if this obligation grow only out of what is superfluous to ones
state. number. 27. It is certain then, that not only extreme necessity, but also
many other urgent necessites oblige us to give Alms. Nor must we look only on
our having superfluity, but on our neighbors necessity. Number. 29.

Ninthly Corduba does justly reprehend Cajetan for saying, it is only a
Venial sin for an Advocate or Lawyer to refuse to plead for a poor man; or for
a Physician to refuse to prescribe physic to a poor man. For Corduba judgeeth
it a Mortal Sin to refuse to prescribe, when the poor man is in danger of
falling into a great sickness, or of losing his health. The like he ^udgeth of
the Lawyer, when the poor man is in danger of losing his ^ame, his stat^, or
his goods, for want of some body to plead for him. And this I think true, not
only when the question is of preventing the loss of fame, state, or goods,
but also for recovering them, when they are unjustly taken from the poor man.
Number. 33. dub. 3. cap. 1.

These are Vasquez his Conclusions concerning Alms, which oblige Secular men
(in this Fathers opinion) under Precept of Mortal Sin. Now tell me, what is
here so criminal, that the whole Society should be defamed by it? With what
face, but that of Impudenc^ it self, could the Author of the Provincial
Letters say, That Vasquez freeth the rich men from giving Alms; and that
according to Vasquez it is as secure a way for a man that desires his
salvation, to be guilty of ambition enough, that so he may have nothing
superfluous, as it is according to the Gospel, not to be ambitious at all? Or
with what face can you say, Sir, That Vasquez his design was to satisfy the
rich, who would gladly be as seldom as may be obliged to give Alms; and that
according to the Method of the Society? Page 201. 2. Edit.

You see here, that Gabriel, Alexander, Major, Gerson, clearly free secular men
(as Cajetan also does) from obligation of Precept of giving Alms in all cases,
but only that of extreme necessity. And Saint Antonine, Conrad, and Durand
dare no^ say. That any other cases oblige under Mortal Sin. Yet Vasquez has
the knack of complying with rich men, though he tell them, there be many other
cases which oblige them under Mortal Sin. You see Cajetan obliges not the
Lawyer, or Physician, to assist the poor Patient, or Client, but under Venial
Sin; yet Vasquez to comply according to the Method of the Society with the
Lawyer and Physician, and give them large scope, tells them, they are obliged
under Mortal Sin to assist in these cases.

You thought that after you had made your Reply, no body would ever look into
Vasquez: for you could not think, but that if any body would take the pains to
read Vasquez, he should find his Doctrine as far from being lax and compliant,
as you, Sir, are from sincerity; that is, as far as heaven is from the earth.

You complain page 194. of the second Engl. Edit. That the Answer to the
Twelfth Letter of your friend the Jansenist touches nothing of what your
Friend had said in his Twelfth Letter. I answer for him then, and tell you, the
reason was, because your Friend had said nothing to the purpose: no more do
you. ^e not angry, good Sir; and I will make my words good. That which your
Friend had to do, (and you also have) was to show, that he had not cited
Vasquez false. This he never showed; nor do you, or can you show. And yet till
you show this, you say nothing to the purpose. This Answer is abundantly
enough. No more needs be said, to prove you and your Friend both Impostours. It
is enough to read on the one side what is objected in the Sixth Letter against
Vasquez; and on the other side the Conclusions here set faithfully down by me
out of Vasquez, for to to confu^e all which both you and your Friend say. Yet
to condescend to you, or rather to satisfy the Reade^s, I will observe some of
your errors.

You object, That what worldly men lay up to raise their own fortunes, or that
of their relations, is not called superfluous: for which reason it will be hard
to find any, among those who are worldly minded, that have ought superfluous,
according to Vasqu^z. What then? Does Vasquez therefore free s^^u^a^ men from
the obligation of giving Alms? Read Vasquez, and you will see, that he is so
far from that, that few Casuists are so severe as he. But Sir, to undeceive
you, I must tell you, your Friend has taken the citation of those words out of
a wrong place; and so he either ignorantly or voluntarily erreth all the way.
He takes the words; which make up his objection out of the Fourth Chapter,
number. 14. where Vasquez treats of the obligation, which Clergymen have to
give alms. If he had taken them out of the First Chapter, he would there have
found the Conclusions, which I have drawn out of him, in his own words. In the
Fourth Chapter, number. 14. Vasquez says nothing of the obligation which secular
men have, or have not, to give Alms: He treats of the obligation of
Clergymen, and says, That there is great difference betwixt Secular and
Clergymen; for Secular Men may lay up to increase their state; but Clergymen
may not. So in Secular Men, even Kings, you will hardly ^inde any thing
superfluous; in Clergymen, that have fat Benefices, you will (says Vasquez)
always find it, if they live sparingly, as they are bound to do. Now if your
Friend would needs quote these words out of the Fourth Chapter, to set down the
obligation, which (according to Vasquez) Secular men have to give Alms, at
least he should have looked, how Vasquez qualified that obligation, in the
place where he treated of Secular Men. By not doing this he fell to charge
Vasquez wrongfully of favoring ambition, and relaxing the obligation which
Secular Men have to give Alms. The Jesuits answered, that Vasquez was severe
enough in his obligation: and to show that he favored no^ ambition, they told
your Friend the Author of the Provincial Letters, that Vasquez allowed not
Secular Men any other raising their fortune, but such as was lawful, nor any
other pretense of Dignity, but such as they might justly alm at. Statum, quem
licite possunt acquirere. -- Statum, quem digne possunt acquirere. And they
asked him, why he cited not these words? You, to help your Friend out at this
dead lift, answer, That those words, Statum, quem licite possunt acquirere, and
statum quem digne possunt acquirere were fifteen pages in folio before the
passage which he cited. A goodly Answer! What if they had been five hundred
pages before? What were that to the pu^pose? Who ^id your Friend cite a wrong
place? It was a gross error in him to do so; and it is a gross error in you
to bring such a simple excuse, unless you did it of set purpose to make your
Friend be laughed at.

Another error of yours is, that as you confound the citations, so you confound
the terms, which is to make your self ridiculous among Schoolmen. So you p.
200. talk of Corduba, and take the matter quite wrong. The question is there
(it is in Vasquez, c. 1. dub. 3. number. 32.) very different. And Corduba is as
much against Cajetan and others, as against Vasquez. Corduba says, That
although there were no poor men at all in urgent want, ye^ he that has
sup^rfluity, would be bound to give Alms sometimes, so to fulfill the Pr^cept
of Charity. This Cajetan will deny, as well as Vasquez: Cajetan, because h^
requir^^h, as a condition to expedite the obligation under Precept, that there
be some poor in extreme want; Vasquez, because he holds, that superfluity
alone is not enough to oblige a man under mortal sin to give Alms, but joyneth
with the superfluity the extreme or urgent necessity of the poor, so to make
the Precept oblige. But because Vasquez has in this place Hoc non placet, you
print these words in great Letters, as though they made Vasquez criminal;
whilst notwithstanding he says no more, then generally all Casuists do. For
all say, That there is no obligation under Mortal Sin to give alms, unless
there be some poor, either in ^xtream, or in urgent necessity. Urgent
necessity. I understand to be such, that they cannot well pass without your
alms. For if they can (as Day-labourers for example do) it is very hard to say,
that it is a mortal sin not to give Alms sometimes, only because the
affirmative Pr^^ept must sometimes be practiced. In this Corduba is singular;
and if Vasquez say Non placet, Cajetan, Navarr, Alexander, Gabriel, Major,
Gerson. Sarmiento, St. Antonine, and all the rest will say, Non placet too: for
none hold with Corduba.

So Sir, you see how you err by not understanding the terms of ordinary and
urgent necessity: and I hope you will say no more, that the Jesuits shuffle in
distinctions, and con^ound matte^s with terms, since your error proceeds
from ignorance in terms, and from not distinguishing ordinary and urgent
necessity. Ordinary necessity is that which Casuists call, communis necessitas
pauperum, the common necessity of all those that are truly poor: urgent
necessity is that, which makes poor men stand in present need of something,
necessary either for life, as Beggars do, (I mean true Beggars, that know not
well where to have a meals meat) or for health, as sick that are in want, or
for preserving their fame or goods, as those that are oppressed by the rich,
do. These and many other such like cases are urgent; in which Vasquez obliges
rich men under mortal sin to afford their help, if they know that others will
not do it. Now these cases, which happen but too often, make it clear, that you
wrong Vasquez, in saying, that he obliges not to give alms, but in very rare
cases, and such as never happen in Paris.

But I go on to show you another error of yours. The Jesuit (for he was a
Jesuit, though you will needs mistake him) had in his Answer to the Jansenists
Twelfth Letter, urged the Jansenist to show, out of what words of Vasquez he
could conclude, That it would be as safe (according to Vasquez) for a man that
desires his salvation, to be guilty of ambition enough, that so he may have
nothing superfluous, as it is, according to the Gospel, not to be ambitious at
all. To this the Jansenist was mute; you give two Answers, but both such as
would make a Dog laugh. First you say, You might answer, that this objection
was never made by the Jesuit in the Imposture. Pretty, Pretty. Do you take
your Friend to be excused from falsifying an Author, if a Jesuit do not pull
him by the sleeve, and say, Here, Sir, you have falsified this Author?
Ridiculous. Is a lie no lie, unless a man be challenged with it? Or a Theft no
Theft, unless a man be caught in it? John D' Alba will thank you for this
Maxim, which makes his stealing more excusable, then the Jesuits Moral. But,
Sir, your Friend was told of this. He was told, that he had disguized Vasquez,
and corrupted his Doctrine; which he had done as well in these words, as in the
rest. He was challenged of all; but because all his words were not cited at
length, you tell us, You might answer that this objection was never made.
Indeed you are a lusty Disputant, that can talk so stoutly against reason. But
I would pardon this frivolous answer, because at least it is short; if you did
not second it with a tedious discourse of Nonsense, which makes your second
answer. The Sum is, That you will needs have it a sin of Ambition for a
secular man to lay up any thing for to raise himself, or his, though to such a
state, as he may lawfully pretend; which Vasquez requires, Statum, quem licite
possunt acquirere. You are extremely out, Sir, in your judgment: Will you say,
That it is a sin of Ambition, that is, of its own nature a Deadly Sin, for a
Peasant to lay up a little money, whereby he may bring up his Child at School,
and make him a Lawyer, or a Physician, or (if God so call him) a Clergyman? Or
would you tell a Tradesman, that he is bound still to work in his shop, and
that it is a sin of Ambition to dispose so, that by laying up something in his
youth, he may live in a better calling in his old days? I am very glad, Sir,
that you cannot impugn Vasquez his Doctrine, nor make it appear ill, but by
advancing such Paradoxes as these.

There remain yet two Objections more against Vasquez, which I will take notice
of: you would prove by them both, that at least Vasquez obliges rich men but
very rarely to give alms. But what if you should prove this? Have I not showed
you, that Cajetan, and diverse others oblige only in case of extreme necessity,
which is but rare? But let us hear you. Vasquez (say you) understands all that
he says of the duty of rich men to give alms, to oblige only, when they know,
that no body else will relieve the poor man. He says so: I have put it in his
seventh conclusion. But is he therefore larger then others? Cajetan (as I have
told you) holds, That I am not bound to give alms, but when I see a man in
extreme necessity. Now I can never know, that a man is in extreme necessity of
my alms, unless I know, that no body else will relieve him. Yet this Cajetan
requires; and it will be a harder matter to oblige a man in Paris to give
alms, out of Cajetans Doctrine, then out of Vasquez his Doctrine. For Cajetan
will say, That to oblige you under Mortal Sin to give this man an alms, you
must know, that this man stands in extreme need of your alms: Vasquez will
say, that to oblige you to give this man an alms, you must know, that this man
is either in extreme need of your alms, or in urgent need of it: Now urgent
need is a great deal more common, then extreme need as is evident.

But now I come to your grand Achilles, by which you would make it peremptorily
certain, that Vasquez is very indulgent to the rich, and obliges them very
seldom to give alms; Because (say you) in those cases, in which Vasquez
obliges rich men to give alms, he allows the poor to steal from them. For to
answer this, I will do, as I did in the former matter, first set down Vasquez
his Doctrine, which in cap. 1. dub. 7. is delivered in two Conclusions.

First, he says with all Casuists generally, That in extreme necessity a poor
man may take from the rich man that which is precisely necessary for his
relief. The reason is, because the rich man is supposed not to be rationally
unwilling, that the poor man should take to save his life that which is
necessary.

Secondly, Vasquez says further That in some urgent necessity a poor man may
take from a rich man. He says in some case (aliquo casu) for it is not
general: and he explica^es himself presently, eo (inquam) casu, quo alius
tenebatur h^ic, patienti extremam necessitatem vel gravem, succurrere. -- In
that case, in which the rich man was bound to succor this poor man. In this
Conclusion Vasquez is against Cajetan, and the Major part of Divines; but he
has with him Sylvester and Angelus. The reason of this Conclusion is the same,
as of the former: For I cannot rationally be unwilling, that the poor man
should take that, which I was bound under Mortal Sin to give him. This is
Vasquez his Doctrine.

Now that which I have to say here is first, that this very Doctrine of
Vasquez, which you lay hold on, evidently convinc^th, that Vasquez is stricter
in point of obliging rich men to give alms, then Cajetan, or other Divines
ordinarily are. For Vasquez therefore grants, that the poor may take from the
rich that which is precisely necessary, in more cases then Cajetan and others
do, because he holds the rich obliged to give alms in more cases, then
Cajetan and others do. So that the first thing, that can be concluded from this
objection, is, that you and your Friend have all the way falsified Vasquez, and
wrongfully judged him to be indulgent to the rich.

The second thing I have to say concerns your Illation, That either Vasquez
does not ordinarily oblige rich men to give Alms, or else he gives the poor an
ordinary permission to steal. I must tell you, this Illation is very illogicall
and inconsequent. It is very true, that Vasquez does not ordinarily, that is,
upon ordinary occasions, oblige rich men by precept to give alms; for he
requires, that the case be urgent at least, which is not ordinary; and so your
whole Argument fails in the first clause. Yet upon another account it fails
worse in the second clause. For Vasquez does not say, That in all cases of
urgent necessity the poor may steal; no, he allows not that: but (as I have
told you) he allows, that when this particular rich man is bound to relieve
this particular poor man, then the poor man may take to supply his necessity.
Now this is not ordinary. And it is made less ordinary, and consequently the
poor man's permission to steal less frequent, by that clause, which Vasquez
prudently put, That this determinate rich man is not bound under precept, to
give this poor man an Alms, unless he probably suppose, that no body else
will, or can do it. This caution you very simply laughed at, though it be a
necessary one, and shows, that the poor man, if he be refused by one rich
man, ought to go to another, and not presently fall a pilfering. But if after
all his industry in begging no body will help him, then according to Vasquez he
may lawfully take that which is necessary for his relief, not only in his
extreme, but also in his urgent want.

This is Vasquez his Doctrine; which if you will impugn with reason, I shall
willingly hear you: for I am not of Vasquez his opinion, nor of Caj^tans
neither; though I respect them both, as far above me. I have only one thing
more to add, That this Treatise of Vasquez concerning Alms is a Post^ume Work;
and therefore it must not be wondered, if it be a little obscure, wanting the
Authors last hand. Nor were it any great credit for you, if in a Work, which
the Author never lived to perfect, you should spy some ^rrour. But your
disgrace is not the less, for having falsified this Work.

But it is time to pass to Valentia and Tann^r; whom you accuse of favou^ing
Simony, which is crime enough, if you can prove it.

But before I begin with you, I will set down something for a general Notion
of Simony, to clear the Reader, and let him know in what all agree, and what
the terms, which we must use, do mean. For though you, Sir, and your Friend,
would needs be answered in this matter without School-terms, yet I judge it
very impertinent to humor you in this desire: and if every Tradesman is
allowed his terms; if a Faulconer or Hunts-man would be laughed at for relating
their Game without the terms of their art, sure it cannot be required, that a
Divine should desert his terms, which are necessary to make him intelligible.

First then, the Reader will be pleased to understand, that the Definition of
Simony, which St. Tho. 2. 2. q. 100. and all Divines allow of, is that which is
given in Gloss. Decret. c. 1. q. 1. in these words. Simonia est studiosa
voluntas ^mendi aut vendendi aliquid spirituale, aut spirituali annexum. Simony
is a deliberate will of Buying, or Selling, some Spiritual Thing, or something
annexed to a Spiritual Thing.

Secondly the Author, from whose infamous crime this horrid Sin has its name,
is Simon Magus; who would have bought of St. Peter the power of giving the Holy
Ghost by Imposition of hands. For though the Author of the Provincial Letters
(a fit Advocate for such a purpose) say, (Letter the Twelfth, page 294. first
Edit.) That it is certain that Simon Magus used no terms of Buying or Selling,
yet it is most certain, that he did; and upon the authority of Scripture we
have it, that he would have Acts 8. 20.
bought that power of St. Peter. So St. Peter understood it, and so all the
world conceived it, till this Jansenist was pleased to plead for Simon Magus.

Thirdly all consent, that according to the Definition given, to make any act
truly Simoniacall, there must be a Buying or Selling of some Spiritual Thing,
or something annexed to a Spiritual Thing: And if there be not a Buying or
Selling, then all agree, that there is no Simony. By this means Curats, and
other Churchmen are exempt from Simony. For though they receive Tithes,
Pensions, Stipends, and Distributions from the people in respect of their
Spiritual Functions, yet they receive them not as a price of their Spiritual
Functions, but as a Temporal Subsistence, which out of gratitude (or to
incline them to do willingly what they undertake) the people pay, or give
those, by whom they are helped in Spiritualls: and this is grounded on Christ's
appointment. For as St. Paul tell^th, 1 Cor. 9. So our Lord ordained, to them
that announce the Gospel, to live of the Gospel. It is therefore allowed by
all, that it is not Simony (speaking only according to the D^finition) to give
a Temporal Good for a Spiritual, either by way of gratitude, or to incline
the will, when there is no pact, or bargain of Justice intervening. And by this
Doctrine many acts, which are commended by Antiquity, are understood. For
example, Baronius in his History, Anno 929. commends Henry King of Germany,
(whom he calls the Ornament of Christian Religion) for having given great
gifts, and a great part of the Province of Su^via to Rodulph King of Italy and
Burgundy, for to obtain of him the Lance of Constanti^e, in which there was one
of the Nails, wherewith Christ was nailed to the Cross. This act is commended
by Baronius; who would never have commended Simony. Nor indeed can that good
King be suspected of Simony; since God blessed him, as Luitprandus relates,
with a great victory by means of that Lance. And besides he made a vow to God
to extirpate Simony in all his Realm. We must therefore say, that what he gave
for the Lance, which he esteemed Sacred, was not as a price to buy it, but as a
motive to induce King Rodulph to give it, or a gratitude for it. And the like
we must judge of diverse other such actions, commended by Antiquity, and
practiced by Saints.

Fourthly it is to be known, that among other Divisions of Simony one very
common is into Simony against the Divine Law, and Simony against Positive Law.
Simony against Divine Law is that, which properly and strictly agrees with the
Definition above mentioned: Simony against Positive Law, as Sotus says, lib.
9. de Justit. q. 5. Art. 2. is not properly Simony; for it has not in it a
Buying, or Selling, of a Spitituall Thing, or any thing annexed to a Spiritual
Thing. But it is called Analogically Simony, because it is punished by the
Church as Simony. For the Church has forbidden many acts under pain of Simony,
for very just reasons, though those acts contain not a Buying or Selling of a
Spiritual Thing. These acts are all expressed in the Ecclesiastical, or
Positive Law. So that to incur Simony against Positive Law, is to do some act
expressly forbidden in the Positive Law under pain of Simony. These acts are
very many, and it imports not to set them down: we have said enough for our
purpose.

These things then being foreknown, now I come to you, Sir, and will begin with
what you say against Valentia.

Your Friend the Jansenist in his Sixth Letter, page 114. charge Valentia to
have deserted St. Thomas, and to have taught in his 3. Tome. page 2042. this
Doctrine, If a man give a Temporal Good for a Spiritual, (that is to say,
money for a Ben^^ice) and that a man give money as the price of a Benefice, it
is apparent Simony; but if he give it as the motive, inclining the will of the
Incumbent to resign his Interest, (non tanquam pretium Benificii, sed tanquam
motivum ad resignandum) it is not Simony, though he that resings, consider and
look upon the money as his principal end. This is the charge he lays to
Valentia; which you, Sir, undertake to make good. The Jesuits answer, that it
is an Imposture; and with good reason: for Valentia has no such thing at all.

I will tell you, Sir, what passed with me, when I read these words in your
Friends Sixth Letter. I imagined, that they being in a different print under
Valentia's name, and the very page ^^ted, must needs be in Valentia. I turned
therefore to Valentia, having his Third Tome by me: But when I r^flected on the
citation, which was only page 2042. of his Third Tome without telling the
Impression, I presently discovered your Friend the Jansenists knavery. On the
one side, by citing the page he would have all the world believe, he was very
exact; and on the other side, by not telling what Impression he followed, he
was sure, no man should find it out. There have been several Impressions of
Valentia, and in my Book, which was printed at Ingolstad, Anno 1603. there is
no such thing in the page cited. I was troubled at this; but being resolved to
search further, and to find it out at last, I went to the Twelfth Letter,
where the the same matter is handled again. There I found, that the citation of
the page 2042. was meant of the page 2044. and that it was in Tom. 3. Disputat.
16. p. 3. I turned therefore for the sixteenth Disputation, hoping there to
find both what was in the Sixth and Twelfth Letter. But the jest on it was,
that in that Tome there are but Ten disputations: So that your Friends citing
the Sixteenth, was but to fool the world, or rather to declare himself a Knave
to all the world. I suppose you will lay the fault on the Printer; but I
believe the Sequel will show where the fault was. For I being still
unsatisfied, went, and read all the Treatise of Valentia concerning Simony;
which is in his Third Tome, Disp. 6. and in the Sixteenth Question: and after
all I must tell you, that there is no such thing in Valentia, as either the
Sixth or Twelfth Letter impose on him. There are indeed p. 3. (and in the
Impression named page 1983. lit. D.) some words, which make it clear, that this
is the place which was meant by those citations; as for example the Latin
words, which he cites in the Twelfth Letter (for those in the Sixth are of his
own coining) are there, though not fully as they are cited. But as to the whole
matter, he has falsi^ied Valentia, both in his Sixth and his Twelf^h L^tter.
And this falsification consists chiefly in two things. First, whereas
Valentia treate^h only of Simony as it is against the Divine Law, and in the
D^finition of all Divines, which I have set down, he makes Valentia speak of
Benefices: which being a matter, where Positive Law is concerned, he detorteth
Valentia's sense. Secondly, he feigneth words in another print, to make
Valentia deliver a Doctrine, which he never dreamt on; nay, which he has
expressly forewarned the Reader of; using neither Valentia's words nor sense;
but smothering some passages of that Author, and foisting in others to make
them ^it for his own purpose. This, Sir, you call to cite the passage of
Valentia at length; for this you say, The Jesuits have nothing to answer to
Valentia. This your Friend calls Valentia's Dream. But, Sir, it is not
Valentia that dreams; it is you that rave: Valentia has no such thing. The
words are not Valentia's; they are your Friends falsifying. You may perhaps
say, that all that is laid to Valentia's charge by your Friend, may be inferred
out of Valentia. I answer you, that it can no more be inferred out of Valentia,
then out of all other Divines, who unanimously admit the Definition of Simony,
as I shall show at the end of this Letter. But allow that it might be in^erred
out of Valentia, you should then have cited Valentia's words right, and showed
the ^llation; you should not have changed and chopped as you do. This is manifest
Imposture; and so I leave you with that good Title on your back, as to
Valentia; and now I come to Tanner.

For Tanner, your Friend says thus. Tanner is of the same opinion with
Valentia, Tom. 3. page 1519. confessing withal, that St. Thomas is of a
contrary opinion, in that he absolutely maintains, that it is undeniable Simony
to give a Spiritual Good for a Temporal, if the Temporal be the end thereof.
Here Tanner is accused first, of all that which Valentia is accused of in the
sixth Letter, though he have not the words imputed to him, nor the sense of
them, no more then Valentia; and next of speaking against the absolute
authority of St. Thomas.

For this the Jesuit charged your Friend with Imposture; and he endeavored to
clear himself in his Twelfth Letter: But the Answer to that Letter made him
st^ll appear an Impostour, so clearly that I need not add one word. After all
you come, Sir, to maintain the Impostour: but your Discourse is so childish,
and so manifestly against reason, that a young Logician, newly stepped over pons
asinorum, would be able to confute it all. Your words run thus.

Tanner says in general, that it is no Simony in point of Conscience (in foro
conscientiae) to give a spiritual good for a Temporal, when the Temporal is
only the Motive, though the principal one, and not the price of the Spiritual.
And when he says, it is not Simony in point of Conscience, his meaning is,
that it is not any, ^ither in regard of Divine right, or of Positive right.

Here, Sir, you falsify Tanner, in telling us he speaks in general of
Simony. He does not in that place speak in general of Simony; he speaks only
of Simony against Divine Right, as is manifest; first by the words which he
uses, vere and proprie Simonia, truly and properly Simony, which import Simony
against Divine Right. And secondly by his express Caveat, which he immediately
gives, as the Jesuit has already told you. Again, Sir, you are highly out in
the terms, when you take Simony in foro conscientiae (in the Court of
Conscience) to be a Generical name, according to Tanner, to all Simony; which
is evidently false. For when Tanner had said, That it is not Simony in the
Court of Conscience, he presently adjoyneth, That this hinders not, but that
it may be Simony of Positive Right: which is the exterior Court. So he
opposes Simony in foro conscientiae to Simony in foro exteriori: by the first
he understands Simony against Divine Law: by the other Simony against Positive
Law. Nor in this is he singular; but uses the terms, as other Divines do.
Therefore when he says, it is not Simony in foro conscientiae, in the
interior Court of the Conscience, his meaning is not to say, that it is not
Simony in point of Conscience, but it is not Simony against Divine Right; which
is just contrary to what you infer.

You go on therefore, and say, Simony of ^ositive Right is Simony in point of
Conscience. I answer, that it is very certain, that he that bath committed
Simony against Positive Right, is guilty in his conscience of Simony. Tanner,
and Valentia, and every body say so. Yet notwithstanding the te^m in foro
conscientiae (in the Court of Conscience) is very different from that other
term, in foro exteriori, (in the exterior Court) where Positive Law is
pronounced, as every Divine can tell you.

Now (to omit some of your Nonsense) I come to the cons^quence which you draw
from this; which is, Consequently there are some Spiritual things which a man
may, without Simony according to Positive Right, give for Temporal goods, by
changing the word Price into that of Motive. I answer first, That your
consequence follows not out of your Antecedent; and so you err grossly in
Logic. Secondly I answer, That no consequence can make, that the change of
words shall save committing Simony. Thirdly I answer, That if you will frame
your Proposition right, and say, That there are some Spiritual Things, which a
man may without Simony against either Divine or Positive Right, give or do for
Temporal goods, not as for a price, but as for a Motive, I grant it. This
Tanner, and Valentia, and St. Thomas, and all generally say: So you may give
your Curate his Fee for Baptizing your Child; not as a price of that
Sacrament, but as a gratitude, or stipend, which inclines the Curate willingly
to do his Function. So I may give a poor man an Alms to move him to pray for
me, or (if he be a Priest) to say a Mass for me, ^ and there is no Simony,
though you are so simple as not to understand it. So also all the Tithes,
Stipends, Distributions, and Fees, that are given to Clergymen, are given, not
as the price of their Spiritual Functions, or administering Sacraments, but as
a Motive, or as a Gratuity, as ^ told you, already: and every body knows, that
the people neither give their Goods to Churchmen for nothing, nor are
Simoniacall for paying their Duties.

And so, Sir, you are extremely out in Tanner, as well as in Valentia and
Vasquez. Tanner teaches not the Doctrine, with which you charge him: nor is he
so much against St. Thomas, as you would have him. He takes the opinion, which
seems to be against St. Thomas, but which is consonant to St. Thomas his
Definition of Simony ^ and in this he follows Sotus a Dominican, who
explicateth St. Thomas. And if you mark it, Sir, you need not have run to
falsify either Valentia or Tanner, for to have drawn the Argument, which you
and your Friend make. If you had not had a mind to butt against some Jesuit,
you might have made a better Syllogism out of the Definition of Simony, which
St. Thomas and all the Schools hold. For example, you might have said thus.
According to the Definition which all allow, Simony is a Buying, or Selling,
some Spiritual Thing, or something that is annexed to a Spiritual Thing. But
where a Temporal Thing is given freely, and is not a price, but only a
gratuit gift, or a motive inclining the will, there is no Buying or Selling a
Spiritual Thing, or any thing annexed to a Spiritual Thing; therefore where a
Temporal Thing is given freely, and is not a price, but a gratuit gift, or a
motive inclining the will, there is no Simony. Thus you might have argued as
well out of the Definition, which St. Thomas and all allow, as out of Tanner,
or Valentia, or any Jesuit. Apply this to your case of a Living of four
hundred pound a year, parted with for a thousand pound in hand, or any which
shock the commands of the Church; and I defy you to answer without using the
distinction of Divine Right, and Positive Right, which the Jesuits use, and
all Divines since St. Thomas his time, and long before.

And now, Sir, I have done. For all the rest that you say, of Eradus Billus,
Sanchez, and who you will else, is nothing to the purpose. That which you
undertook was to show, that Vasquez, Valentia, and Tanner did teach, that which
was imputed to them by the Author of the Provincial Letters. This you have
not performed; and so your Friend remains still an Impostour. Now if Sanchez,
Es^^bar, Eradus Billus, or any body else do say what you allege, (which is not
granted) begin a new Calumny on their account when you will, and you shall be
answered. But first you must grant me, that you have falsified Vasquez,
Valentia, and Tanner, as it is manifest you have. And then I will treat with
you of what you dare, when you appear in your own colors; that is, a convinced
Impostour. And ^o Fare you well.

AN ANSWER to the JANSENISTS Thirteenth Letter.
Argument.
1. THat the Fable of a Box on the Ear, asserted by the Author of the
Provincial Letters, to be given to one at Compeigne, is utterly false, by the
Examine of Monsieur de Rhodes, the Authority of the King, Queen, and whole
Court of France. 2. His sleeveless Answer in saying, when he was convinced of
citing Lessius false, That it was not the Question. 3. That it is evidently
false, that Lessius follows Victoria's Opinion. 4. His gr^sse error, that
having promised to give Satisfaction to the 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18.
Impostures, he has not touched them at all. 5. That no Casuist ever taught,
that one may kill for simple Slanders; though some have taught it lawful, for
^ai^ous Calumnies, that concern Honor and Life: wherein the Learned Jesuits,
as Suarez, and Vasquez, condemn them. And if some private men have taught
otherwise, their Doctrine is disowned by the whole Body, and that by a public
disavowing. 6. That the distinction betwixt Practical and Speculative
Probabilities (which he makes the Secret of the Jesuits Politiques) is a
common Distinction, used in all Schools, intreduced by Cajetan, grounded on St.
Thomas and the Law, and even on Scripture; never esteemed (as he says)
ridiculous in any University. 7. An Antithesis betwixt the Jesuits and
Jansenists. 8. Of the difference of Opinions; and his false reasoning out of
Escobar, concerning the Illation from Speculative to Practique; which he should
have made quite contrary. 9. All that which he says against Probable Opinions,
retorted against himself.

SIR
YOu are ever suitable to your self: always weak in your answers, and violent
in your passions: always cowardly in yout defense, and confident in your
Impostures.

This of the Box of the Ear at Compeigne is no stale one: There I intend to
begin. This question of Fact is without perplexity, and is also very honorable
for you. The world will hereafter clearly perceive what esteem men ought to
make of your integrity, and how far you are from Letter 12.
a hazarding the loss of all by exposing your self to be discovered for an
Impostour. For you could not give the world a more illustrious proof of the
sincerity of your words, nor evince by a more signal instance, That a
Jansenist never lies.

The King knows it; the Queen is thoroughly informed of it; the whole Court has
heard the relation; and I assure my self, that it is still the discourse of all
France; behold a large Theater set open to your reputation. It Is pity you
discover not your self, nor make known the name of so learned a man, who so
solidly grounds his Theology on a Box of the Ear.

The^e was a rumor spread a few days since in the Town of Compeign, that a
person, whose name is well known, had received a Box of the Ear from a Jesuit,
whose rare modesty has gained him the affection of the greatest in France.
Monsiegneur de Rhodes desirous to inform himself thereof, learnt the falsehood
of that calumny from his very mouth, who was said to be the person affronted.

While this false rumor blows over in Compeigne, and affords matter of
laughter; the lie being ashamed to see it self discovered, and not daring to be
seen any longer at Court, repaired to you in your darkness, to request you to
lend it that fair gloss you set upon your Impostures, that so it might pass
current through the streets of Paris.

You have given it welcome, because you love it; you have joyfully enter^ain'd
it; and having painted and disguized it, you set it in the fairest part of your
Letter, at the head of an infinity of falsehoods which attend it as a Convoy.

Were you a grave Author, the Jesuits would be in an ill taking. For how false
soever this popular opinion were, as soon as it should appear in your writings,
you would oblige them by the doctrine of Probability, to grant according to F.
Escobar, that it is a probable opinion, secundum praxim Soci^tatis.

But, Sir, the King is expected at the very instant I am writing this; when he
arrives, how will this mask^ and transformed lie once dare to appear? What will
men say of that able Writer, who has put it among his cases of Consci^nce?
What will become of the Christian instructions of that Curate, whom you only
put into your Letter, because h^ has no great good will for the J^suites, and
was driven out of Pa^is for ^earing less affection to Religion? In ^ine, what
will the Jansenists answer, when it shall be said to their charge, that to the
pr^judice of innoc^nce you have, from a silly report, made the decisions of
their Moral Divinity?

Really, Sir, I do not see what they can say, unless happily that Grace b^ing
Verity in the Spirit, and Charity in the Heart, they have both f^^led you. B^t
since this conf^ssion is no^ v^^y Cathol^q^e, I ^ad rather s^y you h^ve fail^d,
as to Grace; and that it is false, that a J^suite has wounded Charity by
giving a Box on the E^r, bu^ it is tru^, that a Jansenist w^iting it has given
Truth a buffer.

Here leave we then your Imposture of Compeig^e; and let us see whether you
defend the Fourth any better, then you have done the former Thre^.

I have convinced you of falsehood upon the Text concerning Homicide; which you
ascribe to Lessius a Jesuit, though it belongs to Victoria, whose name you
conceal in your Seventh Letter. After reproof for this foul dealing, you
acknowledge in your Thirteenth, that it is indeed Victoria's; and to ^xcuse your
self for ch^rgeing it upon another you answer, That this is not the subject of
the Dispute. I know not whether it be the subject you take for your dispute;
but I well know, Sir, nor can you deny it, that it is the subject of your
Imposture.

I perc^ive plainly it is a Subject that does not please you, as not finding
your self in a good posture concerning it; and that you would be glad to shift
your place: But what avails the sick man to quit his bed, if he cannot leave
his weakness behind, but must car^y his sickness with him? You may well fly
to another Subject, because you find not your advantage in this. It Is the
ordinary method of Heretics, in whom you are not meanly studied. But you
cannot persuade your self, that to father words on Lessius, which you are
forced to restore to Victoria, is not a most visible falsification. See here
the passage in Dispute, which I deliver you in your own terms. He that has
received a B^x of the Ear, may not have an intention to revenge himself, but he
may intend to avoid infamy, and on that account immediately repel the affront,
even with his sword. Tell me then, Sir, is not this the Text you ascribed to
Lessius in your Seventh Letter? And ^ell me, is not this the very same Text you
restore to Victoria in your Thirteenth? Is not this a palpable falsity? In
fine, is it sufficient for him that committed it, to say for his justification,
That this is not the subject of the Dispute? I apprehend a Purser in the very
fact, and compel him to restore it to the owner: is he quit for saying, that
this is not the subject of his charge, and that he is guilty of many more
robberies?

You see, Sir, the fault you have committed in ascribing that to an Author,
which he only reports out of another. I might content my self with having
forced you to a public acknowledgement thereof: But because you will say,
That is not the subject of the Dispute, there being indeed many other faults to
correct in your sheet; I will go on with the list of your Impostures, which
grow still grosser, as they increase in number.

If it be true, say you, that Lessius does but cite the words of the Casuist
Victoria, it is also as true, that he cites them not, but to follow them. This
is a new Imposture, which draws indeed many other after it, but does not
justify the precedent. It is an ill way for the healing of your wounds, to
make still fresh ones.

Had you been content with falsifying this Jesuits words, it might have been
taken for an effect of your distemper, which would have begot our pity. But to
change his thoughts, and cor^upt the purity of his Doctrine, is an effect of an
affected malice, which merits nothing but disdain and indignation.

Is it to follow Victoria's opinion to say, that it ought no^ easily to be
permitted, because it is to be ^eared, lest it might give occasion of hatred,
revenge, and excess? Could he declare himself against that celebrious Author
in any rougher expression, without transgressing the bounds of civil^^y, and
that respect which ought to be observed in this kind of dispute against
Catholic Doctors?

Is it a following of his opinion to impugn it with St. Austins authority,
(which you had no mind to make known, because it would at the same time have
discovered your fraud) and to conclude with the opinion of that great Saint,
that if he hardly grants, that one may kill a man in defense of his life, much
less would he affirm it lawful to kill him in defense of his honor?

Is it a following of his opinion to say immediately after, on the subject of
that other Maxim, which permits to kill in repulse of a calumny that admits no
other defense, that he also condemns it in the practique? Haec quoque
sententia, (these words are remarkable to show the connection of this decision
with the precedent) haec quoque, (give me leave, Sir, once again to repeat
them, that I may show you the reason I had to cite these words; not to con^ound
them with the other, as you impose upon me, notwithstanding I had advertised
you of it in my answer to your Eleventh Letter, but to show you their
conformity) Haec quoque sententia mihi in praxi non probatur^ quia mul^^s
coedibus cum magna r^ipublicae perturbatione praeberet occasionem. Neither do I
approve this opinion in practice, because it would open a gap to many secret
murders, which would occasion great disorder in the Commonwealth; and when we
dispute of the right, which every man has to defend himself, we must always
take heed, that the practice thereof be not prejudicial to the public.

After such evident proofs how durst you assert, that Lessius cites Victoria's
opinion for no other purpose, bu^ to follow it? How had you the confidence, to
take to witness all those persons of quality, that saw it in the Original,
even before I had designed to answer you? I told you in my Answer to your
Impostures, that many Honorable Persons had taken notice of this before me;
and I was satisfied with their testimony without citing you the Text, which
they themselves had examined. How can you affi^m without blushing, that I hid
it from them? I cited it since in answer to that rare Elogium, you give to
Raillery in your Eleventh Letter; How had you the baseness to dissemble it?

I verily believe, you imagined there were not left in the world any persons of
Honor or Learning; and that therefore you might with impunity call them to
witness, like those free sinners, Letter 4. those full and accomplished
sinners, who (you know) swear incessantly by God, and tak^ him to witness
without the least scruple, because they believe not there is any.

For did you fear the judgment of Persons of Honor, by what Jansenian
sincerity could you accuse me of suppressing the Text of the number 80. which
directly impugns Victoria's opinion; since by citing it in my answer to your
Eleventh Letter, I had prevented this cavil? And did you apprehend the censure
of the Learned, how could you assert, that the Text of the number 82. which I
cited in the refutation of your Fourth Imposture, concerns a question of a
different nature, and an opinion totally separate?

Awake your memory, Sir; it has done you great disservice. Reminde your self,
that Lessius compriseth these two opinions, as two species of the same genus,
in one and the same question, viz. Whether it be lawful to kill a man in
defense of ones honor. Remember that the reasons he brings to overthrow the
one, are of equal force against the other. Call to memory those words, which
show their connection in this Authors opinion, haec quoque sententia mihi in
praxi non probatur. But though you vainly glory in forgetting the most
excellent of tougues, yet remember at least your own words, and reflect on what
you say at the beginning of your Letter, that your 15, 16, 17, 18, Impostures,
(where the second opinion is handled, that permits a man to kill a
Calumniatour) are on the same Subject with that where the first opinion is
discussed, which permits him that has received a Box of the Ear to repulse the
injury, even with his sword; and that therefore it is proper to give
satisfaction thereto at the same time. Now if it is proper to give satisfaction
thereto at the same time, why is it not proper to speak of them at the same
time? Shall they be all of different subjects for me, and of one sole subject
for you?

I ask you, Sir, by what equivocation you can reconcile the contradiction that
is between the first and second page of your Letter? I had learned out of the
Abbot of St. Cyran's Indictment, that that illustrious head of your Sect did
believe one might whisper, that the Council of Trent was but a Council of
Divines that had much altered the Doctrine of the Church, and deny it aloud,
when he was accused for having said it. But I must needs confess the Scholar
does far surpass the master. For you think it lawful to say aloud, that two
opinions are o^ the same subject, and a moment after to assert aloud, that
these very opinions are totally separate, and on a clean different subject.

I do not see, Sir, how you can leap over this block, unless you imitate
Monsieur de St. Cyran in one of his excellent Letters, whereof the Jesuits
have the Original in Clermont College, which you may see when you please; for
I assure you they show them as willingly to all the world, as you have formerly
been solicitous to suppress all the Copies.

Hear then, Sir, how this incomparable Abbot speaks, writing to Monsieur D'
Andilly. If I am sometimes caught in contrar^^ty of discourse, as I lately was
by that excellent Cousen whom you love, I have reason to defend my self, being
partly of a ^clestiall composition; two contrary qualities, fire and water,
meet together, which make me sometimes fall into contrary discourses; yet so as
one de^troyes not the other. Like as in the Heavens, the fire that neighbors
the Moon, which is not far from the waters that environ it, feels not any
diminution of its heat.

Truly the Abbot of St. Cyran reasoned not ill sometimes. He knew how to
reconcile the qualities of the Moon and the Fire; and to make a temper of heat
and moisture, excellent to remedy the defects of the memory. This may stand you
in some stead, Sir; for I perceive your memory often fails you; and that having
promised in the beginning to give satisfaction to the Eleventh, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, and 18. Impostures, you are carried away so violently upon the Fourth, that
you leave the rest in your Inkhorn.

I was in hope you would tell us, wherefore you attribute to Layman the Jesuit
the opinion of Navarr touching Duels, which is the subject of your Eleventh
Imposture: you have forgot it.

I expected a more faithful translation of two In the 13. and 14. Imposture.
passages of Molina, which you have so c^u^lly maimed: it was quite out of your
mind.

I judged with you, that it was but just to make some satisfaction to In the
16, 17, 18.
Reginaldus, Lessius, Filiucius, whose Texts you have falsified and lamed, by
suppressing one part to corrupt the other: This slipped clean out of your memory.

In fine, I thought you would have showed me some Jesuit, that taught what you
falsely accuse them of, That the Law of God forbids not to kill for simple
detractions; for it is the word simple that makes the jest: and truly, Sir, you
were of opinion, that it was ^it to give satisfaction therein. But your memory
failed you. You resemble those bad D^btours, who daily commence new suites for
fear of paying their old debts. If you must have satisfied all the Calumnies
you have published, contrary to the duties of Justice and Christian Charity,
you would have been found wholly insolvent. What did you do to deceive your
Creditours? You resolved to bring an action against them upon the Doctrine of
Probability, and to pursue them with such just ratiocinations, and judicious
reflections, that you would give u^ reason to doubt, which of the two you
excelled in most, Judgment or Memory.

I might send you to the first Quaternion of the second part of your
Impostures, which very seasonably appeared at the same time your Letter came
forth, to show you, that you are as learned in the Doctrine of Heretical
Opinions, as ill instructed in the Doctrine of Probability. But because you
seem extraordinarily moved, I must endeavor a new to appease you, and reduce
you to reason.

To take off the scandal you have given the people by most calumniously
publishing, that the Jesuits permit, according to the Law of God, to kill men
for simple slanders, and that if they forbid it, it is only for politic
reasons, I have thought it necessary in refuting that horrible falsehood to
advertise the public of two things. The f^^st, In my answer to the 15.
Imposture, and in the advertis^ment that follows the Eighteenth.
That no Casuists ever advanced that Maxim. The second, That some have written
it as lawful to kill for heinous calumnies that concern Honor and Life, when
they cannot otherwise be rupulsed: and it is pity, that Monsieur Du Vall
engaged himself with Bannes in that party. But as to the Jesuits, their most
learned Authors, as Vasquez and Suarez, do absolutely condemn that Maxim: the
rest condemn i^ in practice. I add, that if some particular men have followed
that strange Doctrine, 'twas their misfortune to recede from the Sentiments of
their Order, which has publicly disavowed them, as all the world can tell. To
this what have you answered?

To elude my first proposition you have falsified it, by omitting the word
simple: There Is a touch of your rare memory, which has found out the art
(sought for by an Ancient) of forgetting what it pleases. And you make me say,
There is not one Jesuit that permits to kill for calumnies: There Is a rare si^k
of your wit, which would deserve a Retort, had not I many more of them to
remark.

To oppose the second, you highly blame that diversity of opinions, which is
among their Authors; where some of them disallow the opinion of Ba^nes both in
Practice and Speculation, others condemn it only in p^actice; and by a new
stratagem, instead of dividing your enemies, you will unite them against their
own sentiments. But for what design? To show that they conspire by an admirable
accord to establish that Doctrine, even while they condemn it; as also that you
might juggle all your Impostures out of sight, while you thus amuse the world
with your Sophismes. This indeed is a subtilty worthy of you: but you even
surpass your self in the observations, and reflections you make in order to
effect it.

You observe in the first place, That this distinction of Speculation and
Practice in matter of opinion, which the University has looked on as
ridiculous, is an invention of the Jesuits, and a secret of their Politiques,
which is sit to be made known.

The Jesuits by this account are much more ancient in Gods Church, then I
conveiv'd they had been, by rules of our Chronology. For Hujus distinctionis
Author primus est Cajetanus op. 17. resp. 13. d. 7 and in 1, 2. q. 57. a. 5. ad
3. ubi sanctu^ Thomas ansam pr^buit, and postmodum multi Doctores eam amplexi
sunt. Tho. Sanch. lib. 2. de Matrim. disp. 41. number. 4.
Sanchez the Jesuit had made me believe hitherto, That Cardinal Cajetan had
introduced it into Divinity; that St. Thomas had opened him the way to it; and
that many Divines had since received it. But seeing you assure me, it was
invented by those Fathers, I conclude them to be of the age of St. Thomas; nay,
even as ancient as the Gospel, since Divines do ordinarily ground this
distinction on that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. c. ^.
who grants, that to eat of the flesh of Victims is lawful in it self. (This
they call in the Schools lawful in speculation) Yet that in the circumstances
of the time, when the scandal of the Faithful was so dangerous, he would
never have practiced it. (This they call forbidden in practice.)

Further, Sir, the Jesuits are very great Politicians, to make a secret of the
commonest thing in the world among the Learned; to publish this rare secret in
all their Books, and to teach it in all their Schools. Where is your judgment?
Sancius, Johannnes Sancius disp. 44. n. 63.
a famous Spanish Divine, affirms this distinction common among the
Jurisconsults, and that many of them dare not follow in practice the opinions
of Cujas, Duarenus, and Donellus, because they think them only good for
speculation and the School. Appellantque illas opiniones solum Theoricas and
non Practic^s, ^antumque ad Scholarum ludum proficuas, and non ad judicandum in
praxi. Du Valliu^ de Bonit. and Malit. human. Act. q. 4. n. 12.
Mo^sieur Du Vall has made it common in Sorbon. Diana. p. 8. T. 1. resp. 9. and
p. 2. T. 6.
Diana, and Pascaligus among the Disciples of St. Austin; Cajetan among the
Disciples of St. Thomas: and yet you fancy men will believe, that the Jesuits
made a secret of it in their Politiques; and that the University of Paris
considered it as ridiculous. Do not you your self deserve to be used
ridiculously by all the Universities in the world?

You add, that the secret of this distinction avails them not for questions
wherein Religion is concerned; and that they little trouble themselves
therewith, because Page 4.
this is not the place where God visibly exercises his justice. But make great
use of it, when they are to secure themselves as to the Judges; Page 6.
and so by a subversion contrary to the spirit of the Saints, are bold against
God, and timorous as to men.

In good earnest, Sir, you ought not to discover the secret of those good
Fathers to the whole world. For besides that you give a jealousy to all
Divines, by these rare commendations which they deserve as well as the
Jesuits, seeing they teach the same Doctrine; you furnish Thieves and
Murderers with a pregnant argument, to secure themselves from the Judges, and
strangely subvert the order of justice: for when by the subtlety of this
distinction, they have shown the Judges, that it is lawful to rob and kill
speculatively, they will find a way to pass (as you admirably prove it) from
the speculation to the practice. And why should not they have right to act,
what the Schools teach? However I am confident, there are not many, that would
willingly trust to that secret of these Doctors, but would rather prefer that
of Jansenius, who had found a method, how to take secretly as much of the money
belonging to the College of Saint Pulcheria, as would maintain Barcos without
any man's discovering it by the yearly accounts he was to make thereof.

Behold how opposite the Maxims of the Jesuits are to those of the
Jansenists. The Jesuits, say you, approve of crimes in speculation, and
condemn them in practice: The Jansenists commit crimes in practice, and condemn
them in speculation. The Jesuits, according to your visions, seek distinctions
to secure themselves against Judges: and the Iansenists invent calumnies to
secure themselves against the Popes. But which is much resented by those who
have a real love for that reformed Church, whose re-establishment you project,
the Jesuits for the zeal they bear to the good of the State, are welcome to
the Judges: whereas the Iansenists, by reason of their rebellion against the
Church, find no favor from the Popes.

Behold the true Source of all your calumnies and reproaches. This it is, that
makes you fret with envy, and which begets this third observation. That the
Jesuits imagine, that the esteem they have in the Church, will hinder men from
punishing their attempts against the Truth.

Do you not fear they will be stung at this reproach, and offended, that you
publish the credit they have in the Church? Had all the Jansenian Sect labored
as long a time to justify the sound Doctrine of the Jesuits, as it has done
to calumniate it, could it have suggested to you a more pregnant, clear, and
invincible proof then this? For if they have credit in the Church, which is
holy and wise; on what else can it be grounded, but on the purity of their
manners and doctrine? Can vice have esteem, where sanctity reigns? Or unsound
Doctrine subsist with honor, where verity Presides?

Recall to mind what you practiced at Rome, with Pope Innocent the Tenth, and
the arts you used to purchase credit in the Church. Have you prevailed therein?
Have you by all your Intrigues procured approbation of any one of your
pernicious Maxims? The very name of Iansenist, is it not equally suspected of
Church and State? Have not all your Books been blasted by an opprob^ious
Censure? Find you not above forty of them in the list of prohibited Books? And
have they not lately condemned at Rome the two last Letters of Monsieur
Arnauld, which made so great a noise in Sorbon? Who sees not this disgrace to
be an infallible ma^k of your errors? and a penalty necessarily annexed to
Heresy?

Now therefore argue thus by the Law of contraries. The Jesuits have
reputation in the Church. Councels approve their Institute; Popes make Bulls in
favor of their sound Doctrine, and good life: The Bishops honout them with
employment in their Diocesses, to labor for the salvation of souls, and
instruction of the people. The good and virtuous, that know them, love them;
there are none but Heretics and Libertines, that persecute them. Men must
therefore conclude, that the Iansenists are much to blame for decrying their
Morality, since it is universally approved, that those scandalous Letters,
which fly over all France, are filled with nothing but Impostures, Falsehoods,
and Disguisements.

Really, Sir, this only consideration might serve, as a general Apology for
all you have hitherto said: which though you should repeat a thousand several
way^s, men might content themselves with se^^ing you to Rome, and desiring you
to present you^ grievances to the Pope, who is the sovereign sudge, as well of
the Doctrine of Manners, as of Faith. For men begin here to be weary of your
repetitions.

How often have you tired our ears with the Doctrine of Probable Opinions? Must
I again make you blush at your absurdities therein? I should willingly forbear
to give you that confusion, but that I evidently perceive, you want light as
well as Charity, and have need of inst^uction.

Learn therefore, Sir, seeing you will make us dwell upon the subject of
Homicide, that there are opinions in this matter openly repugnant to Faith,
which they call Heretical, as that of the Waldenses, who held it was never
lawful to kill a man for any cause whatsoever; no, not by the Laws of Justice.

There be other opinions covertly repugnant to Faith, which we call suspected
and dangerous, as is the opinion you propose without reservation: That there is
an infinite distance between Gods prohibition of killing, and the speculative
permission that is given therein by Authors. For seeing you never explain your
self what prohibition, or what permission you mean, men have cause to doubt,
whether or no (to seem more holy then the Laws) you affect not this error. A
Castro. Minor. verb. Occidere, Haeres. 1.
That it is never lawful to kill a man, no not by public Authority, nor to
defend ones life, cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae. Wherefore speak again, and
that clearly; for there is a precipice on either hand: be it in too much
remisnisse, which corrupts the Doctrine of manners; or in an excess of rigo^r,
which ruins the Doctrine of Faith.

There be other that are against good manners, which we term scandalous, as
those of Monsieur de St. Cyran, It Is a part of his Indictment, to be seen in
Clermont College.
who taught, that one was obliged to kill a man, when incited thereto by
inspiration, though it were contrary to the exte^iour Law that forbids it.

There are some that contradict common sense, which we call Extravagant and
temerarious, as that of the same Abbot, who proves in his Royal question,
which you acknowledge for the first of his works, that men are oftentimes
obliged to kill themselves; and that as this obligation is one of the most
important and difficult, so there is required a great courage, and an
extraordinary strength of mind to perform it.

There be other opinions that are received by the whole Church, from which it
is not lawful to recede, and which for that reason we term Orthodox,
Catholic, Indubitable. For instance, that he who kills a Thief, whom he
finds in the night forcing the doors of a house; or breaking through the
walls, ought not to be questioned for it; for the Scripture it self declares as
much.

There be yet other opinions, that are not so clear and evident, which the
Church leaves to be disputed by Divines, permiting them to hold what they think
good; and these are they we call probable: among which we must yet distinguish
opinions probable in practice, (that is such as one may practice with a safe
conscience) from those which are only probable in speculation, that is to say,
in the subtle precisions of the mind, which contemplates things lawful in
themselves; though in practice they are ever accompanied with such dangerous
circumstances, as render them unlawful.

You see the reason why Divines affirm them probable in speculation, but not in
practice. And if some few, as you have observed, teach that all things, which
are lawful in speculation, are also allowable in practice, it is not in that
ill sense you ascribe unto them: but in another clean contrary. For they
always presuppose them separable from the circumstances that corrupt them;
insomuch, that from the instant of their being inseparable from them, it is
impossible they should pass (according to the universal Sentiment of all
Doctors) from the Speculative to the Practick. Th^s does F. Escobar explain
himself, in the very place you quote; and had you clearly delivered his
meaning, the most illiterate would soon have perceived your digressions.

P. D' Escobar. lib. 2. Theol. Moral. Sect. 1. de Conscientia, Problem. 5.
I hold, says he, the first opinion, because if after I have foreseen the
inconveniences arising from the practice, I yet probably judge this practice to
be allowable, it is lawful for me to make use of it. I grant nevertheless,
that all that is lawful, is not always expedient, by reason of the exterior
circumstances. And moreover if the Prince, or a Sovereign Court, should forbid
it by their Declarations, or Ordinances, then the opinion that should be found
contrary, would cease to be probable. For example, there are found some
Propositions of Angelus, Armilla, and Sylvester, which were probable before the
Council of Trent: and yet since that Council, it is not lawful to follow
them in practice. Wherefore when it is said, that an opinion is not probable in
practice, I hold, for my part, that it is not probable in speculation neither,
because the inconveniences, that occur in the practice, show us the falsehood
of it.

Now, Sir, I pray does not F. Escobar reason well sometimes? Had you argued so
well as he, should you not have passed from the Practice to the Speculation,
instead of passing, as you do, from the Speculation to the Practice? And to
speak clearly, ought you not to have concluded from this Text, that since the
^esuites esteem the opinion of Bannes, Victoria, and Monsieur Du Vall touching
Homicide not to be probable in Practice, it follows according to F. Escobar,
That it is not probable even in Speculation.

Let us then contract our discourse; and to refure (in few words) the rest of
your Impostures, let us make use of these certain rules, for discovery of their
injustice.

It is false in the first place, That whatso^ver is approved by celebrious
Authors, is probable and safe in cons^ience. You take the words of Authors
merely to corrupt them. When it is said that one celebrious Author is
sufficient to make an opinion probable and safe in Conscience, it is not to be
understood, that all he teaches is probable. You are as far from the sense of
this Proposition, as Heaven if from Earth. Cardinal Cajetan is a famous
Author; and yet, by a supreme order, they have cut often from his writings
diverse decisions that were not maintainable. The true sense of this Maxim,
Sir, is, that the probability of an opinion depends not so much on the
multitude of Authors that teach it, as on the strength of the reasons whereon
it is grounded. For were there but one sole Author that asserted it, yet in
case the reasons he brought were solid, and the opinion he established neither
repugnant to Faith, nor good manners, his authority were sufficient to
introduce it into the Schools, and to give it credit among the Learned. See
what it is that has deceived you. You separated the authority of the Author
from the force of his reasons, conformable to Faith and good manners: and it is
no wonder, if from a Maxim corrupted by ignorance, or disguised by artifice,
you have deduced no better consequences.

It is consequently false, Sir, that the Doctrine of Probability makes the
Jesuits the maintainers of all the errors the Casuists can commit; seeing that
to the contrary, Probability excludes the errors that are repugnant to the
rules of Faith, and discipline of good manners.

It is false, that this diversity of probable opinions is fatal to Religion.
This smells of Calvinisme: nor can you aver such a falsehood, without
offending the Pope, who permits them* the Universities, which teach them; and
all wise men, who follow them.

It is false, that this very diversity of opinions, provided they be probable,
is contrary to the spirit of St. Ignatius, and his Order; since it is not
contrary to the spirit of the Church. When he recommends to them uniformity of
mind and doctrine, he takes not from them the liberty of probable opinions,
but severely forbids them to embrace heretical and dangerous opinions: and
were there any one among his Children, that had embraced Jansenisme, their
Order could no more endure him, then the sea can endure a dead body, without
thrusting it from its bosom, and casting it on the sand.

It is false in fine, that the doctrine of probable opinions, is a mark of
their remissness. And when you say, That there are many other Casuists that are
grown remiss as well as they, because with them they maintain probable
opinions; you do them more honor then you imagine. For if all those that teach
this Doctrine are with them, and involved (as you will have it) in the same
^^^^snesse, you oppose your self to all Catholic Doctors, and remain really
a^one without force or support, and indeed without all other defense, then that
of the Disciples of Luther and Calvin.

After all, Sir, I am glad that you acknowledge a^ the end of your Letter, the
pu^ity of their Institu^e, the sanctity of their Founder, and the wisdom of
their first Generals; whom you seem to involve in the confusion of that
pretended disorder of Probability, when you say in your Fifth Letter, That at
their first appearance St. Augustine, St. Jerome, St. Ambrose, and all the rest
of the Fathers vanished out of sight, as to Morality; and that they were spread
over the whole earth, by the Doctrine of Probable Opinions, which is the Source
and Basis of all Irregularities.

You have by this prevented the reproach, I should have cast upon you else
where; and the Jesuits ought to hold themselves satisfied as to that
particular, since their Order having spread it self over the whole earth, under
St. Ignatius and their first Generals, whom you exempt from blam^, it is clear
by your own confession, either that he Doctrine of Probable Opininions is not
the source of their Irregularities, or that they were no^ spread over the face
of the earth by tha^ Doctrine.

But I am sorry you did not at the same time observe, tha^ St Ignatius, and
Father Laines, the two first Generals of their Order, had sucked in the
Doctrine of Probability in the University of Paris, which was then the most
flourishing and pur^st fountain of Moral Divinity, and that they had
transmitted it to their Children, recommending unto them never to recede from
the common opinions of the Schools, to cast themselves upon dangerous novelties.

What will you say, Sir, if I show you, that though you are a declared enemy to
the Doctrine of Probable Opinions, yet you are obliged in despite of your
aversion, to approve what you condemn, and to bear at the same time two so
different Titles, as Accuser of what you approve, and Approver of what you
accuse?

For either you believe, that among the questions of Morality there are
Opinions Probable on either part, or you do not believe it: if you believe it,
you are an adherent to Probability: if you disbelieve it, you go against common
sense. For if it be true, as the Philosopher says, That in no Science there is
more of Probability, and less of evidence then in Morality, is it not absurd
to expect to find in it what is not there? I should as easily say, you have
found the evidence of the truth, and falsehood of all things, and that in case
we hearken to Port Royal, we shall have nothing but Articles of Faith in
Speculative Divinity, Canons and indubitable Rules in Morality, infallible
Aphorisms in Physic, Demonstrations in Philosophy, Questions of Right and
Fact clearer then the Sun in the science of the Laws, and that you will banish
out of the world all Probability, which in your judgment, is the Source of all
Irregularities. Pardon me, if I tell you, it is more then probable, that you
either deceive the world, or your self, if you be in that error.

Moreover presupposing that you must needs pass for ridiculous, unless you
admit of Probable Opinions in Morality, either you hold that of two Probable
Opinions, we must always follow the securest; or you hold it not: If you judge
that men are not always bound to prefer the safest, you approve what you have
condemned. But if you affirm the contrary, that men are ever obliged to prefer
the more secure, then the less safe opinion will remain probable only in
Speculation, and will never be probable in Practice.

Thus of a severe Censurer, behold your self become an Approver of that
distinction which the University (say you) branded with the note of ridiculous.
B^hold your self guilty of all the disorders it is cause of. Behold your self a
Complice of that fatal secret of the Politiques of the Jesuits; a Voucher of
all their Opinions; responsable for their corrupt Maxims; a Pagan with
Lessius, in what concerns Homicide; a Pagan with Vasquez, in what regards Alms;
a Pagan with Tannerus, in what relates to Simony; a Pagan with F. Desbois, whom
you make Author of a Doctrine he never taught, and charge with a Chymericall
offense. In fine, a Pagan with all the Jesuits, in all that has relation to
the Doctrine of manners.

I pray God, Sir, you may be such a one as they; and I believe I cannot wish
you a greater good for all the ill will you bear them, then that of a perfect
confo^mity of Heart and Sentiment with them; which may render you submissive
unto the Church like them; obedient to the decisions of Popes and Bishops like
them; zealous to impugn the pernicious Doctrine of Heretics like them; and
finally modest and discreet like them, not rashly to condemn the Probable
Doctrine of all Catholic Divines.

An ANSWER to the JANSENISTS Fourteenth Letter.
Argument.
1. THat the Jansenist is much out of his element, when he comes to be serious.
2. His Impostures against the Casuists Opinions, in point of defense of ones
Goods and Honor, are mere Reveries. 3. He condemns all to the Devil, that
think not with him; and so no School escapes his Curse. 4. Some of the Saints
must be pulled out of Heaven at this man's Verdict. 5. The J^nsenists are no fit
Judges of the Doctrine of Killing, who teach, that it is ^awfull to kill ones
self: and that when the Interior Spirit moves, one may, and must kill his
Neighbor, though the Exterior Law forbid it. 6. Other Maxims of the
Jansenists are set down; which they teaching, are unfit to c^nsure others. 7.
His falsifyings of Lessins, Layman, Molina, Reginaldus, etc. are again taken
notice of. 8. Port-Royall complains of the Jansenist for his loose Divinity;
and his Answer to them solveth all his own difficulties. 9. That the Casuists
favor not Crimes, when they teach it lawful to kill in the just defense of
Goods or Honor; but the Jansenists favor Thieves and insolent Fellows, when
they say, that the Innocent may not defend their Goods and Honor against them,
for fear of killing. 10. The Jansenists challenge, to show any one that
allows that one may kill in defense of Goods and Honor, answered, and many
Authorities produced; whereof none are Jesuits, but all conspire with Jesuits
in their Maxims, and none with the Jansenist. 11. That all which he says of
the Form of Pleading, signifies nothing to the purpose; since a Thief in a
wood cannot be proceeded with in that manner.

SIR
I Perceive a change in your manner of writing, but can discover no amendment:
you are always in extremes; and having for a long time played the Scoffer, you
will all on a sudden act the part of a Doctor.

You have reason to renounce that Title, since it becomes you so ill; and if
you proceed with so pitiful a grace, they will be so far from receiving you
in Sorbon, that I know not, whether people will ^ndure you in the streets.

One may easily see you are not in your element, when you endeavor to be
serious: you appear too surly and musing; your dreams are all offensive, like
those of a sick man; and your talking of nothing but Murders, Homicide, and
Blood. Thus a great Bishop writ to Monsieur de S^. Cyran whose disposition he
was acquainted with. His Letter is among the Records of the Abbots Trial, to
be seen in Clermont College.
I speak this, Dear Brother, to draw you a little out of your melanchloy
humor, which I read in your Letters, and which I believe you ought to resist
with a most particular care; to the end you may overcome it, before it be too
deeply rooted.

If the Abbot of Sr. Cyran would have followed this good counsel, which a
great Prelate thought himself bound to give him, at the time when he was
beginning to form your Sect, he had never instilled into you such deadly
Sentiments against the Casuists: and if you would follow it your self, you
would presently expunge out of your mind all those sinister impressions you
have received against them.

Those that distemper you touching the point of Homicide, are very st^ange: the
convulsions they cause in you, show that your disease is dangerous, and
requires a speedy help. You seem as if you were beset with Sprights, and that
you take all Divines for Furies: Letter 14.
Their Maxims, say you, are so horrid, that it were to be wished they had
never come forth of Hell; and that the Devil, who was the first Author of
them, had never found out men so far devoted to his orders, as to publish them
among Christians.

See what wicked People these are! But show us, that it is their criminal
Maxims, that have put you into this ill humor. You have often disguised the
Truth; be once at least sincere: and happily when the ground of your distemper is
rightly understood, it will be easier then you imagine, to dissipate those
Apparitions that affright you.

Do they say it is lawful to kill for simple slanders? Letter 7.
It is no simple one to write it to a Provincial, as you have done: but it is a
horrid shame to be so often rebuked for it, and to cover it with no other
excuse, then that of dissimulation and silence.

Do they teach that a man may kill, as you affirm, Letter 14.
in defending that false honor which the Devil transfused out of his own
proud spirit into that of his proud Children? It is not handsome for a person
of any repute to use such language: You have the Devil too often in your mouth;
He names the Devil seven times in one page.
the name of that Father of lies is too familiar with you: it is to be feared,
lest having him incessantly upon your tongue, he shed not some of his venom
into your heart. What! have you no honor to preserve, but that which comes to
you from so bad a hand? Know you not that true honor, recommended by the great
Apostle; which the Wise man prefers before the Diadems of Kings; the
conservation of which is a Christian virtue, and its loss a civil death, more
affl^ctive to worthy minds, then that which puts the body in its grave?

Peradventure they permit expres^y to kill a Thief, who defends not himself.
Letter 14.
This expression is ambiguous; it is a snare set to surprise the ignorant. For
though a Thief defend not himself with weapons, he may defend himself by
flight, and carry away something of great importance, be it either for its
value, or the necessity a man has of it, (magni momenti;) in which case it
being not otherwise recoverable then by killing him, some hold it may be done
with a safe conscience. But that they permit a man to kill him, if he defends
not himself, or being closely pursued, throws down what he had unjustly taken,
is a falsehood of the largest size: and while you endeavored to make it pass
for current, with all that boldness wherewith you boulster up your Impostures,
you durst not affirm it but by halves: so base and timorous a thing is a a lie,
even after it has past all the bounds of modesty.

In fine, do they assert that it is lawful to kill for a crown, nay for an
apple? Letter 14.
It Is clear in your opinion, Lessius has so determined it. How cunning and
malicious are you! You imitate the Serpent, in making use of an apple to
deceive poor women: but the Learned laugh at your poor subtilties. Play not the
child before wise men: lose not your credit for a apple. Say freely that
Lessius teaches in the place you cite, that it is not lawful to kill for the
conservation of ones goods, in case the loss be not considerable; nisi illae
facultates sin^ magni momenti. Say it is most unjust, according to that Father,
to take away a man's life for an apple, or for a crown; est enim valde iniquum,
ut pro pomo vel uno aureo servando alicui vita auferatur. Say that a Gentleman
may at the instant draw his sword, to recover what an insolent fellow has taken
from him to insult over him, though it be but an apple: because it is not his
goods he defends, but his honor; tunc enim non tam rei quam honoris est
defensio. Say if you please, that in this case he may kill, if it be necessary
for the defense of his life which he hazards in disputing his honor, not his
crown, or apple, and si opus est occidere: But add these words which you
suppres'd, juxta Sotum: acknowledge it to be the opinion of Sotus, whose name
is illustrious in the School of St. Thomas: Fling not the apple at Lessius,
Posses conari, and si opus esset, etiam occidere juxta Sotum; tunc enim non tam
rei, quam honoris esset defensio. Lessius l. 2. c. 9. n. 68.
who does but report the opinion of that excellent Divine, who appeared with
honor in the Council of Trent, and governed the conscience of the Emperor
Charles the Fifth. And when you have restored what belongs to him, you have
nothing remaining to your self, but the shame of having aimed to do a mischief,
but could not, though there is not any thing more easy.

Come then to the point of our difference, and tell us in fine, what it is you
find horrid in the Doctrine of the Casuists. But speak it clearly; for I ever
mistrust this turning of the hand, which with a Back-blow absolves you without
scruple from your Imposture of Compeigne, and puts you, as you believe perhaps,
into a security of Conscience.

They say what nature teaches us, and what all Laws, Divine and Humane,
confirm, that it is never lawful for a private person to take away his
Neighbors life, but on the terms of a just and necessary defense; and you
agree with them therein. They extend this just defense to the occasions,
wherein one cannot otherwise avoid the loss of life and chastity; and you are
of the same opinion. But they also comprise therein the loss of goods and
honor which St. Thomas calls the two prime Organs of life, without which it
cannot possibly subsist. This heats your zeal, and so far transports you, as to
treat the Authors of this Doctrine, as if they were the Devils Proctors, come
out of Hell to publish it on Earth. Really, Sir, you damn men with too great
facility: and this excess of heat has I know not what of resemblance, with the
transports of those fantastic spirits, who give all the world to the Devil,
having first given themselves over to the Demon of choler, which predominates
in them.

Did you hold intelligence with that Prince of Darkness, you could not advance
his tyranny over nobler Subjects. You make all Universities tributary to him;
and oblige the most Learned Schools, to leave to him for a prey the flower of
their Doctors, as men devoted to his orders, Ministers of his fury, Emissaries
of his errors, and Accomplices of his crimes.

Sorbon, to give you satisfaction, must sacrifice Monsieur Du Vall, Du Valliu^
de Charitate q. 17. a. 1. dices justa est.
because he teaches that the Laws of a just defense may sometimes be extended
to goods and honor.

The School of the Thomists must deliver up to him Cardinal Cajetan, Cajetanus
in 2. 2. q. 64. a. 7,
who defended this opinion, before there were any Jesuits in the world.

The School of the Clarks Regulars must leave to him their General, who has
lately published the same, even in the Court of Rome, and dedicated it to
Cardinal Carassa, whose name he bears. Carassa praepositus generalis Clericor.
Regular. tract. 3. sect. 2. quest. 16. and alibi passim.


The same Court of Rome must tear from its bosom the Learned Cardinal De
Lugo, and condemn the judgment of the Pope, who has covered this murdering
Doctrine, as you call it, with the splendour of his Purple. Lugo de Justitia
disp. 10. sect. 9. n. 175.


You spare not the very Saints themselves; and though their virtue and wisdom
have gained them never so high a c^own in Heaven, yet you fear not to make them
slaves of Hell. The Order of St. Domminique presented to Pope Clement the
Eighth the Works of B. Raimundus, together with the Raimnndus. l. 2.
gloss wherein this Maxim is contained. The Church has hitherto given to St.
Antonine, a rank among the Blessed, though he also teaches D. Antoninus, part
3. tit. 5. c. 3.
the same Doctrine: But they were both deceived in your opinion, and deserve
(if you might be believed) to be thrust out of Paradise with shame, as men so
far devoted to the Devils Orders, as to publish among Christians those horrid
Maxims, which were too bad to have come even out of Hell it self.

Who gave you the Keys of Heaven to dispose of them in such a manner? Who put
into your hands the thunderbolts of Gods justice to strike his friends with;
you who are beaten in pieces with the thunderbolts and Anathema's of the
Vatican? Had you the pride of Giants, and not felt their punishment, I should
not be astonished at an enterprise so insolent. But having been so often
beaten, so often thrown down and humbled by a sovereign and inevitable power,
how have you the boldness to lift up your head, and open your mouth against
the Children of the Church, especially being declared infamous by the judgment
of their Mother? Does it belong to Criminalls, to pronounce Decrees? to
Corrupters of the Faith, to make themselves Arbiters of Manners, and
Interpreters of Laws? They that teach, That it is lawful to kill ones self,
and that a man is often oblg'd to do it, Question Royal of the Abbot of St.
Cyran.
have they right to define, when it is lawful to kill their Neighbor? And
they that hold, Abbot of St. Cyrans Maxim according to the deposition given
against him at his Trial; which is to be seen in Clermont College.
That we must follow the interior motion that incites us to Homicide, even
when the exterior Law prohibits it, are they not gracious people to take upon
them to determine, at what time that exterior Law permits, and leaves it in
our power.

Have you already lost the memory of those perni^ious errors that caused so
great a scandal among Christians; viz. Jansen condemned by the Pope. Tom. 3.
lib. 3. cap. 21.
That Christ did not dye for all men; Jansen Apol. 1. page 117.
That he is not the Redeemer of those that perish; that they have reason to
reproach him for not being so; that he prayed not to his Father for their
eternal salvation, no more then for the Devils; Vindiciae page 286. 292. and
Jansen. Tom. 3* lib. 3. cap. 8. in the Title of the Chapter.
That the old Law it self induced the Israelites to sin; that the Grace, which
God gave them, was an obstructing Grace, that rendered justice more difficult
and impossible, as if it had put a wall betwixt them and it: Jansen. Apol. 1.
That sufficient Grace is a gift for the Devil to give, and that the Devils
would willingly give such gifts, if they had them to bestow: The Rosary of the
B. Sacrament. A Piece lately come forth of Port-Royall, approved by Jansenius,
but censured by eighth Doctors of the Sorbon.
That one may renounce all Gods promises, and the power that souls have to
subject themselves to him; that we may wish that God would not think of us, nor
regard any thing that passes without himself; that souls should renounce the
meeting with God, and not present themselves unto him, but to be rejected of
him, choosing rather to be forgotten by him, then by being in his memory, to
give him cause to depart from the application of himself, to attend to
Creatures.

These are the horrid Maxims you ought to detest, if your zeal were true and
sincere, and to advertise all the world, that they are come out of Hell, that
the Devil was the first Author of them, and that it were to be wished he had
not met with men so far devoted to his Orders, as to publish them among
Christians. You should say no more, then what the Vicars of Christ have
pronounced from the Throne of St. Peter: then what the Bishops of France have
declared in their general Assemblies: what all Orthodox Doctors have taught
in their Schools: and lastly what the Universal Church holds for certain, no
man daring to contradict, that is not a manifest Heretic.

But this is strange indeed, that in lieu of submitting to the voice of the
Sovereign Pastor, you should choose rather to be a Master of Error, then a
Scholar of Truth; that being voluntarily blind in the ways of God, you
should presume to enlighten the Children of light, and that even while you sin
against your own conscience, intrude your self to regulate the conscience of
your Neighbor: doubly culpable; to believe that the whole world is deceived,
and not see how much you are deceived your self.

Open your eyes, Sir, and of an infinite number of errors acknowledge those at
least, you have committed in your last Letter. I will not tell you, it is only
a common place, which you have reserved a long time to secure your retreat, or
rather that it is a perpetual dig^^ssion, which to all men of understanding
discovers your flight, and that having nothing to answer to the real Impostures
I have convinced you of, your anger and despair carry you away so far beyond
judgment, that a man cannot choose but laugh, to see how you run your self out
of breath. I will not blame you that you accuse me of departing from my
subject; since I only do it to reduce you thither; and am necessitated to do
so, if I ever intend to meet you; who seldom or never come near it, but by
compulsion.

Neither will I force you to blush at your strange boldness in making me say,
that Layman a Jesuit followed Navarr in the point of Duels; whereas I my self
had laid it to your charge in the first part of my answers, that you falsely
ascribed to Layman that opinion, by concealing the name of him, who was
effectively the Author of it.

I will endure, that instead of justifying your self of the Fourteenth
Imposture wherewith I upbraided you, and of giving an account why you make
Molina say in your Seventh Letter, That he durst not condemn of sin one, that
should kill the man that would take from him to the value of a crown, or less,
suppres^ing this clause, cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae, which is essential
to that Fathers decision; because it presupposes, that the party l^ll'd is an
unjust Aggressor, and that the killer cannot otherwise repel the violence
offered him, nor the danger he is in; since he that defends his goods, defends
at the same time his own person, which he ordinarily exposes to danger, as the
same Father affirms: instead I say, of giving a reason of that falsification,
you maintain by the most notorious of all falsi^ies, that whatever Molina
says, he means in that place, that it is lawful to kill a Thief that will ^ake
from us a crown, though we run no hazard of life, without bringing any proof of
what you say, saving that in another dispute, far off from this, and in a case
quite different, he affirms, that one may remain in the moderation of a just
defense, though one take arms against those that have none, or not of equal
advantage with ours; as if in this latter proposition the question were only
of the loss of a crown, as it is in the former. Which is false and ridiculous;
seeing there is not the least probability, that a Thief, who had no weapon,
should dare to set upon a man armed to take from him a trivial thing, and
hazard his life for a crown. This is absurd: you fail in giving color to your
Impostures.

In fine I will not press you any further to satisfy Lessius and Reginaldus,
whom you falsify afresh; because I look upon you as a man that has suffered
shipwreck, and is disabled to satisfy his debts.

I take only what you give: I tie my self wholly to the question you treat of,
(though it be nothing to the purpose, where the matter in debate is to justify
your citations, which you perform the least of all.) And to show you what
advantage truth has over falsehood, I will only make use of your own weapons to
fight against you.

You grant, a man may kill to avoid the loss of life, and chastity, without
exceeding the moderation of a just defense: but cannot keep within that
moderation, if he kill to avoid the loss of goods and honor.

Fear not that I shall accuse you of being too severe. If I must take your
measure by your former Maxims, I shall find you but too remiss: you are no
longer that conscientious Jansenist, who told us resolutely heretofore, I am
for the Sure, not for the Probable; and I believe Port Royal has cause to
complain of you in that respect. It may say to you, who sees not that it is
safer for an Innocent person to lose his corporal life, then to take the life
of the soul from one who is wicked? Death is not to be feared by a just man:
let an enemy assault him, he can do him no considerable hurt: he fears nothing
but the loss of God: and so far is death from doing him that prejudice, that
on the contrary it gives him the fruition of God. But if he kill that unjust
Aggressor, he does him an irreparable evil: he prefers a brittle life which is
but a blast, before the blood of Jesus Christ which is of an infinite value:
and instead of dying with honor to save the soul of his brother, he hazards
even his own by destroying another. It Is true he is allowed to make a lawful
defense: but to be such, ought it not to remain within the bounds of the
Gospel, which has heart enough to give blood, but no hands to draw it? Usque
ad Evangelium, says St. Ambrose, St. Ambrose l. 10. in Lucam.
non autem postea. The Civil Law indeed does sometimes give a man that power:
But as I dare not blame the Laws that permit it; so do not I see how you can
excuse such as make use of them. Truly the famous Chancellor of the University
of Paris in his Tract of the Euchari^l; and Augustinus de Ancona in his
Treatise of the Power of the Church, q. 52. a. 3. affi^me, that it is never
lawful to take away a man's life by private authority: and this was the Maxim
of the Legem quidem non reprehendo quae tales jubet interfici; sed quomodo
istos qui interficiunt defendam, non invenio. S. Aug. l. 1. de lib. arb c. 5.

Vide Tostatum in c. 5. Math^i q. 10. Et Villadiego Tract. de Irregularitate.

S. Cyprianus l. 1. ep. 1. S. Cyril. Alexand. l* 11. in Jo. c. 35. Lactantius,
l. 6. I^st. c. 20.


Ancient Divines, is agreeable to the Sentiments of St. Cyprian, St. Cyrill of
Alexandria, Lactantus, and St. Augustine: Quidam dicunt, quod non repercutere,
praeceptum est perfectis, and consilium imperfectis. Gloss. in Sumn^a B.
Raymundi. l. 2.
that this prohibition may be a counsel to the imperfect, but it is a precept
to the perfect.

How comes it to pass then, that you have abandoned the Doctrine of the
Ancient Fathers, to follow that of the new Casuists in questions of Morality?
How are you fallen from the rank of the perfect, to range your self amongst the
imperfect? and by what unexpected change have you embraced the Doctrine o^
Probable Opinions, which is the Source and Basis of all Disorders, by
preferring it before the Gospel, which is the unalterable Rule of all the
duties of Christianity? What will you say to those of your party, when they
reproach you herewith?

You will answer, that you follow the example of St. Thomas; that a throng of
Doctors has trodden you out the way; that reason it self has served you for
a guide, and that you could not shut your eyes against that clear beam of
natural Light, which shows you that we must not disarm Innocence, to expose it
to the insolence of the wicked: that it were an inhumane meekness to abandon
it to their outrages, and deprive those of force, who may make good use of it,
to put it in their hands, who solely employ it to the hurt of others, and
prejudice of the Public Peace.

I shall t^ke heed of saying with you, That I make no account of this rule. I
receive it, I approve it, I commend you for submitting at last to reason. But I
think it strange, that after you have followed it, in a moment you turn your
back to it again; and that having denied Assasins and Lascivious persons the
impunity of committing evil and assailing the virtuous, by giving leave to
kill them, in case it be necessary for rep^lling their violence; you should
leave it entire to Thieves and Robbers, by forbidding to touch their persons,
as if they were sacred and inviolable. By what Prerogative exempt you these
from danger rather then the other? Why give you them more liberty to sin, since
they have not a greater right? For you cannot be ignorant, that it is only
against those public plagues that Divines arm Persons of Honor: that it is
their constant Tenet, that where there is not an unjust Aggressor, there is no
just defense: and that their decisions are so far from favoring vices, that on
the contray they obstruct their course, by repressing the boldness of those
that would commit them, had they but as much power as they have malice. This
point is decisive, Sir; let me make you conceive it: For it is the rock you
often run upon, and see not the consequence of it.

When Casuists affirm it lawful to kill in defense of goods and honor, to whom
do they grant this right? to the good and innocent; to those very people, to
whom you grant it for defense of life and Chastity. There is then no fear of
their abusing it; or if there be any danger, it is on both sides equal. Against
whom do they grant it? against men that live by their own Crimes, and subsist
by other men's misfortunes. Nor do they allow it, but in case of extreme
necessity, when there is no other refuge; when there is a question of a notable
loss; when they cannot have recourse to the justice of the Laws; when they are
in danger, not only probable, but certain, evident, and indubitable of losing
either their Fortune or their Honor: I mean not the false honor which dazles
your eyes; but that honor which the most wise and virtuous hold for such. The
rules of Morality go no further: If any one imagine the contrary, he is
deceived; and if he dares affirm it, he is a Deceiver. Consider, Sir, the
equity of this Maxim; the wisdom wherewith it was established, the advantage
it affords good People; and the pleasure you do the wicked by endeavoring to
destroy it.

Take from the rich the right of defending their goods, and Thieves, when they
shall be out of danger, will not expect the dark of the night; nor offer more
vows to the Moon to render her Propicious. They will rob by open daylight,
and shall be quit for saying, that their quarr^l is to your Pur^e, not to your
Life. Take from persons of Quality the power of defending their honor, and a
Gentleman must hold forth his cheek, and bow his shoulders to the first that
shall lift up a cudgel to beat him. For to make opposition were (as you will
have it) to put himself in danger of killing him, and to usurp from Justice the
right of Life and Death, while he makes himself Judge, Party, and Executioner
in his own cause.

See whereto all your Ratiocinations tend; and if one well examine the long
discourse you make of the m^ekness of the Spirit of Christianity, which the
Church recommends to her true Children, and of the rigor wherewith she was
wont to punish Homicides, it will be found, that all the benefit of that
austere reformation, and those furious invectives you make against the
relaxation of Morality, tend only to facilitate theft, and offer impunity to
Thieves and Robbers. Truly, Sir, they are much obliged to you; and if they have
any resentment of the good you do them, they will choose you for their Director:
and though you should gain nothing over the Jesuits, you would purchase at
least this advantage to be called the Casuist of Thieves and Cutpurses. That
glory is due to you without dispute; you have deserved it: for the Jesuits
having, with all other Divines, taken the part of the Innocent against
Murderers, you boldly forsake them all, to plead against them the bad Thief's
cause, to uphold the Insolent against the Honorable, the Robber against the
Rich, and the Pirate against the Merchant.

I say all, Sir; because though they agree not among themselves in all the
conclusions they make upon this subject, yet are they in a manner all united
against you in the Principle; and I know not wherefore you have challenged me
to produce you one Law, one Canon, and Interpreter of the Law, that is opposite
to you; unless happily it be to show you what a prodigious multitude of Enemies
you have drawn upon you, and with what temerity you assail them, neither
knowing your own strength, nor the merit of your opposers.

Would you know the opinion of the Divines? Bannes Bannes in 2. 2. q. 64. a. 7.
a famous Disciple of Saint Thomas says, there is hardly any one of them, but
permits a private person to defend his goods and honor, against him that would
unjustly take them from him; nay, to kill him at the instant, if he cannot
otherwise avoid the wrong; provided always he observe the moderation of a just
defense, Haec conclusio est consensus Philosophorum, and sere omnium
Theologorum. This is clear.

Would you have Cardinal Richelieu in his Instruct. of a Christian. Lesson.
16. Cajetanws in 2. 2. q. 64. a. 7. Toletus l. 1. de Instruct. Sacerd. c. 81.
Lugo de Justitia disp. 10. Sect. 9. n. 175.
Cardinals to warrant this opinion? Cardinal Cajetan, Cardinal Tolet,
Cardinal Richelieu, and Cardinal Lugo prove it by pregnant reasons; and the
last assures us, that this is the common and true Doctrine of the School,
Sententia communis and vera. This speaks all.

Would you have Saints? St. Quando violentia infertur rebus, aut violentia
r^bus illata potest per viam judicii repara^i, ^unc non licet qualiter cunque:
si autem per viam judicii reparar^ non potest, tunc licet qualitercunque
de^endere, ^tiam personam occidendo. 3. part, titulo 5. c. 3. initio.
Antoninus, who was one of the Oracles of the Council of Florence says
clearly, that when a man will by violence take from us our goods, if there be
means to repel the force by way of justice, it is in no wise lawful to kill;
but if that means be wanting, it is lawful to defend them, any way whatsoever,
even by killing the person. Tun^ li^et qualitercunque defendere, ^tiam personam
occidendo. The^e can be nothing more express, and yet it is a Saint that
decides it; who has the science of the Divines, and the cons^ience of the Just.

Require you the authority of the Civil Laws? A private person, says
Sylvester, Privatus hominem occidere potest authoritate Legis Civilis, sin^
poena, qu^ pro homicidio in foro conten^ioso debetur. Primo defendendo personam
suam; secundo defendendo honorem suum; ter^io defendendo res suas, quando
aliter haberi non poterunt, secundum multos Logisias. Sylvester v. Homicidium
1. q. 2.
(who has that incomparable glory to have been the first that writ against
Luther) may kill a man according to the Civil Laws, without incurring the
penalty wherewith Homicide is punished in justice: First in defending his
person; secondly in defending his honor; thirdly in defending his goods, if he
cannot otherwise recover them, Secundum multos Legistas. He could not express
himself more clearly.

Would you have the authority of Canons for you? Navar one of the most este^med
Canonists, who drew his science of the Law from the University of Paris, who
read it in the two most flourishing Universities of Spain and Portugal; who
sanctified it by his rare virtues, usually dividing the day between the School,
the Hospitalls, and the Prisons; who made it glorious by the reputation he had
acquired with Pope Pius V. Gregory XIII. and Sixtus V. who made a particular
esteem of his Counsels, gives to this Doctrine all the extent it can have
without transgressing the bounds of a just defense; and grounds it (contrary to
your sense) upon the Laws and Canons. See them in the Fifteenth Chapter of his
Sum; you will be am^zed at the number.

Covarruvias Quarto manifestum es^ ^icere cuiquam ^urem diurnum res auferen^em
capere, and cumse defendentem a captione occidere, hoc probat Textus in d. c.
4. ex August. Textus item in d. l. 14. ad l. Aquiliam, and post pauca: Quinto
inde constat sensus ^jus quod Plato dicit Dial. 9. de legibus licitum esse,
cuiquam spoliatorem in sui defensionem occidere. Covarruvias in Clement.
^uriosus 3. part, Parag. ultimo. Vide ^^nem ^ujus Parag. pro irregulari^ate.
Bishop of Segovia maintains, that one may stop a Thief that ^lics after
Robbery, and kill him, if he defend himself, even at Noon-dayes, without
incurring irregularity, which he proves both by the Canons, and by the Laws.

S^bastian Medices, S^bastianus Medices de fortuitis casibus, quaest. ^.
who has made a Summary of all Heresies, your own excepted, because it is yet
too young, says, A man may defend his honor, as well as his life, even by
killing his enemy; and proves it by the Law justa ^ff. de man. vind. which
equals the loss of honor to that of life; quia periculum famae ^quiparatur
p^riculo vitae.

Brun^llus Brun^llus repetit. 17. c. 1. de Homicidio, n. 75.
a Learned Lawyer of Orleans assures us, that if it be lawful (which he
proves) to kill a man in defense of his life and goods, it is lawful, a
fortiori, to do it for the preservation of his honor; because Honor is
preferrable before Interest, according to the Law. Causa bonoris potior est
quam emolumenti. L. Julianus.

Bartolus Bartolus in l. ut vim, ff. de justitia and jure.
asks the question, whether a man be obliged to fly from the Aggressor when he
can, for fear of being engaged to kill him for his own defense: and he answers
in the negative, if the slight be ignominious and dishonorable. Dico quod si
tu es Perusinus, qui times ver^^undiam, dico quod optime potes usque ad actum
occisionis.

Petrus a Navarra l. 2. de Restit. c. 3. n 398.
Peter of Navarr extends the same Maxim not to life only, but to honor and
goods, and maintains that it is clearly so decided in the Law; Et aperta est
decisio. c. olim. de Restit. spol. 1.

And as to the Text you quote, to prove it unlawful to kill in defense of
goods, except in occurrances where life is also concerned, se suaque liberando:
It is evident by the sense, which all these Authors give it, that you
understand it not aright; and that if we could not remain in the moderation of
a just defense, without insepa^ably joining the interest of goods and life
together, a man could no more defend his life without his goods, then his goods
without his life.

Must I then, after so many clear testimonies, open you all the Libra^ies, and
lead you throughout all the Universities of Europe, to find Interpreters to
expound to you the Canons? Must Major Major in 4. did. 15. q. 13. Parag. 6.
speak for me in the University of Paris? Sylvius Responsio communis est,
licitum esse occidere abripient^m bona nostra, siea sint magni momen^i, and non
possint aliter aut defendi aut recuperari. Sylvi^s in 2. 2. q. 64. a. 7.

Bannes in 2. 2. q. 64. a. 7. Caraffa Generalis Theatinorum jam citatus. Diana
Tom. 5. Tract. de Homicid.

Sotus l. 5. de Justitia q. 1. a. 8. sic ait. Citra dubium licet surem, etiam
diurnum, in defensionem bonorum temporalium interficere, ^^ aliter illa ^ripi
ab ipsa ^equeunt.


in that of D^way? Sancius in Spain? Bonacina in Italy? Sotus, Bannes, and
Victoria in the Schools of the Thomists; Caraffa and Diana in that of the
Clarks Regulars?

Are you not ashamed to see all these great Scholars so firmly united with the
Jesuits, in the opinions you reproach them with, as the sole Authors thereof?
Have you no regret for having treated them with so little respect, like men so
far d^voted to the Devils Orders, as to publish among Christians a Doctrine
come out of Hell?

If you place them in that rank, tell me whom do you acknowledge for the
Disciples of Christ, who speak the language of the City of peace, called
mystical Jerusalem, unless happily Calvin, Luther, Melancthon, and Du Mouli^?
Compare a little your Morality with that of the Jesuits; and of that multitude
of Catholic Doctors who embrace the opinions of the Jesuits, give me but one
only that favors Jansenisme? Give me but one that teaches with Monsicur de
St. Cyran, These Maxims are verified by the testimony of the Abbot of P^ieres
in the information against Monsi^ut de S. Cyran.
That the Church is corrupted in her Doctrine, that she is at present in her
declension, and that God himself destroys her? Give me one that teaches with
Jansenius, That there are Commandments which are impossible to the Just? Give
me one that teaches, as you do in the second page of your second Letter to the
Proivncial, That sufficient Grace is sufficient without being such: and in the
last page of that same Letter, That one may without peril doubt of Potentia
Proxima, and sufficient Grace, provided he be not a Dominican?

And yet after all this, you have the confidence to lead me to the Tournelle,
or Court of Criminal causes, to learn the formalities observed in that August
Temple of Justice; as though one could observe those long proceedings at the
corner of a wood, when a Thief surprises you and demands you^ purse? Or as if
it were then a time, for satisfaction of ones conscience, to get witnesses
examined, and to know certainly if he have any design upon your life; to look
out an advocate to maintain the sincerity of your intentions, and to take the
opinions of the seven Judges, to decide whether ^^ be killable or not in this
case?

Are you not a pleasant Reformer of Morality? and have you not reason to tell
us, That you will bring us back to the most simple Principles of Religion and
common sense? You your self, Sir, stand in no little need of being reduced
thither: for you could not well go further off: and though I had no other proof
of the great judgment you show in your Letters, yet this alone would suffice
me to tell you, that the Silence wherewith you menace me at the end of the
Fourteenth Letter, will do me a pleasure, and not be unprofitable to your self:
You will at once learn to speak more modestly your self of those holy and most
celebrious Doctors; and you will ^ase me of the trouble of upb^aiding your
insolence.

Keep your promise with me, Sir, and you will surpass my hopes; but if you
will fully satisfy my desires, make better use hereafter of the wit which God
has given you: turn not again the point of your knife against the Altars; do
not consecrate your Heart any more to Revenge, your Understanding to Error,
nor your Pen to Calumny.

It Is now above an Age ago, since that foul-mouthed Vice ^ndertook to persecute
the Jesuits; it has stuck close to their Society from its very cradle; it has
pursued them, where ever they have had the honor to publish the Gospel, and
even at this day it has people over all the earth, so far devoted to its
Orders, as to make this Company suffer a cruel persecution: You are not the
first that has attaqu'd them; nor are you like to be the last, that will have
the shame and repentance of having done it. Relinquish that ^ad employment,
Sir, which can bring you nothing but dishonor with men, and in the sight of
God charge you with an heavy account: there is no jeasting with Divine Justice;
the Wisdom of God is not subject to surprise; men cannot impose on the prime
Verity, which endures not falsehood without destroying it: in vain do you
disguise the matter; you cannot make it probable to him; and except you
sincerely dis^vow it, you shall never be in safety of Conscience.

An ANSWER to the JANSENISTS Fifteenth Letter.
Argument.
1. THe Jansenists foul Language in solving difficulties with a mentiris
impudentissime; whence he learnt it. 2. Since the Jansenists have used ill
language to Popes and Prelates, and accused his Holiness's Bulls of falsity, it
is not to be wondered they use the Jesuits as ill. 3. Before Pope Innocent's
Bull the Five Propositions were acknowledged by the Jansenists to be in
Jansenius: since they are condemned, the Jansenists will give him the Lie, that
says they are in Jansenius. 4. The Jansenists are condemned of all sides; and
laying all that on the Jesuits, to revenge themselves they expose the Jesuits
Morality quite disguised to the laughter of the ignorant: and by so doing, they
are themselves become the laughter of wise men. 5. Their false Accusations of
Fath. Dalby, Pintereau, Bauny, and others, refuted. 6. That if one Caputin at
Prague and a Jesuit had a Contrast, yet the whole Body of Capucins conspireth
with the Society, and other Orders also, against the Jansenists. 7.
Dicastillo's opinion hinders not the verity of all that is laid to the
Jansenists charge: which is made good by showing the Originalls.

SIR,
I Perceive you are nettled, and that your game does not please you. When I had
accurately examined the principal parts of your Letter, the whole force and
substance of it seemed comprisable in these two words, which in your opinion
amount to a just Apology, and do wholly acquit Port-Royall; mentiris
impudentissime: Letter 15.
That is to say, Sir, (as you know very well) you lie most impudently. We must
pardon you this exorbitancy: you are in Choler, and your mind not being in a
calm posture, seems to have lost the government of its passions; so that in
this confusion of thoughts, and violent motions that toss it to and fro, it is
hardly able to make a good election of its words.

That Learned man, whose errors make up the Theology of your Sect, and whose
name is one of the most magnificent Titles of your glory, Letter 15.
said very ingenuously, (you know it, Sir, and have graven it since his death,
on the Frontispice of his Work) Subtilis cholerae nonnihil habuit, quam
siamulae Salpetrae lepide comparare solebat; quae momento incenditur, and ^ine
nidore and ^umo momento in nihilum dispergitur. Jansen. in Sy^opsi vitae ejus,
page 2.
that the humor predominant in his constitution, participated of the qualities
of Saltpeter; which being of a thin and simple substance, takes fire in an
instant, and as suddenly goes out, leaving no ill smell nor smoke behind it.
Your fire is more offensive; your Salt peter has Sulphur in it; and those
injurious writings, which degenerate so much from the natural Civility of the
French, smell too much of the German Powder.

I sought at first, with some astonishment, for what reason, or rather out of
what giddy humor, you were gone amongst strangers to learn to speak
opprobriously in Dutch; since without going so far, you might have learned as
good language as this in the common Marketplace, or among the Wash-women at
the River side. But I recalled to mind. that you had good Friends in that
Country; and that Luther, who first found out this excellent Method how to
vindicate Heresy, had made an advantageous use of it against the highest
powers; opposing both to the Writings of a King, and the Anathema's of a Pope,
the same impenetrable shield, which secures you against all the darts of your
Adversaries; mentiris impudentissime, You lie most impudently. For thus in his
Answer to the King of England, who had undertaken the defense of the Faith
against that insolent Apostate, he scossingly terms him your Thomisticall
Majesty, Thomistica vestra dominatio. Egregia Regis Thomislitas.
to clude those invincible reasons of St. Thomas, which that Prince had urged;
and makes him this respectfull complement, Ego fine larva, sed aper^e, dico,
Regem Angliae Henricum istum mentiri. I fear not to unmask my self, and speak
freely, that this Harry King of England lies. And in his Refutation of the Bull
of Pope Leo the X. upon the subject of Free Will, like that of Inn^^ent the X.
against the Jansenists: Mentiris* ne calumniare. Ulricus de Hut^en Eques apud
Lutherum. Tom. 2. fol. 54. p. 1. Wittebergae 1546.
You lie, says he; cease to calumniate those who maintain the Truth, which for
three hundred years past, you have unjustly oppressed. Obsecro quae est frons
tua meretricia, sanctissime Vicarie Christi? Lutherus in assert. articulorum a
Leon^ X. damnatorum, Tom. 2. fol. 117. p. 2. Sed vale scelerata abominatio, tam
stulte simul and impudenter loqueris, ut indignae sis, prop^^r quam verba
fian^. Ibid. fol. 120. page 1. and alibi passim.
And again, You have the face of a Curtisan, (Holy Vicar of Christ) which
cannot blush: You show so much impudence, and so little sense in your words,
that you deserve no Answer.

Questionless it was from this Original that you took your pattern; from
hence you have learned to give the lie so readily to him that dares contradict
your Sentiments: It was not possible to copy him more perfectly, then you have
done, and to compare you both together, a man may say you have full as much
boldness, but more of address then your Master. Indeed if all that afford you
good advice, accuse your insolence, or condemn your false Doctrine, be
Traducers and Liars, and that against such you employ the darts of your
Lutheran Eloquence, the Jesuits have no more to do, but to bow down their
heads, to avoid the blow, which you direct much higher; your aim is at Miters
and Diadems, and you strike no heads but such as wear a Crown. For in fine what
is it you complain of, and what injury has been done you? Men call you
Heretics, and you would make us believe it is a calumny. You do but jest:
it is not an Obliquy, but an Oracle uttered from the mouth of Christ's Vicar,
Constitutio Innocentii X. contra 5. Jansen. Propositiones.
who assures us that your Maxims touching Grace are Heretical, Scandalous,
and Impious. If you be offended thereat, address your self to him; declare
your self; and to justify your Faith, answer him accoring to your usual
style, mentiris impudentissime. You cannot endure to be called Jansenist: It is
a fair name; are you ashamed to bear the name of your Father? that cel^brious
name, known over the whole world? that illustrious name, which Popes themselves
have given you? Vt Janseniani Apostolicis decretis tandem acquiescerent.
Vrbanus VIII. Francisco de Melo Belgii guber natori die 24. October. 1643.
If you take it for an injury, complain of his Holiness, and be not ashamed to
say to him, Mentiris impudentissime.

Men tell you that you are an Impostour; and that your boldness in corrupting
and falsifying the Jesuits Moral is insupportable. I do not only say it, but
prove it, and you cannot deny it; I do no^ whisper it, I publish it on the
house top* I am not the first that says it; I say it after Urban VIII. who so
often complains, that you decry his Constitutions as false and surreptitious,
Quamobrem impudens aliquorum temeritas satis improbari, non potest. Urbanus
VIII. Academiae Duacensi anno 1643. 24. October.
and treats you with a just indignation, as Light headed, Temerarious,
Insolent, Refractory Rebels, who by a pernicious example seek to diminish his
Authority, to the prejudice of men's eternal salvation. Ob tam apertam
quorundam contumaciam ingenti plane aegritudine affecti fuimus, agitantes quam
pernicioso exemplo and salutis suae discrimine id praesumant. Idem.

Constitutionem nostram -- a quibusdam Jansenii asseclis impudenter atque
inanibus prorsus rationibus oppugnari audivimus. Urbanus VIII. Episcopo
Antuerpiensi anno 1643. die 24. October.


If these high praises please you not, wherefore do you fall upon me, who do
but barely report the words of that great Pope? Fall upon your Judge, and to
show that you are not insolent, tell him aloud, Mentiris impudentissime.

You have done it, Sir, and that more then once; you did, upon the Bulls that
were not favorable to you, assay the art of Lye-giving to such, as convinced
you of Imposture and Error by proofs so clear, that you were not able to
answer them: and I am not astonished at your high carriage against the Jesuits,
seeing you have begun your apprentiship upon the Popes.

When the Church denounced her first Anathema against your pernicious Errors,
and Pope Urban VIII. struck dead at one blow the true Jansenius, and the false
Augustine; Port-Royall startled at the thunderclap, found no better shelter in
that conjuncture, which required a quick and hardy resolution, then by public
writings to give the lie to those that sp^ke to you of the Bulls; saying to
every one of them, it is false, mentiris impudentissime. That was bu^ the
trial of your skill, which yet might have past for a Masterpiece. The first
and second observations on the false Bull of the Pope.
The Jesuits, said you then, have forged this Bull against the Doctrine of St.
Augustine, explained in the Lord Bishop of Ipre 's Book: They could not defend
their cause, but by a proceeding so infamous, and so unworthy not only of
Christians, of Religious, of Priests, but even of Persons of reputation. All
Godly People are in hope, that his Holiness will not let such a Crime go
unpunished, and that he will show, by the condemnation of so great an excess^,
what injury they have ^one to the Holy Sea, who endeavored to make it a
Complice of so many black and palpable ^a^sities.

The event did afterward show what Spirit of Divination it was, that made you
speak in the stil^ of the Prophets, when you were not endued with their lights:
Men knew the voice of their P^stour, whom y^u made pass for a Thief: that
Constitution which you had violated by two scandalous obse^vations, was
confi^m'd by above six of the Popes Bre^fs; and that which you had ^e^ry'd
through all the st^eets of Paris, was recei^'d in all Churches by his order.
Yet ^scap^d he not the lie, and your Apology, which had tried the ^orce of
those two terms of your Politiques, menti^is impudentissime, forgot not to make
use of it, cunningly strewing upon it this handful of flowers: Second Apology
of Jansenius, l. 2. c. 14.
A man must put out his eyes, to doubt still that this Bull is not
surreptitious; and that the Bishop of ^pre 's Adversarics have not by
underhand working, obstructed the prosecution of the Popes intentions, and
rendered this Bull as conformable to their passion, as it is contrary to the
will of his Holiness. Could any man give the lie with a better grace? Could
any man vindicate Jansenius more dexterously from the censure of Rome? Could it
be affirmed more tenderly, that the Pope by condemning Jansenius, had put out
his own eyes, and suffered himself to be led by the Jesuits like a blind man?

Not long after this the thunderbol^ fell upon your two heads, which make but
one: and Pope Innocent X. beating down that two-headed Monster, which came out
of your deserts, decla^'d to all the world, that though there were many m^mbers
in the Church, yet there was but one Head, and that he knew how to take the
Sword of St. Paul, without giving him the Keys of St. Peter. But after all he
could not avoid that Serpen^s tongue: the ^atall blow that bere^t that monster
of life, could not stifle his voice; his his^ings were still heard as he lay
expiring, and casting forth the last drops of his venom against his Vanquisher.
Mentir^s impudentissi^e. This deadly cry resounded on the other side of the
Mountains; and Italy was amazed to hear men speak, in the midst of the Church,
a language she had never heard. In notatio^ib^s ad de^retum Latin and Gallice
scriptis.
That his Holin^ss^ had suffered himself to be surpised by false reports; that
the censurers of a Doctrine so holy and advantageous to the Sea Apostolic had
not read it, or if they had, that they understood it not: that they were both
Judges and Parties. That Cardinal Lugo had tied himself to the general of the
Jesuits by the Vow of a blind Obedience. That Cardinal Spada, ashamed that he
could not make that censure prevail, which he had undortaken, had complotted
with the J^suits to save his own credit by exposing the reputation of the Pope:
and finally that the whole affair had been managed rather by Politic
Considerations, then by the Rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and solid
Reasons of Theology.

What was left unattempted by the whole party to set the Prelates against the
Pope; to draw the Universities; to gain particular persons; to engage
Communities; to seduce the people; to mislead souls and insensibly corrupt the
purity of their Faith, and the fidelity they owe to the Universal Pastor of
Christ's Flock? Nevertheless in fine the Providence of God, who watches over
his Elect, and laughs at the malice of the impious, disappointed all your
designs; and unspeakable was the grief that seized your minds, when you
understood, that above fourscore Bishops of this Kingdom, had demanded the
condemnation of the Five Propositions, that make up the Fundamental Maxims of
Jansenisme: that after a long deliberation, the Pope had granted it; that
Heaven had given a blessing to it, as the fruit of so many Vows, Prayers, and
Tears shed by the Children of the Church, to extinguish by such an amorous
deluge, the conflagration you had raised in the midst of their bowels: and
finally that those three famous Columns, erected with so much cost and
preparation, to uphold the credit of your Doctrine, which visibly tended to its
ruin, were not able to support that tottering Machine, nor hinder the fall of
your Sect. Then it was that drawing forces out of despair, you entrenched your
selves within your Fort, ^^ntiris impudentissime, and thence as from a safe
Rampart, scoffing at Fulminations and Censures, you gave your friends to
understand, Arnauld's second Letter, p. 150.
That certain persons having carefully perused a Book, and not found therein
the Propositions which are attributed to a Catholic Bishop after his death, in
the narration of a Popes constitution, could not declare against their
conscience, that they are in the Book. Who would have thought that after you
had given the Lie to Popes and Bishops, who expressly affirm the contrary,
there could any thing have been added to your insolence? Yet you rested not
there, you perceived there was something wanting, and that to crown so manifest
a Rebellion against the Sea Apostolic, it was requisite to give it the name
of Obedience, protesting with pompous words, Arnauld's first Letter, p. 25.
that the Disciples of Monsieur d' Ipre had made it apparent to all France,
that they can humble themselves under Gods Vicar, not only when he honors
them with his favor, but even when he seems to abandon them to the Impostures
of their Enemies: In the same Letter, p. 9.
that they who suspect them of Error, should have much ado to assign the
pretended Heresy, which every one fancies to himself as he pleases; since if
they reduce it to the Five Propositions condemned by the Pope, that Heresy
which he imputed to them, would prove to be but a Chimera, there being no
Divine that maintains those five condemned Propositions.

What, Sir, is this the Jansenian humility, that so vaunts with ostentation of
having submitted to the Vicar of Christ, while it rejects the narration of his
Bull, and accuses the Oracle of truth of falsehood and lying? Is this the
sincerity where with you justisie your Doctrine, by condemning those of
remerity who opposed it before it was condemned, and accusing those of calumny,
who ascribe it to you, since the public voice of the Church has blasted it
with an eternal ignominy? Before the Popes Bull the Heresy of Jansenius
appeared with luster in your Works, it marched with great attendance, and
nevershew'd it self, but guarded with the Fathers of the first Ages: It was the
Doctrine of the Church, the Doctrine of the Apostles, the Doctrine of the Popes
and Councils: After the Bull, this Heresy is nothing but a Chim^ra, which
every man fancies such as he pleases, and no man knows in very truth. Before
the Popes Bull, it was a crime to question the Five Propositions, and they that
held them suspect, were Semipelagians, Enemies of the grace of Christ; such as
attempred to destroy the most ancient Verities, and to obscure the clearest
Lights of the Gospel. After the Bull, it is an injury to impute them to you,
and they that reproach you with them are heinous Detracters, and most impudent
Liars. Before the Bull, those Maxims were as so many unalterable Rules of
Faith, where of Tradition was he Source, Saint Augustine the Oracle, and
Monsieur de Ipre the faithful Interpreter that had renewed them in our Age.
After the Bull, those very Maxims by a strange Metamorphosis, are become mere
Impostures, which Envy alone has invented, Calumny div^lged, and nothing but
Ignorance, to the prejudice of Innocence, can believe; since there are no
Divines, who hold these condemned Propositions.

Thus, Sir, it appears that you have an ambiguous Faith, which you explicate
according to the time; a Faith that has two faces, and which begets illusions
in men's minds: at this day it is a Chimera, because you dare not produce it,
so odious it is to all the world: when you have wiped away the shame of it, and
that the Censure is forgotten, it will again be the spirit of the first Ages.
To grant; to deny; to say yes, to say no, are things indifterent to you: You
put all in practice to advance the pretended reformation you promise, and that
imaginary dominion which you affect in the Church. It Is only the hatred you
bear to the Jesuits, that never changes; because your bad inclination toward
Religion ever continues. You look upon their zeal as an obstacle that retards
the progress of your designs; and because you cannot shake their virtue, you
endeavor, at least, to ruin the reputation it gains, and the approbation it
deserves. Hence it comes that you make them Authors of all your disgraces, and
not daring to complain of the hand that strikes you, at every blow you feel you
bite the hand that would heal you.

If the Pope condemns the works of Port-Royall; the Jesuits presently become
Falsifiers, and Forgers of Bulls against the Doctrine of the Fathers. If he
command the Marble of Jansenius's Tomb to be taken up, and that the marks of
that proud monument, which served as a Trophy to Heresy, be effaced; the
Jesuits are men of profane spirits, they suffer Idolatry in China, they
traffic in Canada, they favor Libertines in Europe, and uphold remissness
and disorder in all parts of the world. If the Clergy in France reprove the
surreptitious Elogium of the Abbot of St. Cyran; the Jesuits every where
persecute Persons of Honor, and are so far from sparing the living, that they
forbear not even the memory of the dead. If Sorbon do justice on it self, and
courageously cut off its own members, where they see inflammation and corruption
to be gathered by the contagion of your errors; the Jesuits (say you) are the
Corrupters of Discipline, and it is necessary to exterminate them for the good
of Souls, and Glory of God.

What ever advantage they may have in the Doctrine of Faith, yet must they
still be attaqued in the point of Manners. Their Writers must all be racked,
and nothing left entire in any of their Books: they must be falsified by
infamous forgings; they must be altered by unfaithful suppressions; a false
aspect must be given them by malignant interpretations; some passages of them
must be shortened, others lengthened; those must have that cut off which
justifie^ them; and these must have something added, which may make them appear
blameable. Divines will soon discover these illusions; but the People, who are
not ^o clear-sighted, will be apt to take such apparitions for solid bodies;
and so you will still find your account. The wise will admire that you take
upon you such a wretched employment, and that after you have spoken so long,
like Oracles, the language of the Ancient Fathers, you are now reduced, like
Moaths, to eat the Books of the new Casuists. But the wise are not the greater
number: for one Person of Honor that will be afflicted at this disorder, you
will make a hundred Libertines laugh, who are so pleased with detractions of
this nature, that even the false do often delight them more then the true. In
fine the Jesuits will not fail to defend themselves, and make you blush at
your gulleries. But you are ready to welcome them; if they press you with the
force of reason, you will ^ire them with your importunities, and repeat so
often those words, mentiris impudentissime, that they will be forced to hold
their peace; perceiving plainly, that you have nothing to lose, and that they
can get nothing of you but injuries.

Truly, Sir, you are fallen upon a very commodious way of defending your self,
and assaulting others; since all your dexterity consists in lying impudently,
which is not hard to do; and in giving others the Lie with impunity, which is
yet more easy; in aspersing the Innocent with hideous Calumnies to make them
criminal, and calling them Calumniators, to vindicate your self of all your
crimes. Let us take a view of your proceeding, and see how you reduce to
practice the method of Port Royal.

You make Father Al^y say, that Monsieur Puys is an Heretic, excommunicate,
and worthy of the sire: You quote his first and second Book, and assure us,
that he confirms in the latter, what he had said of him in the former. This is
an apparent falsehood. For it is to be seen, that from the third page of his
second Book, he declares to the contrary, That men are much to blame to accuse
him of having called that Pastor Heretic; that there is no man of judgment,
who examines the terms of his first Apology, (for he assaults not, but defends
himself) but will judge this gloss too violent, and that complaint very
tender. You are therefore an Impostour, and that a signal one. But what does
it avail me to convince, and press you to an answer? As your accusation is
only a lie, so all your Apology will be to give me that complement. You who
made no consci^noe to lie in imposing upon that Father, will have no shame to
give me the lie in justifying your self, and say, Mentirls impudontissime.

You accuse Father Bauny of having taught, That it is lawful directly, primo
and per se, to seek out the next occasion of sinning, for the Spiritual or
Temporal good of our selves, or neighbor. This is a palpable falsehood. Those
words primo and per se are none of that Divines. I advertised you of it in my
answer to you ninth Imposture. I told you that decision was capable of two
contrary senses; the first, that one may expose himself to an occasion of
sinning upon reasons important to the conversion of Souls, and welfare of the
State, as St. Ambrose, and many other Saints have done: yet so as he have hope,
by the help of Heaven to overcome the danger, and be firmly resolved in himself
to overcome it: and this is the opinion of F. Bauny, and of the famous Basilius
Pontius, which is not rejected in the Schools. The second sense is, that one
may temerariously expose himself to those occasions, and even formally seek
them out upon light grounds. And this Doctrine the Abbot of Boisic, who passes
with you for F. Pinthereau, calls detestable. As to the first sense, I accused
you of ignorance, for making a crime of an opinion common in Divinity; and for
the second I convinced you of malice, in regard there is not so much as the
least print, or foot-stop, thereof in F. Bauny's Book, and consequently cannot
be imputed to him, (as F. Caussin said) but by an instrument of the Devil.
Nevertheless as though you had quite forgotten it, you take me for Surety
against your Creditours, and make me an Approver of what you say against them
that accuse you: was there ever seen such a piece of knavery as this? But you
may do any thing; you have a dispensation general from Port-Royall, which
^xempts you from speaking truth, and impowers you to give the lie to all that
reproach you with unfaithful dealing. See yet another example; for you are
very ^ruitfull in Impostures, as having in you an inexhaust^ble Source of them.

You impute to F. Bauny this Proposition, That Priests ought not to deny
absolution, to those that remain in the habits of Crimes against the Law of
God, Nature, and the Church, though they discover not any hops of amendment:
And you assu^e us that F. Pinther^an and F. Brisaci^r are fallen into a
contradiction about the answering your Imposture. This is a fal^hood more
evident then the day: the answer of the one destroys not the answer of the
other; they are both of them alike good, and satisfactory to all such, who are
not sick of envy like your self. One answers, that Absolution cannot be given
to that sort of Sinners, when they show no desire of amendment; and denies that
ever F. Bauny taught the contrary; all this is true. The other answers, that in
the apprehension which a Priest may have of his Penitents relapses, considering
the frailty of men, he is to rely upon the promise of the Penitent, and to
content himself with his sincere and resolved will to live better, testified by
his words and regrets, without expecting extraordinary revelations to ascertain
him of the good disposition of the Sinner, and of the infallible effect that is
to follow his present protestations and resolutions; which the greatest Saints
cannot promise themselves: and this he avowes for F. Bauny's opinion. This is
also true. Where is then that imaginary contradiction you accuse them of? Where
is that streit which is so difficult to get out of? The first rejects the bad
Doctrine you father upon a famous Divine: the second defends the true decision.
The first unvails your malice; the second justifies the innocence of his
Brother. The weapons they use are different, but are equally good and strong;
they assault you on both sides, but the blow which each of them gives you, is
inevitable. In fine as they have both their particular way of encountering you,
so they both of them obtain the victory, and pu^ you in such disorder, that you
are constrein'd to fly into Germany to learn opprobrious language, and to
answer each of them in particular with mentiris impudentissime.

You will say that you have learned this lesson in a good School; that you
practice it but in imitation of a good Religious German, and that the Capuchins
being then very fatal to the Jesuits, no man ought to be offended that you
profit by their misfortune.

I grant it is of great concernment to you to gain the R R. F F. the Capuchins,
and that if you could divide them from the Jesuits in the cause of Jansenius,
you had played your game well. For besides that their Holiness of life has
acquired them the Love and Veneration of the People, they are vigorous
defenders of the Faith, and of the Popes B^ll; and consequently great Enemies
of Jansenisme, which you maintain. But it is in vain to hope for such a rupture,
and the Decree which they have this year renewed against your Doctrine,
declares to you sufficiently, that the Jesuits are on better terms with the
Capuchins then you imagine; and that if they have not been so fortunate in
respect of one particular, you are undoubtedly most unfortunate in regard of
the whole Body. You shall, Sir, participate of that Decree, and le^t you should
think your self unfortunate only in the Capuchins and Jesuits, I will add
diverse others; whereby you shall understand how hateful your Party is to all
Religious Orders and Societies, wherein Virtue and Science are in any kind of
repute.

Learn therefore, if you know it not already, what are the Sentiments of all
godly people touching your Doctrine, and judge by the universal odium it lies
under, if you be not the most unfortunate upon the Earth. The Reverend Fathers
Capuchins desirous to testify in all occurrences the respect and obedience
they owe to the Holy Sea, ^ave prohibited in their General Chapter, held this
Year at Rome the 25. of July, That no person of their Order presume to expound
or defend the Doctrine of Jansenius, which has been c^ndemn'd and cut off by
Pope Innocent X. neither the Doctrine of Arnauld, nor of the Arnauldists.
Whosoever shall do the contrary, besides the penalties sp^eified in the said
Apostolical Constitution, if he be a Superior, let him be deprived of his
Office; if a Reader, of the Faculty of Teaching; if a Preacher, of the power of
Preaching; and they shall also be liable to other Punishments, as their
Superiors shall think fitting. B^hold you are already very unfortunate in the
Capuchins. The Reverend Fathers ^ueillans, assembled in their General Chapter,
in the Year 1649. made the like Prohibition, and ordained, that the
Constitutions of Pope Urban VIII. against Jansenius should be sent, published,
and exactly observed in all the Monasteries of their Order. See, you are
unfortunate also in them. The Reverend Fathers Carmelites Discalceate,
established the same in their Provincial Chapter, in the Year 1649. with a
strict Prohibition against teaching or defending the Doctrine of Jansenius,
which has raised so great Disturbances in the Church. For instance, That
Christ dyed not for all the world; That all the actions of Unbelievers are
sins; That God has no will to save all men. There again are you unfortunate in
the Carmelites. The Reverend Fathers Minims made the like Ordinance in their
Provincial Chapter, in the Year 1650. To the end (say they) efficaciously to
retrench that dangerous novelty of Doctrine, which creeps into men's minds to
the scandal of the Church. There likewise you are unfortunate in the Minims.
The Reverend Fathers of the Congregation of St. Maurice made the like Decree in
their Assembly General, enjo^ning under great penalties their Professouts of
Divinity, to t^ach Sufficient Grace, and not to go astray out of the grand Road
of Catholic Doctors, to follow new and exo^ick Maxims. There again are you
unfortunate in the Benedictins.

I will not dilate my self in a longer enumeration of your misfortunes, lest I
should seem willing to insult over the unfortunate. Your sad condition touches
me too sensibly, to make any Triumph upon that subject. My design is to
undeceive you, if I can, and to oblige you to acknowledge, how dangerous it is
to depart from the Sentiments of the Church, and to relinquish God; since it is
the least punishment, that attends on a Deserter of the Faith, to see himself
abandoned of all the world. This is it that has befallen you, Sir, and you see
the sad consequences of it, by an unhappy experience. Popes excommunicate you;
Bishops declare you Heretics; the Religious Orders have a horror for your
Doctrine; the Universities condemn you by their Censures, and Sorbon cannot
suffer you in her bosom: she cuts you off alive from her Body, and deprives
you of Funeral Honors after death. You have a fresh president thereof before
your eyes, which ought to startle you. That sage and courageous Mother
suppressed the tenderness she had for one of her Doctors, who dyed not long
since in Paris, to testify the greatness of her aversion for your Errors:
she deserted him, because he would not renounce the commerce he held with you:
she disavow'd him, because he would not know himself: she remained inflexible
in her severity, because he obstinately persisted in his disobedience: and as
he dyed in the forgetfulness of his duty, so she would render him no other
devoirs, then that of an eternal oblivion of his memory.

Yet after all this, Sir, you will persist to tell me, that the Jesuits are
Traducers, because they maintain the Jansenists to be Heretics; and you will go
seek out proofs as far as Germany, to give the Lie touching what is done in
France, and what we see with our eyes. How weak is your Ratiocination, and how
violent your Passion! F. Dicastillo a Jesuit, say you, maintains against the R.
F. Quiroga a Capuchin, that it is no sin of Injustice, but only of Lying, to
repel on^ calumny by another that is equal, and to impose false crimes to the
ruin of his credit, who imposes others on us equally false. Dicastillo proves
his opinion by the authority of Bannes, who is one of the Celebrious Disciples
of Saint Thomas, as also by the authority of Vega, Orellana, and many other
Authors; nay even of the Universities of Prague, and Vienna The R. F. Quiroga
alleges for warranty of his Tenent, three Authors, whereof two are Jesuits,
viz. Lessius and Filiucius: These School-Divines grow insensibly hot one
against another, as it usually falls out in such Disputes; some words escape
their mouth, not so well consorted as might have been. This is all you bring us
from those remote Conntreys; which you display magnificently, making them serve
to fill up the pages of your Letter. What do you conclude from thence?
Therefore the Five Propositions condemned by the Pope are not to be found in
Jansenius, as he declares they are in an The Popes Brief to the Bishops of
France.
express Brief? How weakly is this argued! Therefore those very Propositions
are not Scandalous, Heretical, and Temerarious, as the Pope asserts them to be
in his Bulls? How frivolous is this! Therefore Monsieur Arnauld's second
Letter, which protests they are not in the Lord d' Ipre's Book, has not been
censured? How ridiculous is that! Therefore it is not an Heresy condemned by
the Pope to say with Monsi^ur Arnauld in his preface, that St. Peter and St.
Paul are the two Heads of the Church which make but one? How irrational is
this! Therefore the Abbot of St. Cyran says not in one of his Letters, That he
professes to know nothing but what the Church has taught him twelve hundred
years ago; that he had known all Ages, and spoken with all the great
Successors of the Apostles? Therefore Janseni^s promises not that Abbot to
maintain his Nephew Barcos with College Moneys he had in his hands, so as no
man in the world should discover it in the Accounts he was to render? Therefore
he writes not to the same Abbot, The Original of these Letters are in Clermont
College.
That God has taken away two Ecclesiastiques within a few Days, to cast a
Canonry into his hands, and that he is already proffered for it six hundred
Florins, together with a Bene^ice? Therefore Mother Agnes of St. Paul Abbess of
Port-Royall says not in writing to the Abbot of St. Cyran, That there are some
of her Religious, who have not been at Confession for the space of fifteen
Months; and that this were enough to astonish a Confessor, who requires only
words, and not dispositions?

By what Laws of Logic can you reason in this sort, without exposing your self
to the laughter even of the meanly learned? The Jesuits have no no need to
impose upon you false Heresies; you have published but too many real ones. They
do not falsify your Books, that so they may find them stuffed with errors in
Doctrine and Morality; they have marked you the place, the page, your very
words: they alter not the Letters of Jansenius, and the Abbot of St. Cyran^
they have the Originalls in their Archives of Clermont College: they conceal
them not, they show them to all the world. You have sent thither, and have had
a more faithful relation then you desired; what have you to say in answer?
what have you answered hitherto? Certainly, Sir, you were never more in the
right, th^n when you protested you would only answer en passant, as passing
by. For it is true, you very dexterously pass by all the accusations brought
against you, and take no notice of them. It is not so, as to the aspersions you
cast upon the Jesuits: They answer clearly; they dissolve your int^icate
ambiguities; they unvail your Impostures; they dissipate your illusions; they
plainly convince you of ignorance and falsity. The whole world sufficiently
perceives it.

They know wherefore you treat the Kings Confessor so unworthily; why you
worry Vasquez, Suarez, Molina, Lessi^^, and so many famous Divines, whose
radiant luster dazles your eyes: they know why it is, you so violently attaque
one while the whole Body, another while particular men, as F. Danjou, and F.
Crasset, without imputing to them other crime, then having preached against
Jansenisme, (which is at this day so infamous) and having cleared certain
Persons, who suspected themselves taxed, and made great complaints thereof.
This is it that angers you; this is the real cause of the strange animosity
you express: It Is not your zeal for the Discipline, that makes you scatter so
many calumnies in Paris: It Is the grief you feel to see your self condemned at
Rome, the very place where you should present your grievances, were they
reasonable, that has held you these six months in perpetual extravagances.

Return then, Sir, to the point of our difference; let us resume the subject of
our Dispute: I will not oblige you to justify the Doctrine of Jansenius; that
were to require an impossibility: but it is easy for you, nay advantageous,
sincerely to condemn it, by retracting the Heresies you have advanced in your
four first Letters, and which Monsiuer de Marande Mounsieur de Marande
Counselor of State, in a Book entitled, Considerations upon a Libell of Port
Royal, p. 82.
has impugn'd with such eloquence and strength of judgment, as that generous
Defender of Grace has shown in all his Works against Arnauld, which are
unanswerable. This is the subject of my wishes, the public hope, the interest
of the Church, and the answer I resolve henceforth to make to all your
obloquies; for leaving to you that fair Apology of Port-Royall, men^ir^s
impudentissime, I will not otherwise defend my self in the future, then by
remonstrating your error, and bidding you at every Maxim I refute, Be no
longer a Jansenist,

An ANSWER to the JANSENISTS Complaint of being called Heretics: By Father
Francis Annat.
Argument.
1. THat the ^ansenists are Heretics, because they maintain the Five
Propositions in the sense of Jansenius; which the Pope has condemned and
declared Heretical. 2. The ^ansenists vain distinction of Matters of Fact, and
of Faith; seeing they were agreed in the Matter of Fact long since, as
appears by several Confessions of theirs. 3. A Parallel of Pope Celestins
commending St. Augustins Doctrine, and Pope Innocent the Tenth his condemning
Jansenius his Doctrine. 4. The Five condemned Propositions, with the
expressions of Jansenius conformable to every one of them. 5. The great
stubbornness of the Jansenists denying what is ocularly evident, and what they
themselves have confessed. 6. The Jansenists as truly Heretics, as the
Arians, Nestorians, etc. 7. It is enough, to know that the Pope and Church has
condemned Jansenius his Doctrine, for to be obliged to condemn it, (and call
them Heretics, who maintain it) without knowing what the particular sense of
Jansenius is: as to condemn Mahomets Doctrine it is enough, to know that he has
taught Doctrine renounced by all Christians. 8. It is evident, that the
Propositions are in Jansenius; and it is of Faith, that they are condemned in
his sense. 9. The Jansenists false Submission to the Bull of Pope Innocent,
like the fraudulent Submissions of Ancient Heretics. 10. The Jansenists
Miracles in reuniting the the Love of God with Hatred of their Neighbor; of
Justice with Calumny; of Sincerity with Falsity; of the Doctrine of Christ with
War against the Church of Christ.

I Have newly received the Complaint of a Jansenist, who believes I am much to
blame for calling those of his Sect Heretics, and demands satisfaction for so
great an injury. He sees not how I can well excuse my self, since it is
manifest, as he imagines, that they who are termed Jansenists, have perfectly
submitted to the Popes Constitution, which condemns the five Propositions; and
do hold the same Propositions for well and duly condemned.

I have often and long since satisfied this objection: But because we have to
deal with such as are voluntarily deaf, who will hear but what they please, and
have ears impenetrable to the voice that informs them, what they ought, but
will not do; I shall here again unfold the reason I have to call them
Heretics. Though it prevail with them no more then formerly, yet will it
serve to undeceive those, who might be caught with the fair show of their
Complaint.

I affirm therefore, that the Jansenists are Heretics, and that without all
dispute, they ought to be called by that name. The reason is, for want of a due
submission to the Constitutions of the Holy Sea, and the Declarations made by
the Church to advertise, that the Doctrine they maintain is Heretical. I will
not speak of the Bull of Urban VIII. which affirms Jansenius to have revived a
Doctrine already condemned, to the s^andall of Christianity and contempt of the
Sea Apostolic; and therefore condemns his Book anew. Every man knows, that
both in France and Flaunders they have published a number of Books, to persuade
the nullity and falsehood of that Bull. And if after all they will still vaunt
of their submission, a man must say, that to obey after the Jansenist fashion,
is to dispute against the command.

I only speak of the Constitution of Pope Innocent X. and maintain that they
have not submitted to it, nor hold the condemned Propositions for well and duly
condemned; the demonstration whereof is easy. For the Pope in condemning the
Propositions did not condemn the characters they are written in, nor the voice
they are p^onounced with; but the sense of those that write or pronounce them;
that is to say, the judgment corresponding to the proper signification of the
voice and characters. And that we might not be put to the trouble of divining
that sense, the Pope, who condemns the Propositions, declares it to us in the
same Constitution, when he calls them opinions of Jansenius; showing by those
words, that he pretends to condemn the opinions of Jansenius, in condemning
those Propositions, and which comes all to one, that be intends to condemn
those Propositions in the sense they have in Jansenius's Doctrine. Since that
Constitution, the Pope has made another Decree, by which he twice pronounced,
that in the Five Propositions he condemned the Doctrine of Jansenius: Wherefore
he proscribes, or prohibits afresh the pretended Augustine of Jansenius, and
all Books either written, or to be written, that shall defend his Doctrine. The
Bishops of France having explicated the Constitution in the same manner, and
affirmed that the Five Propositions were condemned in the sense of Jansenius;
the Pope in avowing their explication rejoiced thereat, and has again the third
time pronounced, that he condemned the Doctrine of Jansenius in the Five
Propositions. The assembly general of the Clergy have received his Brief, and
confirmed it by the testimonies they have given of their satisfaction therein.

The manifest result of all which is, that it is not a submitting to the Popes
Constitutions, to say they condemn the Five Propositions; and yet approve the
Opinions, Doctrine, or Sense of Jansenius. Wherefore we ask the Jansenists,
whether in condemning the Five Propositions, as they pretend to do, they
condemn the Opinions, Sense, and Doctrine of Jansenius? If they say yes;
praised be God, that they return to the Churches sense, and ^en^ounce
Jansenisme, and let us call them no longer Heretics. If they say no; they are
manifestly Hr^tiques, since they maintain the Five Propositions in that sense,
in which the Pope has declared them Heret^call; and by the same reason they
have not submitted to the Pope's Constitution. And because they have hitherto
refused to confes^e that truth, th^^ so constant a refusal being not otherwise
interpretable th^n an avowment of the contrary, we have most just reason to
call them absolutely Heretics, as people obstinately defending a Doctrine
declared and condemned for Heretical. So that we cannot change our language,
except they alter their minds.

Their usual evasion, by distinguishing betwixt questions of Right and
question of Fact, cannot secure them. We must consider in that Sect two sorts
of persons, the Captains or Conductors of the Flock, who are their Doctors;
and the Followers that are blindely engaged in the Party, by faction, Caball,
and adherence to their Conductors. The former understand the fact by their own
knowledge, and therein ought to remain agreed with us: The latter know it by
adhesion to the knowledge of their Leaders; Which is to say, that they who make
Apologies for Jansenius, and daily dispute in defense of his Doctrine, and who
have written a hundred and a hundred Pieces in Latin and French, to persuade
men that their Doctrine touching the Five Propositions is the Doctrine of St.
Augustine, (that so it may not be said they have gone sot^i^hly to work, and
disputed on a business they understood not) are obliged to confess, that they
know it to be the Doctrine of Jansenius: as also that it has relation to the
Five Propositions; and that in the same relation, the Five Propositions have a
sense conformable the Doctrine of Jansenius. We are therefore accorded as to
matter of Fact.

But in case they should deny it, they are caught by their own confession. They
have often avowed it. They have acknowledged those Propositions to be laid down
in Jansenius, and that they might be considered, In the Book entitled,
Propositiones de Gratia Sorbonae Facultate propediem examina^dae.
Vt in Jansenii Augustino jacent, vel quoad verba, vel quoad verborum vim and
sententiam. They have noted the places where they are found: saying of the
first. Page 10.
Veniamus ad Jansenium, and expendamus quo ille intellectu positionem han^
usurparit, justis omnibus volentibus and conantibus, etc. Habetur ea apud hunc
authorem, lib. 3. de Gratia Salvatoris, cap. 13.

And of the Second, Page 16.
Acc^dat modo Antistes Iprensis; Asscrit ipse and expli^at ex professo
prop^sitam thesim, libro t^rtio de Gratia Salvatoris, ^amque firmat
solid^ssime, etc.

And of the Third, Page 24.
Quoad Iprensis Episcopi hac in part sententiam, vide ab ipso Augustini
aliorumque Patrum omnis atatis congesta loca innumera, quibus ^vincit
invictissi^e, solam lib^rtatem a coaction^ ad veram libertatem, ac proi^de ad
meritum esse necessariam. And notes in the Margent, lib. 6. de Gr. Salvatoris,
cap 6. and seq.

And of the Fourth, Page 30.
Quid vero senserit de islo argumento Iprensis Episcopus, fusissime reperies a
sexto ad undecimum caput lib. 8. de Hist. Pelagiana, etc.

And of the Fifth, Page 36.
Augustini verba and sententiam summa side repraesentavit Iprensis Episcopus
lib. 3. de Gr. Salv. cap. 2. Vbi and retulit veterem Ecclesiam Lugdun^nsem, and
Sinodum Valentinam expressissime defini^ntes velut ^idei Catholicae dogma, Non
pro omnibus om^ino, sed pro ^idelibus solis, mortuum Christum and Crucisixum.

The Author of the Book of Victorious Grace with six Approbatours says, That
those Propositions are most true, and most Cotholique, according to the sense
of Grace efficacious in it self. Page 16. 18, 21, 22.
As it is also in that sole sense that the Lord Bishop of Ipres maintains them
against the errors of the Jesuits: That they have a good sense, in which the
Lord Bishop of Ipres and the Disciples of St. Augustine have always defended
them. And where is it that the Lord Bishop of Ipres has defended them? Is it
not in his Augustinus? And how should he defend them in that Book, if they were
not there? They are therefore the Propositions of Jansenius: and they that
cannot find them there again, need only resume the eyes they had before those
Propositions were condemned.

Since the Author of the Memoire touching the Jesuits design, affirms, That
Jansenius's opinions on the Subject of those Propositions are the same wi^h St.
Augustins; and consequently, that one cannot determine them condemned in
Jansenius 's sense without violating all the rules of the Church; As also that
the ablest Divines would be obliged to acknowledge the capital points of St.
Augustine 's Doctrine condemned, if the Five Propositions had been condemned in
Jansenius 's sense: Does ^e not grant those Propositions to have a sense in the
Doctrine of Jansenius; and consequently that they are Jansenius's, either as to
the Letter, or as to that sense?

And the Author of the Illustration upon some new Objections, supposes he not
the same, when he says, That though the Jesuits should by surprise have
extorted a general condemnation of Jansenius 's sense -- Yet all the Learned
who are versed in St. Austines Doctrine, would not be able to believe that they
could (without wounding their consciences) so far blind themselves, as to take
the most constant Maxims of that great Saints Doctrine for Heresy and
Impietics? He is careful to forbear denying the Five Propositions to contain
the sense of Jansenius; and contents himself with the common evasion, viz. That
Jansenius his sense is also the Doctrine of St. Augustine.

It Is notoriously known, that the five Deputies at Rome, a few days before
their condemnation, protested before the Pope in the name of themselves, and
all the Disciples and Defenders of St. Augustine, that they did, and would
maintain, during their lives, the Five Propositions in their legitimate sense,
as containing the undoubted Doctrine of St. Austin, and consequently of the
Church. They well knew that in their opinion, the sense of St. Augustine and
Jansenius were not different. But rightly judging that the defense of St.
Austin would appear more reasonable then the defense of Jansenius, they in a
Bravado styled themselves the Defenders of St. Augustine, though they were in
effect but the Defenders of Jansenius. And consequently till such time as we
have a constat of their revoking that generous protestation, we are bound to
believe them on their Parol, that they and the other Disciples and Defenders of
St. Austin, that is to say, all the Jansenists do still and will, during life,
defend the Five Propositions in their legitimate sense, which is just the sense
of Jansenius.

We are therefore agreed of the Fact, by the Jansenists own confession; to wit,
That the five Propositions are of Jansenius, either as to the words, or as to
the sense they may receive; nay, as to their legitimate sense, if we will
believe their Deputies at Rome. We must therefore hence forward dispute only
of the Right, to know whether the Fact which we are agreed on deserves
approbation or condemnation. For it is just as when in secular judgments the
supposed criminal confesses the fact he is charged with; as when Milo, for
example freely grants that he ^lew Clodius; after which it remains only to
enquire whether he had right to do it. So, since the Jansenists have confessed,
that they maintain the Five Propositions in Jansenius's sense, there is no
further di^pute, but whether they have right to maintain them. But the Pope
decides the controversy; saying, That in those Propositions he condemns the
sense of Jansenius. And consequently if he be deceived, he is deceived in the
decision of a point of Right, not a point of Fact. And if the Jansenists refuse
to obey that decision, the pretext of its being a question of Fact, will not
excuse their refusal: For it is but a mear mockery to say they have submitted
to the Constitution; unless in their Morality they call it a submission to
refuse to act what is ordained.

Nor can they allege that Jansenius's own sense of the Propositions, and that
which we pretend to be his, are diverse senses. We call no other the sense of
Jansenius, then that which Jansenius himself has expressed in his Book; then
that which the Jansenists have preached, taught, published by an infinity of
Writings, and have abridg'd in the Paper of Three Columns. That is the sense we
call Iansenius his sense, and which also the Pope intends. And therefore it
was, that in the pursuance of his Bull he condemned all Books that defend that
sense, and namely the Paper of Three Columns. That is to say, he condemns the
expression, which Iansenius and the Iansenists themselves have made of their
Doctrine in the Five Propositions.

In a word, the Pope having declared that he has condemned the Doctrine of
Jansenius, we press the Jansenists with their own Maxims, so as 'twill be
impossible for them to escape without retracting what they have said, or
renouncing the infallibility of the Church. For see how they argue; Pope
Celestine writing to the Bishops of France, declared St. Augustines Doctrine
touching matter of Grace to be the Catholic Doctrine: Therefore they that
impugn the same Doctrine of St. Augustine are Heretics. We say in like
manner, Pope Innocent X. writing to the Bishops of France, declared that
Jansenius's Doctrine is condemned as Heretical: Therefore the Jansenists, who
defend that Doctrine, are Heretics. What is there replyable? It is, they will
say, a question of Fact, wherein the Pope is not infallible, viz. whether the
Doctrine he condemns, is, or is not the Doctrine of Jansenius: And it is also,
say we, a question of Fact, wherein the Pope is not infallible, viz. whether
the Doctrine he established, be, or be not the Doctrine of St. Augustine. What
know we, say they, whether Pope Innocent ever read Jansenius? And what know we,
whether Pope Celestine ever read St. Augustine? Pope Celestine expressed in a
certain number of Propositions the Doctrine which he established as St.
Augustines Doctrine: so Pope Innocent expressed in the number of Five
Propositions the Doctrine which he condemned as Jansenius's Doctrine. We are
not agreed of the sense of the Propositions condemned by Pope Innocent. We are
every whit as much agreed of it as of the sense of the Propositions decided by
Pope Celestine. But was Pope Innocent a School-Divine? And how do we know that
Pope Celestine was more a School-Divine then he? Celestine to^k the Sentiments
of his Church: And Innocent did the like of his. The Sentiments of Celestine's
Church were indubitable: And are not the Sentiments of Innocent's Church
equally undoubtfull? Here Is the difficult pass and dangerous leap the
Jansenists are brough^ unto. They must over of necessity; and either with
Monsieur de St. Cyran scoff at the present Church; or else go back to fetch the
better leap, that is, retract what they have said, viz. that the Five
Propositions are true in the sense of Jansenius, since their condemnation by
the Sea Apostolic.

And this I have said, not to violate the Authority of Pope Celestine, which I
do, and shall ever hold inviolable, and worthy of the respect and submission of
all Christians, as well as that of Pope Innocent; but to show the Jansenists
the blindeness of their proceeding, while they endeavor to justify their
contempt of Pope Innocent's authority, by Reasons equally dest^uctive of the
authority of Pope Celestine; whereon never the less they ground their
principal Defense.

But that you may judge whether the condemned Propositions be not really those
of Jansenius, and as expressive of his sense, as those of Pope Celestine were
of the Doctrine of St. Augustine; and consequently whether there be not as
great reason to affirm, that Pope Innocent X. condemned, in the Five
Propositions, the true sense of Jansenius, as to say, that Pope Celestine
established the true sense of St. Augustine in those eight or nine Heads of his
Epistle; I desire the Jansenists to cast their eyes on the subsequent Table,
and consider on the one hand the Propositions condemned by the Pope as
Heretical, and on the other, those which are the expression of the sense of
Jansenius. Aman needs not be a Doctor of Divinity to understand their
conformity.

The first Heretical Proposition. Jansenius's Proposition. ^tom. 3. lib. 3.
cap. 13. Some of Gods Commandments are impossible to the Just, according to
their present forces, though they have a will and do endeavor to accomplish
them; and they want the grace that renders them possible. And therefore all
things plainly show, that in St. Augustines Doctrine there is nothing better
established, nor more certain Then this verity, That there are some Precepts
which are impossible not only to the Unfaithful, but even to the Faithful
and Just, considering the forces of their present state, though they have a
will, and use their endeavor therein: and that they want Grace to make them
become possible. The second Heretical Proposition. Jansenius's Proposition,
tom. 3. l. 2. c. 4, 14, 25. In the ^ate of Nature corrupted, men never resist
interior Grace The succor of the sick Will is not subject to the Free Will --
but invincibly determines the Free Will to choose and embrace this or that. The
whole Body of St. Augustines Works tends to this, as its scope, that Christians
believe, and also understand if they be able, That there is no Free Will that
can hinder the force or influence of Grace in any action. There is no
medicinal Grace of Christ that has not its effect. The third Heretical
Proposition. Jansenius's Proposition, tom. 3. lib. 6. c. 38. To merit and
dem^rit in the state of Nature corrupted; it is not necessary to have the
liberty that excludes necessity: but it suffices to have that liberty which
excludes ^o^ction; or constraint. The most holy and learned Doctors
unanimously and invariably teach, that the Will is therefore Free, because it
is reasonable: and that no necessity of Immutability, In^vita^ility, or by what
other name s^even you will call it, i^ repugnant to it, but ^nely the necessity
of (...). The fourth Heretical Proposition. Jansenius's Proposition, tom. 1.
lib. 8. cap. 6. The Semip^lagians admitted the necessity of interior
pr^venting Grace to every action, even to the beginning of Faith. But they were
Heretics in this, that they would have that Grace to be such, as the Will of
man might resist it, or obey it. That the Massilians (they are the same with
the Semip^lagians) did not from the Will of Believing, exclude an interiourly
assisting Grace, is eviden^ from that which etc -- In this therefore properly
consists the Massilians Error, that they think we have some relics of our
original liberty left us, whereby corrupted man might at least believe if he
would; yet not without the help of interior Grace; whereof the good or bad use
is left to the Free Will and power of every man. The fifth Heretical
Proposition. Jansenius's Proposition, tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 21. It is
S^mipelagianisme to say, that Jesus Christ dyed, or shed his Blood generally
for all men. Whereas they say that J. Christ dyed for all men, it is an Engine
advanced by the Pelagians, but rejected by the ancient Church -- The Pelagian^,
and principally the Massilians, ever repeated that argument -- Christ dyed to
give life to those eternally who received Faith, Charity, and Perseverance to
the end, not for those, who wanting Faith and Charity die in iniquity -- Christ
prayed not to his Father for their salvation, (viz. for unbelievers, or for the
just who persevered not) no more then he did for the salvation of the Devil.
Th^^ Proposition understood so, as that Christ dyed only for the Predestinate,
is Heretical.

It would be difficult to find elsewhere, save among the Jansenists, such
courageous spirits as durst deny so known a verity, and maintain, that the
Heretical Propositions, and those of Iansenius set over against them, agree in
nothing, neither as to words nor sense; and that they are different
expressions. I challenge them to assign that diversity, and discover any thing
in the signification of the one sort, that may not be as fitly accommodated to
the signification of the other. Wherefore we rightly and with reason, tell the
Jansenists they are Heretics: for in defending the opinions of Jansenius,
they defend those which are the same either formally or virtually, and are
acknowledged and declared Heretical by the Church. And we shall still be
obliged to speak in that Dialect, till they have declared themselves to hold
the Propositions of Jansenius for well and duly condemned. This we require at
their hands: and they are much to blame for complaining of it, there being no
Accuser more humane and innocent then he, who having named the offense he
informs against, is content to receive the lie. That is the part we act in
accusing the Jansenists, for not acknowledging the Five Propositions well and
duly condemned in the sense of Jansenius, but defending them in his sense. If
this be not true, let them give us the lie: It is a Complement familiar enough
with the Jansenists. It Is easily met with among their civilities, even when
they have more reason to take it to themselves, then give it to others. When
therefore we check their stubbornness for not avowing the Five Propositions to
be Heretical, explained in Jansenius's Sense; or the Doctrine of Jansenius to
be Heretical, so far as it is con^prized in the Five Propositions, let them
give us the lie, by avowing the contrary, and we shall soon be agreed;
promising to call them Heretics no more on that account, so long as they
persevere in that confession. But ^if they refuse it as they have done
hitherto, they must not take it amiss, that men call them by their name, that
is to say, Heretics.

Now by this whole discourse it appears, that their argument, who complain of
being termed Heretics, is retorted on themselves: and serves for nothing, but
to evidence their confusion. They make an Induction from the Arians,
Nestorians, Eutychians, and Men^thelites, who have been acknowledged as
Heretics for not renouncing Propositions condemned by the Church, but
defending them, notwithstanding that condemation: and they would persuade us,
they proceed not like those men, for that they sincerely condemn the
Propositions condemned by the Pope; and consequently ought not to be accounted
Heretics like those. But by the precedent discourse it appears, that the
Jansenists act the same part that those Heretics did. For the Pope condemned
the Five Propositions as Opinions of Jansenius, and as containing the Sense and
Doctrine of Iansenius: and affirmed them in that Sense to be Heretical. But
the Jansenists to this day defend them in that sense, and stoutly deny them to
be Heretical in that sense. Therefore the Jansenists are Heretics, as were
the Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Monothelites. And it is impossible they
should clear themselves, till they deal heartily, and confess what is daily
expected from them, that the Doctrine of Iansenius is Heretical.

But if they run back to their old song, that they know not what the Doctrine
of Iansenius is, we have already answered, that the Iansenian Doctors know it
by their own study; that they have avowed it, that they cannot be ignorant of
it; that it is ocularly made manifest to all, that can but understand what they
read; that this Doctrine is expressed in the Five Propositions. And for such as
cannot read, or are not able to understand what they read, and yet obstinately
follow that Belief, they are Heretics, in regard that being obliged by the
conscience of their incapacity and want of Schollership, to refer themselves to
the judgment of the ablest Divines, they prefer the Opinion of three or four
Doctors of Port-Royall, before the judgment of the Pope, and Church of Rome,
of the Bishops of France, of Sorbon, and all other Universities, and in a word
of the whole Church: for that must needs be attributed to the whole Church,
which is received by a part incomparably greater then that which contradicts
it; nay, which alone makes the whole Church, by excommunicating and cutting off
the part resisting. So that the Leaders are Heretics and Heresia^ks, like
Arius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Cyrus, Sergius: And their Followers are Heretics
like the Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians, and Mon^thelite people.

I add, that to be an Heretic it is not ne^essary to be instructed in
particular, in all the points contained in the false Doctine which Heretics
follow. A man that had seen Saint Paul do miracles, and heard of the Sanctity
of his life, might not he have been inspired of God to produce an act of Faith,
and to believe the Doctrine of Christianity to be true, which St. Paul
preached, though he neither understood the language of St. Paul, no^ knew in
particular what the Doctrine of Christianity contained? In like manner as he,
who rejecting the inspiration, should condemn the same Doctrine, and believe it
to be ^alse, could not be excused from committing a sin of Infidelity, or
against Faith? A Christian that knows no more of the Doctrine of Mahomet, but
that it is abhorred by all the Faithful, may he not make an act of Fa^^h,
cooperating with God's inspirations, to disapprove that Doctrine, without
knowing distinetly any one article, or point thereof? And in case some one,
upon light conj^ctures should obstinately say, though but in general, that the
Doctrine of Mahomet were not to be rejected, would it not be an act of Heresy
in him, or something worse? And what does the Council of Trent bid us do, when
it requires all Christians to say, Haereses quascunque ab Ecclesia damnatas,
rejectas, and anathematizatas, ego pariter damno, rejicio, and Anathematizo.
All Heresies whatsoever condemned, rejected, and anathematized by the Church, I
do also condemn, reject, and Anathematizo. Is it not a professing of our Faith,
by renouncing of Heresies in general, without knowing in particular what they
are, but con^enting our selves to understand, that they are condemned by the
Church? Could not the Council (if it had pleased) have named ^he Heresy of
Wicliff; of Luther; of Calvin, etc. as the ancient Councels ^sometimes named
other Heresiarks, viz. Dioscorus, Nestorius, and c* in their Anathematismes,
when they professed the Catholic Faith? And had the Council named them,
would it have been necessary to know what those Heresies contained? Since
therefore it is an act of Faith to reject Heresies in general, when the Church
proposes in general that it ought to be done; why shall we s^ruple to affirm,
that it is also an act against Faith, and an Heresy to contradict her therein?

Wherefore seeing an Authority, sufficient to oblige a man that acts
rationally, (such as is the authority of the Pope, Bishops, and Doctors)
proposes the Doctrine of Iansenius, as a Doctrine containing errors, and
condemned under the notion of Heresy; though we knew no more of it then this,
yet that alone ought to suffice for believing in general that Iansenius's
Doctrine contains errors contrary to the Catholic Faith; and consequently it
suffices for the calling of those people Heretics, who obstinately defend
it, and contradict the Declarution of the Church, without further need of a
particular information of those errors.

I know it is no matter of Faith, to believe that a man called Iansenius was
ever in the world, that he was a Bishop, and writ a Book entitled Augustinus;
and that he treats in that Book of Questions of Grace, Predestination, and
Free Will; but upposing the experimental, certain, and indubitable knowledge
men have thereof, I maintain, that it is a matter of Faith to believe, that the
Doctrine which is known to have been treated by that man, in that Book, and
upon that Subject, is in some points Heretical; and consequently, that this
cannot be contradicted, but by an Heretic. Like as it was not an act of
Faith, when St. Paul preached, to believe that he was a man, and that he
preached and spoke of Jesus Christ: but it was an act of Faith to believe, that
that man's preaching, whom they saw and heard, was true; and an act of
infidelity to deny it, supposing the knowledge of the motives that rendered it
credible.

But if we must descend to the Five Propositions in particular, though it were
granted to the Jansenists, that it is no point of Faith, that they are in
Iansenius, or that in him they have a sense consonant to their signification;
yet they that can tell, how the Church has spoken of them, and know that those
Propositions either are in Iansenius, or have there that sense, perform an act
of Faith in believing, that those Propositions they so know to be Iansenius's,
or in his Doctrine to have a sense agreeable to their signification, are
Heretical in that sense: and they that contradict it are Heretics.

In like manner answer is to be made to what they allege, that true it is, who
ever affirms Attrition, such as the Council of Trent has described it, to ^e
bad, is an Heretic: But if one had a doubt, whether that Proposition were in
Luther or Calvin, he should be no Heretic. For it must be said, that since
the Definition of the Council of Trent, they who shall acknowledge either by
their own study ^or report of those on whom they rely, that the said
Proposition, or one which speaks the same thing, is found in Luther and Calvin,
(and we must add Iansenius, as indeed it is in him) are obliged to say, That
the Proposition which they know to be in Luther, Calvin, and Jansenius, is
Heretical, and that they who obstinately defend it, are Heretics.

It is just here, as in the Baptism of Infants. For it is no matter of Faith,
but rather of humane Science, or Knowledge, that there are little Infants who
receive Baptism. Yet that knowledge supposed, it is matter of Faith to believe
that they are justified; and to believe the contrary is the Heresy of the
Anabaptists. We must therefore say by the same reason, that seeing it is
evident, both by the Jansenists own confession above reported, and by ocular
inspection of the thing it self, that the condemned Propositions meet with
their sense in the Doctrine of Jansenius, and that the same Doctrine may be
understood by the expression of those Propositions; it cannot be denied, but
that the Maintainers of them in Jansenius's sense are Heretics, by the same
principle, by which they maintain that the Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians, and
Monothelites were such; that is to say, because they formally contradict the
determination of the Church.

Yet is not that principle so absolutely necessary, that a man cannot be an
Heretic, without declaring expressly that he contradicts what Faith teaches,
and the Church has determined: 'Ti^ well known, that the ancient Heretics did
sometimes dissemble their Errors, and play their parts as the Jansenists do
now adays, when they say they condemn the Five Propositious in whatever
Author they are found. All History is full of the like fictions: and it was
always requisite to be sollicitous in discovering the ^ail of the Scorpion,
which lay hid under the mask of their counterfeit Confessions. St. Jerome Dial.
co^tra L^cif.
tells us that Arius made a show of recanting, and signed the Rule of Faith
that had been made by the Council of Nice. St. Gregory Nazianzen Ep. ad Cler.
1, 2.
info^ms us, that Apollinaris did the like, and that by ambiguous Propositions
he surpised Pope Damasus himself, to whom he professed to submit, as the
Jansenists now do to the decisions of Pope Innocent. The Letters of St. Leo St.
Leo. Ep. 12, 15.
to Flavianus tell us, that Eutyches had recourse to ^leights, and would have
made Pope Leo himself believe that he acquiess'd in his determinations. St.
Augustino Retract. 41. 1 Con. Jul. c. 5.
informs us, that Pelagius deceived the Council of Palestine, and obtained the
approbation of his Doctrine from the Bishops, upon a false show of a sincere
subscription to the Propositions presented to him. St. Augustine assures us
further, that he was himself so near being over-reached by two Letters he
received from Pelagius and Celestius, that he was upon the point of giving them
his hand in sign of agreement. The Ecclesiastical History Baron. An. 629, 633.
observes the same deceptions from the Chiefs of the Monothelites. Athanasius
Patriarch of the Jacobites, made the Emperor Heraclius believe, he had
submitted himself to the Council of Chalcedon, and having referred him to Cyrus
and Sergius, who were of the sa^e Faction with himself, under color of
reducing all the Heretics of the East to the Catholic Faith, he insensibly
engaged that Emperor in Error, and made him Protector of the Monothelite
Heresy. Sergius wrought so cunningly with Pope Honorius, that by appearances
of submission, and a good intention to defend the Catholic Faith, he drew
from him that approbation, which gave occasion, though not with sufficient
reason, to the suspi^ion men have since had of him, (viz. of Pope Honorius)
that he was a Favourer of those Heretics. Such were also the Heretics of
St. Bernards Nescio qua art singendi ita sua confundit vestigia callidissimum
animal, ut qua vel intret vel exeat, haud facile queat ab homine deprehendi --.
Si fidem interroges, nihil Christianius; si conversationem, nihil
irreprehensibilius: and quae loquitur factis probat: videas hominem in
testimonium suae fidei frequentantem Ecclesiam, honorare Presbyterbs, offerre
munus suum, Confessionem facere, Sacramentis communicare: Quid fidelius? Ib.
Sermon. 66.
time, who for that reason compared them to Foxes, and applied to them those
words of the Cantioles, Capite nobis vul^es parvulas; Take us those little
foxes. The Foxes are a subtle creature, so industrious in their shifts, and so
strangely confounding their traces, that it is no easy matter to discover where
they go. And such also are Heretics for the most part. If you demand an
account of their Belief, there i^ nothing s^em^ more Christian: If you examine
their lives, nothing more irreprehensible: Nay, they will prove many ti^^es by
their actions the profession they make of virtue. They frequent the Churches;
they show respect unto Churchmen; they come to the Sacraments. Yet aft^r all
they are Sheep but only in appearance* they are Foxes in subtl^ty, and in
mali^^ and cruelty Wolves. Oves habit^s, astu Vulpes, actu and ^rud^litate
Lupi^. If the Jansenists, who pretend themselves devoted to the Holy ^ea, and
submissive to the Coun^i^ of ^r^nt, and the Constitution of Pope Innocent X.
will behold themselves in this glass of St. Bernard, they will find it a true
one.

I^ conclude therefore against their Plea for avoiding the name of Heretics,
to wit, That they behave not themselves: like the Ancient Heretics, and
averr^, that they therefore ought to be t^^med Heretics, because they do all
those things, they practice all those ^leights which the Ancient Heretics
did: one while contradicting the Decision^ of the Church; another while
dissembling and palli^ting that contradiction; acting, as St. Bernard says,
now the Wolf, and anon the Fox. The Church ^ells us, that the Five Propositions
taken in Jansenius's sense are Heretical; the Jansenists affirm, That the Five
Propositions taken in Jansenius's sense are the most constant verities of
Catholic Doctrine. This is acting the Wolf, and declaring point blank against
the Church, which is Christ's Flock. Yet they say withal, they condemn the Five
Propositions where ever they find them. Now that is to play the Fox, to wit, by
a mental reservation, and exception of Jansenius's sense; which nevertheless
is that sense, which is condemned by the Church.

I say nothing of their acting the Sheep, by that Innocence and Sanctity of
life, which they vaunt of, and which they endeavor to confirm even by
Miracles. And to say but the truth, they work Miracles to prove their Sanctity
far greater then any man is able to believe. For what greater Miracle in
persons that regard only the love of God; thenthen the accord, which they make
betwixt that love, and the hatred of their Neighbor; which they have shown
from the beginning, and that even before they could pretend to have received
any displeasure from men? It Is well known, that when Jansenius's Book was first
brought into France, one of their Patriarchs, who labored to engage many
Doctors of the Sorbon in the defense of that Doctrine, and begged their
Approbations, having met with one of those Doctors, who would not be persuaded
by his other reasons, to approve the Book without reading it, as some of his
Colleagues had done, he had recourse to his last reason, which he thought so
prevalent that he could not but submit to it, and showing him the Book, Behold,
says he, the Jesuits Tomb. He is fallen himself into it, and I pray God he
may rise happily from it. But is it not a great miracle, to reconcile so
charitable an intention as this, with that purified Zeal for the love of God,
whereof they make profession?

And is not that another great Miracle which appears in their Letters, viz. The
atonement of Justice, (which is so dear to them) with the liberty of
calumniating? Their Calumnies are so clearly displayed in^^ur Answers, that it
will b^ a new Miracle of boldness, or rather impudence, if any man, that looks
but in the Books, shall engage himself to defend them. Which Miracle involves a
Third, viz. The agreement of that faithful and sincere dealing, of which they
make profession, with the imposture and falsity of their Allegations? This
illustriously appears in the same Letters. And after I had particularly shown
it in Seventeen several Citations, they had the candor to affirm in lieu of a
full answer, that I had no^ touched their six last Letters. Which is in effect
to say, that it is but a Peccadillo, (a small matter) to have been taken, upon
seventeen several occasions, in Imposture and Falsifying. I thought it had
been sufficient to have proved it in one only instance: as it suffices to make
a man infamous for his whole life, to be but once convinced of bearing false
witness. But seeing this is not enough for the Jansenists, I must entreat them
to tell me, near about what number of Impostures will go to the making of a
Jansenist be declared an Impostor, seeing that to be taxed of seventeen is
counted but a tri^le, and not sufficient. However their Writings are so
^uxuriant in fruits of this nature, that require as many as you will, it will
be no hard matter for them to make up their account.

I should be over tedious, if I meant to relate all the other Miracles of the
Jansenists. It shall suffice me to add only that, which is the most visible
one in all their conduct, viz. The reconciling of the true Doctrine of
Christianity, with the war they make against the Church of Christ. I call war
against the Church of Christ, their combating against the Decisions of the Holy
Sea, received and approved both by the Bishops and Doctors, I speak not here of
Sorbon only, or apart by it self; which is yet Body considerable enough to
prevail against the authority of certain particular Doctors, whose number is
much less, and whose quality (to speak modestly) is no ways preferrable to
that of Sorbon. Neither speak I of the Bishops separately, whose judgment yet
in Causes Eccl^siasticall, is far more considerable, then that of single
Doctors. No, nor do I speak of the Holy Sea apart by it self, which yet in the
judgment of all Antiquity, was believed to be sufficient to make those
acknowledged for Heretics, who were declared such by the Pope; and those also
reputed Catholics, whom the Pope received into his Communion, and declared to
be such. I con^oyn all three together and (...), to whole establishment the
Pope, Bishops and Doctors do unanimously concur, is to make war against the
Church, whose Sentiments neither ought, nor can ^e be better represented, then
by the common consent of the Head and principal Members, which compose it. And
since that whole united body conspiringly informs us, that the Five
Propositions are condemned in Jansenius's sense, and his Opinions and Doctrine
condemned in the Five Propositions, it is undeniable, that the Jansenists, who
hitherto make a practice of contradicting it, do work so great a Mi^acle, as
not any Faith, save that of the Arians, Nestorians, Eu^ychia^s, Monothelites,
(add likewise Luth^rans, Zuinglians, Calvinists, etc.) is able to believe:
which is, The agreement of the true Doctrine, (which they b^ag to be taught by
them in its purity) with the war against the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman
Church. Judge, Reader, whether one ought to require any other Miracls then
these, in proof of what I have aff^rted, That the Jansenists are Heretics.

An ANSWER to the JANSENISTS Sixteenth Letter; addressed to the Directors of
Port-Royall.
Argument.
1. THat the Author of the Provincial Letters, not deserving an Answer, for
his Rudeness, Calumny, and Ignorance, this is addressed to the Port-Royall;
meaning thereby the whole Party of the Jansenists. 2. That Port-Royall holds
Intelligence with Geneva and Charenton; whilst the Jesuits are maintained by
Popes, Counsels, Kings, and Nobles. 3. Port-Royall 's greatest Happiness is,
not to be known; on the contrary the Jesuits when they are known, are made
happy in the Love and Respect of all: and none despise them, but such as know
them not. 4. That they pretend Reform, and set upon the Jesuits Moralls, as
giving scope to Liberty; whilst really they aim, not at a Reform, but
Destruction of the Church, (which they see is much maintained by the Jesuits)
and the establishing the Heresies of Geneva, impugned by the Jesuits. 5. A
Parallel betwixt Port Royal and Geneva in points of Faith. 6. That all other
Heretics cry up Port-Royall, as consenting with them. 7. Apostata's profess
to have learnt Calvinisme in Jansenius his Books, and Jansenisme in Calvin's
Works. 8. The Book of Arnauld of Frequent Communion commended at Geneva; which
likewise agrees with that Book in the Articles condemned by the Catholic
Church. 9. A Challenge to Port-Royall to disprove what is objected to them; and
then to use the ill language, of which the Provincial Letters are full, when
they have showed the Error. 10. A Continuation of many Errors of the
Port Royal. 11. The Foolish and Impious Devotions of Port-Royall. That all the
Books of Port-Royall are condemned, and do manifest ^y ^ontradict themselves.

SIRS,
I Have too long maintained the Innocence of a Society celebrious in Gods
Church, against a person unknown, whose Impostures yet are no less evi^ent
then himself is invisible. I have cause at present, to show him that contempt
which he deserves; finding him reduced to that strait, as to answer only en
passant, Letter ^5.
cursorily; or rather in running quit^ away and making an escape. It is your
interest to enjoin him silence; since his weak discourses and violent
invectives do visibly turn to the honor of his Adversaries, and the disgrace
of his Sect.

Truly, what hea^ soever he may show in taking upon him your Defense, (...)
performs it in so jeasting a way, as though he had no great will to be
believed. And to declare to all the world, that he aims at nothing but
laughter, he plays the Buffoon, at your cost, in his very first Letter.
Whether Monsieur Ar^^uld be temerarious or no, he declar^s he is not troubled a
jot, because his conscience, say^^ ^e, is nothing therein concerned: and
faining the voice of the Prophe^s, who being extraordinarily enlightened,
foretell us future events with an infallible assurance, he protests in his
despair that that Doctor, what ever he do, till he cease to be, will never be a
good Catholic. But as I ought to hope better of his conversion, so will I
believe, that this prediction is but ra^llery: I should be so^^y it should
prove true, and that i^ could not be shown but by such sad proofs, that there
are Prophecies at Port Royal. But you will grant me, Sirs, that a wise man
cannot possibly have any great esteem of a Scoffer, who equally mocks his
friends and enemies; and that men ought not to credit his words, since they
cannot certainly know when he is serious.

Besides, as he is vain and impertinent in his pleasant humor, so when he
comes to be angry, he is no less rude and savage. Do but advertise him of his
defects, and make him see his weakness, he grows so extravagant upon it, that
you would think he had lost his reason. He declaims against Detractors, and his
own writings are fraught with nothing else but Detractions: he is angry that
men call him Heretic, even whilst he undertakes the defense of your Errors:
his Answers are injurious speeches, his Justification is mere calumny, giving
the Li^ is his complement, his Caresses are no better then Threats, and the
whole strain of his Discourse a perpetual digression.

These considerations, Sirs, have obliged me to address the Refutation of this
Sixte^nth Letter to your selves, to tell you, that if I hereafter neglect the
Author of it, it is because such an injurious Writer (who forgets and tramples
upon all the Laws of Honor and Virtue) rather deserves Correction, then an
Answer. But that I satisfy his complaints, is because they concern the whole
party; and I am willing to let you understand the reasons, many l^arned Divines
have had to believe, that Port Royal (I mean the Sect of the Jansenists, and
not those poor Maids, who are so unfortunately engaged in your conduct there)
holds Intelligence with Geneva, not only against the Jesuits, but against the
Church; nay, against the most holy Sacrament the most Adorable of all our
Mysteries.

First part. Port-Royall holds intelligence with Geneva against the Jesuits.
That Port-Royall holds intelligence with Geneva against the Jesuits, I
believe, Sirs, you will not much contest it. You intend not to make a secret of
that Conspiracy: You glory in wearing the same Live^ies; you match under the
same Colors; you enter the battle clad in Du Moulins Armor, whereof you make
almost as good use, as that Minister himself. Your Divinity is but an
abridgement of his Roman Traditions; your Provincial Letters are but Comments
upon his Text; you have compiled your Morality out of his Impostures, and your
Letters out of his abusive and impious Satyrs. You scoff like him, you asperse
like him, you misquote like him, you dogmatize like him: You have the same
Sophismes, the same Disguisements, the same Illusions, the same Artifice.
Thence it is that the Reformed Church, which has an interest in all that
concerns you, makes public prayers for the good success of your enterprises,
which she (...) for (...) She is afflicted at your losses, rejoices at your
advantages, grows proud with your imaginary triumphs, and reckons the wars of
Port-Royall among those of Charenton, which are the most memorable.

This conjunction was easily made, because it was very advantageous to your
Allies, and seemed absolutely necessary for your selves: for without being
united with Heretics, from whom could you hope for succor against a
Religious Order, that makes profession of planting the Faith, where ever the
sun diffuseth his light? It Is true, the Jesuits still me^t with contradictions
wheresoever they come; and though their intention be to serve all the world,
yet fail they not to find persecutions in every part of it. Their Society has
this peculiar, that sufferances increase it, and patience crowns it. But who in
fine are they that persecute it? Are they the Vicars of Jesus Christ? The firm
adherence of those Fathers ^o the Holy Sea is the object of your hatred, and
the favors they thence receive, is the cause of your jealousy and complaints.
You murmr in your Letters Letter 13.
at the reputation they have in Gods Church, just as Heretics are scandalis'd
at the obedience they yield to the Head that governs it. The Lutherans call
them the Popes Slaves; the Calvinists affirm, that the Jesu^tes, the Council
of Trent, and the Pope are but one Body, and one Soul, when there is question
how to hurt (...) Henry Ottius Minister of Zuric, in a speech ^e published
after the c^nsure of the Catechism of Grace composed by the Jans^nists.
(...) J^su^tae ^ Concilio Tridentino^ discordantne a Popa? Nonne unum corpus
sunt, una anima? Are they Catholic Kings and Princes? They need not carry you
to the Courts of Spain, Portugal, and Poland, to show you how welcome they are
to those Princes; for there can be nothing added to the favors which they
daily receive from our own Kings of France. They are the Heirs of their heart
by Witness the Royal College at La Fleche.
Testament, Depositaries o the secrets of their Conscience by an honorable
Election; lodged in their Palace, and fed with their Patrimony by a Royal
Magnificence, defended and upheld by their Protection with such extreme
happiness, as makes them find a Sanctuary even in their Princes Cabinet,
against the storms that menace them. Are they the Prelates and Bishops? They
have approved this Order in a General Council; they have established it in
the heart of the Realm; they have extended it from the center of the Monarchy
to the utmost limits thereof, and when it was under consideration to procure
confirmation of it in the last General Assembly of Estates, they did it in
such terms, as show the esteem they made of the life and doctrine of those that
belong to it. The great fruits, say they, and the remarkable services, which
those of the Society and Company of the Jesuits have done, and daily do in the
Catholic Church, and particularly in your Kingdom, oblige us most humbly to
beseech your Majesty, that in consideration of their learning and piety,
whereof they make profession, you will be pleased to permit them to teach and
perform their other Functions in the College of Clermont, in the City of
Paris, as they have formerly done. May it further please your Majesty, that
conserving them in the places of your Kingdom, where they are at present, you
would grant them likewise to those who shall desire them hereafter, and that
you would take the whole Society into your Royal Protection, as the King your
Predecessor was pleased to do See Cardinal Roche^oucault's Book, entitled,
Raison pour le Desaueu; Sect. 7. where he observes that the Nobility caused the
same Article to be inserted in the Book of their Requests.
In ^ine, are they the Virtuous people who still conserve (amidst the disorders
of the present Age) the sense of the anc^^nt Piety and Faith of their
Forefathers? It may be there are some that know them not, as having never
contracted acquaintance or commerce with them: but there are none that hate
them without Error, nor condemn them but by surprise, nor suspect them but on
false reports, nor yet have any ill apprehension of them, but from such
monstrous Disguisements and Misrepresentations of them, as they find in your
infamous Libels.

Know you not what answer was made by Henry the Fourth to their Enemies, who
were not a little grieved to see the Innocence of those Religious secured from
their calumnies by his Royal Protection. I have been heretofore deceived like
you, said that incomparable Monarch, but I have since understood that this
Society is beneficial both to Religion and the State. Consider, Sir, the
judgment of the wisest Prince in the world, and you will soon condemn your
own. It is not with the Jesuits as it is with their Calumniators, who conceal
their names to publ^s^ their Impostures with more impunity. The Jesuits crime
is, that men know not their Innocence, and their enemies Innocence is, that men
know not their crimes. O that they were unvailed! O that God would reveal the
Mystery of iniquity to the whole world! We are lost, if we be known, said those
Criminalls so famous in History, seeing themselves surpised by a company of
Passengers: and I, replied one of the Sages of Greece, am lost, if I be not
known. Thus may these Fathers say, whom you assault with so great passion and
fury. They were lost, if they were not known; if Popes, Kings, Magistrates,
Virtuous People were not better informed of their carriage, then by the mouth
of calumny, they were lost: whereas on the contrary their Detractours would be
lost, if they were known. Wherefore they do all they can to conceal themselves;
they never go unmaskt, they walk not, but as if they were moved by engines; they
subsist not, but by Hypocrisy; they so explain themselves, that they may not
be understood; they disavow not their errors, but to maintain their Sect; in
fine they appear nothing less then what they are, and they are nothing less,
then what they would appear.

It is not therefore strange, Sirs, that you had recourse to Geneva's weapons,
that is to say, to calumnies and injurious speeches, to decry the Jesuits
Morality: You could not oppose Truth, but by Falsehood; Innocence, but by
Imposture; nor the Children of the Church, but by the deceits of Heretics. It
is also easily perceivable where at you drive; and the curious searches ^ou
make into every thing, to find some blemish in that great Body, are as so many
evident marks of an ente^prize, that has a further reach then ^ou will yet own.
What does it avail you to dissemble? It Is no^ the looseness of manners that
displeases you: The best people are the w^^st for your turn. You make them
Idola^ers even in China and Japan, where Tyran^s Martyr them: You find out
Castors skins to apparel them with like Merchants, even in those vaste
Forests, wh^re the Iroquois cast them sta^k naked into ^^mes. And there are
Countries, which having nothing but Prisons and Gibbets for the Jesui^es, do
yet fo^bear to question you, because you stigmatize them as Rebels, and
En^mies to the State. This your so violent and unjust proceeding discov^rs your
craft, and makes the clearer-sighted judge, that while you seem to b^ea^h
nothing but reforma^ion, y^u seek that which you care not much to find, and
that all your ill language (to speak truly) has Religion ^n^ly for its obj^ct;
but not daring ^penly to oppose it, you are ^o^c'd to seek other false
pre^^nc^s, to cover the env^nom'd hatred that you ^^ar toward those, whom you
esteem capable of opposing your designs. Entertain us no longer wi^h th^se vain
^lamou^s against their Moral Divi^ity; that is not the thing that gauls you:
they are not od^ous to you for any other reason, ^ut because you love not the
Holy Sea which ap(...), no^: he Church that employes them, nor yet the Faith
they teach; in a word, you had never ^aln out with them so much, but because
you are fal^ in too far with the Church of Geneva, against that of Rome, which
has only C^nsures and Anathema's for you.

Second Part. Port-Royall hol^ing Intelligence with Geneva against the Church.
This accusation (I confess) is a great one, and were it not well grounded, I
should pardon all those bloody invectives, and horrid injuries which passion
forc^s from your mouth, and casts, like foam, upon your Accusers. For if it be
a crime of State to hold intelligence with the Enemies of our Prince, what
s^all it be to hold intelligence with the Enemies of God?

But, Sirs, if this crime be real, if it be public, if you be convinced of
it, if you have been arraigned for it in the sight of all Europe, if the Pope
after examination and a long Audience given to the Deputies of Port Royal, has
judged you, condemned you, and declared you guilty of high offense, why do you
accuse the Jesuits? A^e they Traducers because they press you to submit your
selves to the Decisions of Councils and Popes? Are they base and cruel
Impostors, because they are affl^cted to see you obstinate and rebellious
against evident light? Are they Detractors and most impudent Liars, because
they exhort you to acknowledge sincerely, that the Five Propositions cond^mned
by Pope Inno^ent X. are Heretical, which you are at this day constrained to
avow? And that they are in Jansenius's Book, which you maintained with so great
confidence before they were censured, and now deny so stoutly?

You know it, Sirs, and cannot deny it; you have defended it by a public
writing, in^ituled Propositiones Gratiae, wherein you exactly noted the places
of Jansenius, whence they were drawn. Abuse not, I pray, the credulity of the
simple. It Is in value to personate the blind, and protest (since the censure)
that you never read them in his Bock. You your selves have told us they were
there, when you were not obliged to it; and now that Popes and Bishops assure
you as much, you seem to have lost your sight: Heretofore they were there,
because it was no shame to confess it; but now they are not, because they have
been condemned. This art serves only to proclaim you no less deceitful, then
temeratious; temerarious to deny what has been decided by a sovereign
authority; deceitful to dissemble what you have so solemnly published in your
Works But as to the point of Intelligence, though you had not discovered your
selves, it is but opening your Books to find the articles of that criminal
League that is betwixt you and Geneva, interchangeably signed; and thereby to
show the injustice of your accusations, and the charity of them that advertise
you of your fall, to withdraw you from that precipice, or at least to hinder
others from following you in your exorbitant courses.

Port-Royall Jansenius Tom. 3. l. 3. c. 13.
teaches, That there is nothing more certain, nor better grounded on the
Doctrine of St. Augustine, then this Proposition, That there are some Pr^cepts
which are impossible not only to the unfaithful, blind, and hardened; but
likewise to the faithful, and the just, even when they have a will, and do
endeavor according to their present forces: and that Grace is wanting to them,
whereby they may be rendered possible. These are the very words of Jansenius,
which have been condemned by the Pope, as Heretical, full of Blasphemy and
Impiety.

Geneva agreeing to this article Gravier. Art. 18. of Free Will.
assures, that what the Papists were wont to object, that God commands not
things impossible, is of no force, because though his Commandments be
impossible to man corrupted by the sin of Adam, they were not so to man in the
state of Innocence, before he became criminal.

Port-Royall holds, That the old Law made justice more difficult and
impossible, as if it had set a wall betwixt: Jansen. Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 8.
Lex justitiam reddit disficiliorem, and quasi muro interposito impossibilem;
that before the coming of the Son of God, the Grace of accomplishing what was
commanded, was given to very few; much less the Grace sufficient to Salvation.
But contrariwise, That that kind of Grace was absolutely repugnant to the
institution of the Law, and Gods design: Idem l 3. c. 5.
Talis gratia lationi Legis, ac scopo Dei capitaliter repugnabat; In fine, That
they who lived under the yoke of the old Law, had not sufficient Grace to
perform it: but rather an impeding Grace: Idem tom. 3. l. 3. c. 8. in ipso
titulo capitis.
Status veteris Testamenti non afferebat Judaeis gratiam sufficientem, sed
potius impedientem.

Geneva quickened with the same spirit believes, Calvin's 2. Instit. c. 7. 2. and
10.
that the Jews had never Grace sufficient for their conversion; that it was
not in their power to believe the word of God, Luther in Ep. ad Gal. c. 5.
that he spoke not to them, but to make them deaf, that he enlightened not them
but to blind them, Contra Remonstrantes in speciem. Amst. a. 52. and 57.
that he instructed them not but to render them more blockish; and that he gave
them remedies, but to the end they might never be cured.

Port Royal laughs at the proximate Power, and sufficient Grace, as a Grace
that is monstrous, Jansenius lib. 3. de Gratia Christi, ^. 3. Q^^m monstruosa
sit gratia sufficiens,
monstruosa Gratia; as a Grace that suffices, and suffices not Letter 1, 2, 3.
; as a Grace, which the Devils would willingly bestow, if the^ had it, says
Jansenius's Apologist, in his first Apology.

Geneva likewise speaks of it as a Dream, (...) in Antidoto ad c. 6. sess. 6.
Con^^^ Tri^.
which has nothing of solidity; as a deceitful trap, that makes men fall into
Pelagianisme, callidum Pelagianismi operculum: as an Illusion Du Moulin in his
Traditions, and elsewhere.
that beguils us, promising what it gives not, and never saving any man.

Port Royal Jansenists Catechism, q. 66.
assures us, That God will save none but his Elect, because if he willed to
save all men in particular, (since he does what he pleases in Heaven and Earth)
he would save them all.

Geneva also embraces the very same opinion, and says, it is the common belief
of all the Churches of France that are united to her. Genevenses in Synodo
Dordracena, page 561.
Haec est simplex and fidelis sententia nostra, fides Ecclesiae nostrae, fides
omnium Ecclesiarum Gallicarum, quae confessioni Gallicae adh^rent.

Port Royal maintains, That they who dye in their infidelity, have reason to
say, that Christ is not their Redeemer, (they are the terms of the Apology for
Jansenius, page 217.) Jansenius tom. 3. l. 3. c. 21.
That God by his Counsels most secretly just, and most justly secret, has
predestined to give Faith, Charity, and final Perseverance in the same
charity to some persons, whom we call Predestinate; to others Charity without
perseverance; to others Faith without Charity. As to the first sort, that he
gave and delivered himself up for them, as his true Flock and People; that he
was a propitiation to abolish their sins, and bury them in everlasting
oblivion; that he dyed to revive them ^ternally; that he prayed to his Father
to deliver them from all evil: and not for the others, who losing Faith and
Charity dye in their Iniquity.

Geneva pretends that it is an Article of Faith that Christ dyed not for those
that are damned: the Calvinists have printed above sixty Volumes to mitigate
the horror, which all Christians conceived at the first broaching of a
Doctrine so injurious to the Divine Goodness; and having cloak'd with St.
A^gustine's name and authority, they have molded it into one of the undoubted
Maxims of their Synods of Charenton, Alets, and Dort, to oppose it to the
Council of Tr^nt, Et si ille pro omnib^s mortuus est, non omnes tamen mortis
^jus beueficium recipient. Council. Trid. seff. 6. cap. 3.
which assures us, that though Christ dyed for all men, yet all receive not the
benefit of his death.

Port Royal complains of Pope Urban VIII. who condemned the Errors of
Jans^nius by an express Bull; and his Scholars protest in their observations
upon that Bull, See the Observations upon that Bull, published by the
Jansenists.
That it is proper only to scandalize the world, because it condemns the
Doctrine of St. Austine, as the most blind, say they, are constrained to avow.

Geneva says no less against the Council of Trent, protesting with Calvin,
that all the Anathema's of that Council fall upon St. Austin, and that the
Authors of them understood not the Doctrine of that great man. Melancthon
quarrels with Sorbon, and having said, that those Doctors condemn St.
Augustine under the name of Luther, he cries out with astonishment, Melancthon
in his Apology for Luther.
Is it not strange that in all Sorbon there is not a man, that understands St.
Augustines opinion?

In fine, Port Royal crecting a Trophy to the memory of Jansenius, as the
learned man of his time, whose mind was enriched with the knowledge both of
Scripture and also Tradition, See the first Apology for Jansenius, page 10, 15,
91.
calls him the Hercules of our Age, who vanquished that Monster Sufficient
Grace, brought St. Austin down from Heaven, re-establsh'd his Doctrine, and
clcar'd it, twelve hundred years after the decease of that excellent Father, in
a time when it was cont^mned and obscured.

Geneva gives the same El^gium to Beza in the life of Calvin.
Calvin, which Melancthon does to Luther, affirming almost in the same terms,
that he has, as it were, revived St. Augustine in these last Ages,
reestablished and marvellously cleared his Doctrine, which was for so long a
time obscured.

Who could have believed, Si^s, that the Echo of Port Royal would have been so
faithful to repeat verbatim what it had learned of Geneva, to publish the same
Maxims, to defend them by the same reasons, to explain them with the same
expressions, to ground them on the same passages, even to the citing (as
Jansenius does) of one sole Text of St. Augustine a ^undred and seventy times,
which Calvin had alleged but twenty? Who would have imagined that the
Jansenian Heresic, which appears so young under the trim ornaments of a new
language, had been an Age old? That the most remarkable lines of its beauty
should be but the wrinkles of a face burned and blasted with lightning from the
Vatican, which has been seen to fall above twice upon its head? Who would have
been persuaded, that Gen^va could have com'd so close to Paris, as to make a
part of its Suburbs? Or that Port Royal should in so short a time have gotten
as far as Geneva? and that those pious Solitaries, who make themselves
invisible in the Roman Church, should be so well known in all the Lutheran, and
Calvinian Churches scattered over Europe?

Pass the Sea when you please, Sirs, and go visit your friends in Great
Britain, you will there find great support; yea even though your only
Credentials were the London M^rcury of the third of January, 1656. who has
every where given you this testimony, That your Doctrine is in many things the
same with that of the Reformed Churches.

Descend into the Low Countries, and all the Schools of Holland will be opened
to you; all Calvin's Disciples will give ear to you as Oracles, all the
Ministers will subscribe to your Catechism of Grace condemned by the Pope; all
their Orators will labor to set forth your Panegyric, and will charm your
ears with the sweet harmony of your praises, which Mr. Marsh Professor of
Groiuing has already made resound over the whole Earth: In Sinopsi verae
Catholicaeque doctrinae. Where he defends the Jansenists Catechism condemned
at Rome.
Macte illa vestra vertute viri docti, quod audeatis in os resistere impio illi
Pontifici, qui in suorum Jesuitarum gratiam damnata Orthodoxissima sententia,
puri puti Pelagianismi putidam and impiam protectionem susceperat. Take courage
you generous and learned men, who durst openly oppose that impious Prelate, who
to gratisie his Jesuits, undertook the defense of pure Pelagianisme, by
condemning a most Orthodox Opinion.

Go into Switzerland, there the Protestant Cantons will give you great
entertainment; your Deputies were feasted there in their return from Rome; your
selves will be far more regarded, and making Victorious Grace triumph in
despi^e of the Pope and Jesuits, (as In confesso est ipsis novatoribus vestris,
Jesuitis ultro hoc largientibus, quod victricis gratiae propugnatores
Jansenistae in maximi^ ac fundamentalibus Fidei articulls in castra transierunt
nostra. Henry Ottius Professor and Minister of Zuric in his Speech printed
1653. after the Catechism of Grace was censured.
says one of their famous Ministers) in the Academies of Zuric, Basil, and
Berne, you will be ^avished to behold your selves covered with Laur^ls in the
Zuinglians camp, for having generously defended the fundamental Maxims of
their Doctrine.

Now if you hold so good Intelligence with these strangers, what may you not
hope from the Hugenots of this Kingdom, among whom you have two remarkable
Disciples, L' Abadie, and Le Masson, who being turned Calvinists without
leaving to be Jansenists, do publicly set forth in their preachings at
Montauban what they have heard in your Assemblies; testifying by an
acknowledgement worthy of those Ministers, that they learned Calvinisme in the
Books of Jansenius, and Jansenisme in the Books of Calvin? Hear, Sirs, what the
latter of them says, who violating the honor of his Character, and the
dignity he not long since bore of a Pastor, while he exercised its Functions
in a Parish of Normandy, finds no better excuse to justify his
perfidiousnesse, then to say, that being a Disciple of Jansenius he changed not
his Party in coming to that of Calvin; and had done no more but declared
exteriourly what he already was in the interior of his soul; and manifested to
the eyes of men what had appeared before to the eyes of God?

Lewis le Masson an Apostata Priest, in his Apology printed at Montauban 1656.
It was written me from Paris, says that wretched Runaway, that some of my
Friends did attribute my change to an effect of Jansenisme, and a just
judgment of God, who had forsaken me in my error, to punish my curiosity for
being a little too examining of Things; whereas I ought to have kept my self
submissively in the Commmnion of the Church, and have had a better Opinion of
Rome, and believed her infallible in decisions of Faith. Forasmuch as concerns
Jansenisme, I answer, That before Jansenius was known in France, I was a
Jansenist, as I may say, that is, I had the same Sentiments twenty years ago,
touching matters of Grace, Free Will, and Predestination, that I have at this
day. And could a man acknowledge any other Master of the Celestial Mysteries
then Jesus Christ, I might add, that the Book of Calvin 's Institutions had
made me a Jansenist before the Book of Jansenius, by reason of the great
conformity of those two Authors in matters of Grace, what ever attempts have
been made to prove the contrary by the sharpest wits amongst those they call
Jansenists; who indeed were much to blame (for avoiding the Jesuits clamours)
to term Heretical the opinions o^ Calvin upon this Subject, which after all
are no other then their own. Thus much by the way to give testimony to the
truth.

Behold, Sirs, (you of Port-Royall I mean) behold the strait alliance that
unites you with Geneva, and the great advantage your Doctrine gives you; b^ing
assured to be associated with the little Flock, when you please, without
abjuring your Faith, or changing one sole ar^^^le of your belief touching
matters of Grace: Nay, (which is no less true, then it seems horrid) without
altering any proposition of the Book of Frequent Communion, which the Roman
Church rejects, but Geneva receives and approves.

Third Part. Port Royal holding intelligence with Gen^va against the Blessed
Sa^rament.
Be not angry, I pray you; temper your cho^er, and frame the motions of your
Spirit to moderation, while I make proof of it to you, which is the last thing
that remains for me to make good. I will not judge you (since you think it not
fit) upon the deposition of Monsieur ^^llea^, whose name and merit
nevertheless is too well known to suffer the least reproach, unless it be
from the mouths of Criminalls. I will not condemn you, no not upon your
refusal to use the terms of local Presence, to justify your belief on the
subject of the Eucharist. I will not tell you, that the Council of Trent
teaches, N^q^e (...) inter sepugnant, ut Salvator ^o^^er ^^mper ad dexteram
Patris in coelis assid^at juxta modum existendi naturalem, and ut ^^ultis aliis
in locis Sacramentaliter praesens su^ substanti^ nobis a^sit. Council. Trid.
Seff. 13. c. 1.
(what you pretend to be ignorant of) That there is no repugnancy in this, that
our Savior be always sitting at the right hand of his Father, according to
his natural manner of being, and yet be Sacramentally present by his own
substance in many other places, multis aliis in locis: which is the only thing
that Father ^i^cau urges you to acknowledge, and which you cannot refuse
without rendering your self guilty of error. Neither will I reproach you, that
you abuse the authority of St. Thomas, to ^lude the au^hority of the Counc^ll:
and that if the Angelical Doctor says that the Body of Christ is not locally
in the Blessed Sacrament, Alexander de Hales should have given you the meaning
of those words, when he affirms in his fourth part, That Dupliciter continetur
Corpus Christi sub Sacramento; uno modo continetur sub signo illo quod est
Sacramentum^ alio modo continetur a loco continente ipsum signum. Alensis 4.
par. q. 10. membro 7. a. 3. 7. Et ru^sum. Mirabilis est continentia illius in
quantum est sub signo, and in quantum est in loco. Ibidem.
the Body of Christ is in two manners contained in the adorable Sacrament of
the Altar; the first under the Species of the Sacrament, sub signo; the second
in the place where the Species are, in loco: Now it is true as to the first way,
that Christ's Body is not locally under the Species, but is there as a
substance is under its accidents, though after a more divine and miraculous
manner: and this is the sense of Saint Thomas in the place by you cited in your
Letter. As to the second manner, it may be said to be a kind of local
presence, Illa continentia habet modum continentiae localis, and is like that
of bodies, which are not in the accident of quantity, as in their place, but
are in place by their quantity; yet with this difference, That bodies are in
place by their proper dimensions, mediantibus propriis dimensionibus, as St.
Thomas says, 3. p. q. 76 a. 5.
whereas the Body of Christ is there but by the dimensions of another Body,
mediantibus dimensionibus alienis: and this is F. Meyniers sense, which is
agreeable to the language of the Fathers and Counsels, when they teach, That
Christ's Body is at the same in many places, (multis in locis) by the ineffable
presence he has in the Sacred Mysteries; which gave them occasion to say, That
the Altar is the seat of the Body and Blood of Christ: Optatus Milevitanus l.
contra Parmen.
Quid est Altar, nisi seeds corporis and sanguinis Christi?

I need not these Scholasticall subtleties to judge of the purity of your
Faith; my aim is not to convince you of Intelligence with Geneva by any thing
you have omitted in your Writings, but by what you have dared to affirm. I
pass by your sins of omission, and judge you by your Works. I shall set you
down, out of the sole Book of Frequent Communion, which is the principal
subject of this Dispute, five Maxims (for the most part contrary to the honor
and reverence of the Blessed Sacrament) which the Roman Church rejects, and
that of Geneva approves. See if my proceeding be not sincere.

You have presumed to say page 25. of the Preface, That St. Peter and St. Paul
are two Heads of the Church, which make but one. Is not that a Maxim condemned
by the Catholic Church, and received by that of Geneva? What have you to
reply? How can you vindicate your self of so criminal and public a
Conspiracy?

You have dared to affirm page 628. of that Book, Book of Frequent Communion of
the 1. Edit.
That the most usual practice of the Church in the Administration of the
Sacraments favors the general impenitence of all the world. Carry this
Proposition to Rome, it will there be reproved: Carry it to Geneva, it shall
there be received. How can you defend your self from so just an accusation?

You have dared to say, In the Preface, page 33. and 34.
That there are Souls, which would be ravished to testific to God their regret
for having offended him, by deferring their Communion till the end of th^^r
lives. Without all question the Roman Church detests this Maxim; and if Geneva
approves it not, it is not because it is Orthodox, but because it is ^oo impious.

You have presumed to say, Page 680. of the Book of Frequent Communion.
That as the Eucharist is the same food that is caten in Heaven, so is it
necessary that the Faithful, who eat it here below, have such a purity of
heart as may hold agreement and proportion with that of the Blessed; and that
there be no greater difference, then there is between Faith, and the clear
Vision of God; on which alone (mark that word alone) depends the different
manner of eating it on Earth, and in Heaven. Excuses will not serve you; this
is not the langu^ge of Rome; men speak not thus any where, but at Geneva.

In fine not to overwhelm you with the prodigious number of your errors, you
have dared to say, Page 725.
That God does us an infinite honor to admit us to the participation of the
same food in time, which the Elect enjoy in eternity, without any other
difference, saving that here be affords us not the sensible sight and taste of
i^; reserving them both till we come to Heaven. If you admit no other
difference then that, hope not for the approbation of your Doctrine in the
Roman Church; that of Geneva only will approve it.

Now if these Maxims be not faithfully extracted out of the Book of Frequent
Communion, convince me of Imposture. If the first be not censured, the second
impious, the third licentious and profane, the fourth and fifth suspect of
Heresy, convince me of falsity and ignorance: If I attribute them to you
undeservedly, convince me of slander and malice. But if you be the Authors of
them; if you have produced them under Monsieur Arnauld's name; if some of them
have been condemned by the Pope, (as that of the two Heads) others reproved by
all Persons of Piety, (as the two following) others again held for suspect
against the B. Sacrament by the ablest Divines, why have you not retracted
them? Wherefore, in lieu of suppressing them, do you accuse of detraction,
lying, imposture, and cruelty those who advertise you of your obligations?

Though you had not published them as you have done; though you had contented
your selves with whispe^ing them in men's ^ars, and making a s^cret Caball of
them, they that should have heard them, had they not been bound to become
^^formers, unless they would have entered into the Conspiracy of your Crime?
Why then will you needs have the Jesuits to be detractours for disclosing
Heresies, which they cannot conceal without sinning? Was the deceased Dishop
of Langres In his Declaration directed to the Bishop of St. Malo, signed with
his own hand the 26. of May, 1638.
a Calumniatour for having declared that the Abbot of St. Cyran induced the
Religious of the Monastery of the Blessed Sacrament to Confess but seldom,
and to communicate yet less frequently then they Confessed? in so much as
Mother Mary Angelica Arnauld, though a Superious, was once five months without
receiving the Blessed Sacrament, and likewise passed over an Easter day without
communicating? Was the deceased Bishop of Sens a Calumniator, because he sent a
writing, a little before his death, to the Popes Nuntio, containing his last
Sentiments touching the Disciples of the Abbot of St. Cyran, to the end he
should inform his Holiness, and assure him, that the affected singularity he
had always abserv'd in them, their pride, their presumption of mind, their
contempt of others, and care to hide themselves from those, that were not
wholly theirs, had obliged him to believe the whole party suspected of the
Church, as having seen, that their beginning had been in illusion; one of whose
effects was a false Devotion, called the secret Rosary of the B. Sacrament,
condemned as such by eight Doctors of Sorbon; who had understood by persons of
credit, that Monsieur de St. Cyran spak^ of the Council of Trent as of a
Politic Assembly, that was in no wise a true Council; and had also been
informed by many very credible persons, that the same Abhot endeavored to take
away the frequency of Communion even from the best Souls, under the pretense of
a Spiritual Communion, which he made pass for more Holy and fuller of Grace
then the Sacramental Communion.

If therefore we had no other proofs of your corrupt Doctrine against the B.
Sacrament then the testimonies of those two illustrious Prelates, should we not
with them have reason to hold Port Royal suspect of Intelligence with Geneva?
But suspicion is not now the business. Your Maxims are no longer secret, nor
are your Errors still known but to a few. You have published them in your
Works, and when you were reproved on that account, you obstinately defended
them. Shall I again be forced to set them before your eyes, and show you your
offense in artificially disguising what you ought rather to wash out with
tears? Must I produce the Errors, Blasphemies, Impieties, and Extravagances
noted by those eight Doctors of Sorbon in your Secret Rosary, which your
Apologists have made pass for the pious thoughts of an excellent Religious
Woman, of great wisdom and virtue, and Superior of an Order? Must I after so
many famous Writers summon you to tell me, whether the Solitaries of Port Royal
persist in those Sacrilegious wishes noted in that scandalous Writing, which
seems to have no other scope then the dishonor of Christ, and contempt of the
most adorable of our Mysteries? Whether they can desire without horror, what I
cannot here write without trembling? Impious Wishes contained in the secret
Rosary of the Jansenists.
That Christ be in the Blessed Sacrament in such sort as he go not forth of
himself; that the Society which he will have with men, be after a manner
separate from them, and resident in himself, it being unreasonable that he
should make an approach to us, who are nothing but sin: That he dwell in
himself, leaving the Creature in his incapacity of approaching him; that all
that he is, have no relation to us; that his inaccessiblenesse hinder him from
going forth of himself; that Souls renounce their meeting of God, and acquiesce
to his dwelling in the place proper to the condition of his being, which is a
place inaccessible to the creatures, where he receives the glory of being only
accompanied with his sole Essence. That he regard not any thing that passes
without him; that Souls present not themselves to him as the object of his
application, but rather to receive a repulse by the preference he owes to
himself. That he stoop not to communications disproportionate to his infinite
capacity; that Souls remain in their unworthiness of so Divine a
communication; that they esteem themselves happily portion'd by having no share
in the gifts of God, but rejoicing, that they are so great, that we are not
capable of them?

Is it possible to read such horrid Sentiments without an indignation against
their Authors and Defenders? Compare the judgment given of them by the late
Archbishop of Sens and the most famous Doctors o^ Sorbon, to wi^, Monsi^ur du
Val, Monsieur le Clerc, Monsieur Chapelas, Charton, Hallier, Bachelier, Moret,
Cornet, with the approbation of Jansenius, and your Apologists.

That Archbishop ^ssures us, that the Secret Rosary of the B. Sacrament wherein
those Maxims are comprised, is but a false Devotion, whose first original was
an Illusion that gave beginning to your Sect: And the Author of the Letters to
a Provincial maintains the contrary, Letter 16.
That it is a transcendent wickedness to affirm, the Rosary to have been the
f^rst fruits of that Conspiracy against Christ.

The Doctors of Sorbon aver that writing to be stuffed with Imperti^ences,
Extravagances, Errors, Fooleries, and Blasphemies, t^nding to the separation
of Souls from the practice of virtues, especially of Faith, Hope and Charity.
And Jansenius in his Approbation say^s the contrary, That love it self did
dictate it, and that it contains nothing contrary to the rules of Faith.

The forenamed Doctors declare it a Work tending to the destruction of the
method of praying instituted by our Savior Christ: And your Apologists
Apology, p. 1. p. 24, and 25.
say, That it is full of most Catholic, high, and elevated conceptions, like
the lights of the Superior Angels, which St. Denis says to be more obscure
then the lights of the inferior ones.

The Doctors of Sorbon judge it perilous, and of dangerous consequence,
because it tends to the introducing of opinions contrary to the effects of
Love, which God has expressed toward us, principally in the adorable Sacrament
of the Eucharist, and the Mystery of the Incarnation: And your Apologist on the
contrary, make us believe, that those extravagant motions are the desires of a
Soul inebriate with the love of God, which cannot well be comprehended but by
him that understands the language of love, and knows what thoughts ought to
possess that Soul, which being happily gone forth of it self swims in the
abyss of the Divinity. O what blasphemy! O what impiety!

That a Soul inebriate with the love of God, should be able to frame such a
cruel and enraged desire, as to wish, That all whatsoever Christ is, may have
no relation to us! Alas! he is the fountain of Salvation; and if he have no
relation to us in that respect, we are then in the rank of Reprobates: He is
our Sovereigne Good, our Hope, our Support, our Glory, our Beatitude, our All;
and if he have no relation to us, we are infinitely miserable.

That Souls renounce the meeting of God! Whither shall they go, if they walk
not toward him? He is the Life: Will you that leaving him they run blindely
upon death? He is the Way: Will you that they stray, and perish in their
remoteness from him? He is the Truth: Will you that they embrace falsehood, and
languish in the dark? It Is our good fortune to live in his Church, our security
to walk in his ways, our felicity to be illuminated with his light: Wi^^ you
have them renounce their good fortune, their security, their felicity, to
abandon themselves to the motions of a mortal despair?

That Souls present not themselves to J. Christ as the object of his
application; that he regard nothing that passes without him; that they choose
rather to expose themselves to his oblivion, then by being in his memory, to
give him occasion to go out from the application of himself, to apply himself
to the creatures? Can ^e not then be minderful^ of us without forgetting
himself, nor apply himself to the creatures, without depriving himself of the
contemplation of his own greatness?

Can he not be happy by a delicious enjoyment of his being, but he must quit
the government of the world, lose the emp^^e of the Luminaries, leave all the
creatures at random, and permit all to hazard, and to the malice of men?

What ^ Sirs, approve you these Sentiments? You give them Vogue by your
Writings, you authorize them by magnisient approbations: you say they are most
Catholic Thoughts, Thoughts most con^ormable to the language of God in the
Scriptures, high and sublimated Thoughts, like the Lights of the superior
Angels, Thoughts dictated by love it self, and lastly the Thoughts of a most
virtuous Nun, who being rap^ur'd, swims in the bosom of the Divinity. Do you
thus pervert the use of words (as well as things) the most sacred in the world?
Do you thus cover illusion and blasphemy with the Liveries of Piety? Do you
thus give error the title of Faith, and Falsehood the name of Truth? Vae qui
dicitis malum bonum! A ridiculus, but dangerous, presumption! which believes it
has right to deifie all its thoughts, sanctify all its works, and make all its
errors pass for in^allible rules of Faith.

For if it be lawful to wish with Port-Roal, that the society, which Christ
has with men in the B. Sacrament ^e in a way of separation from them, is it not
also lawful to wish with Geneva, that Christ have no real existence under the
Species of Bread? That his body be not in our Churches? That he enter not into
our mo^^hes? That he des^end not into our stomachs, to unite himself intimately
to us? If one may desire with the Jansenists, That Christ according to his
Divine Greatness be not in any thing that is less then himself, may we not
desire with the Calvinists, That Christ be not under the Species, nor in those
co^^uptib^e elements, which of themselves have nothing equal to him, and are
subject to many changes, the shame and dishonor whereof seem to reflect upon
his Person ^ If one may consent with Mother Agnes, That Christ remain in a
place proper to the condition of his Being, which is a place inaccessible to
the creature; may one not consent with Calvin, That Christ be not in the B.
Sacrament, to the end he remain not in a place disproportionate to his
Greatness? And so passing from the wishes of Port-Royall to the wishes of
Geneva, and from the wishes of Geneva to its Belief, is it not easy to proceed
so far as to imagine that which one desires; to wit, That Christ is not under
the Sacramental Species by a real, and not figurative, Transubstantiation;
and consequently that the Mass is but an illusion, and Sacramental Communion
but a Superstition?

And yet, Sirs, you complain that men suspect you, and lay that abominable
reproach at your doors, that Port-Royall holds intelligence with Geneva against
the Sacrament. If it be abominable, why have you not avoided it? Why have you
given occasion of the scandal by your Rosary? Why have you made so many
pompous Apologies to defend such impious Maxims, as are those which the Sorbon
Doctors discovered? Why have you inserted into that great Volume of frequent
Communion, Propositions either Heretical or suspect, either condemned or
condemnable, which I have related? Why having been advertised of the suspicion
which the two last had caused, have you not made it your business to correct
them, or at least explain them?

You will tell me, that the Assurances you have given of your Belief, free you
from all necessity of engaging your selves in new declarations, on a Subject so
clearly handled in the Writings of Port-Royall. Of what Writings speak you,
Sirs? Is it of those which your Secretary has the boldness to cite in his
Sixteenth Letter with such vain Encomiums; though there be not one of them not
blasted with cen^ure, or stained with Heresy? Is it of Mr. Arnaulds Second
Letter, which the Sorbonists judged rash, scandalous, heretical? Is it of
Monsieur de St. Cyran's familiar Theology, which raised such troubles in Paris,
even before it had drawn upon it the censure of the Archbishop of that City?
Is it of the Canonical Hours of Port-Royall, which were condemned at Rome? Is
it of the Defense of the secret Rosary, which undertakes to justify the
impieties and extravagances of that Libell? Is it of those he esteems so
profi^able to the public, and recommends without naming them, for fear the
people should be info^med, that there is hardly any work set forth by
Port Royal, which is not ranked in the number of prohibited Books, taking up a
great deal of room in the Roman Catalogue? Have you no other proofs wherewith
to justify your Faith, then that which gives us cause to suspect it? Can you
allege no other Writings to prove your opinions Catholic, save those which
the Roman Church has prohibited, because full of Heretical Maxims?

Be it that all the Texts you have drawn out of them, appear most Orthodox, it
follows not, that those which I have quoted render you not suspect of
Intelligence with Geneva. All that can be gathered from that diversity is, that
you are contrary to your self: that in your Books are found many conradictions,
but no appearance of your justification: that they all have two faces, which
you show or hide according to the time, the one Catholic, the other
Calvinist. If men cry heretic, when you show the Geneva-face, you make it
vanish, and dexterously turning the Medall, show the Catholic face in an
instant. So you never publish an Heresy, but you have your Apology ready made:
you couple together Truth and Error, Poison and its Antidote; and by an
artifice common to all the enemies of the true Faith, you employ one part of
your works to defend the other, excusing the crime at the same time that you
commit i^. This craft, I confess, may surprise the ignorant, but cannot
justify you before the wise.

You are accused for instance, of this Maxim of Aurelius, That every ^in that
violates chastity, destroys Priesthood, which differs in nothing from the
Heresy of the Hus^ites; and you answer that he says in the same Book, That
the Church cannot take away the power of Order; because the Character is
Indelible: Behold indeed a manifest contradiction; but that is no justification.

You are taxed for saying, That Christ admits us in time to the participation
of the same food which the Blessed enjoy in eternity, without other difference,
save that here be affords us not the sen^ible sight and taste of it, which is
the language of the Calvinists; and you answer, That the Author of the Letters
to a Provincial, says, that there are many other differences between the manner
of his communicating himself to Christians here, and to the Saints above. I
know not whether he be avowed by you, for he averres that he has no
establishment at Port-Royall, fearing least you should be obliged to warrant
all his Letters: But in fine though he were, his testimony would be, at most,
but a manifest contradiction, not a just defense.

You are accused of saying, that the practice of the Church favors the
general impenitence of all men: and to divert the blame, you answer in your
Apology, that you condemn not the ordinary practice of Penance, which is now in
the Church. It Is clear, that this is only to cross and contradict, not to
purge and justify your selves.

You are charged with writing in the Book of Frequent Communion, that the
Church is corrupted in her Doctrine of Manners; and you answer, the contrary is
also found in your Apology, to wit, that the Church is in corruptible, not
only in her Faith, but even in her Doctrine of Manners. Th^s evidently shows
the truth of what I say, that you fill your Books with contradictions: But it
proves not what you pretend, that men ought to receive them for justifications.

It Is not enough to show for your defense, that of two contrary Propositions,
whereof one is Orthodox, the other Heretical, the former is in your Books: It
must be shown that the latter (the Heretical one) is not there; which done,
you will have right to burst out in reproaches, and say to every one of your
Accusers, mentiris impudentissime. But if effectively it be there, if of all
the Here^ies I have taxed you with, there is not one, but what is faithfully
extracted out of your Works, who sees not, that all the opprob^ious accusations
you return men for their good advice, fall upon your selves; and that instead
of evincing your divorce from Geneva, they prove you culpable not only of the
Errors, but even of the Insolence of Heretics?

Think on it, Sirs, I conjure you; and if you would have us entertain more
favorable thoughts of your Faith, brag no more (as Mr. Arnauld does) that you
never fell into error. Acknowledge that you are subject to failings: yet that
as you have the weakness of men to be mistaken, so have you their docility to
be undeceived, and admit of purer lights, Retract your errors, re-enter Sorbon
by a generous disavowment of your evil opinions, and submit your private
judgments to the Pope. What ever else you do, that is less then this, I may
say without Raillery, You will never be good Catholics.

An ANSWER to the JANSENISTS Seventeenth Letter: By Father Annat of the Society
of Jesus.
Argument.
1. THat the Jansenists, quitting the defense of the other Accusations and
Impostures laid to their charge, endeavor to clear themselves, in their last
two Letters, only of the crime of Heresy; and therefore by their silence are
convicted of the other crimes, viz. Imposture and Calumny. 2. That the Sum of
their excuse is reduced to two Mediums: The first is the Pretext of Difference
betwixt Decisions of Fact, and of Right; which is answered fully in the Tract
called, The Answer to the Jansenists Complaint of being called Heretics. 3.
The second Medium, which is by the Tomists opinion of Efficacious Grace, (which
is Catholic) to defend the Jansenian opinion, is here refuted: and it is
showed, that Jansenius neither explicateth, nor defends his opinion, as the
Tomists do, but as the Calvinists do; asserting what Geneva asserteth, and
denying what Geneva denies. Therefore Calvin's Disciples allow of Jansenius;
(as has already been shown, and again is recapitulated) but the Church
condemns him: Consequently his Opinions are Heresies.

Dear Reader,
THe seventeenth Letter of the Secretary of Port-Royall is now newly arrived;
dated the 23. of January, and published the 29. of February. All the Interim
was but requisite for its journey from Osuabruck, where he affirms it was
Printed; the Jansenists being unwilling to put it to the Press at Pa^^s; so
obedient they are to the Civil State and to the Ordinances of the Magistrate.

It is a long Letter of the size of the other sixteen; which like the precedent
(by me newly answered) tends to prove, that the Jansenists are no Heretics.
For, as to their merited title of Impostors and Falsifiers in their Letters to
the Provincial, (which was all I pretended to demonstrate in my Book, of The
fair dealing of the Jansenists) their Secretary yields us the victory; and will
no longer contend but with those that call them Heretics, as I had
occasionally done in the Preface of the Book. From this accusation he intends
to vindicate the Party, by the difference there is between the judgments of
the Pope and Councils touching questions of Fact, and their judgments
concerning questions of Right; the former not being infallible, as it may be
the later are; and by the unquestionable certitude of the Doctrine of
Efficacious Grace, (that is, Grace efficacious of it self) maintained in the
Writings of Jansenius; and which there is no probability that the Pope intended
to touch.

By this it appears that the Secretary played the Schoolman at the beginning,
in his first four Letters, disputing against the censure of Sorbon; and
perceiving that he advanced little by striving to overbear a judgment
maintained by the authority of the Pope and Bishops, was forced to fall upon
the Jesuits Moral, which furnished him with the matter of the Twelve
following Letters. But being also driven out of that field by the conviction of
his falsities, ^e returns again to the Scholastic in his Seventeenth,
disputing of the infallibility of Pope and Counsels; and of the truth of the
Doctrine of Efficacious Grace.

It would require a Letter longer then his, to refute all his extravagances,
illusions, bravadoes, falsehoods, vanities, and all that he speaks
impertinently, and contrary to the respect he owes to the Sea Apostosique. I
shall only take notice of his two principal Mediums to prove that he is no
Heretic. As to the first, which is the pretext of difference between
decisions of Fact, and decisions of Right, the Reader will see, that there is
nothing necessary to be added to what I have latelely said in answer to the
Jansenists Complaint; and that the stories he reports concerning Pope Honorius
and others, avail him not at all.

As to the point of Self-efficacious Grace, the good Secretary understands it
very ill, and shows not only that he is no Doctor, (as he confesses of
himself) but that he deserves not to be one. He pretends that the Five
Propositions are not heretical in Jansenius's sense, if that sense be no more
then the Doctrine of Efficatious Grace; not seeing that by the same argument
Calvin may justify his Doctrine on the same subject; affirming also, that he
pretends nothing else, but to defend the verity of Efficacious Grace. The
Secretary must learn, that there are two ways of defending Efficacious Grace,
one which is Heretical, and relying upon Heretical Principles: the other
Orthodox, maintained by Principles established in Councills. Calvin follows the
first, and is therein Heretical: The Catholic Doctors, Thomists, Scotists,
Sorbonists, Jesuits agree in the second: and therefore notwithstanding their
particular disputes, they all remain in unity of Faith, and in the Communion of
the Church.

To know therefore whether Jansenius's Doctrine be secured by his profession of
defending Efficacious Grace, it must be known which way he defends it; whether
by Calvin's way, or that of the Catholic Doctors.

Calvin so defends Effcacious Grace, that he believes it leaves us no other
liberty, then the liberty from coaction, or constraint; subjecting us in other
respects, to a necessity of acting; which deprives us of the power of resisting
it, so long as Grace perseveres.

The Catholic Doctors agree that Efficacious Grace so rules the Will, as it
leaves us a power of dissenting; so that these two things are found together,
Grace in the Will, and in the same Will under Grace a power sufficient to
hinder its consenting to Grace: and they doubt not, but this is the true sense
of the words of the Council of Trent, Potest dissentire. Bunnez and Molina,
and all Catholic Doctors, even the most divided in their opinions, and the
most opposite in the disputes of Grace, are united in this point.

They are so likewise in this other, That Grace under that formality of
efficacious, is not so necessary to good actions, as that it cannot be
sufficient without it, and give us all power requisite to make that which God
requires of us, and which yet we perform not, to be truly possible to us, even
when we fail to do it; whence it frequently happens, that through our own
fault, Grace attains not its effect.

I ask the Secretary therefore, whether Jansenius be of that opinion, when he
teaches, that we need not fear lest necessity, by what name soever called,
deprive us of liberty, so it be not a necessity of coaction? Or when he
disputes against the indifference of liberty, and leaves us not any that Calvin
has denied; nor acknowledges any that Calvin has not likewise acknowledged? Or
when he takes sufficient Grace for a Monster in Divinity, and denies, that
there was ever any medicinal Grace, that had not its effect? Or when he
imputes as error to the Semipelagians their saying, That the Will can obey or
resist Grace? And seeing it is evident, that this Doctrine is dissonant to the
Catholic Doctors way of explaining Self-efficacious Grace, and is rather
consonant to that followed by Calvin, it must be concluded, that reducing the
sense of the Five condemned Propositions to the sense of Efficacious Grace, as
it has been explicated by Jansenius, is to reduce it to an heretical sense:
and that all they who follow this explication, are not only Disciples of
Jansenius, but of Calvin too.

Whence it appears, that the Secretary accuses me in vain for having granted,
that the deceased Pope touched not, in his Constitution, the Controversy of
Efficacious Grace. For in the Cavilli, from whence he has taken it, I speak
expressly of the point in controversy between the Fathers of St. Dominique's
Order, and the Jesui^es. It Is very true, the Pope was not willing to touch
that; but he touched the point wherein they and we are agreed, in confirming it
by the condemnation of the Heresy of Jansenius, which is opposite to it, as
being the sense of Calvin.

Wherefore it is no wonder if the Calvinists have every where stretched forth
their arms to embrace the Jansenists, owning them for their School-fellows. The
Protestant Cantons, by the mouth of Henry Ottius, chief Professor of the
University of Zuric, cries out; In nostras cum consortibus Jansenius transit
parts, Jansenius and his Followers are come over to our side: and they find
so great a conformity between their Doctrine of Grace, and that which the
Jansenists have expounded in their Catechism, that they verily believe there
is, nec aliud, nec plus, nec minus, neither more, nor less, nor any other
thing taught in the one, then in the other. The States of Holland encourage the
Jansenists by the voice of Samuel Marez Pastor and Professor of Groyning, who
exhorts them to stand firm. Macte illa vestra virtute, viri docti quod audeatis
resistere impio illi pontifici. Be of good courage, says he, you generous and
learned Jansenists, seeing you da^e resist that wicked Pope. With the rest
joins England, who makes even her Mercuries attest, That the Doctrine censured
by Sorbon, is in many things the same with that of the reformed Churches. Du
Moulin dotes not, when at Sedan he avowes the same uniformity of Doctrine.
Rousselet publishes it at Nismes; Eustache at Montpelier; and of the two famous
Apostates L' Abadie, and Le Masson, who are now at Montauban, the first
confesses; that to Calvinisme he passed through the gate of Jansenisme; the
second, that he learned Jansenisme in Calvin, long before Jansenius printed his
Augustinus. We have in our hands the Book he has lately printed, containing
the Motives of his Apostasy, which happened the last year, after he had preached
the Lent for^going in the Dioc^sse of Roven. It is not necessary to dilate any
more on this Subject, there being so many printed Pieces, which demonstrate the
conformity of the Doctrine of Jansenius and ^alvin concerning Self-^fficacious
Grace; to which the Jansenists have never been able to answer.

As to that which the Secretary adds near the end of his Letter, of the
compassion he has to see me forsaken of God, I have three things to reply. The
first, that since his spirit of jea^ting and scurrility seems to have left him,
his Letters are very flat, and he grows tedious and contemptible to those that
read him. The second, that a Novendiall devotion at the Holy Thorn, would be
well employed, to obtain of God the cure of his blindness. The third, that I
conceive a particular confidence, by seeing my self forsaken of God in the
opinion of those, who believe he has forsaken his Church, and goes daily
destroying it, as the Jansenists do, by adhering to the traditions of the
deceased Abbot of St. Cyran.

If the fancy take him to make any reply, let him not send his Writings any
more to Osnabr^ck: For it is but to make a toil of a pleasure. Amsterdam,
Leiden, and Geneva, are much more commodiou^; since in all those places he
shall not only have permission to print his Works, but an Approbation to
attend them. After all, The Jans^nists are Heretics.

An ANSWER to the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Provincial Letters; and to
another of an unknown Person to Father Annat: which is inserted into the Second
English Edition betwixt the Seaventeenth and Eighteenth.
Argument.
1. THat the Author of the Provincial Letters complains, that he is called
Heretic, when at the same breath he vents Heresy. 2. That all that he says
for his vindication from Heresy, makes him suspected of Heresy. 3. That the
Jesuits dependence on their Superiors, (which he objecteth) is their
security, as his Independance is the S^urce of ^h^s ruin. 4. The Superiors of
the Jesuits proceeding, in Printing Books. 5. An Answer to an Argument wherein
it is said, that the Jesuits take the Piety of their Adversaries for a
pretense of calling them Heretics. 6. That it is a groundless accusation
(which reflects on the Pope, and Synod of France) to say, the Jesuits procured
the condemnation of Jansenius, though nothing is, or can be, produced, that
ever they did in order to a false Information. 7. Three other Calumnies against
the Jesuits refuted. 8. Ten Objections, by which the Jansenists would prove
themselves no Heretics, refuted, and proved to be of no force at all. In the
refutation of the Fifth Objection, the Texts of Jansenius are cited, where he
plainly teaches all that is condemned in the Popes Bull as his Doctrine. 9.
The Jansenists several Histories, and passages of the Fathers and Counsels,
showed to ^e impertinent, and to argue him to be no good Subject of the Church.
10. His Hypocritical Piety to Jansenius his memory; and his false asserting
the matter to be of no consequence, whether the Propositions be in Jansenius,
or no.

SIR,
HAving perused your Eighteenth Letter, which here in England has (as well as
the former) no little Vogue among Protestants, I thought sit to answer it; to
let the world see, how senselesle a Piece it is. For indeed I must ^ell you,
there is not one Reason in it, which ^avours either of Divinity, or of
Philosophy, or of common Sense. But howsoever, because it speaks against the
Popes Bulls, and rails at the Jesuits, it is welcome to all, but only the
poor remnant of Catholics; who with great Resentment, seeing you to pre^^nd
to the name of Catholic, say of your Writings, Filii Matris meae pugnaverunt
contra me. The Sons of my Mother ^ight against me. Had you writ a Consolatory
Missive to us here in England, you had done something worthy the name of
Catholic, and beseeming a good Subject of the most Christian King: But to
call your self a Catholic, and write against the Authority of the S^a
Aposto^que, (for which we here suffer so much, that we are even pointed at in
the Streets by the name of Papists,) is a thing that breeds nothing but
scandal and confusion in the House of God. For this reason I count it my duty
to let all the world know, that your Letter is neither Catholic, nor
Rational; as having neither Faith, nor Sense in it. And to take your Arguments
all in their full force, and consu^e them totally, I will rip up what you say
in your Seventeenth Letter, and your Friend in his to Father Annat: for they
all drive at the same mark. I know Reverend Father Annat has answered your
Seventeenth Letter; and in his Tract against the Complaint of the Jansenists
has ^n substance confu^ed the main points of the other two: so that there
would not be need of ^aying any thing more, did not your Letters do special
hurt here in England. For all that you advance in favor of Jansenisme, is
looked upon here as equally availing for the defense of Protestant, and
Puritan, and Anabaptist, and Quaker, and the other innumerable Sects, into
which our poor Nation is divided. For this reason I presume, Reverend Father
Annat will give me leave to reassume what he has said against the Seventeenth
Letter, and prosecute it to the end of the Eighteenth.

To begin then; you enter upon your Seventeenth Letter with a Complaint, that
you are called Heretic, and challenge all the world to show, where you have
taught any thing Heretical: and yet (which is a strange madness of yours) at
the same breath that you make this challenge, you declare your self Heretic.
I need not then go back to your former Writings, to ^ell you on what account
that Ti^le is given you; The whole subject of your Seventeenth and Eighteenth
Letters makes the matter clear. The Pope and whole Catholic Church hold the
Jansenists Heretics; you hold the Jansenists are not Heretics. The Pope
has declared, that the Five Propositions, condemned in Innocent the Tenth's
Bull, are Heretical in Jansenius his sense: you say those Five Propositions
are not Heretical in Jansenius his senser And for this you are deservedly
called Heretics. We Catholics in England say with St. Hierome, (Ep^st. ad
Damasum. de Hypostafis nomine.) Siquis Cathedrae Petri jungitur, meus est. He
that agrees with the Chair of Peter, is ours; and on the contrary he that
agrees not with the Chair of Peter, is not ours. We ask with St. Amb^ose
(Orat* de obitu fratris) of every new Sect, Whether it agrees with the
Catholic Bishops, that is, with the Church of Rome? (Rogavit, Si cum
Episcopis Catholicis, id est, cum Ecclesia Romana, consentiret.) We conclude
with St. Irenaus, Disciple to Saint Polycarp, That it is necessary that every
particular Church, that is, all the Faithful, should agree with the Roman
Church, by reason of her Prerogatioes. Lib. 3. cap. 3. Ad Romanam Ecclesiam
propter potentiorem Principalitatem necesse est omnem convenire ^cclesiam, id
est, ^o^ qui undique sunt ^ideles. This is our sense; and for this we must
judge you an Heretic, who speak a language unknown to Rome, and do contradict
that Au^hority, which in all ages Fathers, and Doctou^s, and Counsels have
submitted unto.

I know, Sir, you bring many Arguments to vindicate your self, and to prove,
That the Jansenists are no Heretics. But I shall, God willing, show you the
nullity of them. But before I come to that, to disintangle the matter, I think
fit to refute two Things, which serve you for Bravadoes only, and matter of
Calumny; not for any argument to prove that the Jansenists are no Heretics.
The one of these things is, what you say concerning your self: The other, what
you lay to the Jesuits, which is so mixed with the Arguments you bring, that it
is necessary to take it apart, that both it, and the Arguments, may be clearly
answered.

For your self then, Sir, you say (page 296. of the second English Edition;
which is that I always follow in this Letter.) That you are alone. And pray,
Sir, how came you to be alone? 'Twas because you separated your self from the
Catholic Church. You are alone. And so was Arius, Eutyches, Nestorius, and
all other Arch-Heretiques, when they first began to oppose the Church. You are
alone; and therefore suppose you cannot be argued of Heresy: you should have
discoursed quite contray. You are alone, and therefore to be suspected: for
Separatists cannot (likely) be sound in Faith. But, Sir, if you be alone, as
you say you are, without relation to any, how comes it, that in the Eighteenth
Letter, page 337. etc. you take upon you to make Proclamations in the public
cause of all the Jansenists? Who entrusted you to speak in their name, and to
deliver their sense? How shall we believe what you tell us, That they will
submit, when the places are showed them in Jansenius; or when this Pope shall
have again heard them at Rome? How shall we know, that they are not already
satisfied in their conscience? Since as you say, you are alone, and have no
relation to them of Port-Royall, that is, to the Jansenists. No, No, Sir, you
are not alone; you speak for the whole Party; you are the mouth of the Caball;
you act for all the Jansenists: And if they should desert you, you would not
yet be alone; for the Calvinists, the Lutherans, the Anabaptists, the Quakers,
and all that renounce Obedience to the Church of Rome, would shake hands with
you. You know well enough, your Letters were welcome at Charenton, and are made
much of in Germany, in Holland, in England, and all the Nations, which are
divided from the Faith of the Catholic Church, Say therefore no more, That
you are alone.

The next thing that you say for your self is, That you are hid, and the
Jesuits find themselves wounded from your invisible hand, page 297. A Thief
might well comfort himself with this; it is his happiness to be hidden. Omnis,
qui male agit, odit lucem. Every one that does evil, would gladly be
invisible. But that Truth should seek hiding-holes in a place where it may
safely appear, (as in France any Catholic Doctrine may) that, Sir, I never
heard. Appear therefore; or else every one will conclude against you: for every
one knows, that he is to be suspected in all he says, who is forced to hide
himself like an Outlaw; and is so forsaken of all, that (as you speak of your
self) he has no relation to any Community, nor to any person whatsoever.
Embrace therefore the Truth, and you will not need to hide your self: The
Catholic Church is visible; and you need not make your self invisible,
unless it be to become a member of the invisible Church, which is not
Catholic.

The third Thing you say for your self is, That you make a Protestation of your
Faith in these words, page 296. I have not any dependence save that on the
Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church, where I am resolved to live and die in
the Communion of the Pope, the Sovereign Head thereof; out of which I am
persuaded there is no Salvation. Then you ask, what course can be taken with
one, that talks after this rate? You know, Sir, what course can be, and is,
taken, with you, for all this; you know, that the Decree made feria quinta, die
sexto Septembris, 1657. tells us, That Pope Alexander the Seventh condemns
this very Letter of yours together with all the rest, notwithstanding this
Protestation. These words indeed, if they be real, might prove you no
Protestant; but not no Jansenist. For notwithstanding these words you maintain
Jansenisme; you spit your venom at his Holiness, you contemn his Bulls, and
calumniate those, who endeavor to persuade all to submit to the censures of
the Church: I mean the Jesuits, of whom (to come to that) you tell us.

In the first place this, page 298. There is a vaste difference between the
Jesuits, and them that oppose them. They do really make up one Body, united
under one Head; and their Rules allow them not to print any thing without the
Approbation of Superiors, who by that means become accountable for their
Errors: whereas you are accountable to no body for what you write; nor no body
responsible for you. All this you say to tax the Jesuits, and prove your self
irreprehensible; and you do not mark, that really you commend the Jesuits in
it, and disgrace your self, and discover the Source of your errors. Had any
man advised you, and reviewed your Papers before they went to the Press, they
would not have been so full of gross errors. Had you had any dependence on
any learned and virtuous man, he would have told you, that you could not impute
to the Society the inventing of the Doctrine of Probabilities, and the like,
which had been taught some hundred of years, before the Society was in the
world. He would have told you, That to cite Auhours falsely, as you do almost
perpetually, was a direct means to disgrace your own Writings; that to tax good
opinions, was but to discover the blindness of your own passion; that to join
with Jansenists, was but to declare against the Church. In fine, he would have
told you all that, which since to your shame you have been told by those who
answered your Letters, and laid your ignorance open to the world: and by this
means he would have saved your labor, saved your credit, and saved your
conscience. But your having no dependence on any body, made you leap headlong
into the precipice, into which your passion lead you blindefold.

On the contrary, the Jesuits by the dependence which they have from their
Superiors, have stood firm, and their Doctrine, like a rock in the Sea, has
received the boisterous waves of your calumnies and contradictions, without
being ever shaken in the least point. I do not say this to aver that all
their Writings are irreprehensible; I know some Jesuits have writ things which
the Pope has censured, (as that, which you take notice of, of Father Halloix)
and they have willingly submitted to his Holiness's censures: Some opinions
also have been unanimously impugned by all the rest of their Order, and forbid
by their General. This is allowed. Yet that which I say is, that their
Doctrine as to all your Objctions, has stood unshaken and irreprehensible. And
as I did in the Preface to the Impostures, so again I defy you (according to
the conditions which there are set down) to show me any one point of the Moral
Doctrine of the Society, which is reprehensible. If by the Popes admonition, or
of themselves, they discover any error in any particular Author of theirs,
they presently correct it. So for example, that which you allege of Father
Amicus in your Eighteenth Letter, was long since commanded by Father General
to be razed out of the Book; though Amicus were not the first, nor the only
Author, that had taught that opinion. Now that in a great number of Writers it
should sometimes happen, that an unallowable opinion should escape correction
for a time, is a pardonable error of hum^ne frailty. On the contrary it is
laudable virtue that makes them renounce any such error, as soon as it is
known. This advantage then Subordination to their Superiors brings to them,
that their errors are soon corrected; nor can they be taxed for what they
themselves endeavor to redress in the frailty of particulars: much less are
their Superiors criminal, if perhaps some one or two opinions chance to
displease.

For that which you bring concerning the Obligation of the Superiors, is too
frivolous to need an Answer. It is senseless to think, that the General of
the Society, from whom all authority of Printing is derived, can view all the
Books written by the whole Order. If we should allow their General (that which
is never heard of in one man) abilities enough to judge of all the Books, writ
by the several Authors of the Society in all the several Sciences; at least
we cannot think, that he knows all the languages, in which they are written:
nor can he possibly have time to read them all; no, nor is it practically
possible to conveigh them all to him, from the several places of the world,
over which the Jesuits are spread. These are fabulous dreams, fit for you,
Sir, to make matter of a Calumny with, but not to be believed by any rational
man. All that he can do is this. He deputes some able men, three or four, to
view every Work that is to be printed; and then he regulates himself according
to their judgment. Now when this is done, as it is among the Jesuits very
exactly, it seldom happens, that their Books need the Popes Censure: if they
do, then as soon as the error is perceived, it is their desire to correct it.
All this I have said to satisfy the Reader; who by this will judge, that as it
cannot easily happen, that the writings of the Jesuits should be scandalous,
so it may happen, that the three or four Revisours, whose judgment must carry
it for the present, may be overseen: such is the nature of humane frailty. And
if any man can sinde a better way, the Jesuits will thank him for it.

But I go on. The second thing concerning the J^suites, that I intend to take
notice of, I find in the R^ply made to Father Annat, upon occasion of a Piece
published by him, called, The fair dealing of the Jansenists, page 326. It is,
that Father Annat (and the same is understood of the rest) produces the Piety
and Zeal of their Adversaries as a mark of their Heresy. I answer, that it is
not their true piety, but their false piety, their Hypocritical Mummery which
the Jesuits take as a mark of their Heresy. That which Christ noted in the
Pharisees, That they strained a Gnat, and swallowed a Camel. For example,
whilst you will not allow a Penitent to follow his Ghostly Fathers opinion,
for fear of the Monster of Probability, you will, and do, allow those poor
Souls of Port-Royall, to abstain Fifteen Months from Communion, contrary to
the express precept of the Church. Whilst you will not allow, that a man may
defend his goods, or honor, from an unjust Invasour, you will allow, with the
Abbot of St. Cyran, that a man may, and must sometimes, kill himself. Whilst
you cry out against Revenge, you teach, that to follow the interior Inspiration
(so you call it) a man may, though contrary to the exterior Law, kill his
Neighbor. Whilst you cry out against the Jesuits admitting men unworthily to
the Sacraments, you commend it as an act of great Humility to be content to
abstain from Communion all ones life long till the last hour. It Is this impious
Doctrine, (that you call Piety) which the Jesuits take for a mark of Heresy.
These and the like Maxims of you Jansenists are cited in the Impostures, and
in the Answers to your Letters, and justly taken by the Jesuits for marks of
people fallen from the way of Truth.

The third thing, which you say concerning the Jesuits, is very often
inculcated by you, but most largely in the Eighteenth Letter, page 343. etc.
(and Letter 17. page 312.) That the Jesuits have by false Representations
deceived the Pope, and got of him a condemnation of Jansenius. This is no small
fault; and wherein though the Jesuits are chi^fly accused, yet the Synod of
all the Bishops of France, and Three Popes, and their Divines are involved: the
Jesuits for being the Deceivers; the rest for being lead blind so long in a
matter which they ought, and might easily have examined. But what probation do
you bring, Sir? None at all, but your b^re a^^ertion; and so you need no
answer, but a flat denial. Show when, where, and how the Jesuits did thus
deceive the world. All the world knows, that Pope Urban, when he first forbad
the Book of Jansenius, (though not then as Heretical) forbad also the Theses
of Lovain, made by the Jesuits in defense of their Doctrine against Jansenius.
Did the Jesuits procu^e this? All the world knows, that Pope Innocent the
Tenth was moved by the Bishops of France to examine the Five Propositions,
which they presented him taken out of Jansenius. Were there any Jesuits in
that Synod? All the world knows, that among those that were deputed to examine
at Rome, there was but one Jesuit. For although Cardinal Lugo, a Jesuit of
Eminent Learning, was also to have been one, yet at the Jansenists petition he
was excluded. So that of Thirteen Examiners there was but one Jesuit; and his
Censures, as you report them, the furthest from taxing the Five Propositions,
that could be expected. Where then did the Jesuits appear in all this
business? What did they do? Whom did they work upon? Certainly, Sir, you would
not have been silent, if you had any thing to produce against them. You that
have laid so many false Calumnies on the Society, would never have dissembled
any true fault, which they had committed in so important a matter.

You tell us two things, which are mere Surmises, not Probations. One is, that
Jansenius had taxed Molina a Jesuit of fifty errors. What then? Do you
imagine Jansenius so great a Divine, that Molina must fly for his censures? I
believe, no Jesuit ever thought so; and in effect it has not proved so, but
quite contrary: Jansenius his Book is censured as Heretical, and Molina
stands in as good repute as ever. But allow, that Jansenius had found five
hundred true faults in Molina; does that prove, that the ^esuites procured a
Bull by false Information: when it cannot be showed, that they ever did any
thing, which might make them suspected of such an intention.

You tell us then for a second Su^mise, That the Jesuits hold this Maxim, as
one of the most Authentic of all their Theology, viz. That they may without
crime calumniate those, by whom they think they are unjustly molested. Letter
18. page 343. I will not answer this false reproach with that uncivil
language, which your Friend page 325. gives Father Annat the Kings Confessor.
Though you deserve it, yet I scorn foul language. But you must give me leave to
tell you, that you are extremely out. Never any Jesuit taught this Maxim as
you set it down: so far are they from holding it one of the most Authentic
Maxims of their Theology. A Jesuit holds it a crime to lie: and truly
should I know any of them, that should think they might calumniate others
falsely, I should esteem them far otherwise then I do You may therefore file
this up with the other false Calnmnies, you laid on the Jesuits; for this
Proposition cannot be found any where but in your Letters: no Jesuit ever
taught it; no, I dare say no Catholic Doctor ever imagined it.

Of like falsity with this are those unjust aspersions, which you in several
places of your Letters cast on the Jesuits; (which I note in the fourth place)
you say page* 351. That the Jesuits raise a disturbance in the Church, whilst
it is evident, that they endeavor to allay the disturbance which you raise.
All they do is to preach and teach doctrine consonant to the Popes Bulls, to
the sense of the Church, to that which Kings and Princes, and all Catholic
Bishops and Doctors allow of, and agree in. To be obedient is not to raise
disturbance; but to be refractory, as you are, is to raise disturbance.
Therefore Pope Alexander justly calls the Jansenists, perturbatores quietis
publicae, perturbatours of the public peace, because they raise disturbance
in the Church.

Again you say, page 303. That the Jesuits daily fasten new Heresies on the
Jansenists. First, the Propositions were called Heretical; then their quality
was urged, then it was translated to word for word; then it was brought into
the heart; then into the hand. To all this I answer, that whereas you attribute
to the Jesuits the fastening of Heresy on their Adversaries, you cannot be
ignorant, that they never did call you Heretics, till the Pope had first
defined it, and the Bishops and whole Church allowed it. Nor has there been
any change in the Church as to this point. What Pope Innocent first defined,
that Pope Alexander did again define: and because you had found new evasions,
he added a fuller declaration. All the change was on your parts. First you said
the Propositions were in Jansenius, but were not Heretical: then you said they
were Heretical, but not in Jansenius. And when the places were showed you, you
tell us, they are not in Jansenius in the same sense which they are condemned
in: so it is you that change; not the Jesuits, who never desired more or
less, then that the Bulls should be received. You are the Proteus's that
change daily your shape to elude the force of the Popes Constitutions: and so
you are for this reason called by Pope Alexander in his Bull, Filii
iniquitatis, Sons of Iniquity.

Finally to end this matter, you say the Jesuits quarrel is at the person of
Jansenius, page 340. not at his errors. But the contrary is manifest: for you
cannot say, that ever they did any thing against his person; and you will not
deny, but they have always been against his errors.

But now I come to your arguments, by which you would prove, that the
Jansenists are not to be called Heretics. I will set them down by way of
Objections, not as they lie in your Letters, but according to the connection of
the substance of them: nor will I observe your words, which abound with
Tautologies and frivolous excursions. But I will put them in some-form, as much
as they will bear; that when they are seen in their full force, the answer may
be the better understood. For every argument I cite but one or two places,
though you repeat them over and over many times, for to make your Letters the
longer. I hope you will no^ be angry, that I keep something of a School-form:
if you be, it is no matter; the Reader, I am sure, will be eased by the Order.

1. Objection.
You object then in several places of your Letters thus. Letter 17. page 316.
It is not matter of Faith, that the Five condemned Propositions are in
Jansenius his Book: Therefore they that defend Jansenius his Book, are not to
be called Heretics. The Antecedent you endeavor to prove by several
Arguments, which make the following objections, which I shall by and by refute.
But now I deny the Consequence; and ^ell you, that your Discourse is Null in
this, that though the Antecedent were true, yet the Consequence does not
follow. For to make the Consequence good you must suppose this Proposition
true, No man can be called an Heretic, unless it be an Article of Faith, that
he be an Heretic: which is extremely false. For as in other crimes, so in
Heresy, a Moral, or Physical evidence is enough to condemn any one of Heresy.
For example, I hear one tell me seriously and often, that he does not believe
the Three Persons of the Trinity; and that though he know the Church believes
a Trinity, yet he does not, nor will not believe it; without any controversy I
may judge this man an Heretic: although it is not matter of Faith, either
that he is a man, or that I hear him speak. Again, suppose I do not hear him
speak, but hear from irrefragable witness of many honest and understanding
men, that he has made this profession deliberately, or that he printeth and
teaches this; without controversy I may judge him an Heretic: and yet it is
not matter of Faith, that these witnesses tell me true. But it is enough to
have either a Physical, or Moral Evidence to judge one an Heretic. And this
(as I said) is common to all crimes, as well as Heresy. The Judge, when he
condemns a man to death for murder, needs not put it in his Creed, that
infallibly this man has committed Murder: nor needs he have Physical
Certainty, but it is enough that he have a Moral Evidence, Secundum allegata
and probata, (as the Law says) according to what is alleged and proved by
witnesses; which notwithstanding may all err. Just so in cur case, though it
were allowed not to be of Faith, that the Five condemned Propositions are in
Jansenius his Book, yet without scruple we may, and in reason ought to condemn
the Book as Heretical; the Church having condemned it for such. This
proceeding is authorized in Scripture, and that fitly to our case. Hereticum
^ominem, says St. Paul ad Titum 3. post unam and alteram correptionem devita,
sciens quia subversus est. Avoid the Heretic, after having once or twice
reprehended him; knowing, that he is subverted. Where the Apostle tells us,
that after a man has been once or twice admonished of his Heresy, if he mend
not, he is to be avoided as one, with whom the Church holds no Communion: and
his refusing to submit after one or two admonitions, St. Paul calls a knowing
that he is subverted in matter of Faith.

Now if this were ever clear in any case, it is in this we handle of Jansenius.
For to say nothing of the several Briefs made by Pope Urban against Jansenius
his Book, the Five Propositions were extracted out of his Book by the Synod of
France, who profess to have used all diligence in examining them. These
Bishops presented the Five Propositions to Pope Innocent. He having made the
matter be examined with all diligence, (the Jansenists themselves being present
at Rome, and acknowledging them to be in Jansenius, and defending them as his
Doctrine) after all condemned them, as appears in his Bull. After him Pope
Alexander now sitting renewed the condemnation, testifying that the
Propositions are in Jansenius, and defining, that they are condemned in his
sense, as they lie in his Book. To these two Censures all the Bishops, and the
whole Catholic Church have subscribed. Here are then two Admonitions and
more, by which it is made known, that the Book of Jansenius contains
Heretical Doctrine: we therefore (unless we will contradict the rule of St.
Paul) must esteem it Heretical, and know that it is sub^erted. We need not
examine, whether it be matter of Faith, that the Five Propositions be in
Jansenius, or no: it is enough, that it has been once and twice and so many
times declared to us, that we cannot but esteem it sufficiently certain; here
being far more, then that which St. Paul requires. So Sir, you see that your
main Argument (which is the sum and substance of all) is so far from proving
what you would inferte, that though your Antecedent were granted, yet the
Consequence were of no force at all.

2. Objection.
It were ridiculous, say you, Letter 18. page 338. to pretend, there should be
any Heretics in the Church for matter of Fact. But whether the Five
Propositions be in Janseniu^ or no, is pure matter of Fact. Therefore it is
ridiculous to pretend, that Jansenius, or those that maintain his Doctrine,
should be Heretics. This Argument is very oft^n inculcated in many places,
though I cite but one. I answer, That understanding, as you do, Propositions
written in any Book to be matter of Fact, it is a perfect madness to assert,
that none can be declared Heretics for matter of Fact. And the Consequences
of that Assertion are so evidently absurd and Heretical, that nothing can be
more. For first it would follow, that never any Proposition in any Book could
be declared Heretical: for still you would say, it is ridiculous, that any man
should be an Heretic for matter of Fact; and still it would be matter of
Fact, whether the Proposition were in the Book, or no: and so no Books could be
condemned in the Church. Secondly it would follow, that no person whatsoever
could be condemned; and that we must not believe, that ever there was any
Heretic in the Church, that can be named; (except those that are mentioned in
Scripture) though St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 9. Oportet haereses esse: and so we
should never be obliged to avoid any one as an Heretic, contrary to what I
alleged in the first Objection out of the Apostle. For still it will be made
matter of Fact, whether Arius for example (and so of the rest) did hold this or
that: For that Arius writ, or said, th^s or that, is matter of Fact. Thirdly it
would follow, that as no Proposition in any Book could be defined by the Church
to be Heretical; so on the contrary no Proposition in any Book could be
defined Orthodox, or to be consonant to the word of God, or the true word of
God. And so we should by your wise argument come to doubt of every Proposition,
even in the Holy Scripture. For still it will be (according to your ridiculous
Maxim) ^matter of Fact whether that Proposition be in Scripture. And certainly
it is as clear matter of Fact, whether the Scripture says, God will have all
men saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth, as it is, whether Jansenius
in his Book says, Christ did not die for all men. And so by this argument we
shall never be obliged to admit any Proposition as Scripture; which is to say
we may deny, by your argument, all Scripture. And further, as to the whole
Bible, it is as much matter of Fact, whether this or that Edition of Scripture
be true Scripture, as whether the Five Propositions be in Jansenius: yet the
Council of Trent has declared, that the Vulgat Edition shall be held
Authentical, and he would be an Heretic, that would not allow it.

3. Objection.
Popes and Counsels Letter 17. page 307.
may ^rre in matter of Fact, as many stories alleged in the Seventeenth and
Eighteenth Letters prove: Therefore (perhaps) they have ^rred here; and so it
cannot be matter of Faith. I answer, That this may all be said as well of
Arius, or Nestorius, or of any Heretic, who is not named in Scripture, as of
Jansenius his Book: yet the Church has said Anathema to many Heretics by
name. And look what crime he should commit, that should say, Arius never was an
Heretic; the self same should that man incur, that should dare to say,
Jansenius his book contains no Heresy. And certainly the Phrase of the
Church has always been to call those Heretics, whom the Pope condemns as
such, whether there be matter of Fact or no contained in the condemnation. So
the Quartodecimani are by St. Augustine H^res. 29. and by the whole Church
called Heretics, because they would not obey the Decrees of the Pope and
Church: and yet the observance of Easter on such a day had more of matter of
Fact in it, then what Pope Innocent, or Pope Alexander declare concerning
Jansenius. And all this has been ever practiced in the Church of God upon
Christ's Authority, who says, Qui Ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi sicut
Ethnicus and Publicanus. He that hears not the Church, (whether it be in
matter of Fact or no) let him be unto you as an Heathen and Publican, that is,
as one quite out of the Church. As for the stories you allege, I shall answer
you, when I have done with your Objections, Now I observe, that these three
main Objections so often inculcated, whereby you would prove, that it is but
matter of Fact, and so not of Faith, but a matter wherein Popes and Counsels
may err, do not prove any thing at all. For notwithstanding the possibility of
error in matter of Fact, which many Catholic Doctors allow, yet it is not
to be presumed, that here is any error, but quite contrary it is to be
supposed certain that there is none, unless we will be teme^arious and
refractory to the Church; we having two Popes, and a Synod of France's
Assertion redoubled, that all diligence was used; and knowing also, that the
matter was very easily cleared, the Question being only, whether the Book,
which they had in their ^ands, had the Propositions or no: finally the whole
world being certified, that all parties were agreed, that the Propositions were
in Jansenius, before ever the condemnation was thought of, as you may see in
several places of this Book; namely in the Sixteenth Letter, and Father Annats
Answer to the Jansenists Complaint. Now then I proceed to a fourth Objection,
by which you would prove, not only that the Popes and Counsels may err, as
hitherto, but that in effect they have erred.

4. Objection.
Many Learned men have read Jansenius all over, and cannot find the Five
Propositions; therefore they are not there: and so the Synod of France, and the
Popes, who condemned those Propositions as Jansenius's erred. I answer first,
that this is a Negative Argument, and so in effect proves nothing against the
Positive Assertion of the Synod of France, which found them there; and the
Definition of the Pope, who defines that they are there. But to answer again,
I ask who were those sixty Persons that read Jansenius, and could not find
those Propositions? Perhaps Doctor St. Beauve was one, whom page 300. you call
the Kings Professor in Sorbon; but you do not tell us, that he was turned out
of his place for Iansenisme: which I have from a good hand. Or were you one,
Sir? If you were, and the rest like you, I do not wonder that you could not
find the Propositions in Jansenius, though they be there. You that could
find, in so many Authors of the Jesuits as you have falsely cited, that
which is not there, might have the trick of not finding in Jansenius that which
is there. It is a great deal easier to read an Author, and not to find that
which is there, then to find there that which is not there; as you, Sir, are
evidently convinced to have done. The Fourteenth Imposture, and the small piece
of Lessius inserted in the end of this Book, makes this evident. You can
find, or say you find, in Lessius that which he has not: and why may you not
more easily not find, or say you cannot find, in Jansenius that which is
clearly there. You therefore, when you tell us that above sixty Let. 18. page
343.
Persons have read Jansenius, and cannot find the Propositions there; ought to
let us know, who those s^xty were; and if they please to appear, they shall be
showed the places.

5. Objection.
The places cannot be cited; Letter 18. page 342.
therefore they be not there: and so still the Church erreth. But pray, Sir,
who is it that you challenge to cite the places? Would you tell his Holiness
that you will not believe him, till he cites the places, that is, will not
believe him till you see it. That is not the duty of a Child to his Father;
nor would any Servant be so ^aucy with his Master. Or would you say this to the
Synod of so many grave and learned Bishops, as in France collected the
Propositions out of Janseni^s; and for the greater satisfaction of all the
world have given it under their hands, that the Propositions are truly in
Jansenius to their knowledge, as you may see in their Subscriptions put in the
beginning of this Book in the History of Jansenisime. Is it to these you would
say they cannot cite the places? That were to be very disrespectfull, and to
suspect them strangely either of gross ignorance, or of extreme malice. But
you tell us, (Letter 18. page 330.) It Is the Jesuits you mean; it is they
cannot cite the places, and yet they call you Heretics. And what then, Sir?
Suppose no Jesuit in the world could cite the places, must the Church
therefore be out? or must the Jesuits not give the Propositions the same name,
which the Popes and universal Church gives them, that is, to call them
Heretical, and condemned in Jansenius his sense, and as they lie in Jansenius?
What if the Jesuits should answer, that since the Popes and Synod of France
thought not sit to cite the places, they judge it a dutiful Deference not to
cite them neither? Or what if no Jesuit has ever looked in Jansenius? What is
that to us Catholics, who dutifully and obediently believe the Church, that
tells us they are in Jansenius? We believe in the Catholic Church, as our
Creed teaches us; and the Jesuits believe in the same Church: and whether
they have read Jansenius or no, we and they must say, the Five condemned
Propositions are in Jansenius. T^uly, Sir, I cannot hold laughing, when I read
page 342. that you define the Jesuits to cite the places of Jansenius, as you
have cited their corrupt Maxims; which is to say, that you desire them to cite
wrong places: for you know, Sir, you never cite right.

But, Sir, that the world may see how impudent you are, and how resolved to
deny Truth, wheresoever you find it, I desire all to take notice, that long
before your Seventeenth or Eighteenth Letter, (where you urge this Argument so
insolently) the places were cited, and publicly allowed to be truly cited,
and that even by your own selves, as is evidently convinced in Father Annats
Answer to the Iansenists Complaint, where you have the Iansenists own
confession, and the So^bonists citing the places; and besides Father Annat has
also cited the places: All that can be r^plied is, that the Letter 17. page 202.
page is not cited; whichis a mere childish reply, when the Book and Chap^^r is
cited. After all this, if you will needs make a clamor, you do but show that
Heretical Spirit, which you would so fain hide: for never any Catholic used
such extraordinary obstinacy, as this is, which mak^th you resolved rather to
deny that you have eyes to see, that which all the world, that will look in the
B^ok, does see, then to submit to the Authority of the Church: which
considered, you dese^ve not at all to be showed the places. Yet because here in
our Country your asseverations may do hurt, not to Catholics, (for they know
whom they are to believe; they know the respect they owe to the Church) but to
Protestants, who may take your bold Assertions for Truths, and so think, upon
your credit, that the Pope, the Synod of France, and the Catholic Church ar^
all in an error; to take away this occasion of scandal I will set down the
places, and the page too, as you desire, where the Propositions are fully
taught in Jansenius. Though I intend no^ this for to add any Authority to the
Popes Bulls, or to the Synod of France's assertion; for what can it add to
light a candle at noonday? Nor would I have any man think, that if I have not
cited the places to his gust, therefore they are not in Jansenius. No, any man
may dispute against my opinion^; none against the Church. Yet I am persuaded
the places are so clear, that no man having once read them, can make any doubt,
but that the Propositions are truly taken out of Jansenius, and condemned in
his sense; which is that that Pope Alexander says, Ex libro Cornelii Jansenii
excerptas, ac in sensu ab ^odem ^nten^o damna^as fuisse definimus and
declaramus. We define and declare that (the Five Propositions) are gathered out
of the Book of Cornelius Iansenius; and that they are condemned in the sens^
int^nded by him.

And because both the Bull, and the Book of Jansenius, are written in Latin,
and cannot be examined but by those that understand Latin, I shall content my
self to cite them in their own language. Those, who understand not Latin,
may be satisfied with the citations in English already set down in Father
Annats Discourse, before the Answer to the Sixteenth Letter. In citing the page
and column of Jansenius his Book, I use the Impression of Paris, of the year
1641.

Prima Propositio condemnata.
Aliqua Dei Praecepta hominibus justis, volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires, sunt impossibilia: Deest quoque illis gratia, qua
fiunt possibilia.

Jansenius Tom. 3. lib. de Gratia Christi Salvatoris, cap. 13. page 135. columna
prima prope initium, post soluta argumenta in contrarium, sic a^t.

Ex ^ac indubi^^ a doctri^ a quaedam non parvi momenti ad hanc rem spectantia
inferuntur and clarescunt. Primum quidem, esse quaedam homini p^aecepta,
secundum sta^um and vires in quibus constitutus est, impossibilia.

Secundum, non adesse semper gratiam qua possimus, hoc est, qua eadem praecepta
implere sufficiamus.

Tertium, hanc impotentiam reperiri non solum in ex^oecatis, and obduratis, and
infidelibus, (de quibus nunquam Augustinus vel Ecclesia, sed solum Scholastici
nonnulli ex humanis rationibus, dubitarunt) sed etiam in fidelibus and justis,
qui and fidem Christi and charitatem Justitiae susceperunt.

Quartum, hanc impossibilitatem fidelibus accidere, non tantum quando nolunt
praecepta facere, sed etiam quando volunt.

Haec Jansenius loco citato. Postquam autem multis Augustini sententiis (licet
perperam inte^^ectis) doctrinam suam fus^ stabilisset, tum demum page 138.
colum. 2. lit. C. sic concludit.

Haec igitur omnia plenissime demonstrant, nihil esse in Sancti Augustini
Doctrina (ita scilicet semper Augustini tribuit, quod ipse sentit) certius and
fundatius, quam esse praecepta quaedam, quae hominibus, non tantum infidelibus,
excaecatis, and obduratis, sed fidelibus quoque and justis, volentibus,
conantibus secundum praesentes quas habent vires, sunt impossibilia: Deesse
quoque gratiam, qua fiunt possibilia. Ho^ enim ^x Sancti Petri exemplo aliisque
multis manifestum est.

Secunda Propositio condemnata.
Interiori Gratiae, in statu naturae lapsae, nunquam resistitur.

Jansenius Tom. 1. libr. 5. de Haeresi Pelagiana cap. 17. page 120. col. 2.
lit. E. de Gratia Christi post Adae lapsum da^a, quam vocat initio capitis 17.
Christianum Adjutorium, and saepe simpliciter Adjutorium vocat, sic loquitur.

Non est ergo Adjutorium ullum, quod solum possibilitatem (id est potentiam)
volendi atque agendi adjuvat, ut eo pro solo nutu hominis concurrente
voluntatem obediendi sibi sumat homo vel tribuat, sed quod ipsam voluntatem
a^que actionem invictissime dat and facit.

Tom. 3. lib. 2. de Gratia Christi Salvatoris, cap. 4. page 41. columna 2. lit.
A.

Adjutorium vero infirmae captivaeque voluntatis vult esse tale, (scilicet
Augustinus vult, cui Jansenius suam sententiam semper tribuit) quo si^t ut
vesit; hoc est, esse hujusmodi, ut simul ac da^ur, ipsum velle voluntati detur;
and si non detur, nunquam velit: quia fine illo nunc propter infirmitatem velle
non possunt.

Et eodem Tom. ac libr. cap. 24. page 82 col. 2. lit. E.

Gratiam Dei Augustinus ita Vict^icem statuit, ut non raro dicat, hominem
operanti Deo per Gratiam non posse resistere: sed e contrario Deum, non
quicquid voluntatem facturam praevidet, sive absolu^e, sive conditionate, sed
quicquid omnino voluerit, in voluntate operari.

Et capite 25. reflectens ad ea, quae proxime citato capite 24. dixerat, sic
incipit.

Haec itaque est vera ratio and radix, cur nulla omnino medicinalis Christi
gratia effectu suo careat, sed omnis ^fficiat, ut voluntas velit and aliquid
operetur. Quod quamvis gratiae istius congruae Auctoribus (intelligit Theologos
Scholasticos, praecipue Societatis Jesu) permi^um videatur, veritas tamen est
in Scripturis Sacris and Augustini scriptis explorata.

Et paulo post page 83. colum. 1. lit. A sic habet.

Apud Augustinum gratia and opus bonum ita reciprocantur, ut quemadmodum ex
great a data mox effectum operis consecu^um infer solet, ita vice versa ex
defectu operis gratiam non esse datam.

Porro Titulus istius capitis 25. est talis.

Decimo ejus (gratiae scil.) efficacissima natura declaratur ex eo, quod nulla
prorsus ^ff^ctu caret, sed eum in omnibus, quibus datur, infallibiliter
operatur.

Qui ergo dicit de interiori gratia post lapsum data, gratiam ipsam voluntatem
and actionem invictissime dare and facere; Gratiam ipsum velle voluntati dare;
Hominem operanti Deo per gratiam non posse resist^re; nullam omnino medicinalem
Christi gratiam effectu suo carere, sed omnem efficere, ut voluntas velit and
operetur; ita ut ex defectu operis possit inferri defectus gratiae; quae
nunquam effectu caret, sed in omnibus, quibus datur infallibiliter operatur:
Qui ^aec, (inquam) dicit, nonne manifest docet totum, quod hac propositione
asseritur, viz. Interiori Gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur?
Ex his ergo locis convincitur, hanc secundam Propositionem verissime dici in
Bulla Alexandri Septimi ex Cornelii Jansenii libro excerptam esse, and in ejus
sensu damnatam. Innumeri tamen loci alii sunt, quibus id ipsum docetur: quibus
citandis supersedeo.

Tertia Propositio condemnata.
Ad merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate; sed sufficit libertas a Coactione.

Jansenius Tomo tertio toto libro sexto, qui est de Libero Arbitrto, fere nihil
aliud agit, quam ut probet, nullam aliam necessitatem repugnare libertati ad
merendum and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae, praeter necessitatem
coactionis: speciatim tamen haec habet. Capite Sexto distinguit ex Augustini
doctrina duplicem necessitatem. Vnam vocat in ipso Titulo necessitatem
coactionis; alteram necessitatem simplicem, seu voluntariam. Voluntaria autem
necessitas est illa, juxta Jansenium, cum qua voluntas operatur licet
necessario. Coacta illa, quae etiam repugnantibus, invitis, and nolentibus
nobis sit; ut mors, nutritio per cibos sumptos, and similia. De his vero page
268. col. 2. lit. D. sic ait.

Doctrina igitur Augustini est, necessitatem illam primam (scil. coactionis)
capitali^er repugnare voluntati; non autem illam necessitatem, quae simul est
voluntaria; qua scil. necesse est aliquid fieri, non repugnance sed
immutabiliter volente voluntate. Mira videbitur Scholasticis ista doctrina; and
tam^n in Augustini principiis est indubitata.

Et eodem capite page 269. col. 1. lit. D.

Ha^ autem submota necessitate (cogente voluntatem) nullam aliam timet
libertati voluntatis; quantumvis dicatur esse necessarium ut velimus: ubi de
necessitate determinationis ad unum cum imprimis loqui ex multis manifestissime
liquet.

Et page 270. colum. 1. lit. B.

Nunc veto in Augustini sensu adstruendo p^rgamus. Nam eadem illa doctrina,
Quod sola necessitas coactionis adimat libertatem, non necessitas illa simplex
and voluntaria, ex aliis ejus locis non difficile demonstrari potest.

Et page 309. capite 38. quod est ultimum libri Sexti, col. 1. lit. C. de
Antiquorum sensu sic loquitur.

Nihil omnino de necessitate Actus voluntarii curaverun^; sed non obstante
immutabili necessitate, omnem omnino rationalem voluntatem (hoc est voluntatis
motum) and liberam, and electivam sui objecti posue^unt, sola exclusa
violentiae coactionisque necessitate.

Et prope finem paginae 309.

Unanimiter const^n^^ssimeque docent, voluntatem hoc ipso, quo rationalis est,
esse liberam. -- Nullam Immutabilitatis, Inevitabilitatis, vel quocunque voces
nomine, sed solam coactionis necessitatem ei repugnare.

Et libro octavo de Gratia Christi Salvatoris, page 371. cap. 9. colum. 2. lit.
D.

Juxta principia ^orum (Patrum) nulla Gratiae essicacia, nulla necessitas
actibus voluntatis liberis formidanda est, sed sola vis coactionis, and
necessitas violentiae.

Quarta Propositio condemnata.
Semipelagiani admittebant Gratiae interioris necessitatem ad singulos Actus,
etiam ad initium Fidei: Et in hoc erant Haeretici, quod vellent eam Gratiam
talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas resistere and obtemperare.

Du^s parts habet haec Propositio. In prima asseritur Jansenium docere,
Semipelagianos, seu Massilienses, admisisse Gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singulos actus, ctiam ad initium Fid^i. -- Hanc partem docet Jansenius Tom. 1.
libr. 8. cap. 1. page 188. columna 1. lit. D. ubi de Scmipelagianis sic habet.

Sola Christi Gratia and Baptismo sentiunt h^minem a perditione pos^e liberari.

Et sequente.

Fatentur hanc Dei Gratiam, n^n solum propter peccati remissionem, quae in
Baptismo datur, esse necessariam, sed imprimis ut ad incipiendum and
perficiendum quodcunque opus bonum hominis lapsi insirmitas adjuvetur.

Et Capite 3. ejusdem libri page 189. col. 2. lit. C.

Cum igitur duplices Gratiae sint, hoc est, duplicia divinae largitatis
auxilia, remota and proxima, quibus homo ad propositi divini scopum, salutem
ae^ernam, provehatur, neutra ^psi cuiquam ex judicio divino sub^rahi volunt,
^ed omnibus esse promiscue praeparata. Remota voco, quae g^at^a qua ^am
propinquiore and actuali indigent, ut ad sa^ut^m homini prosint, ut ^ncarnatio,
in ^^nce Redemptio, Baptismus, and hujusmodi. Proxima, ipsas Gratias internas,
quas dicimus actuales, quae in ipsum voluntatis modum insluunt.

Secunda pars Propositionis condemnatae est, In hoe erant Haere^^ci, quod
vellent eam Gratiam talem esse, cu^ posset human^ voluntas resistere, vel
obtemperare. Hanc autem doce^ in fine capitis citati; ubi haec verba habet.

Ex quibus manifestum est, omnibus omnino S^m^p^lagianis duo ista communia
fuisse dogmata, and v^lu^i Cardines erroris: Quod Deus general^ quodam
proposito, quantum in se est, vellet omnes omnino homines salvos fieri; and
consequen^ e^ in omnes omnino gratiam suam indi^^erenti quadam bonitate
profunderet, qua possent, si ve^lent, ad salutem salutisque remedia omnib^s
proposita pervenire.

Et capite sexto page 195. col. 2. lit. C.

In h^^ e^go proprie Massiliensium error situs est, q^o^ aliquid p^maevae
libertatis reliquum putant; quo, ^icut Adam, si voluisse^, poterat
persevetanter operari bonum; it a lapsus homo saltem credere posset, si v^llet:
Neuter tamen ^ine inte^io^ is g^atiae adjutorio, cujus usus, vel abusus,
relictus e^^et in utriusque a^bitrio and potest^^e.

Rursum Tom. 3. lib. 3. de Gratia Christi Salvatoris, cap. 1. page 103. col. 2.
lit. E. postquam ex aliis capitibus rejecerat omnem gratiam sufficientem, se^
omnem il^am, cum qua posset homo operari, si vellet, tum eandem ex hoc etiam
capite his verbis rejicit.

Quia est Adjutorium, quod Massilienses ad credendum necessarium es^e, a^que
ita sufficere statuebant, ut cum co credere posset homo, si v^llet. Qui tamen
tanquam Haeretici proscripti sunt, non aliam ob causam, nisi quia tale auxilium
homini sufficere putarent.

Qu^nta Propositio condemnata.
Semipelagianum est dicere, Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus mortuum esse,
aut Sanguinem suum fudisse.

Quod Semipelagianis tribuat ^ans^^ius (...) assertionem, Christus pro omnibus
mortuus est, seu Christus est omnium Redemptor, patet ex Libro Tertio de Gratia
Christi Salvatoris, Capite 20. Quod sic in^ipit.

Sed aliud Argumentum pro G^a^^a sufficienti omnium proferri solet, quod
Christus est Redemptor omnium, juxta illud 1. ad Tim. ^. Qui dedit semetipsum
redemptionem pro omnibus. -- Et paulo post -- Respondetur, and hoc Argumentum
ad nause am usque a Pelagiani^, p^aeser^^mque Massiliensibus, incu^catum sui^;
ut mirum sit recentiores tanto studio trita Haereticorum ar^a colligere, and
obsoleta recudere.

Et paulo post rursum de i^sdem Mas^liensibus, lit. D. Haec habet.

Tanquam firm^ssimam Basim errori suo collocaverunt illa Scripturae loca,
quibu^ Deus dicitur omnes velle Salvos sieri, atque esse Redemptor omnium.

Jam vero suam sententiam Jansenius eodem capite, page 164. col. 1. lit. A. sic
exprimit.

Nec enim juxta doctrinam Antiquorum, pro omnibus omnino Christus passus, aut
mortuus est; aut pro omnibus omnin^ tam generali^er sanguinem suum fudit: Cum
hoc potius, tanquam errorem a fide Catholica abhorrentem, ^oceant esse
re^pu^ndum. Omnibu^ vero illis, pro quibus sanguinem suum fudit, and quatenus
pro ^s fudit, e^iam Sufficiens Auxilium donat, quo non solum possint, sed
reipsa veli^t and faciant id qu^d ^b ii^ volendum and faciendum esse decrevi^.
Nam per illa occultissime justa, and justissime occu^ta con^^^i^ sua, quibusdam
^^min^b^s dare prae^estinavit Fidem, Charitatem, and in ^a Perseverantiam usque
in finem: (q^os absolu^e p^aedestinatos, e^^ctos, and Salvandos dicimus) aliis
Charitat^m fine Perseverantia; aliis Fidem fine Charitate. Pro primi generis
hominibus, tanquam veris ovibus suis, vero populo suo, tanqu^m absolute
salvando, semetipsum dedit ac tradidit; pro istorum peccatis omnibus omnino
delendis, and aeterna oblivion^ sepeliendis Propitiatio est; pro istis in
aeternum vivisicandis mortuus es^; pro istis ab omni malo liberandis rogav^t
Patrem suum, non pro cae^eris, qui a Fide and Charitate desicientes in
iniquitate moriuntur: Pro his enim in tantum mor^uus est, in tantum rogavit
Patrem, in quantum temporalibus quibu^dam gratiae ^ffectibus exornandi sunt.

Et ut alia innumera loca omittam, in fine hujus Capitis 20. quod and ultimum
est, and co^elusio libri. page 165. col. 2. lit. E. sic loquitur.

Nullo modo principiis ejus (Augustini) consentaneum est, ut Christus Dominus,
vel pro infidelium in infidelitate morientium, vel pro justorum non
perseverantium ae^erra salute mor^uus esse, sanguinem fudisse, semetipsum
redempti^nem dedisle, Patrem orasse se^iatur. S^ivit enim, quo quisque ab
aeterno praedestinatus e^at. Scivit ho^ decre^um, neque ullius pretii oblatione
mutandum esse; nec se^psum velle muta^e. Ex quo factum est, ut juxta
Sanctissimum Doctorem, non magis Patrem pro aeterna liberatione ipsorum, quam
pro Diaboli deprecatus fuerit.

And now, Sir, I hope you will not say, that the places cannot be cited; since
there is nothing said in any of the Five condemned Propositions, which is not
in the Quotations I have here brought. And besides these there are innumerable
other places, wherein Jansenius ab^seth the Au^ho^ity of St. Augustine, and
under his name delivers the same Heresies. For you kn^w, Sir, that it is
Jansenius his Mode, to make St. Augustine say, what he would have thought:
wherein he has been very inj^rious to that Learned Doctor and ^i^ht of the
Church; whom after so many ^g^^ he has perverted, to make him become a
D^^ender of Heresy. Bu^ I go on to your other Objections.

The sixth Objection.
Letter 17. page 305.
Jansenius in these Five Propositions teaches nothing, but what the Tomists
and Dominicans teach; But the Tomists are not Heretics; Therefore the
Propositions in Jansenius are not Heretical. I answer, This is one of those
means, by which you endeavor to evade the force of the Popes Definitions;
which Pope Alexander in his Bull points at, when he tel^eth us, that ^^rtaine
perturbatours of the public Tranqui^lity endeavor by subtle interpretations
to clude the sorce of Pope Innocents Constitution. For here you would either
bring the Dominicans Doctrine under the same censure of Heresy, by telling us,
they teach the same with Jansenius; or else (...) your selves under their
shadow, by telling us, the Dominicans are good Catholics: and therefore you,
who teach nothing but what they teach, are also good Cathosiques. But I
suppose, the Dominicans will no^ be much troubled at you and Jansenius for
this. For since Jansenius says, (though falsely) that St. Augustine t^acheth
these Propositions, it is not to be wondered, that he abuses the Dominicans as
much, as he does so great a Doctor of the Church; and the other S^ints and
Fathers, of whom he either tells us, that they were in an err^^r, or else
that they taught his opinions. Nor was Jansenius the first that used this way
of dis^^u^^e. The C^^vinist^ carried the Lanthorn before him; who attribute to
S^. Augustine all their Errors in this matter; and cite the Dominicans for
their opinions, as may be seen particularly in Prideaux his D^cem Lectiones; in
which he uses the same Arguments, which Jansenius afterward used, so fully,
that I believe there is scarce an Argument, which Jansenius has in all his
Tomes to prove any of the Five Propositions, or to confute the contrary
Arguments, which may not be found in Prid^aux. In particular he groundeth his
opinion upon St. Augustine, and proves it by the Tomists, and namely by
Alvarez, as may be seen in his Second and Fourth Lections, and in all the first
six generally: where he often (as Jansenius also does) attributes to the
Jesuits Semipelagianisme, and would make the Dominicans defenders of rigid
Calvinisme.

To the Argument then I answer, that the Major is false. The Tomists Doctrine
is very different from Jansenius his Doctrine, as it is from Calvin's. I could
easily prove this: But the Tomists, as they have virtue enough to k^ep
themselves within the Church, so they have learning enough to defend their own
Doctrine. In the mean time it is enough to say, that never any Tomist advanced
the Five Propositions of Jansenius, or any of them, in his sense; and that
Jansenius himself impugneth the Tomists. And as to the Argument of this
Objection, it is a great deal better to put it thus. The Tomists Doctrine is
Catholic, as all allow: But the Five Propositions are not Catholic, as the
Church believes: Therefore the Tomists do not teach the same with Jansenius
his five Propositions.

This discourse you snarle at; yet it is a great deal better then yours. For
your discourse erreth in the first Principle of all Discourse; which is to
argue a notioribus ad minus nota, from the things that are more known, to those
that are less known. Whereas you do quite contrary; and out of the less known
and less certain you would overthrow the more known and more certain, You
would overthrow the plain sense of the Bull by the Dominicans opinion. Now that
the Dominicans opinion is as you say, is a thing less known and less certain,
then the Definition of the Bull; for two Reasons. First, because the Tomists or
Dominicans (who can give the best account of their own Doctrine) absolutely
deny, that they hold as you say, that is, with Jansenius; and tell us, that you
and the Calvinists falsely impose on them that which they never taught.
Secondly, because that if really the Dominicans (which is not so) should teach
the Five Propositions, as Jansenius does, it is certain and known to all
Catholics, that more credit is to be given to the Definitions of the Pope,
then to any Sentiments of any particular School, either Jesuits, or Dominicans,
or Scotists, as every one of them will, and do allow: And so, if it were
granted, that the Dominicans held the Five Propositions, yet that were a less
certainty, then what the Popes Definition gives. So that, to repeat the
Syllogism once more, we may and must, justly and reasonably, i^vert your
Syllogism, and say, The Doctrine of the Dominicans, or Tomists, is Catholiq^^:
But the Propositions of Jansenius are no^ Catholic: Therefore the Dominicans
do not teach the Propositions of Jansenius.

The Seventh Objection.
Father Annat says, That Jansenius is justly condemned, because he holds
Calvin's way concerning Efficacious Grace: But he does not hold Calvin's way, as
is proved by many Sentences, wherein he condemns Calvin: Therefore Jansenius
is not justly condemned. This is another of your subtle evasions, to elude the
Bull. To this I answer, That I am of Father Annats opinion, that there is no
difference between Jansenius and Calvin, as I conceive it may easily be proved.
But whether Father Annat and I judge right or no, it imports not. For though
it were proved, That Jansenius and Calvin held the Doctrine of Efficacious
Grace in a very different manner, yet it does not follow, that the Pope has
not justly condemned Jansenius. All that follows is, That Father Annat and I
are out in our opinion; which will not prejudice the Church at all. The
Definitions of the Bull are clear, and cannot be everted by my opinion, or
Father Annats, or any bodies; they containing a greater certainty* then any
private man's, or any particular Schools Opinion, as I said to the Sixth
Objection. And Calvin is condemned on another account, and was so, long before
Jansenius was.

Now as to your defense, wherein you heap up Sentences of Jansenius against
Calvin, I must tell you first, That you, that quarrel so much at others for
not citing the Page of Jansenius, ought to have cited the page; especially you
being guilty of perpetual forgery and falsification in your Citations.
Secondly allowing (which is not granted) that the places are very truly cited,
what follows? Only this, that Jansenius teaches Contradictions. For in the
places I have cited, he clearly teaches all that is in the Five Propositions;
and in the places that you ^ite he teaches the contrary: so the conclusion
must be, that he teaches both against the Church and against himself, and
contradicts both the principles of Faith, and his own Doctrine to boo^. Which
I have no difficulty to grant. And this Answer satisfies also those things,
which you bring to clear your self from Jansenisme; by showing, that you have
said many things contrary to the Five condemned Propositions: For though that
be true, yet it is also true, that you maintain Jansenius, and say, the Five
Propositions are not Heretical in his sense, which is enough to make you
deserve the name of Jansenist.

The Eighth Objection.
The Commissary of the Holy Office, one of the chiefest Examiners, Letter 18.
page 342.
says, the Five Propositions could not be censured in the sense of any Author:
Therefore they are not condemned in the sense of Jansenius.

I answer first, that this Objection (were all true that is assumed) is
extremely frivolous. For what? Two Popes say in their Bulls, that the
Propositions are taken out of Jansenius, and condemned in his sense; and one of
the Thirteen Examiners (as you make him to speak) thought, before the Bull was
out, that the Five Propositions could not be censured in Jansenius his sense,
or in the sense of any other Author, because he conceived them to be presented
to the Examiners not as the Propositions of any Author. Who are we to believe?
The two Popes that have effectively censured the Propositions in Jansenius? Or
one Examiner, who if ever he thought as you relate, has now doubtless changed
his Opinion? Every Child will tell you, that one Examiners opinion cannot
prevail against the Popes Definition, in what matter soever, much less in
this. Secondly I answer, that this citation (for you are always unfortunate in
your citations) is taken out of a condemned Apocryphal Paper, which has no
credit, and ought not to be cited. This I say upon the best Authority on earth,
that is, his Holiness's Decree of the Sixth of September 1657. where he says,
Because there are spread abroad some Papers printed in the year 1657. with this
Title. Tredecim Theologo^um ad examinandas Quinque Propositiones ab Innocentio
X. selectorum suffragia, seu (ut apellant) vota, summo Ponti^ici scripto
tradi^a, his Holiness does by this present Decree forbid them, and does
declare and decree that no credit is to be given to them, as being Apocryphal,
and that they ought not to be cited by any man. So you see how little credit
your relation has; and you may gu^sse, how little wit he has, that turned your
Letters into Latin, who would have the Reader, upon his bare authority, to
believe, that those papers are Authentical, though the Pope decre^ the
contrary.

The Ninth Objection.
There are three principles of Letter 18. page 3^7.
Knowledge, Faith, Reason, and Sense; each have their several objects, of
which they are to be Judges; and each object is to be reduced to its own
principle as true judge; matters supernatural to Faith; matters of Discourse
to Reason; and matters of Fact to Sense. But whether the Propositions ^e in
Jansenius is matter of Fact: Therefore the Senses are to be judges of it. I
answer, That if you will call this matter of Fact, and will have the eyes
Judges whether the Propositions be in Jansenius, read the places which I have
quoted, and there you will find the Propositions. But as to your whole
discourse of this Ninth Objection, I must tell you, it is a very ridiculous and
erroneous discourse. What, Sir; must your understanding censure all the objects
of Reason, so that you must not submit to any authority, either Humane or
Divine? Absurd! Must your Senses be judges of all the objects, which contain
matter of Fact; so that neither Reason, nor Revelation, nor the Word of God,
can contradict it? Foolish. My eyes report, that a stick put half in the water
is br^k^n, or bent at the Super^icies of the water: may not Reason correct this
error of my senses? Faith teaches many things, that Reason cannot reach unto,
though the object be not supernatural; must not Reason yield to Faith, because
the matter is an object within the extent of Reason? For example to have a soul
is a thing (to use your own words, page 347. li^. 6, 7.) natural and
intelligible, of all which things you say reason is to be judge. Now suppose
some one could not judge by any reason that occurreth to him, that he has a
soul; must that man never believe that men have souls? Again to judge of the
presence of a Body is an object of Sense: I say there is fire, because I either
see it, or feel it. I say there is a man that speaks, because I hear him. I say
this is bread, because I taste it. And yet, Sir, how far our Senses are out
sometimes, is evident in the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar; where all
Catholics believe, (as you profess you do also) that there is no Bread after
the Consecration, though the Sight, the Taste, the Feeling, carry us to judge
that there is Bread, as well after as before Consecration.

Truly, Sir, when I reflect upon your bringing this Argument, to prove that
which you often say, (as Let. 17. page 298, and Let. 18. page 351. and in many
other places) That there are no Heretics in the Church, and that the Church
is without Heresy, I cannot but take great compassion of your blindness. I
see you take for an argumenent that there is no Heresy, that very thing, which
is the original Source and Cause of all Heresy. You would have every ones
reason judge of all the objects of reason; and sense of all the objects of
sense: and so you sweep away all submission, all respect to authority, all
captivating the understanding in obedience to Faith: and by this very means you
put an answer into every Heretics mouth to maintain his perversity with. If
the Antitrinitarians deny the Blessed Trinity, they tell you, it is against
reason. If the Anabaptist refuse to baptize his Child, he tells you, it is
against reason. If the Quaker refuse a civil respect (as to put off his hat)
to any body, he tells you, it is against reason. If the Protestant refuse to
believe the real Presence, he tells you, it is against reason, and his sense
dictates to him the contrary. Now if you urge Scripture against these men, they
will answer with your own words, in which you abuse the authority of St. Thomas
and St. Augustine, page 347. in fine, When the Scripture presents us with some
passage, whereof the literal sense is contrary to what the senses and reason
judge of it with certainty, we must not endeavor to weaken the testimony of
these (that is of our senses and reason) to submit them to that apparent sense
of Scripture: but we must interpret Scripture, and find out some other sense
thereof. And if you urge the Authority of the Church, they will all find some
matter of Fact to elude the Popes Bulls, and the Decrees of Counsels, and it
will be impossible to find any Decree of Council, or Pope, which ha^h not as
much of matter of Fact, as the condemnation of Jansenius has; since the very
Decrees of Counsels and Popes may be called in question (...) ^his account,
that it is matter of Fact, whether the Decree be truly the Decree of the
Council, or Popes, or no. Thus do you put a weapon into every mad man's hand;
and if any man will fancy himself to have certain reason to say, as James
Naylour did, that ^he has the Spirit of Christ, or is a second Christ, you
will maintain, that such a man is not to submit his certain reason to any body.
And so instead of making it good, That there are no H^retiques in the Church,
you maintain the ground of all Heresy, and take away the Source of all Unity
in Faith; which is submission to the Church.

The Tenth Objection.
Those of Port-Royall, that is the Jansenists, condemn the Propositions, which
the Pope condemns; they maintain nothing against him, or the Church.
Therefore they are not Heretics.

This is the main subject of the little Letter, which is put between the
Seventeenth and Eighteenth, and in a manner all the reason of it; for all is a
deducing of this in the example of the Arians, Nestorians, Eu^yc^ians,
Monotheli^es, Lutherans, Calvinists, etc. who were therefore condemned, because
they held Propositions which the Church condemned, and confessed they held
them; which the Jansenists deny. But I answer, That the Jansenists do not
condemn the Propositions, which the Pope condemns, nor maintain what he
maintains. Pope Alexander in his Bull says, We define and declare, that the
Five Propositions are taken out of Jansenius his Book, and condemned in the
sense intended by Jansenius; and we do again condemn them as such; and we
condemn the Book of Jansenius. The Jansenists, or those of Port-Royall, say,
the Five Propositions are not in Jansenius, nor condemned in Jansenius his
Sense; that the Book of Jansenius is not condemned, and coutaineth not Heresy.
What can be more opposite to the Popes Definition?

Now what you reply, That this is not matter of Faith, to know whether the
Propositions be Jansenius's, or no, I have already answered you in the Second
and Third Objection. Again for what you say, page 321. That if any one that
has eyes to read, has not met with the Propositions in Jansenius, he may
safely say I have not read them there, and shall not for that be called an
Heretic. I answer, That he may say so without Heresy; for perhaps he
understood not, or ma^ke not what he read, or read not all Jansenius: and
merely to say, I have not found the Propositions in Jansenius, is not to be an
Heretic. But to say they are not there, Page 300.
(as you do) and to maintain, That the Doctrine of the Book is good and
wholesome Doctrine, and not condemned, that is to be a Jansenist, and to defend
Heretical Propositions. The sequel will show the Truth of what I say, and
declare the aim of these turbulent spirits. They do not say, we have read the
Book, and cannot find the Propositions there, for to make the world believe
that they are Dunces, or cannot understand La^ne; for it were not for their
purpose to be thought simple fools: But they say so, That the world upon their
credit may judge that the Five Propositions are not there; or (which is
equivalent) that the Doctrine which is there, is good Doctrine, and not
condemnend. And so by saying this, they do really approve the Doctrine and
Authority of the Book, and condemn the Church for falsely censuring a good
Book. Nor is this to guess at their intentions, as the Author of the
Provincial Letters says (Let. 17. page 301.) For it is evident, that no man
would tell us, as he does, That above Sixty Persons, all Doctors, have read
the Book, and cannot find the Five Propositions there, for any other reason
then to make the world think that they are not there, and that there is nothing
condemned in his Book.

Now as he could not be esteemed a Christian as to his belief, who having the
repute of a Doctor should say, I have read over all the Alcoran, and find
nothing in it against reason, and which may not well be believed: so he cannot
be esteemed a Catholic, who after the Authority of the Popes Bull, the Synod
of France, and the whole Church, should say, I have read over all Jansenius his
Book, and find no Heretical Propositions there. Certainly it were no rash
judgment, to think that man no Roman Catholic, who should say, I have read
all Luthers Works, and all Calvin's too and find not any thing there, which is
not Orthodox; since the Roman Church has condemned those Books. And so also
it cannot be deemed a rash judgment to think him no Catholic, who says as
much of Jansenius. For the Doctrine of the five Propositions is as plainly laid
down in Jansenius, as anything contrary to the Catholic Faith is in Luther or
Calvin, or any Heretic.

And this, Sir, as it confuteth your reason, so I hope 'twill take away the
wonder, you express so largely in the beginning of your Letter, at seeing those
of Port Royal called Heretics; who, as you say, admit the Propositions
condemned in the Bull. For if they allow the Bull, and condemn the five
Propositions condemned in the Bull, they also maintain Jansenius, and defend
the five Propositions in his Book; which they will have to be all good and
Catholic. And in so doing they show themselves to be manifest Heretics, by
really maintaining that which they verbally deny; or if you will have it in
other terms, by granting the five Propositions to be Heretical in the Bull, and
defending them to be Catholic in Jansenius, though they be the same in both
places, as is evident to all that can read, by confronting the places: and to
all that cannot read, by the public Authority of the Church. Whereas on the
contrary no man denies the Propositions to be in Jansenius, that deserves any
credit. For that the Author of the Provincial Letters tells us, there are
above sixty Doctors, who have read Jansenius and find them not there,
signifies nothing: that Author being a man that dares not show his face; a
man convinced of notorious Impostures and falsifications; a man that advances
so many things against reason, that he seems to have lost his wits, or
drowned them in passion. And yet this very man, who brings this to excuse
himself from Heresy, dares not name one of those Sixty Persons; which makes
all men justly suspect, either that there are no such persons to be found, or
else that they are not responsible men, since they dare not own, what he
assures, that they say. So that methinks this Argument of Sixty Persons which
he brings, is just as if a man convinced before a Judge, by a number of
sufficient legal Witnesses, of stealing a Horse, should answer for himself,
that above sixty persons, whereof he will produce never a one, could swear,
that they never knew him to be a Thief, though they have known him all his life
time: which would never save that man from the Gallows.

And so, Sir, all the Arguments, by which you in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth
Letter, and your Friend in the Little Letter, which lies between these two,
endeavor to prove, that the Jansenists ought not to be called Heretics, are
fully confuted: and it is made clear, that never a reason you allege, excuses
the Jansenists, not only from Schism, (which your friend page 321. allows
that they deserve) but from the title of Heretic: since they maintain in
Jansenius those Propositions, which the Pope and the unversall Church tell us,
are Heretical in Jansenius.

Now as I promised, I will say a word or two to your Stories; whereby you would
prove, that Popes and Councels may err in matter of Fact. The first thing then
that I say to all your Stories and passages of Fathers and Divines, by which
you would prove, that Popes and Councels may err, is, that they need no
Answers at all. This is evident, because they are all brought to prove that
which is not in question betwixt you and your Adversaries. It is granted to
you, that a Catholic may hold, that a Pope or Council may err in matter of
Fact; for example, that a Pope may upon a false Information esteem a man
unjust, Simoniacall, or Heretical, who is not so. It was therefore to no
purpose for you to prove this with many Stories and Allegations; for it made
nothing to your business. But, Sir, that which you were to have proved was,
that they (the Popes and Synod) have erred in this matter of condemning
Jansenius. But this is so impossible to do, that you never go about it, save
only by saying, that the Jesuits procured the Bull: which how fond a toy it
is, I showed in the beginning of this Letter, where I answered what you say
against the Jesuits. This is the first thing I had to say concerning your
Stories.

The second thing is, that your alleging these stories, as you do, makes me
much suspect that which you would so sain hide; that is, that you are an
Heretic. What dutiful subject would rip up the faults, or disgraces, of his
Sovereigns predecessors, when he were not forced upon it? or what Catholic
would make it his business, to divulge the errors committed by Bishops and
Popes, when it made nothing to the aim of his discourse? Constantine is
commended for saying, that if he saw a Priest commit Fornication, he would
cover him with his own robes, to hide that crime from all the world. But you
tell us page 308. That you think fit to accustom us to the contrarieties,
which happen in the Church in matter of Fact, and give us instances of one
Father of the Church against another, of a Pope against a Pope, and of a
Council against a Council. What Catholic, I pray, ever thought this ^it? or
what good can this produce? what could the sequel be, (were you a man of any
credit in your stori^s) but that the people by this means should be lead by the
hand, as it were, to contemn the Authority of Fathers, of Councels, of Popes,
and of the whole Church? When I read your first Letters, I imagined you had
some spleen against the Jesuits; but now I see your malice is against the
Church. You load the Jesuits with calumnies, that it may be thought, that men
of such wicked practices, as you describe them, might easily be believed to
have wronged Janseniu^ by false accusations. And you set out many Histories of
the Errors of Popes and Councels, that it might as easily be believed, that
the Pope and Synod of France have ^rr^d, in condemning Jansenius upon the
Jesuits false information. And so you leave nothing certain in the Church,
nothing to be obeyed; for what is certain? what is to be submitted unto, if not
the Decrees of Popes and Councels? But I desire the Reader to take notice, that
as you have done in the Jesuits Books, so in the Histories of the Popes and
Councels which you mention, you have falsified and misapplied many things, and
given for certain, that which the best Authors have delivered as very dubious
and suspected; as may be seen in Baronius, Bellarmin, and others; where is set
down a clear answer to every one of these stories. But you did not think sit to
set down the Answers; it was enough for you to bring the Objections, so to
undermine, as much as you could, the Authority of the Church, by making the
world think, Fathers were against Fathers, Popes, against Popes, Counsels
against Counsels: which never was in any matter, which brings any consequence
to destroy the union of Faith, and submission to the Church, which is that you
would overthrow. It would be too long a business to refute every particular
story. I content my self then to tell the Reader, That it is you that tell these
stories, that is, one, who for his perpetual Imposture deserves no credit all.
And that Baronius, and Bellarmin, and many Learned Controvertists beside, have
solved all the difficulties which occur in these passages; all which have
been objected by many Adversaries of the Catholic Church with more vigor,
then this Pedant objects them with.

The last thing then which you say, and with which I conclude, is, That you
tell us in the end of your Eighteenth Letter, That Jesuits wrong the memory of
a Bishop, that died in the Communion of the Catholic Church, and make a great
noise about a matter of no concern. Your Pi^^y to Jansenius his memory is but
mere Hypocrisy. You would have him judged a Saint, though it were with
censuring Pope Innocent, and Pope Urban, and Pope Alexander, and the whole
Synod of France, who are not excusable, if Jansenius his Book be Catholic.
But you care not, that all the Popes and Bishops of the Church ^e thought never
so wicked, so Jansenius pass but for a Saint: You care not how impious you be
against all both living and dead, so you be but pious toward Jansenius,
because of your affection to his Herr^ie.

And how can you call this a matter of small importance, for which you make so
great a noise, and which evidently is such, that the whole Church is concerned
in it? If what you say be true, the whole Church is in an error, for falsely
condemning Jansenius. If your Arguments be good, there must be no power in the
Church to condem^ any Heretic; for never any was, or can be, more clearly and
legally condemned, then Jansenius his Book. If you might have your will, the
Church should lose all Authority in de^ining matters of Faith, because you will
in all cases, as well as this of Jansenius, ^inde matter of Fact, wheresoever
any words written or spoken do intervene; which shall serve you to cast a mist
before the eyes of ignorant people to delude them, and wind them into an
error against Faith. The question is not betwixt the Jesuits of France, and an
idle Libeller, whom they might easily contemn, but it is betwixt the Church of
Christ and Here^ie. If the Jesuits appear in this quarrel, they do their
duty, and oblige all Catholics, whose common cause they defend, in a matter,
where (though you slight it) the Authority of the Church is at stake, and would
be over-thrown, if the Jansenists of Port Royal could prevail. But he that
secured his Church from the Gates of Hell, will secure it from Port-Royall.
Portae inferi non praevaelebunt.

The Conclusion of the WORK, concerning those things which are not answered;
and concerning the Additionalls, which deserve no Answer.
Reader,
By perusing the precedent Work you will see, That the Author of the
Provincial Letters remains still under the same censu^e of a Slaunderer,
Falsifier, and Jansenist; That in all these Letters he has not made good so
much as one of the Twenty Nine Impostures laid to his charge: That he undertook
a d^fence of Four or Five of them, but suc^eded so ill, that he durst not
adventure on the rest. Out of this I conceive every rational man will
conclude, That (as has often been incu^cated in this Work) he ought not to be
believed in any thing. And consequently, That the Reader ought at least to
suspend his judgment, and not give his V^rdict against any Author of the
Society, or others, upon this man's Testmony, till he has viewed the Books. For
none can justly be esteemed criminal, because an arrant Liar gives him out
for such.

This then is desired of all, That before they pass their censure, if they be
able, they will be pleased to hear both Sid^s; and when they have read what
this man objects, then view the Authors in their own Works: which as it
seems but a reasonable request, so I am confident, it is en^ugh to clear all
the Casuists and Doctors, whom this man slaundereth. It was thus a Lawyer of
our Nation not long since did. For having read the Provincial Letters, he, who
knew it was not a legal nor rational way to judge before both Sides were
heard, took some pains to turn to the Authors that were taxed. And he was soon
satisfied. For having lo^ked on three or four Citations, and found them all
false, he gave no more credit to the Provincial Letters, but esteemed all of
no credit; and cited a Maxim of the Law, That he that is once convinced a
Liar, ought never to be believed. In this manner I appeal to all the men of
England, that have ability enough to understand the Authors, and desire them
to be Judges, provided only they will be pleased to read the Authors in their
own Works. And as for those, who (...) want of Abilities cannot look into Books
of Divinity. I entreat them, that they will be pleas^d to a^k that Question,
which the Roman Ora^^^^ did in a def^^ce of his, Quis quem accusat? (...)
accuses whom? The Author of the Provincial Letters accuses the Fathers of
the Society of Jesus, and with them all the Schools of Divinity. Whom are we to
believe? It is evident, that one single man ought not to bear down all the
world: And more evident, that an ignorant man ought not to censure a number of
Learned Divines: And most evident, that no man in reason can conceive a
prejudice against the Doctrine of many great Divines, to whom the world has
for many years given public applause for Learning and Virtue, upon the report
of an infamous Libell, condemned of ignorance by learned men; forbid as
scandalous to be read, by him whom the Author acknowledges his lawful Judge,
(I mean by the Pope) and commanded to be burnt* and in effect burnt by the
Hangman; as the Provincial Letters were, at least Seventeen of them, (for the
Eighteenth was not then come ou^) a^ A^x in Provence by the Authority of
Parliament, in the year 1657. and mon^th of February.

All this makes it clear, that those who cannot examine the passag^s, and
confront what the Author of the Provincial Letters says, with what the
Authors, whom he slaundereth, teach in their Works, ought rather to stand for
the Torrent of Divines, and judge with the judgment of the whole Christian
world, against an infamous Libeller; then siding with a Libeller to oppose so
many and learned Divines. So this short Question, Quis qu^m accusat? This
little r^flexion will be a secure ground for those to go on, who cannot judge
of the Authors in their own Books: and the want of this so easy reflection
has made some run into strange judgment, and draw such consequences, that I
should be ashamed to tell, did not the desire I have to prevent the like,
oblige me to it. I will tell you then two passages, which I have from persons
that I esteem credible.

There was not very long since one, who seeing the multiplicity of Religions,
that swarm daily in England, was resolved at length to embrace the Catholic
Faith. But unfortunately it happpened, that the person, before the day was come
of being Reconciled, light on the Book of the Provincial Letters; and having
read it, resolved never to become Catholic: and in effect quitted all former
good thoughts, upon this Enthymeme, If the Doctors of the Catholic Church
teach such horrid Maxims, what good can I there expect for my soul?

Had this poor creature but once asked the Question, Quis quem accusat? Who
accuses whom? It would have been easy to discover, that good thoughts were
not on so slight authority to be laid aside; that a number of learned men were
not to be condemned on the verdict of an infamous Libeller; that it was easy
for a sl^underer to belie all the learned men in the world; but that they were
not therefore to be esteemed the worse; otherwise we must never embrace any
Religion; for there is none, which some have not made invectives against, and
endeavored to disgrace: and we must renounce all Communities; there being none
so holy, which the envy of some or other has not railed at, and defamed.

This is the first passage. The second was of a sadder consequence then this.
One there is in the World, who bears the name of a Divine, who assevered that
one might take the Oath of Abjuration, though (as he allowed it to be) against
his Conscience; and in effect made some take it. His reason was this, The
Author of the Provincial Letters, says he, tells us, Let. 5. that the
Jesuits in China permit the Christians to commit Idolatry by a subtle
invention, viz. that of enjoining them to hide under their clothes an Image of
Jesus Christ, to which they teach them by a mental reservation to direct those
public Adorations, which they render to the Idol Cachim-Choam, and their
Keum-Fucum: since therefore that the Jesuits permit Idolatry in China, we may
permit (says this unworthy Divine) the Oath of Abjuration here in England. Did
ever man hear such a senseless discourse? If the Jesuits do permit Idolatry in
China, they ought to be punished most severely; but no man ought to infer,
that because the Jesuits commit (as this story would have it) a most heinous
crime in China, therefore we may commit as horrid sins here. But he that
seduced those Venal Souls, who were so base minded, that they would sell their
Faith, their Religion, their hope o^ Eternity, their God and All for a little
pelf, ought to have reflected on the Question I put, Quis quem accusat? Who
accuses whom? An infamous Lib^ll^r, that dares not own his name; a Jansenist,
that denies that Christ dyed for all men; a man, whose Works are infamous, and
were burnt by the Hangman as soon as they came out; this man, I say, accuses
the Jesuits; and those Jesuits, who contemning all the contents which friends
and country can afford them, for to preach the Gospel in the utmost bounds of
the earth, undertake an Apostolical life, and are (as Authentic stories from
thence relate) seconded by the assistance of God, who blesses their labors
with plentiful Conversions of whole Nations, that seeing the Signs and
Prodigies, wherewith God confirms their words, willingly embrace the sweet
Yoke of Christ, and lead a life of admirable sanctity. Is it credible, that
such men should embrace so many labors by Sea and Land, and endure such
hardship in unknown Countries, for to crown their works with teaching, or
allowing Idolatry? Certainly it is no^. Much less can it be thought credible
upon the report of such a Knight Errant as this Letter-writer is. The very
reflecting on the person that accuses and persons accused, makes the matte^
clear, that I need not say any thing to refute this Fable. Although for the
Readers greater satisfaction I tell him, that Father Alvarez S^medo and Father
Alexander de Rhodes, who lived in China (where this Idolat^y is reported to be
allowed) above twenty years, when they came from thence, averred, that there
never had been any such thing allowed, or done, in China. But you will say,
that the Author of the Provincial Letters cites for his relation diverse
Authorities. ^ answer, that it is he that cites them; and that is enough to let
you know, the Citations have no credit at all.

But to return to the cons^quence, which this wicked Divine, and that other
unfortunate person made, I must needs by this occasion warn all, that no
consequences can be drawn out of the Maxims, which in these Provincial
Letters are attributed to the Jesuits. For if to build on Sand be ill, to build
on a Lie is far worse. And although in this Answer all is not refuted, yet I
assure the Reader, that there is nothing in all the Provincial Letters, which
has any more credit then what is refuted: all is but a fabulous Dream, all a
false Slander, and the whole Book of the Provincial Letters nothing else but
a Packet of lies. It would require a very long work to run through all the
Objections made in the Provincial Letters, and would prove tedious to the
Reader, to load him with a long volume, whilst he may justly be satisfied with
what is here presented. Yet if hereafter I find it necessary to answer every
particular, I will do it, and undertake to make good all the Moral of the
Society calumniated in the Provincial Letters, according to those four
conditions which I put in the Preface to the Impostures.

Now therefore there remains nothing else, b^^ to answer the Additionalls of
the Second English Edition. But looking on them, I find them to be of such a
nature, that they need no answer. I shall therefore show you, why they need no
answer, and do no more.

The first thing added in the Second Edition is called the Jesuits Creed; so
childish a Foppery, that though it seems there was a man in the world so
foolish as to print it in English, yet I presume there is no body in England so
foolish, as to believe that ever any man taught it; nor any man of so weak a
judgment, that will think it needs an answer. All I will say is, that it is a
very fit Frontispice for so fabulous a Work, as the Provincial Letters.

The next thing is the Picture of St. Ignatius amidst four other Jesuits at the
beginning of the Letters, with ignominious Inscriptions; and at the end a
headless discourse of St Ignatius, and the Society founded by him; all which
(inasmuch as it is aginst St. Ignatius) being Blasphemous, (for it is Blasphemy
to speak disrespectfully either of God or his Saints) I suppse no Catholic
will expect an answer to it: And no Protestant will judge that it was fit for a
Catholic (who profes^eth a Reverence to Saints) to deride the Saints. But the
Author of the Provincial Letters having writ contumeliously of the Church
Militant, there remained nothing to be added, but to mock at the Saints in
Heaven, and to sport with the Church Triumphant. Yet neither are excused; both
may justly fear that which Tobias, speaking of Jerusalem, a figure of the
Church, says, chap. 13 ver. 16. Maledicti erunt, qui cont^mpserint te; and
condemnati erunt omnes, qui blasphemaverint te.

After those Blasphemies there follow several Pieces, made (or said to be
made) by the Curez in diverse places of France, to which I will come presently,
when I have said a word to the other Trifles packed up in the Additionalls.

In the page 70. to page 86. there is a great deal ado made against Caramu^ll,
who being of the Holy Order of St. Bernard, it belongs not to the Jesuits to
answer for his Doctrine: nor would any but a Mysterious Fool have packt his
Doctrine into the Mystery of Jesuitisme. But I understand, he that printed this
Book wanted not only Grace, (which it is evident he did) but (which he was much
more sensible of) money; and hoped to gain by the bulk of his Book, and so
thrust in every thing to make so many more Sheets. And I suppose he is
resolved, so long as this way will yield him money, to trade in Mysteries. We
have seen a second part of the Mystery of Jesuitisme; and we are to expect a
third, and a fourth, so long as there is hope of gain, the true Source of these
Works, and the Mystery of all these Mysteries.

But to return, if any man have just reason to reply against Caramuells
Doctrine, I am informed, that he is still living, and now an Archbishop, and
will easily be able to answer for himself; provided, that the Objections made
against his Doctrine be put in Latin; for he will not study in English to
answer a Libell: But if he should chance to die, his Order will outlive all
these Calumniatours, and be able to defend it self, when the Adversary is such,
that he deserves an answer, which this man does not.

Page 87. there are opinions o^ Mascarenhas and Escobar, both Jesuits: to
which I need return no answer, because the Persons (as I am told) are living,
and will (if need b^) answer for themselves. In the mean time I must tell the
Reader, that both Mascarenhas and Escobar are undoubtedly wronged, by him that
^ath extracted the Opinions much after the same Mode that the P^ovinciall
Letters do: But if it happen, that eith^^ Mascarenhas or Escobar be truly
proved to teach some thing condemnable, that does not excuse the Author of the
Provincial Letters from being (as is proved) a manifest Impostour: and so it
is but an impertinent appendix to his Work.

Now if upon another score, then that of verifying the Provincial Letters, any
man will form an accusation against Mascar^^has, or Escobar, or any other
Jesuit, I desire him to have a care of three things. The first is to speak
without Spleen. The second is to speak with Truth, and to cite right, according
to the Authors plain meaning. The third is to bring some reason, or authority,
why they mislike their Doctrine. This is a rational way, and which will
deserve an answer. But to cite by halves, and snarle now at this, now at that,
and ^ov^ without fear or wit, from place to place, and from Author to Author,
as it may serve to make sport in Tippling-houses, so it will never dese^ve a
reply in Schools.

Page 100. we have a Letter of James Boonen Archbishop of Mechelin, an annex of
Seventeen Cases, and the judgment of the Faculty of Lovain concerning those
Seventeen Cases. To all which the first Paragraph of the aforesaid Archbishops
Letter gives a very full answer. Where it is showed, that the Archbishop was
checked from the congregation of Cardinall^ at Rome, and commanded not to
forbid the Jesuits ^earing of Confessions, which he would have done, and with
some did do, by refusing them approbation. Furthermore he was commanded from
Rome, that if he met with any thing, that he might be troubled at in approving
the Fathers of the Society in order to hear Confessions, he should within three
months signify the just cause to the Congregation of Cardinals at Rome; and
if he should neglect to give satisfaction, that then some other Bishop should
be empowered to examine and approve them. All this is in the very first
Paragraph; which when I read, I could not but wonder, to see how blind Passion
had made the Author of the Additionals, who could not see, that by producing
this Letter, he made a Defense of the Jesuits, whose reputation he would wound.
Sagittae parvu^orum factae sunt plagae ^orum. He ^elleth us, that the
Archbishop of Machelin opposed the Casuists of the Society: here he ^^ings his
dart at the Jesuits. But withal he ^elleth us, That the Cardinals checked the
Archbishop, and commanded him to desist, under pain of impowering another to
execute his office in his own Diocese: Here he wounds himself, and brings a
great commendation for the Society, whose proceeding the Congregation of
Cardinals (who issue not out their D^crees without his Holiness advice) does
here maintain against that Bishop. Yet I do not say this to allow or disallow
those Seventeen Propositions.

One thing I must add, that this Archbishops being against the Jesuits is no
disparagement to their Doctrine. He was a maintainer of Junsenisme, and for
that suspended ab officio and ingressu Ecele^^ae, and at length threatened with
Excommunication for re^using to submit to the Pope and receive his Bulls
against Jansenius. Yet at length he repented, and was reconciled to the Church.
But if he had such animosity against the Jesuits Doctrine, his successor, who
now is Archbishop of Machelin and a worthy Prelate, has testified his opinion
to the contrary, by his approbation given to the Answers of the Provincial
Letters, which are translated in this Book, as may be seen in the end of a Book
entitled, Responces aux Lettres Provinciales publices par le Secretaire du
Port-Royall, printed at Liege, 1657.

The last piece of these Additionalls is a Catalogue of all the names of the
Casuists cited in the Provincial Letters and Additionals. A man would think,
that in a catalogue of Names there should not be any thing to be reprehended:
yet that this piece might be suitable to the rest of the Book, the Author has
found a way to declar^ either his gross ignorance, or malice, in putting
diverse Authors as Jesuits, whom all the world know, not to be such. For
example Basilius Pontius is writ in great Letters, as one whose Cases this
Additioner judges specially criminal, and that all may redound on the
Jesuits, he is in this catalogue called a Jesuit: yet Basilius Pontius is known
to be of Saint Augustins Order. Sancius is also called a Jesuit, who was a
Secular Priest. Angelus is also reckoned a Jesuit, though he were a Francisca^
Friar: and Navarre is by no little mystery become a Jesuit in this Catalogue;
and very ignorantly under one name are confounded two very eminent men. For
there is Martin^s Aspilcueta Navarrus, an admirable Canonist, and most famous
Ca^uist of the Order of the Canons Regulars of St. Augustine; and there is
Petrus Navarrus, or a Navarra, a very gallant man, who was a Secular Doctor.
All these this ignorant Additioner calls Jesuits, that the blame, which he
imagines they lie under, may fall on the Society. But if they were Jesuits,
they would prove a credit to the Society; their Doctrine being far above the
censure of such an ignorant Additioner, who has so little examined what is
cited, that he does not so much as know the Authors that are cietd.

The like impudence and ignorance is showed in the Index, put in the beginning
of the First English Edition: where the Translatour endeavoring to fasten upon
the Jesuits the names of horrid crimes, makes rather an Index of his own
blindness, malice, and passion, then of the Book. For example under the
letter K. he has this, A man may be killed for six or seven Ducats, or a
Crown; and a little after, A man may be killed for an Apple. By which he would
give the Reader to understand, That the Jesuits are strangely prodigal of
men's lives, and their Doctrine guilty of unheard of cruelti^s. But if we look
on the places cited, we shall see the case is quite altered; and that the
Author of this Index has made it his business to increase the Fourbe, and
out-lye the Provincial Letters, for to make the Jesuits more odious, The
first of these Maxims, for which Molina is cited page 151. is in that page so
set down, that Mo^ina is notoriously falsified by the Author of the
Provincial Letters: yet he retains* something by which it is clear, That
Molina speaks of a Thief, who has robbed you, for he has these words, Who
has taken from you the value of six or seven Ducats, or a Crown. Now because
the Doctrine, that allows to kill a Thief who has taken from you though but
a Crown, would not have sounded ill enough for this man's purpose, therefore he
leaves out both the term Thief, and the other words, which the Author of the
Provincial Letters was not bold enough to suppress; to make it pass for a
Maxim of the Jesuits, That a man may be killed for six or seven Ducats, or a
Crown. Which Maxim carries all that malice in it, which this man would show
he bears the Jesuits, whom he would have thought the most despicable and
abominable thing of the world: whereas the Doctrine of Molina is blameless, as
appears in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Impostures.

The other Maxim is, That a man may be killed for an Apple. By this the
Index-maker would have it thought, That the Jesuits value men's lives so
little, that for an Apple one man may kill another: which if it were true, you
might kill a man, that would steal an apple out of your O^chard. But turn to
the place cited, and you will read the malice or ignorance of this Index-maker.
It is page 343. where Lessius speaks thus. It is not law^ull for a man to
kill another to preserve a thing of little value, as for a business of a
Crown, or for an Apple: which words d^r^ctly contradict the sense intended to
be understood in the Index. There follow in the words of Lessius, in the place
cited, these words, Unless it should be a great dishonor to lose it. For in
such a case a man may recover it, nay if need be, kill the person that has it;
because this is not so much to defend ones goods, as ones honor. In which
place Lessius does not teach, That you may kill for an apple; but that a Person
of Honor is not bound to stand still, and receive an affront, though the
thing, in which he is affronted, be of no value. For example, a Gentleman
carries a Rose in his hand, or an apple; an insolent Fellow, who would affront
that Gentleman, snatcheth at the Rose; the Gentleman is not bound to let the
Rose go, but he may safely hold it fast; and if the other proceed in his
insolency, the Gentleman may endeavor to repel him: and if in the end of the
strife the insolent fellow lose his life, the Gentleman shall not be guilty,
says Lessius, of his blood, provided that he keep (that which all Divines
exact in such cases) moderamen inculpatae tutelae, the moderation of a blamless
defense, that is, do no more then is necessary for his own defense, as Lessius
requires. Now this Doctrine, which gives the Honorable and Innocent Person a
just right to defend himself, is very far from teaching, That one may kill
another for an Apple, which Lessius never dreamt of. The Author of the
Provincial Letters would impose it on him; but because he does it not plain
enough, the Index helps him out in b^lying Lessius. And this he does in all the
other crimes imputed to the Jesuits: which I call to make an Index of h^^ own
malice, blindness, and passion.

Now then having run over all the other points of the Additionalls, let us come
to the Factums, or Representations, of the Cur^z. Of these also I say, that
they ought not to be answered. My reason is, because that the Pope has already
erected a particular Congregation of Learned men at Rome to examine the Book
called the Apology of the Casuists, and the Writings of the Cur^z against that
Book. Which being so, both parties are ^o expect their judgment from that
Court, and to address their Complaints, or Defenses, to Rome. And for my part I
will expect their Censure, before I give mine, as I think it is the duty of
every Catholic to do, and not to forestall the Popes judgment, whom both the
parties concerned, that is, the Author of the Apology and the Cu^^z, do
acknowledge their Judge in this cause. As indeed he is the sole judge, in whose
Arbi^rement the quarrel can cease. For the matter being manifestly of those
causes, which are called Causae majores, it apperttaineth not to any private
Doctor, or School, to determine, and by that means to give rules to all
Christendom; which cannot be done by any under the Pope. For this reason the
Archbishop of Roven answered the Curez of his Diocese, who first stirred in
this business, in these words, as they are set down page 2. in ^ine, in these
Additionalls, That this affair was of great concernment, and reflected on the
whole Church: Therefore he refered them to the Synod of France then sitting at
Paris. Nor did that Synod define any thing as to particular cases, or
condemnation of opinions held by Learned Authors. All which shows us the
importance of the matter; which being of the Causae majores, or greater Causes,
belongs to the Head of the Church. This answer is according to the Doctrine
of Gerson, sometimes Chancellor of the University of Paris. Tom. 1. de examine.
doctrine. Consil 3. and (not to cite others) according to Du Val a learned
So^bonist, and late Author de potest. Sum. Pont. p. 4. q. 5. who speaks
thus. Constat ex p^rpetua Ecclesiae praxi, qua nihil unquam de Fide aut
Moribus, absque Romani Pontifi^is auctoritate and consensu de^r^^um l^gimus.
Hin^ est, quod Primates and Archi^piscopi in Provincialibu^ Synodis, praesertim
ubi de Fide ag^r^tur, Romani Pontificis auctoritatem semper exopt arunt, rati
non aliter sua d^cr^ta robur habcre. This is certain, says he, out of the
perpetual practice of the Church, in which we find, that nothing has ever
been d^creed, concerning Faith or Manners, (now all Moral Divinity, or cases,
concern Manners, as the rule of Manners) without the Authority of the Pope of
Rome. Hence it comes, that Primates and Archbishops in their Provincial
Synods (especially in matters of Faith) have always desired the Authority of
the Bishop of Rome, Knowing, that their D^crees would not otherwise have any
strength. So we ought in all reason to expect from his Holiness, and no other,
the condemnation, or approbation of the Author of the Apology. I therefore
will not go about to answer those things.

Yet because these Factums of the Curez are spread here in England, for no
other reason then to discredit the Doctrine of the Society, I think it but
reason to set down some Thoughts, which may induce the Reader to suspend his
judgment, till the matter be decided at Rome.

The first is, That it is not certain, that these Factums, or Representations
of the Curez are really and truly legal acts; because that some of the ablest
Curez are said to have renounced them, and some to have professed, that their
names were set by others to these Factums, when they k^ew nothing of it. This,
if when it comes to the Test, it proves so, will show, that the whole
business is but a turbulent proceeding of some unquiet spirits, and not really
the Deed of the Curez in general, as is pretended. I k^ow the last Piece in
the Additionalls maintains, that the Factum is truly the Deed of the Curez.
But I say, That still it is not certain, that either that, or the former, was
really a Deed of all, as is pretended, and not rather the act of a factious
party, that usu^ped the name of all. And altho^gh I will not interpose to
decide the question, yet I say we in England cannot at all be sure, having no
other ground, but the Additioner, or Printers assurance, which no man can
justly esteem any thing at all; he being convinced in the former answers to the
Additionalls to be maliciously bent to say any thing, that ^eemeth against the
Jesuits, be it true or false, not sparing even Blasphemy.

The Second Thought is, That supposing it be allowed, that these Factums are
legal, then all that follows is contained in these two Consequences. First,
That those Curez think, that these opinions are taught by the Authors whom
they allege. Secondly, That the opinions in the judgments of these Curez are
not tenible, and ought not to be taught. Now as to the first consequence, that
they are mistaken in diverse of the opinions is most certain. For example in the
very first of the Catalogue, page 17. there is a notable error. viz. They say,
That the Casuists teach, that a man may be confident he does not sin, though he
quit an opinion which he knows to be true, and is more safe, to follow that
which is contrary thereto. This is an error. For no Casuist does teach, That
you may quit an opinion, which you know to be true: that were a mere madness;
no Probability can excuse you against a known Truth. But the whole Doctrine of
Probability, according to all Casuists, supposes a doubt on each side. See the
four first Impostures, and you will be satisfied of this.

Now as to the second Consequence, which I said followed, if it be allowed that
these Factums are valid and legal; to wit, That the the Curez think that these
opinions (I speak now only of those which are truly cited) are not tenible,
and ought not to be taught. I answer, That though they think so, yet we are not
bound to join in their opinion, till the Church has spoken, and declared for
them. The Curez are on the one side, and the chiefest Divines of Christendom
that have ever writ, are on the contrary. Whom shall we believe? The Curez are
not known to have taught Divinity, nor writ Treatises of these matters, in
which they give their censure. They bring no reasons, nor cite no authorities.
For my part I shall rather believe one learned Author, who has joined long
experience with solid study, then forty unlearned men, either Curez, or
Jesuits, or others. Which I do not say to villifie the Curez, but to reflect on
the Authority which they oppose. For example, many of the cases, which are by
the Curez supposed dangerous Propositions, are Navarre's opinions, though they
do not cite Navarre, but some Jesuit. And I tell them, I will sooner believe
Navarre alone, then a hundred such as never taught Divinity, never studied
Canon Law, (the chief ground of Moral Divinity) nor never had any Auctority or
name in the Church: whereas Navarre has the approbation of all learned men in
the world, is read in all Universities, and in the whole Church of God esteemed
an Oracle of Learning. What then shall we say, when the Curez do not only
oppose Navarre alone, but St. Antonine, St. Thomas, Gerson, Sylvester,
Raymundus, Cajetan, Soto, Medina, Lopez, Peter Navarre, Angelus, Corduba,
Sanchez, Suarez, Molina, Vasquez, Lessius, Layman, and an hundred others? But
of this again I advertise the Reader, that I pretend not to diminish the
Auctority of any Learned man, Cure or other: only I say, it is not setting a
number of hands to a Bill, which ought to sway, but Reason, Authority and
Learning, that must be heard.

The third Thought concerns the Apologist, that writ the Book, which most of
these Curez are so violently set against, and which makes so much noise in
France. The man, whosoever he be (for he is unknown to me) is a very learned
man; and I believe they that censure him, will never be able to disprove him.
And therefore I could wish, they would leave the censure to him, to whom it
belongs, that is, to the Pope, and that Judicature which the Pope has
erected for that purpose at Rome, whither the Apologist has appealed. He
cannot be condemned, but that very many of the main Doctors of all
Universities and Religious Communities must be condemned with him. For he is so
wary, that he advances nothing without great Authority, and rather delivers
the opinions of others then his own. I will not say, but that there may be some
fault in him. I know diverse have condemned him, and diverse also maintain him:
and unless a greater authority intervene, then what one private Academy, or
any single persons verdict can give, he has and will always have the greatest
part of Universities and Divines for him. The opinions, which he delivers as
probable are so, and will be so, till he that has authority to decide, and
teach the universal Church in matters of Faith and Manners, shall be pleased
to teach us the contrary. When that is done, I suppose the Author of the
Apology will submit, and all good Catholics with him. Till then, if I think
the Apology is a learned Book, and contains solid Doctrine, I think so with
the Archbishop of Toulouse, and the Bishop of Re^nes in Bretagne, whose Faith,
Doctrine, and Life are such, that no man can call them in question; and this
every person may think, till Higher Powers dispose otherwise. This makes it
clear, that all these Factums, or Writings, of these Additionalls, ought not to
prejudice the Apologist; much less can they (as they are here intended in
England) any ways Patronize the Provincial Letters, which are argued of
manifest Impost^re, in so many, and so notorious falsific ^ions. Yet he that
has turned the Provincial Letters into Latin, and calls himself Willelmus
Wendrockius, supposes that all these Curez are for him, and that they join
issue with the Jansenists.

The fourth and last Thought is, That I conceive we may justly, with due
respect, ask some Questions of the Cu^ez, which will breed occasion of wonder.
First then I ask, why the Curez are so much against the Apology of the
Casuists? That Book was made to vindicate the credit of all Casuists against
the scof^ing Irrisions of a Pamphleter. So that it seems, That to oppose the
Apology may be construed to a ^^sire of defending a Buffoon against a Religious
Order, and against all Casuists; which I will not suspect of such Persons.
Secondly I ask, why the Curez taking their Cases, which they would have
condemned, out of a Book which contains Jansenisme, never take notice of the
greater errors, I mean the Heresies, contained in that Book. I know they
endeavor an answer; yet it is such as does not satifie. For still the wonder
remains, why the Curez should not show as much zeal, in desiring that
Heretical Opinions, which daily spread in France, should be suppressed, as
they do, that the Moral Doctrine, which they esteem bad, should be condemned.
Thirdly I ask, why do not these Curez point us out some body, whom we may
safely follow in resolving of Cases? By taking the authority from all Casuists,
they leave us in the dark, and wholly guidelesse in the many doubts which daily
arise. Is there no body who may safely be followed in matter of Cases? Is there
in the Church no means to clear up doubts in Morality? Fourthly, to end these
Queries, does not this way of proceeding prejudice the Curez themselves, and
take away all their authority in deciding any doubt, which may arise in every
one of their respective Parishes? For if Bonacina, if Sanchez, if Navarr, if
Lessius, if Suarez, if Sylvester, may not be believed; if their authority must
not be heard, though Two, or Three, or Ten, (or as Wendrockius says ten
thousand) agree in a case, upon what account shall the Cure be believed? Allow
the Cure as much virtue and learning as you will, yet he cannot expect to be
generally esteemed more virtuous, or more learned then Navarr. And so, if one
man, though never so learned, cannot decide a doubt, and appease a fearful
conscience, then all Curez and all Ghostly Fathers may sit still, and shall
have no authority in settling consciences, and taking away doubts. And at
length Spiritual Directours shall in matter of conscience have less credit,
then a Physician or Lawyer in their Profession. Nay these, if they be able and
conscientious men, shall have more credit even in matter of conscience, then a
Ghostly Father. For the Physician shall be believed, if he tell his Patient,
that he may eat Flesh on a Friday, or that he is not obliged to fast: and the
Lawyer shall be credited, if he warrant his Client, that he may justly keep the
Land which the Client doubted of. But the Cur^ shall have no authority left him
in any doubt, for fear of the Monster of Probability. For whatsoever he says,
his Parishioners will tell him that he is but one Divine, and that one Divine
(according to his own Doctrine) cannot safely be followed.

All this in my opinion does evidently infer, that we cannot upon the Curez
complaints condemn the Apologist, and those Casuists whom he cites and
follows. Yet my intention is not to dispute against the Curez, nor do I
undertake to defend the Apologist. But as I begun, so I conclude, that since
the Pope has Evocated the Cause of the Curez and the Apologist to himself, it
is the duty of every good Catholic to expect those censures, and not to
precipitate his own. But whatsoever be the event of the Apology, this is sure,
that the Provincial Letters are condemned by his Holiness: and that they are
convinced of manifest Imposture, Slander, Ignorance, and Heresy; which being
so, the Doctrine of the Jesuits, and other School-Divines whom those Letters
inveigh against, ought not to be prejudiced on that account; which is all that
these Answers intended to show.

An Appendix in Answer to a Book entitled, A further Discovery of the Mystery
of Jesuitisme.
I Thought to have ended here; having answered all that belongs to the
Provincial Letters and their Additionalls. But I am u^ged by several Friends
to take notice also of another Pamphle^, called, A further Discov^ry of the
Mystery of Jesuitisme. For my own opinion, I conceive it to be so senseless a
Piece, that it deserves not to be taken notice of: yet to condescend to the
desire of others, I will do as I have done in the Additionalls, that is, I will
show that nothing in that Book deserves an answer.

There are in it Six Pieces; whereof the two first are made by one Peter
Jarrige, during the time of his Apostasy from the Society. That these deserve
no answer is palpable for three reasons. The first is, That they were made by
an Apostata, who renounced the Catholic Faith, in which he had from his
infancy been bred; broke his vows to God, forsook his Religious Order upon
private disgusts, and run away first to Rochel, and then into Holland. All
which (if there were nothing else) makes it evidently manifest, That he is not
a competent witness against the Society. A Thief may as well be chosen judge of
honest dealing, and a Rebel of Allegiance, as an Apostata of Religion. But
such is the misery of those that persecute the Society, that, as the Jews did
against Christ, Quaerchant salsum Testimonium adversus cum. They ^ought for
false witness against Jesus, so they se^k for false witnesses against the
Jesuits. They ^eed not, who beare^h witnesle; nor whether it be like ^p be
esteemed true: All they desire is, to find some body, that will speak against
the Jesuits. But as it happened with Christ, so in this does it happen to the
Jesuits; Non erat conveni^us testimonium illorum. They brought no competent
witness against Christ, nor do these that bring this authority of Jarrige's,
bring a competent witness against the Jesuits. This first reason might be
enough: yet the two others speak plainer.

The second reason then is, That Jarrige, whilst he writ th^se things, was not
only a Runnagate, such as I have described him, but was so upon record;
condemned by the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and hanged in ^ssigi^ for his
eno^mious ^^imes. Now who is so senseless as to judge, That a man by Act of
Parliament condemned of Apost^si^, Breach of Vows, Calu^ny, and made publicly
infamous upon record, can be credited in those Detractions, which make part of
his condemnation?

Thirdly, If all this be not enough to show what I intend, at least Jarrige's
own Recantation, and his Penance for his Enormities, speak so plain, that
nothing can be added. It is notoriously known to all the world, That Jarrige
persecuted by his own c^imes, which gave his restless conscience no quiet day
no^ night, did after two years and a half of his Apostasy, or there abouts,
make a public R^c^ntation, to ask forgiveness of the world for the scandal
he had given, and of the Society for the notorious wrong he had done it in the
several relations: which he solemnly professes to have been effects of his
blindness and passion. This is so peremptory, that it voids all that can be
said to the contrary.

Yet our Preface-maker will have it clear, That an Apostata, in his actual
committing of the foulest crimes is more to be believed, then a Penitent man in
his most serious protestations: which is a Mystery that would never be believed
out of Bedlam. The T^a^sl^tour, for the sole proof of what he says, relates,
That a Clergyman told a Father of the Society, That they (the Jesuits) had
overshot themselves in it, and had been better vindicated, had the Recantation
been more modest. Let Us suppose, if you will, that this relation were true;
what follows? just nothing. For who was that Clergyman? Pe^haps Monsieur
Vincent, a Minister of Ro^hel, of whom there is mention made in the beginning
of the second Piece of this Mystery. But he was publicly convinced of Falsity
and Impostare, in his own Town of Rochel, by the Lieutenant General of Rochel,
as appears by his Act of the 28. of March in the year 1648. So that this
Clergy man's word signifies nothing. I say not this, because he is a Calvinist,
but because he is convinced of Imposture.

B^t perhaps some may think, That by the name of Clergyman is understood some
Priest of the Catholic Church. To this I answer, That I do not think any of
them were so simple, as to talk so foolishly; no^ so forgetful of their duty,
as to Patroni^e an Apostata's Acts, and give them credit against a Recanta^ion,
which the Author publicly owned both in Flaunders and France, and thought
himself obliged to set out, so to satisfy for his crimes, and to restore the
good name to every one of those particulars, whom he h^d unjustly wronged. And
so much for the two first Pieces. For I will not trouble the Reader, ^ither
with Jarrig^'s Recantation, or the Pa^liaments Condemnation of him, or the
Popes Censure, and long Penance he was obliged to perform, or the other
several pieces which were set out against him, whilst he remained in his
Apostasy. If this poor man's fall was great, his Penance was also great, which
he willingly embracing is become an example of a good Penitent. His fall is a
memorial of our frailty, and his Penance an argument of the great mercy of God
to him, and an Inductive to those that have fallen like him, to do Penance like
him.

The Third Piece of this Book has for the Title, The S^^ret Instructions for
the Superiors of the Society of Jesus These are a part of the Mystery too. But
the answer is easy. It is all a mere Fable. Never any such Instructions were
given in the Society. But he that made the Libell thought fit to vent his own
p^ssion under the Title of Secret Instructions, etc. Now as to the Invention,
or strange Discovery, of these secret Instructions, it contains indeed a
Mystery. It is not strange, That a College being ransacked, this Book, if it
were there, among other Papers should be found there; which he that sets the
Work forth, calls a sirange Discovery. But the strangeness is, That th^^
Bock should be found there, where it never was. This is the Mystery. It were no
wonder to have found a Book, where it was; but to find it where it was not,
there is the strange Discovery. This is much like Montalt's juggling; who can
find in L^ssius, that which is not in Lessius, as I have shewe^ in the
Fourteenth Imposture; and gene^ally appears in all this Work. To answ^^
therefore to this s^cret, I tell you aloud, That there never was any such thing
in the Society. I need say no more; for th^s Pamphlet has been confu^ed long
since, and showed to be a m^er Forgery.

The Fourth Piece is a Discovery of the Reasons, why the Jesuits are so
generally hated; by Fortuni^s Gal^ndus. To which ^ answer, That they are not
generally hated by Catholics; and so the whole discou^^^ p^oceedeth (as
Philosop^^^^ speak) de subj^cto^^ on suppon^nte; which supposes an error in
him tha^ ^^ddeth the discourse, and would give a reason why that is thus or
thus, which is not at all. If one would discourse, and bring many reasons, why
the Sun has not shined these twelves years past, what would you answer to
all that man's discourse? You would tell him (as I tell you) that such discourse
needs no answer; it being manifest, that it proceeds upon a supposition
which is an error. If you had asked, why they that are not Catholics, or
live not as Catholics ought to do, but are abandoned to their pleasures, do
not love the Jesuits, I could have given you the reason. But the Title of this
discourse is argued of Falsity, in all the testimonies that can be expected.
Run over all France, Spain, Italy, Poland, Sicily, Germany, the East and West
Indies, and you will find the Jesuits are every where seated, every where
honored, every where loved by Catholiqu^s, who have invited them to every
place they are in. If they have some Adversaries that be good Catholics, they
ar^ but few; and it is no wonder, that some, though zealou^ Catholics, may by
error disesteem the Society; for none of them do (as the Title of this
Discourse supposes) hate the Society. This Discourse therefore failing in the
very Title, I shall not say any thing more of it. Only I observe, it is much
contrary to that complaint, which many, and among the rest Montalt in his
Provincial Lette^s makes. For he testi^ieth his great regret, that the
Jesuits are every where esteemed. You ^ught to have remembered this. For you
know the Latin P^overb, Memorem ^port^t esse menda^em.

The Fifth Piece is a Discovery of the Society in relation to their Politiques.
A gallant Title, and I should have been very glad to have read the Work over
and over, if I had met with any thing of Truth in it. For I esteem the Society
a very Politic Body; which has a very prudent economy. But in perusing this
Piece, I find it no better then a dream of a cracked brain. The two grounds of
all this Policy are notorious slanders, and known for such all the world over.
The first is, That the Jesuits build their Politiques on calumnies and
slaundering of others; which is as far from their practice, as it is from true
prudence. There is nothing in the world more foolish, then to think to raise
ones self to any standing Dignity by calumniating others.

Lauda ut lauderis, Marce; ut ameris ama, says the Poet. Nothing begets
greater hatred then calumny: and so the Jesuits Politics and insinuating
themselves cannot go upon that principle. The other is, their insinuating
themselves into all States and Court-affairs, which gives them a great
knowledge of all that passes in the world, that they can acquaint their
General of all things. Pretty. But by what way do they thus in^inuate
themselves into all Princes Favou^s? There 'twas you should have spoke; for
there is the craft. But I do not intend to dispute nor re^ute. The whole
Discourse is stuffed with such open falsi^ies, that I need not say any thing.
It Is openly false, that the Jesuits ever inform their General, as you set it
down, of State affairs, or that they meddle with State affairs, so s^verely
forbid among them. It Is openly false, and an intolerable slander to say, they
make use of the Secret of Confession for this informing their General, as you
assever page the sixth. It Is openly false to say, That they refuse to hear the
Confessions of poor people, as you assever in the same page. It Is openly false
(to come home to England) to say, That the Archpriest is a Jesuit in voto, as
you say page 21. All that you say of Jesuits in voto is a mere fable: and all
that Discourse of yours concerning Father Parsons, page 20. is a fiction and a
mere dream. And so I will leave it to sleep with its Author in his grave.

The last Piece of the Mystery is a Prophecy with a Comment upon it. The
Prophecy is taken out of the Four Centuriatours of Magdeburge; out of whom,
many a Fable may be taken: for they are full of them. The Saint, who is said to
be the Auhour of it, is St. Hildegard, who lived (says the Short view of the
life of St. Hildegard, set before the Work I now speak of) in a Monastery,
built by some Magical Assistance, and there was a strange Conflux of the
superstitious Multitude to her. Thus does this Commentatour set forth his
Prophecy, with such circumstances that must make every rational man suppose it
a mee^ fable. But if the Text be not good, I must tell you, the Discourse upon
it is worse. Never was there such a Rhapsody of Nonsense, as this hollow-brain
has made for to crown the Mystery of Jesuitisme.

First he is sure, the Prophecy was meant of the Jesuits, because he has
applied it all to them. Ipse dixit. He might as well, and perhaps (if this sell
off currantly) will apply all the Apocalypse, and the twelve lesser Prophets,
to the Jesuits: for I defy him to make more Nonsense of any thing, then he
has done of this. For to exemplisie in one only passage, in his first
Paraphrase, one of the reasons, why the Society (as he will have it) is called
Gens insensata, (an insensate people, or a foolish senseless Nation) is because
St. Ignatius did once fast a whole week together. Did ever man talk so
insensate (so senslesly?) And what will this man judge of Simeon Stylites, of
Moses, and of Christ himself, who fasted forty days together? But I will not
go on with arguing against a man, that has had no care, neither of Truth nor
Reason, nor appearance of either, in any one page of his Work. So that if he
would have taken pains to discredit himself, and credit the Fathers of the
Society, he could not have done it better, then by this insensate manner of
impugning it. But so it is, the Integrity of those Fathers, their Learning and
their Piety is such, That as that gallant Prelate of France and O^nament of the
Purple, Cardinal Peron was wont to say of them, A man may be a good Catholic
without having any particular affection for the Society of Jesus; but he cannot
be an enemy of that Order without error and impiety: which saying is most true
of all the Religious Orders in Gods Church.

This Piece of Lessius was promised in the Fourteenth Imposture. The Reader is
desired to examine the Citations of that Imposture by Lessius his own words.
Lib. 2. de Justit. Cap. 9. Dubit. 12. Page 98, 99.
Dubitatio 12. Utrum pro defensione pudiciti^ and honoris liceat occidere cum,
qui tentat violare.

Number. 76.

REspondeo and dico primo, Licitum est mulieri, Adolescenti, and cuivis alteri,
pro defensione pudicitiae occidere Invasorem. Est communis sententia Doctorum:
quamvis D. Augustinus lib. 1. de libero Arbitr^o cap. 5. videatur dubitare.
Ratio est; quia pudicitia pluris merito aestimatur, quam multae opes:
praeterquam quod in ha^ re sit periculum peccati. Idem Ethnicisenserunt. Nam,
ut scribit Cicero oratione pro Milone, Adolescens, qui T^^bunum occiderat
volentem vim infer e^us pudicitiae, a Mario exercitus Imperatore absolutus
^uit.

Number. 77.

Dico secundo, Fas etiam est viro honorato occidere Invasorem, qui fustem vel
alapam nititur impingere, ut ignominiam inferat, si aliter haec ignominia
vita^i nequit. Ita docet express Sotus ar. 8. Navarr. cap 15. number. 3.
Sylvester verbo Homicidium 1. qu 5. Et Ludovicus Lop^z, cap. 62. Antonius
Gom^z, Tom. 3. cap. 3. n. 23. Julius Clatus Homicidium, number. 26. ubi dicit
periculum samae ^quiparari periculo vitae. Ratio est, quia hic conatur au^erre
honorem, qui mer^^o plu^^s apud homines aestimatur, quam damnum multarum
pecuniarum; ergo, si po^est occidere, ne damnum pecuniarum accipia^, pot^st
^tiam, ^e hanc ignominiam cogatur sustinere.

Number. 78.

Notandum est, varii^ modis honorem alterius posse impeti and auferr^; in
quibus videtur concessa de^ensio.

P^imo, Si baculum vel alapam nitaris impingere: ^e quo jam dictum est.

S^^un^o, Si con^um^liis afficias, ^ive per verba, sive per signa. Hic etim ^st
jus defensionis. Nam, ex sententia omnium, licet contum^liosum occidere, quando
aliter ea injuria arceri nequit, (quanquam ipse armis non invadat) ait Petrus
Navarr. libr. 2. cap. 3. number. 376. E^fi autem* id non inveniam apud auctores
expressum, tamen videtur ex illis posse colligi (praeciso scandalo, and aliis
grav^bus incommodis) quando contumel^ae sunt atroces, and al^a ratione v^tari
nequeunt. Ratio enim naturalis dictat, licitam esse ^am defensionem, quae
necessaria sit ad contumeliam depellendam and comprimendam: alioqui daretur
licentia improbitati, optimos quosque contumeliis vexandi; quae tamen mul^o
quam damna rei familia^is sunt acerbiores, magisque mordent animos. Cavenda
tamen vindictae libido. Non enim licet priva^a auctoritate contumeliam
vindicare, sed tantum compescere; quod ^tiam in vitae and rerum defensione
servandum: tanti interest, quo animo quid agas. Verum ^aec sententia non est
sequenda. Satis enim esse debe^ in Republi^a, ut injuriae verbales verbis
repelli, and legitima vindicta comprimi and castigari possint.

Number. 79.

Tertio, Si illa^a alicui alapa ^^sses, vel etiam ^ugias; multi Doctores
censent in hoc casu, si vir nobilis, vel honoratus hujusmodi injuria sit
affectus, posse statim repercutere, vel fugientem insequi, and ^antum infligere
ve^berum vel vulnerum quantum put^tur necessarium ad honorem recuperandum. I^a
tenet Navarr. cap. 15. number. 4. Henriqu^z. de Irregularitate, cap. 10. ubi citat
multos pro ^ac sententia: inter cae^eros Jasonem, Cordubam, Mantium, Pennam,
Clarum, ^^jetanum, and Antoninum. Eandem docet Petrus Navarr. lib. 2. cap. 3.
n. 380. and c^tat pro hac ^ententia Mercatum. Idem tenet Victoria Relect. De
Jure belli. number. 5. ubi dicit, Eum, qui colaphum accepit, posse statim
repercutere, etiam gladio; non ad sumendam vindictam, sed ^d vitandam infamiam
and ignominiam, etiamsi invasor non esset ulterius progressurus. Unde sequitur,
si ille fugiat, posse laesum statim insequi and percutere: si enim potest
repercutere manentem, cur non fugientem?

Probari potest haec sententia. Primo, qui rem meam accepit, and cum ^a fugit,
potest a me percu^i, ut ^am relinquat, vel reddat, si aliter nequit recuperari.
Atqui is, qui illat^ gravi ignomini^ fugit, honorem meum quodammodo secum
defert. Nam in potestate illius est ^um mi^i resti^uere, offerendo
satisfactionem: ergo possum illum percutere, ut honorem meum restituat, vel
saltem ut ^um sic rec^perem.

Dices, est dispar ratio; nam res adhuc extat, and manet tua: sed contumelia
illa^a, honor jam periit: ergo hic non est defensio.

Respondeo, In ^o est paritas, quod sicut res potest recuperari, ^ ita ^^iam
honor; qui in signis excellentiae and hominum aestimatione consistit.

Secundo probatur; Quia si damnum a te rebus meis illatum non po^^et alia
ratione sarcri, quam tui percussione, posses statim percuti, ut illo modo ^iat
damni reparatio: ergo si violato honor, non potest aliter ^ieri reparatio,
quam si feriatur is, qui eum laesit, poterit sieri, D^be^ autem hoc ^ieri in
continenti, dum ad^uc laesio honoris veluti pendet, suspensis hominum de ^^a
fortitudine and generositare judiciis.

Tertio, quia alias dabitur licentia improbis, quodvis genus contumeliae in
quemvis ingerendi^ nam ^ola ^uga, vel cessatione ^u^i ^runt: praesertim quando
desunt testes, qui eos norine, vel quando non morantur in eodem loco.

H^^tamen adverte, si laesor veniam peta^, offendi non posse; quia quantum in
se est, honorem restituit: unde si alter velit ipsum impetere^ poterit se
tueri, ut recte nota^ Petrus Navarra.

Number. 80.

Ob has rations h^^ sententia est speculative probabilis; tamen in praxi non
videtur facile permittenda. Primo, ob periculum odii, vindictae, and excessus.
Si enim D. Augustinus ob has causas aegre admittit, ut quis pro vita ^uend^
alterum possit ocidere, quanto minus in cali casu ob honorem tuendum
concederet? Secundo, ob periculum pugnarum and caedium. Unde qui tall casu
occideret, puniretur in foro externo, ut docet Gomez, supra. number. 24. ^tsi
mitius; tum quia alter dedit causam; tum quia homo intenso dolor permotus non
est omnino sui compos.

Number. 81.

Quartus modus est, si nomini m^o falsis criminationibus apud principem,
judicem, vel viros hono^a^os det^ahere nitaris, ne^ ulla ratione possim illud
damnum famae avertere, nisi ^e occul^^ in ^^siciam. Pe^rus Navarrus n. 375.
inclinat, licitum esse, talem e medio tollere. Eandem, tanquam probabiliorem,
defendit Bannes q. 64* ar. 7. dub. 4. addens idem dicendum, ^tiam^^ crimen sit
verum; si tamen est occultum, ita ut secundum justitiam legalem non possis
pandere: idem tenent quidam al^^ recentiores. Probari potest.

Primo, quia si baculo vel alapa impacta velis m^um honorem vel famam violare,
possum armis prohibere: ergo etiam, si coneris lingua. Nam pa^um videtur
refer, quo instrumento quis nitatur infer noxam, si aeque efficaciter
no^^bit.

Secundo, quia contumliae possunt armis impediri; ergo ^tiam detractiones.

Tertio, Periculum fam^ ^quiperatur periculo vit^, quod est commune
pronunciatum Jurisperitorum, inquit Clarus number. 26. Atqui ob peticulum vitae
evadendum, licitum ast occidere: Ergo, etc.

Qua^^o, quia jus defensionis videtur se extendere ad omne id quod necessarium
est, ut te ab omni injuria serves immunem: mon^ndu^ ^amen detractor prius
ess^t, ut desisteret.

Number. 82.

Verum ^aec qu^que sententia mihi in praxi non probatur, quia multis occultis
coe^ibus, cum magn^ Reipublicae pertu^batione, p^^beret occasionem. In jure
enim defensionis semper considerandum, ^e ^jus usus in perniciem Reipublicae
vergat; tunc enim non est permittendus. Accedit, quod etsi speculative vera
esset, tamen vix in praxi posset habere locum. Nam infamia vel est illata, vel
non est. Si est illata, non extinguitur per mortem infamantis. Si non est
illata, plerunque non satis constat, aliter non posse eam impediri: ac proinde
non poterimus eo modo defensionis uti.

FINIS.
These few Errata the Reader is desired to correct with his Pen.
Page 121. lin. 5. for one twentieth, read one and twentieth. page 382. lin. 27
for a Pop^, read a Papa. page 428. lin. 24. for contray, read contrary. page
452. lin. 20. for Augustini, read Augustin^. page 453. lin, 20. for possunt,
read potest. page 478. lin. 16. for credit all, read credit at all. page 479.
lin. 8. for Herrsie, read Heresy. page 491. lin. ult. for suspended ab, read
suspended and interdicted ab.


