WONDERFUL PREDICTIONS OF NOSTREDAMUS, GREBNER, DAVID PAREUS, and ANTONIUS
TORQUATUS.

Wherein the GRANDEUR of Their Present Majesty's, THE HAPPINESS of ENGLAND, AND
DOWNFALL of FRANCE and ROME, Are plainly Delineated.

WITH A LARGE PREFACE, SHOWING, That the CROWN of ENGLAND has been not
obscurely foretold to Their MAJESTY'S WILLIAM III. and MARY, late PRINCE and
PRINCESS of ORANGE; And that the People of this ANCIENT MONARCHY have duly
Contributed thereunto, in the Present ASSEMBLY of LORDS and COMMONS:
notwithstanding the Objetions of Men of different Extremes.

LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
T. Fox in Westminster Hall, and M. Wotton at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street.
1689.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of MACCLESFIELD, LORD PRESIDENT of WALES,
And one of His MAJESTY's Most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
MY LORD,
SINCE the Great Grotius and Sir Matthew Hales, sometimes softened their severer
Studies with Verse; I hope Your Lordship will not think a plain English Preface
the more unworthy of Your Patronage, because of the Rhimes that follow it.

Certainly we are bound by the most Sacred Ties, to use all Means in our Power
for the Preservation of the present Government, with which the Protestant
Religion throughout Christendom may expect to flourish or fail, as to its
visibility. And as Your Lordship's Sword is ready, under our Glorious King
WILLIAM, again to do Wonders, whenever this Noble Cause shall draw it; permit
me in the mean while, under Your Lordships Banner, to offer this Earnest of my
utmost either natural or acquired Force in its Service, against a sort of
Enemies below Your Lordships Indignation.

Some of them, being Men of Letters, will yield to no Authority, but what they
find in Books; and were it not for the Invention of Printing, would almost have
been deprived of the use of Reason: For these, I hope, I have brought both
Weight and Measure, and proved to them, that our Government is as Legal, as it
may be Happy, if they please; and, I doubt not, will be, whether they please,
or no.

With others, no Arguments are of any moment, but as they work upon their Hopes
or Fears; and Reason in them is always subservient to Sense or Interest: These,
if they have not Religion, at least are Superstitious, and as the Poet has it,
are the Men who tremble and look pale at every Flash of Lightning: Every cross
Accident is with them a Presage of more, and Hi sunt qui trepidant and ad omnia
fulgura pallent.
disposes them to change their Side; and time was, when by looking up to the
Fane over the Horse-Guards, one might know who they were for. If these Men can
be persuaded, that the wonderful Successes which his present Majesty has met
with, have been plainly foretold, and that no less are promised yet to come; if
they do not assist, they will not dare to oppose: And till they can either fix
an Imputation of Forgery upon the Predictions here collected, or evade their
Agreement with known Events, the Government has them sure.

I must confess, I believe it will never be well with this divided Nation, till
Men act, like Your Lordship, upon more generous and steady Principles. Whoever
espouses Truth only while it is prosperous, is beholden to Chance for his
Honesty, as some have been for their mistaken Loyalty, with which specious
Pretense, they have varnished over a long Series of the most Vid. the Lord
Delamere and Sir To. Arkyns upon the Lord Russel's Trial, and Mr. Hawles's
Remarks upon that and others, etc.
illegal and barbarous Actions, that ever were the Reproach of any Civilized
Nation.

Under that Rage Your Lordship suffered; and not to have suffered, would have
been enough to have brought Your Fame in question; when it was hardly possible
for one of so great a Figure to live in safety, without such shameful
Compliances, as our English Spirits were never guilty of in the darkest Ages of
Popery.

These things, I am confident, Your Lordship would be loath to remember against
any, now likely to represent themselves fair to a Prince newly come from
abroad, were it not for the manifest Tendency, I may say, Effects, of their
Principles: And till they either publicly repent of, or condemn those
Doctrines, upon which such Actions are grounded, Your Lordship may well
apprehend a Relapse into the former State.

The Absurdity of their Notions is not a more proper Subject of Laughter, than
the Guilt is of Punishment; yet had they the Ingenuity, by a free Confession,
to stop the spreading Contagion, I dare say, few would have the ill Nature to
upbraid them with their Faults.

I am sensible that I have raised many Enemies, by the Freedom which I have
taken with them; yet methinks that Caution and Discretion which has withheld
others more able, who look more at Times and Seasons than Things, is little
less than Criminal; at least, they deserve no Praise, who will not make or
enter a Breach, till covered with Crowds. Sure I am, many lamented Worthies
have been condemned in Form of Law, and censured by the thoughtless higher and
lower Vulgar, because of the Pusilanimity or Treachery of others, or fatal
Lethargy of -- Sed quid Turba Romae? sequitur fortunam ut semper, and odit
Damnatos --
the Times; in short, have been thought Fools and Traitors, because they could
not Prophecy.

Yet, as Your Lordship has declined no Danger, where the Cause of Your Religion
or Country called, permit me, though not to aspire to the Imitation, to profit by
the Example.

Many Men above Fears, are Slaves to Ambition or Gain, perfect Mercenaries, and
fight for Pay; they think the World but a Stage to scramble on, and he that
gets most, though to the ruin of Thousands, is with them the Bravest Man. If
Your Lordship had been of this Mind, Your Valor might have carved out a
Fortune enough to have bought a Nation to Your Side.

But that Trust which His present Majesty has reposed in Your Lordship, is more
valuable, than the Indies given by unthinking Multitudes or Monarchs; and I
doubt not but Your Lordship will, in Execution of so high an Office, show that
Bravery of Nature, Fidelity by Principle, and Skill both in Civil and Military
Affairs, from a long well-improv'd Experience, as may sufficiently satisfy all
reasonable Men in the difference between the Ministry of the last Reign, and
This.

For my own part, since my early Zeal for the Service of Your Lordship and the
Public, in truth, of the Public in Your Lordship, has entered me of Your
Retinue, permit me the Glory of declaring to the World, that I am

(MY LORD) Your Lordship's most Obliged and Devoted Humble Servant, WILL.
ATWOOD.

PREFACE.
AFTER those Great and Glorious Things which His present Majesty William III.
has done for this Nation, had we not made His Government our Choice, as His
Protection was our Refuge; the Ingratitude would have been as signal, as our
Deliverance has been, through His auspicious Conduct. And whoever opposes this,
may be thought to fight against those Providence and Predictions, which give
as it were a Sacred Unction, and Designation of His Person, to the Supremacy of
Power among us. Yet how plainly soever this seems to have been designed by
Heaven, I must own, That alone will not authorize Endeavors to this End, unless
it can be done without Injustice to any: For otherwise we should make God the
Author of those Sins of Men, which have often been foretold.

But in order to satisfy those who question what is their Duty at this time,
either for Acting or Acquiescing, I shall show that we have been Grateful
without being Unjust, and may cheerfully act under the present Government, in
sure and certain hope that those great Things which are already come to pass,
according to plain Predictions, are the happy Omens and Earnests, of greater
yet to come, being equally promised. For which end I shall consider,

1. Whether we may not, by comparing the following Predictions, reasonably
conclude, That as the Crown of England has been destined for the late Prince of
Orange, the better to qualify him for the executing God's Purposes for the
Benefit of Mankind; so it has been long since foretold?

2. Whether the People of England have not a rightful Power to contribute
toward their Accomplishment?

4. Whether that Power has not been duly exercised in the present Assembly of
Lords and Commons?

Many, I know, despise Prophesies, and laugh at the Observers of those
Hand-writings from above; and others, though they own that some Beams of Divine
Light had visited the dark Ages of the World, before the Sun of Righteousness
appeared, and that they were more frequent during its abode upon Earth, and for
the two or three first Centuries after: Yet they will have it, that ever since
God has kept his Foreknowledge to himself, without communicating any Notices of
it to Nostredamus Natus Anno 1503.
Mankind. Be their Opinions as it will, it is not unlikely that many, who have
been doubtful what Course to steer in their Endeavors for Denatus Anno 1566.
the Public, will attend to these Divine Admonitions.

But that Nostredamus, either through Judicial Astrology, or Divine Inspiration,
The Edition here chiefly followed, Anno 1568.
or both, as himself professes, did foretell many things which have come to
pass, must not be denied by any body who reads him; Vid. his Preface to his Son.
as where he says, That the Senate of London, that is, the Parliament of Cent.
9. 49.
England, or those of it who usurped its Name, should put to Death their King:
That London should be burnt in Thrice twenty and six, that Cent. 2. 51, 53.
is, Sixty six; and that the Plague should not cease till the Fire: Where,
according to what himself observes of some of his Predictions, he limits the
Place, Times, and prefixed Terms, that Men coming after may Vid. Nostredamus
his Preface.
see and know, that those Accidents have come to pass as he marked. What he
says of the Bastard of England's being half received, is not more obscure, or
less verified. Nor does there seem a greater Veil upon what Cent. 3. 80.
he says of the West's freeing England, where he in very lively Characters
represents the Event of the first and second Attempt there. And as we find
those things to have fallen out accordingly, we have great Cent. 1^. 80. 82.
83. Cent. 6. 43. 3. 9. 3. 49. 6. 34.
ground to believe, that what he speaks of his native Country France, was from
a certain Foresight.

Who can withold his Belief from all those Particulars in relation to it,
which he speaks not in the least mysteriously? Or can any one doubt, but that
this present Juncture bodes it those Ills which he threatens? The Fleet in the
West, and the great Appearance there, with His Majesty's stupendous Progress,
not without cause, made the Cent. 5. 34. 9. 38. Gazet, Dec. 6. Paris, Dec. 8.
Orders are given for the fortifying with all possible diligence the Town and
Citadel of Blay on the Garonne.
French King think Danger approaching by Blay. Nor can it be a question, who is
meant by the Chief of the British Isle, or the Great Cent. 9. 38. 9. 64. 10. 7.
Aemathien, who is to lead the English to Glorious Enterprises. Can it be other
than the Celtique, that is, Belgic Prince, of Trojan, that is, English Blood,
of a Cent. 6. 2.
German Heart, 5. 24. 5. 87.
married to one of Trojan Blood, and in safe Alliance with the Spaniard? I will
not be positive, that a King's danger of drinking the Juice of Orange, unless
he yield to an Accommodation, must necessarily be intended of the late King and
this; though I am very confident no time can be shown when this could be so
properly applied. I cannot but think, that Nostredamus has foretold the Fate of
Cent. 6. 7. 10. 56. 5. 18. 5. 4. 4. 22. 4. 75. 1. 13. 1. 35. 2. 78. 2. 38. 5. 4.
James the Second; the 8. 58. 10. 26.
Question for the Kingdom between this Prince and the reputed Brother-in-Law;
the carrying the Babe into France, the Father's not being able to make good the
Title of his Blood, and this Sham's being the occasion of the late Prince's
accepting the Crown. And who can doubt, but this King is that Native of
Friezland (as one Part of a Country may be taken for the Whole, or other Part
of the Whole) to be cbosen here, upon another's having Death given him drop by
drop by the Guards? Nor can it be denied, that J. 2. has received his
Deaths-wounds, or occasion of a lingering Death, in a great measure, from his
own Guards. Nor is the Crown more plainly foretold to His Majesty from an
Election, than it is to His Royal Consort by way of Succession, which are both
exactly fulfilled in that happy Partnership in Dignity, while the Regal Power
is kept entire to accompany the Marital.

In two Particulars I have taken a Liberty with Nostredamus, which I cannot but
think allowable. 1. Where his Words admit of different Senses, if I have not
left them in aequilibrio, equally applicable to either, I have determined them
to that which best agrees with Events: For if he has truly foretold any thing
without ambiguity, we are to believe, that in others, he, or the Spirit which
dictated to him, intended what has fallen out, if the Words will bear it. 2.
Whereas the Stanzas of his Predictions are scattered up and down, like so many
Sybilline Leaves, I have gathered and sorted them together, according to past
Occurrences, or that relation to the future which they seem to bear; and
certain it is, that God's Holy Spirit foresaw all things in their true Order. I
must own, that the like Persons and Actions may come upon the Stage more than
once; wherefore of many, every body is left to his own Conjecture; but in
others, the Parallel is so exact between Nostredamus his Descriptions, and what
has come to pass in the whole or in part, that where a Connection of Events
seems to be pointed at, 'twill be as difficult not to entertain warm
Expectations of the Accomplishment of the Whole, as to deny that Part is
fufilled: And many Personal Characters, though given in distant Stanzas, have
that mutual Resemblance, that they look like several Parts, or Lineaments at
least, of the same Face, and may without blame be drawn together.

Grebner seems rather to give an Account of what he had lived to see, than to
foretell what lay in the Womb of Time: Who can deny, but A MS. in
Trinity-Colledge Library in Cambridge, cited in the Future History of Europe,
Ed. An. 1650. and in the Northern Star. Nolo, Nolle, Nullus.
that he pointed at the Misfortunes of Charles the First, with the Occasion of
them, the Generalship of the Earl of Essex, then of Sir Thomas Fairfax? And it
is not improbable that the Nullus coming next, might be Nol. Nor can it be a
question but the late Prince of Orange, who by the Mother's Side is Grandson to
Charles the First, and Son-in-Law to James the Second, is that Person of
Charles his Lineage, who was to Land upon the Shore of his Father's Kingdom,
with such Forces as His present Majesty had with him: And if this be admitted,
I am sure His Reign in his own Right is foretold; for the Prophecy of that
Person says, Regnum suum felicissime administrabit; and since Grebner speaks of
one to Reign here after the Knight and the Nullus, it makes it highly probable,
that he had a Foreknowledge of the Protectorship of Oliver Cromwell, who was
commonly known by the Name of Nol.

David Pareus, one would think, had seen the Person of the Prince of David
Pareus natus Anno 1548. obiit Heidelbergae Anno 1622. postquam triennio ante
per quietem vidisset totam urbem occulto incendio fumigantem, etc. Hoffmanni
Lex.
Orange in a Divine Dream, as he was thought to have seen the City of
Heidelburgh in Flames three Years before it happened: Nor is he singular in
calling his Hero a Grecian King; for Nostredamus called his the Aemathien:
either resembling him to Caesar, who conquered Pompey in Greece, in the
Aemathien, or Pharsalian Fields; or else with respect to the future Progress of
his Arms as far as Pareus mentions.

Antonius Torquatus, who wrote above Two hundred Years since, looks like an
Historian setting forth the great Changes and Occurrenrences in Europe, during
the two last Centuries, and not obscurely to describe the present Juncture of
Affairs: Nor does his Northern Prince Ant. Torquatus de eversione Europae,
Dedicated to Matthias King of Hungary, Anno 1480. Edit. Anno 1552.
seem to he other than the English-Belgick Lion.

2d. As to the rightful Power which this Nation had to contribute toward the
accomplishing of those Prophecies, which mark the late Prince of Orange for
King of England,

Not thinking it worth the while to refute the fond Notion of an Absolute See
this excellently well done by my Learned Friend Mr. James Tyrrel, in Patriarcha
non Monarcha.
Patriarchal Power, descending down from Adam to our Kings, in an unaccountable
way; I shall take it for granted, that, as Grot. l. 3. p. 52. Summae potestatis
Subjectum Commune est Civitas. Vid. Schellium de Jure Imperii, p. 32. Plato
(...) definit eum qui judiciorum and magistratuum particeps sit.
Grotius has it, the Civitas is the common Subject of Power; this, in the most
restrained sense, is meant of the People of Legal Interests in the Government,
according to the first Institution. Yet if they are entitled to any fort of
Magistracy, they become part of his Subjectum proprium, the proper or
particular Subject, or Seat of Power: Wherefore I take his Cives to be the same
with Pufendorf's Quorum coitione and consensu primo civitas coaluit, aut qui in
illorum locum successerunt, nempe patres familias, By whose Conjunction and
Consent Sam. Puffend. de Officio hominis and Civis, p. 265.
the Civil Society first came together, or they who succeeded in to their
Rooms, to wit, the Fathers of Families.

And the most sensible of them who deny this, as fighting against V.
Sacrosanct. regum Majest.
their fansied Divine Right of Kingship, own, that the People have in many
Cases a Right to design the Person, if not to confer the Power; only these Men
will have it, that the Extent of the Power of a King, Potestas designativa
personae, and collativa potestatis.
as King, is ascertained by God himself; which I must needs say, I could never
yet find proved with any color. But to avoid a Dispute needless here, since
the Question is not so much of the Extent of Power, as of the Choice of
Persons; Whether any Choice is allowable Nullus interritus est reipublicae
naturalis ut hominis. Cicero de Rep.
for us, must be determined by the fundamental or subsequent Contract, either
voluntary or imposed by Conquest; and it is this which must resolve us, whether
the Government shall continue Elective, or Hereditary to them that stand next
in the Course of Nature, guided to a certain Channel by the Common Law of
Descents, or limited only to the Blood, with a Liberty in the People to prefer
which they think most fit, all Circumstances considered.

And if our Constitution warrants the last, then we may cut the Gordian Knot,
and never trouble our selves with Difficulties about a Demise, or Cession from
the Government, or Abdication of it; for which way soever the Throne is free
from the last Possessor, the People will be at liberty to set up the most
deserving of the Family, unless there be subsequent Limitations by a Contract
yet in force, between Prince and People, which being dissolved, no Agreements
take place but such as are among themselves: In which Case, whatever ordinary
Rule they have set themselves, they may alter it upon weighty Considerations:
And that it is lawful for the People of England at this time to renounce their
Allegiance sworn to J. 2. and to prefer the most deserving of the Blood,
notwithstanding any Oaths or Recognitions taken, or made by them, I shall
evince, not only from the Equity of the Law, and Reservations necessarily
implied in their Submission to a King; but from the very Letter, explained by
the Practice of the Kingdom, both before the reputed Conquest, and since.

1. For the Equity and reserved Cases, I think it appears in the nature of the
thing, that they for whose benefit the Reservation is, must Of equitable
Reservations.
be the Judges; as in all Cases of Necessity, he who is warranted by the
Necessity, Vid. Earl of Clarenden's Survey of the Leviathan, p. 86. speaking of
a Contract whereby the absolute Power of Men's Lives shall be submitted, etc. He
is not bound by the Command of his Sovereign to execute any dangerous or
dishonorable Offices; but in such Cases Men are not to resort so much to the
Words of the Submission, as to the Intention: Which Distinction surely may be
as applicable to all that monstrous Power which he gives his Governor, to take
away the Lives and Estates of his Subjects, without any Cause or Reason, upon
an imaginary Contract, which if never so real, can never be supposed to be with
the Intention of the Contractor in such Cases.
must judge for himself before he acts; though whether he acts according to that
Warrant or no, may be referred to an higher Examen: but where the last resort
is, there must be the Judgment; which of necessary consequence, in these Cases,
must needs be by the People, the Question being of their Exercise of their
Original Power; and where they have by a general Concurrence past the final
Sentence, in this Case their Voice is as V. Cocceium de Principe, page 197.
Leges fundamentales regni vel imperii quae vel diserte pact ae sunt cum
Principe antequam imperium ineat, ut fit hodie cum imperatore (quamvis non ad
eum modum jura Majestatis possideat quo olim Principes) and plerisque aliis in
regnis vel sub ipso regimine a Principe and populo vel ordinibus conduntur, ut
est aurea bulla Carol 4. and alia quaedam in imperio Romano-germanico vel
saltem tacit reipublicae inesse videntur.
the Voice of God, and ought to be submitted to.

For the direction of their Judgment in such Cases, they need not consult
Voluminous Authors, but may receive sufficient Light from those excellent
Papers; The Enquiry into the Present State of Affairs; The Grounds and Measures
of Submission; and, The Brief Justification of the Prince of Orange 's Descent
into England, and of the Kingdom's late Recourse to Arms.

Which I shall here only confirm by some Authorities.

The first, as being of most Credit among them who raise the greatest Dust,
shall be Bishop Sanderson, Of the Obligation of an Oath; Sanderson de Juramenti
obligatione, p. 41.
who shows several Exceptions or Conditions, which of Common Right are to be
understood before an Oath can oblige; in which I shall not confine my self to
the Order in which he places them.

1. If God permit, because all things are subject to the Divine Providence and
Will; nor is it in any Man's power to provide against future Accidents:
Wherefore he who did what lay in him to perform what he promised, has
discharged his Oath.

2. Things remaining as they now are, Whence he who swore to marry any Woman,
is not obliged, if he discovers that she is with Child by another.

These two Exceptions sufficiently warrant Submission to such Government as God
in his Providence shall permit, notwithstanding Oaths to a former King: And if
he cease to treat his People as Subjects, the Obligation which was to a Legal
King determines, before his actual Withdrawing from the Government.

3. As far as we may; as if one swear indefinitely to observe all Statutes and
Customs of any Community, he is not obliged to observe them farther than they
are lawful and honest.

4. Saving the Power of a Superior: Whence if a Son in his Father's Family
swear to do a Thing lawful in it self, but the Father not knowing it, commands
another thing, which hinders the doing that which is sworn; he is not bound by
his Oath, because by the Divine Natural Law he is bound to obey his Father. And
he who has sworn not to go out of his House, being cited to appear before a
Lawful Judge, is bound to go out, notwithstanding his Oath; the Reason is,
because the Act of one, ought not to prejudice the Right of another.

These two last Instances, added to the Consideration of a Legal Vid. Stat. 13
car. 2. c. 1.
King, will qualify the Oath declaring it not lawful, upon any pretense
whatsoever, to take Arms against the King, and abhorring the Traitorous
Position, of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those
that are Commissioned by him.

This I think I may say, with warrant from Bishop Sanderson, That no Man is
bound by this Oath to act against Law, under color of the Vid. infra.
King's Commission; nor to permit such Actions, if it be in his power to hinder
them; the Common Fundamental Law being in this Case the Superior which he is to
obey, and which is to explain and limit the V. Grounds and Measures of
Submission. Salus populi suprema lex. Vid. Johannis a Field Annotata ad Grot.
c. 3. and 4.
Sense of Acts of Parliament seeming to the contrary.

To Bishop Sanderson, I may add Grotius, who runs the Prerogative of Kings as
far as any Man in reason can: Yet he allows of reserved Cases, in which
Allegiance may be withdrawn, though there is no express Letter of Law for it: As,

1. Where the People being yet free, command their future King Grot. de jure
Belli and Pacis, c. 3. p. 60. Vid. Pufendorf Elementa Juris prud. p. 256. Nemo
alteri potest quid efficaciter injungere per modum praecepti in quem nihil
potestatis legitimae habet.
by way of continuing Precept. Whether there be any such with us, can be no
doubt to them who read the Coronation Oaths from time to time required and
taken, upon Elections of some Kings, and the receiving others, by reason of
prior Elections, and Stipulations with their Predecessors.

2. If a King has abdicated or abandoned his Authority, or manifestly Grot. c.
4. p. 86. habet pro derelicto.
holds it as derelict, indeed, he says, he is not to be thought to have done
this, who only manages his Affairs negligently. But surely no Man can think but
the Power of J. 2. is derelict.

And he cites three Cases, wherein even Barelay, the most zealous Asserter of
Kingly Power, allows Reservations to the People.

1. If the King treats his People with outrageous Cruelty.

2. If with an hostile Mind he seek the Destruction of his People.

3. If he alien his Kingdom. This Grotius denies to have any effect, and
therefore will not admit among the reserved Cases: But if no Act which is
ineffectual in Law, will justify the withdrawing Allegiance, then none of the
other Instances will hold; for to that purpose they are equally ineffectual:
Yet who doubts, but the King doing what in him lies to alien his Kingdom, gives
Pretense for Foreign Usurpations, as King John did to the Pope's? And whoever
goes to restore the Authority of the Sea of Rome here, be it only in
Spirituals; endeavors to put the Kingdom under another Head than what our Laws
establish, Vid. Bellarmine how the Pope hooks in Temporals in ordine ad
Spiritualia. Vid. Leges S. Edwardi.
and to that purpose aliens the Dominion: Nor can it be any great Question, but
the aliening any Kingdom or Country, part of the Dominion of England, will fall
under the same Consideration; which will bring the Case of Ireland up to this,
where the Protestants are disarmed, and the Power which was armed for the
Protection of the English there, is put into the Hands of the Native Papists;
so that it is not likely to be restored to its Settlement at home, or
dependence upon England, without great Expense of Blood and Treasure.

Even the Author of Jovian owns, that the King's Law is his most authoritative
Command; and he denies that the Roman Emperor had Jovian, p. 280. Ib. p. 192,
193.
any Right to enslave the whole People, by altering the Constitution of the
Roman Government, from a Civil into a Tyrannical Dominion; or from a Government
wherein the People had Liberty and Property, into such a Government as the
Persian was, and the Turkish now is, etc. Though by the Jov. p. 87. Vid. Just.
Inst. tit. 2.
Roman Lex Regia, which himself takes notice of, the People had transferred all
their Power to the Emperor, yet we see the highest Asserter of Imperial Power
allows of Reservations. Quum lege regia quae de imperio ejus lata est populus
ei and in eum omne imperium suum and potestatem concedat. Vid. Raevardum de
Juris ambiguitatibus. Lib 4. c. 12. de Jure publico.


If, says Bishop Bilson, a Prince should go about to subject his Bilson of
Christian Subjection, Ed. 1586. p. 279. p. 280.
Kingdom to a Foreign Realm, or change the Form of the Commonwealth from
Imperie to Tyranny, or neglect the Laws established by Common Consent of Prince
and People, to execute his own Pleasure; in these and other Cases, which might
be named, if the Nobles and Commons join together to defend their ancient and
accustomed Liberty, Regiment, and Laws, they may not well be accounted Rebels.
And soon after he speaks of a Power for preserving the Foundation, Freedom, and
Form of their Commonwealths, which they forepriz'd, when they first consented
to have a King. Where his meaning cannot be restrained to express Provisions,
excluding such as may be equitably intended. And, not to heap Authorities, with
this agrees the Divine Plato, who after he has affirmed; that the highest
Degrees of Punishment Platonis Politicus, f. 299. Ed. Serrani. (...).
belong to those who will misguide a Ship, or prescribe a dangerous new way of
Physic, having brought in Socrates asking whether Magistrates ought not to be
subject to the like Laws, himself asks, What shall be determined, if we require
all things to be done according to a certain Form, and set over the Laws
themselves, one either chose by the Suffrages of the People, or by Lot, who
slighting the Laws, shall for the sake of Lucre, or to gratify his Lust, not
knowing what (...).
is fit, attempt to do things contrary to the Institution:

This Man, both he and Socrates condemn, as a greater Criminal than those which
he had mentioned, whose Crime he aggravates, as it is an acting against those
Laws, which through a long Experience had been ordained by their Counsel and
Industry, who had opportunely and duly weighed every thing, and had prevailed
upon the People to submit to them.

2d. To proceed to Positive Law, I shall show how the Contract between Prince
and People stood, and has been taken, both before the reputed Conquest, and
since: Where 'twill appear,

1. That Allegiance might and may in some Cases be withdrawn, in the Lifetime
of one who continued King until the occasion of such withdrawing, or Judgment
upon it.

2. That there was, and is, an established Judicature for this, without need of
recurring to that Equity, which the People are supposed to have reserved.

3. That there has been no absolute Hereditary Right to the Crown of England,
from the beginning of the Monarchy; but that the People have had a Latitude for
setting up whom of the Blood they pleased, upon the determination of the
Interest of any particular Person, except where there has been a Settlement of
the Crown in force.

4. That they were lately restored to such Latitude.

1. If the King, not observing his Coronation Oath in the main, lose the Name
of King, then no Man can say that Allegiance continues: But that so it was
before the reputed Conquest, appears by the Confessor's V. Leges Sancti
Edwardi, 17. de Regis Officio.
Laws, where they declare the Duty of the King.

But the King, because he is Vicar to the Supreme King, is constituted to this
end, that he should rule his earthly Kingdom, and the People of God; and above
all, should reverence God's Holy Church, and defend it from injurious Persons,
and pluck from it Wrongdoers, and destroy and wholly ruin them; which unless
he does, not so much as the Name of King will remain in him, etc. Nec nomen
Regis in eo constabit. Vid. Bracton, l. 2. c. 24. Est enim corona regis facere
justitiam and judicium and tenere pacem sine quibus corona consistere non
potest nec tenere.


Hoveden shows how this was received by William 1. Hoveden, f. 604. Rex atque
vicarius ejus. Nota, There was occasion for naming the Deputy, by reason of the
accession of Normandy, requiring the King's absence sometimes.


The King and his Deputy (or Locum tenens in his absence) is constituted to
this end, etc. in substance as above: Which unless he does, the true Name of
King will not remain in him. And, as the Confessor's Laws have it, (in which
there is some mistake in the Transcriber of Hoveden otherwise agreeing with
them) Pope John witnesses, That he loses the Name of King, who does not what
belongs to a King: which is no Evidence that this Doctrine is derived from the
Pope of Rome: The Pope Vid. the Case of Rehoboam, inf. in the Quotation out of
Lord Clarendon.
only confirms the Constitution, or gives his Approbation of it, perhaps that
the Clergy of those Times might raise no Cavils from a supposed Divine Right.
And to show that this is not only for violating the Rights of the Church, the
Confessor's Laws inform us, that Pipin, and Charles his Son, not yet Kings, but
Princes under the French King, foolishly wrote to the Pope, asking him, if the
Kings of France ought to remain content with the bare Name of King? By whom it
was answered, They are to be called Kings, who watch over, defend, and rule
God's Church and Lambert. Qui vigilanter defendunt and regunt Ecclesiam Dei and
populum ejus.
his People, etc. Hoveden's Transcriber gives the same in substance; but, through
a miserable mistake in Chronology, will have it, that the Letter was wrote by
Pipin and his Son to W. 1. Lambart's Version of St. Edward's Laws goes on to
Particulars, among others, That the King is to keep without diminution all the
Lands, Honors, Dignities, Rights, and Liberties of the Crown; That he is to do
all things in his Kingdom according to Law, and by the Judgment of the
Proceres, or Barons of the Realm; and these things he is to swear before he is
Crowned. Barons Majores and Minores.


By the Coronation-Oaths before the reputed Conquest and since, all agreeing in
Substance, every King was to promise the People three Vita Aelfredi, f. 62. Ego
tria promitto populo Christiano meisque subditis, etc.
things.

1. That God's Church, and all the People in the Kingdom, shall enjoy true
Nota, Protection.
Peace. 2. That he will forbid Rapine, and all Injustice, in all Orders of Men.
3. That he will promise and command Justice and Mercy in all Judgments.
And it is observable, That Bracton, who wrote in the time of H. 3. Bracton,
lib. 3. c. 9.
transcribes that very Formulary, or rather Abridgment of the Oath, which was
taken by the Saxon Kings. In Bracton's time, it is certain, the Oath was more
explicit, though reducible to those Heads; and it is observable, that Bracton
says, The King is Created and Elected to this end, that he should do Justice to
all. Where he manifestly shows the King's Oath to be his part of a binding
Contract, it being an Agreement with the People, while they had power to choose.
With Bracton agrees Fleta, and both inform us, that in their days there was no
Fleta, lib. 1. c. 17.
scruple in calling him a Tyrant, and no King, who oppresses his People violata
dominatione, as one has it; or violenta, as the other; either the Rule of
Government being violated, or with a violent Government; both of which are of
the like import.

The Mirror at least puts this Contract out of dispute; showing the Mirror, p.
8.
very Institution of the Monarchy, before a Right was vested in any single
Family, or Person: When forty Princes, who had the Supreme Power here, chose
from among them a King to Reign over them, and govern the People of God, and to
maintain the holy Christian Faith, and to defend their Persons and Goods in
quiet, by the Rules of Right. And at the beginning they caused the King to
swear, That he will maintain the holy Christian Faith with all his Power, and
will rule his People justly, without regard to any Person, and shall be
obedient to suffer Right or Justice, as well as others his Subjects. And what
that Right and Justice was in the last result, the Confessor's Laws explain,
when they show, that he may lose Vid. Seld. Spicel. ad Eadmerum f. 171.
Dissert. ad Fletam, f. 519. Hoved f. 608. Leges H. 1. confirming St. Edward's
Laws, cum illis emendationibus quibus pater meus emendavit consilio Baronum
suorum. Vid. Mat. Par. f. 243. Barons petierunt de Rege Johanne quasdam
libertates and leges Regis Edwardi, f. 244. partim in carta regis Henrici
scripta sunt partimque ex legibus Regis Edwardi antiquis excerpta sunt.
the Name of King. These Laws were not only received by William 1. and in the
Codex of the Laws of H. 1. but were the Laws which in the early Contests which
the Barons had with their encroaching Kings, they always urged to have
maintained; and that their Sanction might not be questioned, the Observance of
them was made part of the Coronation Oath, till some Archbishops, careful only
of their Clerical Rights, provided for no more of those Laws than concerned
them.

By that Oath which is upon Record, and in ancient Prints, the King Vid. Rushw.
1. v. f. 200. Coronation of C. 1. Sir, says the Archbishop, Will you grant and
keep, and by your Oath confirm to the People of England, the Laws and Customs
to them granted by the Kings of England, your Lawful and Religious
Predecessors, namely, the Laws, Customs, and Franchises granted to the Clergy
by the glorious King St. Edward, your Predecessor? V. Rot. Claus. 1 R. 2. n.
44. Magna Carta Ed. cum priv. Anno 1558. Juramentum Regis quando coronatur.
Spelman's Glos. tit. Fidelitas, f. 271.
is to swear to grant, keep, and confirm, among others, especially the Laws,
Customs, and Freedoms granted the Clergy and People by the most glorious and
holy King Edward. And even after the King's taking this Oath, they were to be
asked if they would consent to have him their King, and Leige-lord? Which is
the Peoples part of the Contract; and thus the Contract becomes mutual. To
which purpose the Learned Sir Henry Spelman cites Cujacius, the great Civilian,
to show, that Faith between a Lord and Vassal is reciprocal; and gives an
Instance in the Oath of one of our Saxon Kings, Knute, for the proof of its
being so here between King and Subject.

And with Cujacius agrees the no less judicious Civilian Pufendorf. Sam. Puf.
de Interregnis, p. 274. Quando in regem confertur imperium est mutua juris
translatio, seu reciproca promissio.
When, says he, the Power is conferred upon a King, there is a mutual
Translation of Right, and a reciprocal Promise.

If it be objected, That though this was at the beginning a Contract with a Free
People, it ceased to be so from the time of the Conquest: I answer;

1. Till there be a Consent and Agreement to some Terms of Governing Vid.
Templum Pacis, p. 767. Deditio est pactus quo belle inferior majoris mali
evitandi ergo potestati alterius sese submittit and in jura aliena transit
Dividi potest in simplicem sive purum quando quis mero victoris arbitrio sese
submittit: and compositum sive conditionatum, quando alterius quidem potestati
quis sese subjicit, sed sub conditionibus quibus aut singuli sibi consulunt,
aut toti universitati. So Textoris Synopsis jurifgentium, p. 129. Victoria vel
pactione restricta est vel absoluta; specie priori non plus juris victor
acquirit, quam ei pacto fuit concessum.
and Subjection, 'twill be difficult, if possible, to prove any Right in the
Conqueror, but what may be cast off as soon as there is an Opportunity.

2. William 1. was not received as a Conqueror, but upon a mutual Contract,
upon which old Historians say, Foedus pepigit, He made a Sim. Dunelm. f. 195.
Hoved. f. 450. 2 Samuel 5. 3.
League with the People;which comes to the same thing with what the Holy Writ
records of King David, That the People made a League with him.

His Coronation Oath was the same with that which was taken by his Lord
Clarendon's Survey of the Leviathan, p. 109. and 148, 149. Aequo jure.
Saxon Predecessors, except that the Circumstances of that time required an
additional Clause for keeping an equal Hand between English and French. It Is
not to be doubted, but that the Norman Casuists informed him, that this related
only to Legal Justice; but that in Matters of Grace and Favor, he was left at
large. How much soever he might have strained in this or other Matters, I am
sure he was far from acting so arbitrarily as some have industriously
represented him; I will not say, on purpose to encourage such Actions in other
Princes: And it is yet more certain, that whatever Right either he or any body
under him enjoyed, came from the Compact, not from the Breach of Faith.

3. If William 1. did gain the Right of a Conqueror, it was Personal, and he
never exacted this for his Heirs, as appears not only by his Vid. infr.
Declaration when he came to die, but by the Fealty or Oath of Allegiance Vid.
Leges W. 1. de fide and obsequio erga regem.
which he required in his Laws.

The King's Oath is the real Contract on his side; and his accepting the
Government as a legal King, the virtual one; and so it is vice versa, in
relation to the Allegiance due from the Subject.

Thus far the Author of Jovian is in the right; As in the Oath of Jovian, p.
244.
Allegiance the People swear nothing to the King, but what they are bound to
perform unsworn; so the King, in his Coronation Oath, promises nothing Vid. Dr.
Stillingfl. Irenicum, p. 132, 133.
to the People, but what in Justice and Equity he is bound ^o perform unsworn.
Upon which account I will yield to Saravias, That in Hereditary Kingdoms the
Coronation Oath confers no new Right; and Saravia de Imperii authoritate, f.
221. Grotius de Jure Belli and Pacis, p. 59. Successio non est titulus imperii,
sed veteris continuatio.
therefore there may be a King before his Coronation: Yet we must attend to
Grotius his Rule, who rightly observes, That Succession is only a Continuance
of that Power which the Predecessor had: So that if the first Possessor comes
into Power qualified by express Contract, this binds the Successor, and he is
to be thought to come in upon those Terms. Lord Clarendon's Survey, p. 74.
The Description which Samuel made of the exorbitant Power of Kings, was rather
to terrify them from pursuing their foolish Demand, than to constitute such a
Prerogative as the King should use whom God would appoint to go in and out
before them: Which methinks is very manifest, in that the worst of Kings that
ever reigned among them, never challenged or assumed those Prerogatives; nor
did the People conceive themselves liable to those Impositions, as appears by
the Application they made to Rehoboam, on the Death of Solomon, That he would
abate some of that Rigor his Father had exercised toward them; the rash
rejection of which, contrary to the Advice of his wisest Counselors, cost him
the greater part of his Dominions; and when Rehoboam would by Arms have reduced
them to Obedience, God would not suffer him, because he had been in the fault
himself.

One of the Terms, as appears by the Mirror, was, That the King should suffer
Right, or Justice, as well as his Subjects: And St. Edward's Sword, called the
Curtein, carried before our Kings at their Coronations, Matthew. Paris, Edit.
Land. f. 563. Comite Cestriae gladium Sancti Edwardi, qui Curtein dicitur, ante
Regem bajulante in signum quod Comes est Palatinus and regem si oberret habeat
de jure potestatem cohibendi.
was in the time of H. 3. a known Emblem, and Remembrancer of this: But surely
whoever used that, or a Judicial Power in such Cases as above, how much soever
they continued their Allegiance to the King's Authority, could not be said to
retain it to his Person.

2. There was, and is an established Judicature for the great Case in question,
as is implied by St. Edward's Laws, which suppose some Judge or Judges in the
Case; and, investing the Proceres with the Supreme Judicature, withholds not
this from them. However, it is certain, the Parliament 9 R. 2. referred to a
known Statute, when they mind him of an ancient one not long before put in
practice; whereby, if Knighton, f. 2683. meaning the Case of E. 2.
the King, through a foolish Obstinacy, contempt of his People, or perverse
froward Will, or any other irregular way, shall alienate himself from his
People, and will not be governed and regulated by the Rights of the Kingdom,
and the Statutes and laudable Ordinances made by the Council of the Lords, and
the Peers of the Realm; but shall headily in his mad Counsels exercise his own
arbitrary Will; from thenceforth it is lawful for them, with the common Assent
and Consent of the People of the Realm, to depose him from the Throne, etc.
This Law is not now extant, but was not then denied; and the Reason why it is
not to be found, is very evident, from the Articles against this King some
Years after: In the 24th Article they accuse him of causing the Rolls and
Records concerning the State and Government of his Knighton, f. 1752.
Kingdom to be destroyed and rased, to the great prejudice of the People, and
disherison of the Crown of the said Kingdom; and this, as is credibly believed,
in favor and support of his evil Governance.

The Mirror tells us, That of right the King must have Companions Mirror, p. 9.
to hear and determine in Parliament all Writs and Plaints of Wrong done by the
King, etc.

And the Learned Hornius cites the Speculum Saxonicum, of the like Name and
Nature with our Mirror; the Author of which last, was of Hornii orbis imperans,
p. 196.
his own Name: The Saxon Mirror, as he says, was wrote before the Normans came
hither.

The Justices, or private Persons, says he out of the Speculum, neither
Hornius, p. 196.
ought nor can dispute of the Acts of Kings; yet the King has Superiors in
ruling the People, who ought to put a Bridle to him: And, Hornius says, the old
Saxon Lawyers limit that Maxim, The King has no Peer, to wit, in exhibiting
Justice; but in receiving Justice, they say, he is the least in his Kingdom.

Though Bracton seems to restrain this Rule to Cases wherein the King is Actor,
in judicio suscipiendo si petat; Fleta, who takes it from him, Fleta, lib. 1.
cap. 17. Bracton, lib. 3. c. 9. p. 107.
seems to correct the Copy, and has it si parcat, If he spare doing Justice; to
which end, both affirm, that he was created and chosen King: And Bracton
himself shows elsewhere, that he means more, by the Reason which he assigns why
the King ought to be the least in Ibid.
receiving Justice, Lest his Power should remain without Bridle.This for
certain he sufficiently explains, when he says, That no Justices or Bract. lib.
2. c. 16. p. 34.
private Persons may dispute of the King's Charters and Acts; but Judgment must
be given before the King himself (which must be meant of the King in
Parliament, as appears by a Petition in Parliament 18 E. 1. where Bracton's
Rule is received.) But Bracton says, he V. Ryly, Plac. Parl. f. 20.
has God for his Superior, also the Law by which he is made King, also his
Court, that is to say, the Earls and Barons, for they are called Comites, Fleta
supra, Superiores. So Mirror, p. 9. Ceux compagnions sont ore appelles Comites,
and in Latin Comitatus; where he takes in all that come up to Parliament from
the Counties.
being as it were Companions to the King; and he who has a Companion, has a
Master: Therefore if the King act without Bridle, they are bound to bridle him;
and Bracton in one place says, In receiving Justice, the King is compared to
the least of his Kingdom, without confining it to Cases where he is Actor.

This puts a necessary Limitation to that Maxim, That the King can do no Wrong;
that is, not to be adjudg'd so by Judges Commissaries, or Commissioned Judges,
which the Mirror uses in contradistinction to Judges Ordinary, sitting by an
Original Power; yet this does not Vid. Mirror, p. 209. He there says, Suitors
are Judges ordinaries; and 274. speaks of Counties, and les autres Suitors,
having Jurisdiction in Causes which the King cannot determine by himself, or by
his Judges.
in the least interfere with the Judicial Power of the High Court of
Parliament; and it may be a question, whether that Maxim, as received in the
Courts of Justice, is ever taken to reach farther than, either in relation to
the Remedies which private Persons may there have against personal Injuries
from the King; as where it is said, The King cannot So Judge Crook's Argument in
Hampden's C. p. 59. Whatever is done to the hurt or wrong of the Subjects, and
against the Laws of the Land, the Law imputes that Honor and Justice to the
King, whose Throne is established by Justice, that it is not done by the King,
but it is done by some unsound and unjust Information, and therefore void, and
not done by Prerogative.
imprison any Man, because no Action of False Imprisonment will lie against
him; or rather because of the ineffectualness in Law of his tortious Acts.

But what the Nation, or its Great Councils have thought of such Acts, will
appear by a long Series of Judgments, from time to time past and executed upon
some of their Kings.

Long before the reputed Conquest, Sigibert King of the West Saxons Chronica de
Mailros, f. 137. Anno 756. Bromton, f. 770. Congregati sunt Proceres and
Populus totius regni and eum provida deliberatione a regno unanimi consensu
omnium expellebant.
becoming intolerable by his insolent Actions, was expelled the Kingdom; and
Bromton shows, that this was done in a Judicial manner, by the unanimous
Consent and Deliberation of the Peers and People; that is, in the Language of
latter Ages, by Lords and Commons in full Parliament.

And eighteen Years after, Alcred, King of the Northanimbrians, that is, Chron.
Mailros, f. 138. Anno 774. S. Dunelm. 106. and 107. Consilio and consensu
omnium regiae and familiae ac principum destitutus societate exilio imperii
mutavit Majestatem.
Northumberland, and other adjacent Counties, was banished, and divested of his
Sovereignty, by the Counsel and Consent of all his Subjects. Ib. f. 108. Anno
779. Mailros, Anno 794. f. 139. S. Dunelm. f. 113.
Five Years after this, their King Ethelred was driven from the Throne and
Kingdom, for treacherously procuring the Death of three of his Great Men,
Alwlf, Cynwlf, and Ecga. Within fifteen Years after this, the People having
without Example called back Ethelred from Exile, slew him without any allowable
Precedent, and set up in his stead Osbald a Nobleman, none of the Royal Stock;
and he not answering their Expectation, they deposed him in twenty eight days.

Twelve Years after they deposed their King Eardulf, and remained Mailros. f.
141. Anno 806. Ibid. f. 143. Anno 866. degenerem. Ibid. 144. 872.
long without choosing any. Sixty Years after they deposed their King Osbrich,
and chose Ella, who still swerved from the Ends of Government. Six Years after
they expelled their King Egbert. For sixty nine Years the Kings and their
People agreed, without coming to any Extremities; but then they renounced the
Allegiance sworn to King Edmund, F. 14^. 941. F. 148. 947.
and chose Aulaf King of Norway for their King. Aulaf had not reigned six
Years, when they drove him away; and though they received him again, they soon
cast him off again, and swore Allegiance to the English King Edred: Then they
rejected him, and chose Egric a Dane, with whom their independent Monarchy
expired, and turned into the Government of Earls.

I would not be thought to mention those numerous Examples with the least
approbation; it is certain, they argue great Levity in rejecting, or Folly in
choosing. But if we are believed to receive many Laws and Customs from the
Germans, from whom we are more remotely derived, much more may the English
Monarchy be thought to partake of the Customs of the contiguous Kingdoms which
compose it; and by this frequent Practice the Members of it were sufficiently
prepared to understand that part of the Compact, whereby the Prince was obliged
to suffer Right as well as his Subjects; and that if he did not answer the Ends
for which he had been chosen, he was to lose the Name of Vid. Mirror, and Leges
S. Edw.
King.

Either these Examples, or rather the continual Engagements in War with
Foreigners, had such effect, that from this time, to the Entrance of W. 1.
excepting the Case of King Edwin, (Nephew to the English Monarch Edred) who was
driven out of the Kingdom Anno 957. Vid. Knighton, f. 2312.
I find nothing of the like nature: A King was but a more splendid General; nor
could he hope to maintain his Dignity, but by hardy Actions, and tender usage
of his People: their extraordinary Power had slept but for few Years after the
Death of the reputed Conqueror, till the time of King Stephen, the third
Successor from W. 1. who after Allegiance sworn to him, had it a while
withdrawn Bromton, f. 1031.
for Maud the Empress; but the People soon returned to it again, rejecting her
who was nighest in Blood, because she denied them the Benefit of St. Edward's
Laws. This Power of the People to be sure was roused by the extravagant
Proceedings of King John; upon which the Earls and Barons of England, without
the Formality of Summons Mat. Par. Ed. Tig. f. 243. Anno 1214.
from the King, give one another notice of meeting; and after a long private
Debate, they agreed to wage War against him, and renounce his Allegiance, if he
would not confirm their Liberties; and agreed upon another Meeting, for a
peremptory Demand; declaring, That if he then refused them, they would compel
him to Satisfaction, by taking his Castles: Nor were they worse than their
words, and their Resolutions had for a while their desired Effect, in obtaining
a Confirmation of their Liberties; but the Pope soon absolved the King, and
encouraged him to the violation of them, till they stoutly casting off the
Authority both of King and Pope, proceeded to the Election of another King,
Lewis the Dauphin of France: But the Dauphin assuming Ib. f. 277, 278.
a Power not brook'd in the English Government, upon the Death of King John,
they set up his Son H. 3. and without any solemn Deposing of Lewis, compelled
him to renounce his Pretensions. Henry 288.
treading in his Father's steps, had many unhappy Contests with his Barons; and
having called in numbers of Foreigners, they sent him a solemn Message, That
unless he would remove those troublesome Guests, they would all, by a Common
Council of the whole Realm, drive him and his wicked Counselors out of the
Kingdom, and would consider of making Mat. Par. f. 373.
a new King. Upon this both Sides had recourse to Arms, and neither valued the
others Judicial Sentence; but for certain the Sentence threatened H. 3. was
executed upon his Grandson E. 2. who was formally deposed in Parliament for his
Misgovernment; whose Case, with his next Successor's but one, R. 2. by what I
have observed before, appear Walsingham, f. 107. Rex dignitate regali abdicatur
and filius substituitur.
to have been no Novelties in England. Nor was it long before the like was
again put in practice more than once: H. 6. being a weak misled Prince, gave
occasion to Richard Duke of York, whose Line was put by, to cover his Designs
for restoring the elder Family, with the Pretense of Redressing Public
Grievances: The Crown he was so far from pretending to at first, that himself
swore Allegiance Hollingshead, f. 637.
to H. 6. in a very particular manner: But having afterward an Advantage Ibid.
f. 639, 640.
given, by the Divisions of them who had driven him out of the Land, he in a
fortunate Hour, with lucky Omens, as was believed, challenged the Crown as his
Right; upon which there was an Agreement A Crown over a Branch of Lights in the
House of Commons, and another from the top of Dover-Castle, falling about the
same time. Ibid. f. 657.
ratified in Parliament, That H. 6. should enjoy it during his Life, and R. and
his Heirs after him. And though Richard Duke of York, and his Son Edward,
afterward E. 4. had sworn, That H. 6. should enjoy the Royal Dignity during
Life, without trouble from them, or either of them; yet Richard having been
treacherously slain by the Queen's Army, immediately after the solemn
Pacification, Edward, (...),
at the Petition of some of the Bishops and Temporal Lords, took upon him the
Charge of the Kingdom, as forfeited to him by breach of ^661.
the Covenant established in Parliament. Yet this gave him no sure Settlement;
for the Popularity of the Earl of Warwick drove him out of ^^^5.
the Kingdom, without striking a Stroke for it: Upon which H. 6. was again
restored to his Kingly Power, and Edward was in Parliament declared a Traitor
to the Country, and an Usurper of the Realm, the Settlement upon R. and his
Heirs revoked, and the Crown entailed upon 678.
H. 6. and his Heirs Males, with Remainders over, to secure against Edward's
coming to the Crown: Yet the Death of the Earl of Warwick having in effect put
an end to King Henry's Power, he was soon taken Prisoner, and put to death, as
his Son had been before; and then Edward procures a Confirmation in Parliament,
of the Settlement, under which he enjoyed the Crown. Thus as the Power of the
People, 693.
or Great ones of Interest with them, turned the Scales from time to time; so
'twas their Consent which fixed them at last, during the the Life of E. 4.

It may be said, That whatever the Law or Practice has been anciently, neither
can now be of any moment, by reason of the Oath required by several Statutes
declaring it not lawful, upon any Pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the
King; and abhorring the Traitorous Position, Stat. 13 Car. 2. Stat. 2. c. 1.
Stat. 13 and 14 Car. 2. c. 3. So c. 4.
of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person. And 2.

The Clause in the Statute 12 Car. 2. whereby it is declared, That by the
undoubted and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers 15 Car. 2. c.
5. 12 Car. 2. c. 30.
of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together, in Parliament, or out of
Parliament, nor the People, Collectively or Representatively, nor any other
Persons whatsoever, had, have, has, or ought to have, any Coercive Power over
the Persons of the Kings of this Realm.

I shall not here insist, in answer to the first, on the necessity of a
Commission, and a King, continuing Legal in the Exercise, as well as Possession
of Power; nor the difference between the Traitorous Acts of single Persons, and
the Revolt of a Nation; nor yet upon the Authority Vid. Justin. Pandec. l. 1.
tit. 3. Nulla juris ratio aut aequitatis benignitas patitur, ut quae salubriter
pro utilitate hominum introducuntur, ea nos duriore interpretatione contra
ipsorum commodum producamus ad severitatem.
of the Common Law, whereby a Constable, or other Officer chose by the People,
may act without any Authority from the King.

And for the latter, as Coertion is restrained to the Person of the King, the
declaring against that, is not contrary to the Authorities for discharging
Allegiance by a Judicial Sentence, or otherwise, by virtue of equitable and
supposed Reservations; provided a tender Regard to the Person be still
observed: But if Proceedings to free our selves from his Authority, fall under
this Coertion, then I shall offer something which may remove both this and the
other from being Objections to what I have above shown.

To keep to what may equally reach to both Authorities:

I shall not urge here, That these Statutes being barely Declaratory, Vid. Rot
Parl. 39 H. 6. n 18.
and enacting no Law for the future, introduce none; so that if the Fundamental
Laws shall appear to be otherwise, the Declarations do not supplant them: Nor
yet to insist upon a Rule in the Civil Law, That the Commonwealth is always a
Minor, and at liberty to renounce the Obligations which it has entered into
against its Benefit, which is Vid. Cujacium, tom. 4. f. 154. Resp.
circumscripta in integrum restituitur perinde ac pupillus vel adolescens, etc.
Vid. Cic. de Legibus. Salus populi suprema lex esto. Inter Leges 12 Tabularum,
of which Tacitus says, Accitis quae usquam egregia, compositae duodecim Tabulae
finis aequi juris. Tacitus Ed. Plant. p. 90.
the Supreme Law.

But I shall stop their Mouths who object these Statutes, and maintain, That
according to what themselves receive for Law, the Parliaments which enacted
these Declarations, had no power so to do; and then the Law must stand as it
did. For this let us first hear Mr. Sheringham, whose Authority few of these
Men dispute.

They that lay the first Foundation of a Commonwealth, have Sheringham of the
King's Supremacy, p. 41.
Authority to make Laws that cannot be altered by Posterity, in Matters that
concern the Rights both of King and People: For Foundations cannot be removed,
without the Ruin and Subversion of the whole Building. Wherefore, admit the
Acts had been duly made, according to him, they would be void, if the
Fundamental Law were as I have shown.

However, I am sure I can irrefragably prove to them who will not have a Nation
saved without strict Form of Law, That the Parliament which made those Acts,
had no Power at the time of making them, being by the express Words of a former
Statute repealed.

The Triennial Act, 16 Car. 1. provides in a way not easily to be defeated, not
only for holding a Parliament once within Three Years at least, but that all
Parliaments which shall be Prorogued or Adjourned, 16 Car. 1. Nota, There was
no attempt to repeal this till 16 Car. 2. c. 1.
or so continued by Prorogation or Adjournment, until the Tenth of September
which shall be in the third Year next after the last Day of the last Meeting
and Sitting of the foregoing Parliament, shall be thenceforth clearly and
absolutely dissolved. Now, say I, that Parliament which enacted these Laws, had
sat beyond that Time; Ergo, etc. These were made in the Parliament next after
the Convention which brought in the King, which they, I am sure, will not call
a Parliament: Wherefore we must go back to the first Long Parliament, which,
upon their own Rule, Rex est caput and finis Parliamenti, was dissolved by
Brook tit. Commission, n. 21. Ibid. tit. Officer, n. 25. Vid. Stat. 17 Car. 1.
Every thing or things done or to be done, for the Adjournment, Proroguing, or
Dissolving of this Parliament, contrary to this present Act, shall be utterly
void.
the Death of C. 1. Anno 1648. notwithstanding the Act for making it Perpetual,
which indeed by the Words of it seems only to provide against any Act of the
King to the contrary, without their Consent; But by the Death of the King that
Parliament lost the Being which before it had, as it was under him when it was
Parliamentum nostrum, the Parliament of Charles the First, and so expired An.
1648. by Act in Law.

And perhaps its own breaking up in Confusion before, was in Law Anno 1647.
Vid. Hist. of the Civil Wars, f. 207.
an Adjournment sine die, working a Dissolution; by either of which that
Parliament was dissolved more than three Years before the Parliament which made
the Statute in question; which Parliament assembled An. 1661. and was ipso
facto dissolved when it attempted to make those Statutes, it having been
continued by Prorogation or Adjournment beyond the Tenth of September in the
Third Year after the Dissolution of the last Parliament of Charles the First,
which was the next foregoing Legal Parliament, according to strict Form; for
the Parliament which brought in C. 2. Anno 1660. was not summoned by the King's
Writs; consequently, the Parliament 1661. having no Power, after it had
continued as above, whatever was the Ancient Law in this Matter, remains as it
did before those Laws.

If it be Objected, That the Necessity of the Times had dispensed with the
Letter of the Triennial Act, as to this Particular:

1. They who would plead these Statutes, cannot urge it, since they will not
allow of greater Necessity to authorize the Maintaining and Restoring the
Constitution: But surely however Necessity might support other Laws, it shall
not such as alter the Constitution, but every Legal Advantage shall be taken
for restoring it.

2. The Necessity was not absolute; for the First Parliament of Charles the
Second might continue together as long as they could sit without Prorogation or
Adjournment, and be good for a day at least, time enough to have repealed the
former Statute as to that part, and to qualify themselves for a longer
Continuance.

In short, They with whom our Dispute is, are either for the Unalterableness of
Fundamentals, according to which, what I have shown remains, notwithstanding
all Efforts to the contrary; or else, all of a sudden, they have a mighty Zeal
for the strict Letter of the Law, by which that Parliament, which endeavored
to alter the Fundamental Contract, was ipso facto dissolved before such
Attempt: However, since the Question is not about a Coercive Power over Kings,
but barely concerning Allegiance to them, whenever he who was King ceases Q^^m
aufertur (...) juramenti, juramentum cessat ratione eventus; qui c^sus est
eorum qui juraverunt se obedituros Domino aut Principi alicui, qui postea
cessat esse talis. Amesius de Juramento, lib 4. c. 22.
to be so, either by the Act of God, or the Law, the Obligation of Allegiance
necessarily determines, as the subject Matter of it fails.

But lest the Liberty allowed in extraordinary Cases, be used as a cloak for
maliciousness, I shall restrain it with the Authority of the Learned Pufendorf.

In Contracts by which one is made subject to another, this has the Right of
Judging what the Subject is to perform, and has also a Sam. Pufendorf de
Interregnis, p. 272. Nota.
Power conferred of compelling him to the Performance, if he refuses; which
Coercive Power is by no means reciprocal. Wherefore he who rules, cannot be
called in question for breaking his Contract, unless he either wholly abdicate
the Care of the Government, or omnem reipublic^ cutam ab^^^averit. (...) malo.
become of an hostile mind toward his People, or manifestly, with evil
Intention, depart from those Rules of Governing, upon the Observance of which,
as upon a Condition, the Subjects have suspended their Allegiance: Which is
very easy for any one who Governs always to shun, if he will but consider,
that the Highest of Mortals are not free from the Laws of Humane Chance.

But that the Judicial Power of the People, so qualified as above, is not
peculiar to England, might appear by the Customs of most neighboring Nations:
For Denmark, Swedeland, and Norway, which had anciently three distinct
Negatives in the Choice of a King, I shall refer to Krantius, (...)
particularly in the remarkable Story of their King Erick, who was adopted Son
of the Three Kingdoms, Anno 1411. he having provoked his People, by the
Outrages of his Officers and Soldiers, he was opposed with Force by one
Engelbert, a Danish Nobleman, transmitted down to Posterity with the fair
Character of engaging in the Public Cause, neither out of love of Rule, nor
greediness of Gain, but mere compassion to an oppressed People. This so generous
an Undertaking was so justly Popular, that Eric, not able to stem the Tide,
withdrew from Denmark, the Place of his usual Residence, to Swedeland: But
Engelbert's Noble Cause found so few Opposers there also, that the King, as a
Pattern to J. 2. privately ran away, and recommended his Nephew in Krantius, f.
188.
his stead; but they told him plainly, he was made King by Adoption, and had no
Right to surrogate another: Him (there not being the inconsistency of a
different Religion between the Head and Members of the same Body) they would
have received again upon Terms; but he refusing, the Three Kingdoms unanimously
chose one of another Family.

For the Authority of the People even in France, no longer since than the time
of Lewis 11. Hottoman's Francogallia gives a large Anno 1460. Hottoman.
Francogal. c. 23. De memorabili auctoritate concilii in Regem Ludovicum 11.
Proof.

Nor is the Emperor of Germany more exempt; for the Golden Bull of C. 4.
provides who shall sit as Judge or High-Steward, when he comes to be Impeached:
And by that, the Palatine of the Rhine has the like Power with that which,
Matthew Paris says, the Earl of Chester Mat. Par. sup. f. 563.
had here, as Count Palatine: Nor is this in the Empire founded merely upon
that Bull; for the Bull it self says, Sicut ex consuetudine introductum
dicitur, "As it is said to have been introduced by Custom. And Freherus gives an
Instance of this before that Bull, in the Case Freherus de Orig. Palatinarum,
f. 113, 119, 120. Gunteri Thulemarii Octovirat. c. 18.
of King Albert, whom they threatened to depose, for killing his Leigelord
Adolphus.

With Freherus agrees Gunterus, in his Octoviratus, who says, That the Palatine
of the Rhine, Major Domo to the Emperor, is by Custom Judge of the Emperor
himself, or rather in the highest Matters declares the Sentence of the
Electoral College: And he cites several Authors to prove the like Office or
Power to have been in diverse Kingdoms and Ibid. p. 251.
Principalities; and names France, England, Arragon, Spain, Denmark, Poland,
Bohemia, etc. And for France, Loyseau in effect shows this Power to have
belonged to their Mayor du Palais; for he owns the Loyseau du droits des
Offices, Ed. Anno 1610. f. 409. Ibid. f. 410.
Power to have been greater than the Roman Prefect of the Palace had; and yet
he cites the Words of the Emperor Trajan, giving his Prefect a naked Sword,
which he enjoined him to use against him, if he misgoverned. And Loyseau says,
That this dangerous Office was put down by the Kings of the Third Line, that
they might perpetuate the Crown in their Family. This Office he supposes to
have been split into the Conestable's, Chancellor's, Treasurer's, and the Grand
Maistre's du France, or Count du Palais, which he seems to resemble to an High
Steward with us.

And I meet with an old English Author, who affirms almost such a Treatise of
Politic Power, Ed. Anno 1556.
Power as is abovementioned, to have belonged to the High-Conestable of
England: His Words are these.

As God has ordained Magistrates to hear and determine private Matters, and to
punish their Vices; so also will he that the Magistrates Doings be called to
account and reckoning, and their Vices corrected and punished, by the Body of
the whole Congregation, or Commonwealth: As it is manifest by the Memory of the
ancient Office of High-Constable of England, unto whose Authority it pertained,
not only to summon the King personally before the Parliament, or other Courts
of Justice, to answer and receive according to Justice, but also, upon just
occasion, to commit him to Ward.

3. There has been no Hereditary Right to the Crown of England by Proximity of
Blood, from the Fundamental Contract; but the People have had a Latitude for
the setting up whom of the Blood they pleased, upon the determination of the
Interest of any particular Person, except where there has been a Settlement of
the Crown in force.

The Kingdom, I own, is founded in Monarchy; and so is Poland, which yet is
absolutely Elective: Nor is there any Consequence, that the Dissolution of the
Contract between the immediate Prince and People, destroys the Form of
Government; for that depends upon a Vid. Sam. Pufendorf. Dissertationes de
Interregnis, p. 267. Post decretum circa formam regiminis novo pacto opus erit,
quando constituuntur ille vel illi in quem vel in quos regimen caetus confertur.
prior Contract, which the People entered into among themselves: And, that by
virtue of this, to avoid endless Emulations, Kings have generally, from the
first Erection of the English Monarchy, been chosen out of the same Family,
appears beyond contradiction.

I know some talk of a Birthright and Inheritance in the Crown, which Jovian,
p. 78.
is not founded in the Statutes, but on the Original Custom and Constitution of
the English Government, which is an Hereditary Monarchy, according Ib. Preface.
to proximity of Blood.

But I would desire all Men of this Opinion, impartially to weigh these
following Particulars.

1. There was very anciently an Act made in a General Convention At Calcuth,
Anno 789. Spel. Con. vol. 1. f. 291.
of all England, in Conventu Pananglico, That their Kings should be elected by
the Clergy, and senioribus populi, and the Elders of the People; that is, such
as were Members in their Great Councils, or Witena Gemots, Assemblies of sage
or wise Men. This, tho it was long before the reputed Conquest, yet was never
repealed or cut off by the Sword, nay, seems received with the Confessor's
Laws, as included in them: Which leads to another Head.

2. The Confessor's Law received by William 1. and continued downward, as the
noblest Transcript of the Common Law, shows, that the Kings of England are
elected, and the End for which they are chosen by the People: After the same
manner do the ancient Historians and Lawyers commonly express Accessions to the
Throne, and seem industriously to mind Kings of it, that, according to the
Caution given the Jewish King, their hearts be not lifted up above their
Brethren. Deuteronomy. 17. v. 20.


3. According to the Usage from before the reputed Conquest downwards, the
People are asked, whether they are content to have such a Man King?

4. The most Absolute of the English Monarchs never believed, that their
Children had a Right to the Crown, except the People consented that they should
succeed; as appears by King Alfred's Will, and the Aelfredi Test. Append. ad
ejus Vitam, f. 195. Et mecum tota nobilitas West-Saxonicae gentis consentiunt,
quod me opertet dimittere eos ita liberos, sicut in homine cogitatio ipsius
consistit.
Deathbed Declaration of William 1. And therefore some of our Kings, against
whom there has been no pretense of better Title in any Camd. Brit. f. 104. de
W. 1. Neminem Anglici regni constituo H^redem, sed aterno conditori cujus sum,
and in cujus manu sunt omnia, illud commendo: non enim tantum decus
haereditario jure possedi, etc.
particular Person or Family, when they stood upon good Terms with their
People, have often prevailed with them, in their Lives-time, to secure the
Succession to their Eldest Sons; and H. 2. to prevent hazarding the Succession,
endangered himself, by getting his eldest Son Crowned, himself living: But as
the going no farther than the eldest, argues, that they looked on that as a
Favor; the pressing for a Settlement on their Issue in any manner, argues,
that it was not looked upon as a clear Point of Right without it.

Of later Times Settlements have been made in Tail, which tho they were
occasioned by Pretenses to Titles, are Records against an Hereditary Monarchy.

5. The Oaths of Allegiance, required of all the Subjects, were never V. Leges
W. 1. de Fide, etc. Statuimus etiam ut omnes liberi homines foedere and
sacramento affirment, quod intra and extra regnum Angliae Willielmo Regi Domino
suo fideles esse volunt, etc. Leges S. Edw. tit. Greve. Vid. Juramentum homagii
facti Regi. Prynne's Signal Loialty, p. 274. Poll. Virgil. l. 22. sub initio.
extended to Heirs, but were barely Personal, till Settlements of the Crown
were obtained upon the Quarrels between the Families of York and Lancaster; and
though H. 4. obtained in Parliament an Oath to himself, the Prince, and his
Issue, and to every one of his Sons successively; and in the time of H. 6. the
Bishops and Temporal Lords swore to be true to the Heirs of R. Duke of York;
yet perhaps no Oath of Allegiance to the King and His Heirs can be shown to
have been required of the Subjects in general, till that 26 H. 8. according to
the Limitations of the Statute 25.

6. Even where the People had settled the Crown, they seemed to intend no more,
than to give a Preference before other Pretenders; not but that upon weighty
Reasons they might alter it, as appears by Pollydore Virgil, who was never
thought to lie on the Peoples side, whatever Evidences for them he may have
concealed or destroyed; whose Words of H. 5, to whom the Crown had been limited
by Parliament, may be thus rendered.

Prince Henry having buried his Father, causes a Council of Nobles to be
convened at Westminster; which while they, according to the Nota, Proceres may
take in the Nobiles minores.
Custom of their Ancestors, consulted about making a King, behold, on a sudden
some of the Nobility, of their own accord, swear Allegiance to him; which
officious Good Will was never known to have been shown to any before he was
declared King.

7. As the Practice of the Kingdom is an Evidence of its Right, numerous
William 2. was elected during the Life of his eldest Brother, who was set aside
by the English, against whom he had discovered Ill Will, in spite of the
Normans. So H. 1. Stephen was elected while Maud the Daughter of H. 1. was
alive; and H. 2. succeeded in her Lifetime, upon an Agreement made with
Stephen, by the People's Consent. R. 1. as within. King John crowned in the
Lifetime of his eldest Brother's Son, Prince Arthur: So was his Son H. 3. in
the Lifetime of Elenor, Prince Arthur's Sister. E. 1. as within. E. 2.
elected. E. 3. set up by the People in his Father's Lifetime, which the Father
took for a Favor, R. 2. declared Successor by Parliament, in the Lifetime of
his Grandfather. H. 4. of the younger House, came in by the People's Choice,
upon their deposing R. 2. H. 5. and 6. Son and Grandson to H. 4. came in upon a
Settlement. E. 4. of the elder House, cam^ in under an Agreement made in
Parliament between his Father, who lived not to have the Benefit of it, and H.
6. his Son. E. 5. was never crowned. R. 3. who set him aside, was of the
younger House. H. 7. who vanquished him, could have no Right of Proximity; for
the Daughter of E. 4. and his own Mother, were before him. All that came in
since, enjoyed the Crown, either under the various Settlements of H. 8. or that
of H. 7. which took place again in J. 1. or from H. 6. at the highest.
Instances may be produced of Choices, not only so called by the Historians,
but appearing so in their own Natures; wherein no regard has been had to
Proximity, but barely to Blood.

And I believe no Man can show me any more than Two since the reputed Conquest,
of whom it can be affirmed, with any semblance of Truth, that they came in
otherwise than upon Election, expressed by the Historians of the Time, or
implied, as they had no other Title, or else a late Settlement of the Crown,
either upon themselves immediately, or in Remainder. The Two upon which I will
yield some Color, are R. 1. and E. 1. which singular Instances will be so far
from turning the Stream of Precedents, that unless the Form or Manner of
Recognizing their Rights as Hereditary be produced, the Presumption is strong,
that the Declarations of the Conventions of those Days, or the People's
acquiescing upon the Question, Whether they would consent to the King in
nomination, or both, made even their Cases to be plain Elections. And of these
two Instances, perhaps, one may be struck off; For though Walsingham says of E.
1. They recognized him for their Leige-lord, that does not necessarily imply a
Recognition Walsingham, f. 1.
from a Title prior to their Declaration; for which way soever a King comes in
duly, he becomes a Liege-lord, and is so to be recognized or acknowledged; and
that the Title was not by this Author supposed prior to the Recognition,
appears, in that he says, Paterni honor is Walsingham, ib.
successorem ordinaverunt, They ordained or appointed him Successor of his
Father's Honor. And yet his Father, to secure the Sir P. P. Obligation of
Oaths, f. 295.
Succession to him, had soon after his Birth issued out Writs to all the
Sheriffs of England, requiring all Persons above Twelve Years old to swear to
be faithful to the Son, with a Salvo for the Homage and Fealty due to himself.

Indeed, of R. 1. the Historian says, He was to be promoted to the Walsingham,
Ypod Neustriae, f. 45.
Kingdom by Right of Inheritance; yet the very Word promoted shows something
that he was to be raised to, higher than that Right alone would carry him;
which he fully expresses in the Succession of E. 2. which, he says, was not so
much by Right of Inheritance, as by the unanimous Assent of the Peers and Great
Men. Which shows, that ordinarily Walsingham, f. 68.
they, respectively, who stood next in Blood, might look for the Crown before
another, till the People had by their Choice determined against them.

But this is farther observable of R. 1. That he was not called King here, but
only Duke of Normandy, till he was Crowned; which, Bromton, f. 1155. So
Hoveden, f. 656.
next to the People's Choice, was in great measure owing to his Mother's
Diligence: For he being absent at the Death of his Father, his Mother, who had
been released out of Prison by his means, to secure the Succession to him, went
about with her Court from City to City, and from Castle to Castle, and sent
Clergymen, and others of Reputation, with the People into the several
Counties, by whose Industry she obtained Oaths of Allegiance to her Son and her
self, from the People in the County-Courts, as it should seeem; notwithstanding
which, the Archbishop charged him at his Coronation, not to assume Bromton, f.
1159.
the Royal Dignity, unless he firmly resolved to perform what he had sworn: To
which he answered, That by God's help he would faithfully observe his Oath. And
Hoveden says, That he was Crowned by the Counsel and Assent of the Archbishops,
Bishops, Earls, Barons, and Hoveden, f. 656.
a great number of Milites, which Word was then of a large extent. Wherefore I
submit it to Consideration, whether these are any Exceptions to the General
Rule, or are not at least such as confirm it.

8. The Parliament 11 H. 7. declares, That it is against all Laws, 11 H. 7. c.
1.
Reason, and good Conscience, that Subjects should lose or forfeit for doing
their true Duty and Service of Allegiance to their Prince, or Sovereign Lord
for the time being; that is, to the King de facto, as appears by the Occasion
of the Law to encourage the Service of H. 7. who had no Title but from his
Subjects; and there is a Provision, That any Act or Acts, or other Process of
Law to the contrary, shall be void: Which being built upon the Supposition,
That according to the Fundamental Law, the People's Choice gives sufficient
Title, perhaps is not vain and illusory, as the Lord Bacon would have it; but
argues strongly, Lord Bacon's Hist. of H. 7. f. 145.
that the Parliament then thought the Monarchy Elective, at least with that
Restriction to the Blood, which I yield. And if this be part of the Fundamental
Contract, for which it bids very fair, then perhaps no body of any other Stock
may be King within this Statute.

To what I have offered on this Head, the following are all the Objections of
seeming weight which have occurred to me.

The Maxim in Law, That the King never dies; or, to use the Object. 1. Finch's
Description of the Common Law French, Ed. An. 1613. f. 20. b. and 21. a. The
same made use of Reflections upon our late and present Proceeding, p. 10.
Words of Finch, The Perpetuity which the Law ascribes to him, having perpetual
Succession: and he never dies; for in Law it is called the Demise of the King.

To which I answer, 1. That neither that Book, nor any Authority Answ.
there cited, is so ancient as the Settlement of the Crown above observed; and
that the Death is but a Demise or transferring the Right immediately to a
Successor, may be owing to the Settlement, but is no Argument of any Right
otherwise. 2. Even where there is an Election, though never so long after the
Death of the Predecessor, yet by way of Relation, it is as if there were a
Demise or Translation of Interest, without any Interregnum, as it was resolved
by all the Judges 1 Eliz. of which the Words of Lord Dyer are, The King who is
Heir or Successor, Dyer, f, 165.
may write and begin his Reign the same day that his Progenitor or Predecessor
dies; with which agrees the Lord Anderson. But Anderson, f. 44. He has it, Le
Successeur and le Heir; elsewhere it is Heir ou Successeur. Ib. f. 45. v. 1 E.
6. c. 7. v. 7. Rep. f. 30. Object. 2.
that to many intents a King dies in his Politic Capacity, as well as Natural,
appears by the discontinuance of Process in Criminal Causes, and such in Civil
as was not returned in the Life of the former King, till kept up by Statute;
the determination of Commissions, and the like.

It Is urged, That the Hereditary Right contended for, has not been interrupted
by the People's Elections, so often as it should seem by the Breaches in the
Succession; for that many who came in before them who stood next, were
Testamentary Heirs of the Appointment of the Predecessor, which argues an
Inheritance in him that disposes. And Dr. Brady thinks he produces an Example,
where the Election of the People Brady's Hist of the Succession f. 8, 9.
was bound and limited by the Nomination of the Predecessor.

But if he had duly weighed the Presidents of this kind, he might have
understood, that an Election without a Nomination had full effect, Answ.
while a bare Nomination had none; and he might have learnt from Grotius, that
among the Germans, from whom we descend, Kingdoms Grotius de jure Belli and
Pacis, lib. 1. p. 60.
did not use to pass by Will, and that Wills were but Recommendations to
People's Choice, but not Dispositions.

I find it urged, That as anciently as the time of E. 3. the Realm Object. 3.
declared, That they would not consent to any thing in Parliament, Vid. Debates
about Deposing.
to the disherison of the King and his Heirs, or the Crown whereunto they were
sworn.

If any Color of Evidence can be produced, that the Subjects of England, so
early as that, swore Allegiance to the King and his Heirs, Answ.
this were to the purpose. Indeed, I find, that before this, 24 E. 1. Knighton,
f. 2482.
a Foreign Prince, the King of Scotland, Feudatory to the Crown of England, did
Homage to the King and his Heirs; but the like not being exacted of the
Subjects of England till particular Acts, whereby the Crown was settled, it
argues strongly, as indeed appears from the Subject Matter, that the Homage
paid by a Foreign Prince was due to none but the present King, and his
Successor to the Kingdom, whoever was next of Blood: And by parity of Reason,
the Disherison of the King, and him, her, or them who succeeded to the Crown,
was all that could be referred to, when they urge the Obligation of their Oath
to the King and his Heirs, or the Crown, which appears farther, not only from
the old Oath of Allegiance, to which Leges Sancti Edwardi. tit. Greve.
Conjurati fratres ad defendendum regnum, etc. and honores illius omni
fidelitare cum eo servare. So Leges W. 1. tit. De fide and obsequio erga Regem.
Quod Willielmo Domino suo fideles esse volunt and honores illius, etc.
defendere. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 29.
they must needs have reference, whereby they are bound to defend the Rights of
tbe Crown; but even from the Matter then in question, which was not of the
Right of Succession, but of a Flower of the Crown. Bracton puts this out of
dispute, when he tells us, That Inheritance comes not from an Heir, but an Heir
from Inheritance; and that Inheritance is the Succession to all the Right which
the Predecessor had by any sort of Acquisition. With Bracton Vid. Sir P. P. As
Successors are Heirs, so Dr. Brady tells us, Gloss. f. 18. That Prepossessor,
one that possessed the Land before the present Possessor, without any relation to
Blood or Kindred, is Ancestor in Doomsday, and in the Writ de morte
Antecessoris.
agrees the Civil Law, Haeredis significatione omnis significari Successores
credendum est, etsi verbis non sunt expressi; By Heirs we are to believe all
Successors to be signified, although not expressed in Words: And again, Nihil est
aliud haereditas quam successio in universum jus quod defunctus habuit;
Inheritance is nothing else but Succession to all the Right which the Deceased
had. Wherefore I cannot but wonder that so Learned a Man as Sir P. P. should
cite this to prove, Sir P. P. Obligation of Oaths, f. 302.
that Allegiance is due to the Heirs and Successors in a Legal Course of
Descent; that is, as he explains, or receives it out of Mr. Prynne Fol. 298.
by proximity of Succession in regard of Line. Fol. 300.


Nor is this Learned Man more fortunate in mentioning the Salvo, which
Littleton tells us is to be taken to the Oath of Homage to a Subject, Sir P. P.
f. 297. Littleton, tit. Homage, sect. 85.
Salve la Foy que jeo doy a nostre Signior le Roy; where there is not a word of
Heirs; but he tells us, that Littleton cites Glanvil, where the word Heirs is;
whereas it is the Lord Cook who makes the Quotation, as he does of Bracton,
whose Sense of the word Heirs we have seen; and Littleton fully confirms it, by
leaving out the word Heirs, as a Redundancy, Allegiance being due to every one
that becomes King, and to no other.

But to put the extent of Heirs to a King out of Controversy, we have the
Resolution of all the Judges in B. R. in the time of Q. Eliz. on Popham's Rep.
f. 16. and 17.
my side. King R. 3. had granted certain Privileges to the Burgesses of
Gloucester, with a Saving to himself and his Heirs; and it was agreed by all the
Justices, That although the Words are, Saving to himself and his Heirs, it shall
be taken for a perpetual Saving, which shall go to his Successors. This
therefore they adjudg'd to reach the Queen, who, it is well known, was not Heir
to R. 3.

The great Objection is, That in the Contests for the Crown between Object. 4.
the Families of York and Lancaster, each Side pretended Title by Proximity of
Blood; and as either prevailed, their Right was acknowledged to be according to
God's Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature. To Rot. Parl. 1 E. 4.
which I answer:

As appears in the very Objection, this was applied to those who had no such
Right of Proximity, as well as those who had; and thus Answ.
'twas to R. 3. as well as to E. 4. And even the Election of H. 4. after the
Deposing and Relinquishing of R. 2. with his own express Consent, is by the
same Parliament that says so much of the Title of E. 4. called an Usurpation
upon R. 2. Wherefore if this Record be any way leading to our Judgments, no
Deposing or Resignation, whatever be the Inducement, can be of any force.

Whence it is plain, that all these are but Complements to the longest Sword,
however, they neither set aside former Authorities, nor establish any Right for
the future, at least not more for the Heirs of E. 4. than the Parliament of R.
3. did for his Heirs: Yet whoever comes next by Right of Proximity, according
to any Settlement in being, I will not deny that they enjoy the Crown according
to God's Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature; for, as the Great Fortescue has
it, All Laws Fortescue de laudibus Legum Angl. c. 3. Jovian, p. 253.
published by Men have their Authority from God; and upon which the Author of
Jovian argues, and supposes all Laws of Men to be the Laws and Ordinances of
God: Yet who can say but these Humane Creatures, or Ordinances of Men, may be
altered, as they were made? And though it may seem strange to some, yet I may
with great Authority affirm, That when the People had determined the Right on
the Side of R. 3. he was King as much according to God's Law, as E. 4. For
Pufendorf holds, That where the Question is, what Degree, Pufendorf de
Interregnis, p. 288. Quod si dubitatur qui gradus aut quae linea sit, potior
declarata voluntas populi finem liti imponet, etc.
or what Line is best, the declared Will of the People determines the
Controversy; since every one is presumed to understand his own Intention; and
the People that is now, is to be thought the same with that by which the Order
of Succession was constituted.

But let Men argue as nicely as they please, for a Right or Sovereignty
inseparable from the Person of the next in Blood, to the last lawful King; let
this fall upon J. 2. the reputed Prince of Wales, or any other Person of
unclouded Birth and Fame; and let them argue upon the Declaration 1 E. 4. That
Allegiance is there due by God's Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature: Certain
it is, that the Statute 11 H. 7. abovementioned, was not only made in an Age
of greater Light, but being a subsequent Law, derogates from whatever is
contrary in the former: By this last it is declared to be against all Laws,
That Subjects should suffer for doing true Duty and Service of Allegiance to
the King de facto; which is as much as if 'twere expressed to be against God's
Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature: By the necessary Consequence Vid. 3
Inst. f. 7. upon the Stat. of Treason, 25 E. 3. referring in the Margin to this
Statute. This is to be understood of a King in possession of the Crown and
Kingdom; for if there be a King regnant in possession, although he be Rex de
facto, and not de jure, yet he is Seignior le Roy within the Purview of this
Stature; and the other who has the right, and is out of possession, is not
within this Act: nay, if Treason be committed against a King de facto, and
after the King de jure come to the Crown, he shall punish the Treason done to
the King de facto; and a Pardon granted by a Kind de jure, that is not also de
facto, is void.
of which, Allegiance is due to a King de facto according to all these Laws:
Wherefore whoever denies Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, or
maintains a contrary one to J. 2. offends against God's Law, Man's Law, and the
Law of Nature. Nor, whatever some imagine, can the Proviso at the end of this
Statute in the least impair its Force, as to what I use it for. The Proviso
runs thus.

Provided always, That no Person or Persons shall take any Benefit or Advantage
by this Act, which shall hereafter decline from his or 11 H. 7. c. 1.
their said Allegiance.

Where said Allegiance, shows it to be meant of Allegiance to the King de
facto, whose Service is called true Duty; and no Man surely can think the
meaning to be, that if after such Service they turn to the other Side, or
become Traitors to the present Power, they shall suffer for the former Service,
as Traitors against him that had the Right, either during the Reign of the King
in being, which would be an unlikely owning the ejected Power; or hereafter, if
that should come to be restored, which would be far from answering the apparent
End of that Clause which is to keep Men in Obedience to him who has the Power
of punishing the Disobedient. Wherefore the plain meaning must be, that no Man
who departs from his Duty of Allegiance to the present King, shall save himself
by pleading, that he had been in Arms, or had done him any signal Service. In
short, this was to be no Corban, to answer for any following Departure from
Duty.

4. I think I have, with due regard to all colorable Objections, made That the
People of England were lately restored to a qualified Choice.
it appear, That Allegiance may in some Cases be withdrawn from one who had
been King, till the occasion of such Withdrawing, or Judgment upon it.

And this I have done, not only from the Equity and reserved Cases necessarily
implied, but from the express Original and continuing Contract between Prince
and People; which, with the Legal Judicature empowered to determine concerning
it, I have likewise shown, and exemplified, by the Custom of the Kingdom, both
before the reputed Conquest, and since: And have occasionally proved, That though
Oaths of Allegiance may reach to Heirs according to special Limitations, as was
26 Hen. 8. yet in common intendment, by Heirs of a King or Crown no more is
meant, than such as succeed to it according to the Law positive, or implied:
And that whoever comes to the Crown upon either, Allegiance is as much due to
him by the Law of God and Nature, as it was to the nighest in Blood: Or, to use
the Words of Bishop Sanderson, Dignity varies not with the change of Persons:
Sanderson de Obligatione Juramenti, Lect. 4.
Whence if any Subject or Soldier swear Fidelity to his King or General, the
Oath is to be meant to be made unto them also who succeed to that Dignity.

And when the Crown continues in the Blood, this, especially by what I have
above shown, puts the Obligation of Allegiance to the King in being, out of
controversy, unless it can be made appear, that the Right of the former King
remains; or that there is some Settlement of the Crown yet in force, which ties
it strictly to the next.

I come now to prove, That the People of England are actually discharged from
their Oaths of Allegiance to J. 2. and were lately restored to that Latitude of
Choice which I have shown to be their Original Right.

The Lords and Commons having a Judicial Power in this Matter, as has been
proved at large; their Exercise of this Power in the nature of the thing
determines the Right, unless an Appeal lies from them to some higher Court in
this Nation. But that no Power can legally question them, or any of them, in
this Matter, appears more particularly, in that there is no Statute now in
force, (nor was since the Death of Car. 2.) which makes it Treason to conspire
to Depose a King, or actually Vid. Sir Robert Atkins his excellent Defense of
the Lord Russel, f. 22, 23.
to Depose him. But this is of the Nature of those Common Law Treasons, which
are left to the Judgment of Parliament: And they who are the only Judges of
their own Actions, have a pretty large Liberty in them, especially according to
them who would infer the Absolute Power of Princes, from the Supposition of no
constituted Judges of their Actions. Wherefore the Defense of their Proceedings
might justly seem to be superseded, were it not for an ungovernable sort of
Men, who either cannot, or will not, judge according to the Rules of right
Reasoning: but as they will hardly admit of any Doctrine as true, for which
they have not the Decision of some Father or Council; will believe no Action,
not proceeding from their imperious Dictates, justifiable, even in Cases of the
utmost necessity, for the Preservation of the true Religion and just Laws, for
which they have no Warrant from the Examples of their Forefathers, or Opinions
of Men whose Books have past with their Allowance: Which often drives me to the
seeming Pedantry of Quotations, to confirm the most obvious Considerations, to
which my own Thoughts led me.

The either open, or more covert Matters of Fact, inducing the Declaration of
Lords and Commons, That J. 2. has broken the Original Contract, I need not now
enquire into. All People must own, that (...), if they in the least attend to
the Constitution of our Governme^^ and how apparently he by his general
Dispensations usurped a Legislative Power, for the Destruction of the
Protestant Religion and Civil Rights; which we were in a fair way of being
Dragoon'd out of by a Standing Army, by degrees to have been wholly under
Popish or Complying Officers: Yet if there were no more than his leaving the
Kingdom, without making any Provision for keeping up the Justice of it, and
going into France, a Country from whence all Mischiefs have of late Years
flowed upon us and our Religion; Who can deny, but this alone would have been
enough to set him aside? The going out of the Realm, without appointing a
Custos, was anciently Rastal's Entries, tit. Reattachment, f. 544. b. Resum'
etc. quia extra Regnum Angliae Progres. fecimus, nullo locum tenente nostrum
sive Custode Regni relicto, and e.
in our Law a Discontinuance of Justice.

And the Lord Hobart gives it as a Maxim, Cessa regnare si non vis judicare;
Hobart. f. 155.
"Cease to Reign, if you will not Judge, or maintain the Course of Justice.

Many, I know, upon these Questions rather regard the Civil Law; and that, I am
sure, gives a home-thrust, in the Case of deserting Ved. Leges 12 Tab. de
Magistrate.
one's Country, and going into such an one as France is to our Nation, though it
has been in too strict Alliance with our Kings.

The Digests say,

A Deserter has no Right of being restored to his Country: For he Digest. lib.
49. tit. 15. de Captivis and Postliliminio. Transfugae nullum postliminium est,
nam qui malo Consilio. and Proditoris animo patriam reliquit, hostium numero
habendus est, etc. transfuga autem non is solus accipiendus est, qui aut ad
hosts aut in bello transfugit, sed ad eos cum quibus nulla amicitia est fide
suscepta transfugit.
who left his Country with an evil and treacherous Mind, is to be held as an
Enemy, etc. But we are to take not only him for a Deserter, who runs over to
Enemies in time of War, but also during a Truce: Or, who runs over to them with
whom there is no Amity, either after undertaking to be faithful to his Country,
or else undertaking to be faithful to the other: Either of which Senses the
Words will bear.

It Is likely to be said, That this out of the Civil Law is improperly applied
to the Prince, who, according to that, is exempt from all Laws.

But I would desire such to read the Rescript or Law of Theodosius and
Valentinian, wherein they thus declare: It Is an Expression suitatable Imp.
Theod. and Valentin. Caes. ad Volusianum Praefectum Praetorio. Digna vox est
Majestate regnantis, Legibus ad ligatum se principem profiteri. Adeo de
auctoritate juris nostra pendet auctoritas: and revera majus imperio est
submittere Legibus principatum. Et oraculo praesentis Edicti, quod nobis licere
non patimur aliis indicamus.
to the Dignity of one that Reigns, to profess himself bound by the Laws. Our
own Authority does so depend upon the Authority of Law. And in truth, for the
Governing Power to submit to Law, is greater than Empire. And by the
Promulgation of this present Edict, we make known to others, what we will not
allow to our selves.

That J. 2. had before his Departure broken the Fundamental Laws, and that now
he not only ceases to Protect, but is in a Kingdom which foments and
strengthens a Rebellion in Ireland, part of the Dominions belonging to the
English Crown, I think no body will deny. Nor till they can answer what I have
shown of the mutual Contract, continued down from the first Erection of the
Monarchy here, ought they to deny, that he has thereby broken the Original
Contract which bound the People to him, and him to them. What results from this
Breach, is now more particularly to be considered. That it is a Discharge from
all Allegiance to him required by any Law, and confirmed by any Oaths, is
evident, not only from the former Authorities, but from the Condition going
along with such a mutual Contract as I have proved to be with us between Prince
and People. Or rather, to use the Words of the Learned Pufendorf,

The Obligation is not so much dissolved, as broken off, by the Pufendorf de
Officio Hominis and Civis, p. 201.
Perfidiousness of either Party: For when one does not perform that which was
agreed on, neither is the other bound to performance: For the prior Heads of
things to be performed in Contracts, are in the Subsequent by way of Condition.
As if it should be said, I will perform, if you perform first.

This he more fully explains in another Book, where he distinguishes Pufend.
Elementa Jurisprudentiae, p. 85. and 94. Vid. Puf. supr. de Interregnis, p. 274.
between an Obligation imperfectly mutual, as he supposes it to be between an
Absolute Prince and his Subjects; and one perfectly mutual, as he takes it to
be, where the People have conferred a Power on any Terms.

Of such Obligations, he says,

These, since they have a mutual respect to the things agreed on, Pufend.
Elementa Jurisprud. p. 94.
and suppose mutual Faith; it is evident, that if one Party violate the Faith
which he plighted, the other is no more bound. And therefore he is not
perfidious who stands not to those Contracts which the other has broken. For
all the Heads of one and the same Contract, run into each other by way of
Condition, etc.

And in that Book of his, which is counted the Standard of the Law Pufend. de
Jure Gentium, p. 1105.
of Nations, he asserts it to be lawful for Subjects to oppose their Prince by
Force (which is a sufficient departure from Allegiance) if he goes about modum
habendi potestatem immutare; i. e. to change that Manner V. Grot. de Jure Belli
and Pacis, de summitatem habendi plenitudine, p. 62.
in which he by the Contract enjoys the Power, from less to more Absolute.

And in his Tract de Interregnis, cited above, he allows of this;
Dissertationes de Interreg. p. 272. supra.
If the King abdicate all Care of the Commonwealth, becomes of an hostile Mind
toward his Subjects, or manifestly departs from those Rules of Governing, upon
the Observance of which, as upon a Condition, the Subjects have suspended their
Obedience.

Nor is the German Author Knichen less plain; whose Words are, If the
Magistrate have absolute and full Majesty, due Subjection Rudolphi Godofredi
Knichen opus polit. f. 1226.
ought by no means to be denied him, though he be impious: Nor may another be
substituted in his room, upon his being cast out. Much less can a new Form of
Government be introduced. But if he were constituted by the People under
certain Pacts and Promises sworn to him by the People, and therefore is bound
to certain Rules of Laws, and either to do or avoid things contained in those
Contracts, whether Fundamental Laws, or things particularly concerted, (as for
Example, the Emperor in our Empire:) They not being observed, but studiously,
enormously, and obstinately violated; the Hopes of Amendment, after many of the
Subjects Prayers and Admonitions, plainly vanishing; he may rightfully be
removed by the States and People, etc. The Reason is, Because he was promoted
to the Government by such Agreement, and that sworn to, according to the Laws
of the Agreement or Contract: The Nature of which consists in this, That if
that Party for whose Sake or Cause they are Constituted, violate them, the
other Party of very Right is freed from the Observance of those things which
are granted by such Laws.

Nor does Philip Pareus come short of this, in his Defense of his Father David,
where he speaks very particularly of the Effect of the Philippi parei
Vindicatio, p. 50, and 51.
mutual Compact.

But notwithstanding the Discharge from Allegiance to J. 2. some will urge,
That it continues to the Person that stands next in Blood.

Against which, I doubt not but I shall offer full Evidence. For,

1. If, as I have shown, the Promise to the King himself be Conditional, Vid.
Brook, tit. Condition, n. 67.
and his Interest determines by his Breach of the Condition, be the Condition
precedent, in which Case no Interest is vested till Performance; or subsequent,
in which the Breach divests what before was settled; What Interest can the Heir
have in a Conditional Estate determined by Breach of the Condition? And since
it has been made appear That the Heirs of a King with us, take not as
Purchasers by an O^^ginal Contract, upon which there might be some Pretense of
an Interest vested in them, independent on their Father's Title; but they who
can be said to have succeeded without an immediate Choice, did it by virtue of
subsequent Settlements, entirely depending upon the Original Contract,
continuing down to their immediate Ancestors respectively; If that Contract be
dissolved, what can support the Settlement? Can the Agreement for the Benefit
of a King and his Posterity, be supposed to be other, than that if he govern
them as King, performing the Essentials of the Contract on his part, he and his
Descendents shall enjoy the Crown? Can it be imagined, that this was Vid. Lit.
c. 5. Estates sur Condition.
made for the separate Benefit of the Heir, without regard to the Ancestor's
Performance? Or is it to be supposed in the nature of the thing, that the
People would have made such a Contract, whereby after being justly discharged
from their Allegiance to a King, and having acted pursuant thereto, they shall
enable a Successor to revenge his Ancestor's Quarrel? This were such a Contract
as that which the Lord Clarendon assures us, if never so real, can never be
supposed to be with the V. L. Clarendon, cited above in the Margin, his Survey
of the Leviathan, p. 86.
intention of the Contracter. And Grotius argues against a King's Power of
aliening his Kingdom, from hence, that this is not to be prsum'd to have been
the Will of the People in conferring the Power. And in another place he says,
Right is to be measured according to the Will Grot de Jure Belli and Pacis, l.
1. c 3. p. 60. Grot. sup. p. 64. Fortescue.
of him from whom the Right arises.

2. The Power of the King being, as Fortescue has it, and the Authorities above
plainly evince, a Populo effluxa, derived from the People; and the Interest of
J. 2. being determined, he yet living; so that there can be no Heir to him, or
of his Body; What hinders the Operation of the known Rule in Law, That where
there is no Remainder to take effect at the Determination of the particular
Estate, it Vid. 11 H. 6. f. 12. b. Rolls Abr. tit. Remainder, f. 415.
shall revert to the Donor? Which in this Case is manifestly the People.

If it be said, That this Rule shall not extend to the Descent of the Crown,
which differs from Common Inheritances; I dare say, No Man can show any
Difference, but what is more strong for the People's Choice: For whereas Common
Estates are for the Benefit of them who have the present Interest, the Crown is
a Trust for the Benefit of the People.

3. The Ancient Statute abovementioned, of which the Lords and Commons mind R.
2. upon his Maladministration, says, That upon putting the King from his
Throne, with the Common Assent and Consent V. sup. Knighton, f. 2683.
of the Nation, for the Causes there expressed, they may set upon the Throne in
his stead propinquiorem aliquem de stirpe Regia; some Nota, Not proximum.
body of Kin to the King, of the Royal Stock. If they were tied to the next, it
certainly would have been proximum: Besides, the word aliquem shows a Latitude:
And according to this, upon R. the Second's being Deposed, H. 4. claimed the
Crown, Als descendit be right Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 54.
Line of the Blood comeynge fro the good Lord Henry Therde. But because this,
without consideration of his Merits in rescuing them from R. 2. entitled him to
the Crown no more than another of the Blood; Ib-n. 55.
therefore the Lords and Commons drew up an Instrument purporting their
Election.

4. But admit, none of the foregoing Arguments were enough to show, That upon
James the Second's Abdication, or at least losing his Interest in the
Government, the People of England were restored to that Liberty which they had
before the Settlement of the Crown, which was in force till the Original
Contract was broken by him; yet, I conceive, the particular Consideration of
the State of the Settlement, might afford sufficient Argument.

Henry the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth, if we believe Dr. Brady, held Brady's Hist
of the Succession, f. 25.
the Crown by Usurpation: Yet the earliest Settlement of the Crown farther than
the first Son, was in the time of H. 4. Nor, as I shall show, was the Crown
enjoyed by J. 2. under better Title than they had. H. 5. and 6. came in under
an Entail of the Crown 7 H. 4. confirmed 8. The Misgovernment of H. 6. having
given occasion to Vid. Rot. Parl. 8 H. 4. n. 60.
Richard Duke of York, of the Blood Royal and Elder House, to assert the
Peoples Rights, not his own; Henry and the Duke, with the Consent of the Lords
and Commons, came to an Agreement in Parliament, That Richard and his Heirs
should enjoy the Crown after the Death of Henry. And though here the word Heirs
is mentioned without restraint, yet considering that it is the first time that
ever the Crown was settled so far, I know not whether it is not to be taken
with Gomezius Gomezius de Qualitatibus Contractuum, f. 319. Hottomanni Com. de
Verbis Juris usus-fructus est jus alienis rebus utendi fruendi, salva rerum
substantia, Emphyteusis.
his Restriction, of an Usufructuary or Emphyteutical Estate; of the last of
which, much of the same nature with the other, he says, If it did not use to be
granted to more than the first, second, or third Heirs, the mention of Heirs
simply, ought to be restrained to those only; because the Nature or Quality of
the thing granted, ought to be attended to.

After the Death of Richard Duke of York, his Son Edward the Fourth, as I
before observed, took the Government upon him, as forfeited by breach of the
Covenant established in Parliament. However, H. 6. being set up again ten Years
after, gets that Settlement by which E. 4. was to have benefit, to be revoked,
and the Crown to be entailed on his Issue; the Remainder to the Duke of
Clarence, younger Son to the Duke of York. Afterward E. 4. having success,
revives 13 E. 4.
the Settlement 39 H. 6. Only that he attaints H. 6. with others of his Party.
Which Attainder was removed 1 H. 7. and declared contrary to Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7.
n, 16. H. 7. Son to Edmund Earl of Richmond, Brother by Mother's Side to H. 6.
due Allegiance, and all due Order. And not only the Attainder, but that Act of
Parliament it self was revoked. So that hitherto there had been no Title in the
Heirs of Richard Duke of York, or of Edward the Fourth, but what was derived
under the Settlement of Henry 6. called an Usurper, and Edward the Fourth's
Treason deprived him of the Benefit even of that Settlement.

H. 7. indeed married the eldest Daughter of E. 4. But before that Marriage,
having conquered Rich. 3. he claimed the Crown: As his Words in Parliament
were, Tam per justum titulum haereditantiae, quam Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7.
per verum Dei judicium, in tribuendo sibi victoriam de inimico suo; As well by
just Title of Inheritance, as by the true Judgment of God, in giving him the
Victory over his Enemy.

If it be asked, how he could have a Right of Inheritance, when the Daughter of
E. 4. and his own Mother were alive? It seems in the Judgment of that
Parliament, that E. 4. having acted contrary to his Allegiance due to H. 6. he
and his had lost the Benefit of the Settlement Vid. Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7. n. 16.
supra.
revived by his successful Treason; and that this was lost, even before the
Revival was destroyed by Parliament. And then, though H. 7. could not come in
without an Election, yet he, as H. 4. before, might have a sort of Inheritance;
according to a very witty Author, who speaking of the Kingdom of Israel, says,
Concludere licet, regnum Israelis, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, Ed. Amstelodami,
p. 110.
si stirpem spectas, haereditarium certe fuisse; at sane si personas, omnino
electivum; We may conclude, that the Kingdom of Israel, if you look at the
Stock, was certainly Hereditary; but if at the Persons, altogether Elective.

Be this as it will, the Lords and Commons so far regarded King Henry's Claim,
that they not only received him for King, but it was enacted by the Authority
of the then Parliament, That the Crowns of the Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7.
Realms of England and France should rest in him and the Heirs of his Body
lawfully coming, perpetually; and in NONE OTHER.

When they had thus done, the Commons requested the King to Marry Elizabeth
Daughter to E. 4. that by God's Grace there might be Issue of the Stock of
their Kings. So that this was only to preserve the Royal Blood, not to give any
new Countenance or Confirmation to his Title.

H. 8. enjoyed the Crown not as Heir to his Mother, but under the Settlement
upon H. 7. Nor can it be said, that he was in by Remitter, since that Act under
which his Mother should have derived, was Repealed: And had it stood in force,
yet it would not have made the Title more Sacred; unless it can be shown, that
the Mother had a Title prior to the Act of Settlement 39 H. 6. the contrary to
which appears by the former Account from Law and History.

H. 8. procured several Settlements of the Crown, according as Love or
Jealousy prevailed in him. In the 25th of his Reign 'twas settled 25 H. 8. c.
22.
upon himself, and his Heirs Males of his Body, lawfully begotten on Queen
Anne, etc. declaring the Marriage with Queen Katherin unlawful; Remainder to
the Lady Elizabeth, Remainder to his own Right Heirs. 26 H. 8. an Oath was
enjoined for that purpose. 28 H. 8. the 26 H. 8. c. 2. 28 H. 8. c. 7.
two former Acts 25 and 26. are Repealed, the Illegitimation of Mary Daughter
to Queen Katherine is confirmed; the like declared of Elizabeth Daughter to
Queen Anne; and the Crown entailed upon his Heirs Males by Queen Jane, or any
other Wife; Remainder to Heirs Females by that Queen, or any other lawful Wife;
Remainder to such Person or Persons, and according to such Estates as he should
appoint by Letters Patent, or by Will. 35 the Crown is settled subject to such
Conditions as the King should make, according to the Power there given; first,
upon Prince Edward, and the Heirs of his Body: the Remainder, in like manner,
upon the Ladies Mary and Elizabeth, and the Heirs of their Bodies successively,
without taking off their Illegitimations. And the same Power is given of
Disposing by Letters Patent, or by Will, as by the Statute 28. for which a
memorable Reason is given in both Acts; Lest if such Heirs should fail, and no
Provision Vid. 28 H. 8. sup. and 35 H. 8.
made in the King's Life, who should Rule and Govern this Realm; for lack of
such Heirs, as in those Acts is mentioned, that then this Realm should be
destitute of a Lawful Governor. E. 6. succeeded according to both those Acts:
After him, Queen Mary, by the last: who, at her coming to the Crown, could not
be looked on as of the Right Line, because of the Acts which Illegitimated her:
But in the first of her Reign, the same Parliament takes off her
Illegitimation, and Repeals the Acts 25 and 28 H. 8. And in this the Parliament
seems rather to provide for the Honor of her Descent, than (as Dr. Brady would
have it) to declare the Succession to be in Inheritance by Right of Blood.
Whatever Hist. of Succession, f. 34.
might be the secret Intention, I am sure there is no such Authoritative
Declaration: And the Acts 28 and 35 H. 8. seem to say quite the contrary. 1 and
2 P. M. though there is no direct Settlement, it is made Treason to compass the
Deprivation or Destruction of K. P. during 1 and 2 P. M. c. 9.
the Queen's Life; or of the Queen, or of the Heirs of her Body lawfully
begotten. Queen Elizabeth succeeded by virtue of the Limitation 1 Eliz. c. 3.
35 H. 8. and tho Bastardiz'd by the Statutes 28 H. 8. and 1 M. yet her first
Parliament declare, That she is rightly, lineally, and lawfully descended and
come of the Blood Royal of this Realm; to whom, and the Heirs of her Body, the
Royal Dignity, etc. are and shall be united: And enacts, That the Statute 35 H.
8. shall be the Law of the Kingdom for ever. But the Fee of the Crown not
having been disposed of, according to the Power given by the Statute 28, and
repeated 35 H. 8. And the 25, whereby 'twas limited in Remainder to the Heirs
of H. 8. being repealed upon the Deaths of E. 6. and the Queens, Mary and
Elizabeth without Issue; there remaining no Heirs of the Body of H. 8. in the
Judgment of two Parliaments, the Realm was destitute of a Lawful Governor.

Indeed, according to the Act of Recognition, 1 J. 1. the Crown 1 Jac. 1. c. 1.
came to him, being lineally, rightfully, and lawfully descended of the Body of
the most Excellent Lady Margaret, the eldest Daughter of the most Renowned King
Henry the Seventh, and the High and Noble Princess Queen Elizabeth his Wife,
eldest Daughter of King Edward the Fourth: The said Lady Margaret being eldest
Sister of King Henry the Eighth, Father of the High and Mighty Princess of
Famous Memory, Elizabeth late Queen of England.

Though this pompous Pedigree, to avoid all Objections, goes as high as E. 4. the
Derivation of Title, as appears above, can be no higher than from the
Settlement 1 H. 7. Nor does this Act 1 J. make any additional Provision; but
indeed seems to flatter the King into a Belief, that there was no need of any;
telling him, That they made that Recognition as the First Fruits of their
Loyalty and Faith to him, and his Royal Progeny and Posterity for ever. But
neither then, or ever after, till that in this present Parliament, did the
People make any Settlement of the Crown, but it continued upon the same Foot as
it did 1 H. 7. when it was entirely an Act of the People, under no Obligation,
but from their own Wills. And if we should use Sir Robert Filmer's Authority,
Impossible it is in Nature for Men to give a Law unto themselves, no more than
it is to command a Man's self in a Sir Robert Filmer's Power of Kings, f. 1.
Matter depending of his own Will. There can be no Obligation which takes
State from the mere Will of him that promises the same.

Wherefore, to apply this Rule: Since the People that is now, in Vid. Pufend.
de Interregn. sup. p. 288, 289.
common presumption is the same with that which first settled the Succession,
and so are bound only by an Act of their own Will; they have yet as arbitrary a
Power in this Matter, as Sir Robert and his Followers contend that the Prince
has, whatever Promises or Agreements he has entered into.

But not to lean upon such a broken Reed; nor yet to make those many Inferences
which this plain State of the Settlements of the Crown might afford; Three
things I shall observe:

1. If the Settlement made 1 H. 7. who was an Usurper, according to the Notion
of Dr. Brady and his Set of Men, was of no force; then, there being no
Remainders since limited by any Act but what are spent, of necessity the People
must have had Power of Choosing, or there could have been no lawful Government
since Queen Elizabeth's time, when was the last Settlement, except what is now
made.

2. The Declarations of two Parliaments, 28 and 35 H. 8. fully balance the
Declaration 1 Jac. 1. if they do not turn the Scales; considering, that the
Judges in the later Times seem to have had less Law or Integrity than they had
in H. the Eighth's. I will not take upon me to determine which was the Point of
Two that they might go upon. 1. That a Government shall not pass by
Implication, or by reason of a dormant Remainder. But there having been so many
Alterations since the Settlement 1 H. 7. and the whole Fee once disposed of,
nor ever any express Restitution of the Settlement 1 H. 7. the People were not
to think themselves obliged to a Retrospect: It Is evident, at least, that they
did not. Or, 2. Perhaps they might question, whether they were obliged to
receive for Kings the Issue of Foreign Princes, since there was no means of
being sufficiently informed of the Circumstances of the Birth, neither the
Common, or any Statute Law affording any Means of proving it, as appears by the
Statute 25 E. 3. which for the 25 E. 3. Stat. 2.
Children of Subjects only, born out of the King's Allegiance, in Cases wherein
the Bishop has Conusance, allows of a Certificate from the Bishop of the Place
where the Land in question lies, if the Mother passed the Seas by the King's
License. But if our Kings or Queens should upon any occasion be in Foreign
Parts, it is to be presumed, that they would have with them a Retinue subject to
our Laws, who might attest the Birth of their Children, and be punished if they
swear flalsly.

Wherefore, 25 E. 3. it is declared to be the Law of the Crown, That Stat. 25 E.
3. sup.
the Children of the Kings of England, ENFANTZ DES ROYS, as the Record has it,
in whatever Parts they be born, be able, and ought to bear the Inheritance
after the Death of their Ancestors. Yet this is most likely to be meant of
those private Inheritances which any of the Kings had, being no part of the
Demeasns of the Crown; since the Inheritance of the Crown was not mentioned,
nor, as has been shown, was it such as the King's Children were absolutely
entitled to in their Order.

The most common acceptance of Children is of a Man's immediate Issue: As
where Land is given to a Man and his Children, who can Vid. 1. Anderson, f. 60,
and 61. A Devise to the Wife, after her Decease to the Children. Vid. Wild's C.
6 Rep. In Shelley's C. 1 Rep. f. 103. A Gift to a Man and semini suo, or
prolibus suis, or liberis suis, or exitibus suis, or pueris suis de corpore.
think any remote Descendants entitled to it? Nor could it extend farther in
the Settlement of a Crown.

37 E. 3. c. 10. a Sumptuary Law was made, providing for the Habits of Men
according to their Ranks, and of their Wives, and Children, ENFANTZ, as in the
former Statute of the same Reign. Now although this should extend to Childrens
Children born in the same House, it could never take-in the Children of
Daughters, forisfamiliated by Vid. Sir James Dalrimple's Institutions of the
Laws of Scotland, f. 52.
Marriage; nay, nor those of such Sons as were educated in a distinct Calling
from their Parents.

Farther, the very Statute of which the Question is, cuts off the Descendants
from Females out of the number of a King's Children, when among other Children
not of the Royal Family, it makes a particular Provision for Henry Son of John
Beaumond, who had been born beyond Sea; and yet Henry was by the Mothers Side
in the Fourth Degree Vid. Dugdale's Bar. 2. Vol. Beaumont.
from H. 3. for she was Daughter to Henry Earl of Lancaster, Son of Edmund, Son
to H. 3. Had this Henry been counted among the Children of a King, it is certain
there had not been a special Clause for him, among other Children of Subjects.

Nor does the Civil Law differ from ours in this Matter; for though under the
name of Children are comprehended not only those who are in our Power, but all
who are in their own, either of the Female Sex, or descending from Females; yet
the Daughter's Children were always looked on as out of the Grandfather's
Family, according to the Rule in Just. Inst. lib. 1. tit. 9. So Bracton, lib.
1. cap. 9. Greg. Tholos. Syntagma juris universi, f. 206. Spiegelius, tit.
Liberi. Non procedere in privilegiis quae generaliter publicae utilitati
derogant. Vid. Antonii Perezi Inst. Imperiales, p. 21.
Civil Law, transcribed by our Bracton, They who are born of your Daughter, are
not in your power: And Privileges derogating from Public Vtility, were never
thought to reach them, as a Learned Civilian has it. A Daughter is the End of
the Family in which she was born, because the Name of her Father's Family is
not propagated by her. And Cujacius makes this difference between Liberi, and
Vid. Cujac. ad tit. de verborum significatione, p. 147. and 230.
Liberi sui; sui, he says, is a Legal Name, the other Natural: The former are
only they who are in a Man's Power, or of his Family; and Liberi, strictly
taken, he will have to go no farther.

But in truth, considering the Purview of the Statute which we are here upon,
Children in it seems to be restrained to Sons and Daughters, without taking in
the Descendants from either; the Occasion of the Law being the Births of
several ENFANTZ in Foreign Parts, which could be but Sons or Daughters to the
immediate Parents, whether Kings or Private Persons.

4. But however, this may be enough for my purpose, that there is no color of
any Settlement in force, but that 1 H. 7. and admitting that to have continued
till J. 2. had broken the Original Contract, yet that being broken, the present
Assembly of Lords and Commons had full as much Authority to declare for King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY, as the Parliament 1 H. 7. had to settle the Crown: For
H. 7. could give them no Power but what he had received immediately from them.
Nor is it material to say, He was Crowned first; since, as I have shown, the
Crown confers no Power distinct from what is derived either from an immediate
or prior Choice.

3d. The Power having upon the Dissolution of the Contract between That the
People of England have duly exercised their Power, in settling the Government.
J. 2. and his former Subjects, returned to the People of Legal Interests in
the Government, according to the Constitution, there can be no doubt with
unbiased Men, but this takes in them only who have Right of being in Person,
or by Representation, in those Assemblies where is the highest Exercise of the
Supreme Power. But there are two Extremes opposite the to late Election made by
such an Assembly. The first is of them who would have all things go on in the
same Form as under a Monarch, which was impossible; and therefore the Supreme
Law, the Public Safety, must needs supply the want of Form, nor can be justly
controverted, till the Lawfulness of the End is disproved: For all Means
necessary to such an End are allowable in Nature, and by all Laws. But if this
should still be disputed, all their darling Laws made by the Long Parliament,
which met after that Convention Anno 1660. will fall to the Ground, according
to the strict Application of the Statute abovementioned, 16 Car. 1. nay, the
Attempt of Repealing that Statute, being in a Parliament which had been
actually dissolved before, by that very Law which it went about to Repeal, that
Form which was usual before, is, in default of King and Officers, supplied by
another Provision, for the Regular Meeting of Lords and Commons. And what
hinders, but the People had as much Power to vary from the common Form, when
there was no King, and that Form could not be observed, as when there was a
King, and a possibility of having that Form?

Others suppose, the Consequence of a Dissolution of this Contract to be a mere
Commonwealth, or absolute Anarchy, wherein every body has an equal Share in the
Government, not only Landed Men, and others with whom the Balance of the Power
has rested by the Constitution, but Copyholders, Servants, and the very Foeces
Romuli, which would not only make a quiet Election impracticable, but bring in
a deplorable Confusion. But this Dilemma they think not to be answered:

Either the old Form, as under a Monarch, remains, or it does not: Object.
If it does, the late Action of the Lords and Commons was irregular: If it does
not, all the People are restored to their Original Rights, and all the Laws
which fettered them are gone.

Here we must distinguish upon the word Form; for if it be taken of the Form of
Proceedings or Administration, it is no Consequence Answ.
that the Form of Government or Constitution should fail, because we admit that
the other does.

Mr. Hobbs indeed holds, That when a Monarch for himself and his Hobbs his
Leviathan.
Children has left a Kingdom, or renounces it, the Subjects return to their
absolute and natural Liberty. Whom the Learned Pufendorf thus answers.

They who have once come together into a Civil Society, and subjected Pufendorf
de Interregnis, p. 282.
themselves to a King, since they have made that the Seat of their Fortunes,
cannot be presumed to have been so slothful, as to be willing to have their new
Civil Society extinct, upon the Death of a King, and to return to their Natural
State and Anarchy, to the hazarding the Safety now settled. Wherefore when the
Power has not been conferred on a King by Right of Inheritance, or that he may
dispose of the Succession at pleasure, it is to be understood to be at least
tacitly agreed among them, That presently upon the Death of a King they shall
meet together, and that in the Place where the King fixed his Dwelling. Nor can
there well be wanting among any People some Persons of Eminence, who for a
while may keep the others in order, and cause them as soon as may be to consult
the Public Good.

The Author of a late Paper in relation to these Times, has this Passage, not
to be neglected.

All Power is originally or fundamentally in the People, formally in A Letter
to a Friend, advising in this exttaordinary Juncture, etc.
the Parliament, which is one Corporation, made up of three constituent
essentiating Parts, King, Lords, and Commons; so it was with us in England:
When this Corporation is broken, when any one essentiating Part is lost or
gone, there is a Dissolution of the Corporation, the formal Seat of Power, and
that Power devolves on the People: When it is impossible to have a Parliament,
the Power returns to them with whom it was originally. Is it possible to have a
Parliament? It is not possible; the Government therefore is dissolved.

Hence he would argue a necessity of having a larger Representative of the
People, that the Convention may be truly National. But had this Ingenious
Person observed Pufendorf's two distinct Contracts, by the Vid. Pufend, de
Interregnis, p. 267. sup. in Marg.
first of which a Provision was made for a Monarchy before any particular
Person was settled in the Throne, he would have found no such necessity: But if
immemorially the People of England have been represented as they were for this
Assembly, and no needful Form or Circumstance has been wanting to make the
Representation complete, all Men who impartially weigh the former Proofs of
Elections not without a righful Power, must needs think the last duly made.

Dr. Brady indeed, with some few that led him the Dance, and others that
follow, will have the present Representation of the Commons of England to have
been occasioned by Rebellion, 49 H. 3. But I must do him the Honor to own him
to be the first who would make the Barons to have no Personal Right, but what
depends upon a King in being; for he allows none to have Right of coming to
Parliament, but such only to whom the King has thought fit to direct Writs of
Summons: Brady's first Edit. p. 227. See this proved upon him, Pref. to Jus
Anglorum.
Yet, I dare say, no Man of sense, who has read that Controversy, believes
him. But were his Assertion true, it might be granted, that the Barons would
have no more Personal Right to be of any Convention, upon the total Absence or
Abdication of a King, than they would have of coming to Parliament without his
Writ. Yet since the Right of the People in Person or Representation, is
indubitable in such a Case, what hinders the Validity of the late Choice,
considering how many Elections of Kings we have had, and that never by the
People diffusively since the first Institution of the Government? And the
Representations agreed on (though I take them to be earlier settled for Cities
and Borough, than for the Freeholders in the Counties) yet have ever since
their respective Settlements been in the same manner as now; at least, none
have, since the first Institution, ever come in their own Persons, or been
Electors, but what are present, personally or representatively, and their own
Consent takes away all pretense of Error.

If it be said, That they ought to have been summoned Forty days before the
Assembly held; That is only a Privilege from the King, which they may wave, and
have more than once consented to be represented upon less than Forty days
Summons. Mr. Prynne gives several Prynne's Animadversions on 4 Inst. f. 10.
Instances, as 49 H. 3. 4 E. 3. 1 H. 4. 28 Eliz. and says, he omits other
Precedents of Parliaments summoned within Forty days after the Writs of Summons
bear date, upon extraordinary Occasions of Public Safety and Concernment,
which could not conveniently admit so long delay. And Sir Robert Cotton, being
a strict Adherer to Form, upon an Emergency Vid. Rushw. 1 vol. f. 470. 3 Car. ^.
advised, That the Writs should be antedated: which Trick could make no real
difference. To say, however, there ought to have been a Summons from or in the
Name of a King in being, is absurd; it being for the Exercise of a Lawful
Power, which, unless my Authorities fail, the People had without a King, or
even against the Consent of one in being.

Besides, it appears, That such Summons have not been essential to the Great
Councils of the Nation. Tacitus shows, That the Germans, Tacit. de Moribus
German. Coeunt nisi quid fortuitum and subitum certis diebus, etc. V. Leges S.
Ed. tit. Greve. In capite Kal. Maii. Jus Angl. c. 7. Vid. sup.
from whom we descend, had theirs at certain Days, unless when some
extraordinary Matter happened. And by the Confessor's Laws, received by W. 1. and
continued downwards by the Coronation-Oaths required, to this very day, the
general Folcmot ought to be held annually, without any formal Summons, upon
May Day.

And the Statute 16 Car. 1. which our rigid Formallists must own to be in
force, has wholly taken away the necessity of Writs of Summons from a King.

The Assembly of Lords and Commons held Anno 1660. was summoned 12 Car. 2. c. 1.
by the Keepers of the Liberties of England, not by the King's Writs; yet when
they came to act in conjunction with the King, they declare, enact, and
adjudge, (where the Statute is manifestly declaratory of what was Law before)
That the Lords and Commons then sitting, are and shall be the Two Houses of
Parliament, notwithstanding any want of the King's Writ or Writs of Summons, or
any defect or alteration of or in any Writ of Summons, etc.

Though this seems parallel to the present Case, yet in truth ours is the
strongest: For the King then having been only King de jure, no Authority could
be received from him, nor could any Act of his be regarded in Law, through defect
either of Jurisdiction or Proof, if not both: Accordingly, as not only the
Reason of the thing, but the Lord Coke shows, a Pardon from one barely King de
jure, is of no force. 3 Inst. f. 7. sup. in Marg.
Besides, the Keepers were an upstart Power, imposing themselves upon the
People without any formal Consent, at least not so fully received to the
public Administration as our present King was, who at the Request of a very
large Representative of the People, pursued the late Method of calling a more
Solemn Assembly. If that Anno 1660. had Power, acting with the King, to declare
it self a Parliament; why had not this, in defect of a King, to declare or
choose one?

Sure I am, prudent Antiquity regarded not so much the Person calling, or the
End for which a General Council was called, as who were present; that Notice
which they complied with, being always sufficiently formal.

Wherefore a General Ecclesiastical Council being summoned in the Reign Anno
1127. Vid. Spelm. Con. 2. vol. f. 1. De modo habendi Synodos in Anglia
primaevis temporibus.
of H. 1. by William Archb. of Canterb. thither, according to the known Law of
those Times, the Laity came: I cannot say, they sat there; for the Numbers
were so great, as they commonly were at such Assemblies before the Freeholders
agreed to Representations, that happy was the Man, whatever his Quality, who
could have a convenient Standing. After the Ecclesiastical Matters were over in
the Council I Vid. Jan. Ang. fac. nov. and Jus Angl. Flor. Wigorn. f. 663.
Confluxerant quoque illuc magnae multitudines Clericorum, Laicorum, tam
divitum, quam mediocrum and factus est conventus grandis and inestimabilis.
Quaedam determinata, quaedam dilata, quaedam propter nimium aestuantis turbae
tumultum ab audientia judicantium profliga^a, etc. Rex igitur cum inter haec
Londoniae moraretur auditis concilii gestis consensum praebuit and confirmavit
Statuta concilii a Willielmo Cant. etc. celebrati.
now speak of, they fell upon Secular: Some they determined, some they
adjourned, some the Judges of the Poll or Voices could make nothing of, by
reason of the great Crowd and Din. And when the King heard their
Determinations, and confirmed them, they had full Legal Force.

But had there been no Warrant from former Times, for the late manner of
Proceeding, the People of Legal Interests in the Government having been
restored to their Original Right, who can doubt, but they had an absolute Power
over Forms?

That they were not called to a Parliament, I hope will not be an Objection,
since the Word is much less ancient than such Assemblies: And since the Cives,
the Common Subject of the National Power, have Vid. sup.
made their Determination, this, according to that Positive Law which I have
shown above, ought to quiet the Debate, and command a Submission: And yet were
there not positive Law on their side, the equitable Reservations before
observed might be sufficient Warrant.

Nor is the Civil Law wanting to enforce this Matter.

One Barbarius, a runaway Servant, not known to be so, got in favor with
Anthony at the time of the Triumvirate, and by his means came to be Praetor;
upon this a great Question arose, Whether what he did, or was done before him
during his Praetorship, were valid? Vlpian decides in the affirmative; and
Hottoman upon that Question says, "The Suffrages of the People have the force
of a Hottom. Illust. Quaest. 17.
Law.

The Reasons given for the Resolution, as they are in Gotofred, who best
reconciles the various Readings, will greatly strengthen our Case.

He tells us, That though the Question there is only concerning a Servant,
Gotofredus de Electione Magistratu inhabilis per errorem facta, p. 6.
the Reason of it reaches to Emperors, and all Secular and Ecclesiastical
Dignities. The Reasons why Vlpian holds the Acts of such good, are,

1. In regard of Common Utility, and the Inconvenience it would be to those who
had business before him, if it were otherwise.

2. From the Power of the People to give a Servant this Honor. Gotofred
thinks, If this may be done with certain knowledge that he was a Servant, much
more if through mistake; for if the People, who have the Supreme Power, may with
certain knowledge, for the sake of the Public Good, not only design a Servant
for Praetor, but in this Case, by a just Election, take a Servant away from his
Master; how much more may it be done as in the Case propounded, not to make a
Servant wholly a true Praetor, not to take him from his Master; but only by a
commodious Interpretation, to have what is done by him, or with him, sustained;
and that so long the Error of the People, and Servitude of the Person chosen,
should not prejudice what is done?

Gotofred goes yet further, and says, Magistrates and Judges constituted by
Tyrants, the Manner of Judgments being kept, and things Gotofred sup. p. 23.
done according to Form of Law, or transacted according to their Wills, have
been held good. And yet in this Case the Defect seems greater, being the Power
is collated by one inhabil, and so a substantial sponte transacta.
Form is wanting: Wherefore in this part there seems no difference between the
Inhability of the Elector, or the Elected.

And if ever the Common Utility or Public Good, might warrant Actions out of
the common Course, certainly this could never have been pleaded more forcibly
than in the Case of this Nation; which, unless it had declared for King WILLIAM
and Queen MARY (which they did in the most regular way that the Nature of the
Thing would bear) had in all likelihood, by French Forces, by this time been
reduced to the miserable Condition of the poor Protestants in Ireland, who are
by no means beholden to the nice Observers of unnecessary, and impracticable
Forms.

I cannot think that I have followed Truth too nigh at the Heels for Conclusion.
my Safety in the present Government, which I take to be built upon this stable
Foundation; and that Protestant fondly flatters himself, who thinks to retain
his Religion and Security upon any Terms, at a return of the former, which
some, who were Instruments in setting up this, seem madly to contend for. But
could Men hope to find their private Accounts in such a Change, yet surely the
dismal Prospect of Common Calamities to ensue, should induce them to sacrifice
such low Ends to the Interest of their Religion and their Country.

I am not sensible that I have misrepresented any Fact or Authority, though I
have not urged them with that strength which might have been by a better Pen.
Perhaps what I have offered may give another Notion of the Succession, than
what many have imbibed, who will think I violate what is Sacred. I have not
urged the Illegitimation of the Children of E. 4. by Richard the Third's
Parliament, because, though he was a King de facto, if the Character fixed on him
be true, he was a Tyrant, as well as Usurper upon the innocent Prince E. 5. in
whose Name he first took the Government upon him, and either terrified or
cheated the People into a Compliance with his Pretenses.

Though I have not the vanity to believe, that any thing of my own can weigh with
them who have thought otherwise before; especially if they have listed
themselves on a Side contrary to that, which no Disadvantages can make me
repent of: Yet I cannot but hope, that the Authorities which I have produced,
will occasion some Consideration, till they are either evaded, or disproved.
And being all Legal Objections are answered, nor can any Scruple of Conscience
be here pretended, without, much less against Law; What hinders, but that we
should exert our utmost, in the Service of that Lawful Government from which we
receive Protection, and may expect Rewards for Virtue, at least the Defense of
it, if we do not strengthen the Hands of them who have hitherto made that the
greatest Crime? Wherefore, for us now to look back, after we have set our Hands
to the Plough, would be not only to distrust that Providence which has given
such a wonderful Encouragement to Perseverance; but were enough to tarnish all
our Actions with the Imputation of making the Public Interest a Pretense for
carrying on our own. It Is an happiness indeed when they are twisted and thrive
together: But the Cause is such as a Man ought not to fear to die, nay, to
starve for it. And how improsperous soever a Man's Endeavors for this may
prove, yet it may be a Comfort to have sown that Seed which may grow up for the
Benefit of future Ages. Nor ought he to repine, because another Man has gilded
over his Name by what he has got by the Ruin of his Country, or may have
insinuated himself again into Opportunities to betray it: Let it be enough for
him, how much soever slighted and contemned while he lives, to embalm his
Memory, by a steadiness to Truth, and the Interest of his Country, not to be
shaken by cross Accidents to himself, or the Public Cause. Let him still act
uniformly, while others live in perpetual Contradictions or Varieties; their
Actions and their Principles thwarting themselves, or each other, or varying
with the State-Weathercocks. Let them violate the Laws, out of Loyalty;
unchurch all Protestant Churches but their own, out of Zeal against Popery;
narrow the Terms of Communion, to spread the National Religion; confine all
Advantages to that Communion, for the Public Good; make their King the Head of
a Party, to strengthen his Hands against his Enemies; deliver up Charters, and
retake them gelt of their Noblest Privileges, in performance of their Oaths to
preserve them; fight against their King, and yet urge the Obligation of Oaths
requiring an unalterable Allegiance to his Person; assert that the Power is
inseparable from him, and yet may in his absence, without his Consent, be
transferred to a Regent, not to be reassumed when he should think fit to
return; grant that he has broken the Contract, yet contend that he retains that
Power which he received from the Contract; or that, though the Contract is
broken, the Throne is not vacant; or, if it be vacant, yet an Heir has a Right;
and so it is vacant, and not vacant, at the same time: Or that after one has
broken a Condition, upon which he took an Estate to himself and his Heirs in
Fee-simple or Tail, another shall enjoy it as Heir to him, and that in his
Lifetime; invite a Deliverer, yet reject the Deliverance.

Upon such Principles as these, I find an eminent English Prelate censured
Letter to B. L.
as a Deserter of his Church, for going about, according to his great Learning,
to justify the Oaths taken to the present Government: And thus the Cause of J.
2. is made the Cause of the Church of England. Certain it is, whatever is now
pretended, it is more difficult to justify the taking up, or promoting Arms
against a Deliverer, than an Oppressor. And if Arms against the last were
lawful, even with the Prospect of involving Thousands in the Miseries of War;
much more are they, in Defense of that Power which has restored those Liberties
which the other invaded, and reassur'd the Public Peace. And whoever first
engaged, and now draw back, not only brand themselves for Traitors, but make it
evident, that Ambition, Revenge, or some ungenerous Design, animated their
Undertakings. And as I doubt not but they will meet with their due Reward;
perhaps that Success which Nostredamus and others foretell to our present King,
may go further with such Men, to keep them to their Duty, than the most
demonstrative Proofs of Right, which they generally measure by the Event. And
as no Cause or Action is Just in their Eyes, which is not Prosperous; they, in
the Language of the Poet, are always on the Side of Victrix causa Diis placuit,
sed victa Catoni.
the Gods: But few are in this Point such Philosophers as Cato.

REMARKABLE PREDICTIONS OF Nostredamus.

Nostredamus.
GAnd and Bruxelles marcheront contre Anvers,
Senate de Londres mettront a mort leur Roy: Cent. 9. 49.

Le Sell and Vin luy seront a l' envers,
Pour eux avoir le Regne au desarroy.
Le Sang du Just a Londres fera fault,
Bruslez par foudres de vingt trois les six: Cent. 2. 51.

La Dame antique cherra de place haute,
De mesme sect plusieurs seront occis.
Le grande Peste de cite maritime,
Ne cessera que Mort ne soit vengee, Cent. 2. 53.

Du just sang par prix damn (fans crime,
De la grand Dame par feinte n'outragee.
Du Regne Anglois le digne dechasse,
Le Conseiller par ire mis a feu, Cent. 3. 80. last Edit. 1682.

Ses adherans iront si bas tracer,
Que le Bastard sera demi receu.
Les deux malins de Scorpion conjoincts
Le grand Seigneur meurdry dedans sa salle, Cent. 1. 52.

Peste a l' Eglise par le nouveau joinct,
L' Europe basse, and Septentrionale.
La saeur aisnee de l' Isle Britanniqne,
Quinze ans devant le friar aura naissance; Cent. 4. 96.

Par son promise moyennant verifique,
Succedera au Regne de Balance.
Un Prince Anglois Mars a son coeur du Ciel,
Voudra pour suivre sa fortune prospere: Cent. 3. 16.

Des deux duelles l' un percera le fiel,
Hay de luy, bien aim de sa Mere.
De l' Aquilon les efforts seront grands,
Sur l' Ocean sera la Port ouverte, Cent. 2. 68.

Le Regne en l' Isle sera reintegrand,
Tremblera Londres par voile discoverte.
L' Occident libre les Isles Britanniques
Le recogneu passer le bas, puis haut, Taken out of the 12th. and added to the
7th. Cent. 80. last Ed. par plui.

Ne content triste Rebel corss Escotiques
Puis rebeller par plus and par nuict chaut.
La stratageme simulte sera rare
La mort en voye rebelle par contree: 82.

Par le retour du Voyage Barbare
Exalteront la Protestant entree.
Veut chaut, conseil, pleurs, timidite,
De nuict assailly sans les arms: 83.

D' oppression grand calamite,
L' Epithalame converty pleurs and larmes.
Le chef de Londres par Regne l' Americh
L' Isle d' Escosse tempiera par gelee: (...) 10. 66.

Roy Reb. auront un si faux Antechrist,
Que les mettra trestous dans la meslee.
Dedans les Isles si horrible tumulte
Rien on n'orra qu'une bellique brigue, Cent. 2. 100.

Tant grand sera des predateurs l' Insult,
Qu'on se viendra ranger a la grand ligue.
La Cite franche de liberte fait serve,
Des proffligez and resueurs fait asyle. Cent. 4. 16.

Le Roy change a eux non si proterue,
De cent seront devenus plus de Mill.
Norvege and Dace, and l' Isle Britannique,
Par les unis Freres seront vexees: (...) 6. 7.

Le chef Romain Issu du sang Gallique,
Et les Copies aux forests repousees.
Prelat Roial son baissant trop tire,
Grand Flux de Sang sortira par sa bouche, (...). 10. 56.

Le Regne Anglique par Regne respire,
Long temps mort vif en Tunis comme souche.
Trente de Londres secret conjureront,
Contre leur Roy, sur le pont l' Enterprise: Cent. 4. 89.

Luy Satellites la mort desgouteront.
Un Roy esleu blond and natif de Frize.
Le blond du nez forche viendra commetre, Cent. 2. 67.

Par le Duel and chassera dehors:
Les Exiles dedans fera remettre,
Aux lieux marins commettans les plus forts.
Celuy qui la Principaute,
Tiendra par grande cruaute, Prophesies at the end 5.

A la fin verra grand Phalange,
Par coup de feu tres dangereux.
Par accord pourroit fair mieux,
Autrement boira Suc d' Orange.
Un dubieux ne viendra loing du regne,
La plus grand part le voudra soustenir, Cent. 6. 13.

Un Capitole ne voudra point quil regne,
Sa grande chare ne pourra maintenir.
Regne en querelle aux fieres devise,
Prendre les arms and le nom Britannique, Cent. 8. 58.

Tiltre Anglican sera tard advise,
Surprins de nuit, mener a l' air Gallique.
Le Successeur vengera son Beau-frere,
Occuper Regne souz ombre de vengeance, Cent. 10. 26.

Occis obstacle son sang mort vitupere,
Long temps Bretagne tiendra avec la France.
De Dueil mourra l' infelix proflige,
Celebrera son victrix l' Hecatombe, Cent. 5. 18.

Pristine Loy franc Edict redige,
Le Mur and Prince septiesme ibur au tomb.
Le gros Mastin de Cite dechasfe,
Sera fasche de l' estrange Alliance, Cent. 5. 4.

Apres aux Champs avoir le Cerf chasse,
Le Loup and l' Ours se donront defiance.
Le Grand Bretagne comprise d' Angleterre,
Viendra par eaux si haut innonder, Cent. 30. 70.

La Ligue neve d' Ausone fera guerre,
Que contre se viendront bander.
De plus grand perte novelles rapportees, Cent. 4. 13.

Le raport fait le camp s'estonnera,
Bands unies encontre revoltees,
Double Phalange, grand abandonnera.
La grand Copy qui sera dechassee,
Dans un moment fera besoign au Roy, Cent. 4. 22.

La Foy promise de loing ser fausee
Nud se verra en piteux desarroy.
Pressed a combattre fera defection,
Chef Adversaire obtiendra la victoire, Cent. 4. 75.

L' arriere guard fera defension
Les defaillans morts au blanc terretoire. Albion.

L' Armee de Mer devant Cite tiendra, Cent. 10. 68.

Puis partira sans fair longue allee,
Citoyens grande proye en Terre prendra,
Retourner class reprendre grand emblee.
La gent esclave par un heur Martial,
Viendra en haut degree tant eslevee, Cent. 5. 26.

Changeront Prince, naistra un Provincial,
Passer la Mer, copy aux Monts levee.
Les Exiles, par ire, haine intestine,
Feront au Roy grand Conjuration: Cent. 1. 13.

Secret mettront ennemis par la mine
Et les vieux siens, contre eux Sedition.
Le Lion jeune le vieux surmontera, Cent. 1. 35.

En champ bellique par singulier Duelle,
Dans cage d' or les yeux luy creuera,
Deux plays une puis mourir mort cruelle.
Pres d' un grand Pont de plain spatieuse, Cent. 1. 33.

Le grand Lion par forces Cesarees,
Fera abatre horse Cite rigoureuse,
Par effroy parts luy seront reserrees.
Le grand Neptune du profond de la Mer, Cent. 2. 78.

De sang Punique and sang Gaulois mesle:
Les Isles a sang pour tardif ramer,
Plus luy nuira que l'occult mal cele.
Des condamnez sera faict un grand nombre,
Quand les Monarques seront consiliez; Cent. 2. 38.

Mais l'un d'eux viendra si mal encombre,
Que guere ensemble ne seront raliez.
Un jour seront d'amis les deux grands Maistres,
Leur grand pouvoir se verra augmente, Cent. 2. 89.

La Terre neuve sera en ses hauts estres,
Au sanguinaire le nombre raconte.
Romain pouvoir sera du tout abas,
Son grand Voisin imiter les vestiges, Cent. 3. 63.

Occultes haines civiles, and debates
Retarderont aux boufons leur folies.
Apres viendra des extremes Contrees,
Prince Germain dessus Throsne d' Ore, Cent. 2. 87.

La Servitude and les Eaux rencontrees,
La Dame serve son temps plus n'adore.
Milan, Ferrare, Turin, and Aquileye,
Capne, Brundis, vexez par gent Celtique, Cent. 5. 99.

Par le Lion and Phalange Aquilee,
Quand Rome aura le Chef vieux Britannique.
Le grand Celtique entrera dedans Rome,
Menant amas d'exilez and bannis, Cent. 6. 28.

Le grand Pasteur mettra a mort tout homme,
Qui pour le Coq estoient aux Alps unis.
De sang Trojen naistra coeur Germanique,
Qui de viendra en si haute puissance, Cent. 5. 24. alias 74.

Horse chassera gent estrange Arabique,
Tornant l' Eglise en pristine preeminence.
L' An que Saturn horse de Servage,
Au franc terroir sera d' eau monde. Cent 5. 87.

De sang Troyen sera son marriage,
Et sera seur d' Espagnols circonde.
Les second Chef du Regne Dannemark,
Par ceux de Frize and l' Isle Britannique, Cent. 6. 41.

Fera despendre plus de cent mill marc,
Vain expoicter Voyage en Italique.
Dresser Copy pour monter a l' Empire, Cent. 6. 12.

Du Vatican le sang Royal tiendra,
Flamens, Anglois, Espagne aspire,
Contre l' Italy and France contendra.
Long temps sera sans estre habitee, Cent. 6. 43.

Ou Siene and Marne au tour vient arrousser, Paris.

De la Thamise and Martiaux tentee,
De ceus les gardes en cui dant repousser.
Bourdeaux, Rouen, and la Rochelle joints,
Tiendront autour la grand Mer Occeane, Cent. 3. 9.

Anglois-Bretons, and les Flamans conjoints,
Les chasseront jusque aupres de Rouane.
Du plus profond de l' Occident Anglois,
Ou est le chef de l' Isle Britanique, Cent. 5. 34.

Entrera class en Gyronde par Blois, Last Ed. Blaye.

Par Vin and Sell feux cachez aux barriques.
L' Entree de Blaye par Rochelle and l' Anglois,
Passera outre le grand Aemathien: Cent. 9. 38.

Non loing d' Again attendra le Gaulois,
Secours Narbonne deceu par entretien.
L' Aemathien passer Monts Pyrenees, Cent. 9. 64.

En Mars Norbone ne fera resistance,
Par Mer and Terre fera si grand menee,
Cap n'ayant Terre secure pour demeurance.
Le grand conflict qu'on apreste a Nancy, Cent. 10. 7.

L' Aemathien dira tout je submets,
L' Isle Britanne par Sell en Solcy,
Hem. mi. deuz. Phi. long temps tiendra Mets.
La grand Empire sera tossed translate
En lieu petit qui bien tossed viendra croistre, Cent. 1. 32.

Lieu bien infime d' exigue Comte
Ou au milieu viendra poser son Scepter.
Le grand Empire sera par l' Angleterre, Cent. 1. 100.

Le Pempotam des ans plus de trois cens,
Grandes copies passer par Mer and Terre,
Les Lusitains n'en seront pas contens.
Euge Tamins, Gironde and la Rochelle, Cent. 2. 61.

O sang Trojen mort au Port de la flesche:
Derrier le Fleuve au Fort mise l' eschelle, Vid. Cent. 5. 34.

Points feu, grand meurtre sur la bresche.
Romain Pontife guard de to aprocher, Cent. 2. 97.

De la Cite que deux Fleuves arrouse:
Ton sang viendra aupres de la cracher, Vid. Cent. 6. 43.

Toy and les tiens quand fleurira la Rose.
Regne Gaulois tu seras bien change
En lieu estrange est translate l' Empire, Cent. 3. 49.

En autres moeurs and Lois seras range,
Roan and Chartres te feront bien du pire.
Quand le plus grand emportera le prix, Cent. 5. 43. Louis le Grand.

De Nuremberg d' Ausbourg, and ceux de Basle:
Par Agrippine Chef de Frankfort repris,
Traverseront par Flandres jusqu'en Gale.
Les long cheveux de la Gaul Celtique, Cent. 3. 83.

Accompagnez d' Estranges Nations,
Mettront captif l' Agent Aquitanique,
Pour succomber a leurs intentions.
Fleuve qu'esproune le nouveau nay Celtique,
Sera en grande de l' Empire discord: Cent. 6. 3.

Le jeune Prince par gent Ecclesiastique,
Le Scepter oste Corona de Concord.
Fleuve Celtique changera de Rivage,
Plus ne tiendra la Cite d' Agripine Cent. 6. 4.

Tout transmue ormis le viel Language,
Saturn, Leo, Mars, Cancer, en rapine.
En grande regret sera la gent Gauloise,
Coeur vain, ledger croira temerite, Cent. 7. 34.

Pain, Sell, ne Vin, Eau, venin ne Cervoise,
Plus gran captif, faim, froid, necessite.
Des gens d' Eglise sang sera espanche,
Comme de l' eau en si grande abondance, Cent. 8. 98.

Et d' un long-temps ne sera restranche,
Veve au Clerc, ruin and doleance.
Le Roy voudra dan cite nefve entrer,
Par ennemis expugner l' on viendra: Cent. 9. 92.

Captif libere faulx dire and perpetrer,
Roy de horse estre, loin d' ennemis tiendra.
Pour ne vouloir consentir au devorce,
Qui puis apres sera cogneu indigne: Cent. 10. 22.

Le Roy des Isles sera chasse par force,
Mis a son lieu qui de Roy n' aura sign.
Tant attendu ne reviendra jamais,
Dedans l' Europe, en Asie apparoistra: Cent. 10. 75.

Un de la ligue yssu du grand Hermes,
Et sur tous Roys des Orients croistra.
Comme un Cryphon viendra le Roy d' Europe,
Accompagne de ceux d' Aquilon: Cent. 10. 86.

De rouges and blancs conduira grand troppe,
Et iront contre le Roy de Babylon.
Nostredamus.
BRusles and Gand against Antwerp Forces bring; Cent. 9. 49.

And London's Senate put to Death their King.
The Salt and Wine not able to prevent France.

That Warlike Kingdom's universal Rent.
The Blood of the Just burnt London rues full sore, Cent. 2. 51.

When to thrice Twenty, you shall add Six more. Anno 1666.

The Ancient Dame shall fall from her high Place, St. Paul 's.

And the like Mischief others shall deface. Other Churches.

From the Sea-Town the Plague shall not retire, Cent. 2. 53.

Until the Vengeance of that Blood by Fire. The Plague not to cease till the
Fire.

The Just condemned on Accusations feigned,
And the Great Dame by impious Men profaned.
The Worthy Banished from the English Realm, Cent. 3. 80. Ed. 1672. 82.

Anger shall burn in those that sit at Helm.
The Adherents shall become so tame, so grieved,
The Bastard shall at least be half Received. Monmouth.

When the two Scorpionists conjoined shall be, Cent. 1. 52.

The Great Turk murdered in his Hall you will see.
A King new-join'd the Churches Plague shall prove; J. 2. born under Scorpio.
Q. the Nativity of his Brother of France.

And Europe low, to a Northern Corner move.
The Eldest Sister born to the British Throne, Cent. 4. 96.

Full Fifteen Years before a Brother known: The D. of Cambridge, born 15 years
after the Princess of Orange. England counted the Balance of Europe.

Possessed of the large Promises of Fate,
Takes the Succession to the Ballance-State.
An English Prince Heaven did with Heart endue, Cent. 3. 16.

Shall come his prosperous Fortune to pursue: The Prince of Orange English by
his Mother Sister to J. 2.

Who had his Mother's Love, although his Hate,
IN the second Combat from him takes his Fate.
The Efforts from the North shall mighty be, Cent. 2. 68.

And the Port open as they pass the Sea:
The Kingdom in the Isle again prevails; Viz. The Liberties of the Kingdom.

And London trembles at discovered Sails.
The West shall the Britannick Islands free: Added to the Twelfth Cent. Stan.
80.

The Recognized from Low takes High Degree.
Scotch discontented Pirates shall Rebel, From a Prince becomes a King.

In a hot Night, when Rains the Waters swell.
See a strange Stratagem! The Rebel's Death Ibid. 82.

By Contraries gives to their Cause new Breath: The second Landing in the West.

By barbarous Voyage back again it spreads, He being a Romanist, calls it so.

The Protestants at the Entry raise their Heads.
Hot Wind, cold Counsels, Weeping, Panick-Fear, Ibid. 83.

Assault by Night in Bed, no Army near; A lively Description of the State of
our Court.

Oppression great Calamity does raise:
Fears and Alarms transform the Bridal-days.
The Chief of London by Americ Reign, Cent. 10. 66.

Shall of a nipping Scottish Frost complain. The Commentator renders this a
Reign of Confusion.

King, Reb. so false an Antichrist shall have,
As shall occasion Victims for the Grave.
Within the Isles shall mighty Tumults come, Cent. 2. 100.

All Music yielding to the Martial Drum.
The Assailants shall such a brisk Onset make,
That all to the Great League themselves betake. All join in the Association.

The City made a Slave, of one so Free, Cent. 4. 16.

Shall the Assylum of the Banished be.
The King would gladly change his froward Mind, The King seeing the Numbers
increase, would repent too late.

When he 100 shall 1000 find.
Norway and Dacia, with the British Shore, Cent. 6. 7.

Shall the United Brothers vex full sore. The United Provinces vex Denmark and
England, or the Governor there, of the Romish Religion, and French Blood by
his Mother.

The Roman Chief, proceeding from French Blood,
Shall have his Forces driven to the Wood.
The Royal Churchman bowing's Head too low, Cent. 10. 56.

A Bloody Torrent from his Mouth shall flow. J. 2. of the Order of the Jesuits.

The English Realm by 'nother Realm respires; Another Realm or Government
rescues England.

From Death in Slavery, that, Life, inspires. Vid. Usher 's Antiqu. Brit. f.
(...). citing Merlin, Gallica quem gignet, qui gazis regna replebit, Oh dolor,
oh gemitus! fratris ab ense cadet.

Thirty on London Bridge seek the King's Death; Cent. 4. 89.

The Guards shall make him pine away his Breath. Luy mort desgouteront
distillabunt; shall occasion his Death drop by drop. Blonde is most commonly
rendered Fair, but may be taken for any Complexion departing from Black.

This Scene of Things removed, a brown-hair'd King
Shall there be chose, who did from Frtezland spring.
The Brown-hair'd coming with Hawk-nose to Fight, Cent. 2. 67.

Shall put his baffled Enemy to flight;
The Exiles to the Land he shall restore,
Placing the Stoutest of them next the Shore.
He who the Principality shall hold, Prophecies at the end 5.

By Cruelty indecent to be told,
At last shall see a mighty Army ranged,
And his Condition into dangerous changed.
'Twere better fairly to agree the Thing, Who in danger of drinking the Juice
of Orange?

Lest him to's Fate the Juice of Orange bring.
One dubious, not from far, shall come to Reign; Cent. 6. 13.

The greater Party shall his Side sustain: Doubtful what Title to take.

This by the Great One, though it be withstood, The King cannot justify the Babe.

He cannot maintain the Title of his Blood.
A Kingdom betwixt Brothers in Contest; Cent. 8. 58.

With whom the British Arms and Name should rest:
The English Title shall be late advised,
Into French Air see one by Night surpised. The Babe sent to France.

The Successor avenged of's Brother'n Law, Cent. 10. 26.

Whom that Pretense to take the Crown did draw, The Occasion of taking the
Crown of England.

The Obstacle being slain, his Blood shall slight;
Britain shall long with treacherous France unite.
The Unhappy driven away, for Grief shall die; Cent. 5. 18.

A Woman celebrates the Victory. V. Cent. 2. 63. speaking of France and
Germany, Qui le Grand mur, etc.

The Ancient Law and Edict Freedom have,
The Wall and the Sev'nth Prince shall find a Grave. J. 2. of Scotland the
Seventh.

The City the great Mastiff forced to leave,
Shall at the wonderful Alliance grieve; Cent. 3. 70.
The Mastiff an Emblem of England.

Though he has made the timorous Heart to fly,
The Wolf and Bear shall yet his Power defy.
Great Britain as comprised in England known, Cent. 3 70.

Shall with an Inundation be o're-flown; The Landing of Forces may answer this.
Ausonium, Ausburg.

The New Ausonian League shall offer War,
To all that to unite against it dare.
While through the Camp the mighty Losses ring, Cent. 4. 13.

The News shall Terror to the Soldiers bring:
Into Revolt whole Troops and Squadrons run;
The Great One leaves them, seeing he is undone.
The King shall find the Want approaching near Cent. 4. 42.

Of all the Forces which he did cashiere. The Officers disbanded after the
routing of Monmouth.

The Faith shall fail which long had promis't been;
Forsaken and distressed he shall be seen.
Just upon Fighting shall Defection be; Cent. 4. 75.

The Adverse Chief obtains the Victory:
The Rere-Guard stand: Death follows them that run:
In the White Territory this is done. Albion, England.

The City shall the Naval Force obey, Cent. 10. 68.

That shall return after a little stay.
The Citizens a Prize at Land shall gain; Viz. Their Liberties. Forces sent to
Holland.

The Fleet for a new Lading comes again.
A Land enslaved shall in a Martial Hour Cent. 5. 26.

See its self raised to high Degree of Power;
Their Prince they will change, and a Provincial mounts,
Passing the Seas with Forces raised near Monts. Aux Monts.

Exiles by Hatred and intestine Ire,
Against their King successfully conspire: Cent. 1. 13.

The Foes in secret carry on the Mine,
And his old Friends help forward the Design.
The Elder Lion to the Young shall yield, Cent. 1. 35.

By single Duel in the Martial Field; English and Begick Lion.

He in a Golden Cage shall lose his Eyes:
Two Navies; one shall cruel Death surprise.
Near to the Bridge, upon a spacious Plain, Cent. 1. 33

The Lion shall Caesarian Force maintain;
Their Pride without the City he will abate;
Himself brought in with Crowds within the Gate.
To the great Neptune of the spacious Sea, Cent. 2. 78.

In whom French Blood and Punique Faith agree, The King of England shall find
his Designs fatal to himself.

To try at last in Blood the Isles to drown;
More hurt than from the secret Ill is known.
Of the Condemned shall be a dismal Sight, Cent, 2. 38.

When in the same Design Monarchs unite. England and France.

One shall be so encumbered in's Affairs,
They shall not be able to be joined in Wars.
One day the two Grear Masters shall combine, Cent. 2. 89.

And find themselves advanced in their Design: England and France.

The New Land to its Altitude shall rise, As its State new.

The Number shall the Bloody-one surprise. The King of France.

The Roman Power shall kiss the lowly Ground, Cent. 3. 63.

And its Great Neighbor the like Chance confound. Rome and France.

Secret Debates, and Civil Discords, soon
Shall stop the Follies of the poor Buffoon.
After a German Prince does come from far, Cent. 2. 87.

Carried aloft upon a Golden Car, The Prince of Orange is of German Extraction.

With Servitude and Waters in his Way:
The Dame shall serve, and none her Power obey. The Whore of Babylon.

Millain, Ferrare, Turin, and Aquilee, Cent. 5. 99.

Capne and Brundis sorely vex't shall be,
By the Eagle, Lion, and the Celtiques joined, Germans, English, Dutch.

And a Britannick Head Rome then shall find.
The Celtique Hero with a great amass Cent. 6. 28.

Of banished Worthies into Rome shall pass; Belgic.

And the Great Pastor shall to Death consign The Pope.

All nigh the Alps, who with the Cock shall join. The French.

From Trojan Blood shall come a German Heart, Cent. 5. 24. alias 74.

Who to so high Degree of Power shall start, The English reputed of Trojan
blood, and London has been called Troinovant.

That the Arabian Strangers he shall chase,
And to the Church restore its pristine Grace.
The Year that Saturn's out of Servitude, Cent. 5. 87.

The Free Land shall be covered with a Flood: Vid. Partridge de Anno 1688.

With Trojan Blood in Marr'age he is allied, The Sun now deprest by Saturn.

And shall be safe with Spaniards on his Side.
The second Chief of the rough Danish Soil, Cent. 6. 41.

With those of Frieze, and the bold British Isle, Prince George, the Dutch, and
English.

Shall cause 100 000 Marks to be
Spent in a Voyage into Italy.
The Royal Blood shall Forces raise to gain Cent. 6. 12.

The expected Empire of the Vatican:
Flemings, and English, with the Spaniard joined,
Against Italy and France shall be combined.
Long uninhabited shall be the Place Cent. 6. 43.

Which Sein and Marne with watery Arms embrace: Paris.

Assaulted by the Tbames, and Warriors bold;
Their Force not by the Guard to be controlled.
Bordeaux, Roan, Rochel, joining all their Force, Cent. 3. 9.

Upon the spacious Ocean take their Course: A Sea Fight.

The English-Britans and the Flemings joined, English and Flemings victorious
over the French.

Shall chase them up to Roan as Clouds with Wind.
From farthest Westward of the English Soil, Cent. 5. 34.

Where is the Chief of the brave British Isle, It must needs be thought, that
this relates to the Princes landing and stay in the West.

A Fleet into the Garonne comes by Blay;
France to hide Fire in Barrels, shall essay.
The English shall pass by Rochel into Blay, Cent. 9. 38.

The Great Aemathien leading them the Way: Vid. Pref.

Not far from Again he the French shall meet,
The Help from Narboun fails them by deceit.
The Aemathien over the Pyrenaeans goes, Cent. 9. 64.

Narboun in War dares not his Way oppose:
By Sea and Land he with such Power shall ride,
The Cap shall want a Place where to abide. The Jesuit.

Near Nancy a most bloody Conflict see; Cent. 10. 7.

The Aemathien says, All shall submit to Me.
The British Isle by France.
Salt and Wine in doubt;
But Mets shall not long be able to hold out.
A quick Translation of the Empire see: Cent. 1. 32.

In a small Place the lofty Seat shall be.
A Place inferior, of but mean Account,
Into the middle shall its Scepter mount.
England of Power shall be the glorious Seat, Cent. 10. 100.

More than Three hundred Years continuing Great:
Large Forces thence shall pass through Land and Seas,
To the disquiet of the Portugees.
Thames, Garone, Rochel, all engaged in War; Cent. 2. 61.

Oh Trojan-Blood, your Arrows fatal are! Vid. Cent. 5. 34.

The Scaling-Ladders shall the Fortress reach; The English Forces fatal to the
French.

Fire on the Bridge, and Slaughter in the Breach.
Roman High Priest! Take heed how you come nigh Cent. 2. 97.

The City which two Rivers do supply: Seems to relate to Paris, vid. Cent. 6.
yet may agree with London.

The Blood of you and yours shall freely flow
There, in the Season when the Roses blow.
Great Changes France betide in luckless Hour, Cent. 3. 49.

In a strange Place shall be the Seat of Power:
Quite different Laws and Manners it must take;
Part of its Misery Roan and Chartres make.
When the Great Monarch bears away the Prize Cent. 3. 53.

From those of Ausburgh, and their firm Allies,
Cologne the Chief of Frankfort shall retake:
Their Way through Flanders into France they will make.
Tall Horsemen from the Holland.
Celtique Gall shall ride, Cent. 3. 83.

With Men of diverse Nations on their side:
The Agent for Aquitain they will confine, Part of France. Is it a doubt who
has been Agent for the French.

To make him pliable to their Design.
The River which does the young Celtique prove, Cent. 6. 3.

Shall in the Empire mighty Discord move. The Rhine. First the Administration,
then the Crown.

For the young Prince the Clergy shall declare;
He takes the Scepter, and the Crown shall wear.
The Celtique River shall new Channel take, Cent. 6. 4.

Cologne its Out-bound shall no longer make: Cologne.

Except the Ancient Language, all is new;
Saturn, Mars, Leo, Cancer, Spoils pursue. Vid. Partridge of the Conjunctions,
An. 1688.

Great Disappointments shall the Frenchmen find;
Their vain light Hearts puff't up with empty Wind: Cent. 7. 34.

Salt, Wine, and Bread, Water and Beer shall fail;
The Great one cold, and famish't in a Gaol.
The Blood of Churchmen shall be largely shed, Cent. 8. 98.

And like a mighty River it shall spread:
Long shall it be before the Slaughter ends:
Woe to the Clerk; Ruin and Grief attends.
They Would have the King by Force his Game retreive, Cent. 9. 92.

His Nephew since the Citizens receive: The Prince, Nephew to the K. as well as
Son-in-law.

The Prisoner now to talk and act is free;
The King without keeps far from the Enemy.
The King of the Isles shall be driven out by force, Cent. 10. 22.

For not consenting unto a Divorce,
From what is soon owned unfitting to have been:
One without Mark of King in's Place is seen. Aministrator first.

Such Expectation never shall be known Cent. 10. 75.

In Europe raised: Asia the Sight shall own.
One of the League, of the Great Hermes's Line, The Ausburg League.

In Glory shall the Eastern Kings outshine.
The King of Europe with the Northern Flower, Cent. 10. 86.

Shall like a Gryphon come in mighty Power;
In Red and White a numerous Force shall lead,
All joined against the Babylonish Head.
Grebner.
PEr idem tempus Rex quidam Borealis (nomine CAROLUS) MARIAM ex Papistica
Religione sibi assumptam in Matrimonium conjunxerit ex quo evadet Regum
infelicissimus. Unde populus ejus, ipso abdicato, Comitem quendam perantiquae
Familiae regno praeponet, Nota, Abdicated.
qui tres annos, aut eo circiter durabit and hoc quoque remoto, Equitem quendam
bellicosum in ejus locum assumet qui paulo amplius regnabit.

Posthunc eliget nullum. Interea unus e stirpe Caroli in littore regni patris
sui cum Gallicis, Suevicis, Danicis, Hollandicis, Burgundicis, and Germanicis,
auxiliis stabit, omnes inimicos suos cruentissimo bello superabit, and postea
Regnum suum felicissime administrabit, eritque Carolo magno major.

Sum Anglicus truculentus Leo, modo rugens, fremens, and immane saeviens,
animosus, faelix, and Victoriosus contra omnes hosts; Patriae meae fideliter
auxilio venio and praesidio, ac clementi meae Reginae asporto pretiosum
cimelion Margaritam dictam, Belgicas, and Hispanicas dictiones, unde Regina mea
tempore vitae suae certo magnifice and gloriose Trumphat.

Terra Jubila, Jubila, canta, and exulta quod vidisti exoptatum diem Ruinae and
excidii Antichristi, quod ductu and auspicio faelici Anglorum, Gallorum,
Danorum, Germanicorum, Scotorum, Suecorum, praesidio dextrae numinis
altipotentis fiet.

Europae labes and imbecilitas singulorum ejusdem Regnorum, sedem mirabiliter
struet Quintae Monarchiae, quae sub tempus exitii Romani Imperii ad terrorem
totius Mundi ex ruinis Germaniae refulgebit.

Haec triennii spatio caetera Europae regna aut vi praedomitabit aut belli metu
ad Societatem propellet, quo universalem Ligam and unionem omnium Protestantium
efficiet.

Hoc vexillum de fratribus quoque Uraniae Principis, and eorum posteris
Illustrissimis intelligendum Leones nostri audaces in prima acie fremunt unde
nobis potentia crescit, and Gloria and Fama augescit.

Grebner.
TO CHARLES a Northern King much Woe Cited in the Northern Star, f. 25.
'twill breed,
To marry MARY of the Romish Creed.
The People casting off his luckless Sway,
Shall of an Ancient House an Earl obey.
Three Years, or thereabout, he them shall Head:
Then shall a Warlike Knight come in his stead;
He something longer shall maintain his Post;
After him, Nol is chose to rule the Roast.
Of Charles his Lineage there shall One arise,
Who with French, Germans, Swedes, Danes, Dutch, Supplies,
Upon the Shore of's Father's Realm shall Land,
And Conquer all who dare his Arms withstand.
With great Prosperity he long shall Reign,
In Glory even surpassing Charlemain.
An English Roaring Lion am I found,
My Rage and Courage with Successes Crowned:
For Aid and Safeguard to my Country come:
I to my Queen bring a rich Treasure home:
Holland and Spain well called a Precious Stone,
Whence shall my Queen enjoy a happy Throne.
Rejoice, O Earth! Proclaim a Jubilee;
For you the Fall of Antichrist shall see:
With happy Conduct, in auspicious Hour,
The English, French, Scotch, Swedish, Danish Flower,
Shall cast her down by the Almighty's Power.
The Europaean Kingdoms in decay,
The Scene of a Fifth-Monarchy shall lay:
Which while the Roman Empire does decline,
Out of the German-Ruins bright shall shine,
And with its Luster terrify the World,
E're thrice the Sun has through its Houses whirled.
This Europe's Kingdoms shall by Force subdue,
Or drive to Friendship, while they War eschew;
Whence shall an Universal League be made
Of all the Protestants, for mutual Aid.
Of the Orange Family it shall be said,
Our Belgic Lions shall the Armies Head,
And with undaunted Courage Terror spread.
Hence Glory, Power, and an unrivaled Fame,
Shall to all Ages celebrate the Name.
David Pareus.
THere shall arise out of the Nation of the most Illustrious Lilies, having a
long Forehead, higb Eyebrows, great Eyes, and an Eagle's Nose: He shall gather
a great Army, and destroy all the Tyrants of his Kingdom, and slay all that fly
and hide themselves in Mountains and Caves from his Face: For Righteousness
shall be joined unto him, as the Bridegoom to the Bride: With them he shall
wage War even unto the fortieth Year, bringing into Subjection the Islanders,
Spaniards, and Italians. Rome and Florence he shall destroy and burn with Fire,
so as Salt may be sowed on that Land. The greatest Clergyman, who has invaded
Peter's Seat, he shall put to Death; and in the same Year obtain a double
Crown. At last going over the Sea with a great Army, he shall enter Greece, and
be named The King of the Greeks: The Turks and Barbarians he shall subdue,
making an Edict, That every one shall die the Death, that worshippeth not the
Crucified One: And none shall be found able to resist him, because an Holy Arm
from the Lord shall always be with him: And he shall possess the Dominion of
the Earth. These things being done, he shall be called, The Rest of Holy
Christians, etc.

David Pareus, Among PROPHECIES Printed ANNO 1682.
ONe of long Forehead, and of Eyebrows high,
An Eagles rising Nose, and a full Eye,
From the Illustrious Lillies shall arise,
And his Realms Tyrants with his Arms surprise.
To Mounts and Caves they from his Face shall fly,
And many miserable Wretches die:
For Righteousness he as a Bride shall take,
And to the Forti'th Year famed Wars shall make.
Those of the Islands, Spain, and Italy,
Subject unto his Power the World shall see:
Florence and Rome with raging Fire he will waste,
And Salt into the gaping Furrows cast.
The Prelate that does Peter's Seat invade,
To taste unwelcom Death by him is made:
And the same Year a double Crown he will gain, Nota, Ireland has no Crown.

With a great Army passing over the Main.
Greece he shall enter; styled the Grecian King;
Turks and Barbarians to Subjection bring;
By a firm Edict fixing Death on all,
That don't before the suffering Savior fall.
None shall be found that can his Force abide,
Because God's Sacred Arm strengthens his Side.
The Empire of the Earth by him possessed,
He shall be called, The Holy Christian's Rest.
Ant. Torquatus.
GAlli cum Hispanis pluries, longoque tempore pugnabunt. Post Turcae cum
Hispanis, quibus omnibus tandem Hispani superiores erunt. Omnia extrema visura
passuraque est misella Italia, sed praecipue Longobardi: Bellicus furor omnia
maligna in Italiam effundet, plus Italiae quam caeteris provinciis astra
minantur. Apparebit namque fortissimus Princeps a Septentrione qui populos
debellabit and urbes, and dominia, ac potentatus horribili cum terrore,
saevissimisque and invictissimis bellis expugnabit, universos sibi subjiciet
vi. Aquarum diluvia nedum in Italia, verum etiam and in aliis provinciis and
locis exundabunt, ac humiliora operient loca, and Civitates and Castra
submergentur. Futurumque est mare Piratis and classibus plenum, quo magno cum
terrore civitates maritimas oppriment and spoliabunt. Unde fleant expectantes,
fleantque maxim Romani Imperii hosts.

Quot dominia mutabuntur, quotque illustres familiae antiquae dominia amittent,
haud facile hoc narrari posset, and per maxim in Italia continget. Quot
respublicae per vim and cum dolor, suos status and libertates amittent, and
aliis dominis atque externis subjicientur? Florentia, Luca, Janua, Venetiae,
and aliae quoque respublicae praedicto fato erunt subjectae nec evadere
poterunt, and quo tardius id fiet eo durius infelicius-que eveniet eis, and eo
fato prementur. Nam tam ardua diraque; necnon saevissima bella inter Gallos
atque Germanos and Hispanos, ac inter eorum Reges oritura sunt, inter quos
Angli Italique miscebuntur and etiam Turcae ad ea a Christianis in auxilium
vocabuntur. Itaque tunc videbitur quod totus status orbis sit ruiturus, and
omnes prae confusione rerum timebunt ultimam ruinam. Multi contra Romanum
Imperatorem and suos ferociter ferentur and ibunt. Sed Romanus Imperator tanta
vi repent contra hosts suos praeter omnem spem and opinionem insurget, quod
contra omne Judicium opprimet eos superabit ac vincet, and Gallorum Regem aut
interficiet aut secundo capiet, Tandem tamen gladio concidet, aut amisso regno,
filiis calamitatibus oppressis, ducibusque suis interfectis vitam finiet, and
tunc ultra Gallorum laus sub Aquila volabit, Tunc Galli infelices erunt.

Anglus quoque Rex Gallicis ruinis non long dissimilia pertimescat infortunia.
Poterit ipse cum suis adversam experiri fortunam and ingenti strage prosterni,
quia tutum non est sed fatuum contra fata niti; Sapiens tamen dominabitur
astris.

FINIS.
Ant. Torquatus. Dedicated to Matthias King of Hungary, Anno 1480. Edit. Anno
1552.

OFten and long Spaniards and French shall fight; Page 7. 6.

Then shall the Turks yield to the Spanish Might. The Emperor and King of Spain
of the same House.

Poor Italy, but Lombardy in chief,
Shall see and suffer various Grounds of Grief.
All Ills shall Italy invade by Wars,
Italy chiefly threatened by the Stars:
For from the North a Prince of Valor great
Shall people, Cities, Potentates defeat;
Fierce, and invincible against his Foes,
Subduing all who his Success oppose.
In Italy, and other Countries too,
The Waters Towns and Castles shall overflow:
Pirates and Navies shall the Sea infest,
And Sea port Towns be spoiled, and sore oppressed.
A dismal Prospect this to many shows,
But most unto the Roman Empire's Foes.
'Twere tedious to recount how many Realms
And Ancient Families Ruin o'rewhelms;
How many Commonwealths by Force and Fraud,
Out of their Lives and Liberties are awed,
Letting in cruel Masters from abroad.
Florence and Venice, many other States,
Shall subject be, nor can evade their Fates:
The longer it is before they meet their Doom,
The fiercer will the mighty Ruin come.
French, Germans, Spaniards, with their several Kings,
Engaged in War, perpetrate bloody things:
Italians and the English have their Share,
And by the Christians, Turks invited are.
Many against the Roman Empire rise,
Fiercely assailing it and its Allies.
The Emp'ror shall arise to sudden Power,
And conquer all his Foes in lucky Hour,
Leaving Belief and trembling Hope behind,
And the French King from him his Fate shall find,
B'ing slain, or twice a Prisoner; but at last,
He surely by the Sword his Death shall taste,
His Kingdom lost, Progeny pressed with Woe,
And all his Captains meet an Overthrow.
Then Fortune, adverse to the Frenchmen, brings
Their Praise to crowch under the Eagles Wings.
The King of England then may justly fear,
The like Calamities with France to bear:
He and his Party luckless Chance may try,
And with a mighty Slaughter prostrate lie:
For, Madness it is against the Fates to rise;
And yet, The Stars are governed by the Wise.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere are lately Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St.
Dunstan 's Church in Fleet Street, these Three Books following.

I. An Enquiry into the Power of Dispensing with Penal Statutes. Together with
some Animadversions upon a Book writ by Sir Edward Herbert, Lord Chief Justice
of the Court of Common Pleas, Entitled, A short Account of the Authorities in
Law, upon which Judgment was given in Sir Edward Hales's Case.

II. The Power, Jurisdiction, and Privilege of Parliament; And the Antiquity
of the House of Commons Asserted: Occasioned by an Information in the
King's Bench, by the Attorney General, against the Speaker of the House of
Commons.

As also a Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Realm of
England; occasioned by the late Commission in Ecclesiastical Causes.

III. A Defense of the Late Lord RVSSEL's Innocence, By way of Answer or
Confutation of a Libellous Pamphlet, Entitled, An Antidote against Poison;
With Two Letters of the Author of this Book, upon the Subject of his Lordship's
Trial.

Together with an Argument in the Great Case concerning Elections of Members to
Parliament, between Sir Samuel Barnardiston Plaintiff, and Sir William Soames
Sheriff of Suffolk, Defendant, In the Court of King's Bench, in an Action upon
the Case, and afterward by Error sued in the Exchequer-Chamber.

All Three Writ by Sir Robert Atkyns, Knight of the Honorable Order of the
Bath, and late one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas.


