LONDON'S PLAGUE SORE DISCOVERED: OR, Some serious Notes, and suitable
Considerations upon the present VISITATION AT LONDON:

Wherein is something by way of Lamentation, Information, Expostulation,
Exhortation, and Caution.

Whereunto is annexed, A Never-failing Antidote against the PLAGUE.

London, Printed for the Author, Anno 1665.

Reader,
These are to give thee notice, that one Crouch a Printer happening accidentally
of the Copy of the Antidote at the latter end of this Paper, before I had given
order for any to print it, he took upon him to print it of his own accord,
contrary to my consent or knowledge, and placed it in Books and Papers
according to his pleasure, for his own private advantage, by which means I have
suffered some prejudice, and have been censured by some as if I were guilty of
that, which indeed is detestable to me. This I thought good to insert, that the
Truth might be manifested, and further false Suggestions in that case might be
prevented.

E. N.

Londons Plague Sore, discovered.
AS I of late, about the Streets do go,
I often hear Complainings to and fro:
In every corner, more or less I hear,
And many people much surpised with fear;
And still by observation I do find,
That Cares and Fears do grow in peoples mind;
And Discontents, do almost every where,
Seem to abound within this City here:
But what is the Cause? or, wherefore is it so,
That such Distractions more, and more should grow,
Amongst a People, which of late did glory,
Of Gallant Times, beyond the reach of Story;
For Wealth and Strength they had so great a share,
They scorned that any should with them compare.
What is the Reason such a lofty City,
Should now be willing to accept of pity?
Why several things are urged. I pray name one.
Alas! that is easy, Trading's almost gone
Quite out o'th City, whither shall we run?
The Cry o'th Poor is, We shall be undone!
For why already Trading's grown so dead,
Our present Gains will hardly yield us Bread:
Our Cares are doubled, and our Hopes are vain;
Say what you will, here is reason to complain:
And this does greatly add unto our sorrow,
We fear each day, it will be worse to morrow.
And yet the Great Ones do oppress the Poor:
Such times as these we never saw before.
Nay, more than this, the worst is yet to come,
We have not yet told all, nor hardly some;
There Is something else, that loads our hearts to think,
What Dreadful Cup is filled for us to drink!
Alas, the Plague, the Pestilential Plague,
Which lately made such havoc near the Hague,
Has crossed the Seas, and found our City out,
And put our greatest Champions to the rout.
Our bravest Gallants which did swagger most,
And with their daring tongues would proudly boast
Of Courage, Valor, Strength and Noble-Blood,
As if they scorned to have their wills withstood,
Yet when the Lord did with a challenge greet them,
And sent them word, He did intend to meet them,
To see if they against him would prepare,
How this strange Message did their Worships scare!
O how did this perplex and sore affright
Their lofty minds, and made them take their flight,
And run away from God's appointed place,
As if they feared even to see his face.
For when his angry Angel did approach,
To flee, they strait provide both Horse and Coach.
Then learn this lesson from it you that can,
It Is vain to trust in any mortal man,
For if in danger thou his help shall crave,
Alas! poor worm! himself he cannot save.
But now, alas, the Common People say,
It Is we must bear the burden of the day!
The Mighty God has singled out our City
For Wrath and Vengeance, casting off all Pity;
In every corner of our famous Town
He sends his Arrows of Destruction down;
Yea, round about, almost in every place,
He leaves the Tokens of his angry face.
And now our ears are daily filled with cries,
And Ghastly Sights, do grieve our woeful eyes.
Yea, Father, Mother, Sister, also Brother
Do daily see the ruin of each other;
And little Babes which at the breast do lie,
Amongst the rest do often gasp and dye,
Whilst grieved Mothers over them do mourn,
Till angry Death do them as good a turn.
How many are deprived of wonted sleep?
How many eyes have lately learned to weep?
How many wringings of the hands for Grief,
Because their Sorrows are beyond relief?
For many years it has not been the like,
Which to our hearts does much amazement strike.
Alas, poor London, for thy sad estate
My bowels yearn, How art thou fallen of late?
But can thou only of thy Sorrows speak,
And not discern the door through which they break?
Do thou not know the cause of thy Distress
To be thy Sins and woeful Wickedness?
Have not thy Sins been great and manifold,
Thy Provocations more than can be told!
Thy Lewdness and Profaneness, past compare!
Thy Impudence there is no man can declare!
Thy horrid Blasphemies, and cursed Swearing,
Thy Ranting, Roaring, and thy Domineering!
Thy great Uncleanness and Abominations,
Thy Drunkenness, and such like provocations,
Has often urged the Just and Righteous God,
To fall upon thee with his Iron Rod;
And then consider, how thou did requite
The God of Grace for all his Gospel Light
That he long time unto thy soul did give,
That so thou might repent, return and live.
Have thou not much despised his proffered Grace?
Have thou not spitted in the glorious face
Of blessed Jesus, when in love he came
To wash thee from thy filthiness and shame?
Have thou not Love and Mercy greatly slighted,
His holy Spirit also much despighted?
Have thou not Patience, also, much abused,
And God's dear Servants woefully misused?
In fine, the Gospel thou have cast behind thee,
And suffered Satan to bewitch and blind thee;
And those that were thy best and truest Friends,
How have thou sought to bring them to their ends.
Examine well, and thou may find it so;
Sin is the cause of this thy present WOE,
And therefore now, while it is called, to day
Repent, and turn to God without delay:
Break off thy Sins; Let Righteousness take place,
It may be yet thou may partake of Grace;
But if thou still retain thy stubborn heart,
Thou may expect to feel a greater smart,
And this already thou may plainly see
The Bloody Sword does also threaten thee,
And Famine seems to stare thee in the face,
Impenitence may bring it on apace.
Then look in time, before it be too late,
Lest greater Judgment fall upon thy pate.
Now therefore hark, ye Gallants of the time,
You that have counted Godliness a Crime,
What do you think, or where do y' mean to stay,
That you from London make such have away?
Here this from me; If that you take along
Your Sins with you, you do your selves but wrong
To flee away, for you had better be
Punished at first, than to go longer free:
For, don't you know, the longer you provoke
The Righteous God, the greater is his Stroke;
Therefore observe, the best and surest way
For to escape the danger of the Day,
Is to Repent, and set the Oppressed free,
And then perhaps, God may entreated be.
But if in the Country you in sin delight,
And God's Forbearance and Long-suffering slight,
He in the Country will go search about,
And never leave until he find you out,
And when the Angel takes his Journey thither,
And finds you, and all your sins together,
The fearful dreggs of this destroying Cup
Shall be your portion, you must drink them up.
Hence be exhorted, then, to kiss the Son,
Make peace with him before your Glass be run,
And then in Life or Death you will be His,
And your Reward shall be ETERNAL BLISS.
A Sovereign Medicine against the Plague both Preservative and Curative.
DRink a good draught of Josiah's 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.
Humility next thy heart; then take a dose of Nineveh's Jona. 3. 8
Repentance, well soaked or steeped in the vessel of a Broken Psalm. 51. 17.
and a Contrite Heart, well seasoned with ver. 6.
Truth and Sincerity at the bottom: then let all these boil well together in a
good quantity of David's Psa. 6. 6.
Tears: And when thou have done thus, then spread a broad Plaster of Gods
Grace, and bind it fast to thy soul with the Swaddleband of Love and serious
Eccles. 7. 14.
Consideration; Then cast away all thy old infectious garments of Col. 3. 5, 6,
7, 8.
Sin and Iniquity, and put on Romans 13. 14.
the Lord Jesus Christ, as a sure garment of defense and safety: Then take up
as good a quantity of Joshua's Josh. 24. 15.
Resolution as thou can well bear, and so walk up and down in those wholesome
and pleasant Fields, called Romans 6. 4
Newness of Life, and follow thy Calling in the Prove. 23. 17. and 14. 26
fear of God.

All which, being truly and carefully observed, will undoubtedly and infallibly
preserve thee from the sting and danger of all Plagues whatsoever.

Signatum Caeli. E. N.


