A TREATISE OF THE PRINCIPAL GROUNDS AND MAXIMS OF THE LAWS Of this Nation.

Very useful and commodious for all Students, and such others as desire the
knowledge and understanding of the Laws.

Lex plus laudatur, quando Ratione probatur.
Written by that most Excellent and Learned Expositor of the Law, W. N. of
Lincoln's Inn, Esquire.

The second Edition, with Additions.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, R. Best, and G. Bedell, and
are to be sold at their shops in Fleetstreet, and Gray's Inn gate, 1651.

An Analysis of the Laws of England, by the honorable and most learned William
Noy Esquire Attorney Gen: and of the Privy Council to the late King.
Justice is a constant and perpetual will to render every man his own right:
It is Natural According to law whereare considered Law Divine Law of Reason
Law Humane Foreign English Common, where is treated I. Of law where is
considered The law it self, which is By Tradition, which is General, and
belongs to * Written Statute Injuries forbiden by that Law Private, against The
person and goods Public against the King and Commonwealth



2. Of the manner of delivering that Law Civil Ecclesiastical Temporal In
peace the Admiral In war the Marshal * The Person, where is considered the
Quality; as Name the King the subject who is of Baptism Creation
Natural who is Politic Free, who is Villain In his own Power, where is
considered Not in his own Power Intention Action there Cause Time Place
Efficient Material Formal Final.


by Nature Action of the person

by common law, or the Kings Charter





The Thing, which is universal which is Of natural Right Out of diverse causes

Particular, in which dominion may be gained Where are considered





Peculiar, which belongs to the King to the Subject according to his
prerogative Legal and ordinary Regal and absolute

According to peculiar Custom of place prescription of persons









1. Things or goods themselves; which are Real Personal Primary Secondary
Simple Compound
Of the land Upon it

Corporate Incorporate


2. To have ownership, which is by Estate and Propriety by Right By his own
Right Right of another Single Joint by Possession Possibility Of franktenement
Chattels Hereditary Frank-tenement alone in Fee in Tail absolute conditional
qualified
general special

by Law by Gift as Dower curtesy of Engl.
for Life, or Life of another


Real Personal Term of years at Will
Animate Inanimate


Remote Near reversion remainder


Parceners joint tenants Tenants in common

Interest and Propriety Use Authority

of Action of Entry


3. The manner of acquiring ownership by Law by Purchase Descent, or Forfeiture
absolute With consideration by Writing by Word by Devise by Record by Deed
Fine Recovery Executed Executory
with Voucher without Single Double

Feoffment Grant with atturny Barg. and sale inrol'd
by Grant Ratification Release Confirmation


Render Election Concord Assignment
by Common Law by Statute





4. The manner of admitting ownership by operation of Law by act of the party
Extinguishment Suspension Descent, which takes away Entry
Commission Omission Discontinuance Warranty Estoppell Forfeiture



II. The manner of delivering the law is By Law By act of the party Immediate
Mediate, by actions in Courts where are considered Claim Entry



1. The diverse Actions in which Right is given Writs Plaints Original Judicial
Real Personal Mixed For the Right The possession
For the Person The Goods
Of Right of law Of the Kings grace

Of Course Magistral

Pleas of the Crown Common Pleas


2. The diverse Courts where remedy is had; here are considered The Courts
themselves Their jurisdictions; and there Temporal Of the King The subject
Superior Inferior
Of Record Of Barony


The persons Pleas Of the Courts In them Judges Ministers
Demand' Tenant
Real Personal Plaintiff Defend'


Of the Crown Common



3. The manner of prosecution in Courts Direct Collateral By Process By
Pleading with that Pleas Trial Judgment Execution

by the Court-Adjornment by persons in the Court, as-Essoin


4. The manner of defeating the Process by Prohibition assignation of Errors

5. The manner of taking away the punishment Flight Pardon.


CHAP. I. The Laws of England are threefold; Common Laws, Customs, and
Statutes.
THE COMMON LAW.
THE Common Law is grounded on the Rules of reason, and therefore we use to say
in Argument, That reason will that such a thing be done, or that reason will
not that such a thing be done; The rules of reason are of two sorts, some taken
from Learning* as well Divine as Humane, and some proper to itself only.

OF THEOLOGY.
1. Summa ratio est, quae pro Religione facit.

ATenure to find a Preacher, if the Lord purchase parcel of the Land* yet the
whole service remains, because it is for the advancement of RELIGION.

2. Dies Dominicus non est Juridicus.

Sale on a Sunday shall not be said Sale in a Market, to alter the property of
the Goods.

OF GRAMMBR.
OF Grammar, the rules are infinite in the Etymology of a Word, and in the
construction thereof; what is nature, is single.

3. Ad proxium antecedens fiat relatio, nisi impediatur Sententia.

As an indictment against I. S. servant to I. D. in the County of Middlesex*
Butcher, etc. is not good; for servant is no Addition, and Butcher shall be
referred to I. D. which is the next Antecedent.

OF LOGIC.
4. Cessante causa, cessat effectus.

THe Executor, nor the husband, after the death of a woman Guardian in soccage,
shall not have the Wardship, because ( viz.) the natural affection is removed
which was the cause thereof.

Some things shall be construed according to the original cause thereof.

5.

The Executor may release before the probate of the Will, because his title and
interest is by the Will, and not by the probate.

To make a man swear to bring me money upon pain of killing, and he brings it
accordingly, it is felony.

Outlawry in Trespass, is no forfeiture of Land, as outlawry in felony is; for
although the nonappearance is the cause of the Outlawry in both, yet the force
of the Outlawry shall be esteemed according to the heynousness of the offense,
which is the principal cause of the Process.

6. According to the beginning thereof:

As if a Servant, which is out of his Masters service, kill his Master, through
the malice which he bare him when he was his servant, this is petty Treason.

7. According to the end thereof;

As if a man warned to answer a matter in a Writ, there he shall not answer to
any other matter then is contained in the Writ; for that ^as the end of his
coming.

8. Derivativa potestas non potest esse majus primitiva.

A Servant shall be stopped to say the

Frank-Tenement is belonging to his Master, by a recovery against his Master,
although the servant be a stranger to the Recovery; for he shall not be in
better case then he is in, whose Right he claims, or justifies.

9. Quod ab initio non valet, in tractu temporis non convalescit.

If an Infant, or a married woman, do make a Will, and publish the same, and
afterward dies, being of full age, or sole, notwithstanding this Will is void.

10. Vnumquodque dissolvitur eo modo quo colligatur.

An Obligation or other matter in writing, may not be discharged by an
agreement by word, but by writing.

11. He that claims a thing on high, shall neither have gain, nor loss
thereby.

As if one Joynt-Tenant make a Lease o^ his Joyntee, reserving rent, and die;
the heir which surviveth shall have the reversion of his Joyntee, but not the
Rent, because he comes in by the first Feoffer, and not under his companion.

Also where the husband being leased for years in right, reserving a Rent, the
woman shall have the residue of the term, but not the rent.

12. Debile fundamentum, fallit opus.

When the estate whereunto the Warrantie is annexed is defeated, the Warrantie
is also defeated.

13. Incidents may not be severed.

As if a man grant Wood to be burnt in such a house, wood may not be granted
away, but he which has the house, shall have the wood also.

14. Actio personalis moritur cum persona.

As if battery be done to a man, if he that did the battery, or the other die,
the Action is gone.

If the Leasor covenant to pay quit-rents, during the term, his Executor shall
not pay it, for it is a personal covenant.

15. Things of higher nature, do determine things of lower nature.

As matters of writing do determine an agreement by words.

If an offense which is murder at the Common law, be made high Treason, no
appeal lies for it, for that the Murder is drowned, and punishable as Treason,
whereof no appeal lies.

16. Majus continet minus.

Whereby the Custom of a Manor, a man may demise for life, he may demise to his
Wife, durante viduitate.

17. Majus dignum trahit ad se minus dignum.

As the Writings, the Chest or Box they are in.

OF PHILOSOPHY.
18. Naturae vis maxima.

NAtural affection or brotherly love, are good causes or considerations to
raise an use.

And one brother may maintain a suit for another.

19. The law favors some persons. Viz.

Men out of the Realm, -or in Pison, Women married, Infants, Idiots, Madmen,
Men without intelligence, Strangers, that are neither parties, nor privy, and
things done in another right.

A descent shall not take away the entry of a man out of the Realm, or in
prison, or of a married woman, or of an infant.

And a lease made to the husband and wife, after the death of the husband, the
wife shall not be charged for waste, during the marriage.

An Idiot shall not be compelled to plead by his Guardian or next friend, but
shall be in the Court; and he that pleads the best plea for himself, shall be
admitted:

If a dumb man bring an action, he shall plead by his next friend:

If a Lessee for years grant a Rentcharge, and surrendereth, the rent shall be
paid, during the term, to the Stranger:

A man Outlawed or Excommunicated* may bring an Action as an Executor:

20. And a man's person before his possessions,

Mentioned of corporal pain, shall avoid a Deed, but not his Goods.

21. And matter of possession more then matter of right, when the right is
equal.

As if a man purchase several lands at one time, held of several Lords by
Knights service, and dies, the Lord which first seizes the Ward, shall have
it, otherwise his elder Lord.

22. Matter of profit or interest shall be taken largely: and it may be
assigned, and it may not be countermanded; but matter of pleasure, trust or
authority, shall be taken strictly, and may be countermanded.

As license to him in my Park, or in my Garden to walk, extends only to
himself, and not to his servant, nor any other in his company; for it is
matter of pleasure only; otherwise it is of a License to hunt, kill, and carry
away the Deer, which is matter of profit.

A Church Way is matter of ease.

OF POLITICAL.
23.

NOthing shall be void, which by possibility may be good; If Land be given to a
man, and to a woman married to another man, and the heirs of their two bodies,
this is a present estate Tail, because of the possibility.

24. Ex nudo pacto non oritur actio.

No man is bound to his promise, nor any use can be raised without good
consideration.

A consideration must be some cause or occasion which must amount to a
recompense in Deed, or in Law, as money, or natural affection, not long
acquaintance, nor great familiarity.

25. The Law favors a thing that is of necessity.

As to pay several expenses, shall not be said to Administer; to distrain in
the night, damage feasant, to kill another to save his own life.

A servant to beat another to save his Master, if he cannot otherwise choose.

To drive another man's cattle amongst mine own, until I come to a place to
shift them, is no Trespass.

26. And for the good of the Commonwealth.

As killing of Foxes, and the pulling down of an house of necessity to stay a
fire.

27. Communis error facit jus.

As an Acquittance made by a Major alone, where there be a hundred presidents,
is good.

28. And things that are in the Custody of the law.

Goods taken by Distress, shall not be taken in Execution for the debt of the
owner thereof.

29. The husband and the wife are one person.

They cannot sue one another, nor make any Grant one to another: And if a woman
marry with her Obligor, the debt is extinct; and she shall never have any
action, if another were bound with him; for by the marriage the Action is
suspended; and an action personal suspended against one, is a discharge to all.

30.

An Obligation with a condition to enfeoff a woman before such a day, and
before the day the Obligor takes her to wife, the obligation is forfeited,
because he cannot infeoff her, but he may make a lease for years with a
remainder to his wife.

When a joint Purchase is, during the marriage, every one shall have the whole.

When a joint purchase, during the marriage, is made, and the husband sell; the
wife shall have a Cui in vita for the whole against both, and on a feoffment
made to one man and his wife, and to a third person, the third person shall
have one moity.

31. All that a Woman has, appertains to her Husband.

Personal things, and things absolutely real, as Lands, rents, and so forth,
or Chattels real, and things in Action, are only in her right;
notwithstanding real things, and things in Action, he may dispose at his
pleasure, but not Will or charge them; and he shall have her real Chattels, if
he survive. Of things in Action, the woman may dispose by her last Will, and
she may make her husband her Executor, and he shall recover them to the use of
the last will of his wife.

If a Leassee for years grant his term to a man, or woman, and to another,
they are joynt-Tenants; But if goods be given to her and to another, her
husband and the other are Tenants in common.

The Husband may release an Obligation, or trespass for goods taken when his
wife was sole, and it shall be good against the woman if he die; but if he die
without making any such Release, the woman shall have the Action, and not the
Executor of her husband.

The woman surviving, shall have all things in Action; or her Executors, if she
die.

The Husband shall be charged with the debts of his wife but during her life.

32, The will of the Wife, is subject to the will of her husband.

Note, a Feoffment made to the wife, she shall have nothing, if her husband do
not thereunto agree.

MORAL RULES.
33.

THe Law favors works of Charity, right, and truth, and abhors fraud,
coven and incertainties, which obscure the truth; contrarieties, delays,
unnecessary circumstances, and such like.

34. Dolus and fraus una in part sanari debet.

No man shall take benefit of his own wrong; if a man be bound to appear at a
day, and before the day the Obligee casts him in prison, the bond is void.

A Grant of all his woods in B. Acre, which may be reasonably spared, is a void
Grant, if it be not reserved to a third person, to appoint what may be spared.

A Feoffment made in Fee of two Acres to two men, Habend one acre to one, and
the other acre to the other; this Habend* is void.

35. Lex neminem cogit ad impossibilia, etc.

The Law compels no man to show that which by intendment he does not know;
as if a servant be bound to serve his Master in all his commandments lawful,
it is a good Plea, to say, he served him lawfully.

A Covenant to make a new Lease upon the Surrender of the old Lease, and after
the Covenanter does make a Lease by Fine, for more years to estrange, the
Covenant is broken, although the Lessee did not surrender, the which by the
words ought to be the first Act, for that the other had disabled to take, or to
make.

LAW CONSTRUCTIONS.
THe Law expounds things with equity and moderation, to moderate the
strictness; it is no Trespass to beat his Apprentice with a reasonable
correction, or to go with a woman to a Justice of Peace, to have the peace of
her husband, against the will of her husband, which equity does restrain the
generality, if there be any mischief or inconvenience in it; As if a man make a
feoffment of his lands in, and with Common, in all his Lands in C. the Common
shall be intended within his Lands in C. and not in his other Lands he shall
have elsewhere.

36. Every Act shall be taken most strictly against him that made it.

As if two Tenats in Common, grant a Rent of 10. shillings, this is several,
and the Grantees shall have 20. shillings: but if they make a Lease, and
reserve 10. shillings, they shall have only 10. shillings between them*

So an obligation to pay 10. shillings at the feast of our Lord God; it is no
Plea to say that he did pay it; but he must show at what time, or else it will
be taken he paid it after the feast.

37. He that cannot have the effect of a thing, shall have the thing it self.

Vtres magis valeat quam pereat.

As if a Termor grant his Term, Habendum immediate e post mortem suam; the
Grantee shall have it presently.

38. When many join in one Act, the Law says it is the Act of him that could
best do it, and that thing should be done by those of best skill.

As the Disseizee, and the heir of the Disseizor, who is in by descent, join in
a Feoffment; This shall be the Feoffment of the heir only, and the
confirmation of the Disseizee.

And the Merchant shall weigh the Wares, and not the Collectors*

39: When two titles concur, the elder shall be preferred.

40: By an acquittance for the last payment, all other Arrerages are
discharged.

41: One thing shall enure for another:

If the Leasor enfeoff the Lessee for life, it shall be taken for a
confirmation*

42. In one thing, all things following shall be concluded, in granting,
demanding, or prohibiting.

If one except a Close, or a Wood, the Law will give him a way to it.

43. A man cannot qualify his own Act.

As to release an Obligation until such a time.

44. The construction of the Law may be altered by the special agreement of the
parties.

If a house be blown down by the wind, the Lessee is excused in waste; but if
he have covenanted to repair it, there an Action of Covenant does lie by the
agreement of the parties.

45.

The Law regards the intent of the parties, and will imply their words
thereunto; and that which is taken by common intendment, shall be taken to the
intent of the parties; and common intendment is not such an intendment as does
stand indifferent; but such an intent as has the most vehement presumption.
All incertaintie may be known by circumstances, every deed being done to some
purpose, reason would that it should be construed to some purpose, and variance
shall be taken most beneficial for him to whom it is made, and at election.

46.

An intendment of the parties shall be ordered according to the Law.

If a man make a Lease to a man, and to his heirs, for ten years, intending
his heirs shall have it, if he die, notwithstanding the intent, the Executors
shall have it.

47. Qui per alium facit, per seipsum facere videtur.

A promise made to the Wife in consideration of a thing to be performed by her
Husband, if he agree, and perform the Consideration, in an Action of the case,
he shall declare the assumption was made to him.

And if my servant sell my goods to another in deqt I shall suppose, he bought
them of me.

CUSTOMS. Consuetude est altera lex.
Customs are of two sorts; General Customs in use throughout the whole
Realm, called Maxims; and particular Customs used in some certain County,
City, Town, or Lordship, whereof some have been specified before, and some
follow here, and where occasion is offered.

GENERAL CUSTOMS.
THe Kings Excellency is so high in the Law, that no Freehold may be given to
him, nor derived from him, but by matter of Record.

Every Maxim is a sufficient authority to itself; and which is a Maxim, and
which is not, shall always be determined by the Judges, because they are known
to none but to the learned.

A Maxim shall be taken strict.

A particular Custom, except the same be a Record in some Court, shall be
pleaded, and tried by 12. men.

CHAP. II. Statutes.
THe last ground of the Laws of England stands in diverse Statutes made by our
Sovereign Lord the King, and his Progenitors, and by the Lords Spiritual, and
Temporal, and the Commons in diverse Parliaments, in such cases where the former
Laws seemed not sufficient to punish evil men, and to reward the good.

Of general Statutes the Judges will take notice if they be not pleaded, but
not of special, or particular.

All Acts of Parliaments, as well private as general, shall be taken by
reasonable construction, be collected out of the words of the Act only,
according to the true intention and meaning of the maker.

Four lessons to be observed, where contrary Laws come in question.

1. The inferior Law must give place to the superior.

2. The law General must yield to the Law special.

3. Man's laws to Gods Laws.

4. An old law to a new law.

And oftentimes all these laws must be joined together to help a man to his
right; as if a man disseized, and the disseizor made a Feoffment to defrand the
plaintiff, in this case, it appears that the said unlawful entry is
prohibited by the law of Reason.

But the Plaintiff shall recover double damage, and that is by the Statute of
8 Hen. 6. And that the damage shall be sessed by 12. men, that is, by the
custom of the Realm, and so in some case, these three laws do maintain the
Plaintiff's right.

And these laws concern either men's possessions, or the punishment of offenses.

And so much shall be sufficient to be said touching common Law, Customs, and
Statutes.

CONCERNING POSSESSIONS.
The difference between Possession and Seizin, is,

Lease for years is possessed, and yet the Lessor is still seized; and
therefore the terms of the Law are, that of Chattels a man is possessed;
whereas in Feoffments, gifts in tail, and Leases for life, he is called seized.

CHAP. III. Of possession of Frank-Tenement.
TEnant in Fee-simple, is he which has Lands, or Tenements to hold to him and
his heirs for ever. It is the best Inheritance a man may have; He may sell, or
grant, or make his Will of those Lands.

And if a man die, they do descend to his heir of the whole blood.

CHAP. IV. FEE-TAYLE.
Fee-Tayle is, of what body he shall come that shall inherit.

Tenant in Tail, is said to be in two manners.

Tenant in Tail General, and Tenant in Tail Special.

GEneral Tail is, where Lands or Tenements be given to a man, and his wife,
and to the Heirs of their two bodies, or to his heirs males, or to his heirs
females.

Tenant in Tail, is not punishable for waste.
Tenant in Tail cannot Will his Lands, nor bargain, sell or grant, but for
term of his life, without a Fine, or Recovery.

If a man will purchase lands in Fee, it behooves him to have these words,
Heirs, in his purchase.

If a man would grant Lands in Tail, it behooves him to appoint what body they
shall come of.

Yet a devise of lands to a man and his heirs males, is a good Intayle; and of
lands to a man for ever, a good Free-Simple.

How Lands shall descend.
Inheritance is an estate which does descend; it may not lineally ascend from
the son which purchases in Fee, and dies, to his Father; but discendeth to
his Uncle or Brother, and to his heirs, which is the next of the whole blood,
for the half blood shall not inherit: But the most worthy of Blood, as of the
blood of the Father before the Mother; of the elder Brother before the other,
and borne within espousall.

A descent shall be intended to the heir of him which was last actually
seized; That the Sister of the whole blood, where the elder Brother did enter
after the death of his Father, and not his Brother of the half blood, nor any
other collateral Cosen shall inherit; yet notwithstanding such a one is heir
to a common Ancester; in which Rule, every word is to be observed, and so in
every Maxim, if the Land, Rent, Advowson, or such like do descend to the elder
Son, and he die before any entry, or receipt of the rent, or presentment to the
Church, the younger son shall have and inherit; and the reason is, because that
in all inheritances in possession, he which claims title there unto as heir,
ought to make himself heir to him that was last actually seized.

Here the possession of the Lessee for years, or of the Guardian, shall invest
the actual possession, and Frank-Tenement in the elder brother.

But he dying seized of a Reversion, or a Remainder, or an estate for life, or
in tail; There he which claims the Reversion, or Remainder as heir, ought
to make himself heir to him that had the Gift, or made the purchase.

Feodo excludes an estate tail, where the second son shall inherit before the
daughter.

And if the Lands be once settled in the blood of the father, the heir of the
mother shall never have them, because they are not of the blood of him that was
last seized.

And to the heir of the blood of the first Purchaser;

As if the Father purchase Lands, and it discendeth to the son, who enters,
and dies without heirs of the Fathers part, then the Lands shall descend to
the heirs of the mother or father of the father, and not to the heirs of the
mother of the son; although they are more near of blood to him that was last
seized, yet they are not of the blood of the first Purchaser.

If the heirs be females in equal distance, as Daughters, Sisters, Aunts, and
so forth, they shall inherit together, and are but one heir, and are called
Parceners.

Gavill-kinde.
Does descend to all the sons, and if no sons, to all the daughters: And may be
given by Will by the Custom.

CHAP. V. PARCENERS.
Parceners are of two sorts.

Women and their heirs by the Common law. Men by the Custom.

THey may have a Writ of Partition, and the Sheriff may go to the Lands, and by
the oath of 12: men, make Partition between them, and the eldest shall have the
Capital Message by the Common Law, and the youngest by the Custom; Where the
parties will not show to the Jewry the certainty, there they shall be
discharged in conscience, if they make Partition of so much as is presumed and
known by presumptions and likelyhoods.

Parceners may by agreement make partition by Deed, or by Word, and the eldest
first choose, unless their agreement be to the contrary.

Every part at the time of the partition must be of an even yearly value,
without encumbrance.

Rent may be reserved for equality or Partition (and may be distrained for)
without a Deed.

Parceners by diverse discents, before partition, being disseized, shall have
one assize.

A Parcener before partition, may charge, or demised her part.

The entry or Act of one Copartner, or joynt-Tenant shall be the Act of both;
when it is for their good.

If a Parcener after Partition be entered, she may enter upon her Sisters part,
and hold it with her in Parcenary, and have a new Partition, if she hold none
of her part before she was outed, viz. in exchange.

CHAP. VI. JOYNT-TENANTS.
IOynt-Tenants be such as have joint estates in goods, or lands, where he that
surviveth shall have all without encumbrance, if the Tenements abide in the same
plight as they were granted.

Joynt-Tenants may have several estates;

A Joynt-Tenant cannot grant a Rentcharge, but for term of his own life.

A Joynt-Tenant may make a Lease for life, or for years, of his part, or
Release, and the Lessee for years may enter, although the Lessor die before the
Lease begin, and his heir shall have the Rent, but the Survivor the Reversion.

A Joynt-Tenant may have a Writ of Partition by the Statute of the 31. of H. 8.
cap. 32. A Partition made by Joynt-Tenants, or Tenants in Common of Estates of
Inheritance, must be by Indenture; by Word it is void.

CHAP. VII. TENANTS in COMMON.
Tenants in Common, are those that hold Lands and Tenements by several titles.

They may join in action personal, but they must have several actions Real.

They may have a Writ of Partition by the Stat. of 31. H. 8. cap. 32.

IF one Parcener, Joynt-Tenant, or Tenant in Common take, all the other have no
Remedy, but by Ejectione firm, or such like, or Waste.

Gavil-kinde-Lands.
Tenant by the courtesy of Kent, whether he have Issue or no, until he marry,
and so forth, he may not commit Waste.

CHAP. VIII. TENANT in DOWER.
A Woman shall be endowed of all sorts of inheritance of her husband, where the
Issue that she had by him may inherit, as heir to his father, by meets, and
bounds of a third part,

She shall have house-roome, and meat, and drink in common, for forty days;
But she may not kill a Bullock within those 40. days after the death of her
husband, in which time her Dower ought to be assigned her.

The Assignement by him that had the Frank-Tenement is good, but by him that is
Guardian in Soccage, or Tenant by Elegit, verte Elegit, or Statutes, or Lessee
for years, is not.

She is to demand her Dower on the Land.

She shall recover damages when her husband dyed seized, from the death of her
husband; if the heir be not ready at the first day to assign her Dower.

She shall have all her Chattels real again, execept her husband sell them; he
may not charge them, or give them by his Will; and likewise her bonds, if the
money were due in the life of her husband, and all convenient apparel; but if
she have more then is fit for her degree, it will be assets.

A woman shall be barred of her Dower so long as she detaineth the body of the
heir, being Ward, or the Writing of the sons Land.

A woman shall not be endowed of any lands that her husband jointly holds
with another, at the time of his death.

Dower of Gavil-kind Lands.
If the woman shall be endowed of one half so long as she is unmarried, and
chaste, and it may be held with the heir in Common.

It is of Lands and Tenements, and not of a Fair or such like; where the Heir
loses not his inheritance, there she loses not her Dower.

Jointure.
IF a woman have a Jointure be fore marriage, she may claim no Dower, 27. Hen.
8.

If it be made during marriage, she may enter into her Jointure presently.

If she enter, or accept of it, she shall not be endowed.

If she shall be expulsed of any part of her Jointure, she shall be endowed of
the residue of her husbands Lands.

CHAP IX. Tenant for term of Life.
TEnant for term of life, is he that has Lands or Tenements for term of his
life, or another man's life, and none of lesser estate may have a Freehold.

If a Tenant for life sow the Lands and die before the corn be reaped; his
Executor shall have it, but not the Grass, nor other fruit.

If a Tenant for life be impannelled upon an Inquest, and forfeit Issues and
die, they shall be levied upon him in the Reversion; and so likewise if the
Husband, on the Lands of the Wife.

CHAP. X. Tenant for Term of years.
Tenant for term of years, is where a man lets lands or tenements to
another for certain years.

HE may enter when he will, the death of the Lessor is no let, and may grant
away his term before it begin; but before he enter, he cannot Surrender, nor
have any action of trespass, nor take a release.

He is bound to repair the Tenements.

The Lessor may enter to see what Reparations or Waste there is, and he may
distraine for his rent or have an action of debt.

If Tenant for life or years grants a greater estate then he has himself,
he does forfeit his term.

CHAP. XI Tenant at Will.
Tenant at Will is he that holds lands, or tenements at the Will of another.

THe Lessor may reserve a yearly rent, and may distraine for it, or have an
Action of debt; the Lessee is not bound to repair the Tenements.

The Will is determined by the death of the Lessor, or of a woman Lessee by her
marriage, or when the Lessee will take upon him to do that which none but the
Lessor may do lawfully, it determines the Will and Possession, and the Lessor
may have an action of Trespass for it.

The Lessee shall have reasonable time to have away his goods, and his corn;
But he shall lose his Fallow, and his dung carried forth.

CHAP. XII. REMAINDER:
A Remainder is the residue of an estate at the same time appointed over, and
must be grounded upon some particular estate given before* granted for years or
for like, and so forth.

And ought to begin in possession, when the particular estate ends, there may
be no mean time between; either by Grant or Will.

No remainder can be of a Chattel personal; a Remainder cannot depend on a
matter ex post facto, as upon Estate tail, upon condition That if the Tenant
in Tail sell, then the Land to remain to another, is a void Remainder.

CHAP. XIII. REVERSION.
A Reversion is the residue of an estate that is left after some particular
estate, granted out in the Grantor; as if a man grant Lands for life, without
further granting; the Reversion of the Fee-simple is in the Lessor.

CHAP. XIV. WASTE:
WASTE lies against a Tenant by the courtesy, for life, for years, or in
Dower, and they shall lose the place wasted, and treble damages.

Waste lies not against a Tenant by Elegit, Statute-Merchant, or Staple; but
account after the debt or damage levied.

Waste, or account will lie against a Tenant in Mortgage, because he had Fee
conditional.

Waste is not given to the heir for Waste in the life of his Father.

Waste is given against the Assign of the Tenant for life, or of another
life, but not against the Assignee of a Tenant in Dower, or of the courtesy, it
is to be brought against themselves.

It is Waste to pull up the forms, benches, doors, windows, walls,
Filbert-Trees, or Willows planted.

CHAP. XV. DISCONTINUANCE.
DIscontinuance is where a man that has the present possession, by making a
larger estate then he may, divesteth the inheritance of the Lands or Tenements
out of another, and dies, and the other has right to have them, but he may
not enter, because of such alienation, but is put to his Writ.

If a man seized in the right of his Wife, or if a Tenant in Tail made a
Feoffment, and died, the Wife might not enter, nor the Issue in Tail, nor he
in Reversion, but are put to the Waction.

Now the wife may enter by the Statute, 3: 2. H. 8. and a recovery suffered by
the Tenant by courtesy, or by the Tenant after possibility of issue extinct, or
for term of life, is now made no discontinuance.

Such things that pass by way of a grant by deed without livery, and seizin,
cannot be discontinued as a reversion, or Rentcharge Common, etc.

A Release or Confirmation without Warranty, makes no discontinuance.

CHPP. XVI. DISCENTS.
DIscents which take away entries, is where a man disseizeth another, and
dies, and his heir enters, or makes a Feoffment to another in Fee, or in
tail, and he dies, and his heir enters; these discents put a man from his
entry.

A descent, during minority, marriage, non sanae mentis, imprisonment, or being
out of the Realm, do not take away an entry.

Discents of Rents in gross, the Lord notwithstanding may distrain.

A dying seized of a term for life, or of a Remainder, or Reversion, does not
take away an Entry, he must die seized in Fee* and Frank-Tenement.

A diseizin cannot be to one joynt-Tenant or Parcener alone, if it be not to
the other.

If a condition be broken after a descent, the Donor, Feoffor, or his heirs
may enter.

A wrongful diseizin is no descent, unless the diseisor have quiet possession
five years without entry, or claim, 32. H. 8.

CHAP. XVII. CONTINUAL CLAIM:
COntinual Claim is a demand made by another of the property or possession of
a thing which he has not in possession, but is withholden from him wrongfully;
defeateth a descent, happening within a year and a day after it is made, and now
by the statute within five years.

CHAP. XVIII REMITTER.
REmitter is, when by a new title, the Frank-Tenement is cast upon a man, whose
entry was taken away by a descent, or discontinuance, he shall be in by the
elder title; as if Tenant in tail discontinue the tail, and after diseizeth
his continuance, and dies thereof seized, and the land descend to his Issue,
in that case he is said to be in his Remitter, viz. seized his Ancient Estate
tail.

When the entry of a man is lawful, and he takes an estate to himself, when
he is of full age, if it be not by Deed indented, or matter of Record which
shall estop him, it shall be to him a good Remitrer.

A Remitter to the Tenant shall be a Remitter to him in the remainder, and
reversion

CHAP. XIX. TENURES.
ALL lands are holden of the King immediately, or of some other person, and
therefore when any that has Fee, dies without heir, the lands shall escheate
to the Lord.

And they are holden for the most part either by Knights service, or in Soccage.

Knights Service draws to it Ward, Marriage, and Relief, viz.

Of Ward, Marriage, and Relief.
THe heir male unmarried, shall be in Ward until 21 years of age.

If he be married in the life of his Ance^tors, yet the Lord shall have the
profit of the ^^nd till his full age.

None shall be in Ward during the life of ^he Father.

If the heir refuse a convenient marriage, he shall pay to the Lord the value,
when he comes to full age.

If the Ward marry against the will of the Guardian, he shall pay him the
double value of his Marriage; but if the heir be of the full age aforesaid, he
shall pay a relief.

A relief for a whole Knights Fee, is 5l for half a Knights Fee 50s. for a
quarter 25, for more, more; for less, less, accordingly.

A Relief is no service, but is incident to a Service, the Guardian must not
commit Waste, viz. Chattels.

Tenure in Soccage.
TEnure in Soccage is, where the Tenant holds of his Lord by fealty, suit o^
Court, and certain Rent for all manner of Service.

The Lord shall not have the Wardship but a relief presently after the death of
his Tenant.

A Relief for Soccoge land, is a years ren^ and is to be paid presently upon a
descent o^ purchase. As if the Land were held by Fealty and 10s. Rent per
annum, ^0s. shall be pai^ for Relief.

The next of the kin to whom the inheritance may not descend, shall have the
Wardship of the Land, and of the heir, until his age of 14. years, to the use
of the heir, at which age, the heir may call him to account.

If the Guardian die, the heir cannot have an Action of account against the
Executor of the Guardian.

The Executor of the Guardian may not have the Wardship, but some other of the
next of kin; the Husband may not alien the interest of the Wife, in the
Guardianship, nor hold it; if she die, it may not be sold.

If another man occupy the Lands of the heir, as warden in Soccage, the heir
may call him to account, as Guardian.

If the Guardian hold the Lands, after the heir is 14. the heir shall call
him to account, as his Bailiff.

Gavill-kinde.
THe next of kin shall have the Guardianship of the body, and lands until the
heir be 15. years of age.

Diversities of ages.
A man has but two ages.

The full age of Male and Female is one and twenty.

A Woman has six ages.
THe Lord her father may distrain for aid for her marriage, when she is seven.
She is double at nine.

She is able to assent to Matrimony at twelve.

She shall not be in Ward, if she be fourteen.

She shall go out of Ward at sixteen.

She may sell, or give her lands at 21.

No man may be sworn in any Jury, before he be 21. before which age, all gifts,
grants, or deeds as do not effect by delivery of his own hands, are void, and
all others voidable, except for necessary meat, drink, and apparel, etc.

An infant may do any thing for his own advantage, as to be Executor, or such
like; an Infant shall sue by his next friend, and answer by his Guardian.

Gavill-kind.
The heir may give or sell at fifteen years of age.

1. The land must descend, not be given him by Will. 2. He must have full
recompense. 3. It must be by Feoffment, and livery of seizin with his own
hands, not by warrant of Attorney, nor any other conveyance.
BY the Civil Law, an Infant may be Executor at 17. years of age.

An Infant may make a Will of his goods at 14. years of age, and a Maid at 12.

CHAP. XXI. RENTS.
There are three manners of Rents.

Rent-Service. Rentcharge. Rent-Seck.
REnt-Service is, where a man holds his lands of his Lord by certain Rent,
and so forth.

Rentcharge is granted, or reserved out of certain Lands by Deed, with a
clause of distress.

Rent-Seck, is a Rent granted without a distress; or Rent-service, severed from
other service, becomes a Rent-seck.

The Reversion of a Rent without a Deed, is void if the Reversion be not in the
reser^or; if a Rent be granted from the Reversion, it is a Rent-seck

He which is not seized of a Rent-seck, is without remedy for the same.

The gift of a penny by the Tenant, in name of seizin of a Rent-seck, is a good
possession and seizin.

No Rent may be reserved upon any Feoffment, Gift, or Lease, but only to the
Donor, and his heirs, not to any stranger.

A Rentcharge is extinct by the Grantees purchase of parcel of the Land, but
by the purchase of any of his Ancesters it shall not, it shall be apportioned
like Rent-service, according to the value of the land; but if the whole Land
descend of the same inheritance, the rent is extinguished.

By the grant of the Reversion, the rents and Services pass: If Rent be granted
to a man without more; saying, he shall have it for term of his life.

If the Lord accept of Rent or service of the Feoffment, he excludes himself
of the Arrerages of the time of the Feoffment.

For a Rentcharge behind, one may have an Action of annuity, or distrain.

Distress.
For what, when, and where a man may distrain.

A man may distrain for a Rentcharge, Rent-Service, Herriot*service, and all
manner of Service, as

Homage. Escuage. Fealty. Suite of Court. And Relief, etc.
HErriot custom must be seized: and for Amerciaments, in a Leete, upon whose
ground soever it be in the liberty; a man may not distrain for rent, after the
Lease is ended, nor have debt upon a Lease for life, before the estate of
Frank-Tenement be determined.

A man may not distrain in the night, but for damage Feasant.

A man may not distrain upon the possessions of the King, but the King may
distrain of any Lands of his Grantee, or Patentee.

A man may not distrain the beasts of a stranger that come by escape, until
they have been Levant, and Couchant on the ground, but for damage Feasans.

A man may not distrain the Oxen of the Plough, nor a Mil-stone, nor such like
that is for the good of the Commonwealth, nor a Cloak in a Tailors shop, nor
victuals, nor corn in sheafes, but if it be in a Cart, for damage Feasans.

A distress must be always of such things as the Sheriff may make a Replevin.

A man may not sever horses joined together, or to a cart.

If a man put cattle into a pasture for a week, and afterward I. N. does give
him notice that he will keep them no longer, and the owner will not fetch them
away; I. N. may distrain them damage Feasans.

If a man take beasts damage Feasans, and driving them by the high way to a
pound, the beasts enter into the house of the owner, and the taker prays the
delivery of them, and the owner will not deliver them: a Writ of Rescous lies.

If a man distrain goods, he may put them where he will.

But if they perish, he shall answer for them.

If cattle, they ought to be put in a common pound, or else in an open place,
where the owner may lawfully come and feed them, and notice given to him
thereof, and then if they die, it is in default of the owner.

Cattle taken damage Fesans, may be impounded in the same land; but goods or
Cattle taken for others things may not.

Sheep may not be destreined, if there be a sufficient distress besides.

No man shall drive a distress out of the County wherein it was taken.

No distress shall be driven forth of the hundred, but to a pound Overt within
three miles.

A distress may not be impounded in several places, upon pain of five pounds,
and treble damage,

Fees for impounding one whole Distress, Four pence.

The executor or administrator of him which had Rent or Fee-Farme in Fee, in
Feetayle, or for life, may have debt against the Tenant that should pay it, or
distrain: and this is by the Statute 32: H. 8.

So may the husband after the death of his Wife, his Executor, or
Administrator. So may he which has Rent for another man's life, distrain for
the arrerages after his death, or have an action of Debt, 32. H. 8.

But if the Landlord will distrain the goods, or cattle of his Tenant, and do
sell them, or work them, or convert them to his own use, he shall be executor
of his own wrong.

CHAP. XXIII. Diseizin of Rents*
Three causes of Diseizin of Rents-Service.

Rescous. Replevin. Enclosure.
Four of Rentcharge, Denyer, and Enclosure. Forestalling is a Diseizin of all.

FOrestalling is, when the Tenant does with force, and arms, waylay, or
threaten in such manner, that the Lord dares nor distrain, or demand the Rent.

Denial is, if there be no distress on the Land, or if there be none ready to
pay the Rent, etc.

And of such diseizins, a man may have an action of Novell diseizin against the
Tenant, and recover his Rent, and arrerages, and his damage and costs; and if
the Rent be behind another time, he shall have a Redisseizin, and recover
double damage.

Rescous, and Pound-breach.
IF the Lord distrain when there is no rent nor service behind, the Tenant may
not rescue; otherwise if another distreine wrongfully; but no man may break the
Pound, although he did tender amends before the cattle were impounded.

If the Lord come to distrain, and see the beasts, and the servant drive them
out of his fee, the Lord may not have Rescous, because he had not the
Possession, but he may follow them, and distrain, but not damage feasans.

CHAP. XXIV. COMMON.
COMMON is the right that a man has to put his beasts to pasture, or to use,
and occupy ground that is another man's.

There be diverse Commons, viz. Common in gross, Common appendant, Common
appertinant, Common, because of neighborhood, viz. the terms of Law.

The Lords of Wastes, Woods and pasture, may approve against their Tenants and
neighbors with common appertenant, leaving them sufficient Common, and pasture
to their Tenants.

As if one Tenant, surcharge the Common; the other Tenants may have against him
a Writ de admensuratione pasturae; But not against him that has Common for
beasts without number, neither may the Lord enclose from such Tenants: if he
do, the Tenant may bring an assize against him, and recover Treble damage, but
the Lord may have a quo jure, and make the Tenant show by what title he
claims.

CHAP. XXV. WAYS.
The Kings highway is that which leads from village to village.

A common highway is that which leads from a village into the fields.

A private way is that which leads from one certain place unto another, 3.
Ed. 3.

IN the Kings highway, the King has only passage for himself and his people;
and the Frank-Tenement, and all the profits are in the Lord of the soil, as
they be presented at the Leete.

Of a Common highway, the Frank-Tenement and profits are to him that has the
land next* thereto adjoining, and if it be stopped, and I be damnified by it, I
have no remedy, but by presentment in the Leete.

If a private way be straightened, or if a bridge there, which another ought to
repair, be decayed, an action of the case lies; But if the way be stopped, an
Assize of Nuisance lies, and the Lessee may have it after the Lessors years
begin, or the Lessee may have an action of the case: if the most part of a
Water-Way, be stopped, an Assize will lie.

CHAP. XXVI. LIBERTIES.
A Liberty is, a royal privilege in the hands of a subject.

ALL Liberties are derived from the Crown, and therefore are extinguished if
they come to the Crown again by escheate, forfeiture, or such like, for the
Greater does drown the lesser.

One may have Park, a Leete Wayfe, stray, wreck of Sea, and ^enura placitorum,
by prescription, and without allowance in Air.

But not Cognizance of plea, nor Cattalla fellonum, vel fugitinorum, aut ut
ligatorum

A liberty may be forfeited by misusing, as to keep a market otherwise then it
is granted.

A liberty may be forfeited for not using, when it is for the good of the
Commonwealth; as not to exercise the Office of the Clarke of the Market; but
not to use a market, is not.

Whatsoever is in the King, by reason of his Prerogative, may not be granted,
or pardoned by general words, but by special.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Chattells Real.
Chattells Real, are Guardianships, Leases for years, or at will, etc.

GUardianship is a Commodity of having the custody of the body, or lands, or
both, where the heir is within age; and the Lord of whom the Land is holden,
by Knights service, shall have the same to his own use; for it is a Chattell
Real, and therefore his Executor shall have it.

The Guardian must not do waste, nor in* feoff, upon pain of losing the
Wardship. But he must maintain the buildings out of the Issues of the Lands,
and so restore it to the heir.

If the Committee of the King commit, the Wardship shall be committed to
another; if the Grantee, he shall lose the Wardship.

And one of the friends of the Ward, being his next friend that will, may sue
for him.

If a Lease be made to a man and his heirs for 20. years, it is a Chattell,
and his Executor shall have it; otherwise if a man Will a Lease to a man and
his heirs, here the word Heirs, are words of purchase, and his heirs shall
have it*

If a man grant, Proximam advocationem to I. S. and his heirs, it is but a
Chattell, for it is but for unica vice.

Writings pawned for money lent, are Chattells.

If a woman have execution of Lands by Statute-Merchant, and takes a husband,
he may grant it, for it is a chattell.

Of Chattells Personal.
CHattells Personal, are Gold, Silver, Plate, Jewels, Utensils, Beasts, and
other Chattells, and moveable Goods whatsoever; Obligations, and Corn upon the
ground.

All goods, as well moveable, as unmovable, Corn upon the ground,
Obligations, right of Actions, money out of bags, and corn out of sacks, Sunt
Cattalla.

Money is not to be passed by the grant of all his goods, and Chattells; nor
Hawks, nor Hounds, nor other things; ferae naturae, for the property is not
in any, not after they are made tame, longer then they are in his Possession;
as my Hounds following me, or my man, or my Hawke flying after a foul, or my
Deer haunting out of my Park. But if they stray of their own accord, it is
lawful for any man to take, and the heir shall have them.

All Chattells shall go to the Executors; Fatts, and Furnaces, fixed in a Brew
house, or Dy-house by the Lessee; if they be fixed by Tenant in Fee, the heir
shall have them.

Now something has been said concerning Possessions, it follows, that it be
showed, how they may be conveyed from one man to another.

CHAP. XXVIII. OF CONVEYANCES.
In every Conveyance, there must be a Grantor, and a Grantee, and something
granted.

The Conveyance of some persons is void, of others voidable.

CONVEYANCE of a Woman Covert is void, without the consent of her husband, and
it ought to be made in her and his name, except it be done as Executor to
another.

Of an Infant, that which does not take effect with the delivery of his own
hands, is void, and an Action of Trespass will lie against him, for taking the
things given.

Otherwise it is but voidable, except it be as Executor, or for necessary meat,
and drink, etc. for his advantage.

Voidable Of non sane memory, Royal.

Voidable or made by duresse, Royal.

VOydable by the parties themselves, and their heirs, and by them that shall
have their estates, except Non sane himself.

Grants by Fine.
VOydable by Writ of Error, by an Infant* during his nonage, and by the Husband
for a Fine levied by his Wife alone, during their marriage.

Conveyance of some persons cannot be good for ever, without the consent of
others, as the Deane without the Chapter; the Major without the Commonaltie,
and of other bodies politic, that have a common Seal, or of a Parson without
the Patron and Ordinary.

If there be no condition in the Conveyance, it shall be intended the elder.

A Conveyance made to a feme Covert, shall be good, and of effect, until her
husband do disagree.

An Infant may be Grantee, so may a Woman Outlawed, a Villain, a Bastard, and
a Fellon.

A Bastard can have no heir, but the Issue of his body lawfully begotten.

An Infant at the age of discretion, by his actual entry; and a woman against
the will of her husband may be a disseisor, or a Trespassor.

In all conveyances there must be one named, which may take by force the grant,
at the beginning of the grant.

A grant made to the right heirs of one that is dead, is good, or Custodibus
Eccle. is good for goods.

All Chattells, real or personal, may be granted; or given without a Deed.

Rent-service, Rent-seck, Rentcharge, Common of Pasture, or of Turbarie,
Reversion, Remainder, advowson, or other things which lies not in manual
occupation, may not be conveyed for years, for life, in tail, or in Fee,
without writing.

The Major, or Commonalty, or such like, cannot make a Lease for years, without
a Deed.

CHAP. XXIX. OF DEEDS.
Three things needful, and pertaining to every Deed; Writing, Sealing, and
delivering.

IN the Writing must be showed the persons names, their dwelling place, and
degree. The things granted, upon what consideration, the estate, whether
absolute, or conditional, with the other circumstances, and the time when it
was done.

No grant can be made, but to him that was party to the Deed; except it be by
way of Remainder.

The words must be sufficient in Law to bind the parties; as if a man grant
omnes terras certa sua, a Lease for years passes not, but for Frank-Tenement,
at least, nec per omnia bona sua.

Exceptio semper ultimo ponenda est:
THe Habendum must include the premises:

A Condition cannot be reserved, but by the Grantor, and it is proper to follow
the Habend. presently.

The Habendum, or Condition must not be

Repugnant to the Premises, if it be, it is void, and the Deed will take effect
by the Premises.

A Warrant is good, although it extend not unto all the Lands, nor to all the
Feoffees, or made by one of the Feoffors.

If it be rased, or interlined in the Date, or in any material place, it is
very suspicious.

Of Sealing.
A Writing cannot be said to be a Deed, if it be not sealed, although it be
written, and delivered, it is but an Escrowe.

And if it were sufficiently fealed, yet if the Print of the seal be utterly
defaced the Deed is unsufficient; it is not my Deed.

It may not be pleaded, but it may be given in Evidence.

Of Delivery.
A Deed takes effect by the delivery, and if the first take any effect, the
second is void.

A Jurie shall be charged, to enquire of the delivery, but not of the date, yet
every Deed shall be intended to be made, when it does bear date.

Diversity in delivering of a WRITING.
As a Deed. As Escrow.
THis Delivery ought to be done by the party himself, or by his sufficient
Attorney, and so it shall bind him, whosoever wrote, or sealed the same.

If one be bound to make assurance, he need not to deliver it, unless there be
one to read it to him before.

And if any writing be read in any other form to a man unlearned; It shall not
be his Deed, although he Seal and deliver it.

*There are two sorts of Deeds.
A Deed Poll, which is the Deed of the Grantor, a Deed indented, which is the
mutual Deed of either parties; but in Law, one is the Deed of the Grantor, and
the other the counter-partie, and if any variance be in them, it shall be taken
as it is in the Deed of the Grantor; and if the Grantor Seal only, it is good.

CHPP. XXX. BARGAINS and SALES.
NO Mannor-lands, Tenements, or other hereditaments can pass, alter, or change,
from one man to another, whereby an estate of Inheritance or Freehold is made,
or takes effect in any person or persons, or any use thereof is made, by
reason only of any Bargain and Sale therefore, except the same be made by
writing indented, sealed, and enrolled in one of the Courts of Record at
Westminster, or within the same Court or County where the Tenements so
bargained, do lie, before the Custos Rotulorum, and two Justices of Peace, and
the Clerk of the Peace, or two of them, where of the Clerk of the Peace to be
one, and that within six months after the date of such writing indented, 27, H.
8.

The inrollment shall be indented the first day of the Term, and shall have
relation to the delivery of the Deed, against all strangers.

CHAP. XXXI. FEOFFMENTS.
A Feoffment, is an estate made by delivery of Possession, and seizin by the
party, or his sufficient Attorney.

A man cannot make livery of seizin, before he have the Possession.

A Joynt-Tenant cannot enfeoffe his Companion.

A Co-partner make a Feoffment of his part, or release.

A man cannot enfeoffe his Wife.

A Disseizor cannot enfeoffe the Dsseizee; for his entry is lawful upon the
disseizor.

Such persons as have possession in lands for years, or for life, etc. cannot
take by livery and seizin of the same Lands.

IF a Feoffment be made, and the Lessee for years give leave to the Lessor to
make Livery and seizin of the Premises, saving to himself his Lease, etc. and
he does, the term is not surrendered; for the Lessee had an Interest which
could not be surrendered without his consent to surrender, and here his intent
to surrender does not appear; wherefore he may enter, and have his term and the
rent is renewed, but it is otherwise with a Lessee for life, and the rent is
extinct.

The Lessor cannot make Livery and seizin against the Will of the Lessee being
on the Land; But he may grant the Reversion, and if the Lessee do Attorn, the
Freehold will pass without Livery of seizin.

Livery of Seizin.
LIvery of seizin, is a Ceremony used in Conveyance of Lands, that the Common
people might know of the passing, or alteration of the estate: it is requisite
in all Feoffments, gifts in the tail, and Leases for life, made by deed, or
without deed.

No Freehold will pass without Liverie of seizin, except by way of surrender,
Partition, or exchange, or by matter of Record, or by Testament.

Livery of seizin must be made in the lifetime of him that made the estate.

Dona clandestina sant semper suspitiosa.
BY Livery of seizin in one County, the Lands in another County will not pass.

Livery within view, is good, if the Feoffee do enter in the lifetime of the
Feoffor.

Livery may not be made of an estate to begin in Future, for no estate in
Frank-Tenement may be given in Futuro, but shall take effect presently, by
Livery and Seizin.

Of Uses.
THe Statute of 27. H. 8. has advanced uses, and has established surety for
him that has the Use against his Feoffees; for before the Statute, the
Feoffees were owners of the Land, but now it is destroyed, and the cestyaque
Use is owner of the same; before the possession ruled the Use, but since the
Use governs the possession, Indentures subsequent be sufficient to direct the
Uses of a Fine or Recovery precedent, when no other certain and full
declaration was made before.

Attorney.
AN Attorney ought to do every thing in the name, and as the act of him which
gave him the authority; as Leases in name of the Lessor, but he must say, by
virtue of his Letter of Attorney, I do deliver you possession and seizin of,
etc. for, etc.

An Attorney must first take possession before he can make Livery of Seizin.

If an Attorney do make Livery of Seizin; otherwise then he has warrant, then
it is a diseizin to the Feoffor.

An Attorney must be made by writing sealed, and not by word.

CHAP. XXXII. EXCHANGE.
In Exchange, both the estates must be equal, there must be two Grants; and in
every grant, mention must be made of this word exchange. It may be done without
Livery of Seizin, if it be in one Shire, or else it must be done by Indenture,
and by this word Exchange, or else nothing passes without livery.

EXCHANGE, imports in the Law a Condition of Re-entry, and a Warranty
voucher, and recompense of the other land that was given in Exchange; an
Assignee cannot re-enter, nor vouch, but Rebate; Exchanger may re-enter upon an
Assignee. And the same condition defeated in part, is defeated in the whole,
and the same law is in partition.

CHAP. XXXIII. GRANTS.
GRants must be certain. A Grant to I. S. or I. N. is void for the
incertaintie, although it be delivered to I. S. The delivery of the Deed will
not make a void Grant good, or to take effect.

The Lord cannot Grant the Wardship of his living Tenant; because of the
uncertainty who shall be his heir, unless he name some person.

When any thing is granted that is not certain, as one of my horses, then the
choice is in the Grantee.

When several things are granted, then it is in the choice of him that is to do
the first Act.

A man cannot grant, nor charge that which he never had.

A man may charge a Reversion.

A Parson may grant his tithes, or the Wool of his Sheep for years.

A thing in action, a cause of a suite, right of entry, or a Title for a
condition broken, or such like, may not be given or granted to a Stranger; But
only to the Tenant of the ground, or to him that has the Reversion, or
Remainder.

A thing that cannot begin without a Deed, may not be granted without a Deed;
as a Rentcharge, Fayer, etc. Every thing that is not given by delivery of
hands, must be passed by Deed, the right of a thing real or personal, may not
be given in, not released by Word; a Rent of condition, or a re-entrie may not
be reserved to one that is not party to the Deed.

All things that are incident to others, pass by the grant of them that they
are incident unto.

A man by his Grant, cannot prejudice him that has an elder title.

If no estate be expressed in the Grant, and Livery and seizin be made, then
the Grantee has but estate or life; But if there be such Words in the Grant,
which will manifest the Will of the Granter, so his will be not against the
law, the estate shall be taken according to his intent and will.

All Grants shall have a reasonable construction, and all Grants are made to
some purpose, and therefore reason would they should be construed to some
purpose.

All Grants shall be taken most strong against him that made it, and most
beneficial to him to whom it is made.

To Grants of Reversion, or of Rents, etc. there must be Attornment, otherwise
nothing passes, if it be not by matter of Record.

ATtornment is the agreement of the Tenant to the Grant, by writing, or by
Word; as to say, I do agree to the Grant made to you, or I am well contented
with it, or I do Attorne unto you, or I do become your* Tenant, or I do deliver
unto the Grantee a penny, by way of seizin of a Rent, or pay, or do but one
service only in the name of the whole; it is good for all.

It must be done in the lifetime of the Grantor.

Without Attornment, a Signiory, a Rentcharge, a Remainder, or a Reversion,
will not pass, but by matter of Record.

Without Attornment, services pass not by the sale of the Manor, nor from the
Manor, but by bargain and sale enrolled.

Attornment must be made by the Tenant of the Freehold, when a Rentcharge is
granted.

By the Attornment of the Termor to the Grantee of a Reversion, with Liverie,
and the Rent also, though no mention be made thereof; before attornment a man
may not distrain, nor have an action of waste.

By fine, the Lord may have the Wardship of the body, and Lands before the
attornment of his Tenant.

The end of attornment, is to perfect Grant, and therefore may not be made upon
condition, or for a time.

A Tenant that is to perfect a Grant by Attornment, cannot consent for a time,
nor upon a Condition, nor for part of a thing granted: But it shall enure the
whole absolutely.

If the Tenant have true notice of all the Grant, then such Attornment is void.

Attornment necessary upon a Devise.

CHAP. XXXIV. LEASES.
A Lease for years must be for a time certain, and ought to express the term,
and when it should begin, and when it should end certainly; And therefore a
Lease for a year, and so from year to year; during the life of I. S. but for
two years, it may be made by Word or Writing; If I Lease to I. N. to hold
until a hundred pounds be paid, and make no livery of seizin, he has estate
only at Will.

A Lease from year to year, so long as both the parties please, after entry in
any year, it is a Lease for that year, etc. till warning be given to depart.
14. H. 8. 16.

A Lease beginning from henceforth, shall be accounted from the day of the
delivery* from the making* shall be taken inclusive from the day of the making,
or of the date exclusive.

If Lands descend to the heirs before his entry, he may make a Lease thereof.

A man lets a house, cum pertinent* no lands pass; but if a man let a house,
cum omnibus terris eidem pertinent, there the lands thereunto used pass.

If a man lets Lands, wherein is Coalemines, quarries, and such like, if they
have bin used, the Tenant may use them. if they be not open, if the Tenant for
them, employ them not on the Land, it is waste, likewise marle; the land is the
place where the Rent is to be paid and demanded, if no other place between the
parties be limited.

Trespass is not given for paying of the Rent to the Lessor, howsoever it be
payable there.

And if a man let lands without impeachment of Waste, and a Stranger cut down
the trees, and the Lessee does bring an action of Trespass, he shall not
recover for the value of the Trees, but for the Crop, and bursting of his
close, and the heir of the Lessor shall have such trees, and not the Executor
of the Lessee, unless they be cut by the Lessee, and enjoyed by the Grantee,
without Waste.

Lessee for years, or for life, Tenant in Dower, or by the courtesy, or Tenant
in tail after possibility, etc. have only a special interest or property in
the trees, being upon the ground, growing as a thing annexed unto the Land, so
long as they are annexed thereunto.

But if the Lessee, or any other sever them from the Land, the property and
interest of the Lessee in them, is determined; and the Lessor may take them* as
things that are parcel of his Inheritance, the Interest of the Lessee being
determined.

To accept the rent of a void Lease, will not make the Lease good; But
avoidable it will.

If the Husband and Wife do purchase Lands to them and the heirs of the
Husband, and he make a Lease, and die; his Wife may enter, and avoid the Lease
for her life, but if she die, leaving the husband, who afterward dies, before
the term ends, the Lease is good to the Lessee, against the heir.

Where it is Covenanted and granted to S. I. that he shall have five Acres of
land in D. for years, this is a good Lease, for consessit is of such force as
dimisit.

If a man make a Lease for 10 years, and afterward makes another lease for 21
years* the latter shall be a good Lease for eleven years, when the first is
expired.

If the Lessee at his cost, do put glass in the Windows, he may not take the
same away again, but he shall be punished for Waste; and so of Wainscot, and
seeling, if it be not fixed with Screwes.

Tenant in tail may make a lease for such lands or inheritance, as have been
commonly letten to farm* if the old lease be expired, surrendered or ended,
within one year after the making of the new; But not without impeachment of
Waste, nor above 21 years, or three lives, from the day of the making,
reserving the old Rent, or more, 32. H. 8. By Indenture of Lease, by Tenant in
tail, for 21 years, made according to the form of the Statute, rendering the
ancient, or more Rent. If the Tenant in tail die, it is a good lease against
^his Issue; But if a Tenant in tail die without Issue; the Doner may avoid
this Lease by entry, 32. H. 8. 28. And if he in the Remainder, do accept the
Rent, it shall not tie him, for that the Tail is determined, the Lease is
determined, and void. Ed. ^. 19.

The Husband may make such a Lease of his wifes lands by Indenture, in the name
of the husband and wife, and she to seal thereunto, and the rent must be
reserved to the husband and his wife, and to the heirs of the wife, according
to her estate of Inheritance.

A Lease made by the husband alone, of the Lands of his wife, is void after his
death; But the Lessee shall have his Corn.

By the husband and wife, voidable, if it be not made as aforesaid.

If a man do let Lands for years, or for life, reserving a Rent, and do enter
into any part thereof, and take the profit thereof, the whole Rent is
extinguished, and shall be suspended, during his holding thereof.

The aceptation of a re-demise, to begin presently, is suspension of the Rent,
before any entry; otherwise of a re-demise to begin in suturo.

Reservations and Exceptions.
THere are diverse words, by which a man may reserve a Rent, and such like,
which he had not before* or to keep that which he had, as Tenendum,
reservandum, solvendum, saciendum, it must be out of a Message* and where a
distress may be taken; and not out of a Rent: and it must be comprehended
within the purport of the same Word.

Exceptions of part ought always to be o^ such things which the Grantor had in
possesion at the time of the Grant.

The heir shall not have that which is reserved, if it be not reserved to him
by special words.

If a man make a Feoffment of Lands, and reserve any part of the profits
thereof, as the grass, or the Wood, that reservation is void, because it is
repugnant to the feoffment.

A man by a Feoffment, Release, Confirmation, or Fine, may grant all his right
in the Land, saving unto him his Rentcharge, etc.

Things that are given only by taking and useing: As pasture for four Bullocks,
or two loads of Wood, cannot be reserved but by way of Indenture, and then they
shall take effect by way of Grant, of the Grantor, during his life and no
longer, without special Words.

Exceptions of things, as Wood, Mine, Quarrie, Marle, or such like, if they be
used, it is implied by the Law that they shall be used; and the things without
which they cannot be had, is implied to be excepted, although no, etc.

But otherwise, if they be not used, then the way and such like must be
excepted.

An Assignee may be made of Lands given in Fee, or for life, or for years, or
of a Rentcharge, although no mention be made of the Assignee in the Grant.

But otherwise it is of a promise, Covenant, or Grant, or Warranty.

If a Lessee do assign over his term, the Lessor may charge the Lessee, or
assign at is pleasure.

But if the Lessor accept of the Rent of the Assignee, knowing of the
assignement, he has determined his acception, and shall not have an action of
debt against the Lessee, for Rent due after the assignement.

If after the assignement of the Lessee, the Lessor do grant away his
Reversion, the Grantee may not have an action of debt against the Lessee.

If a Lessee do assign over his interest, and die, his Executor shall not be
charged for rent due after his death.

If the Executor of a Lessee do assign over his interest, an action of debt
does not lie against him for rent due after the assignement.

If the Lessor enter for a condition broken, or the Lessee do surrender, or the
term end, the Lessor may have an action of debt for the arrearages.

A Lease for years, vending rent, with a condition, that if the Lessee
assigns his term, the Lessor may re-enter. The Lessee assigns, the Lessor
receives the Rent of the hands of the assignee, not knowing of the
assignement, it shall not exclude the Lessor of his entry.

A thing in a Condition may be assigned over for good cause, as just debt: as
whereas a man is indebted unto me 20. pounds, and another do owe him 20.
pounds, he may assign over his Obligation unto me, in satisfaction of my debt,
and I may justify the suing for the same, in the name of the other, at my own
proper costs and charges.

Also where one has brought an action of debt against I. N. which promises
me, that if I will aid him against I. N. I shall be paid out of the sum, in
demand I may aid him.

An assignee of Lands, if he be not named in the condition, yet he may pay the
money to save his Land.

But he shall receive none, if he be not named; the tender shall be to the
Executor of the Feoffees.

Assignee shall always be intended, he that has the whole estate of the
assignor, that is assignable; a Condition is not assignable, and not of an
Executor, or Administrator: if there be such an assignee, the law will not
allow an assignee in the law, if there be an assignee indeed; so long as any
part of the estate remains to the assignor, the tender ought to be made to
him or his heirs, it serves; yet a colorable payment to the heir, shall not
vest the estate out of the assignee, as a true payment will, viz. Covenant.

CHAP. XXXVI: SURRENDERS.
A Surrender is an Instrument testifying with apt words, that the particular
Tenant of Lands, or Tenements for life, or years, does sufficiently consent,
that he which has the next immediate Remainder, or Reversion thereof, shall
also have the particular estate of the same in possession; and that he
yeildeth, or gives the same to him for ever; Surrender ought forthwith to give
a present possession of the thing Surrendered unto him which has such an
estate, where it may be drowned.

A Joynt-Tenant cannot surrender to his fellow.

Estating of things that may not be granted without a Deed, may be determined
by the Surrender of the Deed to the Tenant of the Land.

Lease for years cannot surrender before his Term begin; he may grant, he
cannot surrender part of his Lease.

Surrenders are in two manners;
In Deed. In Law.
A Surrender in Law, is when the Lessee for years, does take a new Lease for
more years.

A Surrender in Deed, must have sufficient words to prove the assent, and will
of the Surrenderer to Surrender; and that the other do also thereunto agree.

The husband may Surrender his Wifes Dower for his life, and her Lease for ever.

By Deed Indented, a man may Surrender upon condition.

CHAP. XXXVII. RELEASES.
A Release is the giving or discharging of a Right, or Action which a man has
or claims against another, or out of, or in his lands.

A Release or Confirmation made by him that at the time of the making thereof
had no right, is void; if a right come to him afterward, unless it be with
warranty, and then it shall bar him of all right that shall come to him after
the warranty made.

Release, or confirmation made to him that at the time of the Release, or
Confirmation made, had nothing in the Lands, is void, it behooves him to have a
Freehold or a possession and privitie.

A Release made to a Lessee for years, before his entry, is void.

A man may not release upon a Condition, nor for a time, nor for part; But
either the Condition is void, and the time is void, and the Release shall enure
to the party to whom it is made for ever, for the whole, by way of
extinguishment: But a man may deliver a Release to another, as an Escrowe, to
deliver to I. S. as his Act and Deed if I. S. do perform such a thing, or
Release upon a condition by Deed indented, may be good.

A Joynt-tenant or a Rentcharge, may release, yet all the Rent is not extinct,
nor yet if he purchase the lands, his fellow shall have the Rent still.

If the grantee release parcel of a Rentcharge to the Grantor, yet all the
Rent is not extinct.

A Release to charge an estate, ought to have these words, Heirs, or words to
show what estate he shall have.

A release made to him that has a Reversion, or a remainder in Deed, shall
serve and help him that has the Frank-tenement; So shall a Release made to a
Tenane for life, or a Tenant in Tail, inure to him in the Reversion, or
Remainder, if they may show it, and so to Trespassors and Feoffees, but not to
Disseisors.

A Release of all manner of Actions does not take away an entry, nor the
taking of ones Goods again, nor is any Plea against an Executor.

A Release of all demands, extinguisheth all Actions Real and Personal,
appeals, Executions, Rentcharge, Common of Pasture, Rent-Service, and all
right, and Seizure, and all right in Lands, and property in Chattels: But not
a possibility, or future duty, as a Rent payable after my death, and such like.

CHAP. XXXVIII. CONFIRMATION.
Confirmation, is when one ratifieth the possession, as by Deed to make his
passession perfect; or to discharge his estate, that may be defeated by another
entry.

AS if a Tenant for life, will grant a Rentcharge in Fee, then he in the
Reversion may confirm the same Grant.

Whereas a man by his entry, may defeat an estate; there by his Deed of
Confirmation, he may make the estate good.

A Confirmation cannot charge an estate that is determined by express
Condition, or limitation; To confirm an estate for an hour, if it be for
Tenant for life, it is good for life; if to Tenant in Fee, for ever.

A lease for years may be confirmed for a time, or upon condition, or for a
piece of the Land; But if a Frank-tenement be, it shall enure to the whole
absolutely.

A Confirmation to charge an estate, must have words to show what Estate he
shall have.

To confirm the Estate of Tenant for life, to his heirs, cannot be but by
Habendum, the Land to him and his heirs: And therefore it is good to have such
a Habendum in all confirmations.

In a Confirmation, new service may not be reserved, old may be abridged.

A Confirmation made to one Disseizor, shall be voidable to the other, so shall
not a Release.

CHAP. XXXIX. CONDITION.
There are two manner of Conditions, one expressed by Words, another employed by
the Law; the one called a Condition in deed, the other, a Condition in Law.

ESTATE made, and the condition against the law, the Estate's good, the
Condition's void.

If the Estate begins by the Condition, then both are void.

Bonds with Conditions expressly against the Law, are void.

Conditions repugnant, the estate good, the Condition void.

Conditions impossible, are void, the Estate good; it shall not enlarge any
estate.

By pleading, a man may not defeat an Estate of Frank-Tenement, by force of a
condition in Deed; without he show the Condition of Record, or in writing
sealed; yet the Jurie may help a man, where the Judges will take their Verdict
at large: of Chatttels he may.

Promise does make a Condition; but when it does depend upon another sentence,
or has reference to another part of the deed, it makes no condition, but a
qualification, or limitation of the sentence, or of that part of the Deed, as
provided, that the person of the Grantee shall not be charged.

He which has interest in a Condition, may fulfill the same for safeguard of
himself.

Between the parties, it is not requisite the Condition be performed in every
thing if the other do agree, but to a stranger it must.

If the Obligee be party to any Act. by which the Condition cannot be
performed; then the Obligor shall be discharged; So he shall be by the Act of
the Condition.

Where the first Act in the Condition is to be performed by the Obligee, and he
will not do it, there the Obligation is not forfeited.

Where no time is set, if the Condition be for the good of a stranger, or of
the Obligee, then it is to be performed within convenient time, if for the good
of the Obligor at any time during their lives; Immediately, shall not have such
a strict construction; but that it shall suffice, if it be done in convenient
time.

If a man be bound to pay money, or farm Rent, he must seek the parties. But if
he be bound to perform all payments: if he render his farm on the land, it
suffices.

If the Feoffee, or Feoffor die before the day of payment, the tender shall be
to the Executor, although the heir of the Feoffee do enter, if the heir be
not named, vide, Assignee in assignement.

The money must be tendered so long before Sunset, that the receiver may see to
tell it.

To pay part of a Sum at the day, cannot be satisfaction for the whole sum, as
a horse or a robe is. But before the day, or at another place, at the day of
the request, and acceptance of the Obligee, is full satisfaction.

An Acquittance is a good bar, if nothing be paid.

In all cases of Conditions, a payment of a certain sum in gross, touching
Lands, or Tenements, if lawful tender be once refused, he which made the
tender is discharged forever.

And the manner of the tender, and payment shall be directed by him that made
it, and not by him that did accept it, as that he paid the sum in full
satisfaction, and that he accepted thereof in full satsfaction.

An acquittance is a good bar, etc.

Where a man is bound to pay money, to make a Feoffment, or renounce an Office,
or the like, and no time is limited when the shall do it, then upon request, he
is bound to perform it, in so short a time as he may.

Bu^ where the time is limited, if he do refuse before the day it is no
matter, if he be ready to perform it at the day.

Where a Covenant or Condition is to marry or Enfeoff a stranger by such a day;
the refusal of the stranger is no Plea, as that of the Obligee is; The Obligee
is to be ready on the Land, at his own peril; a Stranger must be requested: if
he refuse, the Obligation is forfeited, wherefore it is good to have these
words, if the Stranger do there unto assent.

Entry.
THe determination of an estate is not effected before entry.

When any person will enter for a Condition broken, he must be seized on the
same course and manner he was when he departed from his possession.

It behooves such persons as will re-enter upon their Tenants to make a demand
of the rent.

If the Lessor demand before he die, his heir may enter.

If the Lessor distrain, he may not re-enter.

The Lessor may accept of the Rent, and yet re-enter: but if he receive the
next rent he may not, for that establishes the Lease.

Entry into one acre in the name of more, is good; it does not extend into two
Counties.

By the Entry of the Husband, the Francktenement shall be in the wife, and so
of such like.

In Gavill-kind Land, the eldest son only shall enter for the breach of a
Condition.

Demand.
THe Land is the place where the rent is to be paid and demanded, if there be
no other place appointed.

And there the Lessor himself, or his sufficient Attorney, a little before Sun
set, in the presence of two or three sufficient witnesses, shall say, here I
demand of I. B. 10. l. due to me at the Feast of, etc. for a Message, etc.
Which he holds of me in Lease by Indenture, etc. and there remain; the last
day the rent is due to be paid until it be dark, that he cannot see to tell the
money.

CHAP. XI. WARRANTIES.
There are three manner of Warranties.

Lineall. Collateral. By Descent.
VVArranty Lineall, is where a man by his Deed binds him and his heirs to
Warranty, and dies, and the Warranty does descend to his issue.

Warrantie Collateral is in another line, so that he to whom it diseendeth,
cannot convey the title that he has in the Testaments by him that made
warranty.

Warranty by Disseizin, is where he which has no right to enter, enters, and
makes a warranty: this is by Disseisin, and barreth not.

Line all Warranty barreth him that claims Fee; and also Fee-taile with
assets in Fee; if he sell, his son may have a Formedon.

Collateral Warranty is a bar to both, except in some cases that be remedied
by Statute, as Warranty by Tenement, by the courtesy, except he has enough by
descent, by the same Tenement.

Tenant,
In dower, for life, not remedied, but do bar the heir, and him in reversion.

AWarranty diseendeth always to the heir at the Common law, viz the eldest
Son, and follows the estate, and if the estate may be defeated, the Warranty
may also.

It barreth not the second Son in Gavillkind, although all the sons shall be
vouched, and not the eldest alone. Yet he only shall be barred.

To plead a Warranty against him that made it, or his heirs, is called a
Rebutter.

Where Fee, or Frank-tenement is Warranted, the party shall have no advantage,
if he be not Tenant.

Where a Lease for years is warranted, it shall be taken by way of Covenant,
and good, if he be outed.

The Feoffor by the words dedi and concessi, shall be bound to warranty, during
his own life.

CHAP. XLI. COVENANTS.
COvenants are of two sorts; expressed by words in the Deed, or employed by the
Law. A covenant in Deed, is an agreement made by the Deed in writing, between
two persons to perform some things, and sealed: for no writ of Covenant is
maintainable without such a specialty, but in London, etc.

When a Covenant does extend to a thing in being parcel of the demise, or
thing to be done by force of the Covenant is quodamodo, annexed, or
appertaining to the thing demised, and goes with the land, it shall bind the
assignee, if he be not named: as to repair the houses, it shall bind all that
shall come to the same by the act of the law, or by the act of the party.

But if the Covenant do concern the land, or thing demised in some sort, the
Assignee shall not be charged, although he be named; as to make a Wall at
another bodies house, or to pay a sum of money to the Lessor, or to a
stranger, But the Lessee his executors and Administrators shall be charged.

If the Covenant do extend to a thing that had no being, but to be made new
upon the Land, it should bind the Assignee, if he be named, because he shall
have the benefit of it.

If a man make a Lease for years, and the Lessee covenanteth and grants to
pay, etc. to the Lessor his heirs and assigns, yearly during, etc. ten pound,
his Executors shall have it.

A Covenant in Law, upon a demise, or grant, the Assignee in Deed, or in law
may have a Writ of Covenant.

An Obligation to perform all Covenants and grants is forfeit on the breach of
a Covenant in law.

A Covenant in Law is not broken but by an elder title.

A Covenant in Law may be qualified by the mutual consent of the parties.

CHAP. XLII.
How Chattels personal may be bargained, sold, exchanged, lent, and restored.

AContract is properly where a man for his money shall have by the assent of
another, certain goods, or some other profit at the time of the contract, or
after.

In all Bargains, Sales, Contracts, Promises, and Agreements, there must be
quid pro quo, presently, except day be given expressly for the payment, or else
it is nothing but communication.

If a man do agree for a price of wares, he may not carry them away before he
has paid for them, if he have not day expressly given him to pay for them.

But the Merchant shall retain the wares until he be paid for them, and if the
other take them, the Merchant may have an action of trespass, or an action of
debt for the money at his choice.

If the bargain be that you shall give me ten pound for my Horse, and you do
give me a penny in earnest, which I do accept: This is a perfect bargain, you
shall have the Horse by an action of the Case, and I shall have the money by an
action of debt.

If I say the price of a Cow is four pounds, and you say you will give me four
pounds, and do not pay me presently, you may not have her afterward, except I
will; for it is no contract. But if you go presently to telling of your money,
if I sell her to another, you shall have your action of the Case against me.

If I buy one hundred loads of Wood to be taken in such a Wood at the
appointment of the vendor, if he upon request will not assign them unto me. I
may take them, or I may sell them: But if a stranger do cut down any part of
the trees, I may not take them; But I may supply my Grantee of the residue, or
have my action of the Case.

If the bargain be, that I shall give you ten pounds for such a Wood, if I like
it upon the view thereof, this is a bargain at my pleasure upon my view; and
if the day be agreed upon, if I disagree before the day, if I agree at the day
the bargain is perfect, although afterward I do disagree. But I may not cut
the Wood before I have paid for it; if I do, an action of Trespass will lie
against me, and if you sell it to another, an action of Trespass on the Case
will lie against you.

If I sell my horse for money, I may keep him until I am paid, but I cannot
have an action of debt until he be delivered, yet the property of the horse is
by the bargain in the bargainer, or buyer; but if he do presently tender me my
money, and I do refuse it, he may take the horse, or have an action of
detainment. And if the horse die in my stable between the bargain and the
delivery, I may have an action of debt for my money, because by the bargain the
property was in the buyer.

If a Deed be made of Goods and chattels, and delivered to the use of the
Donee, the property of the Goods and Chattels are in the Donee presently:
before any entry, or agreement, the Donee may refuse them if he will.

If I take a horse of another man's, and sell him; and the owner take him again:
I may have an action of Debt for the money, for the bargain was perfect by the
delivery of the horse, and caveat Emptor. Every Contract imports in it self
an assumption: for when one does agree to pay money, or deliver a thing upon
consideration, he does as it were, assume and promise to pay and deliver the
same, and therefore when one sells any goods to another, and agrees to
deliver them at a day to come: and the other in consideration thereof, agrees
to pay so much money on the delivery, or after, in this Case, he may have an
action of Debt, or an action on the Case upon the assumption.

The duty to resign an Action personal, may not be apportioned; as if I sell my
Horse, and another man's for ten pounds, who takes his Horse again, I shall
have all the money.

If a man retained a servant for 10. l. per annum, and he depart within the
year, he can have no wages: if it were to be paid at two Feasts, and the man
after the first Feast die, he shall have wages but for the first Feast;
therefore men take order for it in their Wills.

By a Contract made in a Fair or Market, the property is altered; Except it be
to the King; so that the buyer know not of the former property, and do pay
tole, and enter it; and those things as thereupon ought to be done, it must be
on the Market, and at the place where such things are usually sold, as Place at
the Goldsmiths stall, and not in his Inner shop.

In exchange of a Horse for a Horse, or such like, the bargain is good without
giving of day, or delivery.

If a thing be promised by way of recompense for a thing that is past; it is
rather an accord than a contract; and upon an accord, there lies no account,
but he unto whom the promise is made, may have charge, by reason of the
promise, which he has also performed; then he shall have an account for the
thing promised, though he that made the promise have no profit thereby; as if a
man say to another man, heal such a poor man, or make such a highway, etc.

The intent of the party shall be taken according to the Law, as if a man
retain a servant, and do not say one year, or how long he shall serve him, it
shall be taken for one a year, according to the Statute.

In all contracts he that speaks obscurely, or ambiguously is said to speak
at his own peril, and such speeches are to be taken strongly against himself.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Lending and Restoring.

IF Money, Corn, Wine, or such other things, which cannot be redelivered, be
occupied or borrowed, if it perish, it is at the peril of the borrower.

But if a Horse, or a Cart, or such other things, as may be used, and delivered
again, be used in such manner as they were lent, if they perish, he that owes
them shall bear the loss, if they perish not through the default of him that
did borrow them, or that he did make a promise at the time of delivery, to
redeliver them safe again. If they be occupied in any other wise then
according to the lending, in what wise soever it perish; if it be not in
default of the owner, he that did borrow them, shall be charged with them in
Law and Conscience.

If a man have goods to keep to a certain day, he shall be charged, or not
charged after as default or defaults is in him.

But if he have any thing for keeping them safe, or make promise to redeliver
them, he shall be charged with all chances that may fall because of his promise.

If a man find goods of another man's, if they be hurt or lost by the
negligence of him that found them he shall be charged to the owner.

If a common carrier go by ways that be dangerous for robbing, and will drive
by night, or other unfit times, and is robbed; or if he do overcharge his
Horse, or drives so that his stuff fall into the Water, or otherwise be hurt
by his default, he shall be charged by his default.

And if a Carrier would percase refuse to carry, unless a promise were to him,
that he shall not be charged with any such misdemeanour, that promise were void.

Every Inholder is bound by the Law, bona and Cattalla of his Guest to keep in
safety, so long as it is within the Inn, if the Guest did not deliver them unto
him, nor acquaint him with them.

He shall not be charged if the Servant or Companion of the Guest do imbezel
them; or if the Guest do leave them in the outward Court.

The Offler shall not answer for the Horse that is put to pasture at the
request of the Guest: but if he do it of his own head, he shall.

If any man offer to take away my Goods, I may lay my hands upon them, and
rather beat him, then suffer him to take or carry them away.

CHAP. XLIV.
How far other men's Contracts and misdemeanors do bind us.

A MAN shall be bound by many Trespasses of his wife, but not to sustain
corporal punishment for it.

For Murder, Felony, Battery, Trespass, borrowing or receiving of money in his
Masters name, by a Servant, the Master shall not be charged unless it be done
by his command, or came to his use by his assent.

If I command one to do a Trespass, I shall be a Trespassor, or otherwise if I
do but consent: There is no accessory in Trespass.

We shall be charged if any of our family lay or cast any thing into the high
way, to the noisance of his Majesty's Liege People.

Every man is bound to make recompense, for such hurt as his beasts shall do
in the corn or grass of his neighbor, though he knew not that they were
there; and for his Dogs, Bears, etc. if they hurt the goods or Chattell of any
other; for that he is to govern them.

A man shall not be charged by the contract of his wife or his servant, if the
thing come to his use, having no notice of it: But if he command them to buy,
he shall be charged though they come not to his use; or had notice thereof.

If a Wife or Servant use to buy or sell, if he sell his Masters Horse, and
exchange his Ox for wheat that comes to his Masters use, his Master may not
have an action of Trespass for it, but he shall be charged for the corn, and
the other need not to show that he had warrant to buy for him.

If a manservant that keeps his shop, or that uses to sell for him, shall
give away his goods, he shall have Trespass against the Donee.

But if I deliver my Goods to another to keep to my use, and he do give them
away, I shall not: for the Donee had notice whose goods they were, as in the
case of the servant.

If a man make another his general receiver, which receives money, and makes
an acquittance, and pays not his Master; yet that payment discharges the
debtor.

If a servant keep his Masters fire negligently, an action lies against the
Master: Otherwise if he bear it negligently in the street.

If I command my servant to distrain, and he does ride on the distress; he
shall be punished, not I.

If a man command his servant to sell a thing that is defective, generally to
whom he can sell it; deceit lies not against him: Otherwise if he bid him sell
it to such a man, it does.

A Contract or a promise made to the wife is good, when the husband does agree,
so it is to a servant; and it shall be said to be made to the husband and
Master himself.

If a man takes a wife that is in debt, he shall be charged with her debts,
during her life; if she die, he shall be discharged.

CHAP. XLV. Wills and Testaments.
Having hitherto treated of such contracts as de take effect in the life time
of the parties, with their differences, it is now to deal with Instruments
which take effect after their Deaths; that those things which they have
preserved with care, and gotten with pains in their life, might be left to
their posterity in peace and quietness after their Death: of which sort are
last Wills and Testaments.

There are two sorts of Wills; Written and Nuncupative.
ANuncupative Testament is when the Testator does by Word only without writing
declare his Will, before a sufficient number of Witnesses, of his Chattels
only: for Lands pass not but by writing; It may for the better continuance
after the making, be put in writing, and proved: But it is still a Testament
Nuncupative.

A written Testament is that, which at the very time of the making thereof is
put in writing; by which kind of Testament in writing, only Lands and
Testaments pass, and not by word of mouth only.

Two things are required to the perfection of a Will, by which Lands pass, viz.
First writing, which is the beginning. Secondly, the death of the Devisor,
which is the finishing.

In a Will of Goods, there must be an Executor named; otherwise of Lands.

A man may make one Executor or more simply, or conditionally for a time, or
for parcel of his Chattels.

If no Executor be named, then it still retains the name of last a Will, and
shall be annexed to the Letters of Administration in regard of the Gift.

Gavil kind Lands may be devised by custom.

Lands bolden
In Socage tenure all is devisable Knights Service 2 parts 3 in writing.

FEAR, fraud, and flattery, three unfit accidents to be at the making of a Will.

A woman may make a Will of the goods of her husband, by his consent and
license; by Word is sufficient, and of the goods she has as Executor, without
his consent; but she cannot give them unto him.

A boy after his age of fourteen, and a Maid after her age of twelve may make a
Will of their goods and Chattels by the Civil Law.

The will of the Donor shall be always observed, if it be not impossible, or
greatly contrary to the Law.

A Devisor is intended Inops consilii, and the Law shall be his Counsel, and
according to his intent appearing in his Will, shall supply the defect of his
words.

A Prerogative Will is five pound in another Diocese.

A man may not traverse the Probate of a Testament, or Letters of
Administration directly, but he may say against the Testament that the Testator
never made the party his Executor.

CHAP. XLVI. DEVISES.
A Devise ought to be good and effectual at the time of the death of the
Devisor.

The Devisee may not enter into the term, or take a Chattell, but by the
delivery of the Executor.

But he may sue for it in Court Christian.

Into Frank-tenement, or inheritance he may enter.

Devisees are Purchasees, as if a Lease for years be Willed to a man and his
Heirs, the Heir shall have it; for Heir is a name of purchase here.

A Reversion of Lands or Tenements will pass by the name of Lands and Tenements
in a Devise.

If a man devise all his Lands and Tenements; a Lease for years does not pass,
where he has Lands in Fee, and also a Lease there; otherwise it will.

If a man devise all his goods, a Rentcharge which he had for years will pass,
and all other his personal Chattells.

And if a man give all his movables to one, he shall have all his Horses,
Cattle, pans, and personal chattells; and all his immoveables to another, he
shall have all his Corn growing, and fruit on his Trees, and the chattells
real.

A man may devise Lands or goods to an Infant in the mothers belly, or goods to
the Churchwardens of D.

There is great diversity where the property is devised, and when the
occupation is devised: A man may devise that a man shall have the occupation of
his Plate, or other chattells during his life, or for years, and if he die
within the term, that it shall remain to M. A. and it is good, for the first
has but the occupation, and the other after him shall have the property.

But if a chattell be given to one for life, the remainder to another, the
remainder is void.

For a Grant or Devise of a Chattel for an hour, is good for ever; and the
Devisee may dispose of it; but if he do not, the other shall have it.

A man may Devise his Lands he holds in Lease, but not his Lease, under this
condition; Provided, that if the Devisee die within the term then he shall have
it.

If a man Will his goods to his wife, and that after her decease, his Son and
Heir shall have the House wherein they are; she shall have the house for term
of her life, yet it is not devised unto her by express words. But it does
appear that his intent was so by the words.

If a man wills his Lands to his wife, til his Son comes to the age of 21
years, and the woman takes another husband, and dies, the husband shall have
the Interest.

By a Devise a man may have the Fee-simple without express words of Heirs, as
if Lands be willed to a man for ever, or to have and to hold to him and to his
assigns, etc.

By Will, Lands may be intailed without the word, Body: as if Lands be given to
a man, and to his heirs male, it does make an estate tail.

If a man Will that his Executors shall sell his Lands, the inheritance does
descend to the Heir; yet the Executors may enter, and enfeoffe the Vendee.

But if Lands be given to the Executor to sell, and they receive the profits
thereof to their own use, and do not sell the same in reasonable time, the Heir
may enter.

An Executor may sell, if the other will not.

If Lands be recovered against Tenant for life or for years, by an action of
Waste, or former title, he may not give his Corn.

If the Cognizee have sown the Lands, and the Cognizor bring a scire: he may
give the Corn sown.

If a man Devise omnia bona and Cattalla, Hawks nor Hounds do not pass, nor the
Deer in the Park, nor the Fish in the Ponds.

CHAP. XLVII. EXECUTORS.
AN Executor is he that is named and appointed by the Testator, to be his
successor in his stead to enter, and to have his goods and chattels, to use
Actions against his Debtors, and Legacies, so far as his goods and chattels
will extend.

Where two Executors are made, and one does prove the Will, and the other does
refuse, notwithstanding he that refuses may administer at his pleasure, and
the other must name him in every action, for every duty due to the Testator,
and his release shall be a good bar: If he do survive he may administer, and
not the Executor of him that died; but otherwise if all had refused.

If one prove the Will in the name of both, he that does not administer shall
not be charged.

If the Executor do once any action that is proper to an Executor, as to
receive the Testators debts, or to give acquittance for the same, etc. he may
not refuse.

But other acts of charity or humanity, he may do; as to dispose of the
Testators goods about the Funeral, to feed his cattle least they perish, or
to keep his goods least they be stolen, these things may every one do, without
danger.

When Executors do bring an action, it shall be in all their names, as well of
them that do refuse, as of other,

But an action must be brought against him that does administer only, and he
which first comes shall first answer.

An Executor of an Executor, is Executor to the first Testator. And shall have
an action of debt, account, etc. or trespass, as of the goods of the first
Testator carried away, and execution of Statutes and Recognizances, etc. St.
25. Ed. 5.

The title and interest of an Executor, is by the Testament, and not by the
Probate, but without showing it, they may release the Probate.

The Justices will not allow them tosue actions.

The Executor shall have the wardship of the Body and Lands of the Ward in
Knights service, but not in Soccage, and Leases for years, and rent charges for
years, Statutes, Recognizances, Bonds, Lands in Executions; Corn upon the
ground, Gold, Silver, Plate, Jewels, Money, Debts, Cattle, and all other goods
and Chattells of the Testator, if they be not devised, and may devise them; But
if he do will omnia bona and Cattallasua, the goods of the Testator pass not,
neither shall they be forfeited by the Executor.

An Executor is chargeable for all duties of the Testator that are certain; but
not for Trespass, nor for receipt of rents, nor for occupation of Lands, as
Bailiffe or Guardian in Soccage, etc. For this is not any duty certain so far
as he shall have Assets; If the Executor do waste the goods of the Testator, he
shall pay them of his own.

An Executor shall not be charged, but with such goods as come to his hands,
but if a stranger take them out of his possession, they are assets in his hands.

If an Executor take goods of another man's amongst the goods of the Testator,
he shall be excused of the taking in Trespass.

Duties by matter of record shall be satisfied before duties by specialty, and
duties by specialty before charges, and Legacies before other duties.

An Executor may pay a debt or credit of some kind, depending the writ, before
notice of the action, but not after notice or issue joined.

An Executor may pay debts with his own money, and retain so much of the
Testators goods, but not Lands appointed to be sold.

Any of these words, debere, solvere, recipere, borrowed, or any word that will
prove a man a debtor or to have the money; If it be by Bill will charge the
Executor, or Administrator, but not the Heir, if he be not named.

CHAP. XLVIII. ADNINISTRATORS.
AN Administrator, is he to whom the Ordinary of the place where the intestate
dwelt, commits the Testators goods, Chattel, credits, and rights.

For wheresoever a man dies intestate, either for that he was so negligent he
made no Testament, or made such an Executor as refused to prove it, or
otherwise is of no force; the Ordinary may commit the administration of his
goods to the Widow, or next of kin, or to both, which he pleases, making
request; and revoke it again at his pleasure.

The Ordinary may assign also a Tutor to the intestates children, to his
sons until twelve year.

But so that it be not a prejudice to him that is the Guardian; and after those
years, he or she may respectively choose their own Curators, and the Guardian
may confirm them, if there be not good order taken by their fathers Will.

As if such a Tutor die, the Infant cannot have an Action of account against
his Executor.

The power and charge of an Administrator is equal in every point to the power
and charge of an Executor: a man may have an action of the case against the
Executor or Administrator upon the assumption of the Testator, upon good
consideration, or debt for Laborers wages, by the Statute.

And if a man make an Infant his Executor, the Ordinary may commit the
Execution of the will to the Tutor of the Child, to the Child's behoof, until he
be of the age of 17. years, and if he be granted for longer time, it is void.

An Administrator dur ante minoritate, may do nothing to the prejudice of the
Infant, he may not sell any of the goods of the deceased unless it be upon
necessity, as for the payment of debts, or that they would perish; nor let a
Lease for a longer time, then whilst he is Executor.

An infant upon the true payment of a debt due to the Testator, may make an
acquittance, and it shall be good.

For a Child may better his estate but not make it worse.

CHAP. XLIX. HEIR.
IF a man die seized of any Lands, and do not dispose of them by his Will they
do descend to his Heir, as aforesaid.

And he shall have not only the Glass, and Wainscot, but any other of such
like things affixed to the Freehold, or ground; as Tables, Dormant, Furnances,
Fats in the Brew House, or Dye-house; and the Box or Chest wherein the
Evidences are; the Hawks and the Hounds, the Doves in the Dove-house, the Fish
in the Pond, and the Deer in the Park, and such like.

He shall be charged by specialty, for the debts of his Ancestour, so long as
he has assets, if the Executor or Administrator have not sufficient.

No Law nor Statute does charge the Heir for the wrong, or trespass of his
Father, but by express words.

Widow.
THe Widow shall have all her apparel, her bed, her copher, her chains,
borders, and Jewels, by the honorable Custom of the Realm, except her Husband
unkindly give any of them away; or be in debt, that it cannot be paid without
her Bed, etc. yet she shall have her necessary apparel.

What things are Arbitrable, and what not.
THings, and Actions personal incertaine are Arbitrable, as Trespass, taking
away of a Ward, etc.

But things certain are not arbitrable, but when the submission is by
specialty, if they be not joined with others uncertain, as debt with trespass,
etc.

Matters concerning the commonwealth; some are not arbitrable as criminal
offenses* felonies and such like, concerning the crime.

In the submission, three things are to be regarded.

First, that it be made in writing with the parties Covenants, or bonds
subsequent and sufficient to bind them, their heirs, Executors, and Assigns
to perform the Award, which shall be thereupon made, that both the Arbitrators
may know their power, and the parties revoke not their power. For all is void
that is not contained in the Submission, or necessarily depending thereupon;
And the Arbitrators labor lost, if they want means to compel the same to be
executed.

Secondly, that there be power given to them sufficient to do all things
necessary for the ordering of the controversies, as to appoint times and places
for their meetings, to examine and decide the matters committed, and to bring
their parties with their proofs, evidences, and witnesses thither together
before them, and to punish the place defective, and to expound and correct such
doubtful sentences, and questions, as may arise upon their Award, afterward
inconvenient to either parties, contrary to equity, and the Arbitrators good
meaning; which inconveniences not before by them seen, at the making of the
Award, Tempor is filia veritas.

Thirdly, convenient time and place are to be limited for the yielding up
their Award to the parties, or to their assigns.

Six things to be regarded in an Arbitrament.
1. THat it be made according to the very submission, touching the things
committed, and every other circumstance,

2 That it be a final end of all controversies committed.

3 That it appoint either party to give or do unto the other something
beneficial in appearance at least.

4 That the performance be honest and possible.

5 That there be a mean how either part by the Law may attain unto that which
is thereby awarded unto him.

6 That every party have a part of the Award delivered unto him.

For if it fail in any of these points, then is the whole Arbitrament void,
and of none effect:

Examples there of.
1 AN Award that the parties shall obey the Arbitrament of A. M. is void, for
power may not be assigned.

2 An Award that any of the parties shall be bound, or do any other Act by the
advice of the Arbitrator, is not good except it be in the submission so, but
that the parties shall be bound, or make assurance by the advice of Counsel, is
good.

2 An Award, that the parties shall be nonsuited, is not good, because it is no
final end, for the party may begin again: that the party do withdraw his suit,
is good.

If the submission be of diverse things, and the Award only of some of them,
yet is the Award good for that part, as if the Submission be of all Actions
real and personal only, or if it be only, de possessione.

3 If to submit themselves to the Arbitrament of all trespasses, and it is
awarded that the one shall make amends to the other, and nothing is awarded for
the others benefit; this Award is void.

So it were if one of them should go quite against the other, if the Submission
were not by bond, for an Award must be final, obligatory, and satisfactory to
both parties.

An Award, that either party shall release to the other all actions, and that
because the one has trespassed more then the other, he shall pay to the other
first, is good.

In debt or trespass of goods taken, that the Defendant shall retain part, and
the Plaintiff to have the rest, is not good.

4 An Award, that one of the parties shall do an act to any Stranger, the act
is void, if the parties be not bound.

Or if it be that he shall cause a Stranger to enfeoffe, or be bound to the
other party, because he has no means to compel the stranger.

5 An Award is void, if it be neither executed, nor any means by law for the
execution thereof, as if it should be awarded that one should pay the other 10
pounds, this is good, for he may recover the same by an action of debt. But if
it were awarded, the one should deliver to the other an acre of Land, or do
such like act Executory, it were void, if it be not delivered straightway, or
provision made by bond, or otherwise to compel the payment thereof, according
to the Award, if the submission be not by specialty.

6 Indentures of Arbitrament must be made of so many parts, that every person
may have a part.

Arbitramentum aequum tribuit cuique suum.
AN Award is commonly made by Laymen, and shall be taken according to their
intent, and not in so precise a form as Grants, or pleadings, but as verdicts,
yet the substance of the matter ought to appear either by express words, or by
words equivalent, or by those that do amount thereunto.

But it were good that Awards were drawn up by some that is skilful, for the
avoiding of Controversies, which otherwise may arise about the same.

Agreement.
AN agreement is made between the parties themselves; there must be a
satisfaction made to either party presently, or remedy for the recompense, or
else it is but an endeavor to agree.

Tender of money without payment, or agreement to pay money at a day to come,
is not any satisfaction before the day be come, and the money be paid; it
cannot be pleaded in Bar, in an action of Trespass. For that as the other
party has no means to compel the other to pay the money: So he may refuse
it at the day, if he will, otherwise in an Arbitrament; but money paid at a
day, before the Action brought, is a good plea.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF PARTICULAR ESTATES.

Written By Sir JOHN DODDRIDGE KNIGHT.



LONDON, Printed, Anno. Dom. 1651.

A TREATISE OF PARTICULAR ESTATES.
Particular ESTATES.
A Particular Estate is such, as is derived from a general Estate, by
separation of one from the other; As if a man seized in Fee simple of Lands, or
Tenements, does thereof cheat by gift or grant an ^state Tail, or by demise a
Lease for life, or ^y estate for years, these are in the Donee, or ^easee.
Particular Estates in possession derived and separated from the Fee simple, in
the De^nor, or Leasor in Reversion.

Also if Lands be demised to A. for life, the remainder to B. and the Heirs of
his body, the remainder to C. and his heirs, the Estate for life limited to A.
the Estate Tail limited to B. are particular Estates derived ut supra, and
separated in Interest from the Fee simple; the remainder given to C. albeit the
same remainder does depend upon those Particular Estates.

And of Particular Estates, some are created by agreement between the Parties;
and the particular Estates before specified: And some by act of Law; as the
state in Tail apres possibility de issue extinct, Estates by the courtesy of
England, Dower and Wardship for albeit an estate in Dower, be not complete
until it be assigned, which oftentime is done by assent and agreement between
parties; yet because the party that so assigns the same, is compellable so
to do by cours^ of Law, that Estate is also said to be create by Law; also an
Estate at will is a kind of particular Estate, but yet not such as maket^ any
Division of the Estate of the Lessor, is seized, for notwithstanding such an
Estate, the Lessor is seized of the Land in this Deme^sure as for Fee in
possession, and not in Reversion.

Also an Estate at will is not such particular Estate, whereupon a Remainder
may depend; But of all the Estates before mentioned, many fruitful rules, and
observations, are both generally, and particularly so lively set forth by the
said Mr. Littleton in the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Chapters of his first
Book, which is extant as well in English as in French, whereunto I referr you.

Possession.
IT is further to be observed, that all Estates that have their being, are in
Possession, Reversion, Remainder, or in Right, but of all these, Possession is
the Principal: there are two degrees of the first, and chiefest possession, in
fait poss, in Law or Deed, is such as is before spoken of: And that is most
proper to an Estate, which is present and immediate; but yet such possession of
the immediate Estate, if it be not greater then a term does operate and enure
to make the like possession of the Freehold, or Reversion; when a man is said
to have a Term, it is to be intended for years, when it is said, a man to have
the Fee of Lands, it is also to be intended a Fee simple; Possession is that
possession, which the Law it self casts upon a man before any Entry, or
Pernancy of the profits: As if there be Father and Son, and the Father dies
seized of Lands in Fee, and the same do descend to the Son, as his next Heir
in this case, before any entry, the same has a possession in Law; so it is
also of a Reversion exportant, or a Remainder dependant upon particular Estate,
or life; in which case, if Tenant for life die, he in Reversion, or Remainder,
before his Entry, has only possession in Law. All manner of possessions that
are not possessions in fait, are only possessions in Law; and it is to be
observed then, if a man have a greater Estate in Lands then for years, the
proper phrase of speech is, that he is thereof seized; but if it be for years
only, then he is thereof possessed: But yet nevertheless the Substantive
(possession) is proper as well to the one as to the other.

Reversion.
A Reversion is properly an Estate which the Law reserveth to the Donor,
Grantor, or Lessor, or such like, which he does dispose parcel of his Estate,
when he does dispose less Estate in Law then that whereof he was seized, at the
time of such disposition: as if a man seized of Lands in Fee, does give the
same to another; and the Heirs of his body, or if he does dismiss the same for
life or years; in these cases the same reserveth the reversion thereof in Fee,
to the Donor, or Lessor, and his Heirs; because he departed not with his whole
Estate, but only with a particular Estate, which is less then his Estate in
Fee; and such Reversion is said to be expectance upon the particular Estate.
Also if he that is but Tenant for life, for Land, and does by Deed or paroll,
give the same S. in Tail, or for term of his life, which is a greater Estate
then he may lawfully dispose; In this case the Law reserveth a Reversion in
Fee, in such Donor, though he were formerly but Tenant for life: and the reason
thereof is, for that by such unlawful disposition, which by deed or word,
cannot be without livery and seisin, he does by wrong pluck out the rightful
state in Fee, from him that was thereof formerly seized in Reversion or
Remainder, and thereof by a priority of time, gained in an instance, he was
seized of a Fee simple, at the time of the executon thereof. But if a man
seized of Lands in Fee simple, gives the same to A. and his heirs, until B. do
die without heir of his body; in this case the Law reserveth no Reversion in
the Donor, because the state is disposed to A. is a Fee simple, determinable,
is in nature so great as the state, which the Donor had at the time of such
gift, and consequently he departed thereby with all his state, and thereby an
apparent difference is between a gift made to A. and the heirs of his own
body, and a gift made to him and his heirs, until B. die without heir of his
body: for in the one case the Donor has but an Estate Tail, and in the other
a Fee simple determinable, has a possibility of Revertor: for if B. die
without heir of his body, then whether A. be living or dead, shall revert to
the Donor, but such possibility of Reversion, for he that has but such a
possibility, has no Estate, nor has he power to give his possibility; but in
the other case, the Donor has Estate in Fee; and therefore he has power to
dispose thereof at his pleasure.

Remainder.
A Remainder is a remnant of an estate disposed to another at the time of
creation of such particular Estates, whereupon it does depend, as if S. seized
of lands in Fee, demiseth the same to B. for life, the remainder to C. and the
heirs of his body, the remainder to D. and his heirs; In this case I. S. has a
particular Estate of the Lessor, is then also disposed to C. and D. ut supra,
whereby B. has an Estate for life, C. a Remainder in Tail, and D. a Remainder
in Fee, depending in order upon the particular Estate in possession; and in
every Remainder five things are requisite.

First, That it depend upon some particular Estate.

Secondly, That it pass out of the Grantor, Donor, or Lessor, at the time of
the creation of the particular Estate, whereon it must depend.

Thirdly, That it vest during the particular Estate, or at the instant time of
the determination thereof.

Fourthly, That when the particular Estate is created, there be a Remnant of an
Estate left to the Donor, to be given by way of Remainder.

Fifthly, That the person or body to whom the Remainder is limited, be either
capable at the time of limitation thereof, or else in potentia propinqua, to be
thereof capable, during the particular Estate; If Lands be given to I. S. and
his Heirs, the Remainder for default of such Heir to I. D. and his Heirs, that
Remainder is void, because it does not depend upon any particular Estate; But
if Lands be given to I. D. the life of I. D. the Remainder to I. B. his
Remainder is good, for it is not limited to depend upon a Feesimple, but upon a
particular Estate; which is only called an Estate for life of I. B.
descendable: if Lands be given to B. for 11. years, if C. do so long live, the
Remainder, after the death of C. to D. in Fee, this Remainder is void, for in
this case it cannot pass out of the Lessor at the time of the creation of the
particular Estate for years: but if a Lease be made to B. for life, the
Remainder to the Heirs of C. (who is then living) this Remainder is good, upon
a contingency, that if C. dye in the life of B. for that Remainder may well
pass out of the Leassor presently without be yaunce, without any inconveniency,
because only the inheritance separated from the Freehold, is in abeyance: if
Lands be given for life, with a Remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. and the
Tenant for life dies in the life of I. S. this Remainder is void, because it
died not vest or settled, either during the particular Estate, or at the time
of the determination thereof, for until, I. S. die, no person is thereof
capable, by the name of the Heir.

But if Lands be given to I. S. for term of his life, the Remainder to his
right Heir, (in the singular number) and the Heirs of his body, and after I. S.
has issue a Son and dies, that is a good Remainder, and the Son has thereby
an Estate Tail, for although it were unpossible that such Remainder should vest
during the particular Estate; because during his life, none could be his Heir;
yet it might be and did vest at the instant of his death, which was at the time
of his determination of the particular Estate.

Concerning the fourth thing, if a man seized of Lands in Fee, grants out of
the same a Rent, or Common to Pasture, or such like things, which before the
grant had no being, to I. S. for term of life, the Remainder to I. D., in Fee,
this Remainder is void, because of this thing Granted, there was no Remnant in
the grant to dispose. And because some heretofore have been of opinion, that
albeit the same cannot take no effect, as another Grant of a new Rent or
Common. Vtres magis valeat quam operat.

This is a rule in Law, that a thing enjoyed in a superior degree, shall not
pass under the name of a thing, in any inferior degree; and therefore if Lands
be given unto two persons, and unto the Heirs of one of them, unto the Husband
and Wife, and Heir of the Husband; and he that has the Estate of Inheritance,
grants the Version of the same Land to another in Fee, such Grant is void,
because the Grantor was thereof seized in a superior degree, viz. in
Possession, and not in Reversion, as appears 22. Ed. 4. fol. 2 and 13. Ed. 3.
Brook. title of Grants, 137.

And concerning the first and last thing, if a Lease be made of Land, for term
of life, the Remainder to the Major and Commonalty of D. whereas there is no
such Corporation therein, being this Remainder is merely void, albeit the Kings
Majesty by his Letters Pattents, do create such Corporations, during the
particular Estate; for at the time of such grant, the Remainder was void,
because then there was no such body corporate thereof capable, or potentia
propinqua to be created and made capable thereof, during the particular Estate,
but the possibility thereof, was then foreign and probably intended. The like
law is, if a remainder be limited to I. the Son of T. S. who had then no Son,
and afterward during the particular Estate, a Son is born who is named John,
yet this Remainder is void; for at the time of such a Grant, as was not to be
probably in tender, that T. S. should have any Son of that name.

Also before the dissolution of Abbeys; if a Lease of Land were made to I. S.
for life, the Remainder to one that then was a Monk, such Remainder was void,
for the cause before alleged, albeit we were deraigned during the particular
Estate. But if such Remainder had been limited to the first begotten Son of I.
S. it had been good, and should accordingly have vested in such a Son
afterward born, during the particular Estate.

Rights.
A Right in Land, is either clothed or naked; a Right clothed, is when it is
wrapped in a possession, Reversion, or Remainder; a naked Right, which is also
most commonly called a Right, is when the same is separated from the possession
or Remainder, by dissessin, discontinuance, or the devesting, and separating of
the possession; as for example, if a Lease of Land be made for life to I. S.
the Remainder to I. D. in Fee, in this case I. S. has a Right clothed with a
Remainder. But if a Stranger that has no Right or Title, does in the same case
enter into the Land by wrong, and put I. S. out of possession, such entry by
wrong is called a disseisin; and therefore the possession is moved from the
Right by reason thereof, the Disseisor, is seized of the Land, and I. D. has
also the like naked clothing to the Remainder, by such dissessin, is likewise
divested, and plucked out of him, cannot be revested in him, during the Right
of such particular Estate, unless the possession of the particular Tenement but
therewith revested; which must be by this entry or recovery by action; and by
such entry of the particular Tenement, or by his Recovery, with execution, the
Remainder shall be invested, as well as the particular Estate; and so there is a
Right in goods and chattels, as well as Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
which is also clothed with a possession, so long as the Rightful proprietor
has the same, but if another does take them from him by wrong, he now has
only a naked Right to the same, which cannot be by him granted, for the cause
before alleged, but yet he may release his Right there unto him that is
thereof possessed; for the same reason that is before alleged, if a release of
Right, happen to be forfeited to the King, his Highness may grant the same by
his Prerogative.

FINIS.
CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING A DEED OF FEOFFAMENT.

By T. H. Gent.

Cujus posse est velle.


LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1651.

CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING A DEED OF FEOFFAMENT.
The Premises.
YOU may find in the Premises, First, The direct nomination, as well of the
Feoffor, as of the Feoffee, together with their places of residence, habitation
or dwelling, and their qualities, estates, additions, or conditions. Secondly,
The certain expressement and setting down of the Lands conveyed.

In Com. Norff.) Comitatus dicitur a comitando, of accompanying together, for
generally at Assizes and Sessions, those of that County where such Assizes or
Sessions are kept use to be impannelled upon Juries, etc. for trial of issue
taken upon the fact betwixt party and party, and not those in another County;
and it is a common presumption, that al persons within their Counties take
notice of such things as are there publicly don, hereupon it happens, that
where Lands, etc. lie in diverse Counties, if they be conveyed by Feoffament,
etc. livery of seisin, must be made in every County, where any parcel of the
lands, etc. do lie. Otherwise it is of two parcels of land in one and the same
County. The name County, is in understanding al one with Shire, which is so
called from dividing, and either of them contain a certain portion of the
Realm, which is parted into Counties, or Shires, for the better government
thereof, and the more easy administration of Justice; hence it comes to pass,
that there is no parcel of this Kingdom, which lies not within the circuit or
precinct of some County or Shire. There are reckoned in England, 41, Counties
or shires, and in Wales 12. The County of Northfolke lying Northward, is so
called, in opposition to Suffolk, which lies toward the South, each one in
respect of other gains his name.

The addition given to the Feoffor, you may perceive to be Yeoman, the
Etymology whereof, Mr. Verstegan fetches from Gemen, a word anciently used
amongst the Teutonicks, which as my Author says, signifies vulgar or common,
and so the letter G. by corruption being turned into the letter Y. instead of
Gemen, we say and read Yemen, or Yeomen. Others, (how probably I dare not
affirm) derive it by contraction from these two words, viz. Young Men. Famous
Master Cambden, in his Britannia, after he has reckoned up sundry degrees,
both of Nobility, and Gentry, ranketh Yeomen in order next Gentlemen, naming
them Ingenuous, in which sense I apprehend Yeomen to be mentioned in a certain
Statute made 16 R. 2. and in diverse other Statutes. And although the
derivations of words be conveniently required in the Law, and in every liberal
Science, for ignoratis termiignoratur and ars, yet to use the expression of a
learned Divine, though spoken in another case Melius est dubitare de occultis
quam litigare de incertis: So I must leave you to your own conceit, concerning
the original of the word Yeoman, having only set you down one or two opinions
about it: however, I must not forget what Sir Thomas Smith says in his Repub.
Anglorum, who very truly and properly calls him a Yeoman whom the Laws of
England call legalem hominem, that is to say a free man born, and M. Lambert in
his Eirenarcha, will excellently inform you who are, and who are not probi and
legales homines.

There is no special, but only a general consideration expressed in the
Feoffament, neither of which (as I conceive) is in such case absolutely
material (though I may say formal) in regard of the notoriety of deeds of
Feoffament, etc. for livery and seisin (as shall be said afterward) is
essentially required to make them perfect, which cannot be without the
knowledge of others, besides the parties themselves, and a Feoffament does
thereby always import a free and willing consent, otherwise peradventure it
might have happened in a Bargain and sale, before 27. H. 8. cap. 16. for the
better illustration whereof, take this example: You and another man agree
together, theat you shall give him a certain sum of money, for a parcel of
Land, and that he shall make you an assurance of it, you pay him the money, but
he makes you no assurance; in this case although the state of the Land be
still in him* nevertheless, the equity in conscientia boni viri, is with you,
which equity is called the use, for which until the 27. H. 8. cap. 10. there
was no remedy (as says Sir Francis Bacon) and that very truly, except in the
Court of Chancery, but the same Statute conjoyneth and annexeth the Land and
the use together, so you by this means for the consideration have the Land it
self, without any further Conveyance, which is called a bargain and sale. But
those grave Senators, and worthy States men who made the said Act of the 2^. H.
8. cap. 10. for the transferring of uses into possession, wisely foreseeing
that it would be very inconvenient and prejudicious, nay, mischevous, that men's
possessions should upon such a sudden, by the payment of a little money be
transported from them, (and perhaps in a Tavern or Alehouse, and upon
straynable advantages) did discreetly provide in the same Parliament, the said
Act of 27. H. 8. cap. 16. that Lands, etc. upon the payment of money as
aforesaid, should not pass without a Deed indented and enrolled, as by the
purport of the same Act may appear. Now seeing that before the said Act of 27
H. 8. c. 16. Lands might pass by bargain and sale upon consideration, without
deed indented and enrolled, and might not pass* without consideration in such
manner, therefore I have heard Lawyers say that consideration is still required
in a bargain and sale, though it be by deed indented and enrolled, according to
the same Statute. Sure I am that regularly in a deed of Feoffament, it is not
so as formerly is declared, and for the reason before expressed.

Dedisse.
The word dedi (by force of an act of Parliament made 4. Ed. 1. c. 4. commonly
called the Statute de Bigamis,) implies a warranty to the Feoffee* and his
Heirs during the life of the Feoffor, whereupon Fitz Herbert in his Natura
brevium. fo. 134. h. puts a case to this effect, viz. If a man give Lands to
one in Fee, by Deed, by the words dedi* concessi, etc. hereby he shall be bound
to warrant the Lands of the Feoffee, by virtue of those words, and if the
Feoffee be impleaded he shall have his writ of Warrant' Chart. against the
Feoffor, by reason of the words Dedi, concessi, etc. but not against his Heir,
for the Heir shall not be bound to Warranty, except the Father bind himself
and his Heirs to Warranty, etc. by express words in the deed, I know some
alledg, that because as well the Statute, as Fitzh. mention not only dedi. but
concessi also, therefore the one without the other, implies no warranty* to
whom it may be answered that the Statute it self does plainly prove against
them, for the conclusion thereof has these words, ipse tamen feoffator invita
sua ratione proprii doni sui tenetur warrantizare; and also the Testimony of
Sir Edward Coke, may be produced herein, who affirms that the Statute of
Bigamis, anno. 14. Eliz. in the Court of Common Pleas was expounded, as above
is mentioned, namely that dedi did imply the Warranty, and Mr. Perkins, cap. 2.
says that dedi in a deed of Feoffament, comprehends in it a Warranty,
against the Feoffor, and so does not the word Concessi.

Concessisse.
I conceive the word concessi in Feoffaments and Grants (the employed warranty
excepted which dedi creates) to be of the same effect with dedi; and also with
confirmavi, especially in some cases: to which purpose hear what Littleton
speaks in his Chapter of Discontinuance, Also (says he) in some case this
verb dedi, or this verb concessi, has the same effect in substance, and shall
enure to the same intent, as the verb confirmavi; as if I be disseised of a
carve of Land, and I make such a deed Sciant presents, etc. quod dedi to the
disseisor, etc. or quod concessi, to the said disseisor the said carve, etc.
and I deliver only the deed to him, without any livery of seisin of the Land,
this is a good confirmation, and as strong in Law, as if there had been in the
Deed this verb confirmavi, etc.

Liberasse.
The word Liberavi, I take to be of the same nature with Tradidi, which I have
often seen in Feoffaments, whereof it is remarkable, that Hephron the Hittite,
when he assured the field of Machpelah to Abraham, Genesis 32. 11. used the word
trado: agrum trado tibi, that is, to Abraham, as Hieromes Translation reads it.

Feoffasse.
This word comes from feudum or feodum, which signifies Fee, and is always,
or for the most part used in Feoffaments, as participating of the same nature.

Confirmasse.
Concerning the word confirmo, somewhat may be gathered from what has been
spoken about the Verb concessisse, yet I cannot forget how Hierome renders the
expresment of the said assurance of the said field of Machpelah to Abraham for
a possession, in these words, co. firmatus est ager. etc. Genesis 23. 17.

And now I come to the second thing considerable in the premises, namely, the
Feoffee whose addition is generoso.

Generoso.
Generosus, in English we read Gentleman, which some derive from the two French
words, Gentil-houme, denoting such a one as is made known by his birth, stock,
and race. Sir Tho. Smith calls all those Gentlemen that are above the degree
of Yeomen, whence it may be concluded, that every Nobleman may be rightly
termed a Gentleman, sed non vid versd. Master Cowel conceives the reason of
the appellation to grow, because they observe Gentilitatem suam, the
propagation of their blood, by giving or bearing of arms, whereby they are
differenced from others, and show from what Family they are descended.

Haeredi and assignatis suis
Some will have an Heir so called, quia haeret in haereditate, or quia haeret
in se haereditas, but to let such conceits of witty invention pass, it is
certain, that an Heir is so called from the Latin word Haeres.

Littleton in his Chap. of Fee-simple says, that these words (his Heirs) only
make the estate of inheritance in all Feoffaments, and Grants, etc. Sure then
it is necessary for him that purchases Lands, etc. in Fee simple, to have the
Feoffament run to himself and haeredibus suis, for if it run only to himself,
and assignatis suis, although livery and seisin be made accordingly, and
agreeable to the deed; yet thereby only an estate for life shall pass, because
there wants words of Inheritance: and without livery and seisin in the case
aforesaid, only an Estate at Will shall pass. And the reason why the Law is so
strict in this thing (as in many others) for to prescribe and appoint such
certain words to create and make an estate of inheritance, is, as Master
Plowden says in his Commentaries, for the eschewing and avoiding of
incertainty, the very Fountain and spring, from whence flows all manner of
confusion and disorder, which the Law utterly contemns and abhors; what
herein has been said, is to be apprehended and understood of persons in, and
according to their natural capacities. Yet perhaps an estate of inheritance may
sometime pass in a Deed of Feoffament, by words, which may have reference, and
will relate to a certainty, for Certum-est quod certum reddi potest: as for
example, You Enfeoffe me and my Heirs of a certain piece of Land, to hold to
me, and my Heirs, etc. and I reenfeoffe you, in as large, ample, and
beneficial manner, as you enfeoffed me: in this case (they say) you have a Fee
simple for the reason above expressed. So I come next to see what observations
the Deed of Feoffament further affords.

Totam ill. pec. tree cont.
Very necessary and convenient it is in deeds of Feoffament, etc. to have the
Lands, etc. thereby intended to be conveyed, certainly and expressly to be
set down, as well how much by estimation in quantity, they do contain, as the
quality of the same whether Meadow, Pasture, etc. being the species of Land,
which is the genus, and the place where, and manner how they exist and lie, the
better to shun and avoid doubt, and ambiguity, which oftentimes stir up
occasions of unkind suites and contentions betwixt party and party, I know that
Grammarians reading the word peciam, will be ready to smile, and allege, that
it cannot defend it self in bello Grammaticali, which I easily confess; but
what then what can they infer from hence? will they therefore utterly
condemn the use thereof? me thinks they should not, but might give Lawyers
leave to speakin their own Dialect. But what, if some take exceptions at this
word, having occasion to meet with it here, what would they do, should they
read the volums of the Law, where instead of bellum, they shall find guerra,
instead of Sylva they shall sind boscus, and subboscus, with a thousand the
like? Surely (as says Erasmus) they might commend or else condemn what they
could not understand, or happily understanding, might admire from whence such
uncouth words should proceed: for their better information (if I thought they
would thank me for my labor) I could tell them that because the Saxons, Danes,
and Normans, have all had some hand, or at least a finger in our laws,
therefore through the commixtion of their several Languages, it comes to pass
that such difficult terms, and harsh Latin words (if I may so call them) are
frequenly obvious in the books and writings of the Law. And indeed I see no
reason why any man should object or cavil against the usage of such words,
though they be not classical, seeing that as well in the Art of Logic, as in
Philosophy, there are found many words, which they call Vocabulaartis, vocables
of Art, which can no better stand, according to the strict rules of Grammar,
then the ancient words of Law which cannot be changed without much
inconvenience.

Acra.
Acra, in English an Acre, seems to come from the Latin word ager; an acre is
taken to be a quantity of Land containing 40 perches in length and 4 in
breadth. Master Crompton in his Jurisdiction of Courts says that a Perch is in
some places more, and in some places less, according to the different usages in
different Countries, and so then it must needs be of an Acre. But ordinarily,
or for the most part, a Perch is accounted, and esteemed to contain 16 foot and
an half in length. I take it to be the same with that measure which we call a
Rod or Pole. A Perch in Law-latin, is called pertica, or perticata. See the
Ordinance made for measuring of Land, anno 34. Ed. 3. in Pulton's abr. titl.
Weights and Measures.

Quaren.
Quarentena, in English a Furlong, or Furrow long: Firlingus, or firlingum is
the same, it has been sometime accepted and taken for the eighth part of a
mile, anno 35. El. c. 6. and I have read that Firlingus, or ferlingus terrae
continet 32. acras. The Latins call it Stadium.

Abbutt.
Abbutto is a verb used by Lawyers, to show how the heads of Lands do lie, and
upon what other Lands or places, denoting for the more certainty, what Lands,
etc. are adjacent about the Lands, etc. abbuttelled. And now that I may speak
once for all, in regard that Lawyers do use to abbreviate their words in
writing, the reason is not as some ignorantly have supposed, because they
cannot express their terminations and endings, as they ought to be, but because
of the multiplicity of business which they are to go through, oftentimes
requiring very sudden dispatch. Yet I could wish that the custom of short
writing alicui scriptori non esset dispendium, but I fear me too many hereby
take occasion to be wilfully ignorant, which otherwise peradventure they would
not do.

Militis.
Miles, amongst the Latins, signifies a soldier, and in this place, and the
like, Miles is to be Englished a Knight, which (as Master Cambden notes) is
derived from the Saxon Gnite, or Cnight. The Heraldes will enform you of diverse
and sundry orders of Knights, if you please to consult with them, or their
writings thereabouts. A Knight at this day is, and anciently has been, reputed
and taken for one, who for his valor, and Prowess, or other service for the
good of the Commonwealth performed, has by the Kings Majesty, or his
sufficient Deputy, on that behalf, been as it were lifted up on high, advanced
above or separated from the common sort of Gentlemen: The Romans called Knights
Celeres, and sometimes Equites from the performance of their service upon
horseback, and amongst them there was an order of Gentility, styled Ordo
Equestris, but distinguished from those they called Celeres, as several Roman
Histories do plainly testify. The Spaniards call them Cavalleroes. The French
men Chivaliers. And the Germans Rieters, all which appellations evidently
enough appear to proceed from the Horse, which may be some restimony of the
manner of the execution of their warlike exercises. And surely it is a very
commendable policy in States to dignifie well deserving persons with honorable
Titles; that others may thereby be stirred up to enterprise, and undertake
Heroic Acts, and encouraged to the imitation of worthy and renowned virtues.

Armig.
Armiger, in English signifies Esquire, from the French Escuier, and perhaps
an Esquire may be called Armiger quasi arma gerens, from his bearing of arms.
Ancient Writers, and Chronologers, make mention of some who were called
Armigeri, whose office was to carry the shield of some Nobleman. Master Cambden
calls them Scutiferi. which seems to import as much, and homines ad arma dicti:
they are esteemed and accounted of amongst us next in Order to Knights.

Clerici.
Clericus, in English we read Clerk. It has with us two sundry kinds of
acceptations. In the first sense it notes such a one, who by his practice and
course of life does exercise his pen in any the Kings Majesty's Courts, or
elsewhere, making it his calling or profession: hereupon you shall find in the
current of Law, mention made of diverse Clerks; as for example, The Clerk of
the Crown: The Clerk of Assise: The Clerk of the Warrrants: The Clerk of the
Market: The Clerk of the Peace, with many others. In the second sense it
denotes such a one as belongs to, and is employed about the Ministry of the
Church, that being his function: in which signification it is to be taken in
this place, and in the like; for I, for my part, did never find Clerk in the
first sense appropriated to any, as an addition simply. We have the use of the
word Clericus, from Clerus, or Clerecutus, signifying the Clergy, that is to
say, the whole number of those, which properly so called, or rather strictly,
are de Clero domini, i. e. Hereditate sive sort domini, for Clerus comes from
(...), a Greekword, signifying the same with sors in Latin; namely, a lot or
portion.

The Habendum. Habend'.
THe Office of the Habendum, is to name again the Feoffee, and to limit the
certainty of the estate, and it may and does sometimes qualify the general
implication of the estate, which by construction and intendment of Law passes
in the premises: for an example whereof see Bucklers case in the second Book
of Sir Ed. Cokes Reports, and Throgmortons case, in Plowdens Commentaries. It
is to be noted, that the premises may be enlarged by the Habendum, but not
abridged, as it plainly appears, as well in the said case of Throgmorton, as
in Worteslies case reported also by Master Plowden, and I have read (as my
collections tell me) that it is required of the habendum, to include the
premises. Moreover, the habendum, (as W. N. Esquire, has it in the treatise
of the grounds and maxims of the Law) must not be repugnant to the premises,
for if it be, it is void, and the Deed will take effect by the Premises, which
is very worthy of Observation.

The Tenendum. Tenend'.
THe Tenendum, before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, made 18. Ed. 1.
was usually de Feoffatoribus and haeredibus suis and non de capitalibus dominis
feodorum, etc. viz. of the Feoffors, and their Heirs, and not of the chief
Lords of the Fee, etc. whereby there happened diverse inconveniences unto Lords,
as the losing of their Escheats, or forfeitures and other rights belonging to
them by reason of their Seigniories, which as the same Statute expresses it,
durum and difficile videbatur, etc. whereupon it was granted, provided and
enacted quod de caetero liceat unicuique libero homini terras sitas seu
tenementa sua, seu partem inde ad voluntatem suam vendere, ita tamen quod
feoffatus teneat terram illam seu tenementum illud de capitali domino feodi
illius per eadem servitia and consuetudines per quae feoffator suus illa prius
de eo tenuit. Q' estat' fuit fait (as says one) pur l'advantage de Senior',
which statue was made for the advantage of Lords, and indeed I easily believe
it. Now it is evident from that which has been declared out of the said
Statute, that at this day the tenendum, where the Fee simple passes, must be
of the chief Lords of the Fee, etc. for no man since the said Statute could
convey Lands in Fee, to hold of himself, out of which rule the King only (I
think) may be excepted, and it is not in silence to be passed over, that where
Lands, etc. are conveyed in Fee, though there be no tenendum at all mentioned,
yet the Feoffee shall hold the same in such manner as the Feoffor held before,
quia fortis est legis operatio: the Statute so determines.

The clause of warranty.
Et ego and haeredes mei, etc. warrantizabimus, etc. defendemus, etc.

WArrantizo, is a verb used in the Law, and only appropriated to make a
Warranty. Littleton in his chapt. of Warranty says, Que cest parol, etc. that
this word Warrantizo, makes the Warranty, and is the cause of Warranty, and no
other word in our law, and the argument to prove his assertion, is produced
from the form and words used in a fine, as if he should say, Because the word
defendo, is not contained in fines to create a Warranty, but the word
warrantizo only, ergo, etc. which argument deduced and drawn a majori ad
minus, is very forcible, for the greater being enabled, needs must the lesser
be also enabled: Omne majus in se continet quod minus est, and quod in majori
non valet, nec valet in minori. But certainly Littleton is to be understood
only of an express warranty indeed, and of a warranty annexed to Lands, for
there may be, and are other words, which will extend and inure sufficiently to
warrant chattels, etc. and which will imply a warranty in Law, as dedi, etc.
and excambium (as I have heard say) implies a warranty in Law, which from
Glanvil's vel in excambium, or escambium datione lib. 3. cap. 1. may receive
some confirmation: And Littleton in his Chapter of parceners, teaches that
partition implies a warranty in Law, etc. And lest some may here say, that
defendemus stands for a cipher, I will tell them what Bracton declares of it,
speaking about a warranty in deed, from the Feoffor and his heirs, whose words
are these: per hoc autem quod dicit (scilicet Feoffator) defendemus, obligatse
and haeredes suos ad defendendum fi quis velit servitutem ponere rei datae
contra formam donationis, etc. Lawyers in their Books make mention of three
kinds of Warranties, viz. Warranty lineall, Warranty collateral, and Warranty
which commences by disseisin. The first is when one by Deed binds both
himself and his heirs to Warranty, and after death, this warranty discendeth
to and upon his Heir. The second is in a transverse, or overthwart line, so
that the party upon whom the warranty descends, cannot convey the title which
he has in the Land, from him that was the maker of the Warranty. The third and
last is, where a man unlawfully enters upon the Freehold of another, thereof
disseising him, and conveyeth it with a warranty, but this last cannot bar at
all. Of these, you may read plentiful and excellent matter and examples in
Littletons Chapter of Warranty, and Sir Ed. Coke, learnedly commenting upon
him, to whom for further illustration hereof, I referr you, as also unto Master
Cowels interpretation of words in the title Warranty, who there remembers
diverse things very worthy observation concerning it. Before I come to the fifth
part of the Deed of Feoffament, give me leave to observe that a Warranty
always descends to the Heir at the Common Law, and follows the Estate (as
the shadow the substance) and whenever the Estate may, the Warranty may also
be defeated, and every Warranty (as says Sir Ed. Coke) which descends, does
descend to him that is Heir to him which made the Warranty, by the Common Law.

And moreover it is to be noted, as may be gathered from what has been
formerly said, that an Heir shall not be bound to an express Warranty, but when
the Ancestor was bound by the same Warranty, for if the Ancestor were never
bound, the Heir shall never be charged. And I remember I have read a case in
Br. abr. 35. H. 8. pl. 266. to this purpose. Si home dit en son garrantie, Et
ego tenementa praedicta cum pertinentiis praefato A. B. le donee warrantizabo,
and ne dit, ego and haeredes mei, il mesme garrantera, mes son heir nest tenus
de garranter, pur ceo que (Heirs) ne sont express en le garranty. B. garr.
50. So I will forbear to speak any further herein, being a very intricate and
abstruse kind of learning, requiring the pen of a most cunning and experienced
Lawyer and now I address my self to the fifth orderly, or formal part of the
Deed of Feoffament

The clause of in cujus, etc. In cujus rei testimonium.
THis clause is added as a preparatory direction to the sealing of the Deed,
for sealing is essentially required to the perfection thereof, because it does
plainly show the Feoffors consent to, and approbation of what therein is
contained, hereupon it will not be much devious or out of the way, to make some
mention of those fashions, which in the manner of sealing, and subscribing of
deeds, have been anciently used by our Ancestors: Some report that the Saxons
in their time, before the Conquest, used to subscribe their names to their
Deeds, adding the sign of the cross, and setting down in the end, the names
of certain witnesses, without any kind of sealing at all. But when the Normans
came in, as men loving their own Country guises, they per petit and petit
changed that custom (as also many others) which they found here, and Ingulphus
who was made Abbot of Croyland, in an. dom. 1075. seems to confirm this
opinion in these words: Normanni cheirographorum confectionem cum crucibus
aureis, and aliis signaculis sacris in Anglia firmari solitam, in cera impressa
mutant. Yet I have read of a sealed Charter in England before the Conquest,
namely that of St. Ed. made to the Abbey of Westminster: yet surely this does
not altogether repugne that which has been formerly said, for I have seen in
Master Fabians Chronicle, and elsewhere that Saint Ed. was educated in
Normandy, and it is not unlikely but he might in some things incline to their
fashions. The Frenchmen have a proverb, Rome n'a este bastie tout en un jour;
and we in England use the same, namely Rome was not built in one day: So it
cannot be conceived that the Normans in an Instnat did alter the Saxon custom
wholly in this particular, but that it did change by degrees, and perhaps at
the first, the King and some nigh unto, and about him did use the impression of
a Seal, which I am somewhat persuaded to believe, from a certain story which I
have heard, concerning Richard de Lucy, chief Justice of England, who in the
time of H. 2. is said to have chidden an ordinary man, because he had sealed a
Deed with a private Seal Quant ceopertaine al Roy and Nobility solement. In the
days of Edward the third, sealing and Seals were very usual amongst all men,
for proof whereof I need not produce any other testimony, but the Deeds
themselves, whereof almost every man has some. But I must remember that Sir
Ed. Coke, in the first part of his Institutes, fo. 7. a. seems to overthrow
the former opinions about the first using of Seals in England, The sealing of
Charters and Deeds, (says he) is much more ancient then some have imagined,
for the Charter of King Edwin brother of King Edgar, bearing date an. dom. 956.
made of the Land called Jecklea, in the Isle of Ely, was not only sealed with
his own seal (which appears by these words) Ego Edwinus gratia Dei totius
Britannicae telluris Rex meum donum proprio figillo confirmavi, but also the
Bishop of Winchester put to his seal, Ego Aelfwinus Winton' Ecclesiae divinus
speculator proprium sigillum impressi. And the Charter of King Offa, whereby he
gave the Peter Pence, does yet remain under Seal. The either of which two
Charters, are much more ancient then that of Saint Edw. before mentioned, yet
happily there may be some reason probably affirmed why as well King Edwin and
the Bishop of Winchester, as Offa, who was King of Mereia about the year 788.
did annex their Seals to their Charters, which no King of England or Nobleman
did before or after them, (except Saint Ed.) until the coming in of the
Conqueror, that ever I could learn, hear, or read of, in any Author.
Nevertheless, I must of necessity leave the search of such reason to others
better studied in the Commentations and alterations of persons, times, and
customs then I my self, however I never heard any one deny, but that the
frequent use of sealing Deeds did commence in the time of Ed. 3. and was not
ordinarily used amongst private men until then, as has been formerly touched.

Of the Date. Dat'.
IN this clause the Style of the King at large, the year of his Reign, and
the year of our Lord God, according to the computation and account of the
Church of England, together with the day of the month are expressed. In former
times Deeds were often made without date, and that of purpose, that they might
be alleged within the time of prescription, as Sir Ed. Coke, in his said Book
of Institutes, fo. 6. very worthily observes, and moreover that the date of
Deeds, was commonly added in the Reign of Ed. 2 and Ed. 3. and so ever since,
to whom I refer you, who in the place last quoted, has very excellent matter
and observations thereabouts. And thus to perform what I promised, I will speak
a word or two concerning Livery of Seisin, and so conclude.

Livery of Seisin.
LIvery of Seisin is a ceremony in Law, used in the conveyance of an Estate of
Freehold at the least in Lands and other things corporeal: but in a Lease for
years, at Will, etc. Livery of Seisin is not required, it being only a Chattel
and no Freehold. By Livery of Seisin, the Feoffor does declare his willingness
to part with that whereof he makes the Livery, and the Feoffees acceptance
thereof is thereby made known and manifest. The Author of the new Terms of the
Law, says that it was invented as an open and notorious thing, by means
whereof the Common people might have knowledge of the passing or alteration of
Estates from man to man, that thereby they might be the better able to try in
whom the right and possession of Land's and Tenements were if they should be
impanelled on Juries, or otherwise have to do concerning the same. The usual
and common manner in these days of delivering of Seisin, I know to be so
frequent, that of purpose I will omit it: But I pray you note with me before I
make an end, that Livery of Sesin is of 2 sorts, viz. Livery of Seisin in Deed,
and Livery of Seisin in Law, which is sometimes termed livery of Seisin within
the veiw. Livery of Seisin within the veiw cannot be good or effectual, except
the Feoffee does enter into the Lands, etc. whereof the Livery of Seisin was
made unto him in the life time of the Feoffor; and it is not to be passed over
in silence, that a Livery in Law may sometimes be perfected by an entry in Law,
as if a man makes a deed of Feoffament, and delivers Seisin within the view,
the Feoffee dares not enter for fear of death, but claims the same, this shall
vest the Freehold and inheritance in him, to which effect you may see the
opinion of certain Justices, 38. Assis. Pl. 23. upon a verdict of Assise in the
County of Dorc. And I conceive that this vesting of a new Estate, in the said
case in the Feoffee, making his claim were he dares not enter, stands upon the
same reason, for ( contrariorum eadem est ratio) that the revesting of an
ancient Estate and Right in the disseisee does by such claim, whereof you may
read plentifully in Littleton his Chapter of Continual Claim. It is worth the
observation that no man can constitute another to receive Livery for him,
within the view, nor yet to deliver (as I have heard my Master say) for none
can take by force or virtue of a Livery in Law, but he that takes the
Freehold himself, and e contra. Otherwise it is to take and give Livery of
Seisin in Deed, for there as well the Feoffee in the one case may ordain and make
his Attorney, or Attorneys in his name and stead, to take Livery, as the
Feoffor in the other case to give Livery, Concurrentibus iis quae in jure
requiruntur. And now let Delivery of the Deed to be added to the sealing
thereof, and the state executing of the Lands thereby conveyed, and then I
presume none will refuse to allow that every thing has been named, which is
essentially required to the perfection of a bare Deed of Feoffament, and
although I have mentioned the delivery of the Deed in the last place, yet it is
not the least thing, or of the least consequence or moment, for after a Deed is
sealed, if it be not delivered, est anul purpose, it is to no purpose, and the
delivery must be by the party himself, or his sufficient warrant: So it may be
gathered from what has been said, that sealing of Deeds without Delivery is
nothing, and that Delivery without Sealing will make no Deed, but that both
Sealing and Delivery must concur and meet together, to make perfect Deeds.

I hope such as are present at the Sealing and Delivering of Deeds of
Feoffament, and the State executing thereupon, will not forget to subscribe
their names, or marks, as witnesses thereof, whereby they may the better be
enabled to remember what therein has been done, if peradventure there shall be
occasion to make use of them. And it is not amiss here before I end, to
observe, that although upon Deeds of Feoffament, etc. it was not usual before
the latter end of Hen. 8. or thereabouts to endorse or make mention upon such
Deeds of the Sealing and Delivering of the Deeds, or state executing of the
Lands, etc. intended thereby to be conveyed, (for I my self have many Deeds of
Feoffament which do testify as much) yet it is to be credibly supposed, and
not without some manifest probability, that such persons whose names are
inserted after a certain clause in such Deeds, beginning with hiis testibus,
were eyewitnesses of all. Thus desiring you to take notice that I have called
the said six parts of the Feoffament formal, because they are not absolutely of
the essence of Deeds, etc. manebo in hoc gyro. I will here conclude, requesting
all those to whom any sight hereof shall, or may happen to come, friendly to
admonish me of my failings herein: Whereby they shall ever engage me thankfully.

FINIS.

