Now the BILL is past, Wooden Shoes at last.
THE best of all things is the Golden Mean,
Virtue resides not in the two Extremes:
Even the Heavens declare this Maxim true,
Which five Zones have, and yet there are but two
Under which mankind can his Life possess,
That this is so, Astronomers confess.
Perhaps you will say, the third should Center be,
But let two Circles here be drawn by thee.
The third is then Extreme, you will quickly see.
But since it is my design to write upon
The Golden Mean, why stay I here so long?
Of the Hare and Partridge let us take a view.
The first's too fearful, and the latter too
Audacious, stays until the Net be drew:
The other starts at every blast of Wind,
As if the Enemy was even then behind.
The Hare is thus like Jealousy and Fears,
Which sets us ost together by the Ears.
Thus it falls out, we frequent are undone
By Hurly-burlies which we strive to shun,
As in the dismal Date of Forty One.
No less simply the Partridge is beset,
Who takes no care, till in the fatal Net
In which we'd almost been in Eighty Eight.
And then, alas, too late she would avoid
Those Snares in which already she is decoyed.
Then wisely let us act like Reynalds, who
Does timely fly, when that his Foes pursue:
It Is time to stir, when once the Wooden Shoe
Is seen or heard, for fear of L -- s too.
November' s Plots were soon enough foreknown,
Before the Pop was made, or Powder blown,
Before the Duke came in, or Wax-work shown.
And though the BILL is passed, they Brethren are,
And till they are quite undone, need not despair:
Perhaps some B -- t may harangue the Crowd,
To bring Relief before they are in the Shroud.
The Wheel upon the Axis moves still,
And various Winds, various Sails do fill:
There Is nothing which is always at a stay,
The Tide it self does often change its way.
Then if kind Phoebus should resolve again
To grant to Phaeton the Horses Rein,
Let him be mindful of his fatal Sire,
It Is ill Repenting when the World's on fire.
Ulysses like, may Jove preserve him long
From Polyphemus, and the Syrenes Song:
Doedalus like, may he keep the middle State,
And still beware of Icarus's Fate.
Printed for W. Jones near Charing Cross. Price One Penny.


