Sal, Lumen, and Spiritus Mundi Philosophici: OR, The dawning of the Day,
Discovered By the Beams of Light: Showing, The true SALT and SECRET of the
Philosophers, The first and universal Spirit of the World.

Written Originally in French, afterward turned into Latin, By the Illustrious
Doctor, Lodovicus Combachius, Ordinary Physititan to the King, and public
Professor of Physic in the University of Mompelier.

And now transplanted into Albyons Garden, By R. T. (...).

Printed at London, by J. C. for Martha Harrison, at the Lamb at the East End
of S. Paul's. 1657.

To the worshipful and truly worthy Patriot of his Family and Country, WILLAM
PIT of Hartly-Westpel in Hampshire, Esquire Robert Turner of Holshot, wishes
Felicity.
Honored Sir,
SEpius mernini ipse perpendi: I have often involved in my Mind the Worthiness
of the Famous AUSONIAN PRINCES in their promotion of ARTS and LEARNING, by
their Favorable Aspects, in Heartily accepting the Dedications of generally
all AUTHORS and STUDENTS in Liberal SCIENCES; which is no small Encouragement
unto them. Seldom do we see the Title of a Germane DEDICATION, but it is
directed, Aliquo serenissimo Principi, etc.

And this, Sir, I hope will be a sufficient Advocate for me, to present this
small Piece to your Worthy Patronage; and I am encouraged thereunto, through
my sensibility Generositatis, Benignitatisque tuis nostratibus: You remain the
standing- Pillar of your Noble Family, and the Honor of your Country; for
which you have your Neighbors Prayers and Praise: and for my part, my Mite is
small: Hanc igitur meae, in te, habeas qualemcunque sit gratitudinis, and
observantiae Testimonium.

Sir, This is a Piece of Hermetical Philosophy, which is well seasoned with
Salt, and I doubt not will at least help you away with the tediousness of some
vacant Hours: it is a Translation; and if I have erred in Grammar, I submit to
your Censure: beseeching the ALL-Eternal to endow you and yours with all
Felicity, internal, external, and eternal; for which I am your daily Orator, as
I am Revera,

LONDON, 22 December. 1656. Your most humble Servant, Robert Turner.

To the Reader, Whose Studies are seasoned with Salt.
WHEN the rude dark Chaos, and indigesta moles, lay tumbling in darkness, and
rolling amongst the undivided waters; when the Spirit of the Great Eternal
Elohim, moved above the Face thereof, it seemed good to his Great creating
power, to make a Witness of his Glorious Majesty, by framing the spacious
Universe: then did he pronounce a fiat Lux, Let there be Light: and no sooner
was his will declared, but Light immediately, like a ready swift-wing'd Herald,
soon proclaimed his Embassage to the as-yet unseparated Fire, Air, Earth and
Water: and they, as dutiful Subjects, yield ready Obedience to his Glorious
Commands; and Light speedily muzzles up darkness, and presents the Creator with
a new baptized morning.

His sacred Power further intending to manifest his Glory, commands a divorce
between the Earth and Water; and as a mighty Monarch does his conquered Enemy,
or stubborn Rebel; so he with another fiat, makes that terrible, boundless,
fathomless Element, the Sea, become his Prisoner; and confines her swelling
waves to their bounds and borders; banishing them from one end of the World to
the other, to run up and down in an unsettled motion; that though her brinish
Mountains swell never so high, yet further then his great fiat permits, they
never dare approach. Then after he had vanquished this terrible (to poor
mortals apprehension) adversary, he soon bespreads the Earth with a green robe,
embroidered with such variety of glorious flowers, as the greatest Potentate on
the earth, with all his Glory, could never attain to the like array. Moreover,
did his refulgent Majesty yet further illustrate the beams of his glorious
might in bedecking the bespangled azure skies with those powerful Creatures the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, which he set for times and seasons, days, months and
years; and to divide betwixt day and night: to omit the ready obedience, the
Sea, Air, and Earth yielded, in bringing forth fishes, birds and beasts,
immediately at his command. Whither now does my wandering Muse soar? What royal
Potentate or princely Guest, should now be expected to this glorious
Entertainment? Not the Mighty Angels, that excel in strength; but the great
Deity, called a triune Council, and commanded the Earth also to bring forth an
Epitomy of all his voluminous works, the Manual of his glory, Man, a naked
puling Creature, born without Sword or Shield; yet into his Soul did the
All-eternal breath the Image of Himself, crowned him glory, made him little
lower then the Angels, made him Commander of Earths Empire, gave him an os
sublime, a lofty countenance to view the Stars, and learn to know their
powerful influence upon the inferior World.

Now does the wise Philosopher, he who is a true contemplator of the divine
Wisdom, by a threefold operation, and threefold matter, make his creation, and
erect the fabric of his world, with his Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. The
Mercury and Sulphur of the Philosophers, has much been written on, more then
needs talked on; but the third and chief principle, was as yet un^upplied.

Here, Reader, it is fully discussed, and to the intelligent and deserving, wi^
be a great revealed Secret despised by fools, crack^ on by bragging knaves who
indeed like degenerat^ bastards, unframe the frame, and blot the manua^ and
deface the Gloriou^ Image of the Almighty.

Some seek to fill the insatiate Gulf of their unfathomed wills, in vain
pleasure: Another seeks t^ mount the slippery stair of staggering honor, and to
make a perpetuity of his offspring: Another digs in the Earth, and is
shipwrack'd with covetous dunghil-passions. The actions of all these are not a
whit tinctured with the true Salt of the Philosophers; for therein is no such
thing.

Many indeed there are to whom the Philosophers Study seems ridiculous, because
their unseasoned brains cannot apprehend the great mystery thereof: to them I
will not bestow time to say a word; nor here tell you the Virtues of Salt: yet
you see our natural vulger common Salt will preserve dead flesh from
putrefaction: What then will the true-prepar'd Philosophical Salt do? It is not
meet to tell you here but if you are worthy of it, the Book will; and
Paracelsus told you already.

Let me entreat you to take notice by the way, that when you find any mention
made of heaven, earth, soul, spirits; or our heaven, etc. these are not meant
the celestial heaven, or natural earth; but terms used by the Philosophers, to
obscure their sayings from the wicked; spoken with all due and holy reverence
to the divine Majesty; of whose glorious Attributes, the true Philosophers and
Astrologers are as tender as CL -- assical John can be; yet this I thought good
to mention, being cautious lest any spark of my flint should touch the
wildfire of his beacons; but that my Salt may rather preserve the hopes of my
intelligent Reader, to dive through his Studies, to his crowned haven: with
which desire I conclude,

^2 December. 1656. R. T.

To the Reader.
THis little Treatise Secrets does unfold,
More rich, more precious then the Indian Gold:
Here is the path, which who does rightly tread,
To health and wealth it will him safely lead.
Salt seasoning all things, Light illuminating,
The universal Spirit vivificating.
O happy Souls, who first these understood!
Here Is true Philosophy so pure and good,
And freed from errors, that none need to doubt,
If they were in them, this would bring them out.
By Transmutation may be brought to pass,
The courser Metals, be they Copper, Brass,
Iron, Lead, Tin, to purer, (this is high)
But it is not all that is done by Chemistry:
For the Elixir, (which renews our youth,
And age retards, if Spagyricks say truth)
Is thereby got, if these things may be done,
Lets Saturn, Venus, turn to Sun and Moon.
The effeminate French our Author has turned well,
To manly English; and the Latin Spell
Is made so easy, that none need to fear
To understand the Aenigma's writing there.
The busy Merchants for their hoped gain,
To both the Indies, Turkey, France, and Spain;
Nay all the world, for Gold and Drugs do rome,
Now here, now there; but better stay at home:
For health and wealth is here; if they will but look,
They Will find them both discovered in this Book.
25 Xbris, 1656. (...).

To his ingenious Friend, Mr. ROBERT TURNER, on this his laborious and
difficult Translation.
EXpect not (Sir) that I should amply treat
Of this Discourse, (that cost you pains and sweat)
Nor hope for yet, from my more duller pen,
Your Sal should be described to Englishmen.
The sublime secrets of your Chymick-skill
May prosper better from your learned quill.
My fancy's raw, my brain is not endu'd
With Art enough to talk of humors crude,
Nor yet of the Epilepsie, or the Gout,
Consumption, Asthma's, or the rabble-rout
Of Physick-Terms: I study other things:
Ergo, I Will leave these unto Chymist-Kings.
These highborn Fancies do appear to me,
Like great Sir Urquhart's Genealogy.
Nor dare I without Sendivogius Torch,
Approximate you nearer then the Porch;
Lest I (presumptuous) should be gazed upon
By those that have their wedding-Garments on:
But, as man often feels heat, and sees no fire,
So I (unskil'd) this learned Work admire.
The learned Physicians, who years consume
In finding out a Medicine for the Rheum,
(And when they think themselves to be at rest,
They dare not write on it, probatum est)
May learn by this (could they but find the cause)
To cure diseases by the Chemists Laws:
Nor need the ingenious Operator doubt
Of perfecting what ere he goes about:
The lofty Secrets in this Book laid down,
(Once understood) will save him many a Crown.
There is a Secret higher yet in this;
For here is taught what anima mundi is:
For which the Learned often have beat their brains,
And gained naught but labor for their pains
If men would learn this quicker way, and share
In Chymick-skill, deal in learned Turner's Ware.
Jo. Gadbury, Philomath.

To the learned R. T. on the following Tract.
WHat rare Discovery? what light is this
Shines to us by thy Metamorphosis?
That does derive an Art to simple man,
From God and Nature; by which Art he can
Of all diseases know the perfect ground,
And render imperfections, whole and sound.
Thanks therefore, learned Friend, for this our gain,
Who reap the Harvest of thy polished Brain.
The Great Elixir sure enjoy you must,
That thus can raise a subject from the dust
Of dark oblivion, and then transmute
His for vesture to an English suit.
Thus thou have changed the language; ne'retheless,
The sense remains, though in another dress.
This thou have gained hereby; the world will see,
Thou art a friend to dame Philosophy:
And for the labor thou have undergone,
To cloth this Infant in our Albion,
Succeeding times shall praise what thou have writ,
And future Readers own to thee their wit.
Mean time, if Zoilus say, thy pen did halt,
Conclude, his brain's not seasoned with our Salt.
Your humble Servant, Owen Crane.

The Contents.
BOOK I.
Chap. 1 THat the world lives, and is full of life. Page 1 Chap. 2 The World
has a Spirit, Soul, and Body. Page 16 Chap. 3 All things are made by the
Spirit of the World, of the first matter. Page 19 Chap. 4 How the Sun is called
Father of the mundane Spirit and first matter. Page 23 Chap. 5 How the Moon is
the Mother, etc. Page 32 Chap. 6 That the root of the Spirit of the World, must
be sought in the Air. Page 37 Chap. 7 How the Earth nourishes this universal
Spirit. Page 41 Chap. 8 The Spirit of the World is the cause of perfection in
all. Page 44 Chap. 9 The specification of the universal Spirit to bodies. Page
49
BOOK 2.
Chap. 1 THat the spirit of the world assumes a Body; and, how it is
incorporated. Page 54 Chap. 2 Of the conversion of the Spirit into Earth; and
how its virtue remains integrally in this Earth. Page 67 Chap. 3 Of the
separation of Fire from Water, etc. Page 102 Chap. 4 Of the Spirits ascent into
heaven, and descent, etc. Page 160
A TREATISE OF The Philosophers true Salt and Secret; And Of the universal Soul
or Spirit of the World. BOOK I.
CHAP. 1. That the World lives, and is full of life.
PUrposing to comment something on the Spirit of the World, I shall first
demonstrate, That the Universe is full of Life and Soul; and here besides, That
Nature makes nothing Spirituous, but it also indues it with Life; and That the
World consists in continual and restless alterations of forms; which cannot be
without vital motion. We may also take notice, That the same Nature, like a
careful as well as a fruitful Mother, embraces and nourishes the whole World,
by distributing to each member a sufficient portion of Life* so that nothing
occurs in the whole Universe, which she desires not to inform; being never
idle, but always intent upon her action, which is Vivification.

This vast Body then, is endued with motion, yea, continually agitated
therewith; and this motion cannot be wrought without some vital Spirit: for
whatsoever wants Life, is immovable. But here I mean not of violent motion
from place to place; but of that, which in reference to a form, is privation;
to perfection, imperfection. The vegetation of Plants, and concretion of
Stones, are effected by the motion of this universal Spirit, agitating this
great Mass, and the mediation of a certain radical and nutritive Spirit, whose
origin or principle, like some primary procreating cause, resides in the
Center of the Earth; and thence, as from the heart, exerts all vital functions,
and extends it self through the whole Body. And this root or principle is
included in the bosom of the ancient Demogorgon, that universal Parent; whom,
old Poets, those diligent Searchers of Natures Secrets, have ingeniously
described, clothed in a green Cloak, obduced with rust, and covered with thick
darkness; feeding all kinds of Animals, into whose belly, the virtues of the
Celestial Luminaries, continually descend; penetrating the very bowels of the
Earth, and impraegnanting it with all kinds of Creatures; where the elementary
qualities and powers offer their services to this old Parent, as to the
Producer and Distributer of all things; who continually occupies Iliastus, in
dispensing of specifical forms; and Archeus, in exciting vital heat: which
Iliastus and Archeus, are as it were two Instruments, whereby he informs,
conserves and augments all things.

Here note, That by Iliastus we mean a general Steward that affords matter for
all generation; and by Archeus, natural or radical heat, which digests this
matter, and acts upon it.

This Demogorgon then is he, by whom, as by his Instrument, God produces all
things in and under Heaven: so that he containing his Iliastus and Archeus,
does with singular providence, unknown to vulgar Philosophers, and therefore
masked under the supplement of occult causes, form and generate, then nourish
and preserve all things; exercising the office of a good Householder or Steward,
who has his Cellar in the bowels of the Earth, and thence draws Life and
vigor for his Family. The Earth therefore, which is the Receptacle of
Celestial Influences and Virtues, contains in it the Fountain of this vital
Spirit, from whose Rivulets, Animals, Minerals, and Vegetables, derive Life;
which communicates to them, sense, essence, and vegetation, as it finds their
matter disposed for motion: and hence such things as are compounded of a more
ducible Mass, and fit for such motion, become sensitive and vegetable, and able
to generate things like themselves, because they are endued with Life: for
Plants, and the like, whose Spirits are not cohibited in too crass and hard
matter, increase and multiply; grenerating things like themselves by seed and
plantation; but not like Animals, but Minerals, whose Life is neither sensitive
nor vegetive, but only essential, because their composition being too hard and
gross, too straightly captivates their Spirit, that they cannot produce any
thing like themselves, unless they be first purged from their gross impurity,
and reduced to the subtilty of their first matter: about which, Aurelius
Augurellus, that excellent Poet and Philosopher, writes thus, Lib. 1. Chrysop.

Haec inter variant, quae nec primordia rerum
Extant, quaeque frui vitali sort negantur,
Ut media quaecunque sedent tellure m^tella
Quique latent miro grati fulgore lapill^.
Nullo namque genus sobolemve auger putantur
Semine; sed cunctos aevi torpere per annos;
Verum haec ipsa etiam secreto vivere quivis
Sentiat and vitae divino munere fungi:
Haec and oriri eadem si contemplabitur et si
Augeri ex sese penitus increscere cernet,
Vt mox e rariis patefactis nosse licebit.
Quod si non sobolem educunt, non caetera vertunt
In semet, causa est, quod multa spiritus illic
Materie abstrusus, vitam qui porrigit omnem,
Explicat aegre ex se vires in vivida promat
Has hominum virtus densa sub mole latentes.
But those that neither Life enjoy, nor yet
First matter are, but in the Earth do sit,
As Metals rich, and Stones that precious be,
Differ from these: for no offspring we see
They generate, nor kind augment, but lie
Resting themselves: yet he that shall epsy
Their secret acts, and with himself compute
Their augmentation, cannot sure conclude,
That they are quite void of life; for though they do
No offspring generate, nor turn into
Themselves, nor other things; yet life they have
Which is so chained in the closer cave
Of their dense solid matter, that they cannot
Exert such actions as a brute or Plant.
Yet if man's skill do quit them of these bonds,
Their virtue's such, as will make them amends.
For when these Minerals are pure, they will by their specifical form, though
not generate something like themselves, yet work such an alteration and
perfection in things like themselves, that they shall equalize the
Philosophical Elixir, whose divine virtues, wisemen so much admire, fools so
much contemn, because their blind eyes cannot penetrate to the Center of this
Mystery.

If therefore Animals, Minerals and Vegetables, which constitute the greatest
part of this visible World, be full of Life; what Reason have we to think, That
the whole is more imperfect then part thereof? But let us sink further into
Sublunaries: if the Celestial Bodies give Life to the Inferious, they must
certainly and necessarily be enlivened by the Universal Spirit: for nothing can
give that it has not: of which let us hear Augurellus.

Hoc etenim quic quid diffunditur undique Caeli,
Aeraque and Terras, and la^i marmoris aequo^,
Intus agi reserunt anima: qua vivere mundi
Cuncta putant ipsumque hac mundum ducere vitam.
All that is contained under Heavens Canopy,
Both fire, air, earth, and eke the boundless sea,
Are moved, they say, by a most ample Spirit,
That the world enlivens, and all that it inherit.
But natural motion is always conjoined with Life; how then can that produce
Life and motion in another, that has them not in it self? Motion never
forsakes that which has Life; and that which either moves, or is moved
always, cannot want Life: The Soul of the Universe moving it self
spontaneously, is the fountain and original of all corporal motion; for the
most subtle part of this Mundane Soul, soaring high, and inhabiting the
Heavens, is continually wheeled about with the Celestial Bodies, which it self
circumduces with its proper and continual motion: and for this Reason, the
superior Bodies are more lively and perfect then the inferiors, because they
are continually moved orbicularly; and that which is moved continually, must
needs be immortal. And thus it appears, that the whole World is full of Life;
and, that the Life of every species and individual, is but a participation of
this Universal Life of the World, which alone may be properly called an Animal,
in whose corporal Elements, the seeds of all visible and corporal thing are
hidden and included: for we see many Plants grow without precedent seeds, and
many Animals produced without copulation of Male with Female. The visible seed
of Plants lies in their Grains; of Animals, in their Genitors: Metals also have
their seed, but such as is not visible but by true Philosophers, who know how
with great industry to extract it from its proper subject. And unless there be
a certain procreative faculty in the Elements, wherein Generation is
potentially included, many Herbs would scarce germinate on the Earth, much less
on high Walls where no seed was ever sown, nor Herb planted; neither would so
many kinds of Animals be generated in the Earth or Water without copulation of
Sexes, as there are, which do by copulation afterward, perpetuate their
species, though themselves were not generated by the commixtion of any Parents;
as we see in Snakes generated of Mud; and Flies, and other little Animals, of
Excrements. Again, How do Oysters, Sea-Spunges, and other Aquatical Creatures
live, which rather merit the name of Plant-animals, then of Fishes? These do
not so much live by any particular Life proper to themselves, as by that
Universal one, general and common to all; which is more vigorous in subtle
Bodies, as more near to it, then in grosser ones, which are more remote from it.

The World then, created wholly good, by him that is Goodness it self, is not
corporal solely, but participates of spirituality and intelligence: (for it is
full of all manner of forms:) and, as I said before, has neither part nor
member, but that is vital; and therefore wisemen have called it a Masculine and
Feminine, or Hermaphroditical Animal, one part holding a certain Matrimonial
Alligation with another. And hence, by a certain Translation, arises the
diversity of Sexes in Plants and Animals; which, in imitation of the World,
copulate together, and generate a third like themselves: for the World produces
an infinity of little Worlds; for every Body in the World that is generated, is
a Microcosm, having distinct parts, virtues, and qualities belonging to a
little World. So that every thing has an inclination to generate a thing like
it self, by the right ordering of Action and Passion; which could not be, if
all things were not full of Life: for what Generation can proceed from a dead
subject, seeing it is neither probable nor possible, that that can communicate
Life to another, that wants Life it self?

We see indeed sometimes, many things are generated without the congress of
Male and Female, yea, without the production of either, whereinto the Universal
Spirit infuses Life by means of Fomentation; as many by Artifice, who exclude
Eggs and Chickins without the sitting of a Hen: and others, who by preparing
certain matters, and putrefying them, produce wonderful Animals, as the
Basilisk of a Cocks Egg, or of the menstruous matter of a red Hen, Scorpions of
the Herb Bees of Neats bowels, a kind of Ducks of the Leaves of a certain Tree
falling into the Sea (a,) with many things of the like Nature, that merit
admiration rather then credit, because they are made out of the ordinary course
of Nature; certain matters in certain seasons and places attracting Life from
the Universal Spirit, wherewith the World so abounds, that all its actions are
vital: insomuch, that nothing dies, perishes, or ceases from action, and
consequently from Life, but immediately some other living thing results out of
it: and upon this account, no Body perishes, or is totally annihilated: for if
it should, all the parts of the World would by little and little vanish one
after another before our eyes; especially, considering how many mutations and
Ages have gone before us; insomuch, that he that perpends, might admire that
there are any relics left in Nature at this time: which a French Poet, and no
little conversant in this secret Philosophy, hints at to his Friend, thus:
Vostre aspect inegal qui mea fortune change
Est comme le soliel, contraire en ses effects
Qui amollit la cire, and indurcit la fange
Et fait des corpse nouveaux de ceux qu'il a defaicts.
Your aspect in my fortunes changes sways,
As Phoebus in his effects, whose bright rays
Waxes do mollify, but harden Clayes,
And from corruption do sound bodies raise.


(a) Our Author seems here to embrace the vulgar Opinion of the Generation of
the Northern Ducks, which the Scots call Claikis, Claiks, or Claikgeese; and
the English, Bernacles: which many other Writers say are generated of the Nuts
of a certain Maritimous Tree falling into the prolifical Sea, or of some Shells
adhering to putrid pieces of Ships: which thing the learned Lobellius makes
mention of (in Advers. Stirp. page 456.) where first he seems to assent to, and
afterward to doubt of, and last to conclude, That Fabius Columna had justly
refuted this Opinion. Lobellius in the second part of his Work, page 259.
describes the figure of this Duck or Goose, as also of the Tree and Shells.
Olaus Magnus also mentions this kind of Ducks, Lib. 19. Hist. Sextent, cap.
9.) But Carolus Clusius seems to have explained the generation of them more
rationally, Canctario Exoticorum, page 368. where he says, That the Hollanders
sailing toward Waygatz, saw some of these Ducks sitting upon their Eggs.
Fabius Columna repeats his words: but Ulysses Aldronaldus, Lib. 19. Antithog.
cap. 23. toward the end, embraces the middle sentence, saying, He had rather
err with the multitude, then contradict so many famous writers; and therefore
he says, These Ducks may be generated of corruption, and afterward multiply
by copulation and incubation, like Mice and other Animals. The generation of
Palmer-worms from Plants, may also be well referred to this place, which,
whether they be generated naturally, or artificially, feed only upon the Herb
whereof they are generated, or to which they are related: as also the
Generation of Caterpillars, and then of Butterflies; which afterward multiply
their species by copulation. I saw at Rome in Henricus Corvinus, an eximious
Apothechary and Botanist, his Shop, a Butterfly, which they said was made of
the corruption of Cypress-Leaves; so elegant and great, that its Wings
equalized my little Finger in length, and were all over, as it were, eyed;
whereof, as of the Palmer-Worm, you may read Fabius Columna his Observations,
Part 2. Stirp. minus Cog. page 85.

CHAP. 2. That the World, because it lives, has a Spirit, a Soul and a Body.
THe Body of the World lies open to our senses, but its Spirit lies hid; and in
the Spirit its Soul, which cannot be united to its Body, but by the mediation
of its Spirit: for the Body is gross, and the Soul subtle, far removed from all
corporal qualities. For the unition then of these two, we must find some third
participating of both Natures, which must be as it were a corporeal Spirit,
because the extremes cannot be conjoined without an intervenient Ligament that
has affinity with both. The Heaven we see is high, the Earth low; the one
pure, the other corrupt: How then shall we exalt this impure corruption, and
conjoyn it with that active purity, without a mean? God we know is infinitely
pure, and clean: Man exreamly impure, and defiled with sins. Now these could
never have been conjoined and reconciled, but by the mediation of Christ Jesus,
God-Man, that true attractive Glue of both Natures. In like manner, this Spirit
corporeal, or Body spiritual we speak of, is the active Glue of Body and Soul:
which Soul sits in the Spirit of the World, as a spark from and of God's
infinite Intelligence: for these effective elevations, renovations, mutations,
variations, and multiplications of forms, must necessarily arise from
intelligence, and not from matter which participates of no reason; and
therefore cannot cause such formations and specifications. The World then is
nourished by this Spirit, and agitated by this Soul, which is infused into it
by mediation of this Spirit: which Virgil, following divine Plato's Doctrine,
expresses elegantly, Lib. 6. Aeneid.

Principio Caelum ac Terras composque liquentes,
Lucentemque Globum Lunae, Titaniaque Astra;
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per Artus
Men's agitat molem and magno se corpore miscet.
The nourishment of the earth, mountains, and skars
Of th'heaven, of planets, and of glistring stars,
We attribute to the Spirit; but to the Soul,
That these do move and stir without control.
To which Augurellus also attests in his first Book, saying, Ast Animae quoniam
nil non est corporis expers
Mundus at and mundi parts quoque corpore constant
Spiritus haec inter medius fit, quem neque corpus
Aut Animam dicas, sed eum qui solus utroque
Participans in idem simul haec extrema reducat
Hic igitur Maria ac Terras, atque Era and Ignem
Vivereque augerique atque in se cuncta refer
Semper Aves, semper Stirpes, Animantia semper
Gignere, perpetuamque sequi per secula prolem, etc.
But since a Soul is incorporeal,
And all the parts of the world we meet withal
Are bodies; these two cannot be combined
Without a mean betwixt Body and Mind
Which is a Spirit: wherewith the raging seas,
Fire, air, and earth; all plants and fruitful trees
With animals, are acted; so that they
Do generate their like, and live for aye, etc.


CHAP. 3. That all things which have Essence and Life, are made by the Spirit
of the World, and of the first Matter.
ALL things are nourished by the same, by which they were produced. Now that
all things breathe, live, augment and grow by this Mundane Spirit, resolve and
die without it, is plain. Whatsoever therefore subsists, is made by it: and
this Spirit is nothing else but a simple and subtle essence, which the
Philosophers call a Quintessence, because it may be separated from gross
corporeity, and the superfluities of the four Elements, and so made of
wonderful activity in its operations; and it is now diffused over all the parts
of the World; and through it, the Soul is dilated with all its virtues; which
virtues are communicated most to such Bodies as participate most of this
Spirit: for the Soul is infused by, and transmitted from the superior Bodies,
as from the Sun, which acts most powerfully in this case: for this Spirit being
calefied by the heat of the Sun, acquires abundance of Life, which multiplies
and enlivens the seeds of all things, which thereby increase and grow to a
determinate magnitude, according to the species and form of each thing: upon
which account Virgil says,

Igneus est illis vigor and caelestis origo.
But fiery vigor, and heat celestial,
Are to these Bodies their original.
Now this Spirit is by Philosophers called Mercurius, because it is of many, or
all forms, producing all kinds of Bodies: giving to some things a fairer, and
more lasting; to others, a weaker, and more corruptible Life, according to the
pre-disposition of the matter: upon which account, this fiery vigor proceeding
from the Solar beams, is not alike in all subjects, but diversified as there is
more or less of it in the seeds. All matters of purer pre-dispositions, have a
purer and more durable Life and Spirit: for every thing delighting in that
that is likest to it, it is more then Reason, that this pure Celestial vigor
should penetrate and sink deeper into purer Bodies, and make them more durable
and vital. For the proof of which, we need go no further then Gold* which,
being purer then all other Terrestrial Bodies, participates more of that
Celestial Fire, which, penetrating the bowels of the Earth, finds in Minerals
the pre-disposed matter (to wit, the Mercury and Sulphur, which Esdras calls,
The Earth of Gold) prepared by the action and diligence of Nature, and purged
and separated from all inquinations of Terrestrial and adust Dregs: which
matter, in the beginning, is only some Sperm or Water mixed with that Sperm,
Powder or pure Sulphur; which, acted by the coagulative faculty, thickens by
little and little; and in time, by long and continued action of the heat,
hardens, and so comes to its perfection, which is naturally simple, tincted
with the color of Fire: for heat is the Progenitor and Parent of Tinctures. If
therefore it be certain, that this heat comes from the Sun, as it must needs be
indubitable, who can so much contradict Truth and Reason, as to deny the Sun to
be the Author and Parent of this perfection? Let us then look higher, and seek
more accurately how this perfection may be caused by this mean.

CHAP. 4. How the Sun is by Hermes called, The Father of the Mundane Spirit;
and of the Universal Matter.
BUt some may here say, If all things proceed from one and the same matter, how
can the Sun be called the Parent of this matter, when it self is procreated or
produced out of this matter? For answer whereunto, we must consider, That if we
speak of the primaeve prejacent matter of all things, it is altogether
invisible, and cannot be comprehended but by strong imagination; out of whose
vital light and natural heat, this Celestial Sun was produced, with equal light
and fiery vigor: which afterward, strengthening this internal and essential
heat, with natural, displayed the beams of his Fire over the whole Universe,
illuminating the Stars above him, and vivifying the things below him. But
because the Earth is, as it were, the common Mother of all things, the Sun acts
most vigorously upon her, she being the common Receptacle of all Influences, in
whose bowels the seeds of all things are absconded; which being agitated and
moved by the Suns heat, come to light: and for this cause, in Winter, when the
Sun is furthest absent from us, the Earth being destituted of that vigorous
heat which his perpendicular Rays brought with them, she is we see barren, and
produces nothing: Whereas in the Spring, when the Sun again reviews our
Climate, then she rises from her sleep or death, and receives Life and vigor.
The cause of which mutation, must needs be the Universal Spirit full of Life,
inhabiting the Earth principally; which, before it can generate any thing, must
take up its Inn in some Body, as in the Earth, which is the Body of Bodies: and
because all things are nourished and sustained by that which produces them,
there must be great affinity and harmony betwixt this Spirit and the Sun. And
for this cause ancient Philosophers say, That the Sun in the Springtime,
calefies and enlivens his Parent laden with old age, and almost killed with
Winter-cold. Seeing then she is by the Sun fortified, enlivened and
impregnated, Hermes had reason to say, That the Sun was the Father of this
matter: for being otherwise barren, and without offspring, she now conceives,
generates and multiplies her spirituous matter, leading it from incorporality
to corporality.

The Philosopher Hortulanus commenting on Hermes his Table, leaves and omits
the radical principles of Nature; and taking his rise by the principles of
Chemistry by the Sun, understands the Philosophers Gold, which he truly calls
the Parent of the Philosophers Stone. For all that are conversant in this Art,
learn from Experience and all good Authors, That the true matter and subject of
this Stone, has Gold and Silver in potency, and Quicksilver naturally: which
Gold and Silver are much better then those men commonly see and handle, because
these are alive, and can increase; the other are dead: and if this could not be
effected, the matter would never be brought to its perfection, which this Art
promises; which is indeed so efficacious, as to perfect imperfect Metals. But
this same invisible Gold or Silver, which by this Magistery is exalted to so
sublime a degree, cannot communicate its perfection to imperfect Metals,
without the help and service of vulgar Gold and Silver. Wherefore Alchymists
always adjoyn the one or the other, and so make Gold the Father of the Elixir.

But such as would be further informed in this verity, should diligently evolve
good Authors: for it is not my purpose to speak more of it: For it is enough
for me, to show, that divine Hermes, with one and the same finger, touches both
strings, or under one and the same sentence locks a twofold meaning; which
himself declares, when he asserts, That he was called Hermes Trismegistus,
because he possessed three parts of the Worlds knowledge: for having given the
Anatomy of this Universal Spirit, (which is the material Author and principle
of all the three chief kinds, comprehending the whole of the world) he had
attained so much of knowledge and wisdom, that nothing could lie hid from his
eyes: and this principle he makes one. So that all things are produced from
one, by mediation of one, and adaptation to one. This One then of which he
speaks, is that general Spirit whereof I treat: and that One, by which he
says, Miracles may be wrought, is the true Mineral matter of the Stone,
whereof we spoke even now, which is produced from the first general matter, or
universal Spirit, in the Earth, by Nature; which Spirit potentially containing
all Celestial virtues in it self, communicates so much to this Mineral matter,
as is requisite for the obtaining of its perfection.

But omitting Chemical Doctrines as much as we may in this Treatise, we say,
That this general Spirit is a Stone or Elixir composed by Nature; by mediation
whereof, she works all her Miracles: which is much more admirable then the
Alchymists Stone, which is only a grant of this universal Spirit, that it may
act and perfect things like it self: for being truly Metallical, purified and
completed by Art, it purifies and digests Metals left in their impurity for
want of digestion. But this Physical or natural Stone perpetually restores such
things as are produced by Nature, and hourly procreates new things, as well in
the kinds of Animals, as of Vegetables and Minerals; which yet it could not
do, without the help and influence of the heavenly Bodies, especially of the
Sun, which is the origin and principle of all faculties and generations. It
has then the Sun for its Father, and contains in it self spiritual Gold and
Silver, because it is the first matter of Gold and Silver corporal. And because
Air is the medium through which it receives these superior influences, Hermes
says, That the wind carries it in its belly: for which cause Raymundus
Lullius calls it Aereal Mercury: but the Earth, like an universal Parent,
nourishes it in her fruitful womb: which appears by the production of all
things proceeding from the Earth: for if this Spirit were not included therein,
she would have no power nor virtue in generation and production; seeing she is
properly no more then the common vessel or matrix of these many and different
generations: for the general matter or Mercury of them, being, as Philosophers
denote, invisible, and almost incorporeal, cannot be made visible and
corporeal, but by some subtle artifice; which matter, if it can be extracted
out of the Arms of its Nurse, and purged from all accidental superfluities, may
(notwithstanding any Reason I can see to the contrary) in the things whereto it
is applied, separate things corruptive and heterogeneous, and conserve and
multiply things homogeneous and conformable to it.

It is without doubt, That Authors are misunderstood, when they seem to assert,
that Metals only should be usurped to the production of Metals, saying, That
the Seeds of Gold are in Gold: for besides that which we have spoken of common
Metals, and of those which Philosophers assume to the confection of their
Magistery, we dare yet affirm, That without this general Spirit, (which is in
all things the sole cause of vegetation) the faculty innate in all Metals, of
becoming Gold and Silver, can never be deduced to vegetation, or from potency
to act, because Nature produces not it self, but in every operation there must
be some agent, and some matter subjacent to the action.

And this doubless is that fire which Pontanus speaks of, which all
Philosophers have concealed and kept under Lock and Key, as the sole Stearn of
their actions: for want of which Fire, Pontanus (as himself confesses) erred
two hundred times in his practice, though he had to do with the right matter.

This threefold Mercury then, or sum total, is the first Seed of all Metals, as
also of the other two kinds or Genus's; which is by little and little
coagulated, and by the continual action of heat lying in the Mine, hardened and
tincted, when it is perfectly pure: but it makes up several species, and
acquires diverse forms and colors, according to the variety of the place, and
adjacent matter, producing Metals, Minerals and Stones, in the bowels; Trees
and Plants in the surface of the Earth; as she is animated by the Solar Rays,
without which she would be barren: for Nature at first established this for a
Law, That the Sun should perpetually nourish and calefie the matter, always
moving its threefold faculty, Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral to its effect.

And this is the Cause why Hermes wrote the Sun its Father.

CHAP. 5. How the Moon is the Mother of the Spirit of the World, and the
Universal Matter.
LEst any might here be deceived, he must consider, That as one of us, a
Microcosm, has a Body, a Spirit, and a Soul; even so has the Macrocosm: and
seeing nothing exists that wants these three, there must needs be great
affinity amongst them; so that no one of them can be found without the other:
and though two of them may seem sometimes to be separated from the subject, yet
they are only hidden in the third that remains, as a subtle and profound
Artist may easily experience, by the examination of Fire. What therefore is
Matter, the same is Spirit; and what is Spirit, may (and that not
impertinently) be called a Body. If we consider, That they are indivisible, and
by Natures Laws so generated, that they are one and the same thing: by which
account it appears, that the matter is not only Matter, or Soul, or Spirit;
but refers and represents all, because one is always generated and nourished
with the other: so that in the propagation and action of one, the two other are
always present.

When therefore we say, That the Moon is the Mother of the Spirit and universal
matter, we speak not irrationally, nor assert any absurdity: but here we must
more intimously enquire, whence this Maternity proceeds. Heat and Moisture then
are the two Keys of Generation; and Heat performs the office of the Male, but
Moisture of the Female. Corruption arises upon the action of Heat over
Moisture, and Generation follows upon Corruption; as we may see in the small
Body of an Egg, wherein, by the heat of Fomentation and Incubation, the Sperm
putrefies, and afterward the Chicken is coagulated and formed. The same is
also apparent in the Generation of Man; who, by the help of the natural Heat of
the Woman acting upon the Masculine and Feminine Sperm united in her matrix, is
deduced to a complete Body, perfect in all its parts.

By Corruption here, we understand Mutation and passage of one form into
another, which cannot be effected without the mediation of putrefaction, (which
is the sole medium and way to Generation) which is also promoted by the help of
some Mercury or Quicksilver, which is the special Conductor of the vegetative
faculty: and the Sperms of all Bodies are aqueous, and, as it were, full of
Mercurial humor: and if their innate Heat be brought from potency to act by
the external heat of the Sun, then may their Generation be procured by
decoction.

Hence the ancient Philosophers assert, That the Sun and Man generate: the Sun,
the terrestrial Sun, which is Gold; and Man, Man. And it is manifest, That
without the heat of the Sun, the heat of the Elementary Fire is dead and
barren. Whence the Sun is also called the Master of Life and Generation. Heat
then in all Generations comes from the Sun; but radical moisture, by the
influence of the Moon; which influence, all sublunaries receive and feel, when
this Planet is in its increase or wane. And thus you have an account how and
why Hermes called the Sun Father, and the Moon Mother to this universal matter:
for the heat of the Sun, and moisture of the Moon, generate all things; because
heat and moisture, in a due temperament, cause conception; and upon conception,
Life and Generation. And though Fire and Water be contraries, yet one can do no
good without the congress of the other: but by their diverse actions, all
things conceive, and are conceived.

Ainsi dans l'univers discordante concord
Aux Generations devient apt and s' accord.
If Generation in the world be had,
Then what erst discord, is in concord made.
Yet I would not have my Reader suspect, That by too hasty judgment I would
abstract Hermes his prime intention, from the broad way of all Alchymists into
the bypath wherein I tread; because I know, That all good Philosophers,
according to his mind and will, say, That the Sun and Moon should be in
conjunction, that they may absolve perfect Generation: for as Arnoldus de villa
nova in Flore florum, says, The Philosophers Sperm is not joined to their Body,
but by the mediation of their Moon: which Moon is not common Silver; but the
true matter of their Stone, which congregates, and inseparably retains in its
belly, Body, which is the Sun; and Sperm, which is Mercury. And he speaks of
this Moon in his novum Lumen, where he says, That excepting his Master of whom
he learned his work, he knew none that ever operated in the true matter; but
all were extravagant and erroneous in the election of their matter, as if they
would generate a man of a dog.

CHAP. 6. That the Root of the Spirit of the World must be sought in the Air.
Wind is nothing but Air moved and agitated, as we may learn from the
respiration of Animals, which blow Wind when they breath Air. Wind then is
Air, and Air is wholly vital, and the breath of Life: for without Air nothing
can live or subsist: for whatsoever is deprived thereof, is suffocated and
dies, yea, Plants themselves that are destituted of free Air, wither, and are
in respect of others, dry and dead.

We therefore have some Reason to say, That Air is a vital Spirit, penetrating
all things, communicating Life and consistence to all; binding, moving, and
filling all.

By this Air then, the Universal Spirit that lies hid and shut in all things,
is generated and manifested; by this it is engrossed, formed, and made more apt
for Generation: whereof Calid the Philosopher treating, says, not without
Reason, That Minerals have their Roots in the Air, their Heads and Tops in the
Earth. As if he should have said, The Air causes this Spirit to enliven,
augment and multiply Minerals in the Earth; though those that have some
experience in preparing the Philosophers Stones, may say, That this place
should be otherwise understood: for according to their Doctrine, in their
Philosophical Works, there are two parts; one volatile, which is elevated in
form of a vapor, and then condensed and resolved into Water; and this they
call the Spirit: the other more fixed, residing in the bottom of the Vessel,
which they call the Body. Rosinus explains this sentence by another of the same
Authors: for he says, Take the things off their souls, and exalt them on high,
and reap them in the tops of their Mountains, and reduce them to their Roots:
where the Glosser says, These words are true and clear, without envy and
ambiguity; though he declares not what he understands by things whereof he
speaks. But by Mountains (says Rosinus) the Philosopher means Cucurbites; by
the tops of their Mountains, Alembicks: by reaping, he means, we must receive
the Water of the aforesaid things, through the Alembick into the Receptacle: by
reducing them to their Roots, he means, That we should reduce the said Water to
the Earth whence it arose. This is also confirmed by Morienus, who says, That
the Philosophers operations consist only in extracting Water from the Earth,
and reducing it to the Earth till the Earth putrefie: for the Earth putrefies,
when this Water is purified; which, being once pure, will by God's help, direct
and perfect the whole Magistry.

Some have exploded Air out of the order of the Elements, thinking it as glue
or lime to conjoyn diverse Natures; judging it the Spirit or Instrument of the
World, because it is the Chariot of the Universal Spirit: for it first receives
the influences of all Celestial Bodies, and communicates them to other Elements
and mixed Bodies. In the mean while, like some divine Looking-glass, receiving
and retaining the species and forms of all natural things, which it carries
along with it, and insinuating it self into the pores of Animals, impresses
those forms on them, whether they sleep or wake. We learn from Animals and
Vegetables, That every Spirit near the Earth, receives its virtue and vigor
from the Air: for we see such things increase and extol themselves: the Spirit
which gives them Life, does so much delight in Air, as the place where it had
its origin. Hermes also says, That the Air carries it in its belly. Whereunto
Aristotle subscribes, saying, That moist things proceed from the Air, and
Terrene things from the moist ones: for Air being next the Earth, humectates it
on every side; and the humor thereof being condensed by innate heat, is turned
into a certain kind of Earth, which contains Mercury and Sulphur in due
proportions.

CHAP. 7. How the Earth nourishes this Universal Spirit.
THough this Spirit be infused into, and dwells in superior as well as
inferior Bodies, yet it may be best known and discerned in Bodies most evident
and near to our view; of which the Earth is nearest, and most vegetable: in it
therefore is this Spirit generated, and manifested more copiously: for the
Earth is a certain mark, whereto all the Influences, Rays, and Virtues of the
superior Bodies tend. It is moreover the Fundament and Basis of the other
Elements, containing in it self the seeds and seminal virtues of all things;
for which cause it is rightly called the common Mother of all Animals,
Vegetables and Minerals. It is therefore impregnated by the Heavens, and
produces all things out of its womb; and though this Spirit were expelled,
washed away, or separated from it by what way you please, yet the Earth, thus
void of Spirit, if left a while in the Air, would again be impregnated by the
Celestial virtues and influences, so as to produce some Chystalline stones, and
lucent sparks: and by this means, the Spirit which was taken for separated,
would again regerminate in the Earth. Impregnation then made by the action of
the Heavens, and of the first qualities, does continually render her
generative: for out of her womb come all things sublunary. She produces all
things endued with life, preserves, nourishes, and at last resolves them into
their own Nature. When she is agitated by these actions, she causes a twofold
expiration; one without her, another within her: which expirations egrede from
this Terrene Spirit, when moved and calefied by the Celestial heat. The
expiration elevated without or above the Earth, if it be humid, causes and
produces dew and frost; if dry, wind, thunder, and other dry Aereal
impressions: but the expiration included in the Earth, if it be humid,
generates liquable Metals and Minerals; if dry, stones, and the like, that are
not liquable. All things vegetable proceed from, and are nourished by this
Spirit, whereof the Earth is Nurse: for which cause, the ancient Poets call the
Earth the common Mother and Nurse of all Creatures.

CHAP. 8. That the Spirit of the World is the cause of perfection in all.
THe Universal Spirit is the general Genus, and common to every Genus: for if
we cast our eyes into the inferior or elementary World, we see it divided into
three subalternals, to wit, animal, vegetable, and mineral kinds, and yet the
same in all, only operating diversely according to the diversity of its forms.
And hence the infinite variety of Creatures arises; for else there would be
only one species in the Universe: but if we perpend the superior and Celestial
World, we shall also find, That the Spirit is one, equal in all, and differing
in nothing but purity and subtilty: for the Celestial Spirits are procreated of
its pure igneous substance, and differ from Terrene ones in corporal grosness:
and the Celestial Globes and Luminaries are made of its middle and Aereal
substance: it constitutes therefore all things, because it has in it both the
faculties of superior and inferior Bodies, and because it is of an exquisite
temper: for this Body is in all the beginning and end of perfection; and if it
were destituted of its faculties, it could never perfect any thing: and here we
understand simple and natural perfection; and although it be perfect only,
according to the intent of Nature, containing in it self the rule, line, action
and power of perfection; yet it acquires virtues and faculties above the sphere
of natural things, and can deduce things from potency to act. This Spirit
alters and penetrates all things, though never so gross; mollifies hard things,
hardens soft things, and augments, nourishes and conserves all things. This
Spirit also, being in all Bodies the Author of Generation and Corruption, has
necessarily a threefold operation: for by its dryness, it must enliven; and by
its coldness, congeal; and by its moisture, congregate and unite: for which it
has a threefold name imposed on it, desumed from the three kinds of Earth:
for they call it vitrifying, salsuginous, and Mercurial; because of Salt,
Glass, and Mercury, all things are made; though Paracelsus reckons these
principles otherwise, to wit, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, adding Glass as a
fourth. As if he should say, All things are made of these three first
principles, and reduced at last to the fourth; as though neither Nature nor Art
could produce any thing beyond Glass. But I shall prove my own sentence by
Examples and Reason; The Bones of Animals are consolidated and hardened by
vitrification, the Flesh and Nerves concreted by Salt, and united and
congregated into one mass by the Mercurial humor. In Vegetables also, the
shells of Almonds, Pine-Nuts, Wall-Nuts, and the like; as also of Oysters and
Snails in Land and Sea, may be made by vitrification: and the taste
demonstrates, That these Bodies are saltish; for nothing wants Salt, but what
is insipid: yea, those things are very saltish whereof Glass is made, as Fem
Kali, and the like. Some may here object, That it is not Glass, but Salt, that
causes the induration of Bones, Shells, and the like, which I have mentioned.
Whereunto I answer, That Experience and Reason speak the contrary: for Salt is
resolved and melted by the least moisture of Air or Water: but the Bones and
Shells before mentioned, resist liquefaction, as they are more or less hardened
by this Glass-making faculty: for the ultimate confirmation of which my
assertion, I may adduce precious Stones, Adamant and Crystal, which are
nothing but Glass elaborated to perfection in the Furnace of Nature. And now,
that all things are condensed by Mercury, is so manifest, that it needs no
other Testimony, but common Experience. Minerals have enough of Salt, Sulphur
and Mercury in them: Stones and such effoded things as acquire not extention
and fusion by the Hammer and Fire, have some Salt in them; but this is
superated by the adustion of corruptive Sulphur, which comes upon their
induration and vitrification. Metals and all ductile things are concreted and
condensed by Salt and Mercury; and so much hardened by vitrification, that they
bid some resistance to the Hammer, which is indeed more or less, according to
their implication with more or less impurity and adust Earth, which comes upon
the coagulation of their Mercury. And thus we may affirm, that all things are
made of the ternal number of Glass, Salt and Mercury, or Water; where Glass is
the cause of hardness, Salt affords matter, and Water causes unition and
condensation.

CHAP. 9. Of the specification of the Universal Spirit to Bodies.
THe Soul of the World, and its Action and Virtue, is represented in all things
in which it is: this binds and conjoyns the superior things with the
inferior: for as many Idea's as the Heaven contains, so many seminal causes it
obtains; whence, by the Mediation of the Spirit, it forms so many species in
the matter. When therefore it falls out, that any one of these species
degenerate, it may, by the Soul within it, and the mediation of the universal
Spirit, be reformed, and reduced to its former state; for the Spirit is always
at hand, and ready for all motions. In the mean while, we must not imagine that
the intellectual Idea is attracted; but rather, that the Soul is endued with
such a virtue, and allured by the material forms: which cannot seem absurd to
any one; for it prepares every one his meat and nutriment, because it is
transmutable into all things by which it is solicited, and willingly remains
and resides therein. Zoroaster calls the Agreement and Harmony of the Forms,
with the Soul of the World, Allurements. Whence it appears, That all things and
kinds draw their powers and faculties from the Soul of the World, not all
totally, but such as respect the seed or propagation, and the like, whereby
they germinate or increase. An example hereof we have in Man, who, feeding
only on Man's meat, acquires not the Nature of Birds, Fishes, or the like,
which he eats. Many other Animals also feed upon the same victuals, and yet
every one attracts that which is proper to his species: so that it is worthy
our admiration, that out of the same Meat, Man can attract what is proper to
Man, and a Bird what is proper to a Bird. And this is not because there are
many and diverse Aliments in one and the same dish, but because of the species
nourished, which attracts and changes the nutriment proper to, and convenient
for it self; by mediation whereof, it generates its like, by virtue of this
Soul and seed, which is in it according to its quality.

But we must not think, That in the Machine of the Worid, the Spirit, Soul and
Body, are things separated: for these three are always united and conjoined,
as is apparent; and by this union, the whole Spirit and corporal substance
become vital.

The universal Soul then, feigns and imagines diverse forms, which the Spirit
receiving into the bowels of the Elements, makes corporeal, and produces. Hence
Animals generate only Animals; Plants, Plants; and Minerals, Minerals: though
not all alike: for Minerals, as I said before, generate not their like after
the same manner as Plants, because their Spirit is cohibited by too gross
matter; which Spirit, if it could be conveniently extracted, and conjoined with
Mineral matter^, would generate its like, because by its exquisite penetration
into imperfect Bodies, through the subtiliation of Art, and artificious
Graduation of Fire; it brings with it proper and Mineral seeds only, not
animal, because repugnant to its Nature: yet I will not say, That it wants the
action of other faculties; but that it does not demonstrate them, but according
to the species whereto it is accommodated: for else every thing would produce
its unlike: a Tree would generate a Man; a Plant, a Bull; a Metal, an Herb:
which I speak only in respect of the diverse specifications of things.

For if we consider the most general Genus, it produces in all things its like,
because, being Mercury, it assumes the Nature of all things wherewith it is
mixed. But humane Art cannot effect that that is solely granted to Nature,
which alone can procreate a species: Art may dilate and multiply it, if it
begin its operation at the root of the species, as prudent Philosophers do;
who, extracting the Spirit from Minerals specificated, decently purified, and
reduced to perfection, render it apt to perfect imperfect things.

And an expert and industrious Artist perpending these things aright, may
easily institute admirable Adaptations.

Finis Libri primi.
A TREATISE OF The Philosophers true Salt and Secret; And Of the universal Soul
or Spirit of the World. BOOK II.
CHAP. 1. That the Spirit of the World assumes a Body; and how it is
incorporated.
WE have I hope sufficiently explicated in the former Book, that all things
were not only produced; but also made corporeal by the universal Spirit. We now
come to declare what kind of Body this Spirit assumes, and how it self both
is, and makes all things corporeal: for that must needs be corporeal: which
makes all other things such, seeing nothing can give what it self has not. Let
us therefore see with what, and how it is vested with a Body: not that we will
here dispute of the incorporation of celestial and supernatural beings, but
only of Physical and Sublunary Generations, and of the body of the Earth,
which is the sole vessel and true matrix, where the prime and most general
Incorporator of things, is it self incorporated.

I say then, That no body can be made without a precedent Mover, that may
diduce potency to act: that which exists not in save potency, may be produced
into light, and according to Natures intent, reach its final term; which is, to
make that a body which it would produce. Now this mover can be no other then
fire or heat, which moves it self first in the Air; for all Generations begin
there, because fire is the most active Element, and consequently most subtle
and light: whence it is more prompt for motion.

Fire therefore, whose propriety is through its levity to ascend, and make
unknown things visible, does requisitely receive the beginning of its motion
and action from inferior Bodies; that is, from the center of the Earth: where,
as we said before, the old Demogorgon, and Progenitor of all things, inhabits;
sitting there in his Throne, and midst of his Empire: that thence he may
govern, command, preserve, and divide the essence of Life to all the parts of
that great Spherical Body expanded about him; and that he may more easily and
from equal distance, receive from every Member what he wants. The root of Fire
is implanted in the fruitful bowels of this old Parent: which thence emits a
vaporous breath, which Hermes calls the humid Nature: for vapor is the prime
and next action of fire; with which it is so conjoined, that it cannot be
imagined without it.

But some may say, If vapor comes from fire, how can it be moist, seeing fire
is hot and dry? whence acquires it this contrary quality? And here we find
nothing absurd, if we do but consider, That fire cannot live and subsist
without moisture, which is its aliment, support and subject: without which,
fire cannot be conceived: for being by Nature active, and its action
indefatigable, it must needs have something to act upon, and never be destitute
of this thing.

Fire then, and co-essential moisture, are like Male and Female in all
Generations, and are the first Parents of corporification of the Spirit of the
World; as hereafter we shall make appear. But Fire is the first Operator,
because action precedes passion, though the Patient be inseparably co-existent
with the Agent; as the old Stoic Zenon asserts, who thought that the substance
of Fire was by Air turned into Water, and there conserved, as the general
Sperm, and first universal matter, whence all things were first generated.
Thales Milesius, whom the Greeks surnamed the wise, perceiving the matter
patient, said, That Water was the first matter: which Heraclitus attributed to
the Sea: and Moses, more illuminated then both, says, That before the heaven
and earth were created, the Spirit of the Lord moved on the face of the waters:
calling Fire, because of its noble and pure essence, The Spirit of God. In
saying therefore, That Fire is the first principle of beings, I transgress not
the limits of Reason and Verity: for it is without doubt, the first Operator,
and the last Destroyer and Changer of forms, whose cause it is, even till it
has brought them to their period and first matter, beyond which there is no
progress, but only a transformation, as I shall by and by declare, by
comparison with visible and familiar beings: the first active potency, which
begins to operate in the production of man, is the agitation or motion of heat:
which imitating the action of fire (whose Nature is chiefly separative) draws
Sperm from the whole Body (wherein Man's seed is potentially included) and
cocts and digests it: thereby rendering it apt for expulsion, and afterward for
Generation and Augmentation; which Generation and Augmentation is always
helped by Fire, which is the sole Actor: so that if it should attain the end of
its exaltation, being inflamed by the Sulphur of Excrements, and impurity of
Aliments, it would absume the radical Moisture, which is the Seat and Preserver
of Life: which done, the fire remits not of its power and action, till by
resolution and corruption, it brings the Body to Ashes; which nothing can do
but fire.

But that we may make this more palpable, and find out the first matter by the
knowledge of the last, let us impose a Body on a common Fire: and we shall see,
that what is inflammable in it, will be totally consumed, and redacted to a few
Ashes; which Ashes also will participate of a fiery Nature; and for their last
subject and matter, turn into a certain Salt, whose sole Parent and Multiplier,
Fire must needs be. And though these should be further turned, yet Salt would
always be left, in whose internals we may find Fire, which is delighted with
its like.

And by this means, Alchymists find, that there is something in Salt that is
incombustible, or secret Elementary Fire, which has the same actions with
primitive Fire: upon which account they call it the Balsam of the Body, because
it contains that that gives life; as also, that conserves and augments it;
which is nothing else but a moist vapor, accompanied with moderate heat.
Johannes Fontanus in his Philosophical Narrations, (En son Romant
Philosophique.) shows, That he was not ignorant of this Secret, where he brings
in Nature speaking thus:

Aucuns disent que feu n' engendre
De son naturel fors que cendre:
Mais leur reverence sauvee
Nature est dans le feu autee:
Et si prover, je le vou loye
Le sell a Tesmoing je prendoye.
Some dare to affirm, that fire can generate
Nothing but ashes; but those seem to relate
The truth thereof, who say, that in fires breast
All Natures operations are impressed.
And if hereof a proof you do require,
Salt gives you proof enough what is in fire.
And that it participates of moisture, is plain enough from its easy
resolution; as also its fullness of heat is demonstrable, from its ready
congelation: from which we may observe, That Fire acts, and is united with
Fire; as in liquefaction Air acts, and is joined with Air: for how in one
subject could the dry imbibe the moist, if there were no innate heat, seeing
dryness, as it proceeds from heat, does naturally imbibe moisture?

And hence we may easily understand, That the Demogorgon or central Fire,
cannot be destitute of moisture on which it may act, and thence elevate a
vapor mixed of two qualities, which I call, The Spirit of the World; but many
Philosophers Mercury of Merries, because all other proceed from this naturally:
but this elevated vapor is not yet a Body, but a mean betwixt a Body and a
Spirit, participating of both Natures; which, whilst it remains in that state,
can generate nothing. It is therefore necessary, That it either assume or form
a Body, which it thus does: This subtle vapor, proceeding from dry and moist
principles, when it is elevated, penetrates the spungyness of the Earth,
wherein it is gradually turned into Mercurial Water by the occurse of the
ambient Air, and of the Earth it self; whose surface is far distant from its
Center, where the Fire resides, whence this heat arises. After the like manner,
as we see in an Alembick, where the vapor or Spirit to be distilled, runs out.
But this vapor and its water, partaking of two principles, heat and moisture,
it is engrossed; and by moderate and continued coction, condensed. The
principal cause and mean of which action, is innate Fire, which contains this
very vapor; and by its continual action, stimulates and compels it to imbibe
this moisture, and to coagulate this Water: not in all parts with a like
solidity and hardness, nor yet altogether; but first with a mucilaginous and
different solidity. Now that which Nature assayes to do in the information of
Idea's, is, to begin their induration and solidity, which must necessarily hold
on in Natures way, which is a progress from one extreme to another, by
intermediate disposition. And Nature thus continuing its digestion, this
Mucilage stays, of whose grosser matter Metals are generated in the veins of
the Earth, or cavities of Rocks; which differ not in substance, being produced
by one and the same seed, but only in accidents, which they take from the
diversities of the places and matrixes where they are generated. But the more
subtle part of this vapor, ascends to the surface of the Earth, where it
stays by compulsion; and being in continual agitation, though it can neither
regrede nor ascend higher, and finding no solid matter to carry it with it, it
is compelled to continue Natures intention; and therefore serves for the
Generation and Corporification of individuals. But that what I have said may be
better understood, let us take some one individual, and let us see how it is
produced: for this will ascertain us, that the Spirit of the World assumes a
Body, and show us how it is incorporated. An Acorn may be long enough set or
sown in the Earth, and consume without germination, unless some Agent be near
it, that may deduce its occult potency naturally within it, into act. And
whence can any one imagine this action to proceed, unless from the central Fire
issuing out of Demogorgon's breast? Which Fire attracted and fomented by the
Solar Rays, will redouble its force, virtue, and efficacy. Does not then this
germination derive its original from Natures Fire; which elevating and
multiplying its vapor, excites the innate heat of the Acorn, which is of its
own side resolved into a vapor by the mediation of Air? and this raised vapor
is nourished and augmented by the first vapor, which never ceases to act on
the matter of the Acorn, till it have brought it to the period of that
perfection to which Nature destined it, which is, to make it an Oak: which,
when it has acquired its perfect magnitude, begins, not indeed to die, but to
decline, and gradually to return to its first form, even to the Earth: where
the same vapor is not idle or deficient: for of the putritude of this Tree,
certain Animals, called Horse-lice, with abundance of Worms, are thereby
generated; yea, when the Oak is turned into perfect Earth, it causes a new
vegetation.

But if any should say, That the Acorn is augmented and multiplied to this
magnitude, he erres: for it is manifest, That in this germination, the Acorn
remains whole without diminution; yea, separates it self from the Tree when it
is germinated. The Oak then grows not from the augmentation and multiplication
of the Acorn; neither is it from addition and abstraction from the adjacent
Earth: for then so much of the Earth would be exhausted, as the Trees magnitude
is: it must therefore necessarily proceed from some other way and matter,
seeing by these ways it cannot. This Spirit then, or Vapor, which is ordained
for no other end, is that which is incorporated, and produces this individual,
from which the creation, augmentation, and preservation of all things, proceed;
and not from the Mass of the Earth, which is nothing but the Excrement of the
spirituous and primaeve matter, as it appears by the digestion of the stomach,
which rejects Excrements in the same weight and quantity almost that it assumed
Meat in, when nevertheless, it has extracted its proper nutriment from it,
which is only the Spirit included in that Mass; which, by its siccity, makes
it self a Body; and by its humidity, dilates and augments it self.

CHAP. 2. Of the conversion of this Spirit into Earth; and how its virtue
remans integrally in this Earth.
THe former Reasons seem sufficiently to evince, That the Spirit of the World
assumes a Body: now we should declare how it is corporified; and though in this
search, the labor will be great, and effect small, yet shall I endeavor to
make this thing comprehensible, especially for their sakes, who in their
nativities have had favorable Stars; and are thereby rendered Admirers of these
rarer Effects, and Searchers of these occulter Secrets: for in that many
learned and curious Men have erred in the inquisition and detection of this
Body, arises from hence; That some have believed this knowledge far to exceed
Man's capacity, and only attainable by Angels or Devils. Others have thought,
That it being called, The Spirit of the World, no Man should feign to himself
any but an Universal Body, because an Universal Spirit must also have an
Universal Body. And others have thought, That it could not be perceived, but by
conversion of more perfect Bodies into their first Sperm and Spirit, by exact
and industrious subtiliation: not minding nor considering, That Nature admits
of no regress; and, That Bodies, by how much they are more perfect, by so much
they are further distant from their principles and first corporeity.

Some are of opinion, That a Quintessence might be extracted from Bodies:
persuading themselves, That the more subtle and volatile part is that Spirit
they seek; so erring from the scope at which they aim, as if they would seek
the East in the West: for they make Bodies spiritual, where they should make
Spirits corporeal. But seeing this Spirit is manifestly converted into a
Terrene Body, and without contradiction or doubt, generates all bodies; it must
therefore be extracted by them, because otherwise, they forsake the direct
tract of Nature: and seeing it is made a Terrene Body, it may be perfected by
Fire, into something, which the Quintessentials call their Heaven. But
corporification begins from the Earth: for the first work of Mercury is to make
Earth. Why then do they begin with making of Fire? which would proceed, as if a
Man should build a House, and begin at the Roof.

But such as would reduce Bodies to their first being, pretend; and have more
specious Reasons, then those that would redact them to a Quintessence, save
that they go in a crooked way that leads them contrary to their meanings: for,
besides that Nature never goes backwards, they mind not that they should
follow the way of completion, and not of destruction, or reversion to their
origines and nativity: for, besides the impossibility of this course, these
ways are so long and difficult, that an ordinary term of Life cannot reach
their end. Moreover, they can never attain the true and natural first Being
this way, but only a fantastical Body, far different from that wherewith
Nature effects her productive operations; which is solely, the legitimate Sperm
of all Bodies. And if we consider now, That all Bodies are made by
Terrification, we must needs grant, That there is some prejacent subject most
apt for the making of Earth. But I said, That in the beginning Fire was the
first Operator in the World, which elevates a spirituous Vapor, then cocts,
dries and incorporates it: for a Body cannot be made without coagulation, which
necessarily follows the dryness of Fire: And in what other place can this
immassation, desiccation and coagulation be made, save in the Earth, whence all
Bodies proceed? The prejacent matter then, must needs be there occluded; for if
it be not there, then all Bodies are made of nothing; which is repugnant to
Natures course, which would have every thing to have its principle; and out of
nothing, nothing but nothing to proceed.

This matter or principle then is bound to the Body of the Earth, where it is
nourished, engrossed and incorporated; and therefore, such as would extract the
Quintessence out of perfect, simple, or imperfect Metals, should do better to
open the Matrix of the Mother, and take the Sperm out there, then to kill and
destroy her Infants or adult Offspring, while they go about to reduce them to
the state wherein they were in time of conception. But if they should open this
Matrix, what would they there find? for nothing appears to sight or sense. And
many believing this way most profitable, have been deceived, whilst they
thought in the bellies of Mines, to find some seed of Gold; which missing of,
they despair of their purpose, because they never met with a middle disposition
betwixt hardness and softness in Metals. If therefore the eye can discern
nothing here, how then is it possible for them to get any thing? This indeed is
a work, the other a labor. Such Searchers surely believe not, that the first
matter is so subtle and loose a Spirit or Vapor, as that it cannot be
reached, save only by intellect and imagination. However, seeing it is
contained in the Body of this great Parent, and dwells there, Reason evinces,
That it has something of corporeity in it: and although I have sufficiently
declared to subtle intellects of what Nature it is, I shall further add, That
the Pores of the Earth are full of this Vapor, which acquires a dry quality by
its innate heat, accompanied with some secret moisture, by which it is
condensed, and coagulated into a specifical Body: and as this moist Nature, now
dried up, was first Water; so it must be reduced into Waters again by Water,
which is the sole mean whereby to humectate dry things, as fire is to siccate
moist things: which is a work duly observed by Nature in generating Metals:
for Water flowing through the Pores of the Earth, finds there a dissoluble
substance, wherewith it unites its most simple parts: to which union, all the
Elements concur in due proportion.

This substance then, by its own dissolution is so conjoined, that it of it
self condenses through hardness, which is natural to it, because of its innate
siccity; and by successive and long decoction, acquires a metallical induration.

But now this substance being dissoluble, of what other Nature can it
participate, but of Salt? for nothing is so dissoluble as Salt; which by how
much it is more burned, is by so much easier dissolved, unless it be turned
into Glass.

The first matter then, is Salt; or Salt is the first Body whereby this matter
becomes visible or palpable: of which Salt Raymundus speaks, when, in his
Testament, he says, We have before declared, That in the Center of the Earth,
there is a certain Virgin-Earth, and true Element, and that that is Natures
work. Nature therefore is placed in the Center of every thing: so Salt is this
Virgin-Earth which has yet produced nothing, into which the Spirit of the
World is converted by vitrification, that is, by extenuation of its moisture.
This is that which gives the form to all things, and without which, nothing
could incur into the senses; nothing is coagulated without Salt, nothing
congealed. This is that that gives hardness to Gold, as also to the Adamant and
all Stones both precious and vulgar, with a Secret vitrifying Virtue. Yea, what
is more, we manifestly see, that all Bodies, compounded of the four Elements,
return into Salt: for if a Body putrefie, what remains but powder and ashes
covering most precious Salt? and if a Body be destroyed by combustion,
calcination or incineration, what rests in the last extraction but Salt?
Glass-makers do give manifest testimony hereto: whence Arnoldus de villa nova,
in his new Chemical Light, speaking of the permanent Water of Philosophers,
which Water is dry, and wets the Tangents hand no more then common Quicksilver,
says, Who then can prepare this Water? Well, he may do it who can make Glass.

The same Author, speaking of the excellency of this dry Water, manifests it
sufficiently, when he says in his Chemical Treatise, which he calls his
Philosophical Breviary, That an Operator can no more do any thing without Salt,
then an Archer emit an Arrow without a cord or string. And Fons Amantium says
the same:

Sans sell ne peux meter en effect
Utile chose pour lon faict.
I can effect nothing in your rare Art,
Unless with Salt I 'gin to operate.
All Bodies then are composed of Salt, and, as we said before, the Principles
of Composition and Resolution are equal: which concurs with the Philosophers
infallible Rule, That the first matter of all things is one with the last:
where they allege Ice and Snow for example, which are by heat resolved into
Water; out of which, they were by cold congealed. And if I should here suggest
the Testimony of all approved Authors to this Verity, my Treatise would end in
a Volume: but that I may demonstrate, That this Salt is pure and true Earth,
(not such as we tread upon, which I shall hereafter prove to be nothing but the
Dregs and Excrements of the other) I must recur to the first Creation, which I
shall decypher by a familiar example of an Operation made in imitation of
Nature, and by the same Rule and Model by which this great Universe was framed.

I said before, That Water or the humid Nature, as Hermes calls it, upon which
Moses says, That the Spirit of the Lord moved, was the principle of all things.

And here the Question will be, How that great and confused heap of Waters was
so divided, that this ample and gross Terrestrial Mass proceeded thence; and by
what medium so different things were procreated of the Earth?

I shall answer to these Questions only what experience has taught me: It is
therefore naturally probable, that in the middle of these Waters, by way of
separation, there was a certain collection of sediments or setlings; wherein I
follow the Text of Moses, who says, That God separated the water from the
water: for there are two kinds of Waters, to wit, elevative and congelative
Waters: the former then elevating it self in a vapor, left the other fixed in
the botom; as those that coct Sea or Fountain-Salt daily experience: though
perhaps it be be true, that the one is made by the attraction of the Suns
Rays, the other by the expulsion of Fire. And here note, That Fire and Heat
only are endued with a separative faculty, which they exert either by violent
or natural motion. This separation then was made by one of these ways: and to
what thing could Moses better compare this Fire (which cannot be otherwise
defined then the origin of Universal Light, of Animal heat and vital motion,
which gives existence to all things, and preserves them in their being) then to
the Spirit of the Lord?

Let us again consider Natures Salt in its Chaos, diffused, dissolved, and
suffocated in its Water; under what form will it then appear, or with what
quality will it affect our gust, but that of bitter Water? and this form and
quality it would retain for ever, if it were not separated: but as soon as this
elevative Water feels the action of Fire, it begins to fly from it by
vaporation; and so the collection is gradually diminished, till only a little
heap of Salt be left in the bottom, which comes together as the Earth did in
the first Chaos of the Universe.

And thus we see the first operation of Fire, which is the production of
Dryness, that is, of Earth. But as this first Earth remained still coagulated
with its Excrements and Dregs by Fire; so this Salt, which is true Earth,
retains its Excrements, though it seem pure, white, and full of light: for
nothing is generated, nourished and augmented, but it abjects its Recrements of
the formation and separation; whereof we shall elsewhere speak. Now this Salt
or dry Earth, thus coagulated and settled in the Water, drinks up all its
humidity, and is by the continuation of heats action, spontaneously dried:
preserving all this while, its innate moisture, by which it is never deserted,
and from which it has its dissolutive virtue. After the accession of this
moist and dry temperament, it is apt for production, as the action of Fire
shall impel it from potency to effect: and as the Body of this great Earth has
the specifical and productive virtue of individuals; so has that same we call
Salt: not that it can produce Herbs, Metals or Animals, as the other does; but
that it conserves in its breast the original Seed of all things, as Experience
by the operations of Fire, manifests, hereby giving colors, sapours,
vegetations, and induration to all these kinds; and also proper Fire which the
Sun has introduced into it, whereby it enlivens and nourishes all things:
which I have sometimes observed in the prosecution of a Philosophical
operation, whilst I saw in this matter, without other mixtion, all colors
distinctly one after another in order, and according to the internals that the
Masters of this Art determine, as they should be in the matter and confection
of the Philosophers Stone; together with that sudden fusion which follows upon
the attainment of the highest redness, like that of wild Poppy: but it would
not produce that admirable effect in changing of Metals; but it exerted such
miraculous virtues, by causing universal and natural sweats in Man's Body, that
I am afraid to publish them, lest I be branded with the title of a Scharlatane
Medicaster, though C. V. my Sovereign good Prince, as an irreprehensible
Eyewitness, may easily vindicate me from that injury: for when the fame of
those admirable cures came to his Ears, he was pleased, like a gracious
Jupiter, to visit the Habitation of his poor Philemon; induced thereto, I
suppose, by the generosity of his mind, and the relation of a good Man, who
was so afflicted with diverse Dolours, and extenuated with the diuturnity of his
grievous Diseases, that nothing but hopes on Divine Providence, or the solace
of his imminent Death, could move in him resentment. The true relation, I say,
of this Man, so much affected C. V. that he diligently took the information of
many men, whom I had by this remedy restored to sanity: and if the covetousness
or envy of the Man who undertook the cure of the reverend Cardinal, and my
Lord's Brother P. M. had not prohibited the use of this Medicament; I persuade
my self, by God's Grace and Benediction, it would have conduced to the sanity
of many that still lie languishing for want of cures.

If therefore this Salt have all the qualities of the Earth in it, who will
deny it to be Earth; or say, That it may not be called the Universal Spirit
made into Earth, as Hermes describes it? But I aver, That this conversion
cannot be effected, save by the Artifice of easy practice, but difficult
perquisition: for it is without falsity, an act exceeding Man's cogitations, to
render that matter visible to the eyes, and tangible to hands, which so many
learned and famous Writers in all ages have thought invisible and
incomprehensible; of which they have affirmed, That those that labor in this
profound Theory, may be able to discourse well and plausibly of its excellency;
but should never find and know it in effect. And I profess, amongst all the
curious men wherewith I have conversed familiarly this forty years, from which
time I have had some knowledge of this matter; I can scarce find six that know
ought of it.

When then I have sufficiently declared how this Salt may be turned into Earth,
which is the operation of operations; it rests that I show, That after
conversion, its virtue remains entire. But before I enter this Discourse, I
shall, as it is requisite, relate with what virtue this Salt or Spirit is of it
self endued, that we may search and find the same in it when it is converted
into Earth.

I say therefore, for confirmation of my purpose, That it is without doubt, and
needs no proof, that the continual motion of the Heavens, is for some end: for
though Physically we may say, That the end for which a thing is moved, is, to
acquire another place; yet is motion made for other causes: and the intent of
this motion, is not to go from place to place only; but so to move, as to
obtain the effect of another End: for there are two Ends; the one is by
Philosophers called the End for which a thing is made; as the End of Plato's
Generation, is for Plato's Soul; and Beatitude is the End for which Plato
studies Virtue. The other End is that to which things tend: Thus the End
whereto conjunction of Male or Female tends, is Generation; but the End for
which Generation is made, is a Man or an Animal: Thus the End for which Plato
went out of Greece into Egypt, was to learn Wisdom; but the End to which he
tended, was Egypt.

The End therefore of the Heavens motion, is not only to acquire new places,
but to influence upon inferior Bodies: for if any one should imagine, that
these influences are of no use, or that they are cast into a place where
nothing can receive them, he is in an error too gross to be refuted.

This Celestial Influx is perpetual and continual, because the motion by which
it descends, is orbicular; beginning in, and returning to it self. And this is
the Reason why the things whereon it influences, and which it produces, are of
the same Nature and quality, as without ceasing to receive the power and
multiplication of these Virtues which fail not.

And seeing this Influence is not extended above the Heavens, where nothing is,
it must needs be carried toward some inferior thing, that it may act upon: for
nothing is passive but what has a Body; and what other natural Body is there
in the World, but Earth? Is not this the Body of Bodies, and that solely that
can subsist alone, having in it self all the qualities requisite to a Body, as
Longitude, Latitude, Profundity and Superficies? Is not it the Subject and Mark
that Nature has set, whereat to aim all her Darts? where can she better
accomplish her works, then on the Earth?

The Earth therefore is only that inferior Body that receives Celestial
Influences, whose faculties and powers, penetrate, calefie, purge, separate,
enliven, augment, confer, and restore.

We need not now dispute, whether the Heavens and Celestial Bodies influence
upon the Earth: for experience and sense takes away this doubt. This therefore
being left as sufficiently known, we shall only declare how they make their
influences virtuous. I said before, That they tend directly downwards, and not
upwards; and the Earth being the Center of this Spherical Body, they must needs
fall upon her, and fasten their Points there; for the Earth is that Point of
the vast World, where all the lives of these influences concentricate. And
seeing the Earth is a Body so solid, that it gives solidity to all others, it
is requisite that that which penetrates it be very subtle. The Heavens
therefore being of most subtle matter, produce alike effects: for the
operations ordinarily follow the qualities of the Body that operates. And this
penetration would profit nothing, but like a Torrent running over a Field,
because of its swift motion, scarce wet the surface, unless it be by somewhat
stayed. But seeing it tends infallibly to the Center, and there is stopped,
because there is no lower place whereto it may descend; there it is compelled
to subsist and collect it self.

Hence some have said, That the Center of the Earth is most precious, because
in it all the influences are united; which meeting there, have an infinite
potency, not only because they continually flow thither, but because they
proceed from Bodies infinite, incorruptible and indeficient in virtue.

The ancient Poets, who involved their Conceits in Fables, divide the Earth
into three parts; assigning the Heaven to Jupiter as firstborn of Saturn,
(though some attribute the primogeniture's right to Neptune, and the election
of the superior Kingdom to Jupiter, for certain Sophistical Reasons
impertinent to my purpose:) Neptune they make the Lord of the Sea; and that by
lot: To Pluto, as the youngest Son, they assign the Earth for Heritage, who is
yet thought the richest of the three Brethren, because in his Dominion all the
Treasures of the World are contained; yea, he seems to make his two Brothers
Tributaries in those things they possess as best. This Son they call, The King
of Hell, and to him they give the Elysian Fields, as a delightful place, where
the blessed Souls shall follow his Court after death.

Divines also assert, That Hell and the torture of Souls is in this place;
adduced by this Argument: That seeing the Nature of the Stars is fiery, and all
their influences concur, there must needs be incredible burnings there. Again,
That place is infernal, because none is more inferior. But that Souls should
be here tormented, and that the heat of this place should be so vehement as
they say, is a Solaecism in Reason, and a Contradiction to Philosophical
Axioms: for besides that Souls possess no place, according to their own
confessions, and that being divested of the earthy part, and corporeal prison,
they would naturally elevate themselves, and ascend by virtue of their
spiritual levity, which participates more of a fiery then any other quality;
they cannot, but with violence, be detained in this subterraneous place, seeing
they are light; nor yet, being simple, suffer under the action of Fire, which
cannot act on its like.

Why therefore they should assert, That they descend to this place to be
tormented, I see no reason, unless that the burden of their sins, wherewith
they are implicated, should detrude and depress them, compelling and forcing
them to the Center of the Earth; or else that sin has got them under its
Dominion, and has incorporated it self therewith, by some unknown kind of
composition, and so make them passible and subject, not to the simple and
natural action of Fire, but to some other violent created one, destined by God
to that effect: and perhaps the virtue of the Fire we speak of, is by divine
Power doubled for this action; which may be proved by Holy Writ.

But I will not rashly cherish any particular Opinion, or separate my self from
the Orthodox Faith; in the defense whereof, I will not only spend my Life, but
Industry, by God's assistance: yet I say in my Transient, (that I may further
recede from my intended Discourse) That they conclude strangely, that say,
Vehement burnings arise in this place, because the influences of the Stars
concur there: whereunto I would yet yield, if they can evince, That the heat of
the Stars burns and consumes like our Culinary Fire, and does not enliven,
conserve and nourish: for if it were such as they imagine, not only the Earth,
but the whole Universe had been long since burnt to ashes. Those influences
indeed in old Demogorgon's bowels, calefie; but not with a mortal and
destructive, but with a vital heat, which there implants an uniform Virtue;
which by mediation of heat, dilates it self through the whole Body of the
Earth, being the first moving cause of Generations.

But we must not here conceive, That it is only the external heat that comes
from the Sun, which calefies the Earth, and causes Generation: for in
Wintertime, when the Sun is furthest distant, the Earth has abundance of heat
in it, as experience shows, in Fountains, Cisterns, and profound Cells: so that
in the coldest Winter-Season, Metals are cocted and indurated; yea, it is
credible, that they are then most of all engrossed, because the heat of the
Center is kept in and retained, because of the frigidity of the ambient Air.
The Suns approach, and more perpendicular Aspect, is not the sole cause of
vegetation in the Spring; for if so, then doubtless, as its Ascent were more
sublime, Vegetations would augment more proportionably to the increase of the
heat of the Rays: but the contrary is observed. But because every like
attracts its like; and the recess of the one, causes the recess of the other;
The Sun by the magnetical Virtue of its Rays, attracts and revokes the heat of
the Central Sun, detruded by the rigid cold of the ambient into the interior
parts of the Earth; which returning to the surface thereof, affects all things
with a vegetative faculty.

It is not therefore the external heat of the Celestial Sun, but rather the
innate heat of the Central Sun, that calefies the profundity of the Earth: for
heat is twofold; the one acts by reverberation, which is external; the other by
influx and penetration, which is internal, whereof I now speak; whose Nature is
to enliven, augment, and conserve by the sustentation of radical moisture
contained in this Fire, which I made mention of in the precedent Chapter.

But that now we may prove this Central Fire not to be so intense, as to
torment and burn, let us consider how the Stars do not by their influences
cause heat solely, but work other effects: for Saturn is cold and dry, Jupiter
hot and moist, the Sun hot and dry, Mars hot and dry, Venus cold and moist, the
Moon moist and cold, and Mercury all in all, participating of all qualities
alike.

Whence we may gather, That all the influences are temperate, equally
consisting of heat, cold, moisture and siccity; which thus meeting in
moderation, cannot make the place where they meet, immoderate. The Vapor then
or Spirit that comes from the Center, participates of these four: and hence all
the qualities of simples have their origin; whereof some calefie, because in
them heat is predominant; others dry, because siccity superabounds; others
moisten or refrigerate, according to the degree of their moisture or cold: but
on the other side. Stars project many other qualities besides these, into the
Center: for they give Beings to those sapours, colors, and odours, which we
taste, see, and feel in sublunary things. I say therefore, That the Stars
calefie the Center of the Earth, and that the Universal Spirit dwelling there,
participates of this heat; and because it is natural to heat to separate, that
separative virtue which divides the pure from the impure, the subtle from the
gross, and the light from the heavy, and the sweet from the bitter, descends
with these influences: which purgative separation, is the cause why all things
naturally reject their Excrements, as not being of their substantial parts;
which is indeed very requisite, seeing there is nothing in the World, but its
Excrements, exceed its natural substance: nay, all that we see and touch, is
only the excremental part of things, that obumbrates their occult substance;
as we may observe in our Aliments, whose greater Mass turns not into our
substance, but goes away by the passages destined for such egress; Nature only
extracting the invisible and spiritual succe out of them, which is apt to be
converted into our flesh and substance.

We may likewise affirm, That this Mass of Earth we tread upon, is nothing but
the Excrement of that first substance, which was united in the Chaos; Now
encompassing the Center, and so including it in a Spherical, Equilibrial
proportion, that it cannot move or fall: for seeing it is in the lowest of
places, it can tend no ways further, unless it should ascend; which is
repugnant to its Nature. But in the mean while, I do not say, That the Body of
the Earth is nothing but an Excrement: for though it appear wholly
excrementitious, yet there lies under its Excrements, a pure substance; which
being wholly spiritual, could not become sensible without the administration of
some Body; as we see in all things produced: their Seed and first Matter is
invisible; but as they are carried in a corporal Mass, and excrementitious
substance, we can see them; and no Body can be made without Excrements: for
which cause, this substance is separated from the Body of Earth in Generations,
by the influence of Celestial heat; retaining nothing of the said Earth, but as
much as may be for a sustentacle for it; which from the beginning had no other
use, but to serve for a Receptacle and Shop, or rather a Vessel, wherein this
spiritual Matter might effect its operations; as we shall largely and plainly
demonstrate in the sequel Chapter, where I shall treat of Separation more
largely.

But Separation were to little purpose, if the things separated should remain
without action: Natures scope in Separation, is to enliven and abandon Death,
which comes from no other cause but superabundance of Excrements suffocating
the pure substance; but here I mean natural, not violent Death: but if the
Seeds of things should always lie buried in this excrementitious Earth,
nothing would be produced or receive Life: but the Celestial Virtue by its
vital influence extracts them; and these being full of Virtue, dilate and
promote themselves into all and each several species, as their Nature and
Composition require.

Life then proceeds from Purification, which the Stars effect by their
influences, with which the augmentative and restorative faculties descend: for
the Stars being in continual motion, they are continually occupied with action,
and consequently with vivification, giving Life to Life; which cannot be
without Conservation and Restoration: Conservation they give, by sustaining
Life indeficiently; Restoration, by restoring what the Generations of
individuals consume and spend. And this we may see manifestly in the first
Matter incorporated; for being impregnated by Celestial Influences, it is of it
self nourished, multiplied and augmented continually.

And hence it is called a Dragon or Serpent that preys upon it self, always
regerminating; which, wherever it be, it takes such root, that the place
shall never be quite destitute of it, though it be washed or burned; which is a
certain token by which this first Matter may be known.

These then are the principal Virtues which the Spirit of the World has, and
will always receive from the Celestial Influences, which produce great and
admirable effects in all the Members of the Universe.

But here some may enquire, How that the first matter receiving such pure and
potent Influences from Heaven, comes to be conspurcated with so many vicious
qualities; and how it retains them when it has received them, seeing it is
always busied in the actions of vivification, augmentation, conservation, and
restoration: for if it separate not, it will die; and if it augment, conserve,
and restore not, it will diminish, perish, and debilitate; which it never does.

Whereunto I answer, That the Stars have a twofold influence; one natural, the
other accidental: the natural was communicated to them in their first Creation;
and it is that Government of the Universe, which Hermes speaks of, whereby they
keep it in its Being, by defending and preserving it by their influences, from
destruction and annihilation; wherewith the Spirit of the Universe is
continually enriched: which applies them to, and manifests them in all things
whereto it gives increase and substance: but the accidental Influence of the
Stars, is that which falls out preternaturally, by reason of their different
Situations and Aspects: and this is always subject to mutation, and never
remains equal: and this has only power upon the effects of Matter, not upon
the Matter it self; for whatever influence happen, though never so malign, the
Center of the Earth intermits not its actions, but absolves them as before, and
produces Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, as well as ever; and if
mortifications sometimes fall out from the malignity of some Aspect, they only
touch the surface or excrementitious mass of Bodies, and not the interior
substance: and such an accident is often changed; so that the influence
sometimes operates one thing, sometimes the quite contrary: which the natural
and principal influx never does. Whence we may conclude, That the first Matter,
as it is simple of it self, receives nothing but those Celestial Virtues, which
it also retains and keeps in its Terrification.

But we must now declare, how it retains them, that we may make good that
saying of Hermes, That its Virtue remains entire when it is converted into
Earth, because all the Celestial Virtues descend and meet in the Center of the
Earth; which in their course, aim at nothing, but the information of the
Matter, which is as it were the Receptacle of the supreme Idea's.

The same Matter being full of Forms, is diversified not indeed actually, but
potentially, into innumerable specifications: and so it is not properly a Body,
but as it were a Body or Companion of a Body, whereunto it has an Appetite,
and by information moves to that end: and this motion it has from the action
of Celestial Fire, which I before called, The first Mover in the Chaos: which
the old Poets, Orpheus and Hesiod, describe under the Name of Love: And
Ronsardus, our French Homer or Pindar, thus delineates:

Le suis amor le grand maistre des dieux,
Le suis Celuy, qui fait mouvoir les Cieux.
Le suis Celuy qui govern le monde;
Qui le premier horse de la mass eclos,
Donnay lumiere and feudy le Cahos,
Don't fut basty cette machine ronde.
If any Rustic know not who I am,
Love is my name:
To whom themselves, both Jove and all his train,
Subjects proclaim.
I am the hand that moves the heavens, and the reins
That Stars direct;
All that the Earth and Universe contains,
My nod expect.
When all a Chaos was, I spread my rays
Of light about,
And then divided that which in few days
The World brought out.
Seeing then this Matter by its proper Nature and Appetite, tends to
incorporation, who can rationally say, That whilst it assumes a Body, it is
deprived or swerves from Nature, that by its own virtue causes corporation? and
seeing when it takes a Body, it is first turned into Earth; who can deny but
this Earth is endued with the same virtue? for though through commixtion and
concurse, it partake of some elementary impurities, yet in its Center it is
always pure: so that after its purification, Fire (which is otherwise the most
active and potent Element) has no power to destroy it, because it exceeds this
Fire in perfection and subtilty. And hence it so suddenly penetrates Bodies,
enlivening them, and augmenting their virtues, by restoring and preserving what
is natural in them, to wit, their radical moisture, which by its fiery subtily,
it purges and separates from its Excrements that suffocate it. And that I may
in a word absolve all, this that most excellent Medicine, which Siracides says
is extracted out of the Earth, and which no wise Man will despise, It is
moreover that precious Salt, whereto the Doctor of Doctors compared his
Apostles, as to a most exquisite Treasure, produced by the Heavens: for he
might as well have said, You are Adamants, Rubies, Pearls, Gold or Silver of
the Earth; but that he knew, That all these things, though admirable, contained
nothing in them comparable to this general Salt, whereunto all the rest owe the
homage of their perfections. This Medicine operates like Fire, in consuming the
impure, which, as heterogeneous, it disgregates from the homogeneous parts of
the pure substance: and seeing the Heaven generated this Virgin in the bowels
of the Earth, why should she not retain her Parents virtues; and like an Infant
that naturally participates of both Paternal and Maternal Seeds, hold both
Paternal and Maternal Humor? for which cause the Ancients called this progeny
Androgynos, which is a name common to both Sexes; the Poets, an Hermaphrodite,
as being properly neither Male nor Female, but both: and no less properly, may
this Virgin be called Uranogaea, or Heaven made into Earth: for being Earth,
she has the Celestial Virtues tied and annexed to her indissolubly, whose
admirable faculties she manifests in her operations, whereof I have given
sufficient declaration in the precedent Chapters, to all such as armed with any
noble spark of ingenuity, will endeavor to adventure to break through the thick
woods of darkness and ignorance, or to such as Virgil says, to whom Heaven has
granted access or ingress into the obscure Chaos of the Earth.

CHAP. 3. Of the Separation of Fire from Water, subtle from thick; and with
what industry it should be effected.
NAture, the most sagacious Agent, shows us by her proper operations, that in
all things we must first consider the end for which we undertake any matter,
and then find out means to attain the end. A prudent Searcher of Natures
secrets then should have perfect knowledge of the principles, progress, and
qualities of matter, both internal and external, lest in his search he confound
his end with his means: and forsaking the highway which Nature has trodden
from the Foundation of the World, turn into bypath, and fantastical unknown
and unfrequented tracts.

Hermes knew the right way well; for he was endued with the perfect knowledge
of the Worlds constitution; who, desirous by Art to follow the footsteps of
Nature, prudently imagined, That the Earth was the principle of all things, and
the first Creature that was by Separation created in the belly of the Chaos;
and thence he made such ingress into the Treasury of Natures Secrets by the
Terrification of this first Matter, which I said before was nourished in the
Matrix of the Earth. But as it is not enough for a Builder to have Materials
wherewithal to erect an Edifice, unless he know the manner of performing and
fitting his Materials to the work: so Hermes was not content to find out
convenient matter, but made diligent search for the manner whereby he might
prosecute his work in imitation of the chief Operator in the Creation of the
Universe, and so form a little World, wherein all the virtues of the greater
World were included. Considering therefore, That the thing he purposed to make,
must be most, and that he must begin with gross and inferior things to obtain
this perfection; he first begun to divide the contrary Natures, by separation
of the superfluous and useless parts, to avoid the ruin of his work: where,
according to the Adage, it may be truly said, He took the Bird by its Feet:
and so going through the right Gate, entered into the Closet of Natures Secret,
without turning: for Separation is the beginning of all things, and the first
operation of the Universal Body; segregating the confused Members: by the
division of the confused Mass or Chaos, the order and form of Elements first
appeared, and took their places: for without Separation, Day and Night, Sun and
Moon, Winter and Summer, had yet been one; Metals and Minerals, though never so
different, would have been contained in one Body; and all Vegetables would have
been but one Seed.

It was therefore necessary, That Nature, for the attainment of that Order and
Distinction, wherewith we see the Universe condecorated, should begin with
Separation. But that we may descend to particulars, let us see how this
sagacious Agent begins all her operations: but for Separation, Generation would
neither have beginning nor end: by separation, Aliments augment and conserve
every Body. And if I should deduce the proof of this Argument through every
species, I should without doubt confound my self in the intricacy of this
Chaos, and never find exiture, for the infinity of examples: I will therefore
lay down this for a Foundation, That Nature begins all her Actions from
Separation. But because the knowledge of this is not sufficient, unless withal
we know what things she separates, and whence this separative faculty proceeds,
we must discuss this matter more exactly, that our discourse may proceed
regularly: and before I meddle with any disposition, I think it best to propose
some definition of Separation, and declare of how many kinds this Separation
is.

Separation then in general, is nothing but the division and distinction of
things dissimilar from one another; as of the Heaven from the Earth, Sun from
Moon, and the like; as also of the pure from the impure, heat from cold, dry
from moist, and the contrary. And from this Definition, we may draw two sorts
of Separation;

The one of things differing only simply, and not of contraries, as of the
parts of the World which were separated at first from the Chaos; or that we may
descend to particulars, as of the Wood from the Bark; of Leaves from Fruits,
and Roots from Boughs: and this species of Separation may be called simply a
Distinction: for these parts are not really divided or separated from each
other, whether we have respect to the principal or to the particular members of
the World: for though Heaven and Earth seem to be separated from each other in
situation, by reason of superiority and inferiority; yet they are not divided
one from another, seeing there is a perpetual connection and affinity betwixt
them: as appears by many places of this Book. Whence also Homer, no less
Philosopher then Poet, said, That the Earth was bound to Heaven by a golden
Chain. But that I may keep to my former example, Leaves and Fruits, Wood and
Bark, Boughs and Roots, are not separated and divided as contraries; but only
distinguished by their proper places and garnishments, whilst they have a
certain affinity and mutual tie; yet so, that the one does not occupy the
others place, but that they agree together, and support each other.

The second species of Separation, is the Solution or Distraction of things
totally differing, contrary, or superfluous, which have no natural connection
with the substance of things; as pure and impure, hot and cold, gross and
subtle, and the like: not that I would affirm, That these things cannot stand
together; but, That their union and mixtion, because of their diversity, causes
Destruction, or at least hinders the action of the natural Virtue of the pure
substance. And this kind of Separation may be properly called decision or
division, which Nature uses in all her productions, that she may set the proper
actions and virtues of every thing at liberty.

The first species is only the distinction of parts truly dissimilar in
situation and figure, but homogeneous in virtue and substance: for it is
certain, That the Wood, Bark, and all the parts of a Tree, participate of one
innate Virtue, which is particularly proper to the Tree, generally common to
all its parts: but as to subalternate parts, there may be some difference; for
some may receive more or less of the substance or virtue; but none contrary:
for one and the same effect produces not things diametrically opposite, out of
the same matter: a salutary Plant emits no poisonous faculty: yet that may be
salutary to one Body, that is mortal to another. Thus Hellebore nourishes
Quails, but kills Men. But one Plant cannot exercise contrary Powers upon one
and the same subject: for Hellebore cannot both nourish and kill Quails, nor
both intoxicate and nourish Man. The proper virtue of the Plant then, is in the
whole Plant; and any part of the Plant may be dissimilar to another in
situation and figure, but not contrary in virtue and substance: for the Leaves
and Fruits have of the same substance and virtue, though one more then another.

Here some may object, That Brassica produces different effects: for according
to the vulgar opinion, its decoction looses the belly, but its pulpe binds the
same.

Whereto I answer, If it be proper for the substance of this Plant to loose,
it is impossible that it should also bind; for to speak plainly, the pulpe that
remains after decoction, is not of the substance of the Plant, as it appears by
the concoction of the stomach, which receives the substance of Brassica for
Aliment, but rejects its pulpe, as an Excrement that has no nutritive faculty
in it; which faculty is wholly in the substance, and in each part of the
substance: for the substance has this propriety, That it admits of no
contrary, but only of more or less; which we must also understand of its
actions and power, and not of its essence; of which we have an example: in man,
no one part is more the part of a Man then another, though it may be greater,
or more potent in virtue and action: the same may be seen in simples or Plants;
wherein some parts are more or less hot or cold, moist or dry, as their colors
and sapours manifest; yet are they not contraries; for one part of a Plant
cannot kill through cold, and another of the same, kill through heat; but
Experience shows us thus much, That the summities of Boughs, and that Flowers
are more subtle in their Operations, then the trunks and inferior parts of
the same, because it is proper in every substance, for the more subtle and
pure parts to ascend, and the impure to settle and abide next the Excrements:
which Nature observes for two Reasons: first, That she may adorn the Plant; and
by the variety of its digestion, make it grateful to look to. Secondly, That
she may administer to Man or other Animals, what is needful for the
conservation of his essence, in a greater or less degree: herein resembling a
careful and provident Mother, who prepares all things necessary and convenient,
each thing in its degree, as industry or possibility can render it: for she
never exceeds simple perfection; and Flowers and Seeds are the most perfect
parts in Herbs, which she has elaborated: which Art beginning where Nature
left, may bring to a higher perfection, by the same way that Nature kept, to
wit, by Separation; as we shall hereafter further explain.

Nature therefore by this first kind of Separation, does nothing but
distinguish things, for the ornament of their subject, and use of Man, other
Animals, or some part of the World, amongst which she has sown and implanted
mutual Love, and Reciprocal Affinity; so that all things do naturally, and out
of a kind of sympathy, tend to one another succor and service.

But the second kind of Separation is different for by it, Nature, or Art, in
imitation of Nature, divides and segregates contraries; that is, abstracts from
the substance, what is not of its essence, but rather averse to it; dwelling
with it, though it be not of it; as pure with an impure thing, subtle with
gross, substance with its Excrements. And this second kind of Separation is
used as the former, for two Reasons also: one is, That the pure substance be
preserved from corruption and death: the other is, that it may more freely
exercise its virtues and actions, as being free from its gross dregs: for when
that which is impure, possesses and contains that which is substantially pure,
it never ceases to opp ess it, till it has quite vanquished and suffocated it,
and by that means made way for mortal corruption; which never approaches near
simple and pure things, but haunts all fowl and impure ones. Now every
substance is of it self simple and pure, and by consequence not subject to
corruption and death; as we may observe in all superior things, which are free
from Excrements, but inferior Bodies are otherwise; for they lie in the midst
of the impure Excrements of this World, which naturally destroy and mortify
their Guests, whereas purity enlivens and conserves: corruptions and
mortifications surround men, because of the multitude of Dregs and Excrements
they are infested with, which make them live a short and miserable life, as
laden with Aerumnies and Diseases; so that they are here detained as a guilty
Malefactor in an obscure filthy Prison, who being dubious betwixt death and
hope of Life, lies there obduced with moldiness, infested with vermin, and
nourished with immund and corrupt meats: for all Aliments are impure, and carry
with them an Executioner, to wit, hidden poison: whence we at length, take our
own death in our own hands, and spontaneously kill our selves, seeing our
Aliments have so little of enlivening and nourishing virtue in them, and that
so closely enveloped with Excrements, that the digestion of the stomach, though
strong, can scarce attract it: now we eating such meats, do ingest poison with
the good substance; which entering our Bodies, ceases not to be augmented and
accumulated; till it obscure and extinguish the vital Light, or rather Natures
legitimate Action, which is Vivification, unless some Medicine or Separation
retard or suspend it.

Corruption then is induced by Excrements; and it may happen two ways: either
from the Parents Seed, who being not well, and by consequence corrupt, produce
corrupt Seed; degenerating more from Generation to Generation: but this is so
far subject to Medicinal Corruption, as that by help thereof, the course of its
activity toward Mortification may be stayed or retarded.

This Corruption may not improperly be called that Malevolent Satan, who goes
about continually seeking whom he may devour: for which cause, this wanders
about the Terrestrial Globe or the Excrements of the World, which have their
principal seat on the Earth, which also eructate their Corruption upon other
Elements: and thus Men living of them and in them, are corrupted in them and by
them; and so they produce corrupt Seed, which time renders more and more
corrupt: for our age being more vicious and dissolute then that of our
Ancestors, has rendered us worse then they; and the next its probable will be
worse then us, and the next more dissolute still.

The second rise of Corruption is from the continual use of too too
excrementitious Aliments, by which our Bodies are depraved; so that this
infection will pass from the Parent to the Son, as we see in the Leprosy and
other hereditary Diseases. Now these Aliments deduce their Corruption from the
place where they are generated: for after the Almighty Creator had disposed the
confused Chaos, he so ordered, that the superior Bodies should remain pure and
subtle, but the inferior gross and impure, because it is the Nature of pure
substances to ascend to the place of their origin, but of Excrements to
descend to the Center.

And hence it is, That that which is pure in Animals and Vegetables, is
elevated and ascends highest, and makes them ascend and increase with it, till
it be freed from the Excrementitious Mass, which subjects it to mortal
Corruption, and that it may attain the place that is remotest from Excrements,
and live without alteration or spot; for the same cause also more spiritual and
subtle Creatures inhabit in higher places, as being purer, and finding their
Aliments more convenient, and like their natural substance: but such as are
coporal, inhabit lower places, where they are immerged in dregs and filth, that
have their place in lower parts; whence they are corrupted by that of which
they live, which is mixed with mundane Dregs: for whatever the Earth and other
Elements (which are the Receptacles of impurities) can produce, is corrupt and
maculated; and therefore induces corruption and defilement upon all Bodies that
use it for Aliment: And thus Blood acquires an ill disposition, which
afterward beget ill humors; but in some more, in others less; according to
the inquinated state of the Parents, and the abuse of the corruptive things,
which cause mortality and destruction: for if the Earth and the Fruits thereof
were as pure as the Heavens, all Animals would live as long as the Celestial
Incolists: But Nature has ordained this for a Law, That that partakes more of
corporeity, should dwell about that that is most corporeal; and that which is
more corruptible and inquinated, about that that is likest to it: but the Earth
is lowest of Bodies; and therefore most gross and corruptible. Nothing
therefore can proceed from it, but what is like it; unless its corruption and
impurity be stayed by the Art of Separation, and all its pure substance
extracted from its Body; which a true Philosopher may by industry effect.

It never was, nor yet is, my intent to offend Physicians, to whom I owe much
honor; yet I, with many learned men, admire, they do not better instruct
Apothecaries, that they may be more curious in preparing Medicaments; whilst
themselves may observe how often they have been frustrated in success, when they
proceed after the vulgar manner: for they will cure and restore sick and weak
Bodies, by offering them a great deal of Pottage; wherein there is yet so much
impurities and gross dregs, that very little pure substance, wherein the
curative faculty consists, remains; which is so immerged in their Poison, that
they have no power against the Disease: neither can Nature help their
operation; for she is subdued in this conflict, by the impurity of the Remedy
on the one side, and the cause of the Disease on another: which is all one, as
if a Man should drive away Corruption by corrupted and corrupting means; which
is impossible: for Rain never dries up Rivers, nor Fire extinguish a Flame; nor
yet Corruption expel Corruption. They also attempt the Restoration of their
Patients debilitated strength, by Aliments of easy digestion, which they think
partake of little impurity, and so are not subject to Corruption: never
considering, That this way cannot much profit them; for though they use very
choice Aliments, yet are they not of much advantage, because they are endued
with no action or power that can either exterminate or lessen the morbifical
causes, but only refulciate their miserable lives, almost ruined by weakness;
never freeing them from death, unless, that Nature spontaneously arise and
oppose the mortal Machinations of her Enemies, or else the Patient seek help
from some exquisite Medicament, brought by some perite Artificers industry to
supernatural purity and perfection; which being free from Corruption, may
restore the pristine vigor, and by this means, eradicate the cause of the
Disease: for every true Medicament should effect two operations, to wit, purge
from Corruption, and restore lost Strength; and in this the whole Basis and Art
of Medicine consists, though the lesser of the two parts is only in use, to
wit, Purgation; the more excellent, to wit, Restoration, being wholly
abolished, or through sloth or avarice neglected.

And that these things are thus carried, is apparent from certain Potions
introsumed, which have no other effect, but only to make the Belly laxative,
or purge out not that matter that causes the Disease, but some other Excrement,
that has nothing to do with the Disease; or else through the ill preparation,
dispensation, or impertinent adaptation of simples, cause superfluous
evacuations, to the ruin of Nature, too weak before, but now more enervated,
both by reason of vacuity, which it abhors above all things, and also by reason
of violent motion caused by such Purges.

And thus they rather procure Death then Sanity; for Nature can no more endure
violent motion then vacuity; and she is very impatient of these two her sworn
Enemies, which attempt so evidently her destruction.

And for this cause, common Medicine seldom cures obstinate Diseases by their
Compositions, as they commonly prepare them: and if amongst many, any one be
cured, this happens not because of Pills, Boles and Potions; but of the
strength of Nature, which is able to overcome the impure quantity mixed with
these remedies, and extract something out of their pure substance, commodious
for its subsidy: or else, because the poisonous quality of these
excrementitious and corruptive things, is rejected and expelled by Nature;
which is of that power, that it carries with it some portion of the peccant
humor which is like to it, by attraction and sympathy.

And thus an extraneous Medicament, impugning the Body, moves Nature; which
provoked and prepared to resist this her Enemy, rejects and violently impugnes
what is contrary to her. And now, if a Medicament should always be convenient,
and not contrary to Nature, it should be purged from its poison, that is, from
its excrementitious Mass.

Wherefore a Medick should first choose such things, as are convenient for, and
hold sympathy with Man's Body; and free them from their impurities, or at least
choose such as contain in them the general virtue, or innate purity; which
Purification cannot be effected, till the impure and noxious be separated and
destroyed, and the pure restored, which lay buried and suffocated under the
Excrements.

But it being none of my Profession to make Medicaments, I will not further
treat of this business; but will return into the way whence I have a little
swerved. I say therefore, Seeing there is no inferior thing, but that is
infected with Poison, immerged in Excrements, and buried in Dregs, that cause
its mortification, and hinder the liberty and action of its legitimate
substance; Nature is constrained by a certain necessity, to make use of
Separation; which is effected by division of the pure from the impure, the
subtle from the gross, and the salutary from the destructive part. But because
this admirable Agent works her operations in darkness, laboring in bodies by a
secret digestion, she never exceeds simple perfection; for hereto only is her
power extended: whence corporal Elements, being not able to conduce to the
highest degree of their proprieties, the Bodies wherein they are included;
Philosophers prudently endeavor to separate their substance from their
corruptive Mass; and after this Separation in Natures way, to wit, by Digestion
and Sublimation, to carry them to the highest degree of purity; getting them by
Regeneration a new form, taking away their former Nature, Qualities, and
Proprieties, and changing their impure Bodies into Spirits full of purity,
their moisture and cold into dryness and heat: practicing and effecting this,
not only in some species or simples, but in the great Body of the World also,
which is our Universal Spirit: for unless the Universal Nature of all things be
renewed, it is impossible to bring it to a state of incorruption. Regeneration
then is the first Fruits of Separation: but as a Grain can of it self generate
nothing unless it die and putrefie in the Earth, so it is impossible any thing
should be renewed or regenerated, save by precedent mortification.

Mortification then is the first step to Separation, and the only tract to
that end: for as long as Bodies remain in their old Corruption and origin,
Separation cannot reach them, unless putrefaction and mortification lead the
way: which also our Lord Jesus divinely taught, saying, Unless that a Man, like
a Grain of Corn, die, he cannot acquire life incorruptible: not as if he meant
that life incorruptible should be acquired by death corporal; for then impious
and wicked Men, by dying would attain Beatitude with the Good and Just: but he
meant that the old Man should die, that is, mortify and separate his old
Corruption from him, which he attracted from the Seed of his first Parents.

And this Corruption is properly intemperance and excess, introduced by the
eating of the forbidden Fruit, by which Death entered the World; and since
which, Man ceased not to die, because afterward the Earth and all it produced
were infected by the Poison of the fraudulent Serpent hidden in their Aliments,
whose enticements led Man to transgression, and to the eating of Fruit wherein
death was included.

And this corrupting Serpent is he that I call Satan, who creeping, and without
ceasing going about the Earth, mixes his Poison therewith, and with all things
it produces, to wit, Animals, Vegetables and Minerals, with intent to infect
the World with his Poison, and tyrannize over Man.

Upon this intemperance and excess in diet, a privation of Virtue followed: for
Vice is nothing but a neglect of what is just, and justice is a temperate
desire, and continual progress to good.

This intemperance then and excess must die in us, because it generates all
kind of sin in us, and stimulates us to malice and impiety; and therefore we
are enjoined to live soberly, and shun gluttony and drunkenness, the true
Authors of all carnal lusts: and that we fast often, to extinguish those
internal flames, which move our Senses, and burn our Blood to Corruption.

The Anatomists of Man, know, that Man is twofold; the one Celestial and
immortal, the other Terrestrial and corruptible: and the first is as a
Sojourner, the second as a Prisoner.

But here arises a great Question, How it comes to pass, that the heavenly Man
can, whilst buried in this putrid and corrupt Carkase, conserve his essential
purity? for it is manifest, That a Liquor, though never so precious and
excellent, will lose its sapour and odor, if it be long contained in a
stinking Vessel: and Man also, though never so sound, is subject to infection,
if he dwell in a pestilent House: a heavenly Man is of himself good and
sincere; but as he is joined to the Terrestrial, to whom impurity and vices
naturally adhere, he can scarcely remain free from spots.

The depravation of this essential purity, depends without doubt on the eating
the forbidden Fruit; or to speak more expressly, on the intemperance of
Aliments, condited with pernicious and contagious Corruption: for which cause,
this intemperance and corruption must be mortified, that the old Destroyer of
Man may be restrained, and that that may be repaired by newness of life, which
makes us like our heavenly Father in incorruption.

And our Restorer Jesus has taught us two ways to Regeneration: one by the
Water of Baptism, and the other by the Fire of the Holy Ghost. Water washes
away the spots, and Fire consumes and separates all impurity from the pure
essence: and as his precious Blood (which is true Water indeed) purges away our
sins, and saves us from that death, which the mortal corruption of our earthly
Parent introduced; so Water dissolves and purges away those excrementitious
impurities which corrupt all substances. The Fire of the Holy Spirit consumes
and separates the excrementitious impurity of sins, and so the vulgar Fire
blots out the impurity of Bodies; which should therefore be mortified, that it
may be regenerated: and this Mortification is that Putrefaction and Digestion,
which fits it to receive Separation; and this Mortification is then wrought in
us, when the Sun of the Holy Spirit rises upon our Hearts, and warms our
Center, consuming by little and little the corrupt affections of old Adam.
After the same manner, the Chemical Fire reverberating its flame about the Body
that is to be purged, burns and annihilates that that is of an extraneous
Nature; and that more or less, as the impurity is more or less obstinate to
Separation, which is effected by Distillation.

This then is the right way which Nature observes in the Regeneration of all
things; which will have no laudable effect in Medicine, unless they be
gegenerated by Water and Fire. But the same things after this second Nativity
are most free in their virtues and actions; whereas before, their vital
functions were buried in an excrementitious Mass: and though the benign
influences of Heaven had given them much virtue, yet could not they exert it:
even so a Man, whilst he is detained in the impure Prison of old Adam, he can
produce no good and laudable action.

But before I proceed further in the practical explication of these things, I
must return to my begun-order, to wit, that after I have given the definition
of Separation, and declared of how many kinds it is, that now I may show what
these kinds are, whence things proceed to be separated, and whence this
separative virtue arises. And I have sufficiently demonstrated, That there are
in Bodies two parts: the one is an Excrement, the other substance; the one
accidental, and the other substantial: for substance simply considered, is
wholly pure, and without Corruption; but an Excrement wholly impure, mixing it
self with the substance, and contaminating and subverting its purity.

The Generation and Formation of substance is sufficiently detected in the two
first Chapters of this Book: it now rests that I explain the Nature and
Qualities of Excrements: where I infer, from the aforesaid Narration, that
nothing but Excrements should be separated; supposing this for undeniable, That
amongst passible things in this sublunary World, nothing is void and free from
Excrements: for when God separated the parts of the World, he commanded, That
some should descend to the lowest Region, as partaking of the grosness of the
first matter, and that they should there congregate amongst themselves: and of
this feculent Mass, the Earth was formed, which is nevertheless endued with
some part of pure substance, though diffused through its thick crassitude:
after that Phoebus had slain the monstrous Python, swelled up with poisonous
humors, which was generated of the mud of the Earth; that is, when the innate
siccity had imbibed the superfluous humidity, by the operation of natural heat,
the Earth begun to feel the actions of this substance included in its breast:
which substance is that spirituous matter which is never idle, but always
employed about Generations and Vivifications; which may here be properly called
the Earth, because the proper and virtuous substance of the Earth, is that
alone that by proper corporation generates all Bodies according to individual
Idea's; as I have described it in this Ode, out of which I shall take what is
convenient for my purpose.

L'esprit port sur la sace
De ceste indigeste mass,
L'en virounant tout autour,
Feit separer la matiere
Pesante de la legiere,
Et la noire nuict du sour.
Puis de l'humeur a mass
Le corpse plus pesant, and froid
Feit la roundeur compass
Que d'un serrement estroit
L'eau ou l'air contrebalance
D'un poids si ferme and egal
Que sans souff^ir mesme mal
Ne peur choir en decadence.
Puis versant l'ame an dedans
Et les semences du monde
La feit nurisse feconde
Du ciel and des feux ardens.
When yet the world did in a Chaos lie,
The Spirit full of fiery heat did fly
About the surface of this shapeless Mass,
And so fomented it, that what erst was
One lump without all form, did now begin
By Separation, which was wrought therein
By this same Spirit, a multitude to make
Of Bodies, and likewise of forms to take
A number almost numberless: and now
Light things ascend, and heavy things below
The center seek to pass: the day breaks out,
And all the ponderous relics press about
The center, where staying themselves they make
A round terraqueous Globe, which naught can shake
Out of its place; for it is on every side
Equally balanced, and cannot slide,
Seeing no over-weight presses one part
More then another: hereto the Stars impart
Their influences, which by life and seed
Make this great Nurse all things to keep and breed.
And seeing in this Universal Separation, that which is more fiery and subtle,
chooses the higher Seat; and that which is gross and massy, the lowest; it
follows, that Celestial Bodies are immortal, as being most remote and separate
from all immund Dregs; and that they are crooked, or excavated into rotundity,
because they flew up at once: for which cause also, Nature desires a round form
for eternal things, as being most perfect and indeficient: and on the contrary
it follows, that Terrestrial things must be obnoxious to corruption and death,
because contraries are conjoined in their composition, to wit, Elements of
contrary qualities: wherewith the impurities or dregs of the first matter were
mixed; which were not created pure, as some imagine: for then all that
proceeded from them would be immortal; nay, more, there could have been no
Generation in the World: for without contrariety of qualities and impurities,
there had been no alteration nor mutation of forms; but all would have had one
face without distinction: all things would have remained equally pure and
subtle; and consequently, without all ornament: yea, that I may speak freely,
there had been neither matter, nor World created. It was therefore necessary,
That the subtle substance should be mixed with gross dregs: for where nothing
but purity is, there is no action; because there can be no action, where there
is no patient, seeing what is pure has no power over what is as pure, nor
impure over as impure. But Nature being always occupied in separating the pure
from the impure, for the preservation of its essence and vital increase, has
this substance mixed with impurity, for its sole subject; which, retaining the
state and Nature of its Creation, is not nourished, multiplied or augmented,
save with the nutrition, multiplication and accretion of Excrements, which are
not consubstantial with it, but only Companions and Sisters of its nativity.
And that these things are so, such have experienced, who by Divine Inspiration
have found the way to extract this first matter, and to corporate it in
imitation of Nature; which, whatever purity, cleanness, and clarity it seems to
have, yet is it always laden with a great quantity of Terrestrial Dregs, which
cannot be taken away without great industry.

I think then, that I have by most valid Arguments demonstrated, That every
massy Body is not nourished and preserved by the visible Earth, but by
spirituous matter only: whereby we see, that they very much abound with
Excrements, and that their whole Mass is nothing else but an Excrement, wherein
this spirituous Matter, that is apt for corporation, lurks invisibly: for though
we eat and drink, yet all that ingredes our stomachs, goes out alomst in the
same quantity that we assumed it in. We do not therefore extract our vital Oil
out of its Mass, but that pure essence and substance that lies within it.

Briefly, That excrementitious part is nothing else but the house of this pure
substance, and the vehicle that carries this nutritive Spirit to the place of
distribution, there to complete its digestion and requisite Separation. Are not
Trees and Plants incorporated with this mass of Excrements? and is not this
Mass, the Conduit of their enlivening and vegetative Spirit, and as it were a
fulciment that makes them grow? I do not say, That all that is in a Tree, or
other individual, is wholly an Excrement; for in every thing, there inhabits
some particle of this substance, which I cannot justly call a Body, but only a
thing apt for corporation, which Nature cannot work of it self: for though what
we see and touch is progenerated of matter apt for corporation; yet this Body
is not substantial, and nothing but Excrement is seen. So that Nature suffers
nothing of that to appear, that is the vital essence, substance or matter of
the thing; but Art, which by industry superates the simple power of Nature, can
do it well enough: for an ingenious Naturalist considers this, That though the
spirituous matter and substance of things be nowhere pure in natural Creation,
yet being mixed with dregs, it may be separated by the digestion of the
ventricle, which rejects Excrements, and retains the substance: not as if this
Separation were subject to sight, but to the understanding by the appearance of
the effect, whereby we find the dregs and Excrements rejected as useless for
the conservation of the essence of a Body.

Moreover, Augmentation, Restoration, and Vivification, coming to Bodies by
this substance, ascertain us of this thing, though Nature whereby it acts,
hides the operation: the substance then being separable, it must be innately
pure and homogeneous, or similar in all its parts, but this purity cannot be
manifested by Nature for her operations; for the intentional perfection of
things is only simple.

But an Artist, observing that Heat is the only Medium and Instrument which
Nature uses in the attainment of this perfection, and Fire the sole Purger and
Separator, tending to perfect purification: and further minding, that in the
center of every Body, some pure substance is contained, which can be naturally
separated, if not exactly, yet according to the extent of its faculties, he
proposes to himself the same way, and the same Instrument that Nature uses, to
wit, Fire; which he so administers, as to destroy, burn or separate the
Excrements, without the destruction of the pure substance residing in the
center; which he continues, till it be perfectly pure, and the Fire have no
further destructive power over it, but rather acts for its conservation,
exaltation, and the introduction of a Tincture and Quality like to it, and so
at length convert this whole pure substance into its own proper Nature.

An Artist then, minding this substance to reside in all things, and that all
things may be burned; so that after combustion, Ashes will remain, which the
Fire cannot devour, he prudently concludes, That in those Ashes there remains
something not subject to the vigor of Fire and Flame. And further incumbent on
his work, he finds a kind of Salt, not produced by Fire, but rather the
Victor over Fire, like the pure Gold of every burnt Body. This Salt is the last
matter resting in the Anatomy of Bodies, and not Ashes: whence this Salt was
ultimately extracted, and out of which, nothing can be further extracted: for
if by humidity it be turned into Water, by heat it will be again congealed into
Salt. Whence we may conclude, That this Water was Mercury, whence all Bodies
were first created; and that this Water, hidden in the ashes, hinders their
total consumption by combustion, as the universal Mercury in the Bowels of the
Earth, before the production of Bodies.

Wherefore the learned Ronillascus in his Writings, calls this The Water of
Mercurial Fire, because Fire generates, nourishes it; yea, augments its
goodness so much more, by how much it remains longer in it: for the ultimate
operation of Fire is to make Salt; and Salt is nothing but dry Water, which
acquires and conserves its siccity by Fire, and thence it is of like Nature to
it.

And here I would not have any wonder, That in the beginning of this Book I
said, That Fire is not without Moisture; for seeing it is nourished therewith,
it must also participate thereof; because all things take their nourishment
from that whereof they are made. So that Fire and Moisture are as it were two
Correlates; the one whereof cannot exist without the other, no not in
imagination: and the Elements have without doubt, such affinity and connection
one with another, and so participate one of another, that any of them may be
found in his associate: for the Earth contains Air, Water and Fire; Water,
Fire, Air and Earth; Air, Earth, Water and Fire; and Fire, Water, Air and
Earth: without which participations, there could be no mutual conversion, and
no sympathy or convenience.

From the Promises we may collect, That nothing is destitute of Excrements, and
that Excrement and Substance are the two constitutive parts of a Body; and that
nothing but Excrement, as accidental, and not affine to the essence or
substance, should be separated. We may likewise gather, That Fire only
procures and facilitates this operation.

But it is time that we proceed and show how this may be done: for it is not
enough to say, That Separation is the beginning of the works of Nature and Art,
not to know what things are separable, unless the practice and manner of this
operation be also rendered intelligible. I said before, That there were two
kinds of Separation: one for Distinction and Ornament, of which I will say no
more, because it appertains only to Nature, not to Art: the other is made by
Decision or Division, which I shall now explicate. I said before, That all
things consist of two parts; Excrement and Substance: Substance is of it self
simple and indivisible, whether we take it general for the first Universal
matter, or in particular for any species, according to the impression of the
Celestial Idea, which is infinite. This Substance or first Matter in every
species of compounded Bodies, is one in essence, virtue and quality: and in one
and the same subject, one part cannot be of one species, and another of
another: but in Excrements it is otherwise; for the better understanding
whereof, I will lay the following Rule, That there are but two means or mediums
for the completing of all Separations, to wit, Fire and Water: and there are
but two things separable in Bodies; the one whereof is separated by Fire, the
other by Water. In the first place it is indubitable, That the Nature of Fire
is such, as it destroys and consumes all that is combustible; and of Water
such, as it washes and cleanses all substance from its impurity that
commaculates it: Fire devours all that is volatile, and of an Airy quality,
because it is its proper nutriment: but Water divides all that is Terrestrial
and gross. Betwixt these two extremes then, there must be some intermediate
disposition, which should be kept and conserved, containing nothing that is
combustible or impure in it, which may be subjected to these two Warriers. And
it is manifest, That Adustion and Dregs are the two Corrupters and Destroyers
of all things; which Divine Hippocrates was not ignorant of, when he said, That
all Diseases proceed either from the Air or Aliments; insinuating, that the
excess of excrementitious Aliments are apt to receive corruption, and
Excrements by Fire exceeding natural heat, are the inflaming and corrupting
causes of each Disease: for the Excrements of Aliments, fill Bodies with
Terrestrial impurities, and inflammable Air generates sulphurous and adust
matter, which easily conceiving hot ardours, consumes and dissipates what is
radical and vital with it self; carrying it away, because the greater part of
it is volatile, the less adustive. Dregs then, and Adustion, are the two
Authors of corruption, and those that hinder the vigor of substantial actions
in all things.

And if we require any Arguments to prove this, the stink of Digestion and
Excrements demonstrates it; for that same sented in things that are burned,
speaks little of good to be there. The same is also evident in the fumes of
Excrements which stinking Bodies emit; for those suppose corruption; and
besides the corruption they generate, they also cause these two inconveniences;
the one is the hindrance of Penetration, the other of Fixation* which two
actions are absolutely necessary for the conservation of life: for that which
nourishes and supports life, must needs be subtle, that it may by its subtle
parts penetrate Bodies, and like a secret Balsam, roborate and augment the
light of life in the center of the Body: for if it were gross, it would rather
obstruct, suffocate and extinguish, then penetrate and pass through such narrow
ways: and because on the other side it conserves life in its state, it should
in reason be a stable, and no fluxible thing; for if it were volatile, we might
every moment expect death, lest it should be introduced by the corruption
generated by feculent adustion, which continually lays wait for our life.
Grosness then, hinders Ingress and Adustion, Stability.

Hence we may take a good admonition for Medicine, to wit, that every true
Medicament introsumed for the restoring of strength, and profligating the cause
of instant death, should have two properties, to wit, to pierce to the center
of sanity, and preserve the center, by dilating and deducing it through the
whole Body; which the Ancients, with good success, revoked to practice; and not
many years ago, the too much hated Paracelsus, who explained their operations
to posterity, which were so long kept secret; and let him that will, affirm the
contrary, I doubt not to aver, That nothing without the operation of Fire, can
be brought to purity and stability; which two parts must be chiefly observed in
making Medicaments: to which Assertion this valid Reason draws me, That no body
in its first original and form can be truly Medicinal, as immerged in the
corruption of its excrementitious Dregs, because it cannot attain the place and
seat of sanity, nor yet preserve sanity, because it wants subtilty to
penetrate, and fixedness requisite to the Restoration of what is corrupt and
lost, and the conservation of what is restored; which cannot possibly be
attained by the common way of preparation, neither in substance, nor in
infusion: the impossibilty hereof in substance appears, in that such do not
purge without violence, which causes rather perilous weakness, then salutary
Restoration: and as to infusions, nothing can thereby be extracted out of
simples, but a little introsity, which is innate in all Bodies, with a little
of their excrementitious Dregs. Hence infusion attracts not the internal
virtue, but only the external sapour of things, which in their center is quite
different from that in their superficial matter: for commonly we see, all
infusions are bitter; which we are forced to obdulcorate with Sugar or Honey,
because most Apothecaries are not so industrious, as to extract the natural
sweetness wherein the Nature of the things consists, from the things they
infuse; for all bitterness proceeds from Salt, which has sweetness at the
bottom, which cannot be extracted by simple infusions, but by Fire only, and
ingenious Artifice; this sweetness being the very perfection of the Medicine.

Hence Arnoldus de villa nova says, That if you know how to dulcorate what is
bitter, you have the whole mystery. Which Brucestus was not ignorant of, as
appears by his Dialogue, entitled, Demogorgon.

But this occult sweetness can never be manifested, unless it be quite freed
from Terrestrial Excrements, and volatile and Aereal Adustion: for the
earthiness thereof, gives it its extraneous sapour arising from the Excrements
of Salt, from whose variety, according to the species and place wherein they
are generated, the diversity of sapours does arise: for all sapour comes from
Salt; and by how much there is more Salt, by so much is the sapour more
intense. And on the other side, that which is volatile and Aerie, begets ill and
non-natural odours, which send out a stinch, which we perceive in their
burning, because of the combustion and inflammation of the unctuous Sulphur:
and that volatile matter is an Excrement, is apparent from the stinking fumes
of Bodies that are burning, whence smoke proceeds; that adhering to the Chimney
or other part, which afterward retain the odor of the burnt Bodies, and the
bitterness of the Excrements of Salt. And this is yet more manifest, by that
blackness and obscurity which this fume impresses on all things it touches,
which greatly hinders the light and splendour of Nature, which always desires
purity and freedom from darkness, as appears by that intense splendour in
perfect Bodies, a token of their purity, seeing others, more immerged in
impurity, are more obscure; as Metals perfect and imperfect, and precious
Stones, demonstrate.

But if we would avoid long peregrinations, and according to the oracles
advice, terminate our curious journeys in our selves, by seeking out the causes
of our Diseases, we should easily find them derived from those infected fumes
that obscure the light of our sanity; and thence desume a manifest sign of what
is wrought within us: for a sound Man, because of the internal clarity of his
natural disposition, has a clear and lively colored aspect: but a sick Man,
from the first onset of his disease, is pale and plumbeous, his native vigor
perishing and decaying: and all these mutations proceed from the fumes of
sulphurous and excrementitious Adustion and Inflammation, which extend
themselves through all the members, and by mediation of the pores, infect the
whole Body.

This paleness may also proceed from Nature, feeling her self aggravated with a
disease, and thereupon revoking all the pure and good Blood inwards, that
mustring up their forces she may better oppose her enemy, or sustain his
assaults: and upon this occasion, the external parts are destitute of their
clarity; and in this conflict the external parts remain as it were dead like
Earth, and tend to obscurity, because Earth, wherein this battle is begun, is
naturally black; as on the contrary, Fire is by Nature clear and white.

The Earth then on its part, being spisse and obscure, begets blackness and
sulphurous, fuliginous, and smoaky Adustion, begets obscurity; wherefore both
cause corruption, destruction and ruin: and besides these two, nothing in the
world procures universal ruin; neither is any inferior Body exempted from
these evils, save Gold and precious Stones, which Nature has brought to what
perfection she can.

And so Death is to other Bodies a perpetual enemy, seeking how to destroy
them; but Nature, as a careful Mother, how to preserve her works; who has
armed two potent and nimble Champions to help them, and withstand the
Adversaries fury: one whereof is Fire, the expugner of sulphurous Adustion;
the other Water, the expeller and driver of Terrestrial dregs. And as Nature is
ingenious and subtle in all her operations, so is Art endued with equal
subtilty and industry. And there is no other way to Separation instituted by
Nature from the beginning, but these two, which Nature her self has trodden
from the nonage of the Universe, whose first seeds, void of form, and
confusedly mixed in a Chaos, were dissolved in Water, and by the Spirit of God,
the first Mover, moving upon them, divided and distinguished: whence the
Separation of light from darkness proceeded, as also of distinct forms from
confusion, of generations from barreness, and of death from life: and if things
in the first commixtion were thus confused, as impure with pure, Excrements
with Substance, Earth with Heaven, and life with death; all were without
action, power, essence and life; and the whole confusion useless.

An Artist therefore considering this, and observing, That nothing can exert
its virtue, till the confusion of its purity and impurity be separated; he
takes Water and Fire for his Helpers, and follows Natures copy, whose
operations he should observe with all curiosity, especially in generating
Metals, which are by so much the perfecter, by how much they are more digested
in the bowels of the Earth. This sentence is then irrefragable, That Water and
Fire are the sole general and principal means of Separation: but the
composition of things being various, and one thing yielding with more ease then
another, we must also act variously upon them; yet so, as not to vary from the
plain path, that nature has delineated: For adustion and unctuous Sulphur,
making a body inflammable and infective, may be extracted one way out of one
body, and terrestrial feculency another way in others. Calcination and
Sublimation, were invented to purge adustion; but Distillation and Dissolution,
to remove terrestrial feculency; and Descension, for the conservation of weak
and easily inflammable bodies: and all these are either effected by fire; as
Calcination, Sublimation, and Descension; or by water, as Distillation and
Dissolution.

But because both the Books of ancient and modern writers speak at large of
these things, I shall not further labor in their explication, because I can
add nothing new, nor yet any ornament or facility to them: it may suffice if I
add any thing definitively, and known to my self in general; and that is, that
Calcination is invented, for your overcoming of hard and rebellious things, and
for continuity, and valid and firm composition, which hinders division, and
admits not of easy separation: and hence four conveniences arise; the
combustion of impure and stinking Sulphur, the easy separation of superfluous
and extraneous earthiness, the fixation of the internal Sulphur, and more
prompt dissolution.

For it is natural to fire to consume those adustible parts, which are not of
the essence of a substance, to facilitate the division and rejection of
terrestrial excrements, to fix radical Sulphur, and to multiply salt in bodies,
which alone does afterward admit dissolution by water.

I say therefore, that Calcination agrees only to bodies, that because of
their continuity scarcely yield; for spirits and volatile things, which fly
away by fire, cannot be calcined, unless some fixing thing be added, which is
repugnant to their nature.

Seeing there is no other end in Calcination, then to extract salts, wherein
the better part and secret virtue of bodies consist; to which that corruptive
adustion adheres, which in sublimation we suffer to evaporate and fly away, as
useless; that the remaining substance may be better freed from terrestrial
dregs, and easier educed by fire to purification and stability. It is true
also, that sublimation requires some intension of fire; but that happens then
chiefly, when the things to be sublimated are more profoundly mixed with the
dregs of some other fixed body, that they may more pertinaciously hold their
terrestrial impurities: and this kind of sublimation is most secure, save when
we work upon subjects that have their dregs naturally more fixed.

Descension has a two fold use, one is to extract Oil out of vegetables
without combustion, the other to cleanse fusibles bodies, before they be made
volatile; and these are the three kinds of separation made by fire: now we
shall speak a little of the other two, Distillation and Dissolution, made by
water; and the former of these is made by inclination and straining, that the
limpidity of bodies may with water come forth into the water of dissolved
vegetables: for that same that is made by an Alembick, appertains to the order
of sublimations, which is effected by elevation, and not by ablution. And
though some account this for an indifferent and but a mean way, yet I say it
should not be rejected, but much esteemed, as that principally which Nature
uses in her operations, and which she establishes, as the sole medium for the
separation of terrestrial impurity; by which also many things are brought to
the height of their perfection, being by this kind of distillation, elevated
and sublimated to their purity: Whence some Philosophers have called it a
secret sublimation.

The second operation by water, to wit, dissolution, is effected by moist and
moderate heat; as Horse-dung, Saint Mary's Bath, the smoke of boiling water, or
by infusion in water, or else by inhumation in moist places: and the end of all
these is one, to wit, the reduction of the things calcined into water, that by
this liquefaction, the terrestrial matter may by straining, settle in the
bottom of the vessel: but this subtle practice, and all of the like kind,
should be reiterated; for if any would by continual calcination, separate the
more simple parts of the compound, and reduce to salt what has the essence of
salt; he thereby creates much loss, for the intemperate and continual violence
of the fire, will sublimate and evaporate a great part of that which is with
such labor sought, so that nothing will remain, but a small quantity of the
soluble matter, with a great deal of dregs; and besides, that matter may by
long abode in the fire, be made into glass: it is better therefore to fly to
frequent reiterations, then violate nature by the excess of any precinitancy. I
found such an inconvenience once in calcinating common Crystal, which while I
desired to purge from its excrements, and by long ignition to reduce to its
true essence, I found both it and its excrements made into glass, and thence
useless for my purpose: for though Crystal be clear, lucid and transparent,
yet in Calcination it first emits black, and then violaceous fumes, as also
stinking and sulphurous odours, which sufficiently attest its excrementitious
earthiness, as also white fumes following after the true Homogeneity of its
substance, which remains clear and fluid in small quantity, till it become true
chrystalline Salt; yea, by the duration of these last reiterations, its
ungrateful sent is changed into a most delicate one, like that of
violets-powder. By these reiterations of Calcinations, two more conveniences do
yet arise:

One is, that the thing calcined by assuefaction to the fire, brings stability
and subtilty to the Medicaments, as I said before.

The other, that a body often dissolved, acquires easy penetration, and ready
ingression; as also more potent strength to change the state of the patient,
from sickness, to sanity; from weakness, to vigor; from declination, to
restoration and perfect health: and these are the ordinary ways of all
separations, which have no other scope, then the purging of pure substances
from excrements, and elevating of their terrestrial grossness to a fiery
purity, and from imperfection to perfection: Which Hermes hints at, when he
says, that earth must be separated by fire, and the subtle from the gross;
which he says, must be done with great care and animadversion: For when he
speaks of the preparation of the universal Spirit after its terrification, and
opens the way to the preparation of all individuals, he would signify, that
there is something in this earth, which can scarce be retained and conserved;
and this is a light and volatile spirit, which is kept by the temperament of
fire.

But on the contrary, it will easily fly away with the separable and more
copious volatile part, if in the operation, temperate fire and a good method be
not used with much patience; where the Artist should observe this rule with all
diligence, that there are three distinct Sulphurs: whereof two are separable,
to wit, the external, which perishes by Calcination and Dissolution; and the
internal, which vanishes only by decoction; and the third is fixed, which is
properly the Sulphur of nature, and the proper subject of its substance:
whereunto Philosophers give the name of Agent, Fixed-grain, or Element of fire.

As to the external Sulphur, it is that first volatile and adustible water; for
it is plainly extraneous, and the first nutriment of fire: but the internal is
more rooted in, and united to the substance; and therefore yields not, save to
intent and continued heat: and therefore it assumes all colors before it
egrede; beginning first with black, which is the prime sign of earthiness,
adustion, and corruption, and the antecessor of putrefaction and corruption;
and then passes through other middle colors, till at length it put on
whiteness, which is the airy color; and then ascends to a fiery color, or
redness, in which the power of art, and dominion of fire, is terminated, and
beyond which there is no progress.

Which thing the Poets fabulously concealed under the unconstant form of
Proteus, who turned himself into various monstrous forms, that he might
affright those that would captivate him. This variety of colors proceeds from
the internal Sulphur, the true author and producer of all tinctures and
varieties, which are by Nature or Art observed in any subject. These colors
may be also distinctly noted in the decoction of the first universal Subject,
as I have above said, That it produced them in my operations: and first,
whiteness presents it self, and then Natures Sulphur appears, which Geber says
is white without, and red within: for redness immediately follows this
whiteness without all help, save the continuation and augmentation of Fire;
whence one Philosopher said, His Stone was a Gold-Ring covered with Silver.

I would briefly insert these few words about colors, not that I would presume
to teach the preparations and observations, which I know necessary for the
perfecting of that great and so much praised Philosophers Elixir; but only
that I may show the curious Disciples of learned Medea, which induced by
profound and ingenious inquisition, seek to enter the secrets of these
mysterious Physics, what Sulphurs must be rejected, and what must be retained
in all things: I hope, I shall spend that time well, which I have subtracted
from my houshold-affairs, if I restore any vigor or spark of life, to that
languishing part of Natural Philosophy, which envious Men have buried in the
Sepulcher of Calumny, under the odious title of abusive Transmutation and
falsifying of Metals; though ignorance only stop their eyes from discerning
this true mystery, which they load with opprobrious contumelies, and injurious
words; grounding their malice only on the malicious lies of impudent dullards,
who run about Cities, sell smoke, and obnubilate their false Sophistications
under the coat of this fair Virgin; deceiving the eyes of the too credulous
Commonalty with their pigments, and by their Syrenical and fraudulent Speeches,
precipitating curious Inquirers into Scylla or Charybdis.

CHAP. 4. Of the Spirits ascent into Heaven, and descent into the Earth.
THe Almighty Creator of all things, foreseeing from the beginning, that
infection and corruption growing with things compounded of Body and Spirit,
would move continual and intestine wars, he opposed a remedy to this
dissension; whereby the one may be conserved, and the other not destroyed: and
seeing the Spirit and Substance were included in a Body, and the Body immerged
in corruption, it was impossible that corruption should act upon and prevail
over the Body, and yet the Spirit placed in both should be kept free, and incur
no danger; but rather, that with the Body it should yield to deaths Tyranny,
which always intends Natures destruction, and the prostitution of all
individuals: which thing needs no proof, but appears sufficiently manifest,
from the natural, and sometimes the immature end of Animals, Vegetables and
Minerals, which we see every day by their corruption, when the Body being dead,
the Spirit must undergo the same fortune; that is, the virtue that enlivened
it, is annihilated: but because the prime Opificer would be admirable in all
his works, of his mere goodness and love to Mankind, who from the beginning he
predestined to be the Instrument of his Glory, and to whom he subjected
whatever was admirable in the Creation; for his Commodity, I say, he gave
certain expedient Remedies, whereby he might not only purify and perfect the
things created, but also, preserve and arm himself against the assaults of
mortal corruption.

Knowing then, that the two parts of Man were one created in another, to wit,
the Spirit in the Body, and that the Body would be continually infected by
corruption, and by sensuality, drawn and allured to intemperance, which infers
the true corruption, and weakening of all the members; he foresaw, that the
Spirit inhabiting like a Guest in the Body, could not be exempted from its
contagious depravation: and we ordinarily see, That Men given to excess of
intemperance and sensuality, accustom themselves to ill manners, and take
liberty in all corruption, both of Mind and Spirit; neither regarding Love nor
Fear to God, Honor or Respect to the World, nor Piety to themselves, nor
Charity toward their Neighbors. So that it is impossible, if they be thus
bound to inquinations in death, but their Spirits must undergo punishment, as
they have participated of pleasure.

Seeing moreover, all mankind by the fall of our first Parent, obnoxious to
death, and thence every Man inevitably to incur total destruction and
perdition; he mitigated, or rather redintegrated this Misery by an admirable
Remedy, far exceeding our capacity: for knowing Man by his Spirit and his Body
to participate of Heaven and of Earth, the Remedy also he made to partake of
Heaven and Earth, which is competible solely to our only Lord, Savior, and
Redeemer, Jesus Christ, who descended from Heaven into the Earth; and by a
mystery incomprehensible by us and common sense, was miraculously made Man
without the abdication of his Godhead; because our health could not come from
Earth alone, corruption reigning there: but it was necessary, that the Water
should come from above, where the Fountain of purity is; he therefore came
down, that he might dwell in us, and with us, and conclude us within the terms
of justice and temperance; regenerating us to newness of life, by the mutation
of our Spirit and Body, and mortifying in us our corruptions and sins, and
restoring us to the study of purity of virtue; which could not have been
effected save by him alone, the extreme of both Natures; for he is God-Man,
that he might conjoyn superior with inferior things, which were dis-joyned by
the incomparable distance of life and death, purity and corruption.

The Earth doubtlesly received this inestimable treasure far exceeding its
merit, by a medium that cannot be comprehended, from which he again ascended
into Heaven, by the Water of purification, and Fire of the Spirit, without
accidents and corporal passions, though he deposed not his Body, but retained
it incorruptible and glorious, having acquired immortality by death; who shall
again descend from his Fathers Right Hand, into the Earth, after the Universal
conflagration, to renew the World, and make a Separation betwixt the good
destined to life, and the evil condemned to death.

See now how well the Omnipotent Father, the Father of all compassions,
consulted for Man's good; to whose Body, joined with his Soul, he gave an equal
Preserver, whom he sent from Heaven, that he might be born on Earth; and whom,
by the light of Nature, we ought to seek.

Seeing Man was therefore endued with Reason and Judgment, that he might
acknowledge and comprehend his great gifts: but Man, created heavenly, for the
indagation of this benefit, as too forgetful of his birth, lays out that noble
and divine Light within him, in searching out frivolous and transitory
vanities, and not in the pursuit of solid wisdom and verity.

Briefly, he had rather follow the inclination of his Terrestrial Geniture,
then Divine and Celestial Wisdom, which he neglects as a thing indifferent, and
casually sent to him from above. Wherefore the Root of Mankind is as it were
extinguished before it grow out, (except some few who have had better Stars,
and more favorable Aspects in their Nativity) they desiring the possession of
transitory goods, more then the attainment of Divine and precious Gifts, which
our fecund Mother Nature has publicly and in all places fixed, for the
conservation of life, hurt, rather then helped, by their abundance immerged in
mortal corruption: And it is apparent, That those that are of a higher Spirit,
though they look upon the fulgour and splendour of those Mundane Riches, as no
way despicable; yet they will not rest in this surface, but seek to Divine
Virtue, occluded in the Center, which has indeed been cause of great errors
both in Medicine and Philosophy, to such as destitute of true light, groape at,
and in the dark pass by both.

Recalling then my mind to the clear light, by whose guidance we may attain
that salutary and best remedy, which God ordained particularly for the
conservation of mankind, and for the obtaining of Celestial benediction; I
shall endeavor with all humility and requisite sincerity, not as a Divine, but
as a Disciple of Wisdoms followers, to adumbrate my conceptions in a rude
style; which the lovers of verity may accept gratefully, if they find them
rational and pleasing.

I say then, that all understanding communicated to any man from man alone, is
uncertain and confused, because man is ordinarily laden with ignorance and
slow resolutions; but that which he receives from the univerial Light, is clear
and immovable. For to know absolutely, is to understand a thing by its first
causes; and there is no certitude in second causes, till we come to their
original: wherefore we cannot know the Nature of a Species, unless we foreknow
its Genus; neither can we know the Nature of Microcosmes (which are almost
infinite) unless we first find out the Nature of the Macrocosme, that gives
them being. Man likewise cannot be known, without the precedent cognition of
the world, whose effigies he is; nor yet the great world, unless we know whence
and how it was made: For how shall one know a man, whose principle is nothing
but a small deformed mucilage? or how shall a man know him that is born, unless
he know those that begot him? and here I mean not the second, but the first
Parents, to wit, heaven and earth: and unless a man understand the first
creation of these, how shall he know them? as an Embryo in a womb, which is
nothing but the congregation of a certain humor, which is afterward formed to
the example of its parents, and so in progress, till it become perfect: so the
Heaven, Earth, and all that is therein, that is, all this great world, is like
an Embryo in the Chaos, whence none can have any light, unless he consider the
first rudiments and progress of its distinction and formation.

Let us therefore first go to the Fountain and Spring, that we may thence trace
the rivulets that flow from it, and know them, and by examples of forms judge
of things formed.

I say therefore, that the prime and absolute creator (who is as a point whence
all proceed, and an inexhaustible fountain whence infinite rivulets issue, has
a Nature proper and particular to himself, which is to conserve as well as
produce the whole world: for it is the property of a good Author, to produce
things; and when he has procreated them, to conserve and defend them.

This first Effect, which is Creation, is a secret that we are ignorant of; we
understand it not, but by the affinity or likeness it has to generations.

But the second is open and manifest to such, at least, as are illuminated,
elect, and born of the Spirit; but not to such as are sons of the flesh, lest
precious pearls should be trod upon, and cast to swine.

Jesus Christ our Lord has perfected the former and more excellent, and taught
us, commanding us to imitate him in all good works, whereof he has set us an
ensample: For Nature walks always in the same tract, and never forsakes her
ways. As therefore the universal Parent or Conserver, consulted by his
providence the common conservation of all things, from the beginning of the
world: So Nature from the beginning had her intentions, and was always occupied
in continual action about productions: For as it was necessary that the safety
of the Spiritual part of man should descend from above, so is it likewise as
necessary, that the safety of the Body should come from the same Fountain,
because from below, where the seat and habitation of corruption is, neither
life nor safety can proceed. For what end do the Heavens, the perpetual
Fountain of Restoration and Perfection, by the influence of their virtues flow
upon the Body of the Earth, which the benevolent Stars, with their benign
Aspects, sympathizing with the afflicted society of mankind, do daily
graciously prosecute and affect, but to generate in her a durable and
enlivening Spirit, which in the Womb of this fecund mother assumes a Body, and
manifests and dilates its faculties through all the parts of the world,
distributing them to each creature according to its exigency: and hereupon do
the particular powers depend, which we must know, by their effects in Herbs,
Beasts, Stones, and other things which have drawn their proprieties from this
general Spirit, and do miraculously conserve us and other creatures. And as it
pleased God to enrich man with the perfection of his own Son, according to the
extension of the humane Nature, and yet he would not have any one contaminated
with sins and iniquities, to seek remedies and health from man, but from
himself the true Fountain, whence all perfection flows: so also Nature, the
perfect observer of the Divine will, and imitator of his works, has not settled
the perfect virtue of curation and restoration, in Herbs and particular
Creatures, but would have us seek it precisely in the Center, whence this is
communicated to Creatures, to wit, in the Earth, where this enlivening Spirit
is generated: for if simples are endued with the virtue of curing, restoring,
nourishing, and conserving how much more has the abundant dispensor of it,
whence all these receive it? but that the Earth is the treasury and dispensor
of these virtues, daily experience gives us suffient reasons; for she must
needs possess them, else she could not give them.

It is therefore admirable, that so many egregious men should spend their time
in drawing their waters from simple rivulets, far removed from their pure
Fountain, and running through a muddy current, and not go to the Fountains head.

I do not in the mean time contemn special Medicaments, but I would that
Generals were more sought after, and particulars not neglected: for though a
General Medicament might salve every Sore, yet particulars merit commendation;
especially in external superficiary Diseases, when the Center of sanity is not
afflicted.

That therefore I may return to my Scope, I say again, the Earth is the Matrix,
wherein the Heavens beget that Spirit, that Nourisher, Restorer, and Conserver
of Bodies, which alone gives solidity and perfect cure: and how this so potent
and efficacious a Spirit should be found and taken, all wise men should direct
their cogitations to so useful an inquisition, that they might observe the
exemplary Steps, which Nature paces in perfecting her intentions; and hold this
for a rule, though God infinitely exceeding Nature, is not bound to natural
reason, no more then a Monarch to the Laws himself prescribes, which yet his
subjects observe without inquiring why he prescribed them: And who has more
faithfully and successfully followed this example, then Hermes Trismegistus?
who after the deluge, was first (as some say) that opened to men the mysteries
of the perfect knowledge of God, and exactly explicated Natures secrets: for
besides that Angel-like in his Poemandrum, he explains Divinity, where he
manifests the Doctrine of the Creation of the great and small world, its
beginning, progress, and duration; he also continues his holy Philosophy with
the same hand in his Asclepium, declaring with a spirit and voice prophetical,
that the regeneration of man should be wrought by the Mediation of the Son of
God, endued with humane flesh: he also industriously touches the same Scope in
his Tabula Smaragdina, where he says, that as all things in the world were
made out of one subject, by mediation of one God, so his Magistery, which is
the chief and general Medicine, may be perfected and completed by adaptation
only; which adaptation is nothing else but a Glass, where we may see Divine
Meditation aenigmatically represented, to show that Nature necessarily follows
the steps of her Master.

He also attests in other Books, That the Author of Regeneration should descend
from Heaven, and become Man, and live among Men for their edification. He says
also in his Tabula, (which he left as the last Testament and Testimony of the
excellency of his thoughts) That this general Spirit, the Conserver of Bodies,
shall descend from Heaven, to wit, from the Sun and Moon (which in his
Poemandrum, he calls, The principal Rulers in this Mundane Monarchy) to assume
a Body in the Earth, which he calls the Spirits Nurse, by the Mediation of the
Air, in whose Belly he shall be carried, because the Celestial Influences
cannot be communicated to the Earth, unless the Air, which is like an
Intercessor, carry them to it: and as the Divine Restorer and Protector of our
Souls, in the assumption of humane Flesh, deposed nothing of his Divinity; so
(says he) the Universal Spirit shall retain and keep all its Virtue entire,
when it is turned into Earth, that is, when it assumes a Terrestrial Body.

God also willed his own Son, and our Redeemer, in his assumed Humanity, be as
it were regenerated by and with the Water of Baptism, and Fire of the Holy
Spirit: not that he needed any such purgation, but because he was to converse
with Men contaminated with corruption, that he might in all things yield
himself an example of Renovation and Purification; giving Men a visible and
ample Testimony, That, according to the Flesh, he was of the same Nature with
them: not contaminated or corrupted, but obnoxious to passion, and equally
mortal as they.

In like manner, our fecund Mother Nature, willed her firstborn, though pure
in his Center, That he should be regenerated by Water and Fire, that is, by
Separation of the Terrestrial from the fiery part, the spisse from the subtle,
and the impure from the pure: which Hermes also aimed at, when he said, That
the Earth should be separated from Fire: for what God has conjoined, Man
should not separate; but only the impure and gross from the subtle and pure
by Fire.

And besides this Sense, which first offers it self to our Intellects, there is
yet another more occult meaning: for seeing by the Separation of Earth from
Fire, he means, that that is gross, from that that is subtle; he seems to hint,
that we should separate the natural qualities of these two Elements, by
detracting the moist frigidity mixed with heavy Terrestrial things, without
which that cold cannot subsist, and by putting on hot siccity, which is of the
Nature of Fire, and consequently light and spiritual.

For which cause, he adds, That it must ascend from Earth to Heaven, that is,
from imperfection to perfection: for Paracelsus calls Fire the Firmament: and
as nothing can attain perfection, unless it first depose its imperfect, gross,
and mortal bark, wherein this cold quality abounds, the cause of all
mortification, as heat is of life; so also, prudent Nature observes this Rule,
That each subject should sustain and pass the obsure blackness of death, and
expect the clear and candid renovation of life and immortality; that is,
impassible essence, whereon neither Fire nor corruption has any power. And
assuredly, the acquisition of this life by death is naturally exercised by all
Creatures continually; for all Sperm or Seed of Animals is mortified in some
Matrix, and of Vegetables in the Earth, before any specification can be made.
But if this rule takes place in the members, by how much may we more exactly
observe, and directly imitate it in the head? and if the life acquired by
mortification, be of any duration, how much more shall that be perpetual, which
is principal?

Jesus Christ taught these things by similitude of a Grain; which he says
cannot fructify, unless it first die; signifying the mystery of his
Resurrection, which his Death should precede: for he willed Death, that he
might rise to a glorious and perpetual Life: therein not only giving example
to men, but expressing the whole Idea of Nature.

That divine and learned Ermite, Morienus Romanus, who is often quoted by
modern and natural Philosophers, avers the same of the fixed Grain, whereto
Nature has given power to perfect Metals: for he says, Unless it putrefie and
grow black, it cannot be perfected and completed, but returns to naught.

I have taken liberty to say thus much, that I may teach the younger sort, how
the Creator should be acknowledged by simple Creatures: and because the
vulgarity of Men begs this knowledge from remoter things; acting as they do,
who seek the perfection of Sciences, from the Scholars of the lowest Form,
whereas they should require it from the best Directors and Doctors; I would
excite them by these natural conceptions, that they would convert the principal
endowments of their Souls, to the search of the general principle; and that in
more exquisite things, such as impart life and preservation to all mortal
Creatures.

Mortification then, necessarily precedes all entrance into life, and
principally in this Spirit the firstborn of Nature, when it assumed a Body;
for else, no Man could separate it from Body, which hinders its Regeneration to
Life, and Pacification of its Essence: not, as though by combustion and
destruction it lost its Body in Death, nor yet by Putrefaction; but so, that in
Germination, the Putrefaction of Seeds annihilates not that which is
corporified in them: for which cause, in the Exaltion of Mercury, or the
Universal Spirit, after the first degree, which is made by Separation, all
that is corporeal and spiritual becomes volatile, because the sublimatory virtue
therein, overcomes the fixing faculty; but the fixed part afterward retains
the volatile with it, being helped by the action of heat; which augmenting the
power of the two nobler Elements, destroys the power of the two weaker: which
Hermes hints at in a certain Treatise, by a plumous Bird detained with a Bird
without Feathers: And Nicholaus Flumellus, by two Dragons, one with and another
without Wings.

But that I may not longer fold my self in these Daedalean Labyrinths, see we
not all Vegetables increase, and elevate themselves upwards by virtue of this
volatile Spirit? which, as I said before, would carry them higher toward the
place whence it came, whereto it has an appetite, but that it is detained by
its proper Earth and corporal Mass, wherein some fixed matter resides.

But lest some, not sufficiently accustomed to Philosophical terms, should
think we contradict our selves, I will here explicate my self: I say then, That
I mean not by this volatile Spirit, that which I before called volatile and
separable Sulphur; for that is rather the Author of Corruption then Growth: but
that most simple part of the primaeve vapor, which never loses its subtily,
whose Nature is to be elevated, and tend to perfection; for to sublimate, is
properly and Philosophically, no more then to perfect and exalt matters from
imperfection to perfection. As therefore this Mercury has an elevable; so has
it a stable substance: the first is naturally innate in it; the second is in
its center or power, yet it cannot compass its effect without the help of Art.
And that I may show more plainly, in what ways Nature proceeds in her
operations, I think it convenient to add a little about the causes and manner
of Fixation.

Repeating therefore that indubitable Axiom I alleged in the beginning of
this Book, as perpetually observed in the Worlds Constitution, to wit, That all
that has life, has also some duration; and that nothing is produced under the
cope of Heaven, which has not some kind of life in it: I say, that this
Duration must be wrought by Conservation to Perpetuity: for Perpetuation is the
scope of Nature; seeing it is the endeavor of every good Opificer, to preserve
the work of his hands, till it be corrupted by the injury of time, or the light
of its life extinguished by the cold ashes of death, to whose feet all things
necessarily prostrate themselves, by this inevitable law, That whatsoever has
beginning, must also have an end. For if all things should remain in their
first extreme, that is, in their beginning, without progress to their second
extreme, that is, their death, all things had yet been left in their Chaos; or
rather, nothing would have consisted in its being; and the principles of all
subjects were useless, and destructive to themselves.

Nature therefore, to eschew these inconveniences, observes the said order and
progress of things, existing in continual action and motion, that is,
conservation, and perpetuation.

And now, that which extends life, or conserves it, cannot subsist against the
force of destruction, without some fixation and constancy; and this
conservative essence, is in some more fixed then in others; whence they are
also of a longer and more durable life, and more difficultly destroyed and
mortified; as a Heart and Crow, amongst animals; an Oak, amongst Plants; and
Gold, amongst Minerals: and this happens by the more equal and digested
commixtion of Elements: so that death, whose property it is to divide and
disjoyn, cannot so easily enter these compounds, as being firmly united and
well digested; and by how much Bodies are more firm thus, by so much they are
less subject to the accidents of mortal corruption.

But Nature being not able of her self to attain this perfection of union and
digestion, cannot totally and finally save and preserve Bodies from
destruction: but the industry of Art (though Art of it self be nothing without
Nature) imitating her in these things, exceeds her in the proper course of her
own ways: for observing that conservation and prolongation of life, is
attainable by something tending to fixation, which must be effected by union
and digestion (for nothing can be fixed but what is Homogeneous, and of one
Nature) the Artist labors, that he may find out the thing that is fixable, and
deduce it to perfect fixation; which he does by the same ways, order and
operation that Nature uses, to wit, by separating extraneous, and uniting
Homogeneous parts, which he absolves by long and ingenious digestion of the
things united.

But because it is impossible for him to separate or extract this from
individual and specifical Bodies, because of their firmer union and more
compact digestion, he is glad to seek it in the bowels of the Earth, whence all
things proceed: for to extract it entire and absolutely virtuous from another
place, were a work of no profit, and impossible; and to think how it may be
made perfect, is a labor both long and dubious: whence the Poet said well,

Hic sive nullibi illud est quod querimus.
Here or nowhere is that we seek.
And they are doubtlesly deceived, who following crooked and bypath, stick in
the common signification and rind of Philosophical words, and study not to find
out the lively marrow of their intentions: They should therefore sacrifice
first to the infernal Queen; for there is the Fountain and Spring of all things.

Wise men begin their works from the root, and not from the branches; choosing,
as Doctor Bacon says, to congeal the thing that Nature begun her first
operations about, by a proportionate mixtion, and union of pure living Mercury,
with a like quantity of Sulphur, into one Mass: Oh holy words! wherein this
good Anglian, or rather Angel, clearly depinged that one and true matter,
whereof all Philosophers have writ Volumes under diverse figures and Enigmatical
Fables; not because they would maliciously hide it, but keep the privilege of
this knowledge for learned and pious Men, who by continual study and laborious
experience find and adorn it.

But lest I should move some masters to suspect that I allege this place
ignorantly, and understand it improperly; I would have them know, that by that
matter which Bacon so ingeniously represents, I mean the universal Spirit
whereof I treat; and likewise, that I put a difference between the Father and
the Son; or the Genitor, and him that is Generated; or the Producer, and him
that is Produced: neither need I blush to say, that I know the one as well as
the other: For the Philosopher here would have such enquire after the
confection of the Philosophers Stone, to seek the principle of Minerals; and he
paints out the first matter of Metals, prepared, compounded, and specified by
Nature.

But I treat of first matter not yet specified, which may be properly called
the first matter of this first matter of Metals, or the most general Genus, so
much celebrated by Raymundus Lullius; but I used this sentence for example and
authorities sake, yet so as no absurdity lurks therein: for the universal
Spirit is the common Parent of Mercury and Sulphur, contained and
proportionated by Nature, in this one Philosophical subject.

But I would have the curious Artist consider two things: first, that by
subtle imagination he choose an enlivening Nature, apt for the conservation of
all Bodies; the other, that he choose a thing which of it self can enliven, and
regenerates. Yet I would not have him to choose two different and separated
Matters, the one Agent, and the other Patient; but only one, that may at once
be of virtue to enliven, and to be enlivened.

As to active Vivification, I have said enough; but as to the Passive, I say,
That every Principle has its Original from it self: For if it should have it
elsewhere, it were no Principle; and while it gives being to others, it must
necessarily, whilst it generates them, draw from it self restoration, and
perpetual plenitude: wherefore it is in continual action and motion toward
vivification, whereby its destruction is hindered; for it will never forsake it
self: and it has motion in and from it self; which Macrobius also disputed in
his Comment upon Scipio's dream, discoursing on the soul of man; though I think
his discourse may be better apted to the Soul or Spirit of the world, which is
my subject.

I will therefore borrow this from his Arguments: Whatsover is moved of it
self, is the beginning of motion, and lives continually; and that that lives
continually cannot be enlivened but from it self; it is therefore vivificable:
but the Spirit of the world is such, because it has its seat in the Earth, to
convert it self into Earth, wherein, as Hermes rightly, all it virtues, actions
and qualities remain entire: it follows also, seeing it is vital, that it
reassumes life, restoring it self by its own proper power: we find the same
also in this universal Mercury, which is always nourished, and restored in its
Mine; so that if by any means it be extracted, it always grows to the same form
whereof it was before; and wheresoever it is cast, there will be plenty of it
always after.

Not as if it were generated of the Earth, but in the Earth, through whose
parts it creeps, extending it self continually by multiplication and
vegetation; which the Ancients denote by the Serpent, which Moses says creeps
on the Earth, and feeds it self on the dust thereof: and this caused the
Cabalists to call him the prince of Sepulchers, because he devours and consumes
the Bodies there interred; not that dead Bodies, or the earth, are his
aliments, but only the seats where he is fed and nourished. This is the place
where he is moved, turned, and twines without ceasing; whereof Medea admonishes
Jason, where she says (in Epist. Heroid. Ovidij)

Pervigil ecce draco squamis crepitantibus horreus,
Sibilat and torto pectore verrit humum.
Lo here the Dragon with his horrid Scales,
Does watch, and hiss, and plow the very dales.
Which Rythmes a French Author thus expresses.

Voy le dragon veillant, de fureur sorcene
Qui d'escaile crugaten a le corpse entourne,
Don't le gosier sifflant fumee and feu deserre
Et qui par replis lors va baliant la terre
De sa large poitrine en la poudre imprimant
Les sineux siallons qu'il trace incessament.
Behold the scaly swelling Dragon lurking,
Who always listens with a watchful ear
Who knits his brows, and never shuts his eyes here
But him that sees his cust tongues, teeth afrights
With horror; whose wide throat emits such flames,
As do infect the Air with blackest fumes:
Behold his many twinings, which he deep
Impresses in the earth, whilst he does creep,
And plough the ground with his broad breast, whilst he
Returns in the same tract continually.
I adduce these two Considerations, not only to show how Mercury must be
sought, but also to confirm, that that which is fixable in it, is nothing else
but the enlivening essence, which fixed in due manner, perpetuates and keeps
life in all things it enters; by its purity expelling Excrements, and by its
perfection, perfecting imperfect things. The end of Fixation, both natural and
artificial, is Perpetuation and Conservation, which are effected by the
Mediation of that Tincture which Mercury acquires by this Fixation: for that
Tincture is Life, and Life is nothing else but that which opens and colors the
Body with such a Tincture, as shows it to be vital, and perishes with its death.

Nature therefore colors Blood, wherein life consists, with a red Tincture:
and when the Blood is clearer, and more lively red, the Body is more sound,
fair and vigorous: as on the contrary, when the Blood is dense, black, adust
with choler, or changed into a false color, the Body is pained and sick
within, and by discoloration gives Testimony thereof without.

We may observe the same in Vegetables, whose lively vigor consists in
greenness; which being changed, we say it is turning or declining toward
death. The perfection also, or imperfection of Metals, is discernable by their
colors. Gold is endued with a magnetical virtue, which by the splendent fulgor
of its tincture, draws man's earth after it: in which Nature spends all her
forces, but leaves the victory to Arts industry, which by graduation to the
haight, which it adds to its natural splendour, makes it far more fulgent;
insomuch that it is called the Terrestrial Sun.

An Artist then may exalt the golden color to the height of obscure redness;
by which augmentation, imperfect Metals in a certain degree, may, by projection
of this artificial Tincture, be brought to the height of perfection; so that we
see this golden color introduced by Nature into this Metal, is only the way
to that redness, wherein the completion of perfect Virtue lies: for which
cause, this Metal, though far excelling others, can communicate no perfection
nor conservation to humane Bodies, as a thousand Jugglers and Sluggards in
Physics, promise by their Sophistical Fusions, and Fantastical Confections.

But if more curious Artists work upon this subject, they may make it acquire
such a degree of inseparable redness, that by the excess of its heat, it shall
work miracles, and yet it shall consume nothing but superfluities, and shall
conserve and multiply the substance of Bodies; though Philosophers say, That
its heat as much exceeds our common fires, as common fires do innate heat in
Animals.

Paracelsus in his Treatise of Tinctures, extols that highly which is extracted
out of Gold by Spirit of Wine, and attributes many singular Virtues to it, as
also to that that is made of Antimony and Coral; before which, he yet seems to
prefer the Tincture of Mercury, which he says may, by perfect Fixation, be
brought wholly to a Tincture, so that it will penetrate Bodies, because of its
most subtle purity: where I think, he means not that vulgar, but Philosophical
Mercury, wherein Art, perfecting Nature, has wrought these two effects, to
wit, perfect Tincture, and complete Fixation.

Tincture then in proper locution, is the pure substance of things; and Body is
nothing but an Excrement: which is also manifest, in that Bodies, after the
Separation of their Tincture, are useless, without virtue, and corruptible; no
otherwise then a carcass without life, color or motion.

Tincture may then be called the scope of Fixation, it attaining by its
permanency in fire, a conservative faculty in those Bodies to which it is
applied. But the manner of attaining this degree of Fixation, in which the
Completion of the whole work consists, is no other, then that fugitive and
light things be prudently kept in the Fire, that they may be brought into
assuefaction with it, that they may endure most violent heat. And for this
cause, good Authors commend Patience to their Disciples, as proceeding from
God; but Precipitancy, as from the Devil.

Take this for an infallible Rule, That unless Calcination go before, nothing
can be fixed; and that this should be done, by conjoyning the fixable Spirit
with something of a convenient Nature, that may retain it in the Fire of
Calcination, that by this means it may accustom it to sustain heat by little,
till it can endure the ultimate augmentation of Fire, which infers Fixation.
And the Reason why we must proceed with such discretion, is, because, if we
should too readily precipitate this operation, the special Spirituality, which
is the Mother of this Tincture, would fly away, and leave the Body without any
impression of the tingent Virtue; so that a new Spirit must of necessity be
given to this dead Head, before the desired color can be introduced, which is
one of the Secrets of this Chemical Art: for it is the Spirit, and no other
thing, that colors by mediation of Fire; and this Tincture completed and
exalted in our Mercury, should be elevated to the height of perfection; that,
as Hermes speaks, it may ascend into Heaven; and when it has sustained all
mortal torments, receive a new life; that is, after it has passed the darksome
straits of Putrefaction, it may be elevated to a Resurrection, by the Ablation
of all mortiferous and corruptive Accidents. And thus it will attain the height
of perfection, which is effected by Separation of Earth from Fire, the subtle
from the spiss; and by Fixation of its purged part by gradual heat.

But that I may speak without ambages and doubts, This ascent into Heaven
(which is the Sublimation and Exaltation of its parts to perfection) cannot be
effected, unless Separation and Purification go before, and give place to
Fixation, as to the scope and ultimate end of Art.

And here note, That this is done for two ends: one is, That the Tincture may
be perpetuated; the other, That the volatile and combustile Sulphur of the
Mercury, may be separated and extracted; which cannot be effected, but by the
long and continual action of Fire: and this Fire must be regular, lest violent
precipitation in the beginning, make the pure Spirit of Mercury, not yet fixed,
to ascend: which Comes Trevisanus hints at, saying, That Writers differ about
the structure of the Fire, though they all aim at one and the same scope, to
wit, That it should be so made, that the fugitive Spirit should fly away,
before the persequent suffered any thing from the Fire; that is, that the
spiritual part should not leave the corporal, through the ardour of the Fire,
which should fix it by the action of common Fire, discreetly applied in its
several degrees; wherein the whole of this Art consists.

But some may say, If Fixation in the Fire communicate Permanency to this
penetrating subtilty, how shall it afterward be sublimated?

Let such take waxen Wings, and they shall see, that they will have a mind to
fly from this Prison, the Earth: But they must mind, lest ascending too high,
the Sun melt their Wings, and burn their Feathers, and so precipitate them into
the Sea. But let them imitate wise Daedalus, who held the mean betwixt two
extremes, because, if he had flown too low, the Water would have laden his
Wings; if too high, the Sun would have melted his Wax. It was the impatience
and blind desire Icarus had of overcoming Daedalus, that wrought his ruin.

And whence came Phaeton's pernicious ruin, when he would govern the Sun, but
that he thought himself more apt for this work, then his Father? who admonished
him thus:

Hac sit iter manefesta votae vestigia cernes
Utque ferant aequos, and Caelum and Terra calores
Nec preme, nec summum molire per aethera currum
Altius egressus Caelestia signa cremabis,
Inferius Terras, medio tutissimus ibis.
Run where thou see the marks that I have made
With these same wheels; and that thou may evade
The danger of burning Heaven, Sea, or Earth,
Fly not too high, nor yet stoop down beneath
This tract; for if too high you soar, you will fire
The Heavens; if too low, the Earth you will move with ire;
Keep then the mean, as safest, in your gyre.
But the recitation of these Ovidian Verses, are not enough, though they be
most true, according to the Opinion of the Ancients; I will rather explicate
their intention folded up in the Coat of their Fables, seeing those only serve
to the expert in this Art.

Let the curious then know, That when Hermes says this thing must ascend into
Heaven, and again descend to the Earth, and acquire the virtue of both; he
means not that the matter should be sublimated to the top of the Vessel, but
only that it is necessary, that after perfect fixation, some spiritual portion
be applied to it, whereby it may be dissolved, and become altogether spiritual;
leaving its Terrestrial consistence, and assuming an aerie Nature, which is the
Philosophers Heaven; and when it has reached this simplicity, be again
coagulated and reduced to Earth, by a new coction effected by the same degree
of heat, till the Body so embrace the Spirit, that they become one
incorporated, and by this means acquire a Celestial subtilty, and a Terrestrial
fixation.

And that we may always note Natures ways; if this Icarus cannot totally
elevate himself, he must resartiate his wings, by putting to new wax, new
feathers; that is, by reiterated dissolutions, which the Masters of this Art so
often repeat, that they seem importunate to all such as understand not the
consequence of this repetition; which yet is only, that things might be better
united, being mixed by their least particles; which none can effect without the
purification both of the Body and Spirit, keeping the Spirit volatile from all
Terrestrial impurities, and the Body from all internal Dregs, during this
fixation: These things then ascend into heaven by Dissolutions, and descend to
the Earth by congelations.

This Body then glorified, will ascend into Heaven upon the wings of its
Spirit, and in the same perfection again descend to the Earth, to separate good
from evil, and preserve the one but destroy the other: that is, what Bodies
soever it enters, it ejects their impurities, and conserves their purer
substance; for reiterated solutions and fixations, gave it power to enter
Bodies. This Hermaphroditical young man, and his delicate Salmacis, must be
washed in a Fountain, that they may embrace each other; and Salmacis burning in
love, say, When shall the time come, that this fair Young man shall never be
separated from me, nor I from him, and that our mutual loves may perpetuate
their conjunction in felicity, that so these two Bodies may have one heart and
one face? and then we must take care, that the Island Delos remain immovable,
and that Apollo and Diana, whom Latona there brought forth, may be both stayed
in that place. This fable denotes nothing, but that the dissolved matter,
wherein the Philosophers sun and moon is contained, should again be congealed
and fixed.

I would not have my Reader imagine, that he shall in this Book find the rich
Mines of Peru, to satiate his avarice, and make him rich withal; though I have
sufficiently demonstrated in several places, to men that have their eyes in
their heads, that the way to these riches is not unknown to me. Yet I will not
easily be persuaded to undertake so long a journey, for certain reasons, not
unlike those that held Trevisanus two years from this enterprise, after he had
got the perfect knowledge of this Magistery. Only I have in my mind
determined to ratify that most precious confection, or rather inestimable
treasure, which benign Nature gives for the sustentation and prolongation of
man's life, who from God received privilege to be man's Protector; which I
undertake, out of an honorable desire, that I may by my industry advance the
public good, when the favorable Star of experience has led me to my secure
Port, which I would willingly impart to curious Men: For I have so successfully
elaborated this Universal Spirit, that with a small quantity, I have restored
above a hundred men, consumed with different Diseases, to sanity: and doubtless
many excellent wits would have penetrated deeper into this obscure and devious
Wood, but that seeing it filled with horrid Monsters, they have been so
confounded, as to leave this perilous Path, and forsake their enterprise.

As Poliphilus has by a most ingenious pencil expressed; whose generous and
undaunted courage, sleighting those common terrors, has effected so much, that
both the sides of this black, dark Word, lay open to light; and by whose
manuduction you may, notwithstanding all obstacles, arrive safe and and sound
at the delicious and grateful habitation of Lady Polia, shut up in the rich
Temple of Vesta.

This I can assert for indubitable, that the way he held is open to all; but
all have not that Ariadne's Clew that he had, to extricate himself out of this
labyrinth; neither is every one a Theseus, that he can overcome the Minotaure.

It is certain that Nature, like a loving Mother, proposes and offers this
precious Treasure of life to all; and that God our Universal Father, keeps open
the Gate of this fatal Cavern, for the commodity of all men: for the descent
to Hell is easy; but then again, to ascend to Heaven, hic labor, hoc opus est:
Stay coachman, here is a straw.

First then, that splendent Branch, Dedicated to the infernal Juno, must be
found out, of which Virgil writes.

Accipe que peragenda prius, latet arbore opacae
Aureus and foliis and lento vim ine ramus
Junoni inferne dictus sacer, hunc tegit omnis
Lucus, and obscuris claudunt convallibus umbrae,
Sed non ante datur tellures operta subire,
Auricomos quam quis decerpserit arbore faetus.
Hoc sibi pulchra suum ferri Proserpina munus
Instituit, primo acculso non defi cit alter
Aureus and simili frondescit virga metallo.
Ergo alte vestiga oculis, and rite repertum
Carpe manis; namque ille volens facilisque sequetur
Si te fata vocant, aliter non viribus ullis
Vincere, nec duro poteris convellere ferro.
First see what you must do: the golden tree
Which to the infernal Juno we decree,
Lies hid under a grove in a deep vale;
And now you may not pass within the pale
Of the Earths deep Cabinet, until you have
Snatched from this tree her offspring, which to grave
Proserpina you must present: the tree
That gave this fruit, will not long fruitless be:
For lo, another golden offspring follows;
Fix your eyes here, and in your hand retain then
What you do find: if the fates do favor now,
You vanquish; but if not, no force will do.
If therefore Nature be sollicitous in hiding these things, lest they should be
indifferently prostrated to all, or Hogs get to the honey-pots; no wonder if
Ancient and Modern Philosophers, have invented so many aenigmatical Figures,
and hidden Fables, to cover and cloth this Science with; For they know well
enough, that ceremonious Nature, would never have hid her self under so many
different Forms and Species, but have appeared naked, but that her Venerable
Secrets would thereby incur that contempt, which always accompanies common
things.

For which cause I also in this Treatise use the same Solennity and
Taciturnity, lest I should undergo the same peril that he did, who published
the Mysteries of the Elysian Goddesses, which should have been kept Secret and
Chaste, and not like common Harlots exposed to public abuse: And whether I
have spoken conveniently to my own purpose, or no, such as have made progress
in this search, may better judge: for experience is the best Dame.

In the mean time, I hope none will give a hard interpretation, or pass a bad
sentence on me, because I have compared Natural and Chemical operations, with
Divine and Christian Mysteries, wherewith they have some conformity: For by
this application, I have no way profaned them, but rather Celebrated their
Excellences, and pointed at that great care and testimony of our Creator, in
ratifying the safety both of Body and Soul together.

Which reason moved one Author, so that he wrote, that the true Chemistry,
which Paracelsus calls Spagiry, follows the Gospel foot by foot; because by the
help of this and fire, Nature exerts her most potent faculties; which Ancient
Philosophers, as Brachmannus, Gymnosophisters, and all the Egyptians, insinuate
in their Theology.

For all the Magic of Paganism, and all the fables of Poets, signify no more
then what this Book Treats of; which the most Learned and subtle Bracescus
diligently examined; though envious Toladanus writes the contrary, after he was
deceived in an experiment in this Art, which he thought he had wresled from him
by his importunity, believing that the spume of Iron was the Philosophers
Mercury, because he asserted that it was extracted out of a vile Matter, of
small price, which was cast into the streets; not observing, that the discreet
Masters of this Art, cloth their Matter with strange Vestments, calling them
by all the names of Metals, in discriminately, and yet without the least fraud:
for he that knows this matter, knows also, that it contains the seven Metals in
it.

And I would gladly know, whether they think Cosmopolita meant of the vulgar
Steel, when he says, That Neptune showed him under one Rock, two Mines, the
one of Gold, the other of Steel.

The Man was too plain, to harbor such frivolous conceits: but he named his
matter thus, because of the conformity with polished Steel. And Bracescus had
played the part of a Fool, and not a Philosopher, if he had in one moment
opened the whole mystery of his Secret, in the acquiring whereof he had
doubtlessly spent two thirds of his life.

But that I may add something to the explication of these Mythologies, do we
not plainly see, That that ancient Demogorgon, the Parent of all the gods, or
rather of all the Members of the World, which, they say, inhabits the Center of
the Earth, covered with a green and ferruginous Coat, nourishing all kinds of
Animals, is nothing else but the universal Spirit, which by God's command
produced the Heaven out of the Chaos, with the Elements and all things therein,
which it always hitherto sustains and enlivens? for it truly took up its
Habitation in the middle of the Earth, as we have declared in the beginning of
this Book, where it sits as it were in its Throne; and thence, as from the
Heart of some great Body, and Seat of Life universal, animates and nourishes
all things: and that green and ferruginous Coat, is nothing but the surface of
the Earth, which is of a blackish and Iron-colour, decked and variegated with
diverse colored Herbs and Flowers.

Virgil, perfectly skilled in all these mystical Secrets, called this Spirit or
Soul of the World, Jupiter; whom his Pastorer Damaeta invokes, in his third
Eclogue, because, as he says, all things are full of him. And Pan, that god of
the Woods, worshipped by Shepherds, is taken for the same: for besides that
this word Pan signifies All, he is also made the God of the Woods, because the
Greeks, for the Governor thereof, worshipped the Chaos, which they otherwise
call Hyle, that is, a Wood. Orpheus bespeaks Pan thus:

Pan le fort le subtle, l'entier, l'universel,
Tout air, tout eau, tout terre, and tout feu immortel,
Qui sieds avec le temps dedans un throne mesme,
Au regne inferieur, au moyen, au supreme.
Concevant, engendrant, produisont, gardant tout,
Principe en tout, de tout, qui de tout viens a bout,
Germe du feu, de l'air, de la terre, de l'onde,
Grand esprit avivant tous les members du monde,
Qui vas du tout en tout les natures changeant
Pour ame universelle en tous corpse te logeant
Ausquels tu done estre, and mourirment and vie
Promant par mill effects ta puissance infinite.
Pan strong and subtle, great and general,
That art both Fire, Air, Earth, Water, and all;
That raign'st always, and over every thing;
Getting, conceiving, bearing, and keeping
What'ere beginning had, or have an end;
That Art, both Tree and Fruit, both Foe and Friend;
The Spirit that does bind the worlds parts,
That penetrates all Natures, and imparts
Both life and motion, power to act and will,
And that do with thy virtue all things fill.
Saturn the Son of Heaven and Vesta, which is the Earth, and Husband to Ops his
Sister, (which is that co-adjuvant and conservant power of all things)
represent Demogorgon; and the Infants that he first devours, and then vomits up
again, are they not Bodies, to whom he gives being, and at last reduces them to
himself, whence new ones always issue, that by his perpetual vicissitude, the
order established in the beginning, may be preserved to the end?

He is sometimes painted with gray and sordid Hair, his Head covered, with a
Sickle in his Hand; and for his Symbol, having a Serpent circularly grated,
and holding its Tail in its Mouth: And sure he is old enough, being the
Grandfather of all: His Beard and Hairs are white, always growing; which are
the things that always germinate: He is sordid, and ill disposed of himself,
because of the Terrestrial impurity which adheres to it, by reason of its
Sulphurous and Adustive Corruption: His Head is covered, that is, the
principle of perfection is closed in the cover of impurity, which makes it
known to few: His Sickle is his Penetration and Mordacity, wherewith he
penetrates and devours all things: The Serpents biting its tail, is his
regenerating nature, whereby he repairs himself; as is storied of the Phoenix,
by which name he is also sometimes called: so that he is always conversant in a
circular and indeficient increase.

But methinks I hear some say, That I miss of the intention of Authors in their
fabulous description of Saturn; for they mean by Saturn, Lead; which is of all
Metals the Seniour: which also devours all others by its crudity, because it is
full of Salt: for Mordacity arises from Salt, as the Refiners of Metals find
in their probations: for it there vomits out the Gold and Silver, which it
deglutiated, but could not consume, because in its decoction they received
Fixation, so as to resist the weak heat of its Ventricle.

I do not altogether reject this sense, because it is in some places
conformable to the other; and in that it is in all things concordant with what
I have given, I hope none will tell me mine is false.

Maia represented the Earth; so called, because out of her, as a Mother, the
universal Spirit, or Mercury, had its origin; and from the pure invisible Seed
of Jupiter, which is the Air: for it proceeds really out of these, as the
learned Cosmopolita says in his precious Treatises.

Mercury is commonly painted with Wings, that they may show how she is of a
volatile Nature: his Head is covered with a Hat, for the same Reasons that I
before gave for Saturn's Head: He carries a caduceous and fatal Rod, encircled
with Serpents, both to signify and denote his regenerative faculty, as those
Reasons also I gave to Saturn's Serpent. By this Rod, he opens Heaven and
Earth, and gives life and death: and that Rod represents powerful Nature: for
by ascending into Heaven, and descending to the Earth, he acquires the virtues
both of superior and inferior things. By this same power, he draws Souls out
of Hell, makes all Eyes yield to Sleep, as Virgil writes of him.

He is by some also called, Poison and a Theriack, or Life and Death, according
to his use and dosis: for Life consists in due temperament and justice; Death,
in excess.

Many other such mysteries are contained in this Heathenish Theology, which
have no other scope then that I aim at: all which, if I should here explain, my
Treatise would prove a Volume. But I will not defatigate my Reader with
frequent repetitions of one and the same thing.

These may suffice to show, That all Mythological Commentaries, such as these,
with their Allegorical and Historical Sense, gave no occasion to Poetical
Fictions, as if any Truth were in them: but such things tend chiefly to show
the admirable operations of Chemistry, as amongst others, the Story of Jason
and Medea, explicated by Chrysogonus Polydorus. To which Explication I will
add, That this Name Medea, that signifies Cogitation, Meditation or
Investigation, is derived from a word that denotes a Principle, Origin, or
Reason: for all Meditation has doubtless some Principle or Reason for its
Foundation.

This Medea taught Jason, (that is, an Inquirer) two things, wherein all
Philosophy consists: first, The Acquisition of the Golden, that is, the Art of
changing Metals and Minerals. And secondly, The Restoration of Bodies weakened
with Diseases, readily and perfectly curing them, and bringing them from old
Age to Youth and Vigor, by this sole and universal Medicine; expelling all
corrupt and corrumpent humors and superfluities from Bodies, which would else
bring them to their end.

Jason endeavored and perfected these miraculous effects, by the observation
of Medea's counsel, after long and laborious Navigation, obnoxious to many
perils, both in sailing, in killing the Dragon, and taming the Bulls.

This Navigation is the laborious Inquisition, and dubious Experience of
things, wherein many are exercised all their life long, and cannot arrive at
the Port of Nature.

The monstrous Bulls which he was to tame and subjugate, are the Furnaces
wherein the operations are made, which do not ill represent a Bulls Head; and
breath out Fire at their Mouth and Eyes, as the Fable has it: for they must
needs have some Transpirations, else the Fire would be extinguished, and the
degree of its heat not regulated: for unless some experienced Man regulate the
Fire, many things would fall out wrong in the operations, and delude the
Operators hopes, as I have experienced; for of nine Vessels, which I reposed in
a Furnace, to give it a due degree of heat, I lost eight, and one I conserved;
by means whereof, I obtained the said Experiments in curing Diseases.

The watchful Dragon, is that universal Mercury which Cadmus had learned to
kill, that is, fix the Campus Mortis wherein the teeth of the Martial Serpent
should be sown, is nothing but a vessel wherein Soldiers, armed with Spears,
are elevated.

But this Vessel should not be a Glass-Alembick, as Polydorus thinks, but made
in form of a Cooperculum or Covert, narrow below, and capacious above; made of
good Earth, well cocted, and not of Iron or Glass. In whose bottom, Mars his
Field must be elevated, rigid with Lances and Spears, representing soldiers
provoked and fighting.

And this is only an ingenious Fiction of the Poet, to make the thing somewhat
admirable to the vulgar; which yet is so plain and familiar to us, that if I
should name what it is, I should make my self ridiculous.

And when Jason had finished his work, he must needs make the watching Dragon,
that kept the Golden Fleece, sleep, that he might no more eructate Fire and
Fume; which he did, by suffocating him in the Stygian Waters, that is, by
dissolving and fixing him with his Spirit. And then Jason had nothing to do for
the possession of the Golden Fleece, and restoring his old Father Aeson to
Youth again, but only one business that Medea taught him, that is, the
fermentation and conjunction of solar burter, with the paste of prepared
Mercury, which is not of it self fit for two such excellent actions, being
only Earth, wherein pure ferment produced by Nature, and promoted to
perfection, should be sown.

When he had finished this last work, he saw himself possessor of his twofold
Treasury, which he gloriously brought back to the place of his Nativity; by
benefit whereof he became very rich, and reduced his aged Father to sanity, by
removing his languishments.

But I will now leave Jason with his Medea, to the enjoyment of their felicity,
and only add this, That by the Dragon that watched continually, and vomited
fire out of his throat, nothing can be more conveniently denoted, then our
Universal Spirit or Mercury, which is the most vivacious and inflammable thing
in the world; wherefore it is called burning water, or aqua vitae, because, as
Bracescus notes, it always burns before its coagulation; and it is aqua vitae,
because it vivifies all things: And if one should look on its superficies, who
would think it fixed, and inconsumeable, being so easily inflammable, or
vanishing at the least touch of fire? or who would think, that there were any
conservative virtue in its Center? seeing it looks as if it were full of mortal
poison, rather then life?

But as God set a Cherubim, with a flaming Sword, to keep the tree of Life: So
Nature set this ignivomous Dragon, in the door of the Garden, to keep the Tree
of golden Apples, that is, the knowledge of her hidden Secrets, which our
prudent Ancestors would not deliver in writing, but only by word of mouth, to
such as they thought worthy of such knowledge: And this is the cause, why those
great and admirable Sciences, have in progress of time vanished, and are
accounted as Fables and Tales.

Which thing Esdras considered: for foreknowing that the Israelites should
suffer banishments, flights and captivity, he feared lest the secret Mysteries
of the Scripture should perish; because without the benefit of writing, men's
memory might easily fail.

He therefore Congregated all the Elders, in number LXX, who with himself wrote
all these things in as many Books, as himself attests, saying, That after
forty, days the Lord spoke and said, Publish those things which thou have
written, that all may read them: and keep those later LXX Books, that thou
may deliver them to the Wisemen of thy people: for herein is the vein of
Understanding, and the Fountain of Wisdom, and the Flood of Knowledge; and so
he did.

Picus Mirandulanus, the Phoenix of his time for Learning and Knowledge, speaks
of those Books with great reverence, in these or the like words.

These are LXX Cabalistical Books, wherein Esdras said plainly, That the
Fountain of all Understanding and Knowledge, was contained, that is, the
inestimable Theology, concerning the Supreme Deity, the Fountain of Wisdom, and
the entire Metaphysics of intelligences; the stream of Knowledge, that is, the
firmest natural Philosophy.

When these Books had been long kept secret, they were by the command of Xystus
the fourth, turned first into Latin, for the benefit of Religion; but this
good Work was interrupted by his death: Yet they are had in such veneration
amongst the Jews, that no one under forty years of age, may touch them: And
this is most admirable, that in those Cabalistical Doctrines, some Heads of
Christianism should be contained. Thus Mirandula.

And now having, I hope, omitted nothing, which might serve to the
interpretation of Hermes his Table, or obscure Philosophical Cabala; I shall
betake my self to the Port of this unsearchable Ocean, and dry my wet clothes
under the Sunshine of your Favors, wishing well to all; and upon good grounds,
judging that the Good, Honor, and Glory of the World, is the true Philosophy.

FINIS.
Books worth buying, to be sold at the Lamb, at the East End of Paul's.
1 MAscal's Government of Cattle. 2 Wentworth's Miscellania: a piece of
School Divinity. 3 Two Sober Paradoxes: written by Malvezzi. 4 Elementa Optica.
5 The Sovereigns Prerogative discussed in Parliament, in the third and fourth
years of King Charles. 6 The Secretaries Study: an excellent Book of elegant
Letters. 7 The fourth Book of Cornelius Agrippa, in English. 8 The complete
Bone-setter, translated by R. Turner. 9 Arts Notoria: or, The Notory Art of
Solomon, etc. There is now in the Press, an excellent Piece, called The Devil
Anatomized: being a Philosophical Discourse touching the Nature of Spirits.

