Londons Destroyer DETECTED; AND DESTRUCTION LAMENTED: OR, Some Serious
Ruminations, and Profitable Reflections upon the late Dreadful, Dismal, and
neverto-be-forgotten CONFLAGRATION. Where in is briefly comprehended several
things considerable, in order to LONDONS present Recovery, and future
Prosperity.

Psalm. 46. 8. Come, behold the Works of the Lord, what Desolations he has
made in the Earth.

Lam. 1. 1. How does the City sit solitary that was full of People? How is she
become as a Widow, she that was great among the Nations, and Princess among
the Provinces.

Verse. 9. Her filthiness is in her Skirts, she remembered not her latter end,
therefore she came down wonderfully.

Chap. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.

London, Printed in the Year, 1666.

Londons Destroyer Detected, and Destruction Lamented, etc.
HEarken, O Heavens, stand amazed, and be
Astonished, O Earth, to hear and see
The wondrous works the Lord has lately shown,
To make his Justice and his Power known:
Call an Assembly now, of Old and Young,
And takes assistance both of meak and strong:
Consult with, and examine Rich and Poor;
And see who can declare the like before.
Consider Soul, who e're thou art indeed;
If nothing yet has made thy heart to bleed:
Me thinks, here' s something now, might make it sore,
And make thee mourn, till thou can mourn no more.
If thy heart be not like to Flint or Steel,
The thoughts of this will surely make thee feel.
Oh! woe is me. Alas, What shall I say?
Let every Soul bewail this woeful Day:
Let every dry and barren heart lament;
And more then this, let sinners all repent;
Yea every one that can but shed a Tear,
Now show your grief, and learn the Lord to fear.
But what is the news, some sleepy Soul may say,
That thou complainst thus of a dreadful Day?
What is the cause, thou do so strangely speak,
And seem to grieve, as if thy heart would break?
Why do thou stir up people now to weep?
Thou do disturb me, for I fain would sleep.
Thy startling words, I cannot well endure;
Wherefore leave off, and let me sleep secure.
Oh wonderful! Is any yet so blind!
And woefully besotted in their mind!
To live within the Borders of this Nation,
And ask a Reason of a Lamentation?
Such men as these, do make one Reason more;
And add another to the former store.
But hark a little, sleepy Soul, I pray,
Be sure to mind what I have yet to say;
Rouse up thy self from sleep and search about,
And thou may quickly find the Reason out:
Open thy eyes, and thou may plainly see,
That Wrath and Ruin does encompass thee.
The Mighty God has lately been at Work,
And has amazed both Christian Jew, and Turk:
Yea, all the World has cause to be afraid,
To think upon the Ruins he has made;
The found whereof, has gone both far and near,
And many thousands have been filled with fear,
To hear and see, what woeful Desolation,
The Lord has lately made in this our Nation:
We plainly see, what Work the Lord can make;
Who in his Anger can whole Kingdoms shake:
Nations confound, and Cities overthrow:
Alas, poor England, thou have found it so.
But oh my heart even bleeds to think and tell,
What unto Landon lately has befell.
London, I say, Englands once famous City,
The Lord has strangely Ruined without pity.
Yea, London, lately famous for Renown,
The Righteous God has thrown it headlong down.
The stately Buildings of the same are burned,
And all its Beauty into Ashes turned.
Yea London once the glory of the World,
Is sadly now into confusion hurled.
The large and famous Structures of the same,
Are buried in a strange devouring flame.
Let England mourn, let all the World admire,
To think how London was destroyed by Fire.
Oh fearful flame, how matchless was thy rage,
No less than London could thy fury swage?
How terrible was thy devouring ^ace,
To spoil great London quite in three days space?
No Tongue can tell, no Pen can fully write,
How strangely thou did thousands sore afright,
And drive them from their settled dwelling places,
And swallow up their Goods before their faces.
How did thou make all sorts of people fly!
How strangely did thou make them run and cry!
How did thou make them wring their hands; and mourn,
To see their Houses, and their Treasure burn!
Yea sick and lame, thou did turn out of Door;
And many that were Rich, thou made them Poor:
Thou made the lofty-minded fear and quake,
To see what dreadful havoc thou did make;
Both great and small thou sorely did perplex,
Without regard to Age, Degree, or Sex.
And nothing could thy raging power shun,
Till thou had famous London quite undone;
The Mart of Natious, and the Kingdoms Pride,
In Europe was not such a place beside.
London's destroyed; Alas, Who can deny it?
Oh that our hearts were made the better by it.
Alas, poor London, is it thus indeed
What heart so hard, that will not melt and bleed,
To think upon thy sad and wretched state,
And how the Lord has plagued thee of late.
Oh that THOU would but think upon it so,
As to remove the cause of this thy WOE.
Let grief and sorrow se^^ upon thy heart;
Let mirth and gladness from thy Soul depart;
Not altogether for thy dreadful fall,
But for thy sins, which is the cause of all.
Thy sins, thy sins, have made thy sufferings large,
Who can declare the greatness of thy Charge?
Oh that thou would but once persuaded be,
To ruin that which has so ruined thee.
Break off thy sins, or else be sure to know,
The Righteous God will never leave thee so;
But certainly will greater Vengeance take,
Unless thou timely do thy sins forsake.
If thou from judgments therefore would be freed,
Thou must repent, and turn to God with speed,
Or else thy sins will still increase thy sorrow,
Till thou art made like Sodom and Gomorrah.
However thou may yet my counsel slight,
The time will come, when thou shall know it is right.
Thou have had many Warnings fairly sent,
From God and Man, thy ruin to prevent:
Yea oftentimes thou have been told in love,
That sin espoused would thy ruin prove.
And by experience thou have found it so,
Yet still in sin thou more and more do grow.
Thou often have been soberly advised;
From time to time thou have been advertised,
By such as sought thy welfare most of all,
And through thy ^^^ did clearly see thy fall;
But thou from time to time did take upon thee,
Most stubbornly to cast their Counsel from thee:
Yea for their love, thou have abused them sore,
And for their sakes thou have even sinned the more;
Instead of kindly seeking of their good,
Thou wickedly have rather fought their blood:
And none have been so cruelly rewarded,
As those which have thy welfare most regarded;
Whilst those have kindly entertained bin,
That publicly have taught thee how to sin;
And still thy sins do more and more abound,
Though vengeance has and does besiege thee round.
Almost in every Corner, Street, and Place,
Prophanness still appears with open face,
What shall I say? Oh that I did but know
How to prevent a further Overthrow,
How would I Beg, and Crave, Entreat, and Pray,
If that would make thee cast thy sins away;
Because I know thou must more righteous be,
Before Gods anger will be turned from thee.
Mark what I say, Thou must of sin repent,
Or else in sorrow still thou must lament;
The Wrath of God will never let thee rest,
Until thou do thy wickedness detest.
Alas, poor London, I am pained at heart,
For thy past, present, and thy future smart.
Yet once again, O London, I will see,
And try how Counsel yet will work with thee.
Consider, God has Anger yet in store,
And for thy sins can plague thee seven times more.
His Power none is able to withstand,
Nor hide themselves from his avenging Hand;
His strength is great: Who can declare the same?
The Lord, the Lord Jehovah is his Name.
Remember how the noisome Pestilence
Did lately rage, and hurry thousands hence;
And filled the Earth with such a slaughtered store,
The like was hardly ever known before.
The bloody Sword has also thousands slain,
Which in the Bowels of the Sea remain.
And thou thereby have sorely been oppressed;
Within thy Borders none could live at rest.
But most of all, before thou do remember,
The fatal stroke thou had but last September.
Let all these strange Disasters greatly move
Thee now to make thy peace with God above.
Implore his Grace, and for his Mercy cry;
Whom thou by sin have made thy Enemy.
Forsake thy sins, and utterly abhor them.
Humble thy self, and crave his Pardon for them.
The Lord may yet consider thy distress.
If this be done in Truth and Faithfulness;
And thou may be a place of praise once more,
And flourish as thou have done HERETOFORE.
E. N.

FINIS.

