A POEM, Condoling the DEATH of K. CHARLES II Of Blessed Memory: AND
CONGRATULATING HIS Present MAJESTY.

By JOHN NASH of Gray's Inn, Esquire

EXITVS ACTA PROBAT.

LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1684 / 5.

A POEM, CONDOLING ^he Death of K. CHARLES II. Of Blessed Memory, etc.
I.
O thy eternal Exit from this Stage
Ever Resurrection speaks thy Acts and Age.
^ersal Vote, Account select,
(...) CHARLES Gods Anointed, Gods Elect.
(...) his Image the Tribunal pass,
(...) shall praise the Idea of his Grace.
(...) puissant Prince a Nestor died,
^^essings had his Life not multiplied?
^^^se Memorial sacred, Royal Hearse,
^^^k Muse pays an obedient Verse.
^^^ed, dos'd, and drowned in Lachrymy,
(...) grows Rage, and Grief Stupidity.
II.
(...) then, that Patience may Excess resist,
(...) ^^rtues do in Mediums best consist.
(...) plainer Style, the plainer Truth appears,
(...) gives the greatest credit unto Tears.
(...) due Allegiance to the present Crown,
(...) all Professions should their Sorrows own:
(...) manifest their Loyal Hearts, more sad
(...) the black Nation, in deep Mourning clad.
(...) it is our Duty to condole his Death,
(...) was the Law and true Religions Breath!
^^ose Royal-Right Supremacy deserved,
(...) Orthodoxal Patronage observed:
(...) ^^fender of the Faith, that is Protestant;
(...) which Great Charles ascends a Glorious Saint.
III.
(...) to his Life, O mournful Muse Return,
those Justice guarded every man's Concern;
And Nothing Arbitrary would atchieve
Unto his Ancient Prerogative.
Where Liberty and Property did move,
Safe by the Conduct of his Care and Love
MONARCH of mighty Judgment, quick Access;
Renowned for Clemency and Tenderness;
For Mercy, Pardon, Bounty, and Release.
Oblivion and Protection to his Foes!
So mild a Soul did Charity compose.
Never rejecting any Contrite Case,
A Precedent to Princes for his Grace.
IV.
Free from Ambitious as Tyrannick pride;
Contented, Embassy's should be denied.
Rather than Bribes should an Affair effect,
That might upon his Ministry reflect.
By this just Rule, His Sovereign Reports
Transcend the Monarchs of all foreign Courts.
The same Man when restored, as Exile hurld,
And the most Christian Ruler in the world.
Great CAESAR's Laurel, Olive Branch and Balm;
Were most victorious, peaceable, and calm.
Pacifick, and Heroic, Royal will!
Spirit Angelick? Love did Law fulfill?
Candor celestial; Mirror of Mankind!
A Miracle in Nature here divined.
V.
Whose high Economy an Order bears
Of Splendour, raised from Sublunary Stars;
Until his Luster was in Heaven fixed,
And with the divine Influence intermixed.
Now may his Glorious Rays rule day and night,
And All Succession by his Sacred light,
Head undisturbed, till mortal Fit and Pain
Disordered the Dominion of his Brain;
Whose Apoplectick season, Bright, Serene,
Were Signals of his Temper, Mind, and Mein.
Prospect, Prediction, Omen of an Age,
Happy and golden in the Heritage.
VI.
No Chronicle is needful to his Name,
For Ages shall immortalize his Fame.
Blessed King! whose Reign did totally assawage,
Two factious Plots of Villainy and Rage;
And fixed the Government in Church and State,
So firm, that it surpasses humane Fate,
Whereby the Art and Industry of man,
To change the Model, is a Task in vain.
Great was this work to do; and being done,
With as Great Sense his Soul resigned the Throne;
Leaving the management of foreign Fact,
To his Illustrious Brother to Transact.
VII.
Hail! Mighty James the Second, to complete
What Mighty Charles the 2d thought discreet,
Wise in himself, in Council safe and great.
To Thee, All native Aid and Force unites,
As Ruler, and as Champion of their Fights,
And as Preserver of their Lives and Rights.
To Thee, No Foreign Play, nor bold Pretense,
Dare falsify a safe Obedience;
But own Great James sole Master of Defense.
To Thee, all Power as Principal must yield:
Or as a Second to the English Field;
Monarch of Prowess, and Propitious Shield.
VIII.
For whose Establishment in Peace, we bless
Heaven and Earth with Popular Address.
And Humors, And our Habits will be Gay,
Upon Great JAMES's Coronation-day.
Whose Virtue, Valor, are the Pearls of Pr^^^
Beset in Order by the best Advice.
Presence a Spark, and Grandeur a Gem;
Both ornamental to his Diadem.
And Royal Robes with Scepter in his hand,
Shows power of Peace and War at his comm^^^
Then with a Holy Hand Anointed King,
Anthems and Hallelujah's we will sing.
IX.
Seamen shall send loud volly's of Huzza's*
The Fleet and Tower-guns shall thunder Pr^^^
All Ports the duty of that Day shall brag,
Since the High Admiral of the English Flag
Is now the Potent Emperor of the Maine.
Which Right he settled long before his Re^^
Whom God preserve, to govern Sea and (...)
With Chequer mony'd and a Navy (...)
Balance of Peace and Trade over Christ^^^
A Power only to this Province come*
Lord Paramount to Monsieur's Flower de (...)
And Seignior's Half Moon the younger (...)
X.
What is it that JAMES the Second cannot
Who is the first of all Supremacy,
And Laws can agrandize his Monarchy.
May Parliaments in future Bills Tri-une,
Grant what is Requisite and Opportune.
No doubt Great JAMES is worthy of All (...)
Whose Word was in a lower station Just.
No doubt to this Defender Any Gift
May be committed to his prudent Thrift;
Nay, it is a Loyal Debt without delay,
( If Lives and Fortunes serve him) we (...)
And that the Session may explain Add.
Vote for Supplies should be as Generous.
As Royal Declaration Grationis.
FINIS.

