AN ACCOUNT From the Children of light, (to them that asks) in several
particulars, why we have been kept from joining to, or worshipping in, those
forms at Law, and forms of worships, that have been imposed upon us against
our consciences, in these late years, for denying whereof, we have so deeply
suffered, with our lives, Liberties, and Estates.

Also what we own, as to those things, and can be obedient to for Conscience
sake, according to truth, and the practice of the Church of Christ, and the
Scriptures.

For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience; That in simplicity
and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have
had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. LONDON; Printed for Thomas
Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate. 1660.

For as much as many have desired to know the ground in particulars, of our
differences in faith and worship toward God, And in some things as to the
outward forms at Law, which men have sought to impose upon us in these late
years; and also what we would desire therein; therefore is this written
following, toward the satisfying of every honest desire, who loves the
kingdom of Christ.
THere is no kingdom nor people can truly be said to be the Lords and his
Christ's, but as they come to be guided and governed by the Law of his Spirit in
their Consciences, which Spirit and anointing all must wait for, 1 John 3.27.
even from the King that sits on high, to the least place of government in any
people, That with it all may know Judgment, Isa. 5.6. 2 Chro. 19.6
and to do Justice, which is of God, and not of men, That he may be known, to
be the anointing of Kings, and to Judge among the Judges, whose right it is of
old, and God has given it to him by an everlasting generation, even after the
power and order of an endless life, That in him and in his seed may nations
and kingdoms be blessed with peace, even through and in his Righteous
government; for God the Father accepts neither persons, Isa. 6.9.
laws, nor governments, how prudently soever they be made, if they be not in
him, and from him, and for him; because for him, was made all souls that move,
not only in earth, but in heaven also; All signs, and seasons, types and
shadows, worship and sabbath was made for him the son of man, Mat. 12.8.
And no flesh breathing, nor Spirits neither, men or Angels has any true power
or right, but as they receive it in him, and so use it to him, and for him,
over any of these things visible or invisible, to rule, force, Heb. 2.10.
or order, no not over his own body, but by usurpation; and for the time that
he, or they, shall hold that power, and not in him, as aforesaid, they shall be
under the curse of God, not established in peace and righteousness, but in
tyranny and oppression; with force, or with flattery, must such rule in their
day, until their measure of time, and sin, be fulfilled, In which the
vengeance of the Almighty shall remove them far away, only their names shall
remain as a curse to those that come after. Thus God will plead the Cause of
his own seed, and overturne, and shake nations and kingdoms, until the earth
know that the heavens must Reign, and the stout of heart confess that the head
of every man is Christ, Dan. 4.25.
And that God has made this same Jesus (which men has rejected) both Lord and
Christ, Acts 2.36.
which in his time he shall show to be the only Potentate, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, who only has immortality dwelling in the light, 1 Timothy 6.15.
where he sits at the right hand of power till God shall make all his foes his
footstool.

Now this is that we wait for in every appearance and face of authority that
comes up, to wit, the face of Jesus our righteous King and Savior, in whom is
no violence, nor oppression, who when he comes to rule, we know will be tender
of the tender in Conscience, and meek toward the poor in Spirit, and with
righteousness will he judge, and rule on the earth, Isa. 11.4.
to deliver the helpless from him that is too hard for him, who will drive
wickedness from his throne, and the workers thereof into a Corner, but will
gently deal toward all that travails with righteousness, and put the Lambs
of truth in his bosom, for he loves righteousness, Isa. 40.11.
and hates iniquity, therefore has God called him his anointed, and will give
him the heathen for his possession, Psalm. 45.7.
and a Priest to God he is to all generations, in his days shall the upright
rejoice, for he shall walk safely in his uprightness; Jer. 23.5, 6.
no nett shall then be spread on the mountains, neither shall he that turns
from iniquity be made a prey, for under him shall every one serve his God
without fear, Luke 1.24.
in holiness of life, and godliness of conversation.

Now this is he we wait for, even the beloved of our souls, Isa. 6.3.
and we know his birth is come to the nations, and his morning toward the
people, yea to the wise in heart, who are yet afar off, has his star
appeared; And we know his breaking forth to these Islands as the bright Sun
after the stormy rain, 2 Samuel 23.4
even so shall he be after the shakeings, he shall be a Covert from the
tempest, as rivers of waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock
in a weary land, even so shall he be, who shall reign in righteousness, Isa.
32.1, 2. Eccles. 10.16, 17.
and by whom Princes shall rule in Judgment; This is the Royal seed, and he
that is of him is the son of Nobles, his Princes eat in due season, for
strength, and not for drunkenness; thus shall the Land be blessed, who is
found worthy to receive the anointed of God to rule in its borders.

And this is he whom we have preached to all the several governments that has
risen ever since God revealed him in us, and the glory and peace of his
kingdom; and we have patiently waited, and in great sufferings has our souls
traveled, to see if by any means, we might see, any worthy to receive his
anointing, and to be borne of his Spirit, to govern by his power, and with his
Counsel to order, and be ordered, that through him they might be established
of God, and we have looked through the vail of flesh in all sorts of people,
and could not bow thereto, and by many contrary Spirits have we been evil
entreated, because we could not own them, for him, whose kingdom we seek, in
rulers, teachers and people.

And thus have we gone seeking the righteous one, through Parliaments and
Protectors (so called) Priests and Rulers, of all sorts, but his government we
have not found, nor with his righteous Judgments have we been judged among
them, but we have been shamefully entreated for his sake, Psalm. 69.9. Lam. 3.14.
and have borne his reproach, because of his Spirit in us, and his kingdom in
our Consciences; And many times have been tried to the loss of estates, and
lives, to see if they could provoke or drive us from his faith in our
Consciences, or tempt us any way to deny him, and own them in their wills; And
though we have daily suffered thus under every several power, and people, yet
have we not ceased to warn them in love, with much fear and plainness, that
if by any means they might have received his testimony, and not have perished
in their gain saying; for our God in whom we trusted showed it to us, that they
should not prosper, nor be established without him, his Spirit, and anointing,
to whom he has given the government of all people, that shall be blessed by
him, yea, all the nations, Rev. 21.24
of them that are saved must walk in his light, and receive his counsel, for
their stability, and his resurrection for their glory, and his anointing for
the strength of their kingdoms.

And this is the Cause why we have chused rather to suffer under every power
that yet has risen, then to join in with them, because we have not heard the
voice of the holy one in the midst of them, neither has his Spirit in them
been the strength of their Counsels, Isa. 5.21.
but they have sought to make flesh their arm, and to strengthen their
kingdom with flattery and deceit, and not with truth, Jer. 17.5.
and they have sought to make themselves dreadful by violence, and to rule
with cruelty, and not with the sword of God, which is Judgment and Justice;
and have sought honor from men, and not from the Lord, John 5.44.
and their Covering has been vain glory, and not the Spirit of God; Isa. 30.1.
So with the light of Christ we saw their foundation, and their building, and
that they could not stand long in Gods sight, and that all that joined to them
must fall with them, and that the woes that are written of such must certainly
overtake them

And this is the Cause, and no other thing why we have hitherto borne our
testimony against them all, even because they would not join to the Lord, nor
hear his voice in their day, but the more he called after them by the mouth of
his servants, the more they were ^ardned, and the more provoked him to their
own consusion; so it has not been prejudice to any man's person that has kept
us at a distance from them or their commands, for we can truly say we have
waited without prejudice, if by any means we could but have seen any of them
seeking the kingdom of God, that therein they might have been established, yea
we have the witness of truth in us to this day, how glad our souls have been
before the Lord, when we have but felt the least tenderness in any of them,
arising from the Spirit of Jesus, or the least confession from his light in
them.

And sometimes we have felt some tenderness in some of them when they have
been low, little, and in fear, in which we have had some hope and gladness to
hear the voice of simplicity and truth, (though but brokenly) so that we could
then have said they was not f^r from the kingdom of God; But turning away the
ear from the Spirit of truth in them, and consulting with fleshly wisdom and
carnal reason likely to make wise, and to accomplish their self ends, how
soon has truth sallen in them, and blindness, and hardness of heart come
over them again worse then before, which being showed us of God, we could not
but deny them also to be of God.

Thus in general, an account is given to you that asks a reason, why we have
not yet owned any power that yet has risen, so as to join to them in all
things. Now to you who desire to know in what particulars we have differed from
these governments that yet has risen since we was a people; we might say our
lives, practices, and sufferings has openly declared it, through the most
parts of these nations, and in most, and greatest of our differences; Yet for
the better satisfying of some that knows not so much as others, and to take
away all occasion of offense, from all that would not oppose the way of truth
if they knew it, and to leave without excuse the wilfully ignorant, and
persecuters of the good old way of Christ; I shall instance in some things, and
also show our warrant for so doing, both by Scripture, and the practice of the
holy men of God, in their generation; It being that so many are yet ignorant
and unbeleeving, concerning the present leadings of the Spirit of truth in
them, which is chief leader, Romans 8.14. Gal. 5.18.
and corner stone in us, by which we walk toward God, and toward men, in all
these things.

And as to that first. Though God has laid it upon us as matter of Conscience,
to be subject to what outward government or governers soever he shall set up
over us, in outward things; and also that with all willingness of mind a ready
subjection be rendered, at every just command, not for fear only, but even for
Conscience sake; and that in all things, we should seek the safety, and honor,
and well-being of such governers, to the utmost of our power, even as we look
to account to God for it, of whom the powers that be, are ordained; yet has he
begotten us unto himself alone, and to the leadings of his own Spirit in all
things concerning faith and worship, as to matter, manner, time and place; This
is to be done and performed singly as to him, in the leadings of Jesus, Mat.
17.5
and in the power of his Spirit alone, else will he have no regard thereto; And
for this purpose has he given the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, to be our
light and understanding and leader in all these things; to which leadings and
movings the father requires obedience in all things, 2 Cor. 10.6.
upon eternal condemnation in matters pertaining to our consciences; That must
be the throne of Christ alone, and there will he sway the Scepter of eternal
life, and answer his people in all things, and be their Savior, guide, and
lawgiver, in all things that are just and holy.

So that is at any time their teachers have left the way of life, and would
l^ad people after them, yet has he through faith and a tender Conscience,
preserved a seed out of error to himself in such a day, by which he has
reproved and made manifest the folly of such t^achers; And to this the
Scriptures do fully testify, as in the days of the Prophets, when they erred
in vision, Isa. 28.7. Jere. 23. Amos 2.4.
and had not the word in them, and so caused the people to err through their
lies, and through their lightness, then had he men of enlightened Consciences,
to send to reprove their brutishness, though otherwise they themselves was
neither Prophets nor sons of Prophets, but may be, a heardman, or a gatherer of
siccomore fruit, a plowman, or a shepherd, or some such, Amos 7.14.
which Englands pride would call mecannick fellows, yet in these was the seed
preserved, Jerem. 23. Isa. 1.9
else the Land might have become as Sodom, and not one have known the Lord nor
his word. And as it was in the days of the false Prophets, so has it been
since the days of the false ministry, for which many have suffered since the
days of the Apostles, for testifying against such as have erred in Spirit,
form, and doctrine, from Christ Jesus and his Apostles; And this has been
from the indwelling power of Christ in them, and his precious light shining in
their hearts and consciences, that they have thus been preserved, and enabled,
to bear the testimony of Christ against false worships, and worshippers; and
so it is at this day, in all who keep a pure Conscience toward God in all his
word and worship, that his true, and spiritual worship might not be wholly
lost out of the world.

Also if at any time their Kings or Rulers forgot God, or Kings arose who knew
not God, and then would lay upon them Laws and Commands, which was not just an^
lawful for them to do, then by the light of Christ in a pure Conscience they
was enabled to withstand it even unto death; As that of Mordecai and the Jews,
Hester 3.
who would rather all be destroyed then bow to Hammons pride at the Kings
command, though Englands people would have said this is but a civil thing, and
duty, and good manners, and the like, yet Gods Law in their Conscience they
preferred above all that the King commanded contrary thereto, yea life and all
would they lose rather then defile their Conscience toward God, or deny his
Law there, though no Law without had forbidden such a thing; Yet in other cases
did they appear true and subject to the King, for Mordecai's truth saved the
Kings life, not long before, though from man he had little reward for it.

Likewise might be Instanced, that of Daniels praying contrary to the decrees
of the King, Dan. 6. Dan. 3.
his Counsel of Presidents and Princes, and that of the three children against
the fierce Command of Nebuchadnezzar, in denying to worship at his will and
pleasure; likewise that of the Apostles, Acts 5.28, 29.
when their Rulers and Priests also, charged them straightly not to preach any
more, their answer before authority was, we ought to obey God rather then men;
yea it would be too long to tell how many godly men and women, upon the account
of a pure Conscience, not only hazarded their lives, but lost life and all,
for the testimony of a tender Conscience, as might be instanced. But this may
be said for all; That if they would but have denied the law of God in their
conscience, and conformed to the wills of men, and their laws, not o^e of all
the Prophets, Apostles, or all the holy men of God need to have suffered death
or spoil.

So now in that any of us by the same spirit of Christ, and from his light and
law in our Consciences, are moved to go testify against false Prophets, false
worships, and declare the way of truth to all people against them to their
face; And if Rulers have been so opposite to this as to make laws against it,
and to command us to bow and worship at their wills, which for Conscience sake
toward God we could not, for which we have suffered the spoiling of goods,
long and heavy imprisonments, shameful usings, and loss of lives also; I say
in this we have a cloud of witnesses, even the Lord Jesus our Captain, and the
whole body of Martyrs, who have all gone before us in the self same obedience
of faith and Spirit, and have suffered the same or such like things from Rulers
that knew not God, and teachers that knew not God, in their days; and all of
them in their days was counted offenders, heretics* or dispisers of Authority
or some such reproach was cast upon them by their accusers and persecuters, for
obeying the law of their God in their Consciences, John 16.2.3.
whom the Rulers of the darkness of this world have not known, nor can know,
till they believe his light in their own Consciences.

So it is not for new things, nor strange opinions, which was never in the
world before, for which we suffer, (though to the world they seem new and
strange, but for the very same works, of the same Spirit of light and truth,
which has often appeared in a poor contemptible people, and has as often
received the same measure, from them who profess him in words* but in works
deny him; by such have we suffered, who read and preach the same in words,
which this eternal Spirit in us now works; And with such who with words
garnish the sepulchers of those whom their fathers slew, are we counted great
offenders, for being found in the same way and practice, and in obedience to
the same Spirit, in that measure as we have received it; So we have this added
to the testimony of a good Conscience toward God, and toward men, that we
suffer not for evil doing, though as evil doers (to wit) the practice of holy
men, and the Scriptures of truth which will own us herein, and stand on our
parts against all our adversaries and accusers. And t^is will be proved so when
we come to particulars, wherein we differ from the ways and worships of these
present times, and for which we are so much hated and persecuted.

And we know that it will not be found harmfull to the bodies, estates, or
well-being of any Christian neighborhood, nor of any other people in the
nations, to practice those things wherein we differ, in civil and temporal
things, nor hurtful to the souls of any. In the things wherein we differ in
religious or spiritual matters, from the several opinions and forms of
worships that are or have been set up in these nations; As we shall make it
plainly appear if either Spirit of truth* or Scripture of truth or things
equal may but be received on our part. Now we shall mention some particulars
in which we differ for Conscience sake from some of the forms traditions, and
commands of the men of this present age, and the powers that have ruled
therein* under whom we have therefore suffered, as evil doers.

And first as to those things which some calls civil.
ANd indeed it may be wondered at, by any moderate people, that in a nation
called Christians, any man should suffer, so much as to be called an offender
for some of the things which I must mention upon this account, especially they
being laid upon us by the spirit of Christ as matter of conscience, and by a
people so highly pretending for liberty of Conscience.

As it has been laid upon us by the Spirit of Christ, to use the same single
language to all sorts of people, which the Scriptures uses, and all the holy
men of God therein have ever used, that is to say, thou to any one person, and
you to more then one; A language, sound, and true, to God, and man, which the
Spirit of God first spoke, and gave to man, and of man received it again
without offense, and never since gave to man any other form of speech, as we
may read in the Scriptures of truth; And in this we differ from some sorts of
people, and for it have ^uffered as great offenders, and have undergone very
grievous censures, and long imprisonments, diverse of us, though it has been
laid on our Consciences from the Lord, yea the Scriptures also, 2 Timothy 1.13.
commands the form of sound words, to be holden fast; now why those who
profess the Scriptures for their rule, should persecute us for using the
language of it, may be thought strange to the hearers thereof; yet for this we
suffer for a testimony against them.

Also it has been laid upon us by the Lord to call men and women by their own
names, which their fathers have given to them, to be known by amongst men; And
though in this we differ from some sorts of people, who can give flattering
titles to some people in stead of their names, and reproachfully miscall others
in stead of their names, yet herein we are owned by the Scriptures of truth,
and the practice of all the holy men therein, who never refused their own names
to take a proud title, but owned their names that God had given them, And says
the Scriptures, let me not give flattering titles to man, Job 32.21, 22.
for in so doing my maker would soon take me away. And if you respect persons,
James 2.
you commit sin, and are convinced of the law as evil doers; yet for this we
have suffered also by this generation, as evil doers, and contemners of
authority, though we know that to call a man by his name, contemnes not his
authority, nor do we it for that end, but in obedience to truth, and for
Conscience toward God.

Also that about our hats putting off, which has been so great an offense to
many; This also has been laid upon our Consciences by the Lord and we dare not
disobey him therein to please men, though sometimes it has been said to us
that if we would but put off our hats, we should not go to prison; others have
said, when we came before them for Judgment and Justice, you shall have no
Justice, unless you put off your hats; yea some have hazarded their lives
hereon, yet durst not disobey God herein, though they have suffered long
therefore; and lost their rights for want of justice: yet we have not dared to
disobey our God herein, but have valued our peace with him and a pure
Conscience above all sufferings and profits herein. Now, this is beyond all the
persecuters of old, that men should suffer for their hats, yea, even
Nebuchadnezzar in his greatest heat of persecution* he made not that an
offense, to keep on their hats, more then their other garments* but with their
hats on as well as hose and shoes, they was bound and cast into the fire; Dan.
3.21.
nor do we find in all the Scriptures precept or practice of that thing yet
for this we have deeply suffered* in diverse parts of this nation. Thus would
people and powers, drive us from the obedience of our God, in a pure
Conscience* and instead thereof cause us to worship a vain Custom, for which
we have no warrant, neither in Scripture* nor good example, but says the Lord,
Lev. 18.30.
Ye shall keep mine ordinances, but the Customs of the people are vain, and
abominable, you shall not defile your selves therewith. So, we obey God rather
then men* and by men who professes God, suffer for so doing.

This also has been commanded us of the Lord, and laid upon our Consciences,
not to swear at ^ll, upon any occasion whatsoever, Ier. 23.10.
and because of this we have forborne to swear, when men have called us
thereto, whether to swear at any change of government, or what ever it has
been, we may not swear at all; And for this we have deeply suffered also, as
co^temners of the law, though we have not despised government, but have
consented to what just thing was required of us, in truth of heart, without
swearing; And for this we have the express command of Christ Jesus who has
said, Mat. 5.34 James 5.12.
Swear not at all; And his Apostles said, Above all things my brethren, swear
not, least you fall into condemnation. And we have also the practice of all the
followers of Christ who was never known to use an oath since; for to such as
receive Christ there is the end of swearing; and diverse other things which
before Christ came to end them, was ordinances of God, but Christ the Covenant
everlasting has ended all swearings of men whatsoever, and forbidden they are
in his name, upon pain of condemnation. Further, in the time of Moses, when
swearing was in the Jews Church, it was not to be forced upon them by any
penalty, but they might swear or not swear, without any carnal punishment,
nor was it required of witnesses to swear at all, betwixt a man and his
neighbor, two witnesses was to establish the matter before the Judge, but I
never read of those two required to swear, that was as to a man's own
particular, only in this case, when a man had taken a pledge, and it was
stolen from him, then an oath was to be taken of that man in his own behalf,
that he put not his hand to the stealeing of it, and then he was not to repay
it again, but if he would repay it he needed not swear, so he was not forced.
And except in this case only, I find not an oath required by any Judge in
Moses law. So, these who make us offenders, ^or denying to swear, are out of
all the way of God in Moses time. And in Christ's time, swearing is expressly
forbidden at all, even this in Moses time; for faith Christ It has been said
by them of old time, Lev. 19.12. Mat. 5.34.
thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thy
oaths. So here was Moses time, and swearing to the Lord, commanded in truth;
and this said Moses. But (says Christ) I say* Swear not at all, and this is
greater then Moses, whose time is without end.

Further, as to the administration of the Laws of these nations in these late
years, there we have seen many things, which in our Conscience we cannot
join to, being showed to us to be out of truth, and equity, and not helps, but
burdens to the nations; Now as to our selves, so many as walk in Christ
Jesus, we have one Judge, and Lawgiver appointed to us for that end by the
father; And we may not go to Law one with another, as men being come to Christ
Jesus, the end of lust, pride, and strife, which we have found to be the Cause
of fightings, and suits at Law, and if any thing of that nature would arise in
any of us, by our Judge and Lawgiver it is judged, and we are saved; And it is
laid upon us by the same Spirit of Christ, not to sue any man at the Law, Mat.
5.
nor to seek to avenge our selves of such as seek to wrong us, but to love
our enemies, and pray for them that dispitefully use us, and hate us; And so
from all men to suffer for peace sake, for to peace we are called, toward all
men, and under the Prince of peace is our government, so that we need not men
to end Controversies amongst us, who are all in unity of spirit, and life, in
Christ Jesus.

But when men hail us before Iudgement-Seats, or cause us to appear at their
Courts of Law, then we meet with many things among them there, which for
Conscience sake we cannot bow to, nor uphold, finding them, not only against
the rule of Christians, but, out of the way of common honesty as men, yea many
things against truth it self, and this we cannot serve, as Law, which is
against truth.

As when they send a Writ to appear at their Courts, in a man's own proper
person, and in obedience thereto we have come, (may be) two hundred miles or
above, and tendered our appearance accordingly, at the very day appointed, then
they have with violence and reproach thrust us out of their Court^* because we
did appear in our own person^, and not ^n another man's person, whom we have
not known, and for this have we suffered much damage, and long imprisonment, as
contemners of authority and Law Now, this we cannot join to in our hearts, nor
own as honesty, and truth, and plain dealing as men, to let go, all talk of
Christian^, the heathen would not do this to us

Also, when our adversary puts up a Bill o^ Charge against us, drawn up in a
form without truth, filled with false accusations, a^though our offense
amounted to hundreds or thousands of pounds wrong, or damage, when with the
truth of Christ in our Conscience we know, that we have never wronged that man
one penny in our lives, but that it is the enemy of truth, and peace, even that
Old accuser of the brethren, which now works in that Creature to spoil our
goods or take our lives, or liberties from us; Then, we are not suffered to
return an answer in the fear of our God, and in plainness and truth of
expressions, as the Spirit of truth shall move in the simplicity of our hearts;
And so, with the Spirit of truth to deny the lies and false accusations, of the
adversary; But we must be forced to give unreasonable sums of money, to another
man, whom we know not, nor knows he our state and case in this matter, to
answer in our stead, who for ought we know, may in stead of sharply reproving
those abominable lies, justify them, at least as a legal thing, or form at
Law, Isa. 59.4. Isa. 28.15.
fit to be used. And thus our testimony against falsehood is taken from us,
which the Spirit of truth requires of us, Jer. 9.3, 4 5
and we pay money to have it justified, as a form at Law, when we know it to
be a form of lies; Pro. 12.19.22.
And we cannot leave the truth, to serve this deceit; beside, were the truth
no dearer to us, Pro. 29.12.
but that we could thus give it up to be betrayed knowingly, yet it seems to us
unreasonable, as men, to give our cause into the hands of him that knows it
not, further then we must inform him, nor when we have informed him, have no
assurance whether he will speak our words or his own, or our adversaries, and
so bring us under the guilt of the whole body of falsehood. This appears to us
very unreasonable, and dangerous, and below the privilege of a man, as a man,
much more as a Christian, Psalm. 40.4.
so we rather choose to suffer innocently under falsehood, keeping our
consciences clear, then consent thereto, and so establish mischief under
pretense of a Law, Psalm. 94.20. and deny our testimony for the truth, to which
we are called, and for which we suffer in all these things.

Also, if any of us be sued at the Exchequer or Chancery, and appear and take
a Coppie of the Bill, and go to the Judges with a true answer thereto, they
will refuse it, because we cannot swear, though they will show us no written
law for so doing, but tell us its a Custom, and this custom is preferred
above his Law who says, swear not at all; and for this have many been
imprisoned, it being put upon us either to deny their Custom, or Christ's
Command, so we choose to suffer by men, for a season, rather then defile our
Consciences.

If we be summoned to do service for the Country, on a Jury, and be willing to
do the service faithfully as to God and man, yet because we cannot swear, many
are fined, imprisoned, and theit goods spoiled, and reputed unserviceable in
the nation, when we would freely serve the Country, so as we might not therein
deny Christ, our Savior.

If one of us be summoned to appear at a Court for a witness, that would
testify the truth before God from a good Conscience, and in the fear of God,
Deuteronomy. 19.16 17, 18, 19, 20
and according to his Law, viz. in all things, that if we should wrong any man
whatsoever through our false testimony, that its just the same should be done
to us, yet because we cannot swear, (be the action never so great,) our true
testimony is refused, and we thrust away without Judgment, and threatened to
cause us to pay, what they say the party is damnified for our not swearing, and
all this we must suffer for obeying Christ's Commands.

If one of us should buy a piece of land, or have some fallen to him by
inheritance, and come to the Court Baron to take it up, they will not let him
take it, except he swear, and so break Christ's sayings; or if a man purchase,
or have an inheritance within a Customary Court, its the same, and they will
turn us without it, if we will not swear contrary to Christ's Commands. And
thus is the evil Custom of a Cour^ preferred before Christ's Commands, a good
Conscience, and a familyes whole estate and livelihood.

If a man bind an apprentice in this City of London, and give a great sum of
money with him, and the prentice serves his time honestly and truly, and have
his Masters testimony thereto, yet is he denied his freedom, if he cannot
swear for Conscience sake, and so must lose money and service, if he be
faithful to Christ.

If one of us should dye intestate, they will not suffer our own wife or
Children to administer on our own goods, unless they will swear against
their Conscience, and the Law of Christ; or if we make a will, and make wife or
Children Executer, they are denied to prove the will, whereby they are to enjoy
their estates, but by breaking that Command of Christ in swearing.

Likewise, when some of us have been arrested to appear at such a Court such a
day, and have simply given bond to appear; And when the ap^earance has been
made at the day expressed by the party so bound, neither the appearance would
be taken, nor the bond delivered, but a further snare, because another man
appears not for us whom we never knew, nor had ought to do withal.

Also about marriage, which we know to be an ordinance of God from the
beginning, and being ordered in the Counsel of God, and the bed not defiled is
honorable, but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. So as any are moved
of the Lord into that state, we say the Counsel of the Lord is first and
chiesely to be minded, and the thing weighed in his sear, that it be done
only in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39.
that it be not taken on lightly, rashly, nor by any fleshly motion, nor for
any earthly ends, but in the moving and ordering of the Almighty Creator of man
and woman, who only knows their spirits. So to join them, as they may be one
in flesh and spirit, that he may seek a godly seed to himself, and they may
lead a godly and peaceable life; and only thus is it Gods ordinance, M^la.
2.15. Ma^h. 19.6.
as God puts together, and says Christ, let not man put such asunder; and this
we say is the chief thing to be observed, viz. that God join them; And next
that notice be given to the parents, or such as have the oversight of each
party, that (as much as may be) all may be done in love and unity in the will
of God openly. And this we have from God in Spirit, and this we find in
Scripture, to be the ordinance of God to his Saints of old, and their liberty
in the Lord; which God never altered, which we keep for conscience sake, and
may not break. And least any licentious persons should abuse this liberty, to
satisfy their lusts, and then not live as man and wise during their lives, and
the Magistrates not know of them, and so they escape the sword of justice; we
have freedom in our Spirits, to acquaint some of the next Majestrates with our
intents, and hereby confess our selves liable to the just censure of the
Magistrate, with others, in case of misdemeanour, and all this we have done ere
coming together as man and wife, which is as much as the ordinance of God, or
any reas^n can justly require, yet have some of us suffered in this case, by
the changable Laws of men, who some of them have sought to impose one sort of
Priests on us as an ordinance, others Justices as an ordinance, and others
another sort of Priests again: so for denying these uncertain rules of men,
and keeping the ordinance of God that was in the beginning, M^th. 19.8.
we suffer by all of them as evil doers, yet have they not one charge against
any of us, who have been joined according to this ordinance of God, as to
breach of marriage, or misdemeanour therein: for we have putting away, and come
to that which was in the begginning. Mah. 19.4, 5.


These with many other things there be, as touching the outward Laws, whereby
both our lives, l^berties, and estates, become a daily prey to merciless men,
from which has been manifest such imprisoning til death, such persecution and
spoil of goods, as many generations to come may admire to read of, though in
this generation its little regarded or minded, unless it be by some few, whose
hearts God has tendered, that have not been so cruel in their places as others.

Now let none say, that because we cannot bow to such unrighteous dealings of
corrupt men, or their corrupt Customs, or corrupt Laws, That therefore we are
a people that would have no Law, nor Magistracy at all, as some have falsely
accused us: for of this we are clear before the Lord our God, what ever men
may accuse us ^erein, for the Law of God we own in our Conscience, even the Law
of the Spirit of Life, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord and Lawgiver, by
which we are taught, to keep our Consciences void of offense toward God and
toward men, by which we are freed from under the power of the Law of sin and
death. Romans 8.2.
And by this Law of God in our consciences, are we also taught to be subject to
every power our God shall set up over us, by which teaching we know that the
powers that be, are ordained of God. And by the same Law of God in our hearts
and Consciences, by which we are made to suffer, rather then to obey that which
is unjust, by the same Law, and upon the same penalty are we made to be subject
and obey every just and wh^lesome Law of man, for Conscience sake; Therefore,
as the ordinance of God, we obey, and own authority in the Nation; And the
Ruler of the people as the Minister of God, Nom. 13.
for good to such as do well, but a terror to every evil doer without respect
of persons; so we being guided by the pure Law of God in our consciences, are
subject not for wrath, but for Conscience sake; for he is not a terror to them
that do well, and obey God in their Consciences: But if any do evil, let such
fear, for he is the Minister of God, and bears not the sword in vain. And
for this cause we pay tribute, to whom it belongs, and fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor; And from this we exempt not our selves, more then other
people in the same Nation, but desire rather to be examples to others, with all
diligence, not speakinq evil of governments as many do, which will flatter to
their faces, but seeking to our God for what authority he shall ordain, that
under them we may be godly and quietly governed, without respect of persons.

Therefore we might say, as to all the s^verall Rulers that has arisen in
these years since we were a people in Gods light, which of them have we
reviled or sought to supplant, or what just law, old or new? (which has been
just, and according to Scriptures, or a good Conscience) have we denied or
transgressed? though from the evil and abuse of all, God has by his eternal
light, and the power of his Spirit, preserved us to this day, glory to our God
for evermore; So our Consciences are clear toward them that are fallen as to
that thing, by whom we so much suffered in their day.

And now in Gods dread and fear we are, and in his pure Counsel alone, we
desire to be found toward you that are now come up into the seat of
government, That if by any means, we might not be any occasion of offense, or
hardening of your hearts, by our disobedience or denying any of your Laws,
which are just, wholesome and good, and according to Gods truth in Scriptures;
Nor, that on the contrary we might provoke our pure eyed, and zealous God and
Father, to displeasure against us, by yielding to any thing whatsoever, or
obeying what is any way against his Spirit in our hearts, or the light of
Christ in our Consciences. And this at present is our strait way, set before
us to walk in toward God, and toward man, and therefore the desire and
travail of our souls is great at this day, that you might be one with God in
your Laws and Commands, That so, under you we might be godly and quietly
governed, within and without. But if yet, it must be so, that your distance be
so great, that with one heart we cannot obey you both, then whether it is
better to obey God or men, (with the light of God in your own consciences)
judge you, Acts 4.19.
therefore if we can but keep peace with the one of you, we choose to keep our
everlasting peace with God, 2 C^r. 1.12. 1 Timothy 3.9.
and that saving says that's held in a pure Conscience; And our prayers to the
father of lights is, for our whole body of Christ's Church, and every member
thereof, that our hearts may be kept single to him alone, what ever we suffer
from men for so doing.

Now to those things which some call religious.
THough in our selves we make no such distinction, it being that our
Consciences are to be exercised in the light and Spirit of Christ, in all we
do toward God, and toward man, and every particular action toward men, God
requires that it be done as to him, and to his glory, and not in our own wills,
nor in men's wills, nor after their wills, manners, and customs, and commands,
but in the will of God alone, revealed in Christ Jesus in Spirit, and in his
motion and leadings, which if we miss in, and serve either men or our selves
therein, and not God, we are accountable to him, as though we had erred in that
which the world calls Religion; therefore, what ever we do to God in Christ, to
us is his service and pure religion, and undefiled before God, if we keep but
our conscience unspotted from the world; though it be but in visiting a
fatherless child, or a widow, in their affliction, James 1.27.
or any other thing which the Spirit of truth, justice and mercy leads us to,
and requires of us.

But, as the worship of God it self, has relation to him alone, who is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit, and in truth, John 4.23, 24.
betwixt him and every particular creature only known, in matter, measure and
manner, time and place. And knowing that the only wise God, Dan. 4.17.
who gives the kingdoms of the earth to whom he will, yea, and may set over
them the basest of men, as well as the most virtuous, without control, if he
please so to deal in judgment toward any Nation, yet this has he reserved
as an eternal Scepter in the hand of Jesus our Lord, and by an everlasting
Covenant has he sworn once for all, Heb. 1.8, 9.
concerning him, Thou art a King for ever, over the holy people, and his throne
is established in their consciences by a perpetual decree, to all generations,
therefore was it never known, that ever he trusted or titled any earthly
Prince, with Lord over the faith and consciences of his own people; This was
ever the S^ns prerogative above the Kings of the earth, and he alone is to be
Judge and Lawgiver, Isa. 11.1, 2.
and correcter, and leader, in that invisible spiritual work of worship,
toward God, for he only knows the way, and none comes to the Father but by
him.

Its true, the Pope has taken upon himself, such authority under pretense of
the Apostles, even over the faith and consciences of people, and with it has
shed much innocent blood, which lies upon his seat, and his line, till God come
to enquire for it, and for that end has set up inquisitions etc. And others
after and from that, have erected Courts, and Synods with their fines, and
prisons, and tortures, to force the faith and Consciences of people, and they
pretend the Apostles also, for this work. But, this we know that the Apostles
was no such men, nor used any such weapons, but deny them therein both the
Pope, and they that are risen since; And expressly deny to be Lords over Gods
heritage or over their faith, neither did they preach themselves Lords, and
Masters, but Christ Jesus alone the Lord, 2 Cor. 4.5.
and themselves servants for Jesus sake, as both their own words and practice
does testify; for says Paul, Not for that we have dominion over your faith; 2
Cor. 1.24. 1 Pet. 5.3.
And says Peter, Not for filthy lucre, neither as being Lords over Gods
heritage, but as examples to the flock.

So we know that from Peter they had it not, nor from Paul, nor from any of the
true Ministers of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4. Ephesians. 6.12.
for their weapons was not carnal but spiritual, nor did they wrestle with
flesh, but with spirit; so all they can get from the Apostles, either in word
or practice, is this, That if they be troubled with errors, or profaneness in
their Churches; Then, if they have the Spirit and power of the Lord Jesus, then
to deliver such a one up to Satan, 1 Cor. 4.5.
for the destruction of the flesh, that the soul may be saved, and body also
in the day of the Lord. And this is not to goales, or gallows, or
inquisitions, or tortures, or fires; now, had they this spirit and power, they
would know that which would convert in deed and truth, and not make hypocrites,
or else kill them, but the false Church having not these weapons, nor this
spirit and power, is builded with oppression, and upholden with blood. Mic.
3.10.
And in her are found the blood of all the holy Martyrs of Jesus, as says the
Scriptures, yea, even now is she drunk with blood, Revel. 18.24. and 17.6.

So now, this is the thing we say as to the worship of our God, and to the
order of it; In all things it belongs to Christ Jesus our Lord, Col. 1.18.
and to him as sole King and Lord thereof, we commit our selves, even the whole
man, soul and body, as to all things of that nature. And though there may
ari^e power after power, and seek t^ stop us of this liberty and freedom, by
acting force and violence upon our outward man, yet are we free, by birth in
Christ Jesus, and our inw^rd man they cannot bind, nor can we ever while we
abide in that see^e, give up the right of Christ unto any of them; but this we
testify in all we do or suffer, that the right is Christ's, over our
Consciences, Phil. 2.10.
and over our worships, and to him alone we confess before men; and he has
the name in us; And though for a time, or times, we yet suffer, yet we know the
end must come; And the Lamb must take the kingdom, Rev. 17.14.
and we know him that is true and faithful, whom the Father has sealed, John
6.27. Col. 1.18.
and anointed to be head of the church which is his body, and to him must the
Nations account; And therefore we say to all the several powers that comes
upon us, we may not deny the Lord in our Consciences, to bow to, or worship in
what men shall set up or command; Mat. 1.21.
but he that saves us daily from our sins. he shall lead us in our worship,
and to him we must give the obedience of faith, who gives us faith and power by
his Spirit to obey, and who has wrought all our works in us and for us, Phil.
2.13.
and by whose virtue it is we live, and bring forth to the praise of God, and
we are not our own, nor servants of men but we are bought with a price, 1 Cor.
6.10.
that we may serve him for ever* by whom we are redeemed and by whom all men
without respect of persons, must eternally be judged, or justified.

Therefore we say, this is a privilege, that no man should be hindered of, (to
wit) the liberty of his Conscien^e toward his God, but that an universal
lib^^ty for all sorts of people, to worship God, according as Christ shall open
men's eyes to see the truth* and as he shall persuade their hearts, by his
Spirit, seeing no man without Christ can do any thing in this case acceptable
to God, neither can one man worship in the measure of another, but in his own
measure, as he receives of God in Christ Jesus faith and strength, and Spirit,
for it must be in Spirit, and of faith, else it is sin, in Gods sight, what
ever men think thereof. Romans 14.23


And this is just and equal in the sight of God, and all reasonable men, and
that which I know no understanding man or woman would be limited in, seeing
all have immortal souls from God, and to him alone must account for them* and
not to men; That so every soul may stand and fall, Romans 14.4.
to his own Master in this case* seeing none can save his brother, when he
has misled him, nor account to God for him; therefore he is no wise man (in
our eyes) who will leave the light of Christ that once knows it, to follow
another man's opinion; And seeing every man would have this liberty for
himself, why should he go about to deny it to his brother, how is that just
or equal, amongst men? And how does it answer the Law of Christ as Christians,
who has commanded, That all things whatsoever you would that men should do
unto you, do ye even so to them, Mat. 7.12.
for this is the Law and the Prophets; Now if you be not come so far in
equity, as to answer the Law and the Prophets, how will you answer Christ, you
that profess him in words.

And were it not that Nations, and men were drunk, and bewitched with the
fornication of that Scarlet colored whore, they would foresee the danger of
taking that upon them which belongs to Christ alone, it being so many have been
broken on the same Rock, and reason it self might show them how safe it is,
not to be too forward in things of that nature, which God has not called them
to; And also it being so much contrary to that just principle in man which
would lead every man to do to another as he would be done unto; And would teach
every man that he ought to give up himself to his God, in all spiritual
matters; And that so he should suffer every other creature also; And seeing
that there is no infallibility amongst ^en, without the immediate
manifestation of Christ Jesus his light and Spirit in them, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11.
but that since men took that upon them, even to sit as Lords and Judges over
faith and conscience; The Lord has scattered them in this thing, and
confounded them into so many minds and judgments, that he that is subject to
follow every change in these latter days, shall scarcely abide in one opinion
a year to an end; which things duly weighed, might stay the have of every
reasonable man from forceing that upon the Conscience of another, which
himself is not infallible in, and for which he must account to God for all
souls that err through him, and so perish, in gainsaying Gods witness.

And this would be wisdom, with God, first to search in themselves whether
they have tha^ Call from God himself, to force any, or they do it to answer
the desires of others, or to hold up a tradition, and so might they come to
see, what they serves, and whether it will bear persecution or bloud-shedding
at the day of Judgment; And prove whether you have that which is infallible to
force them to, or it be but thought, and opinion of your selves, or others,
seeing its so common a thing for Rulers and Teachers to join in forceing
people that are under them to err, and for which so many have been confounded
and cast out, and so that all might come to prove their work, and bring it to
the light, John 3.20, 21.
to see whether it be wrought in God, and if he will own it with his light,
which is pure in their Conscience, which is an equal rule, and try what power
and Spirit it is that God has made Lord and King, and Lawgiver and Leader in
all his worship; and if they have not this, then it is the old persecuter, and
murderer, which uses to set people on fire that know not God in Spirit; And if
you have that Spirit which God has given the power to in his Church, then its
gentle, drawing and powerful, without forceable imposing, or killing, nor does
he ever compel against faith and Conscience.

Now there be many particular things as to Gods worship and things thereto
pertaining, which the men of this age would impose upon us, yea, and force them
upon great penalties, which the Spirit of Christ does not lay upon us as
matters of faith or practice, nor ever did o^daine them in any age, nor command
them to b^ observed in his Church, as men now impos^ them, but ^he contrary we
find from the Spirit of Christ, both in the oldness of letter, Romans 7.6.
and i^ newness of life; So these things we cannon bow ^o, nor worship in, for
conscience sake, ^onscience toward God conscience toward the holy men of God
in the holy life, and conscience toward the Scripture of truth; for of all
these we make conscience, in their time and place, in which God the Father of
all has brought them forth to serve him.

As men would impose upon our Consciences to come once a week, to such a great
house in their Parish, which they call a parish Church, and there we must
observe what one man shall read, preach or pray, for two or three hours that
day, by an usual form, and this man will have a Clarke, and he shall say Amen
at the end of such a sentence, or part of his prayer or speech, and to this
Church, and to this worship must we be bound while we dwell in that parish; And
either the tithes of all we have, or so much a year set maintenance, must be
paid to the man calling himself a Minister of Christ; And so much a year to
his Clarke for saying Amen after him, in money and eggs, and the like; And if
this we do constantly, we may live peaceably by them, and go under the name
of a good Christian, and a religious man, but if we fail in any of this, but
especially in that of tithes or wages; then they call us heretics, and
complain of us to the Magistrate, or sue us at Law, till they have cast our
bodies into prisons, and taken the spoil of our goods. Now God having revealed
his true worship to u^ i^ the light of Christ, which is is in spirit and truth,
and called us out of carnal things ^or which there is no Scripture, we ^^nn^
for Conscience sake, worship any more therein.

Now, neither by the Spirit of Christ in us, nor by letter of Scriptures
without us, nor by the example of all the holy men of God that have walked
before us, can we for Conscience sake own, nor uphold that for the true and
spiritual worship of God in spirit and truth, neither to repair their house,
maintain their Priest, nor his Clarke, as they would impose upon us.

Now some have said, What would you have no Church, Minister, preaching,
praying, nor none of this worship, nor maintenance, etc. What would you have?

We say yes, we own a Church, ministering, preaching, praying, and the
maintenance that thereto belongs, but we would have them to be of God, and
after his will in Christ Jesus, and not after the will and traditions of men,
contrary both to God, good men and the Scriptures of truth; For we read of a
Church of Christ in Scriptures, but it was in God the Father, and our Lord
Jesus Christ. 1 These. 1.1.
And we read of a ministry of Christ in Scripture, made not of man, neither by
man, but by the revelation of the Son of God in them; And the Gospel or
Ministry that they preached, was not after man, nor received of man, Gala.
1.16. Gal. 1.11.12.
neither was they taught it, but by revelation of Jesus Chist. And we read of a
Maintenance they had, which was to live of the Gospel; And the spiritualls
which they sowed freely without money or money-worth, brought them forth fruits
freely, both in spiritual things, and worship toward God, and in carnal
things toward their outward wants, and as they planted, so they eat; And
where the plant grew, and the soul prospered, till it could bring forth fruit
freely, there they need not to sue them and to take it by spoil, 1 Cor. 9.14.
but of the world they looked for naught but persecution, nor ever coveted or
compelled any such thing from any creature, no not where they had sown and
planted, unless it grew in spirit and life to God, they looked not to reap
any thing but loss, if that which they had sown withered in the way,
therefore did they watch for the soul, and not for tithes, piggs, and eggs and
geese, and sheaves, etc. but that the soul prospered toward God, that was
their prize; And to make the Gospel without charge, that was their reward, if
they did it freely and willingly, but if not willingly, then a necessity was
laid upon them, 1 Cor. ^.17, 18.
and woe was their portion.

And these went on and prospered, gathering Churches out of the world into God,
from place to place, even where they was not sent for; they went freely as they
was moved of the holy Spirit: And if any where they came was found worthy to
receive them, with them they might eat freely what was set before them, where
the Spirit was free, but they did not seat themselves in a Town, or say, this
is my Parish, and this is my hire, so much a year, but wandered to and fro
having no certain dwelling place, nor was their bellyes any part of the
bargain, as to coming, preaching, staying* or going, as to any place.

And when they had gathered a Church into the Spirit and life of Christ Jesus,
which brought them to meet together, then they did not Lord it over them in
faith or conscience, neither was they called their Masters, but still servants
for Christ sake; 2 Cor. 4.5.
nor did they get a glass and set up, and if any spoke in their time, while
they was speaking, say they broke their peace, and send them to prison, but
said, all might prophecy, that all might be edified; and it was joy to them to
hear any to speak by the Spirit, either son or daughter. and some might
speak, and some might judge, of what was spoken; And if any thing was revealed
to him that stood by, 1 Cor. 14 29 30, 31.
the first was to hold his peace; and the Spirit of the Prophets is subject to
the Prophets. Now this Church and its order we own, where ever we find it to
be after God, and in him; but when we meet with a company of people that
denies all this; And if any be moved in the Spirit* either to speak while they
are speaking, or judge what they have spoken; Then the teacher cries away to
prison with him, and the people runs upon us all a heaps, ready to pull us to
pieces; this we own not, nor does Christ, nor the Scriptures own it to be his
Church, t^is is not the Spirit of the Prophets, nor subject to the Prophets,
but the rude Spirit which tumul^ed upon the Apostles and Prophets of old.

So here is somewhat declared of the ministry we own, and his maintenance, but
of such a thing as a Clarke we read not in Scriptures, neither name nor office.
And now let none think it strang^ or an error in us, to compare and weigh and
^ry and prove things, for we are christians, and have received the spirit that
is of God, that we may know the things that are given to us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12.
from things that are of the world; And we may not receive every one for a
Minister of Christ, who tells us he is, nor that for a Church that every one
calls a Church, nor that for worship which every one would impose upon us; for
things had need of trying, and Spirits also, and we hold fast that which is
good Its true in the world there be many Churches, 1 John 4.1. 1 These. 5.21. 1
Cor. 8.5, 6.
and many heads, Gods many, and Lords many, many faiths* and many opinions, but
in Christ Jesus (...) called to unity in all these things, so (...) we say with
the Churches of Christ in ^cripture, to us there is on^ body, one Spirit, one
(...), one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, (...) 4, 5, 6.
who is above all, and through all, and in us all. And this one God in us is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit, and in truth, so of us he requires
truth, and that we worship no other things, nor bow to them; though all men
have not this faith but can follow any thing in their worship, which is the
fashion of the Nation where they live, but this we are called out of; And into
that one worship we are come which is in spirit and truth, for in that is the
father worshipped, and God has sought us out of the many worships that are in
the world, in Spirit to worship him; and Christ says, these are the true
worshippers that so worship, and unto this has Christ led us, and in it he
ownes us in his Spirit, and the Father ownes us, and testifies to us in every
enlightened conscience, and in this we are come to the Spirits of just men, and
they own us; And ^he letter of Scriptures it ownes us also, and in this we
have peace, though persecuted.

But in all these, we read not in all the Gospel worship, of any Temple made
with hands, to bind men to, nor Parish Churches, nor preaching by the hour,
nor for so much a year, nor that ever Minister of Christ took tyths, nor
their hearers gave them, but confessed Christ come, and a free Gospel, and said
^oth the Priesthood that took tyths, and the Law by which they received them
was disanulled by the sufferings of Christ; Heb. 7.
nor do we read of sprinkling Infants, and calling that baptizing them into
the Church, nor do we read of their singing David's words in a meeter, nor
praying in a form, nor a Clarke to lead the Psalm, and say Amen; And much
more we might mention, which was never used so in the true Church but is come
to a form since Popery came up, and the Scripture bears no testimony thereto,
as now these things are used, and all that can be truly said for them is long
custom, but from plain Scriptures they cannot prove them.

Indeed we read in the Scriptures of truth, of the Gospel preaching, but it was
not limited to one house, nor by a glass, but from house to house, and City
to City, and that by the Spirit, and their worship was in Spirit, they prayed
with the Spirit, and they sung with the Spirit, and h^ that had a Psalm sung
it with the Spirit, and with understanding also; And they worshipped, and
preached in fields and mountains, and streets, and schools, and markets, and
they prayed by Sea-shores, or in any place where God moved and led them by the
Spirit of Jesus; And all this we own which the Scriptures testifies to, in our
measure; And this is that we would have all brought to trial, and that worship
owned, which Christ and the Scriptures ownes, and none forced against it, by
any means whatsoever, which is come up since the Scriptures was written, and
the Apostles times.

And this motion, is not unreasonable, hurtful or dangerous to any, especially
(we may say) in this Nation, how can it be denied, wherein all other forms in
words profess the Scriptures to be a rule for all to walk by? And to you all
^his is our motion, that the Scriptures may be heard what it says without
wresting, and what sort of worship it testifies of, let that have the name to
be of God, and then let none be forced from it; and if you deny to be tried in
your faith and profession, by that you have so long called your rule and
touchstone, and then reproach and persecute them that walk in it, will not
your own words judge you, before men, and shall not you walk under
condemnation from God in your own Consciences. And thus in short have we
showed our desires, and what we would have in this thing, which might free
every tender Conscience from oppression, and the Magistrates of the Nations
from the guilt thereof before God.

Will you call your selves Christian Magistrates, and Christian Ministers, and
set your selves against what Christ has wrought by the power of his Spirit*
and is now working, and think you ^re doing him service, when you are grieving
his Spirit, and persecuting him in his members, for doing that to which he
immediately leads them now, as in the days of old; Is not this in effect to
say, depart from our Nations, we will have none of thy ways, nor shall any
under our government, or that will follow our teachings obey thy Spirit if we
can stop them by our power, is not this to withstand his appearance, and resist
the power that you profess to rule for.

Do you not read in the Acts of the Apostles, what labor and suffering they
underwent to bring people out of carnal rudiments and ordinances of men, and
to bring them to the worship in spirit and truth alone, both as to time, place,
and order; how did they run in hazard of their lives, into Temples, Synagogues,
and set places of worship, to bring them out of Temples made with hands, to
worship where the Spirit should lead them, without respect of places; that so
the words of the Lord Jesus might be fulfilled, who had said, Not in the
Temple, nor in the mountain, John 4.21, 24. Acts 7.48. Acts 17.24.
but in spirit and in truth should the Father be worshipped; and did not
Stephen lose his life for telling them that God that made the world dwelt not
in Temples made with hands; and Paul suffered for the same testimony, and they
told them the most high God, could not be worshipped with men's hands, nor
carnal things, but in s^irit. and in truth; And how often was they tumul^ed
and beaten, and their blood shed for this test^mony, against the beggarly
rudiments, and (...) ordinances of men, both of Jews, who had their ordinances
from the letter* and ^^so the Gentiles who followed their customers, That out
of all carnal things they might bring them, to follow God in spirit, and
therein alone to serve him.

And while you profess all this in words, will you be the men that will deny
the very same in works, and shall you be guiltless, shall not both Jews and
Gentiles rise in Judgment against you, and condemn you, who acts against
knowledge, Scriptures, and your own profession? And is it not so with you
Rulers and Teachers of this generation? what force and cruelty has been used
to bring people back to your Idol temples made with hands, there to worship and
no where else, and to repair them, and to bow to the customs of men there set
up, for which there is neither Scriptures nor example; even too many to
mention, what imprisoning and ^ormenting of the spiritual worshippers of the
living God, has there been in these last days for these things? what
sufferings have some gone through, but for testifying against these traditious
carnal, and saying the Church must be in God, and that every one must come to
be led by the spirit alone in all their whole worships, and so give the
kingdom and leading of his people to the leading of Christ that spirit again,
in all things pertaining to worship, life and godliness* has not this been a
dangerous thing in thi^ age to bear this record of God in Christ, (...) to
become his witness? how ma^y (...) lost their liberties, their estates, and
(...) lives for this testimony in word (...) ^^^c^ise, which reconciles to God
in all (...) whole worship? and yet the same is read and preached, every first
day among them that do this to such as live the life thereof for Jesus sake;
these are not the works of Christians indeed, in the Apostles sense, but of
such as know not God, nor the word of reconciliation, have not.

How many have suffered in this age, but for reproving sin in the gate,
cursing, pride, lying, and swearing; how have some been beaten, pulled and
hailed, and dragged through streets and channells, and before Judgment seats,
and to prisons, for no other things; how many have woefully suffered, but for
preaching repentance through streets, towns, and markets, in the name of the
Lord, and by the Call of his holy Spirit; How many hundreds have been
imprisoned for preaching the everlasting Gospel of Jesus freely, in Towns,
Temples, streets, and markets, and from house to house, which was the manner of
Gods messengers in the name of his Son ever to do, and for which they
suffered; How many have had their clothes rent off their backs, and been
shamefully beaten till they have been left for dead, and afterward carried to
prison, for but asking a question, or speaking a word in a Steplehouse, while a
man has been speaking things doubtful, or not true, though this was the way
of old, in which the servants of Christ walked, and by which he gathered the
Churches into God in Spirit, and out of false worships; And it was the manner
of the Apostles to enter into Synagogues and places of worships both of Jews
and Gentiles on their Sabbath days, and openly dispute there with them before
their hearers, and then whose hearts God touched, lest their carnal worships
and clave to Christ in spirit, which is now become a greater offense to this
generation, then ever it was either to Jews or Gentiles; for I never read that
simply for so disputing, they either beat them or haled them to prison, though
they went sometimes three Sabbath days together into one Synagogue, yea, the
fiery Jews, who was set on mischief against that way, yet this they could
suffer in their Synagogue, as is testified Acts 17.2. and says the Scrip^ures,
this was his manner. And in Acts ^8.4. it is said, he reasoned in the Synagogue
every Sabbath day at Corinth, where he continued a year and six months
teaching the word of God among them, verse. 11.

Now has not this been the great offense of these days, yea, I may say the
chiefest crime which the servants of Jesus Christ has suffered for, in this
age, and none scarce either ruler or teacher is able to bear it once, which
they could bear a year and above, among Jews and heathens; so that this way
of Christ by which the Churches was gathered and called in the Apostles time,
is become more abominable in the sight of those that calls themselves
Christians, then it was either to Jews or heathens; And when neither laws of
Jews, Gentiles, nor heathens, that was made in times of popery, would answer
their wills against this, then have they made new Laws of their own against
this practice, which themselves read, believe and preach; and this we cannot
own, that men should withstand that in works which they profess in words,
and seek to impose it upon others who serve God therein by the Spirit of
Jesus, and then call themselves Christians, and say ^he Scriptures is their
rule, who cannot bear it in them that practice it in obedience to Christ Jesus.

And this is that we contend for in all our sufferings and actings, in the
simplicity of our hearts, that our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, may have his
Prerogative Royal restored to him, over his body, the Church, and every
particular member thereof, his Lordship, and Mastership, given to him alone of
all his children, from least to the greatest, and that none else force it, or
require it from him, but that his headship alone over his Church, his leadings,
and the seat of his Judgments, in every redeemed soul and conscience, man be
restored to him, and that he may have (...) name and authority therein, and
that none may presume to take his authority to themselves, while they give him
fair words, and call him, Lord, Lord, but neither do his will in their own
consciences, nor suffer them that would; This I say, is that we seek now at
the hands of men that are called Christians, which by his own blood, and by the
precious suff^rings in many of his obedient servants of old, he once purchased
out of the hands of the old persecuters* and gave it as inheritance to his seed
after him to all generations, to call him head and Lord in the^ and over them,
in all things pertaining to worship and conscience, as the Scripture of truth
is evident.

And this we say in his behalf, and in the power of his name, where ever he
sends us, that though his adversary of old, has taken this his purchased
possession from him, and now sits where he ought not, commandding in
conscience, Jer. 10.2, 3.
over his subjects and creatures, compelling and forceing, to obey his
traditions and law from a carnal precept, or tradition of men, yet we say the
right is Christ's alone, and the whole kingdom of God in every conscience he
has purchased with his blood and great sufferings of old; therefore we say to
all sorts of people, look to him and walk in his light, all that look to be
saved; for we say he is a great and mighty one, who though he have been as one
gone a far jorney for a time, yet he is returned, and has seen how his dear
servants have been entreated, and his little children spoiled of their
birthright, and cast out of their purchased possession, and heavenly kingdom,
and now strangers rule over their tender consciences, and s^^ke to defile them,
with adultery and Idolatry, which is against their spiritual birth, and
breathing, and himself robbed of his authority, and Scepter of his
everlasting Dominion, for which he will tread nations in his wrath, and people
in his hot displeasure, even for Z^on^ sake the City of his glory, and he will
spoil the spoyler, and lead Captivity captive, and so will he make way for his
inheritance, to come into their habitation of ^est*

And this we say to ^ll people, GIVE UP, fear God, and gi^e glory to his Name,
for the hour of hi^ Judgments is come, and he will have dominion as of old,
and his purchased possession as in anc^ent days; But especially to you who are
called Christians, and mention his name, and call him Lord, and profess the
Scriptures, in words, which testifies of him, his sufferings, and his purchase
through blood, and the eternal anointing of the Father, sworn unto him, by an
everlasting Covenant, that he alone shall sit on the spiritual throne, over
the house of David for ever* that he may with his spiritual leadings gather
the outcasts of Israel, and present to God all the precious among the people;
have you not read you professing Priests and Rulers, that it is he alone that
is the light of the world, Isa. 55.4.
and that God has given him for a witness to the people, a leader and
commander; that its he that's appointed for a light to them that sit in dakness,
and in the shadow of death, Luke 1.79.
to guide their feet in the way of peace; did God ever set any at the right
hand of power but he alone, that he might make his foes his footstool; of whom
he says when he brings him into the world, Let all the Angels of God worship
him; Heb. 1.6.
have you not read that its he alone that purges the Conscience from dead
works, And will you not suffer him to reign and govern therein; has not he
quickened every living soul, and created anew, every free Spirit, and would you
take and keep the kingdom therein, out of his hand, and rule there for
another, or your selves, with force and cruelty; Is not this he for whom the
Sabbath was made, and all the ordinances under heaven speaks his dominion* And
will you now read this and profess, and withstand him in the Consciences of
his tender people, and deny him to rule in his Church alone? have you not read
what God has said of him, and his enemies in the second Psalm; nay, are not
all the Scriptures his, and testify to him alone, as head over all, and ruler
in all his Saints? And as you have heard* read, and professed, his dominion
more then heathens, and yet go on to keep it from him; so to you is his first
appear^nce, to seek his own of you; And if you persist to deny him, its you
must drink the Cup first, that the heathens may hear and fear his name from
far, and his rising appear to all the ends of the world, that its he alone
who is from everlasting* at whose name every knee must bow, and tongue
confess, to the right of his inheritance.

And this further I lay before you people of this Nation, who have long been
crying for peace and settlement in the Nations, and in your Religion, and you
cry out of so many divisions, and so many religions; I say to you all, how
should you be otherwise, when you will not come to the one religion that is of
God, and was in the beginning with God, and brought forth in time by Jesus
Christ, for the bringing all into God again, and reconciling all sorts of
scattered people, who are scattered in the imaginations and customs of carnal
spirited men, from God the one good thing, into many things, rudiments, and
traditions, wherein you can neither be reconciled to God, nor one to another;
for how is it like that ever that religion can reconcile to God, which sets you
a killing one another to uphold it? are you like to obtain peace in that
Spirit which in your hearts is the cause of enmity and war or obtain unity
from that root, which has thus scattered you in its fruits and off spring;
This is like the false Prophets of old, who would bite with their teeth, and
cry peace* Mica. 3.


Nay this is not the way of settlement or lasting peace, THAT, you must have in
returning; and making peace with the Spirit of Jesus, you must kiss the Son
and so make peace, for this has been seen concerning you of these Nations,
that if you own not the light of Christ in spirit and truth, that he may lead
you out of these many things which are not of ^od, and reconcile you to God in
spirit and truth, there to worship him alone who is a Spirit, you will ere long
be in blood, either amongst your selves, one against another, or else i^ the
blood of the innocent Lambs of Christ, which will not be for your peace with
God, for he that has let your peace and settlement, is not yet taken away,
nor his power, who is that old bloud-sucker, and divider of Nations, people,
and tongues, about faith and religions, and with which a fire has often been
kindled; nor can his power be stopped, but by the Spirit of the Lamb of God,
which takes away sin, Col. 2.14, 15 16, 17, 20, 21, 22. Heb. 10.11.
and breaks down the wall of separation, which is made about ordinances,
litterall, ceremonial, and traditionall, which can never cease, but as men
turn to the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, That with the light of peace and truth
you may be led into peace, truth, and unity, that wrath may be done away, and
the ground thereof, and you and your religion may be settled on the foundation
of truth, Christ Jesus the chief corner stone, and not upon, days, times,
meats, drinks, and apparel, and other things which will perish with the using,
and so will they that worship and not in the leadings of Christ alone* and God
will shake the Idols of peoples minds, and all the glory of flesh, that he
alone may be exalted in the earth, as he is in heaven.

So if you will have peace you must come to the Son of peace* and if you will
have establishment, you must come to the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles of God; for I say, many have been about to build a house for God to
dwell in, with carnal things, and rudiments, and this they would bind him to,
(and his people,) who is a Spirit, and his house must be built of spiritual
men and women, who like living stones must grow up in his own light and virtue
into a holy temple in the Lord; In which you must be builded together for an
habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. And this is Gods house
built by Christ alone, with that which is elect and precious, not with gold and
garments, or observations of perishing things, but with redeemed souls by the
blood of Jesus out of their vain conversation, and gathered into the Spirit of
truth and life, and power, to worship God who is a Spirit, in spirit and truth;
and this is Gods house at this day, which was his house in the Apostles days,
who dwells not in Temples made with hands, as says the Apostles, nor with men's
hands is worshipped, but with him that's poor in spirit, and of a broken and
contrite heart, to him will I look* says the Lord, Isa. 66.2.
and there will I dwell; And the bodies of his holy people are the Temples of
the living God, as he has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people, 2 Cor. 6.16. And until you
come to this building of God in your selves, God will not dwell with you in
peace, but all your buildings will he confound, and not accept your sacrifice,
and then the Devil will enrage you against Gods house and spiritual building,
even his poor despised people them to destroy; like Cain when his sacrifice
was not accepted in his own will.

But if you turn to the Lord who is that Spirit, then will he cause his light
to shine in your hearts, to give you an heavenly understanding, and he will put
his Spirit in your inward parts, and fill you with heavenly power, and will let
you see the lively Image of truth and peace; and he will take away the veil of
the Covering that is spead over all Nations, Isa. 25.7, 8.
from which arises all their carnal comprehensions, 2 Cor. 3.16, 17, 18.
and carnal worships of the invisible spiritual God, and he will also swallow
up death in victory, which now works in the Nations, to kill one another
about religion and worship, without spirit and life, so will you come to be
taught his true worship, who is a Spirit, and become true worshippers in
Spirit, and so grow up in his knowledge, and he will own your worship, whom as
yet you have neither heard hi^ voice at any time, John 5 37.
nor seen his shape. And Christ says of such worshippers, You worship you
know not what; but the true worshippers worship in faith, and know what they
worship, and such the Father ^ now seeking to worship him, says Christ Jesus,
John 4.22, 23, 24.

And this is the thing oh England, tha^ concerns thy peace with thy God in
thi^ thy day, Luke 19.42^ Luke 10.41, 42.
who art Combred with many things, about Christ and worship, but neglects the
one thing needful, for thy everlasting peace and establishment, and to bring
thee into that worship of Spirit, without which God cannot accept thee, and
that religion which is pure, James 1.27.
and undefiled in the sight of God, which will keep thee unspotted in the
world, which till thou turn^ to, thou will be working against the Spirit of
God, through the darkness of enmity, that is in thee, and he will certainly
work against thee, except thou repent.

THE END.
J. N. R. H.


