THE NARRATIVE Of the PROCEEDINGS AT THE Sessions House For LONDON and
MIDDLESEX. Giving an ACCOUNT Of the TRIALS of diverse Traitors, Clippers,
Coyners, Highway-men, and other Notorious Offenders. The Number Condemned to
Dye, to be Whipped, etc. With their respective Crimes.
THe first Tried on Wednesday in the Forenoon were two Women, one for Stealing
an old Farringden Gown and other Clothes; the other for a piece of
Linen Cloth: The Jury found them both Guilty, only under the value of 10 d.
But against the latter of them there was another Indictment, for stealing a
Silver Tankard out of an House where she took Lodgings, in
Southampton-Buildings, coming thither in good Habit, pretending herself a
substantial Gentleman's Wife, who (she said) would come to her within a day or
two out of the Country; but desiring some Beer to be by her Bed side, got up
early next Morning, and ran away with the Tankard. So that on this Indictment
she was found Guilty of Felony.

So likewise was a Servant-Maid who had robbed her Master, stealing first his
Keys, and then twenty eight pounds odd Money out of his Trunks, and then
absenting herself till she was taken.

Two Youngmen (the one a kind of a Fruiterer, the other a Pewterer) were Tried
for Murdering a Watchman. The Case was thus; The Fruiterer carrying some Goods
to Market very early in the Morning, and being accompanied with this Pewterer,
two Watchmen stopped them near Paternoster Row, and would have them go along
before the Constable; which they seemed somewhat unwilling to do, but at last
consented: And as they were going along, the Pewterer did, or offered to strike
up one of the Watchmens Heels, as he testified, with an intent as it seems only
to get from them; and thereupon a Fray began between them: And a person, that
lives by the place, gave Evidence, that upon the first disturbance looking out
of his Window, he heard one of them often say, Give me my Hat; but of which
side he was, he could not tell, but said, that presently after he saw the
Fruiterer engaged with the person killed, who having got the now Prisoner by
the Hair of the Head, did diverse times knock the same against the Wall, upon
which the said Prisoner (the Fruiterer) turning short, got under the said
Watchman, and flung him down, and struck him with his own Watch-staff, giving
him severe Blows and Bruises, of which he languish'd above three Months, and
then died. The Fruiterer did what he could to get him Cured, promising to pay
the Chyrurgeon; and the Deceased did declare, he did forgive him with all his
heart. And that as for the Pewterer, he never so much as touched him; yet he
being in company with the other, and the first that began the Fray, and the
Watchmen being upon their Duty, (as was proved by the Constable and Beadle, who
that Night gave them their Charge and Stand) the Court gave Directions, That it
was Murder by Law in them both; and they were found Guilty of Murder
accordingly.

On Wednesday in the Afternoon, a Person of Honor and another Gentleman of
Quality being prosecuted as Popish Recusants, did declare themselves
Protestants, and proved that they had fully Conformed to the Church of England,
by receiving the Sacrament, and constantly attending and joining in the Public
Liturgy of the Church.

Then a Carpenter's Servant, and a Coachman belonging to a Noble Person, were
Tried for Murdering a Gentleman at Hampton Court: The Carpenter's man upon his
first Apprehension and now at the Bar did confess, that he himself did the
Murder; having in a most barbarous manner cleft his Head with an Ax, which was
produced in Court. But he also added, That the Coachman Arraigned with him did
put him upon, and bribe him to do that horrid Deed; because, he said, he had
spoken ill words of somebody he belonged to; promising to give him Forty
Shillings and a better thing [for so were his words] for the same, and that
thereupon he did it; but had no body could prove any of all this. Only it was
proved, that when it was told the Coachman, that such an one was Murdered, he
said, It was no matter, for he used to speak ill of a Person of Quality, or
words to that effect, on which he was taken upon Suspicion. But this did not
seem a sufficient proof o^ Convict, several persons of Esteem testifying his
honest Conversation, etc. so he was found Not Guilty. But the other, who
confessed he did the Murder, and afterward took the Gentleman's Money out of
his Pockets and his Watch, which when he was taken he was found exposing to
sale, was most justly Condemned.

A substantial Housekeeper had two Indictments brought against him, for a small
parcel of Bricks, and another time for Tiles; but it appeared there had been
Dealings between him and the Prosecutors, and that the Goods were publicly
carried away (as bought) in the daytime; and that there had been Releases
mutually Sealed, and these very things at that time mentioned. So that upon
both he was brought in not Guilty, there appearing no reason to imagine it a
Felony.

There was leave asked of the Court to bring in an Indictment of Misdemeanour
against an eminent Officer of the City, touching some menacing Words and
Miscarriages said to be used by him toward the Grand Jury that served for
London last Sessions, which (after a defensive explanatory Speech made by the
Gentleman concerned, and other pertinent Discourses) was freely granted by the
Court, declaring that equal Right should be done to all, and nothing denied
that was allowed by Law, or to that effect; for the debate being long, we would
not wrong the Court, or persons concerned, by pretending an exact Relation of
that affair, farther than in Generals.

A Gentleman was Indicted for Murder; the case to this purpose; The Prisoner
sent in some Clothes to be mended or altered, to an eminent Tailor, and one of
the Workmen promised him they should be done by such a day; but coming for
them, he found they had disappointed him, which put him in some passion, to add
to which, one on the Shop-board told him, if he had left some Money to drink,
the work had been finished; whereupon he flung a pressing Iron, or Goose amongst
them, but without doing mischief, and so went out of the Shop; upon which, the
Journeymen (as he alleged) set up an hallow by way of derision, then
returning he caught up a pair of Sheers, and threw it toward the Board
(whether aiming at any particular, or promiscuously, did not fully appear) but
so it was, that they hit one of the men, and gave him a grievous wound, of
which he languished some time, and dyed; though it was the opinion of some
Surgeons, that the same might not be the occasion of his death, yet it was
proved, that he was an healthy man before, and never enjoyed himself
afterward, but complained thereof as his deaths-wound. However, there
oppearing no prepensed Malice, nor particular aim at him, upon consideration
thereof, and all Circumstances, too tedious to recite, the Jury thought fit to
find it Manslaughter.

After this, Four persons were brought to the Bar, viz. one Mr. Markland and
his Wife, and Maidservant, and a Refiner that dwelt in Grub-street, all
Indicted for High Treason, for Clipping and Impairing the Kings Coin; Markland
had formerly been a Brewer, and lived in good fashion, but failed, and was
Imprisoned in the King's Bench, there Poverty, and an Ill Conscience, and bad
Company, taught him this mischievous Clipping Trade; which he has since
followed to great advantage, living like a Gentleman by the Ditch-side in
Black-fryars. The Evidence against him, was, One that being informed he was a
Clipper, got a Warrant, and in searching hi^^ House, found a shilling under a
Chest of Drawers, just newly Clipped, and not so much as rounded; and also two
low stools on which they were wont to rub the Money after they had Circumcised
it. Another person a poor woman gathering Herbs in St. Georges fields, found
two pair of shears, and being advised to carry them to some Workmen that made
such Instruments, happened to light on the very Man that made them, who being
examined, swore that he sold them to Mr. Markland, and that what with
new-steeling, and all, he had had of him four pair. Markland was asked what use
he put those shears to, being a Brewer, which Trade has no need of such Tools;
wherefore being able to assign no occasion, he utterly denied that he had any
shears at all of the Witness, which rendered all the rest of his defense little
regardable. But besides, there was one swore, that he had bargained with him to
give him twenty two shillings in Clipped Money, for Twenty shillings fair and
large, and that he had actually allowed him that advantage, they having dealt
so long on that score, as to have Exchanged five or six hundred pounds. But
that which put all out of doubt, was the Testimony of one of the same Gang,
that he had actually seen him Clipping, so that there was no color of excuse,
but he was found guilty.

The Refiner had been formerly questioned and got off, and so to he did now,
there being no direct proof, but that he held a Correspondence with the other,
etc. so neither could it be fixed on his Wife or Maid, that they were actually
concerned in, or privy to it, though some Evidence and Circumstances were
offered to that purpose; so these three were Acquitted.

A little Boy, scarce high enough to peep over the Bar, was Convicted of petty
Larceny, for stealing a Gentleman's Handkerchief: And an honest Coal-heaver
toward Ratcliffe, who also keeps a Victualing-house, was Indicted on a matter,
which in it self appeared by the Evidence to be a very barbarous Robbery, and a
great deal of Plate and other things of considerable Value stolen; amongst
which was a Watch, which the now Prisoner bringing to a Watchmakers only to
know its value, and there being Bills abroad describing it, the same was stopped,
and thereupon the Prisoner questioned: who proved by sufficient Witnesses, that
the manner of his coming by it was thus; A person owing him eighteen pence (as
he kept a publick-house) comes and pays it, and afterward in discourse tells
him, that if he would lend him twenty Shillings, he would leave him a
sufficient Pawn. The man at first refused, but was at last prevailed upon by
his Importunity to do it, the other promising to return the Money in two or
three Hours; but not hearing of him for a long time, goes as aforesaid to
enquire the value of his Pawn: Nor had he been wanting in endeavors to find
out the Fellow that brought it to him; which as yet he had not been able to do,
though he had been at great Charges therein: Wherefore proving the delivery of
it to him, and also producing people of Credit that justified his Reputation,
he was Acquitted.

The business about Mr. Recorder coming again into debate, upon the Grand
Juries finding the Bill against him, (after the petty Jury had been discharged
by the Court some time before) a Dispute arose about trying it the very next
Morning, and concerning returning a new Jury to that purpose, which after a
tedious discussion terminated at last in this; That the said Indictment should
not be Tried till next Sessions. A more punctual Account whereof therefore must
be expected hereafter.

A Tinker was brought on to a Trial for a Robbery and Murder on the Highway,
in the night time, near Stanes; there appeared some shrewd suspicions against
him, increased by the ill Conduct of his own Witnesses, but it being also found
that some others might probably speak to some material Points that were now
absent, the Jury was discharged of him, and his Trial referred to next Sessions.

A young Fellow was found guilty of a Felony and Burglary; he and Eleven more
of the Gang, violently entering into a Countrey-house, and binding the people,
took away Goods of a great value, and Nineteen pound in ready Money. The
Mistress of the House Swore directly that the Prisoner was one of them, so did
also another prisoner who was in the Robbery, and that he himself made Four
pound of his share of the booty; nor did the Criminal at Bar deny the Fact. But
a Broker Indicted as accessory, after having bought a Wedding Ring, which the
Gentlewoman found in his shop, made shift to get off.

There were in all Eight Persons that received Sentence of Death; Ralph
Markland to be drawn and Hanged, being convicted of High Treason, for Clipping.
Francis Nicholson, for Murdering the Gentleman at Hampton, to be Hanged till
dead, and his body hung up in Chains on Hounslow-Heath. John Watkins and Edward
Whitwick for killing the Watchman by Ivy-Lane, which the Law made Murder. John
Neal for the said Burglary. Eliz. Hull, and Katherine Johnson, for several
Felonies.

There was no person this Sessions Burnt in the Hand, one Gentleman had the
Clergy, but the Burning was respited. And several to be Whipped for petty
Larcenies.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for T. Davies. 1680.


