INSTRUCTIONS Concerning Erecting of a LIBRARY: Presented to My LORD The
PRESIDENT De MESME.

BY GABRIEL NAUDEUS, P. And now Interpreted BY JO. EVELYN, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for G. Bedle, and T. Collins, at the Middle Temple Gate, and
I. Crook in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD, Earl of CLARENDON, Viscount CORNBERY, Baron
HYDE of HYNDON; Lord High Chancellor of England, Chancellor of the University
of Oxford, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council.
MY LORD,
I have had so great a thirst to testify to your Lordship, and to publish to
the World the extraordinary Zeal which I have for your service; that pretending
to so little merit of my own, and yet having so many obligations upon me, I am
to be excused, if in making use of another Labors to accomplish my design, I
take occasion by this Dedication, to declare to the world, how immense your
favors are, and how prone I am to acknowledge them to the utmost of my
Talents: And perhaps it will be more acceptable to your Lordship, that I
express this rather by putting an excellent Author into your hands (of which I
pretend only to have been the Interpreter) than, whilst that learned person
discourses so well of excellent Books, to have multiplied the number of the
ill-ones, by some production of my own. I have made choice (my Lord) of this
Argument to present to your Honor, because I esteem it the most apposite, and
the most becoming, as it has an aspect to your Lordships noblest Character,
which is to be as well L. Chancellor of the most famous University of the
World, as L. High Chancellor of England; and, because I think, worthily to
preside over Men of Letters, is a greater dignity than to be born to the name
of Empire; so, as what was said of the great Themistius in the Epigramm, may
with equal truth be applied to your Lordship in all the glorious steps which
you have ascended -- (...). That you were never less than now you are;
especially, since your Lordships Titles are not so much the product of your
Fortune, as the effect of your Merits; verifying by your universal knowledge,
the Rank you hold over the Learned Republique, as well as over the Political;
which is, in sum, to be the greatest and most accompplish'd Minister, that
this Nation has ever celebrated. But in nothing does this appear more
conspicuous, and for which your Lordship has greater cause to rejoice in, then
that God has enlightn'd your great Mind, with a fervor so much becoming it in
the promoting and encouraging of the ROYAL SOCIETY; which is in one word, to
have dared a nobler thing, than has been done these fifty Ages and more, that
the Knowledge of Causes, and the Nature of Things have layn concealed from us;
and that the World has continued, without once having assumed the Courage and
Resolution, which our Illustrious Prince, and your Lordship, have showed in
establishing, and cultivating a Design so worthy, and perfective of Humane
Felicity, as far, at least, as in this life men may hope to attain it. My Lord,
This is your Honor, and this is truly to fix and to merit it. For let men
talk what they please of the Laurells of Conquerours, the Titles of great men,
illustrious and ample Posterity; all the pleasures of the lower senses how
exalted soever by the effects of Opulence, and Fortune; which make indeed a
great noise, and stir for the time; and, whilst the World is in the Paroxysme,
bear much before them; dazzling the eyes of the Vulgar, and flattering the
weaker discernements; They arrive not to the least perceptible degree of that
Dignity, and true honor which a man may raise to himself by noble and virtuous
Actions; Because there is nothing solid in them, they last but for a moment, in
their using languish and expire. He that would lay a Foundation of true and
permanent Honor, that would place it beyond the reach of Envy, must qualify
it with something more noble and intellectual, and which is not obnoxious to
the common vicissitudes; because, by whatever circumstances such a worthy
Design may happen to be discomposed, it will nevertheless be celebrated as long
as Virtue shall have an Advocate here; and when the World shall become so
depraved, that there is nothing sincere remaining in it, God himself will
remunerate it hereafter. If the Sovereigns and Puissances of the Earth (having
sated themselves with their Triumphs over Men and Provinces, enlarged their
Dominions, and established their estates) would one day think (as our glorious
Prince has begun to them) of extending, and amplifying the Bounds and Empire of
real Philosophy, in pursuit of those Magnalia Naturae, to the glory and
contemplation of the Maker, and the universal benefit of Mankind; how happy
would such Princes be, how fortunate their People! And truly this has made me
frequently to consider, wherein the felicity of that great Monarch consisted,
whose heart was so enlarged with knowledge, improved to the good of his
Subjects, where silver was as the stones of the streets for abundance, and the
conveniences of life so generally affluent: Certainly it is by such a Design as
our own Solomon, and your Lordship, is about to favor, that even We may hope
for those glorious times again, and by which the public health may be
confirmed, our Lives produced, knowledge and conversation improved, and joy and
contentedness become as universal as the Air which gives us breath: For my
Lord, what can be more glorious, and worthy a Prince, to which God himself has
said, Dixi, Dii estis, I have said ye are Gods, then by this means to aid, and
to comfort Mankind, which is environed with such variety of Miseries? And to
emancipate, and redeem the rest, who by the utmost of their endeavors aspire
to more happiness, to be freed from the Pressures, Errors and infinite
Mistakes which they fall into, for want of Experiences, and competent
subsidiaries to essay them. But to accomplish this, my Lord, There is certainly
nothing more expedient, than in pursuit of that stupendous Idea of your
Illustrious Predecessor, to set upon a Design no way beneath that of his
Solomon's House; which, however lofty, and to appearance Romantic, has yet in it
nothing of Impossible to be effected, not only considering it as Himself has
somewhere defined the Qualifications, but as your Lordship has designed the
Instruments (and may in time, the Materials) as all the World must needs
acknowledge, that shall but cast an eye over the Catalogue of such as have
already devoted themselves; Because (but for the mistake which they made in
honoring me with their suffrages) I should not blush to pronounce the
Royal-Society furnished with an Assembly as accomplished for that noble and
great Attempt, as Europe, or the whole World besides, has any to produce; And
that, my Lord, because it does not consist of a Company of Pedants, and
superficial persons; but of Gentlemen, and Refined Spirits that are universally
Learned, that are Read, Traveled, Experienced and Stout; in sum, my Lord,
such as becomes your Honor to cherish, and our Prince to glory in. These are
the Persons, my Lord, that without the least of sordid, and self interest, do
supplicate the continuance of your Lordships Protection, and by your Influences
to put them into a farther capacity to proceed in that glorious Work of
Restoring the Sciences, Interpreting Nature, unfolding the obstrusities of
Arts, for the Recovery of the Lost; Inventing, and Augmenting of new and useful
Things, and for whatsoever else is in the Dominion of inferior Agents. For my
own part, my Lord, I profess it, that were it in my power to choose, I had
rather be the Author of one good and beneficial Invention, than to have been
Julius Caesar, or the great Alexander himself; and do range the Names of a
Gilbert, a Bacon, a Harvey, a Guttemberge, Columbus, Goia, Metius, Ianellus,
Thyco, Galileo (not to mention Hippocrates, Proclus, Hieron, Archimedes,
Ctesibes, Boethius, and what more of the Ancients) who gave us the Use of the
Lodestone, Taught us the Art of Printing; found out the Circulation of the
Blood, detected new Worlds, invented the Telescope, and other opticall Glasses,
Engines and Automates, amongst the Heroes, whom they Deifi'd, and placed above
the Stars; because they were the Authors of ten thousand more worthy Things,
than those who had never been named but for their bloodshed and cruelty, pride
and prodigious lusts; nor would any memory of them have been preserved from
oblivion, but for the Pens of such great Genius's and learned men, of whom some
of them did the least deserve. The noble Verulam your Lordships Predecessor, as
he out-stripp'd all who went before him; so is he celebrated as far as
knowledge has any Empire; and (maugre the frowardness of his latter Fortune)
the Learned rise up at the sound of his very Name; And for what is all this?
But his great and shining endeavors to advance the excellency of men's Spirits,
cultivate humane Industry, and raise an Amphitheatre of Wisdom, without which
this public Soul of his had slept as much neglected and forgotten, as those
who only became great by their power, and perished with it. All this your
Lordship knows; and therefore as your Education has been amongst the most
refined, you burn with a desire to improve it also amongst others; so that the
Chancellours of France shall not for ever bear away the Reputation of having
rendered that Spot the envy of Europe, for being Fautors and Mecoenas's to so
many rare Wits, and laudable Societies, as are amongst that Mercurial people;
since there is that left for your Lordship and our Nation, which is as far
beyond the polishing of Phrases, and cultivating Language, as Heaven is
superior to Earth, and Things are better than Words; Though even those also
will not be neglected in their due Time and Order: But it is prodigious only
to consider, how long these shells have been played with, and pleased the
World; That after so many Revolutions, in which Learning has been seen as it
were at its highest Ascendent, there never yet appeared any man of Power, who
possessed a Soul big enough, and judgment suitable, to erect some considerable
Foundation for Practical Philosophers, and for the Assembling of such whose
united, and assiduous Endeavors, might penetrate beyond the Walls of what is
yet discovered, or received upon trust Atque omne immensum peragrarent mente,
animoque
That might redeem the World from the Insolency of so many Errors as we find
by daily experience will not abide the Test, and yet retain their Tyranny; and
that by the credit only and address of those many Fencing-Schools which have
been built (not to name them Colleges) and endowed in all our Universities: I
speak not here of those reverend, and renouned Societies which converse with
Theology, cultivate the Laws, Municipal, or Foreign; But, I deplore with just
indignation, the supine neglect of the Other, amongst such numbers as are set
apart for empty, and less fruitful Speculations; especially, since I find the
pretenses of so many sober and qualified persons as have deplored this effect,
so very reasonable, and so eminently beneficial. But why do I abound? Your
Lordship who is already possessed with all this, is not to be instructed,
without presumption and impertinence, which cannot be the least design of this
Epistle; since those who know both your Lordships affection, and inclination to
promote so glorious a Work, know also, that there is none more able to make it
attain to its desired protection. And this is, my Lord, worthily to consult
your Fame, and to eternize your Name in the World amongst the Good and the
Virtuous; which will make you live not only in the Mouths and Pens, but in the
Hearts of gallant Persons, and such as best skill to make Estimates of the
Favors you shall confer upon them; because they seek it not out of private
advantage, sordid purposes, or artificially; but to the ends proposed; The
enlargement of real knowledge, and for the public benefit; in sum, my Lord,
for the most useful and noblest effects, and for the Glory of God. And thus, my
Lord, I have taken the boldness in presenting your Honor with this little
Discourse of Books and Libraries, to put these Reflections of mine into your
Lordships hands; Because, as having my self the honor to have some Relation to
that Assembly, who make these their pretenses to conciliate your Esteem, I
think my self obliged to acknowledge with them likewise, your Lordships
favorable Reception of their late Addresses; and because I am for so many
other obligations in particular, to publish to the world, how perfectly I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, and most obliged Servant, J. EVELYN.

Instructions concerning Erecting of a Library, presented to my Lord the
President De Mesine, by Gabr. Naudeus P. TO THE READER.
THis Advice occasioned by a certain dispute, which was some months since
controverted in his Library, who was then pleased to accept of it, had never
been drawn out of the dust of my study, and exposed to the Light; till not
finding my self able to render a better, or more speedy satisfaction to the
curiosity of many of my Friends, who desired Copies of it, I at last resolved
to print it: as well that it might deliver me from the charge and inconveniency
of the Transcribers, as for my natural propensity to oblige the public; whom,
if this Advice be not worthy to satisfy, it may yet serve as a Guide at least
to those who desire to furnish the world with better, that it may no longer be
deprived of a piece which seems wanting to its felicity; and, for which respect
alone I have been first constrained to break the Ice, and trace the way
cursorily for those who may render it more perspicuous at their leisure; This
if you shall accept, I shall have cause to acknowledge your civility, and good
will; If otherwise, I shall, at least, request you to excuse my faults, and
those of the Printer.

A Table of the principal Matters, treated of in these Instructions.
Chap. 1. ONE ought to be curious in erecting of Libraries, and why? Chap. 2.
How to inform ones self, and what we are to know concerning the erecting of a
Library. Chap. 3. The Number of Books which are requisite. Chap. 4. Of what
quality and condition they ought to be. Chap. 5. By what expedients they may be
procured. Chap. 6. The disposition of the Place where they should be kept.
Chap. 7. The Orders which it is requisite to assign them. Chap. 8. Of the
Ornament and Decoration necessarily to be observed. Chap. 9. What ought to be
the principal Scope, and end of such a Library.
In primum struendae ordinatim Bibliothecae: Auctorem, Gabr. Naudaeum.
Epigramma:
Composuisse Libros, promptum and triviale cuique est;
Librorum Auctores composuisse, Tuum est.
EJUSDEM LUSUS.
Bibliotheca licet tot sis Naudaee librorum,
Cusa haec non tamen est Bibliotheca tua.
Non etenim veluti plantam parit altera planta,
Bibliothecam aliam Bibliotheca parit.
Si tamen ista Tua est, mihi credito non nisi monstrum est,
Cum Bibliothecam aliam Bibliotheca parit.
At monstrum esse negas; quod docta lutetia laudat:
Ergo divinae fabrica mentis erit.
Non divuin est, inquis, humana conditum ab art:
Dic ergo tua tu Bibliotheca quid est?
J. C. FREY, Doct. Medic. and Philosoph, in Academia Paris. Decanus.
JANUS CAECILIUS FREY.
Invia ad arts and Scientias. Pars 4. praecepta continet ordinandi
Bibliothecas.

SCRIPSIT AUREUM NUPER DE HAC RE LIBELLUM GALLUM GABRIEL NAUDAEUS. EGO PAUCIS
REM DIFFICILLIMAM ORDINATIM PROFERAM.



INSRUCTIONS Concerning erecting of a LIBRARY, Presented to My LORD the
President De MESME.
Horat. l. 1. Ep. 19.
-- Iuvat immemorata ferentem
Ingenuis oculisque legi, manibusque tueri.

MY LORD,
I Suppose it will not appear unreasonable, that I give the Title and Quality
of a thing unheard of to this Discourse, which I present you with as much
affection, as your favor, and the service which I owe you, oblige me to do:
since it is certain, that amongst the almost infinite number which have to this
day taken the Pen in hand, there never arrived any yet (to my knowledge) upon
whose advice a man might regulate himself concerning the choice of Books, the
means of procuring them, and how they should be disposed of, that they might
appear with profit and honor in a fair and Sumptuous Bibliotheque.

For though we have indeed the Counsel which is given us by John Baptist
Card^n, Bishop of Tortosa, touching the erecting and entertainment of the Royal
Library of the Escurial; yet he has so lightly passed over this subject, that
though we did not esteem it as good as nothing, yet at least ought it not to
retard the happy design of those who would undertake to impart some greater
light and directions to others, upon hope, that if they succeed no better, the
difficulty of the Enterprise will not render them less excusable then him, and
exempt from all sort of blame and reproach.

As true it is, that it is not every man's Talent to acquit himself happily in
this affair, and that the pains and the difficulty which there is in acquiring
a superficial knowledge only of all the Arts and Sciences, to deliver ones self
from the servitude and slavery of certain opinions, which make us speak and
govern all things according to our Fancy, and to judge discreetly, and without
passion, of the merit and quality of Authors; are difficulties more then
sufficient to persuade us, that what Iustus Lipsius elegantly spoke, and much
to the purpose, of two other sorts of persons, may be truly verified of a
Library Keeper: Consules fiunt quotannis, and novi Proconsules: In Electis
Solus aut Rex aut Poeta non quotannis nascitur.

And if I, my Lord, assume the boldness to present you these Memoires and
Instructions; it is not, that I so much value and esteem my own Judgment, as to
interpose it in an affair of so much difficulty; or that I am so far
transported with self-love to imagine there is that in me, which is so rarely
to be encountered amongst others: But the great affection which I have to
perform a thing which may be acceptable to you, is the sole cause which excites
me to join the common sentiments of diverse persons, Learned, and extremely
versed in the knowledge of Books, and the several expedients practiced by the
most famous Bibliothecaries, to that which the little Industry and Experience I
have my self obtained, may together furnish me withal; that I may with this
Advice, represent unto you the Precepts and the means on which it is necessary
to regulate ones self, and attain a fortunate success in this noble and
generous enterprise.

And therefore, my Lord, after I have made it my most humble request, that you
would rather attribute this tedious discourse to the candor and sincerity of my
affection* then to the least presumption of being capable to acquit my self of
it more worthily then another; I shall freely tell you, that unless your
designs be to equal the Vatican Library, or the Ambrosiane of Cardinal
Barromeus, you have already sufficient to give your mind repose, to be
satisfied, and contented in possessing such a quantity of Books, and so rarely
chosen, that though it be not arrived to those dimensions, it is yet more than
sufficient, not only to serve your particular contentment, and the curiosity of
your Friends; but to conserve likewise the reputation of being one of the most
considerable, and best furnished Libraries of France; since you there enjoy all
the Principals in the chief Faculties, and a very great number of others, which
may minister to the various rencontres of particular and less obvious subjects.
But if your Ambition be to render your name illustrious by that of your
Bibliotheque, and to join this expedient also to those which on all occasions
you practice by the Eloquence of your Discourses, the Solidity of your
Judgment, and the glory of the noblest Dignities and Magistratures which you
have so successfully borne, to render an eternal Luster to your Memory, and
assure you whilst you live, that you may with ease disinvelope your self from
the innumerable Volumes and Scrowles of Ages, to live and be famous in the
Memories of men; it will then be needful to augment, and every day to perfect
what you have so happily begun; and insensibly to give such, and so
advantageous a Progress to your Library, that it may become as unparalled as
your self, without equal; and as fair, perfect and accomplished, as it can be
made by the Industry of those, who never effect any thing without some spot and
imperfection. Adeo nihil est ab omni part beatum.

CHAP. I. One ought to be curious in erecting of Libraries, and why?
ANd now, my Lord, since all the difficulty of this Design consists, in that
(being able to execute it with facility) You think fit to undertake it. It will
be requisite, that, before we arrive at those Precepts which may serve to put
it in execution, we first deduce, and explain the reasons which are most likely
to persuade You, that it is to Your advantage, and that You ought by no means
to neglect it. For not to go far from the nature of this Enterprise, common
sense will inform us, that it is a thing altogether laudable, generous, and
worthy of a courage which breathes nothing but Immortality, to draw out of
oblivion, conserve, and erect (like another Pompey) all these Images, not of
the Bodies, but of the Minds of so many gallant men, as have neither spared
their time, nor their Industry, to transmit to us the most lively features and
representations of whatsoever was most excellent and conspicuous in them. And
this is also a thing which the younger Pliny (who was none of the least
ambitious amongst the Romans) would seem particularly to encourage us in, by
that handsome expression in the first of his Epistles; Epist. 5.
Mihi pulchrum in primis videtur, non pati occidere quibus aeternitas debetur:
since this curious passage, not trivial and vulgar, may legitimately pass for
one of those lucky presages, Lib. de utilit. capienda ex adver.
of which Cardan speaks in his Chapter de signis eximiae potentiae; for that
being extraordinary, difficult, and of great expense, it can no ways be
effected without giving every man occasion to speak well of it, and with
Admiration, as it were, of him who puts it in Execution: Ibidem.
Existimatio autem and opinio (says the same Author) rerum humanarum reginae
sunt. And in earnest, if we find it not strange that Demetrius made a show and
Parade of his Artillery, vast and prodigious Machines; Alexander the Great of
his manner of encamping; the Kings of Egypt of their Pyramides; nay Solomon of
his Temple, and others of the like: since Tiberius well observes it in Tacitus
caeteris mortalibus in eo stare consilia quid sibi conducere putent, principlum
diversam esse sortem, quibus omnia ad famam dirigenda: How much ought we then
to esteem of those, who have never sought after these superfluous Inventions,
and, for the most part, unprofitable; well judging and believing, that there
was no expedient more honest and assured, to acquire a great reputation amongst
the people, than in erecting of fair and magnificent Libraries, to devote and
consecrate them afterward to the use of the Public? As true is it, that this
Enterprise did never abuse nor deceive those who knew how to manage it well,
and that it has ever been judged of such consequence, that not only particular
persons have made it successeful to their own advantage, as Richard de Bury,
Bessarion, Vincentius Pinelli, Sirlettus, Henry de Mesme your Grandfather of
most happy memory, the English Knight Bodley, the late President Thuanus, and a
world of others; but that even the most ambitious would still make use of this,
to crown and to perfect all their glorious achievements, as with the Key-stone
of the Arch, which adds luster and ornament to all the rest of the Edifice. And
I produce no other proofs and testimonies of what I say, than those great Kings
of Egypt, and of Pergamus, Xerxes, Augustus, Lucullus, Charlemain, Alphonsus
of Arragon, Matthew. Corvinus, and that great Prince Francis the First, who have
all of them had a particular affection, and sought (amongst the almost infinite
number of Monarchs and Potentates, which have also practiced this Stratagem) to
amass great numbers of Books, and erect most curious and well furnished
Libraries: not that they stood in need of other subjects of recommendation and
Fame, as having acquired sufficient by the Triumphs of their great and signal
Victories; but because they were not ignorant, that those persons, quibus sola
mentem animosque perurit gloria, should neglect nothing which may easily
elevate them to the supreme and Sovereign degree of esteem and reputation. And
truly, should one enquire of Seneca, what are to be the actions of these
gallant and puissant Genius's, which seem not to have been sent into the world
but to do Miracles, he would certainly answer us, Neminem excelsi ingenii virum
humilia delectant and sordida, Epist. 39*
magnarum rerum species ad se vocat and allicit. And therefore, my Lord, it
seems very much to the purpose, since you govern and preside in all signal
Actions, that you never content your self with a Mediocrity in things which are
good and laudable; and since you have nothing of mean and vulgar, that you
should also cherish, above all others, the honor and reputation of possessing
a Bibliotheque, the most perfect, the best furnished and maintained of your
time. In fine, if these Arguments have not power sufficient to dispose you to
this Enterprise, I am at least persuaded, That of your particular satisfaction
will of it self be sufficiently capable to make you resolve upon it: For if it
be possible in this world to attain any sovereign good, any perfect and
accomplished felicity, I believe that there were certainly none more desirable
than the fruitful entertainment, and most agreeable divertisement which might
be received from such a Library by a learned man, and who were not so curious
in having Books, ut illi sint coenationum ornamenta, Seneca c. 9. lib. 1. de
Tranquillitat.
quam ut studiorum instrumenta, since from that alone he might with reason name
himself Cosmopolitan, or Habitant of the Universe; that he might know all, see
all, and be ignorant of nothing. Briefly, seeing he is absolute Master of this
Contentment, that he might manage it after his own fancy, enjoy it when he
would, quit it when he pleased, entertain himself in it at his liberty; and
that without contradiction, without travail, and without pains, he may instruct
himself, and learn the exactest particulars Of all that is, that was, and that
may be
In Earth, the farthest Heavens, and the Sea.


I shall only add then, for the result of of all these reasons, and of many
other; that it is easier for you to conceive, than it is for any other to
express it, that I pretend not hereby to engage you in a superfluous and
extraordinary expense, as being not at all of their opinion, who think Gold and
Silver the principal nerves of a Library, and who persuade themselves,
(esteeming Books only by the price they cost) that there is nothing good to be
had but what is dearly purchased. Yet, neither is it my design to persuade
you, that so great a provision can be made with a shut purse, and without cost;
very well knowing that the saying of Plautus is as true on this occasion, as in
many others, Necesse est facere sumptum qui quaerit lucrum: but to let you see
by this present Discourse, that there are an infinity of other expedients,
which a man may make use of with a great deal more facility and less expense,
to attain at last, the scope which I propose to you.

CHAP. II. How to inform ones self, and what we ought to know concerning the
erecting of a Library.
AMongst these now, my Lord, I conceive there are none more profitable and
necessary, than to be first well instructed ones self, before we advance on
this enterprise, concerning the order, and the method which we ought precisely
to observe to accomplish its end. And this may be effected by two means,
sufficiently easy and secure. The First is, to take the counsel and advice of
such as are able to give it, concert and animate us viva voce: supposing that
they are capable to do it; men of Letters, sober and judicious, and who by
being thus qualified, are able to speak to the purpose, discourse and reason
well upon every subject; or for that they also are pursuing the same Enterprise
with the esteem and reputation of better success, and to proceed therein with
more industry, precaution, and judgment than others do; such as are at present
M M. de Fontenay, Hale, du Puis, Riber, des Cords, and Moreau, whose examples
one cannot err in following; since according to the saying of Pliny the
younger: Lib. 1. Epist. 5.
Stultissimum esset ad imitandum, non optima quaeque sibi proponere: and for
what concerns you in particular, the variety of their procedures may
continually furnish you with some new address and light, which will not be,
peradventure, unserviceable to the progress and advancement of your Library;
by the choice of good Books, and of whatsoever is the most curious in every one
of theirs. The Second is, to consult, and diligently to collect those few
Precepts that may be deduced from the Books of some Authors, who have written
but slightly upon this matter; as for instance, The Counsel of Baptista
Cardonius, the Philobiblion of Richardus de Bury, the life of Vincentius
Pinelli, the Books of Possevine, de cultura ingeniorum, of that which Lipsius
has made concerning Libraries, and of all the several Tables, Indexes, and
Catalogues; and govern ones self by the greatest and most renowned
Bibliotheques which were ever erected: since to pursue the advice and precept
of Cardan, L. 3. de util. cap. ex adver. cap. de contemplat.
His maxim in unaquaque re credendum est, qui ultimum de se experimentum
dederint. In order to this, you must by no means omit, and neglect to cause to
be transcribed all the Catalogues, not only of the great and most famous
Libraries, whether ancient or modern, public or private, with us, or amongst
strangers; but also of the Studies and Cabinets, which for not being much
knownn, or visited, remain buried in perpetual silence: A thing which will no
way appear strange, if we consider four or five principal reasons, which have
caused me to establish this proposition. The first whereof is, That a man can
do nothing in imitation of other Libraries, unless by the means of their
Catalogues he have knowledge of what they contain. The second, For that they
are able to instruct us concerning the Books themselves, the place, the time,
and the form of their Impression. The third, Because that a mind which is
generous and nobly born, should have a desire and an ambition to assemble, as
in one heap, whatsoever the others possess in particular, ut quae divisa
beatos efficient, in se mixta fluant. The fourth, For that by this means, one
may sometimes do a friend service and pleasure; and when we cannot furnish him
with the Book he is in quest of, show, and direct him to the place where he may
find some Copy, a thing very feasible by the assistance of these Catalogues.
Finally, Because it is altogether impossible, that we should by our own
industry, learn, and know the qualities of so vast a number of Books, as it is
requisite to have, it is not without reason, that we follow the judgments of
the most intelligent and best versed in this particular, and then to deduce
this Inference; Since these Books have been collected and purchased by such and
such, there is reason to believe, they deserved it for some circumstance
unknown to us: And in effect, I may truly say, that for the space of two or
three years, that I have had the honor to meet sometimes with M. de F. amongst
the Booksellers, I have frequently seen him buy Books so old, ill bound, and
wretchedly printed, that I could not choose, but smile and wonder together, till
that he being afterward pleased to tell me the cause and the circumstances for
which he purchased them; his reasons seemed to be so pertinent, that I shall
never otherwise think, but that he is a person the best versed in the knowledge
of Books, and discourses of them with more experience and judgment, than any
man whatsoever, not only in France, but in all the world besides.

CHAP. III. The Number of Books which are requisite.
THe first Difficulty having been thus deduced and explained, that which ought
to follow and approach us nearest, obliges us to enquire, if it be to purpose
to make any great provision of Books, to render thereby our Library famous, if
not by the quality of them, yet at least by the unparalled and prodigious
quantity of its Volumes? For it is certainly the opinion of very many, that
Books are like to the Laws and Sentences of the Iurisconsults, which (as one
says) aestimantur pondere and qualitate, non numero; and that it appertains to
him only, to discourse handsomely upon any point of Learning, who is least
conversant in the several Readings of those Authors which have written upon it:
and really, it seems that those gallant Precepts, and Moral Advertisements of
Seneca, Paretur Librorum quantum satis est, Epist. 2. L. 4. de Tranquil. L. 1.
c. 9.
nihil in apparatum: Onerat discentem turba, non instruit, multoque satius est
paucis te auctoribus tradere, quam errare per multos. Quum legere non possis
quantum habeas, sat est te habere quantum legas, and diverse other like it,
which he gives us in five or six places of his Works, may in some measure
favor, and fortify this opinion, by the authority of so great a Person: But
if we would entirely subvert it, to establish our own as the most probable, we
need only fix our selves upon the great difference which there is between the
Industry of a particular man, and the Ambition of him who would appear
conspicuous by the Fame of his Bibliotheque: or 'twixt him that alone disires
to satisfy himself, and him that only seeks to gratify and oblige the
Public. For certain it is, that all these precedent reasons point only to the
Instruction of those who would judiciously, and with order and method, make
some progress in the Faculty which they pursue; or rather, to the condemnation
of those that show themselves sufficiently knowing, and pretend to great
abilities, albeit they no more discern this vast heap of Books, which they have
already assembled, then did those crooked persons (to whom King Alphonsus was
wont to compare them) that huge bunch which they carried behind their Back;
which is really very seasonably reproch'd by Seneca, in the places before
alleged; and in plainer terms yet, where he says, Quo mihi innumerabiles
libros and Bibliothecas, Lib. 1. de Tranquil. cap. 9.
quarum dominus vix tota vita sua indices perlegit? As by that Epigram also
which Ausonius so handsomely addresses ad Philomusum.

Emptis quod libris tibi Bibliotheca referta est,
Doctum and Grammaticum te Philomuse putas?
Hoc genere et chordas, et plectra, et barbita conde,
Omnia mercatus, cras Cithrae^dus eris;
That thou with Books thy Library have filled,
Think thou thy self learned, and in Grammar skilled?
The stored with Strings, Lutes, Fiddle-sticks now bought;
To morrow thou Musician may be thought.
But you, my Lord, who have the reputation of knowing more then can be taught
you, and who deprive your self of all sort of contentments, to enjoy, and
plunge your self, as it were, in the pleasure which you take in courting good
Authors; to you it is that it properly aptains, to possess a Bibliotheque, the
most august, and ample, that has ever been erected: to the end it may never be
said hereafter, that it was only for want of a little care which you might have
had, that you did not bestow this Piece upon the Public; and of your self,
that all the actions of your life had not surpassed the most heroic exploits
of the most illustrious persons. And therefore I shall ever think it extremely
necessary, to collect for this purpose all sorts of Books, (under such
precautions, yet, as I shall establish) seeing a Library which is erected for
the public benefit ought to be universal, but which it can never be, unless
it comprehend all the principal Authors that have written upon the great
diversity of particular Subjects, and chiefly upon all the Arts and Sciences;
of which, if one had but considered the vast numbers which are in the
Panepistemon of Angelus Politianus, or in any other exact Catalogue lately
compiled: I do not at all doubt, but that you will be ready to judge by the
huge quantity of Books which we ordinarily meet with in Libraries) in ten or
twelve of them, what number you ought to provide, to satisfy the curiosity of
the Readers upon all that remains. And therefore I do nothing wonder, that
Ptolemy King of Egypt did not for this purpose collect one hundred thousand
Volumes, Lib. 22. Lib. 1. de Tranquil. cap. 9.
as Cedrenus will have it; not four hundred thousand, as Seneca reports; In
Antiq. Jud. c. 2.
not five hundred thousand as Josephus assures us; but seven hundred thousand,
as witness, Lib. 6. Noct. Attio. cap. ult.
and accord, Aulus Gellius, Ammianus Marcellinus, Sabellicus Volaterran. Or
that Eumenes the son of Attalus had collected two hundred thousand; Ennead. 6.
Lib. 7. Lib. 17. Autrop. Alexand. ab Alex. Lib. 2. c. 30.
Constantine a hundred and twenty thousand: Sammonicus ( Praeceptor to the
Emperor Gordian the younger) sixty two thousand, Epaphroditus, a simple
Grammarian only, thirty thousand. Zonaras. Plutarch. in Sylla.
And that Richard of Bury, Monsieur de Thou, and Sir Tho. Bodley have made so
rare a provision, that the Catalogues only of either of their Libraries do
amount to a just Volume. For certainly there is nothing which renders a Library
more recommendable, then when every man finds in it that which he is in search
of, and could no where else encounter; this being a perfect Maxim, That there
is no Book whatsoever, be it never so bad or decried, but may in time be sought
for by some person or other; since according to that of the Satyrist, Pers.
sat. 5.
Mill hominum species, and rerum discolor usus,
Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vivitur uno.
And that it is commonly amongst Readers as it was with Horace's three Guests,
Lib 2. Epist. 2.
P^scentes vario nimium diversa palato.
There being no better resemblance of Libraries, then to the Meadow of Seneca,
where every living creature finds that which is most proper for him: Ep. 118.
Bos herbam, Canis leporem, Ciconia lacertum. And besides, we are to believe,
that every man who seeks for a Book, judges it to be good; and conceiving it to
be so, without finding it, is forced to esteem it curious and very rare; so
that coming at last to encounter it in some Library, he easily thinks, that the
Owner of it knew it as well as himself: and that he bought it upon the same
account that excited him to search after it; and in pursuit of this, conceives
an incomparable esteem both of the Owner, and of the Library; which coming
afterward to be published, there will be need but of few like encounters, Sen
Ep. 118.
joined to the common opinion of the Vulgar, Cui magna pro bonis sunt, to
satisfy and recompense a man that accounts it never so little honor and glory
in all his expenses and pains. And besides, should one enter into the
consideration of times, of places, and new inventions, no man of Judgment can
doubt, but that it is much easier at present, to procure thousands of Books,
then it was for the Ancients to get hundreds; and that by consequent, it would
be an eternal shame and reproach in us, to come beneath them in this particular,
which we may surmount with so much advantage and facility. Finally, as the
quality of Books does extremely augment the esteem of a Library amongst those
who have the means, and the leisure to understand it; so must it needs be
acknowledged, that the sole quantity of them brings it into luster, and
reputation, as well amongst Strangers and Travelers, as amongst many others,
who have neither the time, nor the convenience of exactly turning them over in
particular; as may easily be judged by the prodigious number of Volumes, that
there must needs be an infinity of good ones, signal, and remarkable. Howbeit,
neither to abandon this infinite quantity without a definition, nor to put
those that are curious out of hopes of being able to accomplish, and finish so
fair an enterprise; it would, me thinks, be very expedient to do like those
Physicians, who prescribe the quantity of Drugs according to their qualities;
and to affirm, that a man can never fail in collecting all those which shall
have the qualities and conditions requisite and fit to be placed in a Library.
Which that we may discern, one must be careful to take with him diverse
Theorems, and praecautions; which may with more facility be reduced to practice
as opportunity happens, by those who have the routine, and are versed in Books,
and who judge of all things maturely and without passion, then possibly be
deduced, and couched in writing, seeing they are almost infinite; and that, to
speak ingenuously, some of them combat the most vulgar opinions, and maintain
Paradoxes.

CHAP. IV. Of what Quality and Condition Books ought to be.
I Will now say notwithstanding, (...) to omit nothing which may serve us for a
Guide, in this Disquisition, that the prime Rule which one ought to observe,
is, in the first place to furnish a Library with all the chief and principal
Authors, as well ancient as modern, chosen of the best Editions, in gross, or
in parcels, and accompanied with their most learned, and best Interpreters, and
Commentators, which are to be found in every Faculty; not forgeting those
which are less vulgar, and by consequent more curious: As for Example, with
the several Bibles, the Fathers, and the Councels, for the gross of Theology:
with Lyra, Hugo, Tostatus, Salmeron, for the positive: with S. Thomas, Occh^^,
Durandus, Peter Lombard, Henricus Magnus, Alexander of Ales, Aegidius Romanus,
Albertus magnus, Aureolus, Burleus, Capreolus, Major, Vasques, Suarez, for the
Scholiastick: with the Body of the (...) Civil and Canon Laws; Baldus,
Bartholus, Cujus, Alciat, du Moulin for the Law: with Hippocrates, Galen,
Paulus Aeginetus, Oribasius, Aetius, Trallian, Avicen, Avenzoar, Fernelius, for
Physic: Ptolomy, Pirmicus, Haly, Cardan, Stotlerus, Gauricus, Iunctinus, for
Astrology: Halhazen, Vitellio, Bacon, Aquillonius, for the Optics:
Diophantes, Boethius, Jordan, Tartaglia, Siliscus, Lucus de Burgo, Villefranc
for Arithmetic: Artemidorus, Apomazar, Sinescus, Cardonius, for Dreams: And so
with all the other, which it would be too long, and troublesome, to specify
and enumerate precisely.

In the second place; To procure all the old and new Authors that are worthy of
consideration, in their proper Languages, and particular Idioms: The Bibles and
Rabbis in Hebrew; the Fathers in Greek and Latin; Avicenne in Arabic;
Bocacio, Dantes, Petrarch, in Italian; together with their best Versions,
Latin, French, or such as are to be found: These last being for the use of
many persons who have not the knowledge of foreign Tongues; and the former, for
that it is very expedient to have the sources whence so many streams do glide
in their natural channels without art or disguise; and that we ordinarily meet
with a more certain efficacy, and richness of conception, in those that cannot
retain and conserve their luster save in their native languages, as Pictures do
their colors in proper lights: not to speak of the necessity also which one
may have for the verification of Texts and passages ordinarily controverted, or
dubious.

Thirdly, Such Authors as have best handled the parts of any Science or
Faculty, whatever it be: As Bellarmine for Controversies, Tolet, and Navarr,
Cases of Conscience, Vesalius Anatomy, Matthiolus the History of Plants,
Gesner and Aldrovandus that of Animals, Rondoletius and Salvianus that of
Fishes, Vicomercatus that of Meteors, etc.

In the fourth place, All those that have best commented, or explained any
Author or Book in particular; as Pererius upon Genesis; Villalpandus, Ezechiel;
Maldonat, the Gospels; Monlorius and Zabarella the Analyticks; Scaliger,
Theophrastus History of Plants; Proclus, and Marsilius Ficinus upon Plato;
Alexander, and Themistius upon Aristotle; Flurancius, Rivaultius, Archimedes;
Theon and Campanus, Euclide; Cardan, Ptolomie: And this should be observed in
all sorts of Books and Treatises, ancient or modern, who have met with
Commentators and Interpreters.

Next, all that have written and made Books and Tracts upon any particular
subject; be it concerning the Species or Individuals, as Sanchez, who has
amply treated de matrimonio: Saints and Perron of the Eucharist; Gilbertus of
the Loadstone; Maier de volucri arborea; Scortia, Vendelinus, and Nugarola
concerning the Nile: The same to be understood of all sorts of particular
Treatises in matter of Law, Divinity, History, Medecin, and what ever else
there may be: with this discretion nevertheless, that he which most approches
to the profession which he pursues, be preferred before any other.

Moreover, All such as have written most successefully against any Science, or
that have opposed it with most Learning and animosity (howbeit without changing
the principles) against the Books of some of the most famous and renowned
Authors. And therefore one must not forget Sextus Empiricus, Sanchez, and
Agrippa, who have professedly endeavored to subvert all the Sciences: Picus
Mirandula, who has so learnedly refuted the Astrologers: Eugubinus, that has
dashed the impiety of the Salmones, and irreligious: Morisotus, that has
overthrown the abuse of Chemists: Scaliger, who has so fortunately opposed
Cardan, as that he is at present in some part of Germany more followed then
Aristotle himself: Casaubon, who durst attaque the Annals of that great
Cardinal Baronius: Argentenius, who has taken Galen to task: Thomas Erastus,
who has so pertinently refuted Paracelsus: Carpenter, who has so rigorously
opposed Ramus: and finally, all those that have exercised themselves in the
like conflicts, and that are so linkt together, that it were as great an error
to read them separately, as to judge and understand one party without the
other, or one Contrary without his Antagonist.

Neither are you to omit all those which have innovated or changed any thing in
the Sciences; for it is properly to flatter the slavery, and imbecility of our
wit, to conceal the small knowledge which we have of these Authors, under the
disdain which we might have, because they oppose the Ancients, and for that
they have learnedly examined what others were used to receive, as by Tradition:
And therefore, seeing of late more then thirty or forty Authors of reputation
have declared themselves against Aristotle; that Copernicus, Kepler, Galilaeus,
have quite altered Astronomy; Paracelsus, Severinus the Dane, Du Chesne, and
Crollius, Physic: and that diverse others have introduced new Principles, and
have established strange and unheard of Ratiocinations upon them, and such as
were never foreseen: I affirm, that all these Authors are very requisite in a
Library, since according to the common Saying, Est quoque cunctarum novitas
gratissima rerum.
and (not to insist upon so weak a reason) that it is certain, the knowledge of
these Books is so expedient, and frugiferous to him who knows how to make
reflection, and draw profit from all that he sees, that it will furnish him
with a million of advantages, and new conceptions; which being received in a
spirit that is docile, universal, and disengaged from all interests, Nullius
addictus jurare in verba Magistri,
they make him speak to the purpose upon all subjects, cure the admiration
which is a perfect sign of our weakness, and enables one to discourse upon
whatsoever presents it self with a great deal more judgment, experience, and
resolurion, then ordinarily many persons of letters and merit are used to do.

One should likewise have this consideration in the choice of Books, to see
whether they be the first that have been composed upon the matter on which they
treat. Since it is with men's Learning, as with water, which is never more fair,
pure, and limpid, then at its source; All the Invention comeing from the First,
and the Imitation with repetition from others: as it is easy to perceive that
Reuchlin who first writ of the Hebrew Tongue, and the Cabal; Budeus of the
Greek, and of Coyns; Bodinus of a Republique; Cocles of Physiognomie; Peter
Lombard, S. Thomas, of Scholastical Divinity, have done better then those many
others, which engaged themselves in writing since them.

Moreover ought one also to take notice, whether the Subjects of which they
treat be trifling or less vulgar; curious* or negligent; spinie or facil;
seeing what we use to say of all things else that be not common, may be so
appositely applied to curious new Books; Rara juvant, primis sic major gratia
pomis,
Hibernae pretium sic meruere rosae.


Under the notion then of this precept we should open our Libraries, and
receive them therein, who first wrote of Subjects the least known, and that
have not been treated of before, unless in Fragments, and very imperfectly; as
Licetus, who has written de spontaneo viventium ortu, de lucernis antiquorum;
Tagliacotius, how to repair a decayed Nose; Libanius and Coclinus of the
Magnetic Ointment; Secondly, All curious and not vulgar Authors; such as are
the books of Cardan, Pomponacius, Brunus, and all those who write concerning
the Caball, Artificial Memory, the Lullian Art, the Philosophers Stone,
Divinations, and the like matters. For, though the greatest part of them teach
nothing but vain and unprofitable things, and that I hold them but as stumbling
blocks to all those who amuse themselves upon them, yet notwithstanding that
one may have wherwithal to content the weaker wits, as well as the strong; and
at the least satisfy those who desire to see them, to refute them, one should
collect those which have treated on them, albeit they ought to be accounted
amongst the rest of the Books in the Library, but as Serpents and Vipers are
amongst other living Creatures; like Cockle in a Field of good wheat; like
Thorns amongst the Roses: and all this in imitation of the world, where these
unprofitable and dangerous things accomplish the Masterpiece, and the Fabric
of that goodly composition.

And this Maxim should lead us to another of no less consequence, which is,
not to neglect the works of the principal Heresiarchs or Fautors of new
Religions different from ours, more common, and revered, as more just and
veritable: For it is very likely, since the first of them, (not to speak of the
new ones) have been chosen, and drawn out from amongst the most learned
personages of the precedent Age, who by I know not what Fancy, and excessive
love to novelty, did quit their Cassocks, and the Banner of the Church, to
enroll themselves under that of Luther and Calvine; and that those of the
present time are not admitted to the exercise of their Ministry till after a
long and severe Examen in the three Tongues of the Holy Scripture, and the
chief points of Philosophy and Diinity: There is a great deal of likelihood, I
say, that excepting the passages controverted, they may sometimes hit very
luckily upon others, as in many indifferent Treatises they have done, on which
they often travail with a great deal of Industry and Felicity. And therefore,
since it is necessary that our Doctors should find them in some places to
refute them; since M. de T. has made it no difficulty to collect them; that the
ancient Fathers and Doctors had them, that diverse religious persons preserved
them in their Libraries; that we make it no Scruple to have a Thalmud or an
Alcoran, which belch a thousand Blasphemies against Jesus Christ, and our
Religion, infinitely more dangerous then these: that God permits us to make
profit of our enemies, and according to that of the Psalmist, Salutem ex
inimicis nostris, and de manu omnium qui oderunt nos; that they are prejudicial
but to them only, who destitute of a right conduct, suffer themselves to be
transported with the first puff of wind that blows.

And to conclude in a word, since the intention which determines all our
actions to good or evil, is neither vicious not cauterised, I conceive it no
extravagance or danger at all, to have in a Library (under caution nevertheless
of a license and permission from those to whom it appertains) all the Works of
the most learned and famous Heretics, such as have been, -- and diverse others
of lesser consequence, Quos fama obscura recondit.

This also ought to be retained as a Maxim, that all the bodies and assemblies
of several Authors writing upon the same subject; such as are the Thalmud, the
Councels, the Biblotheques of the Fathers, Thesaurus Criticus, Scriptores
Germanici, Turcici, Hispanici, Gallici, Catalogus testium veritatis, Monarchia
Imperii, Opus magnum de Balneis, Authors Gyneciorum, De Morbo Neapolitano,
Rhetores antiqui, Grammatici Veteres, Oratores Graeciae, Flores Doctorum,
Corpus Poetarum, and all those which contain such like Collections, ought of
necessity to be put into Libraries; forasmuch as they save us, first of all,
the labor of searching an infinity of Books extremely curious and rare: and
secondly, because they spare abundance of other, and make room in a Library.
Thirdly, for that they handsomely comprehend in one Volume, what we should be
otherwise long in searching with a great deal of pains, and in diverse places;
and finally, because they are less expensive, they being nothing so chargeable
to purchase as they would be, should one buy separately all the Authors which
they contain. I hold it also for a tenent as necessary as any of the precedent,
that one should draw out and make election from amongst the great number of
those who have written, and do daily write; those who appear as an Eagle in the
Clouds, and as a Star twinkling and most refulgent in the midst of obscurity; I
mean those great Wits, which are not of the common alloy; Quorum que ex ore
profuso
Omnis posteritas latices in dogmata ducit;


And of whom one may make use, as of Masters the most expert in the knowledge
of all things, and of their works as of a Seminary, perfectly sufficient to
enrich a Library not only with all their Books, but even (...) the least of
their Fragments, Papers, loose Sheets, and the very words which escape them.
For as it would be amiss to employ the place and the money in amassing all the
world, and I know not what gallimauphry of certain vulgar and despicable
Authors; so would it be a notorious oblivion, and fault unexcusable in those
who make profession of having all the best Books, to neglect any of Them; for
example, of Erasmus, Chiaconus, Onuphrius, Turnebus, Lipsius, Genebra^d,
Antonius Augustinus, Casaubon, Salmasius, Bodinus, Cardan, Patricius, Scaliger,
Mercurialis, and others, whose works we are to wink and take, (...) without
choice; careful, that we be not cheated in Books rampant, with Authors
infinitely more rude and gross: since, as one cannot possess too much of that
which is good, and exquisitely chosen; so neither can one have too little of
that which is bad, and of which we have no hopes of receiving any profit or
utility.

Neither must you forget all sorts of Common places, Dictionaries, Mixtures,
several Lections, Collections of Sentences, and other like Repertories; seeing
it is as so much way gone, and Matter ready prepared for those who have the
industry to use them with due advantage; it being certain, that there are many
who speak and write wonderful well, who have yet seen but very few Volumes,
besides those which I have mentioned; whence it is, that they commonly say, the
Calepine, which they take for all kind of Dictionaries, is the livelihood of
the Regents; And if I should affirm it of many, even amongst the most famous
persons, it would not be without reason, since one of the most renound amongst
the last had above fifty of them, which he perpetually studied; and who having
encountered a difficult word at the first offering of the Book of Equivocals, as
it was presented to him, he had recourse immediately to one of these
Dictionaries, and transcribed out of it above a page of writing, upon the
margent of the said Book, and that in presence of a certain Friend of mine and
of his; to whom he could not abstain from saying, that those who should see
this remark, would easily believe that he had spent above two days in
composing it; though he had in truth but the pains only of transcribing it:
And in earnest, for my part, I esteem these Collections extremely profitable
and necessary, considering the brevity of our life, and the multitude of things
which we are now obliged to know, e're one can be reckoned amongst the number
of learned men, do not permit us to do all of our selves; besides, seeing it is
not granted every man, nor in all ages, to have the means to labor at his own
cost and charges, and without borrowing from others, what ill is there in it, I
pray, if those who are so industrious to imitate nature, and so to diversifie
and appropriate to their subject what they extract from others, Ser. Epis. 8.
ut etiam, si apparuerit unde sumptum sit, aliud tamen esse quam unde sumptum
est appareat, do make bold with those who seem not to have been made but to
lend, and draw out from the Reservatories and Magazines which are destined for
this purpose: since we ordinarily see that both Painters and Architects, make
excellent and incomparable pieces by the assistance of Colors and Materials
which others grind and prepare for them.

Lastly, 17. Aphor. ^ Sect. 1.
we should upon this occasion reduce to practice that same Aphorism of
Hippocrates, which advertises us to yield something to time, to place, and to
custom; that is to say, that some kind of Books be sometimes in vogue and
reputation in one Country, and not so in another; and in the present age,
which were not in the past: it is more expedient to make a good provision of
these, than of the other; or at least to have such a quantity of them, as may
testify we comply with the times, and that we are not ignorant of the mode and
inclination of men: And hence it proceeds, that we frequently find in the
Libraries of Rome, Naples, and Florence, abundance of Positive Theologists; in
those of Milan and Pavia store of Civil Law; in those of Spain, and ancient
ones of Cambridge and Oxford in England, a number of Scholasticks; and in those
of France a world of Histories and Controversies. The same diversity may be
also observed in the succession of ages, by reason of the vogue which have had
the Philosophy of Plato, that of Aristotle, the Scholastique, the Tongucs and
Controversies; which have every one had their turns, domineered in several
times; as we see that the study of the Ethics and Politics do at present
employ the greatest part of the most vigorous wits of this our age, whilst the
weaker sort amuse themselves with Fictions and Romanc^es, of which I shall
only say, what has formerly been verified by Symmacus upon the like narration,
Sine argumento rerum loquacitas morosa displicet. Lib. 10. Epist. 5.


These ordinary precepts and maxims being so amply explained, there remains
now no more to accomplish this Title of the Quality of Books, then to propose
two or three others, which will undoubtedly be received as very extravagant,
and very fit to thwart the common and inveterate opinion which many have taken
up, that esteem no Authors but by their number or bulk of their Volumes, and
judge only of their value and merit, by that which uses to make us despise all
other things, viz. their age and caducity, like that of the old man in Horace,
who is represented to us in his works; -- Laudator temporis acti, In Art Poet.

Praesentis censor, castigatorque futuri:


The nature of these prepossessed spirits being for the most part so taken and
in love with those Images and antique pieces, that they would not so much as
look at the greatest upon any Book whatever, whose Author were not older than
the Mother of Evander, or the Grandsirs of Carpentras; nor believe that time
could be well employed, which was spent in reading any modern Books, since
according to their maxim, they are but Rapsodists, Coppiers, or Plagiaries,
and approach in nothing to the Eloquence, the learning and the noble
conceptions of the Ancients; to whom for this respect they hold themselves as
firmly united as the Polypus does to the Rocks without departing in the least,
or from their Books, or doctrine; and which they never think to have
sufficiently comprehended, till they have chewed them over all their life time;
and therefore it is nothing extraordinary, if in conclusion of the whole sum,
and when they have sufficiently sweat and tired themselves, they resemble that
same ignorant Marcellus, who vaunted up and down in all places where he came,
that he had read Thucidides eight times over; to that Nonnus of whom Suidas
speaks, that he had read his Demosthenes ten times without ever being able once
to plead, or discourse of any thing: And to speak really, there is nothing more
apt to make a man a Pedant, and banish him from common sense, then to despise
all Modern Authors, to court some few only of the Ancient; as if they alone
were, forsooth, the sole Guardians of the highest favors that the wit of man
may hope for; or that Nature, jealous of the honor and reputation of her elder
sons, would to our prejudice put forth all her abilities to the extremes, that
she might Crown them alone with all her graces and liberality: Certainly I do
not imagine that any except those Gentlemen the Antiquaries, can satisfy
themselves with such Opinions, or feed themselves with such Fables; since so
many fresh Inventions, so many new Opinions and Principles, so many several and
unthought of Alterations, so many learned Books of famous Personages, of new
Conceptions; and finally, so many Wonders as we daily behold to spring up, do
sufficiently testify, that the wits are stronger, more polite, and abstracted
than ever formerly they were; and that we may truly and assuredly affirm at
this present day, Sumpserunt arts hac tempestate decorem,
Nullaque non welior quam prius ipsa fuit.


Or make the same judgment of our age as Symmachus did of his own, Habemus
faeculum virtute amicum, quo nisi optimus quisque gloriam parit, hominis
est-culpa, non temporis. From hence we may infer, that it would be a fault
unpardonable in one who professes to store a Library, not to place in it
Piccolomini, Zab^arell, Achillinus, Niphus, Pomponacius, Licetus, Cremoninus,
next the old Interpreters of Aristotle; Alciat, Tiraqueaneus, Cujas, du Moulin,
after the Code and Digest; the sum of Alexander of Hales, and Henry of Gaunt,
next that of S. Thomas; Clavius, Maurolicus and Viet^a after Euclide and
Archimedes; Montagne, Charon, Verulam, next to Seneca and Plutarch; Fernelius,
Sylvius, Fusthius, Cardan, next to Galen and Avicen; Erasmus, Casaubon,
Scaliger, Salmasius, next to Varro; Commines, Guicciardin, Sleiden, next to
Titus Livius and Cornelius Tacitus; Ariosto, Tasso, du Bartas, next to Homer
and Virgil, and so consequently of all the Modern most famous and renouned
Authors; since if the capricious Boccalini had undertaken to balance them
with the Ancients, he had happily found a great many of them more inconsiderable,
and but very few which do at all surpass them.

The second Maxim, and which happily will not less seem a Paradox than the
first, is directly contrary to the opinion of those who esteem of Books only
as they are in price and bulk; and who are much pleased, and think themselves
greatly honored, to have Tostatus in their Libraries, because it is in
fourteen Volumes; or a Salmeron, because there are eight; neglecting in the
mean time, to procure and furnish themselves with an infinity of little Books,
amongst which there are often found some of them so rarely and learnedly
composed, that there is more profit and contentment to be found in reading
them, than in many others of those rude, heavy, indigested and ill polished
masses, for the most part; At least, so true is that saying of Seneca, 6.
quaest. not. cap. 18.
Non est facile inter magna non desipere; and that which Pliny said of one of
Cicero's Orations, M. Tullii Oration fertur tima quae maxima, cannot be applied
to these monstrous and Gigantine Books; as in effect it is almost impossible,
that the wit should always remain intent (...) these great works, and that
the heaps and grand confusion of things that one would speak choke not the
fancy, and too much confound the ratiocination; whereas on the contrary, that
which ought to make us esteem small Books, which nevertheless treat of serious
things, or of any noble and sublime subject, is, that the Author of them does
perfectly command over his subject, as the Workman and Artist does over his
matter; and that he may chew, concoct, digest, polish and form it according to
his fancy, then those vast collections of such great and prodigious Volumes,
which for this cause are oftentimes but the Panspermia, Chaos's and Abysses of
Confusion; Ovid. 1. Metamorph.
-- rudis indigestaque moles,
Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners congestaque eodem,
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum.


And hence it is that there results a success so unequal, as may be observed
between the one and the other; for example, 'twixt the Satyrs of Persius and
Philelphius; the Examen of Wits of Huarto, and that of Zara; the Arithmetic
of Ramus, and that of Forcudel; Machiavels Prince, and that of more than fifty
other Pedants; The Logic of du Moulin, and that of Vallius; The Annals of
Volufius, and the History of Salust: Epictetus Manuel, and the moral Secrets of
Loriotus; The works of Fracastorius, and an infinite of Philosophers and
Physicians; so true is that which S. Thomas has well spoken, Nusquam ars magis
quam in minimis tota est; and what Cornelius Gallus was wont to pro^^^^
himself, of hsi small Elogies; Nec minus est nobis per pauca volumina famae,
Quam quos nulla satis Bibliotheca capit.


But that which on this encounter makes me most to admire, is, that such
persons should neglect the Works and Opuscles of some Author whilst they
remain scattered and separated, which afterward burn with a desire to have
them when they are collected and bound together in one Volume: Such will
neglect (for example) the Oration of James Criton, because they are not to be
found Printed together, who will nevertheless be sure to have those of
Raymondus, Gall^tius, Nigronius, Bencius, Perpinianus, and diverse other
Authors in his Library; not that they are better, or more disert and eloquent
than those of this learned Scotchman; but because they are to be found in
certain Volumes bound up together: Certainly, should all little Books be
neglected, there were no reckoning to be made of the Opuscles of S. Augustine,
Plutarchs Morals, the Books of Galen, nor of the greatest part of those of
Erasmus, of Lipsius, Turnebus, Mazaultius, Sylvius, Calcagninus, Franciscus
Picus, and many like Authors; no more than of thirty or forty minor Authors
in Physic and Philosophy, the best, and most ancient amongst the Greeks, and
of diverse other amongst the Divines; because they have all of them been
divulged separately, and apart, one after another, and in so small Volumes,
that the greatest of them do not frequently exceed half an Alphabet: And
therefore, since one may unite under one Cover, that which was separate in the
impression, conjoyn with others what would be lost being alone, and in effect
we may meet an infinity of matters which have never been treated of but in
these little Books only, concerning which it may rightly be said, as Virgil
does of Bees, 4. Georg.
Ingentes animos angusto in corpore versant;


It appears to me to be very expedient, that we should draw them out of their
Stalls and old Magazines, and from all places wherever we encounter them, to
bind them up with those which are of the same Author, or treat of the same
matter, to place them afterward in our Libraries, where I assu^^ my self they
will make the industry and diligenee of those Esculapius's to be admired, who
are so well skilled to join and reassemble the scattered and separated members
of those poor Hippolitus's.

The third (which at first appearance one would conceive to be contrary to the
first) does in particular combat the opinion of those who are so wedded and
besotted to all new Books, that they totally neglect, and make no esteem, not
only of all the Ancients, but of the Authors which have had the vogue, and
appeared flourishing and renouned since six or seven hundred years; that is to
say, since the age of Boethius, Symmachus, Sydonius, and Cassiodorus, down to
that of Picus, Politianus, Hermolaus Gaza, Philelphus, Pogius, and
Trapezontius; such as are diverse Philosophers, Divines, Iuris-consults,
Physicians and Astrologers, who by their black and Gothic impressions disgust
our most delicate students of this age* not suffering them so much as to cast
an eye upon them, but with a blush, and to the disdaining of those who composed
them: All which properly proceeds from hence, that the ages or those wits
which then appeared, have had (...) Genisu's and different inclinations, not
long harping upon the same string of like study or affection to the Sciences;
or having nothing so assured as their vicissitude (...) change; as in effect we
see, that immediately after the birth of the Christian Religion (not to take
things any higher) the Philosophy of Plato was universally followed in the
Schools; and the greater part of the Fathers were Platonists: and so continued
till Alexander Aphrodiseus gave it a forceable justle to instal that of the
Peripateticks, and traced the way to the Greek and Latin Interpreters, who
were so wedded to the Explication of Aristotle's Text, that a man should yet
err in it without much benefit, if the Questions and Scholasticks introduced
by Abelardus had not put themselves amongst the (...); to domineer over all,
with the greatest and most universal approbation, that was ever given to any
thing whatsoever; and that for the space of about five or six ages, after
which, the Heretics did recall us to the interpretation of the Holy Scriptures,
and occasioned us to read the Bible and the Holy Fathers, who had continually
been neglected amidst these Ergotismes; and in pursuit whereof Controversy
comes now in request as to what concerns Theology, and the Questionaries with
the Novators, who build upon new Principles, or else reestablish those of the
ancients, Empedocles, Epicurus, Philolaus, Pythagoras, and Democritus, for
Philosophy. The rest of the Faculties being not exempted from like alterations;
amongst which, it has evermore been the custom of the Wits who follow these
violences and changes, as the Fish do the Tide, to think no more of what they
have once quitted; and to speak rashly with the Poet Calphurnius, Vilia sunt
nobis quaecunque prioribus annis Eclog. 7.

Vidimus, and sordet quicquid spectavimus olim.


Insomuch as the greatest part of good Authors, by this means, remain on the
sands, abandoned and neglected by every man; whilst our new Censors or
Plagiaries possess their places, and enrich themselves with their spoils. And
it is in earnest a very strange and unreasonable thing, that we should follow
and approve (for example) the Colleges of Conimbre and Suarez in Philosophy,
and should come to neglect the works of Albertus Magnus, Niphus, Aegidius,
Saxonia, Pomponacius, Achillinus, Hervi^us, Durandus, Zimares, Buccaferrus, and
a number of the like, out of which all the great Books which we now follow, are
for the most part compiled and transcribed word for word: That we should have
an incomparable esteem of Amatus, Thrivierus, Capivaccius, Montanus, Valesius,
and almost of all the modern Physicians, and be ashamed to furnish our
Libraries with Books of Hugo Senensis, Iacobus de Forlivio, Iacobus de
Valesius, Gordonus, Thomas, Dinus, and all the Avicenists, who have really
followed the Genius of their Age, rude and dull as to what concerned the
barbarity of the Latin tongue; but who have yet so far penetrated into the
profundities of Physic, according to Cardans own confession, that diverse of
our modern for want of sufficient resolution, constancy, and assiduity to
pursue and imitate them, are constrained to make use of some of their Arguments
to revest them a la mode, and make their braggs and parade, whilst they
themselves dwell only upon the topps of flowers, and superficial language, or
without advancing farther* Decerpunt flores, and summa cacumina captant.


What shall we then say, Lib. 16. de Subtle. Exercitat. 324.340.
that Scaliger and Cardan, two of the greatest personages of the last age,
consenting both in the same point concerning the (...) of Richard Suissent,
otherwise called the Calculator, who lived within these three hundred years, to
place him in the rank of ten of the rarest wits that ever appeared; whilst we
are not able to find his works in all the most famous Libraries? And what hope
is there that the Sectatots of Occham Prince of the Nominals, should eternally
be deprived of once seeing his works, as well as all Philosophers, those of the
great and renouned Avicen? In earnest, me thinks that it is wholly for want of
judgment in the choice and cognizance of Books, to neglect all these Authors,
which are so much the more to be sought after, as they are more and may
hereafter challenge the place of Manuscripts; since we have almost lost all
hopes that they should ever be printed.

Finally, the fourth and last of these Maxims concerns only the choice and
election, which one ought to make of Manuscripts, in opposition (...) that
custom received and introduced by many, from the great reputation of our
present Critics, who have taught and accustomed us to make more account of one
Manuscript of Virgil, Suetonius, Persius, Terence, or some others amongst the
old Authors, than of those gallant persons who have never yet been either
seen, or printed; as if there were any likelihood that men should presently
pursue the capriciousness, imaginations or cheats of these modern Censurors and
Grammarians, which uselesly apply the flower of their age in forging of empty
conjectures, and begging the corrections of the Vatican, to alter, correct or
supply the Text of some Author, who has happily already confirmed the labor of
ten or twelve men, though one might very easily ^e without it.

Or that it were not a miserable thing, and worthy of commiseration to suffer
to be lost and rot amongst the hands of some ignorant possessors, the
elucubrations and labors of an infinity of great personages, who have sweat
and wrought perhaps all their lives long, to impart us the knowledge of
something that was never known before, or elucidated some profitable and
necessary matter; And yet nevertheless, the example of these Censors ha^ been
such, Lib. de ratione corrigendi veteres auctores.
and their authority so strong and forceable, that notwithstanding the disgust
which Robortel and others amongst them has given us; nay, even of these
Manuscripts themselves; yet have they so far bewitched the world in search of
them, that they are the only things now in request, and judged worthy of being
placed in our Bibliotheques.

Tanta est p^enuria mentis ubique, Palinger. Lib. 3. Zodiaci.

In nugas tam prona via est!
And therefore, since it is the very Essence of a Library, to have a great
number of Manuscripts; because they are at present in most esteem, and less
^ulgar; I conceive, my Lord, with respect to your better judgment, that it
would be extremely requisite for you to pursue as you have begun, in furnishing
your Library with such as have been composed clearly, and full, upon any
gallant subject, conformable to those which you have already made search of, In
praefat. Gram. lib. 17. de Variet in Bibliot.
not only here; but at Constantinople, and whatsoever is to be obtained of
many other Authors Ancient and Modern, specified by Neander, Cardan, Gesner,
and all the Catalogues of the best Libraries; and not of all those Copies of
Books which have been already printed, and which at best are only capable to
assist us with some vain and trifling conjectures: and yet it is not my
intentions that men should undervalue and neglect all these kind of Books, as
well knowing by the example of Ptolomy, what esteem one should always have of
Autographes, Lib. de ratione corrigendi veteres autores.
or of those two sorts of Manuscripts which Robortel (in relation to Criticism)
prefers before all others.

Lastly, to close this point concerning the quality of Books, I add, that, as
well concerning Books of this sort, as printed ones, you must not only observe
the aforesaid circumstances, and choose them accordingly; as for instance, be
the question about Bodins Republique, to infer that he ought to be had, because
the Author has been the most famous and renouned of his age, and who amongst
the moderns has first treated on this subject, that the subject is exceedingly
necessary, and in much request in the times wherein we live, that the Book is
common, translated into several tongues, and printed almost every five or six
years; but this we are also to observe, viz. to buy the Book, if the Author be
good, though the matter it self be but vulgar and trivial; or, when the subject
of it is difficult and little known, though the Author thereof be not much
esteemed; and thus practice a World of other Rules, as upon occasion we
encounter them, since it were impossible to reduce them to an Art or Method;
which makes me conceive such a man worthily to acquit himself of such a charge,
who has not a perverted judgment, temerarious, stuffed with extravagances, and
preoccupied with these childish opinions, which excite many persons to despise
and suddenly to reject whatsoever is not of their own (...) as if every one
were obliged to govern himself according to the caprices of their fantasies, or
as if it were not the duty of a discreet and prudent man, to discourse of all
things indifferently, and never to judge according to the esteem which both one
or the other admits of them, but rather conformable to the sentiment which we
ought to have in respect of their proper nature and use.

CHAP. V. By what Expedients they may be procured.
HAving now, my Lord, showed by these three first Points, what one ought to
pursue to inform himself in the erecting of a Library; with what quantity of
Books it is expedient to furnish it, and of what quality they ought to be
chosen: That which now ensues, is to enquire, by what means a man may procure
them, and what we are to do for the progress, and augmentation of them: Upon
all which, I shall truly affirm, that the first precept which is to be given on
this subject, is, that a man studiously preserve those which are actively
acquired, and that he yet obtain new ones every day; not suffering any to be
lost or embezled at any hand. Tolerabilius enim est, faciliusque (says Seneca)
non acquirere, quam amittere, ideoque laetiores videbis quos nunquam fortuna
respexit, quam quos deseruit. Add, that it will never be this way to augment
much, if that which you have collected with so much pains and industry, come to
be lost, and to perish for want of care: And therefore Ovid and the wisest men
had reason to say, that it was no less virtue to preserve a thing well, than to
acquire it so: Nec minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri.

The second is, that we neglect nothing which is worth the reckoning, and which
may be of use, be it either to our selves or others; such as are Libels,
Placarts, Theses, Fragments, Proofs, and the like, which one ought carefully to
unite, and gather according to Titles, and subjects of which they treat;
because it is the only expedient to render them considerable, and so order it,
Ut quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvent. Otherwise, it ordinarily comes to
pass, that whilst we despise these little Books, which appear only as me^^^
baubles, and pieces of no consideration, we happen to lose a world of rare
collections, and such as are sometimes the most curious pieces of the whole
Library.

The third may be deduced from the means that were practiced by Richard de Bury
Bishop of Durham, great Chancellor and L. Treasurer of England, which consists
in publishing and making known to every body the affection which we have to
Books, and the extraordinary desire which we have to erect a Library; for this
being once divulged and communicated, it is certain, that if he who designs it
be in sufficient credit and authority to do his friends pleasure; there will
not be a man of them but will take it for an honor to present him with the
most curious Books that come into his hands; and that will not voluntarily
admit him into his Study, or in those of his friends; briefly, who will not
strive to aid and contribute to his intention all that he can possibly? as it
is very well observed by the same Richard de Bury, in these proper terms, which
I therefore the more willingly transcribe, because his Book is very rare, and
of the number of those which are lost through our neglect. Succedentibus (says
he) prosperis, Philobiblii cap. 8
Regiae majestatis consecuti notitiam, and in ipsius acceptati familia,
facultatem suscepimus ampliorem, ubilibet visitandi pro libitu, and
venandiquasi faltus quosdam delicatissimos, tum privatas, tum communes, tum
regularium, tum saecularium Bibliothecas: and a little after, Praestabatur
nobis aditus facilis, regalis favoris intuitu, ad librorum latebras libere
perscrutandas, amoris quippe nostri fama volatilis jam ubique percrebuit,
tantumque librorum and maxim veterum ferebamur cupiditate languescere, posse
vero quemlibet per quaternos facilius quam per pecuniam adipisci favorem.
Quamobrem cum supradicti Principis auctorita^e suffulti possemus obesse and
prodesse, proficere and afficere vehementer tam majoribus quam pusillis,
affluxerunt loco Enceniorum and munerum, locoque donorum and jocalium.
Coenulenti quaterni, ac decrepiti Codices nostris tam aspectibus quam
affectibus pretiosi, tunc nobilissimorum Monasteriorum aperiebantur armaria,
reserabantur scrinia, and cistulae solvebantur, etc. To which he yet adjoyns,
the several Voyages which he made himself in quality of Ambassador, and the
great number of learned, and curious persons, whose labor and industry he made
use of in this research; and what yet induces me to believe that these
practices would have some effect, is, that I know a person, who being curious
of Medalls, Pictures, Statues, Intaglia's and other Cabinet pieces, has
collected by this sole industry, above twelve hundred pounds worth, without
ever having disbursed four. And in earnest, I hold it for a Maxim, that every
civil and good natured man, should always second the laudable intentions of
his friends, provided they be not prejudicial to his own: So that he that has
Books, Medalls, Pictures, which come to him by chance, rather than out of
affection to them, may easily be persuaded to accommodate such of his friends
(...) he knows to desire, and is curious of them. I shall willingly add to this
third Precept, the craft which Magistrates and persons of authority may
practice, and exercise by means of their dignities: but I would not more
nakedly explicate it, than by the simple narration of the Strategem which the
Venetians made use of, to obtain the best Manuscripts of Pinellus immediately
after his decease; for upon the advice which they had, that they were about to
transport his Library from Padua to Naples, they suddenly dispatched one of
their Magistrates, who seized upon a hundred Bales of Books, amongst which
there were fourteen of them that contained Manuscripts, and two of them above
four hundred Commentaries on all the affairs of Italy; alleging for their
reasons, that though they had permitted the defunct Seigneur Pinelli, in regard
of his condition, his design, his laudable and reproachless life, and
principally, the friendship which he ever testified toward the Republique, to
have Copies of their Archives, and Registers of their affairs; yet it was
neither fit nor expedient for them, that such pieces should come to be
divulged, discovered and communicated after his death; whereupon at the
instance of the Heirs and Executors of the Testament, who were powerful and
authorized, they retained only two hundred of these Commentaries, which were
placed in a Chamber apart, with this inscription, Decerpta haec Imperio Senatus
e Bibliotheca Pinelliana.

The fourth is, to retrench and cut off all the superfluous expenses, which
many prodigally and to no purpose bestow upon the binding and ornaments of
their Books, and to employ it in purchasing such as they want, that so they may
not be obnoxious to that censure of Seneca, De tranquil.
who handsomely reproaches those, Quibus voluminum suorum frontes maxim placent
titulique; and this the rather, that the binding is nothing but an accident and
form of appearing, without which (at least so splendid and sumptuous) Books
become altogether as useful, commode and rare; it becoming the ignorant only
to esteem a Book for its cover; seeing it is not with Books, as it is with men,
who are only known and respected for their robes and their clothes, so that it
is a great deal better, and more necessary, for example, to have a good
quantity of Books, well and ordinarily bound, than to have a little Chamber or
Cabinet full of washed, gilded, ruled, and enriched with all manner of nicity,
lux and superfluity.

The fifth concerns the buying of them, and that may be divided into four or
five Articles, suitable to the several expedients which may be observed in the
practice. Now, amongst these, I should willingly set down for the first, the
speediest, easy and advantageous of all the rest, that which is made by the
acquisition of some other entire and undissipated Library. I call it prompt,
and speedy; because that in less than a days time one may have a goodly number
of Books curious and learned, which one shall not be able to amass and collect
together during a man's whole life. I call it facil, because one spares both the
pains and the time which would be consumed in purchasing them separately; In
fine, I name it advantageous, because, if the Libraries which we buy be good
and curious, they serve to augment the credit and reputation of those who are
enriched by them; whence we see that Pass vinus so much esteems that of
Cardinal de Ioyeuse, for that it was composed of three others, one whereof had
been Monsieur Pitheus, and for that all the most renouned Libraries have
received their augmentation in this manner; as for instance, that of S. Mark at
Venice by the donation of Cardinal Bessarion's; that of the' Escurial by that
great one which Hurtado de Mendoza had collected; The Ambrosian of Milan, by
the ninety Bales which were added to it at once by that one sole naufrage and
ruin of Pinelli's; that of Leyden, by above two hundred Manuscripts in the
Oriental Languages, which Scaliger bequeathed to it by his Testament; and
finally, that of Ascanius Colomna, by that incomparable one which Cardinal
Sirlettus left it; whence I conjecture, my Lord, that yours cannot but one day
emerge one of the most famous and renouned amongst the greatest, by reason of
that of your Fathers, which is already so famous and universally known from the
relation which has been left to posterity by La Croix, Fauchet, Marsillius,
Turuebus, Passeratius, Lambinus, and by almost all the gallant persons of that
strain, who have not been mindful of the benefit and instructions which they
have received of them.

After all which, me thinks, the means which nearest approaches to this first,
is, to rummage and often to revisite the shops of frippery Booksellers, and the
old Stores and Magazines as well of Books bound up, as of those which have so
long remained in waste sheets, so many years, that there are many, not much
knowing and versed in this kind of search, who conceive they can be of no other
use then to hinder. Ne toga cordivis, ne penula de sit olivis,
albeit we often encounter very excellent Books amongst them, and that (the
expense well managed) one may chance to purchase more for ten crowns, than one
can otherwise buy for forty or fifty, should one take them in several places
and pieces; provided nevertheless, a man have a sufficient stock of care and
patience, considering that one cannot say of a Library what certain Poets said
of our City, Quo primum nata est tempore, magna fuit:
It being impossible so speedily to accomplish a thing, of which Solomon tells
us there is no end; Libros enim faciendi non erit finis; and to the finishing
whereof, though Monsieur Thuanus has labored twenty years, Pinelli fifty, and
diverse others all their lives long, yet are you not to believe, that they are
arrived to that utmost perfection which were to be wished one might attain to,
in point of a Library.

But since it is necessary for the growth and augmentation of such a piece, to
furnish it diligently with all the new Books of merit and consideration that
are printed in all parts of Europe; and that Pinelli^ and the rest have for
this purpose entertained correspondency with an infinite number of friends,
strangers, and foreign Merchants; It would be very expedient* to put the same
in practice, or at least, to make choice of two or three rich Merchants knowing
and experienced in their vocation, who by their various intelligences, and
voyages, might furnish us with all kinds of novelties, and make diligent
perquisition of what ever we demand by Catalogues; which thing it is not so
necessary to practice for old Books, forasmuch as the surest expedient to store
ones self good cheap with them, is, to seek for them indifferently among^^ the
Stationers, amongst whom the length of time, and various occasions is used to
disperse and scatter them.

I will not yet infer, for all the good husbandry which we have proposed above,
that it is not sometimes necessary to exceed the limits of this Economy, to
purchase at extraordinary prices some certain Books that are very rare, and
which one shall hardly get out of their hands who understand them, but by this
only means. But the temper which is to be observed in this difficulty, is, to
consider that Libraries are neither built nor esteemed but for the service and
benefit which one may receive from them, and therefore one should neglect such
Books and Manuscripts as are only valuable in respect of their Antiquity,
figures, paintings, binding, and other weak considerations; Such as were the
Froissard, which certain Merchants would have sold not long since at three
hundred Crowns; The Bocace of the unfortunate Nobles, which was estimated at a
hundred; The Missal and Bible of Guinart; the Hours, which they are wont to
say was inestimable for its curious figures and copartiments, The Titus Livius,
and other Historians in Manuscripts and painted in miniature; Chinese and Iapan
Books, such as are drawn in Punchment, stained Paper, of extreme fine Cotton,
and with large Margents, and several others of the like stuff; to employ the
great sums which they cost, upon Volumes more useful in a Library than all
these we have mentioned, or such as resemble them, which shall never make the
passionate Collectors of them so much esteemed, as was Ptolomeus Phil^delphus
for giving fifteen talents for the works of Euripides; Tarquinius, who bought
the three Books of Sibyll, at as great a price as would have purchased all the
nine; Aristotle, who gave threescore and twelve thousand Sesterc^es for the
works of Speusippus; Plato, who employed a thousand denarii for those of
Philolaus; Bessarius, who bought thirty thousand Crowns worth of Greek Books;
Hurtado de Mendo^^, who procured a great Ships freight, out of the Levant;
Picus Mirandula, who expended seven thousand Crowns in Hebrew Manuscripts,
Chaldean, and others; and in brief, that King of France who engaged his Gold
and Silver Plate to have a Copy of (...), a Book belonging to the Library of
the Physicians of this City, as it is testified at large in the ancient Patent
and Registers of their Faculty.

To these I add, that it would be expedient also to know of the (...) and Heirs
of several gallant persons, whether they have not left some Manuscripts which
they would part withal, seeing it frequently comes to pass, that the greatest
number of them never print half of their works; being either prevented by their
death, or hindered by the expense, the apprehension of many censures and
judgments, the fear of not coming well off, the liberty of their discourse,
their modesty, and other the like reasons which have deprived us of many Books
of Postellus, Bodin, Marsillius, Passeratius, Maldonat, etc. whose Manuscripts
are frequently lighted upon in particular men's studies, or in Booksellers
shops. In like manner also ought one to know from year to year, what Tracts the
most learned Regents of the neighboring Universities are to read, as well in
their public Classes, as in particular, thereby to procure Copies to be
written; and by this means easily obtain a world of pieces, as good and
estimable as are many Manuscripts which are dearly bought for their age and
antiquity; for instance, the Treatise of the Druides of M. Marsillius; The
History and Treatise of the French Magistrates of M. Grangier; The Geography of
M. Belurgey; the sundry writings of M. M. Dautruy, Hambert Seguin, of du Val,
of Artis; and in a word, of the most renouned Professors of all France.

Finally, one that had as great an affection for Books as the Sieur Vincentius
Pinelli, may also, as he did, visit the Shops of those who often buy old Papers
or Parchments, to see if there nothing chance into their hands that may be
worthy the collection for a Library; And in truth, we should be much encouraged
in this particular, by the example of Pogius, who found Quintilian upon the
Counter of a Cooks shop, during the time that he was at the Council of
Constance, as also by that of Papi^ius Massonius, who encountered Agobardus in a
Stationers shop, who was ready to cover his Books with it; and of Asconius,
which has been given to us by a like chance: But forasmuch, nevertheless, that
this expedient is (...) as extraordinary as is their affection who make use of
it; I shall rather choose to leave it to their discretion, than prescribe it as
a general and necessary rule.

CHAP. VI. The Disposition of the place where they should be kept.
THis consideration of the place which ought to be made choice of to correct
and establish a Library in, would well take up as long a discourse as any of
the precedent, could the Precepts which one might give be executed with as much
facility, as those which we have already deduced and explicated above: (...)
forasmuch as it only appertains to those who would build places expressly for
this purpose, precisely to observe all the rules and circumstances which depend
on the Architecture, many particularities being necessarily obliged to submit
to the diverse shapes of their dwellings, to place their Library as conveniently
as they can; and to speak seriously, I conceive it the sole occasion which has
persuaded Architects to add nothing to what Vitruvius has said thereupon.
Howbeit, not to publish this advice lame and imperfect, I shall offer you my
opinion in short, to the end that every body may make use of it according to
his power, or as he shall judge it to his liking.

As to what concerns then the situation, where one would build, or choose a
place convenient for a Library, it seems that this common saying Carmina
secessum scribentis and otia quaerunt,
would oblige us to take it in a part of the house the most retired from the
noise and disturbance, not only of those without, but also of the family and
domestics; distant from the streets, from the kitchen, the common hall, and
like places; to situate ir (if possible) within some spacious Court, or (...)
Garden, where it may enjoy a free light, a good and agreeable prospect; the air
pure, not near to marshes, sinks or dung-hills, and the whole disposition of
its edifice so well conducted and ordered, that it participate of no kind of
indecorum or apparent incommodity.

Now to accomplish this with more pleasure, and less pain, it will be always
fit to place it in the middle stages, to avoid the dampness of the ground,
which engenders mouldiness, and is a certain rottenness that does ataque Books
insensibly, and that the Garrets and Chambers above may preserve it from
intemperatures of the air; as those whose roofs are low quickly resent the
incommodity of the rain, snow, and heats; Which if there be no means easily to
avoid, yet ought one at least to be careful that they ascend to them by four or
five steps, as I have observed in the Ambrosian at Milan; and the higher the
better, and that as well in respect of its beauty, as to avoid the named
inconveniences; otherwise, the place being humid, and ill situated, you must of
necessity have recourse to mats or tapistries, to line the walls withal, and
to the stove or chimney, in which nothing must be consumed save wood, which
will burn without smoke, to heat and dry the room during the winter, and other
wet seasons of the year.

But all these difficulties and circumstances are nothing to those which are to
be observed for the giving light, and conveniently placing the windows of a
Library, as well for being of so great importance, that it be fully illuminated
to the very farthest corners, as in respect likewise of the several natures of
the winds which ordinarily blow, and which produce effects as different as are
their qualities and the places through which they pass; upon which, I say,
there are two things to be observed; the first, that the transum and the
windows of the Library (if they must be through-lights) be not diametrically
opposite, unless those only which give day to some table; that so the lights
passing not through, the place be sufficiently supplied. The second, that the
principal overtures be always placed toward the East, as well because of the
early light which the Library may receive in the morning, as in respect of the
winds which spire from that quarter, which for being hot and dry of nature, do
wonderfully attemper the air, fortify the senses, subtilize the humors, depure
the spirits, preserve a good constitution, correct the bad, and in a word, are
very healthy and salubrous: whereas on the contrary, those which blow from the
West are more troublesome and noxious, and the Meridional more dangerous than
all the rest, for that being hot and moist they dispose things to corruption,
thicken the air, nourish worms, engender vermin, foment and create
sicknesses, disposing us to new ones; whence that of Hippocrates, Austri
auditum hebetantes, Caliginosi, caput gravantes, pigri, dissolventes; for that
they fill the head with certain vapors humidities which cloud the spirits,
relax the nerves, obstruct the conduits, obfusk the sense, and render us dull
and almost unfit for all sorts of actions; Therefore, in defect of the first,
you should have recourse to the septentrionall, and which by reason of their
qualities, cold, and dry, ingenders no humidity, and do well conserve both the
Books and Papers.

CHAP. VII. Of the Order which it is requisite to assign them.
THe seventh point, and which seems absolutely necessary to be treated of after
the precedent, is that of the Order and Disposition which Books ought to
observe in a Library; for without this, doubtless, all inquiring is to no
purpose, and our labor fruitless; seeing Books are for no other reason laid
and reserved in this place, but that they may be serviceable upon such
occasions as present themselves; Which thing it is notwithstanding impossible
to effect, unless they be ranged, and disposed according to the variety of
their subjects, or in such other sort, as that they may easily be found, as
soon as named. I affirm, moreover, that without this Order and disposition, be
the collection of Books whatever, were it of fifty thousand Volumes, it would
no more merit the name of a Library, than an assembly of thirty thousand men
the name of an Army, unless they be martial ^ in their several quarters,
under the conduct of their Chiefs and Captains; or a vast heap of stones and
materials, that of a Palace or a house, till they be placed and put together
according to rule, to make a perfect and accomplished structure. And just as we
see Nature, Quae nihil unquam sine ordine meditata est vel effecit, Aristot.
Politic.
does govern, entertain, and conserve, by this only way, so great a diversity
of things, without the use whereof we could not sustain and preserve our
bodies; so ought we to believe, that to entertain our spirit, it is fit that
the objects and things which it makes use of, be in such sort disposed, that it
may always and at pleasure discern the one from the other; draw, and separate
them at his fantasy, without labor, without pains, without confusion. Which
yet it could never accomplish in the affairs of Books, if one should range them
by a design of a hundred Presses, as la Croix du Maine proposes toward the
conclusion of his French Bibliotheque; or the Caprices which Julius Camillus
exposes in the Idea of his Theater; and much less yet, should one pursue the
triple divisions which John Mabun infers from these words of the Psalmist,
Disciplinam, bonitatem, and scientiam doce me, for the distribution of all
sorts of Books under the three Classes, and principal heads of Morals, of the
Sciences, and of Devotion; For as the Eele escapes, by being too hard pressed,
that Artificial Memory spoils and perverts the natural, and that we frequently
fail of accomplishing many affairs, by crouding them with too many
circumstances and precautions; so is it certain, that it would be extremely
difficult for any spirit, to regulate, and accustom it self to this Economy,
which seems not to have any other scope but to torture and eternally crucify
the Memory, under the Thorns of those frivolous Punctilios and Chymerick
subtilties; so far is it from rendering us the least aid, 2. de Orat.
and verify the saying of Cicero, Ordo est maxim qui memoriae lumen assert.
And therefore making no more esteem of an order that can only be followed by
an Author, which will not be understood, I conceive that to be always the best
which is most facil, the least intricate, most natural, practiced, and which
follows the Faculties of Theology, Physic, Iurisprudence, Mathematics,
Humanity, and others, which should be subdivided each of them into particulars,
according to their several members, which for this purpose ought to be
reasonably well understood by him who has the charge of the Library; as for
example, in Divinity, you should ever place the Bibles first, according to the
order of the tongues, next these, the Counsels, Synods, Decrees, Canons, and
all that concerns the Ecclesiastical constitutions; forasmuch as they retain
the second place of authority amongst us; After these, the Fathers, Greek and
Latin; then the Commentators, Scholasticks, Mixed Doctors, Historians, and
finally, the Heretics. In Philosophy, to begin with that of Trismegistus as
the most ancient, follow by that of Plato, of Aristotle, of Raymondus Lullius,
Ramus, and finish with the Novators, Telesius, Patricius, Campanella,
Verulamius, Gilbert, Iordanus Brunus, Gassendus, Bassonus, Gomesius, Carpenter,
Gorleus, which are the principal amongst a thousand others: and so to observe
the like in all Faculties, with these cautions, sedulously observed: the first,
that the most universal and ancient, do always march in front; the second,
that the Interpreters and Commentators be placed apart, and ranged according to
the order of the Books which they explicate; the third, that the particular
Treatises follow the rank and disposition of their matter and subject, in the
Arts and Sciences; the fourth and last, that all Books of like argument and
subject be precisely reduced, and disciplined in their destined places; since
in so doing, the memory is so refreshed, that it would be easy in a moment
only to find out whatever Book one would choose or desire, in a Library that
were as vast as that of Ptolomy; to effect which yet with more ease and
contentment, care must be had, that those Books which are in too small Volumes
to be bound alone, be joined only with such as treat upon the like or very
same subject; and yet it were better to bind them also single, then to make so
great a confusion in a Library as joining them with others of subjects so
extravagant and wide, that a man should never imagine to find them in such
Companies. I know well, that one may represent to me here two notable
inconveniences, which accompany this order; viz. the difficulty of handsomely
reducing and placing of certain mixed Books in any Classes or principal
Faculty, and the continual pains which attends the disturbing of a Library when
one is to range a thirty or forty Volumes into several places thereof: But to
this I reply, First, that there are but very few Books but what are reducible
to some order, especially when one has many of them; being once placed, a very
slight memory will serve to admonish one where they stand; and at the worst,
it is but to destine a certain place to martial them in altogether: And as to
the second Objection, It is true, that a man might avoid some trouble by
setting the Books loose, or in leaving some small place at the extremes of the
shelves, or places, where every faculty ends: but it would yet, me thinks, be
much more advantageous, to choose some place destined for such Books as should
be purchased during every six months, at expiration whereof they should be
ranged amongst the rest, each in their proper stages; since by this means also
they would be the better, being dusted and handled twice a year; And however, I
conceive, that this order being the most practiced will ever be esteemed much
better and easier than that of the Ambrosian Library, and some others, where
all the Books are indifferently ranged pellmesle, according to the order of
their Volumes and Ciffers, and only distinguished in a Catalogue, wherein
every piece is found under the name of its Author; forasmuch as that to avoid
the precedent inconveniences, it draws along with it an Iliad of others, to
many whereof one may yet prescribe a remedy, by a Catalogue faithfully compiled
according to the Classes, and each Faculty subdivided to the most precise and
particular of their parts.

There now remains only Manuscripts to be spoken of, which cannot be better
placed then in some quarter of the Library, there being no occasion to separate
and sequester them from it; since they compose the best part and the most
curious, and esteemed; to this add, that diverse easily persuade themselves,
when they do not see them amongst the rest of the books, that all those
Chambers where we use to say they are locked up, are only imaginary, and only
destined to excuse such as indeed have none. There we may see one entire side
of the Ambrosian Library which is filled with nine thousand Manuscripts, which
have all been assembled by the care and diligence of the Sieur Iovanni Antonio
Olgiati; And in that of M. the President Thuanus, there is one Chamber of the
same floor with the rest, destined for this purpose. And therefore, in
prescribing the order which one might thence observe, you must consider that
there are two sorts of Manuscripts, and that those which are of a just Volume
and Bulk may be martial'd as other Books are; with this precaution
nevertheless, that in case there be any of great consequence, prohibited, and
defended, they be placed upon the upmost shelves, and without any exterior
Title, that so this may be the farthest distant both from hand and eye, and so
neither to be known nor handled but at the discretion of him which has the
charge of them; the same which ought also to be put in practice with the other
sort of Manuscripts which consist in sheets, and small loose pieces; which
should be united by bundles and parcels according to their subjects, and placed
upmost of all the rest, because being small, and easily transcribed, they would
be daily obnoxious to be taken away or borrowed, if they should be placed in
any part where they might be seen and handled by every one, as it frequently
happens to Books which lie upon desks in ancient Libraries: And this is
sufficient to have been spoken upon this point on which there is no farther
need of enlarging, since the order of Nature which is always uniform and like
her self, not being to be exactly imitated, by reason of the extravagancy and
diversity of Books, there only remains that of Art, which every man will for
the most part establish according to his own fancy, and as he finds best to
suite his purpose, by his own judgment and understanding, as well to satisfy
himself, as because he will not follow the tracks and opinions of others.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Ornament and Decoration necessarily to be observed.
I should willingly dispense with this last Consideration, to pass to that
which ought to close and shut up these Instructions, were I not advertised by
that excellent saying of Typotius, Lib. de fama.
Ignota populo est and mortua pene ipsa virtus sine lenocinio, to speak a word
by the way concerning the exterior parade and ornament which is requisite to a
Library, considering that this fard and decoration seems to be necessary, since
according to the saying of the same Author, Omnis apparatus bellious, omnes
machinae forenses, omnis denique suppellex domestica, ad ostentationem
comparata est: and to speak truth, that which makes me the more easily excuse
the passion of those who at present seek after this pomp with a great deal of
expense and useless cost, is, that the Ancients have therein been more prodigal
than we; for let us first of all consider, what the structure and building of
their Libraries were; Isodorus will tell us, that they were all paved with
Serpentine marble, Apud Lipsum Syntag. de Biblioth. cap. 9. and 10*
and the roof overlaid with Gold; Boethius, that the Walls were lined with Glass
and Ivory; Seneca, that the Presses and Desks were of Ebony and Cedar: If we
enquire what rare and exquisite pieces they put into them; Both the Plinies,
Sueton, Martial, and Vopiscus, will testify through all their works, that they
spared neither Gold nor Silver to decore them with the Images, and lively
Statues of all the gallant men. And finally, if you would know what was the
Ornament of the Books; Seneca does nothing else than reprehend the lux and
excessive expenses which they were at in painting, gilding, limming, covering
and binding, with all kind of bumbast miniardise and superfluity. But that we
may extract some instructions from these disorders, we ought to choose and draw
out of these extremes that which is so requisite for a Library, that we may at
no hand neglect it, without avarice, nor exceed without prodigality; I say,
first of all, That as to the binding of Books, there is no need of
extraordinary expense; it were better to reserve that money for the purchasing
of all the books of the fairest and best editions that are to be found; unless
that to delight the eyes of Spectators, you will cause all the backs of such as
shall be bound as well in Rough, as in Calveskin, or Morroccin, to be gilded
with filets, and some little flowers, with the name of the Authors; for which
you may have recourse to the They are two several Trades in France
Guilder that is used to work for the Library, as also to the Binder, to repair
the backs and peeled covers, restitch them, accommodate the transpositions, new
paste the Mapps and Figures, cleanse the spoiled leaves, and briefly, to keep
all things in a condition fit for the ornament of the place, and the
conservation of the Books.

Nor is there any necessity of seeking for, and amassing in a Library all these
pieces and fragments of old Statues, Et Curios jam dimidios, humeroque minorem,
Corvinum, and Galbam auriculis nasoque carentem;
It being sufficient to have good Copies drawn from such as are most famous in
the profession of Letters; that thereby a man may at once make judgment of the
wit of the Authors by their Books, and by their bodies, figure, and
physiognomy by these Pictures and Images, which joined to the description which
many have made of their lives, may serve, in my opinion, as a puissant spur
to excite a generous and well-born Soul to follow their track, and to continue
firm and stable in the ways and beaten paths of some noble enterprise and
resolution.

Much less ought one to employ so much gold on the Cieling, Ivory and glass
upon the Walls, the Cedar Shelves, and Marble Floors, seeing this is not now in
use; nor do they now place their Books upon Desks, as the ancients did; but
upon Shelves that hide all the Walls; but in lieu of such gildi^^^ and
adornings, one may supply it in Mathematical Instruments, Globes, Mapps,
Spheres, Pictures, Animals, Stones, and other curiosities as well Artificial as
Natural, which are ordinarily collected from time to time, with very little
expense.

Finally, it would be a great forgetfulness, if after we have thus furnished a
Library with all things requisite, it should not have the Shelves garnished
with some slight searge, buckrom or canvas, fitted on with nails silve, red or
gilt, as well to preserve the Books from dust, as to render a handsome ornament
and grace to the whole place; and also, should it be unprovided of Tables,
Carpets, Seats, Brushes, Balls of Jasper, Conserves, Clocks, Pens, Paper, Ink,
Penne-knifes, Sand, Almanacks, and other small movables, and such like
Instruments, which are of so little cost, and yet so necessary, that there is
no excuse for such as neglect to make this provision.

CHAP. IX. What ought to be the principal scope and end of such a Library.
ALL things being in this equipage, there remains nothing more for the
accomplishment of this discourse, than to know what ought to be its principal
end and use; for to imagine that after all this pains and expense, these lights
are to be set under a Bushel, and condemn so many brave wits to a perpetual
silence and solitude, is ill to understand the scope of a Library, which nor
more nor less than Nature herself, Perditura est fructum sui, si tam magna,
tam praeclara, tam subtiliter dicta, Seneca de Vita beata cap. 32
tam nitida, and non uno genere formosa, solitudine ostenderit, scias illam
spectari voluisse, non tantum aspici. Therefore, I shall tell you, my Lord,
with as much freedom as affection, for your service, That in vain does a man
strive to put in execution any of the foresaid Expedients, or be at any notable
charge for Books, who has not a design to devote and consecrate them to the
public use, or denies to communicate them to the least, who may reap any
benefit thereby; so true is that sayingof the Poet, Vile latens virtus,
Claudian de 4. Consul. Honorii.
quid enim demersa tenebris
Proderit, obscura veluti sine remige puppis,
Vel lyra quae reticet, vel qui non tenditur arcus.
So far was it one of the principal Maxims of the most sumptuous and splendid
amongst the Romans, or of those who were most affected to the public good, to
enrich many of those Libraries, to bequeath and destine them afterward to the
use of all the learned men; so that even according to the calculation of
Peterus Victor, there were nine and twenty at Rome, and as Pulladius reports,
thirty seven, which were so evident indications of the grandieur, magnificence,
and sumptuosity of the Romans, that Pancirolus had reason to attribute to our
negligence, and to range amongst those memorable things of Antiquity, which
descended not to our times, these assured testimonies of the opulency, and good
affection of the Ancients toward those who made profession of Letters; and
that with so much more reason, as that there are at present, as far as I can
understand, none save those of the Knight Bodley in Oxford; of Cardinal
Borromeus at Milan, of the Augustine Friars at Rome, where one may freely
enter, and without difficulty; all the rest, as that of Muretus, Fulvius
Ursinus, Montalto, and the Vatican; Of Medicis, and Petrus Victor, at Florence;
of Bessarion, at Venice; of St. Anthony of Padoua; of the Iacobins, at
Boulogne; of the Augustines, at Cremona; of Cardinal Siripandus, at Naples; of
Frederick, Duke of Urbin; of Nunnesius, at Barcelona; of Ximenes, at
Complutene^; of Ranzovius, at Brandeburg; of Foulcres, at Ausbourg; and
finally, the Kings at S. Victor, and of M. de T. at Paris, which are all of
them fair and admirable; but neither open to every one, nor so easy of access,
as are the three precedent: for to speak of the Ambrosian of Milan only, and
show how (by the same means) it surpasses as well in greatness and
magnificence, as in obliging the public, many of those that were even amongst
the Romans; is it not a thing altogether extraordinary, that any one may come
into it, almost at all hours he will, stay as long as he pleases, see, read,
extract what Authors he desires, have all the means and conveniences to do it,
be it in public or particular, and that without any other labor, than
visiting it himself at the ordinary days, and hours, placing himself in the
seats destined for this purpose, and asking of the Bibliothecary for those
Books which he desires to make use of, or of any three of his servants, who are
well stipendiated, and entertained as well for the service of the Library, as
of all those who come every day thither to study in it.

But to regulate this liberty with civility, and all those precautions which
are requisite, I suppose it would be expedient to make election and choice in
the first place of some honest person, learned, and well experienced in Books,
to give, together with the charge and requisite stipends, the title and quality
of Bibliothecary unto, as we see it has been practiced in all the most renoun'd
Libraries, where diverse gallant men have always thought themselves much
honored in executing this charge, and have rendered it most illustrious and
recommendable by their great learning and capacity; as for instance, Demetrius
Phalerius, Callimachus, Apollonius, Alexandrinus, Aristoxenus, and Zenodotus,
who had the charge heretofore of that of Alexandria; Varro and Hyginus, who
governed that on Mount Palatinus at Rome; Leidratus and Agobardus, that of the
Island Barbe near Lions under Charlemaine; Petrus Diaconus that of Mount
Cassin; Platina, Eugubinus and Sirlettus, that of the Vatican; Sabellius that
of Venice; Wolphius of Basil; Greuter that of Heidelburgh; Douza and Paulus
Merula that of Leyden, whom the learned Heinsius has succeeded; as after
Budaeus, Gosselinus, and Casaubon, M. Rigaultius does at present govern the
Bibliotheque Royal established by King Francis the first, and exceedingly
augmented by the extreme industry and diligence which he used.

After all which it shall be very requisite to make two Catalogues of all the
Books contained in the Library, in one whereof they should be so precisely
disposed according to their several Matters and Faculties, that one may see and
know in the twinkling of an eye, all the Authors which do meet there upon the
first subject that shall come into one head; and in the other, they should be
faithfully ranged and reduced under an Alphabetical order of their Authors, as
well to avoid the buying of them twice, as to know what are wanting, and
satisfy a number of persons that are sometimes curious of reading all the
works of certain Authors in particular. Which being thus established, the
advantage to be gained is in my opinion extremely important; be it in respect
to the particular profit which the Owner and Bibliothecary may thereby receive,
or in regard of the renown to be acquired by their communication with
everybody; that we may not be like to those avaritious persons, who take no
felicity in their riches; or to that malicious Serpent, who suffered none to
approach and gather the fruits of the Garden of Hesperides; especially
considering, that there is nothing estimable, but as it becomes profitable and
useful: and for that, concerning Books in particular, they are like to the Man
of whom Horace speaks in one of his Epistles, Odisti claves and grata sigilla
pudice
Paucis ostendi gemis, and communia laudas.
However, since it were unreasonable to profane that indiscreetly which should
be managed with judgment, we ought to observe; that seeing all Libraries
cannot continually be so open as the Ambrosian; it were yet at least wise
permitted, that whoever had occasion for it, should have free access to the
Bibliothecary, who should introduce him with the least delay or difficulty;
secondly, that those which were altogether strangers, and all others that had
use only of some passages, might search and extract out of all printed Books,
whatever they stood in need of: thirdly, that persons of merit and knowledge
might be indulged to carry some few ordinary Books to their own Lodgings,
nevertheless yet with these cautions, that it should not be for above a
fortnight or three weeks at most, and that the Library Keeper be careful to
register in a Book destined for this purpose, and divided by Letters
Alphabetically, whatsoever is so lent out to one or other, together with the
date of the day, the form of the Volume, and the place and year of its
impression; and all this to be subscribed by the Borrower, this to be canceled
when the Book is returned, and the day of its reddition put in the margent,
thereby to see how long it has been kept; and that such as shall have merited
by their diligence and care in conserving of Books, may have others the more
readily lent to them. Assuring you, my Lord, that if it shall please you to
pursue what you have already begun, and augment your Library to make this use
of it, or some other which you shall judge to be better, you shall obtain
praises incomparable, infinite acknowledgements, not vulgar advantages, and in
brief, a satisfaction indicible, when by running over this Catalogue, you shall
consider the courtesies which you have done, the gallant men you have obliged,
the persons which shall have seen you, the new friends and servants which you
shall have acquired, and in a word, when you shall have judged by the finger
and the eye, how much glory and reputation your Library shall have produced
you; Toward whose progress and augmentation, I protest I would willingly, and
whilst I live, contribute all that I could possible; as I have already taken
the boldness to render you some testimonies of it by these Instructions, which
I hope in time so to polish and augment, that it shall not blush the
publication, to discourse and speak more at large on a subject not hitherto
treated of, and letting the world see, under the Title of Bibliotheca Memmiana,
what has been so long wished for, An ample and particular History, both of
Letters and of Books; the Judgment and Censure of Authors, the Names of the
best and most necessary in each Faculty; the Scourge of Plagiaries, the
Progress of the Sciences, the Diversity of Sects, the Revolutions of Arts and
Disciplines, the Decadence of the Ancient, the several Principles of the
Novators; and that Excellent Law of the Pyrrhenians founded upon the ignorance
of all men; under the umbrage whereof I do most humbly, my Lord, beseech you,
to excuse my own, and to receive these slender Instructions, though course and
ill woven, as pledges of my good will, and of that which I promise to present
you one day, with a greater attendance, and better equipage.

Nunc te marmoreum pro tempore fecimus, at tu
Si foetura gregem suppleverit, aureus esto.
Virg. Eclog. 7. FINIS.
The Copy of a Letter sent to the Learned, my most honored and worthy Friend,
Dr. Barlow, D.D. Provost of Queens College, and late Proto-Bibliothecary of
the Bodleian Libary in Oxford.
Reverend Sir,
TO what purpose I had designed the Copy which you were long since pleased to
favor me with accepting, I do now publish; and by this acknowledgement express
my obligations to you; that though there was nothing of mine in what I
transmitted to you beside the pleasure of putting a subject into English, which
I thought might be acceptable to you; you would yet honor me with Printing at
Oxford; and where, since it was lost, it is here retriv'd, and by the same hand
presented again to you; but not as a thing which can in the least pretend to
instruct you, who not only have presided over one of the most illustrious.
Libraries in the World; but are also of your self (as Eunapius would express
the merits of the Sophist Longinus) (...); In Vita Porphyr.
and to whom, with no less reason, may well be applied what S. Hierom said once
of Origin; Auxerunt aliorum studia Bibliothecas, ac per parts compleverunt:
unus tamen (Barlous) ingenii facilitate, Bibliothecam unam quamvis ingentem,
implere potuit. Nor do I believe that I shall hereby inform you of a thing
unknown to you, by telling you that the person who published these
Instructions, P. Ludovicus Jacobus, a Monk, has set forth a larger Treatise or
History of the most famous Libraries, as well public, as particular, which
have either been heretofore, or are at present extant in all the World; where,
what he has spoken in commendation of this Piece, and the learned Author of
it; what honorable mention he makes of the Bodlean especially, and of all
those of the several Colleges in both our Universities, cannot but extremely
affect you, and be very acceptable to all those that delight in the progress
and advancement of Learning. But Sir, I do but touch it, and, after my
Addresses to my L. Chancellor, submit these papers to your favorable censure;
becuase I know, if they receive it now a second time, they will be doubly
fortified; if not for the subject, for the great Names which comprehend them.
But, if from hence also the Gentlemen of our Nation derive such encouragements,
as may any way incite them to imitate those gallant and renoun'd Genius's of
our de Bury, Bodley, Cotton, Hales; Their Memmius, Thuanus, Putean, Cordesius,
and a thousand more celebrated for their Libraries, affection to Books, and
promotement of public designs, I shall then esteem my self extremely
fortunate, in having contributed to so great a good; and especially, if to this
also be added your Acceptance of these Expressions of it from

Reverend Sir, Your most humble, and most affectionate Servant, I. EVELYN.


