A NARRATIVE OF The success of the voyage of the Right Honorable HENEAGE
FINCH, Earl of Winchelsea, Vicount Maidstone, Baron Fitz-Herbert of Eastwell,
Lord of the Royal manor of Wye, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Kent and City
of Canterbury, His Majestjes Ambassador extraordinary to the High and Mighty
Prince Sultan Mamet Han, Emperor of Turkey, from Smyrna to Constantinople; His
Arrival there, the manner of his Entertainment and Audience with the Grand
Vizier and Grand Seignior.

LONDON, Printed by I. R. in the year, 1661.

A Narrative of the Success of the voyage of his Excellency the Lord Heneage
Finch, from Smyrna to Constantinople; his arrival there, the manner of his
entrance into Pera, and of his audience with the Grand Vizier and Grand
Seignior.
ON the sixth day of January, early in the morning, returning aboard with our
own Company, and six Merchants appointed by the Factory of Smyrna to attend us;
we set sail immediately with the wind at East, having the Smyrna Factour and
the Catch in our Company, which arrived with us on New years day. As soon as we
had sailed without the command of the Castle, it became totally calm, without
the least breez or breath of air, which enforced us to cast our Anchour, and
expect until a favorable or a brisker gale did present: The next day a
flattering air from the shore at South-east, persuaded us to weigh our
anchours, and set our sails; but this continued no longer than it had brought
us out of the Lands protection, and had exposed us to our own arts and the
strength of our vessel, to encounter with those many shocks and violences of a
storm which suddenly ensued: for in a moment the wind altered, coming about to
the North-east, so that with a strong gale we weathered the Cape Caliberno, and
standing for the Island of Mitylene, we intended under the shelter of that Land
to spend our tedious time of the following night. Our Ship lying a drift under
her main course and fore-sail by the mast, the storm by degrees more violently
increased, that by the morning it was become complete in all points of its
growth and terror; the Sea was all in a breach, the sky was black and thick,
the Sun so lowering and red, signified the continuance of it: the spray of the
Sea so forcibly carried by the wind over the Ship, that Masts, Yards, and
Decks, were covered with a white salt. This extremity of weather made us think
of some port or harbor to secure our Ship. The Island of Ipsera lying
South-east eight leagues from Mitylene, was supposed by our Master a safe place
to spend the fury of the storm, as having formerly afforded him a kinder
entertainment and defense upon the like occasion of distress and fury: Thus
steering for this Port, our main sails in the brails and our foresail set, it
was like paper blown away; and bringing another to the yard, it had the
misfortune to be foul of the flook of the anchour, and so became as
unserviceable as the other: Being thus deprived of the benefit of our
commanding sails, we set up our sprit-sail and main course, steering in between
the Island Ipsera the greater and the less, where keeping too near aloof
toward the shore, we unfortunately struck upon a rock, which astonished us all
with a strange amazement; the poor Ship struck five times, endeavoring to
clear her self from a total wrack and ruin, which all of us began to despair
of; and with cast up eyes, and stretched out arms, thought now of no other but
of our last and final port: And yet in the midst of this horrid consternation
and distress, it pleased God, who was our best Pilot, to bring us clear from
our rock, with some, though (as we hope) with little damage to our Ship. An
escape so miraculous and wonderful, considering the violence of the storm, the
carere and weight of our Ship, as ought to make the 8. day of January for ever
to be recorded by us to admiration, and anniversary thankfulness for God's
providence and protection: The Ship having thus depth of water again, and come
into a place of some convenient anchourage, our first anchour not holding us,
we let fall our sheet anchour, the Smyrna Factour following us. The Catch being
again separated by the night's tempest, came not to anchour, and fearing that
being not furnished with so good ground-tackle as we, she was not able to
endure and ride out so excessive a gale; the 8. and 9 day and night the wind
continued still violent; the 10 it began to abate, so that we could send
ashore, and enjoy some kind of satisfaction, though detained with a contrary
wind: The greatest part of the 12. day proved with little wind, and the 13. a
calm, the 14. day between one and two of the clock in the morning, the wind
sprung out of the West South-west with an easy gale, with which we weighed our
anchour and put to the Sea, the wind still continuing favorable and gentle;
and the 15. early we came to the Island of Tenedos, and soon after entering the
Hellespont, passing the new Castles, from that on the Asian side came off a
boat sent by the Captain of the Castle, signifying the day before that he had
received advice from the Vizier that we weresuddenly to arrive, and that both
for our selves and Ships that accompanied us, free passage should be given
without any hinderance or molestation: passing further up the River about five
leagues, being about three of the clock in the afternoon of the same day, we
came up to the Castles of Sestos and Abydos: from the latter, being on the
Natolian shore, came off a boat with a Janizarie and Drugerman, to welcome us
with Letters from Sir Thomas Bendish, and to return with news of our safe
arrival: The night following, and likewise the 16. day continued there a gentle
and favorable gale; so that passing the Island of Marmora (about noon of the
same day) situate at the entrance of the Propontick Sea, formerly called
Proconnesus, we pleasantly passed forward that night, and on the 27. day, being
that day three months since we embarked in the Downs, we came to an anchor
for some few hours near the seven Towers, until such time as Sir Thomas Bendish
could receive notice of our arrival. And thus giving time for that
intelligence, the anchour was again weighed, and we stood in for the Port with
a fresh gale. Notice being given, that the Grond Seignior was seated in a
Summer House on the corner wall of the Seraglio: our Flaggs and Ensigns were
displayed, our Cuns and Wastcloths out; and being opposite to the point of the
Seraglio, a Bostangee, or one belonging to the Gardens of the Seraglio, came
aboard to acquaint us, that the Grand Seignior's pleasure was that we should
rejoice with Guns, (for that was his expression) after which were fired 61
Guns, and so came to an anchor on Topana side, where we received Sir Thomas
Bendish aboard, congratulating our safe arrival. Against next day things were
provided for our entrance, being the 18. day; and indeed with that handsome
State and Equipage, that I believe none of his Predecessors, nor yet the
Emperors Ambassadors, can boast of a more honorable, nor a more noble
reception. The Grand Seignior sent several of his officers to attend and
receive him at his first landing; and the multitude of people that flocked from
all parts, made the business of more wonder and expectation. As Soon as we
descended from the Ship into the boat designed to carry us ashore, the Ship
fired 51. Guns, with that deliberation, and so leisurely, as continued until
his landing; where being met by his own Servants, the Merchants of the place,
and those brought with us from Smyrna; with the Officers of the Grand Seignior,
my Lord's Horse being covered with a Crimson velvet foot-cloth richly laced,
and being mounted thereupon, and his Lady in the Coach, we marched in this
order.

1. The Vaivod of Gallata and his men. 2. The Captain of the Janissaries with
his Janissaries. 3. The Chouse Bashaw with his Chouses. 4. The English
Trumpeters. 5. The English horsemen, and Merchants. 6. My Lord's own
Janissaries. 7. The Druggermen. 8. My Lord himself with Pages and Footmen by his
side. 9. My Lord's Gentlemen. 10. His Ladies Coach, and three other Coaches
following with her women, made almost after the manner of Holland wagons. 11.
The Officers and Reformadoes of the ship.
As we marched all the streets were crowded with people, and the windows with
spectatours, as being unusual in this Councrey to see a Christian Ambassador
attended with so many Turkish Officers. The press was also the more augmented,
and the passage obstructed, by casting 550. five foll. pieces, which My Lord
commanded to be disposed of amongst the people. And thus being arrived at his
house at Pera, he was immediately saluted by the Secretary of the Emperors
Resident, in behalf of his Master; and soon after by the Secretary of the
Excellentissimo Ballarino, and Capello, who negotiate the affairs of the
Venetian Republique, and the next day by a messenger of the French
Ambassadors, and Dutch Agent. On that day the Grand Seignior sent him a
present of ten sheep, and fifty hens, a hundred loaves of bread, twenty sugar
loaves, twenty wax candles, a favor extraordinary, not usually conferred on
any Ambassador. On the 20. day of this month he had audience of the Grand
Vizier, and being attended thither with the same solemnity as at his first
entrance; only that until he came unto Constantinople side. He had not the
attendance of Chaus Bassa who met him on the other side of the water, and
thence conducted him to his Viziers palace: At his first entrance he was led
in between two of his Gentlemen, very few of his retinue being suffered to
follow him into the presence of the Vizier, who sat in a little room upon
Cushions and his feet covered, a fire in the room, and upon a Sapha were
several Bashaws and Chauses standing by him: Two Crimson Velvet stools were
fetched out; one for my Lord, and the other for Sir Thomas Bendish, on which
being sat, he presented the Kings Letter to the Vizier by the hand of the
Chancellor, who was there present by him; the Letters were wrote on parchment,
and put in a bagg made of cloth of Gold. As soon as they were delivered, my
Lord Bendish began to inform the Vizier, that this was that honorable person
he had formerly acquainted him was coming Ambassador; rhat he was of that
Nobility and Alliance to the King, that had not his Majesty highly and in an
extraordinary manner intended to honor the Grand Seignior, he would not have
exposed his kinsman to so long and dangerous a voyage. Then my Lord began to
tell him the Restoration of the King, of his greatness and power, of his
Clemency in pardoning all but such as were engaged in the blood of his Father;
That in his passage to this place, he had by the command of the King touched at
Algier, endeavoring to renew the former articles of peace, and to release an
English Lord which was there a captive, enslaved contrary to the agreement of
peace, but was foiled in the Treaty, and could reduce them to nothing of reason
or justice, and therefore desired to know of the Vizier what should be done in
this case. To which he replied, that he would have a care of it, and see to do
him justice: My Lord further assured him of the friendship that the King his
Master desired to preserve with the Grand Seignior; and therefore desiring to
honor him, has sent him his first Ambassador to salute him, before he had
appointed or designed any for the Christian Princes: To which the Vizier
proudly replied, that that was but reason, since the Grand Seignior was an
Emperor and they but Kings, and he the greatest and most Sovereign Potentate
of the world. He further told him, that being now come upon a business of
Ceremony and Complement, he could not insist upon much business whereby to over
burden him with a tedious discourse, but should refer that to be intimated
to him by his Drugerman, at some other convenient time of Treaty and discourse.
This being passed, two bowls of Sherbet were brought forth, which we drunk one
to another, but not the Turks. This being done, the English present was brought
forth and laid before the Vizier, consisting of twenty Vests, four of them
being of fine English cloth of several colors, four Velvet, of several flowred
Stuffs of gold and silver four, of watered Tabbies four, of several Sattins
worked gaudy and gay after the Turkish fashion. In recompense we received
thanks, and my Lord himself with Sir Thomas Bendish, and six of those that
attended were vested; which vests had nothing of value more, then that they
came from the Vizier, as usual Liveries and Badges of their favors. After this
my Lord departed, wearing this painted vest until he came without the gates of
the Palace, and then delivered it to the hands of his Page, and so likewise
did those that followed him to their Servants; and thus in the same manner
returned back again to his house at Pera, with an appearance of fair
correspondencie of a maintenance of the former Capitulations, with an
amendment of the before passed abuses.

On the 26. Feb. my Lord had audience of the Gr. Seignior, which was purposely
deferred until that day of payment of the Janissaries, that so the Ambassador
might see more than an usual solemnity, and make a good report in his own
Country of the glory and magnificence of the Ottoman Emperors. We being
attended as formerly when he had audience of the Vizier, he departed from his
house upon the first break of day, and having passed the water, was on
Constantinople side met by the Chouse Bassaw and his Chouses, which conducted
us to the Seraglio, where being entered, and riding through the first spacious
Court we alighted from our horses, and walked through another Court until we
came to the Divan, where at the upper end was placed the Grand Vizier, on his
right hand were five other Viziers, of which the Captain Bashaw was one, on his
left hand were the two Judges or Chief Justices, one of which wore a great
Turbant of green, being of the family and kindred of the Prophet; near to whom
was placed the Toftardar, or Lord Treasurer, with three other Bashaws, being
under Treasurers. The floor of the Divan was spread with Carpets, and on them a
rich covering of bags of money to pay the Soldiery, there being in all an
hundred and fifty heaps, every one of which consisted of ten purses, and every
purse five hundred dollers, so that the sum by computation amounted to an
hundred and fifty thousand pounds. Being come to the door of the Divan, none
were admitted in besides my Lord, Sir Thomas Bendish, and about six or seven
more; being entered, Sir Thomas Bendish and my Lord approached toward the
Vizier, others remaining at the lower end of the room; where for them were set
two small red Velvet Stools, on which being set, there passed some discourse of
kindness and civility, which being done, they retired to another part of the
room: In the mean while the payment of the Soldiers went forward; every
Colonel and Captain receiving the pay of his Regiment and company, which having
done, every one of them came up to the Vizier and kissed the hemme of his vest
on his knees, and so retired with great humility, making haste away from him,
passing with one side toward him, so as not to turn his back: The payment
being over, three small Tables were brought in (the Grand vizier retiring by
reason of his indisposition of body) on which were set a large capacious Voider
for a Table; that on which they dined being of silver oar, other of mixed
metal: Being set at these Tables, their meat was served in one dish after
another, where they had no knives laid for them to cut: for supposing the
sharpness of their stomachs would make amends for the want of knives, they fell
too after the Turkish fashion and tore it in pieces; but scarce was any dish
upon the table, sometimes almost before they had tasted it. but immediately was
snatched off, and another set in his place; having thus superficially proved
every dish, of which there was about two Courses, the Table was taken away, and
the Chouse Bashaw advised them to accompany him, where they should receive the
Honor of the Grand Seigniors Vests, according to the usual custom upon like
occasions. Eighteen Vests were bestowed, and one more above the number, as a
mark of more honor and favor: Whilst this was doing, the present made to the
Grand Seignior by the Turkey Company was displayed in open Court, consisting of
fifty Vests, ten being of Velvet, ten of Satin, ten of Cloth of Gold, ten of
Tabbies, ten of fine English cloth; every one of which Vests was held by a
several person, so that fifty men were rancked in order for the better
appearance, and four English Mastiffs were also given as an addition to the
Present. In this Court were also drawn up the whole body of the Janissaries that
were then paid, consisting of five thousand men, amongst whom there was that
silence, that not one whisper or noise, or the least motion was understood: And
as the Janissaries Aga and other Commanders passed, the bowing and salutations
that they made were also regular at the same time, as may well testify the
exactness of the Discipline and admirable obedience, which has been the sole
cause of their Conquest and enlargement of their Empire. Being thus vested, and
the Grand Vizier gone into the presence of the Grand Seignior, to whom we bowed
as he passed, two Cappagee Bashaws with Silver staves conducted him to the
Audience, none being permitted to follow him, but Sir Thomas Bendish, his
Brother the Drugerman, the Captain of the Ship, the Treasurer, and his
Secretary, who carried the Cloth of Cold bagg, in which were the Kings Letters.
The Gate we first entered was set vvide open, within it was paved with white
Marble, where attended some forty Eunuchs, all clothed with diverse Colors
of silk and Satin Vests, coming near the Presence door, we made a stand in
the Porch, where runs a pleasant Fountain of water, and trod very softly,
so as not to disturb with the least motion that great Majesty, where was so
profound a silence, that nothing was heard more than the murmuring of the
Fountain: Just at the Entrance hung a Ball of gold studded with Diamonds and
precious stones, and about it great Chains of rich Peail. The Chamber where
the Grand Seignior sat, was covered with a Carpet of Crimson Velvet, and
embroidered with Gold vvire; and so likewise was an open Gallery before the
Entrance, through which we first passed, and many of them beset with small
seed-pearl. The Grand Seigntor himself sat in a Throne raised a small height
from the ground, supported with four pillars plated with Gold, from the top
hung great Balls of massy and weighty Gold: The Cushions he sat upon, and
those also that lay by, and the Carpets spread upon the Throne were all beset
with Jewels; on his Right hand stood the Grand Vizier, the two Cappagee
Bashavvs took him by each hand and brought him into the Presence, about the
middle of the room, laying their hands upon his head, made him bovv until he
had almost touched the Carpets with his forehead, and then raising him again,
they retired with him backwards unto the furthest part of the room; in like
manner they did unto the rest of his company. The Kings Letters being
presented, they were appointed to be carried to the Lord Chancellor, and the
Drugerman by his order in the Turkish Language, read in his Paper to this
effect. First declaring how the King of England was restored again without
War or any Conditions, and the great Clemency of the King in pardoning all, but
such as had a hand in the murder of his Father. Secondly, to recommend to his
Majesty the continuance of his protection to our Merchants. Thirdly, to beg all
English slaves, as a Testimony of his Majesty's gracious acceptance of him. The
Ceremonies being over, and the paper read, we immediately retired away; and
so passing along by the Janissaries unto our horses, and being mounted, we
stood out of the way to see those Soldiers march by us, which indeed seemed
a very flourishing Militia of young men, strong and well clothed; about two
or three thousand first marched with baggs of money upon their shoulders,
afterward follovved about as many more running with much haste after the
money, next follovved their Commanders well mounted, with brave feathers of a
yard high upon-their heads; next follovved the Chouses and their Commanders,
with several Bashavvs of great quality. Last of all the Grand Vizier, who
being gone, my Lord and his attendance proceeded forwards, and so returned to
his house. It is observable, that there were admitted to eat in the Divan many
of his Retinue, which never before was admitted, only for the two
Ambassadors; and also that none had access to the presence of the Grand
Seignior, but only the two Ambassadors and the Drugerman: It Is observable,
that the dishes in which the meat was served up were of a greenish color,
made of earth very ordinary to the eye, yet such as Cost the Grand Seignior an
hundred and fifty dollers apiece, brought from China; whose virtue is such,
that as soon as any poison comes into them they break immediately, and
therefore the most necessary for the security of the Emperor.

FINIS.

