OFFICES AND PLACES OF TRUST NOT TO BE BOU^HT or SOLD, OR GIVEN TO INSUFFICIENT
PERSONS. Discovered in a sober and Peaceable LETTER.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his shop in St.
Dunstans Churchyard Fleetstreet. 1660.

The Publisher to the Reader.
READER,
THere are vitia temporis, as well as vitia hominis; Therefore the following
Tetter coming casually to my hands, and I conceiving it to be bent against
crimes and peccancies, (which no time wants) and not at all against persons
high or low, did resolve to endeavor to make it public; the rather because I
perceive the Author cites Authority almost for every paragraph of it, which
thou may examine, and believe* or not believe, as thou find the quotations
true or false; I confidently presume* I do His Sacred Majesty service hereby,
for to have the Law duly executed will much conduce to His Majesty's honor,
and stop the mouths of gainsayers and murmurers, (if any such should be)
against His Highness Government; I really tell thee* that I believe the Authors
end to be honest and sincere, and therefore it is that thou have this trouble
from me, and* for my part* thou may assure thy self* that I have no higher
end in it* then faithfully to serve His Majesty, and his Realms, take it
therefore in good part from

Thy humble servant N. Y.
20. Sept. 1660.
SIR,
BEfore I answer your Question, I shall* according to my best memory and skill
(within that little stint of time, to which I am limited by you,) give you my
judgment, how the Law expects the qualifications of all those, who are to be
subordinate Magistrates, Officers* and Deputies under His Majesty, in the
managery of His Government, and Administration of Justice, to be; and because I
tell you what the Law expects they should be, I do thereby omit to tell you*
what the Law of God says* they should be, but refer you to the 17. Exodus 19.
etc. touching Jethroes Counsel to Moses, and the 1 Deuteronomy. 9. etc. which duly
compared with our Law in this respect; you shall find this to be the daughter,
(if not the firstborn) of that, attended with the auxiliary force of Divines,
Philosophers, Moralists, yea Pagans and Heathens in general, that retain any
thing of the first pure impresses of nature upon them, and are not quite
immersed in forlorn and barren Rusticity and Barbarism.

And because Cicero in his first book of Offices* says, that every orderly
discourse, debet a definitione proficisci, I shall begin with such definition
or description, that the Law only gives of an Office or subordinate Magistracy;
and then proceed according to my purpose.

Plowd. 380.
Plowden a very learned Lawyer tells us, That an Office is a thing to be
exercised by the body of a Man. Another Finches Law. fol. 162. But an Officer
is described to be, One who receives by public Authority the Charge and
oversight of humane affairs belonging to the Commonwealth.
Lawyer of great esteem says, An Office is a duty of Attendance upon a Charge.

Sig de Jur. Romans lib. 1. c. 20.
This being the nature of an Office or Charge, the Law tells us the person or
persons that must attend it ought be, Habiles and idonei, and pares Negotiis.
As Co. lib. 8. f. 41. b.
1. They ought to be honest. 2. Knowing and capable. 3. Able. 4. Diligent. 12.
R. 2. cap. 2.
2. They ought to come to their Employments and Offices, sine praemio, sine
precio, and sine prece, etc. 2 Instit. f. 32.
3. They ought to be a grace to the place, and not the place a grace to them.


Now the right choice of Officers and subordinate Ministers of State, according
to these qualifications* will very much promote the happiness of the Kingdom,
for it will be the principle* as well as the duty* of such men* to advance the
Administration of Justice, 14 Prove. 34.
and Justice or Righteousness, (as the wise man says) exalts a Nation.

And if these Praecognita be not observed in their choice, but that either
money* or wry and warping affection* shall sway in this Case, (each of which
the Law accounts Turpis Consideratio, for quilibet tonetur magis recompensare
virtuoso, quam Amico aut venundatori.) Then may it be said to us, as once
Ingurtha said to Rome, Co. lit. 234.
Vade venalis Civitas, mox peritura, si emptorem invenias: and it is observed
by the Lord Coke* out of Aerod. fol. 353. Aerod. 553.
That nulla alia re magis Romana Respublica interiit, quam quod Magistratus
Officia venalia erant.

It is most true* that if Offices and Places of Trust* in any Nation, should be
given to men not qualified for them, or sold* as it were* in the market for the
utmost penny* or for any money at all (in truth,) this would be a bar to all
generous endeavors; for who would industriously and strenuously betake himself
to any ingenious Art or Profession, if money or squint-affection shall
preponderate true worth? friends or money then will do that which pains,
learning and long experience (which is the Oracle of time, and is indeed gotten
by length of time and variety of occurrences) shall never be able to compass
without them; these are the fodder of the Brutish or sensual part of man, but
not his purest earthly nutriment, much less his Heavenly one; and it is the
fate of wise men often to be poor, and I cannot call it their fault to be
modest; they are poor; they cannot buy; they are modest, they will not buy,
because they conceive merit over-weighs money, or friendship, in wise men's
esteem.

And now give me leave to transpose the order, I first began with, and to bring
instances from History and other Authorities, before I come to give you the
verdict of our Common and Statute Laws of England in this Case, and I pray
pretermit my hasty faults of want of due order in what I offer, and be pleased
to heed the matter proposed* and its weight* above a regular School-method*
which I affect, but have not time to observe; nor in truth do I esteem it of
pure necessity, but among extreme Critics, if things be but clearly offered to
the Readers understanding.

It is observed by an Historian, Turkish History, fol. 227
as an Excellent quality in Tamerlane the great, and Commander of the Tartars,
That he bestowed his preferments not on those that ambitiously sought the same,
(for such he deemed unworthy) but on such, as whose modesty and desert he
thought worthy of those his great favors. And the Historian observes further,
that the services of his servants he never forgot -- he kept a Catalogue of
their Names and good Deserts, and that day was lost with him* wherein he had
not GIVEN something to such.

This Noble Scythian, for such he was by Nation, not only observed, but
searched our desert; kept a Catalogue of Deserving men, perused it every day
(as well knowing, that merit and worth is too apt to retire it self into the
shade of a modest privacy,) and (as we see) he was every day giving something
to such, and not selling. And this he was taught to do from the mere light of
reason and ordinary notions of nature, without any motive of piety, the fear of
God, or the least aid from true Region.

Pacius annot: in Justini. Instit. fol. 413. Minsinger. Scholia in Justin.
Instit. lib. 4. de publicis Judiciis. Tit. 18. f 913. Peter Martyrs Common
places. fol. 47. See Godw. Antiq. f. 241. Minsinger. Ibid.
The Romans had a Law which the Civil Lawyers call Lex Julia de Ambitu, which
Cicero in his Oration pro Murena says, he was Lator or Maker of: This Law
enacted, that those who did compass and attain Honor and Magistracy by money,
should be punished with great pecuniary Mulcts, and also be made Infamous: and
the reason which that Law gives is, quia suae virtuti non Confidunt, sed per
circuitum ambiunt populi suffragia and Magistratus; and one says, Simile
crimen Ecclesiasticum est simonia. And indeed so it is, for Qui pecunia and
largitionibus honores -- Sacerdotia and Magistratus ambiunt, his poena
deportationis est praestituta, This was the ancient punishment among the
Romans, (to wit) exile and banishment, sed postea (says he) Ex S. C. ad
interpretationem leg. Juliae promulgato poena sed aureorum cum nominis Infamia
est constituta, so that after it was turned (as is said before) into Mulct and
Infamy. Thus far, (and it is very far) Scythians and Pagans go, now hear what
others tell you.

Seneca in his Epistles says, Seneca Epist. 91.
Aureum seculum* in quo honores* melioribus (gratis) dabantur; for Salvian.
dignitas in indigno est Ornamentum in luto, a great and a good mind becomes
places of Trust, for Eccl. 10.6.
folly ought not to be set up in dignity, if Solomon be of any credit with us.

It was an excellent Eulogy given by the Historian to Lewis the ninth of
France, French History fol. 153.
That the Realm being corrupted with the Injustice and extortion of the former
Raigns, by the sale of Offices and places of Trust, (it being most certain that
what we buy in Gross* we must sell by Retaile.) This King Lewis the ninth did
expressly prohibit those sales, supplied such places* as were void* according
to the merit of persons, after due examination, to draw good men* and of
understanding, to apply themselves to study, otherwise they should have been
shroudly tempted rather to have stored themselves with money* then merit, with
Gold then Goodness.

The honorable and learned Mornay, speaking to Henry the fourth of France in
his Meditation upon the 101. Psalm, says thus. Mornay on the 101. Psalm. fol.
135.
The Princes Eye and Care should be upon the best sort of men, to set them in
Offices, and BESTOW Charges upon them; those that affect such places he should
always suspect them, their persons and practices, for he that earnestly aims
at an Office or Living, without doubt desires it for the Profit, not for the
Charge.

Reverend old Latimer, in a Sermon of his before King Edward the sixth, has
these words. Latimer fifth Sermon before King Edward the sixth.
God defend that ever any such enormity should be in England, That CIVIL
OFFICES should be bought and sold, whereas men should have them given them for
their worthiness -- the holy Scripture qualifieth the Officers, men of Courage,
Wise, fearing God, etc.

Learned Lavaterus* in his Commentary upon the Proverbs of Solomon, 29. chap.
verse 4. tells you, Ludov. Lavat. fol. 291. b.
That Munera dantes and accipientes perdunt Rempublicam, nam ubi Corruptela
munerum, locum habet, vera Religio, and Justitia concidunt.

Bucer also has to this purpose; Bucerus.
Offices are not Livings and Salaries, but Charges and Duties; not preferments
for favorites, but rewards for deserts. Julius. Theodosius, etc.
Julius, Theodosius. etc. say much more.

Augustine* in his Book de Civitate Dei* says, Aug. lib. 10. de Civ. Dei c. 14.
That such as provide themselves places* and are not PROVIDED for them, come
into them and execute them not with a mind of doing good, but of Domineering,
not of providing for others, but for their own turns.

A learned Interpreter upon Joshuah, speaking of the backwardness and loathness
of Joshuah to be advanced to Moses Room, (though yet he was a man of a great
Spirit and Wisdom,) notwithstanding Gods earnestness, and multiplied
encouragements to him lets fall this Conclusion: Qui Magistratus ambi unt little
sunt indignissimi. Multa honest accipi possunt quae tamen honest peti ^on
possunt.
None are less worthy of advancement then those who hunt most eagerly after
it, and those who ambitiously seek an Office or Honor, do ipso facto by that
very Act discover their extreme unworthiness, and that* of all other men* they
deserve it not. It is certain, That a modest undervaluing of Self, is an
ordinary attendant upon true worth; Austin. Nazienzen. Basil. Chrysostom.
this will appear* if we consider how Austin often fled from preferment,
Nazianzen refused it* till the persuasions and importunities of an Emperor
prevailed with him. Bazil was Haled into it, Chrysostom hid himself from it,
these men weighed their own strength and sufficiency, the importance of their
Charge, the account they must give, and the slippery places they must stand in;
the consideration whereof cooled all ambitious heats in them, and blunted their
Appetite to Honor or Advancement, they well knowing what Causin says, Causin.
That the paths of Honor and Preferment are upon Ice, and bordered upon
Precipices, as well as Honor and Advancement* attained is situated near unto
it.

And all men know, that Honores mutant mores, sed raro in meliores, quia Honor
est sicut Hedera, quae arbores exsiccat, in quas serpit.

But there is little need of looking abroad* from other Authorities, Histories
and Laws* for aid against the sale of Offices and Places of Trust, or for
disposing of them to the most Worthy, the Laws of England are of themselves
sufficient to this purpose.

Fleta* a very ancient Author* says, Fleta.
That the time of Edward the first, was very famous for good Judges and
Officers, for they came to their places sine precio aut prece, without price or
prayer.

34 E. 3. c. 1
The Statute of 34. E. 3. cap. 1. in the last Edition by Powlton, Ordaines that
Justices of Peace of the most WORTHY of their Country shall be ELECTED, and
joined with some learned in the Law, etc. but if you look into the old ancient
Edition of the Statutes, the words of that Statute is (the most valiant,) so
that be it one or other, their Election implies them to be freely chosen; and
their being most valiant or most worthy, fully answers the word of God* as to
either of those single qualifications.

12. R. 2. cap. 2.
But if we descend a little lower, and look into the next Kings Reign, we
shall find a most Excellent Statute made in the 12. year of that King, (viz.)
Richard the second. The words of which Statute I shall set down at large,
because of the inestimable worth and value of it, (viz.) It is accorded that
the Chancellor, Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Steward of the Kings
house, the Kings Chamberlain, Clerk of the Rolls, the Justices of the one
Bench or the other, Barons of the Exchequer, and all others that shall be
called to ordain Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Escheators, Customers,
Comptrollers, or ANY OTHER Officer, or Minister of the King shall be firmly
sworn, That they shall not ordain, name or make Justices of Peace, Sheriff,
Escheator, Customer, Comptroller, nor any other Officer or Minister of the King
for ANY GIFT, BROCAGE, FAVOR or AFFECTION, nor that none that PURSUES by him
or by others, PRIVILIE or OPENLY to be in any manner of OFFICE, shall be put
in the same Office or in any OTHER, but that they make all such Ministers or
Officers of the BEST and MOST LAWFUL men and SUFFICIENT to their ESTIMATION
and KNOWLEDGE.

Com. 379.
Certainly this is a Statute that is a most Excellent one, none (beneath the
Spirit of God) could pen a better, unless he could get a pen made of a quill
snatched from the wing of a Seraphym to do it; but alas, it is a carcass
without a soul, and we have need of the head and hands of Seraphyms to put it
in Execution.

Of this law the Lord Coke says, Co. littl. f. 234. Sect. 379.
That it is worthy to be written in letters of Gold, but more worthy to be put
in Execution, for (says he) certainly never shall Justice be duly administered,
but when the Officers and Ministers of Justice be of such quality, and come to
their places in such manner as by this law is required.

5. E. 6. c. 16.
There is another Excellent Statute made in the 5. year of Edward the sixth,
against buying and selling of some sort of Offices to which there is a severe
penalty annexed; by which Statute no Office in any wise relating to the
Administration of Justice or Clerkship in any Court of Record, or concerning
the Kings Treasure, Revenue, Account, Aulnage, Auditorship, Surveyor, or
keeping of any His Majesty's Castles, Fortresses, etc. may be bought or sold,
and if it be, then all and every such person and persons as shall bargain or
sell any of the said Office or Offices, Deputation or Deputations, of any of
the said Offices or any part of them, or that shall take any money, fee, reward
or profit for any the said Office or Offices, Deputation or Deputations, etc.
or that shall take any Covenant, Bond or Assurance, for any money, reward or
profit, to be given for any the said office or Offices, Deputation or
Deputations, etc. The person so bargaining or selling, or that shall take any
such Promise, Covenant, Bond or Assurance, shall not only forfeit his estate
and interest therein, but also every person so Buying, Giving or Assuring,
shall be adjudged a disabled person* to have or enjoy the said Office or
Offices, Deputation or Deputations, etc. and that all such Bargains, Sales,
Promises, Covenants and Assurances, as is before specified* shall be void.

In this Act are excepted some Offices, as the Office of Parkership, or of the
keeping of any Park, House, or Manor, Garden, Chase or Forest, such Offices
as are in the dispose of the two Chief Justices of the Kings Bench and Common
Pleas, and Justices of Assize.

Upon this Satute a famous Case between Sir Robert Vernon* the Kings Cofferer,
and Sir Arthur Ingram was adjudged in Michaelmas Term 13. Jac. Co. Lit. f. 234.
Sect. 379. Co. 3. Institutes c. 71. f. 154.
Sir Arthur Ingram gave a sum of money to the said Sir R. V. for surrendering
his Office to the King, with intent to have a grant made to him* the said Sir
A. I. which was accordingly done* and Sir Arthur Ingram admitted to the place*
and sworn, and yet the Lord Chancellor Egerton* and the Judges* did resolve
that the said Office was void, and Sir A. I. disabled to ^ave or take the said
Office, and that a non obstante in his grant could not dispense with this Act
to enable the said Sir A. I. to enjoy it, and Sir Arthur Ingram was thereupon
removed, and Sir Marmaduke Darrell (by the Kings Commandment) sworn in his
place, and all Promises, Bonds and Assurances between Sir R. Vernon, and Sir A.
Ingram adjudged void.

Co. lib. 3. f. 83. in Twynes ^ Case.
I shall instance in one Case more upon this Statute, and leave you to examine
the Authorities in the Margin* to satisfy your self further* if you see cause;
the Case was between one Lee and his Wife* Excutrix of one Smith deceased*
Plaintiff, and Mary Colshill Executrix of Thomas Colshill* Defendant in debt
upon an Obligation of 1000. marks Intr. Rot. 1707. Colshill the Testator had
the Office of one of the Customers of Queen Elizabeth, by Letters Patents* to
him and his Deputies, and by Indenture between him and Smith, the Testator of
the Plaintiff, and for 600. l. paid, and a 100. l. per annum, to be paid during
the life of Colshil, made a deputation of the said Office to Smith, and
Colshill covenanted with Smith, that if Colshill should die before him, that
then his Executor should pay unto him 300. l. and diverse Covenants were in the
said Indenture concerning the said Office, and the enjoying of it, and Colshill
was bound in the said Obligation to perform the Covenant, and the Breach was
alleged in the non-payment of the said 300. l. for as much as Smith
over-lived Colshill, and although the said Covenant to repay the said 300. l.
was lawful, yet for as much as the rest of the Covenants were against the
Statute of 5 E. 6. c. 16. 5 E. 6. c. 16.
and if the addition of a lawful Covenant should make the Obligation of force;
the Statute should serve for little or no purpose, for this cause* it was
adjudged that the Obligation was utterly void.

Co. Lit. 120. Cro. 1. rep. 425. and 330. Cro. 2. rep f. 385. pl. 16. Hob. rep.
f. 75. Co. 12. pars f. 74. and 101. etc.
These two Cases give you intimation enough what the Law of England deems* of
selling of Offices* as an addition to what is before, yet I shall refer you to
the several Cases in the Margin, to satisfy your self more fully, wherein you
shall find corrupt Ecclesiastical preferments, (which are quodammodo Offices)
or Symony, to fall under the same censure of our Law, as well as other Laws.

From all the Authorities and Laws that I have thus troubled you with the
mentioning of, give me leave to infer thus much: 1. That the sale of Offices
and places of Trust, whether Original or Deputed* is pernicious to the Kings
Majesty, for it corrupts the Crystal stream of His Justice, and in makes that
Vendible that should be free. For he that will be so sordid as to buy against
Law, will think himself indulged to be so base as to sell also against it. 2.
That the light of Nature is not so dim and purblind, but it can see, nor so
extremely degenerated, but it can abhor. Corruption and unworthiness in places
of Trust. 3. That venalis Justitia is wormwood to the people of the Realm,
yea, I may say venom* that empoysons its purest moral streams, and makes the
Law a leaden Lesbian Rule, to bend at every beck of the Diana of Profit; or if
I may modestly say it, to traile after her posteriors. Thus the ship of the
Realm must shift her sails* as the wind of the Goddesse-money shall blow; and
it must sail this or that, or any other way, though it be upon apparent
Shelves and Rocks, to the hazard of its Ruin, if money bids. 4. It spoils the
Harmony of the World* by inverting the Order of Nature, Virtus post Nummos,
etc. 5. It is a Bar to Ingenuity and Study* after all noble endowments* as I
said before, if Gold shall overbalance Goodness; if an Ass laden with money
shall carry the precedence and pre-eminence before an Heroic and Generous
soul, never so well furnished and laden with Worth and Learning, the richest
ea^hly furniture of mankind.


But, Sir, before I come to your Question, let me have a little more Liberty,
and I will not trespass long upon you.

It is certain, That His Majesty does not, nor His Ancestors have not* sold
Offices and Places of Trust in their mediate dispose, nor have they usually*
unless upon misinformation* disposed them to persons unfit and incapable; and
if sometimes it so happened, the wisdom of upright Judges have laid them aside,
notwithstanding they had Patents under the Great Seal of England; and when they
were so put out, the Kings of England have given their Places to other fit and
capable persons; I shall give you* at this time* but one instance, Bro. Office
pl: 48. 5 E. 4. rot. 66.
which was one Vintor, who was made Clerk of the Crown by Edward the fourth by
Letters Patents, but being found unsufficient, was laid aside by the Judges of
that time, and that King* by advice of the Judges* appointed one West* a fit
person in his place.

It is also certain, that diverse places under the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper* are* by prescription* in his dispose, and have been* and usually are*
sold* as the Cursitors places, etc. the 6. Clerks etc. in the dispose of the
Master of the Rolls, and sold by him. The Philizers, etc. in the dispose of the
chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and other Places in the dispose of the chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, and Justices of Assize, and have been also sold by
them respectively; which time and silence has admitted them also to sell.

I have omitted any particular or distinct discourse of Judicial Places,
(though yet some light touches of them also may be observed herein) as
conceiving no man so far benighted with Ignorance, and consequently so hardy,
as to affirm them to be Vendible by Law, or to be given to such men as are
insufficient, or (as Learned Bacon says in another Case) to such as are Blind
in the Colors of good and evil: Philosophers have an Axiom, That there are
Principia, quae dicuntur DIGNITATES, ob id, quod jure illis fides habenda sit,
cum ea unusquisque statim admittit, ut totum unum quodlibet majus est sua
part. There is a Communis conceptio vel Notitia, (i.e.) a Notion, not merely
probable, and so obvious only to wise men, but such a Notion that* for its
dignity and self-evidence* may justly be styled the universal suffrage of all
mankind in all Nations, so cogent, and (if I may say it) Mathematically
Demonstrative, that it fetches its clear barefaced and fore-right proofs from
the Common Remains of lapsed Nature; so that a Midnight Ethnicke can* without
Pause or Study, not only tell you that he that buys dearly, cannot give
freely; but that a blind Polyphemus* in such a Magistracy* is a Monstrum, etc.
-- ingens, cui lumen ademptum.

Thus much in general and briefly* touching the sale of Offices* and
insufficiency of Officers, the Law affording much more if need required, or had
I more time: Charon.
He that was born in a bottle, and never looked into the world, but through a
hole, may easily see the inconveniences that pursue at the heels of such
practices; but here I desist* as to what I promised to say in General.

Now to give you the best satisfaction in short to your Question, viz.

Quest. In whose dispose the Clerk-ship of the Peace* in every County* is?

Answ. I must confess that I did think this a very needless question, when the
experience of all my life, and I believe of yours, has been* that the Custos
Rotulorun had the gift of that Place; and I ever looked upon the Clerk of the
Peace as his servant, he himself being the Keeper of the Records, and
answerable for them, and not his Clerk; and I did always conceive with
submission to better Judgments, that the Donation of this Place of Clerkship
was an inseparable insident to the Custos, like that Case of Scrogs in Dyer,
Dyer 175. pl. 25.
where Queen Mary granted the Exigenters Place for London, (being vacant, after
the death of Sir Robert Brook chief Justice) to one Colshill, and afterward
made Sir Anthony Brown chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Of the Common Pleas.
who refused Colshill, and made Scrogs Exigenter in his Place; and a great
strife arising about it, Queen Eliz. in the first year of her Reign* referred
it to Sir Nicholas Bacon* Chancellor, the Judges of the Kings Bench and
Exchequer, Attorney General, and Attorney of the Duchy (exclusis omnibus
Justiciariis de Communi Banco,) who after great deliberation and dispute* did
resolve, that Colshill had no Title, and that the Donation of this Office did
not belong to the Queen, but only to the disposition of the chief Justice, and
as an inseparable incident belonging to the person of the chief Justice, and
that by use and prescription.

Mittons Case Co. lib. 4. f. 33, 34.
In Mittons Case in the Lord Coke (where the forementioned case is cited,) it
is resolved, that though Queen Eliz. by her Letters Patents under the Great
Seal, had granted to the said Mitton the Office of Clerk of the County Court*
or shire-Clerk of the County of Somerset, with all fees, etc. for term of life*
in the vacancy of a Sheriff, and after made Arthur Hopton Esquire; Sheriff there,
who interrupted Mitton in that place, claiming it as incident to his Office,
and upon his complaint to the Lords of the Council, it was referred to chief
Justice Wray and Anderson, (before whom Counsel was heard, and the matter often
debated,) after conference with the other Judges, it was agreed by all the
Justices, Nemine contradicente aut reluctante, that Mittons grant was void in
Law, and one of the Reasons given thereof* in short* in this, That the
County Court, and all entering of proceedings there, are incident to the Office
of the Sheriff, and therefore cannot* by Letters Patents* be divided from it;
and although the said Grant had been made to Mitton, when the Office of Sheriff
was void; yet it had been void, and when the Queen shall appoint one, he shall
avoid it.

And though I conceive this were enough to satisfy you in so easy a Case, as
to whose gift it is, and that it is an incident to the Custos Rotulorum, yet I
shall direct you to two Statutes, and the opinion of a very Learned and
Reverend Judge in the point; and then forbear your further trouble* till I hear
of your further doubts herein.

37 H. 8. c. 1.
The first Statute is 37 H. 8. c. 1. wherein the third Paragraph of that
Stature* you shall find, that the Custos Rotulorum for the time being for every
shire of this Realm and Wales, and other Dominions, etc. shall at all times
thereafter Nominate, Elect, Appoint and Assign all and every Person or Persons
which thereafter should be Clerks of the Peace within any the said shires, etc.
You may peruse the Statute at large for your better satisfaction, and see the
provisoes in the close of the Act.

3 and 4. E. 6. c. 1.
The second Statute is 3 and 4. E. 6. c. 1. whereby* in the third Paragraph also
of that Statute* it is ordained, that the Person or Persons that Appointed,
Elected, Named or Assigned to exercise and enjoy the Office of Custos Rotulorum
in every County, may exercise the same* by himself or his sufficient Deputy,
etc. so that it is implied by this Statute, that there is no necessity of a
Clerk of the Peace, if the Custos will please to exercise the Place himself, as
it seems he may, and take no Deputy; as the high Sheriff may exercise the Place
of his Deputy-Sheriff himself, if he please in his own Person; and Deputies* in
such cases* are but Instruments Acted by the principal Agent, and are
accounted but parts animatae dominorum, doing that which the Masters
themselves may take upon them; but if they please* for ease or Honors sake*
they may forbear.

Co. 2. Instit. f. 674.
It now remains, that I give you the opinion of the aforementioned Learned
Judge, which is the Lord Cokes, in his second Institutes, to wit, Comment upon
the Statute of the 27 H. 8. c. 16. speaking of the Custos Rotulorum* says,
That his Place is of the gift of the Lord Chancellor* or Lord Keeper, and he
may exercise his Office by Deputy, and has the Custody of all Bargains and
Sales, etc. and of all Records and Rolls of the Sessions of Peace, and of the
Commission of Peace, whence he takes his name of Office, etc. He has the gift
of the Clerk-ship of the Peace* to exercise by himself* or his Deputy, but he
continues no longer in his place* then the Custos Rotulorum does.

Thus, Sir, you have my sudden and indigested thoughts, not so methodically as
I could wish, nor so largely as I could have done, had not your Command bound
my searches within the Confine of so small a space of time, but I hope however
you will take it in good part. I have in the Margin for your better
satisfaction set down the Authorities and Cases in Law that warrant my
assertions, to the end that, (if you please) you may try what is here said by
the Tou^, and have recourse to the Springhead. I am

SIR, Your humble Servant E.N.
Sept. 19. 1660.
FINIS.

