A Geographicall DESCRIPTION Of the Kingdom of IRELAND. According to the 5
Provinces, and 32 Counties; together with the Stations, Creeks, and Harbors
belonging thereto: fit for Gentlemen, Soldiers, and Seamen to acquaint
themselves withal. As also Declaring the Right and Titles of the Kings of
England unto that Kingdom.

Likewise Setting down a brief Relation of the former Rebellions, and of their
suppression; especially that in Q. Elizabeth's time by Tyrone: whence many
matters worth observing may be collected, useful for this present Service.

By a Well-willer to the peace of both Kingdoms.

London, Printed by I. R. for Godfrey Emerson, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Swan in Little-Britain, 1642.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
MAny have lately cast their Treasure, do thou cast thine Eye, upon distressed
Ireland; 'twill be a way to show thy Charity, without any great venture: Or if
thou be in the number of Adventurers, when thou shall have read this, thou will
count thy part ensur'd. The Advantage, Knowledge; and Delight thou may reap
by it, I refer to thine own apprehension and judgment; Assuring th^e, thou
need'st not fear to engage thy purse, in the survey of that Country, where so
good a King was willing to engage His Person. Such is the engagement of

Thy Friend and

A Geographicall DESCRIPTION Of the Kingdom of IRELAND.
BEing in the North of England, and desirous to pass into the Kingdom of
Ireland, and not willing to go more Northward, although from Galloway in
Scotland, (which Bid terms Candida casa, the Vulgar White-herne) there be but
a short cut, yet more willing to go the nearest way to Westchester; but not
finding the wind fair at my coming, I traveled along to Saint Davis in
Pembroke-shire, whence I had a speedy passage into Ireland, but somewhat
dangerous, by reason of the sands and shelves which lie off into the sea, but
our putting into harbor worse, because of the continual mists that hang over
the low flat land, so that our Pilot could hardly discern his marks.

There are many fair Ports and Harbors for Ships, on the East and South sides
of what I shall speak, in the Description of the particular Counties.

Concerning the names of several Nations and Men, they have their several
conceits, it is known by the name Ireland to us.

It is an ancient Island, and not of little esteem, in regard of the greatness
of it, being accounted the third Island anciently known in the habitable world,
by good Geographers; who say, That of all Islands, for greatness the Indian
Taprobane is chief; the next after it, is Britain; and in a third degree,
another British Island, called Hibernia, that is, Ireland; so that Ptolomie
called it Little-Britain: The situation is under the 10 and 12 Climats, in
Longitude extending 4 Degrees from the Meridian of 11 Degrees and half: And the
Latitude reaches 4 Degrees from the parallel of 54, to that of 58 Degrees.

The Inhabitants are divided by the name of Wilde-Irish, and the English Irish,
living in the English Pale, where the English at their first going over did
enclose themselves.

Formerly it was divided into 5 Kingdoms, now Provinces; namely Mounster, lying
Southward, Lemster Eastward, Connagh in the West, Ulster in the North, and Meth
in the midst almost.

From North to South, in length 400 miles, in breadth 200 miles.

MOunster, in Latin Mamonia, the Irish Mown, contains 6 Counties, besides
the County of Holy cross in Typperary; the first is,

Kirry, which lies near the mouth of the River Shannon, and runs out narrow
at the entrance, but toward the Sea, with a broader promontory embraced by the
Sea on both sides.

A Country mountanous, woody and wild, loftily looking into the Ocean; in
which are many fruitful fields, and pleasant vallyes, beset thick with woods.

A County Palatine granted to the Earl of Desmond by the special favor of
Edward the third; but being often ungrateful in their rebellious treasons, and
rebellions lost it.

Toward the Sea there is a territory called Clanmorris; not far off stands
Ardart a See of a poor Bishop called Ardfert.

Toward the South of this runs a fair River named Dingle, a commondious
Port on the other side named Smirwick-sound, or St. Marywick, where the
Spaniards to aid the rebellious Earl of Desmond, 1583. set footing.

Desmond, Desmonia, in Irish Deswown; lies largely stretched out toward the
South, in which are three high promontories over-topping the Sea, and
contemning his proud waves, running out into the Southwest, called west-
Mounster.

The first promontory lies between Dingle-bay and the River Maire, and is
called Clan-car, and has a Castle built at Dunkeran by the Carews of England,
in it dwelt Donel mac Carty more, a L* of the Irish blood.

The second lies enclosed within two bays, Maire and Bantre, named Bear-haven.

This for the most part is a lean, barren, hungry soil, in which lived O
Swillivant Bear, and O Swillivant Bantre, both of the same stock and high
blood in their Country.

The third called Eraugh situate between Bantre and Balatamore or Baltamore, a
bay or creek famous for the multitude of Herrings that are taken there, in
this the O Mahouns by the gift of the Carews have large possessions; the
Calverts Lord Baltimort the South promontory called of the ancients Notium, is
at this day called Missen-head, the Feildings are Earls of Desmond and Vicounts
Callon.

The County of Cork, anciently reputed a Kingdom, containing the whole space
a long the Sea from Lismore unto St. Brend, where it headeth Desmond westward,
in the bowels whereof lies Muskery, a wild Forest, where Cormac mac xeg, it
is a great name, and toward the Sea coast lies Carkray, in which the mac
Curties have the greatest power.

There lies toward the South Sea a Port and road anciently of good safeguard
for Ships, but by reason of a bar in the mouth of it, it falls dry at the
ebb, and is now of little use, it lies four leagues westward from the
out-point of Kinsale.

Between Rosse and Kinsale there lies a small Island in the Sea called Roem,
which may be failed about, having ten fathom water between that and the main*
three leagues from hence lies cape de velho or Old-head, from whence to
England end is 46 leagues, it is a high point reaching forth into the Sea, from
whence about a quarter of a league South-west lies the mouth of the Haven of
Kinsale: a very commodious Port, 10, and 15. fathom going in and 4 or 5 to the
very town which lies up in the mouth of the river Bany in a fruitful Soil,
furnished with wood, and other commodities: Lord Cour^y is Baron of Kinsale.

On the other side of Kinsale lies Kerry wherry a small territory once
belonging to the E. of Desmond: right before which lies the river Sauranus or
Severanus which fetches its first original from the mountain of Muskerry:
and going along by the head city of the county Cork by the Irish Corcach
honored with a Bishops See; together with the Sea of Clumi annexed to it.

The river both roundeth and runs through the midst of the town not
passible, but by bridges lying in length in one broad street having a bridge
over it.

It is a town of great resort and populous* but formerly subject to the injury
of the Rebels; which made them keep a careful watch against them. That
religious and devout man Brioc who flourished among the Saul's was borne and
bred here.

Below Cork the parting of the river makes a sweet and pleasant Island over
against the chief dwelling house of the Barries, called Barry Court, derived
from Robert de Barry an Englishman; who behaved himself valiantly in the Irish
wars, and was the first that manned and brought the Hawk to hand in Ireland:
he had the title of Baron Barry; but after of Vicount Beutiphant.

The former river empties into the Sea below Barry Court near Imokelly a fair
possession long since of the Earls of Desmond; and contains a safe road in
the mouth of it.

As this supplies the lower part of the country, so Black-water, called
anciently Even-more, the great river moystneth the upper part, upon which
dwells the Noble family of Roeh, who went out of England, and flourished
there and enjoyed the title of Vicount Fermoy: and were Parliament Barons in
Edward the 2. time.

Yoghall stands on this rivers mouth, a Major town, nor great, but walled
about, builded in length, and divided into two parts, the upper reaches
Norwest, and has a Church in it, and the lower part Southwest; the
commodiousnesse of the Key makes it much frequented by Merchants.

The County of Waterford lies in the East side of Ireland, stretching out it
self between the rivers, Broadwater West, and Shour East; the Main on the
South, and Tipperary Norwest; both delightsome, and very profitable.

When Broadwater has outrun the County of Cork, behind it Lismore presently
shows it self, an Episcopal See where Christian once sat, that was of the
same Cloister with Saint Bernard, and Pope Eugenius; but now annexed unto
Waterford: The Lumly's are Vicounts of Waterford.

At the mouth of which river stands Aidmore, a small town, so called because
it stands near the Sea.

Not far from hence stands Dungarvan, having a strong hold of good force: It
is a Tide-haven 8 leagues from Waterford, full of rocks, and deep within the
harbor.

Vicount Dessee, together with the Barony of Dungarvan, King Henry the sixth
granted to John Talbut Earl of Shrewsbury; but afterward, seeing it lay
conveniently to that part of Mounster that was to be brought under, and
reduced into order, it was by a Parliament annexed to the Crown of England.

On the side of the river Shour, Waterford the principal City of this County
makes a fair show; the Irish and Britains call it Porthlargie, the English
Waterford, 37 leagues from Englands end.

It was built by certain Pirates of Norway; the air is gross and unhealthy, the
soil not fertile, the streets pent and narrow; yet by reason of the
commodiousnesse of the harbor, which is fair and wide, 10 or 11 fathom deep
going in, it is much frequented, and of great resort, driving a quick trade, so
that it is esteemed the second City in the Kingdom, and has continued always
true and loyal to the Crown of England, ever since Richard Earl of Pembroke
wan it first, and has received many favors and privileges from the Kings of
England for their good services.

And Henry the seventh augmented them much, for their discreet carriage of
themselves against the mock-Prince Perkin Warbeck, who counterfeited Richard
the third, under which color he couzened a great Peer of Scotland of his fair
daughter.

This County of Waterford, together with the City, King Henry the sixth gave
unto John Talbut Earl of Shrewsbury.

But by reason of wars in France, and the civil dissentions between the houses
of York and Lancaster, the Kings of England were busied, and the Nobles so
entangled in those broils, that they could not intend the affairs of Ireland,
so that the Irish grew very insolent and powerful: So that in the 28 year of
H. 8. though the fault were committed long before his days; yet for
punishment, by Act of Parliament it was ordered, That the heirs of many
Noblemen, as the Earl of Shrewsbury, Ormond, the Duke of Norfolk, and Baron
Barkley, and all the Abbots and Priors (for they were all found liable to this
punishment) with the rest, should forfeit all their lands and demeans in
Ireland, into the Kings hands for such neglect and absence.

The County of Limrick is an inland County, lying behind that of Cork
Northward, between Kerry, the river Shanon, and the County of Tipperary a very
fruitful and populous place, but not eminent for any thing of note.

The Western part of it is called Conilagh, wherein there is Knoc Patrick, a
very high hill, from whence there is a pleasant prospect into the Sea; where
you may see how Shanon falls in to the Virginian.

The head City is Limrick, which Shanon by parting begirteth round, the Irish
call it Loumeagh, and the English Limrick; it is a chief Market Town of
Mounster, and the Sea of a Bishop, and at this day called two Towns; the upper,
wherein stands the Cathedral Church, and a Castle, and has two gates, and
each of them a stone Bridge with bulwarks, the one leading into the West, the
other into the East, unto which the lower Town joyneth, fenced with a wall, and
a Castle thereto, and a fore-gate at the entrance into it: Lord Esmond is Baron
of Limrick.

In the South of this County is Kilmallo, the next Town to Limrick both in
substance and inhabitants, encompassed likewise with a wall: Vicount Sarsfield
of Kilmallo.

Not far off stands Adare, a little Town, hard unto which lies Elan Gibbon,
where dwelt the White-Knight, so called for his gray hairs.

The other inhabitants of note are the Lacyes, Browns, H^rlyes, Chacyes,
Sapells, and Pourcells, all of English race; also the Mac She Is, Mac Brian, O
Brien, of Irish blood.

The County of Tipperary is bounded Westward, with Limrick and the river Shanon
Eastward, with the County of Kilkenny, with the County of Cork and Waterford
southward, and North with the territories of the O Carolls. The south-part has
much corn, and many beautiful buildings, and the river Glason runs with a
large course through the West-part of it; not far from whose banks stands
Emly or Awn, a Bishops See: through the midst of it glideth that goodly river
Shour, or Swire, which issuing out of Bladin hills, hastes through the lower
Ossery: of which Hen. 8. dignified the Butlers with the title of Earls, and
through Thurles, which honors the same Family with the dignity of Vicounts;
and so goes into Holy-crosse, termed the County of the Holy-crosse of Tipp:

Then Shour goes besides Cassile, honored with the dignity of an Archbishop,
by Eugenius, third Pope of Rome; from thence runs the River down Shreading
Islands here and there, and fetches a round about Cahir Castle, then holding
his course by Clomel, a frequented Market-towne, as also by Carick-mac-Griffin
situate upon a rock; it then leaves Tipperary behind it, and is instead of a
bank to confine the countries of Waterford and Kilkenny.

The Botelers or Butlers are great Families in this County, and were near of
alliance unto Thomas A Becket, for whose sake Henry the second did honor and
enrich them.

For the government of which Province, that it might be kept from rebellion and
seditious tumults, queen Elizabeth out of her Princely care and wisdom, first
ordained Sir Warham Sellenger or Saint Ledger, a man well seen in Irish
affairs, to be Lord President, with one Assistant, two Lawyers, and a
Secretary.

THe second part or Province is Leinster, which has seven Counties, it is
called by the Irish Leighnigh, by the Britains Lein, lying all toward the Sea
Eastward, a fertile, healthful, and beautiful place. The first County is
Kilkenny, bounded West with Tipperary: East with the Counties of Weisford and
Caterlogh: South with the County of Waterford: North with queens County; and
Norwest with upper Ossery, a County surpassing the rest in fair buildings,
strong Forts, and exceeding plentiful in all manner of provision.

Near unto Ossery there stands a very great mountain, called Sleiew Bloemy,
towering very high, out of whose womb issue these Rivers, Shour, Neor and
Barrow* running in several streams again join before they enter the Ocean,
and called of old the three Sisters.

This River Neor, commonly called Neure, runs, as it were, through Kilkenny
County, and when it is passed the upper Ossery, and has watered many
fortresses on both sides, it flows besides Kilkenny, which is a rich and
beautiful Town, far exceeding any inland Borough in Ireland: Parted into
the English town and Irish town, the Irish town being, as it were, the
Suburbs, and has in it S. Canicks Church, where the Bishop of Ossery has his
See.

But the English town is nothing so ancient, builded by Ranulph third Earl of
Chester; walled on the West Side by Robert Talbot, and fortified with a castle
by the Butlers.

Below Neore somewhat stands a little walled town, called Thomas town, in
Irish Bala mac Anda, that is, the town of Antonies son.

Below this, the River Callan emptieth it self into Neore, on whose banks
stands the town Callan, the third incorporate town of this County, as
likewise Inise Yeog which is the fourth.

Many Families of the Butlers in this County of good account, and some other
Gentry, as the Graces, Walshes, Lovels, Forresters, Shortels, Blanch-feilds, or
Blanch-velstors, Drilands, Come^fords, etc.

The County of Caterlogh, called by contraction Carlogh, Eastward joyneth to
Kilkenny, lying almost between the Rivers Barrow and Slane, fruitful and well
furnished with woods; the two principal towns stand on the westbanke of
Barrow: Carlogh walled and fortified with a Castle: Also Leighlin, once a
Bishops See, now joined to that of Fernes* Both of them of good force, and
Constables over them: From hence Barrow runs through the Lordship of Ydron.
Upon the River Slane is seated Tullo, a Butler being honored by King James
with the title of Vicount Tullo.

The Cavanaghs are a name much spread, valiant and excellent horsemen: From
Carterlogh, Neore and Barrow run hand in hand some few miles, and after fall
into the lap of their eldest sister the Shour, who all are swallowed up
presently of the devouring Ocean.

The County of Leaz, or queens County, so called from queen Mary, who first
made it a County, lying above Caterlogh toward the Norwest, a small County
full of woods and bogs; the chief town is Mary-burgh, there was used watch
and ward to defend themselves from the insolences of the Irish O Moors,
against Mac Gilpatrick, the O Dempsies, who were very turbulent and seditious.

Many Castles and Forts in this County, one at Tahmelio, another at Obowy, a
third on the River Barrow, and a fourth at Norrach; little else of moment in
this County.

Amulenux is Vicount of Mary-burgh, the principal town in this County.

Kings County; called formerly Offaly, but for the honor of King Philip made a
County; the chief town is Philips town: the Dempsies, Vicount Glenmare, and
Baron of Philips town.

Many English Families seated here, as the Warrens, Herberts, Colbeis, Moris,
Leicesters. Some Families of the Irish, which suppose they have had hard
measure in being dispossessed of their ancient inheritances, seek all occasion
to do the English a displeasure, and will omit no opportunity to revenge: so
that it ever did, and now more especially it behooves the English to be
circumspect and wary.

The County of Kildare, lying eastward from the former Counties, a pleasant,
healthful and fertile country, full of springs and pastures: the chief town
an Episcopal See bears the name of the County Kildare; the noble Families of
the Fitz-Geralds hold the Earldome, granted by Edward the second.

This County was first inhabited by the Earl of Pembroke and his heirs,
until Edward the first.

The Geraldines continued loyal until Henry the 8. and then one of them
unadvisedly rebelled, but was punished, and his confederates: howbeit queen
Mary restored blood and lands.

The places of note above the rest is Naas a Market town, Athie placed on the
River Barrow; Mainoth a Castle belonging to the Earl of Kildare, and a
Market Town.

Castle-martin, the chief seat of the Family of Fitz-Eustace, which descended
from the Poers, who had the title of Vicount Baltinglas added by Henry the
eighth.

But having lost that title by attainder, the Ropers bear the honor of
Vicount Baltinglas.

The chief Families derive from the English* there are the Ougans, de la
Hides, Ailmers, Walshes, Boisels, Whites, Suttons, etc. Now we have done with
the midland Countries of Lymster, we go now to the Seaside.

The County of Weisford, or Wexford, being a small circuit of land, lying on
the Sea side against Beneath, the mouth of the three former sister Rivers
eastward, in a promontory where the shore fetches a compass round, is placed
the County of Wexford, in Irish Reogh; here on the river Barrow there was a
fair city, called Rosse, well traded and peopled, but by discord and
dissension, only a great wall left as the ruins of a huge pile: but the
Hervys are dignified with the title of Barons of Rosse.

Eastward Duncannon Castle stands over the River, and can hinder any ships
from passing either to Waterford or Rosse: from thence there runs out a little
neck of land, which is a help unto seamen to sail into the River; not far
off stands Tinterne upon the shore, with many windings and creeks, where once
there was a famous Abbey.

This Promontory is called Holy-head, lying over against Saint David's in Wales;
at which place the English first set footing into Ireland, where there is a
town by the natives called Banna, which signifies Holy.

Along the shore eastward lie many flats, which the mariners call the grounds,
and endanger their ships.

The River Slane cuts quite through this County, and in the mouth thereof, where
it makes a poole, there lies Weisford the chief town; it is not of any
great bigness, but yet memorable, in that being assaulted by Fitz Stephen, a
valiant Captain, it yielded it self unto his protection, and became a Colony
of the English, so that still it uses the ancient apparel of the English,
and their speech, but somewhat mingled with Irish.

Eniscort is seated on the River Slane, and Fernes is seated more inward, an
Episcopal See; beyond which River dwelt the Cavenaghs, Donels, Montaghs, and O
Moors, of Irish race, stirring tumultuous-spirits and amongst them the
Sinottes, Roches and Peppers English.

Vicount Mount-garretto, the Butlers are the men of note on this side Slane:
many more English of note, as most of the common sort English.

The County of Divelin or Dublin, on the East lies broad upon the Sea, on the
west bounded with the County of Kildare, on the south, on two small territories
of Wicklo and Arcklo, once the habitation of the O Tools and O Birns, and now
termed the Glimes* and norwest limited with the County of Meth, and Nanny a
small River.

It is a very plentiful County both in corn and cattle, abounding also with
game for pleasure; their greatest want is fuel, which is a heavy turfe or
English sea-coale, but in the south side a barren soil, hills and woods plenty,
many hollow valleys overrun with trees, which they call Glinus, among which
was the Bishopric of Glandelaw, but now annexed to the Archbishop of Dublin.

All the rest of the County is rich and plentious, the people of a stately port
and garb, in gentile neatness and carriage surpassing all the rest of
Ireland; and it is divided into five several Baronies, Rath-downe, New Castle,
Castleknoc, Cowloc and Balrodry.

This whole County is Neptunes neighbor, no part thereof being twenty miles
distant from the Sea.

To the south of Dublin Haven stands Wicklo, a narrow Haven, over which bends
a rock immured strongly with fortification in stead of a Castle, whose command
none ought to have but English borne: Lord Maynard has the title of Baron.

Then from the top of a hill, New Castle looks into the Sea in the sight of
the three shelves, which they call the south, middle, and north grounds, lying
in length, yet shall you find between them and the shore seven or eight
fathom of water.

A little higher where the River Bray disburdens into the Sea, is seen
Oldcourt, the possessions of the Walshes of Carickmain, who are a large and
ancient stock.

Next are Powers or Poerscourt, belonging formerly to a Family of that name,
since the Wingfeilds have the title of Vicount Powerscourt.

A little Island Saint Bennets, belonging to the Archbishop of Dublin, lies in
an elbow of land which the River Bray makes.

The creek or bay is called Dublin Haven, which is five leagues from Wexford,
into which Haven the greatest River of this County powers it self, called
Liffy, whose original being but fifteen miles distance from that place, yet
through his many windings and turnings he waters many countries.

First south, by Saint Patricks land, then westward, after north, watering the
County of Kildare* at length into the east by Castle-knoc, and so by Kilmainam.

Dublin is seated seven miles from the mouth of Liffy, it is the most famous
town of all Ireland, the Irish call it Bala Cleigh, that is, the town set upon
hurdles, for the first foundation thereof was laid upon hurdles, by reason of
the soft unsettled ground, like as Sivil in Spain is said to be built on
piles, Venice on woolsack, or such like matter of foundation, it is an ancient
town, yet was much rent and defaced in the Danish wars; after it became
subject to Edgar, King of England, who in his Charter calls it, The most noble
City of Ireland.

Then the Norwegians got it in possession, and at last it fell to the English,
who defended it against the Irish, and was planted with a Colony of Bristow
men, on whom King Henry the second bestowed this City, and all the liberties
and franchises which the men of Bristow have; of which City many write in
praise and commendation, one thus:

A City, in regard of the people, noble, of the site most pleasant, by reason
of the Sea and River meeting together, rich and plentiful in fish, for
traffic famous, for the green plains delightful and lovely, beset with woods
of mastbearing-trees, encompassed about with Parkes of Dear* So another:

Develin, a maritine town, is the mother City of all Ireland, having to it an
Haven passing well frequented, for traffic and enter course of Merchants
matchable with our London.

There are many Keys and Wharfs along the River, jetting out to stop the
violence of the water.

A very strong wall of rough building stone, reaches along by the sides of it,
which opens at six gates, from whence there run forth suburbs of great
length.

Toward the east is Dammes gate, and near it the Kings Castle, very strong
both by art and nature; and an Armory or storehouse built by Henry Lounders
Archb. 1220.

Saint Andrews Church stands in the east suburbs, not far from which is
Trinity College, which queen Elizabeth honored with the title and
privileges of an University.

The north gate opens at the Bridge built by King John of Arch-worke, and
this uniteth Oustmans town to the City: for here the Easterlings, that came
out of Norway, placed themselves about 1050.

In the south quarter of the City stand two gates, Ormonds, and Newgate the
common prison.

These lead into Saint Thomas street, being large and long, where there stands
a great Abbey of that name founded by Henry the second, for the expiation of
the murder of Thomas A Becket, as some say.

Into the south opens Paul's gate, and Saint Nicholas, which makes a way into
Saint Patricks suburbs, wherein stands the Archbishops Palace, called Saint
Sepulchers, and a stately Church dedicated unto Saint Patrick, having an arched
roof of stone, and a tall steeple.

It maintains a Deane, a Chaunter, a Chauncellor, a Treasurer, two
Archdeacons, and 22 Prebendaries; the only light and lamp (as the Parliament
of that Kingdom said of it) of all godly and Ecclesiastical discipline and
order in Ireland.

There is another Cathedral Church standing in the very heart of the city,
called Christ-church; near the south side of which stands the town Hall,
built of square stone, and called the Tolestall, where the Sessions of the city
are kept.

The chief Officer was a Provost, but Henry the fourth gave them liberty to
choose a Major, and two Bayliefes, after King Edward the sixth, changed the two
Bayliefes into two Sheriffs.

No inconvenience save only that the ebbing and flowing of the Sea does much
choke the mouth of Liffy, that hinder great vessels from going up, and makes
them to observe the high water for transporting of goods.

Where Liffy dies in the Ocean, Houth stands compassed in a manner round
with the Sea: of which those nobles Saint Lawrence hold the Barony.

Not far off is Malehide or Molachid, belonging to the Talbots.

More within the country is Fingall, a little place, but very well husbanded,
even the garner and storehouse of this Kingdom, so great store of corn it
yields every year.

This place discovers the idleness of the other Counties, which would equally
answer the industry of the labourer, if it were employed.

Diverse worshipful Families are placed here and there of English in this
County, as namely the Plunkets, who are still Earl of Fingall, and Lord of
Kellene, Barnwels, Russels, Talbots, Dillons, Net^orvils, Lutterels, Burnels,
Fitzwilliams, Gouldings, Ushers, Cadlyes, Finglasses, Sarfeilds, Blackneys,
Crucyes, Baths, etc.

NOw we come to the Province of Meth, because it lies Part. 3.
in the middle; for strength and safety called the Chamber of Ireland:
peaceable likewise in the 38. year of Henry the eight, divided into east Meth
and west Meth.

The County of east Meth is compassed with Kildare, on the south with the
County of Dublin, and the Sea east; on the north with the territory of Louth,
and with the County of west- Meth on the west.

The whole is divided into eighteen Baronies, viz. Dueleke, Scrine, Slane,
Margallen, Navan, Kenlis, half the Barony of Four near Kenlis, Killalou,
Clove, Moylagh, Logherne, Old-castle, Luyn, Moyfeuraragh, Deese, Rath-touth,
and Dunboyne.

Boyne, a fair River, springs out of the north side of the Kings County,
runs through this country.

In the remotest places on this side Boyne, are these memorable places,
Galtrim, Killin Castle, and Dunsany: On the further side of Boyne are
Trimletstown, Gormanston and Slane: the Fleming Lord of it: of the next before
Vicount Preston, Barnwell Baron of the other, Plunket Lord of Dunsany.

Among these last stands a Market-towne, called Aboy, upon the River Boyn,
which passing Glan Jores, that is, the Land of George runs under Trim, a
fine town of trade, having a Castle erected by William Pepard.

So it flows besides Navan, the Barony of the Lamberts, where the Bishops
house is, who having no Cathedral Church, does all with the assent of the
Clergy of Meth.

Boyn then running higher and swifter near unto Drodagh, the Moors being
entitled Vicount of it, loses himself in the Ocean.

Many chief Families of English blood are in this county: the Brabazens being
Earls of east Meth.

The county of west Meth, so called in regard of the situation, in relation to
the former, and reaches to the River Shanon, and lies between the Kings
county south, and Longford county north, to which it is not much inferior in
any thing, if answerable in civility.

Molingar is the chief town, as lying in the midst, compassed with many
bogges.

It is parted into twelve Baronies, viz. Fertulogh, Ferbile, Delvin, of which
the Nugents were Barons, and now Earls of west Meth: Fourry, as also Corkery,
Moyassell, where the Tuts inhabited, Moygoisy, Rathcomire, Magirquirke, all
propagated from English blood; Clonlalon, Moycassell, mere Irish bear sway.
And others of more harsh and unpleasant names, yet better liked of the Irish
than our English names: so that one of them said he would not learn English,
lest it should make him have a wry mouth.

Hugh Lacy subdued this county, and had it given unto him by Henry the second,
who intending to build a Castle, and bowing down his head to show the
carpenter how he would have a piece of timber squared, had his head cut off by
the same carpenter with an axe which he held in his hand.

The county of Longford lies on the north side of west Meth, made a county not
long since, called Anale, before inhabited most by Irish, and those potent and
turbulent.

Shannon runs along this county on the side of it, and arises out of Therne
hills in the county of le Trim, and flowing along makes many open pools, and
after contracts himself again, and then runs into a large broad mere
called Lough Regith, but after finds his banks again, on which stands the
town Athlon: from thence Shannon having passed the water-fall at Killoloe,
being very large and deep, six or seven fathom water: disjoynes, running with
open arms to the imbracement of the city Limrick; from whence speeding about
sixty miles in length, making here and there an Island, and where he grew
shallow and passible, there formerly stood forts and bulwarks to hinder the
inrode of the pilfering Irish; and at last running with open mouth beyond knoc
Patrick, is devoured by the western Ocean: two Irish Septs most powerful and
eminent in this county O-Pharoll Boy, and O-Pharoll Ban; the Lord Aungiers are
dignified with the title of Baron of Longford.

Another Province is Conaght, wherein are six Counties.
1 Twomond, or the county Clare, which the Irish call Twowoun, that is, north-
Mounster, for so formerly was the name, until Sir Henry Syd^y laid it unto
Connaught, shooting out with a narrow promontory into the Sea westward, and on
the east and south side, enclosed with the large stream of the River Shannon,
and to the west with the maine, on the north barred with the county Galloway,
so that there is no entering of it by land.

The territories of Clan Richard are very fruitful and commodious both for sea
and land, only vexed with bad and idle creatures, lazy inhabitants. O
fortunati si sua norint:


Did they but truly consider the benefit that would acrew by industry, how
would they endeavor? As has appeared by the care and pains of some English
of note and esteem, as the Muscegros and Clares, who have built many forts and
towns, from whom Clare the chief town takes name.

Other places of note Kilfennerag, and Killalloe Orlaon the Bishops seat, where
there stands a Rock in the midst of the channel of Shannon, from which the
water makes a great noise in the fall thereof, and which is a great bar and
hinderance, that no vessels can pass any further.

Not far from this bank stands Bunraty, made a Market town by Henry 3. and
is fortified with a Castle.

Seven miles off appears Clare, the principal town, at a creek (flowing
from Shannon) full of Islands, the chief Families are Irish, (the English being
degenerated wholly) mac Nemors, mac Mahon, O-Loughton, the O Brians, the chief
of all, and of ancient descent, and now Earls of Thomond, and who did good
service against the Irish in Queen Elizabeth's time.

The County of Galloway boundeth South on Clare, West on the Sea: North on
County Maio, and East on Shannon, abounding both in corn and cattle.

The West-shore is very craggy and rugged, with a long border of green Islands;
four of which called Aran, make a Barony: also Inis Ceath, where the Monastery
of Colman is a devout Saint founded for Scots and English; but their continual
discord made the English quite forsake it.

More within lies a lake called logh Corbes, spreading twenty miles in length,
and three or four in breadth, being navigable, furnished with three hundred
small Islands full of grass and Pine-trees; but toward the Sea this lake is
more straightened, and runs under Gallway, Irish Gallive, called so from the
people Gallaeci in Spain; a chief town, and little inferior to any in
Ireland, built round like a Tower, a Bishops See much frequented by Merchants,
invited by a commodious haven and safe road.

Four miles from hence stands Knoc-toe, that is, the hill of Axes; and not
far off Aterith, having a large wall, but poorly inhabited: the Birminghams
are Barons of English race, but of Irish disposition.

The better sort of Irish are O Kelleis, O Maiden, O Flairles, mac Dervis etc.,

The country of clan Richard lies at the entrance of this County, and is
annexed to it; it took the name from Richard de Burgh, out of which stock
Henry the eight made an Earl of Clan Rich, whose eldest son has the title
of Baron of Dun Kellis: In this territory is the Archbishops See of Toam, unto
which many Bishoprics were formerly subject, but now only three.

The County of Maio limited on the West by the Ocean, South by Gollway, East by
the County of Roscoman, and North by the county of Slige, very rich and
fruitful, abounding with cattle, Dear, Hawks, and honey; taking its name from
a little city which had a Bishops See, but now laid to Toam (as I said) but the
inhabitants are under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Killaly* Lord Bourgh is
Vicount Maio.

There is a remarkable lake at the West side of this called Loghmesk, full of
fish, and two small Islands: this County is inhabited with a valiant kind of
people stout and hardy, most of which were invited by the rebels out of the
Scottish Islands the Hebrides to aid mac William, and mac Conell, who were
defeated by Captain Bingham, Governor of Conagh.

The County of Slego lying along the Western Sea: between it and Ulster
Northward runs the River T^obis issuing from the lake Erne, it is parted
from the bordering Counties: Le Trim and Roscoman by the vast Curlew hills; and
cut in twain by the River Suc, it is very fit and convenient for the breeding
and rearing of cattle.

Sligo is the principal place of this county, where there stands a castle,
under which is the Bay of Slego, a road full of good harbors for shipping; the
chief names, besides the O Conors, are O Don, O Harris, O Ghar, and mac Donagh.

There is an honorable Family in Herefordshire, now dignified with the title
of Baron Scudamore of Dromore, and Vicount of Sligo.

The County of le Trim, formerly called Breany, which incloseth the county of
Sligo on the East, and was the possessions of that ancient Family of the Rorck,
until Brion O Rorck rebelled in queen Elizabeth's days, who was chased into
Scotland, and sent thence into England, and there hanged, so that his lands
fell unto the Crown: the Sherards are Barons of le Trim; after it was made a
county by the Lord Deputy, and called le Trim from the chief town.

This county is full of rising hills, and very fat rank pastures; so that one
says of it (but how true I know not) that it is so full of forage, that
unless cattle were kept sometimes from grazing, their fullness would endanger
them: but so fruitful and fertile it is, that in a small circuit of ground, it
was able at once to show one hundred and twenty thousand head of beasts; here
is the Sea of the Bishop of Achonry, united to the Sea of Elphin.

The head of the long and large river Shannon first shows it self here.

The Families of note, O Rorck, O Murreis, mac Lochleims, mac Glancheis, and
mac Granelles, all mere Irish.

The County of Roscoman lies Southwest from le Trim, made a county likewise by
Henry Sidney Lord Deputy, being long, but narrow, and bound with the Rivers Suc
Eastward, and Shannon Westward, and on the North with Curlew mountains, which
are high and impassible until a cut was made through them.

It is a plain fertile country, much abounding with cattle, because tillage is
too painful for the inhabitants.

There are four Baronies in this county, lying under Curlew hills, by the River
Shannon.

1 That of Boil, where mac Dermot is chief.

2 That of Balin Tober, by the River Suc, where O Coner Dun, is of greatest
power, and upon it joyneth Elphen the Bishops See.

Somewhat lower lies Roscomon, the Barony of O Coner Roo; but the Dillons
since have been Earls of Roscommon, in which place is feated the chief town,
but now poor and mean.

More Southward lies Athlone, the Barony of the O Kellies, so named of the
head town, which has a castle in it, and a most beautiful bridge of hewn
stone, built by queen Elizabeth, and thought it the most convenient place for
the Lord Deputies to reside, the better to suppress seditions.

The fifth part or Province is Ulster, the North part of Ireland has ten
Counties.
THe County of Louth, in Irish Iriel or Uriel situated beyond Meth, and the
River Boyn runs out with a shore bending toward the North.

A fruitful and pleasant soil if well employed near Boyns mouth is seated
Drogheda, or in English Tredagh, a fine town well peopled and frequented, so
called of the Bridge; Boyne cutting it through; it has both a Market and Fair
granted by King Edward the second, as also a Mint once there; The Moors now
bear the honor of Vicount Drogheda.

Not far off stands Mellifont Abbey, much praised by Saint Bernard, given by
queen Elizabeth to Sir Edward Moore of Kent.

Seven miles off stands Ardeth, an inland town, and above it Dundakle, having
a commodious haven, and formerly a wall, which Edward Br^^, the King of Scots
brother did burn, but after both himself and forces slain and defeated by Sir
John Birmingham: the Lord Gorges are Barons of it.

Eight miles from hence stands Carlingford, a port of good use and frequencie:
the Swifts are honored with the title of Vicounts of this place, the names of
note are Verdons, Tates, Clintons, Bellewes, Donedalls, Wottons, and some
others. Sir John Birmingham, before named, was formerly Earl of Louth. But
Henry the eight honored Sir Oliver plunket with the Barony of Louth.

The County of Cavan lying to the West of Louth, and formerly called East
Brieny, the habitation of O Kellies, who have been powerful in horsemen, for
the suppressing of whom, Sir Henry Sidney divided it into seven several
Baronies, to hold in fee from the Crown of England; they have no towns, but
dwell scattered here and there in forts and piles: they have a poor Bishop of
their own, whose See is at Kilmore; yet somewhat better than those Irish
Bishops who had no other rents and revenues than three milch kine; which being
dry, the Parishioners did change for a new milch one: the L. Lambert or Barons
of Cavan.

The County of Fermanagh lies to the West and nore of Cavan, full of woods and
many boggs, in the midst whereof is the greatest lake in Ireland, called logh
Erne, reaching out forty miles, very full of inhabited Hands, some containing
three hundred, others four hundred acres of land, and the banks of the lake
are set all with shady woods. Such plenty of fish, Pikes, Trouts and Salmons,
that the nets are broken a pieces often with the great draughts.

At Bal Tarbet a little town, first it stretches six miles in length from
South to North; then for the space of six miles it narroweth, in which space
stands Inis Killin a fair Castle, from which Brian mac Guir takes his
Barony. Then it greatly inlargeth it self toward the Sea, as far as to Belek,
near unto which is a great downfall of water, that most renowned Salmons
leap.

Mac Guir was chief until his rebellion; many of that Family dwell on both
sides: and those beyond the Lake are counted of Ulster, and they on this side
of Conagh.

The County Monaghan lies on the West side of the former great Lake, having
many hills and much wood, not having any town but Monaghan, which imparts its
name to the County: which is divided into five Baronies, Iriel, Dartre, Ferey,
Loughty, with the little territory Donemain. The mac Mahons, that is, the sons
of Ursus, or the Bear, were powerful, but through dissension among themselves,
and their rebellious practices, are rooted out: the Blanys are Barons of this
place.

The County of Armagh lies toward the east in length, compassed with the
River Neury by East, with the County of Louth by South, and with the Blackwater
by North. So fruitful and fat a soil, that if any compos or dung be laid on
it in scorn of it, it becomes barren.

The first place is Fewes, a small territory belonging to Turlogh mac Henry,
one of the Family of Oneal, thick set with wood, and by reason of the lakes and
bogs impassible.

Next is Orry, in want of wood, where dwelt O Hanlon, and where stands Mont
Norris, built by the Lord Montjoy: and Ansley are Barons of Mont-norris; eight
miles off near the River Kalin lies Armagh, a poor town, yet an Archbishops
See, and Metropolitan, the first Archbishop was Saint Malachie, much commended
by Saint Bernard, yet nevermore happy than in the enjoying of that learned and
right reverend Prelate Doct. Usher, now Archbishop, whose learning and piety is
well known, and shows that an Archbishop and religious, though not always
convertible, yet sometimes compatible. This town in the last Rebellion was
ruinated by Tyrone. The chief men are mac Genis O Hanlan, and many of the Sept
of O Neal, which assume unto themselves several by-names. The Blackwater
Eastward runs between this Shire and Tiroen: the Chaworths have the dignity
of Vicount from this place.

The County of Down lies Eastward on the Irish Sea, long and broad, on the
North to the Lake Eaugh, and on the South to the County of Louth, from which it
is severed by the river Newry, upon which stands a town called Bagnall, in
remembrance of that noble Marshall of Ireland, Sir Richard Bagnall. Near which
town the River Banthelesse arises out of the mountains of Mourn, passing
through the country of Eaugh, which pertains to mac Genis, it has a Bishops See
at Dromore; above which are the tracts of Kilwalto and Kilwarny much encumbered
with woods and bogs, and lie inwardly: But by the shore the Sea does wind in,
and incroach upon the land, and makes many creeks, and the Lake spreads it
self near Dyffrin, a valley full of woods: anciently the Mandavils, afterward
the Whits, so that it makes two Bilands, Lecall Southward, and Ardes Northward.
Lecall very rich and battle ground, runs farthest into the East of any part
of Ireland, and is the out-most Promontory, called S. John's Foreland: the
Cromwels are entitled Vicount Lecall. In the very straight hereof lies Down, a
very famous town, and a Bishops See, where Saint Patricks Tomb is said to be.

By the Sea side stands Argl^s, where S. Patrick founded a Church, and
Strangford formerly called Strandford, where there is a safe harbor, at which
the River Coin with a violent course breaks into the Sea from an honorable
Family of the Smiths in Kent have the dignity of Vicount Strangford. A^des the
other Biland called Audes, lies over against Lecall to the North, parted with
a small channel out of the Lake Coin, which on the West side incloseth it, as
the sea does on the East, and the Bay of Knocfergus on the North; the soil is
good and fruitful, save only in the midst where it is moist and waterish
plain; the shore is replenished with many small Villages; Vicount Mountgomery
has his title from Ardes. At the Bay of Knocfergus there was an ancient
Monastery of the same Order and name with that near Chester, to wit, Banchor.
More inward near the Lake is the Bishops See of Conereth or Coner, whose Pastor
was devout, but his flock wicked, as Saint Bernard describes them. Ardes was
large in the possession of the Savages, one of whom was persuaded to build a
Fort for his safeguard, made answer that he would not trust to a Castle of
stones, but of bones, meaning himself and men. Above Ardes to the South-west
lies Clanbay, that i^, the yellow nation, a County full of woods, reaching to
Knocfergus, the farthest part of Down, inhabited by the Family of the Oneals:
the Popes are Earls of Down, and Barons Bealter^erts.

The County of Antrim lies next in order unto Louth Northward, taking its name
from a poor despicable town so called, and is seated in an out-corner of
Ireland toward Scotland within three hours sail, and is limited with
Knocfergu^, Logh, Eaugh, and the river Ban: the mac Donels are Earls of Antrim.
Knocfergus, in Irish Cangfergus, that is, the rock of Fergus, where a famous
man of that name was drowned* that place is well inhabited, and more frequented
than the rest of that country, by reason of a good and commodious harbor, well
fortified and strong: Vicount Chichester has his title from it. Hard by lies
the nether Clanboy possessed by the O Neals, until their rebellion in the
queens time: now the Hamiltons are styled Vic: Clanb^y from this or the like
place: near Knocfergus there is a little Biland which runs out into the sea, is
called the I Will Magie, four miles in length, and one in breadth, where was a
Monastery of that name, highly praised by venerable Bede. Then begins the
Glins, that is, the Valleys at Olderfleet, which is a bad road, and run out far
into the sea: this place was formerly much annoyed with the Ilander Scots,
under the leading of James mac Conel, Lord of Cantire in Scotland; but Shan O
Neale slew him, and chased away his army. About this place, as far as the river
Ban, is called the Rowt, the seat of the mac Guillies, a well esteemed Family.
Dunluse castle, a strong one, seated on a rock that hangs over the sea, the
possessions of Surley Boy, that is, Charles the Yellow, who rebelled and was so
chased by captain Meriman, his son slain, his cattle taken away, of which he
had a great stock of 50000 Cows. So that he made his submission, and was
received into the queens favor, and had a fair estate given unto him again
upon some articles of agreement.

The county of Colran is beyond the Glinns westward, and lies between the
river Ban and Lough Foil, and confineth South, on the county of Tir-Oen. This
Ban is a passing fair river, and rises out of the Mountains of Mourn in the
county Down, carrying himself, and his name into Lough Eaugh, or Lough Sidney,
a great lake; and for the space of 30 miles, name and river are both drowned in
the Lake; but after at Tome Castle he resumeth it again, then by Glaucolkein, a
great receptacle of robbers and rebels; carrying a proud stream, he tumbleth
into the Sea: More abounding in Salmons this, than any river in Europe, it
being exceeding water in which such fish much delight. The principal Family is
O Cahan a subject of O Neal, who in that vain ceremony of O Neals election,
flings an old shoe over O Neals head. It is much molested by the Island Scots,
being poor, so that in Summer they seek for booty here. Toward the west of
this lies Derry, a waste uncivil place, but through the great care, charge and
industry of the City of London, so well planted, civilized and built, that it
is scarce inferior to any place of Ireland; and have rightly named it London
Derry: the Ridgways being Earls thereof, as Hu^h Hare was Lord Colrane of
Colrane. There is likewise a Bishop of Derry.

The County of Tir-Oen lies Southwest from the former country; it is upland
from the sea, divided westward from Tir Conell by the river Liffer, from Antrim
Eastward by Lough Eaugh, and bounded with the Blackwater, at South from the
county Armagh a rough rugged uneven country 60 miles in length, and at some
places 30 in breadth, severed by the Mountains called Sliew Gallen into the
upper Tir-Oen Northward, and the nether Southward: there is first a poor
Bishops See, called Cloghar, then Dungannon the chief habitation of the Earls,
also Uhlogahel, where O Neal the Tyrant of Ulstor, was usually installed with
his vain ceremonies: there was a Fort at Blackwater which has been much
assaulted by the Rebels which resort thither to a refuge; but having found
another passage over below that is of such use; therefore the Lord Montjoy built
Sconces on both sides of that passage; and at the Lake Eaugh raised another
Garrison Fort, and called it by his own name, Mountjoy. This Lake incloseth the
west side of Tir-Oea, and is much supplied by the River Ban; a large lake 30
miles in length, and very plentiful in fish. And Nature has showed her skill
in bestowing variety upon the banks of it, as the shady grove^, the medows
always green, the fertile cornfieldsd, if tilled, the bending and hanging
hills; the warbling Brook gliding along it, nothing wanting for delight or
profit, and by that condemns the lazy lithernesse of the inhabitants, who
suffer much of it to lie waste. In the upper Tir-Oen lies Strahan, a Castle
well known, as being the seat of the O Neals there are many more fortresses and
towers with narrow loop-hooles, unto which are adjoined houses of turf and
thetch, with hedges and ditches round about, to keep their Cows from robbers.

The County of Donegall, or Tir-Conell, it lies in the norwest corner of
Ireland, a champion country full of Havens, bounded with the sea North and
West, and parted on the East from Tir-Oen with the river Liffer; and from
Conagh with the Lake Erne. Liffer at his very rising makes a large stream, and
spreads into a Lake, wherein is an Island, in which near to a Monastery is a
narrow vault made by Ulisses (as some fabulously report) when he descended to
hell; the inhabitants call it Ellan a frugadory, that is, the I Will of Purgatory,
and Saint Patricks Purgatory: So in that place there is Saint Brendans
Purgatory, of which much superstition is invented: this river Liffer nearer the
sea, it makes another Lake, called Logh-foile, or Logh Der; and Derry, of
which I spoke before, bounds on it. From this river the fitz-Williams take
their Barony. Here is the fair foreland a promontory Robogh, with a small town
having a B^^ See. From hence Westward runs a cragged shore unto the mouth of
Swilly lake; and so to the utmost promontory, which they call the Rams-head, to
another promontory called* S. Helens-head.

More Southward on the shore is that good and commodious Haven Calebig, whence
you may see the ruins of Sligah castle.

A little lower, not far from the mouth of Logh Erne is Donegall, that is, the
town of the Gallirians in Spain, the Earldoms have been to the O Donels, who
held it until their rebellious hearts cast off all true obedience.

Thus have thou seen, courteous Reader, the limbs and parts of the Kingdom of
Ireland, laid open unto thee rich and plentious, as appears by those large
revenews it has yielded unto the English Crown, when as in King Edward the
third his days some say forty thousand pounds yearly, the Custom House at
this time duly paid into the Exchequer, is thirty thousand pound per annum. And
great was that improvidence (if I may say it) both in civil government and
Church discipline, that have suffered those firebrands of the Christian world,
the Jesuits, to raise there so sudden and great flame of Rebellion, which we
hope (by Gods providence, working with the wisdom and prudence of this present
State now assembled) to see extinct; to the utter ruin and overthrow of that
bloody religion of Popery; and by this means so to root out, and disperse those
unconstant and various dispositions, that all hope of aid and assistance from
others, and opposition in themselves shall be quite taken away.

And further, by this description may thou observe how to entertain the
present profer, made by the honorable Houses of Parliament to thy best
contentment and advantage; how to get sure footing in an Island so great, so
near a neighbor to England, so fruitful in soil, so rich in pasture more
than credible; beset with shady; pleasant, profitable woods, enriched with many
minerals (if sought after) watered with so many Rivers, environed with so many
commodious Havens, lying so fit and open for sailing into the most wealthy
Countries, so that he will seem short witted (whose wealth will bear it) that
embraces not the present opportunity to enrich himself in a plantation of his
posterity, in the midst of such worldly felicity.

The end of the first part.
The second Part treating of the natural Disposition, Apparel, and Diet of
the Irish, and of their several Rebellions.
THe Irish for the most part are proud and haughty, cruel and barbarous,
variable and inconstant in disposition, apt and forward to Tumults, rebellious
to Government, false and hollow-hearted, more ready in promise then
performance, the meaner lazy, idle, and sluggish especially the wild Irish,
and the English Irish much degenerated.

Saint Bernard in the life of Malla Ehy Bishop of Coner, who reports that when
he undertook his charge there, perceived that he was not come unto men but unto
beasts, no where had he until then experience of such, in the most barbarous
parts that ever he came unto: no where had he found for Manners so froward,
for Rites so devilish, for Faith so impious, for Laws so barbarous, for
Discipline so stiffenecked, and for Life so filthy. Christians they were in
name, but Pagans in deed, lawful Marriages they contracted none, or such as
are shameful even with children of ten years old.

So Langfrank complains to a King of Ireland, Therdel^c^, that the Irishmen
forsake and leave their Wives at their pleasure without any just cause, and
marry any others, even such as be near of kin to themselves, or to the said
forsaken wives: and if an other man with like wickedness has cast off his
wife, her likewise with like rashness they join withal.

With which Rites if this Nation of the Irish had not bin corrupted almost to
our days, both the right of lineall succession among them had been more
certain, and as well the Gentry as the vulgar had not embrued themselves so
wickedly with the effusion of so much blood of their own kindred about their
inheritance and legitimation, nor had they become so infamous in these respects
among other foreign Nations.

And further concerning their natures and disposition, you may take the
relation from the Earl of Essex his Letter to Q* Elisabet gathered by his
experience.

The people in general have able bodies by nature, and have gotten by custom
ready use of arms, and by their late success, boldness to fight with your
Majestis forces.

In their pride they value no man but themselves, in their affections, they
love nothing but idleness and licentiousnes, in their Rebellion, they have no
other end but to shake off the yoke of obedience, to root out all remembrance
of the English Nation in that Kingdom. This is the general quarrel of the
Irish, and they who do not profess it, are either so few, or so false, that
there is no account to be made of them.

The Irish Nobility and Lords of Countries do not only in their hearts affect
this quarrel, and are divided from us in Religion, but have an especial
grudge against the English Government, because it limiteth and tyeth them, who
have and still would be supreme Lords, if not Tyrants. The Towns being
inhabited by men of the same Religion and birth with the rest, are so carried
away with the love of gain, and for that cause supply the Rebels with what
they want: therefore they must be strictly looked unto.

The Laws of the Irish was that of fish and birds, the great devour the less,
the strong the weak, having but one Freeholder in a County, and he Lord both
of estate and lives of the rest.

For their succession to inheritances, it was by the law or custom called
Tanistry, mentioned by that excellent Historian Sir Walter Rawleigh: which is
this, that a man is preferred to a boy: the Uncle before the Nephew, and
commonly the most active, not the next heir is chosen, to hinder the inroad
and oppression of the next adjoining Lord, between whom there was always
contention, which did so wast and consume them, or else being idle, the Land
would not have sustained them.

Concerning the apparel of the Irish it is after a slovenly manner, and the
very English, there are much infected with this nasty filthiness, especially
lowzie beds, and foul linen, except where the chief English live, as in
Dublin, Wateford, and Kinsale, which in some measure retain the English
neatness; but for the mere wild Irish it may be said of them as of the
Germans, that they wander slovenly and naked, and lodge in the same room with
their cattle.

Among them the better sort used to wear close breeches and stockings of the
same, of red or some light color, so straight that the unseemly parts of the
body were exposed unto view.

They used likewise a loose Coat and a three covered Mantle of coarse cloth,
with a cap of Thrums.

Their linen is coarse and slovenly, they seldom cast off a shirt until it
be rotten, and are colored with Saffron to avoid Lice which are incident to
those people, and they are very nimble in taking Lice in a Sunny day, or a
green bank.

But in the more Northern parts before the strict civilizing of them in King
James his time, both men and women went naked in the very Winter, having only
their secret parts covered with a rag and a loose Mantle cast over them.

Thus naked they walk with their sword tied unto them with a with instead of a
belt.

And at night men and women lie in a Ring together, round about the fire, in
the middle of the room with their feet toward it, folding their head and
upper parts in their woollen Mantle first steeped in water to keep them warm,
for they say, woollen wetted, and warmed by the heat of their bodies, does
preserve heat.

The Church Discipline has been formerly and now is after the same manner
with that in England, by Archbishops, whereof there are four, Bishops 29, many
more formerly.

It has been anciently a great Nursery of Religion and Piety: even from (if
not before) Saint Patricks time, and Saint Bridget his Disciple, who did
advance Religion and Piety much in that Kingdom, as also in sundry other
places of Christendom.

The Bishops were formerly consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, until
the year 1142: at what time Pope Eugenius the fourth, sent Cardinal Paperio,
who together with Christian Bishop of Lismore, Legate of all Ireland, held a
Council at Mell, and with the consent of the Bishops, Abbots, Kings, and Dukes
of Ireland, established four Archbishops, videlicet Armagh, Dublin, Cassile,
and Toam. But the estate of the Clergy has been very mean there, so that by
reason of devouring impropriations in the whole County of Connought. The
Incumbents stipend is not above forty shillings, and at some places but
fifteen shillings per annum, that the people must needs be better fed then
taught.

Their allowance being answerable to the Irish Bishops in former time, who had
but three milch Kine allowed them, and when one was dry, the Parish did change
her for another.

Which makes the Gospel to languish where it finds so poor entertainment;
that the Messengers thereof through* want and necessity should live so mean and
contemptibly: and it gives great advantage to the Priests and Jesuits both to
abound and seduces who have mayntenance from elsewhere.

The right and title of the English Crown to Ireland was by Conquest, by
Surrender, and Submission.
THe Danes first invaded it with foreign forces, then the Norwegians got
possession of it; but they were rooted out by the policy of that King of Meth,
who had a beautiful Virgin to his daughter, with whom Turgesius was much
inflamed, requiring her to satisfy his lust, to whose will the poor Prince
could not assent, yet durst not deny. So that he told him he had at home a Bevy
of fair Ladies* out of which he should choose for his pleasure. Turgesius
hearing that, wished these Damsels Cupids wings for their more speedy arrival.

But the other attired certain young men of courage in women's apparel, and
had them conducted into the Kings Chamber, from whence all his attendance were
commanded, but when he expected more kind embraces, he was suddenly slain
in the place; so the Norwegians were destroyed, and the Irish enjoyed their
estate until the year 1172.

When Dermet Man Morck King of Lemster, having forced the wife of Ma^rice O
Rork King of Meth (a light woman, and with consent) by whose husband the other
was pursued so eagerly with the revenging sword; that he was driven to quite
his Kingdom of Lemster, and fly to England for succor to Henry the Second,
who very willingly entertained this occasion; who had long sought occasion of
getting Ireland.

Yet not willing to entertain it at the first in person (being not a matter of
that consequence for himself to undertake)

He gave Dermot license to draw-what power of Volunteers he could into that
action.

Who applied himself to Wales, where he found a valiant Gentleman of Norman
Race, one Robert Fitz Stephen, who willingly undertook the service with some
Volunteers whose happy and good success, caused Richard Earl of Pembroke,
called Strong-bow, being the principal man invited by Dermot, and that with
the promise of his daughter and Kingdom in marriage, the Earl himself with
two hundred men at arms, and a thousand other Soldiers who arrived in the Bay
of Waterford 1171, and presently marched toward the town of Waterford and took
it by force the next day, to the exceeding terror of that Nation.

Dermot then accomplishes the match, giving the Earl his daughter Eva; with
which Ring of Marriage he affianced that Island unto this Kingdom: for he went
on with such resolutions, that he in little space subdued much of Ireland.

Which news being carried unto Henry the Second, he made have over thither,
that he might have the glory of the Conquest, and seemed to be displeased with
the Earl for his forwardness, and his rigorous using of that people,
recalling all from thence, under pain of confiscation of their goods in
England; but the King seemed somewhat appeased before his going over, which was
1172, at which time landing at Waterford, he imprisoned Robert Fitz Stephen,
as having gone over without his leave, but not long after released him, but
took Weiford and other Territories from him.

Thus did he receive the homage of diverse Irish petty Kings, willing to obtain
them by gentle means.

And keeping his Christmasse there in great state, and settling the Government
of the Church, he is unexpectedly called into England, leaving Hugh Lacy at
Dublin.

Who in ensuing time rebelled, and were brought under by King John, who was the
first that planted English Laws and Officers in Ireland, and both annexed that
Kingdom and fastened Wales to the Crown of England: and was the first who
enlarged the Royal style with Lord of Ireland.

In the year 1339, there was a general war between the English and Irish,
wherein many of the Irish perished, after which time matters were quiet until
the eighteenth year of Richard the Second, being 1400.

Who went over then with a great Army, but having accepted of the Rebels
submission he returned into England: during whose time and till the civil
wars in England all matters were settled and composed without any charge or
assistance out of this Kingdom.

But in the time of the wars between York and Lancaster, wherein many Noble
Families were quite extinguished in England, many English came out of Ireland
either to take part of possession of some inheritances, which fell unto them by
the death of their friends.

So they have but small regard of what they leave behind in Ireland. The mere
Irish rushed on the forsaken lands, so that growing rich and proud they began
to kick against authority; willing to cast off the English yoke, and the
English Pale had its limits sometime more and sometimes less, according as
they were able to mayntaine.

But when those civil discords were blown over, and all things became calm by
the good success of Henry the Seventh, and leisure afforded to look toward
Ireland, which then harbored a Rebel against him, one Perkin Warbeck who
connterfeited himself Richard the Third, but was suppressed by the sending over
of 1000 men.

Again, Henry the eighth sent over 500 soldiers to suppress the Geraldines of
English Race.

Afterward, all peaceable, until Queen Elizabeth's time, when they saw
themselves out of hope to plant Popish Superstition in any of her Dominions.

Then Religion (never until that age) became the cloak for Rebellion, and the
Roman Locusts, the incendiaries of Christendom, to mayntaine the Popes usurped
authority, breathed every where fire and sword, and worse against her sacred
person and Dominions. And taking advantage of the blind zeal of the ignorant
Irish unto Popery: working on their variable condition. Boulstering up their
hopes and hearts with that old saying, He that will England win, must at
Ireland first begin.
By which means they raised two dangerous Rebellions in that Country.

By the Earl of Desmond one 1578, the other of Tyrone, about 1590, plotting
and intending, although it brake not out till afterward.

This Gerald Earl of Desmond of English Race, whose Progenitors had done good
service against the Irish, and borderers of Wales, in the behalf of the
English King, had the Earldome of Kildare given them, and Earls of Desmond, by
Edward the Third.

But in Henry the Eighth's days, one of them being Lord Deputy, and questioned
for his ill government, on which occasion Thomas Fitz Gerald his son took
arms, but was soon suppressed himself, and five of his Uncles being taken and
executed.

Queen Mary restored the Family to honor and estate.

But after Gerald Earl of Desmond, 1578, rebelled against Queen Elizabeth
unto whose aid came certain bands of Italians and Spaniards, sent by Pope
Gregory the twelfth, and Philip King of Spain, who landed at Swir^ic, and
built a Fort called Del ore, wherein they were besieged by Arthur Gray Lord
Deputy of Ireland, soon taken and put to the sword: And the Earl of Desmond
flying into the Woods, being betrayed by his own followers, and his head cut
off. So this fire soon vanished into smoke, and the Earldome by Parliament
annexed to the Crown, and made a County: with Sheriffs appointed yearly to be
chosen by the Lord Deputy.

Upon the Attainder of this Earl and his Confederates, much land fell unto the
Crown, viz. 574628 acres English mesure, whereof great part was restored to the
offenders, the rest divided into Signories, was granted by Letters Patents unto
certain Knights and Esquires English, who were called Undertakers.

In Kerry and Desmond, by Patent to Knights 30560 Acres with yearly rents 524
pounds, six shillings and eight peace sterling.

In Limrick by Patent to Knights and Esquites, and to their heirs were granted
96165 Acres, with rents nine hundred thirty three pounds, four shillings half
penny sterling.

In Cork, by Patent to Knights and Esquires, and to their heirs were granted
88037 Acres, with Rents, five hundred and twelve pounds, seven shillings and
six peace half p^ny sterling.

In Waterford and Tipperary 22910 Acres, with Rents three hundred and three
pounds, three pence sterling.

But these Undertakers having got so large a proportion of Lands, and so little
care to plant them with English Colonies; and build and fortify them with
Castles as by Patent they were tied, but for private ends without any regard to
the public good or her Majesty's bounty sold them either to Papists or to
Irish ill affected unto the English, which was a great prejudice to the State
of that Kingdom, and the seeds of the ensuing Rebellion raised by Tyrone.

Concerning which I will briefly show unto the Reader such collections as I
have gathered from diverse Authors.
COncerning the name and title of O Neale; it is in so much esteem, that even
those honorable titles of Earls, Marquesses, Dukes and Princes are despised
in regard of that: and in such reverent regard among the Irish, that it is
thought he deserves the greatest curse in the world to fall upon him that
shall dare to lay violent hands upon him: nor have any loyal subjects a more
dreadful awe to violate the person of their sacred Prince, then these people
have to touch their great O Neale.

So that two thousand pound being offered by Proclamation to any that should
betray him in his vast Camp, prevailed nothing at all, although he were
proclaimed Traitor, and held guilty of that crime by Act of Parliament to take
that name upon him.

Near T^llogh Oge, there was a stone Chair placed in the open field, wherein
he sat down that was created; then we whose office it was, took an old shoe
and cast it over his head, proclayming him O Neale.

Henry O Neale and C^nm^re matching into the Family of the Earls of Kildare,
by this their good fortune grew so insolent and proud, that by their cruel
tyranny they grew intolerable.

C^n Batto, because lame, succeeded his father in the dignity of O Neale, and
cursed his posterity if any of them should learn English, sow corn, or build
houses to entertain the English.

This man's greatness grew in suspicion with Henry the eighth, having been a
party in the former Rebellion of the Earl of Kildare: which he perceiving
went into England, renounced the title of O Neale, and surrendered his Lands
unto the King.

Which not long after was regranted unto him by Henry the eighth to hold in
fee, together with the title of the Earl of Tyrone to him, and to Matthew his
reputed son, and to the heirs of their bodies lawfully begotten.

At which time also Matthew was created Baron of Dungannon: This Matthew till
he was fifteen years of age, was reputed the son of a blacksmith of
Dundalke, whose Wife Con had formerly kept; and she at her death gave him unto
the said Con, as being his son which he did accept, and appointed him to be
Lord of Dungannon, but he was murdered in his fathers life time by Shant,
that is, John O Neale the lawful heir of Con, but Matthew the base son left
Brian who was murdered by O Donell at the instance of Shan.

And Hugh and Cormack* who by the means and help of the English were preserved,
yet both proved Rebels, Shan being barbarous and bloody, did ^ave and rage in a
cruel manner over the Lords and people of Vlster.

Began to dispute that his father had no power to surrender to Henry the
Eighth, being but a termer: that Matthe^ was base borne, that himself was O
Neale, and had Sovereigne power and authority over the Lords of Vlster.

Who taking arms overthrew O Really, and took Callogh O Donnell, Lord of Tir
Conell, cast him and his children into prison, took his wife from him, and bore
himself as absolute King of Vlster.

But he was soon quelled by the forces of the Earl of Sussex, the then Lord
Deputy: and by persuasion of the Earl of Kildare, went into England, and made
great submission to Queen Elizabeth, and promising allegiance, was received
courteously.

And so returning conformed himself awhile in civil manner, and did some good
service against the Scots, killed their Leader, and drove them out of Vlster;
howbeit he suddenly fell to his old byas, and played the Tyrant over the Lords
of Vlster; who craved aid of the Lord Deputy to suppress him; but he grew the
more outrageous, and with fire and sword drove Mac Guir, Lord of Fermanagh, out
of his Country: set fire on the Metropolitan Church of Armagh, and laid siege
to Dundalke, but had the repulse by the Garrison and assistance of the Major.

But Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy, taking the field with some forces: sent Edw.
Raldalph a brave Soldier to the North side of Ireland, where at Derry at
Coghfoyle in a pitchfield (though he lost his life) yet gave the rebel such
an overthrow, that he was never able to appear any more abroad; so that he
was minded to have submitted with a halter about his neck to the Deputy, but by
the persuasion of his Secretary he tried, the friendship of the Scots, who
received him kindly, but not long after slew him.

So that presently after Shan by a Parliament at Dublin, was attainted of high
Treason; and all that he had fell to the Queen. Then Turlogh, Linnogh, took
the title off O Neal, for fear of the children of Shan, and Matthew the
bastard, but being aged was quiet, and lived peaceably.

Now Hugh son of the base son Matthew lived sometime in Ireland, but much in the
Court of England, commonly called Baron of Dungannon, who had served with a
troop of horse under the Queen against the Lord of Desmond, and behaved
himself so valiantly, that he had given him a yearly pension off a hundred
marks.

He was a man of mean stature, but of a strange body, able to endure labors,
watching, hunger and cold, being industrious and active, valiant, affable, and
apt to manage great affairs, and of a hgh dissembling, subtle, and profound
wit.

He put up a Petition to the Parliament in Ireland, that he might enjoy the
inheritance of his Grandfather Con, and his father, granted to be Earls of
Tirone, which by the help of Sir John Perrot, Lord Deputy, was procured of the
Queen.

And so he handled the matter (as well knowing the humor of the Court of
England) that through the Queens mediation he got Turlogh, Linnogh, to
surrender his government upon some conditions.

After whose death he usurped the title of O Neale, which was capital, yet
colored it over with a pretense, that it was only to hinder others.

In the year 1588, when that great Armado of Spain was scattered by the
English, and many of the ships cast away on the Irish coast: it is thought that
this Hugh lodging and entertaining many of them, was by them seduced and
persuaded to Rebellion.

And going into England, he was there detained prisoner, for that he came
without the license of the Lord Deputy, Sir William Fitz Williams: but on
submission, and certain Articles proposed to him by the Lords, and he
willingly accepting promising to confirm them before the Lord Deputy in
Ireland.

In the year 1590, it happened that Con the son of Shan O Neale, accused Hugh
of treasonable practices before the Lords in England.

All which Hugh vehemently denied; but after getting his accuser in his power,
he hanged him.

In August, the same year Hugh Earl of Tyrone, (for so hereafter we must call
him, did promise under his hand before the Lord Deputy: and counsel of Ireland
to perform those Articles agreed upon in England, but used many excuses to put
off the execution of them.

And about this time Hugh Ror Mac Mahone was put to death by the Lord Deputy
Williams very unjustly (as some say) to the great scandal of the Lord Deputy;
and it caused great complaints and outcries among the Irish, who presently
preferred their grievances against that Deputy* and he driven to answer them.

And upon this fact the government of the English in the North became odious,
and they did strive what they could to shake it often, by expelling the Sheriffs
from among them, fearing the like usage as M^c Mahone. And 1593, Mao Guir
chief of Fermanagh stood upon his guard, accusing the Deputy of injustice in
the business off Mahone, and set upon Captain Willis, and drove him and his
guard being Sheriff into a Church, and would have put them all to the sword,
had not Tyrone, interceded for them.

Whereupon the Deputy got into his hands Eniskillen Mac Guirs castle, and
proclaimed him a Traitor* and likewise gave out some hard speeches concerning
Tyrone, which did much exasperate him, and caused him to combine with the Lords
of the North, to defend their Honors, Laws, and Liberties: and used two
notable plots to assist him toward this Rebellion.

1 To make his men skillful, he proffered to serve the Queen with 500 men of
his own.

And for that end procured expert Captains to exercise them; and so often
changing these his men, got most of his followers to be able Soldiers.

Secondly, he pretended to build a fair house at Dungannon, and so got much
lead to make Battlements, which after he cast into bullets.

In the mean time Sir Henry Bagnal Marshall of Ireland, whose Sister Tyrone
had married, did prefer many Articles against him, unto which he answered so
cunningly, saying, that the Marshall did it out of spleen of purpose to detain
his sisters portion, and seemingly quitted himself; but afterward he grew
jealous of his own safety.

At this time Gauranus a Priest whom the Pope had made Primate of all Ireland,
seduced certain Irish Lords, among which Mac Guir was chief, and was
overthrown by Sir Richard Bingham, and the Priest slain: in which service
Tyrone was against Mac Guir with the Queens forces* but secretly prepared for
his Rebellion.

Then the sons of Shan O Neale, were prisoners in Dublin Castle, which had
they been kept, had been a bridle in Tyrones mouth; but by connivance of Sir
William Fitz Williams the Deputy, were suffered to escape, and so Tyrone got
them into his custody, nor would he release them although thereunto required.

But covering his Rebellion, with feeming fears of his conceived enemies, made
daily complaints of the Marshals envy; and what wrong he had done him.

In the year 1594, the Rebellion burst out; Sir William Russel came in the
place of Fitz Williams, at which time Vlster men openly distressed her
Majesty's forces; and Tyrone was supposed to countenance them.

Yet he appeared in person at Dublin, before the new Lord Deputy, desiring her
Majesty's favor, out of which he had fallen, rather by the calumny of them,
then any cause of his own.

But the Marshall charged him with great matters, ready to prove them; so that
the Deputy thought fit to stay him, but the Council of Ireland were of the
contrary opinion, so he was let go, but the Queen was much displeased for it,
and sharply reproved the Deputy, but he laid the fault on the Council of
Ireland.

And presently took the field with his Army to relieve Eniskillen in
Ferminaght, and in the Winter following, there was little done because there
was some Treaties of peace, but the Rebels grew so peremptory in their demands,
that it was not liked by the Lords in England.

And therefore sent over two thousand old soldiers that had served in Britany,
and a thousand more taken up in England, which news Tyrone hearing, and that
the Castle of Balishannan, and Relike, were to be planted with English
Garrisons. Drew his forces together, and took the Fort of Blackwater, razed it:
and broke down the bridge there, and now the Northern Rebels appear, but
Tyrone showed a seeming desire of pardon.

This Lord Deputy fearing this storm might fall upon him, desired the Counsel
of England to send him an assistant of some experienced Soldiers; which he
meant should be under his command; but the Lords mistaking his meaning, sent
over Sir John Norris, a great Commander and well experienced, that would scarce
give way to any; who was styled Lord General, and to command in chief, in the
absence of the Lord Deputy.

But the emulation that grew between these two hindered the business; yet both
of them went into the field, with the Army toward Armagh.

Tyrone makes suit again by Letters for pardon, but being intercepted, came not
unto the Deputies hands, until he had proclaimed him Traitor.

But upon Tyrones instance, Commissioners were appointed by the Queen to treat
with the Rebels.

At which time Tyrone complained of the Marshall of many injuries.

And his demands were, that he might have his Wives portion of the Marshall,
and the free exercise of his Religion, and many other.

But when Articles were propounded on the Queens part, they set so light of
them, and made such scorn, that the Conference brake off: though the Queen for
sparing of blood, had resolved to give them any reasonable Conditions.

This parley ended, the Lord Deputy, and the Lord General coming to Armagh,
did so much terrify the Rebels that Tyrone left the Fort of Blackwater, burnt
the Town of Dungannon, and pulled down his house there, and betook himself to
the Woods.

Sept. the third, Hugh Earl of Tyrone, Hugh O Donel; Brian O Rourk, Hugh Mack
Guir, Brian Mac Mahone, Sir Arthur O Neale, Cormac Match Baron Tyrones brother,
Con O Neale Tyrones base son, Henry Oge O Neale, Turlogh Mac Henry O Neale,
Brian Art Mac Bryan, and one Francis Mountford were (though absent) indicted,
and condemned of high Treason.

Now the Lemster Rebels being revolted grew strong, and forraged even to the
gates of Dublin, to the County of Wexford.

This Winter passed without any matter of moment, because indeed, General
Norris not yet acquainted with Tyrones subtilties, seemed to harken to peace,
thereby to reclayme him by fair means.

In the year 1596, the Queen granted another Commission for the Treaty of
Peace, and offered very largely, and at Dundalke Tyrone upon his knees made an
humble submission to the Queen before these Commissioners, and made many
requests, promising reformation, and many circumstances and Ceremonies then
passed. But these inconveniences followed, these delays being no better then
delusions, that the Vlster Rebels had rest this Summer, and O Neale in the
midst of this Negotiation, required aid from Spain.

Sir Richard Bingham a valiant wise man, on some complaint of the Irish, was
sent for over into England, and Sir Coniers Clifford sent in his place: but
afterward Sir Richard was again employed in great command in that service.

Again, an other Treaty of Peace with Tyrone, who laid the cause of his
disloyalty, on the wrongs that were offered him; and so with many dissembling
words, oaths, and protestations, making answer to some questions concerning
Spain, he departed.

This Lord Deputy being recalled into England, and the Lord Bourgh or Borough
was sent over in his place, with absolute authority: so that Sir John Norris
was much disheartened thereby: and was thought of purpose for that end sent over
by the Earl of Essex, whom General Norris had dipleased by undertaking an
action with less force then the said Earl required.

At this Dep* arriving General Norris was commanded to his charge, which was
Lord President of Munster, and not to stir thence without leave, which thing
did presently break his heart, so that he died there in the arms of his
brother Sir Thomas Norris.

Now Tyrone submitted or sweld as he saw occasion.

So that the Lord Deputy perceiving it presently, made his way toward Tyrone,
thinking it best to strike at the head; who encountered the Irish in a narrow
path, and made them give way: he took the Fort at Blackwater, and left
Soldiers in it, which being not long, after assailed by the Rebels, was again
relieved by the Lord Deputy, who immediately fell sick, as he was passing to
Tyrones house at Dungannon; and not long after departed this world, to the
great joy of the Rebels, who found his severity disadvantagious to them.

Then Sir Thomas Norris, Lord President of Munster, under the great Seal of
England, was made Lord Justice of Ireland, who repaired to Dublin; but being
very ill through the great grief he conceived for the loss of his brother in a
months space, he made suit to be released.

So that Adam Loftus Lord Chancelour, the Lord Archbishop of Ireland, and
Robert Gardener chief Justice of Ireland, by Patent from England, were made
Lord Justices for the Civil Government.

And the Earl of Ormond, was made Lord Lieutenant and chief General of all
Martial affairs.

Tyrone again sues for pardon, and proffers submission, saying, that it was
offered injuries that compelled him thus to revolt: So there was another
meeting appointed at Dundalke December. 22. where on his knees he showed great
sorrow; and made humble submission, desiring a cessation from Arms eight
weeks, now this submission being sent into England, the Lord Lieutenant
received authority from the Queen to make a final conclusion; so that another
meeting was appointed, March 15 at Dundalke; where many articles were
propounded to the Rebels, which they slightly regarded; but for better
deliberation, Tyrone desired the tenth of April, for another meeting.

But Tyrone with pretenses did frustrate all these parleys, and though he had
his general pardon granted, yet continued he in his disloyal courses; so that
on the former Indictment 1595, he is after outlawed in 1600.

But he being prepared and his men expert, by trayning and often skirmishing,
whereas at the first two or three of them were employed in the discharge of a
Musket, he left off to dissemble and submitted no more, but gives
encouragement, and that with good success unto his Confederates.

First, he sends aid to the Lemster Rebels to annoy the English, and assaulted
the Fort of Blackwater; as being a hinderance in his passing too and fro.

But Captain Williams valiantly defended it with great loss to Tyrone, who
went and lay further off, but this Captain and his Company continued their
defense bravely until August, though much pinched with want of victuals: when
Sir Henry Bagnal Marshall of Ireland with foot and horse of the English
endeavored to relieve it, and passing along the narrow passages through the
thick Woods beyond Armagh.

Where the Rebel with all his force assailed him, and bearing a deadly hatred
and malice against the Marshall, against whom he bent his whole strength, and
commanded his Soldiers so to do, that he had the fortune to kill him; yet
like a valiant Gentleman he sold his life at a dear rate, to many of the
Rebels. But his fall caused our men's hearts to fail; whereupon the Rebel had
the greatest advantage against the English: the like never happening again,
called The Defeat at Blackwater. wherein we lost thirteen valiant Captains, and
fifteen hundred old Soldiers: whereupon likewise the surrender of the Fort
ensued.

It was thought this misfortune to happen from an oversight of the Marshall,
who made the Van of the army too suddenly to retreat; and too sudden faces
about, puts fear in the Rear; and makes them suppose it may be a running away.

For as Sir Walter Raleigh, in his fifth book and first part of the History of
the World, that as well in the Wars of these later ages as in former times it
has been found ever extreme dangerous to make a Retreat in the head of an
enemies army: as he renders the reason, but I cannot digress any further.

This overthrow much increased the insolency of the Rebels, the Rebels having
gotten courage and arms thereby, and Tyrone termed the Deliverer of his
Country, and the author of their liberty.

All Vlster in Rebellion, Connagh revolted, and the Rebels in Lemster a
continual terror and vexation to the English.

And now Tyrone sent forces into Munster, where after the departure of Sir John
Norris, most of the County revolted, and now brake out like Lightning, making
havoc, and destroying in a barbarous manner. And for the better countenancing
of the matter, a new pretended Earl of Desmond is set up, on condition to be
Vassal to O Neale.

At this time a supply came out of England, of a thousand and fifty old
Soldiers from out the Low Countries, and nine hundred and fifty joined to them
of new, raised in England, sent under the command of Sir Samuel Bagnal Colonel,
and nine other Captains to strengthen the Queens forces i^ Lemster, and a
hundred under Colonel Bagnals command.

In the midst of these broyls, the impudent Rebel is no^ ashamed to entreat
for pardon, and sue for peace.

Although, as appeared in his Letters sent to the King of Spain, he magnified
his victories, and vowed perseverance: but his conditions were insolent and so
not regarded.

And now the wound is grown so great, and the case so desperate that it admits
of no cure, but by the hand of a valiant expert soldier.

And none found like Robert Earl of Essex, whom favor with the Queen, and
fortune of war had made popular.

And his own active inclination, and the policy of his powerful enemies in
Court, wrought it for his undertaking; and by his absence they plotted his
ensuing overthrow.

But before his going two Regiments of old Soldiers out of the Low Countries
were sent into Ireland, and dispersed at his coming through the whole army,
for the exercise of the rest.

1050 Foot.
The first Regiment Sir Charles Percy Colonel. Richard Morison Lieutenant
Colonel, and five other Captains.
950 Foot.
The second Regiment, Sir Henry Bockwra, Colonel. Captain John Chamberlain
Lieutenant Colonel, and four other Captains.
This Earls Commission was large, without limitation almost even the power of a
Prince, and an army as great as he desired, the like unto which in all points
Ireland never saw.

The establishment was sealed by the Qu. March 24, 1598. It contained the pay
of the chief officers of the Army.
The Lord Lieutenant General, per diem, 10 l. The Lieutenant of the Army, per
diem, 3 The General of the Horse 2 The Judge Marshall 1 The Auditor General 0
13* s. The Controuller general of the victuals 0 10 The Lieutenant of the
Ordnance 0 10 The Surveigher 0 6 8 d. Two Clerks of Munition, each 0 5 Four
Corporals of the Field 0 6 8 d. One Commissary of Victuals 0 8 And three others
each 0 6 The carriage Master 0 6 And twenty Colonels each 10 Sum. total. per
annum, 13127 l. 16 s. 8 d.

More it contained, the pay of thirteen hundred horse divided into twenty six
Bands
A Captain at per diem, 0 4 s. A Lieutenant 0 2 6 d. A Cornet 0 2 And fifty
horsemen, each at 0 1 3 d. Sum. total. per annum, 31408. l. 5 s.

It contained furrher sixteen hundred foot, distributed into a hundred and
sixty Companies, each Band having
A Captain at per diem, 0 4 s. A Lieutenant 0 2 An Ensign 0 1 s. 6 d. Two
Sergeants, a Drum, and a Surgeon each at per diem 1 s. And 94 Soldiers and six
dead pays allowed to the Captain, each at per diem 8d. Sum. total. 228246l.
13s. 4d.

It further contained an extraordinary supply of six thousand pounds per annum,
to be allowed by concordation, for Spies, Guides, Messengers, Barks hyring,
keeping of Prisoners, Buildings, Reparations, and like charges.

The total of the establishment per annum, amounts to two hundred seventy
seven thousand, seven hundred eighty two pounds.

Besides, her Majesty was at great charge not contained in the establishment:
as first for Officers general.

The Lord Lieutenant for his ordinary entertainment yearly, 1300l. His
Lordships troop of horse yearly 1513l. 2s. 2d. His Lordships fifty footmen, as
being allowed him for his followers, 608l. 6s. 8d. The Treasurer at wars per
annum, 638l. 15s. The Marshall of the army per annum, 104l. 18s. 9d. The Mr. of
the Ordnance for himself per an. 450l. 3. s. 4d. For Clerks, Gunners, and
Ministers for the Ordnance, per annum, 459l. 5s. 10d. The Muster Master
General per annum, 209l. 17s. 6d.
Secondly, for chief Officers newly erected.
The Governor of Loghfoyle, per annum, 365l. The Governor of Cariofergus,
182l. 10s. The Governor of Dundalke, 182l. 10s. The Commander of the forces at
Rathdrum and Wickelow, 182l. 18s. The Commander of the Forces in Ophaly, 182l.
10s. The Commander of the Forces at Cavan, 182l. 10s. Sum. total. 6590l. 19s.
7. d.
Most of these Officers last named, besides this last allowance, have either a
horse or foot company in the Army, or both:

Thirdly, a further charge the Queen was at for Officers in the four Courts,
and certain Patentees.

In the Exchequer, the Earl of Ormond, Lord Treasurer of Ireland, for his fee
per annum, 40l. The Treasurour at Wars, 66l. 13s. 4d. The Chief Baron, 71l.
10s. And in augmentation to him, 88l. 17s. 9d. The Chancellor, 14l. The second
Baron, 34l. The Auditor General, 200l. The Surveigher General, 80l. The
Remembrancer, 40l. The Sergeant at Law, 17l. 6s. 8d. The Attorney General,
149l. 6. s. 8d. The Sollicitour, 149l. 6s. 8d. The Escheatour, 8l. 13s. 4d. The
second Remembrancer, 10l. 10s. The chief Ingrosser, 14l. The second Ingrosser,
9l. 6s. 8d. The second Chamberlain, 13l. 6s. 8d. The Clerk of the
first fruits, 10l. The Keeper of the Records, 13l. 6s. 8d. The Usher of the
Court, 3l. 6s. 8d. The Clerk of the Common Pleas, 3l. 6s. 8d. The Transcriptor,
2l. 13s. 4d. The Deputy Auditour, 11l. The vice Treasurours Deputy, 11l. The
Somonitor, 5l. 6s. 8d. The Marshall of the Court, 5l. 6s. 8d. A Messenger, 1l.
4s. 5d. Two Pursuivants each for 18l. 5s.
In the Kings Bench.
The chief Justice, 400l. The second Justice, 133l. 6s. 8d. The Clerk of the
Crown, 10l.
In the Chancery.
The Lord Chancellor per annum, 415l. 6s. 8d. The Master of the Rolls, 50l.
And in augmentation to him per an. 88l. 17s. 9d. Two Ministers each, 27l. 13s.
4d. The Clerk of the Crown, 6l. 13s. 4d. And in augmentation, 26l. 13s. 4d. The
Clerk of the Hamper, 14l. Diverse Officers in the Star Chamber, 56l. 13s. 4d.
Several Ministers of the Ordnance holding by Patents, 135l. 13s. 5d. The
Constable of Dublin Castle, and others belonging to him, 335l. 13s. 4d.
To Officers of State.
The Secretary per annum, 106l. 13s. 4d. The Clerk of the Counsel, 62l. 13s.
4d. The Surveigher of the victuals, 143l. 6s. 8d. The King at Arms, 35l. 6s.
8d. The Sergeant at Arms, 18l. 2s. 6d. The Pursuivant at Arms, 13l. 6s. 8d. The
Irish Interpreter, 27l. 7s. 6d.
Officers about the Custom.

For creation money to Noblemen.
The Earl of Ormond, 30l. The Earl of Kildare, 20l. The Earl of Clanrichard,
40l. The Earl of Thomound, 20l. The Baron of Cacher, 15l. Diverse Annates and
Procurations, 299l. 19s. 3d. For Parchment, Ink, and bags in several Courts,
282l. 10s. 8d. For other payments by Warrant, 226l. 2s. 4d.
In the County of Wexford.
The Justice of the Liberties, per annum, 20l. The Seneschall, 25l. The
Receiver, 20l. The Marshall, 2l. The total of these is, 3461l. 13s. 9d.
In the Province of Lemster.
The Lieutenant of the queens County, 121l. 13s. 4d. The Provost Marshall of
the army, 77l. 11s. 3d. The Provost Marshall of Lemster, 102l. 13s. 1d.
Officers in Munster.
The Lord President, 138l. 6s. 8d. For his diet and the Counsels allowed at his
Table, 520l. The Retinue of 20 foot, and 30 horse per annum, 803l. The chief
Justice, 100l. The second Justice, 66l. 13s. 4d. The queens Attorney, 13l. 6s.
8d. The Clerk of the Counsel, 20l. The Clerk of the Crown, 20l. The Sergeant
at Arms, 20l. The Provost Marshall, 255l. 16s. Sum. tot. 1951l. 16s. 8d.
For Officers in Connagh.
The chief Commissioner per annum, 100l. His Diet with the Counsels at his
Table, 882l. 10s. An allowance to himself, 40l. The Justice, 100l. The Queens
Attorney, 20l. The Clerk of the Crown, 20l. The Clerk of the Counsel, 20l.
The Sergeant at Arms, 20l. The Provost Marshall, 264l. 12s. 6. d. The increase
of pay to the present Commisioners, 282. l. 10s. Sum. total. 949l. 12s. 6d.
Certain Bands of Irish Kerne 1579l. 8s. 9d. For Warders in several Provinces,
3577l. 2d. For Commissaries of Musters, 577l. 18s. 4d. For Pensioners of all
sorts, 3249l. 9. d. Lastly, Alms men, 88l. 19. s. 4. d. The total of the
abovenamed charge not contained in the establishment, 21328l. 8s. 7d. To which
add the establishment, 277782l. 15s. The total of the yearly charge was
299111l. 3s. 7d. To which if you add the great charge of all Forts, of
Munitions, with the like extraordinary expenses, and consider that the 1300
horse, and the 1600 foot by new supplies were to be made up 20000.
What a mass of expense is here in one year, able to drain this Kingdom,
seeing nothing comes from Ireland but complaints.

It will require the wisdom and providence of those that undertake it, and the
patience of the people that bear it.

All this in a readiness, the Earl of Essex departs from London in March
1^99, in the beginning of the year, not providently foreseeing what a step he
then made to his ruin.

The Nobility and gallant Gentry accompanied him on his way.

And the Earl of Kildare made such haste in an ill Vessel, that himself and
many a brave man with him were all drowned in the passage.

The Earl being arrived in Ireland, took the place of government, and labored
to acquaint himself with the estate of that Kingdom, what parts were quiet,
what in rebellion,

Who had certain intelligence, that the Rebels in the County of Dublin were in
number of the chief Families, 48 foot, 20 horse.

In Kildare 220 foot, three horse.

In the County of Carlogh, being wholly wasted, only six or seven Castles held
for the Queen.

In the County of Wexford, all wasted but the Castles held for the queen, and
some English Families, but all the rest in rebellion.

In these two Counties 750 foot, 50 horse.

In the Connty of Leaz, most of the chief in rebellion, 570 foot, 30 horse.
Only a few Castles held for the queen.

In the County of Ophaly, some Castles held for the queen, others by the
Rebels, 468 foot, 12 horse.

In the County of Kilkenny, many great Families of the Irish, the Butlers in
Rebellion, 130 foot, 20 horse.

The Rebels held the Castle of Bellirage and Colekill. The rest the Earl of
Ormond held for the queen.

In the County of Meth, the son and heir of Sir William Nugent in rebellion,
and the Rebels of Vlster had much wasted the heart of the Pale.

In the County of West Meth, lying most waste, and possessed by the Rebels, 140
foot, twenty horse.

Besides, Captain Tirril a bold man of English Race, who had of Vlster men and
other Rebels 200 foot.

In the County of Lowth, all wasted by the Rebels, only an English, Irish
Baron, the Towns and Castles stood for the queen.

In the County of Langford, 120 foot.

The whole in this Province of Lemster, and Meth joined with it: 3048 foot, 182
horse.

In the Province of Vlster.
Consisting most of Irish, except somewhat which the Scots, held, were all
forced to give way to Tyrone.

Dundalke the Frontier Town between the Pale and Ulster, and Knocfergus a
Frontier Town toward Scotland, were kept by the English, and some few other
Castles, all the rest possessed by the Rebels.

In the upper and lower Clandebays the Rebels, 160 foot, 70 horse.

The Duffery had 20 foot.

Two more Rebels had 100 foot, 20 horse.

The Captain of Kilwarben had 60 foot, 10 horse.

Mac, 60 foot, 10 horse.

Beyond the Min Water, 40 foot.

Sir Francis Mac Surlebay, 400 foot, 100 horse.

The Island of Magie, belonging to the Earl of Essex was wasted.

Mac Guir in Fermannagh had 600 foot, 100 horse.

Other Rebels thereabout had 500 foot, ^^0 horse.

The O Reylies in the Brenny or County of Cavan had 800 foot, 100 horse.

O Cane in his Country, 500 foot, 2^0 horse.

Seven other chief Rebels had, 1180 foot, 281 horse. Tyrone the Arch traitor,
Tyrone his country, 700. foot, 200 horse.

And diverse other Rebels with him: So the whole forces of the Rebels in Vlster,
1702 horse, 7220 foot.

In the County of Tipperary, the Baron of Caher, a Butler with his Brother and
followers, 30 foot, 12 horse.

And diverse other great Families had in several companies, some not having
above three or four horse, 1660 F. 79 Horse.

In the County of Cork, James fitz Thomas, the new created Earl of Desmond,
250 foot, 30 horse.

And diverse other Families, 820 foot, 8 horse.

In the County of Luirick, Fisz Lacy with others had, 300 foot, 15 horse.

In the County of Kerry, the Lord Fitz-Morice and others, 500 foot, 30 horse.

In the County of Desmond, Osuillinan Bear, and others had, 500 foot, 6 horse.

In the County of Waterford, 200 foot, 10 horse.

The whole number of the Rebels in Munster, 5030 foot, 242 Horse.

The Rebels of Connagh were, 3070 foot, 220 horse.

In all the four Provinces, Meth being reckoned for a County in Lemster, the
strength of the Rebels were, 18246 foot, 2346 horse.

Concerning which in April, the Earl of Essex sent intelligence into England
by a Letter.

And in a second Letter of the resolutions of Tyrone; first, that he intended
to hearten his Confederates, and then to make head in Vlster with his own
forces, and O Donnel in Connagh, that the Rebels had taken oath at a public
Cross to be constant, and none ^ought pardon but in such insolent manner, that
it was rather a contempt.

That the very subjects grew cold in the service, that although on private
revenge they could appear with an 100. Horse, and 300* Foot, yet now pleaded
their inability to aid the Queen with six of each; the Earl gathered some
English forces together, and against his own advice in England, and the Q.
command (deceived by some false counsel) he set not on the head, but on a few
weak Rebels in Munster, a matter of no consequence, being beaten as they were.

June 15. the Lord Lieutenant received Letters from a Captain out of the North
of Vlster, that Tyrone had received Ammunition out of Spain, but no treasure
(as was reported) that he did solicit the Redshanks into his pay, and had
provision of arms, and other assistance daily from the Scots.

And also advised the Earl of their strength, and of their intention to
protract the war, and weary the English; in prevention whereof he wished his
Lordship to procure four thousand Redshanks which in their Boats might break
in upon Tyrone, which thing the Lord Bourgh had formerly undertaken to procure,
but was prevented by death.

Iu. 25. the Lord Lieutenant wrote unto the Queen of the state and condition of
the Rebels, showing the cause of their rebellion, with the means to reduce and
keep them in subjection, and that as well by Sea as Land provision must be
made to reduce them: and afterward gives such direction to her Majesty, as was
followed in the ensuing war, though himself had not the good hap to put it
in practice.

And in the conclusion bewayles his own misfortune, that his enemies (whom he
names) had gotten so near her Majesty's elbow.

In the end of July his Lordship brought back his forces into Lemster,
himself going to Dublin, having done little, but admitted some few to
protection, which afterward revolted again.

In his absence 600. soldiers which were left in the Glinne had been beaten by
the Irish, for which his Lordship used great severity in punishing of them,
putting to death the tenth common soldier, calling the Captains to a Court
Marshall, caused an Irish Lieutenant to be shot for parlying with the Rebels.

By this time the Qu. advertised his Lordship of his error in not setting on
the chief Rebel Tyrone, but he excused himself, and laid the fault on the
Counsel of Ireland, and that his intention now was that way beat, but yet that
first he must suppress some near Dublin: which being done, he took a view of
his Army, and found it so much impaired, that he sent to England for supply of
1000. new men to enable him presently to undertake the Vlster journey. And now
resolved to march Northwest, he willed Sir Conyers Clifford Governor of
Connagh, to compel Tyrone to give resistance at Belike, while himself set on
him on the other side.

So that Sir Con. Clifford with one Troop of horse, and 1400. foot came to the
Curlew Mountains, where he left his carriages under the guard of his Horse,
until he had tried the passage forward,

Who was presently assaulted by the Rebels, taking the advantage of the woods,
boggs, and a stony Causey, and although the English stoutly received the
charge, yet they being weary with a long march, and their powder failing them
which they had about them, they began to faint and so to fly; so that many
were slain in the place, and many hurt, besides two worthy Commanders, Sir Con.
Clifford, Alexand. Ratcliffe, killed: And had not Sir John Jepson valliantly
succored them with his Horse, most of the rest had perished: this happened by
a great oversight (as was thought.)

By this time the 1000. men out of England were arrived in Ireland, yet his
Lordship wrote over that he could do little this year, but only go to the
borders of Vlster, whether going in September, Tyrone showed himself two days
together on several hills some distance off, whence he sent to desire a
parley with his Lordship.

Who rejected that offer, and also sent him word, that on the morrow he should
find him armed in the head of his Army.

The next day after a light skirmish, one of Tyrones horsemen cried that Tyrone
would not fight, but would speak with the Lord Lieutenant apart from the Army
unarmed.

The next day also he was told, that Tyrone desired the Qu. mercy, and would
feign speak with his Lordship at the foard Balla. El^nch, near the chief
town of the County of Louth.

Where they two only met, and Tyrone saluted his Lordship very courtly, many
speeches passing between them.

Whether (as being left not far off) his Lordship called six or seven of his
chief Commanders, and Tyrone as many of his friends: and there was a
Conference about a Treaty of peace, and a truce made from six weeks to six
weeks, until May, with proviso that on 14. days warning given on either
side, it should be lawful to resume arms again.

Now, the Queen having received his Lordships Letters what he had done, which
was nothing with such an Army in so long space.

She wrote him a tart Letter, much blaming his proceedings, and questioning his
discretion.

Which did so gaul and wring his Lordship, that presently he left Adam Loftus,
the Archbishop of Dublin, and Sir George Carew Treasurer of the wars to govern
Ireland, so went into England.

And unexpected presented himself before the Qu. in her privy Chamber, but had
not that welcome that he expected, and after a few words was commanded to his
Chamber, and afterward to the Lord Keepers house in the nature of a Prisoner.

And now a list of the Commanders, and whole Army is taken and set down both
horse and foot, how disposed of throughout the whole Kingdom, and were 14422.
Foot 1231. horse.

The truce continuing the helm was easily held by those hands in which it was
put, but Dec. 6. Tyrone began to practice acts of hostility upon that he had
given (as he said) 14. days warning, and because the Earl of Essex was
imprisoned in England, on whom he did rely for safety, and would not now trust
the Counsel of Ireland, that had so often deceived him before, this
intelligence posted into England, that the Rebels were ready to assail the
Pale.

And a false rumor raised by Essex enemies, that England would suddenly be in
a combustion, which was no little prejudice to the said Earl.

The Queen hearing this and more, that the Rebels daily increased, and the
English Irish discontented that the government was wholly out of their hands,
by sending English Deputies over.

That Tyrone grew proud, bearing trust on the King of Spain, who had sent him
somewhat, but promised more; and the Pope not wanting in his fatherly cate
toward him, sent him a crown of Phoenix feathers, in imitation no doubt of
Urban the third, who sent King John Lord of Ireland a crown of Peacocks
feathers.

Upon this Sir Charles Blunt, Lord Montjoy, is thought fit to be sent, and was
thought on by the Qu. before Essex came over, who was forward to take the
charge upon him, and so turned the Queens intentions*

This Lord was a tall comely man, wise, valiant, and learned, close in his
counsels, resolute in his determinations.

His courses were much contrary to other Deputies, and so effected what they
could not do.

1. He led our men warily on any service, not willing to dis-hearten our men,
or encourage the enemy; and himself ever at hand, either to hearten or help,
he ventured his own person often, although it be a great question in Military
discipline, whether it be wisdom or no.

2. His planting of Garrison in the Rebels countries compassing Tyrone on every
side, so that they could not easily assist on the other.

Other Deputies made two or three journeys in the year, and that with the
whole Army; which was discovered by the Rebels, that they fled into the woods
and bogges, nor could the Army abide the field long for want of victuals, being
so many at one place; where as the Lord Montjoy planting good Garrisons in many
places, taking the field with 1000* foot, and 200. horse only, was able openly
to affront Tyrone, seeing he was compelled to leave many of his forces behind
to guard his Country from those Garrisons, which else would have forraged his
Country.

Thus he did not only in Summer as others had done, but in Winter also,
himself being five or six days in a week, on horseback, which course did
so vex the Rebels, who were driven to lie in the woods without shelter for
themselves or cowes, which allowing them not milk, they wanted present
provision, nor could they save their corn for the future.

4. Again, he had a special care to cut the passages open and plain, that
our forces might the more secure meet together.

5. Further, he was not easy to grant Pardons and Protections, but to such who
had drawn blood on their fellows, and so lost the hope of reconciliation to
the Rebels, and forbad all parlyes with them.

But as the Rebels were many at the Earl of Essex coming, so now much more
increased. In the County of Dublin increased one hundred.

And in many other Countries, besides five Castles lately taken by the Irish.

In the Province of Lemster increased 1280. Rebels. In the Province of Connagh
increased 300. Rebels, besides the doubt of Tibot ne Long.

Who had one hundred Irish men in the Queens pay.

So that now the Enemy strongest, the English weakest, and many other
disasters made the business very difficult.

In this case the Lord Montjoy undertook the business about Ian. 1599.

A little before whose coming Tyrone marches out of the North in a vaunting
manner unto Munster, to encourage and countenance the Rebels, but under a
religious pretense to visit a piece of the Cross at a Monastery in Tipperary
County, and so accompanied with the Lemster rebels went on his devotion.

Now the army of English reduced to 12000. foot, and 1200. horse, for whose
payment order is given to the Treasurer and Chamberlain of the Exchequer of
England, to pay the Treasurer of the Wars of Ireland, after the rate of the
former establishment, and other extraordinaries.

So there was signed an establishment by the Queen, Ian. 1. 1599. for the pay
of Commanders, and Soldiers.

And the Lord Deputy hasting away for Ireland, Ian. 10. 1599. in his way wrote
back to master Secretary, that he might have more Forces in regard the Rebels
were so strong.

A second establishment signed by the Lords, 11. Feb. 1599. wherein every
Officers and Soldiers pay, and other charges, the whole yearly charge 14055
pounds, 4 shillings 8 pence, far short of that allowance which the Earl of
Essex had.

February 26. the Lord Deputy landed in Ireland, when Sir George Carew was made
Lord President of Munster, Tyrone did not expect such a sudden arrival, so
that he was still in West Munster, where he might be surprised as the Earl of
Ormond thought, if things happened well.

And that he could not thence escape without engaging himself, if the passages
were watched.

So that daily news came that Tyrone now, or never was to be ruinated: and how
many Lords and others of the Irish which were for the Queen had laid wait
for him, and would stop his passage back, but all this vanished into Irish
ostentation of service, which seldom use to take effect, and many times are
not truly intended as this business did show.

And that his Lordship should not expect any help from diverse of the
Nobility, and Gentry of the Pale, they preferred a Petition to him, that they
were not able by reason of the spoils the soldiers had made upon them, but a
mere excuse (as Essex showed before.)

Then his Lordship wrote to Secretary Cecill, to excuse himself, for not
reducing the 14000 which he found in the Army unto 12000, and the cause
thereof as he had done before.

And upon that receives an answer from the Queen, that she does accept of his
reasons for the present, but would have him effect it by degrees.

And not to entertain many Irish Commanders, who are of small fidelity, and
being employed to use them far from their own country, and uses some other
advertisements; and so concludes.

And now for all the great hopes Tyrone escaped into the North, passing over
the Enny in great have, and marches 27 miles in one day: more then he had gone
in five before, so that he could not be over-taken.

And at his being there, he sent out a Mandate, by which he summoned the
Subjects of Munster to appear before him in this form.

O Neal commends himself unto you Moris Fitz Thomas, O Neal requesteth you in
Gods name, to take part with him, and fight for your conscience, and right, and
in so doing O Neale, will spend his life to see you righted in all your
affairs, and will help you, And if you come not to O Neale between this and 12
of the clock tomorrow, and take his part, O Neale is not beholding to you, and
will do to the uttermost of his power to overthrow you, if you come not to him
by Saturday noon at the furthest from Knoc Dumain, in Calrye the fourth of Feb.
1599.

O Neale requesteth you to come and speak with him, and does give you his word,
that you shall receive no harm, neither in coming or going from him, whether
you be friend or not, and bring with you to O Neale Gerald Fitz Gerald;
subscribed O Neale.

March the 7, the Lord Deputy had intelligence, that Tyrone was come to his
house at Dungannon, and that the Earl of Clanrichard had sworn, that when his
son came out off England, in May, he would enter into action (for so they
call Rebellion: and that the Plantation at Logh foil, was endeavored to be
hindered by the Rebel.

The 20 of March, the Secretary informed his Lordship of the relaxation of the
Earl of Essex; who sued earnestly in his behalf to the Secretary, even so far
as to make his excuse for the matter in Ireland.

The Lord Deputy makes a List of his army, about the beginning of the year
1600, and casts up the allowances.

General Officers for the army as in the former establishment.

Colonels 12 apiece per diem, 10 s.

Twenty six troops of horse, in some more, in some less at several rates of
pay in number, 1200.

In Loghfoyle Garrison 4000 foot.

In Carickfergus Garrison, 700 foot.

In the Province of Connagh, 1400 foot.

In the Province of Munster, 2950 foot.

In the Province of Lemster, 4500 foot.

Total of Foot, 1400.

Likewise a List which the Deputy drew out of the Companies formerly mentioned;
which lay in Lemster, Newry, and Carbugford, for to prosecute Tyrone in his
Country, horse 325, foot 3200.

Out of these taken to guard places and passages while the Army did return,
foot 810, horse 20.

Besides deduct the six dead pays allowed to each Company of foot, which is
288, and four out of fifty horse, which is 26, and other deductions of sick
and unsufficient men for service.

There remayns for his army in field, 2102 foot, horse 279 which is but a small
handful for so great a service.

Diverse others there were which had pay; as his Lordships chief Chaplain five
l. a week, and ten other Preachers at forty shillings a week, his Doctor of
Physic five pound a week.

In April it was consulted about entertayning of 2000 Scots, and that each man
should have a Cow for a months pay or six pence, per diem.

Which business was to be furthered by the Queens Agent in Scotland, but it
came to nothing being disliked in England.

Now the Deputy resolved to pursue the Rebels in many places at once, both by
the North Garrisons, and the rest of the Army.

April the third, the Lord Deputy sent Master Secretary notice of the
falsheartednesse of those that seemed most sure, and that the Irish Commanders
were dangerous to keep, yet knew not how to remove them without certain loss
of them.

And how he intended to send a thousand old Soldiers out of Dublin, to
Loghfoyle, and others to lie in Garrison at Balishannan, both places of great
consequence, and proved very advantageous to the English afterward.

And informed likewise that Tyrone by his so sudden and hasty flight out of
Munster, had much disheartened many of his Confederates, so that daily the heads
of some Rebels or others were brought unto the Deputy.

And the Rebels of Lemster made suit to be received to mercy: only the Towns
where the Rebels had to do were very insolent.

And Tyrone, by the arrival of two ships, (wherein were many Priests) did
encourage his friends. Lastly, the Deputy complained to the Secretary, that all
places were bestowed in England, so that he could gratify no deserving man.

Further he sent word that he doubted of the Earl of Ormonds constancy to
the Queens cause: and showed his reasonsa name greatly followed in that
Country.

In that Province of Munster, the Rebels were very strong, by reason Tyrone had
been there, and by the aid of Mac Carty more.

There happened an ill chance about the time that Sir George Carew went to his
charge of Munster, whereof he was President.

Who coming to Kilkenney in his way from Dublin, with the Earl of Thomond in
his company, and a hundred horse to attend him; where the Earl of Ormond, told
them that he was to parley with some Rebels of those parts, whereof Ow^y M^c
Rory was chief, and requested them to accompany him.

To which they consented and rode eight miles to the place of meeting, with
some twenty horse of the Earl of Ormonds, and a few followers refusing the
guard of the Lord Presidents 100 horse, and the Earl of Ormond, left his two
hundred foot two miles short, and with his other company met with Owny, who
came out of the Woods, leaving five hundred men well appointed not far off;
came up to him with some pikes, but after an hour spent, and nothing agreed
on, the Lord President wished the Earl of Ormond to return, but he said he
would first speak with the Jesuit Archer; and did much revile him, calling him
Traitor.

In the mean time the Rebels foot had encompassed, the Earl and his company,
and presently took the Earl of Ormond prisoner; and Mac Rory laid hands on
the Lord President: but the Earl of Thomound rushed on him with his horse, and
they both hardly escaped, the Earl of Thom. being hurt in the thigh.

The Countess of Ormond having one only daughter, was much perplexed and
distressed, but the Lord Deputy sent her a Guard for her House.

There were several conceits upon his surprisall, some supposing it was not
against his own will, but howsoever the Lord Deputy thought it a matter of no
great consequence.

The Fort of Phillipstown in Ophaly was to be victualled, and the Rebels gave
cut that they would hinder it.

And through the emulation of a great Commander that had another preferred
before him, and strengthened by the Court faction in England.

It might have miscarried, for the said Commander chose out some weak
companies for this service to be led by the other; but the Deputy being
advertised thereof, proffered them to him that had made the choice of them, but
he refused to go with them.

And Sir Oliver Lambert with 14 companyes did with much valor and courage
effect the business, though strongly opposed.

May the fifth, the Lord Deputy makes toward Tyrone in the North: who had
intelligence that he was lodged in the strong Fortress of Coughlurkin where
the Rebels had fortified three miles in length. His Lordship drew toward
Armagh with 1500 hundred foot and two hundred horse, and sent Captain Edward
Blany with five hundred foot, and fifty horse to make good the passage through
the Moyry for the Earl of Southampton, and Sir Oliver Lambert, who were to
come that way to the Army: and coming to the Faghard, not far from Dundalke,
whether he went to the Earl, and told him of the convoy, assuring him that
the Lord Deputy would meet him by two of the clock in the afternoon; hereupon
the Earl having with him besides the conuoy, two foot companyes, and fifty
horse of Gentlemen Volunteers: and so marched back to the dangerous passage of
the Moyry; where the Rebels taking advantage of the Woods and Bogs, assailed
our men, lying lurking on both sides, our men being to pass over a Ford.

But by this time the Lord Deputy himself was come near the place, who sent
two Regiments, who beat back the Rebels; who left a few to skirmish with those
two Regiments, and the rest fell back into the Wood, and issued out upon the
Rear, brought up by the Earl of Southampton, with great fury both with horse
and foot: But Sir Henry Foliot made very good stand, and Sir Oliver Lambert
taking his colors in his own hand, with some thirty of the Earl of
Southamptons best men, hastened toward the assaylants to second the Earl, who
behaved himself with great courage, and made the Rebels give ground.

Tyrone was seen not far off with great forces, yet fell not on, so that
they marched to the Camp: little hurt being done to the English, but much to
the Rebels.

May the 26, the Deputy had Letters from the Lords in England, and it was only
to answer the demands of some Irish Lords upon submission.

June the 19, the Lord Deputy sent to Master Secretary how that certain aid
was come from Spain to the Rebels; and makes a request for a fleet to lie on
the Coast of Ireland, and some small Barks to hinder the Scots from relieving
the Irish, Now Sir Samuel Bagnal drew out of the Newry into Monaghan, where he
took some booty, and slew six Commanders, and many of the Rebels men with
little damage to himself.

Many Rebels of Lemster now seek for mercy, but are not admitted, except some
service done for the Queen against their companions.

Two chief Rebels offer to submit, but neither could be received without the
others head.

His Lordship now out of England required to do some thing against the Lemster
rebels; in his way thither, took two hundred Cowes, seven hundred Garrais, and
five hundred sheep, burning and wasting the corn all the way, as he went to a
most dangerous passage, where Sir Oliver Lambert was appointed to meet him,
both being constrained to fight all the way with the rebels until they met,
having done much harm unto the rebels.

May the seventeenth, they both marched toward a Fortress, where the Rebels
had stored much provision of all sorts, at whose entry there was a Foard
compassed with Bogs, over which our horses passed quietly: but his Lordding in
the head of the foot was assailed with fury.

The Traitor Terrill having appointed a hundred shot to ply the Deputies
person, and given them marks to know him.

But the English defeated and slew 35 rebels, among which was Owmy Mac Rory, a
vile rebel, who before had taken the Earl of Ormond prisoner, a bloody bold
young man; by whose death that party never was able to appear in field.

And now the Captain, and by their example the soldiers cut down the corn
with their swords, that the rebels were driven to want for the future.

His Lordship returned one day with the foot alone, and sent about the Horse,
and yet the rebels which lay there about durst not fight with him.

Eight heads of chief rebels were brought unto his Lordship that night, and one
arch-rebell alive, who was presently hanged.

Sir Oliver Lambert foraging abroad, took a thousand Cowes, five hundred
Garrais, and a multitude of sheep and killed twenty rebels; and much spoil
daily was done then by the English.

At his Lordships going out of Leaz, some were received protection.

At this time his Lordship had letters of approbation from her Majesty, with a
promise of supply both of horse and foot, and with advice to make the company
less, thereby to gratify more Gentlemen with places of command.

August the twentieth, his Lordship returned to Dublin* where he heard of the
complaints that were made against him by those of the Pale to the Lords in
England.

In answer whereunto he writes to Master Secretary, only desiring his good will
in candid interpretation of his actions

September the fourteenth, his Lordship takes his journey toward the North,
and encampeth three miles beyond Dundalke, and lay there until the eighth of
October, it being most tempestuous foul weather, his Lordships Tent having
been often blown over.

Tyrone, in the mean time, before his Lordship came, had possessed the Newry, a
strong Fortress as any the Rebels had, but his Lordship was resolved to cut
his way through them if they made resistance.

Many skirmishes fell out well on our part, and in small time he came to
Armagh, where not far off his Lordship built a Fort in a very convenient
place; having a River by it all environed with Bogs, and a hill like a
Promontory which his Lordship called Mount Norris.

So he sent some companies of ours to fetch corn and timber over the Bogs,
where Tyrone met with them; and skirmishing with them was put to the worst, and
next day Neale O Quin, was taken prisoner, Tyrones great Favorite.

And the rebels intending to hinder the building of the Fort were soundly
beaten, and that finished and left in it four hundred men under Captain Blany.

His Lordship returning by Carlingford found the passage very difficult for his
horse, that they were sent a little about; and now they had certain
intelligence that Tyrone was come down unto a place, by which we were to pass.

Which was a very great Wood at the foot of a Mountain, reaching so near the
Sea, that it had no more space, then that six or seven might walk abreast,
with some less, and at full Sea none in some places.

His Lordship disposing his forces for the fight, sending out a forlorn hope
to march before, and a forlorn Rear.

The enemy sought to make good a small piece of ground like a semicircle, where
the Sea made a Diameter, and a thick Wood the Circumference; and at the corner
next to our Army, there ran a River out off the Wood at the side of which they
made strong trenches, and at the further corner a Barricado which reached far
into the wood, and down to the Sea.

The enemy appeared horse and foot on this plain, but at our men's going over
the River, their horse drew into the Woods, and their foot into the Trenches,
whence they poured out Vollies of shot.

But the stout courage of the English was such that in little space they beat
them out of their Trenches and from their works, and made them retire into the
woods, but sallied out again upon our Rear; to their further loss.

And in all this not much hurt to us, only two Gentlemen of quality killed; not
twenty lost, about sixty hurt, of the enemy eighty killed, and the loss was
(as we had intelligence two hundred.

Our Marshall and Sergeant Major were always ready to assist the weak, and
bring succor to the distressed, and the Army went on cheerfully.

And by this Tyrones reputation got a crack.

His Lordship returned to Dundalke, and from thence to Dublin, with his
followers and Volunteers, having disposed the horse and foot into Garrisons,
Forts* and Provinces under their Commanders.

The horse were 1198. The foot 14150.

About November his Lordship sends into England, in the behalf of two chief
Rebels submitted Conner Roe M^^ Guire and his son, both which had done good
service in the last North journey: and had taken Tyrones brothers eldest son,
a yongman of the greatest hope in the North, and though three thousand l. were
offered for his ransom, yet they brought him to the Lord Deputy. There were
certain rebels near Dublin, in the Glinne which in his Lordships absence had
done much spoil, so that his intent was to chastize them, but seeming and
showing to go another way, that they should not suspect him, on Christmas day
early in the morning, and after a tedious march he arrived at the chief rebels
house, so suddenly that he took his wife and eldest son, and made him fly
stark naked into the Woods, while his Lordship kept a good Christmas, in his
house till the twentieth of January, his soldiers wasting and spoiling the
Country, in the mean time. And leaving Garrisons in some places, he passed into
Trim in Eastmeth, and so to Danoar, in Westmeth a strong Castle, having visited
many chief Gentlemen in the way.

February the two and twentieth, his Lordship had letters out of England, in
which he heard that the Earl of Essex was in the Tower for treason; which
news wrought much alteration in the Deputy; now he begins to insinuate and
comply with Secretary Cecill.

And Essex irreparably fell, more perchance by the sharpness of his enemies
wit, then by the burden of his own crime.

Howsoever the Deputy being privy to so much as he was, he said he would not
put his neck under the Queens Attourneys tongue; and resolved with himself
that had he been sent for into England, not to have undergone the hazard of a
trial: but his Lordships former service, and future employment blew over this
storm without any shatter falling on him.

But with countenance and good success he goes forward, and with courage to
set on Tyrrils Island very strong, standing in the midst of a Bog, in the midst
of a Plain near an Abbey, where his Lordship proclaimed Tirrils head at two
thousand Crowns, and so assailed the Island. But the next day, the four and
twentieth of February, so much snow fell that nothing could be done, and in the
night the Rebels stole away quitting the Island, and left some store of corn,
and a few cattle, so his Lordship passed beyond the Island into a Plain,
destroying the corn and burning the houses as he went into Meth, and then to
Trim, and so marched into the Ferney, from whence to Ardes, so seven miles to
Mellifont, then to Drogedagh two miles, where he stayed until the tenth of
April, and then went to Dublin, in all which passage nothing of moment was
done, but visiting some chief Subjects, and striking terror to the Rebels.

About this time his Lordship had order for the proclayming of a base coin,
and cry down the current.

To hinder the Rebels traffic, as was pretended, but it proved the undoing of
the poor soldier, each shilling having but two pence halfpenny silver in it:
so that commodities were raised to an excessive rate; and the exchange which
was formerly provided for their help, was grown difficult, or altogether put
down.

At Drogedah, his Lordship altered the list of the foot, but not the horse: and
disposed them into Garrisons.

Her Majesty's charge in the year 1600 to 1601, by establishment, and orders
for increase was 276914l. 9s. 4d.

Out of which by his Lordships providence was saved, 15262l. 6s. 5d.

Also by Checks imposed on the Army 1729l.

So the charges that year, besides munition and other extraordinaries 234622.

Certain businesses that happened in Munster, that year, under the command of
the Lord President, Sir George Carew.

In general some submitted, and some revolted.

His Lordship coming to Dungarun, had notice that Florence Mac Ca^^ie: though
he had received favors from the State, was entered into action (for so they
call Rebellion) and raised in Carby and Desmond, of the Provincialls and
Bonnaghs (for so are hired soldiers called) two thousand foot, never assailed
the English until they came between Kinsale and Cork, where they set on
Captain Flower Sergeant Major of Munster, who had 1200 foot, and 100 horse; who
did valiantly resist and beat back the Rebels, though he had two horse killed
under him; yet were 100 of the Rebels slain, upon which Florence Mac Carty
submits, and yielded his son for pledge.

Now plots are laid for the killing of the titular Earl of Desmond, by one
Dermod Oconner, who had married the Daughter of the old Earl of Desmond, and
had the leading of 14000 Bonnaghs, who after surprised him by a trick, and
presently sent his wife to the Lord President for the money promised in reward,
and wished him to come to Kilm^h, and there he would bring him, but the Rebels
in the way rescued him, and set him free again.

May the twentieth, his Lordship took the field, and marched toward Li^^eck,
and from place to place prosecuted the rebels so close that many submitted and
others fled out of the Country: and the titular Earl of Desmond by Sir Charles
Wil^^^, was quite driven out of the Country, in whose passage Sir George
Thornton sent out the Garrison, and killed 120 of the Rebels, and got 320
Garrans laden with baggage, fifteen Pikes and Pieces, 40 horse; but lost
sixteen horse of his own in the fight, the titular Earl was quite broken and
stole back into Munster, and lived as a Wood Kerne, with three or four in his
company, and once again being like to be surprised, he ran away in such have,
that he left his shoes behind him.

The Lord Deputy wasted and gathered in all the corn, so that the year
following the Rebels were pinched, and in Munster all subdued or submitted, so
that 400 of that Province received their pardons under the great Seal.

And all being quiet, he did question the Corporate Towns that were so ready
to assist the Rebels, as being aiders and abetters of the rebellion for their
own private gain.

And so he sent 1000 of the Munster List to the Lord Deputy to be disposed at
his pleasure.

The Lord Deputy and the Counsel wrote into England from Tredagh, where he had
layne from March, 21, until April the sixteenth following, to signify that
many chief rebels had submitted.

Chief of the Ferny and of the Fewes, and the chief likewife of the Bienny.

And further solicited for supplies of money, victuals and munition, to be sent
some to Dublin, but most to Galloway, for the forces to plant Ballishannon.

An establishment signed by the Queen, March 31, 1601, which was according to
the former, the charge 255773l. besides the charge of munition, of levying
horse and foot, for re-inforcing the Army, with many like charges.

About April diverse Rebels in the North submit, and discover many secrets to
our Captain concerning the Spanish Invasion this year.

Oghy Ohanlon submitted at Tredagh, and subscribed to diverse Articles.

The Garrison at Liffer did spoil the rebels, and took 300 Cows.

The Lord Deputy kept Saint Georges Feast at Dublin, April the twentieth,
inviting many of the submitted Rebels, where he carried himself with such
wisdom and gravity; that they did both admire him and fear him.

In May, Munster Rebels had their pardons granted them upon the intercession of
the Lord President.

A list out of five English Shires, and Irish Submitties, 207 horse, 374
Archers, as likewise arising out of the Irish Lords and their Captains horse
128, Kerne 361.

And now preparation is made for the Summer service, whence to take forces for
the field.!

To be drawn out of Munster to Connagh, a thousand foot, fifty horse.

And in Connagh already 1150 foot, horse 74.

Thus to be disposed in Connagh, at Galloway, and Athlone; 350 foot.

At the Abbey of Boil in Connagh, under the command of the Earl of
Clanrichard, a thousand foot, 62 horse.

To leave in Lemster side of the Shannon, at the Annaly, to further the
plantation of Balishannan, eight hundred foot, horse twelve.

These all lying to infest the Rebels, or to hinder their joining together, or
to hinder Northern forces from coming into Lemster.

And to hinder Tyrones gathering in the corn.

May the two and twentieth, his Lordship parts from Dublin, and wrote into
England for six thousand soldiers ready, if so be any foreign aid should
come, and to have a Magazine at Limrick, many pardoned in the County of Cork.

And about the eight of June, his Lordship came near the Pace of Moyry, where
he purposed to build a Fort to secure that Pace.

Now again, he sollicits his former demands by Letters into England.

And so he marched by Dundalke to Lecagh, coming suddenly on them he took much
booty, and many submitted to his Lordship in this passage, from thence he went
to Mount Norris, and so he intended to plant a Garrison at Armagh, and so
forth he went to Blackwater, to see that way to that Fort, where the Marshall
Bagnal had his defeat.

The four and twentieth, he marched two miles short of the Newry, with a
thousand two hundred and fifty foot, and an hundred and fifty horse.

The nine and twentieth day, his Lordship had notice that Sir Henry Davers had
done much damage to Brisan mac Art, in killing his men, and taking his cattle.

Many received Pardons and were accepted of, because that certain news came,
that the Spanish forces which lay at Lisbone, were to come for Ireland.

So his Lordship disposed of the Companies into Garrisons and Forts near the
enemies Country, and went with his followers to Dundalke, having with him
only three companies of foot, and a troop of horse; but going toward the
North, he gathered some forces out of the Garrisons, so he went to a Hill near
Blackwater on the Southside, making a stand where Tyrone and his horse and foot
showed themselves in a Meadow beyond the River with Trumpets, and Drums, and
Colors which they used not to do before, but now only in a bravado.

Making some shot at us, which being at too fat distance fell short without
doing, any hurt, but we having a Rabenet and a Falcon planted on a little Hill,
made some shot at the Rebels which made them seulke into the Woods like Puppits.

So that his Lordship sent 300 foot to a Hill close by the waterside; and at
the evening came and encamped upon it, whence he saw Tyrone draw some horse
over the water to our side; but Sir William G^d^lphin went with a troop of
horse to meet him, but he presently retired back.

So we placing the two small pieces, charging them with Musket shot, drove the
Rebels out of the Trenches, which they had made beyond the River, so that the
300 men passed over the River and possessed them, and an adjoining old Fort,
with a plain, not altogether Musket shot from the Wood, where the Rebel was
fled, and his Lordship seeing the Trenches did admire that they would take so
much pains to make that which they had so little care to keep, so his Lordship
went to view a Place in Tyrones Wood, who stood looking on us; who only made a
few shot at our men in their retreat.

So the sixteenth his Lordship passing over the Blackwater, with a Regiment of
Irish, marched to a place at the left hand of our Camp, at the entrance of a
great Wood, where our men made a stand in a fair green Meadow, having our Camp
not far behind them, and the Wood at each side and before them; in which
great multitudes of the Rebels were assembled; so that there happened a great and
large skirmish; with various accidents; sometimes they; sometimes we giving
ground; for the Lord Deputy drew our forces out of the Camp, as he saw the
Rebels increase.

Doctor Latwar his Lordships Chaplain, not content to see this in the Camp,
went into the Meadow to our Colors, and was shot so that he died the next day.

Not one more slain of the English only a Captains leg broken, but 26 of the
Irish on our side, and 72 hurt, such as were kept in pay only, that they should
not side with the Rebel.

Among the Rebels Tyrones Secretary, and above two hundred Kernes were killed,
which did much abate their courage, and animate our men.

His Lordship wrote into England, complaining of the scarcity of the victuals,
and that which was, being salt fish, which as he said was most unfit for
marching, was not good nor wholesome.

His Lordship rising from about Blackwater, made another Proclamation for
Tyrones head at 1000l. and 2000l. to bring him alive.

So he marched too and fro spoiling and cutting down all the Corn
thereabouts, and burning houses in the woods near where the Rebels lay, but
would not fight.

So he returned to the Blackwater, and with some choice foot and horse went to
view the way to Dungannon, Tyron's chief house, ten miles distant, and setting
some to cut down the wood the Rebels sought to hinder them, but were beaten
back, so after we marched six miles to Armagh, and three to Rawlaghtany.

From whence Sir Hen. Davers with 300 foot and 40 horse, went to burn some
houses that stood in a Fortress which he performed, but the Rebels followed
them back even to our Camp into which they poured a Volley of shot, and
retired into an adjoining Fortress.

Here the Commissary viewed the Army, and found in the List 2950, but by Pole
1728.

The fourth day at night the Rebels came with cries, Drums and Bag-pipes, as if
they would have attempted our Camp.

And poured into it two or three thousand shot, but doing little hurt.

For his Lordship commanded that none of our men should stir, having lodged
in a Trench some 400 shot, with command that they should not give fire until
the rebels were near; which doing they put up paid with the shot, and sent out
lamentable cries. So then his Lordship sent for more forces because he had
intelligence, that Tyron's Army was much increased.

Now there came more certain news of the Spaniards coming, and of their
intention to land at Waterford, in respect of the commodious harbor, and the
peoples good affection unto the Spaniards.

A speedy supply of a thousand shot was required out of England, because Tyrone
was grown very strong, as appeared by a list given by one that had been lately
Tyrones Marshall, and now received into favor: as follows.

Tyrone for his guard 100 horse. His son Hugh O Neale, 100 horse, in all 400.
His brother Carmack, 100 horse in all 400. Art mac Baron, 20 horse, Phelim O
hanlors son, 10 horse. Turlogh Brasils son 50 horse. Con Tyron's base
son, 20 horse. His guard of foot, led by James O sheale a Lemster man, 200.
400 Led by Jenken Fitz Simon of Lecale, 200. 400 Other chief Commanders of
foot, 3260 foot. Tot. Horse and Foot, 4060.
All these (except 300) had means to keep themselves and companies in Tyrone:
and diverse of them besides have great forces to keep their own forces.

About this time some discourtesies happened between the Lord Deputy and the Lord
President of Munster, for that he had made some complaints of the Deputy in
England, but by persuasion of Secretary Cecil, the Lord Presidents great
friend, they were united as fast as greatness will permit.

His Lordship for want of victual lay about Armagh, and the Blackwater Fort.

Aug. 29. his Lordship came to Trim, where the counsel of Dublin met him, and
from whence, September the third, they wrote into England, in excuse that they
had passed the limited sum of 6000 for extraordinaries: it being far too
little to compass so much business, and provide so many things as was
needful; and had not been able out of it to repair Athlone Castle, the Key of
Connagh; nor diverse other Forts and Castles of great consequence.

Now intelligence came from Secretary Cecill, that the Spaniards were
discovered about Sylly 45 sail, (whereof 17 men of war) and supposed that
they would l^nd ^t Limrick: most of them 100 tun apiece, and had six thousand
soldiers in them.

As also other letters from the Council in England, that his Lordship would
ask what supplies were needful, and that in convenient time.

September the nineteenth, two thousand men out of England arrived, some in
Cork, and some in Waterford.

And his Lordship writes for store of munition and victuals, to be with all
speed sent to Dublin, telling Master Secretary that Tyrones very friends would
fail with his fortune, and many others when they could rid themselves of the
fear of him.

And that the Irish submitted Lords desired to continue subjects, if they might
see appearance of defense, though perchance not so much out of their honest
disposition, as for the smart they yet feel of a bitter persecution.

In June, the Queen wrote to the Lord Deputy with her own hand, a most
gracious acceptance, and a free commendations of his good service.

September the three and twentieth, the Spanish Fleet came into Kinsale, lying
between Rosse and Cork Bay out into the South Sea: the Lord Deputy and Lord
President of Munster, being both together with the Council at Kilkenny, whence
they road both to Cork.

Where they understood the number of the Spaniards to be about six thousand,
under the command of Don Jean de Aquila, who was one of the chiefest Commanders
of the King of Spain, and had been General in Britany: And that a thousand of
them scattered by foul weather, were landed at Baltamore to the Westward of
Kinsale.

And that they expected (according to promise) great aid and assistance from
the pretended Earl of Desmond and Florence, Mac Carty, who were both taken
prisoners, and already sent into England.

And that they had brought sixteen hundred great Saddles, for which Tyrone had
promised to furnish them with horse, and then they would keep the field, for
they had likewise many arms in hope the Irish Rebels would supply them with
men, which would revolt at their first appearance.

About October, many letters are sent into England, to the Counsel and to
Master Secretary.

And he tells them, that seeing the occasions are so great, good supplies are to
be sent with all speed, because defense must be made for the subject that has
means.

And money also, because the Swordmen which have no means, will go to the
enemy if we entertain them not.

Thus his Lordship straightened for want of men, to suppress the rebels in the
North, and oppose the foreign enemy in the South; but that God who accounts
rebellion as the sin of Witchcraft, and an evil thought against lawful
Sovereignty impiety, did so counsel and encourage him, that collecting a small
force together to Cork, he shows himself in field, and presently marched
within five miles of Kinsale, and on the 17 of October, within half a mile of
the walls, and sat down under a hill called Kn^c Robin, whither the Spaniard
out of the Town, made some shot to hinder his encamping but could not.

And the next night made a great salley, but were beaten back again.

Many skirmishes happened between the English and Spaniard, who always went back
by weeping cross; by Gods providence and the valor of our stout Commanders.
So that Don Jean himself said he never saw men come more willingly to the
sword then ours.

There was little done by reason our artillery were not come to the Camp.

But the 26, our Camp rose and entrenched themselves very strongly on Spittle
Hill, on the North side of Kinsale, a little above Musket shot of the Town.

Sir John Barkley with three other Captains, the night before falling into the
Spaniards Trenches, made them forsake them; and fell into the gate of the Town
with them, and killed and hurt above 20 of them, having but three of our men
hurt.

The disposal of the whole army in Forts and Garrisons.

Left at Loughfoyle horse 100, foot 3000 under several Captains.

Left at Caricfergus horse 150, foot 850. In Lecale, foot 150. Left in the
North Garrisons, horse 100. Foot in No: Garrisons 800. Left in the Pale and
places adjoining 175. Foot in the Pale under several Captains 3150. Left in
Connagh 62 horse. Foot left there, 1150. Tot. 587 horse. foot 9100.
A list of the Army with his Lordship at Kinsale.
The old Munster list, Horse 175. Foot 1950. New Companies 2000 Foot. Brought
from the North and the Pale to Kinsale, 436 horse, more foot 950. more foot
2080. tot. at Kinsale horse 611. Foot 6900.
The whole Army in Ireland 1198 horse, 1600 foot.

But many of these Companies were very deficient: the the 27. our Artilery were
landed at Oyster haven, and brought into the Camp: and two Culverings were
planted to batter the Castle of Rincovaur which the Spaniards possessed from
their first coming, which Castle commanded the harbor of Kinsale, but one of
the Pieces presently brake, so we planted two more, which grew so hot, that the
enemy, seeing they could not be releeved, neither by water nor land (for both
had been tried, but in vain) sent out a parley for Conditions that would not
be accepted, but presently after for life only, which was granted, being 86 in
number, and some 30 had been slain in the defense of it.

The Spaniards drew a demi Cannon out of the Town, and did play into our
Camp: the first shot killed two men, and endangered many, piercing his
Lordships tent, the shot altogether falling about his quarter, some supplies of
men, munition, and ^^ctuals, came out of England at this time, brought by the
Earl of Thomond, and being noysed that Tyrone was coming down with a great
Army to join with the Spanyard; the camp was strongely fortified on the north
side from the Town; and the next day the Lord President with 2100. Foot, and
325 horse drew out into the borders of the Province to stop him, at least
hinder his passage.

But the Spaniards getting intelligence of the Lord Presidents going out of the
Camp, and supposing us thereby to be much weakened, about noone they drew out
most of their forces, and sent 60. shot and pikes to the foot of the hill near
our Camp, leaving their ^^enches very well lined.

Some entertained skirmish with those that did approach so near; Others of our
men went about and set upon the trenches, and beat the Spaniards out of them,
so that when the foremost retired, supposing to have relief of their seconds
which they left in the Trenches they were deceived, and feign to make haste
into the Town: many of them hurt and killed, a Serjant taken, so that Don Jean
committed the Serjant major: commended the valor of our men, and that his own
had lost their reputation.

And commanded that no man should after come off from his service, except he
were fetched off by an Officer.

The 13. day ten great ships came into Kinsale under the command of Sir Ri^h.
Leveson, who brought 2000. Foot with Munition and Artillery: and Officers of
all kinds to attend the same.

A list of the Army at Kinsale Foot 11800.

Out of which was chosen a flying Regiment (as they called it) to answer all
alarmes, and were exempted from other duties.

The Horse 857.

The Castle Niparke upon a breach made by our cannon, yielded only on condition
of saving their lives, sixteen being only left in it; It stood in an Island
beyond the water.

The Lord President returned with four Regiments, two he carried out, and two
met him, and coming to the Camp, they quartered by themselves on the West
side of Kinsale, and were commanded by the Earl of Thomand, for the Lord
President went to the Lord Deputy.

The Town with a Demi-Cannon played upon our Admiral, and Vice Admiral in
the the harbor of Kinsale.

And shot them throughout.

But our Ship pieces presently dismounted the Demicannon, and hurt their
chief Gunner.

Our battery lay so continually upon the Town on all sides, that did it much
offend the enemy within, who impatient that we built a fort close to the town
West gate.

Made a brave sally with 2000 men on our Ordinance on the East side, and made
most furious assault, having brought with them tools to cloy the Pieces, and
to dismount them if possible.

And indevoured to pull down the Gabions in our trenches and baskets filled
with earth, for the safeguard of our Gunners and Cannoneeres.

But they found such resistance by the great courage of our men, that they were
driven to retreat into the Town, leaving above 120 dead in the place, and
many slain near the town, some others taken prisoners.

But on our side not many hurt, two Captains and one Lieutenant killed.

Among the Spaniards at their shipping many of them were found to have Spells,
Characters, and hallowed Medalls, as preservatives against death.

A Drum was sent to offer Don Jean to bury his slain, who returned thanks,
but withal prayed the Lord Deputy to see them buried, promising to do the
like for ours, when they fell in his power.

At this time news came that six Spanish ships were put into Castle-haven,
near Baltamore, and six more were scattered from them by foul weather, these
six brought two thousand men, and many Ordnance and Munition, and news that
20000 more were coming.

Sir Richard Levison getting five or six ships out of the harbor of Kinsale,
got in little time into Castle-haven, and and sunk one Spanish ship.

The Admiral of the Spaniard having 9 Foot water in her hold drove on a
rock, and the Vice Admiral and two others run aground, most of the Spaniards
quitting them.

And so our Fleet returned to Kinsale.

Into which harbor came a Scottish Bark laden with 80 Spaniards, who were by
the Master put all into the hands of the English, so were landed and carried
into the Camp, upon whose examination diverse discoveries were made, that great
preparations were made for Ireland, and that in Spain they doubted not but that
it was taken already.

Now intelligence came to the Camp that O Donnell was joined with the
Spaniards that landed at Castle-haven, and that he together with all the forces
that Tyrone could make, would releeve Kinsale.

Upon which our Camps did more strongly fortify and entrench themselves for
their own defense.

And so had not leisure to follow the batteryes as they had done before,
because the new supplies were much wasted with hard service, and great
sickness.

Two small Sconces were built at the West side of the Town, between the Earl
of Thomands quarter and the water, and so cast up trenches from place to place,
to invest the town to the land, and hinder the driving in of the cattle into
the town. O Donnels forces, are said to be 4000. and Tyrones 8000. which are
all to join with the Spaniards, and lie not above six miles from our Camp.

A Letter was intercepted, sent to Oneale by the Spanish General. To the
Prince Oneale, and Lord O Donnell.
J Thought your Excellencies would have come at Don Ricardos going, since he
had order from you, to say that upon the Spaniards coming to you (from
Castle-haven) you would do me that favor; And so I beseech you now, you will
do it, and come as speedily and as well appointed as may be: for I assure you
that the enemy, are tired and very few, and they cannot guard the third part of
their trenches, which shall not avail them, for resisting their first fury,
all is ended.

The manner of your coming, your Excellencies know better there then I to give
here: for I will give them enough to do this way, being always watching to
give the blow all that I can, and with some resolution that your Excellency
fighting as ye do always, I hope in God the victory shall be ours without
doubt, because the cause is his.

And I more desire the victory for the interest of your Excellency, then mine
own.

And so there is nothing to be done, but to bring your squadrons; come well
appointed and close withal, that being mingled with the enemies; their forts
will do as much harm to themselves as unto us.

The Lord keep your Excel. Kinsale December. 18. after the old style.

Though you be not well fitted, I beseech your Excellen. to dislodge and come
toward the enemy, for expedition imports, it is needful that we all be on
horseback at once, and the greater have the better,

Signed by Don Iean de Aquila.




This news made us ply our batteryes the more, and the like importunity made
Tyrone advance within a mile of us in the way to Cork.

But some of our Foot drawing out of the Camp toward him; for that time he
drew himself into the woo^s.

Our Army was but weak at this time, many sick, and some run away in number
6595.

Tyrone often showed his Horse and Foot on a hill not ^a^e off; and we had
intelligence from one of Tyrones Commanders that both he and the Spaniards
resolved to a^t our Camp together on all sides in the night.

But Tyrones guides missing the way, happened to be with^^ an hour of day,
when they were discried, in a plain not far from our Camp: where Tirrill led
the vantgard wherein the Spaniards from Castle haven were, Tyrone leading their
battle, and O Donnell their rear intending to force the great Camp.

But the Lord Deputy, with the Lord President having sat in Counsel all that
night drew out some regiments. The Marshall Sir Richard Wingfield with 400
horse, and Sir Henry Fowers regiment advanced within 20 score of the enemy,
resolving to give them battle, two more regiments being come up; which the
enemy perceiving retired over a foard somewhat disorderly, and the Marshall
seeing it desired leave of the Lord Deputy to fight; which being granted to
take occasion according to his discretion, he presently marched forward over
the foard.

The enemy still retyring further over the bogge into a plain, hoping to find
the bogge some safeguard from us.

But the Marshall with some horse and foot went to the bogge side, and gave
them occasion of skirmish; there their Battalians standing firm on the one
side of the bogge, and our foot on the other.

In the mean time the Marshall found a way through the Foord to the ground
where the Rebels stood, he possessed the same with some foot, and presently
got over three troop of Horse, with which he charged the enemies battles of
1800 men, but finding them stand firm, wheeled about.

But now three troop of Horse more, and two Regiments of foot which were with
the Lord Deputy, who stood not far off with a vigilant eye, came all up.

So that the Marshall with the Horse charged home upon the rear of the
Battle, which being Irish, and not used to fight in the plain, especially
seeing their horse dye, which were the chief Gentlemen (in number five or six
hundred) were suddenly routed, and our men followed the execution. The other
two Battles seeing the other routed, advanced to their succor, but the Lord
Deputy sending another Regiment to charge on the flank of the Vangard, which
presently retired disorderly, being followed by our horse and foot. But the
Spaniards that were not so light footed, drew out by themselves, yet were soon
broken (by a troop of horse led by Sir William God^lphin) and most of them
killed their Commander Don Alinza del Campo taken prisoner, together, with two
Captains, 7 Alfieroes, Ensigns or Colors (as we call them) and 40 soldiers.

In the mean time many of the light-footed Irish escaped away, by advantage of
this execution done on the Spaniard. and all the mayn battle except 60 were
killed.

On our side little hurt, Sir Richard Greames Coronet killed, some Commanders
of quality hurt, and six soldiers hurt, many of our horses killed, and others
hurt. Of the Irish 1200 left dead in the place, besides those that were killed
in two miles chase. We took nine of their Ensigns, all their Drums, Powder,
and two thousand arms.

And their destruction had been greater, had not the greediness of our men in
pillaging and rifling the Spaniards hindered it.

And had not our foot been tired out with continual service, and our horse
spent for want of provision to keep them in good case, we had cut the throat
of all the Rebels, for they never made resistance* nor looked behind them, but
ran and shifted for their lives.

His Lordship presently in the midst of the dead bodies, gave thanks to God for
this great victory.

So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord, but let them that love him be as the
Sun when he goes forth in his might.

The Rebels were upon report about six thousand foot, and 500 horse, whereof 14
Captains slain, soldiers slain 1995.

His Lordship had not above 1200 foot, and less then 400 horse, so that it was
Gods great goodness to give him the day.

And about noon he returned giving volleys of shot in manner of Triumph.

Which the Spaniards in the town hearing, who had layn still all this while
expecting Tyrone, and now supposed that it had been he, made a sally out upon
our Camp, but soon perceiving their error, they did retire into the town
again.

But made diverse sallies out to hinder our making of trenches, and other works
which now we did most earnestly.

About the last of December, Don Jean sent to the Deputy about a parley,
tearming him Viceroy, and much complained of the treachery and falsehood of the
Irish.

And that if honorable conditions were offered, he would accept; and so after
many parlyes and propositions, Articles were accorded on both sides.

That the Spaniard with all he had, and while they tarry be well entreated, and
have things necessary for their money: and sent safe away into Spain in English
ships, as soon as conveniently they may: paying for their passage, and leaving
a pledge for the safe return of them back again.

So our army went to refresh it self at Cork, and the Span. abroad in Kinsale;
only Don Jean* rode with the Deputy, and made means to his Lordship, that his
Excellency would show some commiseration on the Spanish prisoners that were in
Cork, that were in great extremity for want of provision in number 160.

Ian 25* certain Captains are dispatched West ward to receive from the
Spaniards, at Castle-haven, Baltamore, and B^^r-haven, those Castles which they
possessed, but they not knowing of this their Generals Composition, they a^
B^^r-haven being 60, did build a Fort of trees and earth and planted three
pieces in it.

About the eight of March (for so long it was by reason of foul weather and
cross winds, before all the Spaniards* could be sent home; his Lordship with
the Army attending* thereabout, not willing to trust them overmuch, or give
them occasion of doing ill.

About the end of the year 1601, his Lordship wrote unto the Counsel in
England, showing them the hope that they had of the peace and quiet of Munster,
upon the death and execution of three arch-rebels.

Likewise showing them there was great coffeehouse in the army, upon an
occasion of an abatement of half a pound of beef to each m^^ a day, and two
herring o^^^^shdays; and that the horsemen did murmr, for that (...); were
raised 5 s. in a quarter more then usual, being but (...) before* now 15 s.
which his Lordship did alter again for fear of a mutiny.

And presently after his Lordship fell sick, and so continued repayring to
Dublin to take physi^k.

Now here Majesty's charge is cast up for the former year ending 1602, and it
was 246087 l* 7 s. 8. d.

Besides the Concord^u^^* Bills impressed upon account here, the levies and
transporting of forces, (paid in England* the payment of works, and the charge
of the office of the Ordnance, Powder, Bullets, etc.

Now a List is taken of the army in the beginning of the^ year* 1602*
Colonels 14.

Totall^ of the horse by the list 1487. foot 16950.

But of these only 500 horse* and 3650 foot went into the field with his
Lordship, the rest were placed in several Forts, Castles, and Countries* for
the better preventing of the Rebels joining together, and were so placed, that
upon little warning many o^ them might meet with his Lordship, now intending to
bend all his forces on Tyrons country.

So being recovered, took the field in June, and marching up to Blackwater, to
the fittest passage into the heart, of Tyrone five miles Eastward from the Fort
of Blackwater.

There was but a small space or skirt of a Wood between our Camp and the River,
which wood he had cut through the year before, and there building a bridge
over the River, and a Fort to safeguard it (calling it Charlemount, he passed to
Dungannon, six miles distant, a plain open way: whence Tyrone making have away
left the Town and his own house there seated all a fire, so his Lordship
sending a^ company before to view it, presently marched thither with his army,
and Tyrone fled as high as the Castle R^^, upon^ be* Ban, his Lordship sent
out. Companys to spoil and forage, as far as En^^killin or Lough Erne, and
taking two of Tyrones chief Islands, he marched to Lough-Sidney where he met
Sir Arthur Chicester* with his forces; who came from Carickfergus; at their
meeting place his Lordship raised a For^ capable of a 1000 foot, and 100 horse,
and called in Mountjoy, after his own Barony. And his Lordships resolutions
were to follow Tyrone from place to place, but that a scarcity of victuals
hindered him, so that he was fa^^* for 20 days to go^ elsewhere to provide, but
leaving those Garrisons in the mean time, so strong about Tyrone, that he
should not dare to venture on the plain^, and they stirring about to seek after
him in his fortress, he should not feed his C^is abroad.

Now fresh news came of new supplies from Spaina, and confirmed, for that a
ship of Spain arrived at Ardea, and brought O Swillivan Bear, and other
Captains of the Rebels munition and store of money: which made them grow
somewhat resolute, whereas before they were ready to sue for mercy: this caused
some obstructions in their proceeding.

But the Lord Deputy intending to take the field and have the Newry but hearing
that Tyrone would send and disturb the parts about Killultagh, to hinder that
himself should not be prosecuted,

His Lordship sent some Commanders to invest a strong Fort wherein lay all the
goods of such Rebels as were fled into Tyrone: called Enishlanghen, which was
seated in the midst of a great Bog, and no way accessable, but through thick
Woods very hardly passable, and the Fort had about it two deep ditches both
compassed with strong Pallisado's a very high and thick Rampire of earth, and
timber, and well flanked with Bulwarks, and sixty soldiers for its defense;
who by the industry and valor of our men were made to yield, and men brought
to his Lordship at the Newly.

This done his Lordship took the field, Aug. 20, marched toward Armagh, and so
spoiled Tyron's Country, who was fled into Fermanagh; from whence he went to a
Fortress at the bottom of Lough Earne, so that he could not be approached, so
that making wast thereabouts and leaving Garrisons, at the end of Su^mer his
Lordship returned to Dublin.

About October 20, many Rebels offered submission, especially many of Tyrones
Captains, and Tyron himself writes an humble letter to the Lord Deputy.

Who begins a journey into Connagh to take the submission of other Rebels, and
to view the Town of Galloway, where he continued all Christmas, and caused a
fort to be built there.

The Lord President of Munster, went to surprise the castle of Dunbay which
Oswillivan Bear got from the Spaniard, at Bearhaven, where in were sixty
Warders, and three pieces of Ordnance, near unto which his Lordship pitched
his camp having a rising hill between it and the castle; there were within it
some Spaniards and Italians: But our battery making a breach was entered by the
English, and possessed part of it, but the Rebels defended the rest all the day
and night, and part of the next day: until our men won it by force, and slew
and executed 134 men, sparing 12 of good account, which were kept to work upon
Tirrill. Spanish Ordnance taken in this Fort, one Demyculvering, two Sacres,
and one Falcon all of brass, and two Sacres, five Minions, and one Falcon of
iron; the Castle was blown up, and his Lordship returned to Cork, Sir Samuel
Bagual with a Regiment, fell by night into Tirrils Camp, lying in Muskerry,
killed 80 of his men, made him fly away in his shirt, took a thousand cattle,
60 horses and hackneys, and much rich spoil.

And Sir Charles Wilmot brake by night into the quarters. of the Knight of
Kerry, killed 40 of his men, took 500 Cows, 200 Garrais, and two months
provision of meal, and meeting with other Rebels, he took in all 2000 Cows,
4000 sheep, and 1000 Garrais, so that the Rebels as b^oken men flew toward
Pale: About this time Captain Taffe commanding our Irish in Carbery, assaulted
a band of Rebels, led by a Priest the Popes Nuntio, who killed the Priest with
most of his men, and got his cattle.

Upon whose death Mac Carties, and all Cerbery submitted.

So the Lord President from Connagh returned to Munster, and leaving two
Commissioners to govern Munster in the beginning of March, sailed into England.

And now Tyrone himself sues for the Queens favor, which she is very
unwilling to grant, supposing him not worthy to live, who had cost so many
lives, and caused he so much charge and trouble: yet the Deputy earnestly
mediates, but it does not appear that ever she did yield unto it; yet willing
he should come in.

But Tyrone had little left but the grudging of the common people, which
always follows disasters, and exclaymed that he had engaged the ruin of his
whole Nation, for his own private disco^tents, and that these wars howsoever
beneficial to him, yet were they most pe^nicious to them. Thus Tyrone having
almost, if not altogether worn out and wasted his friends and fortune, found
it high time to seek ^avour and accept it upon any terms.

Which the Deputy having secret intelligence of (the Queens death not yet
publicly known) made some haste to accept of his submission, lest another
should have taken the beast out, that he had taken in his toil.

And so March 30, 1603, at Me^ifont he made his humble submission to the
Deputy (sitting in a Chair of State) on his knees, and in the company of the
Deputy rode to Dublin, April 4.

At which time open tidings came of the death of that victorious Queen, and the
happy coming in of K. James: do the Earl of Tyrone, made a new submission to
the Deputy, as to King James King of England.

And now upon this change diverse of the Towns and Cities, as Cork, Waterford,
and Wexford, through the ^educing of the Priests and Jesuits) had set up the
Idolatrous Mass* and brought in Popish superstition, by force and violence, on
a ^a^^e suggestion, that K. James was a favourer of the same.

So the Deputy was ^ike to have a new business in hand by those that had not
showed themselves all this time; who seeing their hope of gain gone, the
rebellion growing to an end, themselves will venture to continue it rather then
let it ^^^ke.

As Limrick and Galloway, but especially Cork grew exceeding insolent, and by
force to advance to the height, the Romish Religion.

And for prevention hereof his Lordship first writes to the Mayor, and then
draws toward them with the Kings forces.

Hanged some of the Ringleaders at Cork, swear the other Cities to obedience,
leaving strong Garrisons in them. Left Sir George Carem the Kings Deputy, sent
for Tyrone, and carried him into England; where he was joyfully welcomed, and
graciously entertained at the Court, created Earl of Devonshire, and made a
privy Counselor, Tyrone having procured his pardon of the King, and a
Proclamation for his safeguard in his return to Ireland, being grown exceeding
odious to our Nation, there he stayed awhile, but after being disloyal, fled
into Spain, and there died.

The War ended the army List, horse 1000, foot 11150, and after to be reduced
to 8000 foot.

The charge from 1602 to 1603, beside concordatum, munition, and other
extraordinaries 290733 l. 8 s. 9 d. Which War continued from October 1, 1598:
to the last of March, 1603, which was four years and a half, and cost
besides great concordatums, great charge of munition, and other great charge of
Extraordinaries 1198717 l. 19 s.

Thus was Ireland by that noble Lord cured of its desperate state, and brought
into the most absolutest subjection, in which it had ever been since the first
conquest. And had the resolution held of disarming the Papists, which afterward
could not be effected when our army was reduced to so small a number.

Or the eye of Policy or Church Discipline been so vigilant or observable, as
it might have been.

We need not now have (...) what we may justly, though (...) enough lament.

But whether slides my eager pen, it was my promise to set a period to that sad
Seen; and how meanly performed, no man knows better then my self.

But since that Tragic part is now again (after so many haleyon happy days)
come on the Stage; it calls to mind still some sad events which then happened,
and follow (...) Rebellion, whose indentive is imaged ^ancour, and end (...)
and destruction.

For besides that inhumane disposition of the Native Irish* as appeared by a
barbarous fact committed about (...) in ^ent by three Irish people in their
house, killing them and burning that running away by the light; but were
apprehended, executed, and hung on Gibbets. There is an imbred hatred in them
toward the English, and a general dislike of our Civil government, but much
more of our Religion, the love of the Irish to Spain, (whence some of them are
descended.

The least success of the Rebels, and the hope of pardon upon the worst event;
which last by the great wisdom of the (...) is prevented by ^etting their
(...) ^ale as soon as they are en^^ed into Rebellion, the better to awe them;
for those continual parleys and overtures of peace proved most dangerous to
the State, and most advantageous to the Rebels* and caused them to revolt upon
the least (...) and where as the ^^i^es have layen so loo^e on them these many
years* it makes them prove ^adish, who by nature go best with a hard hand.

Being best preserved by the same means by which they were first gained.

These things lying (...) in their hearts (has now ^^oake out in a filthy
running soar) especially pressed by the hands of Priests and Jesuits, who for
their own (...) and end^, care not what exigence and extrea^ity they (...)
those mis^ed people into, who were they so wi^e as to consider those miseries
they formerly endured, when the provision of the Country was destroyed, and
they lay scattered in the ways dead by 1000 with hunger, and nothing more
common then to see multitudes of those miserable people dead in the ditches of
Town, with their mouths all colored green with eating of nettles and docks,
and whaelse they could rear out of the ground.

Beside this, two most horrid^ spectacles were then s^^ne three children (the
eldest not above 10 years old all eating and grawing the intrals of their dead
Mother, upon whose flesh they had fed 20 days past having devoured all the
flesh to the bare bones; now fell a roasting the in^r^lles on a slow fire to
sustain themselves from starving.

Another more cruel discovered by Captain Traver lying at the Newry, of
certain old women in those parts which used to make a fire in the fields,
whether diverse little children drove out cattle in the cold mornings, and
coming to warm themselves, were by these surprised, killed, and eaten, which
at the last was discovered by a great girl which brake from them by strength.

For the certain information the Captain sent our for Soldiers to try the
truth of it, who found the ^o^ls and bones of children scattered in the fields;
and so did apprehend those cursed cairiffs, and put them to death. Those and
many as bad are the accidents that happened in that Rebellion.

And who can expect better in this, or (...) who (...) not worse, if no^
suddenly prevented, this fire of rebellion now kindle^; will be found to
increase into a devouring (...) by slow and slender oppositions to the first
cruption, if the Rebels have liberty to combine and know their own strength,
for by delay the foe is encouraged, and his number animated by such as submit
for fear of them, when they cannot be secured by us.

And if we have not such forces as may keep and command the field, thereby to
compel the Rebel to make resistance^t one place with most of his forces, then
will he forage and spoil all abroid in the Country; but if he be made unite
in one head, then will he soon be driven to want of victuals, which will be
apt to breed murmurings and mutinies among themselves.

And a war of force will be great, costly, and large (as the Earl of Essex
said) and that will make the burden more deservedly to be complained of, then
that of Queen Elizabeth, who did grieve and groan (as she said) with her
subjects, under so great a weight as the maintaining of 1400. foot, and 1500
horse, in a climate full of contagion, in a Kingdom utterly wasted.

Which forces ours must far exceed, for although the Rebels have not such
woods and fortresses as then, yet now are they equal in number, and far more
ready then formerly, and better exercised in feats of arms, and no doubt will
make the best advantage of the hills and boggs, for the Earl of Essex was wont
to say that the war in Ereland, was as as well to be made with woods and
bogges as men; It Is not like the coursing of a Hare, but as the digging after
an earthed Fox from one angle to another.

It was then thought the savingst way to break them by factions raised among
themselves, they being coveteous and mercenary; and will be hired to any thing,
especially if the Jesuits and preaching Priests be but rooted out, which do
solder them so fast and close together, that were they quite banished; they
would moulder asunder in short time of themselves.

Some obstructions were then like to happen, as ready to hinder the good
progress arising from the discountenancing of the General by the supreme
authority that employed him; his want of trusty friends to mediate and speed
his proceedings; this fear raised many jealousies in the Earl of Essex head,
and run him on the rash attempt to have (unw^rranted) the Service.

This made Lord Mountjoy, so labor to ingratiate himself with Secretary
Cecil, a man powerful with the Queen, by which means all necessaries are
timely sent unto him, himself encouraged to diligence, and had in honor and
reputation in the eyes of his Soldiers. It was the only overthrow of
victorious Haniball, to be secretly maligned, by the crafty wiles of Hanno
working upon some thrifty humors of the Senators of Carthage, and ready to
urge all his proceeding to his disadvantage.

And when some shall labor by false evidence to sway the opinion of his
Supreme judge in the title of their favor and his deserts; this dealing may
prove injurious to the service by whomsoever to be undertaken.

It was then thought fit for the further countenancing of the General, for to
leave the disposing of many places, especially the Companies of the supplies
sent unto him, for so Gentlemen were kept in Ireland from being troublesome in
importuning authority for Companies in England, and men did more endeavor to
deserve well being in the eye of him of whom they have, or else expect
advancement, and by that means will he be able to curb the insolences and
misdemeanors, of many bad Captains, who sue and press hard for command to
make a living, rather then out of any love to the cause or Country, or any
affection to their Companies, as may appear by keeping of them imperfect, and
so lay the greater burden of service on the rest, or else by changing away some
for such such as are not serviceable, as was attempted in the first Scottish
employment and knowing that their time is short, and at the end of the war
begins (through their wast and improuidence, their misery) Captains make
harvest wages by reaping other men corn.

These crimes in the Queens wisdom were thought so heinous, as that the
offenders were made examples by casheering, degrading, and other notes of
infamy.

And Captains refusing to show their Companies, when they were required by the
Commissaries of the Mustors should be checked two months pay, which will prove
no ill president to be now observed.

Another inconvenience then happened in that there were not large Magazins of
provision laid in the safe Towns lying on the Sea or great Rivers, for an Army
has a large body, and much of it (like a frogs belly) and without that
satisfaction the hands and knees are feeble.

And through the default of the Victualers there happened as great a mischief,
that seeing the state of England exceeds all other Princes in their large
allowance both by Sea and Land. So for the kind more nourishable, as hoof and
porke, where as the Spaniard and French feed-on hard pease and beans, dry
ruske, and insiped rice, easy to be kept indeed.

But through the coozenage and deceit of the victualers, it is both cut short
in quantity, and unsavory, and unwholesome in the quality breeding diseases and
infection among the poor soldiers. This is no news to any that have been in
the late actions of the English, and will never be otherwise until some severe
course be taken with these cruel Harpies that ruin both King and people by
uttering any musty provision.

An excellent and commendable provision was then made for the sick; a
Quest-house in the Town, and carefully looked into, and to have their lendings
in ready money, and surplussage allowed.

And for those that were sick or sickly in the Camp; their own means allowed
them very duly.

Then a general contribution from the Officers and Captains of the Army:
amounting to fifty pound a week, bestowed in providing warm b^o^h, meat and
lodging; as was a great succor both to the sick and ^aymed, not permitting
them to lie in the field scattered or neglected, as though by their loss of
limbs or health, they had lost their Christianity, what is it that takes away
the edge of their valor, that they dare not venture so boldly as they would,
but this neglect and scorn that is offered them, or least the loss of a
member prove more miserable then the loss of their lives.

But let us now go on with better hopes, and resolutions becoming the English
Nation, assuring ^^^selves there is now wealth and honor to be gotten as well
a^ then, when di^^rs archieved the dignity of Earls, many Vis^o^^ts, 13 at the
least.

Barons which were Colonels and Captains in that service, besides many well
affected Irish; who won honor and not b^ing can be w^^^ing C^s^r, and the
(...) will take care of us.

Besides, know of what condition your adversaries are Rebels in the highest
degree against God, so having wounded their own conscience, and God their
hearts; they will prove no other then a hea^^ of Dear, showing a fair head;
but make their heel the safe Guardian off them; and those light-footed Kerne
have always made better use of their heels then hands; and proof has showed
when ever they were called to the aid of the Scots or English.

Whose best commendations was, that the Irish at the first went on well, but
according to their custom suddenly fell off; and leave their party engaged, if
they look not to it.

So they did in a good cause, and with good company, but now all stained, and
stand guilty of Rebellion, which is as the sin of witchcraft.

They became crest-falne, faint-hearted, that if followed with speed, actum est.

The Tragedy is ended, they must all uncase.

But why am I so bold, when wisdom almost divine is busy about it?

As if I meant to light a candle to the Sun; why that has been at noon day, to
pry a corner that glorious light stoops not too.

Besides, Abundans cautela non nocet.

Many boayes in the Sea, many beacons on the shore, makes all the more safe
and secure. And it may be used as an old wifes medicine, if it do no good it
will do no hurt: for it is not meant as an advice, but as an opinion of a
welwisher, which may be allowed or cancelled at any man's pleasure.

But when thou go out with thy Host against thine enemies, keep thee then
from all wickedness, Deuteronomy. 23. 9.
FINIS.

