(...) SPEECHES delivered before the Subscribing of the Covenant, the 25. of
September, at St. MARGARETS in WESTMINSTER. THE ONE By Mr. PHILIP NIGH. THE
OTHER By Mr. ALEXANDER HENDERSON. Published by special order of the House of
Commons.

Edinburgh, Printed by Robert Bryson, Anno Dom. 1643.

An exhortation made to the Honorable House of Commons and Reverend Divines of
the Assembly, By Mr. NIGH before he read the COVENANT.
A Great and solemn work (honorable and Reverend) this day is put into our
hands let us stir up and awaken our hearts unto it. We deal with God as well
as with men, and with God in his greatness and excellency, for by him we
swear, and at the same time we have to do with God and his goodness, who now
reaches out unto us a strong and seasonable arm of assistance. The goodness
of God procuring succor and help to a sinful and afflicted people, (such are
we) ought to be matter of fear and trembling even to all that hear of it, Ier.
33. 9. We are to exalt and acknowledge him this day who is fearful in praises,
swear by that Name which is Holy and Reverent, enter into a Covenant and
League that is never to be forgotten by us nor our posterity, and the fruit I
hope of it shall be so great, as both we and they shall have cause to remember
it with joy; and such in Oath as for matter, persons, and other circumstances;
the like has not been in any age or Oath we read of in sacred or humane
Stories, yet sufficiently warranted in both.

The parties engaging in this league are three Kingdoms, famous for the
knowledge, and acknowledgment of Christ above all the kingdoms in the world;
to swear before such a presence, should mould the spirit of man into a great
deal of reverence; what then to be engaged, to be incorporated, and that by
sacred Oath, with such an high and honorable Fraternity? An Oath is to be
esteemed so much the more solemn, by how much greater the persons are that
swear each to other: as in heaven when God swears to his Son, on earth when
Kings swear each to other, so in this business, where Kingdoms swear
mutually.

And as the solemnity of an Oath is to be measured by the persons swearing, so
by the matter also that is to be sworn to; God would not swear to the Covenant
of works, he intended not to honor it so much, it was not to continue, it was
not worthy of an Oath of his: but to the Covenant of grace, which is the
Gospel, he swears and repents not of it. God swears for the salvation of men,
and of Kingdoms: And if Kingdoms swear what Subject of an Oath becomes them
better then the preservation and salvation of Kingdoms, by establishing the
kingdom of a Savior amongst them, even our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who
is a Mediator and Savior for Nations as well as particular persons? The end
also is great and honorable, as either of the former two is better then one,
says he who best knows what is best; and from whom alone every thing has
the goodness it has. Association is of divine Offspring, not only the
beginning of Creatures, but the putting of them together: the cluster as well
as the grape is the work of God: consort and harmony amongst men, especially
amongst saints, is very pleasing unto the Lord If when but two or three agree
and assent upon any thing on earth, It shall be confirmed in heaven: and for
this, because they gather together in his name, much more when two or three
Kingdoms shall meet and consent together in his name and for his name, that
God may be one, and his name one amongst them, and his presence amidst them.
That prayer of Christ seems to proceed from a feeling sense of his own
blessedness: Father, that they may be one, as thou in me, etc. Unity amongst
his Churches and children must needs therefore be very acceptable unto him: For
out of the more deep sense desires are fetched from within us, the more pleasing
will be the answer of them unto us, Churches and Kingdoms are dear to God, his
patience toward them, his compassion over them, more then particular persons,
shows it plainly. But Kingdoms willingly engaging themselves for his
Kingdom, his Christ, his Saints, the purity of religion, his worship, and
Government, in all particulars* and in all humility sitting down at his feet to
receive the law and the rule from his mouth, what a price does he set upon
such? Especially when (as we this day) sensible of our infirmity, of an
unfaithful heart not, steady with our God, but apt to start from the cause, if
we feel the knife or the fire: who bind our selves with cords, as a sacrifice
to the horns of the Altar. We invocate the name of the great God, that his
vows, yea his curse may be upon us, if we do not this, yea though we suffer
for so doing that is, if we endeavor not so far as the Lord shall assist us
by his grace, to advance the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ here upon earth,
and make Jerusalem once more the praise of the whole world, not withstanding
all the contradictions of men.

What is this but the contents and matter of our Oath? What do we covenant?
What do we vow? Is it not the preservation of Religion, where it is reformed
and the Reformation of Religion, where it needs? Is it not the Reformation of
three Kingdoms, and a Reformation universal, Doctrine, Discipline, and
Worship* in whatsoever the Word shall discover unto us? To practice, is a fruit
of love; to reform, a fruit of zeal; but so to reform, will be a taken of
great prudence, and circumspection in each of these Churches. And all this to
be done according to Gods Word, the best rule, and according to the best
reformed Churches, the best interpreters of this Rule. If England has obtained
to any greater perfection in so handling the word of righteousness, and
truths, that are according to godliness as to make men more godly, more
righteous: And if in the Churches of Scotland any more light and beauty in
matters of Order and Discipline, by which their Assemblies are more orderly: or
if to any other Church or person it has been given better to have learned
Christ in any of his ways then any of us; we shall humbly bow, and kiss
their lips that can speak right words unto us in this matter, and help us into
the nearest uniformity with the word and mind of Christ in this great work of
Reformation.

Honorable and Reverend Brethren, there cannot be a more direct and effectual
way to exhort and persuade the wise, and men of sad and serious spirits (and
such are you to whom I am commanded to speak this day) then to let into their
understandings the weight, and worth, and great importance of the work they are
persuaded unto. This oath is such, and in the matter and consequence of it, of
such concernment, as I can truly say, it is worthy of us, yea of all these
Kingdoms, yea of all the Kingdoms of the world, for it is swearing fealty and
allegiance unto Christ the King of Kings* and a giving up of all these
Kingdoms, which are his inheritance, to be subdued more to his thron, and
ruled, more by his Scepter, upon whose shoulders the government is laid, and in
the increase of whose Government and peace there shall be no end, Esaias 9. Yea,
we find this very thing in the utmost accomplishment of it, to have been the
Oath of the greatest Angel that ever was, who setting his feet upon two of Gods
Kingdoms, the one upon the Sea, the other upon the Earth, lifting up his hand
to heaven, as you are to do this day, and so swearing, Rev. 10 The effect of
that oath you shall find to be this, that the Kingdoms of the world become
the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, and he shall reign for ever. Rev.
11, His Oath was for the full and final accomplishment, this of yours for a
graduall, yet* a great performance toward it.

That which the apostles and primitive times did so much and so long pray for,
though never long with much quietness enjoyed, that which our Fathers in these
latter times have fasted, prayed and mourned after, yet attained not; even the
cause which many dear Saints now with God, have furthered by extremest
sufferings, poverty, imprisonment, banishment, death, ever since the first
dawning of Reformation: That and the very same is the very cause and work that
we are come now, through the mercy of Jesus Christ, not only to pray for, but
swear to. And surely it can be no other, but the result and answer of such
prayers and tears of such sincerity and sufferings, that three Kingdoms
should be thus born, or rather new born in a day; that these Kingdoms should
be wrought about to so great an engagement, then which nothing is higher, for
to this end Kings reign, Kingdoms stand, and States are upheld.

It is a special grace and favor of God unto you Brethren, Reverend and
Honorable, to vouchsafe you the opportunity, and to put into your hearts (as
this day) to engage your lives and estates in matters so much concerning him
and his glory. And if thou should do no more but lay a foundation stone in
this great work, and by so doing engage posterity after you to finish it, it
were honor enough: But there may yet further use be made of you, who now are
to take this oath, you are designed as chief master Builders and choice
instruments for the effecting of this settled Peace and Reformation; which if
the Lord shall please to finish in your hands, a greater happiness on earth,
nor a greater means to augment your glory and crown in heaven, you are not
capable of. And this let me further add for your encouragement of what
extensive good and fruit in the success of it, this very oath may prove to be,
we know not. God has set his Covenant like the Heavens, not only for
duration, but like also for extension: The Heavens move and roll about, and so
communicate their light, and heat, and virtue, to all places and parts of the
earth; so does the Covenant of God, so may this gift be given to other
Covenants that are framed to that pattern. How much this solemn League and
oath may provoke other reformed Churches to a further Reformation of
themselves; what light and heat it may communicate abroad to other parts of the
world, it is only in Him to define to whom is given the utmost ends of the
earth for his inheritance, and works by his exceeding great power great
things out of as small beginnings.

But howsoever, this I am sure of, it is a way in all probability most likely
to enable us to preserve and defend our religion against our common enemies,
and possible a more sure fundation this day will be laid for ruining Popery and
Prelacy, the chief of them, then as yet we have been led unto in any age.

For Popery, it has been a Religion ever dexterous in fencing and muniting it
self by association and joint strength, all sorts of Professors amongst them
are cast into Fraternities and Brother hoods, and these Orders carefully united
by Vow one with another and under some more general notion of common
dependancie. Such States also and Kingdoms as they have thus made theirs; they
endeavor to improve and secure by strict combinations and leagues each to
other, witness of late years that La Saint ligue, the holy league. It will
not be unworthy your consideration, whether seeing the preservation of Popery
has been by Leagues and Covenants, God may not make a League or Covenant to be
the destruction of it: Nay the very rise of Popery seems to be after such a
manner by Kings, that is, Kingdoms assenting and agreeing perhaps by some
joint Covenant (the text says with one mind, why not then with one mouth) to
give their power and strength unto the Beast, and make war against the Lamb.
Rev. 17. where you read the Lamb shall overcome the Beast, and possibly with
the same weapons, he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, he can unite
Kings and Kingdoms, and give them one mind also to destroy the Whore and be
her utter ruin, And may not this days work be a happy beginning of such a
blessed expedition?

Prelacie another common enemy, that we Covenant and swear against, what has
it been, or what has the strength of it been, but a subtle combination of
Clergy men formed into a policy or body of their own invention, framing
themselves into Subordination and Dependencie one upon another; so that the
interest of each is improved by all, and a great power by this means acquired
to themselves, as by sad experience we have lately found: The joints and
members of this body, you know were knit together by the sacred engagement of
an Oath, the Oath of Canonical obedience as they called it: You remember also
with what cunning and industry they endeavored lately to make this Oath and
Covenant more sure for themselves and their posterity. And intended a more
public, solemn and universal engagement, then since Popery this cause of
theirs was ever maintained or supported by. And questionless, Ireland and
Scotland also must at last have been brought into this holy league with
England. But blessed be the Lord, and blessed be his good hand the Parliament,
that from the indignation of their spirits against so horrid a yoke, have
dashed out the very brains of this project, and are now this day present before
the Lord to take and give possession of this blessed Ordinance, even an Oath
and Covenant as solemn and of as large extent as they intended theirs; uniting
these three Kingdoms into such a League and happy combination, as will
doubtless preserve us and our Reformation against them, though their iniquity
in the mysteries of it should still be working amongst us. Come therefore (I
speak in the words of the Prophet) let us join our selves to the Lord, and one
to another, and each to all, in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be
forgotten.

We are now entering upon a work of the greatest moment and concernement, to us,
and to our posterity after us, that ever was undertaken by any of us, or any of
our. Forefathers before us, or neighboring Nations about us; if the Lord shall
bless this our beginning, it will be a happy day, and we shall be a happy
people. An Oath is a duty of the first commandment, and therefore of the highest
and noblest order and rank of duties, therefore must come forth attended with
choycest graces, especially with these two, humility, and fear. Fear, not only
of God, which ought to be in an eminent measure, Genesis 31. 53. Jacob swear by
the fear of his father Isaac, as if he coveted to inherit his fathers grace,
as well as his fathers God: But also fear of an Oath, it being a dreadful
duty, and has this peculiar, it is established by the Oath of God, I have
sworn that unto me every tongue shall swear, Isa 45. 23. It is made the very
Character of a Saint, he fears an Oath Eccles. 9. 2.

Humility is another grace requisite, set your hearts before God in an humble
obedient frame; Deuteronomy. 6. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and
swear by his Name. The Apostle Paul was sensible of this engagement, even in
the very act of this duty, Rom 1. 9, I call God to witness whom I serve in
my spirit; Although it be a work of the lips, yet the heart and the whole man
must be interessed if we expect this worship to be acceptable, Psalm. 119 108.
Accept the free will offering of my mouth, and teach me thy judgments.

Also it must be done in the greatest simplicity and plainness of spirit, in
respect of those with whom we Covenant. We call God as a witness betwixt us
who searches the heart: With him is wisdom and strength, the deceived and
deceiver is his, Job 12. 19. He has wisdom to discover, and strength to
punish, if our hearts be not upright to our Brethren in this matter. Let us be
contented with this, that the words of our Covenant be bands, it may not be so
much as in the desire of our hearts that they should become snares, no not to
the weakest and simplest person that joyneth with us. In the whole work make
your address unto God, as Jacob did to his (...) there be the like fear and
jealousy over: your spirits, Genesis 27. 12. My Father peradventure will feel me,
and I shall seem to him as a deceiver, and I shall bring a curse upon me, and
not a blessing.

I take liberty with more earnestness to press this care upon you, because I
have observed Oaths and Covenants have been undertaken by us formerly, and by
the command of authority, the fruit whereof, though great yet not answered our
expectation; the Lord surely has been displeased with the slightness of our
hearts in the work. I beseech you be more watchful, and stir up your hearts
with more industry this day then ever before: As it is the last Oath you are
likely to take in this kind, so it is our last refuge, tabula post naufragium.
If this help not, we are likely to remain to our dying day an unhappy people,
but if otherwise, You will indeed swear with all your hearts, and seek the
Lord with your whole desire, God will be found, and give you rest round about,
2 Chor. 15, 15.

And having sworn, and entered into this solemn engagement to God and man, make
conscience to do accordingly, otherwise it is better thou should not vow
Ecclesiast. 5. As it is said of fasting, it is not the bowing down of the head
for a day, so of this solemn swearing it is not the lifting up of the hand for
a day, but an honest and faithful endeavoring after the contents of this
Covenant all our days, A truce breaker is reckoned up amongst the vilest of
Christians, 2. Tim. 3. 3. so a Covenant-breaker is listed amongst the worst of
Heathens, Romans 1. 31, But he that swears and changes not, though he swear
to his hurt, that is, he that will keep his Covenant and Oath though the
contents of it prove not for him, nay possibly against him, yet he will keep
it for his Oaths sake, such a one shall have his habitation with the most High,
and dwell in his Tabernacle, Psalm. 15. And as for you, Reverend Brethren, that
are Ministers of the Gospel, there is yet another obligation will lie upon you,
let us look to our selves, and make provision to walk answerable to this our
Covenant for the Gospels sake; it will reflect a great aspertion upon the truth
of the Gospel, if we should be false or unconstant in any word or purpose,
though in a matter of less consequence, as you can easily collect from that
apology of Paul 2 Cor. 1 17, 18. how much more in such a case as this is, if we
should be found to purpose, nay more, to vow, and covenant, and swear, and all
this, according unto the flesh, and with us there should be, notwithstanding
all these obligations, yea, yea, and nay, nay?

That we may all who take the Covenant this day, he constant, immovable, and
abound in this work of the Lord, that we may not start aside, or give back, or
go on uncomfortably, there is a twofold grace or qualification to be labored
after.

1 We must get courage, spirits that are bold and resolute. It is said in
Haggai, that the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel Governor of Judah,
and the spirit of Joshua the High Priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of
the people, and they came, and did work in the house of the Lord, the work of
Gods house: Reformation-work especially, is a stirring work; read Stories, you
find not any where Reformation made in any age, either in Doctrine or
Discipline, without great stir and opposition. This was foretold by the same
Prophet. Chap. 2. verse. 7. the promise is, He will fill his house with glory
but what goes before, verse 6, Yet once it is a little while and I will shake
the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry land that is, all Nations,
as in the words following, This place is applied Heb 12, to the removing Jewish
Rites, the movables of Gods house. The like you (...) in the Apostles times,
Acts 17, the truth bei^^ preached, some believed, others did not; here
beginnet^ the stir, verse. 6. those that believed not. took unt^ themselves
certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all
the City in an uproare: and when they had done so, complained of the brethren
to the Rulers, as men that turn the world upside down, ver. 6 Read also Acts
21. 27, 30. 31. In such a work therefore men had need be of stout, resolute,
and composed spirits, that we may be able to go on in the maine, and stir
in the midst of such stirs, and not be amazed at any such doings. It may
possibly happen, that even amongst your selves there will be out cries, Sir,
you will undo all, says one, you will put all into confusion says another,
if you take this course, says a third, we can expect nothing but blood: but a
wise Statesman, like an experienced Seaman, knovveth the compass of his
vessel, and though it heave and toss, and the passengers cry out about him,
yet in the midst of all he is himself, turns not aside from his work, but
steereth on his course. I beseech you let it be seriously considered, if you
mean to do any such work in the house of God as this is; if you mean to
pluck up what many years ago was planted, or to build up what so long ago
was pulled down, and to go thorough with this work, and not be discouraged,
you most beg of the Lord this excellent spirit, this resolute stirring
spirit, otherwise you will be out spirited, and both you and your cause
slighted and dishonored.

2 On the other hand we must labor for humility, prudence, gentleness,
meekness. A man may be very zealous and resolute, and yet very meek and
merciful: Jesus Christ was a Lion, and yet a Lamb also; in one place he
tells them he comes to send fire on the earth: and in another place
rebukes his Disciples for their fiery spirits, Luke 9. 54: There was the like
composition in Moses, and in Paul, and it is of great use, especially in this
work of Reformation. I have not observed any disputes carried on with more
bitterness in men's writings, and with a more unsanctified heat of spirit, yea
and by godly men too, then in contraversies about discipline, Church
Government, Ceremonies, and the like. Surely to argue about Government with
such ungoverned passions, to argue for Reformation with a spirit so unreformed,
is very uncomely Let us be zealous, as Christ was, to cast out all, to
extirpate and root out every plant his heavenly Father has not planted; and
yet let us do it in an orderly way, and with the spirit of Christ, whose
servants we are, The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all
men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose, 2 Timothy
2. 24 25. We solemnly engage this day our utmost endeavors for Reformation;
let us remember this, that too much heat, as well as too much coldness, may
harden men in their ways, and hinder Reformation.

Brethren, let us come to this blessed work, with such a frame of heart, with
such a mind for the present, with such resolutions for the time to come; let
us not be wanting to the opportunity God has put into our hands this day; and
then I can promise you, as the Prophet, Consider this day and upwards, even
from this day, that the foundation of the Lords work is laid. Consider it, from
this day will I bless you, says the Lord. Nay, we have received as it were
the first fruits of this promise, for as it is said of some men's good works
they are manifest beforehand, 1 Timothy 5. Even so may be said of the good work of
this day, it is manifest before hand, God has as it were before hand testified
his acceptance; while we were thinking and purposing this free will Offering,
he was protecting and defending our Army, causing our enemies the enemies of
this work to fly before us, and gave us a victory, not to be despised, surely
this Oath and Covenant shall be Iudahs joy, the joy and comfort of this whole
Kingdom, yea, of all three Kingdoms.

Jesus Christ King of the Saints govern us by his Spirit, strengthen us by his
power, undertake for us according as he has sworn, even the Oath which he
swear to our Father Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life, Luke 1.
Grant unto us also, that when this life is finished, and we gathered to our
Fathers, there may be a generation out of our loins to stand up in this cause,
that his great and reverent Name may be exalted from one generation to another,
until he himself shall come, and perfect all with his own hand by his own
wisdom: even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.

A Speech delivered by M. Alexander Henderson, immediately before the taking of
the Covenant, by the House of Commons, and Assembly of Divines.
ALthough the time be far spent, yet am I bold (Honorable, Reverend, and
beloved in the Lord) to crave your patience a little; it were both sin and
shame to us in this so acceptable a time, in this day, which the Lord has
made, to be silent and to say nothing: If we should hold our peace, we could
neither be answerable to God, whose cause and work is in hand; nor of this
Church and Kingdom, unto which we have made so large profession of duty, and
ow much more; nor to our Native Kingdom, so abundant in affection toward you;
nor to our own heart, which exceedingly rejoice to see this day: We have
greater reason then the leprous men sitting in a time of great extremity at
the gate of Samaria, to say one to another, We do not well, this day is a day
of good tidings, and we hold our peace? it is true, the Syrians are not yet
sted; but our hope is through God, that the work begun this day, being
sincerely performed and faithfully pursued, shall put to flight, not only the
Syreans and Babylonians, but all other enemies of the Church of God, of the
Kings honor, and of our liberty and peace.

For it is acceptable to God and well pleasing in his sight, when his people
come willingly in the day of his power (and how shall they not be willing in
the day of his power?) to enter a religious Covenant, with him and amongst
themselves whatsoever be the condition of the people of God, whether in sorrow
and humiliation before deliverance, or in rejoicing and thanksgiving after
deliverance? this is it, which the Lord waits for at their hands, which they
have been used to perform, and with which he has been so well pleased, that
it has been the fountain of many deliverances and blessings unto them. When a
people begins to forget God, he lifts up his hand against them and
smitteth them: And when his people, humbled before him, lift up their hands not
only in supplication, but in covenant before the most high God, he is pleased
(such is his mercy and wonderful compassion) first, to lift his hand unto
them, saying, I am the Lord your God, as we have it three times in two verses
of the 20. of Ezekiel, and next he stretches out his hand against his enemies
and there is. It is the best work of Faith, to join in Covenant with God, the best
work of love and Christian Communion to join in Covenant with the people of
God; the best work of the best zeal, to join in Covenant for Reformation,
against the enemies of God and Religion; the best work of true loyalty, to
join in Covenant for the preservation of our King and Superiors; and the best
proof of natural affection (and to be without natural affection, is one of
the great sins of the Gentiles) to join in Covenant for defense of our Native
Country, Liberties, and Laws; Such as for these necessary ends to withdraw
and are not willing to enter into Covenant, have reason to enter into their own
hearts and to look into their Faith, love. zeal, loyalty, and natural
affection.

As it is acceptable to God, so have we for it the precedent and example, not
only of the people of God of old, of the Reformed Churches of Germany, and the
Low Countries; but of our own Noble and Christian Progenitors in the time of
the danger of Religion, which is expressed in the Covenant it self. The defect
was; They went not on thoroughly to enter in a solemn Covenant; an happiness
reserved for this time; which had they done, the corruptions and calamities of
these days might have been prevented: And if the Lord shall be pleased to
move, loose, and enlarge the hearts of his people in his Majesty's Dominions to
take this Covenant, not in simulation, nor in luke warmness, as those that are
almost persuaded to be Christians, but as becomes the people of God, it
shall be the prevention of many evils and miseries, and a mean of many and
rich blessings, spiritual and temporal, to our selves, our little ones, and
the Posterity that shall come after us for many Generations.

The near and neighboring example of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, is
in this case worthy of our best observation: When the Prelates there, were
grown by their rents, and Lordly Dignities, by their exorbitant power over all
sorts of his Majesty's subjects, Ministers and others, by their places in
Parliament, Council, College of Justice, Exchequer, and High Commission, to a
monstrous dominion and greatness, and like Giants, setting their one foot on
the neck of the Church, and the other on the neck of the State, were become
intolerable insolent; and when the people of God through their oppression in
Religion, Liberties and Laws, and what was dearest unto them, were brought so
low, that they chused rather to die, then to live in such slavery, or to live
in any other place, rather then in their own native Country; Then did the Lord
say, I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people, and I have heard
their groaning, and am come down to deliver them. The beginnings were small,
and contemptible in the eyes of the presumptuous enemies, such as use to be the
beginnings of the greatest works of God; but were so seconded and continually
followed by the undeniable evidences of Divine Providence, leading them forward
from one step to another, that their Mountain became strong in the end. No
tongue can tell what motions filled the hearts, what tears were poured forth
from the eyes, and what cries came from the mouths of many thousands in that
Land, when they found an unwonted flame warming their breasts, and perceived
the power of God raising them from the dead, and creating for them a new world
wherein should dwell Religion and Righteousness. When they were destitute both
of moneys and munition, which next unto the spirits and arms of men, are the
sinews of War, the Lord brought them forth out of his hid treasures; which
was wonderful in their eyes, and matter of astonishment to their hearts: When
they were many times at a pause in their deliberations, and brought to such
perplexity, that they knew not what to choose or to do, for prosecuting the work
of God, only their eyes were toward him* not only the fears and furies, but
the plots also and policies of the Adversaries, opened the way unto them, their
devices were turned upon their own heads and served for the promoting of the
work of God. The purity of their intentions elevated above base and earthly
respects, and the constant peace of their hearts in the midst of many dangers,
did bear them out against the malicious accusations and aspersions put upon
their actions; all which were sensible impressions of the good providence o^
God, and ^eg^^e characters of his work* which as the Church and Kingdom of
England exercised at this time with greater difficulties then theirs have in
part already found, so shall the Parallel be perfected to their greater comfort
in the faithful pursuing of the work unto the end.

Necessity, which has in it a kind of Sovereignty, and is a Law above all
Laws, and therefore is said to have no Law, does mightily press the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland at this time: It is no small comfort unto them that they
have not been idle and at ease, but have used all good and lawful means of
Supplications, Declarations and Remonstrances to his Majesty, for quenching
the combustion in this Kingdom: And after all these, that they sent
Commissioners to his Majesty, humbly to mediate for a reconcilement and
Pacification; But the offer of their humble service was rejected, from no other
reason, but that they had no warrant nor capacity for such a Mediation; And
that the intermixture of the Government of the Church of England with the
Civil government of the kingdom, was such a mystery as could not be understood
by them. Althoug it be true, which was at that time often replied, that the
eighth demand of the Treaty, and the answer given thereunto concerning the
Uniformity of Religion, was a sufficient ground of capacity; and the
proceedings of the Houses of Parliament against Episcopal Government, as a
stumbling block hindering Reformation, and as a prejudice to the Civil State,
was ground enough for their information The Commissioners having returned from
his Majesty without success, and the miseries of Ireland, the distresses of
England, and the dangers and pressures of the kingdom of Scotland, growing to
greater extremity; such as were entrusted with the public affairs of the
Kingdom (...) according to the practice of former times (his Majesty having
denied a Parliament) to call a Convention of the Estates for considering of the
present affairs, and for providing the best remedies: which immediately upon
their meeting by the special providence of God, did receive information of
diverse treacherous attempts of Papists in all the three Kingdoms, as if they
had been called for that effect; And by the same providence, Commissioners were
sent from both Houses of Parliament to consider with the Estates of the
Kingdom of Scotland, of such Articles and Propositions as might make the
conjunction betwixt the two Nations more beneficial and effectual for the
securing of Religion and Liberty against Papists and Prelates with their
adherents. Their Consultations with the Commissioners of the General Assembly,
did in the end bring forth a Covenant, as the only mean after all other have
been assayed, for the deliverance of England and Ireland out of the deeps of
affliction, preservation of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland from the
extremity of misery, and the safety of our Native King and Kingdoms from
destruction and desolation. This is the manifold necessity which Nature,
Religion, Loyalty, and Love has laid upon them.

Nor is it unknown in this Honorable Reverend and wise Audience, what errors
and heresies in doctrine; what Superstition and idolatry in Worship, what
Usurpation and Tyranny in Government, what cruelty against the souls and
bodies of the saints have been set on foot, exercised, and executed for many
Generations, and now of late by the Roman Church; all which we hope through
the blessing of God upon this work, shall be brought to an end. Had the Pope at
Rome the knowledge of what is doing this day in England, and were this Covenant
written on the Plaster of the wall over against him, where he sits
Belshazzar-like in his sacralegious pomp, it would make his heart to tremble,
his countenance to change, his head and Miter to shake, his joints to loose,
and all his Cardinals and Prelates to be astonished.

When the Reformed Churches, which by their Letters have been exciting us to
Christian Communion and Sympathy in this time of the danger of Religion and
distress of the Godly, shall hear of this blessed conjunction for uniformity
in Religion according to the word of God and the defense thereof; it shall
quicken their hearts against the heaviness of oppressing sorrows and fear;
and be no other than a beginning of a Jubilee and joyful deliverance unto
them, from the Antichristian yoke and tyranny.

Upon these and the like considerations we are very confident, that the
Church and Kingdom of Scotland will most cheerfully join in this Covenant, at
the first motion whereof, their bowels were moved within them? And to give
testimony of this our confidence, we who are Commissioners from the General
Assembly, although we have no particular and express Commission for that end,
not from want of willingness, but of foresight) offer to join our hearts and
hands unto it, being assured that the Lord in his own time will against all
opposition even against the gates of Hell, crown it with a blessing from
Heaven. The word of God is for it, as you have been now resolved by the consent
and testimony of a Reverend Assembly of so many godly, learned, and great
Divines. In your own sense and experience you will find, that although while
you are assaulted or exercised with worldly cares and fears, your (...) other
times, when upon seeking of God in private or public, as in the evening of a
well spent Sabbath; or day of Fast and Humiliation your disposition is more
spiritual, and leaving the world behind you* you have found access unto God
through Jesus Christ, the bent and inclinations of your hearts will be
strongest to go through with this work* It is a good testimony that our designs
and ways are agreeable to the will of God, if we affect them most when our
hearts are furthest from the world and our temper is most spiritual and
heavenly, and least carnal and earthly. As the Word of God, so the prayers of
the people of God in all the Reformed Churches are for us, and on our side: It
were more terrible then an Army to hear that there were any fervent
supplications to God against us; blasphemies, curses, and horrid imprecations
there be, proceeding from another spirit, and that is all. That Divine
Providence also which has maintained this Cause, and supported his Servants in
a mavelous manner unto this day, and which this time past has kept things in
an equal balance and vicissitud of success, will we trust from this
day-forth, through the weight of this Covenant, cast the balance and make
Religion and Righteousness to prevail, to the glory of God, the honor of our
King, the confusion of our common enemies, and the comfort and safety of the
people of God: Which he grant, who is able to do above any thing that we can
ask or think.

FINIS.

