Sin kept out of the Kingdom.
ALL Professors and People consider where you are, and from whence you are
fallen, you that plead (...) and say none can be set free from sin while they
are in the world, you plead for a Hold for Satan in you while you are here, and
where will you have him cast out, or what fellowship can you have with God so
long as the Serpent is Head in you? 1 Ioh. 1.3.
you are separated from God, and knows him not; for what communion has light
with darkness? 2 Cor. 6.14
God is light, and he that dwells in God dwells in light, and in him is no
darkness at all: but while you live in sin, you are in darkness, and the god
of this world has blinded your eyes that you cannot see it; 2 Cor. 4.4.
you are led captive at his will to serve him, and you are willing to be so,
and you do not believe that ever you shall be otherwise: you are servants to
sin, and you take pleasure in it you are in the flesh and sin, and have made a
covenant with Hell, and darkness, and death: You are resolved to serve and
please the flesh while you live, and you will repent at your death; you have
forgot that your times are in the Hand of the Lord, Heb 3.7, 8
and that this is the day of grace and repentance, which you turn into
lasciviousness and wantonness, you make it plainly appear, you have your
lustful pleasures, wantonness, and filthiness, and love them more then God:
You that love the world and the things of the world, the love of the Father is
not in you; 1 Ioh. 2.15 and 16.
for whom you love, him will you follow. Christ says, If you love me, Ioh.
14.6.
keep my commands, and those that follow him, he leads them out of all the
ways of sin, into the ways of purity and holiness, Hab. 1.19.
and so he is the way to the father; For without holiness none can ever see
God, for he is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, Ephe. 2.2.
neither can any unclean thing come in his sight: But while you are following
the Prince of the Air, which rules in the Children of disobedience, bringing
forth fruits of sin and unrighteousness, having your conversation in the
earth, and earthly things, following your corrupt wills and pleasures, an^ yet
you will profess you love God, and own him in words, and the Devil in
practice: Oh horrible hypocrisy! shall not the righteous God find you out,
and reward you according to your works; Mat. 16.27
you cannot deceive him, you deceive your selves who think to be Heirs of two
Kingdoms, you will have the pleasures of sin here, and you say you hope to be
Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven too; but the hope of the Hypocrite shall
perish; remember thy father Dives, in whose steps thou walk, and the same
way leads to the same end. The Lord says that the wicked shall be turned into
Hell, Psalm. 9.17.
and all that forgets God But the deceit in thee says, That thou may live in
sin while thou art here, and have thy thoughts in the world, and yet thou
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven too: Now who must be the Liar, whether
God or thou, O vain man? was it not sin that separated God and man at the
first, Genesis 1.27.
and think thou to be reconciled again so long as sin stands in thee? Man was
not created in sin, Genesis 2.19, 20, --
but pure and holy, in the Image of God and while he stood here he had
communion with God, Genesis 3.24.
and ha^ the pure wisdom of God, Genesis 3.17.
by which he was able to see into the wonders of God, and to give Names unto
all Creatures; but so soon as he had committed sin, he was stripped of all this,
and became naked, and was thrust out of Paradise, and was curse from the Lord,
yea the ground was cursed for his sake; and all this because of sin which thou
think so light of: for odious is sin in the pure eyes of the Holy God, and
did thou but know thy condition as thou lie in sin, in thy first birth a
Child of wrath, and one to whom all the Curses in the Book of God are due, thou
would tremble at sin, and not plead for it wherein thou plainly show
thy self to be the servant of the Devil. And when thou thus abusest the
goodness of God, 1 Cor. 10.^ to the 11.
that having left the failings of others upon Record as warnings to all that
come after not to do the like, and these thou make use of to encourage thee
in thy sin and filthiness: and because God is merciful to pardon sinners at
what time soever they repent, therefore thou art encouraged to live in sin the
longer, unrepented of. Now all that have eyes in their heads may plainly see
whose Child thou art: for the Apostle says, Know ye not that the
long-suffering of God, and forbearing, leads to repentance; it does so to the
Children of God; Romans 2.4.
but that Scripture is fulfilled in thee, which says, Eccles. 8.11
Because judgment is not speedily executed on the wicked, therefore his heart
is set in him to do wickedness: and thus thou make the mercy of God a Cloak
for thy unrighteous actions, and yet thou will talk of a Redeemer, and of faith
in Christ; but (O friend) where is thy Redeemer witnessed, while thou art yet
in thy sins? what art thou redeemed from, or what art thou redeemed to? those
that are redeemed are set free from the sevitude of sin, John 8.24, 25, 26.
but thou servest sin so long as thou obeyest the motions of it; then where
is thy freedom? Can thou witness Christ dyed for thee, and thy sins still
alive? how will thou witness his death in thee, or thy self dead with him? the
Saints that were dead with Christ, were dead to sin; Romans 6.2.
and (says Paul) How can you that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?
and says also, Those that are dead with Christ are free from sin, and are
become servants of righteousness: again he says, Romans 6.22, 23, --
Now being made free from sin, and become servants of God, ye have your fruits
unto holiness, and the end thereof eternal life. But while thou live in
sin, thy fruits are unholy, and the end thereof is death; and then where is thy
redemption? They who are redeemed by Christ, are redeemed from earth and
earthly things, Revel. 5.9, 10, --
unto God again, from whence they had fallen, out of every Tongue Kindred,
People and Nation, and are made unto God Kings and Priests, to reign above sin
on the earth, and are made conformable to his Image again, which was lost by
sin: but what conformity is there in thee, while thou art in sin, thou art not
like him, but like the Devil; for every sin is the image of the Devil, who
sinned from the beginning; and while thou committest sin, thou hold forth
the image of the Devil in thee, who is thy father: and Christ told the Scribes
and Pharisees, Ioh. 8.44.
who professed to be the Children of God, but lived in sin, that they were of
their father the Devil, for his works they would do; for every sin is the work
of the Devil; 1 Ioh. 3.8.
and (says John) He that commits sin, is of the Devil; and says, For this
purpose was the Son of God manifested to destroy the works of the Devil.
Whosoever can witness Christ manifested in them, can witness sin destroyed;
but if thou say thou can witness Christ manifest in thee, and yet commit
sin, thou art a Liar: for the Scripture says, whosoever abides in him,
sins not whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him, 1 Ioh. 3.^.
and whosoever says he knows him and keeps not his commandments, is a Liar,
and the truth is not in him: and says the holy Ghost whosoever is born of God
sins not, 1 Ioh. 2.4.
but he that is begotten of God keeps himself and the wicked one touches him
not; and says again, that whosoever is born of God sins not, for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God; 1 Ioh. 3.^.10,
--
and says plainly, In this are the Children of God manifest, and the Children
of the Devil, whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he
that loves not his brother. Genesis 13.14.
God in all ages has known his by their obedience, but thou say thou may
live in disobedience, and yet be counted one of his too; but where is thy Mark
by which thou art known from the world? those that are Gods are marked and
known from the world; Rev. 7.3.4.
but thou art in love with the world, and can conform with them in all their
ways, words, works, and worships, Iam. 4.4.
and yet would be counted one of Gods too. O thou deceiver, thou deceivest but
thy self and men that are like thee, for thou can not deceive the Lord. Tike
heed, repent, halt no longer between God and the world; if thou would own
GOD, Rev. 3.1^
thou must disown the world, and the world will disown thee; thou caust not
have both.

Written by James Nailer, late prisoner in Appleby Castle, by the dark world
called a Quaker.

