A Proposal concerning the COIN.
THE best Expedient to hinder (as the Proposer conceives) the going out o^ our
Silver whilst we have any Gold, is to make it the Interest of those that deal
in them, both to melt down and export as well the one as the other, (if they
may not be Exported in Coin) for melted down and Exported they will be, let what
Law soever be made to the contrary, unless the Occasions beyond Sea can
otherwise be better supplied. For the Explaining whereof, such Gentlemen as do
not yet know it, may by this be informed, that in the Spanish Dominion, whence
most of the Gold and Silver does come, and where for that Reason the Proportion
in value is originally set, and must through the rest of the World be allowed,
is as 16 to 1, and so 4 Guinea's coined at 20 s. each, (as they are in this
Kingdom) comes to 4 l.

Sixteen Crowns coined at 5 s. each comes to 4 l.

So 16 Crowns is equal to 4 Guinea's.

Now suppose 4 Guinea's coined of the same weight they now are, should by
Authority be reckoned at 1 l. 4 s. apiece, they come to 4 l. 16 s.

Sixteen Crowns coined at 5 s. if made by Authority to pass for 6 s. then 16
Crowns comes to 4 l. 16 s.

Which makes the Par equal betwixt Silver and Gold, which always will have, as
it ever has had for convenience 18 d. or 2 s. still running upon it, so
Guinea's as aforesaid, set at 24 s. will have the Currency of 25 s. 6 d. or 26
s.

Now against this 'twill be said,
It Is Raising the Standard settled by an Act of this Sessions upon mature Reasons.

It Is not altering the Standard, for that however continues; it is only giving a
Currency to Silver and Gold, as above expressed, for Public Convenience, 'till
otherwise provided by Parliament.

And as to the Reasons ('it is confessed) that have been strongly urged to the
contrary, they are to be answered by common Convenience, and the word
Necessity, against which no Law ever did or ought at any time at all to prevail.

As to the Convenience the Public will reap,
Note, 100000 l. this way pays 120000 l. at present, of which the Public will
have the Advantage, and if at any time hereafter it should be found needful to
Reduce the same Crowns to 5 s. again, 'twill be then but paying 12 d. apiece to
every Person possessed of such Crowns of which the Public as had the use in the
mean time, so it may the better by the Public be repaid. And note also, The
Re-payment of the Shilling so to be hoped for on the Crowns, will hinder their
either being melted down or Exported, it being to be lost if they be.

As to the Necessity,
It Is agreed on all Hands, that whilst Gold goes for more than it is worth, and
Silver for less, the one will be hoarded or carried away, and the other left to
go by it self.

This further Satisfaction 'twill give,
To Farmers and others actual Possessors of Land in the Country, 'twill keep up
the Price of their Commodities, viz. of Wool, Cattle, Corn, Tinn, Lead, etc.
to their general Satisfaction, because they will be thereby enabled the better
to pay their Rents to their Landlords, who for that Reason it is hoped and
believed, will have very little Cause to complain.

Note, What is before Proposed is no way Repugnant to the late Vote, That
Guinea's shall not be taken or paid at above 28 s. and may yet be Enacted this
Sessions (as it is humbly conceived) if so be that it is but approved.

T. N.


