A SERMON PREACHED At the Funeral of the Honorable Sir FRANCIS VINCENT, Knight
and Baronet, at Stokedawbernon in the County of Surrey, the tenth day of Apill,
1640.

By Thomas Neesham, Clerk, and Rector of the same Church.

In Aureolam cum Inscriptione NON NISI VINCENTI, in Vexillo Egregij viri Dom.
FRANCISCI VINCENT Militis and Baronetti, qui ob^it 14. die Martii, anno Dom.
1639.

Chronagramma.

En RegIna nItet Virtues post Fata SVperstes, VInCentI DantVr praeMIa JVstITIae.

Humillime posuit R. C.

LONDON: Printed by Tho: Brudenell for John Benson, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Saint Dunstons-Churchyard, Fleetstreet. 1642.

To the right Worshipful, my most worthy and much honored Lady ELLYNOR, The
late wife of Sir Francis Vincent, Knight and Baronet, deceased.
THOMAS NEESHAM, Clerk* Devoteth himself; Dedicateth this Sermon, and wishes
all health and happiness in this world and the next.

MADAM.
YOur Ladyship has lost a Husband, and laments him; I my self likewise have
lost a Pation, and lament with you. I would to God, and do wish it from my
soul, that you might find ease by my grief, and have your sorrows mitigated
by my bearing part, which hapily you may, and in all reason should, for if
every thing else be the less when it is divided and shared amongst others, why
not your grief, wherein you have not only my self but many others to share
with you? To sorrow for the dead is as natural as death it self; we cannot,
we must not deny nature her due passions and affections, only take heed, your
sorrow be not boundless, immoderate, endless. Saint Paul will allow you to
mourn, but to movrne as one without hope of a glorous resurrection, he will 1
These. 13.
not. If he whom you bemoane were utterly lost, and never to be revived, you
might be the more passionate, and weep for him, as Rachel for her Children,
with bitter lamentation; but seeing he has but only exchanged his lodging
and resigned this on earth for another (a better) in heaven: if you should now
bemoane him above measure, it were to envy his preferment, and to show your
self injurious to him, (if not to God;) you could not but think of such a day,
and forecast within your self of such a destiny, that either you must part
from him, or he from you. I cannot be persuaded, that this affliction did
surprise you upon a sudden, for such a faithful and experienced Disciple (as
your self) would and did without all question (put cases of this nature)
suspect casualties, weigh uncertainties, foresee afflictions, and provide for
them. Now is the trial of your providence, your patience, your fortitude, now
is the time to bring forth that store, that you have gathered, and to practice
that Christianity, that you have all this while so Plausibly, and praisably
professed; the chief use of weapons is in war, and of Christianity in
conflicts and trialls, he that manages his afflictions with wisdom, and bears
the cross with patience when it lies upon his owen shoulders, is undoubtedly
the best Christian.

Let your temper and moderation (good Madam) appear in this difficulty that
the world may see the fruits of your Religion, that you can as well advise your
self, as give advice to others; and wisely digest your own Pressures, as well
as prescribe remedies for other men's. It is not our happiness alone, to be
thus afflicted, but of many others, nor is it the condition of your family
only, to be liable to the stroke of death; but of all in the world; this may a
little revive your drooping Spirits, and add something to your comforts, that
there has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to men. How many
thousands shares with you in the like affliction? for husbands to loose their
wives, and wives again their husbands, is a common thing, you cannot in reason
be justly offended, or grieved at that, wherein you are not singular, but have
the greatest, and the most, to be your companions. I should be loath that the
remembrance of th^se things should laden your thoughts a f^^sh, or rub up that
fore, which wisdom and time has welnight skind over, that is not my
intention, I aim at nothing less, then the remembrance of your grief it is
physic that I prescribe, and if it should chance to cause any little
distemper in the patient, you will not (I presume) blame the physician but the
patients constitutions, every thing works acording to the disposition of the
receiver, nothing comes amiss to a rightly disposed Christian: I know you are
wise, and has learned with holy Job, to receive both good and ill, at the hand
of the Lord. And with patient Paul, into whatsoever condition God shall cast you
therewith to be content, it cannot be denied but that your sufferings are some
what and such as deserve commisseration and condolement, yet nothing to what
God in his seveere justice could and might inflict upon you. You have not yet
resisted into blood: sire and faggot and the sword, and such intolerable
afflictions, (as some of our forefathers have felt the smart of) are not your
portion, it is but a shallow water, in respect, that you now wade over, yet
look (I beseech you) to your footing, and give God the praise, that if he
should call you hereafter (which God forbid) to more swelling waves, and expose
you to more violent temptations, you may be able to withstand, and having done
all to stand as the Apostle speaks.

But I would not willingly be tedious, my intentions at first, were not to
write much, only some short Epistle and no more; for being importuned by him,
who had power to command me, to send your Ladyship a copy of this poor Sermom,
that was preached at the funeral of your noble Husband, and my honorable
Patron, I could not for shame send it bluntly without some small preface, to
make way for it, and usher it to your Ladyships hands: it is not such matter as
can much inform your Judgment, but yet (happily) work upon your affections;
what ere it be, it is presented to your private cabinit, to your own self;
yours it is, and so is he that made it, that preached it, who will not cease to
pray for your good Ladyship that God Almighty would bless you with spiritual
blessings in heavenly things; give you the spirit of wisdom, and the fear of
the Lord; endue you with Courage, Constancy, Patience, meekness and every good
grace; that he would crown you, and all yours, with peace, plenty, welfare,
health and happiness of soul and body: this is, and shall be the unfeigned
desires and hearty prayers of him, who humbly wishes to be esteemed

Your Ladyships in all humble and faithful observance* Tho: Neesham.
Stokedawbernon, Apil 20. 1640.
A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of the Honorable Sir Francis Vincent, Knight
and Baronet, at Stokedawbernon, in the County of Surrey, April the 10. Anno
Dom. 1640.
The Text. Heb. 9. ver. 27. It is appointed unto men once to dye, but after
this the judgment.
FVnera'l Obsequies and solemnities of this nature, they are to use the words
of Saint. Augustine, Magis vivoruns solatia, quam mortuorum subsidia; more for
the solace and comfort of the living, then any wise subsidiary or helpful to
the dead; well may those that are alive, reap some advantage and benefit, by
seeing such spectacles of mortality, and by hearing commemorations of death,
but for those that are dead, these Ceremonies are of little or no avail in the
world: for neither are the wicked any whit bettered by th^^ nor the godly
prejudiced in the want of them. Sepelit natura relictos, (says the Poet)
Nature makes a grave for those that have none; Et coelo tegitur, qut non habit
vrnam, and heaven covers that corpse that has no othercoff^^. And yet I must
tell you, that Christian burial is a great blessing; for a man to come to the
grave in peace, is a singular happiness. This was promised to good King
Josiah, as a recompense 2 King. 22 27
for his consternation and humiliation, when the rest of the people of the Land
committed Idolatry, and provoked the Lord to wrath; That he for his part should
be gathered unto his Fathers, and into his grave in peace; this was both
commended and blessed of David, that the men of Jabosh G^lead showed kindness
unto Saul and Jonathan his 2 (...).
Son and buried them.

It is no less then a part and point of piety to respect those bodies on
earth, and to let them have all the due rights of comely Burial whose souls
are glorious in heaven. How justly do we take care of the honorable interring
of our friends, when as God himself gives us a vive example; he, when the
soul of Moses was expired, and conveyed into glory, caused his body to be
conveyed into the valley of Moab, Deuteronomy 34 6.
to be buried.

Answerable hereunto was Sara buried in Hebron, Genesis 23. Deborah in Bethel,
Genesis 35. Rachel in Bethleem, Genesis 48. Christ in a new tomb hewn out of a
rock. I might be infinite Mat. 27.
in particulars, but this is a most certain truth, that though the dead body be
insensible of any position, yet Christian burial is a blessing. And the
contrary hereunto is a curse at least a punishment, which the Lord threatens to
revolters and rebels. Jehoakam that wicked King, for his violence oppression,
and other his vicious courses, had this message sent him (and it was a cutting
one) that he should be buried with the burial Ier. 22. 19.
of an Ass, drawn out and cast beyond the gates of Jerusalem.

Amongst those many judgments that God threatened to bring upon the Jews, this
was one* and a maine one too, that they should not be lamented, neither be
buried, but should be as dung upon the face of the earth, their carcases should
be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the Ier. 16.14.
earth. I could with ease enlarge my self upon this theme, but I consider
where I am, to whom I speak, and what I have to do; and therefore without any
further Prefacing I address my self to my Text. It is appointed unto men once
to dy^ but after this the ^udgment. These words whether you take them Text.
jointly or separate, in coherence with the Context or a part by themselves,
they are a Statute Law, enacted by God himself in the grand Parliament of
heaven touching man's death and his judgment after death. So that in telling
you what the words are I have told you withal, in a manner, what the parts be:
namely, these three. First, a Statute enacted in the first word (...) that's one
part, Appointed: to whom (...), (...)
to men; that's another part: to men: touching what? touching their dying and
their coming to judgment (...), once to dye, (...), but after this to
judgment; that the last part: these be the parts. Of these in order.

A Statute enacted, is our first point. Statutum est; It is appointed. 1. A S^^
enacted.
All Statutes are not of the same constitution and enactment, for some are
constituted and enacted by men, as those in the Parliament of State, concerning
theft, murder, rape robbery, with a thousand more of that nature. Some again
are constituted and enacted by God, as those in the high Court and Consistory
of heaven concerning sin death, judgment and the like; and such is this
Statute here in my text: a Statute of Death, and that not of man's ordination or
appointment, but of Gods. Statutum est; it is appointed and appointed by God:
hence it is that holy Job ascribes the day of his departure unto God; I know,
says he, that he will bring Job 30.23.
me to death and to the house appointed for all the living: and hence it is
that the Lord in the rejection and extirpation of the Jews, arrogates to
himself both their death, and the manner of it. I will appoint over them four
kinds, says the Lord, the Sword to slay, the Dogs to tear^^ and the Fowls
of the Ier. 15.3.
heaven, and the Beasts of the earth to devour and destroy: the slaying sword
the tearing Dog, the devouring Fowls, the destroying Beasts, all from the
Lord, and of his appointment.

Its well observed, that there be five keys which the Lord keeps in his own
custody, and reserves in his own power; the Key of Rain, The Lord shall open
unto thee his good treasure, Deuteronomy. 28.12.
sure, the heaven to give thee rain to thy land in its season; that's the first
key: the key of Food; Thou openest thy hand, and they are filled with good,
that's the second key: the key of the Psalm. 104.28.
heart, God opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended unto the Acts 16.
things that were spoken of Paul, that's the third key. The key of the womb,
God remembered Rachel and harkned unto her, Gen 30.
and opened her womb, that's the fourth key. The key of the Grave; And ye shall
know that I am the Lord, when I have Ezech. 37.13.
opened your graves; that's the fifth and last key.

Now as none can forgive sin but God only, so none can open the grave,
dissolve these tabernacles of our flesh bring to the dust of death, but only
the Lord; for man not armed with authority from above, but merely out of
spleen, or revenge, or collar, or a bravado, or weariness of the world, or
the like, to open the passage out of the world, and to bring death either upon
himself or others, is to entrench upon Gods right, snatch the key out of his
hand and both peevishly and perilously to transgres that Law, which he has
enacted, which he has appointed.

Now of things appointed by God, some are absolute, some occasional, some Lege
naturae institutae, by the law of nature in its perfection and integrity; some
lege naturae destitutae, by the law of nature in its defection and decay; and
such was this law, the law of death, it was not enacted, neither came it in,
when man was in his prime, but when he was in the wane, not when he was in the
height, in the vertical point of his integrity, but when he was in the
declination, the state of sin. In die quo commederis, etc. says God to Adam,
in the day Genesis 2.17.
that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death, in that day but not before.
If Adam had not sinned, he had not dyed; if he had not transgressed Gods law,
he had not tasted Gods curse, but having once sinned, death presently ensued;
not that Adam presently dyed (for he lived after that 930. years) but Genesis 5.5.
that he was now dyable (as I may so speak) subject to death and the laws of
death; having and feeling in himself aches, pains, infirmities, diseases,
infinite anxieties and vexations, the certain symptoms and messengers of
death, which before be neither had nor felt: express and pat for this purpose
is that of the Apostle Saint Paul, As by one man sin entered into the world,
so death by sin. And again, the wages of sin Romans 5.12. Romans 6.23.
is death; every kind of death, both spiritual and corporal, is the guerdon
of iniquity, the reward of sin. Death was not God^ immediate and proper
work; for God made not death; Wisd. 1.31.
neither was it one of those Impes that God planted in Paradise, for there all
was very good, but it was the work of Satan Genesis 1.13.
and had its original from the bitter root of sin. So that Satan begot it,
Adam and Eve nursed it, and sin brought it forth. To breviate the cafe in
hand, and to give you the substance of it in short, it is this.

Here is a Statute enacted concerning death, enacted by God, by reason of
sin: thus have you the pith of the Doctrine in point of Explication: now for
Application in point of Use.

And first, if man's death be appointed, then is it not contingent Lazarus was
dead, his two sisters Martha and Mary comes to our Savior with this doleful
note, and pitiful complaint; Lord, if thou handst been here my brother Io.
11.12. 32.
had not dyed, says one; Lord, if thou had been here my brother had not
dyed, says another: And is not this the common note and language of the world,
when a man is dead, then if such a Physician had been here, if he had been let
blood, if he had not taken such a potion, or eat of such a piece of meat, or
lived in such a foggy air; if he had not done thus and thus, or so and so, he
might have bin a lives man to this day.

These consider not with Job, That the days of man are determined, and his
bounds appointed, which he cannot pass: the time, the place, and every
circumstance of his dissolution is decreed, that one man dies in the field,
another in his Job 14.1.
bed another in the water; that one dies in a foraine Nation, another in his
own; this, and all this is foreordained in heaven. What though one seem to
dye casually, another by an unexpected violence? What? the hand of God is in
both. If we should come to a man newly fallen dead from his horse, sunk down
upon the sudden dead in the streets, we must conceive and think that we heard
God whisper him in the care and say unto him, Dye thou here that God that
brought us into the world at his own pleasure, will and does carry us ^ut at
his own appointment.

If man's death be appointed and appointed by God, then

It is we^l observed by Saint Gregory, that Deus nouit ma^are senten^^as, at
non novit mutare Decreta: God can and does sometimes alter his meaning and
reverse his Edicts threatened for sin; as in the case of David, of Ahab, of
Ninivie, but the determinations of Gods Decree from all eternity, are
irrevocable, unrepealeable; these like the Laws of the Modes and Persians,
never alter.

In vain do we seek the avoydance of that, which God has appointed: wicked
Balaam could not choose but do God right in his determinations of this nature;
God, says he, is not as man that he should lie; neither as the Son of man
that he should repent: has he said, and shall he not do it? has Number. 23.19.
he spoken, and shall he not make it good? In him there is no mutability nor
shadow at all of change.

Men are mutable, appoint to day, and disappoint to morrow; resolve now, and by
and by are of another mind, but God is not so. If Palate stuck close to this
quod scripsi* scr^ps^, Io. 19. 22.
What I have written, I have written, and would not have a letter a^^^^ed
s^rely God will ^^^ck as close to (...) Q^od sta^u^, st^^u^* what I have
appointed I have appointed, and will not have a tittle diminished; the
foundation of God stands sure, his decree and appointment firm; and though
heaven and earth shall pass away (as for certain they shall) yet one jot or
tittle of Gods word and purpose shall not pass till all be fulfilled. As sure
as God is in heaven (and that's sure enough) so sure shall these and all these
frai^e bodies of ours one day be piled up at the gates of death, for it is
appointed, and appointed by God.

Nor is it without observation, that the phrase of speech here is of the
passive voice, Statutum est, it is appointed; denoting thereby unto us, that
man must be a patient, and not an agent in his own death.

For a man to be felo de se (as the Lawyers speak) to lay violent hands upon
himself to bring a writ of remove, and not from the Kings Bench, and by Gods
own appointment, is a foul and fearful transgression of this Statute.

Let the Stoic Philosophers teach what they will, and infuse this rotten
principle into their Disciples, that non multum ^^erest, etc. It matters not
much whether death come ^o us, or we to it; sure I am, Religion teaches no
such thing: well may such a desperate position be maintained in Schools and by
heathen Philosophers, but never in Pulpits, and by Christian Divines.

That Law in the Decalogue Non occides, Thou shall not Exodus 20.
kill, reflecteth first upon a man's self, and then upon his neighbor. To kill
a man's self is forbidden in the first place, his neighbor, but in the second;
this is but a breach of the law of charity, but that of the law of nature: so
that according to that solid speech of Saint Augustine, Exceptis iis quos just
a lex generaliter, etc. excepting those whom a just Law in general, or God the
fountain of justice in special commands to be slain: Whosoever kills
himself or any other, he is guilty of murder, and a transgressour of the Law.

If the life of man were his own, then indeed it were somewhat, he might be
the more lavish of it, and use it at his pleasure: but it is the gift of God*
and man must not dispose of Gods gift, without the mind of God the giver. 1 Samuel 2.6


Or if man were sui juris, his own man, then it were another case; but he is
pars, Communit^tis (as Aristotle speaks) a part of the state a member of the
body politic, and if one member suffer, all the members suffer with it. ^ Co^.
12.26.


If one man dye an untimely death, all the whole Commonwealth is supposed to be
damnis^ed by it; and therefore it is (as I conceive) that the King does take so
procise an account of the death of the meanest Subject, because both he
himself, and the whole Kingdom had interest in him. That some have made away
themselves, as former. Ages do witness, and this our age too, is no warrant
for us or any one to do the like.

We are all set in this world as soldiers in battle array, and must not
break our ranks without order from our Captain; As Prisoners in a Jail, must
not seek our liberty, without the Jaylors keys to let us out; As Subjects in
a Kingdom, and must not out of the Land; without the leave and past-port of
our Sovereign. And therefore Balaam craves leave Numb. 23.10.
to depart, Let me dye: and Jonah, though weary of his (...) would not quench
the light of it himself, but makes petition Jonah 4.3.
to God, Take away my life. And old S^meon begs his release, Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace. Luke ^.29.


We must not projicere animas (as he speaks) desperately throw away our souls,
but fairly resign them: nor quit our charge he^e upon ^erth but wait upon
God; according to Jobs example, All the days of my appointed time will I Job
14.14.
wait, till my change come.

Man must wait for his change, not work it, not appoint his own death; for it
is appointed by God. And so I have done with the first part; the Statute
enacted in the first word of my text, (...), it is appointed. Appointed by
whom? my text shall answer. (...), to men; that's the second part of text, the
concernant parties, for whom this Law 2. The concernant party
was enacted and to whom it was appointed; namely, to men.

And indeed of all the creatures under the cope of heaven, there is none of
them all, can so properly be said to dye as men; for of them some have only
being, as the Planetary bodies the Stars the Stones and the like. Some again
have being and vegetation, as the Trees and Plants: some have being in
vegetation and sense, as the bruit Beasts; and some have being vigeta^^, on
sense, and a soul too, as reasonable men. Now death being a separation of the
soul from the body, cannot in right reason, nor in a genuine true sense, be
ascribed to any creature, but such as has a soul as well as a body.

To speak properly then, it is mankind that suffers the sentence of death, and
it is men that dye; for to them it is that death is allotted, is apoointed,
(...), and that not to some one man, or to some few men, but to all men: for
though the particle of universality be not expressed, yet sure it is included,
and so intended; an indefinite proposition (we say in the Schools) is
equivalent to an universal. When Job says, Man that is borne of a woman is of
few days, he means every man; so here, when the Apostle says, it is appointed
to Job 14. ^.
men to dye, he means all men, all, without exemption without exception. Death
is a debt that every man must pay, qui vult excipere creatur decipere, he (be
he what he will) that thinks to go free, is foully deceived, and shall find
it otherwise. David puts the question, what man is he that lives, and shall
not see death? but the question is without all Psalm. 89. 48.
question every man living shall see death; Kings and Princes and Dukes and
Earls, and Barons, and Baronets and Knights, and gentlemen, and Tradesmen, and
Husbandmen, and all; there is neither sex nor age, nor Nation, nor condition
that shall be privileged. Absalon for all his beauty, Sampson for all his
strength, Solomon for all his wisdom, Achitopel for all his craft is dead; and
so is rich Dives courtly Haman, valarous Ioab, all dead, (and which is more) so
is righteous Noah faithful Abraham, zealous Lot, meek Moses, religious David
innocent Job, painful Paul, penitent Zacheus, and he that was the center of
all perfection, Christ the Lord. If any power, or greatness, or piety or
integrity, or virtue or grace, or any thing in the world, had been any muniment
or defense against death, surely Christ of all other, had never dyed, nor made
his bed in the dark, as Job seaks. Job 17.13.


This Statute of death, takes hold of all that enjoy the benefit of life:
Paracelsus that great Physician, though he cured many others, and promised
immortality to himself, yet was he cut off in the prime of his years, Contra
vim mortis, non est medicamen in hortis: there is no antidote for death; never
yet was it seen or known. or heard, that any drug was so sovereign as to
preserve a man from dying: of the longest liver it has been said in the end
(...), his life is past, or vixit, he had his time, or mortuus est, he dyed.
Before I quit this point, I will resolve a doubt or two, but briefly and as it
were in two words; the first this:

The Apostle S. Paul says that Christ has destroyed death; Dub.
how comes it then to seize upon the Saints of God? whence (...). 1.10.
is it that the righteous dye, seeing Christ has dyed for the^?

This doubt may be assoyled thus: first, the most righteous man upon the face
of the earth, besides his original has many Solut. 1.
actual sins, which make him liable to death. Secondly, Christ by dying did
not take away the stroke, but the sting tollitur mors, non est sit, sed ne
obsit, men are still mortal; but the tyranny of death, which makes it penal,
is taken away.

Thirdly, the nature of death is changed, it is now in a manner

The second doubt is this; Enoch was translated that he Dub. 2.
should not see death, Heb. 11.5 and Elias was carried up by 2 Kings 2.
a whirlewinde into heaven; therefore all men dye not.

I answer, the translation of Enoch, and the rapture of Eliah, Solut.
are two intrigate and subtle questions, and such as have troubled, I will not
say pusled, the heads of many Divines; my meaning is not to trouble either you
or my self, with any exact discusment of these questions, only to satisfy
for the present and to assoile the doubt proposed; this I say. That Enochs
translation and Eliah his rapture, and the change of all those that are alive
at Christ's second coming in the end of the world, were, and shall be a kind of
death, loco mortis, says Aretius, in the stead of death, instar mortis, says
Bosquter, like death.

But because this change neither did, nor shall separate the soul from the
body, nor dissolve the compositum, therefore it is not a true, proper, real
death. Again, let it be supposed that Enoch and Eliah did not dye, it will not
infring this common Statute, that all shall dye. It is enough that all the
posterity of Adam be obnoxious to death, though some be dispensed withal and
dye not: for as privilegia paucorum legem nor faciunt; (to use the words of the
Canonist) the privileges of a few do not constitute or make a law, so neither
anull or infringe a law.

What though some have been privileged and exempted from death, I say with
Saint Augustine, alia naturalitas, al^a mirabiliter fiant: some things are done
naturally, some miraculously, an ordinary course is one thing, an extraordinary
another; but take it ordinarily, and according to the common course of nature
and it is as true as truth it self, that it is appointed unto all men once to
dye.

And so I come to the third part of my Text, touching what this Statute was
enacted and appointed unto men, and that's expressed here in two branches, Death
and Judgment: 3. Touching what.
once to dye* that's one branch, but after this the judgment.

The former branch of this Statute is touching Death, it is appointed unto men,
says the text, once to dye; semel, once, Death.
not twice, quod casus in Diabolo, id in homine mors, that which the fall in
the Devil, the same is death in man; he fell but once, and we dye but once.
Men that are dead* are phrased by the holy Ghost, as waters spilt upon the
ground, 2 Samuel 14. 14.
which cannot be gathered up again; waters once spilt sink into the dust, and
are not gathered up again, nor cannot be spilt again. What is said of the
death of Christ, may be sa^d of the death of all other men, in an ordinary
regular way; he died but once, no more do they, one corporal death suffices.

If any now shall object unto me, and say, that some have Sareptaes son, the
Shunamites son, 2 Kings 4. the dead man that was cast into the grave of Elisha:
As also Jairus daughter, and Tabitha, and Eu^ichus, and ^ Kings 17. 2 King 13.
Lazarus, and some others; these all were raised up to live, and lived to die
again.

I answer, that all, or the sum of all that can be said is,

I am the more confident in, because my text is clear for it: Statutum est
etc. It is appointed unto all men once to die: (...) to die, that is the maine
matter of the statute, death. There is a three fold death.

1. A Natural the death of the body. 2. A Spiritual the death of the soul.
3. An Eternal the death of the whole man, both body and soul.


The first, of these three seperates the soul from the flesh.

The second, the spirit from grace.

The third, the whole man from the Beatificall vision, and presence of God, and
that for ever.

The first of these three kinds of death, (as I take it) is only meant in this
place, not the spiritual death of the soul, nor the eternal death of the
whole man, but the natural death of the body, that's the death appointed unto
men, without discrimination, to all men without exception. The death of the
body and the dissolution of nature, is that, the remembrance whereof is so
bitter, whereof the wiseman speaks, Ecclesiasticus 41. 1. That which the
heathen Philosopher called (...), the most terrible of all tetribles.

That which Job call, the King of fears. That Cup which Job. 18. 14.
our Savior Christ himself was afraid to drink off, Matthew 26. 39. Et fortior
non est miles quam imperator; and usual^ the Soldier is not more valarous then
his Leader, then his Captain. If the apprehension and scentiment of death, was
so terrible to him that was more then a man; how much more to us that are but
men, but mere men? And yet death is of the nature of those things that are
(...), bitter sweet. Bitter in respect of it self, or being the destroyer of
nature; but sweet in respect of the consequence, as being a passage to a better
life: I dare say there is not a soul of discretion amongst you all, but could
wish the terrors of death taken away and the bitterness of it abated and
allayed. Now that you may have that you wish for, and be able to encounter with
death, as a friend not as a fury, let me commend unto you these specialls.

First, to meditate often upon death. Secondly, to make preparation for death.
Thirdly, to consider the benifits that come by death.
These three well practiced and put in use by a Christian, will like that wood
that Moses threw into the waters of Exodus 15. 25.
Mara, sweeten the bitterness of death, and make it more pleasing. For first
the frequent meditation of death, and the often inculcating, and commenting
upon it, will make it more familiar, and less terrible. Tela proevisa minus
Loedunt, he that sees or thinks upon a bullett or blow a coming, 2 Kings 6. 22.
starts not at it, as he that is hitt upon a sudden and unawares.

Its wisdom for a man to acquaint himself with death before it come. For this
cause King Philip would have his remembrancer every morning to put him in mind
of his mortality; and the Anchorites of old would every day scrape with rheir
nails some part of their own grave. And Saint Jerome would have the scull of
a dead man before him continually. Behold ye despisers, and wonder, ye that put
away far from you the evil day, that make a league with death, and a truce
with the grave; ye that take no notice in the world of your own infirmities,
sickness, weakness, faintness, weariness, age, and the like, never
remembering that these are the messengers of death, and that the sound of their
Masters feet is behind them; ye that can pass by the death of others and
never once apply it, that can see your neighbors* friends, acquaintance,
alliance, etc. carried to the grave, and never lay it to heart. We read in the
second of Samuel and the 20. chapter, that when Amasa was dead and lay
wallowing in his blood all the passengers and people stood still and ^ooked
upon him, ex ruina disciplina. Let us read letters in the ruins of others and
never look upon the death of another, without remembrance of our own death.
This is the first special.

The second is to make preparation for death: the reason why the sons of men
are snared in an evil time, and entangled Eccles. 9.12. I know not whether God
in his wisdom, has of set purpose concealed from us the coming Eccles. 9.12.
of death, for this very end, that we may be always in readiness when it does
come; woe to that man whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find sleeping, it
had been good for that man that he had never been borne; for as the tree falls,
whether toward the South or toward the North, so it lies and there it shall
be. As death finds a man, so judgment Eccles. 11. 3.
takes him; look how he dies so shall he rise again, and so shall he be
judged. It is a maine point of wisdom in a Christian to prepare for death; in
respect, first, of the certainty; secondly, many times of the suddenness of
it. There is nothing in all the world so certain as death: let a man climb up
the highest Mount or Pinnacle let him look down again upon the face of the
world, and he shall see all things hang dandling upon the thread of instability,
wheeling and turning upon the pin of uncertainty, only death, that's certain.
In all other things we may use a forte, a peradventure, or a perchance. It is a
chance for a man to be rich, a chance to be great, a chance to be wise a chance
to be learned but for a man to dye is no chance, but a certainty, a
constitution that shall never be replealed till destruction be thrown into the
Lake of fire* and death shall be no more. Revel. 21.


We all know that we must dye, and know it as certainly as we know our own
names, or our right hand from our left, or the joints of our fingers, yet we
regard it not we prepare not for it.

Secondly, as it is certain, so many times it is sudden too, seizing upon
those soonest that lest expect it. It was far and stulte hac nocte, Thou fool,
Luke 12.20.
this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. Little dr^mpt ^el^hazzar in his
cups that his Kingdom was numbered, and Dan. 5.
that the same night he should be slain; or Corah in his conspiracy, that he
and his partisance should be swallowed up of Numb. 16.
the earth; or Jobs children in their banqueting, that the Job 1.
house should fall down upon their heads; or Ananias and Saphira in the midst
of their lying, that they should sink down stone dead at Saint Peter's feet.
Many a man has Acts 5.
been taken away in an instant and put out like a candle when the thoughts of
death have been farthest from him; and therefore make preparation for it: that's
the second special.

The third and last special, is to consider the benefits that come by death;
and these I shall couch in two words:

1. Vnde Whence it frees us. and 2. Quo, Whither it brings us.


It frees us first from sin: our first Parents dyed because they sinned; we
dye, that we may not sin: sin delivered them over unto death, but death
delivers us from all sin. Hence it is that death is styled by Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 4. (...), a time of liberty; the loosing of the soul from the bonds and
fetters of sin. So that a soul separated from the body, is set at liberty;
like a bird out of a cage, or a fish out of a net; and freed from those
manifold corruptions and heavy pressures under which it groned.

Secondly, it frees us from wicked company: it was no David, that he was
constrained to dwell Psalm. 120.
with Mesech; to Jeremy, that he must live amongst adulterers Ier. 9.2.
and rebels; to Lot, that he must hear and see the filthy 2 Pet. 2.8.
thy conversation of the Sodomites. Now death frees us from all, and carries a
man out of the Gun-short and reach of Satan, of all Satanicall and wicked
compay.

Thirdly it frees us from the miseries of this life: The world is a sea of
sorrows, we live in it as in a vale of tears: And as in the sea, unda undam
sequitur, one wave follows another, and seldom or never shall you see the
waters calm or level: So in the world affliction follows affliction, misery
misery, calamity calamity, and never rest until we arrive at the haven of
death. This was that that made Epictetus speak more like a Divine, then a
Philosopher, Homo calamitatis fabula, in foelicitatis stabula, that man was a
very map of misery. And some of the wisest heathen too, judge it the best
thing in the first place, not to be born, the next to die as soon as we ase
bo^n, this for the (^unde) whence death frees us.

Now for the (quo) whether death brings us, for as it frees Abraham's bosom.
Socrates the heathen professed that he could willingly dye, that he might see
the company of the ancient worthies; As Orpheus, and Hesiod, and Homer, and
the rest: What shall we do then that are Christians but with Hilargan the
Hermit, even chide our souls out of our bodies: And with Saint Paul, desire
to be dissolved, that we may see the blessed company of Patryarches of
Prophets, of Martyrs, of Confessors of Apostles, nay of Christ himself,
sitting at the right hand of God in the glory of his Majesty: This is the
society of Gods chosen and to this estate death brings us. And so I step from
the former branch of the statute to the latter, from that of death, to this of
judgment; But after this the judgment.

After this that is, anon, presently, immediately after, and therefore Aretias
reads it, (...) upon that. Take it which way you will, the phrase implies an
order of death, before judgment, but not a long distance of time between
death and judgment* Judgment follows in the neck of death either of weal or
woe; of salvation or damnation; of It^, or Venite, go ye cursed or come ye
ble^sed. This judgment here after death is either private, or public,
particular, or general, of souls alone, or of souls and bodies together.
Both these ju^^^ments may be here meant, but specially the particular, (...)
follows immediately the other, not til the end of the worlds It is enough that
after death comes judgment, one way or other; be it particular or general, it
matters not look we to it. If whilst we live we play not our game wisely;
repent of our sins and make our peace with God, when death comes it will be
too late to play an after-game of repentance, for then there remains no more
sacrifice for sin but a fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries, as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
10.27. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, persuade them
to piety, to charity, to holiness, to righteousness: In breife, 2 Cor. 5.11.
to a conscientious observation of both the Tables of the Law, and all because
of this, the terror of the Lord the rigor of the last judgment. If this will
not persuade men and prevail with them, I know not what will: He that shall
hear of death, and of judgment after death of a worm that never dies, and of
flames that never shall be quenched, and shall not feel his soul within him
shrink for fear, and shrivell it self together for astonishment: I can say no
more, nay nor less of him, then Simon Peter, of Simon M^gus, Act. 8.23. He is
in the gall of bitterness, the bond of iniquity, the infinite anger of God is
upon him.

Men, Brethren and Fathers let the remembrance of judgment smite every soul
amongst us with fear, make us to rend and ransacke our hearts, and purge these
Augaean stables of our polluted consciences from all uncleanness of flesh and
spirit. For the day will come (and God Knows how soon, it may be this day
before to Morrow) In quo plus valebunt pura coda, quam astura verba conscientia
bona quam marsapia plena (as Saint Bernard has it) in which pure hearts shall
prevail more then plausible words, a good conscience then a full purle. For
the tender mercies then of the Lord your God and for the love that ye bear
unto your own poor souls, think of this judgment after d^^th, and prepare
that for it before death, Cosen not your selv^^ with the weakness, the
corruption, the facility, the merc^^^nesse of the judge at that day, for the
judge is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God one that is infinite in power
and cannot be overborn with greatness punctual in resolution, and will not be
overcome with importunity; powerful in knowledge, and cannot be deceived with
cunning; exact in justice and will not be corrupted with bribes; impartial in
himself; and will not be carried away with favor or affection; either now or
never must ye work your own salvation, and sue the favor of the Judge, now
he is merciful, but then he will be severe. With what face shall Palate and
Judas, and the Jews, and all the route of the wicked, look upon him whom they
have pierced? Peirced in his own body with thorns and spears, and nails;
peirced in his poor members with cruelty and oppression, and
uncharitableness, and the like weapons of unrighteousness* What (troe ye)
will the judge say to such cruel tormentors of his innocent body? but either
afferte, etc. bring them hither, and slay them before me; or It^ ame etc. go
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire: A fearful doom, able to astonish
these that hear it, but utterly, to confound those that undergo it. What can
possibly appale or amaze the soul of a poor Christian more then this? to hear
him that should be his Savior, to say unto him go from me: what (may it say)
from thee Lord the fountain of life? from thee the light of glory? from thee
the river of pleasure? Oh God, this is terrible, intolerable; and yet this is
not all, but from me into everlasting fire; if but into fire, it were enough,
but into everlasting fire, is enough, and enough: This is the Apex, the height
of a wicked man's punishment, that the fire is everlasting.

But I would be loath to trespass too much upon your patience or the time; and
therefore for the matter of my Text, I will conclude, and conclude thus with
Saint Paul's Phil. 2 ^.
^^testation, a little added; If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies
toward your own souls, think on these things* and when that is done, think
on them again; think on death, think on judgment, think on both death and
judgment, because (there is no remedy) you must undergo the stroke and hazard
of both; for, says my Text, It is appointed unto men once to dye, but after
this the judgment. And so I have done with my Text. And yet I have not done;
here is another Text, or rather the same text in another Character, in another
Letter, that will a little require your patience? and my pains; your ears and
my tongue; your attention, and my illustration: and I begin it thus:

When Abner was dead, David (good man) took it to heart, and said to his
servants, Know ye not that there is a 2 Samuel ^.^^.
Prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel? I may take up the like
speech, and say unto you, as he to them; Know ye not? (I need not ask the
question) there is none here but does know) that a worthy Gentleman, a famous
Knight, a renowned Barone^, a great man is fallen this day in our Israel in
these parts and amongst us; witness these persons, this Pall these blacks,
these and all these accoutrements of honor and ensigns of greatness. I
condemn not such pompous solemnities and portly Ceremonies, where there is
worth and estate to bear it out but rather condemn them and as Eusebius
commends Actirius, a noble Senator, for his care and cost of Mari^^s (his
burial, qu^d splendid^ss^ma scpultura ^radidit, that he brought him honorably
to his grave: so do I (and I presume you will all do the like) commend the
generous and noble disposition of him, the Successor of this Patriot here
deceased whose heart and hand, God has enlarged to be at this charge.

If any one (busier then he need) shall think it a superfluous piece of
business, and say of it, as some did of the precious Oyntm^nt and eastly
Spikenard poured upon the head of our Savior; Ad quid perdit to haec? to what
end is all (...). 26.10.
this waste? I say again, let him not trouble his pragmaticall busy head
about it; for what was said of that work, may be said of this, it is (...), a
good work* and la^dable, and lawful; it is done in the honor of Christian
burial, and that is enough.

He that shall read the Story of the Jews or of the Romans either, shall find
the sumptuous and costly Funerals of the dead (and that sometimes even to
excess again) to be no novelty. And their commendations too those that were
honorable, and deserving in their life time, were followed with the amplest
testimonies of praise and honor, when they were dead; not thereby to gratify
any way the deceased, but to testify their love, to bemoan their loss, to
hold out the lamp of their virtues, and worthy Acts, to others lest alive.
When I read how Nazianzen commended Basi^, when he was dead, and Bernard the
Monk, Malachy the Bishop, how Elisha commended his Master Elijah and David,
Saul and Abner, how the blessed Apostles commended those Saints, of whom the
world was not worthy; I cannot think, nor possibly be persuaded, the due and
deserved commendations of the dead, to be any sin, but rather a faithful and
Christian endeavor, to have that blessing of God fulfilled upon them, that the
righteous be had in everlasting remembrance.

For mine own part, I never loved to give titles to any man, either living or
dead contrary to merit; nor am I come at this time (for there is no need of it)
to speak any thing in the praise of the deceased here above or beyond his
desert; for then (happily) it will be said of me as Hierome of Russinus, that I
wrong him with praises; but yet I would be loath to betray the memory of a
deceased, and withal a deserving man; or burden my self with a concealment
of those things, which deserve not only commendation but imitation; and such
as may (perchance) be an incentive to some of you that hear me this day, whom
God has blessed with ingenuous education, and ample estates to tread in his
steps (as Ascanius did in the steps of his Father Aeneas) and to follow him in
the like.

That that I shall speak in few words, shall be nothing but what I have either
heard by faithful and credible relation from others, or known of my own
experience or conceive in my opinion to be real and true. Then thus, This
noble and worthy shadow, and my much honored Patron, presented here before your
eyes, upon the Stage of mortality, was by his Parentage Nobly descended; there
are those in this presence that can tell you far better then my self, that his
birth was lineally very ancient and honorable; I dare not take upon me (nor is
it indeed my Office) to draw the line and list of his Pedigree, but sicut and
vimus, sic etiam vid^mus, as I have heard, so likewise have I seen, and so I
say, and say as I said before, that it was both honorable and ancient; At
Stemmat a quid faciunt? but alas what boots birth without other
beautifications? what availes Nobility without virtue, or ancient Pedigree
without good parts? where these two are sundred and severed, it is a shame, but
where they concur and meet together, it is an honor, worthy an accent of
elevation, and so they did in him: for besides that which he derived from his
Ancestors, he had in himself more then ordinary or common parts; a stately
person, a comely presence, a grave countenance, a solid judgment, a good wit,
a civil behavior, a sober conversation: these are not ordinary, yet these he
had. And besides these, he was deliberate in his courses, and after
deliberation, resolute; he was of an excellent temper, not easily moved to
passion, he was wise, prudent, provident, politic in the better sense; wary in
his ways: to sum it up in short, he was in the esteem of those that loved him
worst, an accomplished Gentleman.

I speak not this to free him from all infirmities; for he was a man, and
nihil human^ a se alie^um putamus; that is enough to entitle him, and all men
else to frailty and infirmities: there is no man breathing lives without them,
or free from them; but comparing him with other men, and making appearance, the
judge, he was as free (I will not say as any) but sure as many, if not the most.

For his Education, it was like others of his rank; first at the inferior
Schools of good learning, and then after that at the famous University of
Oxford, for some small space of time, though not long; but the time that he
stayed there, and the learning that he had, he did improve it to the best
advantage of any that I have known. For the rest of his life, as Coesar
comprised that service of his in three words. Veni, vidi, vici* I came, I sa^,
I vanquished: so shall I in three other words sum up and comprehend the whole
course and tenor of it; Ecclesia, Respublica, Familia; the Church, the State
the Family.

To the first of these, the Church He had a twofold relation; as a Patron, and
as a Professor.

Take him in the former, as he was a Patron; and I must and can say for my own
part^, that he was free from the le^t sm^ck or touch of Simonie, nor did I ever
hear that he made any precontract with any of his Clerks which he did
present, so much as for a farthing. A rare example (I must tell you) in these
bribing corrupt times wherein Simonie is so rise, and sac^iledge, so common,
that unless the Clerk bring the bag; he shall not have the Benefice;
unless he abate, or compound or matry a Ruth, he shall not have the
inheritance. But besides this it is not unknown to many here present that to a
Church near adjoining where he was Patron and Impropriat or too* for the
respect and love that he had toward learning and Religion, he made an
augment^tion of twenty pounds per annum, toward the better support of the
Minister, and the Ministry in that place: true it is (I confess) that the
Church there needed it; but again, it is as true, that r^bus sic stantibus,
things standing as now, they do, and ratified by a settlement of Law, as (men
conceive) they be, he needed not have given it, and therefore deserves the
greater praise: show me a man that has done thus much of his own accord, and
I will speak thus much in, his commendation.

Take him in the latter, as he was a Professor and I must Pet. 3.15.

I have seldom known or heard of one of his profession and quality (not
versed in positive or polemicall Divinity) that would reason a case so strongly
maintain an Argument so stoutly, or assoyle a Doubt so dexterously, as he
would. Thus his relation to the Church.

As touching the second, his relation to the State, he was Secondly, the State.
loyal to his Sovereign, obsequious to his betters, friendly to his equals,
favorable to his inferiors, charitable to the poor and needy.

This last namely his charity, it was the less noted, because it was not (as
some men's be) Pharasaicall, public and for populer applause; but private, and
in secret; his endeavor was to follow the Doctrinall rule of our Savior.
Matthew. 6.1. that the left hand should not know what the right hand did: I am
verily persuaded, that he sent and gave away many a shilling, many a crown,
many a pound, to those that were necessitous and in want, who never knew their
almner, nor from whence their relief came.

It is not yet, six, or not above six hours ago, since I received a relation
in writing from a noble gentleman, a ^^eind both of his and my own, (whose
relation I dare rely upon, Master ^ohn Ackland, Esquire
and pawn my credit, calling and profession for the truth of it) how many good
deeds he has done in and about the place where he lived, what several sums
of money he has given, and caused to be given to poor ministe^s, to poor
widows, and to other poor people, according to their several necessities:
But above all, to one poor minister, a sum of a good, a great value.

But because dolosus versatur in generalibus, it may be thought a kind of
fraudulencie to trade thus in general, without specification of some
perticulars: I will give you some instances, though not in the persons, yet in
some of the sums of money that have been given by him in the way of charity.
And therein I shall make a gradation, not downwards (as Abraham did in his
intercession for Sodom) from ^ftie to forty, from forty to thirty, from thirty
to twenty, Genesis 18.
from twenty to ten, from ten to five; but upwards, from three pound to five
pound, from five to ten, from ten to twenty, to forty, to threescore, to
fourscore; for so much is credibly reported, that he gave to that poor Minister
before mentioned: This was a worthy work, a work of charity, nay more (in these
chill times) a work of wonder: yet such worthy works, such works of charity,
such works of wonder did he practice: And not six days (as I am told) before
he died, he desired to live no longer then God should give him a heart to do
good such a prayer, and such alms* like those of Cornolius, wants not both
audience and acceptance with Acts 10.
God Almighty.

In reference to the State, he was an ancient Commissioner of the peace, and he
had not his office for naught, for as was his office, such was his endeavor,
to make peace his reconcilement of people at varience, was not without labor
and charge too sometimes: For where he saw that satisfaction was necessary to
the party wronged, and the party wronging non solvent, and not able to pay, he
would make it up out of his own purse. Here was justice (as we say) with a
witness; Charity joined with justice; such a piece of justice, as (I must
confess) I have never seen the like, and but seldom heard of: you that are
as he was, do in this as he did, it is worth not only your observation, but
your practice.

His carriage in the place of a Commissioner, was both fair and ingenuous; for
as he was zealous for the promoting of his Majesty's service, so likewise just
and incorrupt, for the affairs of the Country. And to this purpose, (I speak
but what I know, and what fell from his own mouth) his allowance to his Clerk,
was more then ordinary, that he should not sherke upon the Country for fees,
nor grate upon the people by exaction.

He was for a long time a Deputy Lieutenant (and upon the summons of a late
Parliament) was by the common vote of the Country chosen a Knight of the
Sheere; where he served his Country with that gravity and sincerity, that he
gained thereby no small honor and applause.

These are but petty promotions to those (which no doubt) he might have been
advanced unto, if he had nor affected a private life, and chused rather to
command at home, then crouch abroad; to live freely upon his own, rather then
stand to the devotion of another.

As touching the third, the relation of his Family; He was a prudent
householder, one that ruled his own house well, 1 Timothy 3. 4. his government in
this kind was more then ordinary, deserving both commendation and imitation;
for like the good Conturion in the Gospel, he had his servants at such a beck
and command, that if he said to one, go, he did go; if to another, come, he
did come; if to a third, do this, he did do is.

He was not attended with swearers or drunkards, or vagabonds, or rif-raffes,
or debauched ruffians but (which was his honor) with men of fashion, of
staidness, of civility, of soberness,

He was a man that, besides those Stat a tempera, the times set apart for his
own private Devotions, (wherein he was constant) he had prayers usually in his
Family; where for the most part, he was present himself, together with singing
of Psalms, and repetition of Sermons, (as occasion was offered.) So that what
Eusebius reports of Constantines Palace, might in a sort be applied to his
House, he had in it the form and representation of a Church.

What his providence was in respect of his Children and of succession, let the
world judge; he was one that did not waste but improve his Estate left him by
his friends: When he first enjoyed it, I have often heard him say, that he was
deeply in debt, but by his care and providence, together with Gods blessing
upon both, he wound himself out, and added to what was left him.

For the rest of his demeanor in his Family; take him in his several
relations, as a Husband, a Father, a Master, I^e tell you what he was, in a
word; he was a loving Husband to his espoused Lady, a tender Father to his
dutiful Children, a liberal Master, to his officious and well deserving
servants.

Now he is gone and impossible it is, that a man of so much worth, and of so
many several Relations to the Chruch and to the State and to the Family,
should be plucked away, but that some should feel it, and lament the loss of
it; Well may that curse fall upon Jehotakim, that none should lament him,
saying, Ah my brother, or ah my Sister or ah Lord, or ah his glory, bu^ never
upon this worthy personage here deceased: for over these Corpse (...) Coffin,
that Grave, it will be lam^nted; and said by (...), Ah my Father, by others, Ah
my ^usband, by others, Ah my Grandfather by (...) Landlord, by others, Oh my,
Master* and by (...) some others of my Coat and profession, as sharing in the
loss, so in the lamentation too, Ah my Patron.

As concerning the disposal of his Estate, or the nature of his decease, or
the manner of his death, I can say nothing, because I heard nothing; I make no
doubt, but qualis vita, finis ita; as was his life, such was his death; as he
lived in the fear of God, so he dyed in the favor of God. There let us leave
him, thither let us commend our selves, and I have done.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, three persons
and but one God, be ascribed and given, all glory and honor all praise and
power, all Majesty, Might and Dominion, from this time forth and for evermore
Amen.

FINIS

