A Funeral Sermon Preached at the Merchants Lecture, AT Pinner's-Hall,
Broadstreet, UPON THE DEATH of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gouge, Who Deceased Jan.
8. 1699/1700.

By JOHN NESBITT.

LONDON: Printed for John Marshall, at the Bible in Grace Church Street. 1700.

TO THE Relations and Friends Of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gouge, DECEASED.
THE more Useful your Relation or Friend was to the World, and Delightful to
you, the more Conspicuous will your Graces appear, in a becoming Submission to
the Will of Him, who has now removed him to a Better Place. We cannot part with
such in whom we have Pleasure, without Pain; nor can such as have been united
in Affection, part without a Sigh and a Groan. To have no Sense of what we
suffer, or to part with our Friends as if we sustained no Loss, is Stupidity,
and not Submission; but while you feelingly complain to God, to show your
Affection, beware of complaining of him, or censuring his Dispensations, for he
is accountable for None of his Ways; as he cannot deny us that Mercy which we
have Merited, so he cannot take that from us which we have not Forfeited;
therefore it becomes you to say with David, I was Dumb, I opened not my Mouth,
because thou did it. Psalm. 39. 9.


What I have said of him, will appear to the Impartial, his Circumstances being
considered, to be a due Debt. If any of you think I have said too little, blame
your selves, for not making Choice of a more Skilful Hand, to represent him in
his full Luster. If any blame me for saying so much, that is owing to the
Living, who made it needful, and not to my Inclination. If to think and speak
Ill of others is (as a Great Man has Asserted) not only a bad thing, but a
sign of a bad Man, sure I am, it is a very difficult thing to find a good Man in
Conversation, when speaking Ill of others is so much in fashion. It is a pity,
when so many of all Parties seem to be bent for Division, that such should
appear agreed and united only in this, to think the way to do Christ Service,
and promote their own Opinions, is by endeavoring to blast the Reputation of
each other; I wish rather all Parties could learn to be Conscientiously strict
to their own Principles and Persuasions, in Practice, and at the same time do
all the Offices of Love and Kindness to each other, notwithstanding our
Differences, as becomes the Disciples of a Meek Jesus.

As for this Discourse, it is a Theme that is so often Preached and Published,
and Calculated chiefly for Practice, that I must not expect, it will suite the
Gust and Relish of such Airy Christians as despise all Practical Discourses;
but if it may be Blessed of God, to assist and excite any of you, or others, so
to number their Days, that they may apply their Hearts to Wisdom, my Design is
obtained; which that it may, is the Earnest Prayer of,

Your Sincere Friend and Servant in the Ministry of Christ Jesus, John Nesbitt.

Books Printed for and Sold by John Marshall, at the Bible in
Grace Church Street.
AN Elegiack. Essay Humbly Offered to the Pious Memory of the Late Reverend and
Learned Mr. Matthew Mead, Minister of the Gospel at Stepney, etc. Also most of
his Works.

The Effigies of Mr. Matthew. Mead, newly Engraved to the Life, by an Ingenious
Hand, far Excelling any before.

A Sermon on the Death of the Reverend and Learned Mr. Stephen Lobb. By Thomas
Goodwin.

A Declaration of the Congregational Ministers in and about London, against
Antinomian Errors, etc. The Second Edition. To which is added, The Testimony of
some of the Ministers in Behalf of the rest.

The Divine Institution of Congregational Churches, Ministry, and Ordinances.
By Isaac Chauncy.

Variety without Vanity, or a Compact Number of Copies, with most Sorts of
Copy-books, etc. with Copies on the top to learn by: Also most Sorts of Books
whereby to learn Shorthand. Rich's Shorthand Testament and Psalms.

A Funeral-Sermon.
ECCLES. vii. Verse 2. The last clause. The Living will lay it to his Heart.


IT is generally granted that Life is the most inestimable Jewel of the
Creation; the Father of Lies in this spoke Truth; That Skin for Skin, Job 2. 4.
and all a Man has he will give for his Life. Life though but in an Infect, is
more Glorious than the Sun that gave it both Breath and Being. A Living Dog is
better than Eccl. 9. 4.
a Dead Lion. Yet this Royal Preacher when he weighs the Godly Man's Death,
with the Day of his Natural Birth, he prefers the former before the latter. The
one is attended with a numerous train of Miseries, whereas the other is the
Believers deciding Stroke, and final Conquest over all his Enemies. Hence he
persuades us to allay the Sorrow and Toil of a miserable Life, by making
preparation for a comfortable Death; and the method proposed, is to frequent
Funerals rather than Feasts. It is better to go to the House of Mourning, than
to the House of Feasting, and that for two Reasons.

First, Because while we are Lamenting another Death, we may learn the Frailty
of our own Life. For it is the end of all Men.

Secondly, The Influence it will have upon our Hearts and Practice. The Living
will lay it to his Heart. Which passage I hope will not be thought unsuitable
to the late Providence, which gave me the sad occasion to make choice of it.

First, Here Is a Duty mentioned Laying Death to Heart.

Secondly, You have the equity or reasonableness of it. The Living will lay it
to his Heart: As he Merits the Character of a Fool, nay of a Devil, that can
make a mock of his own or another Sins, so he is Prove. 14. 9.
justly esteemed Dead, while Living, that with an unconcerned Eye can see
Death's Conquest over others, which is the Fruit of Sin and the example of his
own.

The Doctrine I purpose to prosecute from these Words is this, When we hear or
see Death removing the best of Men and Ministers, it is highly reasonable to
expect that the Living will lay Death to Heart.

In managing this point I shall,

I. Show what it is to lay Death to Heart II. The reasonableness of it. III.
apply it.
First, What it is to lay Death to Heart.

First, To fix the Mind upon Dying, to make it the Subject of our Mente
attendet.
serious Meditation: He that is a Wise Man will consider his latter end, when
he sees an end is come to others before him: Some like the Prodigal lavish out
their Thoughts wholly about this World, and Death that will shortly snatch them
from it, is quite forgotten; they like Archimedes are drawing their Projects in
the Dust: Take no Alarm by the warnings that are given them, till the Enemy
smite them down at once. Others think it too Melancholy a Theme, and why should
they torment themselves before the time, to think that this Body, carefully
kept and delicately fed, must change its present dwelling, to become not only a
Companion, but a Banquet for Worms. Some they hope that their Sun is not yet
arrived at its Meredian, and for them to think of Dying, is as if you would bid
them go to Bed at Noon Day: When they have settled thire Affairs in the World;
their Years are come, in which they have no Pleasure; when Old Age has Snowed
upon their Heads and devoured their sensual Pleasures, then to think of Dying
is a suitable Doctrine: But while their Blood is Sparkling in their Veins, it
is not a convenient Season: Nay, even the Believer though he is in safety as to
his Spiritual state, is apt to shiver at the first view of this King of
Terrors, as Job calls him, though with the Apostle he groan under the weight of
his tiresom Tabernacle, yet when he sees the Hand that must deliver him, he
desires rather, that the Mortal Body might be clothed with Immortal Glory; but
though we fly from Death like Moses from his Rod when turned into a Serpent, yet
when we frequently take it up by the Hand of Faith, we see there is no harm nor
danger in it. To lay Death to Heart is to acquaint our Thoughts with Dying.

Secondly, To be duly affected with our concernment in it, he will not pass it
over with a slight apprehension, like a Natural Man beholding his Face in a
Glass, and straightway forgets Jam. 1.
what manner of Man he was. But he will work it upon his affections. Inditurus
est illud animosuo. Trem.
I know there are many who Laugh at Death, and treat their dissolution with
Contempt and Scorn, like Gaal of old, who disdained Abimelech, when at a
distance, Who is Abimelech that we should serve him? And yet at the first
attack cowardly Judges 9. 38.
fled before him: Some are like the sleepy Drunkard at ease in their Sins, and
never lift up their Eyes till in the midst of Hell Flames. That profession,
which serves many to keep up a Reputation in Religion, will prove too slender a
defense against the Arrows of this King of Terrors. There are Three things
which one Mr. Sedgwicks Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Sr^^g 1656.
said many Years ago Prognosticate approaching judgments, because not duly
regarded.

First, An unconcernedness of Spirit, when the Foundations of the Christian
Religion are overturned and destroyed, to see the Cornerstone pulled out, and
we not affected.

Secondly, To see the generality of Professors contenting themselves with an
empty Name, without the power of Religion, No Man stiring up himself to
takehold of a departing Isa. 64. 7.
God.

Thirdly, To see the Ministers of Christ despised and contemned. The 2 Chro.
36. 15, 16.
Lord had compassion on his people and on his dwelling place. But when they
mocked the Messengers of God, etc. Then Wrath arose, and there was no remedy.
If the Ambassadors of Peace be rejected, the Herald's of War will follow them:
And have we not the same Symptoms still remaining? There are some things that
are of great Moment, and very uncertain as to our enjoyment of them, and
therefore we should be deeply affected with them; one is the offers of the
everlasting Gospel. O that Luke 19. 42
thou had known in this thy Day. etc. the Waters of Life will not always run
wast by your Doors. If God's to Day be too soon, your to Morrow may be too
late. Another is the inward striving of the Spirit. My Spirit shall not always
Genesis 6. 3.
strive with Man. When you are under conviction take heed how they wear off: If
they leave thee short of a through closure with Christ, thou art undone for ever;
and I may add our own Life, Is it not a Vapor that appears for a little
while, and Jam. 4. 14.
then uanquisheth away? And yet an eternity depends upon it; surely then Ex hoc
momento pendet Eternities.
the laying Death to Heart, is not practiced till our affections are duly
affected with our concernment in it and that,

Thirdly, And Principally by resolving in sincerity to make ready for it. The
Heart by Sin, is become both desultory in its Meditations and deceitful in its
Resolutions. I doubt not but this Day, there are many in the Chamber of utter
Darkness, that in their way thithe^ had their secret purposes to reform their
Courses, only for the present they had not leisure. We forget that Sin like
Dalilah has cut our Locks, and so purpose in our own Strength, and go out in
the Srength of our Resolutions, and thence all our purposes are snapt asunder
like Sampson's Withs, when outward temptations fall in with indwelling
corruptions; but to resolve in sincerity, is with full purpose of heart,
depending upon the Lord and the power of his might, to prepare to meet this
formidable Enemy, and that with respect unto,

Is It, Our Spiritual State; 2dly, With respect unto our present frame, the
former is our safety, and the latter our comfort; every Believer dies safely,
but he that is actually ready embraces Death triumphantly and even before the
Fight can sing the Victory.

First, Then to prepare with respect unto your state, and this includes Three
things.

Is It. To be united unto Christ, and clothed with his righteousness. I know
there are many witty expressions and fortifying considerations scattered in the
Writings of Heathens to arm us against Death's assults. But alas! All of them
cannot make an Armor of proof for a dying Man; the Sting of Death will pierce
through all of them; nay bring in the righteousness which thou have done, and
that too will prove too scanty a Garment to cover thy shame. There is but one
impregnable foretress, where this Enemy can never hurt you, and that is the
Rock Jesus: There is but one Robe that will effectually secure, as well as
adorn thee, against this Enemy, and that is his Righteousness: Death will find
out every Man's standing, whether it be in the first or second Adam; if in the
former, than all your Sins, are upon your Souls, and though now they seem light
and sit easy, yet every one of them will be heavier than a Millstone to sink
thee into endless misery; this the Apostle knew, when he desired to be found in
him, not having his own righteousness, Phil. 3. 9.
etc. to be found in him, Notes his Spiritual union with Christ; not having
mine own righteousness which is of the law. To signify the insufficiency of all
he could call his own, But that which is through the faith of Christ. Thereby
owning that as he had no confidence in the flesh, so his rejoicing was in
Christ Jesus, and his Righteousness; its in him and with him only, that you can
dwell in safety, and through him you must obtain the Victory.

2dly, When your covenant state between God and you is secured: It was this
that made the Psalmist 2 Samuel 23. 5.
of Israel sing so sweetly when stepping into Eternity: He views his Family,
and there finds nothing to support his departing Spirit, but when he Reads over
the Charter of the Covenant, he begins the Songs of Zion, though not yet past the
swellings of Jordan: Here he saw that peace between God and him which would
abide in Death, and outlive the Grave. They that are without the Bond of the
Covenant, who have never given their Heart and Hand to be the Lord's, they may
be dejected, and there is cause for it. But, Why Ps. 49. 5.
should I fear in the day when the iniquities of my heels compass me about:
though not only Infirmities but many Iniquities lay seige against the believers
Soul, yet why should I be dejected? For the Lord will redeem my verse. 15.
Soul from the power of the grave, my God will receive me. What though Death seem
never so terrible, it has lost its Sting; Christ by his Cross has turned
those Waters of Marah into a refreshing Stream to all that are in Covenant with
God through him: As in the first Covenant Death is the Messenger of Justice to
drag the Sinner to execution, so in the New Covenant, it is the Messenger of a
Father to fetch his Children to those Mansions Christ has prepared for them;
though death is continued in its natural conception, as it is a dissolving of our
Frame and Union between Soul and Body, yet it is not continued in its moral
notion, as a penal satisfaction: Death it self is put into the Believers
Inventory, Death is yours. 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Death is to every Man according to the Covenant in which it finds him; if
there be a Covenant of Peace between God and Thee, then thou may go out
boldly and meet death as a real Friend, though in the Array of a formidable Enemy.

3dly, When your Hearts are sanctfied and renewed, We are saved Tit. 3. 5.
by the Washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Christ's
Righteousness will never be a defense to any but his own Image, If we take his
Robe to cover us in our Sin, we do but deceive our own Souls: As death will
wipe away all Tears from the Believer's Eyes, so it will take off the paint of
Hypocritical Professors; then elevated strains shall not go for true Godliness,
nor fair Words pass for Charity, nor an empty Name for the power of Religion;
he only shall appear an Israelite indeed that is without Guile, and has true
Grace or Wisdom in the hidden parts. As Hypocrites, though they are embellished
with many glistering Ornaments in the externals of Religion, yet they are
always loathsome to God, because of their unseen uncleanness; so though
Believers have many visible Infirmities and Imperfections, yet they are always
glorious with the truth of Grace within, though like the Ark covered with coarse
Skins, yet pure Gold within; then do we truly lay death to heart, in preparing
for it, when Sin in its dominion is cast out of the heart, for he is a Jew,
which is one Inward and Gospel Circumcision is Romans 2. 29:
that of the heart, in the spirit. where these three are secured that Soul's
state is safe.

The second preparation is to be actually ready for death: The former is and
has been the care of every true Believer, but the neglect of this latter makes
the message of death strangely surprising to many real Christians; instead of
going out of the World like the Patriarch, saying, I have waited for thy
Salvation; or like old Simeon, Now let thou thy Servant depart in peace,
Luke 2. 29.
they cry out like him, O spare Psalm. 39. 13.
me that I may recover strength before I go hence and be no more; though the
Believer's Righteous Soul, while here, is vexed with the filthy Conversation of
the Wicked, yet like Lot he is ready to linger, when God calls him out of this
Sodom of a World. Would you then, die not only in safety, but with joy, instead
of being dragged forcibly, go out willingly; and while others have their Souls
taken from them, thou, like thy Redeemer, give up thine into the hand of thy
heavenly Father; for this purpose be conscientious in these four things.

1. Let not the things of this World fix upon your Heart and Affections; it is
difficult keeping the Heart chaste for God when the Affections are entangled in
the World; though your necessity will oblige you to drink of this Jael's Cup, yet
beware of sleeping in her Tent; beware of its Syrene Songs and Meretricious
Smiles; though neither Earth nor Hell shall keep the Believer out of Heaven, yet
they make many go halting thither. Maintain as much as possible the same
opinion of your earthly enjoyments while living, as Men generally have (...)
when dying. Look upon them rather as Talents committed to Servants, to improve
for their Master's use, than as absolutely your own, as they are free Gifts,
which we never deserved, so be thankful to the Donor; and as they are Talents
so we should be faithful, because we must give an account to our Lord and
Master. So use this world as not to abuse it, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
nor to have thy heart abused by it. When thou see the Kingdoms of this World
and the Glory thereof, beware of falling down and worshipping; let not the dust
of the Earth blind the eye of thy Faith, nor the pleasures of it divide thy
Love; whatever be the delight of your Eyes, be sure that nothing but God in
Christ be the delight of your Hearts.

2dly. Keep your Loins girt and your Lamps Burning. As we are to stand actually
ready for whatsoever service our Lord may appoint us, whether doing or
suffering; so we must in order thereunto keep every Grace in exercise. It was
very surprising, to the Wise Virgins, when the midnight cry came to go out and
meet the Bridgroom, to find their Lamps untrim'd, though there was Oil in their
Vessels. As Gall. 2. 20.
we are to live by the Faith of the Son of God for daily influence, so we are
to walk by Faith, as the eye to direct our Practice. Let it 2 Cor. 5. 7.
be your care to say with the Spouse. At our gates are all manner of pleasant
Cant. 7. 15.
fruits, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved. There you have plenty and
variety. All manner of etc, and they are at the Gate, that is actually ready;
and all for the Beloved. As all Grace is derived from Christ's fullness, so it is
devoted to him for his service. Let there be Faith, to follow him in dark
Providence, patience to wait for him under delays, meekness to guard thy
Spirit from being ruffled by the scurrilites of a sordid World. Love which
makes every duty easy, and this is the way to have an abundant 2 Pet. 1. 11.
entrance into thy Master's joy.

3dly. Dye daily unto Sin. It Is Sin that will be the Achan and troubler of thy
camp: This will make thee fly before this Enemy: This like Jonah will raise a
Storm, if not cast out. Guilt, that one word spoke by the Mouth of Conscience,
will be like a clap of Thunder in thy Bosom, it will make a dreadful convulsion
in thy inner, when Death comes to attack thy outward Man, therefore keep thy
Garments clean, and be often washing them in the Blood of the Lamb. Though thou
art a Child of God, yet remember thou have that fuel still in thee, that is
very apt to catch the Devils Fire. Can a Traveller hold on his way rejoicing,
with a Thorn in his Foot? No more can the believer with comfort march into
Eternity with guilt lying upon his Conscience. Wherefore, beloved, seeing that
2 Pet. 3. 14.
ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace,
without spot and blameless. Walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise,
uncloathing your Souls as to the Old Man and his deeds, which are Ephesians. 4. 22.
24.
corrupt, and putting on the New Man in Righteousness and true Holiness; and
this is the way with joy to meet thy God.

4thly, And lastly be faithful to Christ in thy particular and proper station:
Christ is the great Master and appointer of every Man's Work and Post in the
World. Be thou faithful unto the Death and then Rev. 2. 10.
comes the Crown of Life. John's hearers were not sollicitous about changing
their employments, but how they might serve God in them. How shall he that
loyters with the sluggard in his day for service, in the Evening rest from his
Labors? Some Men are always busy, but doing nothing in the great work of
their Salvation. Why stand you here Matt. 20. 6.
all the day idle? He that has least has one Talent, and if thou art not a
wicked Servant, that will be improved for thy Lord. Does Solomon send the
sluggard to an insect to be his Teacher? And may not many Christians be sent to
the inanimate part of the Creation to learn to serve God in their particular
relations? The stars in their courses fought for God against Sisera. He is the
most excellent Christian, that Honors God in his particular relations, in
which he has placed him. In short, true Grace is no Friend to Idleness.
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Magistrates and Ministers, have
their work appointed them, in the World; and its our Business to be diligent in
it: Would you then stand actualy ready? Follow the example of your Lord,
Redeemer, who when about to leave the World could say, I have finished the work
which thou John 17. 4.
gave me to do. Lose not your present opportunities, but do the Work of him
that sent thee into this World, while it is day, that thou may say with the
Apostle. I have finished my course, I have fought 2 Timothy 4. 7.
the good fight of Faith. I am now putting off my Sword, and have no more to
do, but to receive the Crown. And Blessed is that Servant whom when his Lord
comes he shall find thus standing and thus doing: He has no more to do, but to
Die and enter into the joy of his Lord.

The Second thing I proposed was to show, That to lay Death to Heart, when we
see it removing the best of Men and Ministers, is but highly reasonable. The
Living will, de jure he ought to do it, and if a Wise Man de facto he will lay
it to Heart, as has been shown. And that,

First, Because it is the end of all Men. No sooner Man brought in Sin, but
Death passed upon all Men. It Is an innocent mistake when in the House of
Mourning, where an end is come to another, to imagine it our own. It is but to
antidate that which must certainly, and, it may be, shortly come. What if in
the succession of many Ages God has made two and but two Men's time run into
eternity without interruption. Can we tell what change past upon them in their
translation? For this I say that 1 Cor. 15. 50.
Flesh, and Blood, as now framed and fashioned cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God: And those that remain alive at our Lord's appearing, tho they shall not
Die as it is a dissolution of the frame of Man, or separation of the Soul and
Body, yet they shall be changed to a fitness or capacity for the Glory 51, 52.
of that illustrious Day: Though the Life of Man admits of, many maybes and
peradventures, yet his Dying admits of none. It is appointed for all Men once
to die. The rich and Heb. 9. 27.
poor are there. The Beggar Dyed and so did the Rich Man; all pass through this
Gate, though the ways immediately part upon it, like a Princes Palace that has
but one common Gate, at which Criminals and Children enter: The one goes up to
his Fathers Mansions, the other down to his Dungeon. Thus it is with good and
bad. The Rose of Sharon and Lilly of the Valley, though they are more Pleasant
and Beautiful while Living, yet they are not less Mortal than the common Grass.
The sweet Singer of Israel must come to his last words, and the most charming
Preacher to his last Sermon. Among the many Rules and Directions written for
the preserving of Health, none was ever so mad as to pretend a Medicine that
would turn away Death, for it is the end of all Men.

Secondly, The weighty but unseen circumstances that may attend our Dying: God
has as much appointed the limits of our Lives, as the bounds of our
habitations: The whole of our Days make up but a few Years, and they are full
of Evil. The time at longest is but short: But there are two circumstances
which should most of all affect us, one is we know not the critical moment when
our Lord will come, whether, while wear young and tender, or whether he will
stay till Luke 12. 40.
the Years come, in which we shall say we have no pleasure. Another is the
manner in which he will send for us; whether the thread of our Lives shall be
snapt of a sudden, or worn out by a lingering Consumption? This Messenger Death
will come, but can we tell where he will meet us, in the Street or in the
Closet, on Bed or at Board? Can you tell in what Livery he will appear? Though
Death be to the believer, the Messenger of a Father, yet thy Father may send
for thee in a Chariot of Fire: May it not blow a Storm when thou art to launch
out into the eternal ocean? Whereas a more gentle gale may waft another over.
In a word, all Pet. 1. 24.
flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the grass, the grass
withers, etc. Can you tell what Hand God will use to cut it down? It may be
the Hand of an Infant, the Teeth of an Insect, or a blast of Wind; and if it
stands long, of it self, it is fading and withering: Surely then it is but
reasonable to be affected with our Death before it come.

Thirdly, Because it is not the end of your being, but your entering upon an
unchangeable condition. You don't cease to be, but cease to be Mortal: Now you
fall into Sin, and there is a may be of your Recovering, but then, as the Tree
falls so it lies: Now many that are caught in the Snare of the Devil, may be
Rescued by their Redeemer; but if you fall a Captive to Satan in this
Rancounter, there is no Ransom for ever. There Is no mistaking twice in this
Warfare, nor is there any room to correct an Error. For there is no Work, nor
Device, Eccl. 9. 10.
nor Wisdom in the Grave, whither thou art going. For you that are Believers,
it is your going to meet your Head and Husband; and shall not the Lambs Wife
make her self ready: You are Wise Virgins, and is it not a reproach that the
Wise should sleep with the Foolish; as this enters you upon a state where
there is no mixture, all pure Joy, or unmixt Misery, so it puts you beyond all
changing; the Believer shall never more put to Sea, or be in a Storm again. And
for you that are Unbelievers, there shall no more be a Messenger of Peace to
knock at your Doors, that which is now your desire shall be your Doom: Now you
desire the Almighty to depart from you, and he will leave you to all Eternity.
O Sirs! this one Word Eternity, if duly Weighed by us, either as it respects
happiness or Torments; we could not look upon the Death of others without
laying it to Heart, by Preparing for our own. Thus I have done with my
Doctrine, which I may rather call an Application: I am afraid the Age we Live
in, needs more to be urged to Practice, than entertained with the Explication
of what is more abstruse; many know much, and know that they do know, but few
Practice what they know. What I have further to say, is to apply this Doctrine
with respect unto the present occasion; I might draw several Inferences from
hence. As,

First, That the Christian Religion does not forbid, but commend our
sympathising with those that mourn for deceased Friends. Religion is not a
rigid Sowerness; true Grace regulates, but does not destroy natural Affections:
Tears came in by the first Adam, and they were Legitimated by the second, Jesus
wept: If we are not only to go, to the House of mourning but to lay it to
heart, sure I am we are to be affected with those that are afflicted in it.

Secondly, I might collect how difficult it is to make right Improvement, even
of those things that are most obvious: We live among the Monuments of the Dead,
and it is of the Lord's Mercy, that we are spared. The Living know they must
die. Some have the Harbingers of this King of Terrors, already come, and feel
Death already invading them: The Records of the Grave, tell us, it is the House
of all Living, and yet how difficult is it to be affected with it. Some
possibly will say, they have been hearing a very common Theme this Morning, but
can thou say by all the Funerals thou have frequented or Sermons, thou have
heard, that thou have laid thy Death to Heart, by making ready both as to thy
state and frame, as has now been shown?

Thirdly, How irrationally do they act, who instead of laying Death to Heart,
put it far from them, and lay Sin next their Heart, and in their Affection:
They hug the Serpent that will Sting them, the Worm that will gnaw in their
Bosoms to all eternity: God has not given them the seeing Eye, nor the
understanding Heart unto this Day. Some there are that carry it toward Death,
as if they were able to Hector it to stay their leisure, or else were resolved
[as one says] to try what Music there is in Weeping and Wailing joined in
consort with Gnashing of Teeth: Such may truly be said to be Dead while Living,
for the living etc

Second use by way of Exhortation.

Shall not we that are Living lay this to Heart, that Death has bereft us of
one that used to be a Messenger of Peace from God to us in this Place: One did
I say? I might have said many: Or must I take up the Prophets complaint. The
rightous Is. 57. 1. Nemo Hemo reponi^ in animo Junius.
Perish, and no man lays it to heart. Possibly you will ask, when such an one
Died? What was his Distemper? Who succeeds him? And in what condition is his
Family left? And when this is done, your concern is over and gone. Is this to
lay what is come to pass to Heart? No! this does evidence, that there was
little Love to them while Living; when we can so easily forget them when Dead.
Is the Staff and the Stay, the Ancient and the Prophet taken away, and will the
Living not be affected.

I know Funeral Sermons have been much abused by daubing flattery, whence some
have condemned them in gross, and think their ought to be no more notice taken
of the precious than of the vile: I grant that my work is not to praise the
Dead, but to instruct the Living; and if I should attempt a panigyrick in this
case, it would be to put Paint upon pure Gold: However, oppressed Innoence
ought to be vindicated, and shameless Sinners ought to be reproved, whether
they will, or will not regard it. I shall therefore mention Three, things which
if well considered, will show what just reason there is to be deeply affected.

1st. The Person. 2dly. The Season. 3dly. The hand the Living had in it.
First, For the Person, not that I pretend to tell you his worth, for that
would suppose I knew all he was. Only give me leave to speak of him under a
double capacity. 1st As a gracious Man. 2dly. As a Minister of Jesus Christ.

First, As a gracious Man. True Grace is the lasting Foundation of Honor and
Greatness. Let Hell and Earth unite their Malice to contradict it, the Oracles
of Heaven will maintain Ps. 112. 6.
it, That the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. In him, Heaven
gave an early confutation of that opprobrious, but too common reflection, That
Ministers Children, of all others, seldom mind Religion: He could say, and that
truly too, as Obadiah did, Thy servant feared the Lord from my youth. 1 Kings
18. 12.
He was early Planted in the Beams of the Sun of Righteousness; and thereby
quickly ripened to do his Master eminent Service: He not only from a Child knew
the Scriptures, but through them was made 2 Timothy 3. 15.
wise unto Salvation. Nor was his goodness like the Morning Cloud and the early
Dew, but like the shining light which shines more and Prove. 4. 18.
more unto the perfect day. Tho through constant labor in his Masters
Vineyard, and other afflictive providence, he contracted an early weakness in
his outward Man; so that his Strength was weakened in the way. Yet it was
evident, that by the influence of his Living Head, his inner Man grew Day by
Day. Were I to tell you the various Trials with which he was exercised, and his
carriage in them, you would them say in him patience had its perfect Work: And
had I time and you patience to speak of the several graces which flourished in
him, in the various Relations and Capacities, in which his Lord placed him. It
would appear beyond contradiction, that Grace shined, with that Divine and
Spiritual Glory, in the course of his Conversation; that if the Malice of any
should infatuate them to deny it: None who truly knew him, will ever believe
them: And as he Lived by the Faith of the Son of God, so he Died like him. (Far
from an implacable Spirit) not without having begged that God would pardon and
bless, even them, that had acted a cruel Tragedy toward him.

Secondly, Consider him as a Minister; his Soul was better taught, than to
think the Ministry, a Work to be undertaken without, or with a mere superficial
Tincture of Learning; and therefore, while he lifted up his Voice for
Understanding, he also sought and searched in all the ordinary Ways for
attaining Wisdom, and through Prove. 2. 3, 4.
the happy Conjunction of a Penetrating Mind, an Active Fancy, and a Tenacious
Memory, with the Blessing of Heaven upon his great Industry, his profiting soon
appeared to the great Judges of Learning then living, insomuch, that before he
was 22 Years of Age (as far as I can learn) he was fixed in the pastoral
Relation at Amsterdam. And this I the rather mention, because there are some
that think no Young Men is to be called into that Relation. I readily grant,
the Apostles Novice is to be shunned for the 1 Timothy 3. 6
Reason there mentioned; but our Apostle does not use the Word (...) a Young
Man, but (...) a Man young in Religion; or newly planted into Christ and his
Communion, an old Man with gray Hairs upon him, if but newly planted in Grace
is the Apostles Novice; such as are not rooted in Christ Jesus, and less in
Learning, may fall under the Apostles Doom, but where God has begun by times
to lay in and store with Grace and Learning; what is his Design but to have a
quick Return, when he finds Employment for them, and such an one was our truly
old, when in Nature a young Man. Though his Ministerial Labors were great, in
which he never served God with that which cost him naught; and but rarely any
Assistance enjoyed: Yet his Active Soul was so deeply inlaid with the Love of
Learning, that without much Danger of an Hyperbole, I might apply to him what
was said Bibliothecam Vivam and Ambulans Museum. Conigii Biblioth.
of Longinus, he became a Living Library. If any would Query what was his
Learning? I might answer in the several parts of it, both as to Words and
Things; but that which was his Delight and his Honor, was to be intimately
acquainted with the Mystery of God-man his Redeemer; his Thoughts run much upon
the Corner Stone, and only Foundation of our Religion; and though his Strength
was much impared before he appeared in this City, yet there was so much left as
to give abundant Evidence of the Greatness of Thought and Spring of Learning
that lodged within; while his Thoughts traveled most in the higher Rounds of
the Christian Religion: He gave also abundant Evidence of his Accuracy in
distinguishing and applying such practical Points as accompany Salvation. This
Heb. 6. 9. His last Sermons at Pinners-Hall.
Light burnt clear, but fast; and though his afflicted Friends and Relations were
ready sometimes to conceive Hopes of his emerging from his Weaknesses, yet the
Clouds gathered after Rain, and the Storms soon returned again; but though the
Winds blew, and the Storms beat upon his battered Bark, yet in Patience he
possessed his Soul, his Faith was firm without wavering, that Jesus which he had
laid for many to build upon, was his Stay: In this Rock he stood, and with
undaunted Courage, encountr'd this last Enemy, trusting in the Lord. This is
the Christian, this is the Minister, that is dead. Dead did I say; I must recall
that Word, (...) Acts. 7. 4.
and say (his Aged Father yet living) God has removed him from this Ur, to be,
not a Sojourner, but an everlasting Inhabitant in the Heavenly Canaan, where he
shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, having been made wise in turning
many unto Righteousness. Dan. 12. 3.


Secondly, Consider the Season of it. That which cut the Patriach Jacob to the
Heart, was, that when Simeon was not, and Joseph was not, to hear that Benjamin
must be taken from him too. We might, according to the Course of Nature, have
expected our Brothers abode with us, for many Years: But lo! An Evening is
come, when but a little past the Meridian of Man, and this come upon us while
our Wounds were bleeding: The other day we were lamenting the Loss of one that
had labored long, and with great Success in his Lords Vineyard: The Arms of
his Hands were made strong, Genesis 49. 24.
by the Hands of the Mighty God of Jacob; One, who for great Grace, solid and
well digested Learning, for Might and Majesty in weilding the Sword of the
Spirit, was an Interpreter Job. 33. 23.
one of a Thousand. His extensive Affection and Charity, maintained in him a
constant Tenderness toward even those that differed from him, though he sorely
suffered for maintaining a Conscientious dissent from them, in Discipline and
Government. And is he no sooner gone, but an other must follow him? As if
Heaven designed a Succession of Losses, till we have no more to loose. To take
a Tile from a House is soon repaired, but to take away the Buttresses from a
leaning Wall, or the Pillars on which the House appears to lean, is as if the
Owner designed the Building to sink into Ruins; the Loss of an immortal Soul,
the Loss of the everlasting Gospel, and the Loss of a faithful godly Minister,
are the greatest Losses that can befall us. And if we are truly affected with
the Loss of the two former, we can but lay to heart the Death of the latter, so
that while we ought to rejoice, quod talem habuimus, that we had such a one, we
ought to be concerned that now he is taken from us, and that when so many were
so lately gone before him.

Thirdly, The Hand the living had in it: When Gods Judgments are on Isa. 26. 9.
the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness; its but
reasonable to expect, when such things are done by the hand of God, that we put
the Question, am I the Person that has provoked Heaven to remove from Earth,
such a Blessing? I readily own, that Ministers are but Men, though their Graces
be great, yet they are but in their Minority, and the greatest Men are not Job
32. 9.
always Wise; I allow also, that God never does any thing toward his Children
in a way of harsh Providence, but he sees cause enough in them for his
procedure in such a way with them: God tells Moses, that he should not pass
over Jordan, into the Earthly Canaan, because of Compare Deuteronomy. 32, 51. with 1.
37. and 4. 21.
his own Transgression; and yet Moses, by the Spirit of God, lays it at the
Peoples Door, as the Cause why it went thus ill with him. Though every Man's time
is appointed, and the Instruments by which his Death is brought about, are
under the Orders of a wise Providence, yet the Instruments are not the less
guilty, that have been voluntary Agents: Offenses must come, but woe to them by
whom they come; Christ's Death was in every part of it, according to the
Counsel of God; yet the Instruments and their Children to this day, lie under
his anger for it; I must speak it on the behalf of him whose Death gave me this
sad Occasion: Was he not wounded in the House of his professed Friends; or did
he not suffer more by divided Friends (as they pretended to be) than united
Enemies? They that are guilty will possibly say like the whorish Woman, who,
when she has eaten, wipeth her Mouth, and says, I Prove. 30. 20.
have done no Wickedness. There is a levelling Spirit yet in our World, and
that among some who bear their Heads high above others for Religion; my meaning
is, that those who never had any Reputation of their own, are prodigal in
murdering and wasting the Reputation of other Men, that none may seem better or
above themselves. That which the Apostle foretold, seems to be now fulfilled, a
spreading Leprofie of vile 2 Timothy 3. 3, 4, 5.
Sins prevailing; and that which makes it both more odious and dangerous, is,
they cover it under a Form of Godliness; they entitle Heaven to the Eruptions
of Hell, and lay their own Brats at God's Door. If any should ask me, what have
they done in this Matter? I shall only return that Answer which Plato did, when
Dionisius the Tyrant wrote to him, desiring he would not report his evil
Practices; Diog. Laert. in vit. Plat. non sibitantum super esse otti, etc.
to whom Plato made this Return, He had not so much Leisure as to think or
speak of him -- Meaning, he had better things to employ his thoughts and time
about, than to relate the noted Barbarities and unparaleil'd Cruelties of a
Person, who was so very notorious that their needed no Historian to inform the
World of him, or them. But when I have said this, I must be just to many of
them, where for a time he stood in a pastoral Relation. Such there were who
truly Loved him, and now lament the loss of him; they were real Mourners for,
though they could not be healers of their breaches, of whom I dare not doubt, but
their Achans being gone and the troublers of their Israel departed, they will
remain a peacable Habitation, and may yet revive and flourish under the
Blessing of Heaven, upon this I would leave these two or three cautious.

First, Let not this prejudice any at Church order. Will any Wise Man speak
against Liberty, because some by it, grow licentious? Or will any affect an
absolute Tyranny to live in a slavish Subjection, because a well constituted
Government is now and then afflicted with a popular commotion? It were easy to
make it appear both from Scripture and History, that the best constituted
Churches have not been exempted from such disturbances. Weeds will spring up in
the most regular Gardens, Vermin will crawl amongst the sweetest Roses. Think
not worse of Churches, because now and then in them there appears a Diotrephes,
to disturb their peace, and cause divisions.

2dly. Let Church Members, beware how they begin contention, beware of drawing
at either end of that Saw, a little spark may not only burn down your own, but
your Neighbors dwelling. It Is easy giving vent to Passion, but its like the
breaking out of Water not easily reclam'd again, and an offended Prove. 18. 19.
brother is harder, to won than a strong Tower.

3dly, Let Churches be prudent and careful whom they admit to their Fellowship.
Its easier letting in, than it is to cast out. Thus I have finished the first
Exhortation to lay this our loss to heart, from the consideration of the
Person, the Season, and the hand the living had in it.

The second Exhortation I would a little prosecute is, to those, who are
setting their Heart and Hand to Christ's Plow. Those who are engaged at least
in their studies and purposes for the Ministry, or but entered upon it, I hope
they will not think me too assuming in what I say to them; nor would I have
others think I flatter, because I am not ashamed to say I sincerely Love them.
Your work is great, and difficulties many; yet in the very work, there is a
reward. The meanest Station about a King is Honorable. What is it then to
stand next the King of Kings? I know several, I wish I knew more, of whom I
dare not doubt, but that they are Plants of God's own Planting, and under his
Blessing shall stand up in his Work and Service in the room of those who now
rest from their Labors: To such I would recommend these things.

First, Labor to have your heart established with Grace, as well as your Heads
with knowledge; without the Oil of Grace, you will never make lasting Lights,
burning and shining for the Reputation and Honor of your Lord and Master, and
without Knowledge, you will hand out Poison, in stead of spiritual Food; God
complains of some that handled Jer. 2. 8.
the Law, they knew him not; that is, God and they had no spiritual
acquaintance, they were void of Grace. The Apostle speaks of others that 1 Timothy
1. 7.
were desirous to be teachers of the law, understanding neither what they say,
nor whereof they affirm. Such seek what they can get, but not to be fit for
what they undertake; it has been observed, That Heretics are always fond of
ignorant Upstarts; because such are most apt to be taken with Popular Applause;
but when Head and Heart are thus qualified, then like a well built and ballac'd
Ship, you will be able to steer a steady Course through all the Storms of this
World.

Secondly, Join much Prayer and Meditation to your studying. Study is to make
you useful to others, but Prayer and Meditation brings it home to your own
Souls: He that is the most earnest Solicitor at the Throne of Grace, is like to
be the most powerful Perswader in delivering his Message, storm Heaven, If you
would prevail with Men, get your own Heart warmed with the Love of God in
Private, and then you will be earnest with others in the Pulpit.

Thirdly, Let the Ministry be your Work, to which your Souls and Hearts are
devoted; make it your work in preparing: He that does not prepare what to say,
tempts God to come out of his ordinary Course to his assistance; he that
depends upon his own Preparations, makes a God of his Gifts. Let it be your
work in delivering; show that your Business is rather to profit Souls than
please the Ear; beware of an affected Niceness in expression, and shun a sor
did rudeness, least it cause a loathing of spiritual Food. Let it be your work
in Living, as well as Preaching; beware of pulling down with your hands, what
you build with your mouths; in a word, if the Ministry be thy work thou'llt
give thy self to it, and thereby in a little time do much for God: And what if
discouraged by the World, seeing your labor is not in vain in the Lord, it
will be more Honor and Glory in the Day of Christ, to have been an Instrument
in bringing one Soul to Heaven, than if thou had conquered a World, and
brought it under thy power; and what if you seem to labor in vain, and spend
your strength for naught, when your judgment Isa. 49. 4.
is with the Lord, and your Reward with your God.

The last Exhortation is to you that are Hearers: Is God by Death removing your
Useful Guides and Instructors from you? Lay this to Heart:

First, In being cautious to whom you commit the Care and Conduct of your
Souls. How shall they teach you the Mysteries of Salvation, who themselves are
ignorant of them? Its an easy matter to run into the Ministsy, but not so
easy to be a Minister: What was opprobriously said of old, may be here
applied, Many Servants 1 Sa. 25. 10.
run away now a days from their Masters, I wish there were no cause to say,
many run from that which is their service, into that they were never called nor
sent of God. There is an universal complaint, that the Spirit is much
withdrawn, but if you view Men's running in this great Work of the Ministry
without regard to the ordinary ways for attaining Qualifications for such an
undertaking; you must allow that either the Ministry is become a more easy
business to discharge, than ever it was judged to be formerly, or that there is
an Extraordinary Effussion of the Spirit, by which Men of a sudden are
qualified for it, or else we are under a dreadful Judgment.

I am not such a superstitious Adorer of Learning, as to lessen or Exclude the
Work of the Spirit, I know the Spirit can qualify Persons for his Work; but
then, what others must seek in an ordinary way, that he does by his
extraordinary power; and when extraordinary Operations are not to be expected,
at least, are professedly owned in the present posture of Affairs to be
departed, we are to seek in the ordinary way to attain such Qualifications as
are needful in that work; the neglecting of which is but a gratifying the
Designs of those who are several ways assaulting our Religion: which are
chiefly Two:

1. Advancing Reason above and against Revelation: As if, like the Moon, it
never shined so brightly as when in opposition to the Sun; they appeal to this
as the supreme Judge for Faith and Practice; as if it were not our truest
Reason, to prefer the Mind and Word of an infinite Being, before our own finite
understanding: Much more intolerable is this Arrogance, when they have so
debased and debauched their Rational Powers, that they are not able to judge in
things of a Man, and yet will appeal to them only, as the great and supreme
Decider of all Matters relating to God and the Christian Religion.

2. By decrying a Standing Ministry in the Church of God: Every one of the
Lord's People are Prophets (Would to God the Spirit of the Prophets appeared in
all that profess and claim the Privilege!) A Standing Ministry is a Humane
Invention, and a piece of mere Superstition, and the Idol Learning is only to
make ignorant People credit, and rashly receive what they impose upon them: As
the former is managed among the Men of Letters, so the other is calculated for
the People of a lower size. I grant, that great Clerks are not always Wise Men;
that Christ's fiercest opposers have been found amongst those who have been
Head and Shoulders taller than others in Natural Knowledge: But because some
that have their Eyes, abuse them, shall I choose a blind Man for my Guide. You
may as soon expect to see a Man bred up at Plough or Cart, to steer a Ship in a
Storm, through Shelves and Rocks without dashing, as ignorant Ministers maintain
the Preaching of the Gospel, without falling into dangerous, if not damnable
Errors; therefore be very cautious to whom you commit the Conduct of your Souls.

Secondly, Pray for your Ministers. It may be you don't profit under their
Ministry, because you deny them a share in your Prayers; their Work is great,
their Temptations many, and their Strength in themselves small; Never say you
love 'em, while you are not concerned to engage God to succeed them; pray that
God would give them the Tongue of the learned to speak a Word in season to thy
condition, and that he would give thee the hearing ear, and the understanding
Pro. 20. 12
heart, both which, are the gift of God.

Thirdly, Maintain Affection and Esteem for your Ministers. Let them not have
cause to complain, These are the wounds I received in the Houses of such and
such Professed Friends. I ask you not superstitiously to idolize Men or
Ministers, yet let them be highly esteemed for their works 1 The. 5. 13.
sake: Tho they are but earthen Vessels, yet they are entrusted with the most
precious Treasure. What if their Persons are no more, nay possibly less than
other Men, yet their Office calls for Respect and Honor. They are Ambassadors
of Christ, and by the Law of Nations Ambassadors are to have civil Usage;
beware of Prejudice, for he that is prejudiced against the Person, will not,
without a Miracle, be edified by his preaching; if Abab hate Micaiah, he will
be enraged rather than instructed by his admonition and warning; therefore
maintain Affection and Esteem for them.

Fourthly, Lay to heart what you are frequently hearing from your Ministers
while living: let not their Doctrine, which drops like the Rain, be only like a
Shower upon a Rock, where no Impression is made, or a Tale that is told; but
like Mary, lay up what thou hear in thy heart, that when thy Minister is
removed thou may be able to recollect and ruminate upon what was formerly
delivered by him for thy Soul's Edification: Oh beware of loosing your Seasons
of Grace it may be, there are some here the Morning, that may never hear
another Sermon, and will it not be a cutting consideration, to think that of
all you have heard of dying, you were never affecte^ with it, nor moved to
prepare for Deat by it. We have lost many Eminent Ministers, and is all lost
you have heard from them? Let not your Souls be like broken Cisterns, that let
out the pure water, and keep nothing but the Mud and Corruption of this world.
Labor to make them the Storehouse of Divine Truths, giving most earnest heed,
lest at any time you should Heb. 2. 1.
let them run out. And this is the true means to keep your Soul, both waking
and working, which is the right way of watching and waiting for the coming of
our Lord.

FINIS.

