A Book of Directions And Cures done by that Safe and Successful Medicine,
CALLED, Nendick's Popular Pill
a man taking medicine, with a wasted leg supported on a footstool Deservedly
so called for it is Special Virtues in Curing that Popular Disease the Scurvy.
Which corrupts the Blood This Pill Cures, By Cleansing of the Blood, Purging by
Urine, and gently by Stool.
Some Diseases are Familiar to some Nations, which others are free from; as
Leprosy in Egypt, swelled Throats in the Alps, the POX in some Parts of the
Indies; so in these Parts our popular Disease is the Scurvy

For the Scurvy this Pill is Commended by all People.

It has done so much good, has been Experienced so many years, that you can
hardly ask any one what is is best for the Scurvy to take at the Wells, or to
carry to Sea, but you will be advised unto this Pleasant Pill for no violent
Physic is good for the Scurvy,

A Caution to those not well acquainted with this Pill.
THat you may not mistake by Counterfeit Bills and Papers which may be worded
like mine, and so buy the wrong Pills to your prejudice, as some have
complained that they have lately been so deceived; therefore take Notice that
this Pill was never put out or made by any one but by me, and with each Box is
always given one of these Books of Directions, Cures and Observations worth
perusal, with my name thus.

By me Humphrey Nendick, at the Two black Posts in Bell yard in Great
Carter-Lane, near St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Nature of the Scurvy.
THe Scurvy is the Original of most Chronick Diseases, from stoppage or
obstructions, raising Vapors that cause Swimming and dissiness in the Head,
Drousiness, makes the Body dull and heavy; it alters the Complexions, causes
Flushings in the Face, Worms, black, loose, and aching Teeth, sore and bloody
Gums, strong and stinking Breath, straitness of Breath, difficulty in
breathing, ready to die, sour Belchings, wateriness at stomach, weariness,
weakness of the Limbs, faint sweats toward Morning.

Oftentimes causes Barrenness, sometimes Spots, red, bluish, or purple in the
Legs, in some it is like Flea-bites, or itching watery pimples, like the
stinging of nettles; it causes windiness in the veins, cramps, -- also heats
and prickings in the Blood.

In many the Scurvy holds them with violent pains in diverse parts of the Body,
others again only wandering pains, heats, and twitchings up and down; in some it
breaks out in scurff, tettars, dry scabs in Head, Face or Body; sometimes with
great Itchings.

How to Prevent and Cure the Scurvy.
WHen the Scurvy has got firm footing, it is the worst of all Diseases, it
will be like the Spleen in some, like a Consumption in another, like the Gout
in others, like the Pox in others, that many that have had it, fear they are
still amiss; because they miss the right Medicine, not thinking they have the
Scurvy, which is the cause so many lie lingering, under so many Diseases, and
can get no cure; when as now and then taking the Pills, would prevent such
Diseases, and preserve health.

This Pill is the True Antidote against the Scurvy.
THis Pill diverts that Rhume that falls on the Teeth, pains them, rots and
fouls them, makes them loose, makes the Gums sore and wast. This Pill does
absolutely hinder a Stinking Breath that usually attends those that have the
Scurvy.

Spring and Fall being the chief times to purge in, to carry off the Relics
of any Disease; therefore those that expect Remembrances Spring and Fall of
Diseases and Pains they are subject unto, may cure and hinder the old grudges
of their Disease.

This Pill removes all Aches, Pains, and Settled Humors.
M. Tho. Coppers Wife in Cantly in Norfolk was lame in all her joints; she had
sixteen weeks trial of Doctors, and Medicines sold, yet all in vain; by my
Pills was so speedily cured, that she rode to Norwich to publish how great a
Cure she had received by these Pills.

M. Forstal Grocer in Canterbury, with a dose or two of Pills, cured a Woman,
that for Pains, Lameness, and other weakness, had been bedridden above a year
before.

The Wife of John Day of St. Margets in Southelman in Suffolk, was by these
Pills soon eased of the Gout, and cured of a Dropsical humor and Scurvy.

This Pill brings away Gravel, and cleanses the Reins.
BY Urine it brings away sand and Gravel, cleanses the Reins and Bladder from
all shiny matter, and eases any heat of Urine, and cures the Running of the
Reins.

These Pills brought blood, slime, and filthy matter, from M. Wormwood in
Wisbich, and made his Urine come freely, who was near dead before with stoppage
of Urine and pain.

In Oundle or thereab^uts, ae Friend of M. Filbridges, had cure of great
Stiches, Vapors and bloody Urine, when left off as past help, by the best
Physicians in those parts.

This is the best Pill for Ulcers of the Kidneys, Reins, or Bladder.
M. Simpson Joyner, near the Gatehouse at Westminster, had present good by
these Pills for stuff like Lime and Grease came away in water, with pain: he
made it into a ball and keeps it; now it is dry, it is hardish like a stone;
this Pill carried off this matter.

Mr. Sy. Forsters Child in Newton near Wisbich, had its water stopped so long,
that a Surgeon was to force a passage; but by the first dose of these Pills,
much filthy bloody matter, and gravel came with abundance of water, and saved
the Child, as it has done many since.

It Cures Bloody Urine, Stoppage of Urine, and Stoneand,
YOu will have thanks for commending this Pill to any that have a Consumption
or wasting of the Kidneys, Stoppage, Ulcer in the Kidneys or Bladder, Bloody
Urine; it hinders the Stone from growing, dissolves it Daily and diminishes it.

This Pill cures Vapors, Womb-diseases, and Stoppages.
MOre cannot be done by any Medicine, upon inward wastures of Nature; it
strengthens weak backs, stays all moistures or whites, got by any wrench or
over strains, all womb diseases or bearings down that cause barrenness in
hundreds.

If any one disclose their Condition to me, that is troubled with any bearing
down, I can advise them to cure it, without pain, and so as it shall keep well
for ever.

Besides in elder Women that are liable to have Cancers in their breasts, Womb,
Noli me tangere, and diverse Diseases, when the course of Nature is stopped: this
Pill hinders them from flying upwards or striking in, and makes them go off
k^ndly: purging with this Pill Carries off these evils which comes from these
stoppages.

A poor Woman came from Kilgarren in Wales to lie in Cardigan, to get Cure of a
sore Distemper, but to complete her misery, she was left penniless, and
uncured; yet by a Box of my Pills, which were given her by Mr. Griffith in
Cardigan, she was Cured; they did expel wind, brought away store of Gravel,
Water, and Blood, and she returned home well, that in three years before had
not had the right benefit of Nature, much more might be said.

It cures old Sores, the Evil, Swellings, and Breakings-out.
THis Pill Purifies the whole body by purging, and Sweetning the Blood by which
way it mightily hastens the Cure of sore Breasts, sore Throats, Piles, scald
Heads, Scabs, Old sores. It kills any Tettar, and all sorts of breakings out or
salt Humors whatever.

In Dublin was Cured Judge Halseys son of the King's Evil, he had been touched
many Years before, the sores was verily thought incureable, but my Pills fails
not in that Cure.

One whole Box of Pills cured Mrs. Katherine Basket of Cranbourn of a salt
Tettarish Humor she had many Years Spring and Fall, and extremely stopped up
with Phlegm.

By these Pills William Kirk, the Countess of Lincolns Gardener was cured, when
his Arm and Hand began to rot, by an Humor as fell into them, and saved the
use of his Hand.

Directions for Purging, Letting-Blood, and Issues.
PUrge with this Pill after the Small Pox, Agues, or a fit of Sickness, Purge
those that come out of the Country or from Sea, if you intend to be let blood,
Purge, a Day or two before, or dry up an Issue, this Pill by Purging makes
Issues run well.

For old Bruises, Colds, Surfeits, and all inward Griefs.
THis Pill brings away clotted Blood, Filth and Matter by Stool and Urine,
whereby many inward Diseases have been cured, as Impostumes, False Conceptions
Ulcers in the Bladder, and Womb, and hurts occasioned by inward bruises or Old
Colds and Surfeits of many years standing, which otherwise must have ended in
Death

This Pill carries off the very Matter that breeds Worms in Old or Young.
A bunch and one link of Worms knotted, above five yards and a half long, came
away by the Pills; This account came from Mr. Daniel Treacher in Sarrat.

For over-Fatness, Pimples, and Heat of the Liver.
FOr those that are inclining to be too fat, or overmuch sweating or be too
high colored, and Subject to have Pimples, heat in their hands, or Soles of
the Feet, nothing better to restore the Complexion, when lost by the
Green Sickness, or Scurvy.

For all Distempers of the Head and St^mach
AS Head ach Vertigo and lightness of Head. Noises and Hard hearing, Rhuemy
Eyes or Impostumes; helps bad digestion, Vomiting, or any thing amiss at the
stomach. Its beyond any Medicine for those Naturally bound or hot bodied, which
is bad for the Head, b^ing used by many for that purpose to keep the body loose
and open.

Mrs. K^rton in Glean-Ailey in South-wark cured of pain in the Head and bad
Eyes.

The Cure of a sore Breast, Impostume, and Headache.
CVred a Woman in Chard left off by two Doctors, because the Scurvy had brought
her unto a Hectic Consumption, her Breasts swelled so hard that one that use
to draw Bre^sts could not but wished her to try these Pills, which presently
brought away an Impostume that runout of her Ears, and cured her of an Old Head
ach she had from a Child: She has had a Childer two since this Cure, and is
still very healthy, her Breast and Head remain well.

Collick-stones brought away by these Pills.
THe Wife of Mr. Ives Hat Maker in Cowlane in West-Smithfield had many stones
cane away by stool, one stone very big and troublesome; the Pills Purged very
kindly; next time came away many other small stones by Urine, by Gods Blessing
thereon.

This Pill asswages Windy Ruptures, and great Swellings of the Cods, where
Trusses do us good, it always does good, it allays Vapors Risings, and Fits of
the Mother, or Colic,

This Pill helps the Spleen, Stiches, Running Pains, or any Windy Humor.

Other Remarkable Cures.
BY the use of these Pills, Thomas Whitehead of Bruton, was cured of a great
Pain at his stomach that had afflicted him above 20 Years, after other Pills
had failed.

A School Mrs. above fourscore, in St. Margat Southelman; her flesh peeled and
was like a Lepar, her Thighs, and Legs turned black and swelled one Leg as big
as two; was given over by the Doctors thereabouts. Yet she was recovered by
these Pills, and remains well.

A Man 72 Years Old, all his Body swelled to his Face, had a great Cough* spit
Blood, the Phlegm so clammy, he could not get it out without help, he was so
weak, a few of these Pills he had from Mrs. Atkins in Chard, they recovered
him, when all yielded him for Dead.

A Gentleman of 65 who had long lost the use of his Arm, and could not lift a
Cup to his M^uth, had the use of his Limbs by a few Pills he had of Mr. Thomas
of Sallop.

In Wallum-Green near Fulham, Mr. Buckels Child had a salt Humor in his Leg,
and other swellings, that run like a Tap, and could not be stopped; it was born
with it, but was Cured by this Pill, and is now very well and lusty, for they
are false and sure for Children.

This Pill is very proper for a Looseness, the Pyles, or Bloody Stools, Over
fullness of Blood and Humors, or if the blood be too thick or too hot.
Those that have sold my Pills any time, can inform you what Cures have been
wrought thereabouts, for one tells and advises another to these Pills for the
Scurvy. And they do much good which encourages Doctors themselves, as well as
other People to send for my Pills by ehe Carrier or Post, when those that sell
my Pills are long without, which it is not my fault.

He that has this Pill at Sea has his Doctor with him.
FOr such as go to Sea this Pill cannot be valued, or for any that live near
the Fens or Seacoasts, who are of all People the most afflicted with the
Scurvy; a better cannot be carried to Sea: For any Disease, and it lasts good
the longest Voyages.

The Abstract of a Letter from Mr. George Macey Merchant in London.
Point Cagua 14. Jan. 1672. Jamaica. Dear Doctor,
This to to acquaint you how happy I was in taking a few Boxes of your Popular
Pill with me to Sea, our Doctor being sick, his Mate Dead, and others sick
aboard I used this Pill and recovered the Ships Company; next our Doctor and
three more Drinking Palm Wine ashore, had a Fettish given them it is a weed
that the Blacks bruise and keep under their Nails, and infect the brims of
their Calabash or Cup, and so poison any they bear a grudge unto, that they dye
what time after they design; I used this Pill again, and recovered them, and
was courted for it, but spared none unless to Min Here Van Gansopoel General of
Morea Castle; I wish I had a good quantity, they would turn to account; this
Pill cannot be extolled beyond its worth;

This by Capt. John Collins of the Province.

Let them confide in this Pill, that have had those Poisonous Diseases the Pox,
or Running of the Reins, had it stopped too soon, and fear they are not well
Cured.

And to justify my Pill above any other for this Cure, take this account
following.

A Trial in the Marshals Court in Southwark, October, 29. 1675.
The Council moved that it was work enough for a College of Physician to make
Thomas Rotland a sound Man; then the Witnesses swore, that T. Rotland had been
Purged, Blooded, Sweated, Salivated, Fluxed Diet-drinked, and had his Shins
laid open, and foul bones taken away, and left off as past the help of Man, yet
chiefly with my Pills was made well of this foul Disease, and has remained
perfectly well this ten Years without relapse.

This was Sworn upon the Trial in open Court as may be found upon Record. Mr.
Vrwin of Cliffords-Inn was the Defendant, Rotland's Attorney.

This Pill cures this Disease in any Country.
WIth these Pills in a Fortnights time I Cured a Man, whose Yard rotted off; is
sufficiently known in Scroops Court, against St. Andrews Church in Holborn,
London, it was a small thing at first; had he come to me, or brought a few of
these Pills, he had prevented it, but it was run too far, and spoiled before he
came.

If you have Scabs, Shankers, Sores, Breakings out or Swellings, and you would
have a speedy Cure, send, for I can help you at any distance or come and
discover your Condition to me, for I never fail the Cure of that Disease, if
its to be Cured by Man.

The usual Seasons and times to take these Pills.
TAke these Pills Spring and Fall, to purge the Blood, or whenever it is fine
open Weather, to keep off the Scurvy, or purge the Reins, or now and then after
h^r^ Drinking; nothing better to carry off ill Humors, or danger of a Surfeit.

These Pills may be taken in any Season, in any Climate or for any new disease.

This Pill procures a sound Habit of Body, by purging the Blood.

It Is no loathsome great Pill; and never leaves the Body bound afterward.

Why these Pills are so usually taken at the Wells.
WHen the Pills were found so safe and rare at clearing the Reins, and Purging
by Urine, many people would take the Pills before and when they were at the
Wells, and after at the Waters, they Cure many people, by purging by Urine
Cleansing the Reins, and bladder or Sweat, when drinking of the Waters and the
Bath salt.

What dose may be given to Children, or Weak people.
THose that purge their Family with these Pills in the Spring and Fall, may
also give their Children one Pill, two, three, or four Pills, according to the
Child's strength. I gave my Daughter Mariamne 3 Pills at 3 Years Old, which
Cured her of a great looseness, and weak bed rid, Consumptive people if they
take the Dose as best agrees with their strength, will quickly find it a
healing Balm unto them and streng^hen the back.

What dose may be given to Women with Child
WOmen with Child may take this pill now and then without fear of miscarriage,
but it helps where weakness causes miscarriage or barrenness; besides it mends
the Blood and Milk, and keeps their Children from Hereditary Diseases and
scurvy*

They are mighty good for hurt got by cold in Lying in, or for any one
distempered from those stopped or struck in, or have few and pale, it brings them
fresh and well, taking a dose or two before the time; whereby Swellings,
Tettars, Pimples, Breakings out, Stoppages, the Green Sickness, Swellings of
the Legs and other ills are prevented.

The general Rules and order of Diet.
EAt no Salt or windy Diet, or drink imtemperately in any Cure, but especially
drink no Claret, in Ulcers of the Kidneys, Gravel, Heat in Urine, pricking
pains, or Running of the Reins; although many are Cured, without observing any
Order at all, but to take the pills in the largest dose and constantly all the
time of the Cure.

White Wind, Whey, Ale, Mead, or any mild drinks are good in Stoppages of
Urine, Heat or Foulness of the Reins, this pill cures the Whites, from any
strain or otherways.

This Pill is above all for cooling and cleansing the Reins.
All People Commend these Pills, far beyond what is expressed in this Book.
MOre cannot be done for the Scurvy, all sorts of Dropsies, and white
swellings, or where the Flesh pits, the Jaundice, Green Sickness, Stoppages of
Stomach, King's Evil, Agues, Joint pains, Aches, Scabs, Tetters, Swellings, and
all Heat and Foulness of Blood.

The Running of the Reins or an Issue got by a strain or otherwise, in Man or
Woman, purge well with these Pills to keep it from a worse Distemper and soon
Cure it.

Children infected by this Disease, or by what way soever, I can Cure them.

I can perfectly Cure a Gonorrhaea Lachrimalis, or Gleet, in any Man.

Note, Its a disease got many ways, and many sober persons have escaped the
sin, yet have not escaped the disease, therefore I have wrote so much, for the
Pills will keep those infected from being spoiled themselves, or from infecting
others, by purging away the Infection.

This Pill by curing the Scurvy, Cure most Diseases.

The Full Directions.
How and When to take these Pills.
TAke five Pills going to bed, after a light Supper, swallow them one by one or
all at once, in pap or roasted Apple, Honey, Conserve, or a spoonful of Drink,
or in Sugar, or how you can best take them, no danger comes by sleeping upon
them, for then they give a breathing Sweat, and search all parts, make you
brisk and hungry.

How to order your self in taking these Pills.
TAke them two Nights together, and miss a Night or two, or take one Night, and
miss a Night or two, but they will not work till the Morning, and then drink
something warm, but eat no Meat till Noon, you may go about you occasinos.

How many may be taken at once, and if they Vomit.
THey are such moderate Physic, and so safe that you may take fix Pills or
more, if you can bear them, but they never Vomit, unless the stomach be foul,
and could not be discharged any other way, for they work only as the Humors
are.

Whether the Pill do Gripe.
THese Pills gripe not unless there be much windy Matter to work upon, and
never makes sick unless it meets with some Obstruction, or opens some old
stoppage, which must be an exceeding benefit to Nature, either to Old or Young.

How long the Pills may be taken together.
OFtentimes one dose does a great Cure, yet some may not find it so soon as
others, for the worser the Disease is, the longer must the Pills be followed,
and no doubt with a through trial they will work the same Cures again and again.

How many ways the Pill works.
THe Pills do purge very kindly by stool, yet effectually, they will not
weaken, for violent Physic is bad in the Scurvy, they purge the Blood, cleanse
the Reins by Urine, expel Wind, and give ease and rest in Pains by breathing
Sweats.

Why the Pills work not alike at all times.
WHen these Pills work not as you expect, rest a day or two longer, take a
larger dose, or bruise them next time; for Nature cures not always by Stool;
yet even then when they scarce purge, they do lie in the Body, and do hurt; but
cleanses the Blood, or works some otherways, as Nature is most inclined

Its the best Purge at Land or Sea, for the Scurvy.
THat many will make no Voyage or scarce a Journey without carrying these Pills
with them, which for their Infallible Operations are used at the Lazaretto, and
Incurabile in Venice, being found the only Curer of that Popular Disease the
Scurvy.

The price of the Pill, the best and cheapest of all Physic.
THe whole Box of Forty Pills, one more or less is Three Shillings, the Half
Box of Twenty Pills, one more or less is Eighteen Pence, each Tin Box is Sealed
with two Crosses and a Demi-Griffen, with each Box of Pills is given this Book
of Directions.

These Pills are Sold by these Persons Following.
In Ipswich by Mr. Wilkenson in St. Peter's

In Guilford by Mr. John Betts a Barber

In Farnham by Mr. Friar distiller and at Aulton

In Marget by Mr. Mackrith a Grocer

In Ramsgate by Mr. Faireman

In Gravesend by Mr. Clark at the Coffee-house

In Maidstone by Mr. Churchil

In Goudhurst by Mr. Richard Puxty

In Burnham by Mr. Brown sales man

In Yarmouth by Mrs. Hester Brooks

In Norwich by Mr. Pepys near the Elm

In Weymouth by Mr. Reed a Grocer

In Andover by Mr. Butcher

In St. Edmonds-Bury by Mr. Chamberline Bookseller

In Beckells by Mr. Will. Cutlove a Draper

In Cook field by Mr. Sturt

In Plymouth by Mr. Northcote a mercer

In Darford by Mr Hubhart at the Threadshop

In Rygate by Mr. Tho. Hills a Shoemaker

In Pulham by Mr. Henry Brett

In Sudbury in Ballendon street Mr. Jones Grocer

In Wells by Mr. Nicholas Painter

In Bristol by Mrs. Hibert at 2 black posts small street

In Chiping Sadbury by Mr. Ady a Barber

In Newport by Mr. Thomas Young a mercer

In Gloucester by Mr. Ludlow Mr. Bell Milliners

In Tuxsbury by Mr. Joseph Sheene

In Ledbury by Mr. Lunt Bookseller

In Kington by Mr. Evans a mercer

In Shepton mallet by Mr. Bartlet at red posts

In Bruton by Mr. Penny a Barbar.

In Lemstar by Mr. Hardwick a Glover

In Hereford by Mr. John Nicholas a Chandler

In Sallop by Mr. Sam. Thomas a mercer

In Monmouth by Mr. Mainstone a Barber Sur.

In Wrexham

In Tedbury by Mr. Matthew Beale a mercer

In Bidiford by Mr. Josias Elliot

In Chard by Mrs. Anna Atkins

In Taunton by Mr. Robert Button a mercer

In Denby by Mr. John Foulks a mercer

In Dublin by Mrs. Hyot a Stationer on cork hill

But in all places in Ireland the half box is one and twenty pence, the whole
box 3 s. 6 d.

MAny buy these Pills to give their Friends a long with them to Sea, or to send
to their Friends in the Countries. Therefore any as desire to sell these Pills
in any other Town in England or in any parts beyond Sea; may be furnished with
them.

By me Humphrey Nendick with any quantity of these Pills reasonably.

These Pills will be delivered unto any Messenger at my own House at the two
Black Posts within Bell-Yard in Great (...)


