A Psalm of Thanksgiving to God for his Mercies,
By JAMES NAYLOR,
Published by him after his Fall, 1659.
IT is in my Heart to praise thee, O my God! Let me never forget thee, what
thou have been to me in the Night, by thy Presence in the Day of Trial; when I
was beset in Darkness, when I was cast out as a wandering Bird, when I was
assaulted with strong Temptations, then thy Presence in secret did preserve me,
and in a low Estate I felt thee near me; when the Floods sought to sweep me
away, thou did set a Compass for them how far they should pass over; when my
Way was through the Sea, and when I passed under the Mountains, there was thou
present with me; when the Weight of the Hills was upon me, thou upheldest me,
else had I sunk under the earth; when I was as one altogether helpless, when
Tribulation and Anguish was upon me Day and Night, and the Earth without
Foundation; when I went on the Way of Wrath, and passed by the Gates of Hell;
when all comforts stood afar off, and he that is mine Enemy had Dominion; when
I was cast into the Pit, and was as one appointed to Death; when I was between
the Millstones, and as one crushed with the Weight of his Adversary, as a
Father thou wast with me, and the Rock of thy Presence. When the Mouths of
Lions roared against me, and Fear took hold on my Soul in the Pit, then I
called upon thee in the Night, and my Cries were strong before thee daily, who
answered me from thy Habitation, and deliveredst me from thy Dewlling Place,
saying, I will set thee above all thy Fears, and lift up thy Feet above the
Head of Oppression. I believed and was strengthened, and thy Word was
Salvation. Thou did fight on my Part, when I wrestled with Death; and when
Darkness would have shut me up, then thy Light shone about me, and thy Banner
was over my Head. When my Work was in the Furnace, and as I passed through the
Fire by thee I was not consumed, though the Flames ascended above my Head. When
I beheld the dreadful Visions, and was amongst the fiery Spirits, thy Faith
stayed me, else through Fear I had fallen. I saw thee, and believed, so the
enemy could not prevail.

When I look back into thy Works, I am astonished, and see no End of thy
Praises! Glory, Glory to thee, faith my Soul! and let my Heart be ever filled
with Thansgiving. Whilst thy Works remain, they shall show forth thy Power.
Then did thou lay the Foundation of the Earth, and ledst me under the Waters,
and in the Deep did thou show me Wonders, and the Forming of the World. By
thy Hand thou ledst me in Safety, till thou shewedst me the Pillars of the
Earth: Then did the Heavens shower down, they were covered with Darkness, and
the Powers thereof were shaken, and thy Glory descended. Thou filledst the
lower Parts of the Earth with Gladness, and the Springs of the Valleys were
opened, and thy Showers descended abundantly, so the Earth was filled with
Virtue. Thou made thy Plant to spring, and the thirsty Soul became as a
watered Garden: Then did thou lift me out of the Pit, and set me forth in the
Sight of my Enemies. Thou proclaimedst Liberty to the Captive, and calledst
mine Acquaintance near me: They to whom I had been a Wonder, looked upon me,
and in thy Love I obtained Favor in those who had forsook me. Then did
Gladness swallow up Sorrow, and I forsook all my Troubles; and I said, How good
is it that Man be proved in the Night, that he may know his Folly, that every
Mouth may become silent in thy Hand, until thou make Man known to himself,
and have slain the Boaster, and showed him the Vanity that vexes thy Spirit!

J. NAYLOR.

About Two Hours before his Death he spoke in the Presence of several
Witnesses, these Words:
THERE is a Spirit which I feel, that delights to do no Evil, nor to revenge
any Wrong; but delights to endure all Things, in Hope to enjoy its own in the
End: Its Hope is to outlive all Wrath and Contention, and to weary out all
Exaltation and Cruelty, or whatever is of a Nature contrary to itself. It sees
to the End of all Temptations: As it bears no Evil in itself, so it conceives
none in Thoughts to any other: If it be betrayed, it bears it; for its Ground
and Spring is the Mercies and Forgiveness of God. Its Crown is Meekness, its
Life is everlasting Love unfeigned, and takes its Kingdom with Entreaty, and
not with Contention, and keeps it by Lowliness of Mind. In God alone it can
rejoice, though none else regard it, or can own its Life: Its conceived in
Sorrow, and brought forth without any to Pity it; nor does it murmur at Grief
and Oppression: It never rejoiceth but through Sufferings; for with the World's
Joy it is murdered. I found it alone, being forsaken; I have Fellowship therein
with them who have lived in Dens and desolate Places in the Earth, who through
Death obtained this Relation and eternal holy Life.

J. N.


