The Case of the KINGDOM STATED, According to the Proper Interests of the
several Parties ENGAGED.

I. Touching the Interest of the KING and his Party. II. The Interest of the
Presbyterian Party. III. The Interest of the Independent Party. IV. The
Interest of the City of LONDON. V. The Interest of SCOTLAND, not extant before
now.
A piece of rare Observation and Contexture; wherein all men are equally
Concerned.

The Third Edition, with Addition by the Author M. N.

Dulce, and decorum est pro Patria. London, Printed Anno Dom. 1647.

To the KING.
SIR,
AFter so many storms I know you would willingly attain the wished Haven, but
then you must imbarque a new, and not in the old Shipwrack't design. And since
it is no Flattery to wish you well, for your own sake, and many others, pray
take this Pamphlet to steer your course by, and account him as good a friend to
your self and the Kingdom, as any you have bin acquainted with these seven
years, who first delivers it into your hands: For, I am confident, were you
abroad among your old Council, you should not reap so much of the truth of
your Interest, as you may in these poor sheets, which are but the Gleanings of
observation.

To the PRESBYTERS.
Sweet SIRS:
Let not your Jealousy accuse this Paper of a Plot against the State: Truly I
have added your Interest out of pity to your condition, that since you cannot
attain your Jure divino, you may (at least) open your eyes, and preserve your
selves (if you please) in a handsome equipage, Jure humano.

To the INDEPENDENTS.
FRIENDS:
You who are Listed more immediately under the Prince of Peace, ought not so to
prosecute your Interest, as to begin a War upon it; but only to remain on the
defensive till your just Liberty be confirmed, and the Prince's due right
restored, since Conscience must needs remain quieter, where the power is
invested in one King, than in an Hydra of Presbyters. Above all things you must
not be Anti-parliamentary, but exercise wisdom with patience, and the
countenance of that Authority cannot long be wanting: A word to the wise.

To the CITY.
SIRS:
My desire is, that you may flourish, which cannot be, unless you mind only
your peculiar Interest of Trade. If you resolve to live and die with
Presbytery, consider that you can ill Bandy against the other two Parties,
since it cannot be unknown, that they are the major part of your selves. A City
divided against it self cannot stand.

To the SCOTS.
Friends and Confederates:
Take this brief draught of your Interest, wherewith I here present you, with
the same Ingenuity and Candor, that I wrote it. God shall bear me record, that
I lay nothing open here, with intent to work division, it being contrary to my
obligation by Covenant; but only to satisfy the world in truth concerning
you, and your selves in what concerns your own happiness, safety, and
advantage, by a wise demeanor, in order to the Conservaton of Peace in these
Kingdoms. Honi soit qui mal y pense.

And now (Gentlemen) but one word more to all: I suppose none can take just
offense, since I state the Interests of all indifferently, pointing out to each
the way to advance and preserve their own Party, and I shall commend to them
what the Duke of Rohan says of the States of Europe, that according as they
follow their proper Interests, they thrive or fail in Successes, so the
Parties now on Foot in this Kingdom, must look to stand or fall upon the same
Ground.

The Case of the Kingdom stated, etc.
First, touching the Interest of the KING and his Party.
THE King (as the case lately stood with him) was a very Prisoner; and so being
fallen from the height of fortune, must remit much of the height of his
design; and what has been lost by bandying, he ought to Salve by a wary
Compliance. That this he may effect in a short time is very probable, since
what Machiavell sets down as a sure Principle toward the purchase of Empire
is acted ready to his hands, by the mutual expense of Spleen in his opposites
against each other: so that all he has to do is to sit still, to foment and
blow the Fire, and give the humors time to toil, till being tired in
extremes there appear a necessity of one Third to rest in, (which can be no
other but himself;) and then his only Interest will be, to close with that
Party which gives most hope of Indulgence to his Prerogative, and greatest
probability of favor to his Friends. That neither of these can be expected from
the Presbyterian, is evident for many Reasons: And first touching the
Prerogative, their Government in the nature of it derogates not only from the
Civil in general, but carries with it a more special enmity against
Monarchy; so that they which intend to found the one, must raze the
Fundamentals of the other in any Kingdom whatsoever. Politic assertions of
this kind should be strengthened by Observations out of History: But the tender
age of this Vpstart Hierarchy and the Little entertainment it has found in the
World, yields us nothing of moment to observe, unless in our own Island. For
if we look abroad, we find it but straggling up and down in France and
Germany, and in such places only as acknowledge little or none at all of
Kingly power; so that Scotland is the only visible Kingome where this Pest is
Epidemicall, and it was (first) Scotch Charity to Baptize it as Christian, into
the name and privilege of a National Form. This was done during the minority
of King James, when the Lords and Clergy ruling all as they listed, at length
parted stakes (though the Clergy then got, and still hold the better) that
when He came to age, he found the Fable of Ixion's Juno moralized upon himself;
for as he instead of a Goddess embraced a Cloud; so the King, when he thought
to grasp his Scepter, laid hold on a Manacle, which kept his hands so fast,
during his abode there, that he could never Act but when they pleased to let
him, according to their own Directory of Kirk and State: And in process of
time this heat of Presbytery proved such an Hectique in the body Politic of
Scotland, that the Substance of Kingly power was utterly consumed, and nothing
left (as we see at this day) but the bare bones, the very Ek^leton of a
Monarchy; Witness the unlimited power of the Convention of Estates, and
General Assembly, but especially of this latter, which (like to the Rod of
Aaron) is in such a budding, thriving condition, that it has devoured the Rod
of Moses, as his did the Magicians of Egypt, and proves a Scourge to the
Magistracy and People. This is a sufficient Instance (being also the only one
in the World) to manifest the Antipathie betwixt a National Presbytery, and
the civil power of Commonweals and Kingdoms, wherein whosoever desires
further satisfaction, needs do no more but take a strict survey of their own
Books of Discipline.

Secondly, touching the Kings Friends [which are of two Sorts, viz. the Bishops
and their Clergy, the Courtiers with the Gentry,] they must expect less from
the Presbyter than the King himself may: For, as They would leave the King
nothing but a name without Substance, so they will allow the Bishops neither
Name nor Substance, and inslave the Gentry in their own Lordships by a new way
of par^chiall Tyranny: For, if so be they conform not, then they must expect
in a short time to see the meanest of their Tenants become their Masters in
judicature, and so what Solomon calls a great Vanity, will be a Prime mystery
in this new Government.

Hence, then we may conclude, that the Kings Interests lead him to close rather
with the other party (called Independent) as the only means to f^ee him and
his friends, from the former Inconveniences, and that for these following
Reasons.

First, because they are the only friends to Civil government in the World,
leaving it wholly in the hands of the Magistrate; pleading exemption in nothing
but their Church Way: Whereas the Presbyters claim not only a distinct power
in Church-affaires [as you may read in that Branch of the Synods late
confession which speaks of Church censures] but they borrow also so much from
the Magistrate, as will in able them to compel men's Consciences: And so under
this cunning Pretense, that the Magistrate is bound to use or lend his power to
support their arbitrary constitutions [the Proofs whereof they Fish out of the
Judicials of Moses, and some places of the Gospel misapplyed in some of their
Articles] lurkes the great Mystery of Iniquity, whereby They gain a power even
over the Magistrate himself, who in this case must use the sword (for
conscience sake) wheresoever they please to Advise or Command him: And so both
King and Parliament must give way, and compel others to submit, to whatsoever
they shall ordain in their General Assembly, as for the wellgoverning of the
Church.

Secondly; because it is easy for the King to mingle Interests with the
Independents, and oblige them w^ that which is denied them by the Presbyter,
viz. Liberty of conscience: In which Particular he ought also to pretend great
tenderness, it being his own case at present to suffer by many pressing
Importunities, to take the Covenant, and pass things of high Importance
wherein he is not satisfied, the refusal whereof upon Scruple of Conscience is
the only cause of his non-accesse to the Parliament.

Thirdly, because the Independent Principles lead them to admit rather of
Monarchy than any other Government, as being that under which they presume of
greater Inlargements, than when Many rule; who are usually most apt to gratify
a faction in the National Church with accruments of worldly pomp and power,
the better to support their own in the State.

Fourthly, Here is a door of Hope opened this way for the Bishops and their
Clergy, with all that are for the Liturgy and that Government, Whereas, if
Presbytrie take place in a National mode, then there will be Form against
their Form, and Policy against their Policy, which when it shall be actually
twisted with that of the State, can never be removed without length of time and
extreme difficulty. Where observe by the way, how it was ever the grand mystery
which Satan set on work in the hearts of those who glory in that usurped Title
of Clergy; first to introduce a plausible, politic, prudentiall way of
Government in the Church, as the only pattern brought out of the Mount; then to
gain it a sure being and repute with men, thy were wont to take in some of the
power of the World to countenance it, and force a Submission thereto by all,
under the old specious pretext of Decency, Conformity, and Order; and lastly to
make all fast, the Custom was to mingle Interests with the State or the Prince
[as the Bishops lately did with our Kings, and the Presbyters do now with some
great Ones and the City] and so their Fundamentalls being once poys'd with the
others, then whosoever shall presume to move the one, must shake the other, and
presently incur the brand of seditious disturbers of States and Kingdoms;
Which has been no mean artifice of the Devil [in all times] to uphold his
Kingdom in the hearts of men, against the Kingdom of Christ. In this Particular
the Bishops and Presbyters have been alike faulty; But if these have time to
supplant the Bishops [as they are in a fair way] and over-act them at their
own game, They are left for ever without remedy. But

Fifthly, by an immediate Close with the Independent, and abandoning that
cursed Principle of universal Compulsion, as well in opinion as practice,
since there is a numerous sort of people in the Kingdom, that will not be
satisfied, without the old external Form of Diocesan and Liturgy; it is clear
then, that Independents may help to Instate Them in that Form again, upon some
visible assurance, that themselves shall be left at Liberty, rather then be
trodden down, by a Mornivall [or two] of Tyrants [no less monstrous [perhaps]
for Ignorance, than pride] in every parochial Inquisition.

The last Reason is, because the Kings Union with this party may so abate the
fury of the Presbiter, that (whether Peace or War ensue) those of the Court,
Council, and Gentry excepted from pardon, and the rest that have not yet
Compounded, cannot continue long at this distance, without some, probable hope,
That Humors altering, and by the mediation of some the rest being brought to a
more moderate temper, it may be no hard matter to reconcile all within the
Limits of an Act of Oblivion.

And so for these Reasons I conceive, we may boldly affirm, That since the
King has no hope of remedy from his Friends here at home, or abroad, his true
Interest at present is by some means or other, to close with that Party in
this Kingdom which they call Independent.

The Interest of the Presbyter and his Party.
PResbiterie was no sooner born at Geneva, but it was nursed up here in England
in the Wishes of many, as Heir apparent of Episcopacie, For it is usual ever in
all wordly Church-reformations (as well as those of the State) to find some
men, either out of conscience or envy, disaffected to the settled Government:
Out of Envy, when they miss of that Preferment which they expected by a
change; out of conscience, when they see a greater glory of Light and Purity
beyond it, and therefore will not live by it, but beside it, or above it; The
truth whereof Experience has told us in all the degrees of Reformation in this
Kingdom, from Popery to Prelacie, from the Bishop to the Presbyter: And I shall
willingly allow the Presbyters (who reckon themselves for the old Puritans of
England) so much charity, as to think their disaffection proceeded merely from
a conscience well-informed, because I observe now an Impressa of divine glory
and excellency in many of their Practices; But yet I would have them to know,
that They are not yet come to Mount Zion, till they be able to prove the Chair
of a general Assembly the very Throne of Christ: And except they show all the
lineaments of their Government derived naturally from Scripture, it will fright
men's Consciences and make Them disclaim it for a monster: For, the Discipline
now contended for, is (as was the Bishops) but external, prudentiall, matter
of Form and Policy, and it is looked upon as so much the more intolerable, if
rigidly pressed, by how much it opens a far wider gap for Tyranny; because if the
Bishops made us groan under 24 Diocesses, and but one High Commission, what
will become of us under almost 10000 Presbyteries, beside the Torment of
Classes, Provincial Junto's Synods, and Assemblies? Were they able to prove
one of them Scripturall, it were a little honester bandying against men of
different judgment, but since the continuation of that ridiculous Plea for a
Ju^ Divinum with compulsive power, can gain nothing but hatred from both the
other parties, and must of necessity by disobliging their friends increase the
number of their enemies, and in time exasperate both so far, that nothing will
satisfy but an abolition of the new Form as immoderate, and a reestablishing
the old, upon more assurance of liberty: Therefore the only Interest of the
Presbyters is to allow the Independents their liberty of Church Way, to esteem
them as Brethren, and not to make difference in circumstantials, a ground for
persecution. And this I shall further illustrate by reason. First, it is as much
madness to persecute men, because they are not like us in opinion, as it were
to quarrel with them when they resemble us not, in outward complexion. For,
since we lost perfection in Adam, what ever knowledge we attain to now, is
either moral, by the improving of natural indowments; or else Divine, which
is an influence from Heaven upon the Soul: For the former, we are beholden
mediatly to the bounty of Nature and our own Industry; for the latter,
immediately to God. Therefore where we see any weaker in judgment then our
selves, we ought to look upon them as deplorable, rather then damnable. Vain
man! What made the difference betwixt thee and thy weak Brother? did not
Free Grace? For, what have thou that thou did not receive? and God may reveal
it to him also in due time. Secondly, the design of Conformity or Uniformity in
the Church, has been, and is the grand Cheat whereby the Devil makes men run a
madding; and though it ever pretend a plausible end of Cementing the State
against Division, yet pull off its Visard, and you shall find it to be both
the Mother and Nurse of all Division (as it ever was) throughout all Europe in
matters of Religion: The witchcrafts of this Jezebel [it is] that trouble our
Israel. For, it is against common sense and reason to expect, that ever men
will be one in opinion (the Heathen said, Quot Capita, tot Sensus,) so that
those which endeavor it seem to me, as if they meant to imprison Aeolus and
all his Sons [the 32 winds] in a Bag (as it is said of the Laplanders) since
Opinion blows from every point of the Compass: And as a confinement of the
Wind torments Nature with an Earthquake, so to rob the Soul of its Freedom
(which is far more agile and diffusive) must needs cause a Colic (with
inflammation) in the bowels of a Kingdom. And therefore till Vniformity-mongers
be pointed at as the only Enemies of a State, and this wicked persuasion be
wrought out of the hearts of men, that they ought to make all men walk that way
par force which their Priests cry up for the right; till men be less in the
Letter that they may be one in the Spirit (which none but the Spiritual can
apprehend) and until they leave crying, Fire from Heaven against Brethren in
the Faith, we shall always have the Kingdom in a Flame, and (perhaps)
themselves may be the first in Ashes. Thirdly, men under oppression (though
sometime wise enough) become mad, and usually trample down all Relations to
make way for a deliverer, that gives hope of the least remedy, and as the
condition of B^ing alters, so all men do vary their Interests, and Principles.
Fourthly, if a rigid course should be prosecuted, and so a Breach be made
betwixt those who (for the major part) are one by Solemn Covenant, the
Independent having that invincible Plea of Se defendendo on his side, the whole
Scandal will retort upon the Presbyter: And if it be objected that the
Independent occasions the Breach, by opposing the Letter of the Covenant for an
uniform Reformation, I answer, that the Covenant in its extent has this
ultimate Limitation, viz. according to the Word of God: No otherwise; The whole
resolves into that, as being all in all. And then, if both Parties be reduced
to that Rule, let God and good men judge (for the World cannot) whose will be
the Breach. Lastly, a Moderate Condescension in the Presbyter will by keeping
the other from extremes stop all new designs, and when there is more of the
Spirit of Love in their proceedings, they will draw less of Enmity. It will
for ever confirm a Brotherly Union, which must prevent the forenamed
Insinuations of the Royal and Episcopal Party, and prove a Bulwark within,
and a Wall of Brass about the Nation. From whence I once again infer, the sole
Interest of the Presbyters is, to counter-work the King in his Interest, as
their grand opposite, by complying with the Independent, and it ought to be
their wisdom to look upon all men and Counsels in their own Party, [whether of
the Purple or Sable robe] that Thunder in the behalf of a rigid Presbytery, as
very Malignants, lurking among them under pretense of a Reformation to draw in
the less wise and more worldly fiery Zelots, to Act for that Party under a
disguise which they pretend most to hate, and by Fulminating against our fast
friends, as Heretics and Schismatiques, etc. to shipwreck us in the Haven,
and Casse all the successes of this Parliament by Division.

The Interest of the Independent Party.
AS Presbytery is the Rival of Episcopacy, so Independency being of an higher
Strain, than to admit of humane prudence in Church Government, her Principles
stand indifferent toward either of them, as may serve most for her own
advantage. Both the other take in some of the wisdom, and much of the power
of the world, and so share with the Kingdoms of the world, to make up a
Church, whereby they draw the world after them, because the way is so suitable
to worldly reason; thus carnal men will ever be for a carnal Church: But
Independents affirm the Church ought to be a spiritual building, framed of
such lively stones as are not of the world, nor of the wisdom of the World,
but founded only upon the wisdom of God, revealed in the word by his Spirit,
which they esteem sufficient to constitute and maintain a Church, without any
assistance from the Kingdoms of the world, whose power they leave entire unto
themselves.

The Sum is this: both Bishops and Presbyters by their Church-policy, stand
Competitors with the Magistrate, and Independents leave all to him, save only
the Kingdom of Christ, which (if you will take his own word) is not of this
world, and so can be no trouble to it, unless His be first troubled by it.

By this description then it appears, that the Government contended for by the
other two is but mere Policy: and since their Politics render them utterly
irreconcilable, Independencie (which owns no Policy) becomes the ballancing
power betwixt them: And as it behooves either of the two, to strive to weigh
down the other, by a timely Close with It, So the only Interest of Independency
is to embrace that party where an union procures most Indulgence and little or
no scandal; which I conceive may be expected rather from the Royal Episcopal
party, then the other, upon these following Grounds.

First, Though principles of Faith should sway the Presbyters, to brotherly
amity with the Independent, yet by their driving so furiously upon terms of
discipline, and through their eagernes upon uniformity in the Letter, slighting
that glorious unity in the Spirit, (which is the very life of Christian
profession) they give little hope of favor, but rather expectation of a fiery
Trial, seeing they begin to heat the Furnace already.

Secondly, though Bishops stand at a great distance; Yet setting aside that
gross mixture of Ceremonies) their discipline were far more tolerable,
notwithstanding they had power to exercise it to the utmost with compulsion,
because Tyranny cannot be so great in the hands of few, as many, So that if
hereafter (in case Presbytery be settled) our former plagues be not a thousand
times trebled upon us, we must acknowledge our present freedom, only to the
courtesy and goodness of our Taskmasters: But if corrupt times come on [as who
can assure us they will not, since the old mystery of iniquity is now in the
world under a new Form;] What then will become of our posterity, when the
yoke shall be fastened to our necks by an Act of Parliament?

Thirdly, though the Episcopal are enemies to both Presbyters and
Independents, yet considering these have been extreme civil in using their
victories, and may now most oblige them in their lowest condition: and it being
possible that both their interests may stand together (with discretion) entire,
then if Bishops quit the exorbitant compulsive power, and the King give
assurance against it for liberty of Conscience, the enmity betwixt him and the
Independent may be soon extinguished.

Fourthly, there can be no scandal to the Independent, by such an union of
interests, since the Woe-following scandal belongs to them always, by whom the
grounds of Scandal are necessitated. And therefore that the Scandal may
clearly report upon Presbyter (as I proved before it must) the Independent
ought not to admit of a Breach till the Red Dragon begin to play Rex, till the
Whore prepares to dye her Scarlet a new, and the pale Horse of imprisonment and
exile threaten a Range about the Streets.

Lastly, though th^s discovery of Interest may seem to portend ruin to the
Parliament, yet it is far otherwise: For Independents ought not to look upon
it so, as to neglect them in whose privileges and safety all Liberty is
involved: But with all tenderness to have regard unto them, as the only
Rampire against all kinds of Tyranny, since all proceedings thence against them
as Heretics and Schismatics etc. are actuated only by some particular men,
whose designs being laid in the dark, Time alone must discover: But that
which will crown Independent Interest [and which is indeed true Parliamentary
Interest, though Presbyterians drive another way] is, to reconcile the King
upon such honorable Terms, that as he and they are in all reason obliged to
down with the Dagon of a rigid Presbytery, so the engagement may be managed
with such Caution, for the safety of the Parliament, and assurance of Liberty
in time to come, as may remove all Iealousies and lay a sure foundation for a
lasting Peace.

The Interest of the City of London.
THis City bears the name of the Metropolis of England, the Royal Chamber, the
grand Emporium, the universal Exchange for Traffic; so that her sole Interest
is a free Trade, whereby having acquired large Demesnes in all Parts, she
maintains a considerable influence upon the whole, which makes her stand on
tip-toe, looking down with disdain upon all, as unable or unworthy to stand in
competition with her single Self. This conceit has been much heightened by
those large Contributions thence, which have been the very Sinews of the War
against the Royal Party; so that it is to be feared the Huge Animal having
found its own strength, may prove Rampant, and contemn the Bridle, unless a
little corrected by Reason.

Therefore I think meet to lay down these ensuing considerations.

First, that what they have hitherto done, must not be looked upon as done by
their own strength and Riches, but only as these received an Authority of
Parliament to give life unto the Action, without which (as then, so) all
designs [now, or hereafter] must prove abortive.

Secondly, though the Citiz^ns pretend Religion to be the only necessary
Appendix to that Trade, by clasping both together with a rigid Presbytery, and
suppose this the more pleasing safe way, because they are made believe it is
Divine, yet if they please to look more narrowly upon the Scriptures and the
procedings of their Priests, they may learn the Scope of their State-Divinity
is only to drive a Trade in the Ministry upon them and their Estates; which the
City shall soon find, when the Presbyterian Charter is once confirmed by Act of
Parliament.

Thirdly, if only even rekonings make long friends, then it is like this hot
love to a Presbytery may end in a Divorce before the three years end,
especially when the Accounts shall be cast up betwixt Clergy and Laity, that
worm-eaten Reverend Cheat of distinction betwixt Brethren. It Is true indeed,
some of them shall be admitted to a partnership in the Tyranny, and this is the
very De-coy to allure them on, but usually the preaching Presbyter swayes All,
and he is a very silly one indeed that knows not how to do it, since they
either stand or fall according to his Report of their good Compliance, in the
opinion of the general Assembly [that Holy of Holies, where the Lay-Vulgars
must not enter;] which neat contrivance of invisible Clockworke, will be sure
to have a wheel going in all affairs of the Kingdom.

But Fourthly, Suppose that the Lay Elders themselves should have fair Play
from the Priests, yet what comfort will that be to the rest of the Parish, who
must be in little better condition then gally-slaves, when the Eldership shall
have an Oar in every Boat? And this appears by the power given them to
suspend persons from, and admit to the Supper, as they shall see cause
according to an Ordinance in that behalf: in which Ordinance, there being no
less than 80. sins enumerated (and an addition of many more endeavored) any
one of which upon Conviction, may include a man guilty, if they please to
pronounce him: then it is clear also, that since a man can hardly do any thing
that comes not within the compass of those Sins, all men must be irrefragably
subject to their pleasure in all their dealings, or else be delivered up to the
Devil [forsooth] by Excommunication. Where then will freedom be in a corrupt
Presbytery when the Citizens shall not dare to dispose of their own Estates,
nor wear Clothes as they please, nor manage their Trades to fructify percent*
nor use an hundred other fine feats, without a friend or feeling in the
Eldership? What will become of our Lawyers ^oo, when it is an casie matter to
make the same Ordinance, a Shoing-horne to draw on all cases, depending betwixt
man and man, into their own Consistori^s.

Fifthly, they may do well to consider, that if they shall drive any other
Interest than Trade, as their own peculiar, which may intr^nch upon the union
of interests before mentioned, or hinder them from uniting by under-propping
the other Party, it is clear then, that their power and greatness will be
suspected, and become odious to Prince and People* For, their High Terms
already with the Parliament, and the establishing of a Militia in their own
hands, distinct from the rest of the Kingdom, makes wise men whisper, as if
they meant to found a new Religious Democracie, by resolving the Co-ordinations
of power in the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council into a popular Senate.

Sixthly, I would have them consider that the Jealousies of States and Princes
are great, and cannot brook any Rival, nor will they judge themselves safe, as
long as any one Corporation of Subjects make a show of Competition in wealth
and power. Nor can it be safe for Subjects to discover them too far in this
way, lest they teach Princes to secure and enrich themselves by seizing upon
Facile est Baculum invenire, ut caedas Canem.
Theirs. What made the Abbeys and Monasteries so looked on, but only their great
Wealth?

And what was the main Plea to ruin them (as Princes (if possible) will have
some color of Law to set off actions of this nature) but their holding vast
possessions in their hands which could not pass from man to man so lay dead to
the prejudice of the Commonwealth? I wish the City to ponder, whether there be
not the same Reason far more pressing, against the unmeasurable Revenues of
their Halls and several Companies, those insatiable Gulphs which swallow up so
great a part of the Kingdom: And whether their high Raunting may not bring on
the same Fate hereafter, on the same ground, upon the first tempting
opportunity.

Lastly, since their Presbytery is only of the World, they may do well to
consider how it is like to thrive in the World, since so few even amongst
themselves are willing to entertain it, and the Counties abroad are some of
them so wise, others so cross-grained to all Novelty: that they generally
detest it: And therefore if it shall appear that the Citizens are the men,
which resolve to bandy against both King and Independent [whose Interests tend
to a speedy honorable Peace and just Liberty] for the settling of that
government in the Church, which neither we, nor our Children shall be able to
bear, it is most certain, that the Odium of a SECOND WAR will reflect upon
them, and the whole burden of guilt and expense rest upon their shoulders: And
then they may guess what the consequence will be, when their Purses are
exhausted and both the other Parties [carying the Kingdom before them] shall
be forced into an unanimous design of revenge, to scourge their pride, with
such an alteration [if not utter destruction] as may verify [perhaps] the
Faggend of the old Prophecy, that YORK SHALL BE.

From all which I may sum up this Conclusion.

That the true Interest of the City is to cool by degrees toward a Presbytery
(not all at once, lest it be accounted Levity,) And in the mean time to stand
neutrall so far as not to make a distinct party, nor drive any design at Home
or at Westminster, by hoisting up supernumerary Votes, and pulling down all
others with Remonstrative or Petitionary Outcries, but to leave the
Presbyterian cause to stand or fall, by Reason and sober debate in Parliament,
that being the less looked upon in so turbulent a time, They may enjoy their
City and Possessions without Envy and the shaken Kingdom [they keeping still]
may have time to settle, and recover the pristine health and splendour of a
glorious Monarchy.

O Cives, Cives, quae vos Dementia ^^pit,
Tanti non est Civilia bella moveri.
The Interest of Scotland.
THat which had been long endeavored in vain by several Kings, being at
length (through the prudence of Henry 7. effected, I mean the Union of both
Crowns in the person of one Prince; King James willing (as much as might be)
to bury the remembrance of disunion and allay the deadly feuds running in a
blood betwixt the borderers, thought meet to curtaile his title of the usual
distinct names of England and Scotland; and as both made but one Island, so he
comprised both in that one ancient appellative of great Britain.

This Union under a native King of Scotland, was an happy occasion for that
poor Kingdom, to augment their repute and fortunes; and as in such cases it is
usual for the less, to drive a purchase upon the greater, by closing in as
near as jealousy will permit; so the Scots (inamoured of the clusters of our
Canaan) lost no time in getting ground on this side Jordan, viz. Tweed, till
many of them became possessors of fair vineyards, and were able to vie
Lordships with our wealthiest English. To this height they arrived through the
favor of that King, which drew many more into a desire of the warmer Sun, and
an emulation of their friends happiness here in England.

But toward the latter end of King James, the passages began to be blockt up at
Court by the Prelates faction: who judged it dangerous for their Hierarchy, to
see men of that Nation in too great a number and power, near hand, for fear
lest the same humor which had depressed Episcopal pomp there, might in time
have an influence here also; so that by this means not only the affections of
King James, (whose ordinary Apophthegme was, no Bishop, no King) were a little
weaned; but he being dead, the same Counsels prevailed upon the new King, his
Son (one easily wrought any way to gratify his Clergy) to a dis-obliging of
the Scots: who seeing themselves now quite out of hope of thriving by the Kings
favor; and knowing well upon what ground, and by whose means things were thus
carried, concluded then there was no way to get into the Nation, but upon the
ruin of our Bishops; which must necessarily follow, if they could introduce
the Presbiteriall government, which themselves had received in Scotland: and
this they found was no hard matter to effect, since there were many that way
affected in England, and their affections highly inflamed, by reason of the
rigorous dealing and tyrannical pride of some Clergymen, which rendered their
whole Order and government, odious to the more tender consciences, and prepared
the people ( hood-winkt) to entertain any change, though to their own prejudice.

This being (on the other side) immediately resented by the Bishops, they
judged it best to be beforehand with the Scots; and first (to try their
patience, and Pick a quarrel, on purpose to tame them by force) a new Liturgy
was contrived, sent, and imposed upon them; the offer whereof bred so much
indignation in the one party, as a refusal did in the other (both glad enough
of the occasion,) that a war immediately ensued; wherein though the King were
engaged on the Bishops part, yet the Scots got most of Honor and (the war
being ended) much money and reputation, among their friends in England; which
so indeared them, that a new rupture falling out betwixt King and Parliament,
they had an easy inlet to build themselves (with high confidence) a more sure
interest than ever, in this Nation; which was accomplished by the mutual
engagement of the Parliaments of each Kingdom to other (as brethren) in the
firm bond of a League and Covenant.

By which lant-skip of discourse it appears, as the Scots have now attained
the pitch of their desires, by a fast foot in the fat soil of England, through
mutual Covenanting, (which has been long a contriving and earnestly struggled
for,) so they ought to prosecute the Covenant (the vitals of their hope) with
all due respect, tenderness, and caution (according to the rational drift of
it) toward the people of England, lest their proceedings become odious, and
themselves be kicked off again with disdain and enmity.

Therefore I shall present them with a few considerations.

First, let them be pleased to remember, that the people look upon them but as
inferiors, and therefore must needs swell high with indignation, if they busy
themselves overmuch in the affairs of England, knowing in how high scorn it
was taken, that they should claim an interest (as once they had the boldness
to do, in their Papers given into the Parliament) in disposals of matters
merely relating to our welfare: And since all men know, that though they were
admitted to engage here ( necessity so requiring it) as equals and competitors
in the same cause, the Kingdoms being supposed equally involved in the same
common danger; yet were they indeed but Mercenaries, in pay of the English
Parliament, who might have had Germans or Swissers at the same rate, and
(perhaps) no more prejudice to the Country.

Secondly, I must confess, it behooves the Scot predicant (if possible) to see
Episcopacy cashiered root and branch, and their own form stated here, in a
sure succession: that so a correspondence being cherished between Clergy of the
same garb and humor, in both Countries, they may freely toss thunderbolts of
excommunication, on both sides, to gratify each other, and so be able to
terrify all Lords and Gentry, that dare be averse in either Kingdom, and
promote such only to places of trust, whose poorer spirits will vassallize
their Birth and Genius to serve their ends. And I confess, it behooves such
great ones, as have already linked themselves in design with the Clergy, to
stick close to them a while, for their own credit and security, except they
can handsomely retreat with speed; yet both English and Scotch Gentry of this
gang, may consider that such a course cannot stand long in England; where being
Myriads of more generous souls than in Scotland, they must always expect a
flying out into any extrems, that yield the least hope of an advantage to throw
their riders.

Thirdly, if the Scots plead conscience for extirping the Government by
Bishops, as bound thereto by Covenant; yet seeing Bishop is every jot as
wholesome a word, and as much Scripturall as Presbyter, and that our weaker
Brethren in England are wedded to that Form, as more tolerable than any other,
and more suitable to the Laws and Constitution of the Monarchy; I suppose,
that the admission of a Bishop mortified, regulated, and pruned of his
superfluities, will no whit clash with the sense of the Covenant: For it is
plain, that the scope of it is not against Bishop in the Abstract, but in the
Concrete, as laden with an accumulation of Deanes, Deanes and Chapters,
Prebends, Chancellours, Commissaries, etc. though if these also were admitted
again, as I cannot see how they may be well refused, yet the Scots (for their
part) and those of their party here in England, having endeavored their utmost
to extirp it, they have done all that the Covenant requires, though it be not
effected. But seeing most in England will not be content without it, and
nothing but another Conquest can force any other upon them, me think rational
men should sit down content with a discharge of their consciences, in having
seriously endeavored the extirping it to their power (further then which the
Covenant does not bind them,) rather then aim at an impossibility in reason,
or venture a sad score upon conscience, in imbroyling two Kingdoms again, to
an inevitable ruin of a third; which can never be justified from Scripture, in
the behalf of Principles of Faith, which are the substance of Religion, much
less upon point of Discipline, which is but the shadow.

Fourthly, if a design be followed, to force their Government upon this
Kingdom, so generally detested by reasonable men, the war cannot possibly be
long-lived here, where the thing contended for is so ill befriended, but must
of necessity, be translated toward Scotland, where it had its Original: And
though the Scots need not fear, being valiant enough, and having one advantage
above all other men, in possessing little that may invite men to a conquest;
yet it will be chastisement enough to be beaten home, and kept there from their
usual way of thriving, by intercourse with England.

Fifthly, since that their Presbytery is more of the World, and so like to be
more troublesome to it than Episcopacy, it will be an occasion to the English,
to prye into the grounds of the Scots so earnest pressing that government upon
them: and finding by the Proeme of this particular draught (which wise
observing men cannot be ignorant of) that wordly respects first made them bring
it in hither, the greater part of men here (which are worldly) will endeavor
to preserve themselves against all such worldly encroachments under pretense of
Religion: and though it be presented in a new dress, called Reformation; yet
since it must prove no other, than an Assassination of the Monarchy, and a
Reducing of the old Privado's which oppressed us at Court to overwh^lm us with
new ones quite throughout the Kingdom, it is like that the love of ^ingly
Government (so surely imprinted in this Nation, and jealousy of Liberty, will
render men implacable to all; that keep a hand in a rigid Presbytery, and urge
them to apply desperate remedies to be cured of it, as the grand canker-worm of
our English interest.

Sixthly, to design that upon a people which their constitutions will not
bear, ordinary Brains must conceive can have no ground in policy, unless
there be some certainty which way to master them: and therefore the Scots and
their favorites may do well to consider, how they can go through stitch with
the business against a generous people, impatient of the yoke. It is not in
England as in Scotland, where men are poor, and so the more easily inslaved,
and led about to serve the ends of the Grandees amongst them; but being rich
and sensible of their freedoms, will entertain no more here from the
persuasions of men, than what they can make visible by reason, as conducing to
the general good; so that the groundwork of all actions must be laid,
according to the peoples inclination, and not the faction of particular men, be
they never so potent in wealth, or wisdom. By this rule they may judge, what
their friends are able to do for the Presbyterian cause in England.

Lastly, since most men un-interrested that way are of a contrary mind, I wish
them to consider, that if by striving against the stream, they lose their hold
now, it can never be recovered again upon the same pretense, and (perhaps) many
ages will hardly afford the like; and therefore if the Scots shall proceed to
scrue themselves in by their engineers of the Clergy (more Lordly already then
the former) to the oppression of Episcopal and Loquor ad sensum vulgi.
Independent consciences, and endeavor to found them with an Antichristian
power, upon the blood of both Countries, by a new war, the ancient Antipathy
must needs revive, and be reared again (like Adrian's wall) as a perpetual
Bar betwixt the Nations.

From whence I may conclude, the case thus standing; that the only interest of
the Scots is, to preserve themselves in the opinion of the people of England,
by a moderate and fair construction of the Covenant, in behalf of a
Presbytery; which being by Covenant to be judged according to the word of God,
they have the less reason to stand for their own way here, because they take
little besides the bare name of Presbytery out of the word, and so having no
pretense to found a quarrel, but only upon some parcels of the letter of the
Covenant, I see no reason they have to be angry, if the English give them leave
to enjoy their own in peace at home, and in the mean time take leave to
settle things here, for the good of this State in Church Government, as they
judge answerable to their principles, (according to the Word) whereupon they
apprehend the Covenant was first intended, framed and founded. And so the heat
of controversy being laid by, a brotherly condescension on both sides, in
matter of religious concernment, the peace and union, in all civil respects,
may be established, and kept inviolable betwixt the Kingdoms.

Dirno, and aedifico, muto quadrata rotundis.
FINIS.

