THE Catholic Answer TO THE Seekers Request: IN A LETTER Directed to the
SEEKER, Proving the Real Presence, BY The SCRIPTURE only.

Mark 16.16. He that Believes, and is Baptized, shall be Saved; but he that
Believes not, shall be Damned.

LONDON, Printed for John and Thomas Lane at the Sign of the Golden-Anchor at
the Corner of Wild-street, nexr Duke-street. 1687.

The Catholic Answer to the Seekers Request, etc.
SIR,
YOUR Request happening to a Press of my Acquaintance, gave Me the Opportunity
of an early Perusal; near the End whereof, I found Your plain Dealing with the
Gentlemen Ministers of the Church of England; telling them, ( Page 8.) in
these, or the like Words, That 'twas Your being in Discourse with a Gentleman
of the Catholic Persuasion, that moved You to this way of Trial; who boldly
affirmed, That he would prove the Catholic Doctrine of the Real Presence, by
the Express Word of God, out of Your own Bibles; and that he Challenged all
England to produce him so much as One plain Text, from the Beginning of Genesis
to the End of the Revelations, to prove the Contrary; if they could, then he
would be of Their Religion, or of any Other They Would appoint him; which, if he
parted with his Own, he thought 'twas all is one. Upon reading whereof, I found
my self concerned, as being the very Person with whom You had the said
Discourse; wherein I own to have uttered the above Expressions or Words, to
that Effect: And what I said then, I Will still perform; though, for a single Man
to Challenge all England, I confess, was a little Rash; but, in the Sense I
spoke it, I again confirm it; that is, I will prove the Cotholick Doctrine of
the Real Presence, by the Bible only; and I defy the World to produce Me One
plain Text, to prove the Contrary; if they can, I will be of Their Religion, or
any other They Will appoint: For, if there be any more than One Religion True,
there may be Forty.

But, upon the whole, I find You are resolved to try, what Scriptures We have
for it, and what Protestants have against it; wherein, I am so far from blaming
You, that I highly Applaud and Commend Your Zeal to know the Truth, especially
in a Matter of no less Importance to You, than an Eternity of Bliss or
Torments; for, as You have well Noted ( Page 3.) that, Without Faith it is
impossible to please God; Heb. 11.6.
and, that the Faith which is pleasing to God, Ephesians. 4.5.
is But One; so, without pleasing of God, by Believing this One Faith, it is
Impossible to be Saved, Mark 16.6.
according to St. Mark, He that Believes not, shall be Damned: And St. James
tells us, That whoever Offends in One Point, Jam. 2.10.
He is Guilty of All: But because this Discourse tends to a Controversy of
another Nature, I am not willing to pursue it; and therefore, do set forward to
the Matter in Question, which is, That You may be satisfied in the great point
of the Lord's Supper, by the Scripture only, (and not by several ways of
Arguing, as is usual, etc.) to which I submit, and accordingly, shall endeavor
to perform the best I can. But, first, You desire to know, ( Page 4.) What it
is We Believe of the Lord's Supper? Whereunto I answer, and resolve in the
Affirmative of what You your Self propose, or in plain terms, I Firmly and
Truly Believe, by the same Faith I believe a God, That in the Eucharist, or
Sacrament (as You call it) of the Lord's Supper, as Celebrated in the Catholic
Church, is Truly, Really, and Substantially contained under the Forms of Bread
and Wine, the True Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of Our
Lord Jesus Christ, in the self-same Substance wherein he now Sits at the
Right Hand of the Father which is in Heaven; and that is, in the very Substance
wherein He was Born of the Virgin, and wherein He Lived and Dyed for Us; with
this Difference only, That He was Visible to the Eye of Flesh then, and
Invisible to the same now; for, with Our Mortal Eyes, we can no more see Him
sitting at the Right Hand of the Father, which is in Heaven, than we can see
Him (in Form and Substance) in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which is on
Earth; though by the Eye of Faith, we See and Believe him as Firmly in the One,
as Substantially in the Other: For, could We with Our Eyes and Sense of Flesh,
See, Feel, Smell, and Taste (if we could distinguish) the Flesh and Blood of
Christ in the Sacrament, it would not be of Faith; for, according to St. Paul,
Faith is the Evividence of Things not seen: Heb. 11.1.
that is, By Faith we Believe what we cannot See, nor by the Sense of Flesh
comprehend: For, as Our Savior said in the Gospel according to St. John, John
6.63.
The Flesh profitteth nothing, it is the Spirit that quickens; but, as Our
Sacred Lord said, in the next Verse, John 6.64.
There are some of You that Believe not; and I am Sorry for it, especially for
You, from the bottom of my Heart, without Equivocation, or Mental Reservation
to the contrary; which are Maxims We utterly abhor in all Cases, wherein any
thing of Sincerity, Truth, or Good of Our Neighbor is concerned; though, by the
Enemies of Truth, it is fathered upon Us, as a Fundamental of Our Faith: but,
that I may not Digress from the intent You are upon, I return to tell You, That
in the above, I have Truly and Really laid down the Substance of what We
Believe, of the Lord's Supper; which Doctrine of the Real Presence, and Being
of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, I Affirm and Prove by the Express
Words of God Himself, in the following Texts, as taken from a Bible of Your
own, Printed at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, in the Year 1628. And
as the Bible is Asserted by D. T. in a late Conference, to be the Protestant
Rule of Faith; so, I hope, no Protestant will refuse to be Tried by his own
Rule; though, I fear, whoever Answers Your Request, of the Protestant Party, that
he will be forced to fly from his Rule, and betake himself to Equivocation, and
twenty other Figures and Fancies of his own; for he will never be able to stand
by his Rule, nor will his Rule ever stand by him: Wherefore, to the Sum of
Your Request, which is, That We should lay down all the Scripture We can, to
prove the Affirmative of Our Part; and, That the Act of Parliament Established
Ministers, should produce all the Scripture They can or have, to prove the
Negative of Their Part; I say, the Negative, for, That they Deny, what We
Affirm for Truth; and this I find is the Pro and Con, that You Would be Resolved
in; and that the Methods You take, are, as it were, Justiciary, i.e. to hear
the Evidence on Both Sides; the Scriptures, as You Repute'em, being the
Recorded Evidence of Truth; and (as I conceive) Your Design is to hear the
Evidence, and not the Parties, by what You say, ( Page 7.) Without troubling
Our selves to tell You the meaning on it; to which I submit, as near as
possible; though, let me tell You, it is a little hard of Our side, that You will
not hear Our other Witnesses, who are without Number, in all Ages since Christ,
that have Believed and Taught this very Doctrine of the Real Presence, as We of
the Catholic Church do now Believe and Teach it: But, to Your Request, These
are the Texts which I Produce of the Catholic Part, to prove Our said
Affirmative: And,

First, I prove Christ's Promise (before He Instituted the Sacrament) that, He
would give us the Bread to Eat, which came down from Heaven; and that The Bread
which he would give us, was his Flesh, which he would give for the Life of the
World.

St. John, Chap. 6.

Verse. 48. I am that Bread of Life, says Christ.

49. Your Fathers did Eat Manha in the Wilderness, and are Dead.

50. This is the Bread which comes down from Heaven, that a Man may Eat
thereof, and not Die.

51. I am the Living Bread which came down from Heaven; if any Man Eat of this
Bread, he shall Live for ever; and the Bread that I will give, is My Flesh,
which I will give for the Life of the World.

54. Whosoever Eats My Flesh, and Drinks My Blood, has Eternal Life; and I
will raise him up at the last Day.

55. For My Flesh is Meat indeed, and My Blood is Drink indeed.

56. He that Eats My Flesh, and Drinks My Blood, dwells in Me, and I in
him.

57. As the Living Father has sent Me, and I live by the Father; he that
Eats Me, even he shall live by Me.

58. This is that Bread which came down from Heaven: not as your Fathers did
Eat Manna, and are Dead: He that Eats of this Bread shall live for ever. But
(as He says Ver. 64.) there are some of you that Believe not: Which some (of
Unvelievers) is since increased, by the numerous Offsprings of the Pretended
Reformation-Lady: For Protestants now, like Murmuring Jews then, strive ( Ibid
Cap. Ver. 52.) Amongst themselves, saying, How can this Man give us his Flesh
to Eat? And as the Disciples murmured then, who, Ver. 60. said, This is an hard
saying, who can hear it? And from that time, ( ver. 66) Went back, and Walked
no more with Him: So Protestants, who before were of Us, do now go back, with
their How can this be? It Is an hard saying, Who can either hear or believe it?
and for this cause, Walk no more with us: But, unto Protestants, as unto
murmuring Jews, our Savior Answers, and says, John 6. ver. 53. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Except ye Eat the Flesh of the Son of Man and Drink his
Blood, ye have no Life in you: And unto Protestants, as unto the Unbelieving
Disciples, ( For Jesus knew from the Beginning (ver. 64) who they were that
Believed not, and who should Betray him) says, ver. 61, 62. Does this Offend
you? What if ye shall s^^ the Son of Man Ascend up where he was before? For
that the Doctrine of the Resurrection was of more difficulty to be Believed,
than this of giving us Bread to Eat, which should be his Flesh; and to show the
World, that He meant as He said, He suffers all sorts of Murmurers, Jews,
Disciples, and Protestants, to go back, and walk no more with Him; without so
much as telling them, 'twas but a Parable, or a Figure of his Body, or the
like; But, to the contrary, confirms it, Ver. 63. It is the Spirit that
quickens, the Flesh profitteth nothing: the words that I spoke unto you, they
are Spirit, and they are Life: For, if We were not Quickened by the Spirit to
Believe, We might, like Jews and Protestants, murmur too: For, though the Flesh
of Christ did infinitely profit Salvation unto Us; yet Our Flesh profitteth not
this Faith in Us to Believe; whereby Christ might not complain of Us, as he did
of Them; ver. 64. But there are some of you that Believe not: And unto Us, as
unto the Twelve, Christ says, ver. 67. Will ye also go away? But, with Peter,
We Believe, and with Peter we Answer; ver. 68, 69. Lord, to whom shall we go?
Thou have the words of Eternal Life; and we Believe, and are sure, that Thou
are Christ, the Son of the Living God; who can neither Deceive, nor be Deceived.

In the next place, I prove, That, notwithstanding the Repulse this Doctrine
met with, by the Murmuring of the Jews, and the going back of the Unbelieving
Disciples, with their hard saying, Who can hear it? and not only to be Rejected
of them, but of Protestants and Others in after Ages; for, Christ knew from the
Beginning, who they were, and who they should be, that Believed not, and would
not Believe: Yet, so absolutely necessary to Our Salvation was the giving Us
this Bread, (which should be his Flesh) to Eat, that (mindful of his Promise)
the Eve before his Passion, Mat. 26.26. Jesus took Bread, and Blessed it, and
Brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, Eat, This is my Body.
And I defy all the Ministers in England, to produce so much as One Text to
prove it was not his Body: the same being again confirmed by St. Mark, chap.
14. ver. 22. And as they did Eat, Jesus took Bread, and Blessed, and Brake it,
and gave to them, and said, Take, Eat This is my Body: And who dare give Christ
the Lie; and say, It Is not so; though the same be again confirmed by St. Luke,
chap. 22. ver. 19. And He took Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it, and gave
unto them, saying, This is my Body, which is given for you: This do in
Remembrance of me. And in like manner of the Cup, in all these places, that it
was his Blood; and the same again by St. Paul, 1 Cor. chap. 11. ver. 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, and 29. to which I refer the Seeker; and in the same Chapter,
with St. Paul, say, ver. 30. For this cause, many are Weak and Sickly among
you, and many Sleep; who have not Faith to Believe it, nor Scripture to
Disprove it; if they have, assure your self, I will perform my Word, and be of
Their, or any other Religion, they shall appoint Me.

Wherefore, I sit down with the above Authorities, as being sufficient to prove
the Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper; and expect to hear what Scripture Authorities they have, to produce
against it; and so soon as they Open, fear not, but We will Trace the Scent,
till the Fox be unkennell'd: If they go to Figures and P^r^bles, We know how to
handle them; but, let them beware h^^ they offer any thing, without showing a
Rule for it: For, since they have Asserted the Bible to be Their Rule of Faith,
They cannot take it ill, if by Their own Rule, they be Well-Rul'd: Which (till
next Occasion) is what offers, From,

SIR, Your always Humble, and Obliged Servant, N. N.

FINIS.

