The Right Way To Promote Reformation.

In A SERMON, Preached at Warrington, Upon the 18th. of October. School.

At the Appointment of the Ministers there Met.

And, at the Request of Some, Published for the use of Others.

By J. NAYLOR Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkburst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
1699.

A SERMON Preached at Warrington.
MAT. VII. V. Thou Hypocrite first cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye; and
then shall thou see clearly, to cast out the Mote out of thy Brothers Eye.
THE Divine Dispensations of late, both in a way of Mercy and Judgment, have so
loud a Voice in this Kingdom, as cannot but awaken a just sense of a Necessity
of Reformation, in all that are not lul'd asleep, upon the lap of Pleasure, by
the Siren Songs of these sensual Sublunary things. God is trying this Nation in
both these Methods, and surely none so Ignorant, as not to know that both these
ways do strongly oblige, to an holy and Reformed course! If God do set us up as
a mark, at which he intends to shoot the Arrows of his Displeasure; it highly
concerns us, to meet him in the ways of his Judgments, by a speedy and sincere
Repentance. And if he unstring his Bow, and put up into his Quiver, the
impoysoned Arrows, that were prepared for our destruction; He expects so signal
a Mercy should soften and melt our hearts, and bring them into an Holy and
Heavenly frame and Temper.

Do I need to tell you, how lately God was graciously pleased, to Remove the
Judgment of a long and expensive War; and how desirable a Peace was before it
was concluded? And surely now the Enjoyment of Liberty and Property; and the
settling Peace within our Borders, under the favorable Influences of good
Rulers; is not the least of Temporal Blessings! God has hushed away Wars from
amongst us, and wonderfully scattered our fears: And shall not so merciful a
dispensation excite us to a vigorous prosecution of an Holy War, proclaimed
between us and our Sins? A War in which we were very early engaged; for in our
Baptism, we were listed under Christ, as the Generalissimo of all who draw the
Sword to Sacrifice their Lusts; and to fight against the World, the Flesh and
the Devil. And surely as the consummation of a long desired Peace, with our
Foreign Enemies, affords a favorable Juncture for the advancement of this
great Work; so it is a powerful Obligation upon us to set to it in good earnest.

No sooner were the Children of Israel come out of Egyptian Bondage, but they
were called to renew their Covenant with God; and what cause have we to take up
the Words of Ezra 9. 13, 14.
Ezra; Seeing that thou our God, have given us such a deliverance as this:
Should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with a People of
these Abominations; would not thou be angry with us; till thou had consumed
us; so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping?

But though the Sword be put up, and the War ended; yet for our Unfruitfulness
under, and Unthankfulness for, so great a Mercy: God has been threatening us in
these Northern parts with another Judgment, nothing less or Inferior to that
which he has lately removed, (viz.) a Judgment of Famine.

The Holy God for those vile Abominations, and gross Profaneness, committed
amongst us; has been threatening to break the Staff of Bread, and to send
cleanness into our Teeth. How has God been punishing us with Immoderate Wet
and Rain, and with a late and thin Harvest? So that our former Deliverances
will not secure us from future Ruin; if we harden our selves in a sinful way,
and wicked course. If we slight God's Mercies, we cannot think to escape the
smart of Judgments: For they that will not learn Righteousness, by the mild and
gentle methods of Divine Patience, and Kindness, must expect to be taught, as
the Men of Judge. 8. 16.
Succoth, With the Thorns and Briars of the Wilderness, We Read that the Men of
Genesis 14. 12, 13, 14.
Sodom were Rescued from Captivity by Abraham's Sword, not long before they
were consumed by Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. And ungrateful Israel perished
in the Wilderness, after their miraculous deliverance from Egyptian Bondage and
servitude. Now God forbid, that all our great Deliverances, and Signal Mercies,
should be attended with so sad a consequent, as to harden us in Sin and ripen
us for Destruction.

And as this is a Juncture, wherein God is thus calling upon us, to put away
our Sins, and to endeavor the Reformation both of our selves, and others,
Psalm. 82. 6.
That Iniquity may not be our Ruin: So our Terrestrial Gods (as Magistrates are
sometimes called) have vigourously set themselves to the Advancement of this so
necessary a Work. How many Pious Proclamations have been issued out within the
space of Eight or Nine years? Requiring all Magistrates, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, in their Respective Stations, to execute the Laws of this Realm
against Profaneness and Immorality, as they would Answer it to Allmighty God:
and upon pain of their Majesty's (and now of his Majesty's) highest
Displeasure: complaining that by a long continued neglect, and connivance of
the Magistrates, and Officers concerned; these disolute Enormities had
universally spread themselves, to the great dishonor of God, and the scandal
of our holy Religion.

These Proclamations have been seconded by several Learned and Pious Biships,
in their Letters to their Clergy, of their several and Respective Diocesses;
enjoining them to Preach against the Sins of the Day, and Place wherein they
live, and take care they go before their Flocks in an holy and exemplary way of
Living.

And for the more effectual suppressing of all Immorality and Profaneness; and
curbing the Exorbitances of this Age; I need not surely number up the
particular Acts, and Laws, that have been made by the late Parliament, against
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Profane Swearing and Cursing, and the notorious
Profanation of the Holy Sabbath.

And though it has been an old saying, that few Nations have better Laws, and
worse executed then we have; yet for the retrieving the honor of the English
Nation; for averting God's Anger, preventing of Impending Judgments, and for
the Reviveing of Religion, and the power of Godliness, which has been so long
dead and so greatly traduced among us; there are not a few at this day, of all
Ranks and Qualities of Men, throughout the Nation; that are willing to help
forward this Blessed Work of a Reformation. And through the blessing of God,
upon the endeavors of some holy Lots of this Age; who have been vexed with the
filthy Conversation of the Wicked; there has been a considerable check, and
stop put to the Impetuous torrent of Impiety and Profaneness; where before it
used to overflow the Banks.

Surely then it highly concerns us all, in our Respective places and
Capacities, to purge out the old Leaven of Sin and Wickedness; and to seek the
Reformation both of our selves and others! And to bless God there are any
amongst us, who are free and forward, to draw forth the Sword of Justice, and
smite therewith, all Impudent and Impenitent Sinners, who have hitherto made a
mock at Sin, and have put on a whores forehead in committing of it. I say,
there are not a few Justices of the Peace amongst us; who (to their Honor be
it spoken) have openly declared their willingness, to Execute the Laws made
against Profaneness, and Debauchery: as was lately heard in their charge, at
the Privy and Quarter Sessions of the Peace, where they publicly Professed,
they would (upon due Information) proceed to punish all Offenders, according to
the nature of the Offense committed by them; whether it be Drunkenness,
Whoredom, Profane Swearing and Cursing, or the Profanation of the holy
Sabbath.

And are there any here that have the face to say, Ministers are obliged to
Preach against Sin and Vice, and Magistrates obliged to punish it: and yet they
themselves may sit still, and do nothing in it but be idle spectators in this
hard and difficult undertaking? I will but ask such Persons this single
question. Are you under the Sacred Vows of the Christian Religion, and have you
Sworn to be faithful to the Kingdom and Interest of Jesus Christ, Manfully to
fight under his Banner, who is the Captain and Leader of our Salvation; and ^et
think your selves not concerned in a Work of Reformation? O Egregious folly and
madness!

Though this Introduction be already too ^^ng, yet I must solicit your Patience
a ^ttle longer, before I come to consider the ^ext: For I cannot omit Informing
some ^^d Reminding others, that at the opening (...) these Itinerant Lectures,
or Monthly Exereises; it was by a Reverend Brother very well, and warmly proved
a Duty, upon all Persons, not only Magistrates and Ministers, but also others,
in their places; to help forward this glorious enterprise of a Blessed
Reformation. I must make so far bold with that Sermon, as from it to tell you,
that the Execution of Justice stands upon these two Bottoms. First, It depends
upon proving the matter of Fact, or the giving due Information before a Lawful
Magistrate. Secondly, In Executing the Penalty of the Law upon the Offender, so
informed against. So that in order to the suppressing of Sin and Wickedness, it
is primarily necessary, the Person before whom the Sin be committed take care
to inform the Magistrate of it; and then secondarily, the Magistrate proceed to
punish it. And if either the Informer, or the Magistrate, be remiss in their
Respective Capacities, Justice is obstructed, the Efficacy of the Law is
Nulled, Sin goes unpunished, and the holy God more and more Provoked. Men cry
out, against the Non-Execution of Justice, and complain of the illness of their
Magistrates; whereas (indeed and in truth) the great fault is amongst private
persons: Justice lies obstructed here, when they connive at Sinners, and
neglect to give Information of the Sins committed before them, and in their
presence.

Now after this long Preface, wherein I have spent but too much time; I shall
bring in the Text under this Conclusion, which was the Subject chiefly insisted
upon; the first of these Lectures, (viz.) That it is the duty of all Persons in
their Respective Places and Capacities, to help forward a Work of Reformation.
This being a duty then so fully proved upon all Persons; I have since thought
with my self, what is first to be done in this needful Work, and which is the
best way, to forward this so Necessary and Important a Duty; or what course we
should take to promote the Work of Reformation: And thereupon made choice of
this Text.

Thou Hypocrite first cast the Beam out of ^hine own Eye, and then shall thou
see clear^y to cast out the Mote out of they Brothers Eye.

This Chapter is part of that excellent Sermon Christ Preached on the Mount;
but I must not take time to give you the Analisis of it; nor would I be tedious
in clearing the Coherence of these words, with what goes before them. And
therefor that I may briefly prepare my way to the Text, there are two things
in the beginning of this Chapter to be noted by ^s.

1. We have our dearest Lord, flatly Prohibiting, and sharply Reproving, all
rash and Precipitous judging of others, verse the ^ st. Judge not, etc.

2. We have him enforceing this his Prohibition and Reproof, by several Reasons
and Arguments.

1. By our Rash censuring and Condemning others; we render our selves obnoxious
to the Just censure and Judgment of the great God, verse the 1 st. Judge not
that ye be not Judged.

2. We should not thus rashly Judge and censure others; because we are sure to
be paid in our own coin, verse the 2d. For with what Judgment ye Judge, ye
shall be Judged; and with what Measure ye meet, it shall be Measured to you
again.

3. We should avoid this Sin of an unwary and uncharitable Judging of others
(...) because we may possibly, be guilty of some greater fault and crime our
selves, verse the 3d. And why beholdest thou the Mote that is in thy Brothers
Eye, but considerest not the Beam that is in thine own Eye? The Word in the
(...)
Orriginal signifies something more then a bare beholding and seeing of
another fault: For it imports a nice and curious prying into the faults and
failings of other Persons; it signifies a curious and critical Eye, in
inspecting other Men's Actions, with an intent and purpose to Reprove them.

4. This is such a thing as renders us very unfit and improper Persons to
Reform others, verse the 4th. Or how will thou say to thy Brother, let me pull
out the Mote out of thine Eye; and behold a Beam is in ^hine own Eye?

5. This rash and uncharitable Judging of others, with an aptness to spy
faults in them, does carry the Face of great Insince^ity and Hypocrisy in it.
Verse the 5th. Thou Hipocrite first cast the Beam out of thine ^wn eye, and
then shall thou see clearly, to cast ^ut the more, out of thy Brothers eye.

No surer note and Mark of Hypocrisy; ^hen a forwardness to Judge and condemn
others, for that which a man is Guilty of himself.

There are two things in the Text to be ^poken to, which may be comprehended
(...) these two Propositions

1. Propo. That is a Christian Frater^^l part and duty to cast the Mote out of
^^r Brothers eye.

2. Propo. That we may more Regularly ^omfortably and Effectually perform this
^hristian Brotherly Office; we must first of (...) cast the Beams out of our
own eyes.

I shall say something to the First of these ^ropositious; tho I do not intend
to insist ^uch upon it because I shall rather take it for ^anted, then make my
Business to prove (...). ^^y work is to direct, rather then to excite ^
Persuade, to Reformation. First cast the ^^am out of thine own eye; and then
shall ^ou see clearly to cast the Mote out of thy ^rothers eye.

And do I need to tell you who is mea^^ here by Brother in the Text? For though
the word Brother, has various Acceptation^ in Holy Scripture, yet we need not
mu^^ Scruple the use of the word in this plac^^ The word is sometimes put and
used properly, for a natural Brother; which is eith^^ an half Brother, both by
one Father, b^^ not by a Mother as Isaac and Ishmael; or (...) full Brother,
both by Father and Mother, (...) Joseph and Benjamin, Cain and Abell, Es^^ and
Jacob. And sometimes it is put and u^ed Improperly; for a Kinsman, companion^
or Neighbor, a Friend, and an acquaintan^^^ The word is put for all these in
holy Scripture, and if you please, you may take it in a^^ these Respects;
because unto all of these, w^ are in duty Bound and Obliged to do all the good
we can; though by many Expositours, the word Brother in the Text, is interpreted
(...) our Neighbor. Yet if our Brother in an^ of these Respects I have Named;
That is if either our Natural Brother, or any of ou^ Relations, Neighbors,
Friends or Acquaintance have a Mote in their eye, it is a Christian Brotherly
part to cast it out.

And may it be thought Necessary to she^ you what is meant by a Mote or Beam in
t^^ eye, and what is meant by casting of the^ out. By motes, we may understand
the ou^ward and external Acts of Sin, which w^ should Labor to cast out of
our Brother^^ life. And by Beams in our own; we ma^^ ^^nderstand, either Sins
that are in themselves ^^reat, or else the same Sins, which our Bro^^her
commits, that are Beams in us, by be^^olding them in our Brother, but not in
our ^^elves. This is a Beam (a Monstrous Sin) ^^ be cast out of all of us, when
we can Spy ^^aults in others but none in our Selves.

So that the Sum and Sense of the pro^^ofition is this. It is a Christian
Brotherly ^^art and duty, to reclaim and reform our ^^rother, to prevent his
Sining, and to ^^cover him out of a wicked and Impi^^s course of life; if
fallen into it. If ^^r Brother be overtaken with the Sin of ^^runkenness,
Whoredom, profane Swear^^g and cursing, or the Profanation of the ^^ly
Sabbath, or any other such like Sins and ^^ces; it is a Brotherly part and Duty
to ^^k out those motes out of our Brothers eye, ^^ith a Soft and mild Tongue,
by a Gentle ^^d Christian reproof; tenderly admonish^^g our Brother, that he
would Sin no more ^^st a worse thing come unto him. And oh! ^^hat this were
more in Practice amongst ^^, that Christians would endeavor more ^^d more, to
cast such Motes, out of each o^^ers eyes, and thus lick them with an holy ^^d
Heavenly Tongue, out of a just and due ^^spect to the Glory of God; and the
eter^^l Happiness of each other.

Surely it cannot be lamented enough, ^^at this Duty of Brotherly admonition
and ^^ristian Reproof; is so little practiced by, ^^d amongst Christians. Were
there more true real Christion Love amongst us; we shoul^^ Strive more by this
means, to cast the Mote^^ out of each others eyes. I Will not say, ho^^ often we
are thus to endeavor the Purging and cleansing our Brothers eyes, from th^^
Motes of Sin that are in, and the Scurfe o^^ Profaneness that Grows upon them.
But i^^ we Find there is no hope of licking our Bre^^ theren whole, if all our
Gentle and mild at^^ tempts to reform them, Prove ineffectiual ^^ if it be an
old Sore and distemper unde^^ which our Brother Labors: we are the^^ to make
use of another remedy; and try i^^ this running Plague and Issue can be Stopped
b^^ the Execution of Justice. We are then ou^^ of a Brotherly Christian
respect, to represent such Persons unto the Magistrates ^^^ Offenders; who are
a terror unto evil do^^ ers, and who are said in Scripture, Rom 13. 3. 4^
not ^^ bear the Sword in vain, but to be the Minister^^ of God, and Revengers
to Execute wrath upon them that do evil.

We read that some Devils were not ca^^ out, but with great difficulty. So we
ma^^ expect that the cure of our Sining Brethre^^ or a work of Reformation,
upon those wh^^ have been long accustomed unto Sin; wi^^ not be effected and
wrought with a litt^^ ado. There is now a remedy in the Law^^ for all Impudent
and Impenitent Tran^^ gressours, and were it but duly apply'^^ there are great
hopes of a good Opperatio^^ We have known and Heard of some, wh^^ have Spent
their substance upon Phisicians, for the cureing of a diseased and infirm Body:
and yet after all, they have carried their Distempers to their Graves. But were
we so kind and Charitable to our Brethern, that Labor under Spiritual
Maladies, and have the sad Symtoms of eternal Death upon them; as to put them
to the expenses and Charge, of paying so much (as the Law directs) for every
profane Oath and curse, so much for being Drunk, and so much for the
profanation of the holy Sabbath; it might have an Happy Tendency, not only to
avert the heavy Judgments of God, that at this day threaten our Land, but also
toward the everlasting Salvation of their Precious and Immortal Souls,

I know very well, that such Indications of our Christian Love, are no ways
Pleasing unto Flesh and Blood; and they will be something Strange at the First;
because wickedness and Impiety has gone so long, with an open Brazen Face. The
power and Practice of Religion and Godliness has lien long out of doors; and
we have been greatly pleased with the Speculative part only. The great noise
for these many Years, in this part of the Christian world, has been about the
Lighter matters of the Law, Mint, Anniss, and Cummin; Meats and Drinks, wherein
the Kingdom of God does not consist. The great talk and Zeal has been about
things less Necessary, and more abscure and doubtful; men doting about
Questions, and Strifes of words, whereof comes envy, Strife, Railings and evil
Surmiseings. This is that, with which we have been but too much taken up, for a
long time.

Now I say, that though the Pressing upon People a life and practice, Suitable to
their Christian profession, will be some thing unpleasing at the first: Yet we
must not gratify, and Humor Insincere people, in their Soft and delicate self
chosen Religion: should we thus do, we should not be faithful to the Souls of
our Brethren; whose grand Interest and Necessary concernment, is to live in the
Power and Practice of Godliness and Religion. This is absolutely necessary to
be Taught and Pressed with all Authority; it matters not, that the Carnal and
Sensual Person does not Relish it: For we are herein to Imitate careful and
Prudent Physicians, who when they come to their Patients, do not ask them what
they Love best, and then Prescribe what is most pleasing to their Pallats, though
most hurtful; but Informeing themselves well of the Case of the diseased, they
Prescribe and prepare what they judge to be most Proper for them, though it be no
whit Grateful, or acceptable to them.

Now there are three Special Benefits, that arise from this Christian
Charitable reprehension and admonition, which may be as so many Arguments, to
enforce upon us the Practices of this Duty.

1 By this means, our Offending and Sinning Brethern may be reformed. And
indeed this is the Primary end of Christian reproof; even the reformation and
amendment of our Brother, and how Blessed a work this is; * Let him know that
he Jam. 5, 20.
that converteth the Sinner from the error of his ways, shall save a Soul from
Death, and shall hide a Multitude of Sins.

2 By this Christian reprehension and admonition, others may be brought to take
warning, Smite a Scorner and the simple will beware; Prove. 19. 25.
and reprove one that has understanding, and he will understand Knowledge.
Alterius Perditio sit tua cautio. When we behold other men Ship-wrackt, this
may make us look well to our own Tackling. O how useful Profitable may the
reproving of one Sinner be to many others? This may have a Happy tendency to
the promoting a work of Reformation in others.

3 He who lives in the Practice of this Christian Duty of Brotherly
Reprehension and Admonition; shall be Sure to deliver his own Soul, and procure
a Blessing upon himself. But to them that rebuke the wicked Prove, 24, 24, 25,
shall be delight; and a good Blessing shall com^ upon them. Read also Levit.
19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine Heart; but shall in any wise
reprove him, and not suffer Sin to be upon him. Not to reprove our Brother when
he Sins? and not to Warn him when Guilty of Sinful Practices, is an Argument
of our hating our Brother. Yea if we Suffer our Brother to Sin, who upon
Christian Reprehension, or Information to some Lawful Magistrate, might be
amended; we shall bear his Sin for him. Qui Emendare Potest, et negligit,
Participem Se facit; says one. He that can reform another, and does not,
makes himself partake^ of his Sin. And thus I have done with the First
Proposition in the Text; it is the Second I intend to Speak more fully to.

2 Proposition. That for our more Regular, ^ omfortable and Successful
performing this Christian Brotherly Office, of casting the Mo^e out of our
Brothers eye, we should First take care, to cast the Beam out of thine own eye,
and then shall thou See clearly, to cast the mote out of thy Brothers eye.) One
that would reform another, whether he be Magistrate, or a Minister, or a
private Person should First take care to Reform himself. This is the thing that
every one who pronotes the work of Reformation in others, should be especially
careful of. Reformers should be examples of all purity, Chastity, ^eekness,
Temperance and Heavenly mind^dness; and then may they with comfort, ^et upon
the Practice of this Christian Bro^herly Duty of Reforming others.

Not, but that we may all know very well, what a thankless Office, the Office
of a Re^ormer is; or one that Promotes the Re^ormation of Sinners. There are
but too ^any Scorners, who hate to be reformed, and make a Mock of Sin. And
though all be ^ot thus wicked; yet it is rare to meet with ^ Person, who thinks
not hardly of those who do admonish him. This was the frame and Temper of
Spirit the Sodomites were of, ^hen but Gently reproved by holy Lot; ^my
Brethern do not so wickedly. Yet for this ^hey thought hardly of him. Gen, 19.
7,
What, will ^is Fellow be a judge, that came but the other ^ay to Sojourne?
Ver: 9. of the Same ^hapter. So we Read, that the Prophet does ^ut find Fault
with Amaziah, and presently ^e Kings eyes are Blinded, 2 Chr^n. 25, 16.
And his heart ^ardened, and he Answers the Prophet, who ^ade you of the Kings
Council? He looked ^n the Prophet a Meddling Person, as a bu^e body in other
men's Matters; as one that had a mind to Pry into State affairs. So when the
Blind man did but find fault Joh. 9. 34.
with the Pharisees, for their persecuteing of Christ, how do they take it at
his Hands. Art thou altogether conceived and Born in Sin, and will thou teach
us? They quickly looked upon his Blindness and Birth, and concluded he was a
greater Sinner then other men, and therefore could not think, he should reform
them. If we would take upon us the Office of reforming others, we should take
care that we be of unblameable Lives our selves. This is our first work; we
must begin at home, and Sweep clean before our own doors, before we find fault
with our Neigbour. We should first get the Beams out of our own eyes, before we
attempt to cast the Motes out of our Brothers eyes. Let the Phisician first
cure himself; and then he will have more Patients, and may, with greater
Encouragement begin to Practice.

But here I come to speak to three things, Is It. I shall show you, who are to
reform^ themselves. 2d. I shall show you, of what the^ should reform
themselves. 3d. why they should first reform themselves before they set upon
this work of reforming others.

I I shall show you who are to Reform them selves. And in the general; all are
to reform^ and livean holy, Examplary life and conversation. All persons are to
Set about this great and needful work, both high and low, Rich and poor, Male
and Female, bond and Free; Persons of all Ranks, degrees and Qualities
whatsoever; from him that Sits upon the Throne; to the Hewers of Wood, and
drawers of Water. There is not one that can plead an Immunity, and exemption,
from this so Necessary and Important a Duty; None that can truly say, I Am left
to my own Choice, whether I will Reform or no but all are to Set upon this work
of self Reformation. Particularly.

I This is the work of all Magistrates; of all who Handle the Sword of Justice.
They especially are to reform. This is the Duty of great men, and men in place
and Power. It Is not the Duty and part of the Poorer and Meaner Sort of People
only; but a work for the more Rich and Honorable, and such whose place and
Office is to Punish others that Offend.

Not the poor only, that are to reform of their Intemperance, uncleanness,
Profane Cursing and Swearing, and the profanation of the holy Sabbath, but
the Brother of high degree is to Engage himself in it. These are the Persons
that should make sure of a self Reformation: For the greater the persons, the
greater are their Sins. And the gross Immoralityes of many Magistrates are no
Small cause of that great Inundation of Impiety and Profaneness, that has
overspread the Face of this Kingdom; and there is cold hopes of Settling this
Blessed work of Reformation in any good Successful method; till such time as
Magistrates, who have the Sword of Justice, are either reformed, or removed.
With what face and courage can a profane Magistrate execute the Laws, or the
Penalties of the Laws, against profaneness. Rom, 2, 1,
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that Judge: for
wherein thou Judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou that Judge,
do the same things. Read also, verse the 21, 22, 23. of the same Chap. Thou
therefore that Teach another; Teach thou not thy self, Thou who say a
man should not commit adultery, do thou commit Adultery. Magistrates whose
Office is to Punish others for their Violations of the Law; should look to
observe the Law themselves. They should be of holy unblameable Lives and
conversations.

2 This self Reformation is the work of all Ministers. They of all Persons,
should look after this work, and approve their works to the Lord. Thus the
Apostle Exhorts 1 Timothy, 4, 13,
Timothy, Till I come, give attendance to Reading, Exhortation and Doctrine.
and verse the 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine; continue in
them; For in so doing, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.
Aarons bells Hung at his Feet, What an uncomely thing it is, for a Profane
Minister to Preach against Profaneness. A Minister given to Swearing, Preach
against it; or a Minister given to Intemperance, Preach against it? Turpe est
Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. How harsh and unpleasing is it, to hear
Vice correcting Sin? Clodius accusat Moechos. The Sins of a Minister are very
Dangerous, how fine soever his Preaching be, for his Practice will go further
then his Preaching; and they who Forget his Sermon, will remember his Example.
If a Minister be but a little leavened, it is much if most of his Auditory be
not Sowred thereby. If the Nurse be Sick, the Child that Sucks the Breast, is
in Danger to Suck the disease from her. O how much does it concern Ministers to
lead holy and Heavenly Lives! Romans 2. 21.
Thou who Preachest a man should not Steal; do thou Steal? do thou commit
Adultery? Art thou covetous and contentious? Art thou unclean and Intemperate?
And Preachest against all these things? Ministers should Especially be of
inoffensive Lives, because it is their work and Office, to Preach this up to
others. They should as much as possible be free from all Sin; because they
Preach against all Sin, and are to reprove with an holy boldness every Sin, be
it in who it will, Poor or Rich, Small or great. It is said of Tacitues that he
took the same Liberty to write the Emperous lives that they took in leading
them. Thus should the Ministers do in reproving of Sinners. But how can a
Minister do thus, unless he be unblameable himself? The Sharpest Sermons of a
wicked Profane Minister, against Gross Sins and Immoralities, are but like a
Smooth, File; or a Saw whose Teeth are broken; or a Knife that has lost it is
edge.

3 This self Reformation is the work of all private Persons; of all who would
draw the Motes out of their Brothers eyes. They should begin her^ First, and
reform themselves. The conversations of all men, even of private Persons, as
well as Magistrates, and Ministers, should correspond and comport with that
holy profession which they make. What have we to do with any base and sordid
Practice; who lie under the Sacred vows of the Christian Religion? I know
indeed it is a most Lamentable thing, to see men call themselves Sons of the
Church, by a Subscrption to her Articles, assume to themselves the Title of
Orthodox; and yet be the greatest Blemishes of it; and forfeit that worthy
appellation, by holding the Truth in unrighteousness, Liveing as if the
commandments had no Relation to the Creed; or as if by the Belief of what is
true, they could Satisfy for what is Evil. Pudet haec opprobria Nobis etc. We
may Blush at this so great wickedness. It was a charge long ago laid upon
Christianity; That it was better known in the Leaves of Books, then in the
lives of Christians; and hence it is, that many are hardened in their
wickedness. It is the purity of Christians lives, that is the best attractive
to winn others to the Love of Religion. This is the Gold that should overlay
the Temple of Christ's Church: and would make others in Love with i'ts Beauty.
This was one Happy means for the incredible increase of converts, in the
Primitive times; even the holy and examplary Lives of Christians. But converts
came in Slower when those who professed Religion, began to cool in their Zeal,
and Slacken in the Strictness of their Lives. Thus you see all are to Set upon
this work of self reformation; not only Magistrates and Ministers, but also
private Persons, all who take upon them the Office of reformers.

2 I come now to Show you, of what we all must reform ouy selves. And that I
may not be tedious in Numbering particulars, I Will only say in the General; we
are to Reform of all Sins. We are to abandon every evil way; we must not only
take care to avoid those Sins, whereof we accuse and condemn our Brother, but
we should free our selves from Sin in every kind. Though we be no Swearers, no
Drunkards, or Whoremasters, or prophaners of the Sabbath; though we be free from
those Sins, which bring us under the lash of the Law; yet we may be very unfit
to reform others. There may be Beams in our own eyes, that should First be cast
out, before we attempt the Reformation of our Brethern.

There are indeed a Sort of Persons, who if they do not live in Whoredom, and
Gross Intemperance; open Profaneness, and Brutish sensuality, think all is
well with them, and they cry out with the Pharisee, that they are not as other
men are; Extortioners, unjust, Adulterers: whereas they may be free from these
more Gross Practices, and yet need to be reformed, as well as others. O! be not
deceived, you are not Possibly so and so Vicious in your outward conversation;
but if there be within of the Heart, malice, hatred, envy, uncharitableness,
self exalting, Inordinate affections to the world, Covetousness etc. These are
enough to discourage a man from his Duty of reforming others; and may
deservedly bring him under the denomination of a wicked Person, that needs to
be reformed. You will grant the Devils are bad-enough; it is because of their
Pride, envy etc. For the Gross Sins of the Flesh, they are not liable to them.
Sirs! do we see one living a Brutish Sensual life, wallowing in his filthy
lusts, laying the reins upon the Neck of his Impetuous corruptions; such a one
is to be reformed? I, but would you Set about this work comfortably, and
ef^ectually; you must not only free your selves from the Sins of which you
would reform your Brother, but also from all Sins in every kind? If you be
worldly, proud, Haughty, and be under the Power of earthly affections, you
should reform your selves, and cast those Beams out of your own eyes First,
before you attempt to cast the Motes out of your Brother's eyes.

3 I Now come to show you why, and upon what account we should thus endeavourto
reform our Selves, before we begin to reform others.

REASONS,

1 Unless we have (in some good degree) a clear conscience, and be of an
unblameable life; we cannot find fault with our Brother, and begin to reform
him; but we Sin against our Office whether he be a Magistrate that is to Punish
offenders, or a Minister that Preaches against Sin, or a private Person that
reproves for Sin, or gives Information to the Magistrate against such a Sin;
unless he be something clear in his own Conscience he cannot discharge this
Dnty toward his Brother but he Sins against his Office, and that because the
Office of a reformer Binds him to be holy, and of an unblameable life; what the
Apostle faith of Gospel Bishops; may be said of all that take upon them the
Office of Reformers, They should themselves be Blameless. 1 Timothy 3. 2.
If a man would Reform another of Swearing, he himself should be one that Fears
an Oath; or if he would reform another of Drunkenness, he himself should be
very Temperate; if of uncleanness, he himself should be very Chaste. If a man
would Reform another of being contentious, and Quarrelsome, he himself should
be meek and Peaceable. If a man would Reform another of being carnal; he,
(viz.) The Reformer Gal. 6 4
should be Spiritual. If any man be overtaken with a fault, ye that are
Spiritual, restore such a one. The Reformer, the Restorer must be Spiritual, it
is no going to cast the Motes out of our Brothers eye, while we have Beams in
our own.

2 Unless we be of inculpable lives, and have Consciences (in some good degree)
void of offense; we cannot reform our Brother, so mildly and so Softly, but we
shall awaken our own Consiences and put them upon the same Office of accusing
and Condemning us. What Stings and Gripes of Conscience does a man that is
wicked (and ^onscious to himself of his own wickedness) ^eet with, even when he
is about to Re^rm others from their Sins? surely he cannot but think and think
again, upon the A^ostles words. Romans 2. 1.
Therefore thou art in excusa^le O man, whosoever thou art that Judge; ^or
wherein thou Judge another thou condem^est thy self; for thou that Judge,
do the ^ame things. One who takes upon him the Office of a Reformer should
himself, be a Conscientious Liver, otherwise he does but make way for his own
Conscience to Sting and gnaw him. Nay, it is hard for a wick^d man to put any
Face upon a work of re^ormation. We may see this verified in the Scribes and
Pharisees, in their accuseing a Woman taken in adultery. And they when they
heard it; being convicted by their own Consciences; went out, one by one,
beginning at the eldest, even unto the Last. They were something Severe with
this Woman, till Christ bid them look unto themselves; and were for Stoneing
her, or putting her to some cruel Death, till Christ directed them how to Stone
her? he that is without Sin among you, Let him First cast a Stone at her. When
they heard this, then their own Consciences began to Rouse up and awaken,
whereupon they had none of them, the Face or Courage, to take up a Stone to
Throw at this Woman. Therefore it concerns us all to set upon this work o^ self
Reformation; in the First place, to cast the Beams out of our own eyes First,
before we attempt to cast the Mo^es out of our Brothers eyes.

3 Except we be of an holy unblameable Life, the reproof we give to others,
will but be retorted upon our selves, and cast as dung in our own Faces. One
that is not of a Serious, sober, conscientious life, can Scarce find fault with
his Offending Brother, but it is a Thousand to one, he hears of his own
Miscarriages; and if his weak Brother have a hole in his Coat, at the time he
is Reprooved, he will rent it out. A man cannot go about to reform his
Brother, but he will Instantly bring in the eyes of all others upon himself.
All men's eyes are upon a reformer; and they look Strictly and very observingly
upon such a Person; and if any thing in the world be amiss in such a man; they
will be sure to mark it, and make more ado of that then if it had been some
greater fault in another Person. And how common a thing is it to see the
reproof given retorted and cast in the teeth of him that gives it. What, do you
reprove me of Sin? who is a greater Sinner then your self? Do you tell me of
my Swearing, Intemperance, uncleaneness and the like, Who more addicted to such
Sins then your self? Pray begin at Home, Reform your self. Some men's repoofes
do Recoil upon themselves. And indeed every one desires, if must be Smitten,
that it may be by the Hand of the Righteous. Psalm. 141. 5.
Let the Righteous sinite me, it shall be a Kindness; and let him reprove me,
it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head. The good advice of
a wicked man, is Spoiled by the Stinking breath of him that gives it.

4 Unless we be something clear in our Consciences, and be of holy unblameable
Lives; our Reforming others from their Sins, will but be looked upon as a piece
of Prevarication, and Hipocrsie with Almighty God. This you have Especially
noted in the Text, thou Hipocrite First cast out the Beam out of thine own eye,
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the Mote out of thy Brothers eye.
Without this all our repooses and admonitions, all our Complaints and
Informations, in order to Reform our Brother, will be looked upon, as a piece
of Mockery. And indeed, what can be a greater piece of mockery then this, to
cry out of Sin in others, and commit it our selves? Sirs will you cry out, and
Complain of your Brothers faults, and never look upon your own! what is this
but Hypocrisy? thou Hipocrite First cast out the Beam out of thine own eye.
When a man goes to find fault with another, before he has Reformed himself,
this is Hypocrisy, for when a man Reformes another, he takes upon him a form
of one that is zealous against Sin, and an Enemy to all Sinful Practices; Now
what is this but Hypocrisy? And indeed this is the way of the Hipocrite, to
fault others for what he himself is Guilty of.

5 To Reform another before we have Reformed our selves, is that which carries
self Condemnation a long with it. Rom, 2, 1.
Thou Condemnest thy self; for thou that judge does the same things. To
condemn another for Sin, when we are Sinners onr selves; is to Condemn our
selves at the same time. We expose our selves to the just Judgment of the great
God, who sees all our works and Actions. And what an odd and absurd thing is
it, to find fault with others, for what we do our selves. How ill does the
word of reproof Sound in the Mouth of a wicked Person. To Steal and yet forbid
Stealing; to Swear our selves, and yet forbid Swearing; To be Covetous,
contentious, and yet cry out against these Sins in others; What is this but to
draw down Judgments upon our selves? Therefore that we may discharge this our
Christian Office and Duty to our Brother, casting the Motes out of his eyes, we
should First take care to cast the Beams out of our own. This is the way and
course we should take, in Promoting a work of Reformation And indeed we cannot
expect to be very successful in any of our endeavors to reform others, till
such time as we have done thus much for our selves.

I Now come to the Improvement and Application of this Point; and that First by
way of Inference, should we Reform our selves before we begin to Reform our
Brother? Then

1 This may let all of us see wherein we have mist. For how often have
Magistrates, Ministers and private Persons gone Irregularly about this work.
Let the Magistrate first Reform himself, and then he may better see how to
execute Justice upon Offenders; Let the Minister first Reform himself, and
then he may better see how to Preach this up to others; Let a private Christian
first reform himself, and then he will see better how to reform his Brother;
Let us cast the Beams out of our own eyes first, and then we shall see more
clearly to cast the Motes out of our Brother's eyes. How have we all been
guilty of this Hysteron Proteron, of putting the first thing in the Second
place. Have we not begun at the wrong end of our work, and inverted the order
of our duties, True! it is a duty to Reform our Brother; but the duty of self
reformation, should take the First place. They are both Duties; but in the
order; of Nature, the one should preceed the other; we should First cast the
Beams out of our own eyes, before we cast the Motes out of our Brother's eyes.
And indeed I cannot but think, one great cause and reason, why Magistrates have
been no more a terror unto evil doers; and Ministers no more successful in
their work, is because both have been too Remiss in their reformeing
themselves. They have not been those holy examples unto others, as their Office
and place required. So that all our Sermons against impiety and Profaneness;
through our own Personal Miscarriages, have been but like arrows shot out of a
weak bow, that comes not with force Sufficient to prick the Heart of the Proud
Sinner. Ministers may complain of the ill Success of their Labors, when they
take no care to Practice what they Preach to others. In vain do they think to
reform their People, till such times as they first reform themselves.

Should we first Reform our selves before we reform our Brother? Then

2 This brings to all our minds what is our work to day or where we are to
begin the work of Reformation. We should begin in the First place with our
Selves. Whoever would Promote a Reformation work; must begin here. Let every
man Sweep his own door and the Streets will be clean. So would every man Purge
and cleanse his own Heart, this work of Reformation would go on in every
place. A general Reformation has it is Rise and beginning in Particular. There
must be a Personal Reformation before it come to a Family. City, Country, or
National Reformation.

This is the work of every particular Person. So that every one of us may say
Particularly, this is my work, my care; we are to begin with our selves, and
not suffer any unmortified lust to abide in us, every eye that Offends, every
hand that Sins, every Lust that provokes, is to be parted with; though never so
dear unto us: we must begin with our selves, and then in our Families, our
Children and Servants, and endeavor the Reformation of all that are under our
care and Charge. This is the way to promote this Blessed work of Reformation,
here we are to begin, we should take this course, and observe this rule, and
Labor with all care and Conscience, to be unblameable in our selves and
Conversations. And O that both you and I might begin here this day with our
selves, with our own Hearts, and lives, and cast the Beams out of our own eyes
And to excite you to this work of self Reformation, to press upon you the power
of Godliness, and the practice of Religion; I would recommend unto you these
following Considerations.

1 Consider it is in vain to think the knowledge and Belief of the Christian
Religion, will avail us any thing without the Practice of it. Jam, 1 26, 27.
If any man among you seem to be Religious, and Bridleth not his Tongue, but
deceives his own Heart, that man's Religion is vain; pure Religion and
undefiled, before God and the Father, is this; to visit the Fatherless and the
Widows, in their Affiction; and to keep himself unspotted from the world. 1 Timothy 6, 3,
If a man consent not to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, he is
proud, knowing nothing.

There must be a decorum kept between our Principles and our Practice. Our eyes
should direct our Feet, and we are called upon in Scripture to act as becomes
Saints. Ephe, 5, 3.
As becomes the Gospel of Christ. Romans 16. 2.
As becomes those who profess Godliness. There is a Phil, 1, 27,
(...) Or comely Behavior, which if a Christian does not observe, he betrays
his high calling unto Scorn and and contempt, to look high and to live Low; O
how rediculous appears it unto all men. It is not a forgetful Hearer but a
doer of the word, This man shall be Blessed in his deed. It is the doing
Practical Christian that shall Stand, when the empty Boaster of his Faith
shall fall. His Religion is vain, which brings not Letters Testimonial from an
holy Life. A Protestant Faith without a Protestant Practice is worth little.
There are but too many, who think it is enough they are no Papists, nor
Atheists, no Heretics, or Erroneouss Persons, but they Embrace, the Honest,
old Orthodox truths, they Believe as well as any, and they are resolved to live
and die in this Faith. They are Protestant in Doctrine, and Recusants in lives,
not Considering that Hell is full, not only of Pagans and Heathens, but also
of ungodly Christians. Alas the Kingdom of God reaches further then the
understanding only; The Devils in Hell have admirable Knowledge, they both
know and Believe, for they are said to Believe and tremble. And do we not read
of Mat. 7. 22, 23.
Many, that shall be brought in at that day, saying, Lord, Lord, have we not
Prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name, done
many wonderful works? And yet Christ will say unto them, depart from ye
workers of Iniquity; I know you not. If we renounce heresy and error in
Doctrine, why not profaneness in our lives.

2 Consider that the Moral Gentiles and Heathens, will one day, rise up to
condemn Immoral, and Profane Christians. Mat. 12. 41, 42,
The men of Nineveh shall rise up in Judgment with this Generation, and shall
Condemn it; because they repented at the Preaching of Jonas, and behold a
Greater here. The Queen of the South shall rise up in Judgment with this
Generation, and shall Condemn it; For She came from the utermost Parts of the
Earth, to hear the Wisdom of Solomon; and behold a Greater then Solomon is
here. Mat. 11, 21.
Woe unto thee Chorazin, Woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works, which
were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sydon, they would have repented
long ago, in Sackcloth and Ashes. What fear and horror has been upon Heathens
Spirits, though they have had no Scripture to accuse them? Hystories declare,
that upon unjust, unclean and Injurious Actions, they have not been able to
rest or Sleep. What sayings have they to recommeud a virtuous life. Hic murus
abeneus esto, nil conscire Sibi, nulla Pallescereculpa. To be conscious to a
Man's self of ^o evil, nor unjust action; is that only thing that may make a Man
happy. That ^razen Wall that will beat back all darts. ^h that Christians
should do so many things to raise up Conscience like a Lion and Bear to roar
within them, when even ^eathens have been afraid to make their Conscience
their Enemy and Adversary! How Moderate and Temperate were ma^y of them in
their Meats and Drinks? ^eneca, Plutarch, Plato, and some of the ^toicks, speak
very high things about that which is virtuous. Now what a Reproach ^s it to the
glorious Gospel, which we re^eive, to be outdone by them? What, ^^all not the
Word of God and the Gos^el of Christ teach us more Holiness then ^he Turks
Alcoran? Shall not the Ten Commandments of God oblige us to more ^urity then
the twelve Tables of the ^omans? O what a sad dishonor is this ^o the Truth
and Knowledge of God! That among his People, should be found ^oers of those
things which natural light ^ould abhor.

Surely we can never grieve enough, to ^ee how many have no better a Title to
^eligion, then what they can challenge ^y virtue of an over eager opposition,
against a dissenting party; and have no Arguments to evidence their
Christianity except their Zeal in controverted point may pass for a
demonstration of it; a^ counting satirical invectives and bitter r^flections,
to be instances of a Religion zeal for God; which are but demonstrations of
their own folly and weakness doteing upon those Images and Representations,
which their abused fancies have suggested to them!

3 Consider that the degeneracy of the human nature appears in nothing more
then in Men's proseliting themselves t^ brutish sensuality, wherein indeed the
Beasts do ovtvie them; as being furnishe^ with greater exquisitness of sense
for the entertainment of sensual Pleasures. An^ yet how many are there, who
Sacrifice their Reason to their Appetite; and sink them selves into a lower
species; placing the Beast above the Man; in pursuing no other things then what
may gratisie their carnal Lusts? It is an opinion no les^ false in it self,
then pernicious in its effects, to all true Godliness; That Piet^ divorcoth its
Proselytes from all pleasan^ enjoyments, and espouseth them to a melancholy and
sorrowful spirit: wherea^ the time, when all true comfort bea^ date, is the
Commencement of an hol^ and Religious Life. And could we perswad^ Men to make
an experiment of what we say; they would soon conclude, that the gleanings of
Divine Joy are infinitely to be preferred, before the Vintage of Worldly
Pleasures.

4. Consider that the constant Practice of Piety, and the conscientious
performing of Religious Duties, would soon overcome all those trifling
prejudices, wherewith the minds of many are preposessed. There are no such
insuperable difficulties in the leading of an holy Life, as some do suggest to
themselves. The Lion in this way is not so fierce as he is painted. There are
no such dreadful apparitions in an holy Life, as a carnal deluded imagination
represents. The difficulties that occur in a Christian course, are not half so
many and great as they are made to be, by persons prejudiced against it. Men
first draw the Picture of an Holy Life, with a sad and lowering countenance, and
then they take occasion to dislike it. An Holy and Religious Life, looks upon
us, with a serene and pleasant Aspect, and puts us upon no task, which our
diligent endeavors shall not overcome, and conquer. The Duties of a Christian,
in a little time, become easy and feasible. Every Virtue is more facile and
easy then its opposite Vice.

5. Consider the Promise and assurance of a Reward, infinitely above the labor
of any services that God requires, tends to the facilitateing of this necessary
Work. That exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, which is promised to all that
are truly Godly, is a powerful inducement to engage unto the practice of an
Holy Religious Life. This is sufficient to make the roughest places smooth, and
level the highest Mountains into a plain, and make the Torrid Zone temperate.
In the view of this Glory, all difficulties are swallowed up; and the edge of
all dangers turned. The encouragement to duty does infinitely preponderate the
difficulty of it. What tho we should a little prick our singers, to get the
Rose of Sharon; and smite our foot on the stony Mountain, to gather the Lilly
of the Valleys? What tho we toil all night, when we are certain of such a rich
draught in the Morning.

6. Consider that the assistance of the Spirit, so frequently promised in Holy
Scripture, makes the power of Godliness, and the practice of Religion facile
and easy. God does not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax,
nor despise the day of small things; insomuch that tho many Duties of Religion
be ac^ounted difficult; yet those who give up themselves to the conscientious
perform^nce of them, have that assistance from an ^nseen hand, which
facilitates and sweetens their hardest labors.

7. Consider the severity and just displeasure of God, which you expose your
^elves unto, by your reiterated acts of Sin and Disobedience. The Apostle was
well acquainted with the force of this Argument, 2 Cor. 5. 11.
knowing the Terror of the Lord, we ^erswade Men. Let us then think, if we can
bear the indignation of the Lord, and ^tand before the power of his Anger. Can
we dwell with devouring fire, and lie ^own in everlasting burnings? etc.

8. Consider that there is an Intrinsique weakness writ upon all those serene,
and ^ransitory delights; which makes them unworthy the pursuit of those who are
truly wise. Those sublunary sinful Pleasures, like Flowers wither in our hands,
and perish in our embraceings. They salute our senses, and then bid an eternal
farewell. The Heavenly Herald, who knew very well how to blazen this Worlds
Coat of Arms, tells us it is made up of fading Flowers; when we come to gasp
these things, they are but wind, and to embrace them they are but a cloud. Thu^
you see, how much it does concern us to live in the diligent, and Conscientiou^
practice of Religious Duties; to set about this necessary work of self
Reformation and be of inoffensive and unblameabl^ Lives.

But methinks I here some one say What shall I do that I may Reform my self; or
what course shall I take that I may promote this necessary work of
self-reformation? And if there be any persuaded (by what I have said) to set
upon the Practice of this Duty: I would further encourage them by prescribing
the following Directions.

If we would reform ou^ selves, and a^ bandon these courses we have lien
wallow^ ing in. 1. We should engage in this wor^ with a full purpose, and
resolution to mak^ our way through the greatest difficulties and severities
that are in it. It must b^ granted that an Holy Religious Life is no^ easy unto
Flesh and Blood: And the way of sin is not relinguisht, without some Reluctance
at the first. The strong Man armed will not presently quit his House and
peaceably surrender to an Holy course the Right hand cannot be cut off, and the
Right Eye plucked out, without some difficult The new Birth is not accomplish^^
without some throws, and the Devil ^ill rage, when disposessed. But to those
^ho put on resolution and courage, and ^solve to make their way over all Rubs
^d Remora's; it does at last become ^^sy and pleasant. It is only burdensome ^
those who are weak through sinful In^mities; and painful only to such who bour
under their own dull and idle Spi^^ts: if any therefore would set upon this
^ork, they must do it with courage. We ^ust put on Heroical Resolutions, and
^outly oppose the Impetuous desires of our ^nsitive powers.

2. If we would reform our selves, we ^ust then deny the first solicitations,
and ^esist the first motions of an Inordinate ^ppetite. We must depress them,
at the ^rst rising, and quench Lust when it be^ins to smoke, before it break
out into a ^ame: For then it will be unruly, and ^o hard to master, and keep
under; we ^all best silence the clamours and impor^nities of a Temptation, by
not listening ^o them; for the yielding to commit a in, leaves a greater
propension, and desire ^o sin again: we should therefore carefully ^heck the
first risings and Ebullitions of ^ur depraved and corrupted Natures.

3. Would we Reform our selves, and lead unblameable and inoffensive lives ^
Then we must show a more then ordinary severity, against the sins (that through
Constitution or Custom) we have the greatest inclination unto. It is not so
much as safe to argue with Temptations unto sin; but we should say to them, as
our Savior once said to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, for thou savourest
not the things that be of God.

4. If we would reform our selves; then we ought, as much as lies in our
power, to shun whatsoever may probably be an occasion of being tempted;
especially to such sins, as we are most inclined to. Are we prone to excess,
either in Meat, or Drink? Are we apt suddenly to take fire and to be enflamed
with Passions? Are we of a Lustful Temper, or the like? Then we should
carefully avoid, as much as we can, all such places, company and objects, as
may be incentives to those Appetites Thus in order to avoiding the Sin of
Uncleanness, the Wise Man advises, not to come near the house of the Whorish
Woman. And for the prevention of the Sin of Drunkenness; not so much as to look
on the Wine, when it is Red, and gives its Color in the Glass. It is in vain
to ^hink of turning to God from our Sins; if we do not turn from the occasion
of them. If we have not strength to turn from the occasion of Sin, which is the
less; ^how can we avoid the Sin it self, which is the greater? He that resolves
not to be burned in the fire, must not come too near the flame. He that will
not be enticed by the Adulterous Woman, must not come too near her dwelling If
we separate our selves first from the occasion of sinning, the Sin it self will
be more easily subdued. As the Husbandman first cuts away the under bushes, and
brambles; before he lays the Ax to the root of the Tree.

5. Would we Reform our selves? Then we should be sure to keep up, and retain
these holy purposes, and Resolutions of a Reformation in us; some Men purpose
to day to Reform, but are off it before to morrow. Their Holy Intentions and
Resolutions Hos. 6, 4.
are very short lived. There comes up a Worm that quickly consumes ^hese
Gourds; their purposes vanish without execution, and continue but for a Season
If we would Reform. our purposes and Resolutions should not be like Pil^rims
and Strangers, that lodge but for Night ^ but they should rather be like ^re
upon the Alter, that never goes out. Those purposes that are not constant and
Rooted, will die as soon as they begin to live.

6. Would we set upon this necessary work of Self-Reformation? Then let us go
forth in the Grace and Power of God, and not in our own strength and skill. If
we be not assisted with Power from above, our own courage, conduct and
strength, will be too little and defective* It is no thinking to conquer our
Lusts by our own wooden Sword, but we must fight with the sword of the Spirit
in this Holy war; we should then say to all our sins we intend to wage War
with, as David did to Goliab: I come unto thee in the Name of the Lord whom
thou have defied. I set upon mortifying these Sins, not by my own strength, but
in the power of Christ whose glory and honor my Sins would take away.

7. Would we reform our selves? Th^^ let us labor to be affected as much as
possible, with the love of God, and of Divi^^ things. If the love of God be
perfect^^ in us, we shall find the work of Self-Reformation, as pleasant, and
easy, as (...) ^an wish. Love will maker^s ^hink nathing precious, that God
will have us pa^^ with: it will make us with (...) ch^arfulness, part with a
right eye a right hand any thing that is offensive. This will cause us to
believe no suffering harsh, that. God shall inflict; and no duty difficult that
he shall command. This is the Love of 1 John, 5. 3.
God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. If
you love me, is a familiar and powerful form of speech with us, to persuade one
another to the doing, or forbearing any thing. And what humane love and
affection does work among Men; that, and much more will be effected by Divine
love. It is love alone that is ashamed to mention difficulty. Nay, love
welcomes difficulties, and pleases it self in hard instances of obedience,
because, by them, it ^hews more of its real fervency.

8 Would you reform your selves, and be helped forward in this so Necessary a
Duty? Then be often looking to those lively Patterns and examples Set before
you in holy Scripture. These are of Singular use, and advantage to be Seriously
considered ^y you, for they plainly Show the work not to be impossible, and
Impracticable. We have the example of some, who lived ^n Profane places, have
been compassed with all wickedness; and yet they have taken care in great
measure, to keep themselves unspotted, from the Sins of the time and place
wherein they lived; you read of a Lot in Sodom; of a Moses, who chose rarher to
suffer Affiction, with the people of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin,
which are but for a season; esteeming the reproaches of Christ grater riches
then the Treasures of Egypt; and thereupon refused to be called the Son of
Phaorohs daughter. Nicodemus a Pharisee, and a Heb. 11, 24. 25 26,
great man in the Pharisees Council, yet this is a man, that feared God, and
was drawn aside by their examples, Could they do thus, and cannot we, by the
same Divine Power and help, do the like? They were men Subject to like Passions
with us; they were Flesh and Blood as we are, and Naturally weak and infirm as
our selves, and God is the same in Power, and Goodness that he ever was. Here
we have examples added unto rules, and paterns unto precepts. How many precepts
have we in Scripture, to engage us to Chasity, Purity, Temperance, and so
briety, meekness and patience, Faith and Charity, to an holy resolvedness of
owning God, and adhereing to his ways, and unweariedness in doing good, and to
every other Grace and Virtue.

And have we not (besides others) the examples of Joseph for Chastity; Moses
for Meekness, Job for Patience, Abraham for Faith, Doroas and Cornelius out St.
Paul for an unwearied zeal, and Timothy for Temper^nce, and Sobriety. And above
all, that example of all examples, for every thing that is holy, pure and
Lovely, our Lord Jesus Christ. Now whence is it that these holy examples are
Recorded for us; but that we should make it our Serious care and holy ambition
to transcribe their virtues, to write after these fair Copies they have set us,
and be followers of those blessed Souls, who are now in a state of bliss and
Glory.

9 That you may go forward with this Blessed work of reformation; ever when you
begin to be weary, or faint in your minds, then look unto Jesus Christ, as
Crucified for you. Heb. 12. 2. 3.
Looking unto Jesus, the Author, and Finisher of our Faith, who (for the Joy
that was Set before him) endured the Cross, despised the Shame, and is now Set
down at the right hand of God in Glory. For consider him that endured such
Contradiction of Sinners, lest ye be weary, and faint in your minds. Who knows
but our looking up to a Crucified Christ may have the same influence upon us,
That a look of Christ had upon Peter, when he had thrice denied his Master? The
Apostle then called to mind, what Jesus said unto him, and he went out and wept
Bitterly. When we Consider how Christ was wounded for our Transgressions, and
Bruised for our Iniquities; when we consider that we have Crucified the Lord of
Life and Glory that our Sins Nailed him to the Cross, wonnded him the Heart,
and put him to all the Grief and Pains he underwent how can we be dearly
Affected to these vile Bodies, or Solicitous for the Pleasing of our Appetites;
and studious about those things which may be grateful to the Flesh? And as to
the impure Pleasures of this world, no Consideration can be more Potent, to
extinguish our desires to them; then the Consideration of Christ upon the Cross

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three-Crowns in
Cheapside, near MercersChapel.
FOrty nine Sermons on the whole Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Colossians,
by Monsieur Daille, Minister of the Reformed Church in Paris, Folio. Sermons
and Discourses on several Divine Subjects; by the late Reverend and Learned
David Clarkson, B. D. and sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall, Cambridge, Folio. A
Body of Practical Divinity consisting of above One hundred seventy six Sermons
on the Catechism of the Assembly of Divisions at Westminster. By Tho. Watson,
formerly Minister of Stephen Walbrook. Folio. The Support of the Faithful in
(...) of (...); or ^ Sermon Preach^d in the Wilderness, to the poor Protestants
in France. By M. Baousson, an Eminent Minister, who was broke upon the Wheel at
Montpelier, Novem. 6. School. Quarto. The Fountain of Life opened, or a Display
of Christ in his Essential and Mediatorial Glory; containing Forty two Sermons
on various Texts. Wherein the Impetration of our Redemption by Jesus Christ is
orderly unfolded, as it was begun, carried on, and finished by his Covenant
Tranfaction, mysterious Incarnation, blessed Offices, deep Abasements and
Supereminent Advancement. A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine
Original, excellent and immortal Nature of the Soul are opened, its Love and
impoved. The Existence, Operations and States of separated Souls both in Heaven
and Hell immediately after Death, asserted, discussed, and variously applied.
Diverse knotty and difficult Questions about departed Souls both Philosophical
and Theological, stated and determined. Reformation of Manners Promoted; by a
Perfect Abstract of all the Canon and Statute-Laws in Force and Use (from the
Reformation to this Time) Concerning the Observation of the Lord's Day,
commonly called Sunday; with the like Abstract of the Act made the last
Sessions of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the more Effectual Suppressing of
Blasphemy and Profaneness.

