THE CASE OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, STATED: OR, The Equity, Vtility, and
Necessity, of a Submission to the present GOVERNMENT; Cleared out of Monuments
both Sacred and Civil, against all the Scruples and Pretenses of the opposite
Parties; viz. Royallists, Scots, Presbyterians, Levellers.

Wherein is discovered severally, the vanity of their Designs, together with
the Improbability of their Success, and Inconveniences which must follow,
(should either of them take effect) to the extreme prejudice of the Nation.

TWO PARTS.

With a Discourse of the Excellency of a FREE STATE, above a KINGLY-GOVERNMENT.

The second Edition, with Additions, collected out of Salmasius his Defensio
Regia, and M. Hobbs de Corpore Politico.

By Marchamont Nedham, Gent.

Salustius. Incredebile est memoratu, quantum adepta liberate, in brevi Romana
civitas creverit.

Fr. Guicciard. Histor. lib. 10. Liberae Civitates DEO summopere placent; co
quod in iis, magis quam in alio genere Rerumpub. commune Bonum conservetur, Jus
suum cuique aequaliter distibuatur, Civium animi vehementius ad Virtutem and
Laudem accendantur, RELIGIO colatur, Sacra peragantur.

London, Printed for E. Blackmore, and R. Lowndes. 1650.

To the READER.
PErhaps thou art of an Opinion contrary to what is here written: I confess,
that for a Time I my Self was so too, till some Causes made me to reflect with
an impartial eye upon the Affairs of this new Government.

Hereupon, beginning seriously to search into the nature of it, with the many
Pleas and Objections made against it; And supposing those learned men who wrote
before these Times, were most likely to speak truth, as being un-interested in
our Affairs, and un-concerned in the Controversy, I took a view of their
Reasons and Judgments; and from thence made so many Collections, that putting
them in order, and comparing all together, they soon made a Conquest over me
and my Opinion.

I know the high Talkers, the lighter and censorious part of People, will shoot
many a bitter Arrow to wound my Reputation, and charge me with Levity and
Inconstancy, because I am not obstinate like themselves, against Conscience,
Right Reason, Necessity, the Custom of all Nations, and the Peace of our own.
But this sort of men I reckon inter Bruta animantia; among whom to do well is
to hear ill; who usually speak amiss of those things that they do not, or will
not understand. From them therefore I appeal to the Great Tribunal, where it
is known I have in this dealt faithfully; and to the more sober Intelligences,
here below, with whom these Papers must needs find the more free entertainment,
because free from partiality, and the least tincture of Faction.

And that they may be the fitter to walk abroad in the world, I have divided
them into Two Parts, and accommodated Them with a Method, suitable to those two
Parties whereof the world consists; viz. the Conscientious man, and the
Worldling. The former will approve nothing but what is just and equitable; and
therefore I have labored to satisfy him (as I have done my Self) touching the
Justice of Submission: The latter will embrace any thing, so it make for his
Profit; and therefore I have shown him the Inconveniences and Dangers, that
will follow his opposition of a settlement. Now, though the other should
continue obstinate in their erroneous pretenses; yet of this latter sort, I
dare promise my Self an abundance of Proselytes, the greater part of the world
being led more by Appetites of Convenience and Commodity, than the Dictates of
Conscience: And it is a more current way of persuasion, by telling men what
will be profitable and convenient for them to do, than what they ought to do.

But Prithee read, and then do what thou list: I have only one word more; and
that is to our modern Pharisee, the Conscientious Pretender, and principal
Disturber of the public Peace. If he will not be convinced by so clear
Testimonies, but raise more dust about our ears, to amaze the People, it must
be concluded; That all this noise of Church-Reformation, Conscience, and
Covenant, is a mere malicious Design to drive on a Faction, for the casting
down of our present Governers, that they may set up Themselves in the Seat of
Authority. -- Farewell, and be wise. Being convinced of the Truth of these
Things, I conceive my Self obliged, to show others the same way of satisfaction.

The Contents of the first Part.
CHAP. I.
THat Governments have their Revolutions, and fatal Periods.
CHAP. II.
That the Power of the Sword is, and ever has been, the Foundation of all
Titles to Government.
CHAP. III.
That Non-submission to Government justly deprives men of the benefit of its
Protection.
CHAP. IV.
That a Government erected by a Prevailing Part of the People, is as valid de
Iure, as if it had the ratifying Consent of the whole.
CHAP. V.
That the Oath of Allegiance, and Covenant, are no justifiable Grounds to raise
a new War, in, or against the Commonwealth of England. The Intent of the First
Part is, to prove the Necessity and Equity: Of the Second, to manifest the
Utility and Benefit of a Submission.
The Case of the COMMONWEALTH, STATED.
Part I.
CHAP. I.
That Governments have their Revolutions and fatal Periods.
THe best of Preachers, Ecclesiastes cap. 1.
SOLOMON, taking the World for his Text, found no other Application could be
made of it then this, That All under the Sun is vanity; and this he proves (as
did the wisest of Philosophers) by the perpetual rotation of all things in a
circle, from Continua est rebus generatio and corruption. Arist. de genesis and
corr. lib. 12. cap 10.
Generation to Corruption. Inest rebus cunctis quidam velut orbis, 3 Annal.
etc. There is (says Tacitus) as it were a wheeling of all things, Certis eunt
cuncta Temporibus. Nasci debent, crescere, and extingui. Senec. consol. ad Hell.
and a Revolution of Manners as well as Times. Nor are the huge Bodies of
Commonwealths exempted from the same Fate with Plants, Brutes, Men, and other
petty Individuals; and this by a certain destiny, or decree of nature, who in
all her Productions, makes the second moment of their perfection, the first
toward their dissolution. -- Numina rebus Crescendi posucre modum. Lucan.
This was observed to our purpose in the present case, by the Master of Roman
Eloquence, Idipsum a Platone, Cic. de divin. Num^ri fatales, vel periodi. Plat.
Philosophiaque didici, naturales esse conversiones Rerumpub. ut eae tum a
Principibus teneantur, tum a populo, tum a singulis. I have learned (says he)
out of Plato's Philosophy, that Commonweals are altered by Turns into the
several Forms of Government, Aristocracy, Democracy, and Monarchy. Nor can
any reason be given For it, besides those rapid Hurricanoes of fatal
necessity, which blow upon our Affairs from all points of the Compass, --
Sicut variae nascentibus --
Contingunt pueris animae, Prudent. lib. post. in Sym.
sic urbibus affert
Hora, diesque, suum, cum primum maenia surgunt,
Aut genium, aut fatum. --
-- Certum est and inevitabile fatum.
Quod -- ratio vincere nulla potest; Ovid.
quodque
-- Omnia certo fine gubernat.
-- Sic omnia verti
Cernimus, Ovid. Metam.
atque, alias assumere pondera gentes;
Concidere has. --


The English of all is, That as men are borne into the world with souls; De
Fato vide Lips. polit. l. 1. c. 4. and l. 6. c. 2. and in uotis ad lib. 1.
polit. cap. 4.
so Cities have a Fate or Genius given them, at the first founding of their
Walls; and this Fate is so sure and inevitable, that no reason or wit of man
can conquer it, but it directs all things to the appointed end. Now that you
may understand what Fate is, Minucius Felix calls it, Quod de unoquoque,
nostrum fatus est Deus, ^lapmar. 124.
that which God has spoken or determined concerning every man. Vide Richter
ax^om. pol. a page 1. usque ad 50.
It is (says Seneca) that Providence which pulls down one Kingdom or
Government, and sets up another; nor is this done leisurely, and by degrees,
but it hurles the powers of the world on a sudden, Sense 2. Not. quae^.
from the highest pinnacle of glory, to nothing. Hence it is, says the same
Author, (almost in the language of Scripture) that a Kingdom is translated from
one family to another, Epist. 92.
the Causes whereof are locked up in the Cabinet of the Deity, though Holy Writ
has left the main cause of such Changes upon record, viz. the wickedness and
injustice of Rulers. It is the weight of Sin, which causes those fatal
Circumvolutions in the vast frame of the world; all things being as changeable
as the Moon, and in a perpetual Flux, and Reflux, like the Tides that follow
her Motion; so that what has been is that which shall be, and there is no new
thing under the Sun.

It was the weight of Sin which sunk the old world in a Deluge, and has been
the occasion (no doubt) of all succeeding alterations, Besold. 309.
by permission of Divine Providence, who leaves the men of the world to the
fulfilling of their lusts, that he may accomplish his own Fatalities or Degrees
by an execution of vengeance. Hence it comes to pass, that the best
established and mightiest Governments of the world have been but temporary;
witness the four great Monarchies, the Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian,
and the Roman; and the time or age of a Government has by some been reputed
Peucerus de divinat. genesis fol. m. 30. and Gregor. Richter, ax^om polit. 1 and
Occonom. 5. ^cum^multis aliis. Herod.
for the most part 500. years. As for example, the Assyrian Empire lasted 520.
years, till it was ruined by the Medos and Persians.

The Athenian, Isocr. Symm.
from their first King Cecrops to Codrus the last, continued 490. years, and
then it was translated to a populan Government.

The Lacedemonian Commonwealth flourished much about the same number of
years, Idem?
from the time of their Founder Ly^urgus, to the days of Alexander the Great,
under whom it fell.

The Roman was governed by Consuls about 500. Numerus quingentesimus est
fatalis. Ultra quingentos annos non durant Regna, ut este^dunt historiae omnium
Temporum. Peucer. in lect. Chron.
years too, from the expulsion of their Kings, till it was reduced again into a
Monarchy by Augustus.

After Augustus it stood in this Form, about 500. years more, under Emperors,
till Valentinian, the last Emperor of the West, was slain at Rome, at which
time the Empire was rent in pieces. The Vandals, under the conduct of
Gensericus, possessed Themselves first of France, then of Spain, at length of
Africa, and in Italy of Rome it self. Ann. 70. and 1569.
The Scots and English shook off the imperial yoke in Britain. The Burgundians
and Franks seized part of France. Illud est abantiquissima memoria proditum;
Civitates omnes Anno quingentesimo converti, aut everti. Bodin. l. 4. de Repub.
c. 2.
The Goths another part of it, and part of Italy, the Country of Aquitain,
with the seats of the ancient Cantabrians and Celliberians in Spain, whilst the
Lombards laid hold on Gallia Cisalpina. By which means, the Emperors had no
certain power in the West, after the time of Valentinian; so that relinquishing
Rome, the old Imperial City, they erected an Exarchate at Ravenna, which was
soon destroyed likewise by the Lombards.

Now, East periodus fatalis regnorum and Rerumpublicarum, plerumque congruat,
ad Annos quingentos; tamen multa regna circa medium b^sas^Periodi defecerunt:
Strigel. u Reg. 1^. Peucer. de Devin. p. 20.
though 500. years be reputed the usual period of Governments; yet some have
not atteined above half the number: As the Persian Monarchy, which from Cyrus
the first to Darius the last, flourished no longer then about 230. years.

The Grecian having completed 250. after many struglings and bloody bickerings
betwixt the Competitors, was divided into the several Kindomes of Macedonia,
Syria, Pontus and Egypt.

The Hoc est, anno ab V. C. 244.
Kingly government of the Romans was abolished, near the one hundred and
fiftieth year after its Institution.

The Lombards domineered in Italy 240. years, till they were subdued by
Charlemain, and their last King Desiderius banished with his wife and children.

But this is not all; I can tell you of many Royal Families and famous
Governments, V. P. Greg.
that have had their fatal periods in a very short revolution of time, Lib.
21. de repub. cap. 5. and Greg.
not exceeding 100. years. Richt. in Axiom. pol.
As, in the one hundredth year after the Empire of Augustus, the Roman
government came into the hands of Princes that were strangers, Annus 100. est
fatalis principibus Familiis.
as Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, by nation Spaniards.

In the year of our Lord, Matthias Christianus in specul. 171. vide Mich. in
Axio. Occ. 23.
280. Artaxerxes erected a new Kingdom of the Persians out of the ruins of the
Parthians.

In the year 300. the Roman Empire was committed to the tutelage of Princes
Christian, as Constantius and Constantine the Great.

Anno Domini 400. The Empire has been usually translated from Family to
Family, at the end of the one hundredth year.
diverse new Kingdoms were raised out of the Ashes of the Empire, inflamed by
Divisions, viz. in Italy, France, Spain, Africa, Asla and England.

Anno 500. the Western part of the Roman Empire was extinct, until the time of
Charlemain, and swallowed up at Constantinople in the Grecian. Ibid.


I could reckon up many more of these short-lived Governments. Centesimas
periodos fatales esse regnis, and regiis Stirpibus, ostendunt historiarum
monumenta.
But this may suffice to show, that (sooner or later) they all have their
fatal Periods; their Crowns are laid in the dust, and their Glories buried in
the Grave of Oblivion. No wonder then, if our English Monarchy, having arrived
to almost 600. years since the Conquest, should now (according to the common
Fate of all other Governments) resign up her Interest to some other Power,
Peu. in orat. de miraculosa (...).
Family, or Form. The late Commotions and Contests betwixt King and Parliament,
were as so many sharp Fits and feverish distempers (which by a kind of
Antiperistasis are ever most violent in old age) upon the approaching Instants
of dissolution. The Corruption of the old Form has proved the generation of
another, which is already settled in a way visible and most substantial before
all the world; so that it is not to be doubted but (in despite of Irriti sun^
conatus humani. Vide Richter. 684.
opposition) it will have a reason of continuance (as others have had)
according to the proportion of time allotted by Divine Providence. And this I
am the more apt to believe, in regard of its confirmation by a continued Series
of many signal Victories and Successes, to the envy of all opposers, and
amazement of the world: Besides, I suppose it cannot be exemplified in History,
that ever Kings were suddenly readmitted, after they had been once expelled
out of a Nation. If any one case of this kind may be produced, there are a
hundred to the contrary: So that if it be considered likewise, how the Worm
works in many parts of Europe, to cast off the Regal yoke (especially in
France, Scotland, Ireland, and other places) it must needs be as much madness
to strive against the stream for the upholding of a power cast down by the
Almighty, as it were for the old Sons of Earth to heap up Mountains against
heaven. And when all is done, Nulla vis bumana vel virtus, incruisse unquam
potuit, ut quod praescripsit fatalis ordo, non fiat.
we shall find it but labor in vain; that we have but fortified Castles in the
air against fatal Necessity, to maintain a phant'sie of pretended Loyalty;
the consequence whereof will be, that at length in cool Blood we may have
leisure to consider, how foolishly we have hazarded our lives and fortunes, and
sacrificed the lives of others, Ammian. lib. 23.
with the common good and peace of the Nation, for the satisfying of an
opinionated humor.

CAP. II.
That the Power of the Sword is, and ever has been the Foundation of all
Titles to Government.
TO clear this, we need do no more but take a review of those Governments
mentioned in the former Chapter, in their Rise and Revolutions. The World,
after the Flood, in time grew more populous; and more exceeding vicious, being
inclined to rapine, ambition, etc. so that the Pater familiar way of Government
being insufficient to correct those grand enormities, there was need of some
one more potent then the rest, that might restrain them by force. Vide
Peterium supra Genesin.
Upon which Ground it was, that Nimrod, first of all men, complotted a new and
arbitrary way of Government, backing it with Power by a party of his own, that
those Crimes which could not be cured by Persuasion, might be cut off by
Compulsion; and that by a power seated in his own Sword and Will, he might
oppose the wilfulness of others: But he, afterward abusing this power, by
stretching his own will too far over other men's wills, to the prejudice of
their wel-being, and oppression of the Church, became the first Tyrant in the
world; Gen cap. 10.
and therefore was called a mighty hunter, as having used his power to no other
end, but to lay the Foundations of Idolatry, and Tyranny.

Thus you see the power of the Sword to be the original of the first Monarchy,
and indeed the first Political Form of Government that ever was; for the
maintenance whereof he fortified himself in the lofty Tower of Babel, the
beginning of the Babylonian or Assyrian Government, which last name it took
under Ninus, and from him continued in a Succession of 36. Kings, down to
Sardanapalus; who was overcome in Battle by a conspiracy of his Capta^ns; among
whom Arbaces the Governor of Media being chief, Vide Justinum, and alios.
reigned in his stead, and by his Sword translated the Title into his own
Family, from the Assyrians to the Medes; with whom it continued in a Succession
of 9. Princes, till the Sword made King Astyages give a Surrender to Cyrus the
Persian, the last of whose Successors, Darius, yielded it up upon the same
Terms to Alexander the Great, who erected the grand Monarchy of the Gr^cians.
Veluti, e specula quadam, libertati omnium insidiatus, dum contentiones
civitatum alit, auxilium inferioribus ferendo, victos pariter, victoresque
subire regiam scrvitutem coegit.
King Philip, the Father of this Alexander, was confined at first within the
narrow compass of Macedonia, too narrow for his ambition; and therefore by
fomenting quarrels betwixt the Thebans, Phocians, Lacedaemonians and Athenians,
he found means to undermine them one after another, and by his Sword made way
for a Title, through those petty Common-weals, to the Monarchy of Greece; which
being improved the same way by his Son to the Dominion of the whole World, was
lost again to the Romans by King Perseus, the last of the Macedonians; all
whose Glories, with those of his Predecessors, served in the end only to
aggravate his misfortunes, Just. l. 8.
and magnify the triumphs of a Roman Consul. But the Title to that of
Macedonia and the other Provinces had been lost from the Family of Alexander
above 150. years before, it being immediately upon his death bandied by the
great men of his Army, and his Mother, Wives, and Children slain by Cassander;
who, with Antigonus, Seleucus, and Ptolomie, having by Conquest rid their hands
of all other Competitors, shared the Empire between themselves, Cassander
reigning in Macedonia, Antigonus in Asia, Seleucus in Syria, and Ptolomie in
Egypt; all whose Successors successively resigned their Titles (as did Perseus
the last Successor of Cassander) to the Sword of the Romans.

If we look to the Original of the Romans, we find Romulus and his Successors,
founding a Kingdom upon the ruins of their Kindred, Friends and Neighbors.
Next, the Kingly Title gained by the Sword and Subtilty, was the same way
derived to diverse of the 7 Kings, and at length extinguished in Tarquin by the
Sword of the Senate; wherewith they drove, and kept him out of his Dominions,
and made a Title to those also of other Nations, so far, that in the end they
entitled themselves Lords of the whole Earth, and so continued, till Caesar
wresting the sword out of their hands, became Master both of it and them: Most
of the Successors of Caesar likewise made way by the sword to the Imperial
Chair; as Augustus by the ruin of Lepidus and Conquest of Anthony; Claudius,
Nero, and most of the rest, by policy, murder, and the Favor of the Soldiery.
At length the Sword divided the Empire into East and West, and in the same
manner likewise each of them suffered many titular subdivisions, till new
Titles were raised in the West, by the Sword of the Goths and Vandals; in the
East, by the Turks and Saracens.

If this be not obvious enough out of profane Histories, take a view of those
in Holy Writ, where you shall find the sword the only disposer, and dispenser
of Titles to Common-weals and Kingdoms. We find Jacob on his deathbed,
bequeathing one Portion to Joseph, above the rest of his brethren; and that was
a Parcel which he took out of the hand of the Amorite with his Sword, Genesis 48.
v. 22.
and with his Bow; unto which Parcel the Scripture mentions not any Title that
Jacob had, but by his Sword. And as for the Title which his posterity had unto
the Land of Canaan, though it were allotted them by divine promise and
dispensation; yet (as to the eye of the world) they were to lay claim and take
possession by the Power of the Sword, and so accordingly they received
commission to ratify their Title, by a Conquest of the Canaanites; after
which, Jure gentium, it became for ever unquestionable.

In the History of the Kings of Israel, we read, that most of their Titles have
been founded upon powerful usurpation: such was that of Jeroboam; who though
the Kingdom were designed to him by a Declaration from heaven in the mouth of
the Prophet, erred notwithstanding in his over-speedy invading the Sovereignty
by force; and that Act of his is branded with the black Character of Rebellion.
Yet being thus gotten into the Throne, God would not suffer him to be
disturbed, saying, 1 Kings 12. 24
the Thing was from him; that is, by his permission; And so he that was a
Traitor in rebellion, being once invested by a mere permissive Act of
Providence, came to have a positive Right, to the prejudice of him that was his
Sovereign, and to the exercise of Jurisdiction over those, that had been of
late his Fellow Subjects.

After Jeroboam reigned his Son Nadab, who was conquered and slain in Battle
at Gibbethon, 1 Kings 15. 27
by Baasha, who with his Sword settled the Crown upon his own head, which was
worn afterward by his Son Elab, till he likewise was slain, and the Crown by
force of Arms usurped by Zimri; Cap. 16.
from whom also it was snatched in the same manner by Omri; who died peaceably,
and left the Succession to his son Ahab, without the least scruple all this
while on the Peoples part, in point of submission and obedience to these
usurped Powers. Add to these Usurpations that of Nebuchadnezzar over the holy
City, which he took by force of Arms, and carried away many of the Jews, 2 Chronicles. ^. 36.
with their King Jehoiakim into Captivity to Babylon; an Action as full of
Injustice and Cruelty as most that we read of: yet Nebuchadnezzar being once in
possession by Conquest, his Title became right and good; as may appear by the
Report given concerning Zedekiah the Successor of Jehoiakim, of whom it is
said, Ver. 13.
that he rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar; which implies an investiture of right
in Nebuchadnezzar by the Sword, or else that Resistance of Zedekiah could not be
called Rebellion.

To come a little nearer, and give you a sight of this Truth in Modern
practices, it will be very convenient a little to examine the Rights and Titles
of present Princes to their several Principalities within Christendom; whom
if we trace up to their Originalls, we shall find* to have no other dependence
then upon the sword. What pretense had Ferdinand the Spaniard to seize upon the
Kingdom of Navarre, but only to satisfy the spleen of Pope Julius 2d. Vide
Anto.
and his own Ambition against the French? Nebrissensem de bello Navarriensi.
for which cause to make his way the easier, he set upon John Albret unawares,
and forced him with his Queen and Children quite out of his Dominions; which he
afterward held in possession, and brought the people under his Allegance.

In the same manner, Philip the second, with an Army under the Command of the
Duke of Alva, set upon Don Antonio King of Portugal, and after he had subdued
the Kingdom, laid claim to the Crown as his own by Right; which he and his
Successors held, till that now of late, in the Reign of Philip the fourth it
was recovered again by the Sword of Don John of Braganz^^. Fair Titles to the
Succession were pretended on both sides; but if either have the better this
way, it must be Don John, as being descended from Edward, a third Son,
whereas the Spaniard descends from Elizabeth, the youngest Daughter, of Emanuel
King of Portugal. Yet it seems possession has hitherto been held the best
Title, and the Portugalls having of late outed the Spaniard, made bold to stop
his mouth with this Answer: Vide Autorem Lusitaniae liberatae.
That his Predecessor Philip 2d. had no Right to the Crown, it being contrary
to their fundamental Laws, that any Foreiner should succeed in the Kingdom:
And that it was lawful for a Kingdom oppressed by Arms, by Arms again to
recover its ancient liberty: which is enough to show, that the Spaniard neither
had, nor has any Title, beside his Sword, to lay claim to the Kingdom of
Portugal.

That Arragon was fairly annexed to the Crown of Castile, by the marriage of
Ferdinand and Isabella, cannot be denied; yet it is notorious to all the world,
that the Spaniard has since this union, usurped much more in Arragon by Force,
then his Predecessors enjoyed before by Right, and dealt no otherwise with that
Kingdom, then if it were his by Conquest, exercising an absolute Tyranny
therein, as well as other his Dominions. To this end he abolished the ancient
and most excellent Constitution of that eminent Office, Covaruv. pr. Quae^t. 1.
called, the Justice of Arragon; whereto some one person was chosen by the Vote
of the People, who in most Cases had a Power to control the King. This was so
great an Eyesore to Philip the second, that (as Petrus Matthaeus says) he
numbered these among the most glorious of his Actions, That he had lessened the
power of the Arragonians, deprived them of their greatest Privileges, and
demolished that grand Office, called, the Justice, the Bulwark of their
Liberty: So that what Title the Spaniard now has to tyrannize in Arragon, is
founded only upon force and usurpation. If we turn our eyes likewise upon his
other Dominions, in America, and those here in Europe, as Sicily, Naples,
Milain, Flanders, etc. his Title stands in all upon the same Terms, viz. a
possession by the power of the sword.

And this is just as much Right as his Kinsman the Emperor had to lay claim to
the Kingdom of Bohemia, and afterward to seize upon the Palatinate; Ut pat^^
ex aurea Bulla C^roli IV. c. 17.
Bohemia being an Elective Kingdom that had power of themselves to choose whom
they pleased for King, and so made choice of the Prince Elector Frederick, whom
the Emperor made bold to drive out of that and his own Country by Force of
Arms, See Instrumentum Pacis.
because he accepted of the Election; And not only so, but after Frederick was
dead, prosecuted the war, Feuda Germanica, praecipue dignitatum illustrium,
ex provisione Legis fundamentalis, and consuctudine perpetuae observantia, ita
ad Liberos and Agnatos pertinent, ut nec crimine lasae Majestatis confiscari,
nec bollo justo, in praejudicium Liberorum amitti possi^t. Ut aiunt J. C.
Germani.
to the prejudice of his Heir, the present Pr. Elector, whom he has
constrained to quit his dignity of the first Electorship, and resign it, with
the best part of his Dominions, upon hard Terms, to the Duke of Bavaria; so
that what Title the Emperor has to Bohemia, and the Duke to the rest, is
derived rather from the Sword of Mars, than the Scepter of Jove by right of
Succession.

This Act of violence against the Prince Elector gave an Alarm to the other
Protestant Princes of Germany, to defend their Estates by Arms from the
Encroachments of the Emperor; and therefore to avoid the inconveniences of
emulation between themselves, they made choice of the Swede to be their Chief;
who, moved partly by the Common Interest of Religion, but especially for
several injuries done him by the Emperor, (as may be read in that King's
Manifesto) undertook the war, and with his Sword has carved out a Title to
many fair Countries and Privileges within the Empire. See Instrument. Pacis.


What Title have the Swisses, the Hollanders, Geneva, etc. to their Liberty,
Plenum Regnum est in Florentino Ducatu; quale plerumqne subsequitur Armis
oppressam Libertatem. Besold. in Synopsi. c. 4.
but the sword? On the other side, what Title have the Medices to domineer over
the free States of Florence, and Siena, to the utter ruin of their Liberties,
but only force? whereby Cosmus introducing an absolute Tyranny, under the name
of Duke made himself more than a King, and (in emulation of the Muscovite)
glorified his Successors with the Style of Great Dukes of Tuscany.

How the Pope's Temporal power (which was once so small) in Italy, came to be
thus considerable, is easily known, if we take an Account of the Actions of
Alexander the sixth, who, of all the Popes that ever were, Nic. Match. de
Principe. c. 11.
showed what a Pope was able to do with Money and Arms, and having a mind to
make his Son Caesar Borgia, a Prince in Italy, he taught him how to make use
of the French Forces to build himself a Fortune in Romania, upon the ruin of
the Barons of that Country. And though the Pope's intent thereby was not to
enlarge the Church-Dominions, but to make his Son great; yet after his Sons
death, it turned to the Churches advantage, the succeeding Pope seizing upon
all, as Heir of Borgia's Usurpations, founded upon blood and treachery. After
this Pope succeeded Julius, who finding the Church thus made great, the Barons
of ^ome quite extinct, and their Parties worn out by Alexanders persecutions,
found also the way open for heaping up moneys, never practiced before
Alexanders time; wherewith acquiring Forces, he endeavored to make himself
Master also of Bolonia, to extinguish the Venetians, and chase the French out
of Italy; in most of which Designs he gained happy success. And thus you see,
how his Holiness himself came by a Title to his Temporal possessions; yet as
among the Jews, none but the high Priest might enter the Sanctum Sanctorum, so
the Roman high Priest, that none might presume to enter upon his Territories,
has ever since gilded these magna latrocinia, these great Robberies, with the
fair Title of Saint Peter's Patrimony; so that having intailed it on himself
first by the sword of Peter, it has been the easier ever since by virtue of
the Keys, to lock the right Owners out of possession.

Out of Italy let us pass into France, and there we find Charles the seventh,
who, when his Title to the Crown was adjudged in Parliament less valid, than
that of the Queen of England, appealed to his Ad mucronem gladii sui
appellavit. Girard. l. 21. Pasquier. 5. c. 7.
sword, as the only Protector and Patron of Titles. Of this Truth the Realm of
France is a most sad example at this day, where the Tyranny of their Kings is
founded and preserved by force, not only upon the shoulders of the Peasant, but
on the destruction of their ancient Princes, and the majesty of Parliament;
which retains not so much as a shadow of their old Liberty. What is become of
the Dutchies of Normandy, Britany, Aquitaine, Burgundy, etc.? what Title had
the French Kings to those Countries, til. they worm'd and worried out the right
Owners by Force of Arms? What Claim had they to this absolute Domination over
Parliaments, but Tyrannical usurpation? yet Lewis the Jactitare so^ebat, sua
potissimum opera effectum fuisse, ut Regnum Gallicanum quasi ex Tutela, ad
plenam Pubertatem fuerit redactum. Besold. in Synops. c. 4.
eleventh gloried in the Action, Lehmann. 2. cap. 4.
as if the Fleurs de Lys never flourished so well, as when they were watered
with the blood and tears of the People. For, according to the ancient
Constitution, that Kingdom retained a mixture of Aristocratical power; so that
the then supreme Court of Parliament at Paris had a principal share in the
Government, and nothing was imposed on the People, but by the Consent of their
Deputies: But now, having been mined out of their Authority by the powerful
Encroachments of their Kings, and being overawed by armed Powers held
continually in pay for the purpose, their Authority is defunct, and their
common Interest in the Affairs of the Public translated into a private
Council d' Estat, which depends upon the mere will of the King: And so the
Parliament of Paris, which was once the Supreme Council, Senatus Parisiensis in
Judicum curiam transmutatus. Besold.
having surrendered its Title to the Sword of the King, serves now only for a
petty Court of Judicature, and a mere Mock-show of Majesty -- Thus we see the
French King's Title to what he holds at home; and if we look abroad, he has
but the same Right to what he got in Catalonia and Flanders: And yet we must
needs say, it is as good every jot as that of the Spaniard, See Malvezzi, in
the Events of the Spanish Monarchy.
whose best Plea is, that his Theeveries there have been of a longer
Prescription: And upon the same Terms, of late years, They have both lain at
Catch for the Duchy of Savoy, and several parcells of Germany.

Here likewise I might sift the Title of the Family of Oldenburgh (the stock of
the late King) to the Crown of Denmark, and of Denmark it self to the Duchy of
Holstein, but to bring this discourse to a Period, I shall draw nearer home,
and make it as clearly appear likewise; that the Power of the Sword ever has
been the Foundation of all Titles to Government in England, both before, and
since the Norman Conquest. First, the Sword of Caesar triumphed over the
Liberties of the poor Britains, Caesar in Comment.
and gave the Romans here a Title to their Dominion. Afterward, their Liberty
returning again, when the Roman Empire fell to pieces, a new Title was settled
by the Sword of our Progenitors the Saxons, See the English Chron.
who submitted for a Time, upon the same Terms also, to the Danes, till the
Saxons, impatient of the yoke, out-acted (by way of Precedent) the Parisian
Massacre, or Sicilian Vespers, and made use of their Knives, instead of their
Swords, to recover their own Title against the Danish Tyranny. Now, if in these
national revolutions of Government, I should examine those also of the Regal
Families, we cannot from any examples produce more pregnant Instances,
concerning the Transitions of Title from Family to Family, merely upon the
account of the Sword: But I wave those, and will take a view of our own Affairs
at a less remote distance, and see whether William the Conqueror translated
the Government, upon any better Terms into the hands of the Normans.

And upon examination it appears, he had no better Title to England, then the
rest before mentioned had at first to their several Countries, or than his
Predecessor Rollo had to Normandy it self. Histor. Norman.
For, about 120. years before, it happened that this Rollo issued in the head of
a barbarous Rout, out of Denmark and Norway; first, into the Dutchies of Frize
and Henault; afterward he seated himself by force in the possession of Rohan;
in a short time of all Normandy, and missed but a little of the Conquest of
Paris.

From him, this William was the sixth Duke of Normandy; who, though a Bastard,
legitimated his Title, by the success of several Battles, against six or
seven of his Competitors, more clear in Blood than himself; by which means
having secured his Claim at home, he became the more confident to tempt his
Fortune with a design upon England. As for any Right to the Crown, he had none,
save a frivolous Testamentary Title, pretending that it was bequeathed to him
by the last Will of his Kinsman, K. Edward the Confessor, upon which pretense
he betook himself to Arms, and with a Collection of Forces out of Normandy,
France, Flanders, and other Countries, landing in Sussex, he gave Battle at
Hastings, and established himself a Title by Conquest upon the destruction of
King Harold, and of the Norman. ille Spurius, Guil^^lmus. dictus, Anglicanum
Regnum vi occupavit; Legesque tulit, nullas accepit.
Laws and Liberties of the Nation, as may be seen in all our Chronicles.

After him, his Sons, the two succeding Kings, William Rufus, and Henry the
first, made good their succession by the Sword, against Robert, their elder
Brother, as did King Stephen a stranger against Maud the Empress, Besoldus in
Synopsi. l. 1. c. 4.
the right Heir of that Henry. Next to Stephen succeeded Henry the second, the
Son of Maud, who, as Heir of his Predecessors way of Usurpation, Quartered the
Arms of England with the Lordship of Ireland, by the Sword; as his Successor
Edward the first, by the same means, cemented the Principality of Wales to the
Kingdom of England, with the Blood of Leoline and his Brother David, the last
of the Welsh Princes. See the Chronicles.
Next, Edward the second was forced by Arms to surrender his Right to his
Son Edward the third, whose Grandchild Richard the second was in like manner
by force of Arms deprived by Henry of Lancaster, whose Son Henry the fifth
made good not only that Title, but craved out a new one with his Sword to the
Crown of France, in defiance of the Salick Constitution; and left it so
confirmed unto his Son Henry the sixth, that he was Crowned King of France at
Paris, and so continued, till (Fortune turning) his Title was Cancelled there
by the Sword of the French, as it was likewise in England by that of Edward the
fourth; whose Son Edward the fifth left the Crown in the bloody hands of
Richard the third, from whence it was wrested by Henry the seventh. This Henry
(from whom the late King derived his Claim) came in with an Army, and (as one
has well observed) by mere Power was made King in the Army, and by the Army;
so that in the very Field where he got the Victory, the Crown was set upon his
Head, and there he gave Knighthood to many of his Commanders. Upon this
Foundation of Military Power, he got himself afterward solemnly Crowned at
Westminster. And soon after, upon Authority thus gotten, he called a
Parliament, and in that Parliament was the Crown entailed upon him and his
Heirs. Thus both his Crown and his Parliament were founded upon Power: As for
any just Title, he could have none; for, he descended from a Bastard of John of
Gaunt, which (though legitimated for common Inheritances, yet) expressly was
excluded from Succession to the Crown. And for his Wives Title, that came in
after his Kingship, and his Parliament, which had settled the Crown before upon
him and his Heirs. And he was so far from exercising authority in her Right,
that her Name is not used in any Laws, as Queen Mary's was, both before and
after her Marriage with the Spanish King.

Now, having made it evident out of the Histories of all Times, our own, and
other Nations, that the Power of the Sword ever has been the Foundation of
Titles to Government, it is as clear likewise out of the same Histories, that
the People never presumed to spurn at those Powers, but (for public Peace
and quiet) paid a patient submission to them, under their various Revolutions.
But it were vain to raise more dust out of the Cobwebs of Antiquity in so
limpid a Case, confirmed by the Practices of all Nations: Look nearer our own
Times into the wars of Germany, and those betwixt the French and Spanish of
late Time in Catalonia and Flanders; one while you might have seen the same
Town uuder the Power of the Emperor, another while under the Swede; th^s year
under the French, the next under the Spaniard, and upon every new alteration,
without scruple, paying a new Allegiance and Submission, and never so much as
blamed for it by the Divines of their own, or any other Nation. Moreover, none
can deny, but that as Henry the seventh, and the rest before mentioned, came
into this Kingdom by mere Power, without Title of inheritance; so the whole
Body of this Nation (as one observes) swore Fealty and Allegiance to them, and
obeyed them whilst they ruled; yea, does yield subjection to those Laws until
this very day. And the learned in the Laws do continually plead, judge,
justify, and condemn, according to those Laws; So that herein the very voice
of the Nation, with one consent, seems to speak aloud: That those whose Title
is supposed unlawful, and founded merely upon Force, yet being possessed of
Authority, may lawfully be obeyed. Nor may they only, but they must, else by
the Judgment of Civilians, such as refuse may be punished as seditious and
Traiterous; Vide Grotium, de jure B^lli, l. 3. c. ^5. Bello ut alia acquiri
pessunt, ita and jue Imperantis, etc.
the Victors being ever allowed (Jure gentium) to use all means for securing
what they have gotten, and to exercise a right of Dominion over the Conquered
Party. Whosoever therefore shall refuse Submission to an established
Government, upon pretense of Conscience, in regard of former Allegiances. Oaths
and Covenants; or upon su^position that it is by the Sword unlawfully erected,
deserves none but the Character of peevish, and a man obstinate against the
Reason and Custom of the whole world. Let his pretense be what it will,
Resistance, in the eye of the Law of Nations, is Treason; and if he will needs
perish in the Flames of his own phren'tick Zeal, he can at the best be reckoned
but the Mad-mans Saint, and the Fool's Martyr. Nescio an Anticyram ratio illi
destinet omnem. Horat.



CHAP. III.
That Non-submission to Government justly deprives Men of the benefit of its
Protection.
IF at any time it seem good to the wise disposer of States and Kingdoms (who
puts down one, and sets up another) to permit the expulsion of such as were
formerly in possession, and admit others in their places, it cannot in reason
be expected, that those which refuse obedience to their Authority shall receive
the Benefit of Protection; and that for several considerations.

First, because Protection implies a Return of obedience and Friendship, from
the persons protected, to those that protect them; otherwise they put
themselves into the condition of Enemies, and by the Law of Nations, which
indulges a liberty unto all that are in power to provide for their own
security, they may be handled as Public Enemies, and Out-lawes; wherefore in
this Case, so little of protection is due to them, that they may be punished as
Traitors, by some shameful Execution. And it appears out of Grotius, De Iure
Belli. lib. 3. cap. 20.
in case of Non-submission, to new Lords after a Victory, the Throats of every
Re^user are wholly at their mercy; and all this, De Jure.

Secondly* there being a necessity of some Government at all times, for the
maintenance of Civil conversation, and to avoid Confusion, therefore such as
will not submit, because they cannot have such a Governor as themselves like,
are in some sense mere Anarchists, and destroy the two main ends of all Civil
Communion: 3 Polit. cap. 4. 1 Polit. c. 2. and l. 2. c. 4. and 6.
The first whereof Aristotle sets down to be Public Safety, in relation
whereunto each Member of the Commonwealth is concerned to have a care of the
whole: The second is Public Equity, for the Administration of Justice,
encouragement of Virtue, and punishment of Vice, without which it is impossible
to enjoy Peace or Happiness. Where this humor reigns, there those two can
never be secured, nor any political ^^taxi^, good Order, or Tranquillity
maintained, which is the very Soul of Government; forasmuch as (say the
Civilians) the essence of a Commonweal consists, A^ist. 1. Polit. cap. 5.
Bellarm de Laicis, c. 5.
Ratione Imperandi and parendi; in Imperii and Subjectionis recta ordinatione,
in a due course of Commanding and Obeying, Rule and Subjection: From whence
(say they) we may conclude. Molina. de Jure and Just. Tract. 2. did. 26.
Regere and Subjici; that Rule and Su^bjection are founded upon the Law both of
God and Nature, and they must needs be Transgressors against both, that upon
any pretense whatsoever shall refuse to obey those Powers that are set over
them, and open a Gap to Confusion, ipsa Tyrannide deteriorem, of far worse
consequence than any Tyrannical usurpation.

Thirdly, private and particular persons have no Right to question how those
came by their Power that are in Authority over Them; for, if that were once
admitted, there would be no end of disputes in the world touching Titles. It is
ground enough for the submission of particular Persons in things of political
equity, that those which have gotten the Power are irresistible, and able to
force it if they refuse: Judicium sibi privatus sumere non debet, sed
possessioenem sequi. lib. 1. c. 4.
For, as touching this Case (says the most excellent Grotius) Private persons
ought not to take upon them to meddle with these Controversies in point of
Title, but rather to follow them that are in possession. For, all Power is from
God; and, our Savior told Pilate, the Power that he had was given him from
above, though all the world knows that Pilate was but a Deputy Governor, and
(in a civil acceptance) received his Power from Caesar, who was an Usurper.
To this accords that of Bodinus 1. Respectu prima ^ausa ^muia Imperia legitima
esse concedo; sed si quaeras de causis intermediis, etc.
de repub. cap. 6. who says, that all Governments are lawful in respect of
the first Cause, viz. God; but on the othor side, if we regard secondary
Causes, all Governments have had their Beginning and Foundation upon Force and
Violence. Now, since all commanding Powers hold their Supremacy from God, and
that by the Law of Nations, They have a Right to exercise their Power over
those whom they hold in possession; Romans 13.
Therefore by the Law of God (which damnes resistance against those Powers) and
by the same Law of Nations, they which refuse submission to those Powers, (be
They just or unjust by way of Acquisition) may be justly deprived of their
Possessions and Protection.

To those Testimonies before Cited, Tract. de Majest cap. 1.
let me add one more, to conclude out of Bocerus: Contra Rempublicam
quamcunque, superiorem non rccognoscentem, si quis aliquid moliatur; is, ut
Criminis Majestatis reus puniatur: Non quidem ex l^ge Julia; sed Jure gentibus
communi, quod cujuslibet Imperantis tuctur Majestatem. If any man attempt ought
against any Commonwealth whatsoever, that acknowledges no Superior, he may be
punished as guilty of Treason: And this, by the Custom and Law of Nations,
which provides for the Authority and safety of all that are in Power. De
Regalibus, c. 3. number. 307.
Now (says the same Author) If any person will not acknowledge, nor submit to
those that rule the Commonwealth, it is to be presumed that he has some
design in hand to their Prejudice, and he may be punished accordingly; which
punishment (the Crime being Treason) amounts to loss of Life, as well as
Possession and Protection.

CHAP. IV.
That a Government erected by a prevailing part of the People is as valid de
Jure, us if it had the ratifying consent of the whole.
SInce after the miserable Confusions of a Civil War, there is in the end a
necessity of some Settlement, it cannot in Reason be imagined (when the
Controversy is decided by the Sword) that the Conquerours should, as to the
manner of settlement, submit to the will of the Conquered Party, though more in
number than Themselves; nor are they obliged to settle the Government again,
according to the former Laws and Constitutions, but may, in this case, use
such means as Necessitas summa reducitres ad merum Ius naturae.
nature instructs them in, and erect such a Form as they thewselves conceive
most convenient for their own Preservation. Grotius de Jure belli. l. 2 c. 6
Grotius inter Pr^legomena de Jure Belli:
To this truth we have the Testimony of the most Learned Grotius, which I will
set down at large. In bello Civili, scripta quidem Jura, id est civilia, non
valent; at valent non scripta, id est, quae natura dictat, aut gentium
consensus constituit. In a Civil war, (says he) written Laws, that is, the
established Laws of a Nation, are of no Force, but those only which are not
written, that is, which are agreeable to the dictates of Nature, or the Law and
custom of Nations. And then that only is Law (says he) which shall be declared
by the prevailing Party. Grotius ibid.
Jus dicitur esse id quod validiori placuit, ut intelligamus fine suo carere
Jus, nisi vires ministras habeat. That only which it pleases the stronger
Party to enact is said to be Law, since it cannot accomplish the outward end of
a Law, Nic. Match. de Principe, c. 6.
except it be attended by Force to constrain obedience. Hence came it (says
the Florentine Secretary.) that all the Prophets that were armed, prevailed;
but those that were unarmed were too weak. And therefore it behaves all
Legislators to be so provided, that if the People will not be ruled, they may
compel them by Force. Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus, would never have
been able long to continue the Authority of their Laws, had they been without
Arms at Command. And Solon himself, the great Athenian Lawgiver, See Grotius
ib.
declares, he could never have established his Laws at Athens, had he not had
Power to second Them; and that all those great matters which he effected in
founding a Commonwealth, he did, (...). Vim Iusque parilis copulans vin^li
Iugo.

by coupling Law and Force, making Authority and Power walk hand in hand
together.

Moreover, as to the late Contest betwixt King and Parliament, Grotius speaks
very home to justify the Parliaments late Proceedings in positive Terms: Grot.
lib. 1. c. 4.
Si Rex partem habeat summi Imperii, partem alteram populus aut Senatus, Regi
in partem non suam involanti, vis justa opponi poterit, quia eatenus Imperium
non habet: Quod ubi fit, potest Rex etiam suam Imperii partem belli Jure
amittere; that is in English, if the Authority be divided betwixt a King and
his People in Parliament, so that the King has one part, the People another;
the King offering to incroach upon that part which is none of his, may lawfully
be opposed by force of Arms, because he exceeds the bounds of his Authority.
And not only so, but he may lose his own part likewise, by the Iure Belli.
Law of Arms. From whence I plainly infer; that if a King may thus, Eventus
belli, velut aequus judex unde Ius stabat, victoriam dedit, Livius 21.
by Right of war, lose his share and Interest in Authority and Power, being
conquered; then on the other side, by Right of war, the whole must needs reside
in that part of the People which prevailed over him, there being no middle
Power to make any claim: And so the consequence is clear likewise. That the
whole Right of Kingly Authority being by military decision resolved into the
prevailing Party, what Government so ever it pleases them next to erect, is as
valid de Jure, as if it had the Consent of the whole body of the People.

These Premises thus laid upon a sure Ground, show the weakness of his, who
wrote that so much magnified Pamphlet, entitled, [An Exercitation concerning
Usurped Powers, etc.] For the Design of that gilded Structure, raised upon the
sandy Foundation of a false Hypothesis, is, obliquely to charge the present
Powers in England as Usurpers, though he have laid the Scene in America. To
this purpose, he spends his first Chapter; where telling what Usurpation is, he
defines it an Intrusion into the Seat of Authority, without any lawful Right,
Title, or calling; and insinuates it to the prejudice of the present Governers,
as if they were guilty of this Intrusion, without right or Title. In applying
this, he first alleges, that the Right and Title to Government is in a King,
Lords, and Commons, coordinate in power, not in the Commons alone. This indeed
was true, til the King (as I showed before) lost his Title by Right of war, and
until the Lords likewise lost theirs, by compliance with the Enemies and
Invaders of the Nation; for which cause they Themselves also, by Right of War,
forfeited all their Interests and Privileges, as Enemies; and so the whose
Authority devolved naturally into the hands of the Commons.

But here the Exercitator objects also, that the present Governers have usurped
over the majority of the House of Commons, in that they were thrust out of the
House by Force. But (for Answer) since by the equity of all Laws, Accessaries
are punishable as well as those that are principal in the Crime, therefore by
the same Right of war, the secluded Members also, in adhering to the conquered
Party; even after the Victory, and favoring the Invaders, were justly deprived
of their Interest, and the supreme Si qui jure suo uti non possunt, coru^ jus
accrescit praesentibus: Grotius de Iure Belli, l, ^., c. 5.
Authority descended lawfully to those Members, that had the courage to assert
their Freedoms, secure their own Interest, themselves and their Adherents, from
future Inconveniences, and take the Forfeiture of those Prerogatives and
Privileges of the King Lords, and secluded Commons, as Heirs apparent, by the
Law of Arms, and Custom of Nations, to an Investiture in the whole Supremacy.

One Objection more he has; how that a Calling from the People, being
necessary and essential, to a humanely constituted Magistracy, our present
Governors ought to have such a Call; but not having it, they are therefore
concluded guilty of Usurpation. This is the sum of the Objection, though not
Syllogistically deciphered. To which I answer: 1. That if only a Call from the
People constitute a lawful Magistracy, then there has very rarely ever been
any lawful Magistracy in the world, nor among us long before and since the
Conquest. The proof of this may be confirmed by a Review of those Instances
set down before in the second Chapter; where it is evident, that all the world
over, most Princes came into the Seat of Authority not only without a Call, but
absolutely against the wills of the People, and so, many of them exercise the
Sovereignty to this very day: And particularly, here in England, most of our
own Kings reigned without any Call, but made way by their Swords; there being
of those 25 Princes that have King'd it among us, not above half a dozen that
came to the Crown in an orderly Succession, either by lineall or collateral
Title: And not any one of those half dozen but laid claim to it, by virtue of
their Predecessors Usurpations, without any Call from the People; only in the
Investiture they had their consent, because out of a love of public Peace,
none would, or out of Fear, none durst offer to question their Titles. Now, if
the former part of this Objection were true, that a Call were the only
Essential, constituting a lawful Government, then it would follow, that as
all the world, so we and our Ancestors have lived and paid obedience for the
most part, under an unlawful Magistracy; which sure no sober man will affirm.
But if any will be so mad as to say it, I only propound to him this sober
Quaere, Why we may not now as lawfully submit to the present Magistracy, in
case it were unlawful, as our Ancestors did heretofore to theirs, for the
public Peace of the Nation?

2. As to the Assumptive part part of this Objection, which insinuates, that
our present Governors have no Call or Consent of the People, I answer, That if
by the consent be meant the Consent of the Body of the People, or of the major
part of their Representatives, this may hold requisite in a State not divided
by Civil War, but at Peace within it self; where it is most consonant to
reason, that in case there be occasion to elect a supreme Magistrate, or
Magistrates, the election should be carried by the greater number of Voices, in
such manner as Voices are usually given in that State; But now in a Civil War
the case is altered, when the controversy touching Government is decided by
the Sword: For, ipso facto the Sword creates a Title for him, or those that
bear it, Majestatem realem durare constat, quamdiu, vel vi maj^re, vel omnium
quorum interest consensunon mutatur.
and installs them with a new Majesty of Empire, abolishing the old; Because,
as the Civilians say, The ancient Majesty of a State or Commonweal continues
no longer, if it be changed either by a greater power, or by consent of the
People; where (you see) force and power is put in equal Balance with popular
consent, in relation to change of Government. And as if it were the best
pedigree of supremacy, they define the Supreme Authority to be that which holds
claim from God and the Sword; Besold. de Majest. cap. 1. Dicitur vero summa,
qui^ non alium nisi Deum and gladium recognoscit; atque ideo suae Origini^
quasi Author existit, etc.
and therefore is also as it were the Author of it is own Original, without
dependence on any other; so that (say they) every Commonwealth, be it never so
small, which acknowledges no Superior but God and the Sword, has a Right of
Majesty, or political Supremacy. Camman. disput. de Iuribus Majest. 1. These.
70. 75. etc. To this accords that of Grotius before-recited; That as in War all
other things fall to the Conquerors, by way of Acquisition; so likewise a Right
to govern the People, and even that Right also which the people themselves have
to Government; Arnisaeus de Majest. c. 1.
so that what Government soever it pleases them to erect, Bello ut alia
acquiripossunt, it a and Jus imperantis in Populum, and Ju^ quod in Imperio
habet ipse Populus Grot. de Jure belli. l. 3. c. 15.
the People having lost their Right of Election to them, must be as valid de
Iure, as if it had the Peoples Consent. But as in this case, there is no need
of their express positive consent to justify a new Goverument; so a tacit or
implied consent is sufficient; which Consent (as one says well) is the very
dictate of Nature or common Reason, because it is better to have some Justice
than none at all; and there is a necessity of some coercive power or
government, left all be left to Disorder, Violence, and Confusion, which none
(even of the conquered Party) can be so unnatural as to desire; and therefore
(says Lib. de legib. 3. cap. 10.
Suarez) They do tacitly consent, that Justice be administered by the
Conquerors, because it is a less evil to be governed, by them, than
altogether to want due coaction and direction.

Objection very frequent in the mouths of many: That this transmission of
Title by Right of war holds good, when Nation is engaged against Nation; but in
one single Nation within its self it cannot; because (say they) it seems
unreasonable that a Nation should challenge a Conquest over it self.

Civil war, and divided into parties, the eye of the Law of Nations looks not
on them as one Nation, In Tract at. de Legatis.
but as two, according to that of Grotius: In Regno diviso, gens una, pro
tempore, quasi duae gentes habentur: In a divided State, one Nation, during the
time of its National Divisions, is esteemed as two Nations; so that what
preeminence Nation may gain over Nation by right of foreign war, the same may
be obtained likewise by one part of a Nation against the other, by Right of
civil war: And what the foreign Conqueror may do in changing the Government,
abolishing old Laws, and establishing new, the same may be done also by the
Civil Victor for his own security.

Thus by all the Premises it is undeniably evident, in a way of application;
That the present prevailing Party in England have a Right and just Title to be
our Governors; and that this new Government erected by them, to the subversion
of the old, is as valid de Jure, as if it had the ratifying Consent of the
whole Body of the People; Nor can they in any sense, be counted Usurpers, as is
most irrationally intimated by the slight Exercitator.

CHAP. V.
That the Oath of Allegiance, and Covenant, are no justifiable grounds to raise
a new War, in, or against the Commonwealth of England.
HAving in the former Chapters cleared the Right and equity of the present
Government, in point of Title, from the slanderous Character of Usurpation, I
shall in the next place descend to examine the vain Phansees of such as refuse
a Submission thereto, upon pretense of Conscience, in regard of former
Obligations. These people are represented unto us under the ordinary Notions of
Royalists and Presbyterians; the the former pleading the Oath of Allegiance;
the later, the solemn League and Covenant, as a Ground for their Refusal.

As for the Oath of Allegiance; In a word, Allegiance is but a political Tie,
for politic ends, grounded upon political Considerations, and therefore being
politically determined, when those Considerations are altered by new
Circumstances, (be it in relation to Caesar, or the Senate) the old Allegiance
is extinct, and must give place to a new. The same description may serve
likewise for the Covenant; For, even that part of it which relates most to
Religion, will be found wrapped up altogether in matters of Discipline and
Church-politie, to serve politic ends and Interests, if the Actions of our
English and Scot^ch Presbyters, may be admitted as a Comment upon the Text, I
grant, both those Oaths are Religious Acts, as they are solemnized with the
Invocation of God, as a Witness; but as all Actions are qualified from their
principal End; so the maine end of those Oaths being Obedience to the Prince
in order to the good of the Public, they are of a political Nature; and when
such an alteration of Affairs shall happen as extinguishes his Title, I
conceive we are not obliged, in this Case, to pay him that Submission which by
Oath we promised, but ought rather to swear a new one, to those that succeed
him in the Government.

For, in promissory State-Oaths (as these two are) it is granted by all, that
there lurk several tacit Conditions, inseparable from the nature of all Oaths
and Engagements; and which are as it were the life and soul of the Obligation:
These tacit Conditions, or (as Dr. Sanderson calls them) Suppositions, are set
down by diverse Authors, Sanders. de Jura. Praelect. 2. sect. 1.
which I shall orderly apply to the matter in Question: One tacit Condition
annexed to every Oath, is, That the words of it be duly interpreted, Idem. in
sect. 8.
in a fair and equitable construction, not wresting it out of hatred or
affection to any Party. This Condition has been but ill observed by the Scots,
and others, in relation to their Covenant, who will not admit any construction,
but what may serve to advance their own own Designs, and heap hatred upon
others: witness their pleading for it in an absolute sense, or their own sense,
when as the principal parts of it are limited by express Conditions; viz.
that part which concerns the maintenance of the King, and the Privileges of
Parliament, is circumscribed with this Clause [In (or no otherwise than in
order to) the preservation of Religion and Liberty] And the other which relates
to Religion, is as to manner of Reformation, qualified with another Clause,
[viz. According to the word of God,] so that the old statu quo of King and
Parliament was sworn to in a sense but secondary, and subordinate, to show that
the usual Privileges of both might be quitted, if they proved inconsistent
with Religion and Liberty; as also that any Reformation might be exploded, to
make way for one more consonant to the word. And certainly, if the present
Presbyterian Whips^ers knew any other way more probable to advance their Kirk
Dominion, than by making a pretended Plea for Prerogative, a Stalking-horse to
the Design, I believe both King and Lords, had been left long since to God's
blessing and the warn Sun (as they say) in despair of any Comfort from the
Kirk's Benediction. It seems now to me likewise, That they added this Clause
[according to the word] not out of any love to a real Reforming, but only
that they might have a Plea for the pulling down of Episcopacy, to introduce
another Form more suitable to their own ambitious ends, since that Form that
they contend for is as little consonant to the word as the other, because they
take little thence besides the bare name of Presbytery, to patch up a
Reformation. These things the world must needs believe of them, till they lay
aside their Self-designings, and admit of an equitable interpretation of the
Covenant in the limitations expressed, or according to that Sanders. ibid neve
sensum aliquem juramento a nobis praestito, aut ejus alicui parti assingamus
proprit commodi aut utilitatis causa, quem non quivis vir alius pius and
prudens (qui est liberioris Iudicii, utpote cuja nihil interest) ex ipsis
verbis facile eliccret.
Latitudo prudentialis, the prudential latitude, spoken of by Dr. Sanderson,
which ought to be considered in all Oaths, when the Sense and meaning of them
is in question. For, as we ought by all means to beware, that we give not our
selves too great a liberty of Interpretation, to the end that we may shake off
the obligation of an Oath; so none ought to fasten such a sense upon an Oath,
or any part of it, for their own profit or commodity, which any other pious and
prudent man (indifferent and un-interested in the business) would not collect
and conclude out of the words of the Oath.

Moreover, if we did grant the Scots their own Interpretation; yet it can be of
small Consequence to their ends, since the Covenant it self is extinct, by
reason of the Breach first made by themselves: Let Grotius determine this truth,
who lib. 2. cap. 15. says, Si pars una Foedus violaverit, poterit altera a
Foedere discedere: nam Capita Foederis singula conditionis vim habent. If one
Party break a Covenant, the other is no longer bound to it: For, each
particular head of a Covenant, carries with it the force of a Condition; which
Condition in relation to the Covenanters is, that either of them observe it
with Fidelity to each other. But the Scots have been so far from observing,
that the whole Nation have been involved in the Breach of it, by dividing the
King from the People, the People from each other, and at length by a perfidious
National Invasion: so that except they can show us some new Foundation whereon
that Breach is repaired, the Covenant must needs be defunct in point of
obligation. For, Grotius ubi supra.
(aith the same Author) Foedus tacit renovatum intelligi non debet: Non enim
facile praesumitur nova obligatio, nisi ex actibus qui nullam aliam
interpretationem recipient. A Covenant being once at an end, cannot be supposed
to be renewed ta^itly: For, a new Obligation is not easily to be presumed, but
by such Acts as declare it, and admit no other Construction. Therefore, till
the Scots and their Partisans can produce evidences of a renovation of the
Covenant, by positive Acts of State, they must of necessity grant, that all
Covenant-obligations and Relations are expired, between the two Nations of
England and Scotland.

A second tacit Condition latent in Oaths promissory, is expressed in these
words, out of the Divinity of the Stoics, by Seneca: Tun^ fidem fallam, Seneca
l. 4. De Beneficiis, c. 36.
and constantiae crimen audiam, si cum omnia cadem sint, quae erant promittente
me, non praestitero Promissum: Alioqui, quicquid mutatur libertatem facit de
integro consulendi; and fidem meam liberat. Then (says he) let me be accused
of falsehood and Inconstancy, if when all things remain the same as they were at
the time that I promi^ed, I shall not then perform my Promise: Otherwise, any
alteration whatsoever leaves me wholly at liberty, and freeth me from my
Enagement. And a little after (says he) Omnia debent esse cadem quae suerint
cum promitteres, ut promittentis sidem teneas.
Affairs ought to be in the same condition they were, when thou did promise,
to bind thee to the performance. And in his 39 Chapter he becomes more
particular, and says, In all promises do lurk these tacit Conditions or
Exceptions, Si potero, if I am able, Si debeo, if I ought, Si haec ita erunt,
if Things continue as now they are. If you require the performance of my
Promise, Si aliquid intervenit novi, quid miraris cum conditio promittentis
mutata sit, mutatum esse Consilium?
bring Affairs into the same posture that they were in when I made it: But if
any new alterations happen, why do thou wonder, my condition being otherwise
than it was when I promised, that I am changed in my intentions? Render things
the same, and I am still the same.

And that this holds good in Christian Divinity, as well as Stoical, appears
out of the aforementioned Doctor, whose Doctrine is equivalent, Sanders
Praelect. 2, sect. 10.
and his Terms convertible with those of Seneca, declaring that all Promises
have these tacit Conditions, Suppositions, or Exceptions; Si Deus permiser it;
if God permit, which answers to Seneca's Si potero; Quoad licet, as far as
lawfully I may, which answers to his Si debeo; Rebus sic stantibus, as long as
things thus stand, which answers to his Si haec itaerunt; According to which
several Suppositions in order, I shall examine both the Oaths of Allegiance
and Covenant, and prove their Non-obligation.

First, ^. S^ Deus ^ermiscrit.
No man that enters into an Otah or Covenant, can be so stupid, as to promise
the performance of any thing, without this tacit Reservation within his own
Soul, that he will do it if God permit, considering we can do nothing without
him, who exercises his Wisdom and Sovereignty in the disposition of all human
Affairs, according to that of the Apostle James, who bid us say, James 4.
If the Lord will, we will do this or that. If so, then having sworn in the
Oaths beforementioned, to continue true and faithful to the King, and his
Heirs, etc. it cannot be meant otherwise, then with this Clause, If God please
to permit their continuance in the Government: But we plainly see God is not
pleased to permit their continuance, since all men will confess, that (at
least) by a permissive Act of Providence, another Form of Government is erected
quite contrary to the Old. Therefore if we consider the Oath of Allegiance and
Covenant, according to this first Supposition, they are now of no force and
obligation; but it may serve to satisfy a private man's Conscience, if in times
past he have done his utmost to perform the duties required by those Oaths,
during the former establishment. The Reason is (says the same Quia cum omnia
divina Providenti^ and voluntati subsint, nec sit in cujusvis hominis potestate
omnes suturos Casus praestare; qui fecit quod in se fuit ut adimpleret quod
promiserat, Juramenti fidem exolvit. Rei Impossibilis nulla est obligatio.
Sanders. Ibid.
Doctor) Because seeing all things are subjected to Divine Providence and
Pleasure, and that it is not in the power of any man to regulate all accidents
which happen in the future; therefore he that has used his whole endeavor to
perform what he promised, has paid his Allegiance, and fulfilled the intent of
his Oath; the Obligation ceasing when things cannot possibly be effected (as
the Doctor says) ex Impossibilitate Facti. Praelect. 2. Sect. 12.

Quoadlicet
As concerning the Dr's Quoadlicet, the second tacit Condition or Excption, it
is to be presumed no man swears to any thing, but with this Reservation, as far
as lawfully he may. If so, then in case it so happen, that we cannot lawfully
act in prosecution of those things which we have sworn to, our obligation
cease ex Impossibilitate Juris; as in the former, by an Impossibility of
Power in us to effect what we were obliged unto, so in this, by an
Impossibility of Right in us to act in order thereunto: For, says he, that is
said to be impossible by an Impossibility of Right, which a man has no lawful
power to endeavor. But as to the restoration of Kingly Government, now that
another is established (by as good a Title (I have proved) as ever the Kingly
was) I would fain know what right or lawful Power, any private man has, and
which way he can ground it upon the Oath of Allegiance and Covenant, to
endeavor the destruction of the New Form of Government, and a restitution of
the Old. For, private persons have no right to question those that are in
Power, Grot. de Jure Belli l. 1. c. 4.
and are no competent Judges in Controversies of that nature, nor ought they to
meddle with them, but (as Grotius says) rather to follow Possession. Yea, put
case they were unlawfully possessed, Ibid.
Usurpers, Invaders, and Tyrants, yet the same Author says, Privato vi
dejicere summi Imperii Invasorem non licet, It is not lawful for any private
Person to endeavor the thrusting them out by Force.

Nor is this founded only upon humane Reason, but also upon Scripture. That
place in the 13. to the Romans [There is no power but of God, The Powers that
be are ordained of God] is sufficient to convince every private conscience of
the necessity of Submission; that is, to submit to them so far, as not to
presume to dispute how they came by their Power; and this course is most
agreeable to the sense of all Expositors, the practice of all Times, and the
voice even of natural reason, since the opening of a gap to question Supreme
Powers, and touch the tender eye of their Authority, would let out all into
Confusion; Tumult following Tumult, like Billow upon Billow, till the world
were overwhelmed with a Sea of Miseries and Distractions.

Supreme Powers without questioning them, how then can this Parliament be
justified in having questioned the King, at their first sitting, for diverse of
his Actions? Supreme Power, and the Exercise of it. The controversy was not at
first concerning his Right of Government, but the abuse of it by way of
maladministration; in defense of which abuses he took Arms, and so by the Law
of Arms losing his Right, (as is proved before) the Power descended to those
that are now in possession, whose Right we ought no more to question, than at
first we did his; their power deriving as natural a pedigree from Heaven as
his did, and being as legally confirmed by the Law of Arms and Nations, as ever
that was which he held from his Predecessors. Now, in that the 13. to the
Romans commands a submission and obedience in general Terms, it is not meant
to all Powers in the arbitrary exercise of their Power in time of Peace, but to
all Supreme Powers in point of Title, be it settled upon them by Potestates apud
Ammianum aliosque dicuntur, penes quos sunt Jurae militaria. Arnold. Clapmar.
de Jure Imperii. l. 1. c. 10.
Right of War, Inheritance, or any other way. And to support this exposition,
give me leave here to introduce two of the main Pillars of Reformation Bucer,
and Calvin, men famous in their generations; whose Testimonies may serve once
for all, touching that so much controverted Chapter to the Romans. The Apostle
(says Calvin upon the place) seems here to go about to take away the
frivolous cu^iosity of men, Videtur Apostolus voluisse tollere srivolam hominum
curiositatem, etc. Calv. in Romans c. 13.
who use often to inquire by what Right those which have Command did get their
Authority; But it ought to suffice us, that they are in preeminence; For, they
did not get up to this height by their own strength, but are set over us by
the hand of God. And says Bucer also, on the same place, When a Question is
made whom we should obey, it must not be regarded what he is that exercises
the Power, Quum quaeritur cui parendum, non est spectandum qualis sit qu^
potestatem exercet, nec^que Jure, vel injuria, quis potestatem invaserit.
Bucer. in Romans 13.
or by what Right or wrong he has invaded the Power, or in what Form he
dispense it, but only if he have Power. For, if any man does excel in power,
it is now out of doubt, that he has received that power from God; wherefore,
without all exception thou must yield thy self up to him, and heartily obey him.

Seeing now all Supreme Powers are of God, and that the Apostle commands
subjection to them, but damns Resistance, it is clear then, as to our case here
in England, that we owe Submission to the present Governors; and that no
private man has any warrant out of the Word to satisfy his Conscience in the
lawfulness of such Actions, as tend to disturb or thrust them out of
possession; therefore according to this second Supposition of the Doctor, no
Oath being of Force to bind the Conscience, further then a man may lawfully
Act, it follows, evidently (the case thus standing) that the Old Allegiance is
cancelled, and we bound to admit a New; and that both it, and the Covenant have
now no influence at all over us, but are utterly void, and of none effect.

Rebus sic Stantibus*
The third tacit condition or Supposition implied in all Oaths is (says the
Doctor) Rebus sic Stantibus, as long as things continue thus; it being to be
presumed, that when I swear to perform any thing, I do it with this tacit
Reservation, if I be not hindered by an alteration of Affairs: But if such an
alteration happen, that neither the same persons nor things are in being which
I swore to maintain my Oath is at an end, and the obligation cease; which
now is our very Case here in England, the Government being changed, and new
Governors set over us. For this the learned Grotius has one instance very
pertinent to our purpose. Non tenebitur, si cesset qualitas sub qua alicui
juravit; ut si Magistratus desinat esse Magistratus.
An Oath (says he) binds a man no longer, if the quality or condition of the
person to whom he swore, be altered: As for example, if he that was a
Magistrate cease to be a Magistrate. In evidence whereof, the same Author
alleges a saying of Caesar's to the Soldiers of Domitius, when Domitius was
a Prisoner. They were unwilling to serve Caesar, because of the military Oath
they had taken for the other: But to take away this scruple, Grot. lib. 2.
says Caesar to them, Sacramento quidem vos tenere qui potuit, cap. 13. de
Jure belli.
quum projectis fascibus and deposito Imperio, privatus and captus ipse in
alienam venisset potestatem? How can he hold you bound by Oath any longer,
being outed of his Authority and Command, remaining a private man, and a
prisoner under the power of another? Alas, Sacramentum capitis dimunitione
sublatum.
your Oath ended together with his Authority.

Thus also, according to this third Supposition of the Doctor's, it is plainly
to be inferred; that since Affairs of State stand not now in England, Ibid.
as they were when we took the Oath of Allegiance, or the Covenant, but a new
Government is erected; therefore our obligation to the former is totally
extinguished. And if the obligation be extinct (as I have proved in the several
particulars beforementioned) then the consequence is as plain; that neither of
those Oaths can be a ground sufficient to justify any Royalist or
Presbyterian, in denying a submission to the present Government, or to raise a
new war within the Nation.

Part II.
HAving in the former Part (as I think) fully manifested the necessity and
equity, my design in the next is, to show the utility and Benefit of a
Submission: This I shall do, by stating the nature of the Designs of the
several Parties claiming an Interest in this Nation; Viz:
ROYALISTS. SCOTS. PRESBYTERIANS. LEVELLERS;
as they stand in opposition to the present Government, and would each of Them
introduce a New Form of their own. And that you may the better understand Them
and their Affairs, I shall in plain Method (for the more easy Conviction)
proceed upon these Particulars:

First, The great Improbability of effecting their Designs.

Secondly, The grand Inconveniences which must needs follow, in case either of
Them be effected, to the prejudice of the whole Nation.

Thirdly, The Excellency of a free State or Commonwealth, as it is now
established in England, and what happiness we may reap thereby.

After I have handled the 2 former, as they hold relation to the several
Parties, I shall bring up the Rear with the Third, by way of Conclusion.

CHAP. I.
Concerning the Royal Party.
THE Royallists are of two Sorts. First, such as adhere to the Prince out of
necessity; Secondly, such as adhere to him out of humor. The former are Those,
who being hopeless of a Return, or of the recovery of their Fortunes, by way
of Reconcilement, are constrained to run any hazard abroad with the head of
their Party, and turn every stone to over-turn the present Powers here in
England, that they may set up Themselves. The latter Sort of Royallists, are
such, as though they served heretofore under the Royal Standard, yet, through
the Favor of the Parliament, have re-gained possession of their Estates: And
therefore being re-invested with their Fortunes, They are loath as yet to attend
the Prince in person, though they follow him with their wishes, and would be
glad to embrace any Design underhand, or perhaps (when time serves) appear
here again in the Field, to make way for his Advancement. These may (not
improperly) be called humorous Royallists, because they have only an obstinate
and vainglorious humor for the ground of their behavior, without any respect
of Advantage to Themselves, but are ridden by the other to carry on the
highRoyall design of Particular persons, and run a new hazard of their own. To
restore the single Family of a Prince, suppressed by the Almighty, they seem
willing to Venture the destruction of all their own Families; and to serve the
ends of certain Persons about him, men whose Fortunes are desperate, they are
apt to fool themselves into the loss of their own; as they must needs do,
if the Prince mis-carry in his Enterprise, whereas if he should carry it with
Success, They will be then but where they were, They can be but Masters of
what they have already. The high Ranters and Fugitives are they that will be
looked on at Court; Those Bell-weathers of Royalty will bear away the Bell of
Preferment, whilst the poor Countrey-Royallists (both Gentry and Yeomen) shall
be glad to drudge and plow, to pay those yet unknown Taxations, which must
needs be collected, to satisfy the forlorn Brethren of the Sword, the many
younger Brothers, and Strangers, which will come in with the Grandees, in hope
to purchase a Fortune by squeezing the Public.

All which being considered, it is awonder to see, how They feed Themselves
with Phant'sies, who pretend in this Nation to the restitution of Royality; how
their eyes are dazzled with that Sun which seems to rise upon their Party,
supposing the golden Ag^ must needs return again with him, and that he will
climb up to the Meridian, in spite of all opposition! But to give them a
Cooler for these Conceits, I shall more particularly, according to the Method
before propounded, show first the Improbability of Success in the new Royal
Designs; and then, the grand Inconveniences that would follow such a Success,
that all mistaken Persons may see, how far they wander (to the hazard of
themselves) out of that way, which leads to the future happiness of this
Nation.

As to the Improbability of the Prince's Success in his Design, First, he is
like to have but a slender Supply of foreign Aids: For, the Affairs of
Christendom are at this time so disposed, that some Princes want leisure;
others ability to assist Him: And diverse there are which refrain, for
particular Reasons of State. The Spaniard has other Fish to fry, keeping a
serious eye upon France, and lying at Catch against Portugal. Besides, there
are several Reasons (not fit here to mention) which may dispose him rather to
embrace the Amity of this Commonwealth, as it is now established; and whereof
there is some hope (were there no other ground) in that he has given our Agent
a friendly reception.

So likewise has the King of Portugal too another Agent; and how far he is
from neglecting our Friendship, may appear by his Demeanor toward our Fleet,
in the Port of Lisbon, where he has given them the like Freedom and
entertainment as he does to Rupert, carrying himself indifferently between
both, though he seem a little to incline somewhat more toward Rupert; not out
of any good will, but only in regard of his Preengagement to that Party.

The King of France has his hands full enough at home, so that he has little
list or leisure to mind Affairs abroad; being jealous not only of the Spaniard,
but even of his own Subjects, by reason of their regret at the insupporrtable
Taxes, the Discontents and Bandyings of his Parliaments in the several
Provinces, and the Partisans of the Imprisoned Princes; all which seem to
threaten (if not the Monarchy it Self, yet) the Family of the Monarch.

Denmark has hitherto given but a cool Acknowledgment of so near an
alliance, having been (at the best) but a Retiringplace for Montrose, seconding
this with some other slight superficial courtesies; one of the best of which
was (to rid their hands of their Guest) by lending him a few Bottoms, first, to
seek his better Fortune in Swethland, and then to waft him and his Forlorn hope
toward their long homes, into Scotland.

Some such trivial Supplies likewise may be expected from the Swede, with a
few Complements from the Emperor and German Princes, their jealousies of each
other not permitting them to spare their Forces: For, whosoever considers the
Delays and Shifts made by the Emperor and his party, in performing the
Articles of Peace; and on the other side, the resolution of the Swede and that
Party to have them fully performed (together with those heart-burnings among
them, which break out often into Flames in every Corner) may easily imagine the
peace of Germany is not long-lived, and therefore that neither of those Princes
will part with many of their Soldiery.

The Hollanders esteem it a safe way to conform themselves ever to the
Prevailing Party in England, having Reason, above all others, to prize the
Friendship and Amity of the English Nation. And though some common Courtesies
are expressed there to the Prince by way of entertainment; yet these are done
rather to comply with the desires of the Prince of Orange, than out of any
inclination or affection to the Royal Party; whereas the Sense of the States
Provincial (and in them the meaning of the whole People) is, to preserve a
strict Correspondence with the Commonwealth of England. Nor do they relish
those close Combinations between the Prince of Orange and his Brother; fearing
so great an Alliance may dispose Orange to aspire, and establish a greater
Interest of his own than is meet for a Member of a Republique, if Monarchy come
to its height again in England; which they ought by no means to desire, but
rather that England should continue as it is; not only for the former Reason,
but also, for that such a Neighborhood would be concerned in Reason, to admit
Them into a nearer Friendship and Complication of Interests, than ever they can
hope from a Monarchy. --

These things being considered, the Prince has small hope of Success, in
regard of any considerable Supplies from Foreign Princes.

Secondly, Put case he can, by the help of the many fugitive English, the
Scots, and Supplies drained out of the Dregs of several Countries, make shift
to patch up an Army, or two, to try his Fortune, yet it is ten to one but They
ruin his Design. For, first, the introducing of Forrainers will soon
alienate the Affections of the English, as experience has proved in all times.
Secondly, Auxiliatores conducti ex diversis locis, nec disciplina inter se, nec
affectione consentiunt. Petr. Greg. Tolos. lib. 11. de Repub. cap. 3. page 656.
Mercenary Auxiliaries that are collected out of several Nations, seldom
agree either in discipline, or Affection. The reason of this is given by the
same Author: For (says he) since the Customs of Nations are diverse,
therefore men of several Countries, differing both in habit and manners,
cannot long continue together, without discovering an Antipathy or Contrariety
in their natures, even to the ruin of that Party with whom they are engaged.

To pass by the Testimonies of many other States men, we have two very
pertinent ones afforded us out of our own Affairs: witness that emulation
discovered between the Scots and English in the Hamiltonian Invasion; and also
of late, between the English and Irish under Ormond in Ireland, whereupon the
English chose rather to join with the Parliament-Party, than continue any
longer engaged with the Irish. Lastly, Those Foreign Mercenaries will, upon the
least misfortune of War, desert the Prince, and take up Arms under the
Parliament. For (as says Patritius) The Mercenarii militis sides ex fortuna
pendet: qua inclivant^ ad hosts, ipsi etiam spem atque animum co incli^^nt.
Francisc. Patrit. lib. 9. de Reg. Tit. 15.
Faith of Mercenaries depends upon Fortune, and if she turn to the Adverse
Party, thither They follow, and incline their hopes and affections. Yea, so
little trust is to be given to these Mercenaries, that notwithstanding their
Condition be good, yet (says another) Solent plus lucrum quam causam scqui
bellandi: Et it a facile ab bostibus, vel majore stipendio, vel donis, corrumpi
possunt. Pet. Greg. Tolos. ubi supra.
They are easily corrupted with Money, and with rewards and promises of better
Pay, bought over to any other Party; respecting gain much more than the Cause
of their Engagement. Judge then, how the Prince is like to thrive with his
Foreign Auxiliaries, if he shall have any, either in England or Scotland; for,
the Reason of these Things holds good in one Nation, as well as another.

Thirdly, since it appears how small Success he is like to have by the Aides
of other Princes, let us see whether he have any better hopes by Foreign Aid
out of Scotland or Ireland, to make a Conquest of England. As for Ireland, he
has but poor expectations thence, since the Lord Lieuten^nt has swept away
those Adversaries with the Besome of Vengeance, and made way by a continued
chain of miraculous Successes, to Shackle that Rebellious Nation; and doubts
not ere long, to bind their Princes with Chains, and their Nobles with links
of Iron, since every month brings in fresh Laurels of Victory, to their Terror
and amazement. But Ireland being given for lost, let us see next, whether the
Royallists are like to receive any more comfort from Scotland: Its an old
saying, Nullum bonum ex Aquilone, No good comes out of the North; and of all
others, Royallists should be the least apt to believe any benefit to come out
of that Nation, from whence proceeded the Ruin and Destruction of the late
King, and all their Party; nor can they hope much better of them in time to
come. For, first, They adhere to the Prince, not out of any love to his
Interest, but only in hope to settle their own upon his Shoulders; and
therefore if they can make a better Bargain elsewhere, they will cast him off,
or (if he be in their power) sell him off (as they did his Father) upon the
first occasion. What else can he expect from a Party, whose Interest was first
founded upon the ruin of his Great Grandmother, continued and augmented to
the perpetual vexation of his Grand father, and at length prosecuted to the
destruction of his Father? Secondly, it is impossible to reconcile the two
Parties, Royal and Presbyterian, even as impossible (King James was wont to
say) as to reconcile God and the Devil. Thirdly, if They cannot be reconciled
or stand together, then whatsoever Agreemens may be made, it will be but from
the Teeth outward; nor can there be an union betwixt them upon any design, but
in the prosecution thereof they will mind the advancement of their several
Interests, which must make them jealous of each other, divided and partial in
their Counsels, and cause the inward rancor to break out, to the prejudice and
utter ruin of the whole Engagement. Fourthly, let the Scots invade us again
upon the Royal, or what score else they please, They will never be endured
(especially in the Northern Parts) having heretofore by their perfidious and
Tyrannical behavior, fixed an odious Impression upon the Spirits of the
People, and quickened the old Antipathy betwixt the two Nations: So that, if the
Prince come in with them, or by them, he will fare never the better (but much
worse) for their Sakes, or their Company. Lastly, they come (if they dare come)
a most nasty, lowzie, beaten Generation, against one of the most generous, best
accomplished, and most Victorious Armies in Christendom; an Army that must
needs be dishonored by such an Enemy, from whom neither Credit nor Advantage
is to be gotten; yet it is meet they should be chastized, since the Almighty,
out of love to the future Peace of our Nation, seems to decree, that Belial
and Dagon, Montrose, and the Kirk, with her Worthies should be sent after
Hamilton. This indeed, would be a fair step to Reformation, by letting out the
Corruption of that Country, which sticks like a Scab, upon the fair Body of
this Fortunate Island.

Now, in the last place, to conclude this particular touching the Improbability
of the Prince's Success, since he has little ground to hope for any by the
assistance of other Nations, let us examine what hope he has from our own.
Several Reasons may be given to the contrary; As first, the People's hatred of
Foreiners, and their fear of that Plague, universal Free Quarter, with their
averseness to War, having tasted some time of the Sweets of Peace; And though
they are sensible of some necessary Burdens, yet considering another War will
increase new ones, more exorbitant, every man would be content with things as
they are; for, the Common people (as the Poet says) -- Duas tantum res anxius
optat, Juvenal.

Panem, and Circenses. --
will be satisfied with Bread and Quietness, rather than hazard their Ease and
Security, to serve the Ambition of others.

Secondly, They will be the less apt to engage in any new Insurrections and
Parties, since the last thrived so ill, to the Prejudice and shame of all the
Undertakers: Examples make Men wise; and though many of them escaped without
punishment, in regard this See the new Acts of Treason, and the Act for
establishing an High Court of Justice.
Government was not then declared; yet now that it is established, and Laws are
made to defend it against all that offend in time to come, men will beware (I
suppose) how they meddle, since they can expect nothing less after another
War, than the punishment of Traitors.

Thirdly, Put case the Counties were resolved upon New Insurrections, yet what
can be done by unweildy Bodies of raw Men, taken from the Streets, the Plow, or
the Harrow; rude, and unacquainted with Military Discipline, against a
well-disciplin'd Army of Old Soldiers? Consider what became of those vast
numbers in Kent, Essex, etc. with what ease they were dispersed, and how soon
they vanished into nothing!

Fourthly, It is not like, that the Gentry, men of Estates, will stir in any
considerable number, to hazard their Possessions, being yet scarce warm in
them, after a Purchase made upon dear rates of Composition; But if any are so
mad as to venture on new Designs, they might do well to consider how hard a
matter it is to carry them on without discovery, seeing the State has a Party
and Friends, in all Countries and Corporations. Besides, if They could carry it
so close, as to bring any petty design into Action, yet they cannot but be
snap't, and nip't in the Bud, the Militia being so well settled, and a Party
ready in Arms in every County -- Now, all these parcells of discourse being
well weighed together, I leave every man's Intellect to make the Conclusion;
what slender probability of Success there is, by the assistance of Foreiners
or Natives in the present Royal Design against England.

Having thus, in the former part of this Chapter, shown the Improbability of
Success in the new Royal enterprrize, which were enough to wean Wise men from
engaging upon that Score, I shall (according to the Method propounded) in the
next place state those Grand Inconveniences, which would unavoidably follow to
the prejudice of the whole Nation, in case the Royallists should proceed with
Success, to the ruin of this Government: The very consideration whereof
should (me thinks) be sufficient to startle all understanding men, from wishing
well to that Party.

First, since there can be no Medium of Reconcilement betwixt our present
Governors and the Son of the late King, it is granted by all, that if ever he
come into possession, it must be by Conquest, and the Power of the Sword: If
so, then he will be as absolute as was William the Conqueror, and we all must
be in the same slavish Condition, as our Forefathers were, under the Tyranny
of that Norman Bastard. That Government which heretofore was called
Monarchical will then be exactly Tyrannycall, Cic. ad Art. 7. Epist. 5.
according to that saying of prudent Cicero in one of his Epistles; Ex victoria
cum multa mala, tum certe Tyrannis existit. As many other mischiefs, so
certainly, a Tyranny ever follows a Conquest. And therefore it was that when
He was afterward King, by the name of Henry. 2.
Henry, the Son of Maud the Empress, contended for the Crown by Arms against
King Stephen, and was like to prevail, the Estates of the Realm wrought an
Accommodation betwixt them, See Daniel. in the life of King Stephen.
upon this Ground, because they conceived it dangerous for them, and the whole
State, to have a young Prince get the Mastery by his Sword: For, Princes ever
improve such kinds of Victory to an Advantage over the People, and Success
makes them cruel; withnesse the savage Proceedings of Edward the Second,
Daniel. in Edw. the Second.
against his Lords, after he had overthrown them in Battle, in the Northern
Parts; executing their Persons, and confiscating their Estates, as Traitors, so
that he is noted in our Chronicles, to be the first of all our Kings, after the
Conquest, who to prosecute his Revenge gave a Precedent of Butchering the
Bodies of the English by Beheading and Quartering. This may be enough to show,
that to bring any Prince into possession by the Sword, is to instate him in a
Tyranny.

Secondly, Though the Prince of himself should not be inclined to Tyranny, yet
his followers having a Power over him, will soon persuade him to it. Besold.
in Cap.
Nam Legitimum Regnum convertitur in Tyrannidem, aut Dominatum, de morble
rerumpub. p. 3. 12.
cum Aulo-politicis (qui plerunque odio prosequuntur libertatem) facile aurem
prabet Princeps. For (says one) a well-regulated Government is soon changed
into a Tyrannycall domination, when a Prince gives ear to Court-politicians,
who (for the most part) are enemies to Liberty. And as to our present case
Machiavel speaks very aptly; Match. de Repub. l. 1. c. 16.
that a Nation which has cast off the yoke of Tyranny or Kingship, (for in his
language they are both the same thing) and newly obtained their Liberty, must
look to have all those for Enemies, that were Familiars and Retainers to the
King or Tyrant, who having lost their Preferments, will never rest, but seek
all occasions to re-establish themselves upon the ruins of Liberty, and to
aspire again unto a Tyranny; that exercising an arbitrary Power, they may take
the more sharp Revenge, against all those that dare but pretend unto Liberty.

Thirdly, seeing that (as things thus stand) to have a King again invested by
the power of his own Sword, were all one as to have a Tyrant erected, with an
Arbitrary Power, to do what he list, it will not be amiss to take a view of
the effects and Consequences of Tyranny, As first, a Leges opprimit Timor. Sen.
Herc. Fur.
trampling of all Laws under Foot. Secondly, using all sorts of Ans^rre,
trucidare, rapere. T^^. in Agric.
Cruelties and Rapine. Hence it is, that Cato called a King Plutarch in vita
Catonis.
Carnivorum Animal, a Ravenous Creature; and by Homer in the first of his
Iliads, a King is called (...), a Devourer of the People, so that no man's Life
or Estate is in safety, if they have a mind to bereave them of either; and for
this purpose, Tacitus says, they always D^latores per praemia cliciu^^.
Tacit. Annal. 4.
keep false Accusations and Witnesses in Lavender. Thirdly, no Boni quam mali
suspectiores su^, semperque allena virtus formidolosa est. Salust. Nec minus
periculum ex unagna fama, quam ex mala. Tacit. Agric.
good man can live safe by them, nor any man that is eminent for Valor or
Virtue; according to that of the Tragedian Seneca. Se^vare Cives Principi and
patriae graves,
Claro tumentes genere, quae dementia est?
Who acting the Part of a Tyrant, says, It is a madness to preserve great
Persons, when they once grow burdensome to their Prince and Country. Thus
Tarquin taught his Son Lucius to secure his Tyranny, by striking off the Heads
of those Poppies in his Garden, which grew higher than their Fellows;
whereupon, his ingenious son gave the world to understand, as well as himself,
what his Fathers meaning was, when afterward he destroyed all the principal
men among the Gabians, by Force, Treachery, and false Accusations. No matter
whether things be justly done, or not; for, a Tyrants Maxims are such as this,
out of Lucian, Scoptrorum vls tota perit, si pe^^ere justa
Incipit. --


That Prince's Scepter is not worth a Rush, who stands upon Justice and
honesty. Caesar has left it upon Record of himself, as Th^^cydides has of
Euphemus, and Euripidei of E^eocles: Regni causa jus violandum esse.
That all Laws may be violated, to make way to a Domination: That Regni causa
secleratum esse.
a man may be wicked to obtain, or maintain, an absolute Sovereignty; That a
Prince Principi nihil est injust^ quod fructuos^m.
ought to account nothing unjust which is profitable. To which may be added one
more out of Ubi honesta tantum dominanti licent, precario regnatur.
Seneca, That where a Prince has no power to do ought but what is just, he
reigns but by Courtesy. These are the usual Rules by which Tyrants steer
their Courses; and therefore it concerns all men to forbear their assistance,
to any that endeavor to re-settle a King by the power of the Sword, lest he
seat himself as a Conqueror, and so slip into an absolute Tyranny. For,

It is seldom, that Kings forbear an arbitrary Power, if they can by any means
usurp it, over the People: and though there may sometimes happen a good King
that will not make use of it to their Prejudice; yet even then the People are
not safe, Quamvis bonus atque clemens fit, qui plus potest tamen quia malo esse
licet, formidatur. Salust. ad Caes.
because (says Salust) it is in his power to be wicked if he please.

Fourthly, If he come in by the Sword, there will be no Act of Oblivion passed
before hand; and if he gain possession, it is a Question then, whether he will
grant any afterward; or if (for fashion sake) he do grant one, how far it
shall extend, and whether it may not be eluded, to make way for revenge against
particular Persons, who (perhaps) little dream of an Inquisition for past
Offenses, as being of the moderate Sort of Offenders against the regal Person
and Prerogative. All these Quaeres are well worthy every man's Consideration,
since revenge is esteemed inter Areana Imperii one of the special mysteries in
the Cabinet-Counsells of Royalty: For, with them, as Tacitus says, Vltio in
Questu habetur, Revenge is counted great gain, and prized as the prime Jeweli
of a Crown. It is so D^lc^ malum vindicta.
sweet a Morsel, that even the best of Kings could not refrain it; as may be
seen in the practices of David and Solomon. 2 Samuel 19. 18.
We read how David pardoned Shimei for a time; and he seemed so earnest in the
doing it, that one would have thought, the Offense should never have been
remembered; Also, how he forbore to revenge himself upon Joab all his own
days; yet being to die, he gives charge to his Son Solomon, not to let them
escape unpunished, but that he should bring their hoar heads unto the grave
with blood, 1 Kings 2.
which afterward (upon slight occasions) were executed accordingly. So Solomon
himself likewise, though he forgave his Competitor and Brother Adonijah, Ibid.
and bad him go to his house in peace; yet he lay at catch still for some new
occasion to be revenged: And therefore for a petty passion of love toward the
Shunamite Lady, in demanding her to be his Wife, poor Adonijah was laid to
sleep with his Fathers. Daniel.
In our own Chronicles we find also, how that when Henry the third had in the
end gained the better by his Sword, over the Earl of Leicester and the People,
he meditated nothing but revenge against all that had opposed him, razing the
Castles of his Barons, confiscating their Estates, and taking forfeiture of the
Charters of many Corporations; especially of the Londoners whom he spightfully
vexed ever after in body and purse, upon every opportunity. So likewise Richard
the second, because the Londoners were not willing to back him in his
Irregularities, but had appeared cross to his Designs, watched every way to be
revenged on them; Ibidem.
and upon a slight occasion of a Tumult in the City (which nevertheless the
Mayor soon suppressed) he deprived them of the best part of their Privileges,
and put them to the expense of no less than Twenty thousand pounds; a fine
considerable sum in those days of Antiquity, to be added to that invaluable
loss of their Liberties, for so poor a matter as a petty Tumult about a
Quarrel with a Bishop's Servant. But when Kings have been dis-obliged by any
City or persons (by hook or by crook, sooner or later) they shall feel their
displeasure: And therefore Machiavel advises never to trust them; Match. de
Prin.
For, whosoever (says he) thinks by new Courtesies to take out of their minds
the remembrance of old Injuries, is extremely deceived.

Fifthly, If Kings are thus revengfull, then what may we expect but the fatal
Consequences of that humor? It is an old Saying; -- Regnabit sanguine multo,
Ad Regnum quisquis venit ab exilio; that is,
His Reign will be very bloody, that comes from banishment to a Kingdom;
whereof they shall be first sensible that have opposed his Interest; and such
are all those in this Nation that have appeared for the Parliament, against the
Encroachments of the Prerogative. Nor let them flatter themselves, that they
shall escape better than others, because they never opposed this Princes person;
It will be ground sufficient for his hatred, that They bandied against his
Father, and the Prerogative, to which he is heir. Nor is it likely he will
forget the observation made by one of his Chaplains, in a Sermon before him at
the Hague; how that the Presbyterians held his Father by the hair, Dr.
Crighton.
and the Independents out off his head; Nor is it to be supposed that we should
have many Parliaments hereafter; For, besides the Provocations given by
Parliament, it is against the nature of King's to love Monarchae nois amant
Ordinum Conventus crebriores. Besold. de Simulachris Reri^npub.
Parliaments or Assemblies of their People; and it was left as a Legacy by
King James to his Family, in his Basilicon Doron; That his Successors should
neglect Parliaments as much as might be: So that consider how this Prince is
engaged, not only by the Interest of the Crown, his particular personal
Interest of Revenge, but also by the Praecepts of his Grandfather, and the
common Inclination of all Monarchs, and we may easily imagine what will become
of Parliaments, and Parliament-Patriots, if ever he get possession.

Sixthly, Whereas many now adhere to him in their hearts, in hope they shall be
eased of Excise and Taxes, etc. if he be restored, they are exceedingly
mistaken. I remember a Passage out of the Stories of France; Du Serres.
that the Duke of Orleans having, upon a difference betwixt him and the King,
laid a Tax upon some of the Provinces, by their own consent, to maintein his
Army; afterward, allured with fair promises, they inclined the Duke to accord
with the King, hoping to be eased of the Imposition; but they fell short of
their desires; for, that which they had voluntarily imposed upon Themselves,
was settled upon Them perforce by the King, when he once had them in possession:
And so that Tax, which was called the Gabel, continues upon them to this very
day, as a Token of their folly. Now, let not us flatter our selves here in
England, that we shall fare any better (in point of Excise, or other payments)
upon the Prince's restitution. If now we have Burdens, we must then look to
have Furrows, made upon our backs: If now we are (through necessity) put to
endure a few whips, we shall then (of set purpose) be chastised with Scorpions.
It is not an Excise, or an Army that we shall escape, but be visited with whole
Legions of foreign Desperadoes, which must be fed with greater Payments than
ever, and (God knows) when we shall be rid of them, if the Prince settle upon
their shoulders. Consider, how many hungry Scots gape after this good Land,
who, with those of other Nations, must be Satisfied out of the Purses of our
own, whilst those that are their Leaders will be gratified, with this, that,
and the other Man's Lands and possessions. And that this Insinuation is no
Fiction, but well grounded upon Precedents out of our own Histories, in the
Practices of our Kings, may appear by the Proceedings of the Conqueror; who
being forced to extraordinary Courses to satisfy his foreign Soldiery, made
bold so frequently with the Estates of his Subjects, that the great Lords of
the Kingdom, fearing it would come to their Turns at last to part with their
Possesions, by way of prevention, sled out of the Land, some into Scotland,
some into Denmark, and other Parts, to try if by aid from abroad, they might
recover Themselves and their Fortunes again at home: But by this means they
happened to lose all so much the sooner; for, miscarrying in the Design, their
Estates were possessed, and their Offices supplied by the Norman Favorites.
Thus also, King Stephen, himself being a Foreiner. and relying most upon foreign
Arms to preserve him in possession, was constrained to take the same Course,
for the satisfaction of his foreign Auxiliaries, which consisted most of
Flemings and Picards, whom he especially trusted in his greatest Actions,
neglecting and oppressing the English. Thus did Henry the third also in his
wars with the Barons; against whom bringing in Foreiners, He, for reward,
invested them with others Lands and Honors, and laid heavy Impositions besides
upon the whole Kingdom, to make Them Satisfaction. And in those variations of
Fortune between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, as often as either of
Them had occasion to make use of foreign Arms to assert their Titles, the
Estates of the Adverse Party, and the Purses of the People, were sure to go to
wrack for the Pay of the Soldiery. From hence then it appears, that if the
Prince put himself in possession by Arms, we shall be so far that way from any
ease of our burdens, that they will be doubled, and trebled, yea, and
tenfolded upon us.

Lastly, The Prince's Confederation with the Scots, and our English Presbyters,
(were there no other Reason) might be enough to terrify any ingeniously minded
People from giving their assistance, be they Royalists, or not: For, if the
Kirk be able to bind the Prince to hard Conditions, and prove (like the Sons
of Zeruiah) too strong for him, so that his Interest bow to theirs, then in
stead of a Regal (which is more tolerable) we must all stoop to the
intolerable yoke of a Presbyterian Tyranny, that will prove a plague upon the
Consciences, Bodies, and Purses of this free Nation. The Scots by this means
will effect their Design upon us, by stretching their Covenant-union to an
equality of Interest with us in our own Affairs: And the English-Grandees of
that Party will seat themselves again in the House, and exclude all others, or
else a New Parliament shall be called of Persons of their own Faction; so that
if they should carry the day, all the Comfort we shall have by casting off the
present Governers, will be only that we shall have these furious Jockies for
our Riders: Things (perhaps) shall be in the old Statu quo, as they were when
the late King was at Holdenby, whose Son must then lay his Scepter at the
Foot-stole of the Kirk, or else they will restore him by leisure (as they did
his Father) into the exercise of Royalty: By which means we should be brought
again, as far as ever we were, from a condition of Settlement, and the
Commonwealth reduced to Ashes by endless Cumbustions. On the other Side, put
case the Prince have the better end of the Staff of the Presbyters, (they
relying upon his Courtesy, as well as the rest of the People) then, in case he
carry the day, They, and All, are at his mercy, and no Bar will be in the way
to hinder him from an Ascent unto an unlimited Power: So that you plainly see,
this present Combination of Royallists and Presbyters (which soever of them be
most prevalent) must of necessity put the Nation in hazard between Scylla and
Charybdis, that we cannot choose but fall into one of the pernicious Gulphs,
either of Presbyterian, or Monarchical Tyranny.

All these Particulars being seriously considered; how Improbable it is in the
first place that the Prince should go on with Success in his Design; and
then, what miserable Inconveniences must needs follow such a Success (in case
he prevail) not only to the Prejudice of any one Party, but of All, I may
undeniably conclude, that all mistaken Royallists, as well as others, who live
now under the Protection of the present Government, are concerned out of
necessity, and in respect to their own well-being and benefit, to wish well
thereunto, rather than prosecute the private Interest, of a single Family, and
of a few Fugitives its Dependants, to the hazard of their own Families, with
the Peace and happiness of their native Country.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Scots.
I Am sorry I must waste Paper upon this Nation; but seeing They make
Themselves Considerable by being troublesome, it will not be amiss to sound
the Depth of their present Design; which that I may the better do, give me
leave to trace them in their Encroachments, from the first to the last, upon
the English Nation. Not to mention those of elder date, let us begin with King
James who being a native Scot, out of love to his Countrymen (or rather to
himself, that he might keep them quiet, by stopping their mouths with the
sweet morsels of England) was pleased to admit many of them into his Court,
then into his Council, and to be partakers of Honors and Offices, equal to
the best of our English. His Son, the late King. knowing danger might come of
discontent out of the Northern Corner, followed the same Course that his Father
took, to oblige Them; holding them in Pension, giving access to all Beggars,
with such fair Entertainment, that most of Them staid here, and none returned
empty. This heaping of Favors upon Some, stirred up the Appetites and Emulation
of others; who seeing themselves neglected, and not like to share in any of
these Enjoyments by the Favor of the King, bethought them of an other way, to
make Themselves as considerable as the rest of their Countrymen, and gain an
Interest with the English. Seeing they could not thrive with the Court, They
would try what They could do without it.

Hereupon, being men of Power in their own Country, They became most Zealous
Assertors of the Presbyterian Discipline against the Episcopal, by which means
they gained the Friendship of all the Religious Party in England, then
persecuted by the Bishops, who were at Court the only Favorites: Hereupon,
these Leaders of the Scottish Presbyterians, beginning to grow active and
forward in establishing their own Form at home, and also to propagate it abroad
by encouraging their Friends, gave such an Alarm to the Bishops, that they (to
cross the Design) fell foul upon all of the Opinion here in England; and not
only so, but pressed the King to establish an Episcopal Uniformity in both
Kingdoms, even in Scotland as well as England. The forcing of this upon the
Scots was a Cause of the Commotions in that Kingdom; whereupon a war ensued
betwixt the King and Them through the instigation of the Bishops; which was
soon ended, to the Advantage of the Scots in Money and Credit, and to the
dishonor of the King and the Episcopal Party.

This happy Success wrought a very reverend opinion of them, in the hearts of
the well-affected Party in England, who stood for the purity of Religion, and a
liberty of Conscience, against Episcopal power and Innovations; as also for
the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, invaded by the Prerogative. And for
redress of these things the King was necessitated to call a Parliament; who
not obtaining such Relief of Grievances as they expected by reason of a
Corrupt Council of Bishops and others about the King, which alienated him from
his great Council the Parliament, and afterward caused Him to break out into
a war against Them, were constrained likewise to take Arms, in defense of
our Liberties. Hereupon, recourse was had to the Scots for their assistance;
who, having the same Enemies at Court, and being equally involved in the same
common Danger, it was supposed they were concerned in Reason to join with the
Parliament, without any Dispute or Scruple. But They, considering now was the
Time to make their Markets (if ever) and their own interest as much English as
might be, came not off so roundly as was hoped, but fell to bartering like
Hucksters, and no Bargain would be (forsooth) without a Covenant. They would
not join, except They might be (in a manner) all one with us, and this Union
must be sealed with that solemn League and Covenant. What their meaning was
therein, we shall know by and by, by taking a view of their Actions ever since,
which are the most sure Interpreters: Yet even at that time, See the grand Case
of Conscience concerning the Engagement, stated, etc.
some men had their eyes in their heads, and many Objections were made at
diverse Expressions in the Covenant, and many Desires for explanation of some
Articles more fully. But the Scots standing stiff upon their own Terms, and
no Conjunction like to be obtained without the Covenant, and the necessity of
the Parliaments Affairs admitting no delay, we were glad to take it as it was
offered, without further question or Demurrer.

It was no sooner taken here at London, but immediately every one began to make
his Advantage (through the multitude and ambiguity of Expressions) and by it to
promote his several Interest; as if it had been made to engage unto a
particular Party, not to unite two Nations in a common Interest. But above all
the Scots, having had the honor of this Invention, conceived themselves much
injured by any, that denied them the Prerogative of making an Interpretation;
and in matter of Religion, urged their own Discipline as the only Pattern to
Reform the Church by; and their Plea had been fair enough out of the Covenant,
could they have proved it to be [according to the word of God;] which Clause
was most luckily inserted. Notwithstanding all the Reasons to the Contrary, the
Scottish Module was still pressed: The Scot was willing to ride, and having (as
he thought) the Englishman fast bridled with a Covenant, he began to switch
and spur. The Throne of the Kirk was the Stalking-horse to catch geese; and if
that could have been settled, then there had been no denying Them whatsoever
they would ask; They would have seated themselves surely in this fat Soil;
There would have been no removing them out of our Councels, whereof the
necessity of our Affairs had made them Members and Partakers. For, had the
Kirk-Interest been once confirmed among us, then by virtue of that Authority
which they use to control the Civil power, the Parliament must have been
subservient to all their ends. And since it would have concerned the English
Clergy (to make their Party strong, and maintein Correspondencies for their
own preservation) to have gratified their Scottish Founders in all their
Desires, the Scots might easily have translated the Covenant-union to as good
as an absolute National union, by gaining a Joynt-Interest with us in our
Affairs for ever, and consequently, in all the Profits, great Offices, Councels
and Concernments of this Nation.

Now, whether this were their Design or not in the Covenant ab origin, I
shall not determine; but let it be judged by their insolent behavior here
among us, after they were admitted to our Counsels: and therefore in the next
place I shall examine their Proceedings, which most evidently represent them in
their Intentions. -- It sufficed them not; after they were come in, that they
had an equal Power with us in public Affairs, in the Committee of both
Kingdoms at Derby-house (which was willingly allowed them for a time, so far as
concerned the Common cause of both Nations, in prosecuting the war) but driving
a Powerful Party in both Houses, They took upon them to meddle with matters
relating to the future Peace and Settlement of this Nation, distinct from their
own, and to provide for an equal Interest with us therein. The first most
notable Evidence of this (though there had been many before) was discovered at
the Vxbridge-Treaty, where Propositions of both Houses for Peace being
presented to the King, it was found the Scots had so far Provided for
Themselves by their Party in the Houses, That in time to come, the ordering of
the English Militia, the Power of making War and Peace, and all other
Prerogatives of Government, were to be administered by a proportionable number
of Scots, as well as English: A thing so ridiculous, and an Encroachment so
palpable, that the King Himself, in one of His Answers, took notice of it, and
said, He was not so much an Enemy to the English Nation, as to sign those
Propositions; or somewhat (I am sure) to this Purpose.

A second evidence or discovery of their Encroachments was made, upon their
delivering in diverse Papers to the Parliament, at several times, wherein they
disputed their Claim, and ventured their Logic upon the Letter of the
Covenant, to prove an Interest in disposal of matters merely relating to our
welfare; which they reinforced afterward with new Recruits of Argument, when
the King came into their Army.

But not knowing well how to maintain their Arguments, They were contented for
that time, to quit Them and their King too, upon such Terms, as are notorious
to all the world; who being at length reduced under the Power of the Parliament
and Army, Propositions of Peace were sent to him at Hampton Court, wherein no
such Provision being made for the Scottish Interest, as was in those at
Vxbridge, their Commissioners here protested against them* accused the
Parliament of Breach of Covenant, and complained highly in one of their
Declarations that they should be so neglected. This may serve as a third
evidence of their Covenant-designe of Encroachment; whereto may be added one
more, when the King was at Carisbrooke Castle, whither the Commissioners of
Parliament were no sooner arived with Propositions again, but the Scots
Commissioners were at hand, and for the same reason protested furiously against
Them. By which insolent demeanors and expressions, from time to time, and
crying up the Covenant for their defense, it is clear enough what their
Intentions were when they urged it upon us, and that notwithstanding all the
specious Pretenses of brotherly Love, their Design in it hitherto has been,
only to scrue themselves into an equal Interest with us in this Nation.

Having smelt out their Project thus far, give me leave to trace them on to
the end, as briefly as may be. The Royal Party being totally suppressed, and
so no further occasion to make use of the Scottish Army, the Parliament, with
some difficulty, made shift to send them home into their own Kingdom: But
being defeated of their Aims and expectations, they could not so rest; having
failed of their ends by pretending for Parliament, they resolved next to try
what they could do upon the Kings Score, and so the Grandees turned the Tables,
in hope of an After-game, by closing with Hamilton upon the Royal Account; not
doubting but if they gained the day this way, to recompense their Travels with
much more Advantage. The Covenant, like a nose of wax, apt to be turned any
way, served this enterprise every jot as well as the former, though the Design
were different from what it was, the great ones not caring much what became of
the Kirk Interest, since they had agreed for the security of their own; which
must needs have been very considerable, if they could have redeemed the King,
and restored him into the condition of an absolute Monarch. Therefore the Kirk
seeing themselves left thus in the Lurch, thundered out their Curses amain
upon that Hypocritical Engagement, as destructive to the Covenant.

But the Grandees being at a loss in this likewise upon Hamilton's Defeat, and
followed home to their own doors by the brave English Army, were glad to cry
Peccavi to the Kirk, and also to our English Commanders, whom they dismissed
with many promises of fair Carriage for the future. Within a while after, a new
door of hope being opened to them by the supposed Succession of the late Kings
Son, They to ingratiate with him, proclaim him their King; and here the
Grandees and the Kirk joining hands again, become friends, and offer their
Service for his restitution, upon Terms of the Covenant; which is their Plea
now at this very day: So that the Covenant, which was pretended to be framed at
first, for the preservation of this Parliament and the Liberties of the People,
against the usurpations of regal Power, is; now that the Scots can serve their
design no longer that way, become the Ground of their present Combination with
the Prince, and their Presbyterian Brethren in England, for the destruction of
our Liberties; being resolved this way, since they have failed in all the rest,
to try whether they can accomplish their profane Projects through the
Covenant, by insinuating themselves into places of Honor, Profit, and Power,
that they may domineere in the possessions, as their Pharisaicall Priests would
over the Consciences of the English.

Thus having made way, in discovering what the design of the Scots ever has
been, and is at this Instant, under the fair Covert of the Covenant,
certainly, no man that is master of an English spirit, but will abhor the
Hypocritical pretenses and Encroachments of that perfideous Nation. And
therefore now that all men may beware how they be drawn into an Engagement
with them, I shall (according to my way) manifest first, the Improbability of
their Success, and then the Inconveniences which must necessarily follow, in
case their design be successefully effected.

First, As to the Improbability of Success, consider by way of Comparison, the
great difference between the English and Scottish Soldiery. Ours are heightened
with extraordinary Pay, bravely accomplished, strong Horse, well disciplined,
veterane Soldiers, better Spirited by reason of a more generous education; and
to all these add the advantage of being Englishmen, and the Reputation of
having been so long victorious; let these considerations be laid in the balance
against the Scots; fresh men (for the main) newly raised, a People of far
less generous Souls, poor in Body, Pay, and other Accommodations, save what
they have purchased by proguing here in England. Judge then in reason what
these are able to do against so brave an Army that contemns and scorns Them,
as having beaten them with a handful (in comparison of their numbers) home to
their own doors; an Army, that to all worldly Advantages, has hitherto had a
special Protection from Heaven, God having Sealed them for his own by many
miraculous victories and Successes, to the wonder of the whole world.

Secondly, consider that our English Army are all of a Nation, Natives, and
unanimous especially upon the appearance of any Invaders; whereas the Scottish
will be made up of diverse Factions, Royalists and Presbyterians, that com in
pursuance of different ends; which (for the time that they continue together)
must needs be a cause of many Confusions and partialities of Counsels, to the
prejudice of their Enterprises and Proceedings; a spring of perpetual
Emulations, that will soon untwist the Confederacy; so that in short time they
must fall asunder like a Rope of Sand, and the private Soldiery be disposed to
entertain thoughts of some new Engagement, to the ruin of the first.

Thirdly, We shall not only be provided for them here, if they dare be so
unworthy as to invade us; but it is like this Commonwealth may find work for
them at home, and (to cure their madness) divert the humor with Phlebotomie,
by way of Revulsion.

Fourthly, It is like they will be far from running much hazard to gain
Success unto the Design. For, if they provr a little unfortunate, the humor
will alter; one good beating will make them understand, there is another way of
Interest and Thriving, than under the wings of Royalty. It may chance to make
them remember (because they cannot forget) how long they have lived without a
King in Scotland, while the Grandees and the Kirk did all; and that the English
have dealt more ingenuously to have no King, than a Presbyterian Mock-King. One
Rout (with this consideration) puts them presently into the humor of a
Republique, as well as England. And then they will have no more work to do,
but to raise the Market, and get Chap men for their King to put him off
handsomely, that they may pay their Army, and go home again like Scots.

Lastly, the Scots having no just Ground of a War against England, can hardly
be prosperous in the Attempt. The Covenant can be none, being extinct, as I
have proved in the former part of this Treatise; besides I shall add one
Reason more: It cannot in common sense be supposed to have been intended as an
eternal obligation, binding both Nations for ever, or to bind the English
Nation with an implicit Faith, to whatsoever the Scots should expound to be
righteous and necessary, to be done here for ever by way of Government. But it
appears intended only for a certain time, for the prosecution of certain
Ends which were common to both Nations as Affairs then stood; and therefore
being of a transient nature, because those Ends (by the alteration of Time, and
other Circumstances) are found either not possible or inconvenient, the
obligation expires of it self. This being the state of the Covenant, neither
the Scots, nor any other Party can found a War upon it in Reason or Justice.
If so, then having no other Ground for a War* but Covetuousnesse, Emulation
and Ambition, which (as I showed in the Preamble of this Chapter) have been
cloaked under the Covenant, in all their Engagements, the hand of Heaven will
assuredly be against them for their unchristian Practices, as may appear by
these examples following.

First, Strig. in Chron. part. 2. p. 186.
The Athenians, carried on with Covetousness, Emulation, and a desire to
possess themselves of the Riches, of the Lacedaemonians, were the Author of the
Peloponesian War; the consequence whereof was, that it ended with the
subversion of their City walls, P^ucer. in lect.
and the miserable slavery of their People. The same end likewise had the
Carthaginians, Chron. d. 18.
for moving an ambitious War against the Romans by the Instigation of Hannibal;
Iul. An. 73.
as also had the Thebans for their unjust invading the Macedonians.

It is observable likewise how that Semiramis.
Babilonian Queen and Virago (as Diodorus Siculus tells us) being gre^dy after
the Wealth of the Indians, Diod. Sic. rerii antiq. l. 2. c. 5.
invaded them by an unjust War, in hope to make a Conquest* Bella injusta
infelices Su^c^ssus, tri^^es, and Tragi^os exitus semper habent.
but the Issue was, that she was forced to fly home again most sh^m^fnlly for
the safety of her life. Thus Xerxes, invading Greece with a world of Men, and
Ships, was in the end glad of a poor Fishing-boat to get home out of Europe, to
a worse destiny in Asia; Strig. ^. Reg. 14. p. 187.
being slain immediately after his Return, by his Uncle A^ta^an^s. Upon the
like occasion, Cyrus lost his Army, and his life; and to quench his
B^oud-thirsty humor, his Head was cut off, and cast into a Hogs head filled
with Blood, by the Scythian Queen. Thus likewise, Mark Anthony, not content
with half the Empire of the World, invading his Partner Octavius for the whole,
lost all, and being taken alive at mercy, laid violent hands on himself to
prevent the Fury of the Conqueror. Thus Crassus another Roman, Philip. Chron.
being of the Scotch Religion, a sacred hunger after Gold, Tom. 1. Epist. per
Pe^c. edit. page 248.
invaded the Parthians without cause, against the advice of the Senate; in
which expedition he lost his Army and Life, and the Parthians considering what
he came for, poured Molten Gold into his Mouth, in Triumph and Mockery.

To these Examples out of profane History, let me add a few out of the Sacred.
You may read 2 Kings 15. how Senacherib, the King of Assyria, mad an impious
invasive War against Hezekiah King of Judah; the consequence whereof was the
Confusion of his Army, and Revenge followed him to his own home so close at the
heels, that it was executed upon him by his own Sons, while he was at his
superstitious devotion, in the midst of his Idols. Nor have wicked Princes
only been punished for invading the good, but you may read also that the good
have had ill Success in invading the bad. 2 Chronicles. 35.
Thus good Josiah, a most religious Prince, warring without cause against
Pharaoh Nicho King of Egypt, received his deaths wound at Megiddo, and after
his death, the same King Pharaoh, to right himself of the Injury done him by
Josiah waged War, and by Gods permission subduing the Land, made the whole
Nation Tributary, and took King Jehoahaz, the Son of Josiah, and carried him
Prisoner into Egypt.

Also, another good King of Judah, by name, Amaziah, provoking Jehoash, 2 Kings
14.
a wicked King of Israel, without cause, to Battle, was utterly Routed, the
City of Jerusalem taken, the Walls demolished, the Temple spoiled, and Amaziah
himself carried away Prisoner, to show how much the Lord of Hosts, and God of
Battle, it displeased with unjust Wars, that he will not prosper them, though
made by his own People against the wicked that are his Enemies.

But there is one example more, which (me thinks) is very pertinent to our
purpose; 2 Samuel Chap. 2, 3, and 4.
and that is of Ishbosheth, the Son of King Saul, who laying claim to the
Kingdom after his Father, by prerogative of Succession, made War against
David, who was chosen King by Gods own appointment: But to show that
Hereditary Succession is no Plea to justify a War against the Powers that
are ordained by him, he placed marks of displeasure against all that took part
with Ishbosheth, so that in the end Ishbosheth had his Head struck off by some
Commanders of his own Party, and brought to David. Now, I leave this unto those
that list, to make the Application: And withal, they may do well to consider
how the Spaniard prospered in 88. in his Invasion against England; how ill he
has thrived ever in his Attempts against the Hollander: And as for the Scots,
I suppose, that as it concerns them to consider the sad example of the late
Hamiltonian Invasion; so they and their Adherents may learn from all these
together, That God will never prosper them, if they proceed in their
unrighteous Combination.

Having shown the Improbability of the Scots success, I shall in the next
place discover the great Inconveniences and hazards that our Nation must needs
undergo, in case it should happen.

First, It being evident, that their design in urging the Covenant upon us,
has been to insinuate themselves into an equal Interest with us in our own
Nation, it is to be supposed, that having hitherto been defeated of their
long-expected Prey, they come now to prosecute it with the greater appetite:
And it is to be presumed they will not serve the King with the Covenant, at an
easier rate than they intended it should have cost the Parliament.

Secondly, It is to be feared, this so much desired Interest of theirs may (if
opportunities fall out right for their Turns) be driven on farther by the
Sword, than yet we are aware of. A National Union has been whispered often
among them heretofore; and there is no doubt but they will bid high for it, if
ever they have occasion; And then it must needs be a very fine world, when we
are confounded with a Miscelany of Scottish and English; when Scots shall be
Competitors with us in point of Privilege, vie wealth with us in our own
Possessions, Honors, and Dignities; and either impose new Laws upon us, or
alter the Old, as may make most for their Advantage.

Thirdly, That these things may be, is probable enough, since their King having
no other rewards to give them, it is impossible he should satisfy the Grandees
and Leaders any other way, than by promising large accessions of Interest, with
other men's Honors and Possessions; even those men's (perhaps) that are the
Moderate Sort of Transgressors; For, in such Cases it is usual to stretch all
Offenses upon the Wrack, to supply the necessities of the Conqueror; and then
if this happen, it is like a Scotch Covenanters stomach, will allow no
distinction, betwixt Presbyter and Independent, but may digest the estate of an
English Covenanter without so much as a Scruple of Regret, or Compassion.

Lastly, it is a very great wonder, since the present Stage Play of the
Covenant, and the Actors are brought on this side the Curtain, and we know what
they are through all their disguise, and what they aim at, That yet many of
our English should be so stupid, as to be led away with their Cheates and
Pretenses for a King and Reformation: Also, since it is evident, that their
chief Leaders and Sticklers gape only after Profit and Preferment, and
(according to the Custom of all Forreiners in Arms) will make no difference
between Friend and Foe, so they may satisfy their covetous and ambitious Ends;
since the whole People likewise must of necessity be harased with innumerable
Taxes, to pay the rabble of their Soldiery; certainly, no true English heart
can be so degenerous, as to forward or countenance them, in their invading this
Nation.

Now, for a Conclusion to the whole; that these Particulars may appear more
solid then mere Insinuations, give me leave to confirm them by many Authentic
examples; it being an ordinary Case in the world, That Ab istis exercitibus,
quos defendendi sui causa attraxerunt, evertuntur.
Commonwealths and Kingdoms have been oppressed often by those Foreiners, that
came or were invited in as Friends, to give their assistance. Here before I
proceed, let me call to mind a Story of the Hedghog, in the Fable; Peucer.
Auxiliatores, ut solet fieri, postea siunt domini. Strigel. 2. Paralip. 28.
who being almost dead with Cold, chanced to light upon a Foxes Kennel; where
asking for entertainment, the Fox more compassionate than wise grants his
Request. But the Hedghog, as soon as he recovered warmth, began to bristle and
prick the Fox, who complaining of his unworthy carriage, the Hedghog made
Answer, that if he found him troublesome, he might leave him, and seek a new
Lodging. I shall make no application, but leave those that would entertain the
Scots as their Friends, to consider whether they should find more Courtesy
from them, if They had power here then the Fox did from the Hedghog, or than
other Nations have had from the friendly Pretenses of Forain Auxiliaries.

Concerning this, Justin.
there are several Precedents. Tht Mac^donians being invited by the Thebans,
to assist them against the Phocians, made a shift not only to seat themselves
among the Thebans, but under the conduct of King Philip, made way to the
Conquest of all Greece: Xenoph. lib. 7.
So the Persians coming as Friends to aid one party in a civil division in
Caria, suppressed both, and deprived that Commonwealth of its liberty. And the
Carthaginians, in the first Punick War, received more prejudice from the
Cel^ae, their Confederates and Brethren in Covenant, than from the Romans their
Enemies.

The Goths and Vandals being invited by the Emperor Theodosius, Pezel. part 4.
page 613.
for his assistance, deprived him of Italy and Spain. Afterward, the Longbeards
or Lombards being called in by Narses against the Goths, seated themselves for
above 200 years in that part of Italy, which from them was called Lombardy.

A Quarrel happening between the two Saracen Sultans of Persia and Babylon, Circa
Annum Christi* 870.
the Persian called in the Turks, under the Conduct of their Captain
Tangrolipix out of Scythia, Chytraeus in Apoc. cap. 9.
who seated Themselves first in a part of his Dominions.

In the Chronicles of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 28.
we read how King Ahaz invited Tilglath-pilneser King of Assyria to his
Assistance, against the Edomites; who coming as a Friend, did him exceeding
prejudice, and laid a Design then for the Conquest of Jerusalem, which was
afterwa^d effected. Josephus tells us likewise, how that Pompey being called to
assist Hircanus, in the recovery of the Kingdom of Judaea, Josephus de bello
Jud. lib. 1. c. 12.
out of the Hands of his younger brother Aristobulus, took occasion hereby to
reduce it under the Roman obedience.

In the time of the Emperor Fredrick the 3. the Princes of Italy being in
contention, the Pope called in the Spaniard and several other Princes, to
compose the Quarrel; In Chron. Phil. lib. 5.
which being done, a new one arose betwixt the Auxiliary Princes for the
Lordship of Italy; but the Spaniard drove away the rest, and made bold to keep
possession for himself. Thus likewise, the Spaniards being invited into Sicily
and Naples, to free them from the French, did indeed expel the French, but
possessed both Kingdoms themselves. On the other side; a Controversy arising
between Lewis and John Sforza for the Duchy of Milain, John called in the
Spaniards to his Party, and Lewis the French: But the French driving out John
and the Spaniards, made themselves at that time Masters of the Duke-dome, and
carried their Friend Lewis away Prisoner into France.

Thus in old time our Ancestors the Saxons, Sam. Daniel.
being called in by Vortigern the British King, to assist him against the
Invasions of the Picts and Scots, turned their Arms against the Britans, and
driving them into Wales, transmitted the possession of this Island to us, Joh.
Bodinus lib. 5. cap. 5.
their Posterity. So the Scots likewise (as Bodin says) being called in to the
assistance of the Picts against the Britains, possessed themselves of the best
part of that Kingdom, which they hold at this day.

And now I would feign know of the Admirers of the Scottish Nation, that if The
Scots come in hither with their King upon their Shoulders, and their fine
Flourishes of pretended Friendship, what assurance they can have, that they
shall not serve us the same sauce, as their Ancestors did the Picts, and as
ours did the Britans, or as others did other Nations, whom they oppressed under
as glorious Pretenses, in case They should get the power in their hands:
Especially since of late time, They have made so many pelpable Discoveries of
Encroachment upon the English Nation.

Seeing therefore that their Covenant-Cause appears a Cause for intrenchment
upon our National Interest, rather than for Religion or Monarchy* I may
reasonably conclude, that it concerns all Parties whatsoever (if not for the
Improbability of their Success, and the Miseries that would follow it, yet)
out of a detestation of their Design, to abhor Them in their Invasion.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the English Presbyterians.
WHence it was, and for what ends, Presbytery was first brought into this
Nation, is not here to be disputed: But if we grant the Intentions of its first
Fautors to be pure in the Fountain; yet it appears polluted in the Streams, by
the Corruption of their Successors: For, as the primitive Pretenses of it were
high and glorious, in the innocence of its Cradle; so being grown up to a full
Stature, it has (after the manner of all other things that participate of
worldly mixtures) in time contracted so many adulterations of worldly Interest,
that it has lost the Beauty which it once appeared to have, and serves every
Sophister, as a Cloak, to cover his ambitious Design.

But since it is arived, notwithstanding, to such a hight in the opinions of
many, as to be cried up for the only pattern of Government under the Gospel,
this is to be imputed to the blind Zeal of those that are led, and the
deceitfulness of the Leaders, rather than to the Intention of its learned
Founder, Mr. Calvin. For, it does not appear that ever he stretched his Module
so far, as the necessity and universality of a Divine Right, but seems only to
have hewn part of the Building out of the rock of the Scriptures, and peeced up
the residue by politic and prudentiall Rules, such as he conceived might
sound nearest the Text, and serve most conveniently to cement the dis-joynted
Members of the then broken and tumultuous Commonwealth of Geneva, into an
entire and well-compacted Body.

It was no sooner lick't into Form there; but (as it is the Fate of all things
new) it began to be much extolled and admired; and the Fame thereof spreading
in England, as well as other Parts, wrought in many of our Countrymen an
Itching desire to go thither, and instruct Themselves in the Nature and
Customs of the Government; where, of Spectators they soon became Proselytes,
and returning home with new Affections, looked with an eye of disdain upon the
Bishops; as if Themselves had indeen found out the Pattern in the Mount, because
(forsooth) the words, Presbytery, Elder, Deacon, and Assembly, etc. sound more
Gospel like than Diocese, Churchwarden, Archdeacon, and High Commission,
etc. With these Terms, Maxima pars vulgi capitur Amba^gibus.
the ordinary Sort of Religious persons, not able to see through this Shell of
words, into the Kernel or Substance of the business, were easily led to a
belief of high matters; whereas this new Form, like the Trojan Horse, brought
an Army of mischiefs in the belly of it; which were never so fully discovered,
as till this Parliament. For, immediately after that the Episcopal Form was
abolished here, as corrupt and Antichristian, the chief Sticklers of the
Presbyterian Clergy began to show their Teeth; and sitting in an Assembly Cheek
by Jo^e with the Parliament, intermedled with their Affairs, labored to twist
their Church discipline with the Interest of State, claimed in their open
Pleas, Discourses, and their Confession of Faith, a Power in themselves
distinct from the Civil, and demanded the Voting of this in both Houses, as
Jure Divino, that so the Parliament might for ever cut the throat of their own
Authority, and Magistracy.

These, and many other Pranks they played, in hope to erect their intended
Domination: And though (being often required) they were as little able as the
Bishops to show their Pedigree from the Apostles, or to derive the lineaments
of their form from the Body of the Scripture; yet they pressed it on still, and
wanted not their Party in Parliament, with the assistance of the Scots, (whose
Interest it was) to second them. And here it might be wondered, that so many
knowing men, and of able Parts, should prove so degenerous, as to prostitute
Themselves, and the Majesty of the Nation, to serve the ambitious ends of a few
Priests; but that they had their Ends in it too, and were willing to follow the
Example of the Scottish Grandees, by gratifying the new Clergy in the form of a
National Church, with Accruments of worldly pomp and Power, the better to
support their Own in the State.

For this Cause it was, that They stooped so unworthily to the Design of the
Scots and the Clergy; and being all of them combined in Interest, they were in
a manner necessitated, to countenance and comply with each other in their
mutual Encroachments, to the dishonor of our Nation, the debasing of
Parliaments, and the extreme hazard of the Libery of our Souls and Bodies. All
which being considered, you may see, how exceedingly we are obliged to our
present Governers, that they strove so mightily against the stream to prevent
Them all in their several Designings; and what necessity lay upon them to
expel that corrupt Interest out of Parliament, and to follow the Counsel of
the Poet, in cutting Immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum est. Ovid.
off a rotten Part for the Preservation of the whole, by the Power of the
Sword. By reason of this necessary and magnanimous Act, it is, that they have
made Themselves so many Enemies to the Presbyterian Party: For, the Scots,
being defeated of their English Interest, the Secluded Members of their Hopes
and Privileges, and the Clergy of their Kirk-domination, incline all
immediately to face about to the Prince, and to hedge in him and his Interest
with their own, as well as they can, in hope of private Revenge and a
Recovery, without any regard at all to the good and peace of the Public. Then
Gentlemen, if they prevail, ye will be but in the old posture again, As You
WERE; yea, and far worse than you were, since all those Church-usurpations
which were then but in design, must needs be confirmed by a new alteration.

For this Cause it is, there are so many Presbyterian Juglings in private, such
Murmurings abroad, and so many Mutinies in the Pulpit; such wel-acted
Lamentations for the glory of the Kirk, and the loss of their Diana, that
every Prayer is a Stratagem, most Sermons mere Plots against the State, and
upon their Hearers. Thus the Nature of their Design being discovered, give me
leave in the next place to manifest the Vanity of their Hopes, that if men will
not forbear for shame of its hypocrisy, they may yet, in consideration of the
many sad Consequents which may follow.

As to the Improbability of their Success,
First, our English Presbyterians are very inconsiderable now in England,
because above three Parts in four are fallen off, since they were able to see
through the Pretenses of the Grandees of their Party, so that the small
Remainder can do little of Themselves, and all their hope leans upon Scotland,
that bruised Reed.

Secondly, As their Party is but small of its Self; so there is small
likelihood of an Increase, because all the Rest of this Nation are Opposite to
them and their ways, being either Common-wealths-men, or Royallists. And
though they use all Endeavors to draw in the Royal Party to their own, yet it
can never be effected, by reason that the old Antipathie will revive upon every
little occasion. For, the Royallists look upon them still, as the Authors of
their Misery; and the Prince (who is Head of that Party) though He may feed
Them with fair Promises, can never cordially embrace them, being the old
Enemies of his Family: Nor will he count them any whit the less guilty for
their hypocritical protesting against the Death of his Father; For, They
reduced him Diminutione Capitis, into the condition of a Captive; They spoiled
him as a King, before others executed him as a private man; They deprived him
of his earthly Crown, and kept him languishing, whereas his own See the Irish
Bishop's Sermon at the Hague, in print.
Party say, others were more courteous in sending him to an heavenly. In short,
I affirm, that the present Powers have done nothing now in altering the
Government, but what was done in effect before, or must have been done by the
Presbyterian Party.

Thirdly, But suppose (what in reason cannot be supposed) that the Prince could
forget old Injuries, and that the necessities of the chief of his Party should
bring down their Stomachs to a compliance with Presbytery; yet the main Body
of that Party will never comply, in a course so destructive to every man's
Interest of Conscience and Liberty; nor venture their Lives and Estates to
establish a Faction, which they believe to aspire toward an intolerable
Tyranny, over Magistrates and People.

Lastly, the Presbyterians Themselves may do well to consider, what Success
they are like to have in their union with a Prince, whose Interest is already
declared to be Revenge for the ruin of his Father. Though They laid him not
down upon the Block, yet They brought him to the Scaffold; and when time
serves, the Philosopher's Maxim will prove good Logic at Court, Bed a. Axiom.
ex. Aristotele.
Qui vult media ad finem, vult etiam and ipsum finem; He that wills the means
conducing to the end, wills also the end it self: Ergo (will the Courtiers
say) since the Presbyterians put such Courses in practice, as tended to the
Kings Ruin, they certainly intended it, and are as guilty as others.

But to illustrate this a little, give me leave to close up this particular
with a notable example -- It happened that Clearchus, This Story is recorded by
Machiavel, in his first book de Repub.
the Tyrant of Heraclea, was by a Conspiracy of the Grandees driven out of his
Dominions, they hoping when he was gone to have all power in their own hands;
but there started up a Party of the People, which prevented them, and settled
the State in a condition of Liberty and Freedom. Hereupon, the Grandees, in
disdain and revenge against this new Party, conspired against the
Commonwealth, and brought back Clearchus into possession. The Tyrant being
thus restored, instead of gratifying them that had a hand in his restitution,
consulted to satisfy both his own Revenge upon them, for having opposed him
at first, and also the discontents of the People against them, for their having
deprived them of their late Liberty: and therefore all the reward they received
for bringing him back was, that he Sentenced them all to a most shameful
Execution. This is the Story, and now I leave those Presbyterians, that dream
of high Success in bringing back the Prince, to make application.

As for the Inconveniences which the Presbyterian Design would bring upon the
whole Nation, guess at them by these Particulars following.

I shall pass by those Inconveniences which must ensue their Combination with
the Scots, having sufficiently mentioned them in the former Chapter, and
consider those only that would follow the establishment of their Presbyteriall
Discipline; First, Besides the many mischiefs it would bring upon the Nation in
general, the Royalist^ (of all others) can receive no content in it, being
absolutely destructive to Regal Dignity. It never was embraced yet by any one
Nation, in a National Form, but by Scotland. This (as one See the Case of the
Kingdom Stated. Anno 1647.
has observed) was done, during the minority of King James, when the Lords and
Clergy ruling all as they listed at length parted Stakes (though the Clergy
then got, and still hold the better) that when he came to Age, he found the
Fable of Ixion's Juno moralized upon himself: For, as he embraced a Cloud in
stead of a Goddess; so the King, when he thought to grasp his Scepter, laid
hold on a Manacle, which kept his hands so fast, during his abode there, that
he could never Act but what they pleased to let him, according to their own
Directory of Kirk and State. And in process of time, this heat of Presbytery
proved such an Hectic in the body Politic of Scotland, that the substance of
Kingly Power was utterly consumed, and nothing left (as we see at this day) but
the bare Bones, the very skeleto^ of a Monarchy: witness the absolute Power
now exercised by their Parliament, and the General Assembly of the Kirk-men;
but especially of this latter, which, like to the Rod of Aaron, is in such a
budding thriving condition, that it has devoured the Rod of Moses, as his did
those of the Magicians of Egypt, and proves a Scourge to the Magistracy and
People.

Secondly, the difference betwixt the present Powers, and Them, is only this;
That they would not have a King so much as in Name; the Presbyterians would
have no more but the Name of King, a Scar-crow of Royalty: The State in
downright terms have declared themselves Free; the other pretend to maintain
the Monarchical Form, yet actually destroy the very Fundamentalls of Monarchy:
And now I would feign know of the deluded Royalist, which of the two deals most
ingenuously; and if the Presbyters take place, wherein he can conceive his
Party will receive any Advance or Advantage: For, besides that this mad
Discipline destroys Bishops, and clips the wings of Regality, it will entrench
also upon the Lawyers, curb the Gentry in their own Lordships, by a strange way
of parochial Tyranny, and bring all People into the condition of mere
Gally-slaves, while the blind Priests sit at the Stern, and their
Hackney-dependants, the Elders, hold an Oar in every Boat. For, --

Thirdly, were those Priests seated here (as they are in Scotland) in a sure
Succession, then (as it has been long since See the Case of the Kingdom, ut
supra.
observed in Print) a Correspondence being cherished between a Clergy of the
same garb and humor, in both Countries, They might finely loss Thunderbolts
of excommunication on both sides, to gratify each other, and so be able to
terrify all Persons, that dare be averse in either Nation, and promote such
only to places of Honor and Profit, whose poorer Spirits will vassalize their
Genius to serve the ends of their Kirk-domination. In hope of this it is, that
we have so much bauling about the Covenant; and rather than fail of it, Oh,
how they pant after the Scots, who cannot choose but laugh in their sleeves at
them, to see them drive on the work, at the peril of their Necks; the new
Scottish Combination being (as I have shown) but a fresh Onset to the first
Design of encroaching upon English Interest, and the mainteining of a Faction
here to serve the Aims of Scotland, and the Ambition of a few Scotified
English, (some particular Grandees among the Laity, and obscure Rabbis of the
Clergy) who are content to share dominion with the Scots; and so they may do
that, care not though they betray the whole Commonwealth and State of the
Nation.

Fourthly, it being clear, that the Plot of Presbytery is carried on merely
for these unworthy ends, what madness is it for any men that pretend wisdom,
to hazard Themselves and their Fortunes to draw on the guilt of innocent blood
by embroyling their Countrymen, only to serve a Faction, whose practices (when
they are invested with power) will be (as they ever have been) to make them
share with others in the Common calamity at present, and entaile Slavery upon
their posterity for ever.

Fifthly, that I may give you a little more light in these Things, consider,
that the Reason why the Presbytery contended for is so destructive of Liberty,
is, because of the In ordiue ad Spiritualia.
Popish Trick taken up by the Presbyterian Priests, in drawing all Secular
Affairs, within the compass of their spiritual Jurisdiction: And this they
do by means of that awe, wherein they pretend to hold the Consciences of the
Magistrate and People; the one being liable as well as the other, by
Suspensions and Excommunications, to be exploded at pleasure as Scandalous
Sinners. This appears by that large extent of their Authority in judging of
scandalous Sins, which reaches almost to every action of humane life; So that
all the people besides their Favorites (from the Counselor to the Beggar)
must at every Turn stoop like Asses, to be ridden by them and their Arbitrary
Assemblies.

Lastly, the Settling of Presbytery, in such a mode, would erect a Power
Ecclesiastical distinct from that of the Civil: For, it is a Maxim among all
Presbyters, and we find it pleaded for at large, in the Confession of Faith set
forth by the Assembly of Divines [That there ought to be a Jurisdiction in the
Church (that is, in their way of Discipline) distinct from the Civil:] which
Tenet of distinction must needs be the same, in effect, with that of the Church
of Rome's Supremacy; seeing, those which plead now for a Power without the
Civil, will not be long before they arive to such a height of Presumption, as
to act above it or against it, in persuance of their own Designs. It will be
impossible to keep such a Church Discipline, within its limits in any
Commonwealth, which makes the same Persons Civil Subjects, and
Ecclesiastical Superiors. -- To pass by many other Examples of the strange
Inconvenience of that Discipline, in this one Particular, I shall only produce
one of late memory, about the Engagement of Hamilton: who (as I signified in
the Preamble of the former Chapter) preparing to invade this Nation without the
Kirke's approbation, was by Them opposed, and all his Party also in Parliament
(which were the Major Vote:) And after he had gotten as Authentic an
Authority, as that Nation was conceived able to give him for his Design; yet
notwithstanding, the Assembly (because they saw the Grandees had deserted Them,
and left the Kirk-Interest in the Lurch) Not out of any good will toward
England, but because their discipline was not like to be set up here, if
Hamilton had prevailed.
protested against Hamilton's Proceedings, and in him, against the Authority of
Parliament whereby he was enabled, cursing Him and his Adherents.

Now therefore, considering what the Nature and Design of their Presbytery
is, what small Success its Abettors are like to find, and what mischievous
Inconveniences must unavoidably follow it, I leave every reasonable man, within
the Closet of his own Soul and Conscience, to make a Conclusion; whether he
ought not rather to Engage with the Commonwealth, than with this unreasonable
Party.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Levellers.
WHat these People aim at, and how they would settle, is as hard for me to
determine, as in what point of the Compass the wind will ^it next, since they
are every jot as giddy and rapid in their Motions. Yea, the very Settlement
which they pretend to, would, were their Desires granted, put the Commonwealth
into an utter Impossibility of Settling, as I shall prove by and by, when I come
to Particulars.

In the mean time, that you may know what They are, and how they came to be
distinguished by this Title, give me leave to trace Them from their Original,
and manifest how they were divided in Affection from the Parliament; which
appears to be occasioned only by a mere misinterpretation or mistake of some
Passages in diverse Declarations of the Parliament and Army touching the
Liberties of the People; wherein they professed, That the complete Settlement
of the Liberties and Peace of the Nation is that blessing of God, than which,
of all worldly things, nothing is more dear and precious in their Thoughts.
From this, and the like Expressions, a certain Sort of men, of busy parts, and
that have a mind to seem Sombody, immediately took upon them to frame such
Comments, and Chimaera's of Liberty, as might fit their own Ends and Phantsies;
And in time, disseminated such strange Principles of pretended Freedom, among
the common Sort of Soldiery and People; that it became evident to all the
world, they sought not Liberty but Licentiousness.

And the first time that they began to appear considerable in view, was in the
year 1647, when that memorable contest happened betwixt the Army, and the corrupt
Party then prevalent, in both Houses and the City: At which time, though they
did good Service in helping to reduce the one, and purge the other; yet no
sooner had the Parliament recovered it Self into a State of Innocence and
Freedom, and begun to act in such a way, as they conceived necessary to
establish the liberties of the Nation, but these men made bold to carp at their
Proceedings, and cry out against them and the superior Officers of the Army,
as perfidious, and betrayers of the public Interest; because Themselves (a
hot headed Rabble, and the meanest of the People) might not have it settled
after their own humor.

From whence it appears, the first Cause of the Difference between the
Parliament and Them, was their bold and impudent behavior, in presuming to
direct their wisdom what to do, and taking upon them, Dictator-like, to
define what is Liberty, and what not, and how it ought to be established; as if
Themselves alone were infallible, and the only Champions of Universal Freedom,
and the Parliament such, as either regarded it not, or sought it is destruction.
And, notwithstanding that they have manifested their great wisdom, courage, and
care ever since, in carrying on the work of Freedom to this height, wherein we
now see it, to the absolute confutation of these men's Calumnies; yet their
restless Spirits proceed still in the same violent Course, having of late, in
a presumptuous manner, presented a mutinous scandalous Remonstrance, which
(nevertheless) they call an humble Petition, to the Parliment; wherein they
take advantage, by the present Necessities of the Commonwealth, to slander
Them in their Proceedings, as Oppressors of that Liberty which they so
Zealously maintain; and for the necessary Defense whereof, they are
constrained to continue diverse payments upon the People at present, to purchase
^ase in the future.

Having thus discovered the vanity of their Quarrel, in the next place give me
leave to show what their Design is: And this They profess, in that Pamphlet,
called the Agreement of the People, See the Agreement of the People.
(set forth May 1. 1649.) to be a Popular Form, or a Government by the People,
as the only Preservative of Peace and Liberty; wherein it is required, That the
Supreme Authority of England, and the Territories therewith incorporate, may
reside henceforward in a Representative of the People consisting of 400
persons, and no more; whereto all of 21 years and upwards, are allowed a Right
to choose, and be chosen Members, except Servants and Vagabonds. And because all
persons have an equality of Right to choose and be chosen, without respect of
Birth, quality, or wealth, all Orders of men being Levelled in this Particular,
therefore the Promoters of this way, are not improperly called Levellers; so
that this Term of Levelling is equivalent with Aristotle's (...), 6. Polit.
cap. 2.
which is translated aequalitas Juris, the Equality of Right beforementioned;
And the same Author says, this Plea for Equality of Right in Government, at
length introduces a Claim for Equality of Estates, and the making of such
Laws as the Indeque frequentantur Agrariae Leges* quae prohibent, ne quis
nimis dives efficiatur. Besold, in Synops. de Democr.
Agrarian Laws enacted by the popular Boutefeus in Rome, whereby it was made
criminal for any man to grow Richer than ordinary. But of this, more anon.

Now therefore, since it appears, how injurious their Calumnies are, and how
perilous their design is, to the Parliament and Commonwealth, I suppose it
were time lost to stand to prove the Improbability of their Success, seeing
all Persons of Credit and Fortune, are concerned, to abhor and detest this
Wild Project: And though the four Champions made proclamation in the head of
their Agreement; See the Preamble of the Agreement.
That according to the nature of Truth, it has made its own way into the
understanding, and taken root in the hearts and Affections of most Men; yet you
must know these men they speak of, are only the rude multitude, who understand
no more of the business, than that it may prove a hopeful way, to mend their
own out of other men's Fortunes, and satisfy their natural Appetites of
Covetousness and Revenge, upon the Honorable and Wealthy. In consideration
whereof, I come next to give you a more exact and lively Draught, of the
manifold miserable Inconveniences of that Government, (or rather, Confusion) so
earnestly contended for by the Levelling Party.

First, Such a Democratick, or Popular Form, that puts the whole multitude
into an equal exercise of the Supreme Authority, under pretense of maintaining
Liberty, is, in the Judgment of all Statesmen, the greatest enemy of Liberty;
For, the multitude is so Brutish, that (as the Emperor Claudius said) they are
Plebs ut prona in miser^cordia^, ita immodica in saevit^am.
ever in the extremes of kindness or Cruelty; being void of Reason, and
hurried on with an unbridled violence in all their Actions, trampling down all
respects of things Sacred and Civil, to make way for that their Liberty, which
Clapmarius calls Clap. de Arcau. dom. pop.
a most dissolute licentiousness, or a license to do even what they list;
according to that of the Lyrick, -- In vitium Libertas excidit. and vim
Dignam lege regi --
when Liberty becomes the greatest Vice, and degenerates into Violence. Such a
Liberty as this is recorded by Tacitus, to have been among the Parthians, an
uncertain loose kind of People, Incerti nimirum, solatique and magis sine
dominio, quam in Liberate.
living rather without government, than in Liberty; or as Salust speaks of the
Abrogines, 2. Annal. Genus hominum agreste, sine legibus, sine Imperio,
liberii, atque sol^tum. Salust.
a rude sort of men, without Laws, without Government, free, and dissolute.
And Livy Quonia^ ea demum Libertas Romae est, non Senatii, non Magistratus, non
Leges, non mores majorum non Instituta patrii, non Disciplinam vereri Militiae.
Live. l. 5.
tells you, how things were come to that pass in the popular State of Rome,
that no regard was had either to the Senate, or Magistracy, or Military
Discipline, or to the Laws and Customs of their Ancestors. When affairs are
in this condition, then (as Aristotle says) Mera (...) est extrema tyrannis,
mere Democracy (or liberty) is extreme Tyranny; and (as Besoldus) Plebs
perniciosissimus fit Tyrannus, the People becomes a most pernicious Tyrant.
Hence it is, says Quicciardin, Histor. lib. 2. very pertinently to our
purpose, That many times, when a People have got loose from the yoke of a
Tyranny or Kingly Government, out of a desire of Liberty, they proceed from one
Extreme to another, and sese, nisi retineantur, in effraenatam licentiam
praecipitant; quae quidem and ipsa, Jure Tyrannis, potest appellari, and except
they be restrained, run headlong to Licentiousness; which also may be rightly
called a Tyranny. To which accords that of Peucerus, who most excellently
describes the Effects of it in these words: Tales long sunt crudeliores, et
long plus nocent quam soli Tyranny, etc.
The study of popular Air, applause, and humor, is a madness no whit inferior
to Tyranny it Self. Those which seek after it, as Leaders of the People, become
far more cruel and mischievous than single Tyrants can be: For, single Tyrants
are the less able to do mischief, because, they are constrained to stand in
fear of others; but the furious Multitude fearing no colors, are hurried on
like a Torrent, and bear down all the Banks of opposition. So that (as
Clapmarius says) reckon up those flagitious Enormities of Kingly Government
together* Clapm. de Flag.
as breach of Faith, violation of things Sacred, depriving men of their
Possessions, Dom. cap. 19.
with all the Acts of Injustice and cruelty, and they abound much more in a
mere Popular State (or Levelling popularity) than any other. And therefore, (
Omnium prope Judicio vapulat; eo quod imbi li^o^tia pro liberate habeatur.
Bodin concludes) since it is the high Road to Licentiousness and Tyranny, it
is justly condemned by all wise men of the world. Bodin. 6. cap. 4.


Secondly, Petr. Gregor. 5. de Repub. cap. 3.
Nor is is only a mere Tyranny in it Self; but so far destructive of a Free
State (especially a Free State newly erected) that it soon causes a change of
it into the form of a regal Tyranny; according to that Maxim of Politicians,
Facilis est transitus a regimine Democratico ad Monarchicum, The passage is
quick and easy from a mere Popularity to Monarchy; And that, because of those
Discontents, Emulations, and Tumults, which arise continually among them, and
whereby their Leaders so tire them out, that in a little time, they Componi non
possunt, nisi Imperio ad unum devoluso.
willingly yield themselves under the yoke of any one Person, who seems willing
and able to deliver and ease them by a settlement. Thus Rome, that stately
Mistress of the World, Clap. de Arc.
who disdained to stoop under Victorious Caesar, Imp. l. 2. c. 14.
falling afterward into Popular Divisions, and Discords, more fierce than ever,
soon grew weary, and willing to bow her neck under Eam Republicam discordiis
civilibus fessam, nomine principis, sub Imperiu^ accepit. Tacit.
Augustus. Plutarch compares those popular tumults to the pangs of a Woman in
travel, calling them (...) Reipub: the Pains of a Commonwealth, that Tumultus
populares parturiu^ Regnum.
must needs bring forth into the world some great Kingdom or Tyranny. Now the
Person invested after this manner, is usually some one of their Leaders; Ann. 1.
who by soothing and carrying them on upon high and glorious pretenses of
Liberty, gains so much confidence and Power among them, that in the end he
bereaves them of liberty to disturb him, or themselves any further. Thus, and
by such Arts as these, Julius Caesar first erected the Imperial Tyranny at
Rome, as Pisistratus likewise made himself absolute at Athens, and Dionysius
the Tyrant at Syracusa; who pretending Themselves great Patrons of Liberty,
stirred the people up against the Senate and Counselors of State, as Enemies
to that Liberty, whereof they were ineed the only Keepers. And it is not to
their Leaders alone, that they expose the public Liberty, but oftentimes to
those out of whose hands it was first recovered: Thus, Agathocles the Tyrant of
Sicily, Periander, and several others, have by this means, after they had been
expelled, regained a possession: And therefore it cannot be improper here, to
return the Language of our Levellers in their late Petition, home to
themselves; that since They, and diverse others disaffected persons* are so
unwilling to embrace the Commonwealth, in its present state and true condition
of Liberty, They are to be reckoned the only Causers of those Taxes and other
Inconveniences now lying upon us, whereas if they would unite (as they ought)
our Burdens would be inconsiderable, because the Royal and foreign
Confederates would have the less Confidence to assail us, and force these
Necessities upon us, were we once free from those Divisions, distractions, and
dis-satisfactions, which Presbyters and Levellers occasion here among us.

Thirdly -- It cannot but be sad to consider, what Tumults and Combustions must
needs happen every year, by reason of those prodigious multitudes, that are
admitted to make choice of the Persons to be entrusted in the Representative:
And though there be one Clause in the Agreement, which seems to provide against
Riots at every choosing of the Members, yet it is impossible to devise any
means to prevent those Inconveniences which will arise in a self-opinionated
Multitude upon such an occasion, S^inditur incertum studia in co^traria vulgus.
wherein they all conceive themselves to have an equal Interest and power, and
touching which it can hardly be expected any Conclusion can be made, till from
Arguments they proceed to Cuffs, and so in the end, the Club carry the Election.

Fourthly, It has ever been the Custom in these mere Popular Forms, Contzen.
1. polit. cap. 20.
for the most part to make choice of the lowest of the People, such whose
Persons are held in Admiration by the rest of their Fellows, and like to
satisfy them in all their phren'tick humors; a lively sad example whereof we
have in the popular State of Athens, where they chose such Persons to
participate of the supreme Authority, Greg. Tolos. l. 4. de Repub. cap. 3.
as would countenance them, and share with them, in slaying or condemning the
richer Sort, and then seizing upon their Possessions, plundring their Houses,
and many more such fine effects of Levelling Liberty. Hence it is, they shift
and change their Governers so often, Plebs Rectores meliores vocat eos, qui
magis ^i indulgeat. Ide^.
rejecting, at every new Election, such as they have found averse to their
licentious ways, as Enemies of Liberty, under pretense of putting Better in
their places; that is, such as indulge them in these and the like Courses.

Fifthly, by this means, unlearned, ignorant Persons, neither of Learning nor
Fortune, being put in Authority, the Commonwealth cannot remain safe either in
peace or war; for, though covetousness and private necessity, they will
exercise rapin and Injustice in time of Peace, and by reason of their Ignorance
in the Affaries of Government, the State must needs run a hazard in time of
War, or any other public extremity. Here, let me call to mind a passage of
the Romans, mentioned by Aquinas Aquin. de Regim. Princ. l. 4. cap. 15.
; among whom it happened, that two Persons being chosen by the Consuls, for the
Government of Spain, they were after the Election found fault with, the one
being very Poor, the other accused of being Covetous: And when it had been
long debated, which of Them should be entrusted, at length Scipio, to end the
controversy, stood up, and concluded neither, because Persons so qualified
must needs be corrupt in their Government, and ever sucking the Body Politic,
like Leeches, wheresoever they can lay hold: yet such Persons as these, poor,
and unexpert in Affairs, if they are Busybodies, and have a nimble Faculty of
prating, are usually adored by the Vulgar, as the only Statesmen.

Sixthly, It is ordinary with the grand Demagogues, or Leaders of the People,
to make Sale of Elections, and all Offices of Judicature, Honor and Authority:
and upon these Terms they many times admit the better Sort into Places of
power, and turn them out again at pleasure: So that ( (...).
as Plato and Plutarch say) mere Popularity is no Government, but is as it were
a Market, wherein all Offices of Government are exposed to sale; and He
ordinarily gains the best bargain of Authority, that has the longest Purse,
and most powerful Tongue, to persuade the Ex Favore, and pretio, populus
distribuebat Magistratus.
Clerks of the Market; Plato.
whereby it is to be supposed on the other side, that the Purchasers will see
Themselves no Losers; it being a matter of Course, that such as buy Authority
should sell Justice.

Seventhly, Polyb. 6. histor. a pr. paratu. 1. disc.
The Plea of our Levellers for yearly Representatives, with this Caution, That
no man shall be chosen a Member of two Representatives together, and that in
the Intervalls we may be governed by a Committee of their own Members, without
a standing Council of State, is very irrational. For, what understanding can
a Succession of mean and new elected Persons have of the public Affairs, so
as to manage them with Skill and Advantage, in so short a Time, seeing it is
use and experience that fits a man for the carriage of Grand Concernments of
State. We find in the Roman State (when it was most Popular) that the Multitude
were never so mad as to cast off, though they took upon them now and then to
control, the Senate, which was their standing Council; and without which no
Commonwealth can continue of any long standing: And thherefore it is that
rather than such a Council of State should be wanting, Summa-Reru^ sit penes
paucos, qui antecellunt reliquos virtute and Sapientia.
Aristotle advises us to entrust them with Affairs altogether, they having
all those Advantages of Observation, Custom, and Experience which cannot be
expected from a tumultuary Succession, of raw and unexpert Statists. Polit. 1.
As for example, we read, in what a flourishing condition the Commonwealth of
Athens continued, as long as Affairs were ordered by that Famous Council,
Thucy^ides l. 2. page 63.
the Areopagites; and no sooner did the power come into the hands of the
People, but afterward all turned to confusion. It were much to be wondered,
that the State of Rome stood so long in a Popular Form, but that we know it was
also underpropp'd by the Wisdom and Authority of the Senate, and had many
eminent Pillars to support it; as Menenius Agrippa, Furius Camillus, Papirius
Cursor, Fabius Maximus, Ca^o Censor, Marcus Scaurus, and Pompey, upon whose
Virtues its subsistence depended, and not upon those Tumultuary Sots, the Many.
Thus likewise, the popular State of the Bodinus 6. (...) Repub. cap. 4
Thebans subsisted a while, by the singular Wisdom and Valor of Pelopidas and
Epaminondas; who were no sooner gone, but the Popularity sunk of it self, and
came to nothing. How much safer then must it needs be for the People of this
Nation, to leave the Succession of Representatives, and the Form of a Council
in the fu^ure, with the time and manner of their Constitution, and Rules for
Election, to be ordered by the wisdom and discretion of Parliament, than after
the humor of some obscure persons, whose Knowledge and Interest in the
Public matters, is no whit comparable to theirs, and therefore not to be
valued in competition with them, for the ordering of such Affairs, as so
highly concern the Good and Peace of the Public.

Eighthly, this Pop^lar Form is the only enemy of true generosity and virtue:
For, how much the more excellent any man has approved himself, either in
Conduct or Council, so much the more he is suspected, hated and calumniated,
by the ungrateful multitude. Lez Repetundarum.
In the popular state of Rome They had Lex Repetundarum, a Law whereby the
multitude were enabled to call all public Magistrates and Officers to
Account; a course seeming plausible enough in it self: But hence proceeded
those Liberae Accusationes, whereby the People having liberty to accuse
Magistrates, Libera accusationes, and Calumniationes.
proceeded to Calumniations, and continually vexed with false and unreasonall
Charges, even those who had been most faithful, and done very famous Services
for the Commonwealth; just as our Levellers now exclaim against the
Parliament, and would (if they might) rage against them about public
Accounts, as appears by their old Agreement, and their late Petition; the
consequence whereof would be, that in the end they should be Ostracised, and
receive an Ostracismus used at Athens as Petalismus elsewhere; when the People
banished any eminent man, the Sentence was written either upon the Shell of a
Fish, or an Olive leaf.
OYSTERSHELL, or an OLLIVE-LEAF, in recompense of all their Labors.

Thus, the most famous Captain Alcibiades, having done many Services for the
Athenian Populacy, was, only for a petty misfortune (and no other Cause) in
mannaging the War of Sicily, called h^me, and banished both from his Command
and Country. At length, being sent for home again, he made them Victorious over
their Enemies the Lacedaemonians; yet notwithstanding so great merits, he was,
upon another Turn of popular Air for a misfortune in Asia, A^. 3. polit. c. 13.
sent the second time into banishment by those Levellers.

So likew^se, Phil. Camera^. Cent. 2. oper. Succis. cap. 51.
another famous Athenian Captain, Themistocles, received no other reward than
Banishment, for all his meritorious Archievements. And Miltiades, who erected
the Grecian Trophies in Persia, and asserted the Liberties of Greece against
all their Enemies, was used far worse, being kept a Prisoner all his life,
and after his death, they not only neglected to give him Burial, but (to
stretch their ingratitude yet further) condemned his Son Cimon to perpetual
Imprisonment. In like manner, they used Phocion, the most deserving of all the
Athenian Commanders, but with much more cruelty; for, they murdered him with
their own hands, and afterward denied him Burial: Whereupon, Bodinus relating
the Story out of Plutarch, makes this observation; That when the Multitude
begin to insult against the most deserving Men, they run beyond all Shame and
Reason.

Nor was it thus only in Greece, but we find the same humor also among the
Roman Levellers whereof that illustrious Family of the Scipio's was a sad
Example. For, Scipio Major, he that for his Famous exploits against Carthage,
was Surnamed Africanus, having rescued Rome from the Brink of Destruction, and
freed her from the fear of that pernicious Rival, was, at his return home, so
afflicted and vexed with injurious Calumnies of the unthankful Rabble, that
for quitnesse sake he spent his days in a voluntary exile, and at his death,
commanded such an Ingrata patria n^ ossa quidem mea habes.
Epitaph to be fixed upon his Monument, as might testify to Aftertimes the
great ingratitude of his Peeple. They accused his Brother also, Surnamed
Asiaticus, of defrauding the Commonwealth, and kept him a Prisoner. In the
same manner, they calumniated likewise the most meritorious Scipio Nasica; so
that to decline the popular Fury, he departed with the good will and consent of
the Senate, as employed by them upon an Embassy to Pergamus, from whence he
never returned. By this it appears then, that all generous Spirits are
concerued in reason, to abhor the Levelling way of Government.

Ninthly, Ubi Imperium plebis est, ibi Patricios ac nobiles, multis magnisque
Injuriis, affici necesse est. Arist. 3. pol. cap. 7.
Aristotle says, where this Levelling popular Form is erected, there is a
necessity that all persons who are become eminent or potent, either by fortune,
or virtue, should receive many high and heinous injuries from the Vulgar. And
Tacitus gives the reason why it was thus in the Roman State; Because (says he)
the Common Rabble have a kind of inveterate hereditary hatred against the more
noble, and worthy persons, especially such as are Councillors of State;
Inveratissimum fuit in Rep. Romana odium plebis adversus Patricios. Tac.
as appears by their frequent calumniating the Senators, punishing them
sometimes with Banishment, as they did Furius, and many others, and often with
unreasonable Fines, as they did Live. li. 4. and 5.
C. Sempronius, Q. Pomponius, and Virginius, etc. And all this, for the most
part without any cause, but merely to exercise their Spleen, which takes the
same course of enmity likewise against all that are Wealthy, be they High or
Low. For, it is reckoned Clapm. de Arcan. l. 2. c. 13
inter Arcana, a prime mystery of Popular Government, to use all private
tricks and ways of Milking and Gelding the Purses of the Rich. Nor is that
alone sufficient, but they fly out ever and anon into violence, and from
Plandering they proceed to ^lat Levelling of Estates, as is evident by those
Licinian and Agrarian Laws made by the Populacy of Rome, whereby it was
provided, that no man should grow too rich, nor be Master of above fifty Acres
of Land. And touching this, there is an insolent Passage recorded by Livy, how
that when the Senate seemed unwilling to permit the Division of certain Lands
among the common sort, the Tribunes, or Ringleaders of the People, asked the
Senators, Auderen^ne postulare, ut cum bina Jugera agri plebi dividerentur,
isis plus quam quinquaginta jugera habere liceret?
how they durst possess more than fifty Acres apeice, yet find fault with a
division made of two apeece to the People! And the same Author tells us, so
many Quarrels and Tumults arose about division of Lands, that the Senate knew
not which way to prevent them, till they disburdened the Commonwealth, by
sending forth Colonies, and satisfying them with Lands, in the remote Parts of
Italy, Live. l. 10.
and other Places.

Lastly, from Levelling they proceed to introduce an absolute Community. And
though neither the Athenian nor Roman Levellers, ever arived to this high pitch
of madness; yet we see there is a new Faction started up out of ours, known by
the name of Diggers; who, upon this ground, That God is our common-Father, the
Earth our Common-Mother, and that the Original of Propriety was men's pride and
Covetousness, have framed a new plea for a Return of all men ad Tuguria, that
like the old Parthians, Scythian Nomades, and other wild Barbarians, we might
renounce Towns and Cities, live at Rovers, and enjoy all in common.

Now for a conclusion, all these Considerations being put together, you may
easily spell what Leveller is, what the meaning is of those Zealous Pretenders
to Liberty and Freedom, and what their Pretense may come to, it being the
ready Road to all licentiousness, mischief, mere Anarchy and Confusion; which
whosoever follows, may stay long enough, ere he see the performance of those
glorious promises, set forth in their late Petition, wherein the People are
made to believe fine things; but I leave them to judge, whether this be the
way, [to sit down securely under their own Vines, under the glorious
administration of Justice and Righteousness.] Odi profanum vulgus, and arceo.
Horat.


CHAP. V.
A discourse of the excellency of a Free State, above a Kingly Government.
HAving in the former Chapters Stated the Designs, and given an Account of
those grand Inconveniences, which of necessity will ensue a Success of the
opposite Parties, this next discourse must needs be very pertinent, by way of
conclusion, to manifest the excellency of the present Government, which They
all endeavor to destroy. And though there needed no other Argument to prove
it, and recommend it to the world, than this; That it is the only Bank, which
preserves us from the Inundations of If this Government be destroyed, we must
expect a Regal, or a Presbyterian, or a popular Tyranny.
Tyranny on the one side, and Confusion on the other; yet it wants not (of it
self) those many Advantages, above all other Forms, which render it most
convenient to promote the Peace, wealth, and honor of the English Nation.

Yet it is a wonder to see, how lightly men prize this invaluable Jewel of
Liberty, which has cost the Commonwealth so much Blood and Treasure,
trampling the precious Pearl under their Feet, like Swine; so that the
Parliament meet now with as many difficulties to preserve, as ever they had to
purchase it. But for this, there are two special Reasons, which may be
collected out of the Match. de Rep. l. 1. c. 16, 17, and 18.
Florentine's subtle discourses upon Livy; who compares such as have been
educated under a Monarchy or Tyranny, to those Beasts which have been caged or
coop't up alll their lives in a Den, where they seem to live in as much
pleasure, as other Beasts that are abroad; and if they be let loose, yet they
will return in again, because they know not how to value or use their
Liberty: So strong an Impression is made likewise, by education and Custom
from the Cradle, even upon men that are endued with reasonable Souls, that they
choose to live in those Places and Customs of government, under which they have
been bred, rather than submit to better, which might make more for their
Content and Advantage. Hence it is, that those poor Slaves under the Turk,
Persian, Tartar, Muscovite, Russian, French, and Spaniard, with other Eastern,
Northern, and Western Tyrants, are so enamoured of their Chains, that they
admire their own condition above all others, and (like the Indians) adore the
Devil which torments them, because they are ignorant of a better Deity to
protect Them.

But besides education and custom, under another Form, there is a second Reason
why men are so degenerous in Spirit, as to vassalize Themselves, and neglect
the maintenance of their Liberty; and that is, a general Corruption and
Depravation of manners, by luxurious Courses, when a Nation is even swallowed
up with Riot and Luxury; so that being Slaves to their own Lusts, they become
the more easily inslaved unto the Lusts of another. The Truth of this may be
observed in the variation of the Roman State; which in its primitive innocence,
was so sensible of Liberty, that when Brutus and Colatinus had once expelled
the Tarquins, the People all most readily joined with then as one man, in
defense of their Freedom; Florus.
yea, they were so zealous of it for a long time, that no Relations or
Considerations whatsoever of former merits, could avail with them to spare
those that attempted ought against it: For, when the Sons of Brutus were found
guilty of a conspiracy, to bring back the Tarquinian Family, They condemned
them to death, and their own Father was as forward as any, to bring them to
Execution: So the famous Manlius likewise, to whom Rome owed both her self and
Liberty, being by him preserved against the Galls, in the greatest extremity,
was notwithstanding, upon a discovery of his after-Intent to surprise their
Liberty, thrown headlong down the Tarpeian Rock, within view of the Capitol
which he had so nobly defended. By which Actions you may perceive, that when
Rome was in its pure estate, virtue begat a desire of Liberty, and this desire
begat in them an extraordinary Courage and Resolution to defend it; which three
walked a long time hand in hand together, and were the Causes, that the first
Foundders of their Freedom had so little difficulty, in maintaining
themselves, against those Invasions which happened afterward, by the Tarquins and
their Royal Confederates. But in process of Time, when the Romans had lost
that ancient virtue, which purchased their Liberty, and an Empire over the
world; being softened in their manners, and conquered by their vices whose
Dominions they had conquered, they soon bowed under the yoke of Imperial
Tyranny; And though there appeared afterward some sparks of ancient courage and
love of liberty among Them, when They took off Caesar himself, Caligula, Nero,
and in the end rid Themselves quite of that Tyrannical Stock of the Caesar's
yet (I say) because those Sparks were kindled only in a few of the more noble
Souls, and the generallity corrupt and degenerate from their old virtue,
therefore such heroic minds as endeavored, could by no means engage Them to
assert their Liberty.

It is observable also in all times, the Northern and more manly People, that
have no Acquaintance with luxurious Diets and Apparel, nor care much to
obtain Them, nor to taste of those melting Enchantments of more wanton Nations,
are endued with a greater courage and Sense of Liberty; whereas those People
that inhabit the delicate parts of the world (as in Asia, and other Countries,
where civility has degenerated into effeminacy) They ever have lived, and do
(for the most part) continue in miserable Slavery, at the will of imperious
Tyrants: And if at any time there have happened worthy Resolutions in virtuous
Spirits, to recover their Freedom, They have (for the most part) failed in the
Enterprise, by reason of the Corruption of their Party, which causes men at
length to decline the common Cause, through pusillanimity, Faction, Treachery,
or Apostacy; being more superstitiously inclinable to adore the greatness of
a Tyrant, Match. l. 1. c. 17 de Repub.
than really affectionate to the worth of Liberty. For this Cause it was, that
in elder time, the People of Naples, Milain and Florence, lost their Freedoms,
as soon as they had gotten it; and of late also the Neapolitans failed in their
Attempt, being a soft effeminate people, easily bribed and courted out of their
Design, with Spanish Gold and Complement; whereas the Swisses, Hollanders, and
diverse other hardy People, stuck close to their Leaders, and by their
constancy, Industry, and Zeal of Liberty, accomplished the work.

By which parcel of discourse we may collect, whence it is, that our present
Governers meet with so many difficulties and oppositions from their own
Country men here in England, viz: by reason of our former education under a
Monarchy, with the general debaucheries of all sorts of People, which render
them Admirers of the Pomp of Tyranny, and Enemies to that Freedom which has
been so dearly purchased. They are Lovers of Vanity more than of Themselves or
their Country, humorous, and led with an admiration of old Customs to their
own hazard, rather than they will steer a new and reasonable Course of far
more Convenience and Commodity; so that if the Commonwealth had not a Party of
its own throughout the Nation, men of valor and virtue, free from those
Corruptions of Excess and Riot, and sensible of Liberty, it were then in
reason to be expected, they could not long maintain their Station: But being
supported by Counselors, grave, serious, abstemious, and vigilant, and by a
Soldiery, whose valiant Commanders are severe and strict in Discipline, both
Moral and Military, when I consider this, with the many other Advantages which
their Enemies have not, their Foundation seems to me impregnable, and prompts
me to this Omen; That being every way qualified like Eis fuit domi Industria,
foris justum Imperiu^, animus in consulendo lib^r; neque libidini, neque
delicto obnoxious. Salustius; de Catone in sua Concione ad Romanos Consules.
those Roman Spirits of old, they will be Courted and confirmed by the Roman
Fortune.

For shame or fear then (if not for love) let men forbear an opposition, and
consider what an honor it is to be in the List of that Party, which have
ennobled Themselves by their own virtue and the love of Liberty; For, as Cato
says in Plutarch, even the greatest Kings or Tyrants are much ihferior to
those that are eminent in Free-States and Commonweals; nor were those mighty
Monarchs of old worthy to be compared with Epaminondas, Pericles, Themistocles,
Marcus Curious, Amilcar, Barca, etc. and other excellent Captains in
Free-States, which purchased Themselves a Fame in defense of their Liberties.
And though now the very name of Liberty is grown odious or ridiculous among us,
it having been a Stranger a long time in these parts; yet in ancient time,
Nations were wont to reckon themselves so much the more noble, if they were
free from the yoke of Regal Tyranny; which was the cause why there were then
so many Free-States in all parts of the world. In our Country here, before the
time that Caesar's Tyranny took place, there was no such thing as Monarchy:
Caesar. Comment. lib. 5.
For, the same Caesar tells us, how the Britains were divided into so many
several States; relates how Cassevellanus was, by the Common Council of the
Nation, elect in this their public danger, to have the principal
administration of the State, with the business of War: and afterward how the
several Cities sent their Hostages unto him. Whereby we perceive it was of old
no Monarchy, but like to the Gauls, with whom it was then one also in
Religion, divided into provincall Regiments; Sam. Daniel. of the State of
Britain.
withont any entire rule or Combination; only in case of common peril, by
Invasion, etc. they were wont to choose a Commander in Chief, much like the
Dictator chosen by the Romans upon the like occasion. And now we see all the
Western world (lately discovered) to be, and generally all other Countries are,
in puris naturalibus, in their first and most innocent condition, settled in the
same Form, before they come to be inslaved, either by some predominant power
from abroad, or some one among Themselves more potent and ambitious than h^s
Neighbors. And such was the State heretofore, not only of our Nation, but of
Gaul, Spain, Germany, and all the West parts of Europe, before the Romans did
by strength and cunning unlock their Liberties. And such as were then termed
Kings, were but as their Generals in War, without any other great Juris^iction.

If we reflect likewise upon the ancient State of Italy, we find no other Forms
of Government but those of Free-states and Common-weals; Match. lib. 2. Cap. 2.
as the Tuscans, Romans, Samnits, and many others; nor is there mention made of
any Kings in Italy besides those of the Romans, and Porsenna. Concerning the
ruin of whose Family, though Histories are silent; yet we read, that Tuscany
(whereof Porsenna was King) became afterward a Free State, and continued so
Zealous of Liberty ever after, and such haters of Monarchy; that they denied
the Veians their assistance against the Romans, for no other reason, but
because those Veians had made choice of a King to protect them in their
necessity; saying, that they scorned to join with those men who had subjected
themselves to the Government of a single Person.

Nor is it only a mere gallantry of Spirit which invites men to the love of
Freedom; but experience tells us it is the most commodious and profitable way
of Government, conducing to the enlargement of a Nation every way in Wealth and
Dominion. Incredibile est memoratu; quantum adepta liberate, in bre^i Romana
Civitas creverit. Salust.
It is incredible to be told (says Salust.) how exceedingly the Roman
Commonwealth increased in a short time, after they had obtained their Liberty.
And Guicciardin affirms, that Deo summopere placent; eo quod in iis, magis
quam in alio g^n^re Rerumpublicarum, commune bonum conservetur, Jus suum cuique
aequaliter distribuatur, Civium animi vehementius ad virtutem, etc. Fr.
Guicciard. lib. 10. Hist.
Free States are most pleasing to God; because that in them more regard is had
to the common good, more care for impartial distribution of Justice to every
man, and the minds of men are more inflamed with the love of Glory and Virtue,
and become much more zealous in the love of Religion, than in any other Form of
Government whatsoever. It is wonderful to consider how mightily the Athenians
were augmented both in Wealth and Power, in the space of one hundred years,
after they had freed themselves from the Tyranny of Pisistratus; but the Romans
arrived to such a height as was beyond all imagination* after the expulsion of
their Kings. Nor do these things happen without special reason, forasmuch as
it is usual in Free States to be more tender of the Public, in all their
Decrees, than of Particulars, whereas the case is otherwise in a Monarchy;
because in this Form the Princes pleasure usually weighs down all
Considerations of the Common Good. And hence it is, that a Nation has no
sooner lost its Liberty, and stoopt under the yoke of an Usurper, but it
immediately loses its former Luster; the Body fills with ill humors, and may
swell in Title, but cannot thrive either in Dominion or Riches, according to
that proportion which it formerly enjoyed; because all new Acquisitions are
appropriated as the Princes Peculiar, and in no wise conduce to the ease and
benefit of the Public.

-- It is observable likewise in the course of Hereditary Monarchies; that
though a Nation may have some respit and recruit now and then, by the Virtue
and Valor of a Prince, yet this is very rare; and when it does happen, it
usually lasts no longer than his life, because his Successor (for the most
part) proves more Weak, or Vicious, than himself was virtuous. For, as Dantes
the Italian Poet says, Non sicut in ramos ex imo Stipite succus
Influit, in liberos sic orta parentibus ipsis
Descendit virtus. --
Virtue is not transmitted from Father to Son, as the Sap of a Tree is from
the Root to the Branches. Virtue is lost in the descent, Lib de Repub. 2. cap.
11.
and comes not by Traduction: Therefore (Machiavel says) Not he that places a
virtuous Government in his own Hands or Family, and Governs well during his
natural life, but he that establishes a lasting Form for the Peoples constant
Security, is most to be commended. It is recorded in Tam obstinate Jus suum
urs^rum, ut Turcicae perfidiae se ^ommittere malucrint, quam Sceptris
haereditariis cum potiri. Besold. de Successione regia, ^ap. 5.
History, that the Hereditary course of Government was so odious to the
Hungarians, that when Ferdinand the first, King of the Romans, laid claim to
that Crown, as Heir in his Wives Right, They chose rather to make a League with
the Turk, than subject their State to the Inconveniences of an Hereditary
Succession. Regibus est aliis, potiundi jure paterno
Certa fides, sceptrumque patris novus accipit hares.
Nos, Gunt. li. 1.
quibus est melior libertas, jure vetusto,
Orba suo quoties vacat inclyta principe Seeds,
Quodlibet arbitrium statuendi Regis habemus.


The German Poet Gunther (who reduced much of Policy into Poetry) in these
Verses commends the fashion of his own Country, that since they had accepted
the Regal or Imperial Form of Government, they were accustomed to trust their
own Judgments in making choice of their Emperor, rather than receive him
blindly from the hand of Chance or Fortune: Nor do I find any that think a
Monarchy tolerable otherwise than upon Terms of Election, except it be Lipsius,
and such partial Penmen as Himself, who were held in pension or relation by
Hereditary Tyrants. For, besides that common Reason disswades men from taking
Governers at Adventure, without respect of wisdom or virtue; so if we take a
view of the miserable events of it in all Histories, it must needs deter men
from the love of such a Succession: And therefore the Argument usually brought
in defense of it, that it is the only way to prevent the Inconveniences of an
Interregnum where the Heir is uncertain, is of no validity; since it has
caused ten thousand times more bloody Disputes between Pretenders in point of
Title, than ever happened in those Inter-regnall Controversies, whith have
risen betwixt Competitors by way of Election; witness the tedious fatal
Bickerings which happened in France and other Nations among Princes of the
Blood, and here in England, between the two Houses of York and Lancaster. It
is observed also, out of the ancient Roman History, that all those Emperors
which ruled by right of Inheritance, Match. de Rcpub* cap. x.
proved most of them no better than savage Beasts, and all of Them wicked,
except Titus; but such as were advanced by Election approved Themselves noble
and virtuous, as you may see in those five that succeeded Nerva to Marcus: And
no sooner did the Empire return again into a Course of Inheritance, but it ran
to a loss, and at length to the ruin of its glory and greatness.

But, to wave this digression touching Hereditary and elective Monarchies, I
affirm, that neither of Them are to be compared with a Free State, nor to be
admitted, unless it be the latter by way of Election; and then only in case of
extreme necessity, as the Roman Commonwealth was wont now and then to create
their temporary Dictators, Dictator was a King pro Tempore.
into whose single Hands they transmitted the whole Power of ordering Affairs,
in time of urgent and imminent danger, to avoid the Inconvenience of delay
which might be occasioned through the variety of Opinions, and multiplicity of
Counsels: Howsoever elective Kings are found fault with, because They usually
practice such Sleights, that in a short time, the Government which They
received for their own Lives, becomes entailed upon their Families.

It is to be considered also, That the Kingly are not much less destructive,
than the Levelling popular Tyrannies to gallant and worthy men. -- Sors ista
Tyrannis
Convenit; Claud. 6. Consol. Honor.
invideant claris, fortesque trucident.
Nor is it the worse sort of Kings or Tyrants only, that hate brave and
deserving Persons; but even the most moderate, and those that seem to be the
best* conditioned become jealous and distasteful, supposing the Fame and
gallantry of their Subjects, detracts from their own estimation: And therefore
They usually consult which way to dishonor or destroy Them; by which means men
are terrified from the Love of glory and virtue. Orat. id. Epist. Philippi.
Demosthenes tells us, Philip the Macedonian was so full of vainglory, that he
would arrogate the worthy Deeds of his Friends, and other men, to himself, and
make them seem to be his own: And he ever hated those Commanders and
Governors which were victorious and successful, more than such as were either
careless or unfortunate. His Son Alexander was of the same humor too: For,
when Curtius. l. 6. suae existimans quicquid cessisset alienae.
Antipater had gained a victory, which he intended himself to have had the
honor of, he could not forbear to utter his Indignation, reckoning himself
injured by the merits of his Subject and Servant. And at another time, he
caused Parmenio to be put to death, for no other cause, but because he hated
him, being suspicious of his extraordinary merits. Thus the Emperor Vespasian
likewise behaved himself toward the General Antonius, by whose means Rome was
secured from him against Vitellius, and the Imperial Diadem placed on his
head, which was no sooner done, but Vespasian, in stead of a Reward, casheered
him of his Command, and all other Employment whatsoever; so that sinking under
the Burden of his own despair, and the others Ingratitude, he lived not long
after. In like manner, Alphonsus Albuquerquius, after he had brought most part
of the East Indies under the obedience of his Master the King of Portugal, was
sent for home; and outed of his Command, died for mere grief and sorrow. Nor
did Consaluus the great or Ferdinando Cortese, fare any better for all their
Services: Sepulveda. Comma ad Arist. polit. 3. c. 9.
Consaluus, after he had driven the French out of the Kingdom of Naples, and
subdued it to Ferdinand of Arragon, was by him, at his coming to Naples put out
of his Command, and carried into Spain in little better condition than a
Prisoner, where his heart broke for grief immediately. How miserable then is
the condition of the most generous Spirits under Tyrannous Royalty, wherein
Princes count themselves dis-obliged by the bravest Actions of their Subjects!
And Tacitus tells of one of the Caesar's upon the like occasion, Desirui per
haec fortunam suam Caesar, imparemque tan o merito rebatur.
That he conceived it prejudicial to his own honor and Fortune, and supposed
himself insufficient to recompense extraordinary merits. For, good Turns seem
then only acceptable to Princes, when they may be easily requited; Nam
beneficia usque eo laeta sunt, dam videntur posse exolui:
otherwise, they return Hatred in stead of Thanks. Cominaeus also reports it
from Lewis of France his own mouth; That he much more loved those whom himself
had obliged by bounty and courtesy, than such as had obliged him by their
deserts.

Yea, Ubi multum ante (...), pro gratia o^i^i redditur. Tacit.
so dangerous a Thing is Virtue in Prince's Courts, that it is as much as a
man's life is worth to be commended for it. And to this purpose we have a story
in Polybius lib. 6. how that one Apelles being Enemy to Aratus, Annal. 4.
a Favorite of King Philip the Macedonian, took occasion to extol him most
highly to the King, as a Person admired by all for his many rare and
incomparable Virtues, knowing this was the way to bring him out of the King's
Favor; which was (says one) a new way of revenge, and it took effect to the
destruction of Aratus: For, after a while, he became so much disrelished, that
the King gave him a Dose in convenient Season, which rid him away by a lingering
Sickness. And Aratus so well understood how the Case was with him, that when
his Friend Cephalon came to visit him in his Chamber, (...)
and asked how it came to pass that he spit blood? O Cephalon (said he) these
are the rewards of Kingly Friendship and Acquaintance. Our own Histories, and
our Neighbors of France, might furnish us with Instances enough of the same
nature; but at home here look no further than Harry the 8 th. and we find him
ever and anon be-dabled with the Blood of the most deserving Persons, Plutarch.
in Atato.
as well as most of his Predecessors. What persecution has happened since, is
notorious to all of the meanest Reading and observation; so that seeing it
appears there is as little Security for the bravest Spirits, in a Regal, as in
a popular Tyranny, certainly, all Persons of generous Thoughts and Resolutions
are much more concerned to dislike it, and apply Themselves to the love of a
Free State; it being concluded by Aristotle the best of Governments, and is by
experience known to be most conducing to the Advancement of a Nation every way
in Honor, Profit, and Dominion; having ever produced many more excellent
Heroes, than any other Form, upon the Stage of Action; as is evident in the
Grecian, Roman, and modern Stories.

But one great Argument of exception (I perceive among some) against this
Government is; because men are permitted the Freedom of their Souls and
Consciences in the profession of Religion. This they conceive inconsistent with
the public Peace; that no State can be of continuance with such a Toleration;
and that it is not agreeable to the Word of God. To the latter part of this
Assertion, I answer, That prudent Toleration of opinions in matter of Religion
could never be proved yet, by any of our Episcoparians and Presbyterians, in
all their VVritings, to be repugnant to the Word; being as far to seek this
way, as they are to convince us of the sacred necessity of a National
Uniformity. Several Instances there are to show, how this Commonwealth has
punished those wild Pretenders, that profess manifest Libertinism and
Blasphemy; many of whom at this day are in Custody: And as long as these Ill
Weeds are rooted out of the Garden of the Church, the wholesome tender Plants
will thrive in Beauty and Virtue, under their several measures, and
dispensations.

And that variety of Opinions can be no way destructive of Public Peace (as
is pretended) is evident by the Customs of other Nations, both Heathen and
Christian. The Joh. Leo. l. 8.
Egyptians have now among them no less than four several Sects, differing in
Doctrine and Discipline, and all derived from the Superstition of Mahomet. Yet
their great Pontifes and Priests, live in amity together, void of hatred and
strife; and the common People also behave themselves accordingly, without
brauling or enmity. And it is usual for the more learned sort of Them, to
Dispute with each other, and defend the Opinions of their Party, which they are
allowed to do with all Liberty, so long as they fly not out into language
against any of the four Doctors, who were the first Patrons of those Opinions.
Wherein if any chance to Offend, they are punished by Fine and Imprisonment.

Lipsius tells us, Lips. l. adversus Dialogist.
that in the Isle of Japan, there are no less than nine Religions, every man
being at liberty to profess which he please: So that in the same House you
might see the Husband of one Religion, the Wife of another, the Son of a third;
and yet no heart-burning nor difference among them, to the disturbance of the
Family. The Turk (we see) also allows an equal Liberty to Christians and Jews,
yet his Empire has long continued firm and Peaceable, notwithstanding the
variety of Opinions tolerated among those of his own Sect, and others. The case
is the same likewise in several Christian dominions; as Poland, Transylvania,
Hungary, and even in the Protestant Dominions in Germany. Yet the experiment is
brought nearer home to us by our neighbors the States of Holland, who by a
prudent toleration of several Professions, have established themselves in such
a measure of Peace, Plently, and Liberty, as is not to be equalled by any of
the Nations round about them. And the Reasons why those Nations continue in
Peace, notwithstanding their difference in Religious Opinions, are confessed by
the same Lipsius (a great Roman Catholic) to be these: First, because the
Prince, and he that is the High Priest, among them, carry themselves with the
same Aspect upon all, giving no Countenance to one more than another. Secondly,
because they severely punish such as offer to disturb their Neighbors about
any matter relating to Religion. Thirdly, because they suffer not that Religion
to be evil spoken of, which is publicly professed by the Prince or State:
whereby it is employed, that a Toleration of different opinions in Religion, can
be no prejudice to the Peace of a Nation, so long as these Rules are observed;
but rather a grand Preservative of public Quiet; whereas persecutions for
matter of Religion have ever been all the world over the great Incentives of
Sedition. And since it is of unavoidable necessity, that (while the world
stands) there will be divisions of Opinion, certainly such a course must needs
be most rational, which shall provide ways of remedy against such
Inconveniences as may follow them, rather than Inventions of Torture and
Torment to thwart and stifle Them; because the understandings of men can no
more be compelled than their Wills, to approve what they like not. So that from
hence it appears plainly, the great pretenders of National Uniformity in
Religion, those high imperious Vniformity-mongers, that would have men take
measure of all Opinions by their own, are the greatest disturbers of States and
Kingdoms; and seem of the same strain with the Tyrant Mezentius, who, if his
Guests were too long for his Bed, cut them shorter, and if they happened to be
too short, he had Engines of Torture to stretch them longer; being resolved to
fit them all to his own measure and humor.

Several other Objections there are against this new Government, in the mouths
of many People; but they are founded upon outward Sense, more than inward
Reason; they raise Arguments from those Things which are the effects of present
necessity, and not of the nature of the Government it self, whereas if men
would unanimously join in an establishment, no such necessity would be: But as
now, so always all alterations of Government (though for the better) have been
declaimed against by the more ignorant sort of People, supposing those Burdens
will remain for ever, which Governors are constrained to lay upon Them for
present subsistence and security: yet it has been ever observed likewise, that
the more willing and forward People have been to settle in Peace under a new
Government, the sooner they have been eased of all their Grievances and
Pressures; according to that saying of Curt. apud Alex: lib. 8.
Curtius, Obsequio mitigantur Imperia. And therefore in this case, Omnes
intelligant, si salvi esse velint, necessitati esse parendum.
Cicero advises all men that would be safe, to submit unto necessity.

Whence is it that Taxes continue, but from absolute necessity? and this
necessity is much augmented by the peevish humors of People; Cic. de offic.
lib. 2.
who remaining unsettled, give cause of Jealousy to the State, and of hope to
their Enemies; so that they are forced to keep up an Army for security. When
things stand thus, Tac. Hist. 4. Dissolutionem Imperii docent, si fructus
sustinetur, diminuantur.
Tacitus affirms there can be neither Peace nor Security without Armies, nor
Armies without Pay, nor Pay without Taxes. And therefore (says he) they aim at
a destruction of the Government, that would take away those Profits whereby the
Commonwealth is supported; From whence (by the way) may be collected, what the
meaning of our Levellers is, in demanding a present Release of all Taxes and
Payments. And whereas great Complaint is made against the imprisoning men in
unlawful ways, and trying them by extraordinary Courts and Commissions of
Justice, know that of Tacitus takes place ever upon extraordinary occasions:
Tac. Annal. ^4.
Magna exempla semper habent aliquid ex iniquo, quod tamen adversus singulos
utilitate publica rependitur. Great examples are not tied strictly to the Rule;
and though some particulars suffer by swerving from it; yet recompense is made
in that Profit, which redounds to the good and safety of the Public: For, it
cannot in Reason be presumed, that such ordinary Proceedings as are used in
times of Peace, can be sufficient to secure a Commonwealth, during the
necessities of War, at which time Inter Arm silent Leges.
Laws use to be silent, and those Courses are judged most just and equitable,
and have ever been allowed so by all States and Statesmen, which are dictated
by common reason and prudence, for their necessary preservation, To this
accords that of Queen Dido in Virgil, Aeneid. 2.
Res durae, and Regni novitas, me talia cogunt
moliri. Seneca*
--
And that of Hercules in the Tragedian;
Quod civibus tenere te invitis scias,
Strictus tuetur Ensis. --


Therefore if men will not submit and settle, but keep the State by their
obstinacy, under the necessities of war, they must (if they plot or attempt
any thing against them) expect such proceedings and consequences as attend the
Sword when it is drawn: But would they close cordially in affection, and be
resolved once to settle, in opposition to all Invaders, and Intruders, and let
the Commonwealth have leave to take breath a little, in the possession of a
firm peace, then they would soon find the Rivulets of a Free State, much more
pleasing than the troubled Ocean of Kingly Tyranny; begetting Fertility and
verdure (as they run along) in all the Meadows, and reviving those Pastures
which Royalty was wont to drown and swallow. Had they but once tasted the
sweets of Peace and Liberty both together, they would soon be of the opinion of
See Axiom. polit. Rich. p. 152.
Herodotus and Demosthenes, that there is no difference between King and
Tyrant, and become as zealous as the ancient Romans were in defense of their
Freedom. And though this discourse may sound like that concerning the Joys of
Heaven in the ears of ordinary people, as of Blessings afar off; yet since it
is in your power to hasten them, why stand ye off, and delay? ye may (if you
please) by an unanimous obedience, quickly open the Fountains of future
happiness, that Justice may run down as a mighty stream, in the Channel of
the Laws and righteousness and Peace embrace each other.

Seneca in Here* Fur.
Si aeterna semper Odia mortales gerant,
Nec caeptus unquam cedat ex animis furor,
Sed Arma faelix teneat, infaelix paret;
Nihil relinquent bella. Tum vastis ager
Squallebit Arvis, subdita tectis face
Altus sepultas obruet gentes cinis.
Pacem reduci velle, Victori expedit,
Victo necesse est. --
FINIS.
An APPENDIX, added out of Salmasius, and M. Hobbs.
NOtwithstanding that I have already in the former part of this Treatise,
sufficiently proved these two particulars, viz. [That the Power of the Sword
gives Title to Government: And that Governers thus invested (though perhaps
unlawfully) may, and must be lawfully obeyed;] yet being to appear in the world
with a second Impression, and in regard of the present Controversy touching
Government, hangs upon these two hinges, I thought meet to fasten them more
surely upon the Reader, and drive the nails home to the head, by inserting
some Additions, which I have collected out of Salmasius his Defensio Regia, and
out of M. Hobbs his late book de Corpore Politico. Not that I esteem their
Authorities any whit more Authentic than those which I have already alleged;
but only in regard of the great reputation allowed unto those Books by the two
Parties, Presbyterian and Royal; And I suppose no man may triumph, or cry a
victory, more honorably then my self, if I can foil our Adversaries with
weapons of their own approbation. Wherefore I commend the whole to the
consideration of those hotliver'd Gentlemen, which call themselves the
Non-subscribers of Cheshire, Lancashire, and the parts adjoining; who may (if
they please) find a fair return here for all their malicious expressions, and
matter enough, whereby to frame Answers to their own futilous Objections.

How fairly the Sword trans-mitted a Title to our present Governers, and how
lawfully they stand possessed, is cleared in the first part of this Treatise in
particular; but the only drift at present is, to determine the point of Power
in general, and of submission and obedience to such a Power, though it had
been unlawfully gained. And now to the purpose.

Of the Power of the Sword, in point of Title, according to the Opinion of
Salmasius, in his Defensio Regia.

Page Populi luplici m^do i^ alteri^^ arbitri^m se (...).
188. and 189. he says, People usually submit to the will and pleasure of
others, in a twofold manner, and yield to be governed by them, either by force
and constraint after victory, or voluntarily by their own consent. Both these
ways they are conceived to quit their own power, and transfer it irrevocably
to him (or them) that take them into protection. And though such as are subdued
by Arms lose their power by force, yet being necessitated to yield submission
to the Victor, he is supposed to rule over them by their own consent. Moreover,
it is to be observed, that in this case, not all those which yield to the
conditions of an unjust peace imposed by the enemies, but those only that bare
Arms, are understood to be the Conquered Party: And because the rest that never
bare Arms are constrained to follow the fortune of the other, therefore for
the settling of a firm peace, there follows a necessity of such a Compact or
Agreement (though it seem somewhat unjust) that the Conquerors should give Law,
and become Lords to them all, as the Conquered Party. Therefore when Augustus
had deprived the Romans of their Liberty by force of Arms, the people seeing
him in a condition to impose what Laws he pleased upon them, framed a Law
Royal, whereby they resigned up all power into his hands, when they could no
longer resist him, and took an Oath of Allegiance, as you may read there at
large.

And this he illustrates, page 191. by a Simile; that as in the Case of a Rape
by the old Law, if a woman had once desired to marry a man, and it had happened
afterward that he took her away from her friends by force and ravished her,
she was no less his lawful wife, than if she had been given to him by her
Parents; The marriage also became as lawful, though she were forced, if she
gave consent to it after the Rape: So likewise the same may be said of him, or
them, who hold a government over men by force after a victory; This is that
(...) Consent, mentioned by (...) in Part 1. c. 1. p. 23, 24.
forasmuch as by that consent of the people, which the people can no longer
deny, the Power of governing is established in the Conquerors hands, and
becomes no less lawful, than if the people had consigned it to them of their
own accord.

Page 195. Quod Armis quaeritur, transit in ejus dominium qui acquisivit, etc.
Whatsoever is sought by force of Arms, falls of right into his Power, who has
made himself Master* Hence it was, that when ever such as were overcome in war,
sought to change, or cast off their new Lords and Masters by Rebellion, being
proved guilty of the fact, Cruci assigebantur, aut in Ergastulum trudebantur.
page 196.
they were either imprisoned, or hanged. For, (says he, page 197.) it is
evident, even by the light of natural reason, that such as are subdued ought
ever to remain subject to the subduers, Quos poterat ^ure belli perdere,
servatos maluit.
because they had Quarter given by the Conqueror, when by the Law of Arms it
was in his election to destroy or save them: And therefore they are bound, in
consideration of his favor and protection, to serve and obey him faithfully.

Page 228. he says, that at this day there is no Commonwealth or Kingdom
extant in Europe, Asia, or Africa, that can lay claim to any other beginning
and increase of their greatness. And Page 198. he says, that if the
transferring and holding of Governments on this manner by way of purchase and
possession, were not allowable, then it would follow there are no lawful ones
now in the world, Imo nulla^ quae non ad ho^ Instar nata, vel facta sucri^^.
since there are very few or none at all, that had any other beginning. Thus
Alexander the Great carried away the Empire from the Persians. After his death,
his great Captains by force converted the several Provinces under their
command into so many Kingdoms, which in time were swallowed up by the Roman
Empire. At length likewise, the Roman was divided by those barbarous Nations,
that issued like an Inundation out of the North, and overran Europe, Asia, and
Africa. In Britain, the Saxons drove out the old Britains, the Danes the
Saxons, as the Saxons afterward drove out the Danes again, and then were
themselves subdued by the Normans.

Of Submission and Obedience to Power (supposed usurped and unlawful)
according to the Opinion of the same SALMASIUS, ut Supra.

Page 71. speaking about Christ and his Apostles paying Tribute to Caesar,
says he, who was this Caesar, to whom they paid Tribute? Was he a good and
lawful Prince? Or, was he not rather a cruel Tyrant, both in the usurpation,
and exercise of his Power? It was Tiberius that then reigned, who by the
practices of his Mother, possessed himself of the Empire, to which he had no
right, and secured it by the subtle sleights and wickedness of a woman, while
the right Heir was excluded. Having invaded the Sovereignty as a Tyrant, as a
Tyrant he ruled; yet since Christ himself so freely and willingly submitted
himself, did he not in so doing signify by the Doctrine which he delivered,
and commanded his Disciples to publish to all Nations, That he desired not any
change of that form of Government, which was then established? And did not his
Apostles delare to their Successors, and recommend unto the people, the very
same Doctrine which they received from their Lord and Master? Peter, in that his
Epistle general, which he wrote to the Jews, scattered in all Nations,
cammanded them to submit to every Ordinance of Man; by which (according to the
best interpretation) is meant all Principality, or Magistracy whatsoever. To
whom accords Paul in his 13. to the Romans, where, according to the old Greek
Copies, we read, [To all super-eminent Powers] and in the old Latin [Be ye
subject to all higher Powers] as it is read also by Irenaeus and Ambrose in
their Commentaries. And whereas Peter says, [To every ordinance of man] it is
meant to every Power which is set over men, to all Magistrates, as well as to
Kings, and whereas he says, to the King as super-eminent, it is to be noted,
that Epistle was written from Babylon; and so the subjection must be meant then
of the King of the Parthians, to whom he willed the Christians in the Provinces
of that Country to be subject; and whereas it was super-scribed to the
converted Jews that dwelt in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
those things spoken by Peter, may be meant likewise of the Roman Emperor. And
who was Emporour at that time but Nero? no ordinary Tyrant, but the most
notorious cruel Tyrant in the world: so that in all times since his name has
been made use of, by all Nations, as an ordinary Appellation for the worst of
Tyrants. But whether it were to the King of the Parthians, or to the Roman
Emperor, or whatsoever Tyrant besides, Peter affirms there is a debt of
Subjection due unto them from the People. So likewise does Paul, in his
forementioned Chapter to the Romans, and gives the reason, why we should
submit to all supereminent Powers; Non esse potestatem nisi a Deo.
because There is no Power but of God; the Powers that are, are ordained of
God: And from thence he infers, Whosoever resists the Power, Nihil differunt,
omnes potestates esse a Deo ordinatas, and nullam esse nisi a Deo.
resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive damnation.
Lastly, he says, subjection must be yielded, not only for fear of the anger of
the Magistrate, but also for Conscience sake: As if we could not preserve a
Conscience pure and upright before God, except we paid the obedience due unto
all Magistrates whatsoever, without dispute concerning their Right of Power and
Supremacy.

Page 113. Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, chapter 2. exhorts that Prayers
and Supplications be made for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; because godliness and
honesty cannot well subsist without peace and tranquillity; and there can be no
peace and quietness without the safety of our Governers. But what were those
Governers which the Apostle commanded us to pray for? Certainly, they were
Tyrants by Usurpation, that ruled in a tyrannical manner, haters of the true
Religion, Persecutors and Idolaters. Yet this was the Rule, this the Law, this
the Commandment. And, as he observes, Page 197. Christ himself was content to
be born, to live and pay obedience, to acknowledge their Authority in matter of
Tribute and Judicature, and at last to be condemned injuriously, and suffer
death most shamefully, under a tyrannical usurped Government. -- Much more he
has to the same purpose; but let this suffice out of one of their own Oralces,
to show; That if the present power were usurped, (as our Antagonists would
suppose, though as yet they never proved it) yet their Consciences cannot be
secure from the guilt of that Treason, wherein they must needs involve
Themselves, if they proceed in their pertinacious courses of disobedience and
opposition.

Arguments for Submission, brought out of Mr. Hobbs his Book* de Corpore
Politico.

If it be true, Part. 1.
which Mr. Hobbs says; That the Cause in general which moves one man to
become subject to another, Chap. 6.
is the fear of not otherwise preserving himself. Sect. 11.
And if a man may subject himself to him that invadeth, or may invade, for fear
of him. Or, if men may join among Themselves, to subject Themselves, to such as
they shall agree upon for fear of others: And, if when many men subject
themselves the former way, there arises thence a Body politic, as it were
naturally; Then it appears, that since there is no other possible way to
preserve the wel-being of this Nation; but by a Submission to the present
Powers (as I have proved in the second Part of this Treatise,) we may pay
subjection to them, in order to our security: nor can any hold a Plea for
Non-Submission, upon pretense of having been invaded, or over-mastered by those
whom he reckons here as Invaders, or Usurpers. Nor can the Prevailing Party of
this Nation be blamed in any wise, for joining among Themselves, to subject
Themselves to such as are now in Authority, for fear of foreign Invaders; but
having thus subjected themselves, they are naturally, lawfully, and completely
united in the form a of Body politic, or Commonwealth, truly called, The
Commonwealth of England.

Mr. Hobbs says further; Part. 2.
The end for which one man gives up, and relinquisheth to another, Chap. 1.
or others, the right of protecting or defending himself by his own Power,
Sect. 5.
is the security which he expects thereby, of protection and defense from
those to whom he does so relinquish it; and a man may then account himself in
the state of security, when he can foresee no violence to be done unto him*
from which the do^r may not be deterred by the Power of that Sovereign or
Supreme Authority that is set over them; And without that security, there is no
reason for a man to deprive himself of his own Advantages, and make himself a
Prey to other^ How far therefore in the making (...) Commonwealth, man
subjecteth his will to the power of others* must appear from the end, namely,
Security. from whence may plainly be inferred, that since no security for Life,
Limbs, and Liberty (which is the end of all Government) can now be had here, by
relinquishing our right of self-protection, and giving it up to any other Power
beside the present; Therefore it is very unreasonable in any man to put himself
out of the protection of this Power, by opposing it, and reserving his
obedience to the K. of Scots, or any other Power whatsoever, it being clear,
that neither he, nor any other, can now protect us, by affording any possible
present security from violence and Injury.

Sect. Sect. 8.
8. He says, And forasmuch as they who are among themselves in security, by
the means of this [Power, or] Sword of Justice that keeps them all in awe, are
nevertheless in danger of enemies from without, if there be not some means
found to unite their strengths and natural Forces, in the resistance of such
enemies, their Peace among themselves is but vain. And therefore it is to be
understood as a Covenant of every Member, to contribute their several Forces
for the defense of the whole, whereby to make one Power, as sufficient as is
possible for their defense. Now seeing the use of every man's strength is
transferred to him, or them, that have the Sword of Justice, it follows, that
the power of Defense, that is to say, the Sword of War, be in the same hands,
wherein is the Sword of Justice; and consequently those two Swords are but one,
and that inseparably and essentially annexed to the Supreme Power.

Sect. Sect. 9.
9. Moreover, seeing to have the right of the sword, is nothing else but to
have the use thereof, depending only on the judgment and discretion of him, or
them that have it, it follows, That the Power of Indenture in all
Controversies, wherein the Sword of Justice is to be used; and in all
deliberations concerning war (wherein the use of that Sword is required,) the
right of resolving and determining what is to be don, belong to the same
Sovereign or Supreme Power.

Sect. Sect. 10.
10. Farther, considering it is no less, but much more necessary to prevent
Violence and Rapin, than to punish the same when it is committed, and all
Violence proceeds from Controversies that arise between men concerning Meum
and Tuum, Right and Wrong, Good and Bad, and the like which men use every one
to measure by their own judgments, it belongs also to the judgment of the
same Supreme Power, to set forth and make known the common measure by which
every man is to know what is his, and what another's* what is good, and what
bad, and what he ought to do, and what not, and to command the same to be
observed. And these measures of the Actions of the Subjects are those, which
men call Laws Politic, or Civil. The making whereof, must of right belong to
him that has the Power of the Sword, by which men are compelled to observe
them; For, otherwise they should be made in vain. All these Sections are so
express and positive to our purpose, that I need not press the Inferences for
Submission, upon the meanest Understanding.

There are three Titles only, Part. 2.
by which one man may have Right and Dominion over another. Chap. 3.
The first is Hereditary, and takes place upon supposition of Children
begotten: Sect. 2.
The other two may take place presently, and these are Voluntary offer of
Subjection, and yielding by Compulsion. Likewise (he says in the 2. Chap.
Sect. 15.) A man is released of his former Subjection by Conquest. For, when it
comes to pass, that the Power of a Commonwealth or Kingdom is overthrown, he
is discharged of his Obligation to the former: For, no man can serve two
Masters.

And since God speaks not in these days to any man by his private
Interpretation of the Scriptures, Part. 2.
nor by the Interpretation of any Power above, Chap. 7.
or not depending on the Supreme Power of every Commonwealth, Sect. 11.
it remains, that he speaks by his Vice-Gods, or Lievtenants here on earth,
that is to say, by Sovereign Kings, or such as have Sovereign Authority as well
as They. Chap. 6.


These things considered, Sect. 11.
it will easily appear, that under the Sovereign Power of a Christian
Commonwealth, there is no danger of Damnation from simple Obedience to human
Laws: For, in that the Sovereign allows Christianity, no man is compelled to
renounce that Faith, which is enough for his Salvation, that is to say, the
Fundamental Points. And for other Points, seeing they are not necessary to
Salvation, if we conform our actions to the Laws, we do not only what we are
allowed, but also what we are commanded by the Law of Nature, which is the
moral Law taught by our Savior himself. And it is part of that Obedience which
must concur to our Salvation.

Sect. Sect. 1^.
12. And though it be true, that whatsoever a man does against his Conscience,
is sin; yet the Obedience in these Cases is neither sin, nor against the
Conscience. For, the Conscience being nothing else but a man's settled Judgment,
and Opinion, when his Right of Judging is once transferred to another, that
which shall be commanded, is no less his Judgment, than the Judgment of that
other. So that in obedience to Laws, a man does still according to his own
Conscience, but not his private Conscience. And whatsoever is done contrary to
private Conscience, is then a sin* when the Laws have left him to his own
Liberty, and never else.

These things (together with the whole Treatise) I once again recommend to all
Non-Subscribers (whether Royal, or Presbyterian) God give them impartial
hearts to weigh the Particulars. Rode, caper, vitem; tamen hic, cum stabis ad
Aras,
In tua quod fundi Cornua possit, erit.


FINIS.

