Licensed by Command of the Right Honorable the Earl of SHREWSBURY.

April 1. 1689. JA. VERNON.

A LETTER TO A MEMBER OF Parliament, In Favor of the BILL FOR Uniting
Protestants.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
1689.

A LETTER to a Member of PARLIAMENT in favor of the BILL for Uniting
Protestants.
Many prejudiced against the Bill for the name of it.
THE Bill of Union, which being commonly spoken of under the less popular name
of Comprehension, has suffered very much among the zealous friends of our
Church, will certainly meet with a more favorable entertainment when it is
more fully understood.

Of the design of it.
The Design of it is not, as some have imagined, the Breaking of our Frame, but
rather the giving a greater Firmness to it.

That it is agreeable to the Principles of the Church of England,
No Alteration, that I know of, is intended by it, but in things declared to be
Alterable by the Preface to the Common Prayer.
Church it self. And if things Alterable be altered upon the grounds of
Prudence and Charity; and things Defective be supplied; and things Abused
restored to their proper use, and things of a more Ordinary composition,
revised and improved; whilst the Doctrine, Government and Worship of the Church
remain entire in all the substantial parts of them; we have all reason to
believe that this will be so far from injuring the Church, that on the contrary
it shall receive a very great Benefit by it.

And of all other Christian Churches.
This has been the manner of all Christian Churches in all times, not excepting
the Roman Church its self; which has changed her Offices in every Age, but
generally for the worse: And yet other Churches have not t^ereby incurred the
imputation of Inconstancy and of unfixing things well-fixed. No argument of
Inconstancy in our Church.
For that which is always to stand is fixed, and that which is Variable is by
the discretion of the Church accommodated to Seasons, and Places, and Occasions.

Some such thing promised to be done by us.
Some Condescentions have been already Promised, and Promises are sacred things.
They were so very lately renewed, that he must have a very short Memory, and a
worse Conscience, that has already forgot them. When the Bigots among the
Papists, and those who blindly at least, if not wilfully went into their
Interest raised a mighty Clamor against the Church of England as a PERSECUTING
CHURCH, And necessary to remove the Objection that has been made against us of
our being a Persecuting Church.
the Members of it declared that so much as there was of persecution in it, was
all a Court Artifice, and gave their word for the showing of such a temper
(when opportunity should favor them) as might fully acquit them of such a
Spirit of which they were so publicly and so vehemently accused.

We are now better able to know what is fitting to be done in this matter then
we were heretofore.
And after so long a time since the Reformation; and so many Revolutions, and so
many Objections heard and Considered, a review of our Constitution (if we had
not passed any Promise) may seem fit to be made, and now to be capable of being
made much better, than it could have been formerly.

That it is the only way to remove the Dissenters scruples.
It is true indeed for any Objections that can be made against our Constitution
as now it is, we need not enter on any alteration of it. All that have ever yet
been brought having been often and fully Answered with great strength and
plainess. But it is our unhappiness (or rather theirs) that they who have most
need of Books of this kind, either will not, or are not suffered to read them.
Or if they chance to read, yet they come with such prejudice to them, as
prevents a diligent and impartial perusal of them. The surest way therefore to
remove all objections of this kind is to remove the occasion of them, and that
will be done by this Bill of discreet Charity.

That this Bill will be no prejudice to Ecclesiastical Power.
I am well aware of your highly commendable tenderness to Ecclesiastical Power,
and this review is not designed to be made without the Sanction of it, expressly
mentioned in the last words of the Bill. The present Bill is but a Preparatory
Act, and may as well be passed in Parliament as Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions
without offense to the Clergy.

Nor take away the Fences of our Church.
Neither need you dread this Bill as a means to the throwing down the Fences of
our Church. Fences which are always attacked, and which put us perpetually upon
the defensive part, have more of Trouble in them than security. And certainly
after the Essentials and convenient decencies of Religion are provided for, our
strongest fences under God are Unity and Number.

Nor lead the way to the yielding up All to the Dissenters.
I cannot so far suspect your judgment as to think you will say, that if the
least thing be yielded to Dissenters, they will by degrees extort the whole
from us by their restless importunities. What we yield, we yield not so much to
them, as to the Peace of the Church. And the wisdom of those great Bodies a
Parliament and Convocation will know where it ought to stop. And when once that
which is fit is Granted, if Men who affect to be a State party shall insist on
all that remains, the mere unreasonableness of their demands will procure a
denial, and will justify it to all the World.

Nor will it be any discredit to us if the dissenters should some of them
refuse to acquiesce in it;
Nor can I any more think that a Person of your good sense should harbor a
suspicion, that the Authority of this Church will be made cheap, and seem to be
prostituted by an Offer of a Condescension, of which it may be the Dissenters
will not accept. It is the grief of all good Men of our Communion, that any of
the Dissenters should be guilty of so much as the least Appearance of
obstructing this Union which they formerly seemed so impatiently to desire. And
I do own that in some of them there is more than an Appearance of Aversion to
this Bill. As it may be they will.
If it were not so, after an universal forbearance of Preaching or Writing in
those Controversies on our side, Books levelled both against Liturgy and
Episcopacy would not come as they do, in this juncture, fresh from the Press.

But on the contrary, such an Union being offered by us will render them
inexcusable.
However, let that be offered by the Churchmen which may be agreed with safety
to the Church, and which has been so solemnly promised by them, and they will
at once both justify themselves and render those Men inexcusable, who advance
toward us when we are Bound and cannot meet them; and when we can, and come
forward, run back to their old extremities of Aversation.

And tho the interested Men among the Dissenters may dislike it,
It is indeed to be feared, that those who cover Interest under the pretense of
Conscience, and perhaps among those some few that are Pastors of Wealthy
Congregations, may be tempted to desire a continuance of the distance betwixt
the Dissenters and the Churchmen. It would be Policy in them to endeavor that
the Exceptions may remain as means of continuing the Separation, seeing by that
they gain more than they had reason to expect if they were set in the common
level, in the parochial charges of a National Church.

Yet we may Reasonably Hope, all others will approve it.
But I have more charitable thoughts of the sincere Dissenters; and the rather,
because this present Bill is so framed, that it may give them all reasonable
satisfaction.

The conditions of this Bill being very easy both to the Ministers
For, First: As to those Dissenters who are in the Ministry, their special
Objections have been against the Forms of Subscription and Ordination. But now
there is only one Form to subscribe; and that is so adjusted, that as many of
them as are Episcopally Ordained may come into Parochial Cures, without scruple
at that which is now required. For them that have not Episcopal Orders, there
will be such a provision made, as will satisfy all the Ministers of the
Foreign Protestant Churches; and there is all reason to hope, that it will
satisfy our Dissenters. And then when they are within the Church, they will
have no Temptation to make such Ordinations as they are said to have done of
late years, tho even those they have made are not capable of the Excuse that
was made for those in the Ill Times; when Bishops were few, and those
imprisoned, and otherwise discountenanced by the Powers in being.

And to the lay-dissenters.
And then for the Dissenters among the Laity; things that are indifferent in
their own Nature, being left indifferent in their Use, the grand Objection of
their being made unlawful by their imposition, will be perfectly removed. So
that be they henceforth used or not used, they can be no Bar to Lay-Communion.

This Bill if it has no present good effect, yet will secure the next
Generation.
For these reasons we cannot but hope that we shall have some fruit of this Bill
among the sincere Dissenters at present: But this to be sure, we shall by this
means secure the next Generation, who cannot have those Prejudices instilled
into them, which now by a public Law will be taken away. And for the French,
and German, and other Foreign Christians of the reformed Religion, And satisfy
the Protestant Churches abroad.
I am well assured both by Conversation, and by Letters lately sent from
Holland, Geneva, Switzerland, and other places; (not to speak of the Churches
of the Lutheran Communion which write the same;) that they look upon the Church
of England at this Time as the Center of Protestant Unity; and esteem the
Conditions proposed in this Bill (which have been Communicated to them) as
Terms full of Christian Moderation, To whom it has been communicated, and who
do highly approve the conditions of it.
and fit for the Uniting of Protestants. And you are not to be taught how
necessary a Union is, (especially in this State of affairs) not at Home only,
but among all the Protestants in the World.

This Bill approved by the truest Sons of the Church of England.
It will perhaps be some further satisfaction to you to let you know, that I am
not singular in all this that I have with so much freedom written to you. Among
all those who have appeared in the Churches Cause, as well against Dissenters
as Papists, I do not know one single person that is not a Well-wisher to this
Bill; and I believe they will all tell you so, if you please to advise with
them. And so far as we may learn the Genius of Men from their Writings,
Archbishop Usher, Bishop Sanderson, Dr. Hammond, and a long order of other
most worthy Men of the last Age, whose Memory is most precious in our Church,
had they been now alive, would with all Zeal have promoted this Bill of Union.

And would be fit to be passed, though it were not necessary for an Union.
And upon supposition that there were not in this Nation one single Dissenter,
that there were no occasion for either Union or Comprehension, it would still
be the Churches Interest to propose something of like Nature with that which is
now under Consideration, and ripe for its Birth, and which I hope will not want
a legal Strength for the bringing of it forth.

We may improve our Constitution,
For I pray, is any Church so perfect, as to lack nothing at all? Would it be a
prejudice to our Communion to make Confirmation and Excommunication much more
solemn? Would our Service be impaired by Additional Prayers and Hymns, and
choice Lessons, and an improved Office for the sick; and by some new Offices
for Prisoners of Debt and Crime, for the reconciling of Penitents, etc.
together with diverse other things which are obvious to Considering Persons?

Tho it be already very good.
God be blessed we are not defective in things absolutely necessary to
Salvation: nor redundant in any superstitions, or in any sinful Terms of Church
Communion. But when we may grow up into considerable improvements, and provide
for Peace and Piety together, if we shall so tie our selves down to our present
State as to refuse to do it, we shall certainly answer it to the great
Shepherd, who requires us not only to do Well, but to proceed in Welldoing, and
to abound in every good Work.

None but the Papists who have hitherto prevented our Union, ought to be
displeased at our present endeavor after it.
To conclude, We have lost one juncture already at the return of King CHARLES
the Second: And the Popish party who helped us forward in our Heats, as well as
held back the Dissenter, have since that time sufficiently shown why they did
it, by making their Advantages all along by our Discords.

We have now another favorable Season; and that such as was never yet offered
to us, by reason of the League at this time between the Protestant Princes and
States. In this Bill we shall go as far as they desire us to go. So that there
can be no need of any considerable alteration to be made for the future.

Let us not a second Time suffer our selves to be so far mistaken in our own
Interest, as to neglect that which will so much make for our Peace: Which is
what all true friends to the Reformed Religion must needs desire; and I know
none but the Common Enemy, that can reasonably be displeased at our Endeavors
for the promoting of it. I am

SIR, Your very humble Servant N. N.


