A LETTER TO A GENTLEMAN, Touching the TREATISE Entitled, Two hundred Queries
concerning the Doctrine of the Revolution of Humane Souls, and its Conformity
to the Truths of Christianity.

By a Pacifick Christian, a Member of the Catholic Church, though not of the
Roman Synagogue, falsely so called.

Let your moderation be known to all men, for the Lord is at hand, Philip. 4.5.
LICENSED,

October. 3.1689.
LONDON, Printed for Awnsham Churchill at the Black Swan in Ave-Mary Lane.
MDCXC.

SIR,
HErewith I send you, according to my Promise, an Abstract of the Doctrines
which I find contained in that wonderful Book styled Two hundred Queies
concerning the Doctrine of the Revol^tion of Humane Souls, so far as I an guess
at the Author's Sentiments ^^m his Queries.

I had much rather he had himself plainly asserted his Judgment, that (...) I
might have been tree from all ^ame in asserting these Doctrines to be so, tho I
am in no great pain about it.

For it happens often enough, That ^m do by Questions as forcibly di^over their
Sentiments, as by any ^^her way of Writing whatsoever; and so I consider this
Author to have done.

Yet because it is not impossible, but in Matters so strange and new, I may in
some things have mistaken him, I will not be equally positive as to every part
of it, and only say this, That I judge the Author at least so far accountable
for these Principles, as he has given occasion to a Man so impartial as I am to
think them his.

For sure I am, I find not the least inclination in the world to stretch any of
his Words to any other Sense than they plainly seem to bear, and much less to
ascribe any Opinion to him out of ill will, which I do (...) think to be his.

Nor needs what the Author says in his First Question, to deter (...) from
looking on them as the Persuasion of his present Judgment, where he says, That
(...) does not pretend to the utmost Assuranc^^ that every thing therein
proposed is the infallible Inspiration of the Holy Ghost

Nay, this rather confirms me, that he did look upon some of these Doctrines at
least as such, although he will not impose them upon any of his Christian
Brethren, as necessary Articles of Faith, that must be believed upon pain of
Damnation; of which there is no need, tho they were all so: It being most
certain, that all the Inspirations of the holy Men of God (in whatsoever Ages
of the World) were never so to all Men, tho they were so to those that received
them, in that Evidence which brings Condemnation if rejected.

But, that which farther induces me to believe those Queries not put forth
merely, nay nor yet chiefly, for the Proposers information, as Matters of which
he doubted; but to inform others of his Judgment, and to stir them up to a
Consideration of his whole Hypothesis: First, Whether it be not consistent with
the Scriptures? Secondly, If so, Whether it be not the most probable System
that hitherto has been proposed, to reconcile the Doctrines of Scriptures to
themselves, from the seeming Contradictions which the various Professions of
Men do fix upon them, and make the most difficult and perplexing Points of
Faith intelligible to the meanest Understanding?

In this I am yet farther confirmed, by the manifold Argumentations,
Anticipations of Objections, with their Answers, and Explications of Scripture,
so often occurring to the advertent Readers, in the Queries. To which add what
he says in his Preface of another Treatise that he has ready (if these Queries
prove acceptable) in which the most important things in them are more at large
treated of, and illustrated, than in the Queries, and that after another way:
Which must then needs be by way of Position, and Argumentation; to say nothing
of that other Treatise translated out of Hebrew into Latin, under this Title,

De Revolutionibus Animarum, Tractatus Primus, etc. Or,
The First Treatise of the Revolutions of Souls, etc.
Written several hundred years ago by a Rabbin, styled the Eagle of the
Cabalists.

Yet to do the Author all the Right I can, I do confess, that his propounding
them rather by way of Query at first, may have been in hopes, that some Learned
and Moderate Pen might, by discussing the Matters contained in them, in whole
or in part, give him occasion to correct his first Thoughts in some Points, and
so amend some parts of his Hypothesis that are perhaps but weakly guarded,
before he came to write any thing by way of Position. And who can blame this
Modesty, while he treads in a Path so seemingly new and hidden?

Yet this neither need nor ought so deter any moderate Pen from showing either
the self-inconsistency of the Hypothesis, its Contrariety to the Scripture, or
any the ill Consequences it is accompanied with, with respect either to the
Christian Faith or Life, lest they should lose their time in writing against a
Book that asserts nothing, and only asks Questions.

To prevent which Scruple, I have made this Collection of Fifty Positions and
Negations evident in the Queries; which to be sure, if the Author shall hear
of, and not purge himself timely of them, he will be the more accountable for
them, and for any ill Consequences, if any there be, that can justly be fixed
upon them.

As I have then adventured upon the first Step, with all the Care and Caution
imaginable; so some more able Pen, I hope, will undertake the latter; lest, all
Men being silent, it be looked upon as a Conviction, if not of the Truth of the
Hypothesis, at leas of the inoffensiveness of it, and us non-repugnancy to, or
good consistency with the Doctrines of Christianity, as the Title Page
insinuates.

In my Judgment, seeing the Author was about to treat of the Soul, and that his
Opinion concerning the first Existence of it, varies from the most common
received Opinion of Christians, his first Query ought to have been concerning
her first State; but of this we find nothing directly till page 129. where he
intimates,

Qu. 157, etc.
before this was made; out of which they do come into this World, when they are
first born; for which cause that Term is made use of in Scripture, of ^^ns
coming into the world, Joh. 1.9.

This I say, I judge had been more proper for the Author to have begun with,
before he had gone to treat of the Souls descent out of that her pure Virgin
and Spiritual State, into the dark Dungeons of these our gross Bodies; of which
his other Queries by,

Qu. 4.64.
God, of his wonderful Long-suffering, Mercy, and Forbearance, does give unto
every Man a long day of Visitation, even of a thousand Years, to live upon this
Earth, that so he may be converted, and, through Faith in the Blood of Christ,
grow up to such a State of Stability in Righteousness, as to overcome, to be
cleansed, and to be made free from all Sin; Matthew. 20.30. Luke 1.17.23.56.
that so they may be fitted and prepared for that future and eternal Weight of
Glory laid up for those that shall have overcome; of which those that are not
so cleansed, are utterly incapable: Or, that being, as it were, on the other
hand, perfected in Unrighteousness and Unbelief, they may, by the just Judgment
of God, be cast into that terrible Torment, and long Damnation, that is
appointed as the Lot and Portion of all those, that shall have out finned so
long a day of Visitation, the and Tender of the Mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

Qu. 8, 61, 62, 63, 70, 114.
twelve Revolutions or Times of Living upon this Earth, and that continually in
the same Body for Substance.

Qu. 44.
who being, through this Faith in his Name and Blood, perfectly purified,
cleansed, and sanctified from all Sin, stood not (generally speaking) in need
of returning to live upon the Earth, until that time that all the Saints shall
so return, to wit, in the first Resurrection, to live here together a thousand
Years.

immediately to their Bodies again, as the Heathen Philosophers have taught,
who all along did corrupt the Divine Truths, which they learned of the Church
of God, by mixing in with them their own Imaginations: But, Qu. 194.
that every Soul is so long out of the Body, as, together with the time of the
precedent Life, makes up one Hour, that is, according to this Hypothesis, 333
Years, except Infants, that return sooner.

Adam to the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, which he says is almost Four
thousand Years, P. 8.
and which sometimes he calls the Great Circle, sometimes the Whole Great
Revolution, is in Scripture called the Night. This be divides into Twelve equal
Parts, as the Twelve Hours of the Night: One of which Hours being 333 of Years,
and Three Hours being a Watch of the Night, makes the Psalmist call a thousand
Years a Watch of the Night, Qu. 5, 11, 12, 61.63, 72, 74, 194.
in one sense, ( viz. as it is Three of these Hours of this Night (or Time from
Adam to Christ) and in another sense as one Day ( viz. as it is the Day of
Visitation which God gives every Man to live upon the Earth) Psalm. 90. ^4. And
from this Text he admirably derives all his Scripture-Chronology.

Qu. 32.
God having appointed no other Place, nor State, out of the Body, for Men and
Women to be converted in, but this Earth.

Qu. 43.
at rest: but that those of the Impenitent and Wicked are not so.

Christ Jesus, crucified and offered up as a Propitiation for the Sins of the
World, Qu. 39, 40, 41, 42.
is so necessary to Salvation, that no Man ever was, or ever shall be saved, or
receive Remission of his Sins, but through Faith in his Name and Blood.

Jesus Christ was by his Death a Ransom for the Sins that were under the First
Testament, Heb. 9.15.
so that even the Sins of Cain, Esau, and all that died in their Sins, Qu. 19,
22, 52, 65, 70.
before the Resurrection of Christ, and the preaching of the Gospel, should be
pardonable to them, at what time soever they should, again live in the World,
if, when they should hear the Gospel preached unto them, they should truly
believe in his Name: And consequently, that none had at that time committed the
unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Qu 36, 39, 29.
and particularly for having rejected the Tenders of the Mercy of God in Jesus
Christ, preached unto them in the Gospel, as well outwardly as inwardly; for
which all their Sins, of a thousand Years past, shall be charged upon them,
that so God may be just in sentencing them to that terrible and long Damnation
for Ages of ^^ges. of which no Man knows the and. Heb. 2.3. John 8.24.16.9.

Christ Jesus; Qu. 26, etc.
yet where it pleased him (...) to superadd that singular Grace of the
Revelation of Christ to come in the Flesh, to be offered up as a Propitiation
for the Sins of the whole World, that Grace was not sufficient to the final and
eternal Salvation of my Man, it not being indeed given (...) that end, Luke
1.17.
but only to prepare their ^^arts for the Reception of that Do^^rive, when God
in his Providence should cause the same to be preached (...) them, both
outwardly and inwardly.

Qu. 37, 51, 52.
WHERE MENTION SHALL BE MADE OF WHAT THAT WOMAN DID TO CHRIST IN MEMORIAL OF
HER, Matthew. 24.14.26.13.
shall live again in the World, in some Age and Place where they shall hear it,
before the End of the World; that so they may be in a capacity, through. Faith
in his Name and Blood, of receiving the Remission on of their Sins, or be
condemned to that just Damnation which the Contempt and Rejection of so great
Mercy and Salvation shall demerit.

Christ was offered up upon the Cross, risen again from the Dead, and that
Remission of Sins was preached in his Name; Qu. 95, 96.
because then such a Soul could not have been saved. And for this Cause it was
that the Apostle said, that even now, in the ^^d of the World, after Christ was
appeared to put a way Sin by the Sacrifice of himself, it was yet appointed for
all Men [at least] once to die, before the Judgment of God should ^^^^lly come
upon them, Heb, 9.26.

Christ arose from the Dead, and the Apostles were sent forth into the World to
preach Remission of Sins through Faith in his Name and Blood, was the last
Revolution, Qu. 67, 87.
or last time of living upon Earth, to many that were then alive; and that
therefore Christ was then to come, and could not stay way any longer, no more
than he could come sooner, that being the Fullness of Time appointed by God,
Gal. 4.4.

they must be converted, or they cannot be saved; for Men having once heard the
Preaching of' the Gospel; Qu. 87.
after the wilful rejection of it, there remains no more Sacrifice for the Sin
of such, but a fearful looking for of Judgment, and violent Fire, which shall
devour the Adversaries, Heb. 10.27. 1 Pet. 1.20. 1 John 2.18.

Qu. 81, 82, 84.
and then be converted because, first, No Man knows but this is his last Hour;
nor yet, if he should have yet more Hours to live upon Earth, but that it will
only tend to his farther hardening against the Doctrine of the Gospel, to the
aggravation of his Damnation, and not at all toward his Conversion, because he
has now neglected and resisted so great Salvation.

before God, only for the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, who has not consented
to, and received it, Qu. 161, 162, 167, 171.
by a living Faith, to the purifying of his heart; so neither shall any Man be
reputed before God a formal Sinner only for the Transgression of Adam, who
never consented to it: that all Souls did so, and that that is the reason why
all Men do so partake of the dismal Effects occasioned thereby.

Christ their Head, and are therefore in holy Scripture called his Fellows,
Psalm. 45.7. Heb. 1.9.

Jews (of which the greatest part are yet to be fulfilled in these last days)
were made to that whole People, Qu. 48, 49, 50, 54, 55, 56, 57, 60,
to all the natural Branches, of all Ages, and not only to the Children, which
shall yet live in the last days, with seclusion of the fathers of former Ages,
who died in unbelief; which caused the Apostle to say most expressly, That all
Israel shall be saved, and that those Branches that were then cut off though
unbelief, should be grafted in again, Row. 11.12, 16.17.19.

Qu. 79.
Rev. 11.3. must be understood of so many natural Days, not of so many Years.

Qu. 180.
must be understood of so many Prophetical Days, i.e. Years, accounting a Day
for a Year, as the Prophets were wont to do.

Exodus 20.12. is that New Earth of which Peter writes; Qu. 97, 98.
and that the Promise in the Fifth Commandment is not yet fulfilled to the
generality of Men, whose Days, since that time, have been not long, but short,
upon Earth 2 Pet. 3.13.

1 Cor. 15.49. Qu. 100, 102, 103.
that is, of Adam before the Fall, or in the State of Innocence; but that THAT
is reserved as the peculiar Privilege of the Saints in the first Resurrection,
when they shall live a thousand Years upon Earth, in Bodies free from Sin,
leading a Life of perfect Holiness, without the least Sin or Disorder.

Adam had not sinned, he should have known it; and lived a thousand Years so on
Earth, in order to his being perfected in Holiness, that he might thereby be
faced and prepared for his entrance into that future Glory.

1 Cor. 15.52, Qu. 108, 181.
World, of Holy Women and Virgin-Mothers, that, so they may, even in that
respect, be like their Head, though still inferior to him; and that for this
cause this Time is called by Christ the Regeneration. Matt. 19.28.


1 Cor. 15.23. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. Qu. 105, 181, 79, 80.
saving the Two Witnesses Moses and Elies, who shall live again among the
first, even in the Interval of Forty five Years before the thousand Years
begin; about which time John also is to live again, and to measure the Temple.

Qu. 181, 110.
in which time they shall all be born: And that afterward, before the end of
the World, all Generation shall cease for a full thousand Years; that so every
one may have at least a thousand Years to live upon Earth, and so the Day of
Christ be as long as the Night of Antichrist, that is, Twelve hundred and sixty
Years.

Millenium, in the Year of the World 5740, Qu. 113, 180.
or from the Birth of Christ 1777, if his Chronology holds good; by which I am
told, that he thinks that the Conversion of the Jews shall begin 1666 Years
after Chist's Resurrection, i. e. about Anno 1699, or 1700.

Qu. 186, 187, 190.
as Adam's in the State of Innocence, free from all Sin and Disorder, together
with all the other Privileges belonging to that State, and therein be more and
more perfected in Holiness, and so fitted to receive (in the second
Resurrection) the Divine and Celestial Body, from the second Adam; and that
that State shall so far transcend the former State, as the Image of the
Heavenly does the Image of the Earthly, and as the second Adam's quickening
Spirit does excel the first Adam's living Soul. 1 Cor. 15.45.


Qu. 178.
but shall, in the Conflagration thereof, be bur^ed, and afterward be
tormented for Ages of Ages, Time without end, with respect to the Knowledge of
Man, but not of God.

dead, which are said not to live again till the thousand years be exprired,
Rev. 20.5.
are probably such as had ended their Revolutions in impetitency in this World,
Qu. 111, 112.
together with perhaps some other fallen Souls in some former World, who, being
at that time living all together upon the Earth, shall form the Armies of Gog
and Magog, that so resisting the Truth and the Saints to the uttermost, they
may be together justly cast into that terrible Damnation already spoken of.

Moses his Description of the making of this World, Qu. 155, 157, 160.
that there was a World before this World, so shall there also (...) Worlds
after this.

Heb. 11.3. that this World was not created out ^f Nothing, but out of the
Invisible, Qu. 156.
(...) that which did not appea^^

Matt. 12.31, 32. Qu. 130, 131, 139.
nor in that which is (next) to come; but in some after-World, more remote, and
to succeed ^^er that which is next to be.

Qu. 123, 124.
(...) a Magnetic Virtue, attract to it ^^lf the Particles of its former Body,
(...) the Loadstone does the Particles (...) Iron dust; so that there is a
Re^^lution of the same Bodies as well (...) of the same Souls.

Qu. 114, 116, 117, 176.
the same, I say, for substance, to wit, as to its Essential Parts, or
Hypostatick Principles; as the Body of a Child and a Man are thought to be the
same, and the Body of a Man at Sixty Years old, is the same that he had at
Twenty Years, though wonderfully changed in respect of the more gross and
inanimate Parts.

Qu. 118, 119, 120, 121.
is rather something that cleaves to the Body, than the Substance of the Body
it self; and rises not in the Resurrection so as to make any Part of the Body,
which shall be the same for Substance, though not for Quality; because it shall
be changed and spiritualliz'd: Just as the Husk, or more gross Part of the Body
of the Grain, that is sown, rises not out of the Earth, so as to make any Part
of the new Body of the Grain that comes up.

Qu. 125, 126, 127, 128, 129.
live: And that that Objection which some Philosophic Divines of (...) Times
do make against the rising again of the same Body for Sub^^ance, is very
frivolous, Because say they) the Body is no living sensible ^rinciple; which is
their Error.

Qu. 118, 119, 120.
but shall be clothed upon ^ith the heavenly Body, the immor^^l, spiritual, and
incorruptible Bo^y: And that our Bodies, which are ^turally mortal and
corruptible, shall ^e by it made spiritual, immortal, and ^^corruptible, 1 Cor.
15.42.

Qu. 122.
in the end of this World, be spiritualliz'd and glori^^d; so shall all the
other Particles (...) this Earth, in the other Worlds (...) shall succeed this.

With reference to this Article, N. B.
I am informed, that the Author supposes, that by how much this World is
diminished by those glorified Parts of which the Bodies of the Saints are
formed, by so much it is augmented, though insensibly as to us; and that this.
Earth changes, as does the Body of Man, after its sort; for that all things
are in a continual motion, flux, and change, save God alone, who is alone
unchangeable. So that, though it be said, Eccles. 1.4.
the Earth abides for ever, or for Ages, it is only to be understood of the
Earth in Species and Form, but not in respect of the same number of individual
Particles that do constitute the Earthly Matter, which is in continual change;
the Earth continually receiving from the visible Heavens, and continually
giving forth unto them again, and to other Worlds in visible to us.

But because this is not in his Book (though very agreeable to his Hypothesis) I
will not insert it otherwise than as a Report.

Qu. 130, 131, 133.
^^d shall all (as John heard them) (...) all that are in Heaven, Rev. 5.13.
on the ^^rth, and in the Sea, praise, honor, ^^d glorify the Lord and the
Lamb.

Qu. 137, 138.
to express the ^^^ation of the Torments of the ^^icked, as of the Felicity of
the ^^^nts; yet there is no necessity that ^^ey must be therefore of one and
^^e same duration; as every consi^^rate Man, that reads, may easily ^^serve.
And therefore though the ^appiness of the Saints is SO for ^^er, that it shall
never have an end, ^o more than God can cease to be; ^^t it is not so, with
respect to the ^^erlasting Torments of the Wicked, ^ut that they at last shall
cease; ^^o' when that End shall be, is only ^^own to God alone.

Damnation in the vulgar Sense, Qu. 136, 137, 141, 147.
(viz.) for Ages infinite and innumerable, not only with respect to the
Knowledge of all Men, which is granted) but also with respect to the Knowledge
of God himself; is a Doctrine false and absurd, and contrary to that Idea which
all prudent Men have of God, who is Love it self, and is both merciful and
just: And that the Damnation and Torment of the Wicked is truly enough said, in
a Scripture-sense, to be for ever, for ever and ever, everlasting; or endless,
though it be none of these with respect to the Knowledge of God; because the
Scripture uses these Terms of for ever, Genesis 13.15.12.14, 17. Deuteronomy.
15.17.29.29. Isa. 30.8. Jer. 7.7. Genesis 17.8.49.26. Psalm. 90.2. 2 Kings 17.37.
and everlasting, to things of far less duration than shall be the Torment of
the Wicked in the end of the World, after they have neglected so long a Day of
Mercy as a thousand Years, and so clear a holding of it forth, as in the
Preaching of the Gospel outwardly as well as inwardly to them.

holy Scripture, Qu. 131, 132, 133, 134, 140, 151.
not bears any proportion with any Idea of Justice Humane a Divine; for Justice
always proportions all Punishments to the Crimes committed; but it is impossible
for any Man to assign any Proportion between a Temporal Crime and an Eternal
Punishment, in the ^ulgar sense, because there is no ^^oportion betwixt Time
and Eter^^ty.

Qu. 145, 146, 147.
on the the other hand, to furnish the Athestick Spirits of these Times (the
very Scab of the Age) with Matter of Mockery against the Doctrine of Gospel,
while they find so unreasonable and absurd a Doctrine as this, with so much
Zeal and Confidence, preached up, as one of the most weighty Doctrines of
Christ Jesus, by all Sects that make profession of his Name, which therefore
(without all examination) they take for granted; to be his, and so make no
difficulty of exploding all the rest, because they do clearly, find this to be
false.

Qu. 135.
which the Holy Ghost has used to express this great and terrible Damnation
by; and that they would yet return to the same, viz. that it shall be
everlasting, for ever, for ever and ever, or for Ages of Ages, of which no Man,
and only God alone, does know the end.

great Judgment, Qu. 149.
in which yet they can clearly and distinctly conceive a possibility of a
Proportion and Consistency with Justice, will never leave them for that other
unreasonable Addition, which they clearly discern to have no Foundation in
Justice at all, but i^ a mere Chimera; and they that ^o not believe such a
Punishment as (...) consistent with Justice, can much less believe the other
that is not so.

Qu. 150.
yet that of the Love and Mercy of God in Jesus Christ is much more prevalent:
Yea, that that of Fear, without the hope of this of Mercy, can be of no force
to persuade the Soul of any Man.

Qu. 141.
And that all his Afflictions and Punishments are the mere Effects of his Love,
applied as so many Medicines for their Recovery.

Behold here, Sir, if not all (for some may have slipped my observation) at least
the most important and principal Doctrines (as I think) pointed at in the Two
hundred Queries: Concerning which, you will (with me) no doubt conclude, That
it was not without Reason that the Author said he did not presume to the utmost
assurance of every Particular there proposed, and therefore would not impose
them upon his Christian Brethren as the infallible Dictates of the Holy Ghost;
and much less as necessary Articles of their Faith.

While yet he seems though, to have so many Reasons for his Chief Doctrine of the
various Revolutions of the Souls of Men, that he cannot doubt of the Truth of
it.

Ps. 90.3, 4. Matthew. 21.23, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. 1 Thessalonians. 2.15. Matthew. 11 14.
Rev. 11.1.
as a general Docrine, and confirms it by particular Examples.





Christ came in the Flesh, by the better part of the Church, even by such the
Jews became his Disciples, as appears by their Questions to him. Mark 8.28.
Luke 9.19. John 9.2.


Christ, notwithstanding the many Occasions his Disciples gave him to have
informed them better, Qu. 195.
(had it been an Error or Chimera of the Rabbis) he never reproved them for
if, but rather, upon all occl^sions, presupposing the Doctrine of the Corporal
Regeneration to be true, he endeavors further to inform them of some things
which they then of understood not; and particularly from thence takes occasion
to preach his Fundamental Doctrine of the Spiritual Regeneration, John 3.4, 5.
and the Necessity of it: which certainly he would never have done, had it been
a mere Fiction, that was not ^terum Natura.

Jews, Turks, and others, Pagan Nations, (who do believe it to be so necessary
a Truth, as that without presupposing it, they judge that there is no clear
evincing of the chiefest Attributes of God, as his Justice, Mercy, and Wisdom)
do take at the Christian Religion, for rejecting that Doctrine, frankly
averring, That the Christians seem to them rather to worship the Idol of their
owr Brains, than the True God.

Justice, Mercy, and Wisdom of God. As,

That with God there it no respect of Person. Ezech. 18.25. Act. 10.34. 2 Samuel
4.14. Col. 3.25.
When we certainly believe, from Scripture-testimony, that he has given to
some five, six, seven, eight, nine hundred Years, to live upon the Earth, that
they might be converted and perfected in Holiness.

While we daily see many others out off in their Sins, without having the one
tenth part of a hundred Years to be converted in.

Again, Some are born with large Capacities both as to Body and Mind.

Whilst others are born under great Distempers of both; yea, stark Fools and
Madmen, without any exercise of Reason or Understanding; of whom it cannot
properly be said that they are enlightened, because they want the Capacity of
being so.

Again, Some are born in Ages and Places of the World, when, and where, much
Gospel Light and great Holiness has shined forth in very eminent Examples.

While others are born and die in Ages and Places of the World, where little or
no Gospel Light has shined, and scarce any Examples of Virtue and true
Holiness have appeared; but much Darkness, Superstition, Idolatry, and
Profaneness.

Now how does, the Equality of God to all the Sons of Men, and his non-respect
of Persons, (not to say his Justice, Mercy, and Wisdom) so well appear, to a
reasonable, impartial Man, as by this Hypothesis, which asserts all Men to have
an equal Day of a thousand Years, and that in diverse Ages of the World, and by
which every one lives, at least once, to hear the Gospel of the Kingdom
preached to him outwardly and inwardly?

Romans 2.16. John 3.5. Heb. 11.6. and 12.14. Gal. 6.7.
That Christ will render unto every Man according to the Deeds done in the
Body, good or evil: That except a Man be born again, he cannot enter into, nay,
nor so much as see, the Kingdom of God: that without Holiness no Man shall see
him; and that without Faith it is impassible to please God.

Now, says he, How can this be true with respect to the many Millions of
Mankind, some of which do die in their Infancy, others live and die in Frenzy,
and others natural Idiots, never being in any capacity (...) either doing good
or evil, while they are in the Body? Except this Doctrine be received, which
supposes them to have lived before, when they had a Capacity; or that they
shall (...) after, and shall have a Capacity of doing good and evil in the
Body, ^^d of receiving a Reward accordingly? Besides, How is the common
Doctrine of all Christians, both Papists and Protestants, with respect to these
Creatures, reconcilable to the Justice, Wisdom; and Mercy of God, and to the
Scriptures alleged, with many more that might be produced?

For, Whither shall these Infants, Franticks, and Fools go? What shall become
of them?

Shall they all go to Heaven, and partake of that eternal Weight of Glory,
prepared only for those that have overcome? For what, I pray? What good have
they done, that they should reap so great a Reward?

Shall they all go to Hell? For what, I wonder? What evil have they done, that
they should be condemned to so great Damnation? How does the Wisdom of God
appear in the former? or his Justice in the latter?

Shall they go to the Popish Limbus, where they shall be free from Pain or
Pleasure, but for ever secluded the Presence of God? But where do the
Scriptures speak of any such middle Place or State?

Not to speak of the inconceivableness of such a State, as in which
Intellectual Beings; (if these can be said to be such) deprived of all outward
Objects to divert their Thoughts upon, should (while to all Eternity deprived
of the Enjoyment of the Presence of God) be void of Torment?

Or shall they (as the Socinians say of the Wicked) be annihilated?

But what Glory can accrue to that Supreme Intellectual Being, (who created all
things for his own Glory) by annihilating any of his Intellectual Creatures? To
say no more.

What more reasonable Solution then of this Difficulty has hitherto ^^n found,
than this Hypothesis; which ^^ars both the Wisdom, Justice, and ^ercy of God,
in rewarding or con^^mning them, because he has afford^d, or will afford them
other Oppor^^nities of living upon the Earth, in which they received, or will
receive a ^apacity of doing Good or Evil; of ^^^ving in Christ, or persisting
in (...) belief?

Christ, (...) order to Salvation? Saying,

That there is no other Name under ^^^en, by which any Man tan be saved, Acts
4.12.
(...) that of Jesus. Mat. 26.8. Luke 24.47. Acts 2.38.10.43. Romans 2.25. Heb.
9.22.10.18.


That Remission of Sins is only attain^^ through Faith in his Name and ^^^d.
That he that believes not shall (...) damned, yea, is condemned already. that
God shall judge all the World in Righteousness, by the Man Christ Jesus; Romans
2.16.
and that according to that very Gospel which Paul preached.

How is all this, by any other Principle but this Hypothesis, reconcilable to
the Infinite Justice and Mercy of God's Nature; not only with respect to that
numberless number of Infants, Franticks, and Idiots already mentioned; but also
with respect to the many Millions of Souls of Men and Women, even whole
Nations, for many Ages together, who have lived in the Body, and died, without
ever having heard of the Man Christ Jesus, or of that Law of the Gospel; or of
any Necessity of believing in his Name for the Remission of their Sins, or that
they should for want of it be condemned to so terrible Damnation?

Shall we, to avoid the manifest Injustice that there seems to be, in
condemning Men for not believing in him, of whom they never heard, and for not
conforming to a Law never promulgated in their Nation; Shall we, I say, to
avoid this gross Absurdity, fall into another almost is bad, viz. give the Lie
to this ^ain Doctrine of the Gospel? Or, by Fetches of Wit, no where to be
^ound in Scripture, seek to evade or elude it, and so (as some think, and call
it) introduce a certain kind (...) Paganism, or Salvation without ^y explicit
knowledge of Christ cru^^hed?

Or, is it not better, and more ^^^e, to embrace this middle Way, in which the
Justice of God is sufficiently cleared on the one hand, and the Doctrine of the
Gospel on the other hand preserved, asserting, That every Man shall, at one
time or other, live in one place or other, where Christ, and Remission of Sins
through Faith in his Name, shall be preached to them outwardly, as well as
inwardly?

That Christ, by his Death, Heb. 9.15.
became a Ransom for the Sins that were under the First Testament, and that in
that time of Ignorance God winked. Acts 17.30.


But how is this Scripture. Doctrine consistent with the vulgar Opinion, which
equally condemns the Sinners under the First Testament to the same everlasting
and endless Damnation, with the Sinners under the Second Covenant?

Christ says cannot be broken) say most expressly, That with what measure men do
mete, Mat. 7.2.26.52. Rev. 13.10. Luke 6.38.
it shall be measured to them again. That he that kills with the Sword, shall
with the Sword be killed; and, he that leads captive, shall be led captive.

But, do we not see (says he) Men daily die without receiving, in this Life,
the same Measure they have meted to others; and that diverse die on their Beds,
at liberty, that have killed and enslaved others?

How is then the common Doctrine true, That no Man lives more ^an once upon the
Earth; or how (...) it consistent with these Scriptures, (...) this Doctrine
is? For that, tho they ^eet not with the same Measure in ^is Life, they may
hereafter, upon ^is Earth, and have the Reward of (...) their other Sins, at
last, to boot.

That when we were Enemies, Romans 5.10.
(...) were reconciled to God, by the death (...) his Son on the Cross.

But how could we at that time (...) Enemies, if we had not then any ^^ing at
all, but did first begin to ^^ist above Sixteen hundred and ^^ghty Years after?

Romans 9.22.
That God en^^^th with much long-suffering the ^essels of Wrath fitted for
destruction.

But is it probable, that ten, twelve, (...) twenty Years (at which Age we
(...) many die in their Sins) is a time (...) much long-suffering with God,
with whom at thousand Years is as one Day?

That after Christ was put to death in the Flesh, 1 Pet. 9.20. 1 Pet. 3.18, 19,
20.
and quickened by the Spirit, [that is, was raised from the dead] he went by the
Spirit and preached to the Spirits in Prison, which once were disobedient in
the days of Noah.

But how could this be, if those very Souls, that lived and were Captives of
the Devil in the Days of Noah, were not then again living upon the Earth, in
the same Captivity of the Devil, that Christ* might go and preach to them by
his Spirit in their own Hearts, and in the Ministry of the Apostles?

Or shall we, with the Papists, feign this Prison to be some Limbo under the
Earth, into which Christ descended after his Death, but before his Quickening or
Resurrection, to preach to these Spirits?

Contrary to the express Doctrine of the Scriptures, which never speak of any
Plate but this Earth, in which ^en can be converted; and to the express Words
of the Text it self, which says, That it was after he was (...) to death in
the Flesh, and quickened if the Spirit.

Or shall we, with the Protestants (...) general, assert this preaching to
them, to have been only in the Days if Noah, and by his Ministry alone,
contrary to the Text it self, as above ^^served?

Or, confessing that Preaching ^is after the Resurrection, because it seems
evident from the Text, shall we, by another Fetch of the Socini^^s, contradict
the Apostle another way, viz. by denying that they were the very same Spirits
to which Christ then preached, which lived and were ^^sobedient in the days of
Noah, and that they were only Men and Women guilty of the same Sins?

O^, is it not best, (now a way is found out how it can be) to take the
Apostle's Words as they lie, without any Fetch or Quirk of Wit foreign to the
Text?

That upon that Generation, Matthew. 23.31.
which slew the Son of God, should come all the righteous Blood shed from the
Blood of the righteous Abel, to the Blood of Zacharias: Which is about Forty
Generations.

But if this Doctrine, by which that very Generation may have lived formerly,
(as Christ says they did) in the days of Zacharias, and of the Prophets, and
did slay them, be rejected, and the Vulgar Doctrine maintained, and it be said,
that all this Blood should come upon them for their Parents and their own Sins,
being found in the Footsteps of their Parents; and that they never lived
before; pray tell me how this Denuntiation of Christ, is consistent either with
the Doctrine of the Law, or of the Gospel? Seeing: that even under the Law it
self, God never threatens to visit the Iniquities of the Parents upon the
Children beyond the third or fourth Generation, Exodus 20.5.
even of them that hate him?

And that Ezechiel prophesied, that in the days of the Gospel, even that should
also cease, and that the Child should not bear the Iniquity of the Father; but
the Soul alone that sianed, Ezekiel. 18.2.
that alone should die.

that Generation, Mat. 23.39.
that then slew him, should yet believe in him, and say unto him, Blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord.

Now, is it probable that they were, or could be, at that time converted, after
Christ had pronounced such Woes against them, and told them, That they could
not escape the damnation of Hell; Matthew. 23.33, 35, 37, 38.
that they had filled up the measure of their Fathers Iniquities; that they
would not be gathered; Luke 19.42.13.15.
that the things that belonged to their Pea^e were then bid from their eyes;
and that their House was (for that time) left them desolate?

Must they not then yet once more, after that time, live again upon Earth, if
they should ever see him (whom they had pierced) and pronounce him Blessed, as
coming in the Name of his Father? As he there says they shall, ver. 39.

Romans 11.16, 26.
That after the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in. All Israel shall be
saved; That the whole Mass, as well as the First Fruits, the Branches as well
as the Roots, are holy.

Now there is nothing more clear from Scripture; than that, at that time, such
blindness had happened to Israel, Romans 9.2.
that but very few, but a remnant of them were saved.

Must they not then live once more on Earth, that they might believe and be
saved, if all Israel shall he saved? Or where do we read of wicked Men's being
converted in the Grave?

These and such like are, Sir, the Reasonings of this Author; upon which he
thinks himself as certain of his Chief Doctrine, That the Souls of Men do
ordinarily live more than once upon this Earth, as any Sect of Christians are,
or can be from the Scripture, of any Opinion in Theology, that is in
Controversy among them.

Of all which, whether true or false, I shall forbear as yet to determine, till
I hear what Men of more mature and solid Judgment, Piety, and Learning, shall
say to it, and what the Author has to reply; as when he must descend from the
State of a Querer, and take upon him that of an Asserter and Defender, and
perhaps of an Informer of his mistaken Adversary; which a Man may easily be, if
he take not good heed; and from which I dare not pronounce my self so
altogether free, as I am sure I am from intending to misrepresent him.

But this, I think, I may say, That, if it be an Error, it seems to me to be an
Error that has been received by Persons of as much Probity, Piety, and
Prudence, as perhaps greater are not to be found in the generality of the most
refined Professors of Christianity of this Age, which yet I grant far to exceed
that of many Ages last past.

For Pythagoras and Plato before Christ, Plotine, Pro^lus, and the best of the
Heathen Philosophers since Christ, and the Disciples of Christ when he was upon
Earth, did believe it to be a Truth.

And nothing is more plain than this, that if Christ did not approve it, he did
at least bear with it in his Disciples: And one would think it might, without
incurring his displeasure, be as well born with now.

For although some Men, of very sharp and penetrant Judgments, may possibly
discover here and there some Weakness, in some or other part of the Fabric;
yet the Author, for his Good Will to Christianity, for his Love to God and his
Neighbor, discovered by putting himself to the pains of thinking out this
System, to the clearing of the Divine Attributes of God's Justice, Mercy, and
Wisdom, and rendering the most perplexed Articles of the Christian Religion so
plain to the very meanest, as well as to the largest Capacity, that no Atheist
can rationally oppose them, deserves, I should think, to be treated with all
Humanity and Christian Candor by the People of our Nation, whom he honored
with the first Propositions of this Nature.

And not, for every little Error or Mistake, be rudely run upon, unmannerly and
unmanlike traduced with those vile Names of Papist, Jesuit, Atheist, and what
not. A thing too common with many of the Professors of our Nation.

For which of us is, or pre^ches to be, free from all Mistakes or Errors in
Judgment? And which of us would be willing to be so treated, for offering his
Thoughts to the Consideration of Men, in the most modest way possible?

I suppose there are no Sort or Sect of Christians that do think that any part
or Scripture dropped by chance (as Men call it) from the Pens of the Holy Men,
though there might be more sometimes in the manner of Expression, perhaps, than
the very Penmen themselves did then apprehend, which might be reserved to be
farther opened in future Ages, according to the Counsel of God's Wisdom, in
whose Hands the Times and Seasons are.

Nor do I at all doubt, but it will be readily granted by the most sober of all
Parties, but there have been Truths so couched in Scriptuee, that they have for
many Ages not been so clearly and generally understood, even by serious,
heedful, and pious (whether learned or not learned) Readers, as they have been
in after-Ages; when the appointed time, in the Providence of God, for the more
clear opening and general spreading of them, has come.

Nor do I believe that any Man will deny, but that there may be some such, and
very probably are so, which are reserved for the latter Ages of the World more
especially; seeing the. Scripture speaks of them, as of Times in which
Knowledge should more generaly abound; and Christ says, That there is nothing
bidden which shall not be revealed.

I doubt as little, that all will confess, that there are deep Mysteries in
Scripture, which, though not equally necessary to be known, and believed by every
Christian, upon pain of losing all Fellowship and Communion with Christ, are
yet, to those, that shall see them in true Light, and receive them in pure
Love, of great advantage to ^onfirm their Faith, and increase their Love to God
and their Neighbor; which as Christ says, is the Law and the Prophets.

Nor do I think that there is any one Man, in any one Sect, whatsoever, that
has that overweening Conceit of his Seize, and Proficiency in
Scripture-knowledge, as to imagine that he knows, not only all things
necessary, but even all the most deep Mysteries and Truths, Natural and Divine,
contained in the Scriptures, that are knowable by the Illuminations of God's
Spirit, which at any time ever have been, now are, or ever can be, of any true
advantage to any one Soul.

But it may be you may ask, to what purpose I say this, which no prudent Man
will contradict?

Truly, to no other purpose at all, but to put Men in mind, that every thing is
not an Error that they (nor their Forefathers before) did not see: Nor that all
is Truth that they have taken for such.

That, on the one hand, every Er^^^ merits not to subject those that ^^ieve it
to an Anathema Maranath^.

Nor every Truth of that concern, that it merits a particular Altar to ^e
erected to it, or that a new Fra^^ion or Sect be made among Chri^^ians for it,
if Men could but once ^^me to be wise and considerate.

I would, from my heart, that I could move all Men to that Modera^ion and
Tenderness toward each others Principles, Persons, and Repu^^tions, as not to
be so censorious, as they are, till they are sufficiently sa^^sfied in
themselves, and at least in ^^me measure capable to evince to others, that they
are so satisfied, that ^^e Principles which they do impugn ^^d condemn, have
some tendency, (...) not to subvert the Christian Faith in whole or in part, at
least to weaken it, (as some think that the Doctrine of the Salvation of the
Heathens, that never hear of Christ, does) or, that they do, on the other hand,
tend to the propagation of Looseness, and hindering of a Godly Life, as People of
diverse Persuasions do judg^ the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, as it is
maintained by some Men, naturally to do.

In both which Parties we yet cannot doubt, but that there are very serious
Christians, that hate the thoughts of reducing Christianity to Paganism, on the
one Hand; and on the other, that detest any thing that leads to Profaneness.

The next thing I would I could persuade all Men to, is, That when they think
themselves obliged and qualified to proceed to censure any thing in. any Man,
they would take care to proceed with that evenness of Ten per and Spirit, as to
endeavor more in Live to detect the Error to the Persons engaged and entangled
^n it, in order to the better informing and reforming of their Judgments, than
(as great Doctors of the Chair) pro authoritate, to condemn them, without ever
vouchlasing to enter into any arguing the base with them. A way so
disingenuous, that certainly it cannot prevail in the least degree, with a free
Mind, which as it is most easily led by the Powers of Light or Love, so it is
as immovable as a Rock by any the Thunderbolts which weak and empty Heads can
utter against them. Tools, only adapted to the State of enslaved Minds! F^^
suppose this Man, and others, do think that they see more than most Men, from
Psalm. 90. ver. 4. and do apprehend, that from those Proportions is deducible
the whole Chronology of the Scripture, being confirmed in it by several
Examples alleged in the Queries, and that the Doctrine of the Revolutions is
sufficiently intimated to be just Twelve, and no more nor less, being compared
with other Scriptures: Must they for this (admitting it to be a Mistake) become
the Objects of Ecclesiastical Fury? or be delivered over to Satan, as Men given
up to a Reprobate mind? Or shall they, on the other hand, if it be a Truth,
therefore be authorized to separate themselves from their Brethren the may be
willing to bear with them, though they judge it an Error. God forbid, that either
of these things should come to pass; and grant, on the other hand, that through
an amicable discussion of things, if this Hypothesis will not fully do it, some
other, that may go farther, may be found; that so that bright Light of Truth
(by the agitation of the various Measures in which Men do stand) may clearly
shine forth, of which that Prophecy speaks which honest George Withers
published in his Britain's Genius, above Forty Years ago (reprinted by Richard
Janeway, 1681. page 51. of a Treatise called Multum in Parvo) where, the
Confusions of the late evil and boisterous Times, and (as the Margin tells us)
the Restoration of his Majesty being foretold, these Lines do immediately
follow.

Then shall Righteousness ascend the Throne;
Then Love, and Truth, and Peace reenter shall;
Then Faith and Reason shall agree in one,
And all the Virtues to their Council call.
For though Men, by their shallow and narrow reasonless Conceits, and stiff
adhering each to their own Sect, Separation, Divison, or Church, (imagining
themselves to have hit the Mark, and gotten to the Herculean Pillars, beyond
which they think there is no going) cannot, being pressed, satisfactorily either
to themselves, or to others, reconcile any one of their Systems or Confessions
of Faith to Reason or Scripture, by a clear Solution of all the Difficulties
with which every one of their particular Ways may be justly charged; Yet,
seeing it is, with me, a Truth past all doubt, That all Truth does p^oceed from
the same Divine Root and Fountain, from which Right Reason does proceed, that
is, even from Jesus Christ, who is the Truth it self, the True Light, which, at
one time or other, does enlighten every man, I say, every man that comes into
the world; I see no reason why, as the little Crafts of Men, and that
ridiculous empty Thing called Authority, (without Light and Conviction) comes
to be worn out of Men's Minds, and they come to mind what is propounded to them
to be believed, e're they receive it; and not to receive any thing, but upon a
sound and previous Examination, by that Light of Truth which God in Christ has
imparted to them: I see, I say, no Reason why we may not hope to see this
fulfilled, so far as the Mind of Man is capable of it, provided we be but as
ready to give up our selves to obey what we have or shall come to discover to
be the Will of the Father, as we are greedy of knowing if. And that this is a
necessary Requisite, Christ himself has testified, saying, He that will do the
will of my Father, shall know of my Doctrine: Nor is there any other lawful way
of striving.

And thus, having trespassed, upon your Patience too far, I crave leave to
subscribe my self,

Dear Sir, Yours in all Offices of Love, N. N. Philanthropos.

FINIS.

