A Translation of the Articles Established by the most Excellent Magistracy of
Revisors and Regulators of the Public Revenue in the Exchequer at Venice, and
approved by the Senate the 5th of March, 1693.
In matter of Erecting a Profitable Adventure for the Fortunate, of One hundred
and fifty thousand Tickets or Bolletines of two Ducats each. MARCH the 9th 1693.
BEing to establish just Rules for the carrying on, and effecting a Profitable
Adventure for the Fortunate, decreed by the most excellent Senate the 20th of
December past, the following established Articles are published by the
Magistracy of the most excellent Rivisors and Regulators of the Public
Revenues in the Exchequer, and approved by the Senate the 5th Instant.

THat there shall be put up an Adventure containing One hundred and fifty
thousand Tickets, or Bolletines, to be taken out in three Months time by all
persons whatsoever, as well Subjects as Strangers, paying two Ducats for each
Ticket or Bolletine, which three Months shall begin from the day of publishing.

To this Effect, a Booth shall be built in St. Mark's place, wherein shall sit
a Magistrate deputed for this Undertaking, who shall subscribe and number the
Tickets, or Bolletines, that shall be given out to any Person or Persons, and
shall answer to the Name or Sentence each Person shall please to add to the
Number (if they shall think fit to add any) for their further satisfaction; And
this shall likewise be noted in the printed Books to be made for this purpose
only, so that they shall particularly answer each Bolletine or Ticket of the
said Undertaking, and shall be delivered to whom ever shall pay the two Ducats.

There shall be sent a proportion of Tickets and Books to the Terra Firma, for
the easier and sooner effecting the said Undertaking, where the same method
shall be used as in Venice, and at the time expired the Books and Moneys shall
be sent to Venice to the Persons appointed for the keeping of each.

The Money which shall be received by the Payments for the said Tickets, shall
be kept in a Chest by it self by the Person appointed, to be punctually paid to
those who shall have the benefitted Tickets.

As soon as the 150000 Tickets are completed, there shall be the like number
of Tickets printed and numbered, that shall answer to those that shall have been
given out; and also the Notes of the Books, which Tickets shall be locked up in
a Vessel or Urn, in the presence of the most excellent Assistants deputed to
oversee the drawing; and this shall be kept by the said Assistants, so that
there shall be no fear of Alteration, or any Cheat imaginable.

There shall also be prepared the like number of Blank Tickets, among which
shall be the Four hundred and ten benefitted Tickets, as hereunder declared,
and shall be put in another vessel or Urn, and those, as well as the others
numbered, shall be put each of them into an Iron Box, and the day shall be
appointed to begin to draw them, which shall be publicly proclaimed, and
continue daily and public in the Hall of the most Serene great Council, always
with the assistance of those that shall be decreed for it.

The benefitted Tickets that shall be put in the said Vessel, and printed with
the same, declared thereon, shall from time to time as they are drawn, be noted
(by a Secretary) with their numbers in a Book kept apart for that purpose;
which Note shall be underwrit by one of the Assistants at the drawing, the said
Book to be kept and showed in public or private.

The Money of the benefitted Tickets to be paid to them or their lawful
Representatives, and immediately to whomsoever shall present the Tickets given
out the following day that they shall have been so fortunate; and this Money
shall not be liable to be stopped or sequestered by any pretense whatsoever in
Law, or the like, either public or private, and this by a particular
Privilege. This also shall extend to discharge the Allowance that by the
Public shall be paid to the Register.

The Benefitted Tickets are to be 1 For -- 25000 Ducats. 1 For -- 20000 Ducats.
1 For -- 15000 Ducats. 1 For -- 10000 Ducats. 6 For 5000 each -- 30000 Ducats.
6 For 2000 each -- 12000 Ducats. 8 For 1500 each -- 12000 Ducats. 12 For 1000
each -- 12000 Ducats. 24 For 500 each -- 12000 Ducats. 150 For 200 each --
30000 Ducats. 200 For 100 each -- 20000 Ducats. And to the first Ticket that
shall be drawn, besides the Benefit that may come out with it, 1000 Ducats. And
also Ducats -- 1000.


To the first Ticket that shall be drawn after the last benefitted Ticket shall
come up; and if it shall happen that the last benefitted Ticket should be the
last drawn, the 1000 shall be paid besides the Benefit.

And if in the abovementioned time, the whole number of Tickets be not
completed, the Draught shall yet be made for those that are put in, and the
Benefits proportioned to the number of the Tickets, a diligent Calculate being
made.

Given by the Magistracy of the most excellent Revisors and Regulators of the
Public Revenue in the Exchequer, the 9th of March, 1693.
IN IMITATION now of this Venetian Adventure, but without the Possibility of
one third of the Profit that will be got by it there, and with much more
Advantage to Adventurers, Mr. Neale the Groom-Porter, at the special Request
and Desire of many eminent Merchants, and others (so fond of the Matter, that
they return Money to Venice to invest in those Tickets, which would never be
done, if it might be on better terms here) does in the same manner propose the
giving out Fifty thousand Tickets, at Ten shillings per Ticket, to be in like
manner drawn at the end of Four Months, to be reckoned from the First day of
this July 1693. or sooner, if the same shall be sooner filled up against so
many Blanks, wanting only Two Hundred and Fifty, which are to be Benefitted
Tickets, and in value as herein after expressed. And for the better convenience
of dispensing the Tickets for the ease of the Adventurers, and for their full
satisfaction that the Money laid down for these Tickets shall again be repaid
them, if the Tickets should not be drawn in the time, upon giving back only
their Tickets to the Goldsmiths who have signed the same; And that those to
whom Fortune dispenses these Benefitted Tickets, whether absent or present, may
be certainly sure accordingly to have the Money in specie, as herein after
expressed. And that all possible fairness, in seeing the Benefitted Tickets duly
put in, and duly drawn out as they ought, and every other thing done that ought
to be done in this Case, wherein the method at Venice made use of, for signing
and giving out Tickets both in City and Country, and entering of them in Books
printed on purpose, and numbered just to answer the Tickets given but, for which
Ten shillings apiece must be paid, shall and is truly intended to be the same
as near as possible can be, that shall be made use of here; with this
difference only, That whereas at Venice the State is to answer for the just and
well-performing of all things in the Articles printed, and for so doing, is
allowed above 33 l. per Cent. here the Groom-Porter, who sets up this
Adventure, for all his Cost, Care, Pains and Management, is allowed only 10 l.
per Cent. and no more; and in stead of Officers deputed by that Senate to
manage the matter to the satisfaction of all Parties concerned, has and does
hereby depute Richard Lascells near Charing Cross, Joseph Fells by the
New-Exchange, John Coggs against St. Clements Church in the Strand, Sir Francis
Child and Richard Hoare in Fleetstreet, John Johnson in Cheapside, Sir Stephen
Evans, Thomas Williams, John Sweetapple, Will. Atwell and Will. Shepherd in
Lombard Street, London, Goldsmiths, their Deputy and Deputies, Receivers of all
Moneys to be so paid in for Tickets, and to sign and give out Tickets for the
same; who have undertaken to be answerable for the Money so by them to be
received, and to answer and pay the same as herein before or herein after
expressed. And Sir Benjamin Thorowgood, Sir Tho Vernon, Sir Peter Paravicine,
Sir Joseph Hearne, Sir Will. Gore, Sir Charles Cotterell, Sir Will. Forrester,
Tho Povey, Rob. Rawworth, Rich. Goodall, Rob. Not, Will. Lownds, Rob. Squib,
Rich. Normansel, John Genew, Rob. Beningfield, Rich. Spencer, Dalby Thomas, and
John Thraile, Esquires; together with the Goldsmiths before named, have been
requested, and have undertaken to be Overseers, Directors and Managers of the
whole Affair, in which there is nothing to be ordered or done without the
Concurrence of Five at least of the Persons before-named; so that there will be
no room left to doubt of Justness and Fairness throughout the whole managing of
it; and nothing, ever like this, was at so small Advantage proposed.

And to answer the 25000 l. so to be taken for 50000 Tickets to be given out at
Ten shillings apiece, there will be 250 Benefitted Tickets to make up the said
25000 l. abating 10 per Cent. only to be allowed for the Trouble and Charge;
and as soon as the 50000 Tickets are given out and completed, the Overseers
before-named shall meet and call for the Books, and see all the Money so placed
as to be ready to be paid on demand, to such Persons or their lawful
Representatives as shall present the Benefitted Tickets; and the same shall be
accordingly so paid the following day after they have been so fortunate; and
the said Overseers shall then also appoint the Day to begin to draw these
Tickets, which shall be made public, and continue daily and publicly at Mr.
Hughes. Great Room at the Upper End of Freemans-Yard in Cornhil, London, with
the assistance of the Overseers till ended, which it is hoped may be done in two
or three days.

The Benefitted Tickets are to be In ready Money to be paid the next day when
required, without any Rebate whatsoever.
1of -- 3000 l. 1of -- 2500 l. 1of -- 2000 l. 1of -- 1500 l. 1of -- 1000 l. 1of
-- 500 l. 1of -- 300 l. 1of -- 200 l. 2 of 150 l. each -- 300 l. 50 of 100 l.
each -- 5000 l. 40 of 50 l. each -- 2000 l. 50 of 40 l. each -- 2000 l. 100 of
20 l. each -- 2000 l. And to the first Ticket, whether Benefitted or not that
shall be drawn, besides the benefit that may come out with it -- 100 l. And to
the first Person whose Ticket shall be drawn next after all the Benefitted
Tickets are taken out -- 100 l.


And if it should happen that the Iast benefitted Ticket should be the last
drawn, the said 100 l. shall be paid, besides what may come by the said
Benefitted Ticket.

And if in the abovementioned time the whole number of Tickets be not
completed, the Draught shall yet be made for those that are put in, and the
Benefits proportioned to the number of Tickets, of which by the Overseers a
diligent Calculate shall be made.

And to farther explain the practical Part of this Matter,

Note: Books will be purposely printed, containing the whole number of Tickets,
and of those three of each Sort (as hereunder described) just marked and
numbered alike; No. 1. C. D. Or any other mark the Adventurers desire may be put
No. 1. C. D. No. 1. C. D. No. 2. B. F. No. 2. B. F. No. 2. B. F. from which
Book the outermost Ticket Signed by the Goldsmith shall be first cut, and given
to the Person that so pays the Ten shillings for it; the next, which will be
just like the Tickets given out, is to be cut, and put into a strong Box,
whence it is to be drawn; and then the third, just the same with the other two,
will remain still in the said Book, so that to whoever Chance gives a Ticket
that entitles him to a Benefit, must bring or send the said Ticket to the place
where the same shall be drawn, and there it must answer (to prevent all
mistakes) the Ticket of the same number drawn, which will likewise answer that
that is left in the Book, and it so appearing to do, the Benefit to be forthwith
delivered.

And now,

The better to demonstrate how this is to be drawn and done,

Note. All Tickets in the second place to be cut out of the Book, as aforesaid,
just numbered and marked like those given out, are, in the presence of the
Managers, to be put up into a large Glass to be sealed and locked up in an Iron,
or other strong Box, and there Jumbled together, and kept so locked up, 'till
it is drawn, and the Blanks, with the 250 Benefitted Tickets in like manner, in
the presence of the said Managers, are to be put into another such like Glass,
to be also sealed up and locked in another strong Box, and there to so remain,
'till drawn out, which is to be done thus:

An Oval Table is to be set in the great Room in Freemans-Yard in Cornhil,
London, round which, the Managers and Clerks in order are to sit, and at one
End shall be placed the Box wherein are the Tickets so numbered and marked, as
aforesaid; and at the other End of the Table the other such Box, wherein are
such Benefitted Tickets and Blanks, out of both which, one by one, by some
Strangers, they are all to be drawn out thus:

First, From among the Tickets so numbered and marked, one shall be drawn, and
then from the Blanks and Benefitted Tickets another, which is to be before all
the Company opened; and if it does prove a Blank, the said Blank and numbered
Ticket at the same time drawn shall without more ado be put together into a
Hole in the middle of the Table for that purpose provided: But if it does prove
a Benefit, that and the numbered Ticket shall be both filed up together; but
first shall be noted (by the Clerk) with the said numbered Ticket at the same
time drawn, in a Book kept apart for that purpose, which Note shall be
underwrit by two of the Overseers then present, the said Book to be kept and
showed in public and private, and Printed as soon as all the Tickets are drawn
out, that all Persons may see to what Number each Benefit does belong, and so
accordingly come for the same: And all this to prevent, as aforesaid, Mistakes;
And, that no possible Suspicion may remain of any foul Play in this Thing,

Note. The numbered Tickets as aforesaid, being put in one Glass, and the Blanks
and Benefitted Tickets in another, the said Glasses sealed up just before the
Tickets are going to be drawn, shall be took out of the strong Boxes, and
showed to the Company present, with the Numbered Tickets, Blanks and Benefitted
Tickets in them, and be then shaked and jumbled together, that there may be no
placing of either; which Glasses shall then afterward be again placed in the
strong Boxes, from whence all shall be drawn.

In short, whoever is any way possessed of any one of these Numbered Tickets, so
signed by any one of the Eleven Goldsmiths aforesaid, will this way be certain,
that another such Ticket so Numbered and Marked as that he is possessed of, shall
for him be put in and drawn at this Adventure; where, whether absent or
present, he will have an equal Chance with the rest for the Benefits proposed;
and be sure that what Sum of Money soever Good Fortune this way shall design
him, on produce of his Ticket that entitles him to it, shall forthwith be paid
at demand, free from all Charge, or any Deduction whatever.

All Persons are desired to take Notice, That although near four Months are
allowed for receiving the Money, and giving out Tickets, it is however intended
that the same shall be drawn as soon as the Number is complete; which is hoped
before Bartholomew-Day.

This is thus undertaken to be done by Thomas Neale Esquire Groom-Porter to Their
Majesty's, the 10th of July 1693.

A COPY of the Goldsmiths Security to the Adventurers.
I (...) Goldsmith, Do hereby acknowledge to have received from Tho. Neale Esquire
a Book signed and sealed by the Overseers, of Sides or Pages, on every Page of
which are Printed Ten Treble Tickets, every Treble Ticket just Numbered alike,
beginning with the Number (...) and ending with the Number (...) which I
promise and oblige my self by these Present to return to the said Thomas Neale
undefaced, or to be accountable for 10 s. for every Ticket cut or taken off, to
the said Thomas Neale, and Overseers of and for this Profitable Adventure
herein before named, and for the Purposes, and in manner as is also above in
this Printed Paper expressed; or to the Persons who shall return me such
Tickets signed by me or my Servant, if the same is not completed and drawn
according to this Printed Paper. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand
and Seal, the (...) day of (...) 1693.

Sealed and delivered in the Presence of (...)

