portrait of Christopher Nesse

Christopher Nesse

Minnister of the Gospel in fleet street London.

atutis suoe 56: 1678

A Complete and Compendious Church History: SHOWING, HOW it has been from the
Beginning of the World, to this present Day.

Being an Historical-Narrative, How the Power and Providence of GOD, According
to His Promise, Has hitherto Confounded all the Damnable PLOTS of the DEVIL.

To which is ANNEXED A Scripture-Prophecy: FORE-SHEWING, HOW it shall be Hence
to the End of the WORLD.

The Whole Containing the Quintessence of Sacred, Civil, and
Ecclesiastick-Writers; And serving as a short Comment upon all the Books in the
BIBLE, both Historical and Prophetical.

Published for Public Good, By Christopher Ness, Minister of the Gospel, in
Fleet Street.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. and are to be Sold by Jacob Sampson, next Door to the
Wonder in Ludgate Street: And by Jonathan Wilkins, at the Star, next
Mercers-Chappel, in Cheap Side, 1680.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Robert Clayton, Lord Mayor of London.
My LORD,
I Beseech You Pardon my Boldness, that (Poor) I do take upon me to Interrupt
your Lordship in your so Great Affairs and so Emergent Occasions, as the Saving
of a Sinking City and Nation, most justly Challenges: Were I as Worthy as
Jonathan, it is no less a Law writ in my Heart to do for your Lordship what he
did for David, [In going to him into the Wood, to Strengthen His Hands in God,]
I do here Present to your Noble Hands as Noble and Necessary a Prospect as this
lower World can Afford, to wit, GOD wageing War against the DEVIL, from the
Beginning of the World to the End thereof, and God all along (as is most meet)
Obtaining the VICTORY: It Is a pleasant Spectacle to behold Christ and
Antichrist contending for Mastery: To be an Universal HISTORIAN, (as I presume
your Lordship to be) is the most Effectual Means to make Wise for both Worlds:
Hence Plato Derives Historia, [(...),] from Stopping the Flux of Humane
Extravagancy, History being the Witness of Time, the Light of Truth, the Life
of Memory, and the Doctress of the Life of Man: As it is a continued Calendar
of most Remarkable Actions in former Ages, so it holds forth Caution, Counsel,
and Comfort, to following Generations; Quid Divinius, Nosse omnia? To be a good
Historian, is a good way to be both Wise and Good, as Contracting a Blessed
Composition of all those Perfections perused in every Age, and leaving a
Transforming Influence behind them: History makes Wise (1) to Secular Affairs,
as it is a Knowledge of Things past, whereby we may Judge of Things present,
and make Probable Conjectures at Things to come, seeing there is no New thing
under the Sun. The self-same Scenes are Acted over and over again upon the
Stage of the World, It Is only the Persons (that Act them) which are changed;
therefore the Representing in an Historical-Glass, what has been before, is a
plain Praemonition of what shall be Hereafter. 2. Wise to Salvation: The Great
God has been making a Large Comment (even in Capital Characters) upon his own
Text, Genesis 4. 7. If thou do Well, shall thou not be Accepted? and If Ill, Sin
lies at thy Door: and upon that Text, Isa. 3.10, 11. Say to the Righteous, It
is well, etc. and Woe to the wicked, and tell them so from me, says the Lord.
As the most Wise God made Two Great Luminaries (the Sun and Moon) to give Light
to the World, so has he Ordained Two Great Lights (the Word of His Promise,
and the Work of his Providence) to Enlighten his Church: as the Moon borrows
Light from the Sun, wherewith she looks upon the World with greater Splendor:
so the Work of Providence (as to us) Receives Light from the Word of Promise,
whereby the Church is more Illuminated. What is the Work of Providence, (upon
all Ages, Places, Families, Persons, etc.) but the Accomplishment of the Words
of Prophecy and Promise: All the Actings and Emanations of Providence, are a
standing Comment and a clear Interpretation of Abstruse Prophecies, and of
Vnfulfill'd Promises: All Occurrences (whether Great or Small) in the World,
are but the Accomplishment of what God has Prophesied and Promised in His
Word: Solomon Says, The thing that has been, it is that which shall be,
Eccles. 1. 9, 10, It Is True, there has been some Extraordinary Actings of God
in the World, (such as Noah's Deluge, the promulgation of the Law, the Suns
standing still and going back, a Virgin bearing a Son, etc.) shall never be
again: Yet all Ordinary Occurencies are alike in all Ages, from a Twofold
Ground. 1. All Natural Causes and Effects continue as they were at the
Beginning, Natura nihil Molitur Novi, Nature Produces no New Species of
Creatures, though there may be some Accidental Defect or Superfluity in the
Matter. (2.) All Humane and Voluntary Actions, Counsels, and Contrivances,
(having the same Principles to Produce them, and the same Objects to Draw them
forth,) are the same in Substance, as Heretofore, and therefore must have the
same Tendency: As Face Answers to Face in a Glass, so does the Heart of Man to
Man, Prove. 27. 19. that is, The Counsels of the Hearts, and Courses of the
Lives of Men in one Age, do exactly Answer unto those of another, As it was in
the Days of Noah, even so shall it be, etc. Matthew. 24. 31, 39. A Man may as in
a Mirror take a Shrewd Prospect of Future Events by former Instances. It must
therefore be acknowledged a mighty Loss to Mankind to Bury the Knowledge of
former things in the Grave of Unmindful Heads, or Unthankful Hearts.

My Lord, You are WISE (I would say) as an Angel of God, to Discern
Dexterously, and Improve Practically, what is here (Quale, quale est,)
Presented to your Lord-ship, it is a CHURCH HISTORY, being an Orderly
Commemoration of Things past, with the Circumstances of Time and Place in
Distinct Descents and Distances for the better Help of Remembrance, Affection
and Application: wherein your HONOR may turn aside with Moses to Behold the
Bush ever Burning * in the Flames of Her Adversaries Fury* yet never Consumed,
Exodus 3. 3. because the Good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, did preserve
it, Deuteronomy. 33. 16. That Excellent Emblem of the Church had a Complication of
Wonders, as 1. There was a Flame of Fire, else how could the Bush be Burning?
2. There was Light, else how could Moses behold it? 3. Yet no Heat, else the
Bush had been Consumed: It was the Angel of the Covenant, that either Qualified
the Fire to have Light without Heat, or Consolidated the Bush, so, as not to
become Combustible: 'Twas the presence of Christ that made the Fiery Furnace a
Gallery of Pleasure to the Three Nobles of Babylon. The Church is the only
Salamander that can Live in the Fire by Virtue of that Promise, Isa. 43. 2. No
Flame can Consume her. And to Behold a Lilly in the midst of Thorns, Cant. 2.
3. Though one Churlish Thorn can Scratch in pieces 10000 Tender Lillys, yet is
so Marvelously Preserved in the midst of many and mighty Enemies, It could
never be Cut up by the Sword of Persecution, or Burnt down by the Fire of
Martyrdom: And to Behold all along a most Harmonious Consort, and a most Con
onant Coincident Correspondency betwixt the Words of Gods Mouth, and the Works
of Gods Hand. Lastly, Your Honor may behold how the Church has been (and will
be) Secured by a Divine Power, Promise, Prophecy, and Providence, against the
Fraud and Force, Craft and Cruelty, Power and Policy of all her Foes, that
notwithstanding all their Stratagems and Strength, the Issue has ever been the
Destruction of All the Designers, leaving a Fatal Monument of themselves to
Posterity behind them; yet the Church is still preserved: That your Lordship
may be (...), do Worthily in Ephratah, and be Famous in Bethlehem, (as you
Hitherto have been) and that you may have Safety in this World, and Salvation
in the World to come, is the Hearty Prayer of

Your Humble Orator, CHRISTOPHER NESS.

ERRATA.
Page 11. l. 15. r. own Bow, l. 29. r. (1) Rage. p. 26. l. 4. for savely r.
save, p. 45. for Protestator, r. Protector p. 50. l. 16. for Ezekiel. r. Exodus p.
74. l. 8. for Moses, r. Moab. p. 87. l. 1. for Parlus, r. Pareus. p. 143. l.
20. for place, r. peace. p. 224. l. 4. r. Evilmerodach. p. 256. l. 1. for 3. r.
20. p. 157, for 257. p. 290. l. 27. for day, r. days, p. 312. l. last. r. 3
[presently] p. 321. l. 27. for 1, r. 8. p. 415. l. 4. for Southwind, r.
Southward. l. 5. for Northward, r. Northwind. p. 451. l. 16. for 22. r. 23.

The Table of the Devils Plots against the Church, Defeated by God.
Chap. 1. THe First against Adam in his State of Innocence. page 2, to 11. Chapter
2. The Second against Abel, after the Fall by Cain. page 12, to 26. Chapter 3. The
Third against Seth and his Posterity at the Deluge. page 27, to 31. Chapter 4. The
Fourth against Israel by the Bondage in Egypt. page 32, to 41. Chapter 5. The
Fifth against the Church in the Wilderness, By Amalek. page 41, to 46. Chapter 6.
The Sixth against the Church in the Wilderness; by the Golden Calf. page 46, to
52. Chapter 7. The Seventh against the Church in the Wilderness, by Korah's
Conspiracy. page 53, to 62. Chapter 8. The Eighth against the Church in the
Wilderness, by Inward Murmurings and Outward Assaults: page 64, to 70. Chapter 9.
The Ninth against the Church in the Wilderness; by Balak and Balaam, a Type of
Rome. page 71, to 86. Chapter 10. The Tenth against the Church in the Wilderness,
by Moses Death and Burial. page 86, to 90. Chapter 11. The Eleventh against the
Church in Canaan, by Achan and by the Altar Ed. page 91, to 98. Chapter 12. The
Twelfth against the Church in Canaan, by Idolatry and Debauchery. page 99, to
111. Chapter 13. The Thirteenth against the Church in Canaan, by the loss of the
Ark. page 112, to 126. Chapter 14. The Fourteenth against the Church in Canaan, by
Saul, Absalom, and Adonijah. page 127, to 152. Chapter 15. The Fifteenth against
the Church in Canaan, by Solomon's Apostasy. page 153, to 164. Chapter 16. The
Sixteenth against the Church in Canaan, by Jeroboam's Idolatry to the Captivity
of the Ten Tribes. page 165, to 188. Chapter 17. The Seventeenth against the Church
in Judah, by Apostasy to the Captivity of the Two Tribes, page 189, to 222. Chapter
18. The Eighteenth against the Church in Babylon, by 70 Y. Captivity. page 223,
to 238. Chapter 19. The Nineteenth against the Church after their Return by
Samaritans, Sanballat, etc. p. 239, to 255. Chapter 20. The Twentieth against the
Church in Persia, by Haman, etc. page 256, to 294. Chapter 21. The 21st. against
the Church, betwixt the Old and New Test. and in Christ's Minority. page 295,
to 310. Chapter 22. The 22d. against the Church, in Christ, after his Minority at
his Bapti^m. page 310, to 328. Chapter 23. The 23d. against the Church in Christ,
fulfilling his Ministry. page 329, to 360. Chapter 24. The 24th. against the
Church, in Christ, by Crucifying him at last. page 361, to 372. Chapter 25. The
25th. against the Church in the Apostles, by Persecution. page 373, to 400. Chapter
26. The 26th. against the Church in the Seven Golden Candlesticks of Asia. page
401, to 407. Chapter 27. The 27th. against the Primitive-Church, by the Ten first
Persecutions. page 407, to 413. Chapter 28. The 28th. against the Church, after the
3d. Century, by Arrianism. page 413, to 435. Chapter 29. The 29th. against the
Eastern-Church, after the 6th. Century, by Mahometanism. page 421, to 435. Chapter
30. The 30th. against the Western-Church, by Popery, from the 6th. Century.
page 436. Chapter 31. The Popish-Plot against the Waldenses, in the 11th. and 12th.
Century. Chapter 32. The Popish-Plot against the Lollards, in the 13th. and 14th.
Century. Chapter 33. The Popish-Plot against the Protestants, in the 15th. and
16th. Century. Chapter 34. A Scripture-Prophecy, opening the Revelation, and
Evidencing how the Church shall overcome all her Enemies to the End of the
World, and shall at last have a Glorious State, etc.


THE PREFACE.
IT IS a most Sacred and undeniable Truth, that The Wicked Plotteth against the
Righteous. [Zomem Rashang letsadik.] The Mouth of the Lord (the God of Truth)
has Spoken it, Psalm. 37. 12. This is the Churches Malady in all the Ages of
the World; it has been so in times past, (both before the Flood, and after it,
under the Law, and under the Gospel.) It is so in time present, and it will be
so for time to come, until time shall be no more. And it is as Sacred and
certain a Truth, That the Lord laughs all those Plots to nothing, ver. 13. This
is the Churches Remedy. Deus Videt Ridet, God looks and laughs, he laughs them
to scorn; when he looks, that their Day is coming, even their dismal Day,
wherein they shall be Slain with their own Sword, v. 14, 15, 17. and Fall by
their own Counsel (though no Hand be upon them.) Psalm. 5. 9, 10. Now while God
laughs at the Plots of the Wicked, (both to disgrace the Plotters, and to
degrade their Plots,) God's People have little cause to cry; especially
considering, that their God is loath to laugh alone, and therefore he tells
them of a time, wherein they shall laugh (with him) at their over-witted, and
overpowered Adversaries, Psalm. 52. 6. The Cause of the Wickeds Plotting
against the Righteous in all Ages, is Twofold; The 1st. is [Causa (...) or) The
Inward Cause; to wit, The Old Enmity which the Fall of Man brought (Judicially)
betwixt the Two Seeds: Genesis 3. 15. Ever since, there has been a boisterous and
bloody Disposition (running all along in the Black Line of a carnal
Generation,) in all the Seed of the Serpent against the Seed of the Woman: This
Enmity had there its beginning; but it shall never have an ending until the
World ends; Yea, it may be called an Eternal Enmity: [a part post] though
not [a part ante,] for as the Angels and the Souls of Men had a beginning, but
shall never have an end: So this Cursed Enmity (which had its beginning at the
Fall) will continue beyond this World, even in the World to come. As long as
evil Angels and damned Souls continue in Hell, (which shall be for ever,) so
long will this Enmity continue in them against the Glorious Angels and
Glorified Saints; Thus it is a Bottomless, boundless, and endless Enmity. The
2d. Cause is [Causa (...)] or, The Outward Cause why the Wicked Plot, etc. is,
the Malignant Adversary of Mankind, the Devil, so called Quasi, [Do Evil.] 1st.
He is their Father, and they are his Children, and the Lusts of their Father
they will (and must) do, Joh. 8. 44. 2dly. He is their Lord, and they are his
Vassals, and they will (and must) run his Errands. Yea, 3dly. He is their God,
2 Cor. 4. 4. and they are his Creatures. And as God (at the Creation of the
World) did but Speak the Word, and it was done: So if the Devil (in the
Conversation of the wicked) do but speak the word, hold up his singer, his will
is done; He leads them Captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. He leads them like a
Dog in a string, whether he pleases, yet hangs them up at last (like Dogs) upon
everlasting Gibbits in Hell, where they hang and howl as Dogs, yet never dye;
to which if Tertullian's Character [Sessorem habent Diabolum.] be added, Then
(4ly.) He is the Rider, and they are his Asses, which he Rides upon, whipping
and spurring them (as Balaam did his Ass,) as if Riding Post to meet their own
Destruction: And (as says the Proverb) They must needs go (yea, gallop,) whom
the Devil drives; especially such as (with the Man in the Gospel) have a whole
legion of Devils in them; such wicked ones (with the Gadaren's Hoggs) do Run
Violently down most steep places, and most desperate praecipices, until (at
last) They be choked in the deep Pit of Hell, Matthew. 8. 32. Now as long as
there be the same Original Corruption in wicked Men (while this present evil
World lasts) to be drawn forth; and the same Devil (who, whosoever become
Converts, can never become one) to draw forth that depraved Disposition, so
long, there will be a wicked Plotting and practicing against the Church of God
in the World. Solomon says, There is no new thing under the Sun, the thing
that has been, it is that which shall be, Eccles. 1. 9, 10. And the Apostle
tells us, As it was then, he that was Born after the Flesh, persecuted him
that was Born after the Spirit, (as Ishmael did Isaac) even so it is now, Gal.
4. 29. Paul says, It is so, now in my days; And we may say, It is even so now
in our days: It was so then, it is so now, and it will be so for ever; so long
as there be any wicked in the World, and the old Manslayer to set them on, who
is that Evil Spirit which works (as the Artificer does in his Shop) in the
Children of Disobedience, Ephe. 2. 3. We Read of the Dragons War (but as a sad
Cordolium) with the Woman (the Church) and her Seed; Rev. 12. And if this War
were in Heaven, v. 7. how much more on Earth? v. 17. This War is managed and
maintained with great Wrath, v. 12. having the Assistance of an Inveterate,
Implacable, and Everlasting Enmity in all incarnate Devils (his Auxiliaries)
all acted and agitated by the Devil, who lends them his Seven Heads to Plot
with, and his Ten Horns to push with against the Church. And we Read of the
Lambs War with this Dragon, (as a sweet and Sovereign Cordial) even our Blessed
Michael and his Angels in the behalf of the Woman and her Seed, Rev. 12. 7, 8.
And though the Beast (to whom the Dragon gave his power, Rev. 13. 2.) make War
with the Saints, and overcome them, (during his Lease of 1260 y. allotted him)
Rev. 13. 7. yet the Lamb shall overcome the Dragon and all his Auxiliaries,
Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 19, 20. and 20. 10. And in the mean time, though the Beast
seem to overcome the Saints, (so it seemed, but so it was not) Rev. 13. 7. For
the Saints overcome the Beast (by the Blood of the Lamb) when they seem to be
most overcome by him, to the shedding of their own Blood, Rev. 12. 11. This
Lamb Laughs all the Plots of the Beast to nothing, and all as Vain Things,
whereof no good Reason can be given, nor any good Issue can be expected. Christ
sits in Heaven, sees and Smileth, is no more concerned, save only to ask the
Many and the Mighty (that Club their Craft and Cruelty against Christ) if they
be all Mad, to Attempt that which shall assuredly come to nothing, Psalm. 2. 1,
2, 3, 4. The little Stone dashes all in pieces, Dan. 2. 34. So that it may be
said of the Church, (as it was said of the old Romans) She has lost (now and
then) a Battle, but never a War. And as it is said of Gad, A Troop may overcome
Gad, but Gad overcomes at last, Genesis 49. 19. So the Church [Concutitur, non
Excutitur] may sometimes be Shaken, but never Shivered into Nothing; She always
gets and gains by her Losses, and though she may be trampled under Foot all the
Night of her Asfliction, yet is she sure to have Dominion in the Morning, Psalm.
49. 14. And that Morning ushers in the Dismal Doomsday of all her Enemies.

Niteris Incassum Christi Submergere Navem
Fluctuat, at nunquam Mergitur illa Ratis.
Dipped may the Churches Ship be, but not Drowned,
Christ will not fail her Enemies to Confound.
No Weapon that is formed against her shall prosper, Isa. 54. 17. Nor ever did
prosper; That Precious Promise has blunted the Point, and turned the Edge of
many Thousand Weapons that have been formed against her; The Gates of Hell
(though in a Combination of all its power and policy) shall not prevail
against it, Matthew. 16. 18. All the Plots both of the Wicked One, and of all
Wicked Men, (from Adam to our Day) have been [Velut Unda Supervenit Undae] as
the waves of the Sea succeeding one another, yet all have dashed themselves to
pieces upon this Rock of Ages, whereon the Lord has founded Sion, Isai. 14.
32. and 26. 1, 4. and 54. 10. The Church is Invincible, and can never be
Demolished either by Angry Men or Enraged Devils.

Magna est Veritas and Valebit,
Truth is great, and will prevail,
AN Historical Narrative OF THE Devils Plotts AGAINST THE CHURCH, All Defeated
by GOD.
The First Plot against the Church, etc.

CHAP. I.
THis I shall Demonstrate by an Induction of Particular Instances (as the Lord
shall help me) both out of Sacred and Civil History, to make manifest the
mavelous Conduct which the Pillar of Providence has secured the Church
withal in all her passages through the World, as the Pillar of Glory did the
Church in the Wilderness.

The 1st. Instance of the wicked Plotting against the Church, and the Lords
laughing it to Nothing, is, that first Plot of the Grand Plotter [(...)] that
wicked One, 1 John 5. 18. the Devil, against our first Parents: As of Jacob's
Ladder, (which consisted of so many rounds or steps as would reach from Earth
to Heaven) it is said, The Lord was upon the top of it, Genesis 28. 12, 13. So of
this Scale of Conspiracies against the Church, (which contains so many Distinct
Designs as do Reach from Adam to our present time) it may as truly be affirmed,
That the Devil must be at the top of it. We Read of a Book of the Wars of the
Lord, (a Book not extant, but (if not lost) latent,) Numb. 21. 14. However this
is extant in the Book of God, that here began the War of the Devil or Dragon
against the Church: No sooner was Lucifer fallen from Heaven, Isa. 14. 12. and of
a Glorious Angel was become a damned Devil, Jude v. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 4. partly for
his pride against God, in aspiring to be like the most High; and partly for his
Envy at Man, when he first beheld the Honor and Happiness wherein Man was
Created, and first heard the charge which God gave the Angels to keep Man in
all his ways, Psalm. 91. 11. This Command proud Lucifer disdaining, that a
superior should wait (like a servant) upon an inferior Creature, Psalm. 8. 5. He
kept not his first Estate, but left his first Habitation, Jude v. 6. Thus he
sinned from the beginning, 1 John 3. 8. and abode not in the Truth, Joh. 8. 44.
And now being come down, (by his Sin) or rather cast down (for his sin) from
Heaven; and having great Wrath (Rev. 12. 12.) for being hurled out of Heaven
into Hell, he had no comfort left him, save only this miserable and
mischievous one, to make Man as miserable as himself, and to bring him into the
same Condemnation, 1 Timothy 3. 6. For this purpose, he lays a dangerous and
Diabolical Plot, consisting of many parts: As

(1st.) He assumes a fit Engine, that Creature which was more subtle than all
the Beasts of the Field, Genesis 3. 1. The sharper a Weapon is, it makes a deeper
wound, and gives a more deadly blow: the sharpest and subtilest Wits are (of
all others) the most mischievous Instruments in the Devils hands against Gods
truth. This grand evil Angel made use of this Serpent (which, as some say, was
very specious and delightful to the Eye by his comely mixture of lovely
Colors) to deceive the first Woman, as the good Angel made use of the Ass to
rebuke the mad Prophet, 2 Pet. 2. 16. Numb. 22. 28.

(2dly.) The 2d. part of his proposed and pursued Plot, is, in Assaulting (not
the Man, but) the Woman, the weaker Vessel, which is soonest and easiest
overcome; where the Hedge is lowest, there the Beast leaps over with the least
difficulty: A besieging Enemy raises his Batteries against the weakest part of
a besieged City; the weaker Sex is most likely to truckle to his temptations;
hence he Essays to break the Man's head with his own Rib, and to make use of
this Rib, as of the Round of a Ladder, whereon to climb up so high, as to Reach
a blow to her Head and Husband.

(3dly.) He sets upon the Woman when alone: It Is supposed, As Adam and Eve
walked together in Paradise, Eve stood still, gazing with her fancy upon some
Delectable Object, which Adam passed by with less looking on; he got so far
before her, as to leave her behind, whereby she was overtaken by the Tempter;
the absence of her Head (with its counsel and comfort) gives Satan a fair
opportunity, which he improves to the utmost. Solomon says, Where Two are,
there is Help, Eccle. 4. 10.

(4thly.) While Eve is alone, the Tempter falls a disputing with her, in asking
her a Concise and an Abrupt Question, [Yea, has God said, etc.?] That he might
Enervate the Authority of the Divine Menace or Commination: Hereupon the weaker
Vessel (Eve) gives but a weak Answer, for she might (in her state of Innocence)
have that Ignorance which the Schools call a pure Negation, not a depraved
Disposition; (which is found in Children, etc.) She might not know whether
Serpents could naturally speak, or whether there was now any Devil existing,
not hearing of the fall of Angels: she did know her protection of Angels, (as
before) so might mistake the Devil (in the Serpent) for a good Angel, and
therefore disputes with him, and was deceived by him, (as she confesses, Genesis
3. 13. So dangerous it is to dispute with the Devil, who is better believed
away, than argued away. They do but shoot with Satan in his own Bow, that think
by parlying with this [(...)] or subtle Sophister, to put him off: by this
means he draws Eve out of her Trenches of the Divine Praecept, and wrings the
Sword of the Spirit (the Word of God) out of her hand, then does he what he
will with her, yea, wins the Day, when he had disarmed her.

(5thly.) No sooner had the Woman put in her weak Answer (in this Disputation)
to the Devils Question, mincing the matter of the Divine Menace in her. [Least
ye Dye] instead of Gods Word* [Ye shall surely Dye.] Whereby she made that
Danger doubtful only, which God had made Certain, peremptory, and without a
peradventure. Hereupon this subtle Serpent (watching for her halting, and when
to have her upon the hip) does as confidently deny that sentence of Death, v.
4. as God had seriously and severely Threatened it before, Genesis 2. 7. Hereby her
belief of Gods Word is battered down, and not opposing the certainty of Gods
Threatening (which she but seemed to doubt of in the Disputation) against Satan's
Insinuation, (in his plain and positive Denial of it) she yields. If the Word
of God had abode in her, she had overcome the Devil, 1 John 2. 14.

(6thly.) The Tempter tempts her with an Apple from the Forbidden-Fruit-Tree,
telling her (as some say) that there was no death in the Apple, (according to
the Divine Threatening) from a proof of his own Experience, For (says the
subtle Serpent) I do climb the Tree, and eat of the Fruit thereof, and yet am
not Dead for so doing. This was (probably) done while Eve looked on, and
therefore she said, (at least in her mind) That she saw it was good for Food,
v. 6. Hereupon she concluded that Death was not in the Fruit of the
forbidden-Tree, and hereupon inclines to take and Eat.

(7thly.) The Devil (to promote his Plot the more) accuses God of Envy, to Eve,
(which is truly called) Morbus Satanicus, the Devils own Disease; as if God had
forbid them the Fruit of this Tree of Knowledge, only out of Envy, least their
Eating thereof should make them Equal with God in Knowledge and Wisdom. Thus
the Devil abused the very name of the Tree of Knowledge to her, making it far
better than (indeed) it was; as if it would make them as Omniscient as God:
Thus he mused, as he used, and would have made God as envious as himself, who
envyed that either God should be honored or obeyed by Man, or that Man should
be Gifted and Graced by God: Hereupon he tells her, [Your Eyes shall be
Opened,] pretending, to Divine Contemplation, but intending, to Horrible
Confusion, as it proved afterward, when ashamed of their Nakedness: So that
(in v. 5.) this Liar from the beginning, was not so much [Mendax] a Liar, as
[Fallax] a Deceiver; according to that Ancient saying, [Et si semel videatur
Verax, Millies Mendax, and semper Fallax.] Though he sometimes seem to speak
truly, yet will he lie a thousand times for it, and be always Fallacious and
Deceitful.

(8thly.) He promises to her, [Ye shall be as Gods,] which was more likely to
make them Devils (like himself,) or (at least) Beasts that Perishes, Psalm. 49.
12, ^0. What God said Ironically and by a sad Sarcasm, Gen* 3. 22. The Man is
become as one of us. The Beasts might say most truly, and without any figure,
The Man is become as one of us. Thus while Satan makes her Free from Fear, it
was only designed by him to make her Free to Sin; hereupon She took of the
Fruit, and gave it also to her Husband, v. 6. to whom she Related all Satan's
Promises concerning the force of the Fruit, etc. whereby she seduced him, v.
17. in hearkening to her Voice, hoping that according to her suggestion from
Satan) he might become a God, and his Wife a Goddess. Thus the plurality of
Gods was first taught by the Devil, whose Grammar [Deum pluraliter declinare
Docuit] first learnt to Decline God in the Plural Number, and thus he
transforms his own sin upon them, [Ero sicut Altissimus] I shall be like the
most High, Isai. 14. 12. says he of himself, and [Eritis sicut Dij.] Ye shall
be as Gods; says he of them.

The 9th. and last part of his Plot, is the Timeing of his Temptation: herein
this subtle Serpent has a singular sagacity: no sooner was he cast out of
Heaven, but he Resolves to be Revenged of his Maker for this expulsion; and
because he could not come at his Creator (God) with his Revenge, he Falls
immediately upon his Creature (Man,) the Masterpiece of the Creation, upon the
same Day wherein he was Created; he loses no time, but about high-Noon the same
Day (which was Dinner or Eating-time) he Attempts his Ruin by tempting him to
Eat Forbidden-Fruit, and so flatters them out of the True Paradise into a Fools
Paradise of their own Dreams and Dotage. Thus [(...)] by the cogging of a Dye,
Ephesians. 4. 14. (like a cheating Gamester) he gives them an Apple for Happiness,
and Sin, and Misery, for a state of Innocence; not suffering them to Rest (so
much as one Night) upon the Bed of Honor and Happiness. This the Psalmist
(according to some Interpreters) does Insinuate, Psalm. 49. 12. Adam being in
Honor, [Bal Jalin, non pernoctavit] abode not (or lodged not) one Night in
Paradise. It Is the saying of a Greek-Father, That Adam [(...)] was made and
marred all in one Day. Thus he who thought to become a God, became a Beast that
perishes, Yea, Carrion, says Junius. Here the prime Plot of the principal
Plotter, (the Prince of Darkness) has a shrewd seeming success, yet the Lord
laughs at it; and Ridendo irritum Reddidit; he Defeats the Devils Design, and
that with Disgrace, for there was a Covenant transacted betwixt God the Father,
and God the Son [ab Aeterno] from all Eternity, 1 Pet. 1. 20. Joh. 17. 6. Tit.
1. 2. and 2 Timothy 1. 9. This Covenant the Devil knew nothing of, and it was this
that spoiled all his Plot: Indeed our first Parents were under this dedolent
and disconsolate Condition, from Noon to Night, or (at least) to the cool of
the Day: (having now most woeful Experimental Knowledge both of the Good which
they had lost, and of the Evil wherein they lay.) Then comes Jehovah to Judge
them, V. 8. Satan assuredly expected that the Greatly Offended Creator (God)
would have met his Greatly Offending Creature (Man) in as much Fury, as he did
(afterward) Moses in the Inn, when he had much ado (as it were) to forbear
Killing him, Exodus 4. 24. Or that he would have come to Adam, as the Angel came
to Balaam, with a drawn Sword in his hand, wherewith to destroy him, Numb 22.
32. or that he would have rushed upon this Rebel, as David ran upon Goliath, and
cut off his head, 1 Samuel 17. 51. No such Fury is in God against fallen Man, Isai.
27. 4. The Devil is disappointed, for God comes to Man, (indeed,) but not so
much a Judge, as a Father, and as a Physician. 1st. As a Father, saying, (as it
were) Though Man be fallen by the Devils malevolence, yet he shall be raised up
again by my Benevolence, by my Good will to Man, Luke 2. 14. 2dly. As a
Physician, God has prepared a Sovereign Plaster to Apply to the wound that
Man had received from the Devil; God promises Christ to be a Redeemer to Man,
and (withal) to be a Destroyer of the Devil, Hebr. 2. 14. and of all his Works,
1 John 3. 8. This Plaster was prepared by the good pleasuro of God the Father,
Covenanting with God the Son long before Man was in being, much more before he
was wounded. No such Plaster was provided to Cure the Fall of Angels, for they
sinned upon their own accord, and without a Tempter, Therefore Gods (...), did
outshine his (...), His love to Men was greater than his love to Angels, for
in coming to Judge Man, such was his Graciousness toward him, that in Wrath he
Remembered Mercy, Habb. 3. 2. And giving the Promise of Christ, (in the Seed of
the Woman) Adam takes hold of the Promise, and in Faith therein, he calls his
Wife, Eve, (which signifies Life,) He (instead of Dying the same Day of his
Eating Forbidden-Fruit,) Lives 930 Y. after, and she became the Mother of all
Living: and though they brought in Death by their Disobedience, yet God Taught
them the Ordinance of Sacrificing, so the first thing that Dyed in the World,
was a Sacrifice, or Christ in a Figure, the Lamb, slain from the Foundation of
the World, Rev. 13. 8. And who opens a passage into a better Paradise than that
which they had Forfeited, Luke ^3. 43. 2 Cor. 12. 4. Rev. 2. 7. And if that
Rabbinical Notion (no way dissentaneous to Truth) be Received, to wit, That the
Tree of Knowledge stood upon Mount Calvary, (Paradise being placed in Canaan,
the Glory of all Lands, Ezekiel. 20. 6.) where Christ was (after) Crucified on a
Tree, then it follows, that in the same place, and by the same means an
Expiation of Sin was made, where and as it was first committed. Thus God
overshoots Satan in his own (...), and the Devil goes off from his first Plot
with a broken-Head by the Woman's Seed, which makes him weaker in his Projects
ever after.

The Second Plot against the Church, in ABEL, Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. II.
WHen Satan saw his first Plot Defeated, (in as much as Man did not dye
immediately, nor was made as miserable as himself) and that (in despite of the
Devil) God would have his Church in the World, to make up that Breach withal in
the City of God, which Lucifer and his Apostate Angels had made therein; he
takes other Measures, and projects a New Plot by his Serpentine subtilty, to
wit, seeing he could not Hinder the Being of the Church, he (next) Endeavors
to Divide it into a True and False Church, that (at least) he might thereby
hinder the Well-being of it; if he could not make the False Church Destroy the
True One. This is held forth in Cain and Abel, both whom our first Parents had
Religiously Trained up in the Worship of God by Sacrifice: they were (both)
Worshippers of the True God, Cain as well as Abel, Cain did not offer his
Oblation to an Idol, but it was [Mincha la Jehovah] an Offering to the Lord,
Genesis 4. 3. and we do not find that God blamed Cain, either for the Matter,
Time, or Place of his Worship: Cain [Recte obtulit, non Recte Divisit] offered
right, but did not Divide aright, betwixt God and himself, he should have given
God first Se, and then de Suis, first Personam, and then opus Personae:
Himself, and then of his Substance, as Abel did according to Gods Demand, [My
Son, give me thy Heart] Prove. 23. 26. he dealt Fraudulently therefore with God,
and so became the Head of the False Church, as Abel was of the True: or as
(August. de Civit. Dei. lib. 15. cap. 1.) expresses it, Cain was the Author of
the City of the World, both as he was Born first of fallen Man, and was called
Cain, which signifies Possession; so he made the World his Possession, and that
first City which he Built therein: yea, and as he Plots against his Brother
Abel, who was chosen out of the World; Born second, and called Abel, i. e.
Vanity, because he looked upon the World (in all its Pomps and Possessions) as
Vanity, and he is called the Author of the City of God, and therefore is he
driven out of the World by an Untimely Death, so early came Martyrdom into the
World upon the True Church (which Abel represented) by the False One, Cain. As
the first Beast, that Dyed in the World, Dyed for a Sacrifice: (Figuring Christ
the True Sacrifice for Sin, ut Supra,) so the first Man that dyed in the World,
dyed for Religion; 1 John 3. 12. The first Righteous Man that went to Heaven,
must swim thither in a River of his own Blood, Matthew. 23. 35. The City of the
World (which (at the best) only professes Religion,) will persecute the City
of God, which both professes and possesses the power and purity of Godliness:
Or (as the Holy Scripture better then Augustine expresses it,) Cain was the
Head or top of the Seed of the Serpent, who was the first begotten of Adam in
his fallen Estate: And (as Rab. Menachem says) was conceived of the Filth and
Seed that the Serpent had conveyed into Eve: However Gods Word speaks
Infallibly, That Eve was much mistaken at Cain's Birth, saying; She had got a
Man from the Lord, Genesis 4. 7. or, that Famous Man, The Lord; as if she had
brought forth that promised Seed of the Woman, Genesis 3. 15. the Holy Child
Jesus: These were Verba Spei, non Rei, her Hoping was better than her Having,
for Cain was a Wicked One, and of the Wikced One, 1 John 3. 10, 12. Joh. 8. 44.
so was the Root of all the Reprobates in the World: but Abel was the Root of
the Righteous, as Christ himself reckons him, Matthew. 23. 35. And therefore the
Devil (Cain's Father, Joh. 8. 44.) complotts with Cain to Root out Abel by
Killing him, and in him all future Hope of the True Church, That Tree cannot
grow, whose Root is Destroyed. This Head of the Black-Line, Cain, Clubbing wits
with the Head of the Serpent, Satan, (whose Head was already Broken or Bruised
by the Promise of Christ) Essays the 2d. Plot against Abel, the Head of the
White-Line, to break his Head with his Club, and to Brain him therewith, yet
even this Plot that came from the Devils Broken Head, proved (in the Issue) but
a Broken Plot, God over-shooting him in his Bow.

The preparation to this 2d. Plot was, This Lucifer (that was come down from
Heaven in great Rage, Rev. 12. 12.) enrages Cain, touching him with a live Coal
from Hell, (as the Angel did the Prophets with one from Heaven, Isai. 6. 5.)
and sets his Heart on Fire of Hell, Jam. 3. 6. This made him Hot, and Burn in
Indignation, as the Word [Charah, Genesis 4. 5.] signifies, for of all the Eight
Hebrew Words which signifies Anger; This Word [Charah] is the most Vehement.
Cain's hot Displeasure was first Inflamed against God, as being [(...)] a
Respecter of Persons, in sending Fire from Heaven in Token of Accepting Abels
Bloody Sacrifice, and yet rejecting his un-bloody Meat Offering: Thus Cain's
Eye was Evil, because God's was Good, Matthew. 20. 15. Yea, and such was his Rage
against God, that when he, not only told him, [If thou do well, shall thou
not be accepted, v. 7.] but also asks him, Where is Abel thy Brother, v. 9.
Cain Angerly Answers, and bids God Go look, as if God had asked him an
Impertinent Question, and as if he had put an Office upon him which belonged
not to him; yet he that disdained to be his Brothers Keeper, disdained not to
be his Brothers Executioner, and the Wrath of Man, that never speaks the
Righteousness of God, much less works it, Jam. 1. 20. transported Cain so far,
as to tell the God of Truth a loud Lie, in his saying, [I know not where he
is.] Thinking, by this frivolous Evasion to blind the Eyes of the All-knowing
God, as the God of this World had blinded his Eyes, and hardened his Heart too:
and hereby he declared himself to be immediately descended from the Devil, who
was both a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8. 44. 2dly. His Rage
against Abel, for though his Rage was great against God, insomuch that he could
have found in his heart to have pulled God out of Heaven, (Omne peccatum est
Deicidium, all sin is a kind of God-Murther) for his partiality, but God was
out of his Reach, yea, and of the Devil's too that set him on work; The
Borrowing power can never match the Lending power: The Creature can never be
too strong for the Creator; Howbeit Abel was within his Reach, and he will
Wound the Master in his Servant: The Rabbis say, The Devil was mad at Abel,
because Abel had slain the same Serpent, which he had lately possessed to
seduce his Mother, yet not without a wound in his Heel, before he could break
its Head.

This Satan takes as an high Affront, and therefore Plots to break Abels Head
with a Club, as if not enough, his Heel was bruised by the Serpent: however
this is certain, and beyond the Credit of a Jewish-Fable, That Cain was mad
against Abel, because his own Works were wicked, and his Brothers Righteous, 1 John 3. 12. Now when he saw Abels Worship Received and his own Rejected, and
thereby losing the Blessing of the Primogeniture, and the Consecration of the
Firstborn; this Ripened him for the Devils possession, who thereupon Enters
and Fills his Heart (as Act. 5. 3.) from corner to corner, then falls Cain's
Countenance from a cheerful to a churlish one, Index animi Vultus: The
Malignity of his Mind was bewrayed by his surly and lowering Look, Heu quam
Dissicile est Animum non prodere Vultu: And being thus prepared, yea and Acted
by the Devil's both craft and cruelty he falls upon plotting Abel's Death and
Destruction.

The 1st. part of his Plot, was his Deep Dissimulation, Talking with Abel after
a Friendly and Brother-like manner, V. 8. In the Hebrew there is an
Extraordinary pause, Intimating some Amicable Discourse, and in the Word [Amar]
an Insinuating Invitation, as [Let us go into the Field.] This the Greek,
Version and Thargum Jerus: adds: his Rage by a Diabolical Fire lay now
smothered, and he puts on as fair a Look as his Fester'd Heart would admit, not
unlike that of Absalom to Amnon, who hated him with an Habit of Hatred, wherein
the Venom of all Vice is steeped, yet spoke he to his Brother neither Good nor
Bad for Two full Years together, 2 Samuel 13. 22, 23. Yet all this time he
Nourished a Resolution for Revenge, and only waited for a fair opportunity to
his foul Fratricide; so long did Inveterate Rancour lie lurking in Absoloms
Malicious Heart, and then could Invite his Brother to a Feast, V. 26, 27. which
had sour Sauce in the end. Thus Cain covers with Dissembled Courtesy his
Design of Cruelty, and draws a fair Glove upon his foul Hand, Enticing Abel to
walk hand in hand (as a Brother) with him into the Field, a convenient place
for his bloody contrivance.

The 2d: part of the Plot, was, When Cain had got Abel thither, he picks a
Quarrel with him, upon the occasion of Abel's contradicting his Discourse,
saying, (as the Chaldee Paraphrase adds,) That there was no Judge, nor Day of
Judgment, nor World to come, nor Reward for Righteousness, nor Punishment for
Wickedness, etc. Thus he (as it were) Imprisoned those [(...)] common
principles of Nature in Unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. and Muzzl'd the Mouth of
his own Conscience, that he might gratify his revengeful Spirit without
control. Hereupon he turns all his former Flattery into downright Railery and
Chiding of Abel, for whose sake he had been newly chidden of God, v. 6. 17.
This done, he falls on

The 3d. part of the Plot, by Adding to his Craft in the Two former, his
Cruelty in this later; who having Decoyed his Brother far enough from his
Fathers House, from all sight, noise, and relief, (none being nigh to Rescue
his Innocent Brother out of his nocent Hands) he Addresses himself to knock him
down on the Head with his Clubb, or Plough-staff, wherewith (as it is supposed)
he, being an Husbandman, usually walked, Inter Amplexus Interfecit: or (as the
Greek-Word (...) signifies, which we Read Slew,) He cut his Throat, 1 John 3.
12. Now when Cain (the Devils first Patriarch) had Killed Abel God's first
Martyr, and the Only Hope of a Succeeding Church, Satan had seeming success;
yet this 2d. Plot is soon Blasted, the Lord Laughed it to nothing, (though the
Devil and his lmps had been Laughing together for laying Abel (their Tormenter,
along on the Ground, as Revel. 11. 10.) and that by these Means: 1st. Though
there was no Man an Eyewitness of the Murder, and though Cain, (to keep it the
more secret, (as Josephus says) did Bury the Murdered Body privately, yet God
(who is (...) All-Eye saw it, and heard the Cry of Abel's Blood, (which had as
many Tongues, as Drops, and every Drop crying for Vengeance,) v. 10. Heb. 11.
4, and 12. 24. Murder ever Bleeds fresh in the Eye of God: Surely (says he) I
have seen Yesterday the Blood of Naboth, etc. 2 Kin. 9. 26. And cries as fresh
in the Ear of God, whereby Abel, though Dead, yet speaks, Hebr. 11. 4.
Hereupon God comes to make Inquisition for this Fresh-bleeding and
Fresh-speaking, or crying Sin, (who is not said to make Inquisition after any
other sin, as after Murder,) Psa. 9. 12. And God in his Inquisition is more
strict and critical, than the Spanish-Inquisition, Though that be done with
utmost secrecy and severity: The Lord looked upon it, and Required it, 2 Chronicles. 24. 22. Yea, and Requited it too, Mat. 23. 35. and 22. 6, 7. Revel. 16.
6. Even upon the Heads of every [Ish-Damm^^,] or Man of Bloods, Psa. 5. 6. such
as the Damming Hectors of this Day mostly be. 2dly. God (after his severe
Inquest) passes a sad Doom upon the Murderer, ver. 11. a more severe Sentence
is not found in Sacred Scripture, Woe be to Cain, and to all that walk in his
way, Jude. v. 11. The Judge of all the Earth will do right, Genesis 18. 25. Cain
shall not escape Scot-free, (as he hoped,) God will appear (himself) when Man
either does not, will not, or cannot: The Judge of Quick and Dead (himself)
Arraigns Cain at the Bar, denounces Judgment (notwithstanding all his
Jesuitical Evasions as before) against him, which consists of 3 Particulars.
1st. He is cursed in his Person, v. 11. and they whom God curses, shall be
cursed, as they whom God blesses, shall be blessed, Genesis 27. 33. Numb. 23. 20.
Even the Grand Balaam of Rome (who Canonizeth Cains for Murdering Righteous
Abels) cannot take off that Curse which the great God lays on: better all the
Witches in the World, and all the Devils in Hell or their Eldest Son the Pope,
should curse us with Bell, Book, and Candle, than this one God whose Curse is
Irrevocable, and can never be Reversed. This Cain was the first cursed Man upon
Earth, cursed in his person: 2dly. He was cursed in his Patrimony, v. 12. his
Land he Tilled, was cursed to him. The former curse, laid upon the Earth for
Adam's sin, in general, Genesis 3. 17. was now Increased by Cain's Murder unto him
in particular: This was a particular curse upon Cain's Portion wherever he
came, when he Tilled it as an Husbandman, it might Upbraid him as a Murderer in
its barrenness: The Earth had been Kinder than Cain to Abel, for it had opened
its Mouth to Receive his Blood from Cain's cruel hands, and so to give it an
honorable Interrment, and now opens its Mouth again (in not yielding him its
strength) in a clamorous petition for Vengeance against him: As the cursed
Fig Tree lost its Vigor, and Withered, Mark 11. 21. So a Fruitful Land is made
barren for the Wickedness of its owners, and Occupiers, Psalm. 107. 34.

The 3d. Means God uses to Defeat the Devils Design, is, He Excommunicates Cain
(Satan's prime Patriark) out of the Church, who would have Excommunicated the
Church out of the World, (in God's proto Martyr Abel) and that with the greater
Excommunication, v. 12. [A Vagrant, and a Vagabond shall thou be. Thus his Doom
Rises higher, and falls heavier upon him, Psa. 59. 12. and 109. 10. Cain (the
first Apostate) went out from the Presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land
of Nod, (which signifies Wandering, v. 14. 16. So that he was a Vagrant from the
Church (from his Fathers Family and Fellowship) as well as a Vagabond upon
Earth: God would come and Talk with him no more, nor Vouchsafe one Gracious
Glance toward him, nor Accept any one Oblation from him at any time.

4thly. God sets a Brand upon him, v. 15. and thereby (as it were) Burns him in
the Hand, and Stigmatizes him for a Rogue. This mark was not an Horn in his
Forehead, (as the Jews feign) but 'twas an Hornet in his Conscience, (as Exodus
23. 28.) stinging him with horrible Conviction and Compunction for his Murder:
The words of the Septuagint [(...)] signifies Sighing and Trembling; as if
God's Mark upon him had been (probably) a Trembling, not only of his Hands and
Head, but also of his Heart and whole Body, which made all People pity him:
Some Rabbis say, Cain was continually Dogged with Abel's Dog, but Assuredly he
was Haunted with his own Evil Ghost, which made him look with a most ghastly
Countenance, having Horror in his Heart, and a very Hell in his Conscience.
This might make him Tremble every where, and fear every Bush (he saw) was a
Bailiff to Arrest him, and every Man (he met) a Devil to Torment him; So that a
longer Lease of his Life was no better than a lingering Death: nay, such a Life
(under the Guilt of such a sin, and under the sense of such a Curse) was far
worse then a Temporal Death: Therefore God Dooms him to Live, and not
immediately to Dye, that he might be a Landmark of Shame, and a
Living-Monument against Murder and Murderers.

5thly. His Death after a Woeful Life, was Woeful also, as humane Testimony
Reports, for though he used some Carnal Anodynes to Allay the unbearable pangs
of his wounded Spirit, and to drown the horrible noise of his self-condemning
Conscience, he falls upon Building a City, and called it Enoch, that his Son
might be called Lord Enoch of Enoch, v. 17. Yet Vengeance would not suffer him
to live, Act. 28. 4. Nor to Live out half his Days, Psalm. 55. 23. Nor to go
down to the Grave in peace, 2 Kin. 2. 5. That he Dyed an Untimely death (all
Historians concur) about the Year 131. the manner how is Variously Reported;
some say It was by the Fall of an House which he was Building in his New City:
Others say, He was slain by his Grandchild Lamech, who being a Blind Archer,
was led to shoot him by a wicked Boy: Take it either way, and his Sin is Writ
upon his Punishment, for either, as he that Designed to pull down Gods House
(the Church) so his own House which he was rearing up, falls down upon him and
knocks him down dead on the place, as he had done his Brother Abel: or, As he
Disdained to be his Brothers Keeper, but not to be his Executioner, Lives to
beget a Son, whose Son became his Grandfathers Executioner: Thus when God
makes Inquisition for Blood, Psalm. 9. 12. shall not he Search it out? Psalm. 44.
21. Yea, he will, and wound the Hairy Scalp of such as go on in their Iniquity,
Psalm. 68. 21.

6thly. Neither does Divine Vengeance upon him End here in his Untimely and
Violent Death, but his last Doom is the most Woeful of all Dooms; Cain must not
only be doomed out of the Church, and out of the World, but also he must be
Doomed to Hell, whither all wicked Men are turned, and all the People (though
there be whole Nations of them) that forget God, (as Cain did) Psa. 9. 17.
Especially Murderers, who are abhorred of the Lord, Psalm. 5. 6. He that sat
upon the Throne has (himself) said it, Rev. 21. 8. Murderers shall have their
Lot in the Lake that Burns with Fire and Brimstone; more especially such as
Murder Gods Image in his Servants, who have his Image upon them in a double
manner, both by Generation, Genesis 9. 6. And also by Regeneration, Ephesians. 4. 24.
God will (of all others) avenge their Blood, Rev 6. 10. and that speedily, Luk
18. 7. Thus Cain was a wicked One, was of the wicked One, and went to the
wicked One in Hell at last.

But the last Means whereby God Defeated the Devil's 2d. Plot, was, In raising
up a Seth to Stand up in Abel's Stead, according to the Signification of his
Name Seth, Hebr. Posuit placed in his Brothers place for Upholding the Church;
Sic Vno avulso non Deficit Alter Aureus: Though one Branch (Abel) was lop'd off
from the Tree of Mankind, (Adam) yet another Springs up (and that a Golden One)
in his Stead; And out of the Ashes of the Dying Phoenix another Phoenix Arises
to Continue its Kind in the World. Thus Seth or Sheth signifies, not only
Posuit, but Reposuit, laid up, as his Godly Mother believingly Acknowledged,
That the Church was laid up in him, and that he was the Foundation of it, a
Type of Christ, Isa. 28. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 11. out of whom Christ Sprung, Luke 3.
last. Genesis 4. 25. and, though Adam had many other Sons, Genesis 5. 4. yet none are
Named, savely only Seth, as being the only Professor of the True Religion, and
Foundation of the Church.

Now when the Devil and his Agents had got Abel out of the Way and World, and
saw Adam for an 130 Y. without an other in his stead, Genesis 5. 3. Oh what
Rejoicing was there, and sending of Gifts amongst them, as Rev. 11. 10. But God
Cut their Coxcombs, and Confuted their Confidences in Raising up Seth; by whose
Means, with God's Blessing, the Devil lost and the Church won Ground, for then
('it is said) Men began to call upon the Name of the Lord, Genesis 4. 26. That is,
Publicly and in Solemn Assemblies, making an Open Profession, which hitherto
had been but Privately done.

The Third Plot against the Church, in SETH, Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. III.
WHen Satan saw his 2d. Plot Defeated, and Laughed to Nothing by the Lord, that
Seth must Live and have many Children, (though Abel was Dead, and that
Childless) Genesis 5. 7. Numb. 24. 17. And the Church not only Maintained but
Advanced by them. This Restless Adversary Projects a 3d. Plot: that is, To
Corrupt the White Line, (the Posterity of Seth,) and to make them as Black as
those of the black Line, the Cursed brood of Cain.

That the latter Line was very Obnoxious and Injurious to the former all along,
may easily be believed, though the Scripture does not express it: even until
they were all swept away with the Flood, Job 22. 16, 17. However this is
Expressed, That the Devils design was now to Debauch those bold Professors; (who
had so openly opposed his Kingdom) and this he promotes and pursues by setting
the Fair Faces of the Daughters of Men (Cain's Brood) before the Eyes of the
Sons of God, the offspring of Seth, Genesis 6. 2. This, by the Tempters
Instigation drawing out Man's Corruption, Corrupted the very Church it self: The
Sons of God, (Deuteronomy. 14. 1.) or Members of the Church, looks, loves, and Lusts
after the Daughters of Men, that were out of the Church, Their Eyes became
Burning-Glasses to se^ their Hearts on Fire, even Loop-holes of Lust, and
Windows of all Wickedness, the Lust of the Eyes ushered in the Lust of the
Flesh and the Pride of Life, 1 John 2. 16. Professors then began to be
prosligate with the Profane, and made Profane Marriages with them, as
profane Esau did, Genesis 26. 34, 35. and 28. 8, 9. contrary to God's Law, Deuteronomy.
7. 3, 4. They took them Wives, of all which they chose: that is, Such as their
wanton Eyes and Wild Affections liked and loved, without either Gods License,
or their Godly Parents leave: [Cu^ multum Caepissent Generare, Multum
Caepissen^ Degenerare.] When the Two Seeds mingled multiplied, and began to
Generate much, they began to Degenerate much: Their Marrying by the Eye, more
than by the Ear, (thinking a fair Face enough, though covering never so foul a
Soul, without either Holy Grace, or an Honest-Race) made them as Carnal as the
Offspring of Cain: Hence sprang the Giants called Nephilims, that is, Fallen
Ones, (as the Hebrew Word signifies) for they were fallen from God, as they had
fallen on Men, and made Men (by force and fear) to fall before them: They fall
into Lamechs sin of Poligamy, and must have more Wives than one; [Item pollices
Quot and Quas Volebant,] and as many Whores as they pleased: Hence all the
World was overspread with Cruelty and Corruption, even a World of ungodly Men,
2 Pet. 2. 5. Hereupon God says, Genesis 6. 3. I Will Consult no more with my Mercy
for sparing them, I am Resolved with my Justice to Ruin them: Satan had
Consulted to Destroy, (and his Consult had an Happy (or rather Unhappy) Hit
here.) It Is sad when God will not (at such a time) Consult to Deliver:

The World was now become so Fowl with Sin, that there was no Remedy but to
Wash it clean with a Flood, the whole Earth (plainly) stank before God, v. 11,
12. and he Sweetens it with a dowsing Deluge: This Resolve to Ruin the World,
(to wit) both the Seeds, of Seth, as well as of Cain) must needs make the Devil
Laugh to see his Design so seemingly successful; notwithstanding all this, The
Lord laughs this Project to nothing: God still consults to Save, as well as to
Destroy; Though the World shall be Drowned, yet the Church shall not be so,
according to the Devils Design: for unto Noah God graciously gives a Promise of
Preservation, and the Platform of an Ark, wherein he and his should be
Preserved, Genesis 6. 8, 14. Yea, and for the Churches future Sustenance and
Accommodation, Two of every sort of Creatures shall be preserved also, Genesis 6.
20. And ah how Sequacious were they all to God their Centurion, they All come
at his Call; and even Beasts of Prey were so cicurated and Tamed for this Time,
that they all Lived together and Dyeted together, (the Lion with the Lamb, Isa.
11. 6.) without any dissension: Yea, the Antipathy and Enmity 'twixt the
Serpent and the Woman, was here Restrained: By Faith Noah prepares the Ark,
Heb. 11. 7. and every stroke upon it was a Real Sermon to Fore-warn the Old
World, that they flee from the Wrath to come: And so this Preacher of
Righteousness Preached without Preaching; In the midst of Wrath, (resolved on)
God remembered Mercy, Habb. 3. 2. Those Corrupters of the Earth, and of their
Ways had 120 Y. given them, wherein to be Reclaimed by this Preacher of Right:
but they had the Space (not the Grace) of Repentance, and they Jeered where
they should have Feared; looking upon Noah's Work (of Preparing an Ark) only
as a Work of Dotage: as if he had Dreamed, not so much of a Dry Summer, as of a
Wet Winter. This long-Suffering of God is Admired and Adored, 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19,
20. All the Devils Vassals were Drowned, (Yea, and Burned too,) (So Deep is the
Stain of Sin, it Requires Fire as well as Water to fetch it out.) For they are
called, The Spirits, once in Pleasure, now in Prison, and in pain of
Everlasting Burnings; but Noah, Gods Servant, was Saved, who in the Spirit of
Christ strove long with them for their Salvation, to whom he was but a little
Beholden for his own, in this Respect especially. The Door into his Ark must be
in the side of the lowest Story, and so it was under Water a whole Year, all
the time of the Flood; and it must be a prodigiously great Door for so vast and
Bulky a Body as an Elephant to enter; Noah within cannot shut it, it is too
heavy for him: This Jeering Generation without would not; they ought him no
such Service. Now rather than the Church should be drowned, either by an Open,
or a not well-shut Door, the most High God stoops to that low Office of
Shutting the Door after Noah: That which God does, is well done, therefore it
Leaked not for so long a time; and he that Vouchsafed to be Noah's Turnkey,
condescends to be his Pilot too for a long and dangerous Voyage, whereby the
Ship (or Church) Swam safe to shore: the Ark arrives at Arrarat its place of
Rest, Genesis 7. 16. and 8. 4.

The Fourth Plot against the Church, in EGYPT: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. IIII.
NO sooner was the Church (in Noah) safely Landed, and God had Smelt a sweet
Savor (instead of the stench of the Old World) from Noah's Sacrifice, Genesis 8.
11. but Satan has a 4th. Plot to Promote and Pursue: God will not War with a
Weaponless Devil, but out of his Unsearchable Wisdom ever allows him Suitable
Instruments to work withal in the World for the Glory of his own Grace: The
Enmity betwixt the Two Seeds never dies (as before) so long as the World Lives,
and Cain will be Murdering Abel (by Propagation) to the end of the World: Yea,
and the Older he grows, the more Savage and Bloody will he be; The last Bite of
the Beast will be the most deadly Bite.

As the Serpent had crept into Paradise to Plot against our first Parents, the
First Foundation of the Church, so Satan creeps into the Ark to Plot against
the Superstructure thereof: He wants not his (Cham) even in the Ark, (a Type of
the Church) a fit Instrument for him to Work with. It Is thought this Cham had
concealed his wickedness from Men, (which he could not from God,) and soon
after Degenerated: However this bad Son had a Temporal Favor for the sake of
his good Father, which he badly Requited afterward: This Cursed Cham or Ham
the Devil makes Use of. 1st. In his Person. 2dly. In his Posterity against the
Church of God. 1st. In his Person: The Occasion was this. As Satan had made
Adam Transgress in Eating; so he made Noah to Transgress in Drinking, Genesis 9.
21. He that had Escaped the Drowning of the World by Water, (because Just and
Upright) was now (perhaps not knowing the strength of the Grape) himself
Drowned in Wine, and was Shamefully Uncovered. Though this Act was but once,
(he was Ebrius, not Ebriosus, Drunk, not a Drunkard, Denominatio non sit a
particulari,) yet this wicked Cham saw it both with Delight to himself, and
with Derision to his Father: and therefore Noah (for whose sake he had been
Saved in the Ark) did Doom him accursed, and his other Two Sons he Blessed.
2dly. In his Posterity. The Egyptians (from whom the Church suffered hard
things in their House of Bondage) are frequently called the Children of Ham,
and Egypt the Land of Ham, Psalm. 78. 51. and 105. 23, 27. and 106. 22. It Is
True, there be some Hundreds of Years betwixt those Two Actions (of Hams
Person, and of his Posterity) against the Church, which some may judge
over-large a Leap, as if the Devil had been Idle all that Interspace of Time:
No doubt but it may be safely said, There is some time wherein God Chains up
the Devil, as Rev. 20. 2. And wherein the Church has her lucid Intervals, as
Act. 9. 31. Yea, and this may be said also, That all those Games the Devil
played, and all the Plots he Plotted betwixt these Two, were the lower Games,
the lesser Plots of a Daring Devil: compared with this of the Church, and (of
Isreal's) being in Aegypts Bondage. No doubt, but the Devil was gratified in the
Building of the Tower of Babel, whereby the Holy Tongue was lost to all the
World, (save to One Family) and so the Doctrine of Salvation, which was
Preached in that Tongue only. This began Satan's Kingdom in Heathenism through
the Confusion of Tongues at Babel, which was Blessedly Recovered by the Gift of
Tongues at Sion, Act. 2. 4. 13. The Devil was also well-pleased to have Lots
Righteous Soul vexed with the Wicked Sodomites, To have Isaac (that Heir of the
Promise) Scoffed at by Ishmael, Yea, Persecuted also by him, Gal. 4. 29. To
have likewise Profane Esau so Bloodily bent against plain Jacob; To have Godly
Joseph Abused both by his own Brethren, and by his Wanton Mistress, Psalm. 105.
18. Oh how would Satan have Rejoiced to see Lot and his Family Burned in Sodom,
Isaac Sacrificed by his own Father Abraham, Jacob Murdered by his own Brother
Esau, (as Abel had been by Cain at his Instigation,) Yea, and Joseph Perished
in the Pit (his) Brethren cast him into: or in the Prison where his wicked
Mistress Lodged him. Yet God baffled the Devil (who will Play at small Games
rather than sit Idle) in all these Plots. But now when the 70 Souls (that went
down into Egypt, that Land of Ham) were Increased to a great People, so as to
fill the Country of Goshen, Exodus 1. 7. this Enraged him, so that he puts out
his utmost Power and Policy to Suppress them. In the first Age before the
Flood, the Church of God was Shut up some time in One Person, as in Adam, Abel,
Seth, Enoch, etc. And though Adam Falls, Abel is Slain, Seth Dies, and Enoch is
Translated, etc. Yea, and the Devil does his worst to Extirpate it out of the
World, (as above;) yet the Great God has so Secured his Church, (both by)
Promise and Providence, that his Mount Sion can never be Removed: Insomuch that
in the 2d. Age after the Flood, the Devil Loses, and the Church Wins Ground,
and Spreads her self from the Narrow Compass of Persons, to Families, as in
Noah's, Abraham's, Lots, and the Patriarchs Families: and yet more, when the Time
of the Promise drew nigh, Act. 7. 17. Through the Special Blessing of God, the
Church Spreads forth her Tents, (as she is bidden) Isa. 54. 2, 3.) from the
Narrow Compass of Families, and became a Nation Great Mighty and Populous,
Deuteronomy. 26. 5. and all this, out of One, as Good as Dead, Hebr. 11. 12. Satan
meddles not with his Match, when he Meddles with God, who of very Stones can
Raise up Children unto Abraham, Matthew. 3. 9. To behold the Church Increase as
Stars in the Heaven, and as Sands on the Seashore, This makes the Devil more
mad then ever; So he falls upon his 4th. grand Plot, to Cut her short by the
Children of Ham the Father of Mitzraim, (which is the Hebrew Word for Egypt)
Genesis 10. 6.

The 1st. part of his Plot, was to make God their Enemy by their Sinning fowly
against him. In Order hereunto, he Tempts them to Commit Idolatry, (a
God-provoking Sin,) Josh. 24. 14. Ezekiel. 20. 8. and 23. 3, 8.

(2.) To forego Circumcision, (the Covenant of their God) which was the
Reproach of Egypt. Josh. 5. 9.

3. To join in Marriage with the Egyptians, Levit. 24. 20. and Exodus 12. 38.
Hereby the Sun (of Religion) goes down upon them, as God told Abraham, Genesis 15.
12. Then God was Angry, and he Turned the Hearts of the Children of Ham to hate
his own (God-provoking) People, Psalm. 105. 25. as after the Death of
Methusalem. (which in Hebrew signifies, He Dies, and the Dart comes.) The
Deluge came; so after the death of the Godly Patriarks their Bondage began;
They were cast into a Furnace of Iron, Deuteronomy. 4. 20. to see them there must
needs be the Devils Delight, whose Design Undoubtedly was to Burn up the Church
as Dross therein; but Gods Design (which is always to countermine his Mines,
and to counterplot his Plots) was, when he had Tried them, to bring them out as
Gold, Job 23. 10. as he did his Servant Job from Satan's Furnace of Affliction.
The 2d. part of his Plot, was, To stir up a new King that knew not Joseph,
Exodus 1. 8. Well knowing, that such Kings as know not Joseph or Jesus (our
Brother) are his sit Tools for Oppressing the Church: This King (the 8th.
from Ham, and Supposed to be Busiris, a Savage Tyrant in Heathen History) was
the first that Oppressed Israel, whom his Predecessors had Entertained as
Guests, and Enjoyed as Friends and Benefactors: He (I say) deals both Craftily
and Cruelly with them, and (both) to Prevent their further Increase, (which he
saw, v. 7.) Exodus 1. 10, 11. Ach. 7. 19. Psa. 105. 25. and all this was to
prove God a Liar in his Promise to Jacob, Genesis 46. 3. 4. Yet his (...) Sept.
and (...) Gre. Dealing Subtly, his Setting Severe Taskmasters over them, as
making them to make Brick, Yea, such a Tale and no Straw given: All this would
not do, for God Catches this Fox in his own Net of Craft and Cruelty, 1 Cor. 3,
19. and the more the Church was Molested, the more they Multiplied. It Is true,
This Rigor and Fierceness (from Pherec the Hebr. Word) in Imposing
Intolerable hard Labor upon them, was a probable Plot (in the Ordinary Course
of Nature) to Prohibit Procreation of Children; yet this King was, as every
Oppressor is, a Fool, Prove. 28. 16. For, besides it is usually seen, That
Laboring Men have the most and the Lustiest Children. Here was an
Extraordinary Path of Providence to overruled this Project: which David
Celebrates, [God Increased his People greatly, and made them stronger than
their Enemies,] Psa. 105.24. This Camomile, the more it is trodden, the faster
it grows: This Walnut-Tree, the more it is beaten, the more it bears. This
Grieved their Grievers, Exodus 1. 12. So the Egyptians grieving at Isreal's
Growth, it became both their Crime and their Curse: When this Design was
Defeated, this Dragon (lying in the midst of the Waters, Ezekiel. 29. 3.) falls
upon his 2d. Plot, to Destroy all the Males of Israel as soon as Born, not
unlike the great Red Dragon who stood ready to Devour the Man-Child as soon as
the Woman (the Church) had brought it forth, Rev. 12. 3. 4. This Pharaoh Treads
in that Fiends steps, and Commands the Mid-Wives to Strangle (with a privy
-Pinch) All the Born Males: Hoping that the Lions (or Dragons) Skin might Patch
up the Fox that had failed in worrying up Isruel: But God Baffll'd this Plot
too, for Shiphrah and Puah (the 2 Principal Mid-Wives) Feared God, and durst
not Obey the Kings Inhumane and Unnatural Command, v. 17. That which is
Inferior and Subordinate, may not Control and Contradict that which is
Superior. Thus Peter Explains his two Sociable Duties, [Fear God, Honor the
King, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Compared with Act. 5. 29. and 4. 19. Here the Mid-Wives
stick, (they cannot do the Devils Drudgery,) and here the Plot sticks. Pharaoh
Frowns upon them for this, but God Smiles on them, and Blesses them, v. 18. 19,
20, 21. They would not pull down Gods House, (his Church) and God Builds up
theirs. Pharaoh (thus disappointed) falls on ^is 4th. Plot, in Publishing a
Bloody Edict to all his People (among whom some Savage Slaughter-Men he might
probably not miss, and possibly not without a Penalty to Neglecters,) To Drown
those Males openly which the Mid-Wives would not Strangle Privately, v. 22.
Notwithstanding this Edict, and the strict Execution of it, Exodus 2. 3. Moses
is Preserved by Pharaohs Daughter, who becomes the Ruin of Pharaohs Kingdom:
Thus no Counsel, nor Might, nor Wisdom [neither Craft nor Cruelty] can prevail
against the Lord, Prove. 21.30. This (Miraculously Preserved) Moses brings 10
Plagues on Egypt; The 1st. whereof was, The Waters wherein the Childrens Blood
had been shed, were turned into Blood. And in the last were Slain all Egypts
Firstborn, for their slaying Israel, Gods Firstborn, Exodus 4, 22. Then did
Israel go out of the Furnace, being loaded with Spoils, and Egypt was glad that
they were gone, though gone with their Jewels, Psalm. 105. 36, 37, 38. Exodus 12.
33, 35, 36. Has the Devil now done, and his Instrument Pharaoh? Oh no! he has
yet another (his 5th. and last Plot,) which ends (as all other Plots against
the Church do) in his own Destruction.

Israel Marches 3 Days directly to Horeb, (as they had Requested, Exodus 3. 18.
and 5.3.) then turning toward the Red Sea, Pharaoh's Spys gave Intelligence,
That they were Run away, and would not Return, and that they were Intangl'd in
the Mountains, Exodus 14. 3. This hardens his Heart, (at which Gods Mighty
Hammer had given 10 Mighty Strokes in the 10 Plagues, yet could find no
Entrance) and Resolves to pursue them; Yea, and his People also, (who Repented
of their Well-doing, but not of their Ill) saying, Why have we let them go, v.
5. all pursues, and overtakes to Recover their Jewels, and to bring them back
to Bondage, thinking they had caught them in a Pound, they had no way to
escape, unless they could Climb up to Heaven, which because they could not do,
Heaven comes down to them, Divides the Sea, Israel walks 'twixt Two Mountains
of Waters, which made a fair Lane for them, Exodus 14. 22. Psalm. 105. 8. 9.
Isai. 63. 12, 14. The Egyptians follow them into the Sea, the Angel of Gods
Presence (who had led them thither) removed from the Van to the Rear, to be
betwixt them and their Enemies, they who had drowned Isreal's Firstborn were
all drowned; but Israel (the Church) passes over dry-shod, and when safely
Landed, Sang that Song of Praise to the God of Israel, Exodus 15. Psalm. 77. 18.
and 18. 11.) for this great Deliverance.

The Fifth Plot against the Church, in the Wilderness: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. V.
NO sooner was Israel got safe out of the Red Sea, and into the Barren
Wilderness, but presently the Devil Projects a 5th. Plot, and plays a New-Game
against the Church in the Wilderness, (so called) Act. 7. 38.) In not only
making the Multitude to murmur against Moses no less than four times about
their Meat, (in the Cause and Quarrel of the Belly, as the Wilderness wanted
provision, so they wanted patience to keep peace with their governors) But also
in stirring up Amalek (Esau's Grandchild, Genesis 36. 15, 16. and the Heir of his
Hatred against Israel, for beguiling him of his Blessing as well as
Birthright) to War against him, Exodus 17.8. These Amalekites being a Warlike
People, and now fearing that the Blessing (conferred upon Jacob by Isaac) would
be confirmed, and [not having the fear of God before their Eyes, Deuteronomy. 25. 18.]
This Seed of the Serpent Way-lays the Seed of the Woman in their passage to the
Land of Promise, which was the Blessing promised: Amalek meets them by the way,
not with Broad and Water, as he should have done to his afflicted Kindred,
Obad. v. 10. 11, 12, 13. but with Fire and Sword, and cuts off the hindmost of
them, Deuteronomy. 25. 18. Yea, and he exercised the Devils Craft as well as his
Cruelty, in smiting all that were faint and feeble, that came behind the Host,
not unlike the Serpent (that Acted him) in his bruising the Heel of Israel.
This (Josephus says) was done by common consent and Council of all the Nations
adjacent in their Ambassadors, pitching Unanimously upon this People of
Amalek, (as being of the most Martial and Military Spirit and Courage) to cut
off Israel, whose Renown now had so exceedingly Alarmed them. Israel (or the
Church in the Wilderness) was at this time under great Disadvantages, (neither
expecting any Acts of Hostility, nor being provided of due Arms and Ammunition)
was much dismayed at the danger of being Assaulted by a puissant and well-armed
Adversary. Now the grand Plotter (Satan) had a fair Prospect of his 5th. Plot
as to its success, but still the mischief of it was, he Reckoned without his
Host, even the Lord of Hosts, (that Man of War, Exodus 15. 3.) who gives
Victory (not as the Devil, but) as himself pleases: For though the Lord
permits Amalek to oppose Israel, for the Chastizement of their Murmurings,
yet had he other Designs then only to Chastize his Church whom he had allured
into the Wilderness; He must also Speak Comfortably to her Heart, Hos. 2. 14.
Amalek must Fall (and therein the Devils Project) before the People of his
Promise, and they must not only be Encouraged by their Victory over the
Amalekites, (as they had been with that over the Egyptians) but also Enriched
with their Spoils, and Furnished with their Arms and Ammunition. God has (in
his Design) not only the want of Innocence in his People to Chastize with
Rods, but also the Guilt of Insolency in his Enemies to Scourge with Scorpions.

Amalek (indeed) comes forth to meet Israel, but it was to meet his own ruin,
and to fetch in his own destruction, which Moses [Precando] by Praying, and
Joshua [Praeliando] by Fighting brought upon him: Moses in the Mount lifts up
the Rod to God, as a Standard against Amalek; and Joshua in the Valley Engages
them: and Moses Prayers gave most-effectual Pushes as well as Joshua's Pikes
against the Enemy. Moses Orat and Vincit, Cessat and Vincitur, v. 12. While
Moses Devotion goes down, Amaleks Courage gets up and prevails; but when it
goes up and keeps up, being sustained upon Christ, the Stone of Israel, then
Amalek is discomfitted, v. 13. And being the first Nation that Warred against
the Church after her deliverance from Egypt, Gods Hand is upon his Throne,
Swearing, That he will have a perpetual War with Amalek, and wipe out the
Remembrance of them from under Heaven, v. 14, 16. Amaleks Hand had been lifted
up against Gods Throne, (his Church, so called, Jerem. 14. 21. Now Gods Hand is
lifted up upon his own Throne, in taking this Solemn Oath, That he would wage
War against Amalek for ever: This present Discomsiture was but a [praelibamen]
or Pledge of this perpetual War. As a lasting Monument of Gods great Mercy to
Israel in this first Victory. Moses Builds an Altar, and calls it [Jehovah
Nissi,] that is, The Lord is my Banner, under whose Standard he had got the
Victory: And as a lasting Memorial of Gods great Wrath against Amalek in this
first Opposition, Moses must Record this of them, (either in the Book of the
Wars of the Lord, Numb. 21. 14. which is latent, or in the Pentatuch which he
was then Writing, and now Extant,) That they should utterly be destroyed. This
Saul should have done, 1 Samuel 15.7. etc. destroying only some, David destroyed
more, 2 Samuel 8. 12. Such as escaped those Destructions, were destroyed by the
Simeonites in Hezekiah's time, 1 Chronicles. 4. 41, 42, 43. Lastly, Haman and his
Ten Sons were slips of this cursed Stock, and Hanging was their end, and the
end of that Race of Rebels (being the last that we read of) to be Rooted out.
Oh how dangerous it is to Anger the Ancient of Days his Forbearance (for many
Hundred Years) is no Forgiveness: 'Twas 400 Y. after when God gave Command to
destroy them utterly, 1 Samuel 15. 2. and long after that, God made a War against
them, and at last did Root them out, [Root and Branch] thus Amalek, Hebrew
signifying [Populus Ling^us] a Licking People, that had licked up the Hindmost
of Israel, the Wrath of God licked them all up as Fire does Stubble, who can
stand before Everlasting burnings, Isa. 33. 14. The Church's Protesta^^^ is
Consuming fire to them, Hebr. 12. last, who not only Laughs but Burns, not
only their Plots but their Persons, to nothing. A Man had better Anger all the
Witches in the World, Yea, all the Devils in Hell; as Anger this One Jealous
God, the Heat of whose Wrath lasts longer, and Burns deeper than the Coals of
Juniper, Psalm. 120. 4. His Judgments are severe and durable, never Rots in the
Sky: 'Twas this Divine Wrath that waged War against Amalek from one Generation
to another, until it came at last to an utter Extirpation; Haman (the Agagite)
of the Blood Royal of Amalek, descending from Agag their King whom Saul spared)
is Hanged, no more of that Rebellious Race (that Warred against Israel without
Cause or Provocation) do we Read of, the Wicked are forgotten, Eccles. 8. 10.
Yea, the Devil (that set them on work) is Chained and Defeated: The Church (by
her Champions help) abides for ever.

The Sixth Plot against the Church, in the Wilderness: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. VI.
It Is said, Luke 4. 13. That Satan Departed from Christ only for a Season; no
more does he depart from his Church, he will have his Returns to do her all the
ill turns he can: Thus does he here to the Church in the Wilderness, that
almost as close did he Dog her behind, as the Pillar of Glory did Conduct her
before, and though Christ (whom she Tempted there, 1 Cor. 10. 9.) suffered her
thus to be Proved and Tried, yet it was always to do her Good at the latter
end, Deuteronomy. 8. 16.

The 6th. Plot against the Church, (which was the 2d. in her Wilderness-State)
was the Tempter tempting Israel to Set up the Golden-Calf, Exodus 32. 1. which,
the Devil knew well, would make God disown Discard, and Discovenant his People.
This is one of Satan's Grand Wiles, that when he cannot play his Game upon the
open Stage of the World by an Extrinsick Adversary, as by Amalek, then he trys
his Skill by an Imrinsick-Engine, Screwing himself into the Minds of Israel,
(this piece of Ingenuity he taught the Jesuits,) and being (...) a Lover of
Idol-Worship, (as being Devil-Worship, 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21.) he puts them upon
making an Idol, to make God cast them off and destroy them for such a
God-provoking Sin, v. 22. as provoked God to Jealousy: The Advantage Satan
took for promoting this his Project, was Moses Absence, (Non-Residents do
little consider this,) though Moses had Warrant for his Absence both from God
and his People, for 1st. God called him up into the Mount, Exodus 24. 12. and
2d. The People consented that he should be as an Ambassador and Mediator
'twixt them and God, Exodus 20. 19. Moses (the 40 Days faster) staid longer with
God in the Mount than the People expected, though all the while he was
Negotiating their Weal in bringing the Two Tables of the Decalogue, (both of
Gods Writing and Workman-ship, Exodus 31. 18. and 32. 16.) The Heavenly Pattern
of the Tabernacle with all the Ordinances concerning Legal Worship, to them:
They grew Impatient of Moses delay: The Devil (no doubt) did suggest to the
Worser sort, That he was torn of Wild Beasts, and to the Better sort, That (as
Enoch was) he was Translated into Heaven, as Josephus says: Or, That he had
deserted his Charge and mocked them, as some, Or that he was Ashamed to Return,
because he could not make good his Promise of Conducting them into the Land of
Promise, as others say: Hereupon this Stiff-necked People (so called, Exodus
32.9.) will stay no longer; Joshuah could wait for Moses (all alone all the
time) on the outside of the Cloud, Exodus 24. 13. and 33. 17. yet the People
could not (with Company) in their Tents. Thus Deluded by the Devil, would have
a Worship of their own, such as they had Retail'd in their trading with the
Merchants of Egypt, Act. 7. 39. 40. Though they wanted Moses, yet they wanted
not the Pillar, Deuteronomy. 9. 15. But because this Pillar of Glory stood still
during Moses Absence, they would have a stirring God to lead them at their will
when and whither they pleased: Hence they say, [Vp, make us Gods, to go before
us:] Oh! How had the Devil Deluded them (even to a Stupefaction) to make them
prefer a Stirring Calf (that could not stir, but as they stirred it, having
Feet, but walked not, etc. Psalm. 115. 4. 5, 6, 7, 8.) before a Standing-Pillar,
that did Support their Union and Communion with God, Yea, a Pillar of Glory,
which had Divided the Red Sea, and Destroyed both Egypt and Amalek for them;
And Oh how had Satan Intoxicated Israel so, as to make them See double for
though they had but one Calf, yet they cry, [These be thy Gods which brought
thee out of Egypt, v. 4.] even to this single as well as senceless Idol. No
doubt but the Grand Plotter had now a fair Prospect of his present project, and
could not but think, he might win the Game. And so indeed he bid fair for it,
having gained this Notable Point, inasmuch as Israel had twice promised To do
all that God had Commanded, Exodus 19. 8. and 24. 7. Yet here he makes them to
break the very 1st of the Ten, [in having other Gods,] and the 2d also, [in
Making and Worshipping a Calf-Idol,] as if he had designed to drive them
thorough gradually in the Breach of all the Ten, one after another: However he
had already drawn them so far out of Gods Favor, as to make them Naked, Exodus
32. 25. to wit, Destitute of Divine Protection, (which had hitherto been their
Armor of Proof) and Exposed to be devoured of their Adversaries, Genesis 3. 10.
Rev. 3. 18. and 16. 15. God bids Moses Get thee down, (before the 40 Days were
Expired) for thy People have Corrupted themselves, v. 7. God will own them no
longer, they are thine, rather than mine, seeing they have turned aside so
quickly (when thy back was but newly turned of them) let me alone that I may
destroy them, v. 10. Now the Devils Game was at the Fairest, yet he wins not,
but los^th it: God says to Moses, Go down quickly, Deuteronomy. 9. 12. but he
returned not till he had first Prayed, and also had Prevailed, Ezekiel. 32. 11,
12, 13, 14. God (as it were) bespeaks his own Freedom, v. 10. Moses by the
great power of his Prayer does (after a sort) tie Gods Hands from Punishing
this Rebellious People; as if Moses's Devotion had been stronger than Gods
Indignation, not by the prevailing of Humane Power above Divine Omnipotence,
but by Condescending of Divine Grace to Humane Prayer; especially this of
Moses, who preferred Gods Glory before his own Preferment, which God offered
him, v. 10. God grants a present Reprieve from Utter Destruction, yet not a
Liberate from future Plagues, v. 35. Upon New Provocation God Reckons for the
New and the Old: There is (says the Rabbys) an Ounce of this Calf in all the
Plagues upon them to this day: Though Satan had got by this Calf, the Breaking
of the Two Tables, (hewn out of the Saphir of the Throne of God, Exodus 24. 10.
as the Thargum says) by his Transporting Moses to do unadvisedly with his
hands, v. 19. (as well as to Speak Unadvisedly with his Lips, Psa. 106. 33.)
Judging Israel unworthy of such a Jewel now Forfeited: They had broke the Two
first of the Ten, and for this, he breaks them all at once, because Gods Bride
had played the Whore at the Threshold of the Marriage-Bed-Chamber, so had lost
her Title to her Dowry and Jewels, neither the Tables to be Restored, nor
Tabernacle to be Erected, nor the Creating Angel (Christ) Exodus 23. 20, 21. to
go along with them, but they shall be turned over to a Created Angel, Exodus 33.
23. This Degraded their Dignity. Notwithstanding all this, the Crasty Devil
carries it not, but his Plot is Laughed to nothing, for Moses broke the Golden
Calf, as well as the Two Rich Jewel-Tables, Executed Divine Justice upon the
Chief in the Transgression, (about 3000 of the Ringleaders) Exodus 32. 20, 27,
28. Then Returned he up again unto God (as Angry as he was) to Intercede for
those Calvish-Idolaters the 2d. time, v. 30. and (though Returned back the same
day with a sad Answer, whereupon Israel is Humbled, Exodus 33. 3, 4.) The
Mourners (as good cause they had to mourn for the loss of Gods presence, Hos.
9. 12.) looked after Moses, Exodus 33.7, 8. to see what access to God, and what
Success from God he could Obtain; by this Address he gains some Hope of
Reconciliation, then the 3d. time he goes up again, v. 14, 17. and Fasts other
40 Days, and by hard tugging in Prayer and Fasting, he at last prevails in the
whole: (This kind of Devils (the Devil of Idolatry) would not be Cast out but
by Fasting and Prayer;) Then comes he down with Glad Tidings, That all is well
betwixt God and Israel: The Cloudy Pillar Returns, the Two Tables are Restored,
and a Commission given to Build a Tabernacle; Israel sets about it, and not
only does, but over-does in their Offerings, Exodus 36. 7. (like a Stumbling
Horse, gains Ground by his Stumbling,) The Tabernacle is Finished, and Filled
with Gods Glory, Exodus 40. Thus the Devil is Disappointed, and his Design is
Defeated, and the Church in the Wilderness [al Despito de grand Diabolo,]
Marches forward toward the Land of Promise.

The Seventh Plot against the Church, in the Wilderness: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. VII.
THe Devil has not yet done with the Church, but makes one Proof more of
another Plot from Intrinsic Engines, to wit, in the Conspiracy of Korah, Numb.
16. Satan had given the Church many Disturbances betwixt this Plot or
Conspiracy, and that about the Golden Calf: The People were often making
Tumults against Moses, and as often did Moses (in the Wisdom and Power of God,)
quiet these Tumults. One of the worst of them was that, wherein Aaron and
Miriam did murmur against Moses upon the account of Zipporah, either because
she, being not of the Stock of Israel, hindered him from Circumcising his Son,
Exodus 4. 24. or because he was too much with God, and too little with his Wife,
as the Rabbis say: Or rather, because Miriam (according to the signification
of her Name) would be Exalted, (as she was a Prophetess, Micah 6. 5. Exodus 15.
20.) and could not brook that Zipporah should take too much Honor upon her
self, (because of her Honorable Husband) and give too little to her: As Satan
prevailed first with Eve, then by her with Adam; So here first with Miriam,
then by her with Aaron; so sets a Sister and a Brother against Moses, he loves
to Fish in Troubled Waters, no Relation or Qualification (either of Honor or
Meekness) can secure a Man from Offensive exceptions. Their Murmuring against
meek Moses, causes the Cloud of Glory to depart, as the sin of the golden Calf
had done before, wherein Aaron had a Hand in the Sin also: Moses is Vindicated
by God himself, Numb. 12. 4. He that had been a Lion in Gods Cause, (in
breaking the Calf to Powder) was a Lamb in his own: and the less he speaks for
himself, the more God speaks for him. God Hears and Stirs, Yea, and Strikes
Miriam with Leprosy, because Chief in the crime, and (possibly) more
passionate and peremptory in her Reports and Reproaches: Not Aaron, because he
was the Judge of Leprosy, and so could not be tainted with it, as some say;
but rather, because he met God by Repentance, v. 10. So disarmed Gods
Indignation, and Redeemed his own sorrow, Yea, and Miriam was humbled too,
Deuteronomy. 24. 9. The People staying and Mourning for her, (to go before them, Micha
6. 5.) till she was Recovered. And another Disturbance (after this Halt) was,
They Journeyed to Kadesh-barnea, Numb. 13. 3, 26. not far from the South-point
of the Land of Promise, Deuteronomy. 1. 2, 19. 20. From hence they sent the Spys,
which (no doubt, but) the Devil of Unbelief put them upon, seeing God had
before Spyed out the Land for them, Ezekiel. 20. 6. and Searched it out, Deuteronomy. 1.
33. But this Satisfied them not, Seeing (with them) must be Believing: Those
Spys came to Hebron, Deuteronomy. 1. 22. and Returning with the Fruit of the Land, Ten
(against Two, great odds) prove the Devils Instruments, (who had prompted them
to this Practice) and Raised an hard Report upon the Glory of all Lands, Ezekiel.
20.6. Numb. 13. 32. Hereupon Israel falls upon Mistakes: As 1st. That the Lord
Hated them, Deuteronomy. 1.27. whereas never was Child more Charily carried by a
Tender Father, (as his own Bowels,) and never was Prince served in more State,
than they had been all along, yet they thus Desperately Belyed the Lord. 2dly.
They make themselves a Captain to Return to Egypt, Neh. 9. 16, 17. as if that
were better for them, (which could no way be.) Thus they cast the Helve
(according to the Proverb) after the Hatchet, and like Children because they
might not have what they would, grew Sullain, and would have nothing: This
highly pleased the Devil, and the rather, because it mightily Displeased the
Lord, insomuch as he Swore, They should wander in a Circle until they were worn
out, and spend about 38 y. in Journeying from that place (of their Sin)
Kadish-Barnea, to the self-same place Kadish-Barnea again, Numb. 33. 18. and
37. which is called Richmah here, but before, Paran, and Kadesh, Numb. 13. 3,
26. and Deuteronomy. 1. 19. Kadish-Barnea, as the Lord was there Sanctified (Hebr.
Kadesh,) upon the People, and made them Wandering Sons, as [Barnea] signifies,
Numb. 14. 32. Yea, and there Man's Life was shortened, from Hundreds of Years
they had Lived, to 70 or 80 Y. (as Moses (then making the 90 Psalm) shows) to
wear them out the sooner. And thus God was a Moth to them (to wear them [Sensim
sine Sensu] insensibly away, though he would not be as a Lion to them to Devour
them at once, and to Extirpate them utterly, Hos. 5. 12, 14. because he had
Pardoned them at Moses Prayer, Numb. 14.20. And therefore does he Preserve
their Children both to Propagate the Church, and to Possess the Land: However,
this sad Doom, (both in cutting their Lives shorter, and in causing them to
Wander so as to make that way, which in it self was but 11 days Journey, Deuteronomy.
1. 2. to be above Three times 11 years Journey long) Exposed them for the Devil
of Discontent to possess: Hence arose this grand Plot, Korah's Conspiracy, as
well as all their other Murmuring afterward. Korah was the Devils Chief
Instrument in this 3d. and Grand Disturbance, or Internal Impediment, in the
Church's Motion toward Canaan, he was the Principal Rebel: Hence this Plot is
called Korah's conspiracy, and it is Korah's Congregation or Company, Numb. 16.
5, 16, 22. and 26. 9. and 27. 3. And the Gainsaying of Korah, Jude v. 11. And
to make his Conspiracy the stronger, draws in Dathan and Abiram to be his
Accomplices, Yea, and 250 Princes of the Assembly, Numb. 16. 2. and not only so,
but even all the Congregation, v. 19. Who were all too ready to promote this
Plot, he having persuaded them that God also would promote and Prosper it, v.
41. Thus one Scabb'd Sheep infected the whole Flock; and as Juvenal says,
Vuaque Corrupta livorem ducitabab Vua: Hence the Psalmist Imputes this
Conspiracy to all Israel, [They Envyed Moses also, and Aaron the Saint of the
Lord, Psa. 106. 16.] Inasmuch as the People did neither Desire to Punish those
Conspirators, nor Entered their protest against them, they are all looked on as
a Rabble of Rebels against God and his Servants, and accused as Guilty of the
Sin: (Thus Satan's sour Leaven almost Leavened the whole Lump:) And though Aaron
was not Innocent in the Two former Internal Impediments, being an Accessory in
them both, yet in this he keeps Clean, and is called a Saint of (...) Lord,
being one of the main Marks those Rebels Shot at, for Korah (his Cousin-German,
Exodus 6. 18.) of the Tribe of Levi, Aspired to have the Priesthood from Aaron,
v. 11. and being enraged that Elizaphan Son of the 4th. Family, should be
preferred before himself of the 2d. Family, Numb. 3. 30, and he Incenses Dathan
and Abiram (who were his next Neighbors in the Camp, so soonest seduced) to
claim the Principality from Moses, as being of Reuben the Firstborn: It Is
against Moses, and against Aaron, Numb. 16. 3, 11. against Magistracy, and
against Ministry, a Desperate and Dangerous Conspiracy, 1st. In Slaunderlng the
Governors, that they took too much State, too much Power, too much Honor, and
too much Holiness upon them, whereas they took none of these upon them, but
what the Lord God had given them, Hebr. 3. 3. and 5. 4. Thus these Ringleaders
of the Rebellion most Presumptuously prescribe an Amendment of Gods Word and
Work, and would have his Divine Institutions to truckle unto their Humane
Humors, and fond Inventions. 2dly. In Flattering the Governed, As if the
People were Holy, and might make their immediate approaches to God both with
their Incense and Offerings. All this is as false as the former, Moses was
Ambitious, (say they,) It Is as true as Israel was Holy, much alike: had Moses
been so, while God lifted him up over Israel, he had never fallen at their Feet,
as v. 1. And had Israel been Holy, (who had now scarcely wiped their Mouths of
the late Transgression) assuredly there had never been so much Idolatry,
Infidelity, and Mutiny amongst them: What could make them Wicked, if all these
would Denominate them Holy?

No doubt but the Devil had a fair prospect of his Plot and Design, when he had
raised up a Grand Ringleader of Rebellion, and not only so, but when this One
Man, v. 22. the Great Wheel (the Primus Motor, or Primum Mobile,) thereof, had
(by his Instigation) Twisted to himself such Two considerable Interests of 250
Princes, and of so many People, yet the Great God (who is higher then the
Highest, Eccles. 5. 8.) Laughs all this to Nothing; for Moses well tells them,
v. 11. That this their Rising was against the Lord, as the Lord told Saul
after, Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou me? Act. 9. 4. Who ever hardened
himself aegainst God, and prospered? Job 9. 4. Nor they then, for (1st.) Moses
Retorts upon those Rebels the same they had falsely reflected upon him and
Aaron, v. 7. Ye take too much upon you, ye Sons of Levi: (as does Elias upon
Ahab, 1 Kin. 18. 17, 18.) and (to Hide pride from them, Job 33. 17.) he minds
them, not to look up at those few Priests that were above them, so much as look
down at the many Myriads of People that were below them. Their
Thankful-Contentedness with their Advancement (as Levites) above all the
People, should have kept them from all Repining Discontentedness at the few
Priests that were above them: But those sturdy Rebels were Uncounsellable,
Incorrigible, and their Envy and Ambition are restless and Unsatisfiable: Hence
they say, We will not come up, v. 12. Preferring the Land of Egypt (their
House of Bondage, and their Iron Furnace, Deuteronomy. 4.20.) most Ungratefully and
Maliciously, before that of Gods most Gracious Promise, v. 13.14. Hereupon
(2d.) Moses referrs this Controversy betwixt the Church Malignant and the True
Church Militant to a Divine Decision, 1st in Praying, that God would not
respect their Offering, v. 15. and thereby maintain his Honest Cause and Holy
Calling against those Invaders thereof; they had forgot Gods Judgments upon
Nadab and Abihu, Levit. 10. 1. which should have made their Hands Tremble,
insomuch as Handling strange Incense and Censors, which they had ready provided
when first they Combined to Usurp the Priests Office, and now stood stouting it
out in the very Face of God; but he had no Respect to their Offering, when he
came to make known who were his, as v. 5. Though he Answered by Fire from
Heaven, it was to Burn themselves, but not their Sacrifice. 2dly. In Predicting
Gods Miraculous Judgment upon those Rebels, v. 28. 29, 30. wherein Moses
Engages the Truth and Honor of his Cause upon a Miracle Immediately coming
to pass: At last (3dly.) both the Plot and all the Plotters Perished, Jude v.
11. Some one way, and some another, (as the Word [(...)] signifies) none of
them dying a common Death, God Created Two New Destructions for them: Some were
Swallowed up of the Earth, so Buried Quick, (the worst of Deaths) because their
Mouths had been open Sepulchers to swallow up Gods Servants, and Others were
Burnt to Death with Fire from Heaven, having sinned by Fire in their Censors
and Incense. As for Korah (the Captain of the Conspiracy, and the Ringleader
of the Rebellion, the main Wheel of this Malicious Mutiny) the Scripture seems
to doom him to a double Death, (as his Sin was [(...)] a Twice-dip'd Scarlet
Sin, and of a double dye: As if he were not only Buried Quick, (in that Dismal
and Universal Grave) but also Burned with those that Offered strange Incense,
as if the Mouth of the Earth below him, and Fire from Heaven above him had both
Conspired together to Stigmatize and Brand that Arch-Rebel who had been the
Original of all.

For 1st. That he was Swallowed up of the Earth, Appears, (1.) Inasmuch as the
People were bidden to Separate from the Tents of Korah, as well as of Dathan
and Abiram, Numb. 16. 24. and accordingly they did so, v. 27. (2.) The Words,
[v. 30. If the Lord Create a New Thing, and the Earth open her mouth and
Swallow Them up] seems to referr unto all the Three: (3.) The Earth did Swallow
up all the Men that appertains unto Korah, v. 32. And (4.) it is Expressly
said, That the Earth did Devour Korah himself, Numb. 26. 10.

2dly, That he was burned by Fire from Heaven, Inasmuch as Korah being a
Levite. 1. was one of those that offered such Incense as God Respected not. 2.
Korah joining with them in the same Sin, was also joined with them in the same
Punishment: They all sinned together by Fire, and they were all Punished
together by Fire, and that Immediately after their burning Incense. 3. Those
that were thus burnt are called Korah and his Company, ver. 40. 4. Korah's
Censer was among those Censers which were to be Plates for the Altar as a
Caveat to succeeding Ages, That none should Invade the Priesthood as Korah and
his Company had done, Numb. 16. 6, 17, 38, 39, 40. However he was Burned in
Hell, both he and his whole Tribe of Traitors; Thus the Sheol, v. 30. (taken
either strictly or largely, for Hell or Grave) Swallowed up both this Plot and
all the Plotters; Yea, and the Wise God here beats Satan, and batters his
Kingdom with his own Weapon, and strikes him thorough with Arrows out of his
own Quiver; in his Reserving Korah's Children alive: [The Sons of Korah Dyed
not, Numb. 26. 11.] who (some say) were born up (Pendulous) in the Air by
Divine Power, (while the Earth had Swallowed up their Wicked Father) being
either Innocent of their Fathers Sin, or Penitent at Moses Admonition, Numb.
16.5. And those became as eminently Serviceable, as their Father had been
notoriously Destructive to the Church. Of them descended Samuel, 1 Chro. 6. 33,
34. (with 1 Samuel 1. 20.) They were singers in the House of the Lord, v. 31. and
many Psalms have them in their Titles, as Psalm 42, 44, 45, etc. Thus God can
gather Grapes from Thorns, and Figgs from Thistles: And (as one says) can make
White Paper even of Dunghill Rags: An Holy Offspring Extracted out of an
Unholy Root: Thus Satan loses Ground by this Plot, and the Church winns;
Aaron's Priesthood (so opposed) is Confirmed by a Miracle, Aaron's Rod (alone)
Budded, Numb. 17. And the Church marches on toward Canaan.

The Eighth Plot against the CHURCH: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. VIII.
THe 8th. Plot is as a Rope of the Devils making, wherewith he Designs to draw
back the Church not only from Canaan, (when they were come to the very
South-point of it, Numb. 21. 1.) but also farther off into the Wilderness, yea
(if possible) into Egypt again: And in Order hereunto, [whereas the Scripture
says, A 3-fold Cord is not easily broken, Eccl. 4. 12.] To make it stronger,
Satan Twists his Rope (here) of 4 Cords to make it a 4-fold one, that it might
make a stronger Hale without breaking: to wit, 2 Internal Cords, or 2
Murmurings within the Camp: and 2 External Cords, or 2 Assaults and Onsetts
upon the Camp by King Arad and by King Sihon: yet God broke this 4-fold Cord
more easily than Samson did his, when Philistims were upon him, Judge. 15. 14.
and 16.12.

As 1st. Internally: And 1st. A Murmuring within the Camp for Water at Meribah,
Numb. 20. 2. They wanted Water the first Year of their coming into the
Wilderness, and now the like want befalls them in this 40th. Year of their
Wilderness-Wandring: In the 1st. Year-want, God Tried the Fathers, Exodus 17. 1,
2. etc. and God gave them Water out of the Rock Horeb, v. 6. which followed
them all along, till they came near Canaan, 1 Cor. 10. 4. In this last
Year-want God tried the Children, and they Murmur like their Fathers, and
[Patrizando] do want Patience as well as Water: The former at Rephidim, Exodus
17. and this at Kadesh do Harmonize in many Particulars; save that Satan was
more successful in this Plot than in that, for here he Transports meek Moses
(1.) to an Immoderate Anger, to Speak unadvisedly with his Lips, Psalm. 106. 32.
(2.) To a Speaking (passionately) to the People, when he should have spoken
(believingly) to the Rock, v. 8. (3.) To his Smiting it, and that Twice as in a
pang of Passion, when he should have only Spoken to it with the Rod in his
Hand stretched toward it, v. 10. It Is true, while Moses Spoke to those Rebels,
he spoke to a Rock, even to their rocky hearts. Here Moses is at a stand, and
his Faith staggers, (as knowing a Flinty rock was more likely to have Fire
fetched out of it than Water, by striking: He is not bidden Here to smite the
Rock, as Elsewhere, Exodus 17. 6. And because he did it Unbidden, (not believing
in the Lord, nor Sanctifying him before the People, v. 12.) both he and Aaron
his Brother (for the same fault) were Excluded Canaan; but Satan could not get
either of them Excluded Heaven. However, God pardons their Murmurings, (the
Belly has no Ears) and satisfies their Thirst by a Miracle: Waters came out
abundantly by a Work of Omnipotency, v. 11. and so the Church is Preserved.

2dly. A Murmuring within the Camp at the Tediousness of the way in compassing
the Land of Edom, when that Unkind Cousin would not suffer Israel to pass
thorough his Land, Numb. 20. 14, 17, 18. and 21. 4. which had been the far
nearest way: This turning about Mount-Seir, turns them again into their Old
(Paroxysms, or) Fits of Murmuring against God, (that forbad them the way
thorough Seir or Edom, Deuteronomy. 2. 5.) and of Loathing Manna, as their Fathers had
done, Numb. 11. 5, 6. as if it were not so Solid and Substantial as that Food
they had in Egypt; Though it maintained the Body in an equal Temperature of
Strength and Vigorous Health (without offending the Organs, or oppressing with
Fullness) for many Years, as it did Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. and Caleb, Josh. 14.
11. For this Contempt God sent [Seraphim Nehashim] Fiery Serpents to Sting
them, that those Ungrateful ones (who had causelessly Cried) might now have some
Cause to cry. It Is a Wonder, that seeing the Wilderness (through which they
went) did Abound with those and other Serpents, Deuteronomy. 8. 15. That the Old
Serpent the Devil) had not (before this) Molested the Church with these Biteing
and killing-Serpents, but the Great God (who was their Conduct and Covering)
overruled the Devil or Serpent, and kept all those Serpents from hurting his
People, till now (by their Sin) he gave them a Commission, as Amos 9. 3. I will
command the Serpent, and he shall bite thee: It Is the Church's Mercy that the
Serpent cannot Hurt nor Destroy upon Gods Holy Mountain, but when God permits,
Isa. 65. 25. And though God (here for their Sin) does permit this grievous
Malady, yet Provides he a most gracious Remedy at the Prayers of his people, v.
7, 8. to wit, The Brazen-Serpent upon a Pole (a Figure of Christ, Joh. 3. 14,
15.) to which whoever looks (though with a weak Eye) are healed, Isa. 17. 7. and
45. 23. and Joh. 12. 32.

So 2dly. Externally. (1.) Satan stirred up the Canaanites to Oppose this
Wilderness-Church in her Passage to Canaan: now when they were come so nigh to
it, even to the South-point of the Land, Numb. 21. 1. and 33. 40. These under
King Arad fought against Israel, and took some of them Prisoners. Undoubtedly
those Canaanites had heard of the overthrow which was given to Israel 38 Y.
before this, when they presumptiously went up against an Express Prohibition,
Numb. 14.41, 44, 45. and of the Hand of God against them in Detaining them so
long in the Wilderness: Hereby the Devil hardened and encouraged them to
Encounter Israel, coming so near them again, which was done accordingly with
some Success, yet from differing Thoughts of God and the Devil; for 1st the
Devil did this to discourage Israel, that as their Fathers through Unbelief
entered not into the Promised Land, but their Carcasses fell in the Wilderness,
Deuteronomy. 1. 27, 32, 35. Hebr. 3. 11, 18. So their Children also might be deprived:
(2.) but God Suffered this Success for a Chastizement of their Sins, and for a
Trial of their Faith, and that his People might know, that they should not
Conquer the Land by their own Strength, or for their own Merit, Psalm. 44. 3.
Deuteronomy. 9.4. This Success of the Canaanites prevailing and taking some Prisoners,
gave Satan a fair Prospect of his Plot and Project; yet behold how the Lord
baffles him, and Laughs it to Nothing, for it was only some Prisoners, not
all: the Church (as the Old Romans) may lose a Battle, but never a War: This
Loss was so Sanctified, as made them take the right way to prevail with God,
(as Jacob the Father of Vows had found it, Genesis 28. 20.) Upon this Occasion
Israel (Jacob's Offspring) Vowed a Vow, Numb. 21. 2. Invocating Gods
Assistance, and promising a Devotement of their Conquest to God: The Lord
accepts of this Religious Vow or Promise, performs his Part of Helping them to
a Victory, v. 3. King Arad (Satan's Instrument) being Drunk with his former
Success, comes again into the Field like Thunder and Lightning, but goes out
like Smoke, and a Snuff; as it is said of the French, [Prior Impetus est plus
quam Virorum posterior minus quam Foeminarum,] More than a Man at first, less
than a Woman at last. God Delivered him into Isreal's hands, and his Cities they
Destroyed, which they Devoted to God, as the first Fruits of the Land of
Promise; And that they might keep their Vow the better to the end of their
Conquests, the place of this first Victory was called Hormah, to wit,
Devotement, for a Standing Memorial both of Gods Mercy, and Isreal's Duty, in
after Ages, v. 3. And when the Devil saw that he had lost this Game, and that
Isreal's Sighing for their first Defeat, was Turned into Singing for their last
Victory, (as well as for their Deliverance from the fiery Serpents, and for
their Sanedrims (or 70 Elders) causing Wells to spring up in the Dry Wilderness
by the stroke of their Staves, as Moses had done with the stroke of his Rod, v.
8. 9, 17.) This Enraged him again (2.) to Stir up Sihon King of the Amorites
against Israel, v. 21.23. Deuteronomy. 2. 30. Judge. 11. 20. But behold the Issue,
Sihon comes forth at the Devils Instigation, and it was to fetch his own
Destruction, (as King Arad and others had done) Gods Judgments need not go to
find Wicked Men, they do come out to meet it the better half way: Jehovah (the
God of Israel) Smote him and his Accomplices, Numb. 21.24. Deuteronomy. 2.33. Though
their Height was like the height of Cedars, and they as strong as Oaks, Amos 2.
9. Psalm. 135. 10, 11. with 136. 17, 18, 19. The Glory of this Victory in
Defeating the Devil and his Imps, is Attributed to the God of Israel: And mark
a Mavelous good Providence toward Israel; who was forbidden of God to meddle
with Moabs Land, Deuteronomy. 2. 9. Yet Sihon had taken this part from Moab, Numb.
21.26. God takes it from him, (making him a Proverb, or Byword, v. 27. Deuteronomy.
28. 17.) and Gives it to Israel: Thus they Lost not, but Gained by it herein.

The Ninth Plot against the CHURCH: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. IX.
BUt the Sorest Thrust, and most Fiery Dart of the Devil against this
Wilderness-Church, was that of the Moabites, (with their Assistants the
Midianites,) which was [Vltimus Diaboli Crepitus] the last Gunshot of the
Wicked one against Israel, (as to External or Outward Engines,) before they
Entered Canaan, yet proved it (by the Overruling Providence of God) but the
Shot of a Pot-Gun, a Dintless Dart; and an Unsuccessful Thrust in the Issue: No
Weapon that is formed against the Church shall prosper, Isai. 54. 17. This
Divine Promise did blunt the Point, and Spoiled the Purpose of all both Humane
or Diabolical Projects; Yea, of this last, which was the worst of all, [Morsus
Morientum sunt Maxim Mortiferi.] The last Bite of Dying Beasts are most
Deadly, no less was this last of the Serpent to Interrupt the Church in her
Passage out of the Wilderness to Canaan.

Take a Particular View of Two Things, 1st. of the Church's Danger, and 2dly.
Of the Church's Deliverance. God Requires a Due Commemoration hereof, Micah 6.
5. where he says, Oh my People, Remember now what Balak King of Moab
Consulted, and what Balaam the Son of Beor Answered from Shittim unto Gilgal,
that ye may know the Righteousness of the Lord: The Compellation [Oh my
People,] does plainly Demonstrate, That the sinfulness of Gods People does not
Destroy Gods Claim to, and his Interest in them. They are his by Creation, by
Redemption, and by the Covenant of Grace: It Is True, by the Old Covenant God
might Write Lo-Ammi, and Lo-Ruhamah upon his Sinful Church, but the Free Grace
of this New Covenant Rides Triumphingly over all the Incapacities and
Unworthinesses of his People; and when they are not (in themselves) Worthy, yet
their Gracious God will Account them Worthy, Luke 21.36. when he cannot own
them (as his Jewels,) Mal. 3. 17. for their sakes, yet then will he own them
for his own sake, Ezekiel. 36. 22, 32. No Love like Gods love, that Loves thus
Freely, Hos. 14. 4. Though all the World disclaim them, yet must God lay his
Claim to them, Oh my People; How can he Disclaim them: So he tells us in his 4.
such Hows as are not to be paralleled in the whole Book of God, Hos. 11.8. How
shall I give thee up Ephraim, etc. I cannot find in my heart to do it, What
will the Egyptians say, Exodus 32. 12. And, what will become of my Great Name?
Josh. 7. 9. The very Banks of Blasphemy will be broken down, when God cannot
behold Innocence in his people, (as before) yet will he prevent the Insolency
of their Enemies, Deuteronomy. 32. 27. Psalm. 140. 8.

The Commemoration Holds forth Three Things; 1st. The Plot or Danger, as the
Church in the Wilderness had a Balak and a Balaam against her: So the Church
evermore in her Wilderness-State has Force and Fraud, Power and Policy against
her. 2. The Issue and Deliverance, God Delivered the Church out of their Hands,
Josh. 24. 10. and brought her from Shittim (the place of their Sin of
Baal-Peor) to Gilgal, where he Renewed his Covenant. 3. The End, to Proclaim
Gods Praise.

The other Plots before this was a Complication of lesser Plots, but this last
External, is a Plot of Plots: the Devil Employing his Grandest Engines at this
Onsett against the Church. As 1st. Balak Hires Balaam to come and secretly
Curse them, Numb. 22. 4. 2. He Draws out all his Armies in Battel-Array against
them to Suppress them by Open Power, Numb. 22. 5. Josh. 24. 9. as soon as
Balaam had Cursed them. 3. When this would not do, than by Wiles and Private
Policy, according to the Counsel of Balaam, he Seduces them to Fornication and
Idolatry, Numb. 25. 1, 2, 3. In the Management of this last and worst Plot,
Observe Three things, 1. The Ground or Occasion. 2. The Manner. 3. The Matter
thereof. 1. The Ground, it was indeed a groundless quarrel, for Moses fretted
against Israel, to see them upon their Plains, just ready to set foot upon the
Land of Promise, Numb. 22. 3. though Moab was (Allied to Israel) eased by them
of a Troublesome Incroaching Neighbor, (Sihon King of the Amorites, that had
taken some part of their Land from them, Numb. 21. 26.) and (3) Assured by
Israel that they would not meddle with them, or molest them, because they were
of the Posterity of Lot, Deuteronomy. 2. 9. So it was a Causeless Quarrel, as Satan
moved God against Job without Cause, Job 2. 3. So they were Acted and Agitated
by the Devil without cause on Isreal's part: they being of a Differing Religion,
were carried on with Satanical malice, and sought their Ruin. Thus Rome (at
this Day) seeks the ruin of those of the Reformed Religion, and Devises
Deceitful matters against them that are Quiet in the Land, Psalm. 35. 20. Their
Quarrel is Causeless. 2ly. The Manner, Threefold. (1.) Secret and Undermining,
Moab sent no open Desiance by sound of Drum or Trumpet, it was close as the
Plot of Rome against us at this Day. (2.) It was Earnest, Importunate and
Irreconcilable, for Balak was a restless Adversary, and would not give over,
till some Mischief were done, as Rome does at this Day. (3.) Sumptuous or
Costly, Balak spares no Cost, either in proffering Honors, or in Building of
Altars and offering Sacrifices: Paul Persecuted out of Ignorance, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
so was easily Checked, Act. 9. 4. but Balak out of Malice, as Rome does, and
spares no cost in her Malice. 3ly. The Matter of the Plot. (1) Balak Hires
Balaam to Curse Israel, Numb. 22. 6. Balak was a politic and potent Prince,
not more Valiant than Vigilant, Ingeniose Nequam, Wittily Wicked; he calls for
Balaam (the Devils Spelman) to Curse Israel. This Balaam (his Instrument) is
called a Prophet, 2 Pet. 2. 16. there is frequent mention of his Receiving
Messages and Answers from the Lord, Numb. 22. 8, 13, 18. and 24. 17. it is said,
God put a Word into Balaam's Mouth, Numb. 23. 5. a Phrase never used concerning
the Inspiring of any of the Holy Prophets, which Word did but pass through him
as a Trunk through which a Man speaks, his Heart was not Holily Affected with
what his Tongue uttered; He did not Eat his Words as Jeremy did, Jer. 15. 16.
Nor did he Believe what he had spoken, as David did, Psalm. 106. 10. And after
him Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 13. And as he was called Prophet, so a Sooth-sayer, Josh.
13. 22. As all his Altars, Sacrifices and Consultations with the Lord were by
the Wicked Art of Enchantments, or Observing of Fortunes, such as the Diviners
and Prophets of the Heathen used, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 14. Numb. 24. 1. He went not as
at other times to seek for Enchantments, as being Resolved to curse Israel
however and without Gods leave, he was fully bent to do it, and nothing shall
Hinder him. Thus Satan makes Use of the meetest Means to Accomplish his own
Develish Ends, and makes Balaam to do more Mischief to the Church by his
Counsel, than Balak could do by his Courage: He laid a Stumbling Block before
Israel, Rev. 2. 14. No doubt but this Wicked Person had excellent Gifts; yet as
he was Famous for Prophecy, so he was Infamous for Profaneness. And oh what
pernicious Counsel was this of Balak's Consulting with Balaam to have Israel
Cursed, and that, from Heaven too, to wit, by the Mouth of a Prophet, this was
more Dangerous than to Fight against them with all his Forces: And Balaam was
as willing to Curse them, as Balak would have had him, for the word [(...)]
Jude 11. Imports it. He powered out his Malice (like Water in a Spout) after an
Impetuous and Violent manner, he Ran greedily from Altar to Altar, gaping after
the Gain Promised, If but his Cursing-Cursed-Work were persorm'd, he was like a
swift swelling Torrent that breaks down all its Banks and Bounds which are made
to keep it in. Thus Balaam's March to Mar the Church was as furious as Jehu's,
so that, neither Gods Prohibition before his Journey, nor the crushing of his
Foot, the Speaking of his Ass, the drawn Sword of the Angel in his Journey, nor
the Disappointment of all his Endeavors by his Enchantments afterward, could
Hinder him from pursuing his Cursed-Cursing Project: yet God made all Fruitless
and frustrate, neither had Balak his Will, nor Balaam his Wages: God overrules
the Devil and his Spelman, Turns the Desired Curse into a Devout Blessing:
gladly would Balaam have Cursed Israel, but he cannot wagg his wicked Tongue
without Gods leave, nor Balak with his Men of might could find their Hands
without Divine Permission, Psalm. 76. 5. Yea, Balaams Heart Curses against his
Tongue, and his Tongue Blesses against his Heart.

Let us turn Aside a little here (with Moses, Exodus 3. 2.) and Wonder a while
that this Bush should be ever Burning, yet never Consumed. Oh let us Admire the
Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God toward his Church, both in that Ancient and
in this present Wilderness-State, as to those Pregnant Parallels following.

The 1st. Parallel is, As the Church then had a Balaam to Curse her, and a
Balak to hire him thereunto; Even so it is now, Gal. 4. 29. There is no new
thing under the Sun, etc. Eccl. 1. 9. The present Church of the Reformed
Religion, has the Great Balaam of Rome to Curse her with Bell, Book and Candle
(as the Phrase is) he is The Devils Spellman, [Primo genitus Diaboli] The Gull
and Cheat of the World, to whom the Balaks or Kings (that have given their
Power to that Beast, Revel. 17. 13.) says, Whom thou blesses shall be blessed,
and whom thou curses shall be cursed, Number. 22. 6. Whereas the Power given to
Man, for Blessing or Cursing others, is not Despotical or Magisterial, but
only Ministerial.

The 2d. Parallel, As Balaam is called a Prophet, 2 Pet. 2. 16. yet a Mad One,
yea, a Sooth-sayer, Josh. 13. 22. So the Great Man of Rome is said to sit in
the Temple of God, as a Prophet, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Yet a Sooth-sayer, a Sorcerer,
a Necromancer, a Conjurer: See my Discovery of Antichrist, Page 48. and 59. So
he is the Devils Prophet: and it is very remarkable the Devil has done more
Mischief to the Church of God in his Transforming himself into an Angel of
Light, than ever he could do while he appeared in his own proper Colors, as
the Prince of Darkness, Gog [Tectus] or the Secret Adversary is a greater
Plague to the Church, than Magog [Detectus] or, the open Enemy. The Pope, that
False Prophet, and Christ's pretended Vicegerent, has given more bloody blows
to the Reformed Religion, (in its Power and Purity) than ever the Turk has
done.

The 3d Parallel. As Gain is the great Wheel (or at least the Yellow Unction)
that made Balaam run so greedily after his Design of Cursing Israel, Jude v.
11. So the Balaam of Rome Hews out the Principal Pillars of his Romish-Religion
out of the Quarry of filthy lucre. Gain is not only got from the Living, in
his Pardons, Indulgences, Dispensations, Oblations, Pilgrimages, etc. (He
making a Money-matter of the most Execrable Abominations, as Witchcraft,
Parricide, King-Killing, Incest, Sodomy, Beastiality, etc.) but also from the
Dead, (in his Masses, Diriges, etc.) who leave large Legacies to be Prayed out
of Purgatory, a Toy which he cries not up so much for Truth as for Traffic; as
Mr. Jenkins Excellently shows, upon Jude last part. p. 212. saying, Silver is
in the Sacks Mouth of every Popish-Errour: It Is a Religion wholly Compacted and
Compounded for Gain: It Is altogether a Contrivance to make the Pope 's Kitchen
Smoke, and their Thirst after Gain makes them Thirst after Blood.

The 4th. Parallel, As Balaam Broke through all Difficulties to break Gods
Design of Blessing Israel, (whom he was Bribed to Curse) though (1) a good
Angel stood in his way to stop him, (who was Acted and Agitated by the Devil
that wicked Angel) (2) though his own Ass (that had been long his faithful
Servant) did reproove his Madness, 2 Pet. 2. 16. (3) Though he saw a Sword
drawn before his Eyes, and that in the Hands of an Angel, who was able to Kill
185000 Soldiers (notwithstanding their Armor of Defense) in one Night, Isa.
37. 36* and therefore able to Kill him (a Naked Man) at one blow: Yea, and (4)
though God stood over him with a Cudgel, (as the Angel had done with a Sword)
or Whip all the time he ran from Altar to Altar with his Enchantments and
Diabolical Arts, and would as gladly have Cursed Israel, as ever the Dog would
be at his Carrion, which he yet forbears, not because he Hates it but because
he fears the Whip or Cudgel. So the Grand Impostour of Rome has met with many
Rebukes in his bloody Designs, the Kingdoms that has Couched under him as his
Asses, Genesis 49. 14, 15. and have been over-faithful Servants to him, 1 Chronicles.
4. 23. have (at least some of them) (through Grace) thrown their Mad Rider. And
what Signal and Singular Appearances of Divine Providence has been Evident
against him, Yea and Blessed be the Lord who holds his Whip and Cudgel over
that Balaam at this Day, so that the Dog cannot come at his Carrion, (no better
than Carrion he accounts the Church) whom he would Eat up as Bread, Psalm. 14.
4. Yea, as Flesh, Psalm. 27. 2. Yet when he comes to do so, Oh stand and wonder,
God gives him a knock with his Cudgel, and then he Stumbles and Falls.

The 5th. Parallel, As Balaam (who had been bribed by Balak) goes about to
Bribe even God himself, to keep off the Blows of his Whip and Cudgel, and to
purchase a permission for Cursing Israel. Hence was it, that he cries so often,
Build me here Seven Altars, and Burn on them Seven Bullocks and Seven Rams. The
first whereof was done upon the High places of Baal, Numb. 22. 41. with 23. 1.
a sit place to bribe God in, and to bring him into this Wickedness, who had
forbid him to Curse his People, Numb. 22. 12. Hereupon Balaam (who instead of
disuading Balak from his Wicked purpose, and instead of Consulting with God
about the Building of his Altars) he first builds his Altars to Consult with
God, and then boasts of his Devotion, saying, I have prepared Seven Altars,
etc, Numb. 23.4. as if he would bribe God with his Sacrifices, and now did
merit this Favor to turn his Blessing into a Curse; but it is expressly said,
God would not hear him, notwithstanding all his Flatteries, Deuteronomy. 23. 4, 5.
Josh. 24. 10. God was not so soon taken with the Multitude of Balaam's
Sacrifices, as he had been with a Multitude of Balaam's Treasures and Honors.
So the Balaam of Rome with his many Altars and Sacrifices (though unbloody)
thinks to Merit Gods Favor, Yea, to over-Merit it in his Works of
Supererogation; exceeding the Pharisee, saying, [(...)] Wherein am I behind
hand with God? Matthew. 19. 26. What lack I yet? he can keep the Law, and be
beforehand with God, saying, Coelum Gratis non Accipiam. I scorn to take
Heaven as a Free-Gift, I will either Earn it, or I will never have it: And
another Romish-Pharisee said, Non habeo Domine, quod mihi Ignoscas, I have no
Sin, Lord, for which I need to Beg thy pardon. Thus (with Balaam here) they
make themselves Vessels of Merit, rather than Vessels of Mercy, but they (as
Vessels) shall be filled with their own Merit, or rather Demerit at last, even
with endless wrath as vessels of wrath.

The 6th. Parallel, As Balaam had his Consults, Micah 6. 5. and his Confidence
that by his many Altars and Sacrifices he had merited this Favor to Blast
Israel, whom God had Blessed, yet both were Blasted and Baffled by the God of
Israel, who overrules the Matter so, that Balaam's Answer unto Balak, was 1. a
plain Prohibition, Numb. 23. 8. as God had said to Laban concerning Jacob, [I
Charge thee not to hurt him,] Genesis 31. 34. It must therefore follow, that
Laban's Words were false, when he said, It is in the power of my Hands to hurt
thee, v. 29. For that Power must be given of God, as Christ told Pilate, Joh.
19. 10. 11. Even so had God Charged Balaam not to Curse or Hurt Israel, Numb.
22. 12. and 23. 12. God Speaks for his People in the Hearts and Mouths of their
Enemies, 2dly. Balaam's Answer was an Absolute Inversion, God does not only
put a Spoak into his Wheel to stemm, and to stop him from Cursing his Church,
but he makes him to power out Blessings, when he was Hired to Curse; and thus
the Wrath of Man turns to the Praise of God, Psalm. 76. 10. 3ly. His Answer is
an Unexpected Retortion, all his Intended Curses are Retorted and Returned (1.)
upon Moab that Hired him, (2.) upon himself that was Hired, Numb. 24. 9. Cursed
be every one that Curses thee. They both Designed and Desired to Curse Israel,
and therefore on Gods Account they did it, Josh. 24. 9. Qui, quia non licuit,
non facit, ille facit. Even so the Balaam of Rome has his Consults de propag
and a Fide both at Home and Abroad, and his Confidence in his Multitude of
Masses and Money: but oh! how Wonderfully has God hitherto bound their Hands
to the Peace, and their Tongues to Good Behavior. Their causeless Curses shall
not come, Prove. 26. 2. but are returned on their own Heads: And it is very
Remarkable here (3ly.) that though Balaam cannot Curse Israel, yet he Curses
Amalek their first, and Rome their last Enemy, Numb. 24. 20. and 24. As sure as
that of Amalek is come to pass, so sure shall that of Rome be [Gods Hand is
upon his Throne] to Accomplish both in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. and by him, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Thus [Me Jad Kittim] from the Coasts of Kittim is meant Italy, as
Dan. 11. 33. for there is an Harmony and Congruity betwixt the Two Names,
Latium of Latendo, and Kittim of Katham abscondere, to Hide or Lurk: The
Italians, Latins, (called Ketims or Ketij, as Suidas says,) or Romanists are
Gog (ut Supra) as the Turks are Magog) to wit, Hidden and Lurking Enemies
against the Church, and do (as Balaam had foretold they should) Afflict Heber,
Numb. 24. 24. to wit, the Hebrews, or Israel, (Hebers Posterity) or the Church
of God. Now Christ was the Chiefest of Hebers Race, Luke 3. 23, 35. and was
Killed by Pilate the Roman-Deputy, and since that time, Rome (by Antichrist
Reigning there) has been Killing Christ in his Members ever since: But shall
he Kill for ever? Oh no, for God makes Balaam (himself) to Denounce his Doom
and Downfall: [He also shall Perish for ever, Numb. 24. 24.] Or shall go into
Perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8, 9. Thus Balaam (the Devils Spelman, and Hired by
Balak to Curse Israel) was overruled by the Great God to begin with the
Blessing of them, and to End with the Cursing of their first Enemy Amalek, and
their last Enemy Antichrist. The Lord (even by the Mouth of this Sooth-sayer)
Confirming his Promises made to Abraham and to his seed for ever, which are all
Propounded, ratified and Performed in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 20, 21. Notwithstanding
all this, the Devil has not yet done, nor his Divelish Diviner Balaam,
although he foresaw such Felicity laid up for, and to be laid out on Israel,
as made him Wish that his own latter End might be like theirs, Numb. 23. 10*
Yet Rests he not Here, but Acts still in giving cursed Counsel, and never gave
over Acting Devilishly until the Sword, which he had seen Drawn in his way, at
last was Sheathed in his own Bowels, Numb. 31. 8. It Is said (indeed) He
returned to his place, Numb. 24. 25. That is, says Baal Turim, He went to
Hell, as Judas did, Act. 1. 25. had he gone then to his own place in Hell, his
Doings of Mischief would then have Ceased, and been Turned into Suffering of
Misery, which Undoubtedly was done at last; but either he was (in his Returning
Homeward,) Detained by the Midianites, where he gave that Pestilent Advice to
Entice them (with their Daughters) both to Adultery and Idolatry. Israel was
joined hereby to Baal-Peor, that Shameful God of Opening, Numb. 25. 3. Hos. 9.
10. This became [Peccatum Flagrans] a Foul Flaming Sin in God's Eye, that Stank
in his Nostrils, without which (he had Subtly said) none of his Enchantments
could prevail against Israel, Numb. 23. 21, 23. Until this sin put them, (at
his Advice) under Gods Displeasure, 2 Pet. 2. 15. Jude 11. Rev. 2.14. or if he
went Home, he returned again to Midian to Demand his Wages (says Chaskuny,) as
soon as he heard Gods Plague was upon Israel through his means, Numb. 25.9. 1
Cor. 10. 8. but as Shemei sought his Servants, and lost his Life, 1 Kin. 2. 40,
46. so did Balaam, Numb. 31. 8. Neither Balak had his Will, nor Balaam his
Wages: How could he Dye the Death of, that Lived not the Life of, but Plots
against the Lives of the Righteous.

The Tenth Plot against the Church, in the Wilderness: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. X.
THus have I shown what a Mavelous Conduct the Church had by the Pillar of
Providence (Defeating all the Devils Designs against her) from Adam to Noah,
from Noah to Moses, and from Moses to Joshuah; Winning (not losing) Ground all
the time, for above 2493 Y. according to Helvicus, Paro^^; Calvisius; or 2553
according to Dr. Lightfoot. When Satan had got quit of Moses, (by his Tempting
him to Unbelief, Numb. 20. 12.) who Dyed in the very Borders of Canaan,
(whither he had brought Israel) and was Buried by God himself, Deuteronomy. 34. 5, 6.
Next he proposes and pursues his 10th. Plot and Project (which was the last
Internal Engine) against this Body of the Church, which had now lost her Head,
Moses; and that, in his Contending with Michael or Christ about the buried Body
of Moses, Jude 9. Michael or Christ (who only could bury Moses Law, Romans 8. 3.
Gal. 3. 13, 14. Col. 2. 14, 16, 17. Hebr. 9. 9, 10, 11, etc.) becomes (himself)
a Sexton, and burys Moses Body; the like is not done by God to any Mortal Man,
a Peculiar Privilege and Honor, testifying how God Loved him both Alive and
Dead; which Body was Raised at Christ's Transfiguration, Matthew. 17. 4. with a
Glory upon it, and yet should Rise with a greater Glory at the last Day, Phil.
3. 21. The Devil Disputed with Michael about the place of Moses Sepulcher, that
he might take up the Relics of Dead Moses (as the Romanists do of their
supposed, and Supposititious Saints) and set them up as Idols in the Hearts of
the Living Israelites, who were so Notoriously Inclined to any sort of
Idolatry, Psalm. 106.28. Isa. 8.19. and 65.4. thus Satan (being ambidexter) lays
about him on both Hands, while Moses was Living, he Tempts Israel to Despise
him, (in their Murmurings aforesaid,) but when he is Dead, he would Tempt them
to Idolize him, and to Translate his Body out of its Grave into a Temple of
their own Hearts: yet all this was but as a Stirrup and Stalking-Horse to
Advance and Advantage the Devils Design of setting up a Divine Adoration of
Himself among the People of God: This Game did Satan play with Saul in making
him Disregard Samuel, while Living, and then puts him upon Conjuring him up (as
his God) when Dead. Whereby Satan got Divine worship from Saul in that Mock
Samuel: Here, Satan had no Respect to the Body of Moses, any further than
thereby to Hurt the Souls of Israel; it is probable, he might Argue to the
Archangel in the Dispute: It Is a shame that such an Honorable Magistrate and
Holy Man should have such a private, and not a public Burial, Attended by all
Israel; whereas indeed it was most Honorable, for God only Attended and Acted
all the Solemnity, the only fault or quarrel was, that God would not Invite
the Devil to be present at the Funeral, for the Reasons aforesaid.

Thus the Plot was laid, to make Moses an Idol, and an Occasion of Idolatry
when Dead, who had been the greatest Opposer of it whilst Living; But what
Success had this Plot? 'twas Laughed into Nothing, for Michael Over-matches the
Devil, rebukes him; Satan may be rebuked, but never reformed, he may be Curbed,
but never Cured, he may be Chained, but never Changed: And as the Lord's rebuke
was upon him for his Contending about the Body of Moses, so Undoubtedly it is,
about the Body of the Messiah, to wit, the Church, which is his Body, and he is
the Head: Never did Michael make War with this Dragon, but he has always the
Victory, as Rev. 12. 8. Dan. 10. last, etc. And if he do not now lay his rebuke
upon Satan, it is not from the scantness of his Power, but from the greatness of
his Patience, yea, and of his Wisdom. Behold here! God did not leave the Church
(his Body) without an Head, but raises up a Living Head (a Joshua, or Jesus,
(so called, Act. 7.45.) a Type of Jesus, our Lord) instead of a Dead Moses:
Moses (or the Law) cannot bring to Canaan, no, it is Dead, and all the
Ceremonies of it; and it is the Devil that puts Men to digg them out of the
Grave: but to bring us into the Possession of the Heavenly Canaan, is the work
of Jesus by the Gospel, as Joshua (not Moses) brought Israel into the Earthly
Canaan: This Jesus is the Head of the Church, a Living Head at the Right Hand
of God; Hence the Church can never be Drowned, so long as her Head (Christ) is
lifted above the Waters: neither does God ever starve his work for want of
Instruments; Moses Dies, Joshua (who had been trained up with him from a Child)
is his Substitute, God will not leave his Church Destitute, as one is broke
off, another Rises up in his Room, and that with Commission and Qualifications
suitable for his Work, so that Israel might follow him with Confidence, as they
must with Obedience, Deuteronomy. 31. 1, 8. and 34. 9. and Josh. 1. 1, 2, 16. who
after his Inauguration Renews the Two Sacraments of Circumcision, and the
Passcover, Conquers all Canaan, settles Israel in it, and all this after Moses
Death; a Figure of Christ, who brings into Eternal Rest after the ending of
Moses Law. Thus the Church at last Landed in the Land of Promise, maugre the
Malice of angry Men, and of Enraged Devils.

The Eleventh Plot against the CHURCH, in Canaan: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. XI.
NOw though the Church had lost Moses, and at his Death the Cloudy Pillar too
which then Departed, yet The Righteousness of the Lord brought Her from Shittim
to Gilgal, Micah 6. 5. that is, The Faithfulness and Goodness of God in keeping
Promise with his People, notwithstanding all their provocations, and in Despite
of the Devil that (all the way in the Wilderness) made many Desperate
Disturbances: Still the Church had a Joshua to stand for her in Moses stead,
and though the loss of the Cloudy Pillar was Undoubtedly a very great and most
Discouraging loss, especially she having Jordan (yea, and at that time,
overflowing all his banks, Josh. 3. 15.) betwixt her and Canaan, for the Devil
had blocked up all other ways to it, having stirred up Moab, Midian, Ammon,
Amalek, and the Amorites to obstruct her passage thither.

Yet God comes to Comfort her at that time, Hos. 2. 14. saying as it were, Be
not Descouraged, I have taken from you my Cloudy Pillar, to Teach you that the
Umbrages or Cloudy Shaddows of the Law of Moses cannot Conduct you into Canaan,
(though it has through the Wilderness:) yet now shall you have The Ark of the
Covenant (which typisies the Angel of the Covenant Jesus Christ) to go before
you, Josh. 3. 3, 11. and that shall Divide Jordan for you, as the Cloudy Pillar
had Divided the Red Sea for your Fathers. Hereupon the Order and Course of
carrying the Ark of God's Presence was changed, for while the Pillar went
before the Camp, the Ark abode in the midst of it, Numb. 2. 17. (to betoken,
Gods presence in the midst of his people, Psa. 46. 5.) Now the Ark must go
before (when the Pillar was gone) and Israel must follow it to Show, that as
there was no other way of Entrance into the Earthly Canaan but by following the
Ark, so there is no other way of Entrance into the Heavenly Canaan, than only
by following Christ, (whereof the Ark was the Type) Joh. 14. 6. then did the
Lord Magnify Joshua, Josh. 14. 14. by making him Equal with Moses, (who had
divided the Red Sea for them at their coming out of Egypt under the Conduct of
the Pillar;) now Joshua divides Jordan under the Conduct of the Ark, and gives
them passage to and Possession of Canaan in despite of the Devil and all his
Instruments (the Nations aforenamed) that Obstructed them.

Joshua (through the Righteousness and Goodness of the Lord) brings them from
Shittim to Gilgal, Micah 6. 5. He removes them from Shittim, Josh. 3. 1. This
Shittim was the last Stage of all the 42 Stations or Mansions Israel had in the
Wilderness, Numb. 33. 49. and it was that Unhappy place where Balaam (Satan's
Spelman) made the Midianites out-wit Israel by setting fair Faces (his
stumbling block, Rev. 2. 14.) before them, who soon Drew them into those Two
Sister-Sins. Adultery and Idolatry, for it was upon those Terms, That if they
would Worship their Idols, they should have the Free use of their Bodies: some
Derive Shittim from Sethim, Spinae, as it was a place of Thorns, sure I am,
here Gods Flock of Sheep, Psa. 77. 20. were so caught among Thorns, (to wit,
with that Smoking and Flaming Sin) as they were not cleans'd from it until
after the Conquest of the Land, Josh. 22. 17. it left (as the Plague of Frogs
Exodus 8. 14.) a long lasting Stench behind it, by that Sin of Baal-peor. Israel
brought themselves under the Wrath and Curse of God, which Balaam (with all his
Spells) could not otherwise bring them under, and this place is called
Abel-Shittim, Numb. 13. 49. because of the sad Lamentation (as Abel signifies)
which was made for the Death of the 1000 that Dyed (as Ringleaders) by the
Hand of Justice, and the 23000 (that followed those Ringleaders) by the Hand
of God in the Plague, Numb. 25. 4, 9. 1 Cor. 10. 8. yet the Lord's Goodness
over-comes all Isreal's Badness, and not only stirs up Phinehas to stand in the
Gap to stop the Plague, Psalm. 106. 29, 30. but also Joshua, to bring them off
from Shittim, where they might all have perished, been cut off and cast away
from being a People before him; yea, and to bring them through Jordan even to
Gilgal, where he first pitched his Tent, and so did take Possession of the Land
of Promise, wherein Gilgal stood, Josh. 4. 19, 20. Nonne hic Refulsit
Admirabilis Dei Gratia, says Calvin, Behold here a Miracle of Divine Mercy,
especially in Six Respects. (1.) The Devil was Infatuated by God in not
stirring up the Canaanites to Guard their Coasts, (as is usual for people to
Man their Frontiers in Danger of Invasion) All the Host of Israel passed over
and quietly Landed without any Assault or Opposition, Josh. 3. 17. and (2ly.)
That the Lord should Magnify his Mercy to his Church (notwithstanding all her
Demerit by Sin) in bringing Israel into Canaan (the Land of their Enemies, yet
the Land of his Promise to them) in the very time of Harvest, when it was best
furnished with all manner of Provisions both for that present time and for the
following Year, Josh. 3. 15. 3ly. Another manifestation of God's Mercy to his
Church was this, That God Roul'd away (as the Word Gilgal signifies, and
therefore the place is so called) the Reproach of Egypt, to wit, the
Uncircumcision of their Flesh, Josh. 5.9. Restoring to them that Seal of the
Covenant, to wit, Circumcision, (to Teach, none but the Circumciz'd in Heart
must Enter the Heavenly Canaan, as none but the Circumcised in the Flesh must
enter the Earthly one:) Yea, (4ly.) behold a mavelous Mercy of God to Israel
in this, that the Devil did not stir up the Cursed Canaanites to Fall upon
Israel when they were (all) sore in their Circumcision, (as Sinicon and Levi
did upon the Sichemites, Genesis 34. 25, 26. and slew them,) then Israel abode in
the Camp till they were whole, Josh. 5.8. Considing in God's Promise,
Providence and Protection for Securing them from their Enemies; Undoubtedly the
Terror of the Lord was upon their Adversaries all the time, (as in Jacob (their
Fathers) Case, Genesis 35. 5. with 34.30.) that they Assaulted them not upon this
Advantage: Yet further, (5ly.) God manifested his mercy to his Church in giving
them the other Seal of his Covenant, to wit, the Passover, and that within
Three Days of their Circumcision, Josh. 5. 8, 10. which shows, not only their
speedy and miraculous Healing, otherwise they could not have (Four Days after)
kept the Passover with joy; but also God's Speedy applying both the Seals to
his Bond of Promise, to Assure them, that though they had wanted them both in
their Wilderness-Wandrings, yet now their former Sins were all pardoned, and
their persons now received as a peculiar People into the Bonds of the Covenant,
he would be a God to them, and they should be a People to him: Moreover (6ly.)
Christ (himself) comes to be their Generalissimo with a Sword drawn in his
Hand, v. 13, 14. which Sword he will never put up, or lay down, till the Wars
of the Lord be ended, the Cursed Canaanites were all Conquered by this Captain
as the 1st. Fruits, so shall all the Cursed Foes of the Church be by his Wisdom
and Power, Hebr. 2. 10. Romans 8. 31. All that the Devil could do (in this 11th.
Plot) further against the Church under the Conduct of her Captain General (who
was present with her, Josh. 5. 13. and 6. 2. not wrapped up in a Cloud as in
the Wilderness, but as a Man of War, Exo. 15. 3. Mighty in Battle, Psalm. 24. 8.
in Canaan, as a praelude to his Incarnation) save only Two poor Spirts, or
small Skirmages, the one in the beginning, and the other in the end of the
Conquest: The 1st. petty-Plot, was that of Achan, who Interrupted their
Progress, and Troubled their Host for a time, Josh. 7. 25. The Occasion was
this; The Man Christ Jesus (who appeared to Joshua) Ordains and Orders the
means of the Downfall of Jericho, even such as the World would judge Despicable
and Ridiculous, not the Silver Trumpets of the Sanctuary, (which might have
both Graced the Enterprise, and given Confidence of Success) but Contemptible
Rams-Horns fitter to be Laughed at by a Carnal Eye. God loves to go a way by
himself, Josh. 6. 3, 4. Joshua passes on before the Lord, v. 8. Uses the means
Appointed. The Ark of Christ's Presence compasses Jericho and Down it falls,
(so sure shall Mystical Jericho or Babylon Fall by the powerful presence of
Christ, though the means be Despised.) The whole City (as the 1st. Fruits) is
Devoted to Destruction, v. 17. and the People are Commanded to Keep from the
Accursed thing, v. 18. This was fair Warning to that foul Sinner Achan, who
Sacrilegiously seized on a Wedg of Gold, and a Babylonish-Garment, Josh. 7.21.
The Devil knew his covetous Temper by feeling his Pulse, so fitted him with an
Object, a fit Pennyworth, or Prize, he sets before him, Achan Covets them, (as
he confesses) Robs God of his Right, God is Displeased with all the Body for
the Contagion of this One Sinner, [Who Destroyed much Good. Josh. 7. 1. Eccles.
9. 18. This one Sin (of one Member of their Body) betrays them into the Hands
of Divine Justice, (for looking no better, not only to the Observing, but to
the Preserving of God's Law, on which Account every Man should be His Brothers
Keeper;) Israel Fled before the Men of Ai, Josh. 7.4. Joshua Fasts and Prays to
find out the Sin and Sinner; God Directs to both, both are Removed, and God's
Favor Recovered, than the Church goes on (with Christ) Conquering and to
Conquer for Seven Years, till the Land (Let to her by God's Sealed Lease) was
Subdued before Her. The Devil being soon Baffled of this 1st. Plot in Canaan,
was Chained up to the End of its Conquest: It Is True, he put a Cheat upon the
Church by the Gibeonites, pleading Antiquity to Her, (as the Romanists would do
with Us now with their Old Sacks and Molded Bread. See my Antidote against
Popery, in the Chapter of Novelty; But he had like to have made them Sheath
their Conquering Swords in one another sides, (which was his 2d. Plot) when
Reuben, Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasseth were Dismissed, and Built an Altar
of Remembrance on the other side of Jordan, Josh. 22. 11, 12, 16, 18. No Doubt
but the Devil made the Smoke, while an Holy Fire so Blessedly Blows up Israel
into so Inconsiderate Zeal and Uncharitable Censures: but Phinehas (their
Ambassador) being rightly Informed by the Reubenites, takes up the
Controversy, v. 22. 30, 31. So Satan lost this Design also, and this might
rebuke the Reubenites that choose to Live so far from the Tabernacle (as they
were on the other side Jordan) so far off from the place of God's Worship.

The Twelfth Plot against the CHURCH, in Canaan: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. XII.
IN the Devils 12th. Design and Plot against the Church, (which continued 450
Y. in its Vps and Downs, Act. 13. 20) Take a Distinct View, 1. of the Churches
Danger, 2ly of the Churches Deliverance: 1st. of her Danger. 'Twas Twofold.
1st. by her Sin the Devil seduced her into, and 2ly. By her Punishment the
Devil procured upon her for her Sin: 1st. Her Sin was Twofold; 1st. She sinned
against the 1st Table of the Law in her Worship. 2ly. against the 2d. Table
thereof in her Manners: Thus the Devil Debauched the Church both in her
Holiness to God, and in her Righteousness to Man, and he made her Degenerate
into a most dangerous Apostasy, Until this be done, the Devil well knows, none
of his Plots can ever be prosperous, Numb. 23. 21, 23. The Churches 1st. Sin
against God in her Worship, was Idolatry, that God-provoking, and
Land-destroying Sin: Idolatry (after the Death of Joshua, and of the Elders,
who had seen the Wondrous Works of God, and Upheld the purity of Divine
Worship in her, Judge. 2. 7.) was begun in Israel by a Woman, to wit, Micah's
Mother, Judge. 17. 1, 2, 3. etc. (which Story must Undonbtedly follow after,
Judge. 2. 10. in order of time and place) and that in Ephraim also, where
afterward Jeroboam Established it by a Law: The Devil began his Kingdom of Sin
in the World by a Woman, to wit, Eve, 1 Timothy 2. 16. And he carries it on here
by a Woman, to wit, Micah's Mother, of the weaker Sex, yea, an Old Woman (who
had not only a Son in a Married Estate, but also a Grandson grown up and
Consecrated to the Priests Office, Judge. 17. 5.) The Tempter knew well, that
weak and old Wood was most Apt to take Fire, even the Fire of Hell: yea, she
was not only a Woman, an Old Woman, but also a very Superstitious Woman,
possibly she might (though then very young) Learn her Superstition from the
mixed Multitude, Exodus 12. 38. Numb. 11. 4. And though God had been Ayring
Israel full 40 Y. in the Wilderness, (where many sweet Gales of Grace did blow
upon them) yet Micah's Mother did Smell of Egypt, in her Devoting Eleven
Hundred Shekels of Silver to the making of an Idol, for the loss of which she
most grievously Cursed, Cursing Persons are mostly Cursed Persons; a wicked
Heart wants not a wicked Mouth, that is full of Cursing and Bitterness, Romans 3.
14. Yea, and out of the same Mouth proceeds Blessing (of the Thief, her Son,
without reprooving him for his Sin) as well as Cursing, Jam. 3. 10. Judge. 17.
2. And partus Sequitur Ventrem, The Birth follows the Belly, Morrally as well
as Civilly, so did Micah his Mother, (...) of an Evil Bird comes an Evil Egg,
like Mother, like Son; they Two consent together to lay out Nine Hundred of the
Shekels for Materials, and the other two Hundred for Workman-ship of the Idol.
Micah sets it up in his own House, for his own use, and the use of the
Neighborhood round about him. Now he who had been hitherto called (in the
Hebrew Text) Micaiahu (with a part of Johovah affixed to his Name) is from v.
5. Cut shorter in his Name, and ever after is called Micah, as having lost his
part in the Name Jehovah by his Idol he sets up and Worships for Jehovah, and
Consecrates one of his Sons for his Priest, though neither of Levi's Tribe, nor
of Aaron's Lineage.

Yet afterward, he bethought himself to Amend that Fault by Choosing a Novice,
one Jonathan, Moses Grandchild, a Degenerate Plant, the 1st. Idolatrous
Priest, who would Murder Souls for a morsel of bread, Ezekiel. 13. 19. which was
the worse in him, because he (Descending from Moses the Man of God) should have
been Better. This young Levite Micah Hires for a slender Sallary to Officiate
before his Idol: He, who had Eleven Hundred Shekels to bestow upon his Image,
thinks Ten Shekels Wages enough for Priestly Work, only he will make up that
Defect by a parcel of cheap Complements, (calling the Young Man a Father) and
if that were not enough, he would give him a Summer and a Winter Suit: This
Jonathan being forced by the Iniquity of those times, (while yet there was no
Judge or Supreme Magistrate to Suppress it, v. 6.) to shift and seek
Subsistence any where, (as those did after Neh. 13. 10, 11.) and being
Hunger-bit, he snaps at any thing, even at this sordid Work and Wages, not
having Grace to Restrain him, v. 7. 8, 9, 10. Micah Consecrates him as he had
done his own Son, (which none might Lawfully do, but the High Priest, Exodus 29.
22, 23, 24.) and as Jeroboam did (after) the basest of the People, 1 Kin. 13.
33. All this Micah did as a Gross Idolater, expressly contrary to the Law of
God, yet does he Bless himself in all this his Blind Devotion, (Entertaining
this Levite as a Son, in respect of his Youth, yet as a Priest and a Father in
respect of his Office) v. 11, 12, 13. he promises himself much Prosperity (as
the Papists do in their Popes Pardons, and Priests Absolution) in his
Idolatrous way of Worship: but his gross Idolatry brought a gross
Disappointment, the contrary came to pass, it indeed Exposed him to God's Wrath
and Vengeance, as appears, Judge. 18. 18, 19, 22, 24. When he had like to have
lost his life for pursuing the Plunderers of his Gods, Goodly Gods they were
that could not secure themselves from Plundring-Men: yet he Accounts them his
All, (though of his own making, so could have made more) Reckoning the rest of
his Goods as nothing without his Gods, and therefore Arms himself and his
Neighborhood (who had Haunted his House of Gods) for a Rescue, but all in
vain, v. 26. he returns without his Gods, yet took no Notice that God Punished
his Idolatry by this (to him such a Lamentable) Injury. However, the Devil
(whom Synesius calls (...) a Great Promoter of Idolatry) Notably promoted his
Notorious Design of spreading this Sin of Idolatry from an House to a Tribe,
even to the Tribe of Dan. (1st.) The Devil gives the Danites his Equivocating
Oracle and Doubtful Answer to their Question by the Teraphim, (as Ezekiel. 21. 21.
Zach. 10. 2. Hos. 2. 4.) in bidding them, [Go in Peace, before the Lord is your
way] Judge. 18. 5, 6. wherein the wary Devil is [(...)] Ambiguous, that however
the matter proved, he might still save his Credit (as in all his Oracles both
in Sacred and Civil History, 1 Kin. 22. 12, etc) for his Answer Imports,
either, God sees what you are going about, or, he will also See to your Safety
and Success: and yet his Answer might be the more peremptory, inasmuch as he
well knew the Men of Laish (whom they were going to Invade) were thoroughly Ripe
(at that time) for their own Ruin: However, it was so Accomodated to the
Danites Humor, that the Devil (having given them this Sweet Bit for a Foretast
in Micah's House) makes them (2ly.) long to take the Idol along with them, (as
most Useful in their Unsettled-Estate) and to set it up publicly in their own
Tribe after; for which cause ('it is supposed) the Tribe of Dan is not Named
among the Sealed of the Lord, Rev. 7. because, The first public Idolatry began
among them; The foresight of which (and the Misery attending it) made the
Dying Patriark sigh, Genesis 49. 10:

This Idolatry the Church or Israel does tolerate, never Entering their
Protests either against that in Private, (which was in Micah's Temple of Idols,
Judge. 17. 5. or against that in Public, which was set up in the Tribe of Dan,
Judge. 18. 30. This over-soft Toleration became the Nurse and Mother of all
Sorts of Impiety, insomuch as Gibeah, a City of Israel, becomes as Abominable
as Sodom, Judge. 19. 22. those Men of Belial, or (as the Word signifies)
Yokeless-Ones, Differing only from Beasts, [Non Ratione, sed Oratione] Not in
Reason, but in Speech, had taken their Lust by Turns upon the Levites
Concubine, until they had turned her out of the World, and turned her Soul out
of her Body, which they had so Villaniously Abused, v. 25. Thus a Whorish
Woman, Judge. 19. 2. is killed with Whoredom, and so filled with the Evil of her
own ways, Prove. 14. 14. The Levite Appeals to All the Tribes for Justice
against Gibeah, four Hundred Thousand Marches against it, and that by Command
and Commission from God: forty Thousand of them are Slain by that Wicked and
Wretched Town, and by that Tribe who patronized it in this wicked Lewdness.
Whereby God Avenged his own Cause against Israel, because Israel would not
Avenge God's Cause against Idolatry: They were enough Sensible of the Injury
done to the Lord's Levite in Gibeah, but were not at all Sensible of the Injury
done to the Lord Himself in Micah's and Dan's Idolatry. Yet the Rod after this
Chastizement is Burnt at last. When God has thus used Benjamin to Correct
Israel for their not Punishing Idolatry, He then uses Israel to Scourge
Benjamin for Protecting Gibeah from Justice: No doubt but it greatly gratified
the Devil to see the Tribes of Israel Destroy one another, and to have one
Tribe (well nigh) Cut off, which God Ordered as a Just Judgment upon them for
their Iniquity in one Tribe, and their Idolatry in another; yet has not the
Devil done here, but he after all this, causes this Cursed Leaven of Idolatry
(which had hitherto spread only over one Tribe, the Tribe of Dan, just at
their Settling in the Promised Land,) to Spread over All the Tribes, and so to
Leaven the whole Lump of Israel, Judge. 2. 11. (before which All those Stories
in Chap. 17. 18, 19, 20, 21. ought to be Understood, as all Transacted soon
after Joshuah's Death, and before they had any Judges.) It Is not now said the
Children of Dan only, or the Children of Benjamin only, But, The Children of
(All) Israel did Evil in the sight of the Lord, and Served Baalim and Ahtaroth,
v. 11, 12. Judge. 10. 6. That is, He-Gods and She-Gods. Idols of all sorts, as
the Papists do Adore their He-Saints, and She-Saints, at this Day: This
Corruption of Worship brought in (2ly.) Corruption of Manners. (1.) In
Neglecting God's Command of Driving out the Canaanites, who became Thorns in
their sides, Judge. 2. 2, 3. in their Conversing and Commercing with them, they
did draw Israel to Participate both of their Sins and of their Plagues. (2.) In
Contracting Marriages with those Canaanites, (they thus spared against God's
Command, Josh. 23. 13.) Judge. 3. 4, 6. expressly contrary to God's Law, Exodus
34. 16. Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Those Interchangeable Matches marred their Manners, and
produced many Enormities, as (3.) that Prodigious Sodomy and Villainy in Gibeah
aforesaid. Yea (4.) Obstinacy in their Impieties, Judge. 2. 19. They would
Persist and Persevere in their Stubborn way, and would not Repent either (1) at
the Rebuke of the Angel, Christ, who had offered Himself to be Captain of the
Lord's Host, Josh. 5. 13, 14. and had led the Field in all the Wars of Joshua,
yea, and of Judah too, till he spared the Canaanites, Judge. 1. 18. 19. for this
(and other Sins) the Angel of the Covenant did Reproove them, Judge. 2. 1, 2 and
for this, Departs from them. Hereupon the People fall a Weeping (as they had
good cause) for the loss of such a Captain General as Christ, and called the
place Bochim, that is Weeping, v. 4, 5. yet this blessed and Hart-bleeding
Frame was soon lost, for they Forsook the Lord, v. 12. and Corrupted
themselves, v. 19. and Stubbornly Walked in their own Wicked Ways. Neither
would they Repent (2) at the Reproof of the Prophet, whom Christ (though
Himself was gone) sent with a Message, Judge. 10. 11, 12, 13, 14. Thus Israel
having broke both the Tables of the Law. The 2d. thing, to wit, Punishment must
follow, as the Thread follows the Needle; God is Angry (though Satan is
pleased) and God's Anger brings Revenge, God sold his People into the Hands of
their Enemies, Judge. 2. 14. and 3. 8. and 4. 2, etc. that is, he Renounced his
Right in them, writing Lo-Ammi on them, he gave them over as the Seller does
the Matter Sold into the Hands of the Buyer, (yet, without that Complement, I
wish you good of it,) or as the Turk sells his Slaves, and the Conqueror his
Captives; And this is Aggravated in Two Circumstances. 1. God made not his Best
of them, but took his first Chap-man, (as the Pope gave England, upon the
Abolishing of Abbeys, primo occupaturo, to the first that could Conquer it,
which, he thought, might easily be done, and won, when he withdrew his
Protecting Papal Benediction from it, and put his charming Curse upon it,) God
Sold his People for naught, and did not increase his Wealth by their Price,
Psalm. 44. 12, 13. he plainly gave them away gratis, for whom he was wont to
give great Nations, Isa. 43. 3. They had sold themselves as Ahab did, 1 Kin.
21, 20. to work Wickedness, Isa. 50. 1. and now they are sold by the Lord also:
And as they had sold themselves for naught, Isa. 52.3. so they are sold by God
for naught, he had not so much as Thanks from the Enemy, and as little from the
Devil that set them on: 2ly. They were sold, as to the first, so to the worst
Chapmen, not to their Brethren, who would have shown some pity, as the
Israelites did to Benjamin, Judge. 21. 2, 3, 6, 7, 15, 16, 17, 22. nor to
Strangers coming in as Conquerors, for then common Humanity would have taught
them some Mercy: but unto such Neighboring Enemies, as they had highly
Incensed in their former Wars, and therefore breathed forth nothing but the
worst of Rage and Revenge against them, Judge. 7. 3.

Here the Devils Design against the Church was promising and prosperous, and no
doubt, he had a fair Prospect of this Plot; yet the Lord (notwithstanding all)
Laughs all to Nothing, and Works (which is the 2d. thing) the Church's
Deliverance from this Danger; for (1.) though they were sold as Slaves to their
Adversary, yet even then were they precious as Sons to their God, Isa. 50. 1,
10. Though the Mother had Divorced her self, yet God owns himself the Husband,
and he owns them to be his Children, yea, Children of light, even then, when
they Walked in Darkness: And though they had sold themselves for naught, he
would (accordingly) Redeem them without Money, Isa. 52. 3. and love them
freely, Hos. 14.4. (2) Though the Church was then under great Distress, Judge,
2. 15. and 4. 3. (God Strengthening their Enemies, Judge. 3. 12. as Ezekiel. 30.
24. and weakening their Arms and Armies, and God Prospering that Wickedness in
their Adversaries, which he Punished in them, being Professors) yet had she (as
often) great Deliverances, as many Salves as Sores upon their Repentance; God had
one Hand to Help them, as well as another to hurt them, pitying his People for
his own sake, he Raised them up Judges, Judge. 2. 15. 16. as Othniel, Ehud,
Shamgar, Deborah, Gedion, Tola, Jair, Jephtah, Ibzan, Elon, Abdon, and Sampson,
all Twelve to save his Church, one by an Ox Goad, as Shamgar, another by the
Jaw Bone of an Ass, as Samson; and Gideon was but a Barley-Cake, Judge. 7. 13.
God never starves his Church for want either of Instruments or of Agents. (3)
Though the Church was often Sighing, yet as often Singing: God goes in a Circle
with her, as often as she Repented of her Sins, so often God Repented of his
Judgments, Judge. 2. 18. and quite through the Book of Judges. The whole
History of the Book of Judges for 450 Y. the Church lived all that time (as may
be said) at the Sign of the Chequer. God Chequered his Providence toward her
with the Black of Misery, and with the White of Mercy, and all Checkered Work
is accounted Beautiful Work: God Speckled his Dispensations to his Church, as
is set forth by those speckl'd Horses among the Myrtle Trees in the bottom,
Zech. 1. 8. Crosses and Comforts are Interwooven while she is in her
Militant-state in this Vale of Misery, and Valley of Tears, Psalm. 84. 6. God
has set the one over against the other, Eccles. 7. 14. As there is a
Vicissitude of Night and Day, so of Adversity and Prosperity. God turns the
Church's Night into Day, and the Upright has Dominion in the Morning, Psalm.
49. 14. No sooner does the Church alter her course from Sin, and Return to God
by Repentance, but presently God alters his course from Wrath, and returns to
Her with his Mercy, Zech. 1. 16. Oh that it were the present practice (as it
was then the Continual Course of God with his Church, and his Church with him)
in this our Day; God would soon turn our Mourning into Mirth, Heaviness might
endure for the Night, but Joy would come in the Morning, Psalm. 30. 5: No Doubt,
but God Wishes his Church's Welfare, (as the Loving Bridegroom does his Beloved
Bride's,) otherwise He had never Sighed out those sad Words, [Oh! that my
People had Hearkened unto me, etc. I should soon have Subdued their Enemies,
etc.] Psalm. 81. 13, 14, 15, 16. God, with a bare turn of his Hand can overturn
both the Many and the Mighty of them, and Rescue his Little Ones out of all
their Hands, Zech. 13. 7. Isa. 25. 11. none shall Pluck them out of Christ's and
His Fathers Hands, Joh. 10. 28. 29.

The Thirteenth Plot against the CHURCH, in Canaan: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. XIII.
THe Church's Restless Wretched Adversary, Satan, seeing he cannot still Hinder
the Being of God's Church, Trys again his 13th. Experiment against the
Well-Being of it, and that once more before Isreal's Aristocracy was changed
into Monarchy, to wit, in the time of Eli and Samuel the Two last Judges of
Israel; yet such was the Overruling Providence of God above the Devil, that
whatever Ground he Won upon the Church in Old Eli's Maladministration, he
Lost it All again in Young Samuel's Godly Reformation. So that here again
Divine Dispensations toward the Church (concerning Sorrows and Joys) were most
beautifully Chequered with Interchangeable Colors: Magistracy is, what the
Pole is to the Hop, or the Tree to the Ivy, or the Wall to the Vine; the former
gives Support to the latter, which cannot stand alone without something to
Sustain them: The Church's Word to the State, is, [Te Stante Virebo,] While
thou Stands, I Flourish. This Blessed Nail (as Eliakim, that Godly Magistrate)
Keeps all the Vessels of the Lord steadfastly, and Holds them from falling to
the Ground, Isa. 22. 24. This the Devil knew well, and therefore played his
Pranks against the Church in that Interval of Magistracy betwixt Joshuah and
the Judges, in which Interspace Satan wrought and brought down Israel to that
gross Idolatry, Impiety and Apostasy, mentioned in the Five last Chapters of
the Book of Judges. The Stories whereof there Related (that the History of the
following Judges might be continued without any Interruption, as before) did
all Befall Israel soon after Joshuah, and some 100's of Y. before Sampson, whom
this Eli immediately succeeded, unless we make Phinehas (mentioned in Judge. 20.
28.) to live far beyond Moses term, Psalm. 90. 10. even above 300 Y. who was at
Man's estate at his Killing Zimri and Cozbi in the Wilderness, and therefore
could not outlive Samson.

It Is said expressly in those Five last Chapters no less than Three times, (to
wit, Judge. 17. 6. and 18. 1. and 21. 25.) In those Days there was no King in
Israel, that is, not a King in its proper Sense, for so, Israel never had a
King in any of those Days, until Readiness time; but no Judge or supreme
Magistrate to keep Israel in Awe and Order. This time of Isreal's Anarchy,
(before their Aristocracy) the Devil Improved as his Golden Opportunity,
wherein to propose and promote his Hellish Projects, and to bring All to an
Horrible Confusion, when there was no public Power to control or restrain
their Extravagancies: Yea, this Daring Devil (though over-Witted and
Overpowered by the only Wise and Almighty God, even upon that
Advantage-Ground) Durst Attempt the Church when under the Protection of Her
Godly Governors, as under Sampson, of whom it is said, [He shall (only) Begin
to Deliver Israel,] Judge. 13. 5. He made some essays to save them from the
Oppressing Philistines, yet that Oppression lasted 40 Y. v. 1. to wit, During
the Days of Samson and of Eli his next Successor: though Samson was Destroying
them all his life, and Destroyed more at his Death, Judge. 16. 20. (wherein he
was a Type of Christ, who by his Death overcame Death, and him who had the
power of Death, the Devil, Hebr. 2. 14.) yet did he only Begin, and kept Doing
at the Church's Deliverance, both all his Life and at his Death, the Perfecting
whereof was Reserved for David the Father and Figure of Christ, who is both the
Founder and Finisher of Faith and Salvation, Hebr. 2. 10. and 12. 2. So under
Eli, who undoubtedly was a Godly Man, as is Apparent (1) by his Godly Prayers,
(whereby he made her Amends for his Uncharitable Censure for Disconsolate
Hannah.) [The God of Israel Grant thee thy Petition,] 1 Samuel 1. 17. He, having
a particular Faith that God would grant her Request, if she composed her self,
and cast her Burden (or Petition) upon the Lord, Psalm. 55. 22. promises his own
Prayers for that purpose, and hids her, Go in Peace, which she did, taking the
High-Priest's Answer for an Oracle, being Comforted with this Comfort, and
having Prayed down her Discomfort, as David often did (2) by his Humble and
Hearty Submission to the Will of God when Declared to him 1. by the Mouth of
the Man of God, 1 Samuel 2. 27. and 2ly. by the Mouth of his Young Minister
Samuel, Chap. 3. 11. 17. Eli said upon the Hearing thereof, v. 18. [It is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good,] id est, His Holy Will be done, I and
my House have Deserved All, God has Just cause to punish, but not I to murmur,
I must patiently bear what God pleases to Inflict: He is too kind to do me
harm, too just to do me wrong, he will turn Temporal evil to my Everlasting
good, (3) by his Trembling for the Ark of God, Chap. 4. 13. out of his Zeal for
God's Glory and the Church's Good, lest Israel should lose and Philistines get
the Sign of God's Presence. He loved his Spirituals better then his Temporals;
he could hear with patience of the loss of some Thousands, and of the loss of
his Two Sons, but when he heard of the loss of the Ark, this goes like a Dagger
to his Heart, and it is a Question whether his Neck or his Heart were first
Broken, v. 18. Like a godly Man, he cannot live without the Ark of God, no
Sword of the Uncircumcised could have given him a more Mortal Blow than the
Report of this Loss, that struck him down into a deadly swound. Yet was he not
Driven away in his Wickedness, as is a Wicked Man, but he had Hope in his
Death, as a Righteous One, Prove. 14. 32. He that could not Live without the Ark
of God, how could he Dye without the God of the Ark? The Sins of his Sons
Displeased his godly Soul, and he Reproov'd them for it, yet more Mildly than
was meet; hence God Writ his Sin upon his Punishment, He that minded not in
time to Break the stiff Neck of his stubborn Sons while Young, Prove. 19. 18.
had now his own Neck broken. And though he was not a good Father to his Sons,
yet was he (Himself) a good Son to God, and his Memory is Blessed among all the
other Godly Judges, says Wisdom or Eedus, Chap. 46. 11. in the Apocrypha.

Although Eli was a Godly Man, and both Judge over Civil, and High Priest over
Ecclesiastic Affairs, and so had a most Precious Price put into his Hands for
promoting the Church's Weal, yet the Devil made a Fool of him, so that he has
no Heart to it, Prove. 17. 10. and this Satan did Accomplish, (1.) by Prompting
him to too much Indulgency toward his Dissolute Sons. 2ly. by Tempting him to
a too much Neglect of his own Duty toward them, and that in his Threefold
Capacity. 1. As a Father. 2. As the High Priest. 3. As the Chief Magistrate or
Judge. 1st. As a Father. So the Devil made use of his Candid Constitution, and
his sweet Natural Disposition, even to a Cockering of his Sons, and to a too
much Tenderness toward them (as he did David's afterward toward His, 1 Kin.
1. 6. etc.) both in their Younger and Elder years: overmuch Mercy marrs many a
Child, Pro. 13. 24. and 23. 13, 14. It Is likely, Eli had always been a Fond
Father to his Sons, and brought them up in his Doting Indulgency, till he
brings down his House by their Diabolical Impiety* 2ly. As High Priest, which
added more Authority to him over his Wicked Sons, yet does he so gently
Reproove them for their Sins, (so exceeding sinful, even to Black Sins under a
White Ephod,) as if he had been Afraid to Hurt them, 1 Samuel 2. 22, 23. A Gentle
Reproof can never be a Salve broad and sharp, enough for such a Sore as is
Notorious and Abominable Wickedous; He did it (as Hierom says) [Lenitate
patris, non Authoritate pontisicis,] by the Gentle Lenity of a Father, not by
the grave and Severe Authority of an High Priest, who should have expelled them
out of their Sacred Function, for their sinful Practices, and Excommunicated
them out of the Church of God. 3. As the Judge or Chief Magistrate, which gave
him power (most of all) to punish those prosligate Varlets, yet he only Shaves
the Head, which Deserved Cutting off; he should have punished them for their
Adultery, (they having Wives of their own, 1 Samuel 4. 19.) according to the Law,
yet comes off only with [Why do ye such things, and Nay my Sons, etc.] whereas
he should have Instanced and Aggravated their evil Doings, for their Shame and
Horror, and Executed Justice upon them as Degenerate Sons of Belial* rather
than of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.23. 24. 25, etc. Hereupon he is blamed for Gratifying his
Sons more then Glorifying God, v. 29 choosing rather to please them than him,
and not punishing those profane Priests, either by Ecclesiastic Censures, or
by Civil Penalties, Fearing (possibly) least by this means the High Priesthood
should go from his Family of Ithamar, as it had from Eleazar's for the like
Misdemeanour) which also did befall him afterward, 1 Kin. 1. 26. 1 Chronicles. 29.
22. Thus Eli by seeking to prevent that Evil, (in an evil manner and by evil
means) did the sooner procure it. For God became highly Displeased, and the
Devil took this Advantage, and powered in three Grand Mischiefs and Maladies
upon the Church of God, (all which had most Blessed Remedies in Samuel,
Successor to Eli,) to wit, (1.) The Abhorring of the Lord's Sacrifice. (2.) The
Failure of all Prophetic Visions. (3.) The Captivity of the Ark by the
Philistines. 1st. Of the 1st. Those Prosligate Priests made the People to
abhor the Offerings of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17. and to Transgress, v. 24. where
the Profane Clergy (so called) laid a Stumbling Block before the Sober Laity,
not only in their sinning so presumptuously (and scaping Scot-free in so
Doing,) against God himself, and Dishonouring the Lord in profaning his
Worship and Abusing his Ordinances: but also in giving such an evil Example to
God's People by their wicked Practices, (whom they should have Instructed in
the good ways of God according to their Office) so as to make them withdraw
from God's Worship, when they saw it so much profaned by their Impieties. This
God Complains of (as a Spiritual loss to his Peoples Souls) more than of the
Honor of his own Name dishonored thereby: Hence it is said the People
Transgressed in Neglecting to come to God's Worship in Shilo; The Men would not
come, while those profane Priests Theevishly and Sacrilegiously Abused God's
Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 2. 13, to 16. And the Women durst not come for Fear of a
Rape, v. 22. for those lewd losels (though they had Wives of their own) were
sick of a Plurisie for knowing more Women. And like the Devil their Master,
loved to Sow their Seed upon other Men's Ground, Matthew. 13. 25. The 2d. Malady
was The Failure of Prophecy in those licentious times of Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 2. The
Word of the Lord was Precious in those Days, though there was some secret
Vision as to Manoah and his Wife, Judge. 13. yet there was no open Vision, the
Spirit of Prophecy was Rare and Scarce, and therefore Precious, [Rara,
Praeclara] in those Days of Detestable Debauchery, and both Neglect and
Contempt of God's Worship, for which God Inflicted this fore Judgment upon
them, that they should have a Famine of the Word, Amos 8. 12. and that there
should not be a Prophet among them, nor any that could tell them how long,
Psalm. 74. 9. It Is very sad with the Church, when there is a Sealing up of
Prophecy, Dan. 12. 4. and she is plainly benighted in this way-less Wilderness:
This Darkness upon Israel, (who were Children of light and of the Day, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 5. could not but please the Prince of Darkness, and give him both light and
fight of the Success of his Plot, to make them both stumble and fall, Joh. 3.
20. 1 John 2. 11. The 3d. Malady is, the Captivity of the Ark, which was first
Touched, (for which Vzzah perished, 2 Samuel 6, 6. 7.) and also taken by the
Hands of the Uncircumcised, 1 Samuel 4. 11. which made the Wife of Phinehas to
cry out, [Ichabod] that Glory was departed from Israel; the greatness of her
Grief made her Repeat it Twice, v. 21, 22. seeing the Sign of God's presence
and Protection, (which was therefore called their Glory, Psalm. 78. 61. the Face
of God, Psalm. 105. 4. Yea, God himself, Psalm 122. 5.) was carried Captive, as
if the Devil had been too strong for God, and as if God could keep the Ark no
longer, but was Constrained to let it go out of Canaan into the Country of the
Philistines, who verily Thought they had taken the God of Israel Prisoner, v.
8. Indeed Israel ascribed that Honor to the Ark of God, which was Due only to
God himself; for upon their Defeat, (knowing no other Cause, though there was
enough, Psa. 78. 58, 61, 62, 63. but the want of the Ark.) They send for it to
Shilo, that it might save them, v. 3, 4. (1) without Consulting with God, (2)
they brought it into the Camp without due Reverence, (3) and that by the Hands
of Two prossligate Priests; All which was more likely to bring a Curse upon
them, and not a Blessing: When this Ark of Wood was made an Idol by the
Israelites, they fare worse and not better, v. 2, 10. Notwithstanding its
presence (external privileges rested and Trusted in, are more Destructive than
Saving, Romans 2. 9.) and God justly suffers it to be taken from them by the
Philistines.

Now the Devil having got the Ark of God into his own Temple, to wit, the
Temple of Dagon, (which they had Rebuilt, since Samson pulled it Down, Judge.
16. 23, 25.) and the Two Cherubims now Spreading their Wings under the Roof of
an Ugly Image (Half a Fish and Half a Man,) no doubt, but he had a further and
fairer Prospect of prospering in his Project; yet even Then God Awakes, (who
had been Asleep, as it were, all this time, Psalm. 78. 65, 60.) puts forth his
Power, Beats Dagon upon his own Dunghill, yea, Beats him down to the Ground, as
if he had met his Worshippers to Worship them, and falls down to them, that
came the next Morning to fall down to him, 1 Samuel 5. 3. and when their
Superstition had made them more Senseless than their Senseless Idol, Psalm. 115.
8. they become Patrons to their God, and (as if it had been only a Chance)
Helps him up into his place. He is a miserable God that cannot Rise alone, but
stands in need of Helping up by his own Worshippers, and craves more Help from
them than ever he could give to them: Dagon is again raised up into His
Rood-loft to Affront the Ark, and has those very hands lifted up to him, which
had helped to lift him up. Will a Jealous God (who Winks and sits still on
purpose to behold their mad Folly and stupid Confidence, and to Fetch about his
own Glory) put up this Injury? shall this Lifeless Stone continue as a sit
Companion with the Living God, and escape Scot-free with an Harmless Fall? No,
God cannot Brook Corrivals, Dagon Falls again and Breaks his Neck, His Head
(the Seat of Wisdom,) and His Hands (the Seat of Power) were both Cut off, v.
4. to show them their God could neither Consult nor Act for them; yea, God had
chopp'd them off upon the Threshold of his own Temple, (as a Cook sometimes
does the Head and Legs of a great Fowl for his Masters Dinner) and now those
that came to Worship him, might Tread those parts (they most Trusted in) under
foot, as unsavory Salt, and Dagon was now no better than a Dunghill-Deity:
They might now set their Foot upon the best parts of their Idol; whereon they
had set their Heart, and now those chiefest pieces met them at the Threshold to
tell them how much they were mistaken in their Headless, Handless, and ever
Footless God, Nothing but the Stump remained, to wit, the Fishy part that had
no Feet, and that also sadly Bruised and Battered by the Fall. And because
those obstinate Idolaters, instead of giving Glory to God who had Destroyed
their Idol, gave Honor to the Threshold which their Dagon had Touched, v. 5.
(whereby, however, God perpetuated the Memory of the Miracle in the minds of
Posterity) as if the Broken Head and Hands of the Idol had Hallowed it, They
had it in great Veneration. Thus the Pagans of Old Kissed the Threshold of
their Temples, and the Papagans at this Day do Kiss the Threshold of
Peters-Church in Rome, when they enter into it. Suppose it were done (as some
say) by way of Detestation, and not by way of Veneration, as Dear Relations
will Detest to touch that Sword wherewith their near Friend has been
Murdered: yet even so the Romanists do Symbolize with those Uncircumcised,
inasmuch as the Pope in his Solemn Procession declineth to Walk that Street in
Rome, wherein Pope Joan was Delivered, as a Street unhappy to the Credit of
their Church: Thus the Priests of the Devil might forbear to Tread upon the
Threshold that was so Unhappy as to break the Head and Hands of their Supposed
Deity: However, the Lord was Angry, for no better Improoving the Fall of their
Idol, (neither the first nor second) therefore Falls he foul upon themselves,
pays their Posteriours like so many Puniboys, and Plagues them with Emrods,
yea, and (as some think) with the Foul Disease, and likewise with Mice, that
Marred their Land, (as the Blind Piles Marred themselves.) Their Dagon could
not drive so much as a poor Mouse from them; insomuch that their own Mouths
Confessed, [The Lord's Hand is sore upon us, and upon Dagon our God.] v. 7. The
Ark is too Hot for them to Hold; They carry the Ark of God, (and with it the
Plague of God) up and down to their Neighbors, any whither they would bear it,
rather than Home to Israel; until God forced them to yield, saying, Let the Ark
Return to its own place, v. 11. Yea, and that City which first said so, fared
the best, for the Men there Dyed not as they did in other Cities. Thus God's
Revenge Works out [Nolens, Volens,] the Ark's Return, and not without a
Trepass Offering, though Ridiculous, such as Satan (in Contempt of God) had
suggested to their Diviners, 1 Samuel 6. 2, 4. The Ark is carried Home by two
Untamed and Untrained Kine, that had Calves at Home, (which, Naturally, they
break through All to come at) and that without a Driver; All this made the
Miracle greater: God (Himself) drove the Cart, and made the Kine know their
Owner, Isa. 1. 3. which Hophni and Phinehas (Two Priests had not done, 1 Samuel
2. 12. This was (no doubt) The Fruit of Samuel's Prayer, (in whom the Lord
Restored the lost Spirit of Prophecy; hence is he called the first of the
Prophets after that Failure, Act. 3. 24. Hebr. 11. 32.) and of Israel that
Lamented after the Ark, not being Contented with an Empty Tabernacle, but
thought themselves forlorn without the Ark in it. Thus Gracious was God to his
poor People to make the presence of the Prisoner (the Ark) Grievous to the
Philistines, and being set at Liberty, Joyful to Israel: Even so will the Lord
do with all those that Deal thu with the Gospel, as they did with the Ark, he
will make them Smart for it, and Laugh all their Plots to Nothing, Especially,
if God give his Samuels to his Church, that cease not to Cry to the Lord for
her, at her Request, 1 Samuel 7. 8, 9. And the Spirit of Repentance be powered out
upon his People, so that All (Universally) Lament after the Lord, even with
Storms of Sighs, and Shours of Tears (though after 20 Y. Bondage and
Backslidings, v. 2, to 6. Weeping before the Lord abundantly, that their
Sorrowing might be proportionable to their Sinning. Samuel's Sermons to Israel,
in his Itinerary Circuits, wrought so powerfully upon them, as to fetch Groans
out of their Hearts, Tears out of their Eyes, Vows out of their Mouths, and
Idols out of their Hands. Oh! for such a Divine Dispensation in our Day; then
though the Five Lords of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 6. 16. those Five Lords in the
Tower do Plot against us, and Assault us in our Fasting and Praying; If our
Samuels do but Cry, (as he was Excellent at that Work, Psalm. 99. 6. Jer. 15.
1.) and Offer up the Lamb of God with their Prayers, (as he did, v. 7, 9.) God
will Hear, and Thunder upon them with a great Thunder, as v. 10. and Chapter 2. 10.
and Josh. 10. 10. Judge. 4. 15. and smite them so (at Beth-car, the House of the
Lamb) as to make them come no more, v. 10, 11, 12, 13. the same God is our
Eben-Ezor, or Stone of Help, v. 12.

The Fourteenth Plot against the CHURCH, in Canaan: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. XIV.
WHen God had Graciously given a Suitable Remedy to that great Malady (by Eli's
Sons) in Holy Samuel, and so had Established his Church, Ark, and Worship
again; Satan played his Pranks, and plys his Plots again, in the Days of Saul,
David, and Solomon. 1st. of Saul. The Wicked One (never Idle) Debauches
Samuel's Sons, (as he had done Eli's) notwithstanding their stricter Education,
(Samuel could not well be guilty of that Sin of fond Indulgency, which he, from
God, had Reprooved in Eli.) This gave the Occasion to Israel for changing their
Aristocracy (or rather, Theocracy, 1 Samuel 8. 7.) into a Monarchy, and Saul (of
Wicked Gibeah, Judge. 19.) was set over them, for his Stature, (as David was
after, for his Heart.) Saul at first Reigned (as a King) well and Orderly, but
being Rejected of God for Disobedience, he turned a Tyrant, and Ruled with
Rigor, 1 Samuel 13. 1. with 14. 47. Then the Spirit of the Lord departed from
Saul, and an evil Spirit from the Devil (by the Lord's leave) possessed him,
Chapter 16. 14. which cast him into Fits of Phrenzy and Fury. Here began the 1st.
Branch of this 14th. Plot in Readiness Reign, as the other Two did in David's and
Solomon's, which all Three (in Conjunction) makes up this 14th. Diabolical
design against the Church of God. By Isreal's 1st. King, Satan labors to Hinder
the Church; By the 2d. God Advances her; By the 3d. God brought her to her
greatest Glory. 1st. In Saul; who at his first Entry quitted himself nobly, in
the overthrow of Isreal's Enemies; but when scarce well warm in his Kingdom, he
Hears of losing it, 1. For his Incroaching into the Priests Office of
Sacrifising, 1 Samuel 13. 8, 9, 13, 14. where his distrust made him praecipitant,
he should have stayed for Samuel one Hour or two longer; had he done so, his
Kingdom had been Established upon him, but his Rotten Heart was Discovered by
this Delay, and his Doing foolishly in Thrusting himself among the Priests as
he had done among the Prophets, procures him tidings of its Translation to
Another whose Heart was Upright, Psalm. 57. 7. and who would do all Gods wills,
Act. 13. 22. 2ly. For his sparing Agag with his Amalekites and Cattle, contrary
to God's express Command, 1 Samuel 15. 2, 3, 8, 9, 26, 28. out of foolish pity
to his fellow-King he spared the one, and because he Feared the People, he
spared the other; therefore Samuel said to him, The Lord has Rejected thee,
etc. And this Doubly Declared Rejection, brings him into a sad Melancholic
Dejection. Discontent is called the Devil's Bath, wherein he Delights to Wade.
The old Manslayer takes this Advantage, and turns his Melancholly-dumps into a
mad Phrenzy, inasmuch as in his frantic Fits he Transports him outragiously to
Slay all in his way, Friends as well as Foes, even his own dear Jonathan once,
Chapter 20. 33. as well as his Deserving David often, sometimes covertly, as Chapter
18. 17, 25. and sometimes overtly, as v. 11. and Chapter 19. 10. The Devil (that
Evil Spirit possessing him,) had filled Readiness Heart from Corner to Corner with
his own Disease, to wit, Envy (which is called Morbus Satanicus and Vitium
Diabolicum,) against David, whom he knew God had Raised up to Raise up the low
Estate of His Church, 1 Samuel 24. 20. Yet (by the overruling Hand of God.) The
Spirit of the Lord that rested upon David from his first Anointing, chapter 10. 13.
(by the power of which he Killed a Bear and a Lion, Chap. 17. 34.) was all
along too hard for Saul's Devil, not only when David's Music drove away Saul's
Melancholy, Chap. 16. 23. but also in all Saul's both Secret Craft and open
Cruelty: 1st. In his Craft; How many Plots did the Devil (in Saul) contrive to
cut off David from advancing the Church, yet God Laughs them all to nothing;
and it is very Remarkable* God Extracts Happy Remedies out of the very Loins of
Wretched Saul against all David's Unhappy Maladies; once Michal, and often
Jonathan, Saul's own Son and Daughter. God makes use of his own Children to
disappoint him of his Wicked Design, and to deliver Innocent David, whom he
foolishly followed as his Adversary, Chap. 19. 2, 4, 12, 13, etc. and 20. 27,
29, 30. 34, to 42. Jonathan shot over David that Saul might shoot short of him.
And 2dly. in his Cruelty, When he threw his Javelin three times to Kill David,
yet the Lord Interposes as often, and he who Guided the Stone (which David did
sling) unto Goliah's Forehead for his Destruction, Diverts Saul's Javelin from
David's Body, (though a fairer Mark and nearer hand) for his Deliverance: This
was Saul's Cordolium or Heart-ake, when he could not come at and compass David's
Heart to destroy it, (whose only Fault was Faithfulness, and who must dye,
only because he made Israel Live.) Saul (as is the Nature of Envy) feeds upon
his own heart, Chapter 18. 12, 15. Invidia Siculi non Invenere Tyranni majus
Tormentum. Envy exceeds all the Torments the Tyrants of Sicily ever Invented;
it destroys its own Habitation, as the Worm does the Nut wherein it is bred.
Thus God made Saul his own Inward Executioner (by sending this Fire into his
Bosom to burn him, and this Worm to be continually gnawing upon his Intrals)
long before he was his own Outward Executioner, at last. And Saul's Frantic
Devil did not hurry him into Outrageous Cruelty against David only, but
against the Priests of the Lord, for showing kindness to David, Chap. 22. 12,
13, 16, etc. Oh what a Mad Phrensy was manifest in his cruel Commission! [Turn
and slay the Priests of the Lord, Ver. 17. His malice was bent against the Lord
himself, for taking away his Kingdom and giving it to another, and because he
could not come at the Lord (who was out of his reach) he spends his Spleen and
vents his mad Fury upon his Priests: It Is a wonder, that the very Word [the
Priests of the Lord] in his Mouth, did not make his Hands tremble to Murder
them, and that without two or three Witnesses according to the Law, but only
upon the bare single Testimony of a falie and flattering Sycophant; hence some
say, that this Damnable Hypocrite (Saul) did commit herein, the Sin against the
Holy Ghost, Massacreing such a multitude of Innocents, as 8, Priests, as the
Scripture, and 300 persons more, as Josephus tells us, Chap. 18. ver. 18, 19.
and though his own Servants durst not do such a Villainy, verse. 17. obeying God
rather then the King, yet Doeg (that bloody Edomite of Esau) that had been as
far in Gods Sanctuary as David, Chap. 21. 7. sticks not at this Desperate
Villainy; yet in this Horrid Act of Cruelty, God baffles the Devil that acted
Saul and (his Swine-herd) Doeg in two respects. 1st. While this base and bloody
Wretch and his Master thought of nothing but Revenge, and satiating both their
barbarous and brutish, yea, Devilish Blood-thirstiness, they are Unwittingly
made the Executioners of Gods Determined Counsel, and justly declared sentence
of God against Eli's Family, Chap. 3. 31, to 37. 2dly. As they served Gods
Glory, so they sent David Comfort: Abiathar God marvelously hid from their
bloody hands, he escapes them according to Gods promise of preserving some of
Eli's House, Chap. 2. 33. and comes to David with the Ephod in his hand, Chap.
22. 20. and 23. 6. This Ephod had the Breast plate with the Urim and Thummim in
it, Exodus 28. 30. The coming of this must needs be very comfortable to
Distressed David; Now he has an High Priest, Abiathar, with him (as well as
the Prophet Gad, Chap. 22. 5.) in his Army, by whom he might consult with God
in all his Dangers and difficulties, Chap. 23. 2, 4. and often. Saul
strengthened David more by sending this Ephod, than if he had sent him (as one
says) many thousand men: And as he strengthened David, so he weakened himself,
as he complains, God answered him not by Vrim and Thummim, 1 Samuel 28. 6. He had
bereaved himself of it, by putting Abiathar to the Run, who brings it to David,
which was a plain Evidence of Saul's Falling and David's Rising: Saul had neither
Priest nor Prophet to consult with (when David had both) Hereupon he consults
with a Witch, Flectere Cum Nequeat Superos Acheronta Movebit. If God will not
answer him, the Devil shall: Satan comes up in Samuels Resemblance, Preaches
Saul's Funeral-Sermon, he flies in Battle, falls upon his own Sword, so like the
Candle in the Socket, goes out in a Stink, and (notwithstanding all his Plots
he leaves himself to the Uncircumcised; yea, his Body to a cold Grave, and his
Soul to an hot Hell, as an Hypocrite, Matt. 24. 51. and leaves his Kingdom to
David.

The 2d. Branch of this 14th. Plot, was in the Reign of David, whose entrance
to the Kingdom was strongly opposed, not only all the time Saul lived (being
Hunted like a Patridge upon the Mountains, to be taken and destroyed) but also
after his Death by Abner, under the Hereditary Title of Ishbosheth, a man of
Shame, (as his Name signifies) a weak and Unworthy man, (passing by
Mephibosheth the Right Heir, (because Young and Lame) as hoping to Rule all
under his Empty Title. Hereupon it is said, 2 Samuel 3. 6. that Abner (not
Ishbosheth) made himself strong for the house of Saul, to bring about his own
Design, and to fix himself fast in the Saddle; Yet God did Laugh this Project
to Nothing: The Issue was, though there was long War betwixt them (as there is
'twixt Christ and Antichrist) The House of Saul waxed weaker and weaker, and
the House of David Stronger and stronger, 2 Samuel 3. 1. So the Stone, Dan. 2.
Weakens the Beasts Kingdom gradually. It Is Wonderful to consider, How the Lord
Baffled the Devil here, in sending an Evil Spirit 'twixt Abner and Ish-bosheth
(as he had done 'twixt Abimelech and Shechem, Judge. 9. 23, 24, 25. which Evil
Spirit was the Devil, that sower of Sedition, that great Coal-kindler and
Makebate of the World) 2 Samuel 3.8, 10. God Overrules the Devil so, as to make
him destroy his own Designs, by his Working upon those Men's Corruptions (whom
God had justly given over to a Reprobate mind) and filling them with Envy,
Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity, etc. Romans 1. 28, 29. Here, Abner the Devil
makes first an Athiest, in acting all along contrary to his Conscience, v. 9,
18. He knew that God had designed David to be King over Israel, whom Samuel
Anointed to be Readiness Successor, yet against the Light of his own knowledge, as
well as against Gods express command, he endeavors to set up Ishbosheth. 2dly.
The Devil makes him an Ambitionist, not only in advancing this weak Prince, of
small parts, and of no Martial Spirit, (he not fighting in that fatal Battle
wherein his Father did fall) that he might be the [Dominus, fac totum] Lord
Paramount of doing All, but also in aspiring to the Crown and Kingdom it self,
by his Lying with Readiness Concubine (who had two Sons) which might give some
Color to his Claim. When Ishbosheth was taken out of the way, whom he had
hitherto used only as a Stalking-Horse: Upon this occasion the Devil divides
the two Grand Plotters against David, Chap. 3.7, 8. and so Defeats his own
Design. Unlawful Leagues never last long; when Thieves fall out, True men come
to their own. Abner will now be Godly (who never had been so) in helping the
Lord to fulfill his Promise to David, which he had hitherto hindered; He
pretends, all (he now acts) was in Obedience to God, and for the Good of his
Church, but intends both Revenge to Ishbosheth, and Respect to himself, that he
might thereby secure his present Power and Dignity of Generalship: But, because
he would have done David right with an Evil mind, it all turns to his own ruin,
and God will Right David by a fairer way than by Abners Persidiousness; So vain
a thing it is to strive against God, Psalm. 2. 1, 2. David (in despite of the
Devil) does come to his Kingdom (though by Steps, and gradually) Ish-bosheth is
removed out of the way (as well as Abner:) He dies in his Sloth, as he had
lived Slothfully all his days, Chap. 4. 5. Qualis Vita, Finis Ita. As a man
lives, so he dies. All Israel then owns and Crowns David, (Cha. 5.) Who, as
soon as settled on the Throne, expressed his first care for the Church and
Religion, Chap. 6. So brings the Ark (as they had brought him from Hebron to
Jerusalem,) from Kiriath Jearim, (where in Readiness days it had been slighted) to
Obed-Edoms, and thence to Sion, a more public place than those private Houses
wherein it had been before, verse 17. This was a joyful day to David (and
Israel) v. 14, 16, 19. And not being satisfied that himself should dwell in an
house of Cedar, while the Ark of God's presence dwelt in a Tabernacle, he both
designs and vows to Build it a Temple, Chap. 7. 2. Psalm. 132. 2. Nathan hinders
this purpose, and promise, yet left he vast Provisions for his Son to perform
it, his Psalms for the Church, and the Church in a flourishing Condition,
(notwithstanding all disturbances,) which Solomon brings to Her Greatest Glory,
and after Advanced to Her Hight.

The 3d. Branch of this 14th. Plot, was, in the Reign of solomon: before which
Satan had his fore-Games to Oppose, as his after-Games to Depose the Church's
Glory. The 1st. His fore-Games were in causing Absalom and Adonijah to Exalt
themselves both, saying, I will be King, that Solomon might be put by, and
never have an opportunity to raise the Church into a more Glorious State then
it had ever been in, which Satan Designed to Ruin by insolent and arrogant
Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. 10. and by haughty and ambitious Adonijah, 1 Kin. 1. 5.
Those two Sons were David's Darlings, whom he had honored above the Lord (as
Eli had done his two wicked Sons, 1 Samuel 2. 29.) and therefore they proved sad
Cordoliums, and singular crosses to him: Such as love overmuch, shall be sure
to grieve overmuch, strong affections bring strong afflictions: The Devil
manages the first part of his fore-game by Absalom, and the latter part of it
by Adonijah, both of them goodly men, of a comely countenance, both personable,
and of a Princely presence, 2 Samuel 14. 25. 1 Kin. 1.6. upon whom Nature had
spent all her strength in beautifying their bodies (says one) but she had left
their Souls altogether unbeautified; they had (both of them) foul fouls in fair
bodies; so were both the fitter Tools for Satan to work with to prevent Solomon
from the Throne, and thereby the glory of the Church: David had always cockered
them, when he should have corrected them; and because they were both
personable, and Prince-like, as the Children of a King, Judge. 8. 18. therefore
were they made to think better of themselves, and their (ever too-fond) Father
to think too well of them, their Father had not displeased them at any time in
their Childhood, and therefore they displeased their Father in his Old Age, and
made no bones of breaking his heart, when now decayed, and even Bed-ridden (as
in the last) by their Disloyalty and Usurpation: yet all was, that it might be
fulfilled what was fore-threatned, 2 Samuel 12. 11. 1st. Arrogant Absalom was
hammering and hatching his part of the Plot two full years, 2 Samuel 14. 28. with
15. 1. after David had kissed him (being persuaded by Joab that he was a true
Penitent) when he should rather have kicked him, and not have hardened him for
further Villainy by his fond credulity: (1.) He gains a guard, that he might be
put into the Port of a Prince (being the Kings Eldest Son) that so the people
might look upon him as Heir of the Kingdom, and by counterfeit courtesy
(wherein he slandered David) he soon stole away their hearts) from his Father
the Right Owner) slily and secretly: (2.) He makes Religion a Cloak for his
Rebellion (as is usual in the Papaey) Chapter 15. 6, 7, 8. Let me go and pay my
Vows, etc. well knowing, that his Pious Father would promote rather than
prevent any act of Piety in his Son; and Hebron was the sit place for his
purpose, because ancient and famous, the place of his Fathers first Crowning,
of his own Birth, and where he had many Friends to assist him: (3.) He calls
Achitophel to be his Counselor; that old Fox laid close till the Plot was
ripe, yet probably he paved the way (from the first) by his persuading to take
two hundred Principal Citizens along with him, (the better to conceal the Plot,
and that other Cities might make Jerusalem their pattern to follow Absalom)
those are said to follow Absalom in their simplicity, to wit, to his
Gratulatory Oblation, knowing nothing of his villainous and rebellious
intention: Even so it may be said of our Forefathers, they followed Antichrist
in their simplicity; for they being kept (by him) in gross ignorance, had this
happiness, not to know the depths of Satan in the most principal and most
pernicious points of Popery, Gods Providence so overruling the matter, that
the people of Christ might not perish under the Priests of Antichrist. (4.) The
Conspiracy was strong, by a mighty confluence of the common people, who were
but over-ready to worship this Rising Sun, and to be weary of David (the
Setting Sun) whose Credit the Conspirators had blacked and blasted to them,
Neutrum modo, mas modo Vulgus. The many-headed multitude cry even to Christ
himself (of whom David was both Father and Figure) Hosanna one day, and
Crucisie the next day. This put holy David to such a fright, that he was forced
to take his slight to save himself from slaying (according to Achitophels
counsel, 2 Samuel 17. 3.) and his chief City from sacking. Now was the Devil
undoubtedly most highly pleased, not doubting here, but having got the Ball
upon his foot, he should carry it cut and dried, and prevent Solomon from the
Crown, and the Church from her Glory. But behold God over-matches the Devil
here, David pours out his Prayer (made in Psalm. 3.) on the top of Mount Olivet,
where he prays himself into a particular Faith of his own deliverance, and of
his Enemies destruction. And when David's case seemed so desperate, as if
Salvation (it self) could not save him, v. 2. yet even then did God arise at
his prayer, v. 7. and gives David a Prophetic prospect, not only of the death,
but also of the manner of the death of his two grand Adversaries, Achitophel
and Absalom: [Thou have smitten them upon the Cheek-bones] as if he had seen
Achitophel knocked with the Knot of the Rope, and Absalom with the Bough of the
Oak wherein they were hanged, by the heavy Hand of God: It Is very observable,
that no sooner had David prayed, [Lord turn the counsel of Achitophel into
foolishness] 2 Samuel 15. 31. but presently God sends him in Hushai as a return
of his prayer, a Man who could match Achitophel in any of his deepest reaches,
and who did defeat his counsel (which might very probably have destroyed David)
by starching an Oration every way accommodated to Absaloms ambitious humor,
Chapter 17. 7. to 15. and when David's deliverance depends all upon the faithfulness
of a Wench, v. 17. God delights to work by weak means to confound the Mighty, 1
Cor. 1. 27. and to help his servants with a little help, Dan. 11. 34. Though
the Devil at that time had a Lad (he never wants tools) to work mischief by in
such cases, v. 18. yet the issue of this first part of Satan's fore-game was
this, the Grand Counselor of the Conspiracy (Achitophel) seeing his counsel
basled, sadled his Ass, (when he should have bridled his anger) got him home to
his house, and (as Josephus says) told his household, that Absalom would be
undone, and himself should be hanged; wherefore he thought it better to save
David's Hangman the labor, and to prevent him, with dying manfully by his own
hands: He set his house (but not his heart) in order; he took care of his
Family after his death, but no care of his Soul for Eternity; he hanged himself
(as Judas did after him for the like Crime) so strangled he those very Chaps
wherewith he had given wicked counsel against David (as Judas did against
Christ) both despairing of mercy, 2 Samuel 17. 23. Mat. 27. 3, 4. The like fatal
end to the like froward Counselors the good Lord send in our day, says Dr.
Willet. In all this Achitophel did but answer the signification of his own
name, for Achi Hebr. signifies Brother, or Cousin-German, and Tophel Hebr. a
Fool. Thus this Arch-Artist in Hellish Policy, etc. (whose counsel was as the
Oracle of God, the Event usually answering his Advice with suitable success, 2 Samuel 16. 23.) proves no better than a Brother or Cousin-German to a Fool; and
no better proof can they make, that follow the Popes Placit as Infallible, as
Ipsissimum Dei Verbum, the very Word of God when they are most damnably wicked;
like that pernicious and pestilent counsel of Achitophel, which brought Absalom
into the briars, and could never get out, until this Grand Commander in the
Conspiracy followed in the same Fate, and came to the same end with his Grand
Counselor, only with some difference: As (1.) God (himself) was his
Executioner, giving him a just reward for his unjust Rebellion; 'twas of the
Lord that he should be reserved from the Sword, to be entangled in the Oak.
(2.) This Divine Execution does make his Hair to be his Halter; and that
wherein he had so much prided, to be the means of his own destruction: His long
Locks he had possibly plaited (as Samsons, Judge. 16. 13.) and those being blown
up by a strong wind, wound about the Bough, and became his Halter to hang by:
He had wont to weigh his Hair, and was proud to find it so heavy: Now his Hair
poiseth the weight of his body, and makes his burden his torment. (3.) His own
Mule he rode on (as it were) turns him off the Ladder, Achitophels Ass carries
him to the place of his Execution, and he turns himself off when be had tied
his Halter for his turn, and put his Head into it: But Absaloms Mule not only
beans her Master to that place, but when all was ready for Execution, runs from
under him with the Reins uncurbed, as the Cart at Tyburn drives away when the
Tippet is fast about the Necks of the Condemned. Thus this Plot ends in the
cursod and ignominious Death (Deuteronomy. 21. 23.) of both those Grand Conspirators,
who were both hanged between Heaven and Earth, as if rejected of both, and as
unworthy to live in either of them. Behold Absalom (whose name signifies Hebr.
his Fathers pla^^^ whereas he breathed out nothing but War and Rebellion
against him) is hanged by that Head which had plotted against so good a Father:
His haughty Head is now in its proper Exaltation, and his arrogant heart has
no less than three Darts thrust through it, En Admirandum Dei Judicium, Divine
Vengeance over-takes him with a revengeful hand for his detestable disloyalty,
who would needs be a King before David's death, and now has he an Oak to be his
Throne, his twisted Hair for his Crown, the Darts in his heart for his Scepter,
and Joabs ten Armour-bearers for his Guard, 2 Samuel 18. 9. Oh wonderful!

And little better was the end of the Devils second part of his fore-game in
Adonijahs, than was his first part in Absalom: It Is true, 'twixt those two the
Devil was not idle, but did disturb the Church, (1.) By instigating Sheba, a
man of Belial, to blow up another blub of Rebellion at the very heel of
Absaloms, 2 Samuel 20. 1. He himself being Tuba Rebellionis, a Trumpet of
Rebellion, blew a Trumpet, taking an occasion of the unhappy difference 'twixt
Israel and Judah, Chapter 19. but he was soon suppressed by David's Forces suddenly
surprising him in a Siege at Abel, where a wise Woman wrought upon the timorous
Citizens to throw over the Head of the Traitor to General Joab; 'twere happy if
all such Traitors might hop headless. (2.) By provoking David, that Man of God,
to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. He pricked him up to a pride both in the
magnanimity of his Worthies, and in the multitude of his Army, which was no
better than Creature-confidence: This sin brought a Plague upon Israel, to
lessen their number, which David began to make his pride, and probably intended
to make his profit (by Polling them.) This Plague was threatened to last three
days, but in the beginning (not in the midst) of wrath, God remembered mercy,
Hab. 3. 2. For as Vatablus notes on 2 Samuel 24. 15. God repented, and bad the
destroying Angel hold his hand at the evening of the first day, which
commends Gods good eye to his Church (while it was under the Devils evil eye)
who for three days threatened, sends the Pestilence one day only: Yea, and
Divine Mercy extracted this great good out of this great evil, that in the very
place where the Angel was bid to put up his Sword, David builds an Altar,
offers Sacrifice, and God answers him by Fire from Heaven, to betoken his
acceptance and reconcilement, and he pointed out from Heaven the place where
the Temple should be built, which whole plat of ground David purchased for six
hundred shekels of Gold, 1 Chronicles. 21. 25.

Now as to Adonijah, the Rabbis say, David was so frighted at the Dreadful
Apparition of the Destroying Angel, that he became Bedridden ever after, and his
impatient ambitious Adonijah would gladly have buried him alive, and wishing
his Bed his Grave. Hereupon he exalts himself, saying, I will be King, 1 King.
1. 5. Though David had declared Solomon to be designed King even from God
himself, (1 Chronicles. 22. 9, 10. and 28. 5. and 2 Samuel 7. 12.) and Adonijah knew
it to be so, and therefore he called not Solomon and his Friends to his Feast,
v. 19. The Plot and Conspiracy was strong in him (as it had been in Absalom)
being strengthened by the hands of Joab the General, and Abiathar the
High Priest, both under some disgust, and so more easily engaged: Joab was
conscious of his own demerit, and Abiathar might fear the extinction of Elies
House: Those two Grandees (having an influence upon both Church and State)
could not but give a fair prospect of the Plot, and hope of success, v. 7.
especially considering all the other Sons of David did join with them in the
exploit, respecting Adonijah (as now the Eldest) more than Solomon, and all the
men of Judah, the Kings servants, v. 9. Hereupon the Plotters fall on feasting
jovially, and undoubtedly many a merry Health was drunk to their new King
Adonijah (who had got his Guards as Absalom had done, v. 5.) many a Taunt was
cast on the old King, and many Acclamations to the new: But the Triumph of the
wicked is short, Job 20. 5. David upon this Emergency hastily Anoints Solomon;
tidings of this mars all Adonijahs mirth; after the Meal comes the Reckoning
that damps the mirth, v. 41. yea, when the Plotters were at the very height of
their joys and jollities, God comes and confounds all their contrivances, and
serves up for their last Dish at this Feast a Cup of Horror, Astonishment, and
fearful expectation of righteous revenge, this dreadful sound in their ears,
(Job 15. 21, 24.) The Feasters had heard at Solomon's Coronation, v. 40. was a
doleful Knell to them, and like the Knuckles upon the Wall, Dan. 5. made them
(as Belshazzar did) knock their knees one against another: The Guests were all
afraid, and rose up, and went, etc. v. 49. as well as their trembling legs
could carry them, all sculking away: Their Plot (being laid open, and timely
prevented) laid them open to the scorn of the people, and to the anguish and
horror of their own guilty Consciences.

Thus does the most wise and righteous God befool insolent men in their never
so secretly projected and promoted Plots, wherein they do hope to supplant the
Son of David, our Lord Jesus, that Prince of Peace, as those did Solomon here,
and the Church in him: But what became of the Plotters? Adonijah (himself)
flies to the Horns of the Altar, (which probably so profane a Prince had
hitherto despised) and was pardoned by this peaceable Prince, but upon his good
behavior, v. 52. which when he broke, in seeking the Kingdom with Abishai,
Chapter 2. 22. (being no small Petition, as Bathsheba called it, v. 20. for
Solomon's sagacity saw the depths of the Devil in it, which his Mother could not
dive into) for this he lost his life, v. 24. as Joab did after him, v. 30.
where the very Altar could not secure him from Just Vengeance; and as for
Abiathar, he was thrust out from the High Priesthood, v. 37. his Linen Ephod,
or sacred Function, did not exempt him from Civil Censures, as the Romanists
plead; and so was fulfilled the Word of the Lord upon Ely's House, 1 Samuel 2.
31, 35* and had he not been afflicted in all wherein David had been afflicted
(which was for above forty year) he had been also a dead man with Adonijah and
Joab for this Conspiracy.

David dies full of days, riches and honor, 1 Chronicles. 29. 28. and leaves the
state of the Church honorable, Solomon succeeds, and brings the Churches State
to its (...), or highest pitch of Glory, while Militant, which is a Figure of
the Kingdom of Christ (one greater than Solomon) here on Earth; David had
advanced the splendor of the Church, in his Religious provision for the
portable Temple, to wit, the Tabernacle erected in the City of David, and also
in his Religious preparations for the Fixed Temple, (1.) Knowing the place
where it should stand, to wit, on Mount Moriah, where Abraham offered Isaac,
Genesis 22. 2, 9. and 2 Chro. 3. 1. (2.) Receiving the pattern of it by Divine
Inspiration, 1 Chronicles. 28. 19. he gave it to Solomon, Chapter 29. 11. who by the
help of David's prepared materials (to wit (1.) Spoils of Enemies, Chapter 18. 11.
(2.) An hundred thousand Talents of Gold. (3.) A thousand thousand Talents of
Silver. (4.) Hewn stone and Timber. (5.) Iron and Brass without measure, Chapter
22.14. (6.) Precious Stones, Chapter 29. 2. (7.) His own offerings, and those of
the Princes and people, Chapter 29.4. etc. though Solomon added much more of his
own store) built the most stately and costly Structure, the most sumptuous and
glorious Edifice that ever was in the World (therefore justly called the Worlds
Wonder) the House of the most High God, 2 Chronicles. 2. 5. and a Type of the Church
Triumphant in Heaven, as the Tabernacle had been of the Church Militant upon
Earth. This Temple was twice so long and large every way, as was the Tabernacle
Exodus 26. as the Temple in Ezekiel. Chapter 40. 41, 42, etc. (setting forth
Gospel Times) is described as much bigger than all the old Jerusalem, and a new
Jerusalem bigger than all the Land of Canaan. Solomon finished his Temple in
the year of the World 3000. Hence some gather, that the Spiritual Temple shall
be completed in 3000 more, and then the Sabbatical year shall take place, as
the Sabbath succeeds the six days of the Week. In the building of this
Magnifical House of the Lord, all the materials were made ready before they
were brought thither; so that there was neither Hammer, nor Axe, nor any Tool
of Iron heard in the House while it was in building, 1 King. 6. 7. to teach us
three things: 1. That all true Members of Churches must be sanctified, and
called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2. hewn by the Word and Spirit, and made
living Stones before Admission. 2. That in the Church Militant upon Earth, all
noise of jars and contentions (which are as the knocking of Iron Instruments)
must be declined. 3. That in the Church Triumphant in Heaven there shall be no
sorrows nor sufferings, all noise of fears and tears shall be done away, the
State then shall be peaceable and joyful, for which the Saints are fitted by
the Hammer of Gods Word, and the Hand of his Spirit upon the Mountains of this
lower World, there to enjoy rest and glory: The Sanctum Sanctorum of the Temple
or Oracle (so called, because there God used to deliver Divine Answers or
Oracles, Exodus 30. 5. and Levit. 16. 2.) was the place prepared for the Ark of
the Covenant to rest in, after its many removes and wanderings, 1. From the
Desert to Gilgal. 2. From Gilgal to Shilo. 3. From Shilo to the Philistims. 4.
From thence to Bethshemesh. 5. From thence to Kiriath Jearim. 6. From thence to
the House of Obed-Edom; And 7. From thence to Sion, the City of David: Now
Solomon provides a resting place, to wit, the best part of the Temple (the Holy
of Holies) for this best and most precious piece (which had the Law within it,
and the Mercy-Seat upon it) far more precious than the Palladium at Troy, the
Pessinuntium at Rome, or the Image at Athens (made by Canetias the Artificer,
yet said by the covetous Priests to be dropped down from Jupiter, Act. 19. 35.)
as it was the principal Evidence of Gods gracious presence, and the lively Type
of Christ, in whom are hid (as in an Ark or Coffer) all the Treasures of Gods
goodness, Col. 2. 3. So that when Solomon dedicates his glorious Fabric
(which, as Josephus says, dazzled the eyes of all its beholders) by Sacrifice
and Supplication he concludes his Prayer, saying, Arise now therefore, O Lord
God, into thy resting place, thou and the Ark of thy strength, 2 Chronicles. 6. 41.
whereby he invites the Lord to take possession of his Temple, where his Ark
should be no more transportative, but settled for a long season, Psalm. 1 ^2. 8,
9, 10. And the Lord testifies his acceptance of all, both by Fire from Heaven,
(which was kept alive till the Captivity of Babylon) and by filling the House
with his Glory. 2 Chro. 7. 1. Now was the Church of God (by his good hand upon
her) brought up to such a beauty of Holiness, and to such a perfection of
dazzling splendor (like that of the Temple) that Religion was had in great
Veneration, both by Domestics and Foreigners. 1. His own Israel went home so
refreshed with the Prayer, and the Blessing, that they adored the Lord for his
goodness to them, 1 Kin. 8. 66. and both Hiram King of Yyre praised God for the
Blessing that the Church had in Solomon, 1 Kin. 5. 7. saying, Because the Lord
has loved his people, he has set a Solomon over them, 2 Chro. 2. 11. Hence
some verily think this Hiram was a Proselited Prince; and (2.) Mackeda, Queen
of Sheba, coming from a far Country, Mat. 12. 42. falls into an Ecstasy of
admiration, 1 Kin. 10. 5. and coming to her self, she blesses the Lord God that
had loved Israel so, as to set Solomon on the Throne; saying, the reality of
Isreal's glory (in him) far exceeded all the Reports she had received, v. 7. 9.
yea, and not only those two Foreigners, but even all the Earth sought to
Solomon, etc. v. 24. both Princes and People, Chapter 4. 31. 34. The Devil put
Israel upon casting off God, and desiring a King, 1 Samuel 8. 7. Now God uses a
King to raise his Church to her highest glory. Thus God over-shoots Satan in
his own Bow.

The Fifteenth Plot against the CHURCH, in Canaan: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. XV.
HAving shown how the Pillar of Providence has ushered and over-shadow'd the
Church of this lower World, from Adam to Solomon, in whose Reign she arrived at
her greatest Splendor and Beauty, notwithstanding all the Devils Fore-games he
played to prevent it. Now come we to speak of his After-games, whereby he
brought an abatement of her glory, and a declension of her luster in this her
Militant state upon Earth: As it is the course of Nature, in Celestial and
Terrestrial things, there is a time of their rising and growth to their
perfection, gradually carried on (for Nature makes no leaps) and there is a
time of setting and gradual declining also: Thus it is in Celestial Bodies, the
Sun rises and runs its course, till it come to its Zenith at High-noon, or
Mid-Summer; and then it descends and goes lower to the Earth, observing its
Apogaeum and Perigaeum.

The Moon has not only her Ortum and occasum, Rising and Setting, but also her
Plenilunium and Novi lunium, Increase and Decrease: and therefore is the
Emblem of the Church in sacred Writ, as having her filling and weaning times;
and Terrestrial things, both Animate and Inanimate, have their seasons of
attaining their perfection both of parts and degrees, and then follows their
declining time; yea, the Kingdoms of the World have their times, and their
turns, their points and their periods, beyond which they cannot pass: Even so
it is with the Kingdom of Christ, his Church: there is nothing here below that
can always say [I am] but the unchangeable God [Go tell Pharaoh that I am has
sent me unto thee, Exodus 3. 14.] The Creator only can say, I am that I am; but
the Creature is to day, and is not to morrow, being a changeable thing: and so
the Church here upon Earth is changeable as the Moon, which has her Eclipses,
her Obumbrations under a black Cloud, and (when silled round with light
borrowed from the Sun) has her time of a gradual losing that luster again.
Thus the Old Testament Church came to her Full-Moon of light and glory
(borrowed from the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2.) Vxor fulget Radiis Mariti,
the Spouse shines with the Beams and Bracelets (such as Isaac sent Rebekah,
Genesis 24.) of her Bridegroom, Ezekiel. 16. 14.) in the days of Solomon for about
thirty years together. In his last ten years, the Devil begins his first
after-game to bring a decrease of her glory upon her: It is observable, that
Gods promise of establishing the Throne of Israel for ever, 2 Samuel 7. 13, 16.
as it was Typical (and so temporary) relating to Christ, the Son of David, who
should build a Mystical Temple, the Church, called the House of God, 1 Timothy 3.
15. (whose essential and natural Kingdom shall never have an end, though his
Mediatory has, 1 Cor. 15. 24. yet not till he has put down all contrary
Powers, and made all his Foes his footstool) so it was (2.) Conditional,
relating to Solomon, who built the Material Temple which should flourish for
ever, upon condition of his perseverance in Piety: [If he commit iniquity, v.
14.] which Solomon did (but Christ could not) in the latter end of his Reign,
by falling into Idolatry, 1 Kin. 11. 9, 14, 23, 26. therefore the Lord
corrected him with the Rod of men, by stirring up Adversaries against him,
which would not have been, had he been constant, as at that day (when another
promise was propounded upon that condition) in the good ways of God, 1 Chronicles.
28. 7. Solomon had been well educated, both by his Father, Prove. 4. 4. and by
his Mother, Prove. 31. 1. and at that day (while young) kept the Commandments of
the Lord, and brought both Church and State to the highest point of sublunary
happiness: So that as David's Reign represented the Church Militant upon Earth,
so Solomon's Reign resembled the Church Triumphant in Heaven: yet as man that is
in honor abides not, Psalm. 49. 12. so Solomon (according to the manner of all
temporal things, and by the means of man's corruption) abode not in this
Honorable and happy estate, but when he was old, 1 Kin. 11. 4. and then should
he have been best, Job 32. 7. Having had so long Communion with God, and so
much experience of his goodness in his appearing to him twice after an
extraordinary manner, which was a great Evidence of Divine favor, and laid a
great engagement upon him to cleave close to God, who twice appeared, 1 Kin. 3.
5. and 9. 2. and 11. 9. Some make Solomon's old age the extenuation of his sin,
inasmuch as it brings along with it many weaknesses, which exposed him to be
over-witted by Outlandish Women, upon which he so fondly doted: But surely his
Age was an aggravation of his sin, his last days should have been his best
days, and his Graces (like good liquor) should have run fresh to the bottom:
Some do give the Flower of their Youth to the Devil, and reserve the Dregs of
their Old Age for God. This is bad enough; but Solomon did far worse, in doing
quite contrary, as if he expected to find the Devil a better Master to serve in
his old age, than he had sound God to be in his youth: Oh what need we have to
stand upon our watch, little do we know what the Devil may tempt us to before
we die; if God leave us, Satan may sift us worse (in his Sieve of Temptation)
when we are old, than ever he could do while we were young: The Innocentest man
Adam, the Strongest man Sampson, and the Wisest man Solomon, were all undone by
Satan, and all by Women, especially Solomon, who had hitherto the character of
a Nonesuch, from 1 Kin. 3. 1. to the end of Chapter 10. then Chapter 11. begins with a
But, like that of Naaman, 2 Kin. 5. 1. he was Captain of the Syrian Host, a
great man with his Master, and Honorable; he was also a mighty man of Valor,
But he was a Leper. So here, after all Solomon's glory is graphically described
in the foregoing Chapters, it follows, Chapter 11. 1. But King Solomon loved many
strange Women; hereby he (who should have been the man for establishing the
Church in its perfection of beauty, and for perpetuating the power and purity
of Religion to his Posterity) becomes himself Effeminate, and Emasculates
himself so far, as to be entangled by them into great evils: 1. In tolerating
(at least) their Idolatrous practices. 2. In allowing places for their Idols.
3. In his complying with them, and conforming to them in their worshipping of
Venus, Bacchus, Saturn, etc. and all this (as it were) under Gods very eye, so
nigh the Temple, the place of Gods residence; for this the Lord was angry, and
says, he will rend the Kingdom, v. 9, 10, 11. and does it (as well as says it)
afterward. The Devil is as much pleased as God is angry, hopes to win the
Game, and to damn Solomon; yet that wicked one could not touch him, to wit,
with his deadly touch of final Apostasy, for the Seed of God was in him, 1 John
3. 9. and 5. 18. the Root of Grace remained, wrought in him, and brought him to
repentance; his Book of Ecclesiastes is his Penitential Palinody, so ought he
not to be pictured by Papists half in Heaven, and half in Hell: It Is
remarkable, that David and Solomon are conjoined in one Commendatory Sentence,
2 Chronicles. 11. 17. to show that Holy David is as much in Hell as Solomon, and
Solomon as much in Heaven as Holy David: And it is not possible that the
beginning of Rehoboams Reign could be like David's (as that Clause affirms) if
Solomon had left his Kingdom in so corrupt a condition as his Apostasy caused,
and not have reformed it after his return to the Lord. The Devil having lost
this first after-game (for eclipsing the glory of the Church, which gained that
blessed Book of Ecclesiastes by Solomon's fall) upon Solomon's self, he trys
conclusions upon Solomon's Son, as his second after-game; and no better Tool
could he have to work withal, than Childish Rehoboam: It Is a wonder that so
wise a Father as Solomon, should have (only) such a foolish Son as Rehoboam,
and that of seven hundred Wives, and three hundred Concubines: Many a Fool has
had a wiser Son than this wisest Father; assuredly Solomon did prognosticate
his Sons future folly, in his saying [Who knows whether he that comes after me
will be a wise man, or a fool, etc. Eccles. 2. 18. yea, the holy Scripture
calls him a Child at forty years old, 2 Chronicles. 13. 7. All this he did prove
himself in the Parliament held at Shechem, 1 Kin. 12. 1. where an humble
Address is made to him, that he would lighten their grievous Yoaks, and lessen
their great Taxes which his Father had laid on them for the maintenance of his
vast Retinue, of strange Women especially, and (say they) we will be thy
servants for ever; which promise (annexed) anticipates a tacit Objection, for
it might be said, if the King had once submitted himself to the request of his
Subjects, they would prove Lords over him: but here they show the contrary, and
promise to accept of him, and to be subject to him: he (being less wise than
his Father who advised him [by a soft Answer to pacify wrath, Prove. 15. 1.]
but more wilful) rejects the advice of his Fathers old experienced Counselors
(with whom was wisdom, Job 12. 12. and whom he consulted only for fashion sake)
and followed the device of his own green-headed Companions and Courtiers, who
parasitically persuade him to stand upon his Pantoffles, and not at all to
stoop to his people, for that would make him a King without a Kingdom, and a
Subject to his Subjects. Thus they humor him into a conceit of Absoluteness:
Hereupon he threatens Tyranny to the people, who hear of nothing from him, but
Scourges and Scorpions, v. 13. Oh foolish and childish King, whose very words
have Stings! was this the way to gain a discontented people? No, but rather to
disoblige, even a willing people, who could not but think how cruel will this
man's hands be, who thus draws blood with his Tongue. Thus he fondly loses ten
Tribes from his Crown with his churlish words, and rough answers, which he
would (and might not) have recovered with the blood of a great Army, v. 21, 22,
23. Then saw he (when too late) that strife is easier stirred than stinted, and
that the people is a most Heady Water, when once out of their Banks, which now
were broken down by his indefinite profession of rigor and severity upon their
purses and persons: Sad consequences ever accompany those Princes that would be
Absolute in Power, will be Resolute in Will, and dare be Dissolute in Life. The
wicked one had a double advantage for promoting this Plot, not only Rehoboam to
work on, who was green-headed at forty (though the Son of Solomon, who was
grey-headed at twenty) year old, 2 Chro. 13. 7. and 1 Kin. 3. 3. 7. with 2. 6.
and 1 Chro. 14. 21. but also Jeroboam to work by, who was as wily as wicked,
plotting a revolt from former affronts, forming a Religion accommodated to his
Rebellion, and designedly marring the Israel of God, for the better making them
his own Subjects: By both those two helps (of childishness in the one, and
craftiness in the other) Satan, that Schismatical Spirit (who made the first
Schism or Rent in the City of God, at the first being of the World) now made
(1.) The largest Schism or Rent, (2.) The longest that ever had been made in
the Church of God under any Government: (1.) It was the largest, for here the
Devil got more than nine parts (even the ten Tribes) leaving God only his
tithe, his tenth, his one Tribe, to wit, the Tribe of Judah only; so it is
expressed, 1 Kin. 11. 13. with 12. 20. and it (2.) was the longest also, for it
was a Rent that could never be stitched together again, neither by force of
arms, nor by the most forward Reformers, but lasted till the Captivity. However
it is a work of wonder, a Miracle of Mercy, and a matter of great admiration,
that the Devil made not the ten Tribes to swallow up the one Tribe (ten to one
is great odds) the Kingdom of Israel to devour the Kingdom of Judah, so
called, though Benjamin was included in Judah: No, God had promised, that his
mercy should not depart away from Solomon, as he took it from Saul, 2 Samuel 7.
15. that is, I will not quite cast him out of my favor, or wholly deprive him
of his Kingdom, as I did Saul. This spoiled the Devils design of destroying
the Church, for Solomon's Seed was not rejected of God, as Saul's was, to give
way to David's succession; yea, and that which spoiled Satan's project yet more
was, when God was angry with Solomon, his Jedidiah, his Darling for his sin,
and threatened to rend the Kingdom (which is as a glorious Mantle upon the
Kings shoulder, 1 Samuel 15. 28. 1 Kin. ^1. 29, 30.) from him, yet the severity
of that Sentence God was pleased to sweeten with some mitigation and mixture of
mercy; as, 1. I will not do it in thy days, etc. 2. I will not rend away all, 1
Kin. 11. 11, 12, 13. (1.) For David's sake (which is five times repeated there
for his honor) and (2.) For Jerusalems sake, both which had peculiar promises;
as, 1. David, 2 Samuel 7. 9, 10, 11, 12, 16. all performed by the promiser,
either in the Types' or Antitypes. 2. Jerusalem, that holy City, Neh. 11. 1.
18. Isa. 52. 1. wherein Zion and the Temple stood, and was the special Type of
the Church, Psalm. 51. 18. Isa. 62. 1, 7. and 66. 20. Revel. 21. 2. and therein
God promised to David his servant, that he should have a light or Lamp always,
1 Kin. 11. v. 36. to wit, a Royal Successor, that should shine before his
people, which was most properly accomplished in Christ, Luke 2. 32. The Scepter
could not be taken (either by men or Devils) from Judah, until Shilo came, Genesis
49. 10. and then was he a light to the Gentiles, as he had been, (and still
was) a glory to Israel. Now though the Devil (that Grand Makebate of the
World) had a great hand in this Rent or Division, together with his Impious
Instrument Jeroboam, yet the Lord had a greater hand in it to ordain, order,
and overruled all: For thus says the Lord, This thing is from me; and the
cause was from the Lord (as well as from the Devil) 1 Kin. 12. 15.24. As it was
a sin (called Rebellion, Chapter 12. 19.) so it was from the Devil; but as it was a
punishment of sin (both of Solomon's Idolatry, Chapter 11. v. 11. and of Rehoboams
insolency) so it was from God, as an Act of Justice from the Supreme Judge, Am.
3. 6. God here withdraws the Spirit of Wisdom from Rehoboam, and leaves him to
his own egregious folly, as Chap. 22. 23. 2 Chronicles. 25. 20. and 32. 31. God
knows how to order the disorders of the World to his own glory, as having an
overruling Providence beyond man's purpose, and an over-pouring power still to
preserve his poor Church, though Solomon had been sharing himself betwixt God
and Idols, and therefore his servant (Jeroboam) shall share the Kingdom with
his Son (Rehoboam) yea, and bear away the better half from him; yet Judah still
rules with God (and God with them) and is faithful with the Saints: When
Ephraim (the ten Tribes) compassed God about with lies, Hos. 11. v. 12. that
is, while backsliding Israel went after their Leaden Priests (made by Jeroboam
of the basest of the people) and their Golden Calves, Judah kept tite to the
Temple-worship, and firm in the true Religion. Thus the most gracious God, even
in the midst of wrath, remembers mercy, and leaves this blessing (soon
repenting of the evil) behind him, that a Lamp should be lighted in Jerusalem,
which the most boistrous blasts of the Devil, and his Instruments, should not
blow out.

The Sixteenth Plot against the CHURCH, in Canaan: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. XVI.
NOw when the Devil had divided so great a share of David's Kingdom to himself
by Divine Permission, (the Lord of the Soil, Hos. 9. 3. Isa. 8. 8. giving way
for his own glory to such sad Encroachments) he falls upon sowing the cursed
seed of his Tares upon the Lords Land, among those Tribes who disdained to live
any longer by the Lords Law. Oh wonderful! there was no visible Church upon
Earth at this time, but in the Land of Promise; and yet the only wise God gives
up to Satan (when all the World lay in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. and so in the
possession of that wicked one) even the largest share of his own Land also,
though it was but a little spot of Land (no bigger than our Wales) in all. Thus
the Lords Land, Levit. 25. 23. became the Devils Land too (in the greatest
part) with all the rest of the Habitable World: Oh how unsearchable are the
ways of the Lord, and his works past find-out, Romans 11. 33, 34, 35. (...), Oh
the bottomless depth of Divine Wisdom! the Devil, having got this leave
against Israel (as once against Job) when Gods Hedge was gone, begins to lay
waste Gods Vineyard, Isa. 5. 5, 6. He now falls to work for debauching Israel;
he first makes them cast off their true Sovereign, and choose a false one;
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat must be the man, one that wanted neither Craft nor
Courage to back this Horse which had cast his Rider: Next to Achitophel, the
Devil had not a craftier Head to plot against the Church, than this Leader of
the Faction and Fraction. As the subtle Serpent infused into him his subtilty
for stealing a Scepter, so for securing it to him when he had stolen it: His
Plotting Head had this considering Cap upon it, ['twas but a pang of discontent
that made me King, violent things are not permanent, sudden Paroxysmes, or Fits
of passion, have as sudden Relaxations and recoveries; the Revolters cannot
return thrice a year to the Temple in Jerusalem (as God commands them, Exodus
34. 23.) but 'twill make them revolt from me, and return to Rehoboam; I must
either keep them off from God, or I shall never keep them off from Loyalty and
Piety] Therefore to give them a pleasant Diversion (when he durst not offer a
direct Restraint and Prohibition) he changes and adulterates that Religion,
which he dare neither inhibit nor abolish: Hereupon this new King plots to make
Israel a new God, and (for their ease) nearer home too, that they might not be
toiled with going so far as the Temple, pretending to be more merciful to the
people than the most merciful God, yea and more prudent than he in his more
compendious and plausible way of worship, altogether accommodated to the ease
and humor of the people: Aaron had humored Israel with one Golden Calf (such
as they had seen long in Egypt) Exodus 32. 4. Now Jeroboam (who had lately lived
there, 1 Kin. 11. 40.) judges it proper (after Aarons example) to humor them
with two, which he sets up at Dan* and Bethel, at both the ends of the Land,
North and South, 1 Kin. 12. 27, 28, 29. Thus took he crafty counsel of his
cursed Courtiers, and, so he might secure his Realm and Region, he mattered not
though Religion were run down to ruin. And this thing became a sin to Israel,
v. 30. a most heinous sin, though it was but a base thing, this Image was one
of the basest, Psalm. 106. 20. The Image of a Calf eating Hay. Oh what Brutish
Creatures were Israel made by an Intoxicating Devil, Psalm. 115. 8. so as to
fall down and worship such a Brutish Creature as a Calf as soon as it was set
up; yea, that service (which was only due to God) was performed to Devils in
this base thing, 2 Chronicles. 11. 15. all Idolatry is Devil-worship, all Devotion
that is not done to God (nor by a Divine Warrant) is done to the Devil, there
is no Medium or Mean betwixt them, 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21. Revel. 9. 20. Now the
Devil (that (...), or Idol-lover) had got his design in debauching Israel, when
he had got a Divine Service set up (1.) In another place, 1 Kin. 12.29. (2.) At
another time, v. 3^. (3.) After another manner, v. 28. (4.) And by other
Priests, v. 31. than God had appointed: Proud Lucifer, the Devil, was well
pleased with this Devil-worship. This sin not only brought a black Brand upon
its abominable Author to all succeeding Generations, that the phrase frequently
rings in our reading the Scripture [Jeroboam the Son of Nebat that made Israel
to sin] but also had such an Indelible Character in it, as could never be
removed, neither from his own Family, nor from any of his Successors (though of
other Families, when his was rooted out) all the Kings of Israel after him (by
his example) grew worse and worse, (and Israel with them) until they were all
carried away Captive out of their own Land, in the days of Hosea, their last
King, 2 Kin. 17. 1. to 6. Here the Devil played like a cunning Gamester with
notable seeming success; yet God is not an idle Spectator all this time, and
permits Satan to carry it on without any Counterbuffs: but now and then he is a
swift witness against, and a severe rebuker of this Plot; (1.) Both at the
beginning, (2.) Afterward, and (3.) At the end. (^.) At the beginning,
Jeroboam must not manage his new Rebellion without a Testimony from Heaven,
(against his new Religion.) And 1st. The Lord stirred up a select number, both
of Priests and people, that abhorred Jeroboams Idolatry, and fled from all the
Coasts of Israel (though Jeroboam waylaid them, Hos. 5. 1.) to cleave close
unto the true God in his worship at Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 14, 16. The
godly Priests gave a good example to the godly people of every Tribe in their
self-denial, and leaving their Livings rather than violate their Consciences:
Their voluntary Exilement, after their Ejection, (ab officio and beneficio)
drew much good people after them, v. 16. whereby not only Rehoboam was much
strengthened, v. ^7. but also the Church was preserved in despite of Jeroboam,
and his Segnirim, or Hairy Devils, v. 15. insomuch that God had his seven
thousand in wicked Ahabs day, that bowed not the knee to Baal, nor those to the
Golden Calves; and God preserved them in their slight to the holy City, though
wicked Watchers laid Traps to catch them upon Mizpeh and Tabor in their passage
thither, as the Papists in the Marian days watched all those that be took
themselves to Basil, Geneva, etc. yet the Lord marvellously preserved them for
his Church in a better day, as he did those in a better place. 2. Gods
Testimony was not for his servants Innocence only, but against Jeroboams
Idolatry, when he stood at his new Altar at Bethel, with a Scepter in one hand,
and with a Censer in the other, invading the High Priesthood, as well as
usurping the Kingdom, 1 King. 12. 33. and 13. 1. God sends a Prophet out of
Judah (possibly one of his banished servants) to Jeroboam in the midst of his
great Assembly and Solemnity at Bethel, to cry against the Altar, v. 2. that
one Josiah should be raised up, to destroy it, and its Priests: And because
'twas long too, (more than two hundred year) he gives them a present Sign of
the certainty of his Prophecy, to wit, the rending of the Altar at present, to
show its downfall afterward, which accordingly was accomplished, v. 3, 5. At
this Jeroboam rages, cries, Lay hold of him, and himself would have been the
first man in doing it, had not God by another Miracle manacled him, by
withering his hand; which though restored again, by a third Miracle, at the
Prophets prayer, yet hands not its owner into repentance; and while the Altar
(of Stone) rends, yet his Heart (being harder than any stone in the Altar)
remains still without any rending, or relenting. This God foresaw, and
therefore the Man of God was directed to direct his speech to the Altar, and
not to Jeroboam, seeing the former would receive impression sooner than the
latter, who had forgot how Israel had startled at an Altar of the Reubenites,
which was only for a Monument and Memorial, Josh. 22. when they were newly come
out of affliction, now an Altar for Idolatry startles neither him nor them,
being settled upon the Lees of a long abused peace in Solomon's day; and this
same Bethel (where one of his Calves stood, and the rent Altar) being now
become a Beth-Aven [the House of God an house of wickedness, as the two Hebr.
names signifie] was recovered again out of Jeroboams hands, 2 Chronicles. 13. 19.
His Golden Calfish God could not protect its own Seat and City from its Enemy.
This Divine Testimony from Heaven against Jeroboam was manifold: (1.) Against
his Altar. (2.) Against his Arm, which he stretched out to apprehend the Lords
Prophet (who had born witness against his Idolatry) contrary to Gods Special
Command [Touch not mine Anointed ones, and do my Prophets no harm, Psa. 105.
15. It Is safer to anger a Witch, than provoke a Prophet; for if any man will
hurt such, fire proceeds out of their mouth to devour them, Revel. 11. 5. To
touch these, is to touch the Apple of Gods Eye, Zech. 2. 8. Therefore does God
say to Kings (not of Kings) Touch not those that have the Unction of the
Father; which when King Jeroboam offered to do, God shrank his sinews, and
makes him stand like an Antic Statue, pointing out the way to Travelers with
an hand stretched out, but cannot pull it in, 1 Kin. 3. 4. So facile a thing it
is with God to cool the courage, and restrain the rage of the proudest Prince,
or Persecutor, Psa. 76. 10. This very Arm that had been burning Incense to his
Idol (in his playing the Priest himself, to give some Grace to his sordid
Priests, made of the Dregs of the Vulgar) God dried up, as the arm of an
Idol-Shepherd, Zech. 11. 17. and because his Eye was darkened too (according to
that threatening) so that he would see nothing of Gods Hand in withering his
hand; Therefore Gods third Testimony was against his Heir; and as Gods Wrath
was upon his first Son, so on his best Son, who was also his Right Hand indeed,
for he was his Heir, and hopeful for good, 1 Kin. 14. 13. Now God strikes at
the Father for his sin, upon the Back of the Child in his sickness: Jeroboam
seeks to Ahijah (the Lords Prophet) what would be the issue (not what was the
cause) of his good Sons sickness, which none of his wooden Priests could tell
him, v. 3. He receives heavy tidings, and that by the hands of his own Wife,
that this only gracious Son must die, but all his other graceless Sons must
live; he must die to afflict them, they must live to afflict them; because
Jeroboam was bad, therefore was he unworthy of so good a Son; and because the
Son was good, therefore was he worthy to be removed from so bad a Father: This
Son alone shall have both Tears, and a Tomb for his goodness, his other Sons
shall have no sorrow but for their lives, and at their deaths no Graves, but
the Belleys of Dogs and Fowls, v. 6. 11, 12, 13. Israel had cause to mourn when
they had lost such an hopeful Heir of the Kingdom. The fourth Divine Testimony
against Jeroboams Idolatry was (as 1. Against his Altar. 2. Against his Arm. 3.
Against his Heir; so 4.) Against his Army: Jeroboam in the eighteenth year of
his Reign raises a vast Army (no less than eight hundred thousand) to vanquish
Abijah while young, and newly ste^t into his Father (Rehoboams) Throne, which
was then empty by his Fathers death; young Abijah raises an Army to resist him,
which was but half as big as Jeroboams, yet was it an huge Army too,
considering that fifty thousand is now counted a Royal Army, whereas his was
four hundred thousand, which is eight times as many as is fifty: Those two
great Armies (the 800000 of Jeroboams for Idolatry, and the 400000 of Abijahs
against Idolatry) faces each other in the Field; Abijah by his Heralds sounds a
Parley, stands upon Mount Zemeraim (as Jotham likewise had done upon Mount
Gerizim, Judge. 9. 6.) makes a pious, pithy, elegant and artificial Oration (not
unlike Solomon's Grandchild) to the Heads of Jeroboams Army, wherein he shows
them the honor God had from Judah, and the dishonor he had from Israel, and
many mighty Motives he presses upon them to desist their irrational and
irreligious enterprise, whereof they could never render any good reason, nor
ever hope for any good success: While Abijah was thus Haranguing in his
Religious as well as Rhetorical Disswasives by a fair and friendly Treaty,
Jeroboam basely uses most foul and filthy treachery, in causing an Ambushment
behind him, while his main Battalia was before him, to surprise him at
unawares, 2 Chronicles. 13. 3, 4, 5, 13. Judah (espying his treachery, and their own
danger) cried unto the Lord, v. 14. having strong fervency in praying to God
for succor in that dangerous case, prayers were their Soldiers surest great
Ordinance, and together with their holy prayers they join an honest policy, the
whole Army together gave one great unanimous shout, v. 15. This loud
Acclamation [They run, they run] affrights Israel, especially God striking them
at the same time with a panick fear, and with frightful Furies in their own
Consciences, they all fly, and fall in a monstrous and matchless slaughter, v.
16. 17. to wit, five hundred thousand men of Israel were slain by the men of
Judah, who were but four hundred thousand, so that they slew more than every
one his man; and this Slaughter is well called a Great Slaughter, it being the
greatest slaughter of men in any one Battle in all the World that we read of,
either in Sacred or Civil History: And had those two Armies been united as
Brethren against a Common Enemy, they had made up the greatest Host that ever
we heard or read of, assembled together in the Field; yet Judah (the lesser
number) prevails against Israel (twice as many) because they relied upon the
Lord. v. 18. [Deo Confisi, nunquam Confusi: Judah confided in God, therefore
were they not confounded by Israel: True trusting in God can never miscarry;
God is faithful, and never fails the Faith of his people: He that believes in
him shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2. 6. The fifth and last Divine Testimony
was against Jeroboam himself: God had let him blood (as it were) in the Arm to
cure him of his Idolatry, and struck the Vital Spirit out of it when 'twas
dried up; but now God comes to strike the Soul out of his Body, when neither
Ministry, nor Misery, nor Miracle, nor Mercy, could mollisie and heal his
impenitent heart; neither the Wind, nor the Sun (to wit, neither the blasts of
Divine Judgments, nor the Beams of Divine Mercy) could make him cast his
cumbersome Coat of Idolatrous worship, but he will not (though his hand was
both withered and healed, etc.) see Gods Hand against him, but will live and
die in his Idolatry: Therefore the Lord smote Jeroboam, v. 15. and the Lord
struck him, v. 20. that he died. God gave him two deadly blows upon his
Cheek-bone (as Psalm. 3. 7.) with his heavy hand; so that he died not an
ordinary, but a sudden and violent death, and that by a special hand of God:
The Lord smote him, as with a Thunderbolt, as he smote Nabal that he died, 1 Samuel 25. 38. Deadly Diseases are Divine strokes, as the Pestilence is called
(...), Morbus Sacer, or the Divine Disease, though it is not expressed in
Scripture of what Disease neither Nabal nor Jeroboam died; and had his Idolatry
died with him, it had been better for Israel: This Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat,
who made Israel to sin, 2 Kin. 10. 31. etc. which is often added as Jeroboams
infamous style, 1 Kin. 12. 30. and 13. 34. and 14. 16. etc. (so often it sounds
in our ears) made all the Kings of Israel sin his sin of Idolatry after him,
there being not one good Successor in his Throne of Apostasy until the
Captivity, though God raised up sundry famous Prophets (as Elijah, Elisha,
etc.) to reclaim them, and though God did witness from Heaven against them in
his most severe Judgments, yet the perdition of one was not any availing
caution to another, for (2. (Nadab took no warning at Gods Judgments upon his
Father Jeroboam, and he was rooted out, and all his house, 1 Kin. 15. 27. by
Baasha. (3.) And the same Judgments, in the same words, are threatened against
Baasha, which had been against Jeroboam, because he persisted in the same sin,
1 Kin. 16. 3, 4. And (4.) Ela Baasha's Son was a Sot in his drunkenness, and
was slain in his sin by his servant Zimri, v. 9. who (5.) succeeded him, but
God soon cast that Rod into the fire, wherewith he had chastised the house of
Baasha, v. 10, 11, 12. for Omri (the 6.) forced him to burn himself with his
Palace, v. 18, 19. This Omri made wicked Statutes, Mich. 6. 16. and made
(undoubtedly) as wicked an end: Qualis vita, Finis ita; he lived wickedly, v.
25. (seeking to out-sin all his predecessors) so died wretchedly, though not
(that we read of) by any violent death: His Son Ahab (the seventh) that
Nonesuch sinner succeeded, whom (being an uxorious man) Jezabel (his Wife)
stirred up, even to unparalled wickedness, v. 31, 32, 33. God sets this black
brand upon this Virago Jezabel, 1 Kin. 21. 25, 26. who held her Husband in such
slavery (by a mischievous (...), or Woman wearing the Britches) that for a
quiet life with her, he did not dare to deny her any thing that she would have
done: Hereby he proves worse than his Ancestors, extorts Naboths Vineyard and
life from him, where the Dogs licked his blood afterward, yea, and the Dogs
did eat up Jezabel also, 1 Kin. 21. 19, 22, 23. with Chapter 22. 38. and 2 Kin. 9.
35, 36, 37. So they who sold themselves to work evil, and might have been sure
they should (in time) rue the bargain, at length as they had made a Match with
mischief, so God gave them both their Belly-fulls of it, and filled them with
the evil of their own ways, Prove. 14. 14. Gods Arrow found out wicked Ahab
under his disguise (which he did to evade Micaiah's Prophecy of him) a certain
man drew a Bow at a venture, and smote Ahab 'twixt the joints of his Harness, 1
Kin. 22. 30, 34. This casual and contingent shot was guided by God to hit the
mark to an hairs-breadth, whereas the cast of Saul's Javelin was three times
guided by the same hand of God to miss the mark of holy David's body: Micaiah
was imprisoned for foretelling this fate, v. 26, 28. Who would not rather be a
Micaiah in the Goal, than an Ahab in the Chariot; God preserved the one in the
former, but wounded to death the other in the latter: Then was God even with
him, for all his Idolatry and impieties in persecuting the Prophets, murdering
of Naboth, who doubtless had hope in his death as righteous, and so in a far
better condition now than Ahab was, who had no hope, but was driven away in his
wickedness, Prove. 14. 32. Wicked men may have some advantage of the way, but
godly men have their advance at the end; as Ahab had sold himself to sin, so
God sold him to destruction, and Ahaziah (the eighth) succeeds him, who was a
soft-pated Prince, and low-spirited, in losing no mean part of his Kingdom, in
the beginning of his Reign, by the Rebellion of Moab, 2 Kin. 1. 1. with Chapter 3.
4, 5. and 2 Chro. 20. 1. but above all, he was a wicked King, like Bird, like
Egg, he had as black a Soul as his Father Ahab, to live in his white Ivory
Palace that Ahab had built, 1 Kin. 22. 39, 52. His sin finds him out, Number. 32.
23. as he was walking upon the Leads of this stately Palace, he falls through a
Grate, and catches his death, which Baalzebub of Ekron could not prevent, or
rather the Devil of Acheron (as Hell is called by the Poet Virgil, as above,
Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta Movebo. This Beelzebub, or Baalzebub, is
called the God of Flies, or Jupiter Stercorarius, a Dunghill Deity, for out of
the Dunghill have the Flies their Natural Generation: This Devil could not take
off that sickness which the God of Israel had laid on him, and whereby he was
disinabled to attempt any thing against rebelling Moab. This pusillanimous
Prince Jehoram (the ninth) succeeded, who was more active than his Brother
Ahaziah, and not all out so bad as his Parents Ahab and Jezabel, (for he
destroyed Baal out of Samaria yet not very much better than they, for he
continued Jeroboams Calves, 2 Kin. 3. 2, 3. God likes not that men should make
a straight furrow here, and a balk there, partial Reformation discovers
Hypocrisy, wherefore Gods Arrow finds him at Ramoth-Gilead, as it had done
Ahab (his Father) at the same place, and coming to be healed of his wounds at
Jezreel, is there slain by furious Jehu (the tenth) whom God raised up
extraordinarily to destroy Ahabs Posterity, 2 Kin. 9. 1, to 30. 37. and 10, to
15. He had a zeal (indeed) for the Lord (as Jehoram had) against Baal, v. 16,
to 28. yet proves he but an half Reformer, putting down Baal, yet keeping up
the Calves, v. 29. lest it should cost him his Kingdom by Isreal's repairing to
Temple-worship, notwithstanding this his Dispensatory Conscience, because he
had done well, for the matter, God gives him the favor of his fourth
Generation, v. 30. (which was not granted to any other King of Israel after the
Revolt) to wit, Jehoaaz the eleventh, who does wickedly, and Joash (the
twelfth) who rides in the same rode, 2 Kin. 13. 2, 6, 11. and Jeroboam (the
thirteenth) who did [Patrizare] also, and walked in his forefathers steps, Chapter
14. 24. for which cause Amos prophesied against him, and was banished from
Bethel for it, Amos 7. 10, 11, 12. foretelling a dreadful Earthquake, Amos 1.
1. and Jeroboams death by the Sword, Chapter 7. 9. him succeeded Zecharias (the
fourteenth) and the fourth from Jehu, to whom God would not be indebted for his
good actings, but gave him this reward; yet this his last Branch being wicked,
he was slain for his wickedness by Shallum, (the fifteenth) Chapter 15. 9, 10. who
was paid home in his own Coin by Menahem (the sixteenth) whose cruelty ending
with himself, Pekaiah (the seventeenth comes on the Throne; but he (not
degenerating from his evil Ancestors) was soon put off by Pekah (the
eighteenth) who (being no better than the rest) was traitorously slain by
Hoshea (the nineteenth) who (being wicked also) was carried Captive by
Salmanezer of Assyria: 2 Kin. Chapter 15. and 16. and 17. Thus Israel provoked the
Lord to anger; as if they had done all this for that very purpose of causing
God to cast them off, and to write Lo-Ammi upon them: by the forementioned
Earthquake, the Lord did plainly foreshew, that God would shake terribly the
Heaven of that Church, and the Earth of that State: And as God forewarned them
by his works (both ordinary and extraordinary) so all along by his Word in the
mouths of all his (both the greater and lesser) Prophets, saying to them, that
if they would not live by Gods good Laws, they should not live in Gods good
Land, etc. Hos. 9. 3. This Hosed who forewarns Israel, that their Land would
spue them out, (as God had threatened, Levit. 18. 26, 28. was the first of the
Race of those Prophets (before Isaiah) in the days of Jeroboam, Hos. 1. 1, 2.
And thus, as under an Hosea, Israel was possessed of Canaan, Numb. 13. 16. and
under an Hosea they were dispossessed of it, 2 Kin. 17. 1, 6. so the Lord sent
an Hosea to blame their unthankfulness for the former, and to declare the
dreadfulness of the latter. No doubt but the Devil was much delighted with this
sad Catastrophe of Isreal's Ejection out of Canaan, he always makes mirth and
merriment out of Isreal's mourning, he makes Comedies of their Tragedies; he had
(indeed) so rooted and riveted Idolatry in Israel, that it could not be rooted
out, but by rooting up the corrupted Stock: yet all along the Reign of those
twenty Kings of Israel (for so many, Tibni (Corrival to Omri) 1 Kin. 16. 21,
22. does exactly make) and often several Stocks, yet all agreeing in Jeroboams
sin, God raised up a Race of Prophets to give warning, even from the Man of God
(that cried against Jeroboams Altar, 1 Kin. 13. and from Elijah and Elisha,
down to the last-of those Kings (very few whereof died a dry or natural death)
2 Kin. 17. 13, 23. God wanted not his Witnesses (though in Sackcloth) all that
time; His Eye to Israel (even under great provocations) was good, while the
Devils Eye was evil: Oh the admirable workings of Divine Compassion in 2 Kin.
14. 26, 27. [The Lord saw the affliction (as well as the transgression) of
Israel, that it was very bitter, when they had neither safety, nor a Savior:
Oh the yernings of Gods Bowels in that Word [The Lord said not, that he would
blot out the Name of Israel from under Heaven] God had not then said it, yet
though afterward he both said it, Hos. 1. 6, 9. and did it, 2 Kin. 17. 18.
'Twas a long time, and upon great provocation (as is related from v. 7, to the
18.) before he removed them out of his sight, that is, out of the Land of
Promise, upon which the eyes of the Lord were continually after an especial
manner: Notwithstanding all this, the Devil got not all, nor did the Lord lose
all, he divided the spoil with the strong Devil, Esa. 53. 12. As God had his
Witnesses 1. At the beginning of the Apostasy; so 2. All along afterward, he
had both Witnesses and people too, that had a blessed tenderness toward their
two hundred thousand Captives, at the powerful preaching of the Prophet Oded
(whom God had as a Witness in the worst of times) 2 Chronicles. 28. 9, to 16. so
mightily did the Word of God work upon this armed Army, that they showed a
great work of mercy to their distressed Brethren, etc. though they had but one
Prophet to press them to it in so great an Host. And as God had his seven
thousand of people in Ahabs time, 1 Kin. 19. 18. so he had great multitudes in
Hosea's time (their last King) out of Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, Zebulon, and
Asher, who humbled themselves under the sight and sense of their sins, and came
to Jerusalem at Hezekiahs Proclamation to keep the Passover, according to the
Word of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1, 6, 11, 13, 18. though some jeered (showing
themselves ready ripe for ruin in their last Kings time) yet many others
feared, v. 10, 11. And though those which came out of the ten Tribes (out of
the fear of God) were ignorant of due preparation, (having been long without
God, Law, and Teaching Priest, 2 Chro. 19. 3.) came rudely and irreverently to
the Passover (and probably smarted for it, as 1 Cor. 11. 30. Matthew. 22. 12,
13.) yet at Hezekiahs godly Prayer for them, God Healed them and accepted their
Service, v. 18, 19, 20. Yea, and Gods Pity was such to his Covenanted people,
that the Old Style and Title [The Lord God of Israel] is kept up even by
Abijam, 2 Chronicles. 13. 5. and such was Gods Respect to Israel under the Revolt,
that he sent sometimes Saviors to them, as 2 Kin. 13. 5. Obad. 21. Neh. 9. 27.
All which does plainly Demonstrate Gods Care of his Church even in the worst of
times, let the Devil and his Imps do all they can: And though there has been
such a Revolt from the Ture Christian-Religion by the Papacy, as this of the
Ten Tribes from the Temple-Worship, (the Foundation whereof was laid in Blood,
to wit, the Blood of Adoram, 1 Kin. 12. 18. as that of the Romish-Revolt much
more.) Yet the Lord secureth his own Interest, Rev. 12. 6, 14. Maugre the
Malice of Men and Devils, both in Witnesses and People, as I have shown at
large in my Discovery of Antichrist. Moreover (3ly.) at the End of this
Revolting Kingdom, when God had cast the Ten Tribes out of Canaan, because they
had cast him off and his good Laws; yet God had respect (1) to the very Land
out of which they were cast; for when the King of Assyria had Conquered Samaria
and the Cities of the Ten Tribes, which he carried Captive into his own
Country, and had Planted his Colonies of mixed People in their place, The Lord
sent Lions among them, which Slew some of them, 2 Kin. 17. 25. because those
New-Planters (as themselves say) knew not the manner of the God of the Land, v.
26. foolishly thinking, that each Land had its proper God: Indeed the Land of
Israel had another God than the Gods (or Idols) of those Lands from whence they
came; it was a Land which Jehovah had Chosen as an Habitation for himself, and
says, The Land is mine, Levit. 25. 25. Hence it is called the Lords Land, Hos.
9. 3. and Immanuels Land, Isa. 8. 8. and by their Seventh-Year Sabbath, they
Acknowledged that their Land belonged to God, and that they were only Gods
Tenants and Tythe-men: now seeing those Assyrians that came into Canaan in
Isreal's Room, made no such Acknowledgment, nor Owned him in a Land which the
True God was pleased to Own, therefore he sent this Judgment of the Lions upon
them, to let them know that the God of this Land had all Creatures (even the
most Ravenous) at His Command wherewith to be Avenged for their not-Fearing
him. Thus, it appears, God did not Hate the Ground (as some say) that Israel
trod upon, though they were Revolters. 2ly. God had Respect to themselves much
more, (if so much to their Land,) so that they were (in a sort) Ammi, while
they were Lo-Ammi; and Ruhamah, while they were Lo-Ruhamah, Hos. 1. 6. Yea,
when the name Israel was too good and too Honorable a name for them, but they
must be called Jezreel, that is, a People devoted to Dispersion, v. 4. and such
as God would scatter into the four Winds of Heaven, [Zerang,] as the Seeds-man
scatters his Seed, so that the Ten Tribes never returned out of Captivity; yet
(sure I am) neither the Devil got all, nor God lost all, for God did not lose
Israel, but only laid them up in an Unknown Sepulcher with his own Hands, (as
he had done their Mediator Moses,) in sure and certain Hope of a Resurrection:
God did not cast off his People for ever, 1 Kin. 11. 39. Though the dry Bones
of Israel lie in Babylon, etc. as in a Sepulcher, and were (as it were) Buried
Alive at their final Abdication, yet the Lord Promises, These Graves shall be
opened. This is spoken over and over again, Ezekiel. 37. 11, 12, 13, 14. to the
whole House of Israel, the Lord says, Behold, Oh my People. God owneth them
still, though they little deserved it. This is Alleged as an Allay to those
Dreadful Desolations; so loath is the Sun of Righteousness to set under a
Cloud, that in the midst of Judgment he remembers Mercy, Hab. 3. 2. Thus while
the Lord wrote Jezreel, Lo-Ruhamah, and Lo-Ammi upon Israel: In the Invasion
made by Tiglath-Pilneser upon the Tribes beyond Jordan, 2 Kin. 15. 29. 1 Chro.
5. 6. and by Salmaneser upon the rest of the Ten Tribes on this side Jordan:
Yet behold how graciously God comes off in that Direful Sentence; Yet the
Number of the Children of Israel shall be as the Sand of the Sea that cannot be
Numbered; and where it was said, Ye are not my People, there it shall be said,
Ye are the Sons of the Living God, Hos. 1. 4, 6, 9, 10. to show Gods great care
of his Church, and of his Promise to Abraham, even when he seems to have
Utterly Abandoned them: The same Graciousness that had sent Prophets to them
all along their Revolt, and a Promise of the Messiah at the same time their
Rejection was foretold, Isa. 7. 8. (within 65 Y. of its coming to pass,) That
the Lord would not quite cast off the House of David, till a Virgin have born a
Son, and he to be God in our Nature, v. 14. and this Son to be Born in
Bethelem, One that should tread down all the Churches Enemies, and be her
Peace, etc. Micah 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. yet would be War to the Assyrians in
sending Lions among them, (as before,) all which does show, That this Ancient
People (of the Ten Tribes) are not altogether Abandoned and Abolished, but God
reserves this Honor for them, to Vouchsafe them a Call to the Participation of
Christ, (but more of that in New-Testament-times.) Ezekiel. 37. 16, 19. Jer. 3.
12, 13. etc. Isa. 11. 12, 13. Obad. 20. Romans 11. 15, 26.

The Seventeenth Plot against the CHURCH, in Judah: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. XVII.
WHen the Devil saw how successful he had been in Debauching and Destroying the
Ten Tribes of Israel, He falls upon his 17th. Plot against the Kingdom of
Judah, which yet Ruled with God, and was Faithful with the Saints, Hos. 11. 12.
God was sincerely served amongst them, and they Held fast their first
integrity, the True Religion was Publicly Professed, and the True Worship of
God was Purely Preserved in the Temple at Jerusalem: This made Abijah (the next
to Rehoboam, though none of the best) to boast so boldly, and therefore
prevailed, 2 Chro. 13. 10, 17. Isreal's Apostasy was not only Aggravated, but
also Vanquished by Judahs Integrity: yea, and Judah was Kind, Courteous and
Communicative to those good Souls that left the Ten Tribes and came thither to
Enjoy the Pure and Public Worship of God.

This the Envious One espying and Envying, Endeavors to Corrupt Jerusalem as
he had done Samaria, that so Aholah and Aholibah might be both Alike, nay, the
latter to be worse than the former, (as afterward,) Ezekiel. 16. 2, 45, 48. and
23. 4, 11. Yea, that Prince of the Air (the Devil) never gave over his stormy
Blasts (with his stinking Breath) until he had Blown out that Lamp which God
had promised to give David in Jerusalem, 1 Kin. 15. 4. at the last, which did
fall out about the 3420 Y. of the World, in the 11th. Y. of Zedekiah, when
Ezekiels 390 Y. (mentioned Ezekiel. 4. 5.) were exactly accomplished,) in that
fatal Fall of Jerusalem, for which Jeremy Writ his Book of Lamentations to
Condole the sad Condition of the Church, because the Crown was fallen from her
Head, Lam. 5. 15, 16. and her Light, or Lamp, was Extinct by the Devils
Extinguisher; then was she brought into darkness, and not into light, Lam. 3.
2. and removed into dark places, as they that be dead, v. 6. so put into the
Dark Graves of Babylon, until the Time of their Opening came, Ezekiel. 37. 12. etc.

Now to Reduce the Church to this fallen and Extinct Estate: The Devil Designs
against her many Maladies, and it is remarkable, God sent her as many Remedies,
in Raising up a good King for a bad, a good King for a bad, almost, all-along,
(whereas those of Israel were all bad Universally) until they had sinned
themselves beyond the Reach of all Remedies, Prove. 22. 1. 2 Chro. 36. 16. Oh
Dreadful and Direful Divine Sentence!

Satan's (first) Blast against the Lamp of the Church in this 17th. Plot, was,
in Rehoboam, who at 41 Y. old was Childish and Simple, 2 Chro. 12. 13. with 13.
7. but of an Haughty and Hard-oppressing Spirit, so prooved himself a very
Fool, Eccles. 2. 19. though he were the Son of so Wise a Father, a very fit
Tool for the Devil; and though for 3 Y. he did Well, 2 Chronicles. 11. 17. yet after
he did Evil, and Judah with him, which brought up Shishak K. of Egypt, to
Plunder Jerusalem, 1 Kin. 14. 22, 23, 24. Upon this; the Devil got the Golden
Shields of Solomon changed into Brazen ones, v. 27. as he had made the faithful
City now to become an Harlot: No Wonder therefore, that her Silver was become
Dross, and her Gold turned into Brass, Isa. 1. 21, 22. Shishak (prompted to
this Enterprise by Jeroboam who had lived in the Court of Egypt, and (as some
say) Married a Wife of the Blood Royal) easily prevails through the
Pusillanimity and Effeminacy of Rehoboam, but especially because Judah had
Transgressed against the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12. 2. His Prevalency could not have
happened without the Church's Prevarication: Notwithstanding at the Preaching
of the Prophet Shemaiah, (which was a great Divine favor) both Princes and
People Humbled themselves, v. 5, 6. (which was a greater Divine favor,) but
the greatest of all was, that God did not then pour out his whole Wrath, but
granted them some Deliverance, v. 7, 8. So that things went well in Judah, v.
12.

The Devils 2d. Blast against David's promised Lamp, was in the Reign of
Rehoboams Son, called Abijah, 2 Chronicles. 12. 16. so his Father named him,
(signifying, [The Lord is my Father,] with Respect to that Promise made to
David, 2 Samuel 7. 14. but because he Walked not in the ways of David, therefore
is Abijah called Abijam, 1 Kin. 15. 1. which signifies, [My Father is a Sea,]
Indeed his Father was as Inconstant in good as the Fluctuating Sea, because he
Prepared not his Heart to seek the Lord, 2 Chro. 12. 24. he had only some
slashy and fleeting Resolutions (in his aforesaid Humblings,) but he did not
draw them out into Execution, because they Sprang not from his Heart, (that
right Spring of all True goodness:) so they were soon off again, and he
wavering like a wave of the Sea, Jam. 1.6. was driven by the Wind of Temptation
to do Evil, and so Dies, leaving a Diminished and Impoverished Kingdom to his
Son Abijah or Abijam, who did Evil like his Father. Though the Book of
Chronicles lays no Wickedness to his Charge, (so joins Jah [the Name of God]
to his name Abijah, yet the Book of Kings Charge him with the Wickedness of
his Fathers ways, and therefore calls him Abijam, as above, 1 Kin. 15. 3.
Though at first, when he went out to War against Jeroboams vast Army, he seemed
to be good, pretending to, and pleading hard for Religion, 2 Chronicles. 13. 5, 10,
12. and praying to God in his Distress, v. 14. and believing in God, v. 18. but
being puffed up with this great Victory, he falls away, and showed himself in
his Colors, treading in the same Dirty steps of his Idolatrous Father, who,
when he Recovered Bethel from Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 13. 19. did not Destroy the
Calf and Idolatry there, for which cause ('it is probable) God shortened both his
Reign and his Life; Oh what a sad Aspect had the Church in that Day, when not
only Israel Worshipped Jeroboams Calves, but also Judah Built them high places,
and Images, and Groves on every High Hill, and under every Green-Tree, 1 Kin.
14. 22, 23. Yea, and Tolerated Sodomy in the Land, v. 24. This sad Face of the
Church (and that continuing two Kings Reigns) must needs sadden the Hearts of
those Faithful Ones, who (among the 12 Tribes) were Gods Remnant, and Instantly
served him Day and Night, Act. 26. 7. There was no Visible Church in the whole
World, but in this little part of it, And how was the Church here most
Deplorably Depraved? God sometimes suffers his Church (as he does the Moon) to
Wane out of sight and to be Ecclipsed; yet such Gloomy times shall not last
always, God causes Light to Spring up by Asa (the 3d. King after the Revolt,)
who Revives the Church, and Refreshes the Children of God by a Right
Reformation of Religion, 1 Kin. 15. 11. both in the Privative and in the
Positive part. 1. The Privative. He, finding Sodom in Jerusalem, Roots out the
Sodomites, v. 12. Demolishes the Idols, those Dirty Dunghill Deities, (called
[Deos stercoreos] because of the Stench wherewith they offend Almighty God;
yea, removes Maachah from being Queen-Regent for setting up a most filthy Idol
in honor of Venus, supposed the Picture of Pan or Priapus, v. 13. (2ly.) The
Positive part; He does not only put down Idolatry, etc. but he sets up and
Restores the Splendor of Temple-Worship: 'Twas his Grandfather Rehoboam that
turned Solomon's Gold into Brass; now Asa turns Rehoboams Brass into Gold, 1
Kin. 15. 15. It Is said of Augustus Coesar, [Romam Invenit lateritiam, Reliquit
Marmoream,] He sound Rome all of Brick, he left it all of Marble: So it may be
said, as Rehoboam had turned Jerusalems Marble into Brick, so Asa turns it back
from Brick to Marble as Solomon had left it. It Is a Wonder, that both Sodomy
and the Worst sort of Idolatry (to wit, Priapism) should be found amongst
Mankind, (being so contrary to the Light of Nature, Romans 1. 19, to 28.) but
much more amongst the only professors of Religion that were then upon Earth.
Here the Devils Design had notable Success; yet behold as great a Wonder in the
Churches Remedy, (as was in her Malady) the Lord raises up a good Son (Asa)
from the Seed of an evil Father (Abijam;) and from the Soil of an Idolatrous
Mother (Maachah;) and makes him to be such an Impartial Reformer, as he would
not grant a Dispensation to his own Mother or Grandmother, 1 Kin. 15. 13. and
2 Chronicles. 15. 16. He finds her Unreclaimable from her Idols in her self, and
very Influential upon the People; Hereupon, the Law of God (in Command: 1. 2.)
Preponderates the Law of Nature, (Command. 5th.) Down goes her Idols from their
Station, and her self from her Regency, because his Heart was perfect with the
Lord, 1 Kin. 15. 14. And as a Reward of his Covenant-Reformation, God gave him
a glorious Victory over the greatest Army that ever we read of in any History,
to wit, a Thousand Thousand Aethiopians, who (likely) were called in by the Ten
Tribes (at the Devils Instigation) in Revenge of their Five Hundred Thousand
which Abijam had overthrown, 2 Chronicles. 14. 9, to 12. God at good Asa's Prayer
Smote his Enemies, and (as the Word signifies) Tumbled them down Headlong: Asa
Reigned long to do great and good things for the Church. Therefore the Devil
(who did owe him an ill turn, and had been hitherto under a Divine Restriction,
which to him is a grievous Vexation) at last gets leave to Touch him with his
Churlish Touches, (as Job 1. 11, 12.) to wit, in causing him (1) to Connive at
the Will Worship in the High Places, mis-devoted for the Worship of God, (who
had Confined it to the Temple;) though he Demolished those set up in honor of
Idols, 1 Kin. 15. 13, 14. this God graciously overlooks, beholding Truth in his
Heart: God tenderly covers Asa's Frailty with the Mantle of Sincerity, which he
would not do for Unfound Jehu, though Excellent things were done by him, 2 Kin.
10.31. and inasmuch as the Indulgency of Asa's God did draw a Cross-line over
all Asa's Weaknesses; Satan lost his Design in Tempting him to this Sin, and to
the following also. (2) To a Relyance on the King of Syria more than upon the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8, 9. Considence on Man (an Arm of Flesh) draws off his
Confidence on God, (who gave him Victory over the Million of Aethiopians) Isa.
31. 1, 2. He trusts. not God at all, who trusts not God above and over all:
Asa Hires Benhadad with Sacrilegious Treasure, unfaithfully to break his League
with Baasha, and brings a Wicked Enemy into Gods Inheritance: (3) To that which
was worse, even to the Imprisoning of Hanani the Prophet, for reprooving him
for his sin, v. 10. Asa, instead of coming to Repentance and calling for
Mercy, in a great rage against his Faithful reproover, commands Revenge. (4) To
be as Harsh to the People as he was to the Prophet, Tyrannically trampling upon
those that protested against his Tyranny to the Lords Prophet; for this, God
did not only send upon his Kingdom continual War, v. 11. but upon himself the
sharp Dolorous Gout, v. 12. whereby God clapped him up a closer Prisoner by the
Heels in his Bed, and with more Torturing Fetters, than he had done Gods
Prophet in Prison: Then (5) to seek to the Physicians for Cure of his Gout, and
not to God, v. 12. Thus falls he into his former sin of Creature-Confidence; He
that in his outward straits sought to Benhadad, and not to God, now in his
Inward Sore seeks not to God, but to Physicians, not depending upon the Lord
for his Blessing upon Men and Means. No Wonder therefore that his Disease
struck upward to his Head and Heart, and that his Hot Feet carried him to his
Cold Grave, v. 13. Notwithstanding all those Failings the Devil lost his
Design, for it is more than probable, that Asa repented before he Dyed; Seeing
(1) God gave him this commendable Character, That his Heart was Perfect with
the Lord all his Days, 1 Kin. 15. 14. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. and 20. 32. and (2) his
People gave him a most Honorable Funeral, 2 Chronicles. 16. 14. which was Denied to
Wicked Jehoram, Chapter 21. 19. and which they would not have done (in that costly
Solemnity) for Asa, had he not Repented and Reformed, to be thus Honored at
his Burial; Yea, and God blessed him with a long Reign (of 41 Y. v. 13.) wherein
he saw many Successions and Changes upon the Throne of the Ten Tribes, who were
all speedily rooted out by their Idolatry, whereas good Asa was long
Established upon his Throne by his True Piety, in Despite of the Devil;
leaving his godly Son Jehosophat (the 4th. King) to succeed him, who prooved
one of the best of the Princes of Judah, whom God Stirred up for a Farther
Reformation of Religion, and for a fuller Preservation of his Church, etc. 2
Chro. 17, etc. The Father was good, but the Son was better, inasmuch as he
Repented, when he was Reprooved, (which his Father did not, but Raged,) Chapter 19.
2, 4. where the Son (Jehu) succeeded better than his Father (Hanani,) Chapter 16.
7. Now for this his great Goodness the Devil envyed him, sinding him more
forward and forth-putting in religion and reformation than his Father. Hereupon
Satan sets upon his over -good Nature, and over-facile Disposition, seduces him
into an Assinity with Wicked Ahah, 1 Kin. 22. 44. to a Match 'twixt Jehoram his
Son, and Athaliah Ahab's wicked Daughter, 2 Kin. 8. 18. and to a Courtly
Compliance in Ahabs Warring against Syria, which had like to have cost him his
life, 1 Kin. 22. 2, 4; 31. Here the Devil had Entangled good Jehosaphat into
most desperate Danger; but God Disappoints the Devils Design: Jehosaphat Cried
out, that is, to the Lord, 1 Kin. 22. 32. and the Lord Helped him, 2 Chronicles. 18.
31. So he returned to his House in Peace, Chapter 19. 1. which his Ally Ahab did
not, as Micaiah foretold him, 1 Kin. 22. 28. finding it True (but too late)
that a whole Council (of false Prophets especially) may Err, in telling him the
contrary: Jehosaphat now is a Brand plucked out of the Fire, so dare not do as
he had done, 2 Chronicles. 19. 4. and 1 Kin. 22. 49. he now stays at Jerusalem,
making no more any courtly goings on Progress to Samaria, 2 Chronicles. 19. 4. This
good Man made Peace with bad Ahab the Father, 2 Chronicles. 19. 3. and with bad
Ahaziah the Son, Chapter 20. 35. but better he had not done so, for God was deeply
Displeased with it, therefore was Wrath upon him, 2 Chronicles. 10. 2. A Man had
better be at Variance with all the World, than with God and his own Conscience:
He that parts with his inward peace to purchase the outward, pays too dear a
rate for it, one may buy Gold too dear, as Jehosaphat did for his Desired and
Designed Gold. While his Conversation was Godly, God blessed him with a most
Signal Victory over Moah, Ammon, and Mount-Seir, 2 Chro. 19. 20. then God was
highly pleased with him; but when his Confederacy was once wicked, then God was
highly Displeased with him, and broke his Ships even in the very Harbor
(before setting out) with a Tempest, 2 Chronicles. 20. 36. as the Lords Prophet
foretold him, v. 37. and upon this fore-warning, though Ahaziah did solicit
him to a 2d Attempt, as looking upon the miscarriage of the 1st to be only a
Casualty, (not Eying the Hand of God against it,) yet Jehosaphat would not, for
upon the Prophets Reproof he Repented and Refused, 1 Kin. 22. 49. he dare not
Venture upon a 2d. Expedition, when God had Blasted the first; and though
Wicked Ahaziah would not behold the Hand of God in his Judgments, yet good
Jehosophat heard the Voice of the Rod, Mic. 6. 9. and knew that this Breaking
Blast came from God, (who holds the Winds in his Fists, Prove. 30. 4.) and
that it came from Gods Faithfulness, Psalm. 119.75. who will not prosper the
evil Enterprises of his own Children: Thus the Devil lost his Design against
Jehosaphat, (as Jehosaphat lost his about Gold;) and though he Contrived New
Plots against the Church by the following Kings of Judah, (finding them fitter
Instruments for him than their Forefathers,) yet did the Lord Laugh them to
Nothing in those better Kings whom God Raised up to destroy the Devils Designs:
It Is true, Jehoram, (the 5th. King) of a pious Father was an impious Son, than
whom a worse could hardly be found, who (being an Idolater, like all such) laid
the Foundation of his Kingdom in the Blood of his Brethren, because (as Rabbis
say) they Walked in the good ways of Jehosaphat, and would not yield to his
Idolatries: Athaliah, his Wife (who was now the Jezabel of Jerusalem) stirred
him up to all Villainy, 2 Chronicles. 21. 4, 5, 6, 13. yet all this moved not God to
gratify the Devil in casting off his people; Oh the yerning of Divine Bowels
in that, [Howbeit the Lord would not do it, but preserved a Lamp or Light for
the Church, v. 7. out of which there came at length that Sun of Righteousness
the Lord Jesus, that light of the World; and the Devil in Jehoram shall not
carry it without a Control from Heaven, both (1) by that Letter brought to him
from one that was then in Heaven, v. 12. to Convince him of, and to Confound
him for his Abominable Impiety, which Writing (some say) an Angel handed to him
out of Paradise to his greater Confusion, not unlike the handwriting upon the
Wall in Belshazzar's Palace, Dan. 5. and (2) by the stroke wherewith the Lord
(from Heaven) smote him in his Bowels, v. 18. which incurable Disease and
torturing Malady lasted Two full Years, v. 19. a long time to lie under
intolerable Torment, and yet all this was but a typical Hell, and a fore-tast
of Eternal Misery prepared for him, who was all that while an incorrigible
Wretch, he lived wickedly, and dyed wishedly: There was no Healing for his
Body, and as little for his Soul: he dyed under the Displeasure both of God and
Men, for he Departed without being Desired, v. 20. his Subjects had no Bowels
for him, who had no Bowels for them, (much less for his own Brethren whom he
flew) and who dyed loath somely of a Disease in his Bowels; therefore they
afford him neither Subjects Tears, nor a Royal Tomb: Be Wise now therefore, Oh
ye Kings, etc. Psalm. 2. 11, 12. Fugite ergo Reges, ejusmodi exitum, fugien^o
hujusmodi flagitium, says Ambrose; Overthrow not your selves and your Houses
by lifting up your Horns on high against God.

Neither did Ahaziah, Azariah, Jehoahaz, (that Man of Three names) the 6th.
King of Judah, fare better, because he prooved so bad, though by a mavelous
Providence he was preserved (as a Lamp promised to David) from the Rigid
Murders of the Ragged Arabians, 2 Chronicles. 21. 17. with Chapter 22. 1, 6. he was made
King by the chief City of the Kingdom, the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, while
Jehoram lay miserably under the Gripes, and not minding the matters of
Succession. Notwithstanding the Kindness both of God, in his Preservation, and
of Men in his Preferment; he also walked in Wicked ways, wicked Athaliah (his
Mother,) and other wicked ones being his Counselors to do wickedly to his own
Destruction, 2 Chronicles. 22. 3, 4, 5. He confederates with his wicked Cozen
Jehoram of Israel, in the War against the Syrians, wherein his Cozen being
wounded, went to be Cured of his wounds. This cursed Sprig of Athaliah goes to
Complement him, and to Condole with him, which cost him his life by the hands
of furious Jehu, whom God raised up to Ruin and Root out Ahabs cursed Family,
2 Kin. 9. 14, 15, 16, 27. and 2 Chronicles. 22. 7, 8, 9. Thus as he had joined with
Jehoram in Sin, he was joined with him in Slaughter, and that by the
Appointment of God, even at a time of great Joy and Jollity for the recovery of
Ramoth-Gilcad. Wicked Men are taken in an evil Net at the worst, and when they
never dream of Destruction; S^c Deus, quos Destruit, Dementat; So God
Infatuates them before their fatal Foil and Fall come upon them: and it is
Remarkable, no place must serve wherein Ahaziah shall be slain, but Gur, by
Iblaim, where ('it is supposed) his Father Jehoram had slain his Brethren, (as
Ahab had done Naboth at Jezreel,) thither did he slye, and there Divine
Vengeance (which pursued) overtakes him; yet receives he Courtesy from
Jehosaphats Dust, Holiness has its Honor even in Unholy Hearts; he for his
good Grandfathers fake had a Royal Sepulcher and Funeral: Upon which, his
Wicked Mother Athaliah (in the 7th. place) Usurps the Kingdom, by whom the
Devils first Design was to Root out that Race whereof Christ was to be Born, 2 Chronicles. 22. 10. but the Great God did Counterwork him, who had his Compassionate
and Pious Princess Jehosheba, (the godly Priests Wife, even in this bad Age,
such were insomuch and so good estimation, as Kings Married their Daughters to
them, 2 Kin. 11. 2.) As the Devil had his Jezabels and Athaliahs to cut off all
Competitors that stood in their way: That Old promise, Genesis 49. 10. The Scepter
shall not depart foom Judah, etc.* and the late promise of Preserving David a
Lamp, etc. 1 Kin. 11. 36. Spoiled all Satan's Engines and Endeavors, by Virtue
hereof Jehosheba Sacredly as well as Secretly, stole young Joash out of the
Royal Nursery, nourished him up in the Temple Six Years, so long lay he hid not
only in the House, but also in the Hand of the Lord from Athaliahs bloody
Hands: All this time that wicked Woman (being Devoted to Destruction as one of
Ahabs Family) not only escapes Jehu's Hand, but was spared Seven Y. long to
Revel in more mischief for the punishment of the peoples sin; but by the pious
and prudent Contrivance of good Jehohiada) in Subordination to Gods'
providence) she was brought to condign Punishment, and the right Heir Joash (at
Seven Y. old) Enthroned to be the 8th. King. Behold how low David's promised
Lamp was Reduced, even to one Suckling Child, yet the promise is made good in
Despite of the Devil and this Devilsh Woman, who sought his life also, as
Herod did the Holy Child Jesus's: so foolish it is to Fight against God and his
Promise.

This 8th. King Joash, Jehoiada had no sooner brought to the Crown, but he
brought his people into the Covenant, 2 Kin. 11. 12, 17. Joash repairs the
Temple, (his Sauctuary for Six Y. as well as Gods,) and Rules well under the
Tutorage of his good Uncle, and reforms all that were deformed: no sooner was
Jehoiada Dead, but his cringing Courtiers Debauch him, 2 Chronicles. 24. 17. he
forgets God, forsakes his Temple, and falls into open Idolatry, v. 18. yea, and
out of monstrous Ingratitude falls foul upon Zechariah the Son of Jehoiada (to
whom he did owe both his life and his Kingdom) and stones him to Death, for no
other fault but for his Dealing faithfully with him, v. 20, 21, 22. In his
Reign Observe, God was at the beginning, the Devil in the middle, and God again
at the end: thus the Devil is hedged in both before and behind by the Almighty
God, so that he cannot carry it as he would; for though he played his pranks
after Jehoiada's Death in the latter end of Joash Reign, yet God will bring up
the Rear, looks upon him, and requites him according to Dying Zachary's Prayer,
for 1. the Syrians are the Executioners of Gods Vengeance, and Destroyed all
his flattering Sycophants that had Seduced him, v. 17, 23, 24. though the
Syrian Army was but a small Company, 2. God plagued him with fore Diseases
contracted (possibly) by the wounds he had received: 3. God gave him up to be
Treacherously slain by his Servants, because he had Conspired the Death of his
faithful Servant Zechariah, v. 25. Thus though the Beginning should be Satan's,
(as in Job's Case) yet the End will be the Lords, Iam. 5. 11. Neither did it
fall out better with his Son Amaziah, (the 9th. King,) who, though in his
beginning, did works, that were materially good, yet prooved not so formally
and eventually; no sooner departed he from God, but his Subjects hearts
departed from him, 2 Chronicles. 25. 14, 16. God gave him up to Worship those very
Idols of Edom, which could not deliver them out of his hands, v. 15. as a just
Punishment of his Pride and Hypocrisy, and prooving Unreclaimable at the
reproof of Gods Prophet, he was told by him, [I know that God has Determined
to Destroy thee,] v. 16. An Uncounsellable person has Gods Brand for
Destruction put upon Him: No sooner had he abused his Victory (God gave him
over Edom) to gross Idolatry with their Idols, but God raised him up a Scourge,
even the Cedar of Israel, to Tread down this proud Thistle of Judah, v. 18. 22.
and to plunder Jerusalem: After this he spent his time sordidly, serving false
Gods without remorse. Hereupon he falls under the Universal Hatred of his
People, (whom he had subjected to so much misery by his fond Challenging of
Ioash,) they Unanimously Conspire against him, v. 27. forces him to slay from
Jerusalem to Luchish for his safety, they pursue him and slay him. Thus ended
the Devils Instrument (for Corrupting the Church,) who had (indeed) a fair
Beginning, but in his latter end did notoriously Apostatize.

Neither did Vzziah or Azariah his Son, (whom all the People of Judah made the
10th. King in his stead, 2 Chronicles. 26. 1.) make a better End: It Is no good
Commendation that is given him, [That he did according to all that his Father
Amaziah had done, 2 Kin. 15. 3. they both began fairly, but ended foully. This
[Desinit in piscem] or bad Ending, marrs many a Man's better Beginning; Oh how
many Young seeming Saints become no better than Old Incarnate Devils at the
last. Thus Vzziah at the first was wholly taken up in Consulting with God,
while Zachariah the Prophet was his Houshold-Chaplain, and as long as he sought
the Lord, God made him to Prosper, 2 Chronicles. 26. 4, 5, 6. God Helped him against
all his Enemies, v. 7. God usually deals with Men as they deal with him; those
that Honor him, he does Honor them, 1 Samuel 2. 30. and God strengthened him
exeeedingly, v. 8, 15. This swelled him up into Arrogance and Impudency, v. 16.
his Victories and magnificence made him proud, then was he become a sit
Instrument for the Devil to Debauch Gods Worship in the Church: out of
Curiosity and Insolency he invades the Priests Office, (emboldened hereunto,
because he had Married Ierusha the Daughter of Zadok the High Priest, 2 Kin.
15. 33.) Therefore the Lord spat in his Face, that he might be ashamed, and
others warned: God smote him with Leprosy, 2 Chronicles. 26. 18, 19. and at that
time (says Josephus) was that Terrible Earthquake, Amos 1. 1. Zech. 14. 5.
even while his Wrath was hot against the Holy Priests, who withstood him; Gods
Wrath waxed Hot against him, and taking their part, (as he did their Office)
he makes a Leprosy immediately to rise up in his Forehead, and so by presuming
to go into the Temple farther than he should, did lose that liberty which
before he had: This Arrogant Act did not only cast him out of the House of
God, but also out the Holy City. (for Lepers by the Law were to live by
themselves, Levit. 13. 46.) Yea, and at last cast him out of the World, who was
then Buried in some By-corner of the Kings Burying-place for they said, He was
a Leper, 2 Chro. 26. 20, to 23. leaving his Son Iotham to Succeed him as the
11th. King, who did learn to beware from his Fathers Harm, He entered not into
the Temple (to Usurp the Priests Office) 2 Chronicles. 27. 2. though Son of the
Priests Seed, of the Daughter of Zadok, 2 Kin. 15. 33. Then did David's Lamp
(God promised him) burn brighter than before, notwithstanding all the Devils
blasts against it; for Jotham was a good Prince, and did that which was right
in the sight of the Lord, v. 34. both for Matter, Manner, Motive, and End; yet
had this very Lamp one filthy Snuff in it to darken its splendor and glory: to
wit, The High Places were not Removed, v. 35. And the People did yet Corruptly.
2 Chro. 27. 2. had Jotham removed those High Places. he had prevented the
peoples corruption: Oh how hardly comes off a thorough Reformation: It was with
the good Kings, (in respect of those High Places) as it was with Jonathans
Signal Arrows, Two whereof fell short, and but one beyond the Mark, 1 Samuel 20.
36. so where one of them shot home to the Mark of the Divine Institution, as
Hezekiah and Josiah did, many fell short, as 1 Kin. 14. 14. and 2 Kin. 12. 3.
and 15. 4, 5. and Here, whereas they should have removed not only those for
Idol-Worship, (as they did) but also those for Gods Worship too, according to
Gods Institution, Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 6, 11. Those High Places unremoved was as the
Nest-Egg to make the Hen of Will Worship and Idolatry to return again, when his
Son Ahaz (the 12 King) succeeded, who brought in all the Idolatry of the Kings
of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 28. 2. and went beyond the worst of them all in Wickedness,
for 1. he burnt his Children in the Fire, v. 3. in Honor of Moloch, which was
the Devil, Psa. 106. 37. Some he caused to pass only through the fire to purge
them from evil, as the Papists send their Friends to their supposed Fire of
Purgatory, which (they conceit) their Masses make them pass thorough to Heaven.
2. He set up the Altar of Damascus in the place of Gods Altar, (which he thrust
into a by-corner out of the way) by the help of Vrijah (that Temporizing
Parasitical Priest, a fit Helve for such an Hatchet,) and Ahaz approached his
New Altar, and burnt his Offering upon it, etc. Vrijah suffering him so to do,
whereas Azariah (a far better Priest) would not permit his Grandfather Vzziah
(a far better King) to do so, 2 Chronicles. 26. 18. 2 Kin. 16. 10, to 16. 3. He did
wickedly as he could, with both Hands earnestly, Mic. 7. 3. as if afraid to be
outdone by others, and as if he had been delivered to Work all Abomination,
Jer. 7. 10. He took long strides toward Hell, which did gape for him, and was
but a little before him; Vzziah (his Grandfather) was smitten with bodily
Leprosy for the like Sin (of Invading the Priests Office,) but Ahaz was
smitten with a worse Judgment, to wit, with such an hardness of Heart, that he
became so stubborn and stiff-necked even in the time of his distress, as he
would rather Break than Bend, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. Adding Rebellion to his Sin, Job.
34.37. and Jer. 48. 4. Hereupon the Lord set a black Brand upon him, as upon
Cain, Genesis 4. 15. upon Dathan, Numb. 26. 9. and here upon him, [This is that
King Ahaz,] and all for his Stubborness: this is that stigmatized Beast, and
stinking Belialist with his Mark of Ignominy, 2 Chronicles. 28. v. 22, to 25.
provoking the Lord to Anger, etc. and (as he provoked the Lord, so) his own
Subjects to Anger; insomuch as they vouchsafed not his Dead Body a Royal
Sepulcher, v. 27. Notwithstanding all this, The Devil cannot Run down the
Church in Judah by such a Dangerous Instrument still; for God raises up
Hezekiah (the 13th. King) to Undo all that his Father (Ahaz) had done, by the
Help of his godly Mother [Abiah,] whose Piety could not prevail upon her
Husbands Pertinacy, yet had her good Instructions a most Blessed Influence upon
her Tender Son, 2 Kin. 18. 2. and 2 Chro. 29. 1, 2. Here the Rule [Partus
sequitur ventrem, The Birth follows the Belly,] holds good: as Ahaz had stood
like a Pricking Thistle betwixt Two Fragrant Roses, his good Father Jotham, and
his godly Son Hezekiah) so Hezekiah stands up like a Fresh Spring after a sharp
Winter, and (by the good Hand of God upon him) brought the Ship of the Church
in Judah, from a Troublesome, stormy and Tempestuous Sea, into a Safe and Quiet
Harbor; according to the signification of his Name, [Hezekiah.] The Lord was
his strength, insomuch that he obtained sundry Famous Remarques (better than
the Brand by a black Coal on Ahaz) upon him: as (1.) his neglecting no time in
his Generation-Work, but falls upon Reforming Religion in the first place, in
the first Year, in the First Month, in the first Day of the Month, and on the
First Day of his Reign, even immediately upon his Corronation-Day, 2 Chronicles. 29.
3, 4, 5, 17. This he does effect by Convocating an Assembly, or Synod, or
Council of godly Priests and Levites, (whom his Idolatrous Father had forced
from their Temple-Service) to which Convocation this pious Prince made a
prudent, pithy, and pious Oration, hereby he removes those High Places, (that
Nest-Egg of Idolatry) which the best of his Predecessors could never remove,
and the brazen Serpent which Moses had made, (not for an object of Worship, but
for means of a Cure) he brake in pieces, when Abused to Idolatry, calling it
(when so broken) Nehushtan, a little poor paltry piece of Brass, for the
shameing of such as had so doted upon it, 2 Kin. 18. 4, 5. His Confidence in
God was the Cause of his Courage in so doing, who could not but expect
Opposition at such an Ancient Relics Deposition, it being now about 730 Y.
old; Fiat justitia, etsi Coelum Ruat; Duty must be done, whatever be its
Consequences. (2.) his Rising early the next Morning (after his Godly Speech to
his Synod of Divines) to call a Parliament, the Representatives of the Kingdom,
with whom (after seeking Reconciliation with God by his Attonement-Offering for
the late Apostasy) he Consults 2 Chro. 30. 2. the better to effect his Intended
reformation, 2 Chro. 29. 20, 21, etc. and with whose Concurrence he not only
Accomplisheth the Removeal of the High Places, and of the Brazen-Serpent
(aforesaid,) but also the Cleansing of the Temple and Kingdom of all the Idols,
and of all their Trinkets, Trash and Trumpery, he would leave nothing behind
that might make Idolaters Hope for a Desired Day of return, 2 Chronicles. 29. 15,
16, 18, 19. and Chapter 31. 1. Oh that our Reformers had cast all Romish-Reliques
into the Town-Ditch, or Kidron. The (3d.) Famous Remarque is his consenting to
an Act of Parliament for Keeping a Passover according to Gods Law, and
Inviting his Brethren of the Neighbor-kingdom thereunto, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1, 5. 6.
at which Celebration, this good King (1) Prayed heartily for the People, that
God would pardon their Unpreparedness, and (2) he spoke comfortably to the
Ministers, to encourage them in their work, Oh how few such Princes are found
in the World? Therefore has he the Honor of a Nonesuch; None like Hezekiah,
before him, (among all the Kings of Judah) nor after him, 1. for his miraculous
Healing-Prayer, 2 Chro. 30, 20. and 2. for his Early Essay of reformation,
(beginning in the first Y. (and Day) of his reign, but Josiah began in his
Eight, 2 Chro. 34. 3. 3. neither is it found that any other K. so Prevailed
with God as he did, 2 Kin. 19. 15. and 20. 2.) all 3 Considered make him a
Nonesuch.

No wonder if the Devil look upon all this with an Envious Eye, so falls to
Work in his plotting against him, and (1) he stirrs up Senacherib (whose Father
Salmanezer had Captivated the Ten Tribes, 2 Kin. 17. 3.) to come and Beleagure
Jerusalem, Chapter 18. 17. Observe the Time when the Devil did this, 'twas, after
these things, 2 Chronicles. 32. 1. to wit, Immediately after Hezekiah had set all
things in Order (by the Advice of his Grand Council) both in Church and State,
and immediately after the Glorious Celebration of the Passover; Up comes
Senacherib with his Army, and thought to swallow up Judah, as his Father had
Israel; [He thought to win them for himself,] but did this Design of the Devil
take? No, the Lord laughed it to Nothing, for He sent his Angel, v. 21. (at
Hezekiahs Prayer, 2 Kin. 19. 15, 35.) in that very Night, when they were
preparing for a storm the next morning, who smote (with a Plague) 185000 of
them, with their Leaders, Captains, and mighty Men of Valor, 2 Chronicles. 32. 21.
and Railing Rabshakeh among, if not above the rest, for his Abominable
Blasphemies against the God of Israel, (for we hear no more of him) Yea, and
Senacherib himself hardly escaped, having his Head and Beard (as the Rabbis
say) singed by the Fire of God, according to Isa. 33. 11, 12. However his
Preservation from the stroke of Gods Angel, was but a reservation for the
stroke of his own Sons, for he returning with shame of Face to his own land, 2 Chronicles. 32. 21. as he was Worshipping Nisroch his Tutelar God, (to whom he
Ascribed his preservation) his Two Eldest Sons (that came forth out of his own
Bowels, and yet neither of them having Bowels for their own Father, nor awe to
his Idol) Conspire together, and smote him with the Sword even in the very Act
of Worshipping a God that could not preserve him, 2 Kin. 19. 37. As this Fatal
End of Senacherib sounds a loud Alarm to all proud and Blasphemous Princes and
Persons; so it Discovers their Vassalage and Slavery (far worse than that of
the Turks) to a Cursed and Cruel Master, who loves Treasons, but hates
Traitors: As it is most sure that Satan stirred up Senacherib to war against
the Church of God, so it is no less sure that he also stirred up those his Two
Sons to Murder their own Father, for he is a Murderer from the beginning, Joh.
8. 44. Such as dare be his Drudges and do his Devilish Work, can expect to have
at last no better than such Devilish Wages; Oh who would wear his Cursed
Livery? (2ly.) When Satan saw himself Bassled in Senacharib (his Extrinsick
Engine) against Hezekiah, he makes an Experiment of an Intrinsic, in Tempting
him to Pride and self Admiration: This he successfully effects in the Matter of
the Ambassadors of Babylon, wherein God left him to himself to let him see what
was in his Heart, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25, 31. the Occasion and Opportunity of the
Temptation was this, Hezekiah had been mortally sick of the Plague, (that had
seized upon his Vitals,) and he had (likely) the Tokens also, so that in humane
apprehension a [Miserere mei] was Writ upon him, he was as a Dead Man; yet at
his Prayers and Tears God gives him a new Lease of his Life, (even a Lease of
Two Lives) Two Seven Years, and one more, to wit, Fifteen Years; so that 1st.
his Recovery [in Three Days] was miraculous by a Cataplasme or Plaster of Figs
applied to his Carbuncle; 2ly. to him alone (and to none else in Scripture) God
makes known the Term and Period of his Life. 3ly. As a Sign of his sudden and
supernatural Cure, and of his super-added Term of Life. The Sun in the
Firmament must not know the time of his going down, that Hezekiah might know
his: 4ly. The Caldeans Observing how the Sun (their God) had honored him in
its retrograde motion, come 680 miles to Honor him in their Courtship and kind
Congratulation: All these Four peculiar Privileges Tickled his Depraved
Nature, God (for this once) withdrawing, and Satan improoving, blows up this
Bladder of Pride, and makes him Act like a petty-God within himself, without
Dependency upon his God; he shows the Ambassadors all his Treasures, 2 Kin. 20,
12. 13. Hereby Gold-thirsty Babylon knew where to have a full Draught, where to
have a fit and fat Booty, Oh sublime Folly! yet the Devil is Disappointed of
his Design, God forsakes not Hezekiah utterly, Psalm. 119. 8. but sends Isaiah
to prick this Bladder, lets Pride out of his Heart, (which had been lifted up
net as Jehosaphats in the ways of God, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. but in self-Admiration
and Ambition, which is the Work of the Devil, Chapter 32. 25.) hereat Hezekiah is
Humbled, Hearing how his ostentation Contributes to the Babylonish-Captivity, 2
Kin. 20, 16, 19. Satan's Snare is broken, and his Soul is Delivered, Psa. 1^4.7.
For the very last thing we hear of Hezekiah, is of his goodness, 2 Chronicles. 32.
32. But the Devil played a better Game upon his Son Manasseh (the 14th. King,)
whom he wrought and brought up to become a Sinner of the largest size, 1. in
his Defying of God, 2. in his Destroying of Men, 3. in his Deifying of Devils;
yet lost he his Game at last, though it lasted longest, Manasseh having the
longest Reign we read of in the Holy History, even 55 Years, 2 Kin. 21. 1, to
12, 16. 2 Chronicles. 33. 1, to 10. This Degenerate Plant of a noble Vine, this
Manasseh was a Matchless Man in Sin, and quickly made mad Work, turning all
upside down; he Deformed all his good Father had Reformed, yet (as Romanists
do) under the notion of the Old Religion, and therefore by all means must be
done: Notwithstanding Affliction tamed this Wild Ass, this Monster of Men,
stopped him in his Career, yea, brought him Home to God, v. 11, 12. etc. and he
that had out-faced Heaven in his Sin, comes to hide himself among the Thorns,
as 1 Samuel 13. 6. in this lurking Hole his Sin finds him out, (and God for his
Sin) Numb. 32. 23. because he would not find his own sin out; there he was
taken, and put into Fetters, and brought to Babylon; now beholding his Golden
Chain of a King Changed into an Iron-Chain of a Captive, he bethinks himself
and besought the Lord, v. 12. those Sanctified Fetters broke the Devils sinful
Fetters; when the Rod spoke, he heard it, Mic. 6. 9. who would not hear the
Word, v. 10. though powerfully Preached to him by Isaiah, Micah, Joel,
Habbakuk, etc. the Darkness of his Dungeon helps him to the Light of Gods Love,
though he had cast off his God, yet his God had not cast him off; Satan would
have Coached him to Hell in Prosperity, but his God Lashes him to Heaven by
Adversity: As he had sinned greatly, so he Humbled greatly, that there might be
a proportion 'twixt his Sinning and his Sorrowing, as he is Humbled for Sin, so
is he Quickened to Prayer, wherein he comes with Fetters on his Feet to his
God, as distressed Benhadad did with a Rope about his Neck to the merciful King
of Israel, 1 Kin. 20. 31, 32. no sooner did he find (through Grace) a Praying
Heart, but his God finds also a Pitying Heart, v. 13. his God heard both his
Prayer for himself, and Solomon's Prayer for him, 1 Kin. 8.46, to 51. Now is
this Design of the Devil Disappointed, Manasseh is Returned and Restored to his
Realm, and his Reformation (the Blessed Evidence of his True Repentance) was as
large as his Deformation had been, and he most Remarkably Reduced his Subjects,
(whom he had formally Seduced out of the Right Religion) into it again, v. 15,
16. as Luke 22. 32. When he had Reformed effectually, he dies Religiously, and
leaves Amon (an Irreligious Son) to succeed him (the 15th. King of Judah) at 22
Y. of Age: he was old enough to take warning by his Fathers Example, yet would
not be Warned, but was rather Hardened in his Wickedness thereby, as thinking
to take a long swing in sin (as Mannasseh had done,) and to Repent afterward as
his Father did; but Gods Thoughts were otherwise, who neither gave him the
space nor the Grace of Repentance: This Man (that Trespassed more and more
after such loud Praemonitions; 2 Chro. 33. 23.) was a sit Engine for the Devil
to restore the Worship of those Images his Father had only laid aside and not
Burned, as he should have done, Deuteronomy. 7. 5. Instead of which (the Rabbis say)
this Amon Burned the Law of God, adding Rebellion to his Sin; He Imitates his
Father in his Race and Rage of Sin, but not in his Repentance for Sin. God
therefore soon cut him off (as judging it high time after a Year or Two Trial)
by the hands of his own Servants, 2 Kin. 21. 19, 23. which was a wicked Act in
them, yet a just Judgment from God, as he had Conspired with Satan to Destroy
the Church; so God suffers his Servants to Conspire his Destruction. This
Spoiled the Devils Plot, and yet it was worse spoiled by Josiah his Son, whom
God Raised up (the 16th. King) to be his Salvation, (as his Name, which was
given him about 340 Y. before he was Born, 1 Kin. 13. 2. does signify) and to
be as a fresh Spring after a sharp Winter (as Hezekiah after Ahaz) to the
Distressed Church: God had much Work for him to do in a little time, therefore
God soon removes his Wicked Father out of the way, and sets this godly Son upon
the Throne betime, at Eight Y. old God Advances him thither, and there shows
him (as on a Stage) to the World, as the Wonder of the World. Josiah zealously
lays out his Life until he was 39 Y. old in Reforming Religion, removing all he
knew to be Evil, and restoring all he understood to be good, even all he could
possibly do to Divert the Desolation of the Kingdom foretold by the Prophets,
but then the Decree was even ready to bring forth, Zeph. 2. 2. God turned not
away from his. Wrath, 2 Kin. 23. 26, 27. he is Unchangeably resolved on their
Utter Ruin, because the Peoples Reformation was but seigned, Jer. 3. 10. and
4. 3. God is Absolute in Threatening, because Resolute in Punishing: Now the
Devil, being notoriously Enraged at Josiahs Glorious reformation, Tempts him to
a Foolhardy Rashness in Affronting Pharaoh-Necho without any provocation, and
without Consulting the Lord by Jeremiah, Zephaniah, etc. So he rushes upon his
own ruin, v. 29. and 2 Chronicles. 35. 20, 22, 23. No doubt, but the Devil had an
Hand in the Death of this peerless Prince, wherein Dyed also the Felicity of
that Kingdom, for whom all Judah and Jerusalem (as they had good cause) made
great lamentation, v. 24, 25. yea, and it is no less to be doubted, that God had
an Holy Hand (as the Devil had a wicked) in Josiah's Death, for now he who
stood in the way of Gods Judgments, was removed, and now the way lay open for
the Divine Decree to bring forth, and all Gods Direful Threatenings to rush in
upon that sinful Nation: Yea, and God made good Josiah to Dye in Peace
(according to his Word, 2 Kin. 2^. 20.) though (through the Devils Temptation)
he Dyed in War; for 1. he Dyed before that General Deluge of Desolation came on
the Land, (as the next Word explains it:) 2. He Dyed in Gods favor, though by
the Hand of an Enemy: 3. The Tenderness of his Soul had made War to become
Peace to him, his Humiliation had Altered the very Nature of Trouble. 4. He
went then to Everlasting peace: The Four last Kings were all Wicked as Jehoahaz
(the 17th. King) Josiahs younger Son, and best beloved of his Subjects, who
therefore settled him on the Throne, 2 Kin. 23. 30. but for his ill-Reigning,
at Eight Months end Pharaoh-Necho Deposes him, and Disposes of his Crown to his
Elder Brother Eliakim, whom he named Jehoiakim, v. 34. who was a great Exacter,
and got from his Subjects a greater sum of Curses than of Coin, v. 35. he was
the 18 King, a Degenerate Plant from Josiah, who Trembled at the Reading of the
Law, Chapter 19. 34. but this Son cut it in pieces, Jer. 36. 23. and Burnt it: he
flew Vrijah the Prophet, Jer. 26. 23. and would have slain Jeremy and Barach,
but that the Lord hid them, Jer. 36. 26. For his Wickedness he was taken
Captive by Nebuchadnezzar, against whom he had rebelled, and was slain in the
way, where he had the Burial of an Ass, Jer. 22. 18, 19. His Son Coniah, or
Jehoiakin (the 19th. King) is Wicked also, Jer. 22. 24, etc. and within Three
Months surrenders the City, got Quarter for his Life, and Used kindly after for
his yielding, Chapter 24. 11. and 25. 27. Zedekiah (the 20th.) whose Pride against
God, 2 Chronicles. 36. 12. and Perjury to Nebuchadnezzar, prepared him for
Destruction, v. 13. And there was then a general Defection both of Priests and
People; now Gods wrath comes on them without Remedy, v. 14, 16. the Devil is
well-pleased (as God was displeased) to see the Temple burnt, and Judah carried
Captive to Babylon.

The Eighteenth Plot against the CHURCH, in Babylon: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. XVIII.
NOW when the Devil had got the Church laid wast in Judah, and (as it is
expressed in Scripture) Buried in the Graves of Babylon, he made as sure Work
as he could to keep them down there; In order thereunto he made them Servants
to Nebuchadnezzar and to his Sons, evil Merodach and Belshazzar, as the Prophet
Jeremy had foretold, Jer. 27. 6, 7. yet this was not to fulfill the Will of the
Devil, but the Word of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 36. 20, 21. Until only the Land had
Enjoyed her Sabbaths; which had likewise been foretold, Levit. 26. 34, 35. and
23. 32. Ier. 25. 9, 12. and 29. 10. Dan. 9. 2. The Land was Eased of that
Wicked weight which brought upon it Gods heavy Curses, and it had been toyled
and tired out with continual Tillage, and so they had got out the very Heart of
it to spend it upon their Lusts, (both) in a Neglect and Contempt of Gods Holy
Sabbaths: The good Lord divert from us the like Judgments (as an utter
extirpation) for the like Sins: Oh how should our notorious Provocations make
us Weep over, and Tremble at the Word of the Lord, Ezekiel. 24. 13, 14. least
Ruin come upon us without Remedy, as upon Israel and Judah, whom Ezekiel calls
Aholah and Aholibah, Chapter 23. 4. the Lewdness of both which God caused to cease,
as a Caution to all Kingdoms, that they may Hear, Fear, and do so no more, v.
49, 49. and Ezekiel. 16. 51, 58, 59. where the same matter is Expressed more
plainly, (as in Chapter 23. it is spoken parabolically) yet this Thundering Law God
was pleased most graciously to qualify with some serene Sunshine of the
Gospel, v. 60. Nevertheless I will remember my Covenant. This spoiled the
Devils plot, who thought the Cup now put into the Churches Hand (in her
Captivity) was so Deep and Large, Ezekiel. 23.32. that it had Eternity to the
Bottom; but Gods Covenant of Grace stopped her bitter Draught be times, (not by
thy Covenant, to wit, of Works, made on Mount Sinai) but by my Covenant, to
wit, of Grace, made on Mount Sion, Ezekiel. 16. 60, to 63. This destroyed the
Devils Design of Burying the Church in the Babylonish-Grave of Everlasting
oblivion, which was as Impossible as to keep Christ in his Grave from a
Glorious Resurrection, Act. 2. 21. Romans 1. 4. as the literal Body of Christ
(our Redeemer,) so the Mystical Body of Christ (the Church) Swallows up Death
in Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 54. The Lords Witnesses cannot be kept Under without a
Glorious Resurrection, Rev. 11. 10, 11. Oh how gladly would the Devil have (by
his Agents) kept Christ fast in the Grave, when he had got him there? Hereupon
his Instruments (those Kill-Christs) procures a Commission to do that servile
Work on the Sabbath Day, in Securing and Sealing up Christ's Sepulcher by
Authority: So they went and made the Sepulcher sure, Matthew. 27. 66. and now the
Devil Dances upon the Grave of Christ, as thinking himself Cock-sure of him,
but he that sat in Heaven Sees and Smiles, Videt, Ridet, looks and laughs, and
Laughs all to Nothing: he sets his King (in despite of the Devil) upon his
Holy Hill of Sion, Psalm. 2.4, 6. and, as Daniel was brought out of his Sealed
Den of Lions, was made greater than ever; So the Church (that Prisoner of Hope)
is raised out of the Pit (out of the Graves of Babylon) by the Blood of the
Covenant, Zech. 9. 11, 12. Gods Promise to this People is, that though they lay
in Babylon as in a Sepulcher, and, as it were, buried alive there, yea, and now
nothing but bare Bones, yea, dry Bones, such as were ready to crumble into
Dust; Their Case being so desperate, that they desparingly say, [We are cut off
for our parts,] hanging up their Hopes and their Harps together upon the
Willows, Psalm. 137. 1, 2, 3. yet God owneth them, saying, [Behold Oh my
People,] though they little deserved it, Ezekiel. 37. 3, 11, 12. [The Graves shall
be Opened,] together with my Dead Body they shall Arise, Isa. 26. 19. Come my
People, your Captivity is but your Chamber, a place of Rest, I will bring you
out thence; God sent his Angel to Roll back the Stone, as an Officer sent to
let Christ out of Prison without the Keepers consent, and sat upon it, in
despite of all their Arms, which the Guard let fall out of their Hands at the
Astonishing presence of the Angel, Matthew. 28. 2, 3, 4. There was an Earthquake
at Christ's Death, that Opened the Graves, Matthew. 27. 52, 53. for the Earth
could not bear his Suffering, and there was an Earthquake at Christ's
Resurrection, for the Earth could not hinder his Rising, and Christ graciously
Comforts his Disponding Church in the Graves of Babylon; Thy Dead Men shall
Rise, together with my Dead Body they shall Arise; Awake and Sing thou that
dwell in the Dust, Isa. 26. ^9. Arise, and come away, Cant. 2. 10, 13. and
till thy 70 Y. be Accomplished, he says, Come my People, Hide your selves in
your Chambers of Rest, or Babylonish Retirement, as it were for a little
Moment, etc. Thus God lovingly bespoke his people when they were led Captive to
Babylon; as if leading them by the Hand to an hiding place of his own providing
there, saying, I will make Babylon to you (Oh my People) what the Ark was to
Noah, and what Zoar was to Lot, your Captivity shall be your Sanctuary; [Build
ye Houses in Babylon and dwell in them, take ye Wives and beget Sons, and seck
the peace of the City, Jer. 29. 5, 6, 7. (in a Land like your own Land for
Fruitfulness, 2 Kin. 18, 32. As it is with sundry Plants which loses their
Stalks (as well as their Flowers) in Winter, yet shelter themselves by their
Roots in the Earth, the Ground is not their Grave, but their Sanctuary; a New
Spring makes them live again to Bud and Blossom: So it was the Churches
Wintertime in the Graves of Babylon, wherein God secured Sion, when an
outcast (as it were) under Ground, and trampled under foot, (as Roots of the
most beautiful Plants in Winter) yet Behold how the Lord Cherishes the Churches
Root there, and then with Thoughts of Peace and Love, to give her an Expected
End of her Winter, and to bring a fresh spring upon her, Jer. 29. 11, to 14.
and 30. 17. It Is very remarkable, that those Jews who were in Babylon (though
as Buried there) Fared far better than those that were left and lived in
Canaan; for God Spoke in the hearts of their Enemies for the Former, and made
their Foes to Favor them; God Interceeded for them with the Chaldeans, Jer.
15. 11. Verily it shall be well with thy Remnant; Hebr. If it be not well, etc.
and If I do not cause, etc. as if the Lord had said, Then never Trust Me more,
never look on Me as Lord or Master of My Word more: But the latter that still
lived in their own Land, were within a little while Involved in Woeful Misery by
Ishmaels Murdering of Gedaliah, many of them were Massacr'd, and the rest went
down to Egypt, (expressly contrary to Gods Command, Deuteronomy. 17. 16. and the
Prophets Counsel, Jer. 42. 14.) where they found no such Graves to Rest in, (as
their Brethren found in Babylon) but while they sought to run from Death, they
run to it, v. 22. and Jer. 43. 9, 11. and 46. 13, 15, 17, 24. Yet so
compassionate is God to his Church's-Relick there, that while he is denouncing
the Doom, and foretelling the Conquest of Egypt, yea, and of Babylon too
afterward, (for Persecuting the Church, Jer. 50. 1, 9. etc.) The Lord
Intermingles his Comminations against Egypt and Babylon with sweet
Consolations to Sion, Jer. 46. 27. but Fear not thou, Oh my Servant Jacob, etc.
I will make an End of all the Nations whither I have driven thee, but I will
not make a full End of thee, but Correct thee in measure: Oh the Bleeding of
Divine Bowels over his Captivated Church, in this consolatory Clause, God could
not find in his Heart to make a full End of her, as Hos. 11.8. but keeps their
Room empty all the 70 Y. till the return of the Natives, his Church. The Devil
undoubtedly gave Judahs land, (as he had given the land of the Ten Tribes)
primo occupaturo, to him that could catch and Conquer it first: he was a
Blasphemous Usurper in his saying to Christ, [To whomsoever I will, I give it,]
Luke 4. 6. wherein he Robbs God of the chiefest Jewel in his Imperial Crown,
Dan. 4. 32, 17, 25. Thus the Pope (like the Devils Heir) takes upon him to be
Lord of all (that Incommunicable Attribute of Christ, Act. 10. 36) both
Temporals and Spirituals in all Countries and Kingdoms: So Boniface the 8.
(that Antichrist) styled himself to Phillip King of France; and so did his
Successor to our Henry the 8. whom he Excommunicated from the Church, Deposed
him from his Crown, and Disposed of his Kingdom to him that could first Win it,
so far as his Roaring Bull (which yet proov'd but a brute Thunderbolt) might
Accomplish; no less had the Devil (his Master, Father, and God) done concerning
the Kingdom of Judah. Nevertheless the God of Israel would not suffer any of
those Warlike Adversaries (that surrounded Judea) so much as to Desire their
Land, Exodus 34. 23, 24. when they left it unmann'd thrice in the Year, much
less Invade it; and this Providence is yet more mavelous, that while their
land was empty of its Inhabitants for 70 Y. together, yet none of those
Neighbour-Nations (which always Watched, yet never Catched an Opportunity) do
make a Seizure of that tempting Glory of all Lands, Ezekiel. 20. 6. when the
Prophet Jeremiah has done Denouncing dreadful Woes against Egypt, and all
other Adversaries of the Church, (nine in number) he comes to his 10th. even
Babylon; and oh how amazing it is to Consider how in his giving out Confounding
Corrasives to Proud Babylon. He still scatters most Comfortable Cordials to
drooping and distressed Sion, as Chapter 50. 4, 19, 20. The Iniquity of lacob shall
be sought for, and there shall be none, Chapter 51. 5. Judah has not been for
saken, etc. v. 44, 45. God will make Babel spue up his Church as too Hot a
Mouthful, and that cannot be disgested, and still, My People, no reason can be
rendered, why Judah was not consumed as well as the Ten Tribes, and the Ten
Nations, but Gods never-failing Compassions, Lam. 3. 22. his mindfulness of the
Covenant of giving David a Lamp always, 2 Kin. 8. 19. the Lord said not, that he
would blot out the Name of Israel from under Heaven, 2 Kin. 14. 2, 7. Hereupon
he sent Prophets all along, 2 Chronicles. 24. 19. to comfort the good Figs, as to
Confound the bad ones, Jer. 24. 25, 8. Finally, when the Devil had got the
Church [the good Figs] in Babylon [as the bad Figs] in Egypt, yea, and
Fettered them there, until she was become as very dry bones, and in a deep
Grave too, with a great Stone upon it, insomuch that she looks upon her self in
a forlorn Condition, and that no Created power or Natural means could possibly
recover her, saying, Can these dry Bones live? etc. Ezekiel. 37.3, 11. they say
(as it were) Let them Hope that Hope can, There is now no Hope, Ier. 2. 25. the
less Hope that the Church had, the more Hope the Devil has to win the Game:
but the great and Gracious God comes with a [Liberate] serves a Writ of [Quare
Impedit] upon the Devil for Detaining them, this spoils all his Sport, God
Commands his Angels to Roll away the great Stone that lay upon the Mouth of his
Churches Tomb, Sealed down with the Devils Seal upon it, (as Daniels Den was
with that of Darius, Dan. 6. 17.) then Opened he the Graves according to his
Promise, Ezekiel. 37. 12. the same God who vouchsafed to be a Grave-maker for
Moses Person, Deuteronomy. 34. 6. vouchsafes now to become a Grave-Opener for Moses
People; when he had opened their Graves (with a Non-obstante-Writ,) the People
were there preserved Alive (as they had been buried Alive,) for God had sent
his Angel to shut the Mouth of that all-Devouring Lion, Death, (as he did to
the Lions in Daniels Den, Dan. 6. 22.) Hebr. 11. 33. so that the Savage and
Hunger-starved Death had not seized upon them, Psalm. 55. 15. with a Writ of
Habeas Corpus, or taking their Bodies, like as an austere and over-Lordly
Landlord attaques his poor Tenants, or as a cruel Creditor does his failing
Debtor; or as that merciless Man in the Gospel, who took his Fellow by the
Throat, and said, [Pay that thou owe me,] Matthew. 18. 28, 33. neither had the
Devil (that Roaring Lion, [seeking whom he may Devour,] 1 Pet. 5. 8.) served
the other Writ of [Habeas Animam] or attaching their Souls, to carry them away
into his Dungeon of Darkness: Oh what a miracle of Mercy was here manifested,
that neither the Cold Grave could contain their Bodies, nor Hot Hell catch
their Souls: Death had not fed upon them, neither was their Beauty consumed in
the Grave, as Psalm. 49. 14. but those Upright ones had dominion over Death and
Devil in the Morning, (after the long Night of their 70 Y. Captivity was ended)
in a dawning Day: But suppose they had been of that Moiety of Mankind that lie
dead in the Grave, as Psalm. 88. 5. and that Death had not only seized, but
also fed upon them, and had Gnawed them to the very bones, leaving nothing but
bare bones; yea, suppose those bones had been dried, yea, so very much dried,
ex Vetustate, and Carry, both so old and so rotten, as ready to moulder into
Dust at the least Touch: yet the great God, who comes to stand over these
Opened Graves, (as Christ did over Lazarus's, Joh. 11. 38, 41.) and who by his
Almighty Power can quicken the Dead, and call things that are not as if they
were, Romans 5. 17. Joh. 5. 28. Isa. 26. 19. Hos. 13. 14. he cries (with some
Groanings over the Grave,) Lazarus, Judah, Oh my People, Oh my Church, come
forth, Joh. 11. 43. Ezekiel. 37. 12. Yea, he Roareth mightily from on high, Ier.
25. 30. like the lusty Lion finding his Whelps dead in his Den at their birth,
he falls a Roaring so fiercely, that (as Pliny Reports) they presently revive
and rise up. So the Lion of the Tribe of Judah Roareth here to the like
purpose, and much more at the last Day, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 52. together
with Gods Word there goes out a Power, Luke 5. 17. (as when he said, Lazarus
come forth.) So it is in the first Resurrection, and so it shall be in the
last, Joh. 5. 25, 28, 29. If God do but Speak to the dry bones, saying, Ye
shall Live, etc. accordingly it is done, as in the Creation of the World, Genesis
1. 3, 6, 9, 14, etc. The Admirable Work of this great World was all made by a
bare Word out of the Mouth of the Almighty God, and He who could give a being
out of nothing at the first, can more easily restore a Being out of something
again, as out of dry Bones here. This great Truth, Ezekiel (Gods Interpreter)
excellently Evidenceth in his Parabolical and Typical Vision of the dry Bones,
most aptly Applied and Accomodated to the Jewish-Church in the Graves of
Babylon, which yet was Revived, Ezekiel. 37. v. 7. (1.) By a Noise, or Rattle, to
wit, some Roaring Thunderclap. (2.) By a Shakeing, as that of the Earthquake at
Christ's Resurrection, Matthew. 28. 2. the Earth did shake then to let Christ out
of his Grave, and now to let the Church out: and when God delivers his Church
from mystical Babylon, he will shake Heaven as well as Earth, Hebr. 12. 26, 27.
he will shake the old Heaven and the old Earth, to settle the New Heaven, and
the New Earth, 2 Pet. 3. 12, 13. Gods Shakeing concludes with Settling; it is
not to Ruin, but to Refine his Church: Oh what a Noise and what a Shakeing was
made here, by Ordinary Means (as well as by Extraordinary, in the Thunderelap
above, and in the Earthquake below;) to wit, (1.) by the Power of Prayer. (2.)
by a prevalent Proclamation: (1.) Prayer has a shakeing Power, Act. 4. 31.
Yea, and a rattling Noise or Sound with it, Act. 2. 2. (as Ezekiels Vision of
the dry bones had both those Two extraordinary and sensible Signs of Gods
powerful presence) so the Spirit of God came upon those Praying Ones as a
Spirit of Power, 2 'Tim. 1. 7. and shakes the place of Prayr (with a mighty
rushing Wind) and shakes the Persons too at that first planting of the Gospel,
as Planters do to young Plants that they may settle the better. Now this
Powerful Prayr (for the Jewish-Churches Restoration out of Babylon) was
Threefold, 1. That of Solomon, 1 Kin. 8. from 46, to 54. this very Prayr
(though made about 468 Y. before) shakes the Heart of the Persian Prince
(Cyrus) so, as to show Compassion to Gods poor people in Babylon, and at length
gives them leave to Return: thus Jacobs Prayr, [God Almighty give you Mercy,]
or Hebr. Bowels, Genesis 43. 14. was particularly Answered, when Joseph's Bowels
yerned over Benjamin, v. 30. 2. That of Daniel, when he Understood by Books how
the 70 Y. were expired; then he puts Gods Promise in Suit, and speaks nothing
in his Prayers but what God had spoke in his Promises, and so was Answered by
God in his Providence, Dan. 9. 2, 4, 20. This Prayr shakes Heaven, brings from
thence Gabriel, who tells him, for the 70 Y. Captivity, they shall enjoy their
own Country Seven Seventies, or 490 Y. v. 24. 3. That of the People, who
Prayed, Fasted, and Wept by the Waters of Babylon, Psalm. 137. 1, 2, 3. 1 Kin.
8. 47, 48. Zech. 7. 5. Those Three Actions in those 70 Y. shows the Church was
no more Dead in Babylon, than Daniel was in his Den, for they are all Actions
of the Living, not of the Dead: They Sow in Tears the precious Seed of Prayr
(Winged with Fasting,) so Reaps at last in joy. Their Desolate Country made
them Disconsolate Souls, yet their Sighs unutterable brought Joy Unspeakable,
Psalm. 126. 1, 2, 5, 6. Then comes the (2d. Shake) Cyrus prevalent Proclamation,
(the Lord stirring up his Spirit to it) Ezra 1. 1, etc. This turned the
Churches Tears into Triumphs, her Sighing into Singing, her Sadness into
Gladness. And the Devil (for all his Plots) has the Contrary to all these, is
Sad at his Defeat, and goes learing away. Now when God (in whose Hand are the
Hearts of all Kings, Prove. 21.1.) had most Happily stirred up the Spirit of
Cyrus to Issue out his most Gracious Proclamation of a Jubilee to the
Distressed Church, (wherein he was a Type of Christ, Proclaiming Liberty to the
Captives, and the Opening of the Prison to them that are Bound, Isa. 61. 1.)
and to give her so fair and full a Patent, this Mighty, Mavelous, and
Immediate Work of Divine Mercy (in her so deplorable misery) did so surprise
her, that she could hardly believe her own Eyes, but was for a while as those
that Dream, Psalm. 126. 1. This was the Lords own Doing, and most Mavelous in
the Churches Eyes, Psalm. 118. 23. especially upon those Respects. (1.) That
their Graves should be opened. (2.) That their dry Bones should live again,
stand upon their Feet, walk home into their own Country, build a Temple, etc.
(3.) That Cyrus, an Heathen King, (who did not know the Lord, Sc. savingly,
Isa. 45. 4, 5.) should not only be called by Name, (above 170 Y. before he was
Born) to become the Lords Shepherd to Feed his distressed Church, Isa. 44. 28.
but also (4.) in the very Entrance into his Monarchy, before his Affairs were
fully settled) to Dismiss so great and so United a People (in their Religion
and Custom) and so given to Insurrection (as their Character was, Ezra 4. 12,
19.) and to Return them into their own Land with all manner of Accomodations
both for State and Strength. (5.) 'Twas most mavelous, That this Decree or
Proclamation should be Signed, not only, 1. Precisely, at the End of Daniels
Prayer, Dan. 9. 21, 23. and 10. 12, 14. No sooner was Daniels Prayer out of his
Mouth, but it was presently in Gods Ear, and no sooner was it there, but
Immediately Gabriel comes posting upon the Wing, with an Answer, That (the 70
Y. being Expired) the Decree for their Liberty was now Signed, but also, 2.
Exactly at the End of the 70 Y. Captivity, neither more nor less. God will come
according to his Promise, Jer. 25. 12. and 29. 10. but Daniels Prayers must
lead him; thus he will have it to be: and God will be Punctual in keeping his
Word: a Day (with Men) breaks no squares, it does with God. Hence those Two
great Deliverances (out of Egypt and Babylon, and this latter more Mavelous
than the former, Jer. 16. 14, 15.) has Two special Remarques upon them in
their Accomplishment at a Punctual and Precise point of Time promised, as 1.
That very Night (wherein the Firstborn of Egypt were slain) was the Ending of
the foretold Four Hundred Y. Exodus 12. 40, 41. And 2. That very Night (wherein
Belshazzar was Slain by Cyrus and Darius) was exactly the Expiration of the
foretold 70 Y. Dan. 5. 30. This is the Churches Cordial and Comfort, though God
sometimes fails to come at her time, yet he never fails to come at his own time.

The Nineteenth Plot against the CHURCH, in Judea: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. XIX.
THe Church of God (through his Overruling Hand) having got this Royal Wind
under her Wings, flies Swiftly out of Babylon to Canaan, there to re-Build the
House of the Lord, (one of the Seven Wonders of the World) and to Repair the
City of Jerusalem, that Holy City, Ezra 1. 5. then Rose up Zerubabel, the Chief
Prince, and Joshuah, the Chief Priest, with all the Heads of the Families, the
Priests and Levites, with all their Children, Men and Maidservants, in all
7337, Ezra 2. 65. whose Spirits God had raised up, leading them into the Land
of Uprightness, Psalm. 143. 10. 1 Chro. 9. 3. Ezekiel. 37. 16, 17, 21, 22. many
Israelites joined with the Jews: Those (by the good Hand of God upon them) 1.
setts up the Altar, Ezra 3. 3. in the place where the Temple stood, (for, as
yet, they had none) v. 6. that by their Prayers and Offerings thereon, they
might get God on their side, and run to him Reconciled, what ever evil should
befall them from their Evil and Malignant Neighbors.

Then those Godly and Active Souls (not being content with the Altar of God
only, but Desirous (as we should all be) of all Gods Ordinances) lay the
Foundation of the Temple, v. 10. Then did the Devil Rage, projects (his 19th.)
a new Plot against the Church, which indeed is a Complication of Plots, as the
Books of Ezra and Nehemiah does Demonstrate. The 1st. part of the Devils 19th.
Plot, was to stir up (1) the Samaritans to obstruct the Superstructure of the
Temple upon the Now and New-laid Foundation, (2) the Governors of the Land, to
wit, Tatnai and Shether-Boznai, when they began to Build again after the first
Obstruction: 1. The Samaritans Satan Awakened and Rouzed up at the loud
Acclamations and Outcries, (Partim Jubilando, partim Ejulando, some shouting
aloud for Joy, and others howling aloud for Sorrow, Ezra 3. 9, 12, 13. Those
Adversaries of Judah, Devises Two Designs against the Children of the
Captivity, to wit, the Church: Their (1.) Plot or Design was most Craftily to
offer their own cost and pains to promote the Building of the Temple, Ezra 4.
1, 8. Here the Devil pretends Devotion to promote his Divelish Design: Those
Mongrels in Religion (who put it on and off at pleasure) would have mingled
with the Church, and would Compound with them here, when they saw they could
not Conquer them, that would break through all Difficulties and
Discouragements, and do their Duty, Ezra 3. 3. and this Accommodation they set
on with a loud lie, saying, We seek your God, as ye do, which they did not, 2
Kin. 17. 28, 29, 32, 34. for they feared the Lord not Filially, but for his
Lions: Thus they Pretend Amity, but indeed, Intend Enmity, and breeding of New
Broils by their Intermixed Influence, so as to Hinder the Building: This is the
very practice of the Jesuits at this Day, who pretend Conversion, and coming
over to the Protestants, yet those Cassandrian Reconcilers intend Subversion by
the bitter Contentions they keep alive in the Church to hinder Reformation: but
the Lord will Detect and Defeat them as he did those Samaritans, whom his
Servants repulsed, telling them, Ye have nothing to do with us, but we our
selves together (or alone) will Build the Temple, for which Doing they had
Royal Authority, v. 3. So it was a Godly Combination, no Wicked Conspiracy or
Faction: In a Word, They stand off from them, 1 Timothy 6. 5. not accepting of
their false Service, for the Jews have no Dealing with the Samaritans, Joh. 4.
9. When this 1st. Design of the Devil (in those Samaritans) was Disappointed,
then the 2d. was, their Hiring of Counselors, that others might Hinder the
Work; which they (themselves) could not, v. 4, 5. Such Counselors as can
Condescend to Bribing for bolstering up a bad Cause, or for Brow-beating a good
one, Justifying the Wicked for a Reward, and condemning the Righteous, are the
most probable Promoters of the Devils Hellish Plots and Projects: Those Sordid
Silver-Lovers, [(...)] being Courtiers, had a fair opportunity to frustrate the
Purpose of the Church; Inasmuch as Cyrus Warring abroad against the Scythians,
etc. made Cambyses, his Son, the Viceroy; and he, being a light, loose and
lewd lossel, was easily prevailed with to obstruct the Building: If Cyrus did
connive at the Crossing of his own Decree (by his Son) all his Days, then his
Fatal Fall by Tomyris (Queen of Scythia, who Conquered him, cut off his Head,
casts it into a Vessel full of Blood, saying, Satia te Sanguine quem Sitisti,
Cujusque Insatiabilis semper fuisti; Glut thy self now with Blood, whereof thou
could never get enough) was a Just Reward from the God of Justice: This
Cambyses, (who is called Artaxerexes in the Persian, and Ahasuerus in the
Chaldee-Tongue, Names given in common to Kings of Persia, (as Pharaoh to the
Kings of Egypt, etc.) signifying, Great Warrior, or Great-Head) those
Courtifi'd Counselors Writes to, and turning Informers, Wrote a Divelish
Accusation, Hebr. [Satana] a Satanical Suggestion) Hatched in Hell, and Dictated
by the Devil, the Contents of it being False and Scandalous; for then they had
not begun either with Building the City or the Walls of it, v. 6, 12, 14. Those
Mercenary Pick-Thanks obtains hereby a Commission to cause the Work of the
House of God to cease, v. 24. The Hindering of the Temple-Building was the
Principal thing Intended, though the Building of the City and of its Walls was
falsely Pretended. This Plot proves so powerful, that though the Propher Daniel,
(and Gabriel, Dan. 10. 13.) Remained there with Cambyses and his Counselors,
to repress their Rage, and to Blast their Projects against the Church; and
though he was a great Man still with the Kings of Persia, (as he had been long
with the Kings of Babylon, and so, marvellously Useful to the Churches
Preservation during her Captivity) though still he was in great Account, (after
her Return out of Babylonish-Bondage) yet was he not now Great enough at Court,
so as to Defeat the Devilish Designs of Cambyses his Bribed Counselors, who
had now put a Stop to the Temple-Building at Jerusalem: This Disaster casts
Holy Daniel into his Melancholly-Dumps, Dan. 10. 1, 2, 3. in the 3d. Y. of
Cyrus (which was the first of Irreligious Cambyses Reigning as a Viceroy in
his Fathers absence, as above, Ezra 4.6.) Daniel Understanding the Stop to
Temple-Work, falls a Fasting and Praying Three Weeks, because the Prince of the
Kingdom of Persia withstood him, v. 13. for so long a time, even Three Weeks,
or One and Twenty Days: This [Him] thus withstood, is the Angel Gabriel as well
as the Prophet Daniel, and this Prince (that withstood them both) is Wicked
Cambyses, or that Evil Angel, the Devil, who had an Hand in the Stop, and set
Cambyses on Work to Restrain the Re-edifying of the House of the Lord. Yet may
we not Imagine that any Earthly Prince has any power over an Holy and Heavenly
Angel; No, not, though he has the Devil to Help him, as here Cambyses had:
but, inasmuch as Cambyses (this New King of Persia) had Hindered the Temple-Work
(by Divine Permission,) he had thereby Hindered Gabriel from bringing Daniel the
glad Tidings, which otherwise he had sooner brought him, seeing his Prayers
were (both) Heard and Granted from the first of those 21 Days, v. 12. Though
this Grant was not made known by Gabriel to Daniel until Daniel had been
Tugging hard with God for an Answer all that Three Weeks; at the End whereof
Gabriel comes flying swiftly, as Dan. 9. 21. Hebr. with weariness of Flight, as
if glad of the Good News himself, thinking (as it were) his Wings could not
carry him fast enough to Comfort Disconsolate Daniel, as Ahimaaz (who overran
Cushi) thought his Legs could not carry him over-fast to Comfort Distressed
David, 2 Samuel 18. 23. 'Twas Gabriel that brought the good Tidings, but 'twas
Daniel that brought him (who brought them) by his Prayers: the Angel says, Now
I am come for thy Word, v. 12, 14. Though I have stayed thus long, further
telling him, Cambyses (and the Devil by him) had so strongly withstood his
Ministering Office for the Churches Good in the Persian Court, that he stood in
need of the Help of Michael, that Angel of the Covenant, or Lord of Angels, One
of the Chief Princes, v. 13. One of the Three Persons of the Trinity, or Chief
of the Angels, or, Sept. (...) the Cheerful Ones, (who serve the Lord
Cheerfully in his Wars.) this Chief One was the Messiah, who is Elegantly
Described, v. 6. answerable to that Description of Christ, Revel. 1. 10, 13, to
15. and 19. 12. Hence observe that Gabriel stood in need of the Help of Michael
or Messiah (which is a better Help than that of Angels) against the Adversaries
of the Church, to Repress and Suppress their further Crafty Counsels and Cruel
Contrivances against her: This is a standing Cordial to the Distressed Church,
That She has a Champion who will stand by her and for her, though all Wicked
Men on Earth, and all the Wretched Devils in Hell stand against her and
withstand her. Thus the Angel Gabriel Comforts Dejected Daniel, (who Sadly
Sympathiz'd with the Sad Suffering-Church, v. 15.) that none Helped the Angels
against the Churches Enemies, but Michael her Prince, v. 21. and Dan. 9. 25,
26. He is the King and Head of his Church, and Savior of his Body, Ephesians. 5.
22, 23. see Josh. 5. 14. Ezekiel. 34. 24. Act. 5. 31. Revel. 1. 5. and 19. 16.
This is Comfortable, that when the poor Church has no Humane Helps, yet has
she Angelical. The Angel Gabriel tells Daniel, I will Return (now I have
Delivered my Joyful Embassage to thee) and Fight against the King of Persia, v.
20. Chapter 10. to wit, Cambyses and all his Wicked Counselors, who are set on
by the Devil, and who setts on their Instruments, which went up in haste, to
cause the Work of the House of God to cease, Ezr. 4. 23, 24. the Devil driving
them, and their own Malignant Disposition (like a strong Byasse) drawing them
thereunto: but (says Gabriel) I will withstand them (who has hitherto
withstood me) and Confound all their Plots and Proceedings against the Church;
I will Return and Finish that War which I have lest (to come with Tidings to
thee) Unfinished; and though not One (of the Princes or Potentates) join with
me to Answer thy Prayers and Favor the Church, yet know, the Archangel,
Michael or Christ, concerns himself, and this is enough: Oh how many must we
Reckon the Messiah for? as Antigonus said of himself to his timorous Army, that
Trembled at the multitude of their Adversaries: This Michael (signifying, who
is like thee) is of himself a whole Army of Men, Van and Rear both, Isa. 52.
12. If he be for us, it is no matter who is against us, Romans 8. 31. Hence the
Devils Plot began to be Spoiled; this Mighty Michael stirs up Two Prophets
(Haggai and Zechariah) to Stir up the People to Return to their Building, Ezr.
5. 1. Zerubabel and Jeshua (the Prophets of God Helping them) carry on the
Temple-building which had been begun before; then the Devil Rages against them,
being ever an Adversary to the House of God and to the things thereof; He Stirs
up Tatnai and Shether-Boznai (with their Accomplices) to Interrupt them in
Building Gods House, (though they never opposed them in Building their own
Houses) by Asking their Authority, and (just like our Informers) requiring
their names, Ezr. 5. 3, 4. but the Eye of their God was upon the Elders (that
Eye not only of general Providence, but also that of Special Grace) to Animate
them in their Work) so that they could not make them to cease, v. 5. And
hereupon those Governors Write a Letter to Darius Hystaspes, (who Succeeded
Cambyses) wherein they give a fair Relation, but with a foul Intention. The
Devil and his Instruments had now the Ball upon their Foot, thinking to carry
the Game before them (having now got the Governors on their sides) and that
none could come near to overtake them; but behold! the Triumph of the Wicked is
short, Job 20. 5. The Pillar of Providence pursues them (as with an Hue and
Cry) comes up to them at Darius Court-Rolls, Ezr. 5. 17. and 6. 1. There that
Commission of Cyrus for rebuilding the Temple was found, (which they had
suggested in their Malicious Letter would not be found, hoping the Jews would
be found Liars) the Contents whereof was, That none should come at them to
Hinder them, none should meddle with them to make disturbance, if any durst
Disturb, let his House be pulled down for a Penalty, and let all Kings and
People (that dare Disturb them) be Destroyed, [a Dreadful Curse, and such as
God says Amen to,] Ezr. 6. 6, 7, 11, 12. The finding of thid Decree of Cyrus
(with those Contents, etc.) was a mavelous good Providence to the Disturbed
Church; the Malice of her Adversaries in Writing that Malicious Letter, prooved
a great Furtherance to the Finishing of the Temple, as Paul's Persecution at
Rome prooved not an Hinderance, but a Furtherance of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 12.)
For hereupon Cambyses's Wicked Decree (of Hindering Temple-Work) was far
Removed, as Micah had foretold, Mic. 7. 11. and those very Governors (the
Churches Adversaries) do (upon the Receiving of Cyrus Decree by Darius) 1. Pay
in the Kings Tribute to defray the Charges of Building the Temple; and 2. send
in all manner of Sacrifices, when finished, v. 12, 13, 8, 9. Thus God still
over-shoots Satan in his own Bow, causes the very Dogs to lick the Sores of
Lazarus, and makes all things to work for good to them that love God, Romans 8.
28. Josephus and Esdras say, Darius granted all this upon Zerubabels excellent
Discourse, how Women was stronger than Wine, too strong for Kings, yet Truth is
strongest of all. Then the Lord Removed the Decree (of Hindering the Building)
asar off, Mic. 7. 11. by Darius's Commission, Ezra 5. 3. and 6. 1. So that
notwithstanding all the Oppositions from Wicked Men and a Wretched Devil, in
the 6th. Y. of Darius, the Temple of God is Finished, and the Dedication of it
is Solemnly Observed, Ezra 6. 15, 16. (about 15 Y. after the Foundation had
been laid) Yea, and the Passover also, v. 19, 20, 21, 22. Neither was this all
the Lord did for his Churches Weal, Romovendo Prohibentia, in Removing
Hindrances out of her way, but also [Applicando Adiutoria] in Contributing
Furtherances, not only in making their very Adversaries to become their
Auxiliaries, as before, v. 13. (who did lend her Sacrifices of all sorts, and
that Speedily, according to Darius Decree, because they durst do no otherwise)
but also in Sending her Ezra in the 7th. of Darius, (called by that common Name
of the Persian Kings, Artaxerxes) to strengthen their Hands in the Lords Work,
and to make a wonderful Reformation, Ezra 7. 1. etc. and Chapter 8. and Chapter 9. Thus
the Vision of Zachary, Zech. 1. 17, 22. (who Prophesied at that time) was
Accomplished in the greatest part, for he saw four Horns who sought to scatter
Judah, to wit, Rehum and Shimshai, Ezra 4. 17, 23. Tatnai and Shether-Boznai,
Chapter 5. 6. and he saw four Carpenters to break those Horns, to wit, Zerubabel,
(called also Shesh-bazzar, signifying, Joy in Tribulation) Joshua, (a Savior)
Ezna, (an Helper) and (to Complete the Number of Four, God sent his Church
Nehemiah, (signifying, the Comfort of the Lord) in the 20th. Y. of this Darius,
Artaxerxes; with a full Commission from the King to repair the Walls of the
Holy City, after that the Altar and Temple had been Rebuilt by other Hands.
Hereupon began the 2d. part of the Devils 19th. Plot, who stirred up Pestilent
opposition against the Church both from Without and from Within. (1.) From
Without, by open and professed Enemies, to wit, Sanball at, Tobiah, and Geshum
the Arabian, Neh, 2. 10, 19. Sanballat (which signifies a pure Enemy) and
Tobiah, (that Advanced Vassal) were so Sly and Subtle, (being the Old Serpents
Disciples) as to Insinuate by Allyances to the High Priest, Neh. 13. 4, 28. yet
were mortal Enemies to the Church, and 1. It grieved them exceedingly, that
there was come a Man to seek the Welfare of Israel, Neh. 2. 10. had they been
Ingenious, their very Alliance to Israel should have made them Rejoice in
Isreal's Prosperity; but the Cursed Malice of this Moabite and Ammonite, had
swallowed up all the sparks of common Ingenuity. This is the (1st) Appearance
of the Devil in them, they looked upon Nehemiah with a lowering look, with an
evil Eye, (as Cain did upon Abel) and such was their Spleen and Spite, that
they became Sad at it. (2ly.) The Devil (in them) turns their Sadness into
Madness, v. 19. they had only been made Sad before, but now are they made Mad
with their own Malice, and falls a wagging their Wicked Tongues to Scoff and
Deride those Godly Wall-Builders, and to laugh them to Scorn. Herein Geshem
(Darius's Lieutenant in Arabia) Confederates with them at the Devils
Instigation, v. 10. and Chapter 6. 2. and Chapter 4. 1, 2. Now when God had Laughed
this Laughing-Design of the Devil to Nothing (1) by Nehemiahs Courage, Neh. 2.
^0. and (^) by the Peoples Constancy, and their good mind to Work. Chapter 4. 6.
when Scoffs and Sarcasms could not deterr them from Working; then (3ly) Satan
Hurries them into a Secret Conspiracy to Oppose their Building-Work by an Open
Hostility, Neh. 4. 8. that by turning their Works into Knocks, they might make
them either Creep into Corners or Run away: (4ly) They Strengthen their Cruel
Conspiracy by the Devils Crafty Counsel. (1) In Raising false Rumors,
Reporting that Nehemiah and the Jews did Intend to Rebel, Chapter 6. 6. Thus they
lay no less than the Crime of High Treason to their Charge, Intending to charge
Home those Children of the most High God, as Dan. 6. 13. Ezr. 4. 13. Esth. 3.
8. And they have a most Credible and Creditable Witness to prove it too, to
wit, Geshmu (or Geshem, the Arabian, their Fellow-Conspirator) says it, Who
knows not, that Vulgar Rumor is a loud Liar? Is it true because it is
Reported, and that by them that say Report, and we will Report it, Jer. 20. 10.
Psalm. 31. 13. as if there were no false Desaming Detracting Reports feigned
only out of the Addle-Brains of the Reporters themselves, Chapter 6.8. Geshmu here
Broaches the Slander, and Sanballat and Tobiah will Blazon it; the former setts
it on Foot, and the latter keeps it a Float, Hoping (according to Machiavels
Maxim, (Fortiter Galumniare, and aliquid Haerebit) If they slandered stoutly,
something would stick: It does not follow, because it is Reported, therefore it
must be true, besides Geshmu's Tongue was no slander, for he was known to teach
his Tongue the Art of Lying, as Jer. 9. 3, 5. and was this Man who was a loud
and lewd Liar, Yea, and a Party too in the Conspiracy, fit to be a Witness, but
any would serve Sanballats turn, who, for a need, could have Sucked such a
Slander as this out of his own Fingers ends: And they belyed good Nehemiah, (as
after they belyed Christ himself, Joh. 19. 12.) that he would have made himself
King of the Jews, and that he had Hired Prophets to Preach him up King in
Jerusalem, v. 7. As if Haggai and Zachariah (the True Prophets of the Lord, and
Preaching Up the Kingdom of Christ, Hagg. 2. 7. and Zach. 9. 9.) had been Hired
by him to Preach up the Kingdom of Nehemiah: whereas (indeed) they Mused as
they Used; this was their own (2d) Artifice in Hireing false Prophets to
Affright the People from the Work of God, to wit, (1) Shemaiah the Prophet,
Neh. 6. 10, 12, 13. and (2ly) Noadiah the Prophetess, etc. v. 14. All these had
Linguam Venalem, were merely Mercenary: Thus the Churches Adversaries can be at
Cost and Charge to Corrupt Gods People, and such Hypocritical persons may
easily by Hire be Corrupted: the Suffrages of a great many Bribed Prophets are
not so much to be Numbered as Pondered, their concurring Consent in an evil
Matter, was not so much Unity as Conspiracy; neither did the Devil Rest here in
giving Disturbance from Without, but (2ly) the Church must have Disturbance
from within also, by their own People and Brethren, and that (1.) by Mutiny,
Neh. 5. 1. and there was a great Cry of the People, as if it had been the
outrageous Uproar of a Seditious Faction, which is as Dangerous and as
Threatening a Deluge, as the Headstrong Water when once it is out of its Banks:
(2.) by Treachery; some of the Nobles Maintain a private Correspondency with
their Enemies, (just as it is at this Day) Neh. 6. 17. Tobiah (that Cursed
Adversary of the Church) had his Pensioners among the Jews, and such as were
his Sworn-Servants to be true to him, and to promote his Designs, because he
was Son-in-Law to Shecaniah, Ezra 2. 5. whose Son had Married the Daughter of
Meshullam, (a Zealous Builder, Neh. 3.4.) This Mischief mixed Marriages brought
upon them, Neh. 6. 18. and 3. 5. The Sooty Souls of those Nobles, (or, Hebr.
White Ones) under their White Garments, were too Stiff to Stoop to Gods
Service, but not to the Devils. Notwithstanding all this, The Lord Laughs all
the Devils Design to nothing: Nehemiah under all his Difficulties directs his
Prayer to God, Neh. 4. 4, 5. This was his Sanctuary he slyes to, Easing his own
Grieved Heart by Breathing Heavenward, and turning over all the Churches
Adversaries into the Hands of the Captain of his Salvation, (he looking upon
himself but as a private Soldier under him) to take them all to Task: Woe to
those Enemies against whom Saints do Pray as he did, [Turn their Reproach upon
their own Heads; Give them for a Prey, and Cover not their Iniquity.] If they
only be Blessed whose Sin is covered, Psalm. 32. 1. Oh what a Curse do they lie
under, whose Condition is contrary: Nehemiah makes Prayr (all along) his City
of Refuge, His Anchor in all Storms His Salve for all Sores, Neh. 4. 9. and
this brought all the Counsel of the Devil and his Imps to naught, v. 15. Psalm.
33. 10, 11. God Strengthened his Hands in his Work, (as he Weakened the Hands of
their Enemies) Neh. 6. 9. So that he Finished the Wall of Jerusalem, (maugre
their Malice) v. 15. The Feasts of Tabernacles was kept, Chapter 8. and a Solemn
Fast, Chapter 8. and 9. a Solemn Covenant is Entered into, Chapter 10. Offices are
Ordered, Chapter 12. The Temple Purged, and Religion Reformed, Chapter 13, etc. See
more of this further on Nehemiah in the 20th. Plot next Following.

The Twentieth Plot against the CHURCH, in Persia: Defeated by GOD.

CHAP. XX.
THe 3d. and last Plot of the Devils in the Old Testament, was against the
Church that Returned not with their Brethren out of Captivity, but continued
(1) in Babylon, and (2) in Shushan, where they had Built Houses, and Planted
Gardens, etc Jer. 29. 6. and so were unwilling to leave them, and their Estates
they had gathered (with Gods Blessing, upon their Obedience to Gods Prophet) in
them. There were (indeed) a Sordid sort, (to wit, the Posterity of Selab) who
preferred the Service of the King of Babylon, above the Freedom of the Land of
Promise, 1 Chronicles. 4. 23. They could be content to drudge in making Pots in
Babylon, (as their Forefathers had made Brick in Egypt) both those Works were
but Mortar-Works, Exodus 1. 11. There they stayed with the King (of Babylon) for
his Work, 1 Chronicles, 4. 23. which Scripture shows, that Ezra Wrote those Two
Books of the Chronicles after the Jews Return from their Captivity: but there
were others, that might stay there upon more Noble Accounts, as (1) Daniel did
and his Three Noble Companions, whose continuance there conduced more 1. for
Gods Glory; for though those Four eminent Servants of God were not Delivered
from their Captivity, yet God got greater Glory to himself in Delivering Daniel
from the Den of Lions, and the Three Nobles from the Fiery Furnace. 2. 'Twas
also more for the Churches Comfort to have Four such Friends and Favorites in
the Court of Babylon, (where her Adversaries were Unweariedly Circumventing
her) than any Service they could do her in their own Land. 3. And 'twas
likewise more for the Worlds Advantage, seeing by this very means, those same
Heathenish and Idolatrous Kings and their People came to some Knowledge of the
True God, as appears by Nebuchadnezzar's, Cyrus's, and Darius's Proclamations:
2ly Ezra (himself) and his Company came not (all of them) out of Babylon at the
first Return upon Cyrus Proclamation, Ezra 1. 3. and 2. 2, to 60. and 7. 1. and
8. 35. with Zerubabel: nor 3ly. did Nehemiah come up with Ezra, it being 13 Y.
after his Return, Ezra 7. 1. and Neh. 2. 1. and it is much he should Return at
all, being the Kings Cup Bearer, a place of great Trust and Credit, yet a Man
of Religion is marvellously trusted with it, even by an Heathen King: 'twas a
strange Work of God, that Artaxerxes should show Favor to a stranger, a
Prisoner, and one of a strange Religion, which he himself knew not, and which
his Subjects Hated: And it is as strange a Work of God, that Nehemiah a
Courtier, should leave his Wealth, Ease, Honor, and Authority (that he was
in,) and go so far from Court as many Hundred Miles, to Dwell in a Tattered and
Decayed City, among a poor People there to Drudge like a Day-Labourer, and that
in daily danger of his Life: Therefore is he most deservedly called and counted
the 3d. Founder of that Church and Commonwealth after Joshua and David: though
Zerubabel began the Temple, and Ezra Restored the Law, yet Nehemiah comes after
and Compleats All; so became [The Comfort of the Lord] to his Church, according
to the signication of his Name. (4ly) God had his Mordecai, (which signifies
Pure Myrrh, or Bitter Contrition,) 1st. in Babylon, and then (2) in Shushan;
he was carried Captive to Babylon about Ten Y. Old, in Jeconiahs Captivity, 2 Chronicles. 36. 10. Jer. 24. 1. Ezra 22. 2. Esth. 2. 6. (according to Junius, Dr.
Willet, and Dr. Lightfoot's Opinion) living about 110 Y. This Mordecai Returns
to Jerusalem, when the Captivity was sent back again to their own Country by
Cyrus, Ezra 2. 2. and there had Helped forward their Settlement, so long as the
Temple-Work was allowed to go forward, but when that was Hindered by Cambyses,
(all his Life time) He (with many others) Return back again to their Old
Residence into Babylonia, or Persia: As soon as Darius had Conquered Babylon,
Dan. 5. 34. he Models his Monarchy into 120 Provinces, under 120 Princes, Dan.
6. 1. over these he setts a Triumvirate, or Three Praesidents, being Principal
Princes, whereof Daniel (so well known in Babylon) was the Chief, v. 2. so was
Removed from Babylon to Shushan the Metropolis of Persia: compare Dan. 7. 1.
(then Daniel was in Babylon) with Dan. 8. 1, 2. there he was in Shushan, (which
signifies a Lilly, so called, for its Beauty and Delectable Situation.) There
was Nehemiah (as well as Daniel) Neh. 1. 1. waiting upon his Honorable Office
of the Kings Cup Bearer, and upon promoting the Churches Weal: There got he his
Commission to go Governor to Jerusalem for 12 Y. Neh. 2. 6, 7. and 5. 14. In
no less space of time could he hope to Rectify the Churches Deformation by a
Glorious Reformation, which when (through the Good Hand of his God upon him) he
had Accomplished, he then Returns to his Office in Shushan again, Neh. 13. 6,
7. whose Back was no sooner turned but all Returned into Disorder again, (as
Exodus 32. 8. Gal. 1. 6.) notwithstanding their better purposes and promises,
Neh. 10. 30, 39. he stays in Shushan about 12 Months, and yet the Devil (that
(...), or great Church-Troubler) had in less than a Y. time notoriously
Disjoynted, what Nehemiah had so Happily Settled, Neh. 13. 7, 8, etc. as he was
Inquisitive how it fared with the Church, Neh. 1. 2. The Church was his
greatest Care, [Omnis in Ascanio cari stat Cura Parentis,] His Honor in
Shushan could not Satisfy him, so long as it went Ill with Sion: he still
Enquires how his Reformation Remained, and he Understood, Neh. 13. 7. it was
Deformed again, this puts him on getting another Congedelere, or Commission at
Court, and Hastening to Jerusalem (where his Heart was before him) Reforms all
Disorders, v. 8, 9, to 31. so leaves the Church in a most Blessed Estate, (in
despite of the Devil and his Instruments) which continued so for a long time
after. And (5) Gods care of his Church (whom he be speaks in the Phrase of [My
People,] Jer. 50. 4, 6.) even in Babylon, sends Ezekiel thither among the
Captives, to Nourish the Seed of God among them, Ezekiel. 1. 1, 2, 3. who had his
Comfortable Vision by a Branch of the River Euphrates, (those Waters of
Babylon, where many Godly Souls sat down and Wept at the Remembrance of Sion,
Psa. 137. 1, 2, 3.) Now that the Church was planted in a Foreign Country for
a long time, (even for 70 Y.) The Lord most Graciously showed her such a Glory,
as he had showed her at her first Constitution into a Church State in the
Wilderness by that Pillar of Glory; God shows himself Here, as he had done
There, out of a Cloud and Fire, v. 4, 5. and from between Living Creatures
Here, as there from between the Cherubims; God gives his Oracles to this
Prophet Ezekiel, who calls this Captivity [Our Captivity,] Chapter 40. 1. and
besides him ^6) many other Good Men, (as Heldai, Tobijah, Jedaiah, and Josiah,
Zech. 6. 10, 14. who were Ambassadors from the Godly Jews in Babylon) together
with those Tradesmen and Carpenters, (Religion being most really found amongst
the Laborious) carried away in Jeconiah's Captivity, whom Jeremy calls his
Basket of Good Figs, Chapter 24. 2. and to whom God gives many Gracious Promises,
v. 5. I have sent them out of Canaan for their Good, and v. 6. I will set mine
Eyes upon them for Good, and v. 7; I will give them an Heart to know me, and
they shall be my People, for they shall Return unto me. Thus the falling out of
Lovers is the renewing of Love; their Afflictions were Sanctified to them, God
Enforces them from Evil, and Entices them to Good; He saw to their Safety in
Babylon, and provided for their Necessity there. Jehoiakim (called also
Jeconiah) was Spoke Kindly to, and done Kindly for by Evil Merodach at length,
2 Kin. 25. 27, 28. having his Prison-Rags changed into Princely Robes, v. 29,
30. and (as the Rabbis tell us) was truly Converted, having his Heart changed
as well as his Habit and Allowance, as Manasseh had been before him, 2 Chro.
33. 12, 13. And those Good Figs (no doubt) did share in his Comforts, getting
good Estates and Respect in the Land of their Captivity, Jer. 29. 4, to 16. but
the other Basket of Bad Figs, v. 17. was not Happyer because at Home, were cast
away as naughty Figs, or rotten Apples, and became most miserable by Zedekiahs
and Ishmaels Treachery; the 1st. against Great N^buchadnezzar, Ezekiel. 17. The
2d. against Good Gedaliah, Jer. 41. 2. God gathered the Good Figs as his
scattered Jewels, and strung them, Mal. 3. 17. but the Bad Figs he quite cast
away; though good and bad Figs were carried out, yet in Differing Baskets, and
for Differing Purposes.

The Two Baskets of Figs resembled Two Breasts, as the Hebr. Word Dodaim, or
Dudaim, Baskets comes from Dodim or Dudim, Breasts. Thus the Church at that
time was like the Nurse-Woman who has one Breast sound, good, and strutting
out with much Milk for Nourishing her Tender Babe; but the other is naughty,
rotten, shrunck up and dried away; And yet, even in this Basket of bad Figs,
God had his [Methe-Mispar] a small Number, a poor Few of good Figs even among
the bad ones, Jer. 44. 28. a small Reserve God had yet among them, to whom he
was a little Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 11. 16. wheresoever they were scattered: Still
God Reserveth a Remnant for Royal Use, even in the bad Basket, and in Egypt,
where no good Figs should have come, it being Expressly contrary to Gods
Command, Deuteronomy. 17. 16. and his Commination, as the last and greatest Plague,
Deuteronomy. 28. 68. and as expressly contrary to his Prophets Counsel, Jer. 42. 19.
saying to them, Be Ruled, or you will Rue it. It Is better for you to be in cold
Irons, Prisoners at Babylon, where ye may serve the Lord among the good Figs,
than to be serving the Idols of Egypt at never so much Liberty; your Fathers
brought one Golden Calf thence, Jeroboam Two, what may you bring thence if you
should escape? but know, All that learn their evil Manners, shall Perish in
their Punishments, v. 22. To save this little Remnant alive (both from Aegypts
Sin and Punishment) God by a mavelous and Special Providence, sends Jeremy
and Baruc along with them thither, Jer. 43. 6. in Order to Accomplish that
Gracious Promise, Isa. 27. 13. They shall come, which are ready to Perish in
Assyria, and the Out-easts in the Land of Egypt, and shall Worship the Lord in
the Holy Mount at Jerusalem: When the Jubilee-Trumpet of Cyrus's Proclamation
sounded, God most Graciously promises to Protect those good Figs that were
among the bad, in Egypt, and in due time to bring them back again; Yea, and
God further Promises, There shall be (not only) an Highway out of Egypt,
etc. as well as out of Assyria, but also that Israel shall be a Third with both
in the Communion of Saints, and Convey a Blessing to both, and then the Lord
shall Bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt, my People, (a New and Honorable Title
to them) and Assyria the Work of my Hands, (as Created anew in Christ) Ephesians. 2.
10. and Israel my Inheritance* Isa. 19. 23, 25. Thus we see Gods Care of his
Church in Babylon and in Egypt too, Defeating all the Devils Designs, which
were to Destroy it every -where, as well as any-where: Now let us view the same
Divine Care and Kindness to his Church when Removed to Persia, at the
Destruction of Babylon, out of which she Fled, Isa. 48. 23. and 52. 11. and
Jer. 50. 8. and 51. 6, 45. Zech. 2. 6. Revel, 18. 4. For it was Devoted to
Destruction by Darius the Persian; God had Reserved an Holy Remnant for Royal
Use even in Persia, for not half of the Jews Returned to Jerusalem at Cyrus
Proclamation, (whatever Josephus says to the Contrary, who makes the Returners
to be above Four Millions) whereas Ezra makes them only Forty and two
Thousand, Ezra 2. 64. Ten or Twelve Thousand whereof might probably be of the
Ten Tribes, that were first carried Captive, who together with Benjamin and
Judah, make up the (...) or Twelve Tribes which the Apostle speaks of, Act. 26.
7. Instantly Serving God Night and Day, Hoping to come to Heaven, which plainly
Intimates how God carefully keeps his Covenant in preserving his Church among
them: Now, (I say) this People having lived a long season safely in a Fat
(though a Foreign) Country, there they had lived in Peace, enjoyed their
Religion, gathered Riches, and had Favorites at Court, so were loath to trouble
themselves with removing into their own Country, where they were sure to meet
with much opposition, and many Enemies, the Samaritans and others. Hereupon
many of them remained in Babylonia and Persia, as before; yet God Delivers them
not over to the Devil to do what he would with them, but Defeats his Design,
even there also. As the Devil had his Wicked Haman to contrive the Churches
Destruction in Persia; so God had his Holy Mordecai there for her preservation,
before whom Haman Fails and the Devils Plot in him. Now come we to the most
Eminent Evidence and most pregnant Proof of Divine Providence in Preserving the
Church of God against the Devils most powerful Plot Recorded in Scripture: And
in discoursing upon it, I shall not meddle with the Timeing of it, (which some
Critical observers of Chronology do place betwixt Cyrus and Darius's Decrees
for re-Building the Temple) but shall take it as it is placed in Canonical
Scripture, the very last Book that Describes the History of the Church in the
Old Testament, to wit, the Book of Esther; wherein, though the Name (God) be
not found, yet most Eminently the Hand of God is found there in Capital
Characters. And herein Observe Two Principal parts; 1. The Churches Danger, and
2. The Churches Deliverance, both exceedingly Eminent, even in Shushan the
Head-City of Persia, wherein God had a great People reserved and preserved
there, and scattered about in many other places, as will appear by the Sequel.
First, The Churches Danger, in it Three particulars are observable. 1. The
Occasion of the Danger, to wit, Holy Mordecai's refusal of Bowing the knee to
proud Haman, (that cursed Amalekite, a deadly Enemy of the Church, and the
Kings great Favorite) both before he had obtained the Royal Decree against the
Church, and afterward also: 2ly. The Persons who were in this Eminent Danger,
to wit, not Mordecai alone, (for he thought him alone too mean a Sacrifice
below his Revengeful Rage) but also all the Godly Jews everywhere Dispersed,
Esth. 3. 6. and 3ly. The Danger it self, to wit, (not personal only, as that
of Dan. 3. 20. and Dan. 6. 14. but) an Universal and Utter Destruction
maliciously Intended by a Decree obtained upon false Informations that the Jews
did not keep the Kings Laws, v. 8. Thus Haman cloak'd his private Malice with
public pretenses; Oh what a likely Tool had the Devil now got to Work the
Churches Ruin withal, to wit, the Adversary and Enemy Wicked Haman, Esth. 7.
6. where he is painted in his proper Colors; The Man-Adversary, or Hebr.
Satan; the Church has her Man-Adversary (as well as Devil-Adversary) a Man of
might, and a great Favorite at Court, an Utter Enemy, a Sworn Sword-man of
Satan (that old Manslayer,) from whom Haman had drawn this Ancient Enmity,
Genesis 3. 15. and from cursed Amalek, Exodus 17. 8. He is (as pious Queen Esther
Brands him) our Angustiator, or Oppressor, and ready to do all Hostile Acts
against us: It Is this Wicked Haman, a Man of Mischief, and the Worst of
Mankind, even Wickedness it self, no better than a Breathing Devil, so
prodigiously and peerlesly profligate in his Plots and Projects against the
Church. Now the Devil begins his Plot by this sit Instrument, (as soon as he
had set him alost upon the pinnacle of highest Preferment, and the King had
commanded all his Courtiers to Bow to him, Esth. 3. 1, 2. (1st.) In Hamans
madness against Mordecai for his being so stiff in the Ham as not to bend to
Great Prince Haman, with the Cringing Courtiers at the Kings command. That was
enough for them, right or wrong; and so it is in our Day with Herodians, that
will be of King Herod's (or King Harry's) Religion, whatever it be, many
matters it not, so it have a Royal Sanction, it must be done, though they
(themselves) be Undone for ever for so doing; this Godly Mordecai could not do,
not only because Haman was a cursed Amalekite, whom God would have Israel (not
to Honor, but) to Destroy, Exodus 17. 14. Deuteronomy. 25. 19. 1 Samuel 15. 3. but also,
because this kind of Bowing had a Divine Devotion in it, due to God only, and
not due to any mortal Man, quite contrary to the Law of his God, Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
and 10. 20. Matthew. 4. 9, 10. Dan. 6. 13. It was not therefore a proud
self-willedness that made Mordecai so stiff, (notwithstanding the Allurements
and Affrightments of the Courtiers) but Fear of Sin, and Conscience of Duty,
and he would rather offend all the World than God and his own Conscience; This
enraged Haman, to be slighted by a Captive-Jew, whom the Freeborn Persians
Honored and Adored; Insomuch as he Swelled like a Toad, and Glowed like a
Devil, (1) in designing his Destruction, and the rather because he was a Jew,
whom he Naturally Hated, (as Josephus says) seeing they had Anciently
destroyed the Amalekites, his Countrymen, Esth. 3. 3, 4, 5. (2ly) His
Designing to cut off all his People as well as Mordecai, it being below his
haughty Heart, and too narrow for his Revengeful Mind to be confined within the
Compass of Killing one Captive-Slave only, but the Fire of his Rage will Burn
up all the Jews that lay in his way, v. 6. 1. In order hereunto he cast Lots to
find a lucky day wherein to Accomplish his Wickedness, which by an overruling
Providence was ordered (according to their Blind Superstition) not to be till
the February following; so he remained in his Savage and Bloody mind almost 12
Months, from March to February, v. 7. When he had by his Sortilegy (or rather,
Sorcery) found out his Lucky Day, (though long to) he obtains a Royal Decree
for the Execution of his Extensive revenge, by basely Aspersing the Dispersed
Jews, calling them a certain People, as if they had not been worth Nameing,
Scattered abroad, as if that had been their Fault, not their Misery, Dispersed
among the People, and therefore the more dangerous for Sowing Sedition, Their
Laws are Diverse from all People; so they were (indeed,) and (in their Enemies
Judgment) Better Laws, Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7, 8. Neither keep they the Kings Laws,
that is false, (Jerome. 29. 7. They Prayed for Peace, etc.) save only when Man's
Law did contradict Gods, as in Adoreing of Haman: therefore it is not for the
Kings Profit to suffer them, v. 8, 9. etc. Thus this sordid Sycophant filled
his Mouth with Arguments, (every Word having a show of Weight, and answering
objections about damnifying the Tribute paid into the Exchequer by the Jews for
their Liberty of Conscience) and all to Atchieve his Devilish design: the then
Credulous King (who in the Case of Vashti had been Deliberate, referring the
Matter to his Counsel, Esth. 1. 13, 15, 17, etc.) now Rashly Grants his Bloody
request, to do what, and destroy whom he pleased, Remitts the vast Sum (even
3750000 l. sterling) promised by Haman, the Jews Enemy, v. 9, 10, 11. and which
he Hoped to Raise out of the Spoil of the Jews. Then the Commissions were
Written (not with Black, but with Blood) in multiplied Cutting and Killing
Words from his malicious Mind, and Sealed with the Kings Signet given to Haman
to make it Unalterable, v. 12. Yea, and they were sent away in Post-haste by
the swiftest Posts long before the Lucky Day, (to hold the poor Jews upon the
Rack all that Interspace) v. 13. And the Letters were not only Posted away in
all Haste by the Kings Commandment, (as if he had been in Danger of his Crown)
but were also Pasted up upon every Post and Pillar, that all people should be
ready against the Day to take the Spoil of the Slain, v. 14. and the King and
Haman sat down to Drink, v. 15. to drown the Noise of Conscience, and to
declare their Jollity in the destruction of Gods People: Now the Devil had a
fair prospect of his Game, having the Ball upon his Foot and got almost to the
very Goal; but now is God seen in the Mount, and makes him miss his Game; Oh
what Fools did God make of the Devil and his Haman? he lets them both go to the
very length of their Tedder, and then pulls, Yea, plucks them back with shame
again. The Godly Jews had no place to fly to, none among the Caldees, Medes,
and Persians, to pity them; none to own them, and then both God owns them, and
they God; which brings in the 2d. General part, The Churches Deliverance,
wherein is Observable, 1. Means Preparing to 2. Means Performing of that
Deliverance in the Hand of the Almighty: 1. The Means Preparing were 1. The
Removal of Vasthi from being Queen, upon her refusal to come at the Kings
Command: This mighty Monarch (who had added Seven Provinces more to his vast
Empire than Cyrus or Darius had, Esth. 1. 1. with Dan. 6. 1.) while he was
Vain-Gloriously showing to his Subjects the prodigious Glory of his Universal
Command, he could not Command his own particular Wife, v. 4. 12. this
Contumacious Insolency enrages Ahasuerus, yet will Act nothing herein without
the Advice of his Council, (for so was the manner, v. 13.) not to be Arbitrary
(in that most Absolute Empire) altogether, but according to the Law, v. 15.
Hereupon the King and Counsel Excludes Vasthi, (which signifies a Drinker,)
and She, (the Jews Enemy, as Rabbis say) was Excluded, lest the Ladies (who
were Feasting with her, v. 6.) should learn Imperiousness by her example; Thus
the Vanity of this Royal Drinking Feast was Stained by Degrading Vasthi, (a
Drinker) this sad Catastrophe was its End; and Esther a poor Captive Maid, yet
Godly, and a faithful Friend to the Jews) was brought in by a mavelous
providence into the Vacant Place, Esth. 2. 4, 9, 15, 16. having decked her self
with the White of Simplicity, with the Red of Modesty, with the Silk of
Sanctity, and with the Purple of Chastity, as Tertullian Phraseth it, (not as
the other Virgins) not setting out her Beauty with Sophistical Paint, but in
her Native Comeliness, and in that Wisdom which makes the Face to Shine,
Eccles. 8. 1. She wholly Rested upon Divine Providence, and Prosper'd
accordingly. The 2d. Preparing Means, was Mordecai's Discovering the matter of
Treason (of the Kings Two Porters, Bigthan and Teresh) unto Ahasuerus: Those
Two (...) (as the Greek calls them) Keepers of the Door of the Kings
Bedchamber, (so had fair opportunity for Mischievous Treason, under that Great
Trust) conspired against the King, while he was in the Glut of his carnal
Concupiscence, Drowning himself in sensual Delights, not only in Deflowring so
many Virgins, v. 8. (four Hundred, says Josephus) but also Satiating his Gust
or Lust upon his new Queen; so dreading no Danger in this his Delightful
Bedchamber; then did those Two Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, or Chamberlains,
Design his Death, being Incensed, that Vasthi (to whom they had been
Favorites) was Deposed, and that they might Transferr the Empire unto Haman,
the Jews Enemy, Esth. 2. 21. This Bloody conspiracy was made known to Mordecai
(as he sat in the Kings Gate, v. 16.) by a Jew (says Josephus) who was Servant
to one of the Conspirators; or by themselves, (says Rab. Solomon) who either
Discoursed of the Plot before him in a Language (they supposed) he Understood
not, (as our present plotters have done in French, and have been Understood and
Discovered) or they Solicited him (being one of the Keepers of the Kings-Door
also) to join with them: Hereupon he tells Esther, she tells the King,
Inquisition is made into it, (* this Plot is not smothered,) v. 22. 23. the
King sleights not the Information, least he should betray his own Life, and
bring all into a Confusion, as Gedaliah had done before him, Ier. 40. 8, 13, to
16. against whom (being envyed for his Promotion, and for his Revolt to
Nebuchadnezzar, though he did so in Obedience to Gods Word by his Prophet
Jeremy) Treacherous Ishmael, (some younger Brother of the Blood Royal) and Ten
Nobles of the Court, (whom the Grand Conspirator had (probably) promised to
Restore to their Principalities when he should be King, or at least Viceroy)
Jer. 41. 1. do Traitorously conspire: Those Traitors had (1st.) come to do
their Homage to him, Jer. 40. 8. and good Gedaliah sincerely Swore he would
protect them to the utmost of his power, v. 9, 10. (2ly) They came pretendingly
to give him a Friendly Visit, (whom he Feasted as familiar Friends,) Jer. 41.
1. not unlike to Psalm. 41. 9. Luke 14. 1. Mat. 26.23. Then those Judas's
assaults him (when he and all his Guests were (as Josephus says) merry with
Wine, and so, less able to Resist) and slew him and all that were with him, v.
23. and Seventy Samaritan Proselytes, who had not (in the least) offended this
Brutish Butcher, v. 5, 6, 7. All this befalls this good Governor by his own
fond Credulity, for he had a faithful Information of this Bloody Plot by
Johanan and the Captains, Jer. 40. 13. Discovering to him, How the King of
Ammon was the prime Engineer (out of his Inveterate Hatred to Israel) in
pussing up this young Gallant, and his Ten Desperado Hectors, with Promises of
Preferment, (as before) v. 14. (not unlike to that Influence our present Plot
has had from the French-Court) Yea, and those Discoverers of the Plot do offer
their Service to Prevent it, v. 15. but this Just Man (too much Ingenuous, too
little Suspicious) was too secure, and would believe nothing, v. 14. 16. * Qui
omnia Credit, and qui nihil Credit, ex A^quo peccat. It Is no less a fault to
believe nothing, than to believe every thing. As Reports are not to be
over-heeded, so neither are they to be over-slighted, especially where Life is
concerned, and most especially the Life of the King, or chief Governor; the
latter whereof was Gedaliah's Case, and the former is this of Ahasuerus, who
like a Wise King makes Inquisition, to wit, a Thorough Enquiry and Searching
out to the Bottom, whether the Report were True or No, Esth. 2. 23.
well-knowing that the Weal of the whole Land Depended mainly upon One Man's
Safety; and though Cruel and Crafty Ishmael was successful so far as (by his
Deep Dissimulation) to cut off good Gedaliah (through his want of an Honest
Jealousy) and many others, to whom he made a show of a mournful Mind with
them, (in his Crocodile-Tears) that they might not mistrust him, Jer. 41. 6.
Yet God Laughed his Plot to Nothing, he lost his Design of making himself
King, or Viceroy, for though he did what he could to conceal his Wickedness,
Jer. 41. 4, 9. yet God will have all Barbarous Murders to come out to light
though never so closely carried; Rumor out-ran him before he could get away
with his Prize; Johanan hears of all his Butcheries, comes and makes a Rescue
to the Joy of the People, v. 10, to 13. Ishmael escapes to Ammon (as our
Conspirators do to France) * which Defeat could not but be a greater vexation
to his proud Heart there, than Death it self; with what Peace, Honor, or
Conscienbe could this base Judas live in the Court of the Ammonites King, who
had set him on to Raise himself by the Ruin of Gedaliah, and to give him an
Opportunity of Invading the Country when they had none to protect them: Here I
cannot pass over in Silence those four Famous Remarques. The 1st. is, That
Divine Vengeance pursued Ishmael to Ammon, as appears, Jer. 49. 1, 2, 3. Amos
1. 14. and 2. 2. which had always Infested Israel, and now Grossly Injured, (as
if Heir-less) so is put under an Irreversible Decree of Destruction for Three
and Four Transgressions; God knows what may in due time befall France for the
like Sins. The 2d. Remarque is, Gods Freedom in his Choice of Instruments for
Deliverance: This Johanan was not Right, no more than Ishmael, out of whose
Wicked Hands he Delivered the People, for though he pretended fair in that Act,
and in his Address to Jeremy, Jer. 42. 1, 2, 3. yet this was all but Hateful
Hypocrisy, v. 20. and 43. 2, 4. The 3d. Remarque is, Divine Vengeance Pursues
this Deliverer when he stepped out of Gods way into Egypt, as appears, Jer.
43. 11. and 46. 1, 2, etc. Thither those persidious Persons are pursued Hot
foot, for refusing to live in Gods good Land, and according to Gods good Laws,
as they had feignedly promised. The 4th. famous Remarque is this, God suffers
some Secret Plots and Cursed Conspiracies to Succeed more and farther than
others; yet all Baffled and Blasted at last: Thus that against Gedaliah had a
farther Success, than this against Ahasuerus; for Gedaliah did fall by that
against him, because of his Remissness to find out the Treason: but Ahasuerus
did not fall by His, for it was found out, Esth. 2. 23. as all Treason usually
is, for Mordecai had so prudently Managed the Matter, that he could punctually
prove the Information, and did so, whereupon the Traitors (who like Bells, will
never be well Tuned, until they be well Hanged) were both Hanged on the
Gallows, wearing a Tyburn-Tippet, as Father Latimer phrased it, * whereof some
such like in our day seem to be Ambitious, but much Joy have they of that
Ambition to themselves, though they be Canonized for Saints thereby in the
Romish-Kalendar. Mordecai's Discovery becomes the Kings Deliverance, and the
Traitors Destruction. This memorable Act is Entered into the Journal Book, or
public Records of Persia, the King being an Eyewitness of its Registring,
yet Mordecai's Good Service was soon forgotten, God forgot not Ahasuerus, to
Recompense him for his Love to Esther, and Kindness to her People by Detecting
and defeating the Damnable Plot of the Conspirators against his Life; but he
soon forgets Mordecai, who from a Conscience of Duty, and Fear of God, became
the Instrument of saving his Life, though the whole matter was in his
Chronicle-Book before him: However God (who had an Holy Hand in all this)
forgot not Mordecai, but brought to pass great things by his Providence, even
out of the Kings forgetting him, and that Nothing was yet Done for Mordecai,
Esth. 6. 1. etc. as is there at large related: * Gods time is the best, and we
shall one day say so; let us leave our All believingly with the Lord, never is
there any thing lost by waiting Gods Leisure and Pleasure, who both Bottles up
the Tears and Books up the Groans of his People, Psalm. 6. 8. Yea, Writes down
all their Prayers in his Roll of Remembrance, Mal. 3.16. and will not forget
them as the Butler did Joseph, Genesis 40. 23. nor as Ahasuerus did Mordecai here,
therefore all things went Sadly with the Church after this forgetfulness; Haman
gets the Kings Decree to Destroy all the Jews in the 12th. Month upon his Lucky
Day, Esth. 3. 13. and his revengeful Heart being too Impatient of so long
Delay, till that Day came goes (in the mean time) to get a Grant of Ahasuerus
to Hang Mordecai (the Kings Deliverer) before hand, Esth. 5. 14. and 6.4. Now
the Devils game was at the fairest, and the Church brought to a low ebb, Haman
is come unto the King (for an Order to Hang Mordecai) very early in the
Morning, yea, so early, that Esther could not possibly prevent him by begging
of his Life, had she been never so Desirous: Here was the Low Water Mark, now
the Tide begins to turn and the Wheel of Providence to Move most apparently in
order to the Church's Deliverance, God loves to come (...) in the very nick and
Opportunity of time, God will be seen in the Mount, when there is a damp upon
our Hopes, and a death upon our Helps; when We are low enough, and our
Adversaries High enough: Never was the Church lower, nor Haman (her Enemy)
higher, than that very Night, wherein God began to stir, and to take those
following famous steps (all added to the the Two former, 1. of Esthers Advance
in Vasthi's Throne, and 2ly. Mordecai's Saving the Kings Life from the Traitors
Hands) for Advanceing Mordecai to Honor, whom Haman had Devoted to Hang up,
and that before his own Door (to feed his Eyes the better upon so Happy a
Hanged Spectacle) upon a Gallows fifty Cubits high, (which was well nigh Thirty
Yards in height) for the greater Disgrace of Mordecai to be seen thereon far
and near. The 3d. famous Step God takes, is the taking away of the Kings Sleep
from him that very Night, Sleep is a Gift of God which he gives to Man and
takes from him according to his good Pleasure, Psa. 127.2. This great King,
that commanded an 127 Provinces, cannot command so much as an Hours Sleep for
himself when he pleases: It was God that kept him awake for excellent Ends.
Gods 4th. Step was, The Kings Commanding to bring the Book of Records to be
Read before him, the better to deceive that Tedious time of his lying Awake:
Had not God overruled him, he might have called for his Wives, Concubines,
Musicians, etc. whereof he had abundance: Nothing but History must be called
for to Comfort him, and thereby God put small Thoughts into his mind for great
Purposes, as the Scruple God cast into the Head of our Henry the 8th. about his
Marriage, became the occasion of Unhorsing the Pope in England, etc. The 5th.
Step God takes here, Esth. 6. 1, 2. that the Reader of that Persian History or
Chronicle should be (by Gods Secret Providence) directed to Read that very
Story of Mordecai's Saving the Kings Life by Discovering the Treason against
him, (like as the Eunuch was, Act. 8. 30, 32. to that place in Isaiah, Chapter 53.
7, 8. and Austin to Romans 13. 14. the main means of their Conversion) not
turning to that place purposely, neither the one, nor the other of all the
Three, (no doubt but Gods Hand in the Margin pointed him to it.) The 6th. Step
God takes in his Providence is, That Noble and right Royal Mind God stirred up
in the King, to enquire, What Honor has been done to Mordecai for this, v. 3.
Turpe est Regi, Beneficijs Vinci; it is too sordid for mighty Kings to be
Ungrateful to their most Loyal Subjects, and not to Reward those that have been
Instruments of Saving their Lives: God makes Ahasuerus Reflect upon the great
Crime of his own Ungratefulness to Mordecai for so great a Service. Gods 7th.
Step, is, his Ordering it so, that those Gentlemen of the Kings Bedchamber
should be by, who were Ingenious, and had a Kindness for Mordecai, whom yet
they knew a great Eyesore to Prince Haman; and had those young Courtiers been
as envious as Haman, and disaffected to Mordecai, they might have extenuated
his good Service, and minded the King of his Decree against the Jews, or have
told Ahasuerus, as the Apocryphal Additions, Esth. 12. 5, 6. tells, that he
had been Rewarded; but they heartily Answer, There is nothing done for him, not
Grudging (as it is common with Courtiers) to have others come over their Heads.
Gods 8th. Step is, That Mordecai should not have any present Recompense for
that eminent Service, but that he should wait Six Y. (says Lyra) and yet have
no Reward, especially from a King of Persia, whose Kings had used to be very
Bountiful to those that Deserved well of them, as Herodotus, Xenophon, and
Plutarch, largely Relates. It Is probable, a Reward was at first Decreed for
him, but he being a Jew, its Execution was for some time (through Hamans
Insluence) obstructed, and at last it was altogether forgotten till now.
However Haman (and the Devil his Master) had a Wicked, the great God had an
Holy Hand in it, that it should be deferred to a fitter opportunity, wherein he
might be more Glorified in the Preservation of his People, and in the
Destruction of his Enemies, at the Due Season, Gal. 6. 9. Let us not therefore
be weary of Well-doing, God Times all his Mercies well, and well sees when they
will be most Sweet and Seasonable, Isa. 30. 18. Gods 9th. Step, is, The
Mavelous Providence, that Haman (himself) should be present at that Juncture,
when God had corrected the Kings Forgetfulness, and now had put it into his
Heart to Reward Mordecai, Esth. 6.4. It Is true, his carnal Friends had put this
Revengeful Wretch onward in his pride and revenge, (adding fuel to his flameing
sire.) They said to him, [To Morrow speak thou to the King, etc.] Chapter 5. 14.
Hereupon he gets early up, (sleeping that Night as badly as Ahasuerus) comes by
Morning-light to procure a Warrant for Mordecai's Execution: yet all this was
of God, (for it is not in Man to order his own way, Jer. 10. 23.) that Haman
(himself) should, to his greater Vexation, prescribe the Honor that must be
done to Mordecai, and that at a time when he was come to get him Hanged, yea,
and with full confidence to compass his Design, though for no other Crime but
not cringing to him; neither Haman nor the Devil (himself) had any thing else
to accuse Mordecai of, for he is One of those few in Scripture-Record, that
both lived and dyed in Glory, being no where taxed for any Gross sin, that we
read off. Gods 10th. Step, is, The Wonderful Disappointment he brought upon
this Wicked Ambitionist. Haman comes merrily into the Kings Presence as soon as
called, ('it is strange Ahasuerus Consulted not with his Courtiers who then
attended upon his person; no, God will have Haman to be the Counselor)
coming in for another purpose, a mischievous one against Mordecai, and is
assured it would be but Dictum, Factum, the King would not say him Nay; but God
Overruled all: Ahasuerus asks Hamans Advice [What shall be done, v. 6.] by an
over-powering Providence he names not the Man whom he would Honor; Haman
mistaking himself to be the Man meant, does most liberally Advise to all
Punctilio's of Honor, and as Aspiring to the Kingdom, he affects the
Crown-Royal it self, v. 8. (which because it was not practicable, the King
leaves it out of his Commission.) All this Honor (he expected to himself) he
is commanded to conferr upon Mordecai, whom he hated, and would have Hanged.
Thus had he made a Bridge of his own Shadow, and down he falls into the Ditch,
which was but a Praelude to his final fall at last. Thus Quos Deus Destruit,
Dementat, when God has a mind to Undo a Man, he first Infatuate him: Oh what
a Fool God made of Haman here, he comes in to the King with his Head full of
Hopes, but goes out with his Heart full of Blanks, (as in a Cheating Lottery)
his big Expectations ends in gross Disappointments, the Kings own Horse must be
the Gallows on which Mordecai must safely and stately Ride in Triumph, and the
lofty Gallows which Haman had erected for Mordecai, now groaneth for himself:
Hamans malice (which would bear no delays, for he could neither Sleep in Quiet,
nor Eat with Content) against Mordecai, is miraculously Converted to a
conferring such an Honor upon him, as the King or his Courtiers would never
have thought on to have done him, had not Haman (himself) Counseled it to be
done; it is easy to be Imagined how the Kings peremptory Precept, v. 10. did
Stabb Haman to the Heart, who must now (perforce) Honor him whom he Hoped to
Hang, Cloth him with Royal Robes, whom he Hoped to Strip of his own ordinary
Raiment, Help him Up upon the Royal Horse, whom he Hoped to Help Up upon the
lofty Gallows, and then (when put down into his Grave) to Hop and Dance over
him; Prepare a Triumph for him, for whom he had prepared Ruin, Proclaim his
Loyalty (the cause of that Honor) as a Crier, for whom he had procured a
Destroying Decree of a Traitor; and lastly, he must run at Mordecai's Stirrup
as a Lacquey, and as his Slave and Underling, being then a Great Prince, and
the Kings greatest Favorite. Oh what a Cutting and Killing Cordolium must all
this needs be unto Hamans Haughty Heart; it is a Wonder his Heart burst not, but
that God would not have him to save the Hangman his labor, and therefore his
sordid Spirit truckles and crouches to do all those Offices of Honor which he
would have Monopoliz'd to himself: * Oh turn aside (with Moses) to gaze a while
upon this Work of Wonder: The King had no Intention (in all this) to cross
Hamans Humor, or to thwart him in his malicious Ambition, not knowing any
thing (as is supposed) of the Difference between him and Mordecai, but Gods
all-powerful Providence brought all this about for effecting his own ends,
which cannot but ever be exceeding good, seeing his Will is not only Recta,
but, Regula, the Rule Ruleing, never severed from his Wisdom: (1) Behold here
how Men (by a secret Working of the Divine Hand) accomplisheth the Will of God,
which they think not of, but are fulfilling their own wills. (2) Behold here
(as in a Mirror) how the Holy God overrules the Wicked Wills and Wiles of Men
in all their Affairs, Counsels, Times and Turns for the fulfilling of his own
Will and Decree, even then, when they think least of Serving his Providence.
(3) Behold here the Excellency of True Piety, it is a constant and unchangeable
Blessing whether Advanced or Abased; Godly Mordecai's Motto was, [Semper Idem]
always the same Man, neither Puffed up with Honor, nor Pressed down with
Dishonor, as too many be; a small wind blows up a Bubble, all this Honor no
whit over-joys Mordecai, he comes again to his old place, v. 12. and in his old
habit sits quietly down there, neither envying his Superiors, nor Insulting
over his Inferiors, nor molesting his Equals, etc. but committing his Concerns
to Gods good Pleasure and Providence; this is the Godly Man's Guise, Psalm. 131.
1, 2. and his Goodness to do so, 1 Pet. 4. 19. (4) Behold here the Baseness of
base Impiety, every Disappointment Unhinges their Dispositions as this did
Hamans, he hasted to his House mourning, he fretted at himself, that he should
be such a Fool as to prescribe such Honor to a Man before he knew who the Man
was that should be so Honored: he made account to have gone merrily to the
Queens Banquet when he had Trussed up Mordecai, but now (this Fortunae
Ludibrium, Fortunes Play-fool) not only missing of Mordecai's murder, but made
to do him public Honor in ample manner, and all by his own Direction; this
went like a Dagger to his Heart and Galled him above measure, he pulls his Cap
over his Eye, as ashamed to look any in the face, so Bladder-like is the mind
of a proud Carnal man, that filled with Earthly Vanities (which are but Wind)
it grows great and swells to a None such; but if pricked with the least Pin
of a piercing Disappointment, it presently shriveleth into nothing. Thus Haman
retires Home for his Privacy, there his own Wife and his Wizzards, (whom he
Consulted for his Lucky Day) when he expected Counsel and Comfort from them,
Read him his Doleful Destiny, v. 13. they all prove as cold Comforters now, as
they had been bad Counselors before: while Haman is grieving at this
Disappointment at Home, as well as at that abroad, he is Hurried away (the King
and Queen staying for him) to that fatal Feast, (where Haman pays the Reckoning
of all with his own Life) v. 14. Harbonah Hastens him, whose Stomach was now
full enough already, and would rather have been excused: Now the Churches
Deliverance draws near, being thus notably Provided for by 1. those Preparing
Means, and no less notably Promoted by (2) those Performing Means, Used 1. to
God. 2. to the King. 1. to God, so the Jews and Mordecai falls upon 1. Weeping,
2. Fasting, 3. Lying in Sackcloth and Ashes, Chapter 4. 1, 2, 3. This was the way
to get in with God, though they might not come to the Court: this shows, God
had his Remnant of Godly Jews, even in Persia, such as now were mourning before
the Lord, but dare not be murmuring or mutinying against the King and Haman:
such as begin at the right end of Duty, to wit, Humiliation before God; then 2.
to the King an Address is made by Esther, not without some Reluctance; that God
might make it successful, Esther Injoyns a Three Days Fast, 1. by her Self, 2.
by her Maids, 3. by Mordecai, 4. by all the Jews in Shushan, Chapter 4. 12, 16. God
Accepts of all their Prayers, and the King of Esthers Address at her Feast.
Haman is hanged (before his Lucky Day came) upon his own Gallows, and Mordecai
is Honored, all turns to the contrary, God Laughs the Plot to Nothing, and the
Church is Advanced. See Prove. 4. 16. and 11. 8. Psalm. 83. 3. Deuteronomy. 21. 34.
Esth. 7. 9. and 9. 1, 3, 4. the Church (in City and Country) keep Yearly Two
Days of Joy to God for this Great Deliverance, v. 17, to 29. Now when God (by
his Wonder-Working Providence) had brought Godly Esther to be Queen, She came
to the Kingdom (designed by a Divine Decree) for the Churches Deliverance,
Esth. 4. 14. and had made Mordecai the Second Man in the Kingdom, being next
unto the King, Esth. 10. 3. and Advanced Higher than ever Haman was, for he
wore a great Crown of Gold, Esth. 8. 15. which (we Read not) Haman had any
like: Then the Church had Light and Gladness, v. 16. Light is sweet, says
Solomon. Eccles. 11. 7. especially to those that had been some Months shut up
(by Haman) in the Dark Dungeon of Deep perplexity, Esth. 3. 15. from that time
walking in the very Vale of the shadow (the Darkest side) of Death, Psalm. 23.
4. yet there God takes his Church by the Hand and leads her through that Dark
Entry into Light and Gladness. The Churches Light had been Sown for her upon a
safe Soil, Psalm. 97. 11. All the time of Haman's Heart-grieving Grandeur, it
lay under the Clods, as Seed underground, for a while Unseen, but now it is
Risen up for the Righteous, and their Seed-time brought in a Blessed Harvest,
Psalm. 126. 2, 5, 6. when Haman was fallen from the Palace to the Gallows, and
from the highest Stage of Honor, to the lowest Stair and Step of Ignominy:
thus Sings the Poet,

Ludit in Humanis Divina potentia Rebus. Gods Providence often tosseth Great
Favorites like a Tennis-Ball, now up, and now down, from the highest Honor to
extreme Infamy, when Hamans Greatness was Hanged up, and himself wrapped up in a
Sheet of perpetual Shame: then Shushan (the Lilly, Hebr.) and the Church (the
Lilly, Cant. 2. 3.) now looked most Lightsome and Lovely; and that Lucky Day
(as Haman had Deemed it, but was Deluded by the Devil) had Deceived the
Hamanists, and by a sw^^^ and Gracious Providence was turned to (...) contrary,
to wit, an unlucky and Bloody Day to themselves who had designed it a
Destructive-Day to the Church, Esth. 9. 1, 4, 6, 10, 16. Now the jollity of the
Jews began, being delivered from their perplexity, by Standing for their Lives:
upon the Thirteenth day (Hamans Lucky Unluckyday) on the very next (the 14th.)
day, they made a Day of Feasting and Gladness, v. 17. not deferring one day
longer, while the mercy was fresh and yet of Recent Remembrance, they Proclaim
the Praises of their Delivering-God, and speak good of his Name, covering Gods
Altar with the Calves of their Lips, and paying their Vows to the Lord; Yea,
and on the 15th. too, they do the same, (as if one day, the 14th.) had been too
little, wherein to Magnify Gods Mercy (in Psalms and Sacrifices of Praise) and
to Testify their own Thankfulness to him for their Lives, Liberties, and
Estates, so lately and so Liberally Restored to them, v. 18. and the
Observation of those Three Days (the former as a Fasting, the latter as
Feasting Days as say some,) became a Standing Law for both City and Country,
v. 20, 21. not as any Addition to the Word of God, but only as a Sacred
Memorial of this so Remarkable and Memorable Mercy, in turning them from
Mourning to Mirth, etc. v. 22. from the Jaws of most dreadful Death, into the
Joys of a most Glorious Deliverance: Thus God can turn (and has often turned)
the Churches Sadness into Gladness, her Sighing into Singing, and her Tears
into Triumph: all Hamans and Hamanists (notwithstanding all their Fraud and
Force, Craft and Cruelty) shall find to their Cost that there is no Enchantment
against Jacob, nor any Divination against Israel: Yea, it shall be said of the
Church, Oh what has God wrought? Numb. 23. 23. Such Savoury Discourse the
Godly Jews were Appointed to have upon those Days of Purim, (so called, for a
Brand on Hamans casting Pur or Lots for a Lucky Day) as we should have for our
Deliverance from the Devils Waterworks in Eighty-Eight, and from his
Fireworks on that famous Fifth of November. This Annual Festivity, Esth. 9.
23, 26, 28. was so Solemnly enjoined, that Yearly the Jews kept it until the
Coming of Christ, and do indeed (though Abusively) Keep it to this Day,
counting and calling all that Cross them, so many Humans, and Fondly please
themselves with Hopes of being Revenged of them, as their Fathers were of this
Haman. The Memorial of the Matter of their Fasting, v. 31. (most probably on
the 13th. Day) and of their Feasting (on the Two following Days) was not to
Perish from their Seed, but to be perpetuated from one Generation to another,
and therefore was Registered for Posterity, that the People which should be
Created, might Praise the Lord, Psalm. 102. 18. (Popish Persons keep not the
14th. of February so well in their Vain Valentines,) and least they should
slight and slack this Sacred Service, Queen Esther and Prince Mordecai did
Confirm the Letter (Writ in the Y. foregoing) in the Y. following, v. 20, 29.
And Mordecai (all his Life) kept his Dignity, Seeking the Weal of his People,
and Speaking Peace to all His Seed, v. 30, 31. and Chapter 10. 3. God Raised him up
for the Comfort of his Church, not only in Speaking Good of and for His
Contrymen, (then Living in the 127 Provinces) to the King, Promoting their
Prosperity to the Utmost all his Days, but also in Speaking Prosperity to all
their Posterity, providing for Future, that after his Death, the Weal of the
Church might be Continued: How long this lasted, the Scripture-History (which
extends no further) does not Express: To know therefore how it Fared with the
Church after, we must have Recourse to Scripture-Prophesie, for
Scripture-History gives only some short Intimations thereof, as Genesis 49. 10.
tells us, How the Scepter should not Depart from Judah, until Shiloh (or
Christ) come; and Luke 3. (in the Genealogy of Christ) Shows how Gods
Providence made Good that Precious Promise, in giving David a Lamp or Light in
Jerusalem, until Christ the Son of David was Born into the World: Even all the
Prophets (the Greater and the Lesser) do Prophecy of the future Estate of the
Church from their own present Time, and of the Coming of Christ, which should
make the Glory of the latter House to Exceed the Glory of the former; But more
especially the Prophet Daniel Writes a Prophetical History of the Church during
that Interspace of Time, in Chap. the 7th. he Declares his Vision of the Four
Monarchies which troubled the World, especially the Church, from the First
Rising of Nebuchadnezzar, till the Coming of the Everlasting Kingdom of
Christ in the Gospel. In Chap. 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. Christ (Himself) comes to
him, and gives him a Revelation (as he did to John in Patmos) how it should
Fare with the Jewish-Church under their Powerful Enemies, until the Fury of
Antiochus Epiphanes, (Polybius calls him Epimanes, the Madman, their worst
Adversary) was over: Daniel Declares, How this Mad Antiochus would Violate the
Sanctuary, and Cast down Religion into the Dirt for Three Y. and an Half, or
1290 Days, yet Comfort the Church with this Cordial, That He who Waits and
Lives Forty Five Days more, should see an End of Antiochus, and of all his
Crafty and Cruel Plots against the Church; and that in Fullness of Time the
Messiah would come to Finish Transgression, and to bring in Everlasting
Righteousness, etc. Dan. 9. 24. and Change the National Church of the Jews,
(therefore much Wasted then) because Shortly to be Changed into
Congregational-Churches by the Gospel, Gal. 1. 22. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. To know more
particularly how God dealt with the Jewish-Church in all that Interspace of
Time betwixt the History of the Old and New Testament, Consult the Following
Chapter, where that State of Defection (wherein Christ found them at His
Coming) is largely Related.

The Twenty-First Plot in the New Testament; against the Church, in Christ,
Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXI.
WHEN the Blessed Messiah ((...), God-Man,) was Born into the World, he found
his Brethren (the Church) as Joseph did his, Genesis 37. 17. Indeed in Dothan,
Hebr. in Defection, as the Word Signifies: The Devil had Debauched the Jews
most Desperately, so that scarce were there Four or fewer that Waited for the
Consolation of Israel, to wit, the Birth of Christ, which was ever the best
Cordial that the Lords Prophets proposed to the Church in her most Disconsolate
Condition in foregoing Ages, as Isa. 9. 6. and Zech. 9. 9. and Mal. 4. 2. etc.
That Christ is given to the World, is the Sum of all the good News in the
World, and affords such Joy as surpasses the Three Grand Worldly Joys, the
Joy of Marriage, the joy of Harvest, and the Joy of Victory, Isa. 9* 3, 5, 6.
yet the Jewish-Church was at that time in such a State of Defection, that they
Generally minded it not, though then a very plentiful Harvest, a great Number
of Elect among the poor Gentiles were Ready Ripe, Matthew. 9. 37. Luke 10. 2.
Joh. 4. 35. This Defection of the Jews was foretold by Daniel, (that
Ish-Chamudoth or greatly Beloved Prophet) Speaking of most Sad Calamities that
should befall them (both before and after the coming of Christ) for the
over-spreading of Abomination, Chap. 9. 24, 27. with Chapter 8. 23. When the
Transgressions are come to the full, that is, when the Jews were notoriously
Degenerated, then did God set that Breathing-Devil (Antiochus) over them, as a
punishment of their public Impiety, and profane Apostasy: This was that
which procured a Commission to this Fierce-Countenanc'd, or Hebr. Brazen-faced)
King for Destroying Wonderfully the Holy and the Mighty People (who while they
were Holy, were so Mighty as to be Inconquerable, but now being Revolted from
God, as Weak as Water) both by Power and Policy, Chap. 8. 24, 25. Then was the
Glorious Land, Judea, (as Daniel calls it, Chapter 11. 16. for its having the
Service of God set up in it above all Lands) crushed asunder, as Corn lying
betwixt Two heavy Milstones, that is, betwixt the King of the South, Ptolomy,
and this King of the North, Antiochus, called a vile Person, v. 21. though he
affected the Name of Epiphanes, or Famous, yet this was his true Title with
God, Psalm. 15. 4. and though he be an Abominable vile Person, when Gods Justice
Required such a Scourage to his People, His Heart must be set against the Holy
Covenant, v. 28. to wit, against the Jews, Gods Covenanters; and against the
True Religion, which made that Land more Beautiful and Glorious than all other
Lands, Ezekiel. 20. 6. He shall enter into the Glorious Land, Dan. 11. 41. and
shall make Havoc of Gods people, (Revelling in their Ruins) and shall set up
the Abomination of Desolation (to wit, the Abominable Idol of Jupiter Olympius)
in the Holy Temple: Yea, and the Renegado Jews (which first forsake the
Covenant, then do Wickedly against it,) Comply privily with him in all this
Wickedness, v. 30, 32. and 2 Macca. 4. He (by their Assistance) practices and
prospers, till the Indignation be Accomplished, v. 36. in Gods revengeing the
Quarrel of his Covenant: notwithstanding this vile Villain, this Turbulent and
Truculent Tiger, God had turned loose upon his People to punish their sins, and
though he practiced and prosper'd so far in his prodigious Prophanity, as to
cast the Truth down to the Ground, both the Profession of Truth, and its
professors, Dan. 8. 12. yet the Devil loses this Game also with all the other
his Games aforesaid in the Old Test. History: For the most great and gracious
God comes in with most Comfortable Allays. (so Spoils the Devils Design.) The
1st. Allay is, the Palmoni Hamadabbar, Hebr. or most Excellent Speaker or
Numberer Christ, Numbers the Time how long this Scourge should continue upon
Gods People, concerning their loss of the daily Sacrifice, etc. to wit, only
Five or Six Years or thereabout, Dan. 8. 13, 14. this was a sweet Cordial to
them, that it should be for no longer time, much less, not for Ever: * Now if
the proper and genuine Sense of that Text and Type be Applied to Antichrist,
typified by Antiochus, (as most Learned Men Concur) then it may be as
comfortable for us to consider how Christ, the Messiah, moderates the Matters
of the Romish-Antichrist, (though his Wicked practices do prosper for a time,
as Act. 12. 1, 2, 3.) yet due Bounds He sets to his proud Waves, Job 38. 10,
11. as to the Sea or Ocean, so to the Sea of Rome, as he did in the Marian
Days, (of Abhorred memory) which lasted no longer than those of Antiochus, to
wit, about Five or Six Y. and as he promised to do, Revel. 2. 10. The 2d.
Allay, was, Christ comforts the Church with telling her, not only, that her
Trouble under Antiochus should not last Seven Y. much less Seventy Y. (as it
lasted in Babylonish Bondage) but also that from the end of those Seventy Y.
they should have Seven Seventies of Years in the enjoyment of their own
Country, out of which they had been carried Captive, Dan. 9. 24. maugre the
malice of Men and Devils: wherein behold how most marvellously the Mercy of God
does bear the same proportion to his Punishments, which Seven (a complete
Number) carries to an Unit, or One: Thus his Mercy to his Church Triumphs over
his Justice, Jam. 2. 13. and over all his Works are his Tender Mercies, Psalm.
145. 9. The 3d. Allay of this troublesome Interspace of 490 Y. was Christ's
casting in that Signal Cordial, in the Days of Jaddus or Jadduah, (whom Neh.
12. 10, 11. mentions the High Priest Descended from Jehoshuab) who met Daniels
Capering Goat (Alexander the Great) in all his Pontificalibus or Highpriests
Formalities, which struck such a Veneration upon him, that he whom all the
World adored, falls down to Adore Jaddus, or rather (as he told Parmenio)
Jaddus's God, who in such a like Apparition had encouraged him to Undertake his
Wars against Asia: Hereupon he was easily prevailed with (the People of the
Jews praying all the while for their Highpriests good Success) to spare
Jerusalem, (which he came to Plunder) especially when Walking in Jaddus's Hand
to the Temple, and seeing what Daniel had foretold of him, Writing rather an
History than a Prophecy, even an Abridgement of all his Victories; hereby he
was not only pacified, but also offered Sacrifices to the True God according
to the Highpriests Direction, and bestowing upon the Jews many Favors and
Freedoms, he went away much encouraged in his Enterprise, not doubting but
(according to Dan. 8. 3, to 8. the Grecian Goat would overcome the Persian
Ram: 'Twas a mavelous Providence, that God should preserve the
High-Priest-hood all the Captivity to this time, (as Neh. 12. 11.) but more to
have this Pledge of Gods Grace in Jaddus time. The 4th. Allay was, though
Antiochus (who sprung out of Alexanders Successors) became a fierce Fiend to
the Jews, yet God told them by Daniel, that his standing up against the Prince
of Princes, (to wit, God Almighty, in Destroying the Daily Sacrifice, and in
setting up Idolatry in the Temple) would quickly bring Gods Vengeance upon him,
He shall be broken without Hand, Dan. 8. 25. and though for a few Y. (as above)
he shall do according to his wicked Will in the Holy Land, Dan. 11. 36. not
Regarding any God, v. 37. yet shall he come to his end, v. 45. a loathsome and
lamentable end, a Visible Hand of God laid upon him a loathsome Disease, and
wrapped him up in the Sheet of Shame, 1 Macc. 6. 8. and 2 Macc. 9. 5. not so much
because he would have spoiled the Temple of Diana, but because he did Spoil the
Temple at Jerusalem. The 5th. Allay was that Spirit of God and of Glory which
Rested upon the Godly Jews, both for Doing Gods Work, and for Suffering Gods
Will, 1. In Doing, Oh what a Blessed Zeal did blow up Matthias, the Father, and
Judas Maccabeus, his Son, who with the Help of his Brethren and other Jews,
drove the Enemy out of the Country, and cleansed the Land of all the
Uncleanness which had been brought into it; Yea, and with a very small Handful
of Men, did mighty Exploits against this Vile Antiochus's great Armies, so that
the Church was (in those Worst of Times) most Graciously Helped with a little
Help, Dan. 11. 34. in which Weaker Means God Manifested to them his Greater
Strength, In whose name, and by whose Conduct, the People that knew their God,
were strong to do Exploits, and to out-doe those Exploits of Antiochus, Dan.
11. 28, 32. The Apostle seems to speak of these Maccabees, who wrought
Righteousness, (both Civil and Military) Obtained Promises, (of Glorious
Victories) and Escaped the edge of the Sword, (of their Cursed Enemies) which
sometimes Conquerours do not, but purchase their Conquests with the loss of
their own Lives, as it happened to those brave Brethren at last, Hebr. 11. 32,
33. and 2ly. in Suffering, and no less Glorious Spirit did Act the Godly Jews
in their Undergoing Cruel Mockings, and most exquisite Torments, they were
Tempted, and they were Tortured too, yet being got above both the Allurements
and Affrightments of the World, they would not Accept of Deliverance, upon
Sordid and sinful terms, but as willing to Dye as to Dine, they commit
themselves to their God in their Martyrdom, That they might obtain a better
Resurrection, Hebr. 11. 35, 37. Where that time seems to be Related to; God had
(even then) an Holy Remnant, whereof the World was not Worthy: They were fitter
to shine as Stars in Heaven, than to be torn in pieces by those Dogs and Hogs
on Earth, as Josephus, the Book of Maccabees, and of Martyrs tell us. The 6th.
Sweet Allay the Church had in this Doleful Day, was that miracle of the Pool of
Bethesda, graciously granted by God to corroborate Her in the True Worship of
God, under the sad persecutions of Antiochus and other Tyrants, until the days
of John Baptist, and of the Lord Christ, Joh. 5. 2, 3, 4. This held up the
fainting Spirits of the good people in those bad Times, when Prophecy failed,
and Prosperity too, Yea, and in the general all true Piety, Profaneness
coming in its stead, as Malachi (their last Prophet) declares at large: The
Rabbis indeed tell us of a Bath-Kol, (or Echo) that was heard in the Temple,
which served them for an Oracle, etc. but waving Jewish Fancies and Fables, the
Scripture of Truth tells us how an Angel went at certain times to give Healing
Virtue to that Water (wherein their Sacrifices were washed) Here many Impotent
Folk lay Languishing at Hopes Hospital, and looking (after all other means had
been ineffectual) for God to say to them, In the House of Mercy (as the Word
Bethesda signifies) I am thy God that Heals thee, Exodus 15. 26. Jehova
Ropheka, a Gyant-like Healer, Omnipotenti Medico nullus Insanabilis Occurit
Morbus: No Disease is, but God can Cure it. This Beneficial Pool was supplied
with Water from the Fountain of Siloam, which Represented the Kingdom of
Christ, Isa. 8. 6. The 7th. and last Allay, was the Promise of the Messiah,
(that Mercy of Mercies) who was to be a more Sovereign Bath than this of
Bethesda, or House of Bounty: Christ is the Royal Fountain, or Kings Bath,
Zech. 13. 1. ever-flowing and overflowing, such as Wash herein Believingly
shall be both Clean and Whole, not Healing at the times of the Jewish Feasts
only, as that Pool did, but all times of the Year, and not one at once, (as if
one only had Sucked up all the Healing Virtue from all others there) but here
3000 persons were Healed together at one Sermon, Act. 2. 41. when the Angel of
the Covenant Descended to move the Waters that were drawn out of the Wells of
Salvation, Isa. 12. 3. for no other moving but that of an Angel (who are
Ministering Spirits to heirs of Salvation, Hebr. 1. 14.) could Dispense to the
Diseased any such powerful and immediate Cure, the Waters were at all times of
a cleansing Property, (as to their Sacrifices) but only at that time had they
a Cureing Power, as to themselves. When this Beneficial Virtue began in this
Pool, is uncertain: it is supposed to begin when Eliashib (Joshua's Grandchild)
with the godly Priests, Built the Sheep-gate, and Beautified it, then
Consecrated it with their godly Prayr, Neh. 3. 1. Hereupon (as Tremellius
says) probably followed that Miracle of an Angels Descending into the Pool
there, (at their several Solemn Feasts) and Healing all Diseases, how old,
great or Desperate soever, and that immediately and in a moment: it is as
Uncertain likewise when this Miracle of Healing Ceased, it is supposed, not till
the Destruction of Jerusalem, which did fall out about Forty Y. after Christ's
Healing this Cripple at Bethesda, it being so many Y. 'twixt this Passover,
Ioh. 5. and that Passover when Titus Vespasian laid Siege to the City: yet
this is more than probable, that this Miraculous Gift of Healing was given to
this Pool before the Coming of Christ, as a (...), or famous Forerunner of
him who was to be the Opened Fountain, Zech. 13. 1. for Healing all Diseases,
and Cureing all Sins, Matthew. 1. 21. even Jesus, the Greek Word comes of (...)
Sano, to Heal, as the Hebr. Word, of Jashang, to Save; and this is most certain
that the time when this Famous Fountain was opened, is well known (though
concerning the Pool (aforesaid) the Beginning of its Miracle be unknown) to
wit, to be about the four Thousand Y. of the World, according to the Latitude
of Time, and latest (therefore exactest) Computations: The Temple of Solomon
was Erected about the 3000 Y. of the World, (as above) and the Temple of
Christ's Body, Joh. 2. 19. 21. (whereof Solomon's Temple was a Type) was Reared
up a 1000 Y. after, about the 4000d. Y. of the World, after 2000 more (say the
Rabbis) comes the Sabbatical 1000, See before of Solomon's Temple; Christ calls
his most Exquisitely Framed ((...). Hebr. 10. 5. Ephesians. 4. 9. Psa. 139. 14,
15.) Body a Temple, wherein the Godhead dwelt Bodily, Col. 2. 9. that is
Personally, (as God dwelt in the material Temple, Sacramentally, and in our
Hearts Spiritually, Ephesians. 3. 17.) to mind the Jews there, that their Second
Temple wanted the Ark, Vrim, and Thummim, which the first Temple had; therefore
they must look for another Temple, that would correspond in all things to that
Complete Temple of Solomon, and that was the Temple of his Body. No sooner was
this Fountain opened, this Temple Erected, but the Devil begins to play his
pranks in plotting how to Stop up this Well of Salvation, as the Philistims (at
his Instigation) had done the Wells of the Patriarch Isaac. Genesis 26. 15. one of
those Wells is called Sitnah, of Satan, v. 21. for Satan Hindered it, (as he did
the Word, (that Well of Salvation) 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. and this Prince of the Power
of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. and 6. 12. (and so has a power to move the Air, and to
raise Storms, as he did to Blow the Feasting-House of Jobs Children down, and
to Sink the Ship wherein Christ was Embarked, Matthew. 8. 24.) Does now Raise
(...) a mighty Storm wherewith to Blow down this Temple as soon as ever it was
Reared, and Herod the Askalonite or cursed Edomite, was a fit Tool for the
Devil to Work this Wicked Will and Wile with. This Herod was Troubled at the
Birth of Christ, Matthew. 2. 3. whereat the Sages and the Shepherds (with sundry
Saints) so much Rejoiced; hereupon he pretends to go and Worship him, when as
he Intends to go and Worry him; but God did marvelously Bassle and Befool this
Fox, so that with all his Craft and Cruelty he could not Worry the Holy Child
Jesus, for he was Over-Witted by the All-Wise, and over-powr'd by the
All-powerful God in those following Respects. (1.) Though Herod wrought Wilily
with the Wisemen, Transacting all privately with them, that his purpose of
Killing Christ might not be prevented, Matthew. 2. 7, 8. yet all his Wicked
Wisdom prevails not against God, Prove. 21. 30. because his Wisdom was but
Folly, otherwise it is a Wonder he went not himself with the Wisemen, or sent
some cruel Cutthroat along with them privily. (2.) Though Herod had charged
the Wisemen to bring him Word again, v. 8. yet after the Payment of their
Homage to this Holy Babe and little King, v. 9, 10, 11. They being Warned of
God, (an Higher power than that of Herod's) Returned not to Herod. Thus God Kept
them from Betraying Christ, and themselves (as well as Christ) were pulled out
of the Mouth of this Lion by this sweet and mavelous providence. (3.) Though
he sent forth Soldiers which Slew all the Male-Children in all the Coasts
about, (as well as in Bethlehem) from Two Y. Old and Under, etc. Matthew. 2. 16.
yet he deferred his Murdering Work so long, until the Bird (he sought to Kill)
was flown into Egypt by Gods Direction, v. 13, to 15. Thus though it was the
Devil in Herod that sought to Destroy the Young Child, Matthew. 2. 13. Revel. 12.
4. yet God was aware of it, prevents it by providing a Sanctuary for his Son in
Egypt, which had been cruel to Gods first Born, even Israel, Exodus 4. 22, 23.
There Christ was preserved in Safety, (though the Crafty Fox (Herod) and the
subtle Serpent (the Devil) Clubb'd their Wits together to contrive his Death)
until God brought Word of Herod's Death, v. 20. according to his promise, v. 13.
And, some say, at Christ's coming into Egypt, all the Idols of the Land (which
abounded with them) did fall flat to the ground: 'Twas not only this that
enraged the Devil against Christ, but also, because he had Silenced all his
Oracles, as that at Delphos especially, where Augustus Coesar, urging the Devil
for an Answer, was told, That an Hebrew Child had stopped his Mouth, and sent
him with a Mittimus to Hell, and therefore he might spare both his Labor and
Cost to Consult his Oracle any more. The like Lamentation was made for the
Death of the great God Pan (as Plutarch relates) in Arcadia, which Rustic God
and Hairy Satyr, (with his Horns) was no other but an Apparition of the Devil.
And as the Cause of the Devils Rage was his feeling the loss of his Kingdom, so
the Cause of Herod's Rage was his fearing the loss of his Kingdom; for as soon
as he had heard from the Wisemen of Christ, (Born King of the Jews,) he was
Troubled, Matthew. 2. 2, 3. fearing that he himself being a Stranger (of Idumea,
not of Israel) might be Deposed by the Jews, whom (he thought) would be glad
enough to have a King of their own, to whom they would contribute their best
Assistance, therefore he goes about to Murder the Messiah, before his time was
come: 'Twas a mavelous providence that preserved the Line of David in the
Tribe of Judah all that Troublesome time from the 2d. Temple to Christ, (as
both Matthew. 1. and Luke 3. does in their Genealogies Demonstrate) the former by
the Pedigree of Joseph, the latter by that of Mary, (Mary's Genealogy is put
upon Joseph, because the Hebrews do reckon them not by Women, but by Men
only.) Showing that Christ was of the Line-Royal of David, (as well as that
Seed of the Woman which should break the Devils Head,) and though those
mentioned there, that lived in those Calamitous Days, (after the Captivity)
were not formal Kings, (being Subject to other Nations) yet were they Principal
Men among their People and Lawgivers, (as Jacob had Prophesied, Genesis 49. 10)
Until Shilo came; not a tittle of Gods Word can fail or fall to the Ground. In
this Herod the Askalonite, (or Raskalonite) the Scepter departed from Judah,
and least it should depart from him, because Shiloh was come, he Racks his Wit
in Divelish Devices to secure himself, but at last he wracks his own Weal, for
though he had escaped many Conspiracies, yet soon after his Bloody Butchery in
and about Bethlehem, the Hand of God seizes on him, so that he Dies of an
execrable and most loathsome Disease; And God (himself) takes care to send his
Holy Angel to Christ and his Parents with those glad Tidings of cruel Herod's
Death, and of all his cursed Accomplices and Conspiratours too, for the merry
Message is Delivered in the plural Number, [They are Dead that sought the Young
Child's Life,] Mat. 2. 19, 20. * And the like good News God has in store to
send his Distressed Church in due time, that all they which sought to make the
Church Dye, are themselves Dead, and all their Diabolical Designs with them.
The Devil being thus Defeated in the 1st. part of his Plot against Christ in
the Infancy of his Manhood, (Christ still Lives, grows up in Wisdom and
Stature, and in Favor with God and Man, Luke 2. 52. and at twelve Y. Old able
to Dispute with the Doctors, Yea, to nonplus them, v. 47.)

The Twenty-Second Plot in the New Testament, against the Church, in Christ,
Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXII.
HEreupon he projects a Second Plot against Christ in the Infancy (or Minority)
of his Ministry: as the first was Managed with an Instrument, to wit, Herod,
mediately, but this 2d. without any, immediately by the Devil, himself: Satan
will not trust any Instruments to Tempt Christ, as his Imp (Herod) had trusted
his Soldiers to Kill Christ, Matthew. 2. 16. Now he Assaults Christ by himself,
Matthew. 4. 1. he had Assaulted the 1st. Adam in his Proxy (the Serpent) but he
will Venture upon the ^d. Adam in his own Person, and that Immediately upon his
very Entrance into the Ministry. Behold here the Dreadfullest Duel, the most
Memorable Battle betwixt Two the Strongest and Stoutest Champions was sought
that ever appeared upon the Stage of the World; that of David and Goliath was of
a far Inferior Alloy, (though a type of it) to this, ^ Sam. 17. 41, to 51.
There was only Man against Man: and that of Michael and the Devil, Jude 9. is
below this, for 1. there it was only an Archangel against the Arch-Devil.
2ly. 'Twas only a Dispute about the Body of Moses, but here, it is not Man
against Man as in the first Instance, nor an Angel against a Devil, as in the
second: No, it is the Lord of Angels, Hebr. 2. 4. Wrestling a Fall with the
Prince of Devils, Matthew. 12. 24. Oh how do people Run to see some Remarkable
Fencers sight their Prizes? etc. * Behold here a Prize sought betwixt God-Man
and Beelzebub, 'twixt the Prince of Life, and the Prince of Darkness, and that,
not about the Natural Body of Moses, (as above) but about the Spiritual Body of
the Messiah, to wit, his Church, the Mystical Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12.
neither is it, that Israel may Overcome the Philistims only, (for which David
fought Goliath) but that all Believing Jews and Gentiles (that ever have been,
are now, and shall be to the end of the World,) may Overcome Flesh, World, and
Devil, in this Captain of their Salvation, Jesus Christ, Hebr. 2. 10. Romans 8.
37. Col. 1. 16. and 2. 15. Oh what will ye go out into the Wilderness to see?
Matthew. 11. 7. turn aside (with Moses, Exodus 3. 3.) and with Me, to see this
Great Sight. The Strong Man, and the Stronger Man Entering the Lists together,
not Two Reeds (shaken with the Wind) shakeing one another, but a mighty Devil
(a complete compound of Goliahs Strength, of Achitophels Craft, and of Doegs
Malice) Combating and Conflicting with Almighty God; and for a fuller and more
distinct View of this most Famous Contest, behold it in Two Pregnant
Particulars. 1. A most strange Act. 2. As strange an End. 1. The Strange Act
(like the River of Paradise, Genesis 2. 10.) Divides it self into Four Streams,
Branching it self out in Four Circumstances. 1. Time, 2. Place. 3. the Agent.
4. the Patient. 1st. of the Time when, then Matthew. 4. 1. (...), Immediately,
Mark. 1. 12. 1. Presently after he was Baptized. 3. Presently after he was
Proclaimed the Son of God, or Presently after he was 30 Y. Old. As to the 1st.
Christ was no sooner out of the Water of Baptism. but Immediately he comes into
the Fire of Temptation, and both, not for himself, but for us: Behold how he
loved us! Is there any Love like the Love of Christ, who passed thorough both
Fire and Water to Work our Redemption: As to the 2d. Immediately after his
Highest Communion with Heaven, he has his Deepest Temptations from Hell: If
Heaven Open its Mouth to Proclaim him the Son of God, Matthew. 3. 17. then
presently Hell opens its mouth, Isa. 5. 14. to power out Floods of Temptation
upon him, as Revel. 12. 15. If God say, I am Well-pleased with Christ, Matthew.
3. 17. The Devil comes presently, and says, But I am Highly displeased with
Christ: And if Heaven send a Dove and the Holy Spirit to Christ, Matthew. 3. 16.
Hell will be sure Immediately to send him a Fiend, and an Unclean Spirit; the
former Descends from Above, the latter Ascends from Below, as 1 Samuel 28. 13. As
to the 3d. Relating to Christ's Age, we do not Read what Christ did in his
Minority and Nonage; how he spent his private Life was Judged (by the most Wise
God) fitter for Secrefie than for Knowledge; where the Word has not a Mouth to
Speak, we should not have a Tongue to Ask: However, it is not probable that
Christ (that Pattern of Holiness, the [Regula Regulans] Rule-Ruleing, as well
as Regulata, the Rule-Ruled) should spend his thirty Y. either (1) in Idleness,
especially considering the Jews generally were Charged with their Children
after they had Circumcised them, to train them up in the Knowledge of the Law
of God for the good of their Inner Man, Exodus 12. 26, 27. and in some Honest
Calling for the good of their Outward Man: and Rab. Judah says, Quicunque non
Doceret suum Filium, aliquod Opificium, est, acsi illum Latrocinium Doceret,
Whoever Taught not his Son some Honest Employ, is as if he had taught him to be
a Rogue or a Robber; Yea, and the Heathen Hesiod could Sing [(...)] Nullum
Opificium est probrosum, No Handicraft-Trade is Reproachful, but of good
Report; or, (2) in dedicating his Youth to the Study (1) of Curious Arts, as
those had done, Act. 19, 19. and such a Devilish Black Artist those
Black-mouthed Blasphemers would have made of the Divine Messiah, Mat. 12.24. or
(2) of those better (called Liberal) Arts; whereof he had no need, being the
Wisdom of God, Prove. 8. 30. 1 Cor. 1. 24. and having the Godhead dwelling
Bodily in Him, Col. 2. 9. a Beam whereof he was pleased to put forth in the
Temple among the Doctors, when he was Twelve Y. Old, Luke 2.42, 46, 47. until
which Y. the Scripture Relates nothing of him after his Deliverance from Herod,
nor any thing of him after this, until he was Thirty Y. Old; save only that
when he had drawn in this Beam of his Deity which he had put forth among the
Doctors, he went Home with his Parents, and was subject to them, v. 51. where
it is not improbable, the Grand Carpenter and great Architect of the World,
followed his Fathers Calling of a Carpenter, as the Evangelists Words are, [Is
not this the Carpenter?] Mark 6. 3. And as Justin Martyr, (that lived not long
after him) says, That before his Ministry, he made Yokes and Ploughs, which
some would confirm from Christ's own Words, [My Yoke is Easy,] Matthew. 11. 30.
However this honest Occupation might consist well enough with his state of
Humiliation, wherein he made himself of no Reputation, Phil. 2. 7. Reduceing
himself (comparatively to Nothing,) (...), he emptied himself of his own
Majesty, and he (who became a Sinner (both by Imputation and Reputation) for
us, why might he not become (much more) a Carpenter, while his Glory lay long
obscured, that he might not give an Example either of Idleness or of Vain
Curiosity: according hereto was the tart Answer the Godly Schoolmaster made to
Scoffing Julian (the Apostate) Asking him, What was the Carpenters Son now a
Doing? He smartly Replied, That he was making a Coffin for such a Cursed
Apostate, who, getting his mortal Wound in that very Expedition, was
constrained to confess, [Vicisti me O Galilae.] Oh! thou Galilean Carpenter,
Thou have Conquered me. It Is very remarkable that all those many Years of
Christ's Private Life, the Devil never once meddles with him, since his Defeat
at his Birth in his Blood-thirsty Herod, who Butchered (as some say) 14000
Babes in his Bethlehem-Massacre, yet missed that Holy Babe of Bethlehem, who
only was Born without Original Sin, and whom the Lord Hid from his Bloody
Hands, as he did Jeremy and Baruch, Jer. 36. 26. Oh what an opportunity had the
Devil for Cutting off and Killing Christ when Joseph and his Mother had lost
him at the Feast in Jerusalem, Luke 2. 43. It Is a Wonder they should be so
careless of such a Peerless Pearl; they might easily Imagine, though Herod (who
sought the Child's Life) was Dead, yet were there Herodians enough alive, who
would be Glad enough of Dispatching any that were (but Reputed) King of the
Jews; and they might well fear, If he had lost his way, many Evils might befall
him, as usually befall Children in the like Case, and as Jacob feared, had
befaln his Dear Joseph, Genesis 37. 33. when they found him not in the Company,
Luke 2. 43. yet even then his Godhead secured his Manhood, and that in the
midst of the Doctors, who knew not the Messiah, so Clouded under such an
obscure Education, although the Lord of the Temple was come at that time into
His Temple, and Taught therein with his own lively Voice, as Malachy had
foretold them, should suddenly be, Chapter 3. 1. It Is a Wonder how the Devil did to
hold his Hands for almost Thirty Y. together, when he could not but take Notice
of this his Disputing with the Doctors, yea, and (as it is probably supposed) of
his Domestic Deeds of Wonder, (wherewith had not his Mother been Acquainted at
Home, she could not rationally have expected one abroad, in her telling Christ,
that Wine was wanting at the Marriage in Cana, Ioh. 2. 3. But 'twas not Christ's
Private Life that was so Destructive to the Devils Kingdom; as soon as ever he
began upon his Public Ministration, and but barely Ordained to it by
Imposition of Hands from Heaven, together with a Celestial Suffrage; then this
Dragon the Devil (who had Slept quiet in his Den for many Years before) now
Rowseth, Roareth, and Rages against Christ, If Christ begin to Gird himself
with the Girdle of Man's Salvation, then he begins to Gird himself with the
Girdle of Christ's Destruction: Oh how gladly would the Devil have broke Christ's
Neck by casting him down from the Pinnacle of the Temple whereon he had placed
him, had he but the same Power to Cast him off, as he had to Set him on, but
this he had not.) 2ly. the Place where, In the Wilderness either of Sinai,
where Moses and Elias had Fasted, (there Christ must Fast too, (to Feast us
with the Fatted Calf, Luke 15. 23.) and those Three famous Fasters met together
upon Mount-Tabor, Matthew. 17. 3, 5.) and where Israel were Afflicted, or of
Judea, where David was so persecuted by Saul, as Israel had been by Pharaoh,
both which were resemblances of Satan's Tempting Christ Here; whatever
Wilderness this was, 'twas Satan's own Ground, he is the God of this World (or
Wilderness,) Cor. 4. 4. Christ must fight the Devil upon his own Dunghill. The
2d. Adam must Conquer him in the Desert, who had Conquered the 1st. Adam in
Paradise; In this Desert or Dry places (where the Devil Wanders, Matthew. 12. 43.
and walks about, secking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8.) he meets Christ and
would have Devoured him, as a Lion the Lamb, (of God) and as a Dragon the
Man-child, Revel. 12. 4. Hither Christ was led by the Spirit, (that Dove which
Descended upon him, Matthew. 3. 16.) and thus behold a Wonder, a Dove leads a
Lamb to fight with a Lion; The Spirit led the Lamb of God as his brave Champion
to grapple with the Devil that roaring Lion, as Sampson and David (his Two
Types) had done the like before him, Judge. 14. 5, 6. and 1 Samuel 17. 34, 35.
Here the Seed of the Woman Combats the Serpent in the Desert, who had foiled
her in the Garden of Eden: Here Christ must be Alone upon the Devils
Advantage-Ground, where Christ had none to Help him, and the Tempter none to
Hinder him, that Christ might Tread the Wine Press alone, Isa. 63. 3. This
Single Duel must be fought in the Open Field, and have none but God and Angels
to be Spectators of it; yet Christ was not so alone, but his Father was with
him here, as Joh. 8. 16. and 16. 32. and his Spirit (that led him Hither looked
on to behold his Champions Behavior: Yea, the Scripture says, He had a
Tripple Neighborhood. 1. Satan, his Antagonist. 2. wild Beasts, Mark 1. 12.
which Hurt him not, but showed their Subjection to this 2d. Adam, as they had
done to the first Adam in his state of Innocence. 3. The Angels which came and
Ministered both Food and Comfort to him, the former for his Body, the latter for
his Soul, Matthew. 4. 12. None lose any thing in their Suffering for God. 3ly.
The Agent, or Inslicter, it is one with three Names, (which some do call
Ominous) 1st. (...), the Tempter. 2. Satan, the Adversary. 3. the Devil, or
Calumniator, and so he Calumniates God (the Father) to Christ, the Son, saying,
Do thou think if thou were the Son of God, that thy Father would suffer thee
(his Son) to Starve for want of Bread in this Wilderness? Thus he Calumniated
God to Eve, Genesis 3. 5. and Job to God, Job 1. 9, 10. This Adversary, or
Piercer, (as the Word [(...)] signisies) comes Accoutred with Three sharp
Weapons, wherewith to Pierce the Churches Redeemer, Luke 4, 2. tells us, that
Christ was Tempted all the Forty Days Space, to wit, Invisibly the Devil strove
to Inject sinful suggestions into him (as he does into other Men) all the time
of his Watching, Fasting, and Solitude, but finding nothing in him to Work
upon, as Joh. 14. 30. therefore at Forty Days End, he takes other Measures,
and Appears to him Visibly with those three worst Weapons, (which he reserved
for the last) and that not like himself, (the Prince of Darkness, a Fowl Fiend
of Hell) but as an Angel of Light, tempting Christ (in the first temptation) as
a faithful Friend, pitying to see him Famished in the Wilderness, and with
seeming compassion counsels him to change Stones into Bread, Matthew. 4. ^. that
is, Distrust Gods Providence for Relieving thy Hunger, by Working a
preposterous Miracle, this was Intendsd, though better was Pretended. In the
2d. he comes, not as a Friend to Advise, but as a Divine to Direct, v. 6.
quoting Scripture most Gravely to corroborate his Directions, but in this,
though his Words were the Smooth Voice of Jacob, yet his Sense was the Rough
Hands of Esau. The old Liar spoke Truth here, but for Divelish Ends; yet (in
his Apish Imitation of Christ's Alleging, Scriptum est) he fallaciously Clipps
off that Clause, [In all thy Ways,] and so marrs the Masculine-Sense thereof;
for if a Man be out of his way (appointed him by God to walk in) if out of Gods
Precincts, he is out of Gods Protection, Deuteronomy. 23. 6. Prove. 27. 1. In the 3d.
he comes, not like a faithful Friend to furnish him in his Famine, as in the
(1) nor like a Grave Divine to Direct him from Scripture how he might get
Immortal Applause by his Flying in the Air from the top of the Temples Pinnacle
down to the Ground, as in the 2d. but like a Mighty Monarch to Seduce our
Savior with great and goodly Gifts, v. 8, 9. Showing him all the Kingdoms of
the World, and the Glory thereof, all in their Beauty and Bravery, and
doubtless a most Bewitching Object, Hoping hereby to Dazzle our Redeemers Eyes,
(those Windows of the Soul) and so to Conjure his Affections; especially
offering all this Rule and Riches (as his Royal Bounty) to him, and (according
to the Centurists) to make him Pope, to wit, of a Christ, he would make him
Antichrist; but that which Spoiled the Devils Game, he backs his Prosser'd
Beneficence (which in its self was but (...) (an Opinion, or Imagination) and
(...), Act. 24. 23. a mere Fancy, or Shadow, or an Empty Apparition) with a
loud Lie, saying. All this is Deliliver'd unto me, Luke 4. 6. This (as a Lying
Spirit) he Spoke of his own self, Joh. ^. 44. it is not to whom the Devil will,
the Kingdoms of the World are given, but it is, to whom God Wills, Dan. 2. 44.
and 4. 25. and 5. 21. the most High sets up and takes down, appoints and
bestows on whomsoever he will: the Prince of Hell can do no more in giving to,
or taking from, than the God of Heaven permits, Revel. 13. 7. Jer. 18. 4. and
27. 5. 4ly. The Patient, The Lord Christ our Blessed Redeemer was the Sufferer,
as the Devil was the Agent and Inflicter; for Forty Days and Nights too our
Lord was continually and uncessantly Buffeted, (not by the Messenger of Satan,
as Paul was, 2 Cor. 17. 7.) but by Satan himself in Person with all sorts of
Temptations (during that time) not Recorded, Luke 4. 2. but these three (which
are upon Record) were certainly the worst, (as before) In quibus Diabolus omnes
suos Astus, and Fraudis suae Sacculos Exoneravit, wherein the Devil did his
Utmost, and turned up the bottom of his Bagg and Budget, wherein were all
manner of Hellish Weapons, wherewith to Wound this Blessed Babe of Bethlehem:
As our Great Grandmother Eve was tempted by Satan to the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, 1 John 2. 16. [for She saw the
Fruit of the Forbidden Tree was good for Food, that it was Pleasant to the
Eyes, and to be Desired for making one Wise, Genesis 3. 6.] So by all these (had
it been possible) would the same Old Serpent have Seduced the Seed of the
Woman; for Satan tempted our Savior first to turn Stones into Bread, for
satisfying the Hunger of his Flesh: 2ly. to fall down and Worship him for that
goodly Catch (a shining Nothing or Scheme) wherewith he would have bewitched
his Eyes, and 3ly. to fly in the Firmament in a way of Pride, that all Men
might adore him as they did his Sorcerer Simon Magus for so doing in Samaria,
Act. 8. 9, 10. therefore it is probable Luke laid the three Temptations in this
Order, answerable to that Order, 1 John 2. 16. that the Parallel 'twixt the two
Adams Temptations might more plainly be Observed, Luke 4. 1, to 14. Now come we
from the 1st. Part, The Strange Act, to the 2d. Part, the Strange End, the
Issue of the Act, yet discoursing all along upon those mighty Means in tendency
to the End. The Upshot of all was, our Lord Vanquished the Devil, Blunting all
his Weapons weelded against him, Isa. 54. 17. not one spark of Satan's Hell-sire
would take upon Christ's Wet Tinder, neither the 1st. nor the 2d. nor the 3d. no
more than the many before the End of the forty Days; Christ keeps his Ground,
maintains his Standing, resists the Devil, and puts him at last to the Flight,
by these following Means: Christ's Defensive Weapons (against the Devils
Offensives) in the General, (1) was not to thrust the Tempter away by his
Divine Power, which by Virtue of his Godhead he might have done at the first:
nor (2) does he Use a Revelation against Satan, nor an Inward Word, as some
pretend to: nor (3) does He Argue him away by Strength of Reason, when he could
easily Reduce the Seducer to this Undeniable Dilemma, [If I be the Son of God,
I can Live without Bread, and it is Impossible for thee (a Creature) to overcome
Me thy Creator; if I be not the Son of God, why do thou doubt of it? and why
do thou propose a Miracle to be done by Me, which no mere Son of Man can
possibly perform by his own Power?) Nor 4. does he plead Tradition, as the
Romanists that are more for their Traditum est, than for Scriptum est: to plead
Scripture is according to Christ, but to plead Tradition (in neglect of, and
opposition to the Scripture) is according to Antichrist: but (5) his Weapon was
the Word Written, such as we may weeld by his Example, and must do so by his
Command: yet (6) not by making a Charm of the bare Letter of the Word, as the
Superstitious and Magiquely-minded Men do, thinking the naked Rehearsal of the
Words in Joh. 1. 1, etc. is an exorcism Strong enough to Conjure away the
Devil, but 'twas the Sword of the Spirit drawn out of the Sheath of the Letter,
wherewith Christ Answered all the three Assaults, It is Written, It is Written,
It is Written, Three times over, v. 4, 7, 10. this was his Sore, great and
Strong Sword (of the Spirit) wherewith our Lord Punishes Leviathan that Crooked
Piercing Serpent, Isa. 27. 1. He Draws Three Arrows out of the Divine Quiver of
Sacred Scripture, and chooses three Smooth Stones (with David) out of those
Silver Streams, wherewith he lays all along this great Goliath of Hell upon the
Ground. In the 1st. Rancounter the Tempter tempts Christ to a Desponding
Diffidence, and being Foiled in that, this Unwearied Assaulter endeavors to
transport him into a Vainglorious Confidence, making up the matter of his 2d.
Temptation, even out of the very matter wherein he was foiled in the first; If
Christ will Trust God, he shall have enough and too much of Trusting; If he
will trust God for his Provision of Bread, he shall trust Angels (in his
Leaping down from the Pinnacle) for his Protection of Body; and though this
((...), or) Piercer points his 2d. Temptation with Scripture, (finding Christ's
Strength lay there) yet Christ Baffles Satan in this too, by proposing a Plain
and parallel Text to give Light to that the Devil Urged, being Darker,
especially as his Antagonist had mis-quoted it, and had Ruffl'd (by his
Curtailing it) the true, Proper and Genuine Sense of it: now when the Dragon or
Beast (Satan) had taken the Horns of the Lamb, as Revel. 13. 11. to Push with,
even the Holy Scripture, and was become a white Devil, as an Angel of Light, or
at least some seeming Grave Divine, (so that Satan as well as Saul thrusts in
among the Prophets, among Divines, among Saints, 1 Samuel 10. 11. and 19. 24. and
Job 1. 6.) yet was Vanquished by Scripture; He has not still done, but after a
Double Repulse, trys his 3d. Impulse, which was the Sharpest and Sorest of all
the three: It might be unnecessary to turn Stones into Bread, and Dangerous to
Cast Himself down from the Pinnacle; but Oh how Plausible was this Proposal, the
Tempter came [Petendo] in Requesting only the Two times before; now he comes
in this 3d. [Et Petendo and Promittendo] not only in Requesting a little, a
very little Work, a Work soon done, and without Pain or Danger, ('it is but to
Fall down and Worship me) but also in Promising a great, a very great and Rich
Reward for this little and easy Work: Oh how sweet and luscious (as well as
Delicious) are Rule and Riches, and to have the Glories of the World without
the Cares (which the Devil showed him not) and Troubles thereof: This Evil
Spirit, who had not an Inch of Earth, either in himself, (having no Earthly
Real Body) nor of his own, (being but an Usurping God of this World,) Yet
Offers the whole Earth to Christ, who was the First Maker, and now the True
Owner of it; this is the Devils 3d. Assault after his 1st. and 2d. Repulse and
Rejection: The Devil is not lightly Discouraged, but [Muscarum ad Instar, quo
Magis Abiguntur eo magis Premunt,] like the Flies is this Beelzebub, or
Master-Fly, though Beaten away once, and again, yet Returns to the same place:
yet now coming to his height of Impudency, and offering this High Indignity
(of placeing the Devil in Gods Throne) Christ Endures him no longer, but
Commands him out of His Presence with Utmost Indignation; And if Christ command
him away, There is no Abiding for him, Then the Devil left him, Matthew. 4. 10,
11. Basely Bassl'd and Befoiled; And no sooner was this Evil Angel Vanquished
and Vanished, but presently the Good Angels come to Comfort this Conqueror,
and to Carry Him back from this Mountain where the Devil had left him. Thus the
Son of God whom God the Father had Owned by a Voice from Heaven, and God the
Holy Spirit, by the Dove Descending upon him. Now the Devil Owns Him as One too
Strong for him, by his quitting the Field, Yea, and His Good Angels Owns Him as
Their Lord, having such Power over Evil Angels.

The Twenty-Third Plot in the New Testament, against the Church, in Christ,
Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXIII.
NOw come we to the Devils 3d. Plot against Christ, when he carried on his
Office, as the last was at the beginning of it: Though the Devil was now both
Defeated and Departed, yet it is said expressly, He Departed from Christ but
only for a Season, Luke 4. 13. Here Expired the Devils Commission, he can now
(nor at any time) do no more Evil than God permits; Here the Devil (Quasi, Do
Evil) endeavored to break Christ's Head by drawing him to Sin, that thereby he
might Overthrow both him and his Work of Redemption, which he had Undertaken:
However Satan (being Defeated in this Design) waits now for a Season wherein to
Bruise his Heel, well knowing, That was in his Commission, from Genesis 3. 15.
It Is pity we should be so Ignorant of the Holy Scriptures, when the Devil has
them so at his Fingers ends, (as we say) as readily to rehearse them (as he
did) in sharpening his 2d. Tempting Tool against Christ. He well enough
understood that though he could not now Corrupt Christ with those his three
temptations, so Spoil him as the Church's Redeemer; yet he might have leave
(from that Genesis 3. 15.) to do him much mischief, yea, and to Murder him at
last, which yet (as God overruled it) was but the Bruising of his Heel in his
Redemption-Work, as will appear after. Hereupon the Prince of this World
comes again to Christ, (after his 2d. Defeat) Joh. 14. 30. Non tantum clam
Tentaturus, quantum palam pugnaturus, Not so much privily to Tempt him, as
openly to Fight him; the Tempter will have his Returning Times, as he had to
Christ, so he will have to Us, and therefore after we have foiled him in one
Conslict, we must expect another; he will have the the other Bout with us, in a
calm prepare for a Storm: Satan is Restless, Impudent and Importunate, and will
not easily be said Nay: If we live out all our Days, he may put us hard to it
in every Article of the Creed in Respect of our Belief, and Urge us to the
Breach of every Branch of the Dealogue in Respect of our Obedience, so may he
tempt us to all kind of Sins. Thus this Restless Devil (though he had let
Christ alone all the time of his Private Life, as before) never allows him any
Quiet after he had Entered upon his Public Ministry, but did Disquiet him all
along, until he had finished his Work his Father gave him to do, Joh. 17. 4. No
sooner began Christ to Declare himself the King, Priest and Prophet of his
Church both by his many Gracious and Nonesuch Sermons which he Publicly
Preached, Luke 4. 15, 22, 32. Matthew. 7. 28, 29. Joh. 7. 15. and 1. 14. Psa. 45.
2. Cant. 4. 3. Isa. 50. 4. (that Palmoni Hammadabbar, most Excellent Speaker,
or Prince of Preachers, Dan. 8. 13.) and also had Confirmed His Doctrine
(Preached) with Matchless Miracles, as was that first of turning Water into
Wine, (a better Miracle of the Messiah, than that of Moses's turning Water into
Blood, Exodus 7. 20. for he was a better Mediator, and of better things, Hebr.
3. 3, 5, 6. and 8. 6. and 9. 11, 12, 13, 14, 23, 24.) Joh. 2. 9, 11. But
presently the Devil begins to stir, and to Assault Christ again by his
Diabolical Instruments; This 3d. Plot consists of many Assaults, the 1st. was,
the very first Sermon that Luke Records Christ Preached after his Relation of
the Forty Days Temptation, (though that Miracle in Cana of Galilee was in Order
of time before it,) Luke 4. 16, to 28. The Devil stirred up those Ungrateful
Contrymen of his at Nazareth, where Envy it self had seemed to be Silenced
by his Gracious Words; yet (1) they (by the Devils Instigation) cavil at his
Person, saying, Is not this Joseph's Son? v. 22. and (2) they would have found
an Hole in his Seemless Coat, as to his Works, for not Cureing Diseases in his
own Country, (as he had done in other Countries, Joh. 4. 43, 45, 46, 54.) v.
23. but when Christ Hinted only, the Calling of the Gentiles, and withal
pinching close upon Nazarets Unbelief, (by which his Hands were hindered from
Working Miracles among them, Matthew. 13. 54, 58. Mark 6. 1, 5.) v. 24, to 27.
Hereupon (3) they were filled with Wrath, v. 28. picks a Quarrel with Christ
whom they had so lately and so much Admired; Their Anger was Christ's Danger:
they thrust Christ out of the City, as Unworthy to Walk upon their Pavement,
and the Devil made them so mad with Malice, that though it were on their
Sabbathday, v. 16. and though Christ was not Condemned by any Legal Trial, yet
will they Immediately (of themselves, and on that Day) become Christ's
Executioners; in order hereunto, those Divelishly Supercilious Jews carries him
[ad Supercilium Montis] to the Brow of the Hill, to cast Christ down Headlong,
and so to break his Neck: This the Devil would have had done by Christ
(himself) Voluntarily, (which God permitted him not to do by his own Hands,
when he set him upon the Pinnacle of the Temple, and now Endeavors to do by the
Hands of Christ's own Carnal and Cursed Countrymen, v. 29. but God Baffles the
Devil here again; for Christ, like a second Samson, makes His own Way
miraculously through the midst of his Enemies, (as Psalm. 18. 29.) either by
Blinding their Eyes, (as Genesis 19. 11.) or by Binding their Hands (as Psalm. 76.
5. and 1 Kin. 13. 4.) with a Beam of his Divine Power: thus his own Hand Saved
Him from the Devils Hand (who would have made an Hand and an End of him) at
this time: This Escape Christ made, [(...),] not to avoid Suffering, (which was
his Errand into the World) but Waiting for the Appointed time, for his Hour was
not yet come, Joh. 8. 59. The 2d. Assault Satan makes against Christ, was, when
he saw this Jesus of Nazareth (whom God Anointed with the Holy Spirit) going
about and doing good, and Healing all that were Oppressed of the Devil, for God
was with him, Act. 10 38. therefore the Devil will be against him, for pulling
down his Kingdom of Darkness, and setting up his own by the Light of the
Gospel, and by himself, the Light of the World, Isai. 42. 6. and Luke 2. 32.
and Joh. 8. 12. Hereupon the Devil catching Christ in a Ship, Matthew. 8. 23. as
Prince of the Air, Ephesians. 2. 2. stirred up a mighty Tempest, v. 24. to drown
Christ (that Male-Child of the Church, Revel. 12. 5.) and his Disciples (the
Church it self) all together, and see how near he came to Accomplish his
Devilish design, The Ship was covered with Waves, she Shipped much Water in
those overgrown Seas, insomuch as she was ready to Founder and to Sink down to
the bottom: this (...) is Usually Understood of an Earthquake, but here it is a
Sea-Quake, Luke calls it (...); which Pliny calls Navigantium Pestem, the
Seamans Misery, the most Hideous of Storms, that will strike all the points of
the Compass, (like that called Euroclydon, Act. 27. 14.) Luke 8. 23. and so
Mark 4. 37. which is a Whirlwind, not properly one Wind, but a Conflict of
many Winds that turns all upside down; no doubt but the Devil was in this
stormy Wind, though God was not in that of Elijahs, 1 Kin. 19. 11. And the
saddest Circumstance of that Story, was, that Christ was of a Deep Sleep upon a
Pillow, [(...)] Sopitus est, of a Dead Sleep as it were; so that neither the
Noise of the Sea, now Roaring out its Rage; nor the Clamor of the Seamen,
laboring for Life; nor the Single loud Call of his Disciples, can Awake
Christ, till they Double their Cry, Maste, Master, Luke 8. 24. Here the Devils
Hope was as High as the Sea, yet Christ Awakes and Rebukes both the Rage of the
Sea, and the Hope of the Devil: We must cry Three times, Awake, Awake, Awake
thou Arm of the Lord. (that is Asleep) Isa. 51. 9. then will Christ cry, Peace,
be still thou Stormy Sea, then both the Winds and the Seas, yea, and the Devil
(that Raised them) does Obey: Christ lays Laws upon all Created beings, yea,
upon the Devil himself: Hereby both Christ and his Church were both Delivered,
and then the Calm became as Great as the Storm had been. There was then a great
Calm, Mat. 8. 26. when Christ had first Rebuked the Church's (His Disciples)
Unbelief; and then the Storm the Devil had raised against them, and against
himself with them. Oh how safe is that Ship (the Church) wherein Christ
embarques himself in the same Bottom; If Julius Coesar could say to his
Barge-man in a stormy Sea, [Quid times? Coesarem Vehis, and ejus Fortunam,] Be
of good cheer, Barge-man, for it is the Fortune of Coesar thou art wafting over,
and that cannot Miscarry: How much more may those that are embarked in the
same Bottom with Christ, be confident of a safe Arrival. It may be said to the
Devil, (the raiser of those storms against the Church) what was once sent to
the Great Turk,

Niteris Incassum Christi submergere Navens,
Fluctuat, at nunquam Mergitur illa Ratis.
The Church may sometimes be Drenched, but she shall never be Drowned, no not
by the worst Storm that the Devil can Raise against her; the Venom of a Toad
may foul that Crystal, but can never stain it; Satan's stormy Sea may Dip and
dowse that Bottle, but can never Drown it: the Church is like the Constellation
(called the little Bear) that always turns round about the Axis, or North Pole,
but never goes down under the Earth with other Stars and Constellations, as
Father Hieronimus elegantly expresses it in these Words, [Polus
Septentrionalis, Semper Versatur, nunquam Mergitur,] The North Pole always
wheels about, but never wheels down out of the Horizon, much less, is drowned
in the Sea: and as excellent is that Sentence of Father Ambrose, [Diabolus
contra Ecclesiam Tempestatem movet, sed ipse Naufragium facit;] though the
Devil stirrs up many storms against the Church, yet he (himself is sure to
suffer Shipwreck, as he did here, for no sooner was Christ got safe to Land,
but the very next News we hear of him is, his Encountering with and Casting out
a whole Legion of Devils, that he might be Revenged of the Devil, who had
endeavored to drown both Him and all His, Matthew. 8 28. Mark 5. 2. and Luke 8.
27. The 3d. Assault, or rather, a Meeting, through the Devils being Out-dared,
was when a certain Man which had Devils met, Christ, (one that was more noted,
more bewailed, and more outrageous than the other) having a whole legion of
Devils in him, (which among the old Romans was Six Thousand Armed Soldiers, or
as Dr. Hammond says, more than twice as many, even Twelve Thousand Five
Hundred) so many Devils were gotten into this one poor Man: All Pharaohs
Cruelties exercised upon the Israelites, and all the most exquisite Torments
the most Savage Persecutors put Gods people to, were all nothing to this; it is
a wonder that this poor Man, having so many Devils crammed up all together in
him, did not crack asunder both in Soul and Body: This Man had his Dwelling
among the Tombs, There the Devils kept him to Terrify him the more with the
fear of Death all his Life, Hebr. 2. 15. and indeed he was as Dead while he
Lived, so that Burying place (which the Devil Haunts and plays his pranks there
to enhaunch a Superstition of Praying to and for the Dead) was the sit
place for him, thither had those Devils driven him, ((...), driven, as the
Horse is by the Spur of the Rider,) Luke 8. 29. it is a Wonder they drove him
not into the Tombs, as well as among them, and that they made him not Run
Violently down a steep place into the Sea to Choke him, as they did the Herd of
Swine, Matthew. 8. 32. This the Devils would have done with him, and more than
this, they would have Run him down to the Bottomless Deep of Hell, had not God
Preserved him from all, that he might meet his Savior, who durst meet him,
(though no Man else durst do so, because of his Fierceness, Matthew. 8. 28.)
notwithstanding his Legion of Devils in him: Those Devils had driven him to
Assault and Batter many Passengers Traveling that way, yet dare they not
(though so many Devils) Venture upon one Christ, for upon his first Approach,
they feel a Beam of his Divine Power coming forth to Torment them, crying, Art
thou come hither to Torment us? and what have we to do with thee? v. 29. but
Christ had somewhat to do with them, that is, to Dispossess them, letting them
know their Unclean Company was sitter for Unclean Swine than for Man, Gods
noblest Creature. Thus Christ's Presence was the Devils Torment, yet the poor
Man's Happiness, * 12500 Devils cannot match one Christ; and this poor Possessed
Man becoming by Grace Dispossessed, and coming to his Right mind, was so sadly
Affrighted, (as he had good cause) sits down at Jesus Feet, and Entreated him
that he might continue with him, Luke 8. 35. 38. Mark 5. 18. not only to
Testify his Love to his Redeemer, but also his Fear, that upon Christ's
Departure from him, he might Fall under the Devils Power again, and so be
Repossessed. Thus Christ Conquers a great Army of Devils, and makes this Man
(whom the Devils had made the most miserable of Mankind) more Holy (and so more
Happy) than all his Contrymen, who besought Christ to Depart from them,
Matthew. 8. 34. (preferring a Swine-stye before a Sanctuary, and Swines Company
before a Saviors) whereas this only Man besought Christ not to Depart from
him; and the Devils besought Christ that he would not command them to go out
into the Deep, Luke 8. 31. (...) or Bottomless-Pit, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Joh. 12. 31. *
The matter is well amended now, not long ago the Devil Assaults Christ with all
might and malice in the Wilderness, but here in the Gadarens Country (none of
the best) a whole Legion of Devils dare not Threaten Christ, but joins all in
one Petition, and besought him not to pack them away to Hell: They had no mind
out of this Country, (that loved the Devils Company better than Christ's) and
less mind out of this World, where they are (as it were) Respited and Reprieved
till their full Torment come; they are suffered as Free Prisoners (in Libera,
non Arcta Custodia) to Flutter in the Air, and to Course about the Earth,
Ephesians. 2. 2. Job 1. 7. Matthew. 12. 43. 1 Pet. 5. 8. yet all this they do in
Chains, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude v. 6. until the last Day, which they Tremble to think
on, I am. 2. 19. And which they that mock at, 2 Pet. 3. 3. or make light off,
Matthew. 22. 5. are herein worse than Devils. Behold here this great Wonder, that
our Lord Christ (so lately Tossed in the Sea, as well as Tempted in the
Wilderness) has here, even in his State of Humiliation, brought (above 12000)
Devils down upon their Knees, when they Besought him, finding themselves
overpowered, not only the Hoggish and carnal Gadarens Besought Christ, (whom
they durst not Threaten out of their Coasts) Matthew. 8. 34. but even those
Principalities, Powers, and Spiritual Wickednesses in High places, Ephesians. 6. 12.
do bow before this Ab-rech, Genesis 41. 43. (which signifies Tender Father,) This
Joseph our Brother to whom Men and Devils must bow the Knee: How much more may
he make every Knee bow to him in his State of Exaltation? Phil. 2. 8, 9. The
same power of Christ (when He Pleases) can now make the Tempter to change his
Tone to us, and all Incarnate Devils their Cruel, into Kind and Candid
Carriages, undoubtedly He will Tread Satan under our Feet shortly, Romans 15. 20.
If it were [Shortly] in Paul's Day, wherein the Mystery of Iniquity did but
begin to Work, and the long Lease of the Beasts-Kingdom was not yet begun: How
much more is it [Shortly] in our Day, wherein the Beast has been playing Rex
in his Pranks for above a 1000 Y. surely it is not long e're this Word shall be
Accomplished. The 4th. Assault the Devil makes upon Christ, (after his
Departure from Him for a Season, Luke 4. 13.) was in his taking New Measures,
(being Hitherto at every turn over-match'd) and putting the People upon making
Christ King, whom he could neither Kill nor Conquer, Joh. 6. 14, 15. It Is true,
before this, Satan made Two dangerous By-blows at Christ, the 1st was in
Cutting off John Baptist, who had Witnessed him into the World, that so Christ
might stand upon his own Legs only, and not be any longer shored up by the
Baptist, whom all People believed to be a Prophet, Matthew. 21. 26. The Occasion
was this, John Baptist had not only Preached up Christ and his Kingdom, (which
Enraged the Devil) but also had told Herod the Truth about his Darling-Sin,
which none others (though they knew it) durst tell Herod so, but the Baptist
only: this Herod (the less) was as fit a Tool for the Devil now, as his Father
(Herod the great) was at Christ's Birth, Tange Montes and Fumigabunt; Touch the
Mountains and they will smoke, Psalm. 104. 32. Touch a great Man upon the Sore,
(as the Baptist here did Herod) and he fumes, casts the Toucher into Prison
without Bail or Mainprize, and there he lies for half a Year without ever
coming to a fair Trial or Hearing: John Baptist knew well Gods Truth must be
told, however it be taken, and not to be Betrayed (as too often it is) by a
Cowardly and Sinful Silence: Here John lies in Fetters, while the Fear of Man
(more than of God) Restrains Herod from Murdering him, Mark 6. 17, 20. Matthew.
14. 4, 5. he feared John's Innocence, which shone in his Face, and he feared the
People, (who Hated him already for his many Crimes and Cruelty) least they
should move a Mutiny at the Death of so Innocent and so much Honored a Person:
Hereupon the Plot was laid 'twixt Herod and his Harlot (Herodias) to cut him
off when their convenient Day (Herod's Birthday) did come, Mark 6. 21. that day
had been appointed long before for craftily Acting this cruel Tragedy; a great
Feast must then be made, the Nobles Invited, the Damosel-Daughter must Dance,
the King must Swear, and must gratify the Queen with the Baptists Head: All
this was done as if God had not been concerned at all; but God did so far
concern himself, that Herod was struck with Horror upon it, with Terror and
Torment, Luke 9. 7. (...), he stuck fast in the Mud, and could find no way out,
yet God made him find a way out of his Kingdom, (the half whereof he had
promised to the Damosel (for Tripping Wantonly upon the Toe) as Josephus
Relates, and (probably, out of Gods Kingdom too: So Father and Son be both
alike in their Sin and Punishment: The 2d. By-Blow the Devil gave Christ was,
to cut off his Followers (the Disciples) as he had done his Forerunner John
Baptist; And this he endeavored to effect, when he had got the Disciples to
Sea apart from Christ, Matthew. 14. 23, etc. Mark 6. 45, etc. Joh. 6. 16. Very
loath were the Disciples to Lanch out to Sea alone, and to leave his Sweet and
Safe Company, but Christ constrains them to do so, (1) that he might the sooner
dismiss the Multitude, (2) he dismisseth his Disciples to Sea, least they
(also) should strike in with that Rash-many-Headed Multitude, who would have
made him King. (3) Though they were loath to leave their best Friend behind them
so near Night, in a Desert, and all alone too, yet this was Christ's Choice,
that He might have an Opportunity of Solitary Prayer for their Safety, and of
his Miraculous Walking upon the waves to their Relief: by the Want of Christ
(for a few Hours of Danger only) they learnt the Worth of Christ: no sooner
had the Devil caught the Disciples at Distance from Christ, but to Work he
falls, then down comes the Storm and up goes the Sea; another (...) or mighty
Storm, (which is a Wind (says Aristotle) that Rouls in a Circle with such
Violence, insomuch as it swallows up whole Towns in Italy, etc.) and (...), a
great Tempest, a very Sea-Quake, of the same Nature with an Earthquake, (which
has the Formidable force of removing Mountains, and of casting down Strong
Castles that stand upon them) Descends from the Stinking Breath of the Prince
of the Air, (the Devil) upon now the poor and Christless Apostles, with a
malicious Intention to Drown them all, that they might never trouble his
Kingdom any more; as with an Horrible Wind Satan had Brained all Jobs Children,
so by the like means he would have Drowned all Christ's Disciples, Christ being
absent in this latter, as Job (himself) was in the former Instance. Behold
(with me) a little, 1. The Churches Calamity, 2. Her Comfort; in the 1st. See
the sad Circumstances of this History of the Church: * as (1) in this little
Ship was embarked all the Hopes of a Church that now God had in the whole
World, as in Noah's Ark, couped up in a little compass: (2) The Winds were
contrary, Matthew. 14. 24. as Act. 27. 4. So it is mostly with the Church, that is
so often blown back from the Cape of Good Hope, and from the Haven of Heaven in
her Militant-State, she is ever and anon, as in the Straits of Magellan,
wherein which way soever a Man Bends his Course, he is sure to have the Wind
sit cross to him. (3) Those Contrary Winds were not so much Ordinary as
Extraordinary, so that those Apostles (who were Fishermen, and thereby
experienced in ordinary Sea-Storms) cried out, We Perish, for (4) they were
[(...) Mark 6. 48, 49.] which signifies not only that they were Tossed with
the Tempest, but also Tormented with it so the Word is used, Luke 16. 23. The
Rich Glutton was [(...)] in Torments: Thus the Afflicted Church was here not
only tossed with Tempests, and not Comforted, as Isa. 54. 11. but also
Tormented, as those miserable Men are by the Tormentors (in the Spanish
Inquisition) tossing them too and fro up and down till they be Ready to loose
one Limb from another: So this Wind was far unlike the sweet Gales of the
Spirit of God, which always blows Good to the Church out of every Quarter,
North and South, Cant. 4. 16. but more like that [Ruach Gedolah] strong and
mighty Wind, 1 Kin. 19. 11. which had not the Lord in it, for his Voice is a
Voice of Mercy and Clemency, and Natural to him, Micah 7. 18. and his Voice of
Justice against Jezebel (which was not to be yet) is called his strange Act,
Isai. 28. 21. yea, more then so, for this Tempestuous Wind had the Devil in it,
and therefore it tossed the Church up and down, hither and thither, so it
Toiled and Tormented them, as if it had been Extorting (as upon a Rack) a
Denial of Christ and of all Christianity from them: (5) They were in the Deep,
the Ship was now in the midst of the Sea, Matthew. 14.24. Mark 6.47. the Syriack
Adds, They were many Furlongs from each Shore, agreeable to Joh. 6. 19. where
it is said they Rowed about Thirty Furlongs, so deep was the Sea here that they
could not Fathom or Feel the Bottom, and here the Devil Hoped to carry it, by
carrying them down into this Deep, and not only so, but to carry them also
down still lower into his own Deep, even to the Deep and Bottomless Pit of
Hell. (6) It was very Dark (as well as very Deep,) Joh. 6. 17. which is a time
very Terrible to Mariners to whom the Water affords them mostly a little
Light: now Darkness (of it self) was their Danger, not knowing how to Steer
their Course safely from Rocks and Quicksands, Sailing was then Dangerous, as
Act. 27.9. when no Stars appeared, v. 20. but this was more Dangerous (in it
self) it being a Darkness from the Prince of Darkness, the Devil, who Hoped to
Drown them in the Deep and in the Dark, (a right Divelish deed of Darkness)
that they might not Discern their own Destruction; Oh how doleful was all this
to the Disciples? 'twas so deep they could not feel Bottom, and so dark they
could not discern Shore, and whether this (the Devils) Hericane would drive
them, to drown them, either by swallowing up the Ship in the midst of the Sea,
or by splitting her upon the Rocks or Sands of the Shore, they knew not: Oh
what a sad Taking was Judas (whom Christ calls a Devil soon after this, Joh.
6.70.) in, at this sad Bout. But the (7) was the saddest Circumstance of all,
to wit, Christ was Absent from them in this Storm, who was present with them in
the other, And Jesus was not come to them, Joh. 6. 17. This was worse to them
than the Storm, their best Pilot and Protector (whose Presence had Protected
them from the last late Storm) was wanting; Though Christ was Asleep in the
former Storm, yet was heat hand, they could quickly Awake him; but now was he
out of their Call, and they knew not when he would come: Oh what can they do?
no doubt but the Devil might make them doubt of the Truth of Christ's Words to
them [Ye shall bear by Name among the Gentiles,] as Act. 9. 15. 'twas now more
likely they should bear it down into the Deep, and unto the Dead; yet mark it,
they altogether Despond not, they do not betake themselves to their Boat, as
those Desperado's did, Act. 27. 30. but to their Oars, Rowing hard about
Twenty-Five or Thirty Furlongs, Joh. 6. 19. They had so learnt of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 20. that God must be Trusted, but not Tempted by a wilful Neglect of
Due means; he is not tied to them, yet does he usually Work with them; their
Sails they could not Hand out, the Wind was too Boisterous, therefore they keep
Tugging (with Hands all) at their Oars, even all the Three long Watches of the
Dark and stormy Night, (for the Stress of Weather, and the Disciples Distress
lasted, from Evening to Midnight, and from thence to Cock-crow, then after
Cock-crow (the 4th. Watch of the Night) God Blessed their Endeavors so far as
to bring them to a Sight of their Dear (longed and long-looked for) Savior,
Joh. 6. 19. * This does Teach us, In greatest storms to use all lawful Means
and Practicable Helps for our own Deliverance as the Disciples here [Non Navem
Deserunt sed Remigando Laborarunt,] Deserted not their Stations, but did their
utmost at their Oars when they could do nothing with their Sails; Try all
things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. if one way may not, another may avail. Having Viewed 1.
the Churches Calamity (in those Seven sad Circumstances,) now take a View of
the Churches Comfort, Christ will not leave her Comfortless, (...), or Orphans,
Joh. 14. 18. as his Disciples seem to be now during Christ's Absence, who was
not only their Lord but their Father also, for he calls them his Children,
Matthew. 5. 45. but more plainly and distinctly he says to his Disciples,
[Children have ye any Meat? Joh. 21. 5.] Oh the Boundless and Bottomless Bowels
of this Heavenly Father to his poor Children, ever saying Compassionately to
them, [Have ye Food, and have ye Raiment, Have ye this, and Have ye that?] our
Heavenly Father knows that we have need of these things, Matthew. 6. 32. both
for our Souls the good things of the Throne, and for our Bodies those of the
Footstool; he Cares and Catereth in every thing that is good for us: Oh Happy
we, did we but know Believingly our own Happiness, Psalm. 139. 14. and 22. 9.
and 144. 15. Numb. 11. 13. Hos. 2. 8, 21, 22. Psalm. 50. 10. Romans 8. 28. Oh
Happy Disciples, that had such a Father, (present or absent) even when plunged
into the Deep of Misery, we have seen their sad Suffering or Passion (in the
Circumstances aforesaid,) now View a little Christ's Compassion for Comforting
the Church in Calamity; the Disciples could not well be Ignorant of the yerning
of Divine Bowels over his Church in such a like Condition as theirs then was,
Isai. 54. 11. Oh thou Afflicted, etc. and it could not but comfort the
Disciples to consider they had not stepped out of Gods way when they met with
this Storm, for Christ had Constrained them to go this Voyage, and that,
without him: It Is very Comfortable to take along with us (in all our Journeys
and Voyages.) Christ's sweet and saving Company, but Christ Commands them to go
without him to this place where they were in this Jeopardy. Hence Observe (1)
Storms may be met with in ways of Obedience, in going where and whether Christ
bids us go. (2) If Storms meet those that Walk in ways of Obedience, what can
they expect that Walk in ways of Disobedience, but Sodoms Storm of Fire and
Brimstone? (3) Storms may well be expected if Christ be Absent, as here: Yea,
(4) they are not exempted from Fears and Dangers by the presence of Christ,
Matthew. 8. 25. (5) Christ may seem to be Careless of the Cause, Case, and
Condition of his Church and Children, he falls asleep in the first Storm, and
had withdrawn himself in the second. (6) Christ was tugging and toiling as
earnestly in his Prayer for them, Matthew. 14. 23. as they did for themselves in
their Perilling and almost Perishing condition with all their Hard Rowings. (7)
Astormy Sea cannot Separate Christ from his Church in Danger, Romans 8. ^5.
Christ comes Walking upon the Sea, showing himself herein to be greater than
Moses, who only Walked through a Sea Dried up, but the Messiah Walks upon the
surface of a Full-Sea, yea, Notoriously Raging, Christ steps from off one proud
Wave upon another, his Godhead all along bearing up the Natural weight of his
Manhood; he well knew that his Absence made their Sufferings Unsufferable, so
takes he long and more than Mortal strides toward them, Matthew. 14. 25. (8)
When Christ on the Shore saw them toiling in the Sea, then out of compassion he
came upon the Sea to comfort them, Mark 6. 48. Christ is now landed upon the
Shore of Glory in Heaven, and thence he beholds all the Toilings of His Church
upon this Troublesome Sea on Earth, then comes he down to Deliver her, Exodus 3.
7, 8. (9) yet not till the 4th. Watch of the Night, then, and not till then: he
commonly keeps his hand for a Dead lift, and his Help is always sweet, because
(whatever we think of it) it is always Seasonable, Isa. 30. 18. (10) How apt are
Men to mistake their Comforts when they come to them, as here, they were
troubled at the coming of their only Comforter, Matthew. 14. 26. They Feared
this Spectrum or Apparition as well as the Storm; they might think it was the
Devil, who had raised that Storm, and was come (himself) to sink them
outright: thus mistook they their Savior for Satan, and their Choicest
Comforter for their chiefest Confronter and Confounder: (11) it is sad to a
sensible Soul when Christ seems to pass by him, Mark 6. 48. This Affrights
them still more, and made them think he was some Walking Night-Devil, when he
seemed to pass by them, and to take no notice of their Deplorable Estate, which
Christ might do only to try them whether they would Entreat him to come
aboard, for Joh. 6. 21. they would have (so some Read it, [(...),] for,
Willingly,) Received him into the Ship, and did so, Mark 6. 5. (12) Oh how
sweet a Cordial to those words, [It is I,] even I with an Emphasis, [Be not
Afraid,] either of the Phantasme ye Fear, or of the Furious Sea ye Feel, It is
I, whom ye need not be afraid of, for I am not the evil Angel that comes to
Harm and Hurt you, but I am the good Angel of the Covenant, who comes to Help
you, and to Hand you safe to Land: I am he that keeps the Ensuring Office both
by Sea and Land, and my Right Foot (the stronger of the two) is upon the Sea
(the more Unruly Element) in all its Sea-Quakes, as my Left Foot is upon the
Land, in all its Concussions and Earthquakes, Revel. 10. 2. therefore I shall
lose nothing of all that the Father has given me, Joh. 6. 39. So he tells them
soon after this Mavelous Deliverance, for the Working of which, he had
purposely withdrawn himself from them until now: All this is comprised in this
Concise Kind of Speech, [It is I,] he does not say [I am Jesus,] as he said to
Persecuting Saul (who had never heard his Voice before) Act 9. 5. but only [It
is I,] as speaking to those who well knew his Voice, and thus Abruptly, as
Importing his Have to come and comfort them, behold he comes leaping over
Mountains, the Hills of Bether or Separation, Cant. 2. 17. Those lofty
Mountains (the highswoln Surges of the Sea) he leaps over, they shall not
Separate him from his Spouse, the Church: And no sooner was Christ (whose
Absence troubled them, and whose Presence Terrified them) come Aboard, but
Immediately the Ship was at Land, Joh. 6. 21. and those Half-Dead Disciples
came lively ashore where they would willingly have been. * There wants nothing
to Help our Ship (the Church) through this Stormy Sea safe to Land, save
Christ's coming to us both for calming the storm, and for conveying Home the
Ship. * Things often go backward, e're they go forward; Christ did come here. but
while he was Unknown, neither his Disciples were comforted, nor the Sea
becalmed, the coming of him (in whom all their comfort was contained) caused
them to cry out for fear, Matthew. 14. 26. their Fears befooled them, but Christ
straightway heard their Cry, and makes himself known to them, yet does not
becalm the Sea for them, Peter's Faith (Requiring a Sign) must be tried first
and after this, Christ (himself) yea a known Christ must come up into the Ship,
and then comes the calm, (Oh that it were thus with us now,) v. 32. The ending
of Peter's Trial was the ending of the Disciples Trouble, Christ will have an
Hand to Hand Peter both out of the Sea and into the Ship (yet not without a
check for his looking too much on the Sea, and too little on his Savior)
before the Storm cease, 'twas not only Christ's Presence, but his Praecept that
Allayed it: The Disciples must be better Awakened both to Hope and Desire this
favor from Christ before it be done: yet their Delivery was at hand, while
they apprehend nothing but Destruction, both from the Raging Sea, (making no
way with all their Rowing) and from the frightful Apparition, * others took
Shipping then, Joh. 6. 24. yet met no Storm: Satan's spite is against the
Church. Those Two By-Blows of the Devil against Christ in his forerunner, (the
Baptist,) and in his followers, (his Disciples) being Dispatched; come we now
to the Devils Downright Blow at Christ himself, which was much about the same
time, to wit, his Divelish Design he proposed and promoted, of making Christ a
King, Joh. 6. 15. Here he was a white Devil indeed as to Appearance, but as
Black as (His) Hell, as to the Design, for had Christ been content that the
People (stirred up thereunto by the Devil) should have King'd him; then the
proud Priests and Pontius Pilate would have had the Law on their sides to have
Killed him, and have found Hundreds of Witnesses against him, whereas they
earnestly sought for Witnesses against him, yet found they none, Mat. 26. 60.
then they might have laid Treason against Coesar to his Charge indeed, for at
this time they were Vassals to the Romans, of whom they stood in fear, Joh. 11.
48. This therefore was one of the Devils Master-Stratagems, which yet had
Christ accepted of, it had been far below that Universal Kingship that the
Devil had tendered in his Temptations to Christ, Matthew. 4. 8, 9. yet now he puts
the People on to make him King of the Jews, (a Kingdom, that was but a little
Spot of Earth, and but one Tribe of Twelve) that he might be Arraigned at the
Bar (by a Bill of Attainder) afterward, Matthew. 27. 11. 1st. This Design the
Devil Managed by a moveable Multitude, whose Bellies Christ had filled with
Meat by a Miracle, which had rarely been filled by their own hard Hand-labour.
Hereby Satan Transported them so, as to cry up Christ (whom after he made them
Cry down as a Deceiver) far above Moses, Joh. 6. 14. who thus multiplied Bread
even to a greater quantity of Reversions; this must be the Messiah promised,
and therefore in an heat and Hurry, they must take him by force, and make him
their King: That this Praecipitant People were Satan's Instruments herein,
Appears, (1) Inasmuch as Christ is a Born King, not to be made one, Matthew. 2.
2. where is he that was Born King of the Jews: He was a King before he came
into the World, Behold thy King comes, etc. Zech. 9. 9. (2) Christ was a King
by God himself, Psalm. 2. 6. and not to be made so by Man, he is Gods King, not
Man's. I have set my King upon my Hill. (3) Those same looked only at a carnal
Kingdom, their Belly was their God, they would make him King, because he had
filled their Bellies, not because he had Preached to them the Word of Eternal
Life, They followed him for Loaves, not for Love, as Christ told them, Joh. 6.
26. they did not love Jesus for Iesus-sake, but dreamt all of Plenty under him:
(4) They would have Run Christ into a Praemunire, as to the Roman Power, which
did then Lord it over the Jews, to which Christ paid Tribute, Rendering unto
Coesar, the things that were Coesars, Matthew. 17. 27. and 22. 21. but their
Bellys had as few Eyes as Ears, so could not discern this Danger. (5) The
Devil well knew (though they did not) that Christ's Kingdom was not of this
World, Joh. 18. 36. nor comes with Observation of common Notice, Luke 17. 23.
(6) Those praeposterous Persons, as they were thus soon so Hot, so they were as
soon Cold (when they cried Crucify him) in their Affections to him. (2ly.) As
the Devil had notably Managed this Design, so Christ as notably broke the Neck
of it, both by breaking the Confederacy, and by Avoiding the Occasion and
Opportunity. 1st. Christ broke the Confederacy 1. by packing away his
Disciples, who probably might Abett this Tickling Motion of the Rude Multitude,
for they were often Harping upon an Earthly Kingdom in their Day, Luke 24. 21.
Act. 1. 6, 7. wherein the two Aspiring Sons of Zebedee, desired to sit, the one
on King Christ's Right Hand, and the other on his Left: They dreamed of a
Distribution of Honors and Offices as in David and Solomon's Days, but Christ
calls them Fools for it, Luke 24. 25. 2ly. Christ packed away this over-zealous
Multitude, Matthew. 14. 26. that he might shun all Suspicion of any Treasonable
Sedition, Christ avoids all Appearance of Evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. he commanded
them to be gone by his Almighty Power, which they (though a Multitude) could
not Resist; and he tells them at their next Meeting, they must expect no other
Food to be provided for them by him, then his own Flesh and Blood, Joh 6. 53,
54, 57. This was (...) an hard Saying; it sounded so harsh in their Ears, that
they fall quite off from their former project of making him King, and would
not so much as follow him any more, v. 66. but suppose this many-Headed
Multitude would not Disperse themselves, yet it is said (9ly) Christ withdrew
himself [(...)] Privily into a Mountain, Joh. 6. 15. to avoid the very occasion
of being Imposed upon by the People, as to a Kingship for those following
Reasons. (1) Christ came not into the world to be Ministered unto, but to
Minister, Matthew. 20. 28. (2) He was not to Receive a Kingdom from Men, but to
give a Kingdom to Men, Luke 12. 32. (3) He was the Nobleman that was to Travel
into the far Country of Heaven, while all his Servants (even the Elect in all
Ages) did Trade with their Talents upon Earth, there he was to Receive a
Kingdom from God, Luke 19, 12 and then the Lord Returns, and His Servants
Reckons, Matthew. 24. 15, 19. (4) Christ withdrew to Teach us, that his Kingdom
is not carnal, consisting of Pleasures, Treasures and Honors, of Meat and
Drink, etc. but it is a Kingdom of Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the
Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. (5) to show, that the Kingdom of God was within us,
Luke 17. 21. which teaches to contemn the Vanities of a Kingdom without, and
merely External. (6) He withdrew to disappoint the Devil of all just occasions
of Offense against him; for if the Devil (in his Instruments) did so prosecute
Christ for a Mover of Sedition, though he rejected this Royal proffer from the
People, how much more would he have done, had he Accepted of it; how would this
Act have been an Article of High Treason, (and with much seeming Justice
Improov'd) against Christ. Thus the Devil (called Diabolus from Calumniating)
was confounded in this Design of procuring a just cause of Calumniating against
Christ. This Assault is fruitless and frustrate also, as all his former
Assaults had been before: After this, the Devil made many other petty-Assaults
against the Church in Christ Her Redeemer, (well knowing, could he but Cut off
the Head, (Christ) his Body (the Church) would soon Dye,) before his great and
Grand Assault when Christ's Hour was come, and that fatal Hour and Power of
darkness, Luke 22. 53. for extinguishing the Lamp of David, and the Light of
the World. When the Devil saw how Christ carried on the Kingdom of the Gospel,
not only by the Preaching of the Twelve, but also of the Seventy sent out to
confirm their Doctrine by Miracles, Matthew. 10. and Luke 10. Insomuch as Satan
was seen to fall like Lightning from Heaven, v. 18. to wit, Viewably,
Violently, and Velociously, or Swiftly, as Lucifer did, Isa. 14. 12. [from Men's
Hearts] which the Devil accounts his Heaven, but is cast out by the mighty
Gospel, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. This Enrages Satan: Hereupon he sets the Jewish
Sanhedrim on Work, they seek to Kill Christ, Joh. 7. 1, 11, 19, 25, 30. but no
Man had power to lay hold on him at that Feast of Tabernacles, not only,
because his Hour was not yet come, as is there Expressed, v. 30, 44. but also
because he was so Marvelously Matchless in His Preaching, v. 46. and so
uncontroulably Innocent and Inoffensive in His Practice, v. 21, 31. Act. 10.
38. This Convincing Life which Christ led, (paying all his Church-Duties,
Matthew. 17. 27. the half Sheckel that went to the Repair of the Temple, and
likewise his Tribute to Coesar, Matthew. 22. 21.) did so confound the Devil and
his Tools, that they went away (as it were) with a Flea in their Ear, an Unseen
Coercive Hand of Divine Power and Providence binding their Hands at this time;
The Counsel (being confused, consisting of Sadducees (which Approved
Nicodemus's Seasonable saying) as well as Pharisees,) was also Confounded and
Dismissed, [Re Infecta,] Every Man went Home disappointed, ver. 2, 3. laying
aside (not leaving or losing) their Mischievous Malice only till the next
Opportunity, which was Joh. 8. 59. where they took up Stones to Stone Christ:
The pretended Provocation whereunto this was; (1.) Christ had Avoided their
Entangling Question they asked him about the Adulteress, v. 6. the Snare lay
here on both Hands, if he Condemned her, he then would seem to Assume Judicial
Power, if he Condemned her not, he would then seem a Contemner of Moses Law,
Levit. 20. 10. so could not be the True Messiah: Christ in His Divine Wisdom
Uses such Means as neither Reflected upon the Authority of Moses Law, nor
Retracted His own Doctrine (so often Sounding in their Ears) concerning the
Remission of Sin and Sinners: He (who had stooped down from Heaven to Earth)
stoops down Here to Write (as some suppose) this Penitent Woman's Sin in the
Dust, which he Wiped out again according to the Promise, [I, even I am He that
Blotteth out Transgressions, etc.] Isai. 43. 25. He did not Write her Sin with
a Pen of Iron upon the Pavement of Stone, (as he did the Law, and as he does
the Sins of the Impenitent, for Duration, and for their Obduration,) but upon
the Ground, whither his Adversaries Verily Thought they had Knocked Him down
to. Hereupon they more Insolently Urge him for an Answer. At this, Christ Lifts
up himself (Woe to them against whom he does so. Psalm. 68. 1. and 44. 23. Deuteronomy.
32. 40.) Saying, ver. 7. He that is without Sin, let them cast the first Stone;
with this Word (as with a Stone) he knocked those Stoners (for such they would
have been to the Woman) on the Head, for Christ Stooping down again, to give
them Opportunity of Consulting with their own Convicted Consciences, and of
Stealing away privily, least this All-knowing One (whom They would have
Ensnared) should Detect their Abominable Crimes before the People, so Blast
their Reputation among them, ver. 8. 9. and the Eldest (who had the most Sins)
leads out the Youngest, none of them being Able to stand it out before this One
Word of Christ: This Disappointment of their Design made them mad, yet Christ
meeting them after in the Treasury, v. 20. and telling them they should Dye in
their Sins, ver. 21. and they were Children of the Devil, ver. 44. This madded
them more, Insomuch that they took up Stones to Stone him, who would not let
them Stone the Woman, ver. 29. [But Jesus Hid himself] either strikeing them
Blind, or making Himself Invisible, as before, He Departs without Harm, and
the Devil Loses his Design thereby.

The Twenty-Fourth Plot in the New Testament, against the Church, in Christ,
Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXIV.
BUt that which made them mad most of all, was His Raising up Lazarus from the
Dead, Joh. 11. 47. Those Reprobate Wretches would not Believe, no, though one
Rose from the Dead to them, Luke 16. 31. as Lazarus, and yet they listened as
little to Him, as they did to Christ: They Call a Council, not out of the
unlearned Rabble, but most learned Clerks, (which should have known better
things) the Chief Priests and Pharisees Convene and Consult, yea, and
Unanimously Conclude, that not only Christ, but also Lazarus must be put to
Death, Joh. 12. 10. and why must Lazarus Dye? 'twas only because God had made
him Alive; but they seem to have better Reason (even that of Necessity) for
Killing Christ; If this be not done (say they) the Romans will come, etc. Joh.
11. 48. and because it was done, the Romans came indeed and Plagued them in
taking away their Place and Nation, principally for this Inexpiable Sin of
Killing the Lord of Glory, as Christ had told them, Matthew. 21. 38, 39, 40. and
as they (themselves) had unwittingly Read, (even) their own Destiny, v. 41, 43.
Luke 20. 15. Thus they pretending and pleading a Necessity to Sin, whereas they
lay under no Necessity, save only one, to wit, Not to Sin, and because they
did so Sin, (which they thought their Duty) therefore the thing that they
feared came upon them, King Jesus (for Killing him) sent forth his Armies, (the
Roman-Spoilers) who Dispossessed them of their Country, Burnt their Temple, (as
the Caldeans had formerly done in the time of their Forefathers) Matthew. 22. 7.
and 24. 2, 16, 20, 21, 34. the Destruction of Jerusalem (for Murdering of
Christ) was a Matchless Destruction, as Josephus Relates, a Million of Jews
perished miserably by the Siege, (the whole Body of the Land being then
gathered together at the Passover,) and 97000 carried Captive, Mark Chapter 13.
19. calls those Days Affliction, as if that time were nothing else but
Affliction it self. Well, therefore might the Chief-Priests and Pharisees (when
(...), Self-Condemned, Tit. 3. 11.) say, God forbid, Luke 20. 16. when Christ
had extorted from them an Evident foretelling of their own final Fate, Mat.
21.41. while they thought others were concerned in the Parable, but perceiving
that themselves were the Wicked Men which the Parable did personate, they would
have Retracted the Sentence they had Denounced against themselves out of their
own Mouths, and cries [(...)] God forbid, Mark 12. 9. and Luke 20. 16. which the
Syriack Reads, [This shall not be, we will not Kill the Son of God, the Lord of
the Vineyard, etc. notwithstanding this their [absit] be it far from us so to
do, yet they did it; the Devil Helping them with a Jesuitical Aequivocation,
That it was not their Right Messiah, but only a Mock-Messiah whom they sought
to Murder: Hereupon they fall to Work by the Devils Direction, and with his
best Assistance; the Grand Remora was. They Feared the People, Matthew. 21. 46. (
They are Worse than Christ-Killers, that fear them not, and while the Body of a
People bear Favor to Christ and his Cause, neither of these Two can be Killed
by the worst of Persecutors.) This Rubb and Remora is still Unremoved, Matthew.
26. 3, 4, 5. The General Council (not unlike to that of Trent) Convene again,
hold the Conclusion, (Christ shall be Killed) but cannot Hit upon a Convenient
time, crying, Not at the Feast, for Fear of a Rescue: * Behold here the
contrary Motions of Heaven and Hell: The Devil (in this Council, just contrary
to that, Act. 15. 28. where the Holy Ghost sat Praesident) cries here, Not on
the Feast Day, another time is more seasonable: No, says God, It shall not be
when you will, Christ whom you Kill is my Paschal-Lamb, (the Lamb that is to
take away the Sins of the World, Joh. 1. 29.) you (and the Devil to Help you)
do nothing but according to My Determinate Counsel, Act. 4. 28. and 2. 22.
Though you be a Company of Bloody Dogs that are mussled up with the fear of an
Uproar from the Friends and Favorers of Christ; so that you say, Not on the
Feast; but I say, It shall be on the Paschal Feast Day, and on no other. Here
is a Mavelous Overruling Providence of God; those Wicked Priests had often
sought a time (before this) wherein to Kill Christ, but never could find any,
Until his Hour was now come, and not now must they Determine the time, the
Passeover-Lamb must Dye on the Passeover-Day, to put an End to the
Iewish-Passeover, (signifying their Deliverance from Egypt and her King) but
this Praefigur'd our Redemption from the Spiritual-Pharaoh, and from his Two
Heavy-Handed Taskmasters, to wit, Sin Mortal, and Death Eternal: Yea, and in
all this, those Miscreants (in fulfilling their own Wicked Will) do but fulfill
the Holy Will of God and his Divine Decree, and no more Thanks to them, than
was to Haman in Mordecai's Advancement, whereunto Haman held the Stirrup only.
However, this Cursed Council Consults to take Jesus by Subtilty, Mat. 26. 4. by
Fraud, and not by Force, for fear of an Vproar: they feared the fury of Man
more than the frowns of God, v. 5. The Devil (who set them on Work) steps in to
Hand them over this Stumbling Block, He Entered into Judas after the Sop was
given him at Supper in the House of Simon the Leper) Two Days before the
Passover, Joh 13. 27, 30. from Bethany (though it were Night, and though
Unsolicited by those Conspirators) Satan makes Judas trudge to Jerusalem, he
freely offers his Service, (not doubting of its Kind Acceptance) makes his
Market with them at their own Rate, Referring the Price of that Peerless Pearl
(his Holy Master) to those Barbarous Buyers Pleasure; they Bargain to give him
Thirty pieces of Silver, (the price of a Slave, Exodus 21. 3^.) a goodly Price
for this Pearl of great Price, Zech. 11. 12. Mat. 13. 45, 46. The Devil of
Discontent was Entered into those Prodigiously prosligate Priests long before,
because Christ's Gracious Words (he Spoke,) and the Mighty Works (he Wrought,)
Weakened both theirs and the Devils Kingdom, therefore they all along sought to
Kill Christ, as before, but Durst not do it for fear of the People. Now the
Devil of Discontent Entered into Judas, (missing his Fat Morsel, the price of
the precious Ointment, which he would have put into his Bagg, Joh. 12. 4, 6.)
so here was the Devil in the Priests Conspiring with the Devil in Judas,
therefore the Contract about this Horrid Treason was like enough to Comply:
Hereupon Judas Undertakes to take the Thorn out of the Priests Heel, (the fear
of a Tumult) and to Deliver his Master up to them, (though at the Feast, yet
Quietly enough) to wit, In the Absence of the People; from that time he sought
Opportunity to Betray him, Matthew. 26. 16. both for time and place he promised
to do it [(...)] without any Tumult from the People, Luke 22. 6. This Judas (by
the Devil, his Liege-Lords Direction) soon effected, to wit, in the Night when
Christ was (with the Disciples only) in the Garden at Gethsemane, without the
City, Matthew. 26. 36. Mark. 14. 32. Luke 22. 39. Mark here (1) the Confidence,
(2) the Contumacy, (3) the Craftiness of this Devil in Judas: (1.) his
Confidence, Oh what a dareing Devil was this Frontless Traitor, that, after he
had Contrived and Contracted that prodigious Villainy of Shedding his Lords
Blood, he should Dare thus Boldly and Impudently to Intrude himself into the
presence of his Omniscient (as well as Innocent) Master, at His Lords
Passover, Matthew. 26. 20, 21, etc. (2.) his Contumacy, the Innocent Life of his
Lord Christ could not but Dart most powerful Convictions upon the Conscience of
this Traitorous Villain, yet Conspires he his Murder, not out of any sudden
pang of passion, or by any surprising Incogitancy; but all he did was done in
Cold Blood, and upon Mature Deliberation, (therefore it is said, from the time
of his making this Damnable Bargain with the Priests, he sought Opportunity,
etc.) and all, without any (save Satan in him) to Solicit him to it, for Two
Days and Nights together. (3.) his Craftiness, in Watching this Opportunity,
not in the Daytime, least his Deed of Darkness should be Discerned and
Detested; nor in the City, least some good Citizens should make a Rescue; but
his monstrous and matchless Villainy must be done in the Nightime, least it
should blush to behold the Light, and without the City in a Solitary place,
(Judas knew Christ's Haunts, as Saul did David's, 1 Samuel 23. 22.) to wit, in
the Garden, (where he had his Agony, and where he began to Expiate that first
Sin Adam had committed in a Garden) of Gethsemane, which signifies, the Valley
of Fatness, there this unparalled Impiety must be perpetrated; this place was
over the Brook Kidron, Joh. 18. 1, 2. and near the Mount of Olives, Luke 22.
39. Mark 14. 32. Here was Christ (1) Apprehended, hence was he Hurried to be
(2) Arraigned in the Spiritual-Court before a full Council of
Corrupt-Churchmen, Matthew. 26. 57. with a great deal of Injustice and
Subornation, ver. 59.60. being Resolved to have his Blood right or wrong; then
is he (3) Condemned in their Court for a Blasphemer, v. 65, 66. then was he (4)
Spitted on in token of Contempt, Numb. 12. 14. Deuteronomy. 25. 9. (5) He was
Buffeted, v. 67. as if he had been their Slave. (6) Blindfolded, Luke 22. 94.
Insulting over him with their mad Mockings, as if he had been but a
Mock-Prophet. (7) they Binded his Hands behind him, (as is done to the
Condemned,) and is sent away by the Consistory of Priests to be put to Death by
the Secular or Civil Power, Matthew. 27. 2. Joh. 18. 12. (8) the Roman-Magistrate
dooms him to be Crucified after the Roman manner, at the Wicked Jews
Instigation: Matthew. 27.22, 23, 26. then (9) was he Striped, v. 26. that by his
Stripes we might be Healed, Isa. 53. 5. (10) he was Stripped, v. 28. that we
might be Clothed, Ezekiel. 16. 10. so was led away to Dye the most Ignominious
Death, as a Traitor to Coesar, and as the Vilest of Men, to expiate Adams Sin,
who would have been as Wise as God; (Lastly,) When Dead he was Buried, and his
Sepulcher made sure and secure both with Seal and Watch, and a great Stone upon
it, Matthew. 27. 64, 65, 66. it is a common saying, Mortui non Mordent, Dead Men
Bite not: but here Christ, though Dead and Buried, Bites and beats Hard upon
those evil Men's Consciences, they could not Rest all the Night before, ver. 62.
for fear Christ should get out of his Grave some way or other, and so Create
them more and further Trouble: And they that had forgot all Christ's other
sweet, savoury, and saving Sayings, (Writing them all in the Sand) could
remember (but for a Wicked Purpose) that which his own Disciples could not so
Readi^y call to mind for their own good and Comfort; no, nor Understand it,
when plainly told them, Mark 9. 31, 32. Those mad Men remember what he had said
about his Resurrection, only because they would gladly have kept Christ in the
Grave still, where now they had him; that they might securely Dance upon his
Grave, and that they might think themselves sufficiently Cock-sure of him. Oh
that we could do all this to the Cursed Body of Sin, what those Cursed Priests
did to the Blessed Body of Christ, would we be of the Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet.
2. 5. made so by Christ unto God, Revel. 1. 6. Exodus 19. 6. Then must we do to
the Body of Sin all these things: (1) Apprehend it. (2) Arraign it. (3) Condemn
it. (4) Spit in its Face. (5) Buffet it Black and Blew. (6) Blindfold it. (7)
Bind it Hand and Foot. (8) Stripe it. (9) Stripp it. (10) Crucify it. (Lastly)
Bury it in a sure Grave, that [Peccata non Redeant] never Rise or Return our
Sin may any more, neither in this World to our Temporal or Spiritual Confusion,
or in the World to come, to our Utter and Eternal Condemnation: All these
Actions are but manifest Duties in Scripture, as 1 Cor. 9. 27. Gal. 5. 24. Romans
8. 13. and 6. 4, 11, etc. Now when Christ was Buried thus surely, the Devil (no
doubt) Danced (for Company) upon His Grave, having made all firm and fast (as
he thought) for ever and a Day: But He that sat in Heaven (saying, Yet have I
set my King upon my Holy Hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. 4, 6, etc.) Laughed at this,
and all this to Nothing, Jehovah had them in Derision: Behold how God
over-shoots Satan in his own Bow: Divine Providence makes use of those very
Means (the Devils Malice used to obscure Christ's Glory) to Render Christ's
Resurrection more Glorious and much less Obnoxious to any Just Exception: That
very Watch which was set to keep Christ Underground and in his Grave, are made
(Nolens Volens) the Trembling Witnesses of his (to them frightful)
Resurrection, they were struck half Dead for bearing and wearing Arms against
God, and so Exposing themselves to his Wrath, Matthew. 28. 4. and 'twas the
Trembling of the Earth, (that now had Possession of Christ, who proved too Hot
a Mouthful for it to swallow, Act. 2. 24.) together with the Apparition of a
Glorious Angel, (Rouling away the great Stone from the Mouth of the Sepulcher,
and sitting down upon it in Despite of the Guard, as a Conqueror) which made
the Watch Tremble, the stoutest of the Devils Champions shrink and shrivel
away, when Christ begins to Display his Glory: Neither the Weight of the great
Stone, nor the Watch of the Stout Soldiers, nor yet the Bands of Death,
(stronger than all, so strong as to hold fast many Millions of Men, from Adam
to this Day, under the power of Death) could Hold the Dead Body of Christ from
Rising beyond his own time. To all those Three Impeding Maladies, God found out
and Applied as many (even Three) most Effectual Remedies: for (1.) The great
Stone that was laid upon the Tomb by Man, was Roul'd away by an Angel: (2.) The
Earthquake makes an Heart-quake in the Watch, insomuch that they (though Sixty
of them, according to Theophylact) are all Affrighted away. And (3) the Deity
of Christ Losed (or Broke) the Bands of Death, Act 2. 24. for Chist being Life
Essential, it was not possible he should be Holden of them, therefore he
Swallowed up Death in Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 54. His Resurrection was to be the
Demonstration of His Divine Nature, Romans 1. 4. and the Foundation of our Faith
and Perseverance, 1 Cor. 15. 14. notwithstanding their malicious Wresting of
Christ's words, [Destroy this Temple of my Body,] yet I will Raise it again the
Third Day, Joh 2. 19. (the meaning of which they Invert) and made it a matter
of Accusation against him, at his Arraignment, Matthew. 26. 61. but after his
Interrment, they take up his Right meaning, and made Advantage of it, for
Secureing him fast in his Sepulcher, calling the Faithful and True Witness,
Revel. 1. 5. and 3. 7. this Cheat, or Deceiver, Matthew. 27. 63. yet the Lord
turns all their Wicked Counsel into Folly, 2 Samuel 15. 31. 1 Cor. 1. 19, 25.
etc. and in the sight and Despite of Sixty Weaponed Witnesses, (After the Sun
of Righteousness had been set in the Grave Six and Thirty Hours, just so long
as the Sun in the Firmament had his Course, stopped on Joshuahs long Day, Josh.
10. 13.) Then did Christ Break the Bonds of Death as easily as Samson did his
Green Withs, Judge. 16.7. and Rose up on the first Day to bring Life and
Immortality to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. upon the same Day that God
had drawn out of that Abhorred Estate of Nothing, and brought the first Light
out of Original Darkness, by his Almighty Word, Genesis 1. 2, 5.

The Twenty-Fifth Plot in the New Testament, against the Church, in Apostles,
Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXV.
AFter a few Days that Christ was Risen out of his Grave, he Rode up to Heaven
as a Conqueror (in his Triumphant Chariot) over Sin, Death, Hell, and Devil,
leading Captivity Captive, that is, Captivating all those Four who had held us
in Captivity, 2 Timothy 2. 26. Just as in the Roman-Triumphs, the Great Conqueror
Rode up to the Capitol in a Chariot of State, and all their Prisoners following
behind with their Hands bound behind them; He Throwing certain pieces of Coin
abroad (all along as he Ascended) to be picked up by the People. Even so our
Lord Christ (that Mighty Conqueror) in the Day of his Solemn Coronation, or
Inauguration into his Heavenly Kingdom, Triumphed over all those Spiritual
Adversaries of his Church, making a show of them openly, Col. 2. 15. as
Tamberlain did (the Great Turk) Bajazet, whom he carried about all Asia, shut
up in an Iron-Cage, to be seen of all Spectators on every side for Scorn and
Derision: And Christ likewise (that the Grandeur of his Glorious Conquest might
be more magnificently Celebrated) gave great Gifts to Men: It Is said he
Received those Gifts before in the Old Testament, Psalm. 68. 18. and he Gave
them now in the New, Ephesians. 4. 8. He Received them, that he might Give them, he
therefore Receives them with one Hand, and Gives them with the other,
Accounting it more Honorable to give than to receive, Act. 20. 35. Now the
Gifts Christ gave to his Church were both Ordinary and Extraordinary, to wit,
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, All Gifted by God, for the
Perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry and for the Edifying of
the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, 12. (...), that is, for the right Joynting
of what ever the Devil may Disjoynt, even to the End of the World, v. 13.
before which, a complete coming up into an Unity of the Faith, and unto that
full Measure of the Stature of Christ (even a Perfection of Grace) cannot be
expected: Hence Christ Insists upon this point, that his going from his
Disciples was as Expedient as his coming to them, Joh. 16. 7. He came to them,
that he might Converse with them in the Flesh, but he must Depart from them,
that he might Conferr upon them his Spirit. Christ had often promised (to send
the Spirit (or Comforter) to them) in his Life time, John 14. 16, 26. and 15.
26. and 16. 7. that they might once observe it as an unparallel Privilege to
have the Spirit (which is the best of all things) powered down upon all Flesh,
(the worst of all things, Hos. 8. 13.) Joel 2. 28. Christ tells them that this
Spirit (whom he calls, Another Comforter, whereof they would stand in need,
(during his Departure) in an Evil World) should be as his Vicar General, with
whom he would leave them in a dark forlorn World, and by whom he would be with
them, (and with their Successors) even to the End of the World, Mat. 28. 20.
Now after his Resurrection, He Breathed on them, saying, Receive ye the Holy
Ghost, Joh. 20. 22. as Adam received Life by Gods Breathing upon him, so the
Disciples received a power of Life and Death, of Remission of Sin and Execution
of Judgment, (as Act. 5. 5. 10.) by Christ's Breathing upon them, or, at least,
this Breathing was a prefiguring-preparation for their further and fuller
Reception of the Spirit upon the Day of Pentecost, which Christ had Promised,
Luke 24. 49. and did perform over and over again, Act. 2. 2, 3, 4. and 4. 31,
33. whereby they were Enabled (as Christ had told them) to do greater Works
than he did, Joh. 14. 12. not for the Manner, they doing all in Christ's Name,
not in their own, nor as Equal with God, but for matter greater, as (1)
Converting Three Thousand Souls at one Sermon, (alas! now not one Soul scarce
is Converted by Three Thousand Sermons) Act. 2. 41. (2) Curcing the Diseased,
not only by a Word speaking, or an Hand touching, but also by the shadow of
Peter passing by, Act. 5. 15, 16. or by an Handkerchief, (only touching Paul,
though at a Distance,) Act. 19. 12. both these had a Sovereign Miraculous (yet
neither of them any Inhaerent) power to Cure Diseases, and to Cast out Devils.
(3) Conversing with all Nations in all their several Languages, Act. 2. 4, 8,
to 11. which they never Studied to learn them at Home, nor ever Traveled Abroad
to gain them. (4) Conferring Corporal Plagues, Act. 13. 11. and Spiritual, 1
Cor. 5. 5. Yea, Death it self, Act. 5. 5, 9, 10. upon Opposers and Disgracers
of the Gospel.

Christ never Hurt any by his Miracles, but Healed all. (5) Conquering a great
part of the World, Reduceing it to the Obedience of Christ, they being the
White Horses on which the Gospel Rode abroad and about the World, Conquering
and to Conquer, Revel. 6. 2. (6) Contracting no Harm by Drinking Deadly Poison,
Mark 16. 17, 18. as John the Apostle, Barsabas, and others did, according to
Eusebius and other Ecclesiastick-Histories: Yea, and Sacred Scripture does
better Confirm, that the Viper about Paul's Hand did not Hurt him, Act. 28. 3,
4, 5. no Doubt but the Devils design here was to have Destroyed him by that
Viper, but he was (as in all his other Plots) deceived and Defeated by Virtue
of that Promise of Christ, Mark 16. 18. Isa. 11. 8. The same God that shut the
Mouths of the Lions for Daniels safety, Dan. 6. 22. did also shut the mouth of
th^s Venomous Beast for Paul's Preservation, and so shut it, as the Devil could
not remove the Muzzle for his Destruction, see Psa. 91. 13. and Luke 10. 19.
Now the Devil beholding the Gospel carried throughout the World upon those
Stupendous Miracles, as upon so many Eagles (or rather Angels) Wings; the
Apostles Working greater Works by the power of Christ's Spirit (Poured out upon
them, Joh. 7. 39.) now in his state of Exaltation; than ever Christ personally
wrought in his state of Humiliation. This made the Devil and with malice, to
see the Gospel Dart it self (as Eusebius says) like a Sunbeam through the
World, rejoicing like a Giant to run its Race, Psalm. 19. 5. and to feel himself
fall like lightening from Heaven down to Hell thereby, Luke 10. 18. Upon this
High Provocation, Satan begins to bestir himself, and to make many Assaults
upon the New Test. Church in the Apostles, etc. both while they kept together,
and when they parted asunder; the Issue of all was this, That Satan (the Strong
Man) was basely Baffled by Christ (the Stronger Man) at every Turn, Luke 11.
21, 22. and was constrained to cast down his Arms. The Devils 1st. Assault and
Opposition against the Gospel, was, when Peter and John had Cured a Cripple at
the Temple-Gate, and thereby their 3000 Converted by the first Sermon, were by
a second made 5000, Act. 2. 4. and 4. 4. Satan Incenses the Sadducees, (who
Denied the Resurrection, Luke 20. 27. Matthew. 22. 23. Act. 23. 8.) that Two
Unknown and Illiterate Men, having no Call from the Consistory of the Priests,
should preach in the Temple the Resurrection of Jesus to the seduceing of so
many Thousand Souls; this was Insufferable, especially to those Sadducees, for
then their Cause and Controversy with the Pharisees about the Resurrection,
would quite be lost: Hereupon they Incense the Priests, who were all also
grieved, (or Sick of the Devils Disease) that the Innocent Blood of Christ
should be laid at their Doors; they complain to the Captain of the
Temple-Garrison, (part whereof was the Watch at Christ's Sepulcher, Matthew. 27.
65.) They all conspire to lay those very Hands (which had been lately Gored
with the Blood of Christ) upon his Two Apostles, and put them in Hold, Act. 4.
1, 2, 3. * Here mark how marvelously the (now Exalted) Messiah Mastered the
Malice of the Devil, and the Malignity of his Instruments; This was the first
Cross Christ's Followers took up, (as Christ had told them, Luke 9. 23.) and he
orders it to be but a light one, they were put [(...), in Custodiam,] into the
Sergeants Ward, not [(...), in Carcer^m.] into the Goal, or Dungeon; Christ
will not have those [Tyrones, or Fresh-Men] young Pupils Tempted above what
they are able, ^ Cor. 10. 13. but Inures them Gradually to the bearing of the
Cross, Crux est Evangelij Genius, the Cross is the Ghost that continually
Haunts the Gospel, Act. 14. 22. and 2 Timothy 3. 12. the first Ghost must not
therefore be over Affrightful. The restless malice of the Adversary calls a
Council (which had the prescription of 1500 Y. Authority, as Aarons Successors.
and which was countenanced by all their Kindred, the more to confirm their
Conspiracy against the Gospel) together with Annas, the same Old Man, no
Changeling from his Condemning Christ: This Convention summons the Two Apostles
to appear before them, in the next Morning (they laying but one Night in their
Sergeants-House) calls them to Confess whether by God's, or the Devil's Power,
whether in Christ's Name, or by the Black-Art, they had Healed the Cripple that
was Born Lame, Act. 4. 3, to 7. The Apostles Apology (by the Help of the
Holy Ghost) was so Convinceing, v. 8, etc. that the Council had nothing to say
in Contradiction, v. 14. This Conviction brought them to a Conference, v. 15.
and that to a Confession, [that all the Country Rang of that notable Miracle,
v. 16. Now they have no power to Punish them, yet to maintain their own Credit
against the light of their own Consciences, they Consult to keep the People in
Ignorance, command the Apostles to Preach no more of Christ, they could not
find a face to do any thing, (though their Fingers Itch'd to do something)
against them, for Fear of the People, save only to Dismiss them with a few
formal Threatenings, which the Apostles (returning to their own Company) spread
before the Lord, that Great Master Controuler, whom they praised for
Disappointing the Devil and his Agents in their Plotting and Plowing Mischief
to the Church, (Job 4. 8.) and for Advancing the Gospel by this Opposition,
Augmenting the number of Believers, v. 4. and Dropping down great Grace upon
them all, as it were out of Heaven, v. 33. and the shakeing v. 31. showed, they
were Christ's young Trees, whom he had (as the Planter does) shaken them a
little, to settle them the more. The 2d. Assault Satan made, was after he had
filled the Hearts of Ananias and Sapphirah, (Two forward Professors, having an
Holy motion at first to sell their possession for Relief of the Needy Brethren,
but Beelzebub soon Fly-blow'd it,) in making them Vilify and Belie the
Holy Ghost, (which the Apostles had received) by purloyning part of the Price,
as if Gods Spirit in the Apostles, could not have discerned the Affront, Act.
5. 1, 2, 3. The Devils Design herein was to Blast the Credit of this new
Profession by the Lies of those Two Rotten Professors, but was Defeated herein
by the dreadful and sudden Death of those Two Hypocrites, v. 5, 10. and the
Church Increased by that Defection of the Two Botches from the Body, and ^y
many mighty Miracles of Mercy (as well as this of Judgment) wrought even by
the shadow of Peter, Act. 5. 6, 11, to 16. Hereupon Satan fills the Sadducees,
etc. again with Indignation, v. 17. the Council now casts the Apopostles into
the common Prison, (among the worst of their Malefactors) v. 18. but in the
Night an Angel of the Lord opens the Prison Doors, and released those (whom
their Adversaries of themselves had released before) with a Command to go
Preach boldly in the Temple, though the Sanedrim sat there; upon which Affront
they were Convented again before the Council, but by the Grave Counsel of
Gamaliel, (Paul's Tutor, who Diswades them by Historical Instances from Fighting
against God) they were Dismissed again with their Lives, yet not without Blows;
then they went away rejoicing, that they were so Highly Graced, by being thus
Disgraced for Christ, v. 19, 20, 21, 23, 28, 34, 35, 38, to 4^. The Wonderful
release of the Apostles (not by Magic Art, or by Bribeing the Keeper, or by
breaking the Prison, but) by the Power of an Angel, (sent as an Officer from
God to let them out of Prison without the Keepers consent) Startled those proud
Priests, v. 23. but Converts them not: Yet afterward so much Conviction shone
upon them, seeing no Counsel, nor might and malice of Man can prevail against
God and his Truth, Prove. 21. 30. Isa. 46. 10. all the Rage of both Rulers and
Ruled (though never so Unruly) were but Vain, fruitless, and frustrate, Psalm.
2. 1, 4. and as Gamaliel told them, Ye cannot overthrow the Counsel of God,
neither you, nor Kings and Tyrants to help you, so one Ancient Greek-Coppy
reads, Act. 5. 39. The Gospel gaining ground (notwithstanding all the
gainsaying of Governors) amongst Grecians as well as Hebrews, Act. 6. 1. it is
said expressly, [A great Company of the Priests were Obedient to the Faith,] v.
7. We read in Ezra 2. 36, to 40. that 4289 Priests, etc. Returned from Babylon,
and that number might well be Increased in Judea now: therefore [(...)] a great
Company may well enough be fixed on them, and on no other; and 'twas a mighty
Testimony from Heaven, that so many (of those ever most Implacable Enemies. and
most Active Adversaries of the Gospel) should be Converted to the Faith and
Truth of the Gospel. I would to God he may give us this Divine Testimony in our
day, We should not Despair of the Worst, God has his time to call even a
Persecuting Saul, and to change him into a Praying and a Preaching Paul: This
Increase of the Word, and of the Number of Disciples, v. 7. Enrages the Devil
to make the 3d. Assault, (beholding also Steven, so full of Faith and Power,
whereby he wrought many mighty Wonders among the People, v. 8.) Hereupon Satan
Incenses the Libertines, which, in the common Notion of the Word, are always
most Desperate Despisers and Destroyers of Truth, as it Condemns
Licentiousness) to Oppose Steven, v. 9. and when they found themselves
over-powr'd by Argument, they Convent him before the Sanedrim, and Suborned
Witnesses against him, (a Lesson they had Learnt from their Master the Devil,
Joh. 8. 44.) who (as they had Instructed them) accused him for Vilisying Moses,
the Law, the Holy City and Temple, v. 10, 11, 13. Where it is enough to Accuse,
even the H^ly Child Jesus Escapes not as Innocent: notwithstanding their
matchless malice against Steven, yet (1) before his Apology, he is miraculously
Vindicated from Heaven, by that Angelical Splendor and Majesty (as that of
Moses, Exodus 34. 30.) Seated in his Countenance, v. 15. which was a most
Convinceing Evidence, 1. of the Goodness of His Cause, 2. of the Greatness of
his Courage, 3. of the Clearness of his Conscience: (2) After his Apology,
(which was full of Wisdom, and of the Holy Ghost) in every Distinct Answer, and
wherein he cuts them to the Heart by telling them, their Killing Christ made
them Worse than their Forefathers, who only had Killed his Prophets, and that
they were Substantial about Circumstantials given only by Moses, but
Circumstantial about those Substantials given of God (himself) by the
Disposition of Angels; Hereupon they in a furious Outrage Stone Steven, who
then had his 2d Vindication, to wit, (1) a clear Vision of Heaven through a
great Shower of Stones, and (2) of his Dear Redeemer in a Standing Posture, as
if Rouzed up from his Sitting on the Throne at the Right Hand of His Father,
and just ready to Revenge the Injury done to his Servant; yea, and (3) Steven
Dies Dignified with a Double Honor, (1) in his place, as Proto-Martyr,
standing first in the Catalogue of all those that wore the Crown of Martyrdom,
He was the Prince and Bel-weather of the Flock that went to Heaven by that
Bloody way in Gospel Times: (2) In his Prayer, the prevalency whereof might
Contribute much to Paul's Conversion, in as much as Saul's Sin (in Consenting to
Stevens Death) was not laid to his Charge for his Utter Confusion; However this
was Honorable at his Death, He stood, while he prayed for himself, this showed
the Greatness of his Piety; but he Kneeled down when he Prayed for his Enemies,
no less will serve for the greatness of their Impiety; he is more concerned for
their Riot than for his own Ruin. The Devils 4th. Assault was in the great
Persecution that followed Stevens Death, which the people quietly suffered: and
as soon as Satan and his Savage Instruments saw the Silence and Tameness of the
Multitude, which had Hitherto Awed them from executing all Extremities: The
Fear of the People (so often expressed) being now evidently Allayed, they fall
foul (not upon the Apostles only, as before, but) upon the whole Church, Act.
8. 1. so that they were all Scattered abroad; and Satan had Saul, a fit Tool to
effect this by, who (1) was Consenting to Stevens Death; it is all one to hold
the Sack, and to fill it; to do evil, or to consent to it: a mind to do evil is
sin in the Seed, which time and warm Temptation may bring forth to Fruit, Jam.
1. 14, 15. there is Heart-Adultery, Matthew. 5. 28. and Heart-Murder, Matthew. 5.
22. Joh. 8. 44. Thus the Cursed Jews became Guilty of all the Bloodshed from
Abel to Christ* by their Allowance and Consent, Matthew. 23. 35. So Saul
(Allowing of Stevens Death) made himself guilty of it by his Allowance: and
that which is more, (according to the Syriack reading) he was both Desirous of
it before, and Delighted in it after: (2) This same Saul was Scholar to
Gamaliel, Act. 22. 3. President of the Sanhedrim) and likely the more Active in
Dancing after the Devils Pipe upon that account; for his Master Gamaliel
(notwithstanding his plausible Speech by which he dismissed both the Assembly
(the Accusers) and the Apostles (the Accused) Act. 5. 34, to 41.) Lived and
Dyed a downright Pharisee, and published that pestilent Prayer, (called, the
Prayer against Christians) which he commanded to be constantly said in their
Synagogues, wherein they Curse the Gospel and the Professors of it: No doubt
but the Tutors Prayer pricked on the Pupils Principles to Persecution: Yea, and
(3) This Pupil became a notable Proficient in this proud Pharisees School, as
we have an Account both from Gods Mouth and his own; (1. From Gods Mouth, Act.
8. 3. Saul made Havoc of the Church, being (as some think) that Ravening Wolf
of the Tribe of Benjamin, Prophesied of by the Patriarch Jacob, Genesis 49. 27.
never any Benjamite Ravened more in Wolfish Worrying. Cruelty than this Saul
(of the Tribe of Benjamin, Phil. 3. 5.) did, who brake into Christians Houses,
Dragged out Men and Women (sparing no Sex) to Prison, (2.) out of his own
Mouth, Act. 22. 3, 4, 19, 20. I was (says he of himself) Metubak or Disciple
to Gamaliel, and aptly learnt from his form of Prayer, [Maledic Domine
Nazaraeis] to Curse Christians [Nazarites, Heretics, Bastard-Gentiles,] in my
Daily Devotion, and I was Zealous to practice (as well as to Pray) against
them, yea, my blind Zeal (which was no better than Metal in a Blind Horse,
than Fire on the Chimney-top, than the Devil in the Demoniack, that threw him
sometimes into the Fire, and sometimes into the Water) so Transported me into
Malice and Madness, that I was as Violent against Christians as the worst of
you are and Act. 2^. 9, 11. I being (says he) exceedingly mad, persecuted them
to Death, and (which was worse) I compelled them (by Cruelties) to Blaspheme.
Thus Saul was fit enough to be Satan's prime and principal Agent in his
Persecuting-Work; and thus far the Devil had a fair Game before him, when the
Church (the first Gospel Church) was Dispersed by his Devilish Instruments; yet
behold, the Lord looks on, and laughs, yea, laughs all to nothing: God
overshoots the Devil in his own Bow here also, and makes Satan (himself) break
his own Design. * God would never suffer Evil to be, or the Devil to do evil,
unless he knew how to extract Good out of that Evil: * Mark the mavelous
Miracle of Gods mercy to Consound the Devils Device in those particulars. (1.)
Satan (with all his Savage Sanhedrims) could not yet Scratch Christ's Apostles
out of their Mansions; it is said expressly, the Twelve stayed by it at
Jerusalem, as in the Furnace, to Cherish and Comfort the Church there in so sad
a time, while Saul was making such Havoc of it. Act. 8. 1, 3. Christ had
commanded them first to Preach the Gospel at Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47. there the
Church must succeed the Synagogue, as the Gospel followed the Law, and there
God marvelously maintained the Twelve Apostles in Safety, even among the midst
of their most pestilential Enemies. (2.) The 120 Ministers mentioned, Act. 1.
15. (more noble than those 120 Princes set over 120 Provinces, Dan. 6. 1. being
of a more Noble Extract, as Heaven-Born, and of a more Noble Employ, as all
Designed to the Ministry, and so became Princes of the Provinces of that
Universal Kingdom of the Gospel) were indeed all Dispersed, saving their Lives
(which Steven had lost) by Flight, yet they Preach all along in all places
where they were scattered, the Dispersed Disperseth the Light of the Gospel
every where; and whereas before they were like Candles tied up in a Pound, and
gave no light, now they are scattered one from another, and one is lighted up
in one place, and another in another, so gave they saving Light to a Dark World
in Despite, yea, and by the Spite of the Prince of Darkness, for that
Scattering Persecution, which the Devil contrived on purpose to smother the
Gospel, God overrules, and makes Use of that very Means to spread it the more.
(3.) Hereby also the Partition Wall was broken down betwixt Jew and Gentile,
Ephesians. 2. 14. Christ had forbid them (before) of going into the way of the
Gentiles, Matthew. 10. 5, 6. and he bid them flee to other Cities when
Persecuted, v. 23. This they do now, Act. 8. 4. being driven from Jerusalem,
they carry the Gospel to the Gentiles, which redounded to the Churches great
Advantage. Ecclesia Augetur, quant^ Magis Premitur. The Church like Israel in
Egypt, the more they were Molested, the more they Multiplied, Exodus 1. 12. The
Church is like the Sea, what Ground it loses in one place, it gets and
gains in another: and thus has often God ordered it, Vnius Ecclesia
Destruction, ceu potius, Dispersio, Multarum fuit Aedificatio, The Destruction
or rather Dispersion of one Church, has been the Aedification of many, as this
at Jerusalem was. (4.) Hereby likewise Satan makes the Jews to convey the
Gospel among the Samaritans, who (of all People under Heaven) were most Odious
to them, Ioh. 4. 9. and 8. 48. The Jews Hated them, because Sanballat (says
Josephus) had opened a Sanctuary in Samaria for all Renegado-Jews, etc. Hence
they called Christ (the worst word in their minds and mouths) a Samaritan; yet
could they not have sent to this People (whom they so much Abhorred) a better
Blessing than the Gospel, thither they Drove Phillip the Deacon, (and one of
the 120) who Industriously Preached Christ unto them, Act. 8. 5. This Corrupt
City, and long bewitched by the Sorceries of Simon Magus, (yet having never
blown upon the Gospel, as the Jews had done) Unanimously Attend and readily
Receive it: And there was great Joy in that City Samaria, v. 8. while nothing
but Rage against the Gospel was found among the Highpriests and great Councils
at Jerusalem: Herein the Despised Samaria exceeded and excelled that (once
Holy) City Jerusalem. (5.) By this means lastly Satan's chief Engineer (Simon
Magus) was quite Cashiered; for though this Conjurer had a long time bewitched
the People, carrying them out of themselves, (as (...) signisies) making them
Adore him as a God, Act. 8. 9, 10, 11. Yet such was the power of God in
Phillips Ministry, that it breaks through all those Difficulties, and both the
Seduced and the Seducer are gained over to it, v. 12, 14. yea, and this Magus
or Master of the Magicians, Simon so far submitted unto Peter's reproof, that he
begs Peter's Prayers for the pardon of his Sin, least he should be smitten with
Death (as Ananias was) by him. The Devils (5th.) Assault against the Church was
in this Ravening Wolf, (Saul aforesaid, not below his Namesake King -Saul in
Rage and Malice, though he was in Honor) who like a tired Wolf well-weary'd
with Worrying Christ's Flock in their Golden-Fleeces, lies down panting for
Breath, Saul yet Breathing, Act. 9. 1. but in as much as he Breathed out
Threatenings and Slaughter, etc. it shows the Vehemently Flameing Heat of his
Hellishly Enraged Heart, who like a Brutish Blood-Hound, being Blooded in the
Butchered Body of Steven, etc. he pursues after others with utmost Outrage,
and when he cannot Glut himself with Blood enough at Jerusalem, He gets
Letters Patent from the High Priest to range abroad and to worry Christ's Lambs
at Damascus, v. 2. The going out of the Gospel from Jerusalem to the Gentiles,
makes Satan Mad, Satan makes Saul Mad; Hereupon he Rides or Runs Post after it,
to reclaim and Suppress it: thus far the Devils Bowl runs well, but now it
meets with a Rubb that casts it quite out of the way, and that which was most
Vexatious, this Rubb falls out, when the Bowl was well nigh got home to the
Jack, even when Saul was come near to Damascus, Act. 9. 3. Damascus (the chief
City of Syria) or Damesec, (signifying, a Bagg of Blood, so called, because
there ('it is supposed) Cain Murdered Abel) was Distant from Jerusalem 160 miles,
or Six Days Journey, Saul was suffered by his Savior to become an Apparitor or
Inquisitor against private Meetings of Heretics, (Christians so called) this
was more than a bare Base Informer; he must get a full Commission for doing
much Mischief by Authority, he must Travel without Disturbance Five Days
Journey, and be also toward the end of his 6th. even near Damascus, and not
one Rub or Remora (we read of) does he meet with in all this Wicked Work and
Wretched Way; and it may be easily Imagined, what Bloody Thoughts this
Blood-Hound (Saul) had Suggested into his Mischievous mind by Satan all the way
as he went: Oh how did he Hope to Pepper the poor Christians with a full
Execution of his Barbarous Designs? Oh how was he Delighted to espy on the Road
his Dear Damascus, (where his Design lay) when he came near to it, and so near
as to behold it? no doubt, but he meant to fill that Bag of Blood (as Damascus
signifies) with a great deal more of the Blood of many Righteous Abels, and he
Resolved to do something in order hereunto before he slept that 6th. Night; but
Behold! in the midst of all those his Murdering Imaginations and Hellish
Machinations, Christ meets him, and Unhorsed him or Knocked him down with a
Thunderbolt, or Flash of Lightning, when almost at his Journeys end, there he
stumbl'd upon that stumbling-Stone, (the Rock of Ages, as well as of Offense)
and falls to the Earth, Act. 9. 3, 4. and it is a Wonder he brake not all his
Bones, and that his Breath was not beaten out of his Body, yea, that his
Carcass was not hung up in Gibbets, (as a public Warning to all Bloody
Persecutors) that the Churches of Christ might have the more Rest and Respite
thereby: No, Christ's thoughts are not as ours; it is True, Christ's Throws and
Blows with his Heavy Hand are Deadly to effect the aforesaid, and his Anger is
Destructive to such as will not Kiss him with a Kiss of Subjection, he says, a
little of his Wrath will make them Perish in the midst of their way, of their
Plots, and of their Lives, Psa. 2. 12. yet lo, together with the Beams of his
Glory, Christ here shows the Bowels of his pity: though now he be in Heaven in
a Glorified Estate, yet has he still his Heart as kindly affected to Sinners
as when he was upon Earth; though he has changed his Honor, yet not his
Nature, he is as kind and loving as ever, yea more, for it is Glorified Love
that is now in Christ, though he now be free from Passion, (as (...), or
incapable of Suffering) yet not at all from Compassion: still has He a kind of
Feeling, as well as Fellow-Feeling, in those Words, Saul, Saul, why Persecutest
thou me? Act. 9. 4. the Head of the Church (Christ) feels himself Wounded in
his Members (the Saints) Christ lives in them, Gal. 2. 20. their Reproaches
are his, Hebr. 13. 13. and their sufferings are his, Col. 1. 24. Saul Hearing
from this Compassionate Christ, that he was but kicking against the Pricks, v.
5. that is, In his mad marching to Damascus, he was but Hurting himself, in
Hurting the Saints, he Truckles and becomes (of a mad Bull of Bashan) Tractable
to Christ's Yoke: * Oh matchless Mercy in Christ, thus to make of a Worrying
Wolf, such a Blessed Shepherd of his Flock of Sheep, Then had the Churches
Rest, etc. v. 31. when the Wolf was changed into a Lamb, yea, into a Pastor or
Feeder and Defender of the Lambs of Christ. God has still this way open
whereby to give Rest to his Afflicted Chruches, He can Convert as well as
Confound the worst of their Persecutors: It Is plain here, Satan lost and Christ
gained the Game. Satan's (6th) Assault was upon Saul (himself) when converted
into Paul, [so called (...) a Cessando] because Christ caused the Flame of
Hellfire to Cease in him; no sooner was the Fire of Hell caused to cease in
Saul, and he become Paul, but presently the Fire of Hell from Satan began to
flame out against him, Tempora Mutantur, etiam and persona, etc. Now Satan's
principal Assaulter of the Church, is become the principal Assaulted by Satan
in the Church: now Satan's prime Apostle, or (as the Word signifies) Messenger,
(with his Credentials and Plenipotentiary Letters-Pattents from the Sovereign
Sanhredrim) for persecuting the Church, becomes a prime Apostle of Christ (with
all Apostolical Qualifications thereunto) for the preserving and protecting of
the Church; this makes the Devil mad against him, and not only to hinder him
at every turn in his Work, (as himself says) 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. but also does
his Utmost not only to Hurt him, yea, and to Hand him out of the way by some
of those often Perils he brought him into, 2 Cor. 11. 14, 24, to 30. Paul
Describes his Perils and Passions both by Sea and Land, by Forraigners and
Domestics (all Satan's Instruments) in a Golden Flood of Eloquence; to which
Demosthenes is but Dull: yet here again the Devil was Defeated in this Design
also by a marvelous Hand of God: for (1.) Paul (after he had been struck Blind
with the Lightning, and was led Blind into Damascus, (which he would so gladly
have seen and been at for persecuting the Christians) to show him he was but
Blind in that Rage against them, and after he had Afflicted his Soul in Fasting
Three Days, and receiving his Sight both of Soul and Body by his Rapture into
Heaven, as some say, 2 Cor. 12. 2.) becomes Insatiabilis Christi Concionator,
an Unwearyed Preacher of Christ, Act. 9. 20, 22. both there and in Arabia, Gal.
1. 17, 18. God Chained up Satan for Three Y. so that he could not Act any
Violence against Paul all that time, God gave him [(...)] sufficient (or so
many) Days, Act. 9. 23. or Three Y. so long a time to Settle, e're he called
him to Suffer; the good Husbandman turns not the crushing Wheel upon his
(tender) Cummin, nor his (hard) Flail upon his (soft) Fitches, Isa. 28. 26.
when Paul was well confirmed in the Faith, then the Devil has leave to stir
up Layers in Wait against him, but God both Discovered it, and (by an Honest
shift) Disappointed it, Act. 9. 23, 24, and 2 Cor. 11. 32. (2) God delivers him
his Danger from the Graecians or Helenists, (Stephens great Adversaries, Act.
6. 1, 9. with whom then Saul was a Collegiate and Companion) who, now looking
upon Paul as an Apostate, by turning Christian, sought his Death, as he (with
them) had sought Stevens, and the more Zealous he was now against them, the
more Enraged they are against him, (more than against Peter, James, etc. in
Jerusalem) and is forced by them to fly to Tarsus for his Life, Act. 9. 29,
30. (3) From those of Iconium, where the Malignant Jews Incensed the Ignorant
Gentiles to Stone him for cutting the City into Contrary Factions, Act. 14. 1,
6. (4) From those at Lystra, whether he sled, and where he Healed the born
Cripple, for which they first Deifi'd him, (a wile of the Devil, tempting him
to accept of Divine Honor) which Device being disowned, then Satan stirrs them
up to Stone him, so that he was Stoned unto Death, as to appearance; yet by a
Divine Miracle he Revived for further Work, Act. 14. 8, 10, 12, 14, 20. (5) God
Delivers him also from the Danger he was in by those at Philippi, (for casting
out a Divining Spirit out of a Gainful Damosel, for which he was both Whipped
and Imprisoned) both by an Earthquake, and by the Conversion of his Jailer,
Act. 16. 12, 18, 20, 23, 26, 30. 34. (6) So likewise he was saved from the
Uproar at Thessalonica, Act. 17. 1, 5. made by the Rascality of the City, which
pursued him to Berea, (where he found Nobler Auditors, v. 11.) and Drove him
thence. (7) He was also Delivered from Demetrius and his Silver-Smiths (that
made Shrines for Diana) at Ephesus, by the Wisdom of the Town-Clark, Act. 19.
23, 28, 35, 39. (8) From those Beasts he found and Fought with, (as at Ephesus,
1 Cor. 15. 32. so) at Jerusalem, where Beastly Men laid hold of him, and would
have Killed him, but the Chief Captain Rescued him from them, Act. 21* 27, 31.
Those Asian-Jews were Satan's Bloodhounds, Chasing Paul from Asia Hither. (9)
From those Forty Bloody Butchers that would have pulled Paul in pieces, binding
themselves under a Curse, that they would neither Eat nor Drink till they had
Killed him. God Defeats the Plot (1. by casting a Bone of Dissension 'twixt the
Pharisees and Sadducees, Act. 23. 7, 8. (2. by the Captains Rescuing him again,
v. 9, 10. (3. by sending a Guard with him to Cesarea; as the first was a Godly
Policy in Paul to Divide his Enemies, so the Two last were Effects of Gods
great Power and Providence in making Heathen-Captains to become Paul's Patrons,
v. 13, 15, 23, 33. (10) God saves him (1) from their Wiles, Act. 25. 3, 4. (2)
from Shipwreck, Act. 27. 44. (3) from the Viper, Act. 28. 5. (4) from Nero the
Lion, 2 Timothy 4. 17. at Rome he Preached Two Y. and Converted some of Nero's
House, and from thence Wrote Epistles to Confirm the Churches to the End of the
World.

Satan's (7th.) Assault was against Peter, the first of the Apostles, against
one of the Prime Pillars of the Church, which the Devil had often been shaking to
throw it down, seeing the Gospel of the Circumcision was committed to him, as
that of the Uncircumcision was to Paul, Gal. 2. 7, 9. both being Equal in
Office and Dignity; God giving them alike Success both to Jews and Gentiles, v.
8. 1 Cor. 9. 1, 23. and 2 Cor. 13. 4, 5. This the Romanists do Deny, though
more Failings be Recorded in Scripture of Peter, than of any other Apostle
whatsoever, Matthew. 16. 23. Gal. 2. 14. Matthew. 26. 70, 72, 74. and Joh. 21. 17,
etc. Yet this Peter, or Cephas, was a great Eyesore to Satan, being always a
stout Stickler, and a Courageous Champion for Christ, therefore does he Desire
leave to put Peter into his Sieve of Temptation, and therein by tossing him too
and fro to make Chafe of him, Luke 22. 31. but the Devil was Deceived and
Disappointed in all his Tossings and Temptings of Peter, by the Prayer of
Christ, v. 32 and by the Power of God: as (1) no sooner had Christ given Peter
the Keys of the Church, (as he did also to all the other Apostles, Matthew. 10.
2. and 20. 24. and 18. 18. and Joh. 20. 23. making them All the Stewards of His
House, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Isa. 22. 22.) Matthew. 16. 19. but immediately Satan tempts
Peter to become as Satan himself, to wit, an Hinderer of Redemption-Work, v.
22, 23. no doubt but Peter had a good meaning in his taking Christ by the Hand
and leading him aside, (as we do an Intimate Friend for imparting some Secret
to him) and in his saying to him, [Master, spare thy self, etc.] Rebuking him
for his carelessness of himself, (being still strongly prepossessed with a fond
Conceit of an Earthly Kingdom) yet (to Humble him under that Honor put upon
Peter, v. 17, 18, 19.) he is called a Devil for his Rash Incogitancy and
Arrogance, as well as Judas is for his Malicious Obstinacy, Joh. 6. 70. He was
the Devils Instrument in Diswading Christ from Dying for his Church, and so
became an Offense to him: Notwithstanding all this, Christ graciously brings
Peter off out of Satan's Sieve, Teaching him his proper place of following his
Lord as a Disciple, and not to Run before him as a Teacher, all along, v. 23,
to 26. and also taking him to his Transfiguration, Mat. 17. 1. as one of his
best Beloved, and 26. 37. (2) When this brave Champion (who out of a
preposterous Zeal could cut off Malchus's Ear with his Sword, that he might
stand to his Master according to his Word) and stout Stickler, stood at the
Door and by the Fire, yet was Daunted by a silly Damosel, Joh. 18. 16, 18, 25.
Matthew. 26. 69, 70. to Deny his Lord Three times, and that with Swearing and
Cursing himself, v. 72. 74. notwithstanding all, Christ had a Look of Love to
melt Peter's Hardened-Heart, Luke 22. 61. he had a Plaster Prepared before the
Wound was Received, v. 32. and he had an Hand to save sinking Peter, Mat. 14.
30. Now when he was like to Shipwreck Faith and a good Conscience, and when
Satan had like to have made Chafe of him (indeed) in his Sieve of Temptation;
through Gods Helping-Hand he comes out good Corn; and when Converted, he
Strengthens his Brethren by his Two notable Epistles. (3.) When Satan sought to
Kill him (after he had been a Marvelous Instrument in long promoting the
Gospel) by his Vassal Herod, (as Bloody as the 1st, Herod, that would have been
a Christ-Killer, and as the 2d. that was John Baptists-Killer) this
Herod-Agrippa was a James-Killer, Act. 12. 2. and according to the Old Trick of
all Tyrants, willing to Curry Favor with the Wicked, by Shedding the Blood of
the Godly, he Attempts to be a Peter-Killer also, v. 3. but Deferrs his
Execution (God overruling his Bloody Intention by his own fond Superstition)
out of Reverence to the Passover, while he had none at all to Gods Sixth
Command, [Thou shall do no Murder,] In the mean time, the Church was hard at
Work in Earnest and Incessant Prayer, v. 5. This set the Prayer-Hearing God at
Work, (yet not till Peter was at the Pits-brink, v. 6.) He sends his Angel,
Awakes Peter, (who had cast himself into Gods Arms in his Sleep) strikes off
his Chains, opens the Iron-Gates, conveys him out in Despite of his Guards,
Peter lives to do the Church much Service, and soon after the Tyrant Dies of a
Lowzy Disease by the Churches-Prayer, ver. 7, 8, 10, 21, 23. to which Peter's
Release, (who was Returned to them in their very Work) and Herod's Dreadful
Destruction, (in the midst of his Glittering Glory) was a Signal Answer.

The Twenty-Sixth Plot in the New Testament, against the Church, in the
Apostles, Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXVI,
THe last and longest Liver of all the Apostles, was, John the Divine, who is
well called the Daniel of the New Test* as Daniel is called the John of the
Old; for as Daniel Wrote not only an History of the Church, what it was in his
Day, but also a Prophecy what it would be after to Christ's first Coming: so
John Wrote 1st. an History of the Church, what it was in his Day, (in the Three
first Chapters of his Revelation,) then 2ly. a Prophecy what it would be, from
his time to the Second Coming of Christ, in all the following Chapters of that
Book from the 6th. to the last, the 4th. (alluding to the Old Test.) and the
5th. (alluding to the New.) being but a Preludium or Preface to his Seal,
Trumpet, and Vial-Prophecy concerning Things that must after come to pass. This
Apostle the Envious One (Satan) Envied above all; 1. because he was Beloved
above all, he was as Daniel, [Ishchamudoth] a Man of Desires and Delights,
greatly Beloved, Dan. 9. 23. Hence is he called the Disciple whom Jesus loved,
Joh. 19. 26. and 20. 2. and 21. 7, 20. Christ loved all his Disciples, Joh. 13.
1. but John more singularly and signally, therefore did he lean on his Bosom,
v. 23. and Christ committed his dear Mother to his peculiar charge; for this he
was the more Hated by the Devil: and (2) for his being a Boanerges, a Son of
Thunder, Mark 3. 17. a most powerful Preacher, whereby he did Thunder down the
Devils Kingdom. (3.) for his joining in Commission with Peter in Cureing the
Cripple, Act 3. and in Confirming the Samaritans, and Conferring upon them the
Gifts of the Spirit, yea, and Confounding Satan's Grand Sorcerer there, Act. 8.
(4.) for his out-Living all the Apostles, (as Christ Intimates, Ioh. 21. 22,
23, 24. who Lived to 120 Y. old,) and so Succes^fully Watering those Churches
in Asia the less, which Paul had Planted; he after Paul's Death comes from
Jerusalem thither, and takes them for his Province and Diocese: Hereupon the
Devil makes his 8th. Assault upon him, so begins his 26th. Plot against the
Church. (1.) Satan stirrs up Domitian to cast John into a Vessel of Boiling
Oil, out of which he came out Unhurt, as the Ancients tell us; however, the
Scripture of Truth truly lays, (2) that he was Banished (by Domitian, at the
Devils Instigation) into the Isle Pathmos, Revel. 1. 9. that he might Preach no
more, he having none to Preach unto in that Desart-place. (3) The Devil sets
upon those Golden-Candle sticks, and Corrupts them most Horribly in this
Apostles Absence, insomuch as (1.) the Church of Smyrna was Pestered with a
Synagogue of Satan, to wit, the Unbelieving Jews, Rev. 2. 9. but (2) more
especially Pergamus, where their Divelish Maliciousness is styled the very
Throne or Seat of Satan, v. 13. and where Attalus (the Devils Agent) had
Martyred Antipas. (3) False Apostles had Worm'd themselves in among them,
pretending Apostolic Power, and perhaps practiceing Magic, to make themselves
look more Apostolical like, Revel. 2. 2. Those troubled the Church at Ephesus,
but they were Tried and found Liars there. (4) other Seducers crept in by the
Devils Craft, (though not by the Magic Miracles of Devils, as the others did,
yet) by the Doctrines of Devils, as that of the Nico Laitans, Rev. 2. 14. and
6. teaching Community of Wives, and that things Sacrificed to Idols might be
Eaten. (5) a Jezabel, (either of her Name, or Nature, or both, was foisted into
Thyatira by Satan, both a Whore and a Witch, therefore she and her Children (to
wit, Disciples) are Threatened to be Destroyed, Revel. 2. 20, 23. (6) Formality
and Hypocrisy had Leavened Sardis, Revel. 3. 1. and (7) Lukewarmness was on
Laodicea, ver. 15, 16. so to be Spu'd out. But mark how God Bassles the Devil
in ali this, by laying limits upon him: Rather than fail, Satan (himself) will
execute the Office of a Justice Rev. 2. 10. Behold the Devil will cast some of
you into Prison, etc. either he acts thus in Person, or (at least) by a Proxy,
to wit, by his Imps and Instruments, yet all Satan's Actings (in the Children of
Disobedience, by whom he Works, Ephesians. 2. 2.) are under a Divine Limitation, as
1. it is but some of them, and not all of them, 2. into Prison, not into Hell,
3. it is only to Try them, not to Destroy them, 4. it is for Ten Days only, not
for Ever: and though the Devil got John the A postle cast into a Vessel of
Boiling Oil, yet he came out thence without harm, as before; And though
Domition (the Emperor of Rome) Banished him to Pathmos, yet there he Wrote
those Seven Epistles to the Seven Churches which were not un-Churched with all
those Corruptions, but are Written to as Churches still, and as
Golden-Candlesticks in those Epistles, wherein sweet Cordials and Comforts are
Intermingled with sundry sad Corrasives and Cordoliums as (1) God threatens the
Removal of the Candlesticks, id est, to another place, not the quite
Extinguishing of the Light set up thereon, Rev. 2. 5. (2) Christ stemms himself
from that Removal, because he saw some Goodness in the Church, v. 6. because
thou Hate, etc. God may do so to England, etc. (3) Deus minatur, ut non
puniat, Ambrose, God Threatens, that he may not Strike, he has set his Bow in
the Clouds, but there is never an Arrow in it, and the Bent of that Bow is
toward Heaven, not toward Earth, or us. (4) Christ says, Fear none of those
things, ver. 10. promising withal a Crown of Life. (5) He promises also, the
Hidden Manna, and the White Stone with the New Name, to wit, Absolution, as
well as Assurance, v. 17. (6) not to lay any other Burden, than what they
already suffered, v. 2. Oh! that God may say so to his Churches in this great
City and Nation. (7) that They shall walk with him in White, Revel. 3. 4. to
wit, in pure Ordinances in a better Day and Dispensation, (8) and have an open
Door, v. 8. yea, and (9) Good Counsel, v. 18. to show they were not
Incorrigible, and (lastly) Christ was not gone from them, much less had
delivered them up unto Satan, but still Walked in the midst of His Golden
Candlesticks, Revel, 1. 13. and standing at the Door Knocking both by Outward
Means, and Inward Motions, by the Hammer of his Word, and by the Hand of his
Spirit, Revel. 3. 20. with those Seven Epistles (together with His own Return
and Personal Preaching to them after the Death of Domition) he marvelously
Repaired, Refreshed, and Established those Seven Churches well-nigh laid waste
by the Cruelty and Tyranny of that Persecuting Emperor. In that Isle also
(whither he was Banished from all Humane Society) Christ came to him and gave
him to Write (not only that Excellent Gospel, so useful for Defense of Christ's
Divinity against the Blasphemies of Cerinthus, etc. And those Blessed Epistles
of His, the 1st. 2d. and 3d. but also) the Revelation of things to come, Rev.
1. 19. and 4. 1. Even all the Wretched Maladies that should befall the Church,
and all the Blessed Remedies for Her Deliverance to the End of the World. Thus
in all this also, God over-Shoots Satan in his own Bow, and left not himself
without Witness, Act. 14. 17. This Bloody Wretch (Domitian) was Murdered by his
own Men and the stiff-necked Jews (which had all along opposed Christ and his
Gospel with the utmost Outrage) were paid Home (at last with Matchless
Miseries, as before, both under Vespasian (the Father) and Titus (his Son) that
were Predecessors to Domitian; and this John only (of all the Apostles) lived
to see (in Despite of the Devil and all his Cruel Cutthroats) the Wrath of
God come down upon those Christ-Killers to the utmost, as Christ had foretold.

The Twenty-Seventh Plot against the Church-Primitive, by the Ten first
Persecutions, Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXVII.
Satan's 27th. Plot against the Primitive-Church was managed by Rome-Heathen,
when now Grown Great under her Coesars, and became the Lady of Kingdoms, and
the Imperious Domineering Mistress of the World: The Provocation was this, 1.
The Churches of Asia were Recovered from their aforesaid Apostasy, (which, it
seems, began in Paul's time, 2 Timothy 1. 15, 16. [All they which are in Asia are
turned from me*] etc. being ashamed of his Bonds,) by John's Ministry. 2. The
Gospel was spread all the World over by the scattered Apostles, at the
Destruction of Jerusalem, (until which, (at least) some of them had their
Residence there,) as by Andrew into Scythia, Phillip into P^rygia, by
Bartholomew into Judea, by Thomas into Parthia and Persia, by Matthew into
Aethiopia, by Simon Zelotes into Mauritania and Africa, by Judas (Brother of
James) into Edessa, by Matthias into Macedonia, etc. but that which provoked
the Devil and his Imps most of all, was, 3. that the Gospel should so Prevail
and Prosper even in Rome it self, where Satan's Principal Throne was, and that
by Paul, who was there a Prisoner at large for Two Years, Act. 28. 16.
Preaching the Kingdom of God, v. 23, 24, 30, 31. whereby the Roman-Gentiles
were brought into the Obedience of Faith, and a Famous Church was Constituted
there of those called to be Saints, whose Fame was spread for its Faith all the
World over by that Resort which was to Rome (the Queen of Cities now) from all
parts of the Earth, Romans 1. 5, to 8. and 16. 19. And still that which was of
Greatest Provocation, is that not only the Beloved of God (therefore Hated of
the Devil) were found in Rome it self, Romans 1. 7. but even in Nero's very
Family, Phil. 4. 22. This Cursed Leaven of Christianity (as they called it) had
not only Leavened Rome, (the best and chiefest City in the world) but also
Caesar's own Royal Palace, which was the best and chiefest Building in that
best and chiefest City: All Nero's Court Rang of Paul the Prisoner and the
Preacher, Hereby the Lord ordered the Futherance of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 12.
13. even where Satan's Seat or Throne was: what could the Court of such a Cursed
Caitiff and Castaway (as Nero was) be, but a Barathrum, and Brothel-House,
abounding with all Abominations, quite contrary to the Prince of Anhalts, which
was called Academia, Ecclesia and Curia, a Court, a Church, and an University.
And what was this, but to Depose the Devil from his Dignity and Dominion, and
to set up Christ in his Throne: No Wonder if this provoked him to do, as John
had foretold in his Seal-Prophecy that, after the White Horse, (with Christ
upon him) to wit, the Gospel had spread it self like a Sunbeam, Conquering
every where, and also Crowned for its Conquests by those Primitive Preachers:
Hac non Successit, alia Aggrediendum est Via: The Devil would then come forth
Riding upon his Red Horse (together with his Black, and with his Pale Horse) to
bring War, Famine, (of the Word especially) yea, Death and Hell too in those
1st. Ten Bloody Persecutions, Revel. 6. 2, 3, 5, 7. This is the 1st. Branch of
the 2d. part of that Book which John divides into Two parts, 1st. an History of
things then present: 2d. a Prophecy of things to come, Chapter 1. 19. Now this Rage
of this Mad Rider was the first of those things that should be hereafter; the
whole of the Prophecy being as a Comedy Represented on a Theater in a Dramatick
Dress, as in Three Acts; the 1. is the Tragical Misery of the Church; 2. Her
Deliverance; 3. Her Doxology, or Magnifying her Deliverer: So that though the
Beginning be the Devils, yet always the End is the Lords, Jam. 5. 11. and that
a Good End for his own Glory and the Churches Comfort. As Daniel Assured the
Church how it should be preserved to Christ's first Coming: so John assures no
less Preservation to Her from his time to Christ's 2d. Coming: Indeed all the
Ten Primitive Persecutors were as Red Horses, whom the Devil Rode upon, (so
Bloody that for every Day in the Y. (excepting one) 5000 were Murdered, as
Jerome Writes) and the 1. was Bloody Nero, that Monster of Mankind,
notwithstanding his [Vtinam Nescirem literas,] I wish, I could not Write my
Name to the Execution of any, during his Plausible Quinquennium, or Five Y.
Reign) whom the Devil spurred up to burn Rome, (his own Imperial City) Singing
upon his Harp (all the Nine Days it was Burning) the Song of Homer, about the
Burning of Troy, and then charged it upon the Christians, to avoid the Odium of
it from himself, who had Hired several Villains to Fire it in several places,
openly casting Firebrarnds (if not Fireballs) amongst the Oyl-Shops and
Drugsters; yea, some of his own Bedchamber were seen to carry Flax, Toe,
Torches, etc. to promote it, and his Pretorian Soldiers (or Lifeguard Men,
did not only further it, but even Threatened those (that Attempted to Quench
it) crying, They knew what they did, they had one to bear them out. * Now the
Christians (many of which Paul Salutes in Romans 16.) goes to the Pot, Yea, Paul
himself, (as he had foretold, 2 Timothy 4. 6. to be his Free Will offering, Phil
1. 23.) in Rome, and all over the Empire, yea, he cut off also many of his
richest Citizens, merely to make up his own Wants out of their Wealth, when he
had wasted his own Treasure. but this made him unsufferable, the Senate
Condemns him for a Traitor, he stole out of the City at Midnight, (having seen
a Blazing-Star preaching from Heaven his fall, and being Affrighted with an
Earthquake, and with most ghastly Apparitions of those he had Murdered) crying
out, Have I neither Friend nor Foe left to Dispatch me? so Drinks a Glass of
Poison, and (as if that had not been enough) he falls upon his own Sword, Dying
Miserably, as he Lived Wickedly. How escaped Peter at Rome, if he sat Bishop at
Rome? (when Nero Burnt it) as the Romanists Affirm: it is more probable he Dyed
by the Mad Jews in Babylon (literal) where he was at the Writing of his 1st.
Epistle, 1 Pet. 5. 13. and which he fore-tells in his 2d. 2 Pet. 1. 14. Suppose
this was Babylon, (Mystical) or Rome, as some Romanists say, (thereby to prove
Peter Romes Pope) then this far-fetch'd-Notion grants Rome to be the Babylon
that has so many Woes against it in the Revelation: It Is not unlikely that the
Jews must Murder Peter, for the Devil made them exceeding Mad with Malice
against the Gospel, immediately before their final Downfall, now knowing their
time was so short) and that in the Caldean Babylon, from whence many (being
conveniently seated) returned not at Cyrus Proclamation, as above, in Chap. 20.
and there became a great people; yea, and that Babylon was the Metropolis of
that Dispersion, to whom Peter Writes, to wit, Pontus, Galatia, etc. 1 Pet. 1.
1. The 2d. Red Horse, (Domitian) follows the fore-Horse of the Team in his
Bloody Plowing, Psalm. 129. 3. in whom there was only this one good, that he
punished Informers, saying, That not to Punish such, were to Encourage them: he
Banished John, etc. The 3d. was Trajan the Spaniard, who Murdered many
Ministers, as Magicians, because of their Miracles. The 4th. was Antoninus
Verus, or rather Severus, Polycarps shining Piety, Justin Martyrs Apology, and
the Prayers of his Thundering Legion of Christians stopped his Career. The 5th.
was Severus, whose Name answered his Nature, this Hellish Horse was Dyed Red
with the Blood of Christians, he poisoned himself at York to end the Dolor of
his Gout. The 5th. Maximinus, who Eat Fifty pound of Flesh at a Supper, and for
his Drink, he must have the Blood of Saints, especially of Ministers, saying,
Kill the Captains, and their followers fall too. The 7th. Decius, who Murdered
Millions, yet being beaten by the Goths, leaps into a Whirlpit, where his Body
was never found. The 8th. Valerian, whom an Egyptian Conjurer made Cruel,
because he could not Conjure in the presence of Christians: Sapores takes him
Captive, and justly made a Footstool of him. The 9th. Aurelian, who was
frighted from it by a Thunderbolt falling hard by him. The 10th. Diocletian,
the Devils last Bite was the worst, yet God Preserved and Increased His Church
by all, having all along Lucid Intervals, and Testimonies from Heaven against
all those Tigers, none of them Dying a Dry Death, but like the Devils Red
Posthorses, all Posted away to Death and Hell, (their proper place) the Pale
and the Black Horse must follow the Red, the Lord said it, Revel. 6. 5, 7.

The Twenty-Eighth Plot against the Church by Arrianisine: Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXVIII.
NOw when (after the 2d. 3d, and 4th. Seal bringing War, Famine, Death, and
Hell) the 6th. Seal had brought an Earthquake upon the Pagan-Roman Empire,
(for bringing so many Souls Under the Altar in the 5th.) even such Horrible
Commotions and Confusions, (for the Ten Persecutions,) Insomuch as the
Persecutors Killed one another, Rev. 6. 4, 9, 12. The Reward they all got, was
only [ut Citius Interficerentur] to be Cut off the sooner: Then the 7th. Seal
brings in Silence in Heaven for half an Hour, Rev. 8. 1. that is, some little
Breathing time of Rest and Peace, which the Church (called often, The Kingdom of
Heaven) had when Constantine came to the Crown Imperial: This was 1. as a
Doomsday to the Dunghill D^ities; and to the Chemarims or Chimney-Chaplains
of Rome-Heathen, as Described, Rev. 6. 12, 13, to the end; but 2. 'twas a Day
of Refreshing, (...), Refrigerationis, a Cooling time to the Church after Hot
Persecutions, Act. 3. 19. 'twas a Time of Restitution of all things, ver. 21.
Now the Church Militant on Earth became (as it were) Triumphant in Heaven: This
Constantine was the Man-Child which the Church brought forth (by her Prayers)
and which the great Red Dragon would have Devoured, Rev. 12. 1, to 5. (1) He
was the Answer and Fruit of her prayrs; She had been a Garden Enclosed, a
Spring shut up, and a Fountain Sealed, to wit, under Restraint, and even in
Fetters (as the Word signifies) all the time of the Ten Persecutions, Cant. 4.
12. Hereupon she prays for an Enlargement by the Blowing of the North Wind upon
her, that her Spices (not still Destroyed by all her Sufferings) might slow
forth, v. 16. It may be read, [Awake, O Northwind, and come Southwind,] to cool
my hot persecutions; God Answers, the Northward arises, (even Constantine Born
at York, in the North) comes into the South, breaths upon her with a Blessed
Gale, Eats and Drinks abundantly of her fruits, and thereupon the Devil began
his 28th. game, when the Church is lulled asleep upon the Lap of Ease and
Honor, Cant. 5. 1, 2. The Lamb (Christ) opening the 7th. Seal, brings forth
the Seven Trumpeis, Rev. 8. 1, 2. Those sounded such a Dreadful Alarm with
their Thundrings against the Roman-Pagan-Empire, (now ready to be Ruined, at
the earnest suit of the Martyrs, Rev. 6. 10. by the Christian Emperors,) This
Awakened the Church, whose heart was awake even while she Slumber'd or Slept,
Cant. 5. 2. yet for her thorow-Awakening, the same Angel of the Covenant (that
had Perfumed her Prayers, Rev. 6. 10. with his own sweet Odours, Rev. 8. 3, 4.)
lets out again the Angel of the Bottomless Pit upon Her in the Arrian Heresy,
for out of the same Cen^er he scarters the Fire of the Altar abroad upon the
Earth, ver. 5. Insomuch that the Arrian Bishops persecuted the Orthodox with
most monstrous Malice and Malignity; especially in the times of Constans,
Constantius, and Valens the Arrian-Emperours, this might be the Hail and Fire
mingled with blood after the 1st. Trumpet, v. 7. and till that Woe was over,
one part of the Answer to the Martyrs Prayer was, that they should Rest yet for
a little season, until their Fellow Servants were Killed by those Cursed
Arrians, Rev. 6. 11. and under this 2d. Period of Events, it may be said, (at
least by way of Exemplification) (as in the 2d. and 3d. Trumpet, Revel. 8. 8,
13.) that a great Star fell from Heaven, to wit, Arrius a great Mountain fell
into the Sea, to wit, his Heresy, who being in the Gall of Bitterness
(himself) did not only Embitter the Doctrine of the Church, but turned it into
blood, making it plainly Mortal to Drink of, and Destructive to the Soul by his
Denying the Deity of Christ (in his turning (...) Possessed into (...) Created,
Prove. 8. 22. as if Christ were only a mere Creature, and not (...) God-Man, as
if Jacobs Ladder (Christ) had not Two Sides, and a top and a bottom, to wit,
his Divine and Humane Nature, as if he were only (...), like-God, and not also
(...), Coequal, Co-Essential with God, Ioh. 10.30. the Express Image of his
person, Hebr. 1.3. in whom the Godhead dwell'd bodily, Col. 2. 9.) this his
making Christ, only a Diminutive-God was a Soul-Damning Doctrine, for this is
the Rock and Foundation of our Faith, (that Christ is God-Man) Matthew. 16. 16.
Ioh. 1. 1. Phil. 2. 6. If we believe it not, there is no Heaven to be had for
us, 1 John 5. 20. Therefore this Truth Men must hold as their Lives, that
Christ (1) has the Incomunicable Attributes of God, Joh. 8. 58. and 20. 28. as
Eternity, Joh. 1. 1, 3, 9, 11, 14. and 17. 5. Infiniteness, Joh. 3. 13.
Omniscience, Joh. 2. 24. and 2^. 17. (2) that He is one with the Father in
Essence and Power, ^oh. 10. 30, ^8. and 14. 23. (3) Doing the Works of God, as
Creation, Ioh. 1. 3. Conservation, Ioh. 5. 17. Matchless Miracles, Ioh. 7. 31.
and 8. 32. (4) and taking to himself Divine Honor, Ioh. 9. 38. and 14. 1. and
20. 28, etc. Now Arrius in Denying the Deity of Christ, Denied the Redemption
of the Church, for it is not the Work of a mere Mortal, but of a Divine Power to
take away the sins of the World, and to satisfy the Curse of the Law, and the
Wrath of God, for them. The Express Image of God must restore that Lost Image
in Man. The Son of God, (...), by Substance must Recover Adam (the Son of God,
Luke 3. last.) and all Believers to be the Sons of God, (...), by way of
Privilege only, Ioh. 1. 12. No Wonder then that this Doctrine of Devils did
Darken (as it is said, Rev. 8. 12.) the 3d. part of the Sun, (the Prelates) of
the Moon, (their Curats) and of the Stars, the Common-Professors. Under the
4th. Trumpet, accordingly it may be said, That this Arrian-Heresie was that
Flood which the Dragon (when Dethroned by Constantine, the Churches chief
Champion) cast out of his Mouth to Drown her for bringing forth such a
Man-Child, Rev. 12. 9, 15. which Flood was so Impetuous and Universal an
Innundation, [ut totus Mundus Ingemuit, and se Arrianum Miratus est.] The whole
World Groaned under the Pressure of it, says Jerome: the Devil did more
Mischief to the Church by the Arrian-Hercticks, than ever he had done by
Pagan-Persecutors. Still the Devil (or Dragon) cannot carry His Game, and it is
a Wonder he did not, considering, How the Roman-Emperours (who had so lately
given their Names to Christ) might have cast of all Profession of Christianity,
when they saw such Desperate Digladiations and Bloody Contentions among
Christians (so called) about so abstruse (yet fundamental) a point; yet God
overruled this (enough probable) occasion of Offense, he fixed Constantine,
Martianus, Theodosius, Sen. and Jun. Arcadius, Justinian, etc. to Suppress it;
though Constantine (himself) Declined in his latter Day, through his Sister
(Constantia's) Influence upon him, and by Arrius's Cheat in Subscribing and
Swearing to the Nicen Creed, (when he meant both to another under his Arm, a
right Jesuits Trick) whereby he was owned by the Emperor; yet could not this
Wretch so cheat the Great God, who set this Black Brand upon him, that when he
was going in great pomp to be Reinvested into his Church at Constantinople, (by
the Command of his Cheated Constantine) and stepping aside to Ease himself, his
Excrements, Guts, and Soul, went all out together; this was [ut Precationis
opus, non Morbi] the effect of faithful Prayers, (calling for full and final
Vengeance) rather than of any former Distemper; for Alexander (the good Bishop
of that place, and fearing his Return) earnestly Prayed (the Night before) that
God would prevent it, and this was Gods Answer; He, who had made so Dreadful a
Rupture in the Church, (Christ's Body) Dies (himself) of a Dismal Rupture, by
his Bowels and Life breaking all out together. Thus the Lord Branded this
Wretch, as he had done Judas, Act. 1. 18. [(...), All his Bowels gushed out,
because he had no Bowels for his Master in Betraying him] and worse, for that
Rupture (Cum quodam Singulari Crepitus fragore, coming off with a great Crack,
as the Word signifies) befalls Judas, when he had gone sneaking to confess his
Sin to the Priests, Matthew. 27. 3, 4. (which yet were but Miserable Comforters)
but this be fell Arrius as he was going in his Pontisicalibus, and proudly
strutting to reassume his Dignity, out of which he had been Ejected, even then
did he send out his Soul (wrapped up, as it were, in his Excrements) to be his
Harbinger unto Hell to provide Room for his Body: * By this (1) Divine
Testimony against Arrius, many were Admonished and Renounced their Arrianism.
(2) The like Testimony God gave against that Grand Arrian Emperor, Valens (who
Consulted with the Devil about his Successor, and the Older, the fiercer
against the Church) when about Subscribing an Edict to Banish Basil, his Hand
was smitten with such a Trembling, that he was forced to desist; and when
(both) Beaten and Wounded by the Goths, and flying into an obscure Cottage to
dress his Wounds, these Barbarians (the Goths) pursued him thither, and there
Burnt him Alive with the Cottage, to leave his Name a Curse to all Ages:
Besides (3) the Church had and Heard the Voice of her beloved Knocking, even
while she was Sleeping under Arrianisme, Cant. 5.2. that her Heart might be
kept Waking by all Her Woundings from the Heritical Watchmen, v. 7. Christ put
in his Hand by the Hole of the Door, v. 4. in stirring up so many Orthodox
Emperors, who all were Nursing Fathers to the Church, Isa. 49. 23. calling
Synods 1. against Arrius Denying the Deity of Christ; 2. against Nestorius
Dividing the Persons in Christ; 3. against Eutiches Confounding their Natures,
4 against Macedonius Denying the Deity and Person of the Holy Ghost. And for
this very Cause of Comforting the Church, that She might not Sink under her
many and sad Sufferings: the 7th. Chap. of the Revelation, seems to be
Interlac'd (in the whole of it) betwixt the 6th. and 7th. Seal; wherein is
expressed (1) Gods great care in preserving a competent Company, even 144000
Sealed Servants, v. 4. a great Multitude, v. 9. and more than most thought they
had been, in Despite of the Devil. (2) Gods great kindness in causing those
Sealed Servants to Triumph before the Throne with their Palms in their Hands
over all their Persecutors, v. 9, 10. unto which Songs of Praise the Angels say
Amen, v. 11, 12. See more of Gods Care and Kindness in the close of Chapter 29th.

The Twenty-Ninth Plot against the Church, by Mahometism, Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXIX.
THE Devils Twenty-Ninth Plot against the Church was Mahometanism in the
Eastern part, as Antichristanism was his Thirtieth in the Western: Those Two
Sister-Sins, and Born from Hell beneath, (quite contrary to Christianism, which
is Born from Heaven above, Ioh. 3. 3, 5.) were indeed Two Twins and
Contemporaries, having their Birth and Beginning (much what) at the same time
in the 6th. Century, for Mahomet (that grand Arch-Impostor, and Boniface, that
proud purchaser of Supremacy (by Symony) of the Parracide Phocas the Emperor)
brake forth (almost) both together, being (both of them) appointed by God to be
a Scourge, the former, to the Eastern-Church, and the latter to the Western:
Now because Arrianism had prevailed in the Eastern part, and the Cessation
thereof brought Pride, Luxury, Superstition, and Idolatry into that Church,
insomuch that then John of Constantinople claimed the Title of Universal
Bishop, which Gregory of Rome (Boniface's Immediate Predecessor) earnestly
withstood: Then it was that the Spouses Beloved had withdrawn himself, as
ashamed to own her, who was ashamed to own him in the Naked Simplicity of the
Gospel, and not to be Clothed with the goodly Coat of Humane Ceremonies, Cant.
5. 3. 6. and then it was that Christ (thus Offended) loses the four Angels,
(to wit, the Mohammedan Tetrarchy) the four Sultans of Asia, Aleppo, Antioch,
and Damascus; or those four fierce and potent people, the Arabians, the
Saracens, the Tartars, and the Turks, called (all) Angels, as they are
Messengers of Gods Wrath, and Instruments of Christ's Justice, who has power to
bind and loose them at his pleasure, even from the four Horns of the Altar, or
from any of the four Quarters of the World, Revel. 9. 13, 14, 15. those were
all at an Hours Warning, at any time [for an Hour and a Day] whenever Christ
would Command those fierce and fell Creatures out of their Caves, (wherein he
had hitherto shut them close up like Tigers or Band-Dogs) out they go to their
Spoil and Rapine, and do Drive Christianity out of the East, and Destroy the
3d. part of Men, (to wit, of such as were not Sealed, Rev. 7. 3.) with his Vast
Armies, and great Guns, such as were those Two monstrous Spet-fires, called,
the Earthquake, and Grand-Diabolo, or Great-Devil, such were planted against
Rhodes and Constantinople, etc. This is the 2d. Woe of the 6th. Trumpet,
following the 1st. Woe of Arrianism, yet Differing from the 3d. Woe of
Antichristianisme, which wages War against the Sealed Ones, against the Saints
is the Beasts War, Rev. 13. 7. This Woe is the great Land-Leviathan (as the
Whale is at Sea) that Devours all before it, Considerable (1) in its Author
Mahomet, whom some Historians call the Sworn forerunner of Antichrist; Sure I
am, he is his Fellow-runner, running in parallel Lines, the one ruining all the
East and South, and the other all the West and North: and it is as sure that
this Dirty Dog or Hell-Hound licked up the very Excrements of Arrius (which
carried out his Soul in the Jakes) from Sergius the Monk, who because he was an
Arrian had been Banished from Constantinople into Arabia, where he taught
Mahomet to Deride Christ's Deity, and to make a Laughing Stock of the Mystery of
the Trinity; and where also they Club'd both their Wits with the Devil in
Composing the Alcoran, (which signifies in the Arabic, The Glory) that
Shameful Cento and Non-sensical Poisonful Gallimafry out of Christian, Jewish,
and Heathenish Writers, that something might be in it to Tempt the Gust of all
those Three, especially it being wholly accomodated to gratify all Carnal
Affections: And this Mock-Messiah, that he might make many Proselytes, cries
himself up as a greater Prophet than either Moses or the Messiah, and the
better to Impose this Belief upon the Credulous People, he plays Three
Legerdemain Tricks, the (1.) was, when his Debauchery had brought him into an
Epilopsy, His Fits of the Falling Sickness (he said) were his Divine Raptures
wherein he Conversed with the Angel Gabriel: the (2) was, his Training up a
Dove to pick Wheat out of his Ear: This he Blasphemously professed to be the
Holy Ghost, which Dictated his Alcoran to him: and the (3.) was, his breeding
up a tame Bull to that Familiarity with him, that no sooner heard he his
Masters Voice, but he would Run to him and lay his Head upon his Masters Lap
after a most familiar manner: At a set time upon a Friday He promises a
Miracle from Heaven to a great Assembly; His Bull has the Alcoran fastened
between his Horns, and set in a convenient by-place, when the Scene was Ripe,
Mahomet lifts up his Voice, his Bull Immediately runs, makes his Way through
the Throng, lays both his Head and the Book upon his Masters Lap, whereby 'twas
cried up as coming from Heaven. (2ly.) The Extent of it is considerable both
as to Place and Time; 1. as to Place, Mahometanism is extensive, having spread
its self over the Seacoasts of Africa, almost all, saving some small places,
but much more in Asia, Running down the Golden-Candlesticks, and removing them
as Christ had threatened, Rev. 2. 5. Yea, and in Europe also, from some part of
Hungary to Constantinople in Greece, etc. In all those places thrusting out
Christianity, and changing the Cross into the Half Moon. 2. as to Time it is
Extensive; This Plot of the Devil has lasted longer (to the Churches Disquiet)
than ever any of his other Designs aforesaid, for this has lasted above a 1000
Y. not only to the Grievous Vexation of the Church, but also to the great
Dishonor of Christian-Princes, who, had they spent the 10th. part of that
Blood and Treasure, (which they have shamefully and sinfully spent upon one
another in their private Animosities) might have by their Unanimity and United
Armies given a Stop long ago to the Growing Grandeur of this severe Scourge of
Christendom: It Is True, some Expeditions were made herein, but all were soon
Blasted, and no better could be Hoped, upon a Twofold Account, (1) from the
Original, 2. from the Instrument of the Holy War. 1. The chief Original was the
Pope's Successively (though not Successfully) Hopeful Promoters all, to wit,
such as (1st.) Pope Adrian, (who was Choked with a Fly at last, perhaps it was
Beelzebub the King of Flies, that flew into his Mouth, and could not be got out
with Medicines) gave both his Commission and his Benediction to Frederick, the
1st. Emperor for Undertaking this Holy War, (so called) yet could be so
Incensed against him, only because the Emperor (being not (as he said for
himself) Used to that Kind of Drudgery) Held not the Popes Stirrup
(Hostler-like) upon the Right side; besides many other Injuries. (2) Pope
Alexander's Indignities he put on this Emperor, were Worse, (to say nothing of
his Betraying Frederick into the Sultans Hand, by sending him his Picture,
etc.) who set his foul Foot upon the Emperors fair Neck, and said the Psalmists
Words, [Thou shall Tread upon the Serpent and Adder, etc.] and the Emperor
Replying, [Non tibi, sed Petro.] The Beast goes on, crying, It belongs to me,
as well as to Peter: But above all, (3) Pope Vrbanus in Animating the
Christians against the Turks, at his Placen^ia-Synod, where Alexius (Emperor of
the East) made his Complaint by his Ambassadors, that the Mahometans had got
his All in Asia from him, yet Dealt he most Treacherously with the Western
Emperors Forces, by mixing Lime with their Meal to Poison them; and this Pope
was so Troublesome to the over-Obsequious Emperor, because he Honored not his
Holiness in all his other Projects also, that he would needs Excommunicate him,
hence got he his Name Vrbanus changed into Turbanus, for being so Troublesome;
yea, Frederick the 2d. fared no better than Frederick the 1st. aforesaid, who
though he frighted the Turks into a Peace very Advantageous to the Christians,
yet all this could not Content (4) Pope Honorius, (5) Pope Gregory the 9th. (6)
Pope Innocent the 3d. (7) Pope Coelestin; but the poor Emperor, for all his
good Service in the Holy War, was Excommunicated about Five times,and
Sequestered from all his Royalties, and this must be Ratified by a Bull,
(commanded (in stead of a Sermon) to be Read in every Church) beginning thus,
Ascendit ^ Mari Bellica Bestia, etc. the Words of Revel. 13. 1. so well his
Holiness could point out the Accomplishment of that very Prophecy: The
Benediction of such Popes (as those) was more like to bring a Curse than a
Blessing upon the Undertakers in this Holy War, especially considering Four
things. (1.) The Design of those Popes in sending those their Humble Servants
(the Emperors) abroad into the Holy Land; was, that they, being not only
absent, but also Weakened by War, might give unto them a better Opportunity of
Usurping their Desired Dominion and Tyranny at Home. (2) Besides, that
Expedition into the Holy Land has been notoriously Hindered by the Damnable
Dissentions and Contentions of the Popes one with another for Peter's Chair,
insomuch, that the Emperors have been sundry times sent for into Italy, and
there found it a very Difficult Work to keep the Peace among the Popes, without
whose Mediation, the very Popes themselves (by their many Schisms and
Animosities) would Infallibly have pulled the Infallible Chair all to pieces.
(3) There was likewise another Avocation from that Expedition, to wit, The
Deadly Fewd (that then was in its Height and Predominancy) betwixt the Guelphs
(the Popes party) and the Gibellines, (the Emperors) the former Mortally
hateing the latter, and had a more willing mind to Imbrue their Hands in the
Blood of the French, (as they did in the Sicilian Vespers) and of the
Imperialists, than of the Mahometan-Turks; Now while the Black and the White
(as those Two Factions were called) made all Red about them with Blood at home,
the Holy War abroad was not likely to Prosper. (4) Such was the Notorious
Extravagancy of the Popes in all manner of Villainy, that it is a just Matter of
Inquiry, whether the Grand Seignior with all his Mahometan-Saracens, did not
less Hurt to the Church and Christianity in the East, than the Popes Unholy
Holiness with his Cruel Croysado's did in the West: thus for the Original. The
2d. Account is from the Instrument, which was Peter the Hermit, the grand
Trumpet to this Holy War, who was better Acquainted with Sounding Alarums to
War, than with lifting up his Voice like a Trumpet in Preaching the Gospel of
Peace; In a word, If he were not the same Man, yet was he very like that same
Peter the Hermit, whom (the Centurists say) was a Magician, who told King John
of England, That upon Ascension-Day he should be cast out of his Kingdom, and
he Pawned his own Life to assert the Truth of his Prophecy: for an Experiment
hereof the Hermit is Imprisoned from January to June the 24th. and then
nothing Happening to K. John according to his Prediction, he was taken at his
Word, and Hanged up for a Fool, etc. Much more concerning this may be seen in
Fuller's Holy War, which I have not by me to Consult with. No Wonder then, If
this Expedition, against the Turks, (both the first Five and all others after)
had no better Success: When the Roman-Bishop (who was the Grand Promoter of it)
did Pollute both the Eastern (yea, Jerusalem it self) and the Western Church
with all kinds of Idolatry, which the very Turks Abhor; yea, and changed the
Ecclesiastical Office of Episcopacy every where, into a mere Political or Civil
Administration, and the people generally (in that Day) Loved to have it so.
Jer. 5. 31. This drew on the Curse of God upon them, and not a Blessing,
especially when that Bloody Beast or Bishop Delighted more in Drinking the
Blood of the poor Waldenses and Albingenses, (for Differing from him in some
Popish points) than the Blood of the Saracens (who were professed Enemies to
the Christian Religion) in the 11th. Century, and the Blood of the Pauperes De
Lugduno, the poor Men of Lions in the 13th. Century, when there had been no
less than Twenty-Eight several Schisms in the Romish Church, all which could
not but exceedingly Hinder the Success of the Popes Holy War.

It Is True, Mahometanism has already Afflicted the Church longer than (1) the
Egyptians did, which was at most but 430 Y. or (2) the Assyrians, which (from
first to last) was not above 300 Y. or (3) the Pagan-Roman from Nero to
Constantine, which was about 260 Y. or (4) by the Arrians, which lasted about
300 Y. (to say nothing of other smaller terms of time) for it has lasted above
a 1000 Y. (as before) already, and how long it may still last, the Lord alone
knows, yet (for the Comfort of the Church) he makes her to know, not only
in the general, that it shall not last for Ever, but more particularly, that
(1) it is Limited as to Time; the same Divine Power that (first) Bound up those
Band-Dogs, and (2ly.) Loosed them out of their Chains and Muzzels, both can and
will (3ly.) Call them off from their Worrying Work, and Bind them fast up again
in his Chain and Muzzel at his own due time, the Rod of the Wicked shall not
always Rest upon the lot of the Righteous, Psalm. 125. 3. Though this 29th. Plot
of the Devil against the Church has been a long-lasting Plot, as History
shows, yet Prophecy plainly Prognosticates its End, and so it shall not be
Ever-lasting; the Devil will lose this Game also at last, for God has Limited
the time of it, how long those Four Evil Angels, or Messengers of his Justice
(being indeed Incarnate Devils) shall be losed, to wit, for an Hour and a Day,
a Month and a Year, Revel. 9. 15. from which Words Mr. Brightman gathers,
that the Turkish Empire shall last no longer than about 1696. (See my Discovery
of Antichrist, Page 115. line 12. for that Y. and Page 21.) However it holds
out, that there is a Divine Determination in particular, even to a Year, a
Month, a Day, and an Hour, when this Plot and Plague shall be Determined: And
if Gog and Magog (mentioned Ezekiel. 38. and 39. and Rev. 20. 8.) have Relation to
the Great Turk, as is supposed, then we have an Account of his End: Ezekiel is
bid to set his Face against Gog, and say to him again and again, (for the
better Support and Comfort of the Church) All thy Possession in the Lords Land
shall be a Grave only, Ezekiel. 38. 2, 14. and 39. 11. One of the last Enemies of
the Church before Christ's first Coming, was, that Heathen Antiochus, and God
brought him down to his Grave: So one of the last Enemies of the Church before
the 2d. Coming of Christ is this Mohammedan Adversary, and as sure as God
Dispatched the former, he will the latter also. (2) God would have his Church
to know also, that the Great Turk is not Absolute, to do all what he will, but
only what God will; he cannot Conquer beyond his Commission, nor Kill beyond
it; his Commission was Limited, not only 1. as to Time, as before, but 2. as
to Persons, he must not Kill all before him as he would do, no, it is only a
3d. part of Men, to wit, only such as were not Scaled, Revel. 7. 3. God would
Hide his Sighing ones from him, Ezekiel. 9.4. and 6. Come not near any upon whom
is the Mark, what ever is Sealed is excellent in its kind, as Hordeum Signatum
is Excellent Barley, Isa. 28. 25. These Sealed and Sighing Ones (that Sighed
both out of Pity and out of Piety for the Abomination of the Times) were the
Precious Sons of Sion, and the Excellent Ones of the Earth, Lam. 4. 2. and
Psalm. 16. 3. they are Gods Darlings, and Heavens Favorites, therefore the Turk
must not Touch those Anointed Ones, Psalm. 105. 15. they are Sacred Persons, to
Touch these is to Touch the Apple of Gods Eye, Zech. 2. 8. and that is a tender
part, God will not suffer it. It Is very Observable, that as yet, the Turk has
not done much Harm to the Reformed Churches, (those Sealed Ones,) all the Hurt
he has done is mostly upon the Supercilious Greeks, and the Superstitious
Romists, They both Providentially lying betwixt the Protestants and the Turk:
and it is Italy, Italy (from whence Principally the Popes Holy War was Promoted
against him) is the main Mark he Shoots at.

(3) This Eastern Antichrist is Limited as to Place also, for though he be that
Land-Leviathan, who has Swallowed up many Countries, (as the Whale does
Fishes) to wit, (1) the Name and Empire of the Saracens, (2) the most Glorious
Empire of Greece, (3) the Renowned Kingdoms of Macedonia, Peloponesus, Epirus,
Bulgaria, Servia, Boznia, Armenia, Cyprus, Syria, Egypt, Judea, Tunis,
Argiers, Media, Mesopotamia, with a great part of Hungary, as also some part of
Persia, all Chaldea, etc. in a Word, a great part of Asia, Africa, and Europe,
as before; Yea, Keckerman says, Mahometanism is more and larger spread than
Christianity, yet never could he yet set his Foot upon any part of America, God
puts an Hook into this Leviathan's Nose, Job 41. 1, 2. so that he cannot
Conquer the Gold Mines of the Indies, nor the Golden Gospel of Christendom: The
Great Power of God has set Bars and Bounds to him, saying, Thus far shall
thou go, and no further, and here shall thy proud Waves be stayed, Job 38. 10,
11. and in Due time God will break the Head of this proud Leviathan in pieces,
and give him to be Meat to his People Inhabiting the Wilderness, Psalm. 74. 14.

(4) God would have his Church to know, that the Grand Seignior is Limited also
as to things, he cannot do every wicked thing he would do, he would Undoubtedly
Blow out the Light of the Gospel, and lessen the Limits of the Church of God,
but this God will not permit him, saying to those Churches of Asia, Repent, or
I will Remove thy Candlestick, Revel. 2. 5. It Is Christ's Work, not the Turks to
do, and though this be done now by the Turk, not only to them Seven, but to
all the other mentioned in Scripture, (except the Roman, which He Daily
Threatens) yet all this is done by Commission from Christ, as a Punishment for
their Apostasy, (which Paul both told and foretold, 2 Timothy 1. 15. Act. 20. 29,
30.) yet was it only a Blowing away the Gospel, and not a Blowing it out, The
Candle was not put out, only the Candlestick was Removed, The Kingdom of
Heaven was taken from them, Matthew. 21. 43. It was not Lost or Destroyed, but
Given to another place: Thus the Church is still like the Sea, what it loses on
one side, it gains upon the other; what ever it lost in Asia then, it has
Gained in America since, It goes with the Sun from East to West.

(5.) And to know, that though the Western Church were not wasted by the Turk,
(as the Eastern was for Idolatry) yet would she not be Warned thereby, nor
Repent of her Idolatry, Revel. 9. 20. (that must be meant of Romanists, for
neither Jews nor Turks (much less Protestants) make Images for Worship) and
therefore Reserved for the Seventh Trumpet, Revel. 11. 15. that brings in the
Seven Vials upon it, and while the Pope Stands, the Turk cannot Fall, as more
Tolerable of the Two in these Respects: 1. He Hates Images: 2. He Forces none
in Matters of Religion; Hence our Martyrologies mentions no Persecutions by
him. 3. He is a Bridle to the Pope, (as to Protestants in general) but when he
falls upon the True Church, then Fire from Heaven falls upon him, Rev. 20. 8,
etc.

The Thirtieth and last Plot against the Church, by Popery; Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXX.
THE Devils Thirtieth and last Plot, (consisting of many parts,) (called
Vltimus Diaboli Crepitus) is Antichristianism or Popery in the Western
Antichrist, which is the worst of all, inasmuch as, [Corruptio optimi est
Pessima; The Golden Church of Rome-Christian is Degenerated not only into
Brass and Iron, but into Clay; yea, into the Dung and Dirt of
Rome-Antichristian, as I have largely Demonstrated (1) in my Christian-Walk, p.
9. (2) in my Hearts Treachery, page 85. (3) in my Antidote against Popery all
along: and (4) in my Discovery of Antichrist, quite thorough; to all which Four
Books I shall Referr the Reader, and therefore I shall say the less of this
Subject (which indeed would make, up a Distinct Volum of it self) in this
place. As the Turk is that great Sea Monster Leviathan, so the Pope is that
great Land-Monster, Behemoth, Hebr. Faemin, plural, that is, Beasts, for his
prodigious Hugeness, as if he were made up of many Beasts, and so he is called
the Great Beast in the Revelation, that has many Beasts in the Belly of it;
And indeed this Mystery of Iniquity (so called, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. 11.) has many
Mysterious Plots in it, and is the Plot of Plots: As the Turkish Empire,
(Quantum, quantum est, as Luther Phraseth it) however Vast, yet is it but a
poor Crust which God (the Master of the Family) casts to his Dog, whom he
loses off and binds up at his pleasure, as before: So, the whole Popedom is
but a sorry Commission which the same God gives unto a Company or Legion of
Unclean Devils to Enter into an Herd of Hogs, or Swinish Men: As the Elephant
(or Behemoth) is the chief of the ways of God, Job 40. 15, 19. the Masterpiece
among all the Beasts: so this mystical Behemoth (the Pope) is the chief of the
ways of the Devil; the very Masterpiece of all Satan's Works and Wiles: Now
though he has the Strength, Cunning, and the long-Life of the literal
Elephant, yet he cannot carry it against Christ in his Antichristianism, for He
that made him, can make his Sword to approach unto him, Job 40. 19. though no
Man dare Undertake him, or can Match him, yet the Great God (who made him as
the Devil has marred him) both dare and can: As God has given an Horn to the
Rhinocero's, and Poison to the Dragon, (both which are the Elephants mortal
Enemies) that some Beasts may have the better of him, who Masters them all by
his monstrous mighty Limbs and strong Trunck, (able to over turn Trees) though
God has not given him either Horns on his Head or Claws on his Feet to do
Mischief withal. So though this Behemoth, or Apocalyptick Beast, has Seven
Heads (to Plot with) and Ten Horns (to Push with) given him, yea and
Clawy-Scratching Hoofs also; yet Christ has his Christian Hammer-men to Cut
off and to cast down those Antichristian-Horns, Zech. 1.20, 21. and seeing
those Hammering Carpenters are Men, (yea, and Spirited with the Wisdom and
Power of God) they must be more Wise than all the Seven Heads, and more Strong
than all the Ten Horns of him who is but a Beast that bears them: The Blow of
an Hammer has more force than the Push of an Horn. And were but Gods Israel
Pushed nearer to the God of Israel by those Horns, no Doubt but God would
Command his Carpenters to Cut off and cast away those Horns that do now Hit and
Hurt his People, as he has done in all Ages ever since the Beast got his
Horns, which appears by the Sequel. God knows how to Deliver his, 2 Pet. 2.
9. not wanting either Ways or Means to Help them at a Dead lift at any time,
and therein will go a way by himself sometime; as when he sets the Enemy
together by the Ears among themselves, while that the Church with all escaped,
Psalm. 141. 10. Thus God made Nebuchadnezzar (who was himself the Churches
Enemy) to fall foul upon all her other many and Mighty Adversaries, and so God
by him as by his Mall, or Hammer, broke the Rest of those Horrible Horns in
pieces at that time: Accordingly in this Day God makes Use of the Great Turk,
(as before) to Mall the Pope in so many Battles of his Holy War,) so now to be
as a Bridle to hold him (and all his Popelings) in, from any Universal
Proceeding against the Protestants, who are (by a mavelous Providence) the
more secure from the Turk, inasmuch as Popish Countries lay betwixt him and
them, or their Countries (as Denmark, Sweedland, etc.) Coasting so much toward
the North, lay out of his way, and (at present) no part of his aim: by an
overruling Hand of God Rome is his Grand Eyesore, though she think her self
out of the Reach of Gods Rod, so Repents not, Revel. 9. 20, 21. the Turk may
Repent, (if the Turkish-Prophecy [That as soon as their Sultan has taken the
Red-Apple, (or the Red-Letter City Rome,) they shall then become Christians,]
may be believed; However the Word seems not to Seal them up under Impenitency,
(as here the Romanists are) being neither such Notorious Hypocrites, nor such
Bloody Persecutors: 1. not such Hypocrites, for they are open Enemies, as the
Papists are Close and Covert, (as Gog and Magog signifies) We Read not in
Scripture of the Conversion of any Hypocrite, and no Wonder, inasmuch as after
Sin, Conversion is left as a Means to Cure all other Sins, but no means can
Cure and recover him who Converteth Conversion it self into Sin, as the Romish
Hypocrites do: 2. nor such Persecutors. The Turkish History tells indeed of
their Savageness, yet it is in the way of War, and not upon the Account of
Religion; they have no Bloody Inquisition to Compel Men into Conformity, but
they say, Whether Men serve Christ or Mahomet, so they lead good Lives, they
may be Saved. Hence it is, our Martyrologist (that Writes of all the Churches
Persecutions) names the Persian, the Julian, the Arrian, etc. but not a Word of
the Turk or Mohammedan Persecution, so that this Romish Beast (above all Name,
Dan. 7. 7. as above all Natures, even of the most Savage of Beasts) has
outdone all in Blood, yet lies she in Impenitency, not laying to Heart, that
her Neighbors House (the Eastern Church) was Fired by the Turks, though less
Guilty. Oh Rome, thou Western Church, look to thy self, that art more Guilty;
Christ may soon say, Loose the Four Angels, and Kill the 3d. part of Men; or he
may put it into the Heart of the first (that rose) of the Ten Horns to make
Roast-meat of thee. Now the Pope was not Born a Beast, but was at first a good
Bishop, and above Thirty of them Successively Shone as Stars, and suffered
Martyrdom for Christ, until Constantine came to give a Calm and Halcyon Days to
the Church, which indeed (through Satan's Temptation drawing out Men's
Corruption) proved Poison to her. * It Is a Thousand pitties such fair Weather
should bring forth any such foul Fruits: Then began the Roman-Star to Dwindle,
and Degenerate into a Meteor or Blazing-Comet, and gradually lifting himself
(like proud Lucifer) up above his Brethren, (his Fellow-Ministers) he gradually
falls from Heaven, he began to fall under the 3d. Trumpet, Rev. 8. 10. as some
sense it, but under the 5th. [(...)] he was fallen effectually: This Star was
falling by Degrees from Constantine in the 3d. Century, until Phocas in the
6th. Sylvester was the first that did Degenerate in the 3d. Century, burdening
the Church with Jewish and Heathenish Ceremonies, but 'twas Phocas that set up
Boniface in the Chair of Pestilence in the 6th. then was the Star fallen from
Primitive Integrity, into the Deepest Gulf of all Impiety, Revel. 9. 1. and
this Star was well called Wormwood, Chapter 8. 11. because he (himself) was in the
Gall of Bitterness, and became as bitter as Wormwood to the Church, far more
bitter than Arrius, (the Star of that Trumpet forementioned) who was but
Antichrists forerunner, of whose bitter Potions the Church has been long
Drinking-still is so, and not yet come to the Dregs thereof: Here began the
Devils general Game after the Declining Age, (wherein the Thirty-Three Bishops
of Rome (Sylvesters Successors) can scarce pass for Tolerable, much less
Laudable,) When the Star (which was Wormwood (...) by way of Eminency) did fall
to the Earth and set up the Earthly Kingdom of the Apocalyptick Beast: When the
first of the Usurping Nimrods (to wit, Boniface the 3d.) began with his
[Volumus and Jubemus] We Will and Command, instead of the Holy Apostles Style,
[We Beseech you Brethren.] (1) Mark all along 1. the Churches Malady by Satan,
2. the Churches Remedy by Christ: and (2) Mark also, How the Prophecy in the
Revelation shows the Progress of the Church all along to the 2d. Coming of
Christ: (3) Mark likewise how the Pillar of Divine Providence has both Secured
and safely Conducted the Sealed Ones (his Church) to this present Day, and will
do so to the end of the World; and all this, sweetly and exactly Concurring all
along with the Revelation-Prophecy, As this Book will show at the End, in
Chapter the last. The 1st. Malady of the Church at that time, Y. 606. (presaged
by a prodigious Comet as well as by Mahomets then publishing his Alcharon) was,
when the Key of the Bottomless-Pit was given to this fallen Star, (ushered in by
that Blazing-Star aforesaid) to wit, Boniface, and his Successors, who pretend
to a power of Damning or Delivering whom they will; Here the Pope is made the
Angel of the Bottomless-pit, Revel. 9. 1, 11, or the Devils Lieutenant General,
called Abaddon, or Abadone, as the Devil (his Lord-General) is a bad Angel:
Hereupon the Pope casts away the Key, that Christ gave to his Holy
Predecessors, (of binding and looseing according to the Word) and takes up the
Devils Usurped Key with his Tripple Crown, and therewith opens Hell, (which the
Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles had hitherto shut) then Arose the Smoke
of those Doctrines of Devils, and of that Black and Diabolical Divinity
Preached and Practiced in the Church of Rome ever since, which so Darkened [the
Sun and the Ayr] the Doctrine of Christ of the Church, and of the Scriptures;
and then came out of that Smoke those Devouring Locusts, the Monks and Friars,
the Priests and Jesuits, etc. called so, both for their Numerosity, (the last
of which alone has sometimes maintained Two Hundred Thousand Scholars, Oh
what Swarms of those Locusts are there then in all?) and for their Votacity,
those Popish Flesh-Flyes do so pester many Princes Houses which do receive
them, that not only the Duke of Bavaria's Court (notwithstanding his Vast
Revenue) but many other Princes and places are kept poor by them, that lie
Lurking (as Scorpions) in their Cells and Obscure Residencies, Revel. 9. 2, 3.
and which is worst of all, Stinging Incureably the Souls of Men, etc. Yet 2ly.
Christ has his Antidote and Remedy against this Divelish Malady; for though
God permitted this bad Angel or Apollyon to punish those that Obeyed not the
Truth, Romans 1. 24, 26. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. Insomuch that this Key of the
Bottomless-pit, was so notably Improved by all the Usurping Nimrods, Luxurious,
Sodomites, and Egyptian Magicians, (unto Hildrebrand or Brand of Hell in the
10th. Century) as that in his Popedom, Letters were set forth, as sent from
Hell, wherein the Devil and his Angels gave the Popish Clergy many Thanks for
sending them so many Souls, as they never had sent them in any Age before.
Though the Devil and his Locusts played Flush in this general Game, yet the
Lord limits them both in their Task, and in their Time, and in their Torments.
(1) In their Task, Those Locusts or Scorpions must not Sting whom they will,
but whom Christ will; none of his Sealed ones must be Stung by them, 'twas
Commanded them not to hurt the Grass of the Earth, nor any Green thing, Chapter 9.
4. Whatever charge Satan gave those Locusts, Sure I am this was Christ's Charge
in the behalf of His Redeemed; not unlike unto David's Charge to his Captains,
[Deal kindly with the Young Man Absalom.] So, and much more than so Sollicitous
is Christ (the Son of David) for the Safety of all his Sons and Servants, none
of those whose Names were Written in the Lambs Book of Life were stung, no, not
those young Christians who were as Tender as Grass, nor any Green Plant though
never so weak: Christ Secured his Church, and the Kernel of Christianity,
maugre the Malice of that Man of Sin. 2. In their Time, Those Locusts must not
last so long as they list, but as the Lord lists, who has limited them to
Five Months, v. 5. which is justly the Life time of the Natural Locusts, that
are Bred in April, and Dye in September; and though those be Craftier (in
having a King over them, ver. 11.) than they, Prove. 30. 27. so might better
secure themselves over Winter, yet Five Months must be their Term, which they
cannot exceed: The Question is, How long is that? (1.) Answ. Suppose a Definit
and Certain time be set down for an Indefinite and Uncertain Here, however it
holds out this Comfort, 1. that it shall not be for Ever, 2. it shall be only
for a short Time, as this phrase (Five Months) plainly Imports. (2.) Answ. It Is
True, Antichrists Lease is much longer than Five Months, (even Forty-Two
Months, Rev. 13. 5.) and his beastly biting has lasted much longer, yet this
term may hold out the five Ages of the Beasts biting Life, 1. Infancy, 2.
Childhood, 3. Youth, 4. Middle-Age, 5. Old, Decrepit, or Dote-age, and so, his
last Bite is not yet over. 3d Answ. by the five Months may be Understood the
five Hundred Y. wherein the Pope stood in his prime pride and plenary power,
that is, from the 6th. Century to the 11th. when God stirred up the Waldenses,
etc. to call the Pope Antichrist (which is exactly 500 Y.) and Bellarmin
(himself) confesses, that ever since the Pope was so called, [Non Modo non
Crevit ejus Imperium, sed Magis ac Magis Decrevit,] He has lost a great part
both of his Command and of his Commodity more and more Daily, De pap Romans lib.
3. cap. 1. So long was he Trump and Triumphant in the World, and why his Term
is Reckoned by Months. See my Discovery of Antichrist, p. 200. 4th. Answ. Those
five Months hold an Exact Correspondency with the time of Noah's Deluge
prevailing over the Earth, which was 150 Days, which make up five Months
Complete, Genesis 7. 24. Now Noah's Deluge and this (which the Dragon powered out
of his mouth to Drown the Church, Revel. 12. 15) do Symbolize together after a
most singular manner in sundry particulars; 1. as that was a General Flood over
all the Habitable World, so is this over all the Christian World. 2. As that
began in April, and lasted to September, (in the prevalency of it,) Genesis 7. 11,
24. and 8. 3, 4. so those Locusts here do prevail just the same Term of Time,
and then it shall be said [The Waters are abated,] or Abating: 3. As Noah and
his Family (the Church) only, were Delivered from that Deluge, so Gods Sealed
Ones only, are Saved from this Antichristian Deluge in the Ark or Church. 3ly.
They were limited in their Torment which they put others to, their Commission
reached not to Torment any to Death: [to them it was given,] this is often
repeated in the Revelation, to show, that Antichrist and his Auxiliaries
(though Bandying and Bending all their fraud and force for Destroying Souls)
are so Butted and Bounded by the great God, that they all can do no more than
is given them from above: The Popish Locusts are so Confined in their
Commission, that as they must not Hurt whom they will save only those that are
not Sealed, as in the first Limitation, so they must not Hurt as much as they
please, they have power only to Hurt, but not to Kill, ver. 5. 10. This was
all in the 1st. Commission, only to Torture and Torment the Consciences of Men
by their Penances, Pilgrimages Purgatory, etc. And though larger power was
given after, of Killing the Witnesses, Chap. 11. 7. and the Saints, Chap. 13.
7. Yet while they Killed their Bodies, they could never Kill the Souls of any
of Gods Sealed Ones, as they did of the Unsealed.

The Devils 1st. Design against the Waldenses, Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXXI.
THis Ushers in the Devils first Design, the first part of this last Plot was
against the Waldenses, in which God also disappointed him, giving still a New
Remedy for this New Malady: No sooner did the Lord stir up his Faithful
Witnesses Bereng arius, the Waldenses, and the Albingenses, in the 11th.
Century, to give their Testimony against the Kingdom of the Beast, which had
now overspread the whole Christian World (like another Deluge) by the help of
those Swarms of Innumerable Locusts: but then began the Devil (in his first
Persecution under Papacy) to Support by force what he had hitherto Advanced by
fraud; Here the Beast began [(...)] to make his Bloody War against the Seed of
the Church, Revel. 12. 17. as the Red Dragon had done 1st. against the
Man-Child (Constantine) whom the Church brought forth after her Ten Sharp
Throws in the Ten Primitive Persecutions, v. 4. and 2ly. against the Woman or
Church it self, in his Flood of Arrianism, v. 5, 9, 13. Then did the Dragon
give Power to the Beast (that came out of the Bottomless pit) to make War with
the Saints, to overcome them, and to Slay them, Rev. 13. 2, 7, 15. The Occasion
of the Beasts first War was this, A Knot of Jovial and Jolly Rich Romanists
being at their mad Merriments and Pastimes, one of them suddenly falls down
Dead, at which sad Spectacle Peter Waldus (a Rich and Learned Citizen of Lions
in France, and then a boon-Companion with them) was much startled; This
Providence God made an Ordinance for his Conversion; He Returns Home, falls
upon Instructing his Family and Familiar-Friends, in the Doctrine and Practice
of Faith and Repentance; as also upon Inveighing against the Ignorance,
Superstition, and Debauchery of the Romish Religion, (which Indulged such
Mad-Merry-Meetings as God from Heaven had Testified against.) This Coal being
Kindled, Kindles many more Coals, which eagerly Hearkened to this 1st. Angel,
Rev. 14. 6; who laid the first Foundation of Romes Ruin: from this Waldus
Sprang those Good Christians, the Waldenses, All Kindled with a Coal from
Heaven by this Man's Ministry: This was Matter enough to make the Devil stir,
and to Kindle the Beast with a Coal from Hell, to wit, Alexander the 3d. (the
same that Betrayed the Emperor into the Turks Hand, and that set his Foot upon
the Emperors Neck, etc. as before.) This Pope first Curses them with Bell,
Book, and Candle, 2ly. Persecutes them with the Inquisition, Fire, and Sword,
etc. yet neither this first Game will Satan Win, as the Sequel shows: for (1)
Sanguis Martyrum est Semen Ecclesiae, The more they were Molested, the more
they Multiplied, Insomuch that G. Morrel in his Memorials says, there were
above Eight Hundred Thousand who made profession of the Waldensian Faith, in
the Y. 1260. or 12th. Century, notwithstanding all the Bloody Cruelty of the
Beast against them. (2ly.) Their Scattering by persecution did Spread the
Gospel almost into all Lands, as France, Picardy, Lower and Upper, Germany,
Bohemia, Savoy and Lombardy, yea, into England, Poland, Italy, Spain, Flanders,
and many more, in all which the Light of Truth has ever since Shone (more or
less) to the Dispersing of that thick Fogg of Antichristian Darkness. (3)
Though the Waldenses (when they were forced to take up Arms in their Just and
Necessary Defense, both as Men and as Christians) did then Confess to the
Beasts Champions, [We know ye must overcome us, for God has said, The Beast
shall make War against the Saints, and overcome them,] Rev. 13. 7. Yet by the
Help of Earl Reymund, and Peter K. of Arragon, Christ (the Captain of their
Salvation) gave them many Signal Victories over the Popelings which came
against those Christians with their Croysadoes or Crosses, (the same they
carried to their Holy War) as if they had been as bad as Turks. (4.) God did
marvelously send them Saviors in their saddest times, as (1.) Lewis the 11th.
of France, who (upon a Just Information of the Waldenses Innocence, and of
their Enemies Malicious Slanders) stopped all proceedings of Persecution by his
Royal Decree. (2) King Francis was called off from persecuting them, just as
Saul was from pursuing David by a Messenger that told him. [The Philistims have
Invaded the Land,] 1 Samuel 23. 27. even when he had got David (as it were) in a
Pound, and had no way to Escape him, v. 26. just so a War arose 'twixt the
Prince of Piedmont and this K. Francis the 1st. which gave to him a Diversion
from his persecuting Work, and to the poor persecuted Waldenses a sweet
Relaxation from Hot Persecution, as his Death did much more when another
Persecution was Designed. (3) K. Lewis the 12th. whose Chancelour (together
with the Popes own Commissioner) examining the Witnesses against the Waldenses,
and finding them Innocent of the Matters they were Charged with, they were
Immediately Discharged, the Kings Commissioner publicly professing, that he
wished himself as Good a Christian as the worst of them; yea, the King
(himself) Swore an Oath, that they were Honester than himself, and any of his
Catholique-Subjects: Upon this he stayed the Persecution. (5ly.) The last
Divine Testimony for those Christians, was Gods Black brand he set most
Signally upon their Persecutors: as (1) on that Archbishop, (who was the
Devil's and the Pope's Arch-Engine in persecuting Waldus, for Translating the
Bible into the French Tongue, and for Converting so many precious Souls from
the Cacolique (rather than Catholic) Church of Rome) God left not his Cruelty
long Unreckon'd for and Unrevenged, for the stroke of Divine Justice shortly
after put a period to his Life and to his Persecution both together. (2)
Another of the Devils Tools, one Martin, who would have been a Mar-Priest
indeed, boasting how he would Slit the Nose of a godly Minister, but soon after
a Wolf met him, set on him, and bit off his Nose, upon which he ran Mad and
Dyed miserably: a (3) Bloody Villain against those Christians, was one Miniers,
whom his Sin found out, having it Legibly Writ upon his Punishment, for he was
smitten with excessive Bleeding at his Fundament, as if God made him cast out
there all the Blood of the Saints (which he had Drunk,) together with his own
Blood, and then was he Struck with an excessive Inward burning in his Bowels,
(as if he had been in Hell beforehand) and with an extreme Intolerable Stink
of his lower parts, with all which he ended (in many Blasphemies) his miserable
Life: And with no less black a brand did God Stigmatize the Devils (4) Tool
John de Roma, a Monk, a Roman Jack indeed, that filled it self top full of
Saints-blood, but God smote him with Intolerable Torment all over his Body,
(without the least Respit) and with such an unsufferable stink of his Lousie
and Ulcerous Carcass, that his nearest Relations were not able to come near
him, and ragingly crying out, Oh! this is for my Cruelty to Christians, so Dies
Accursed. (5) Earl-Simon, the Pope's prime Champion, was brained with a Stone
thrown at him by a Woman out of an Engine at the Siege of Toulouse, as
Abimeleck was at Shechem, Judge. 9. 53. (who had slain his Seventy Brethren upon
a Stone, and now it is just that a Stone should slay him) thus also this
Earl-Simon (more hard-Hearted in his Barbarous Butcheries of those Ancient
Protestants, than any Stone, and having been the Deflowrer and Murderer of
many Women) has his Head Shot off from his Shoulders by a Stone, and that out
of the Hands of a Woman. Thus God by his most powerful Providence Plagued the
Churches Enemies, and Preserved his Church as a Diamond in a Dunghill, and as
pure Wheat in the midst of much Dirty Chaff, to wit, of Romish Corruptions.

The Devils 2d. Design against the Lollards, Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXXII.
THe Devils 2d. particular Design (being the 2d. part of the 30th. Plot) was
against the Lollards, the Followers of Wickcliffs Doctrine. Now the Devil being
Disappointed of his 1st. Game, (still the more he Stirs, the more he Stinks,
and Sticks fast too, for hereby he had much Enlarged the Tents of the Church)
Ventures upon a 2d. Game against Wickliff, (as he had against Waldus.) The
Supposed 2d. Angel, Rev. 14. 8. a most eminent English Divine, and Doctor of
Divinity in Oxford, who with a most Acute Wit, and a Gracious Spirit, Wrote
many Volums against the lying Doctrines of the Romish Church in the 13th.
Century, whereby the Church of Christ (though much Enlarged, yet much Subjected
and kept under, and in obscurity by the Universal Persecution of the
Waldenses,) was much Revived, not only in this Land, but also Beyond Sea, John
Hus and Jerome of Prague standing up in the 14th. Century to Defend the Doctrine
of Wickliff, (so much Decryed by the Romish Rabble.) This was Occasion enough
to Rowze the Roaring Lion or Dragon, the Devil, whose Kingdom of Darkness was
not able to bear any such Shining Light, because his Deeds are Evil, Joh. 3.
19. Hereupon he Stirs up his Eldest Son the Pope, who Hires Thomas Waldensis to
write against Wickliff, and the Popish-Prelates in England to persecute Him,
and to Banish him into Bohemia, where John Hus and Jerome of Prague had the
Happiness (as well as Hap) to Read His Writings against Popery, and so became
(both) great Zelots for Reformation: Upon this, the Romish Fry of Friars, etc.
(like a Nest of Hornets with their Venomous stings, slye at them, and Burn
them, and Wickliff's Books (because his Body was out of their reach) with them:
Yet that Fiery Pope Martin the 5th. had not the Flames of his out-ragious Folly
quenched by all this, but Wickliffs Bones must be Dug out of his Grave,
(after he had layn in it One and Forty Y.) and must be Burned (as if they had
all been Heretics) by this Popes Decree. Oh the Sublime Folly of this Romish
Rage, thus to Disquiet the Body of him whose Soul was at Rest with God, and to
Nickname his many Learned Disciples (he left behind him) Lollards, as if they
had been (no better than) Tares, Cockle or Darnel, (as the Word signifies) and
themselves (then most lewdly Wicked) as pure and clean Wheat, Cujus Contrarium
Verum. Notwithstanding all this, God still gets this Game from the Devil
likewise; it is marvelous how the Lord was putting a Spoke into the Popes Wheel
when it was in its fairest and fastest passage and progress, as appears in
diverse Divine Testimonies: The (1) was, Though Wickliff had most Potent Foes,
as Prelates, Pope, and Devil; yet had he more Potent Friends, as the Duke of
Lancaster, K. Edward the 3d. (who always protected him) yea, and God himself,
by whose good Providence he was not only preserved from bloody persecutors,
but also Recalled from his Exile, and Restored to his Place, where (after his
doing much Good) he Dyed full of Days, and in his Nest, (as Job says) and not
by the Hands of the Sons of Violence. The (2d.) was, when Pope Gregory the
11th. sent his Roaring Bull to Oxford, wherein he Commanded them to Root out
Wickliffs Tares, (as he called them) but the Masters and Proctors having a long
Debate whether this Bull should be Received or Rejected, at last ('it is said)
that the whole University gave a Testimony (in Favor of him) under their Seal
in the Congregation-House, they not only Rejecting this, but many other Bulls
from Rome. This very Humane Testimony held out a Divine one in such a Day
wherein Rome was in her Regency. The (3) was, when the Popish Prelat of
Canterbury, held a Convocation at London, for Condemning Wickliff's Doctrine as
Heretical; and being all come together for that purpose, just as they were
falling upon the Debate, God sent such a Dreadful Earthquake, as they
(Affrighted with it) Desisted from that Wicked Enterprise and Departed. The (4)
was, As God had kept Alive the Celestial Live Coal of the True Religion from
being quenched in England ever since the first Plantation of the Gospel Here,
by his Raising up Worthy Instruments in the worst of Times all along until
Wickliff, (as I show in my Discovery of Antichrist, Chapter 16.) for the
Vindication of the Truth; so this Live-Coal was blown up into a bright Flame
(which did but Smoke before) by this bold Preacher of the Everlasting Gospel,
(see my Discovery of Antichrist, page 82. 83. more of this,) and that Gospel
(this 2d. Angel Preached) has indeed been Everlasting hitherto, for though
Pope and Devil (with all their Princes, Prelates, and People) have Conjoined
their furious Blasts, yet could they never be able to Blow out the Light, for
the Lord has ever held his own Hand betwixt it and them: that Blessed Doctrine
did take such Deep Root in the Hearts of the Elect then, and does so now, that
as Men and Devils never could, so they never shall suppress it in England. The
(5) was, by Wickliff's means the Pope lost his long Usurped Power of Imposing
what Bishops he pleased upon England, his great Gain of Peter Pence, and of
Tenths out of every Spiritual Promotion, our K. Edward the 3d. was too Wise to
admit of any such Intrusion and Encroachments. The (6) was, As Wickliff's
Ministry was so exceeding Successful in this Land, bringing so many to the
Obedience of the Truth, that some thought that Day to be the first
Resurrection; so it was a means of Reformation in other Lands, for our Rich.
the 2d. then Marrying Ann of Bohemia; as this Queen Taught our Women Modesty,
in Riding on Side-Saddles, so in Exchange, they Taught Bohemia Religion out of
Wickliff's Works, for there John Hus and Jerome of Prague Lighted their Candles
at our Torch. The (7th.) was, Though the Devil and all his Black Bands did
their Utmost to blow out this Candle, (thus Lighted) and to Run down the
followers of it, yet God sent them Valiant John Zisca to comfort them, by
Working mighty Deliverances for them: and when after Zisca's Death, Pope Martin
the 5th. sent a great Army to suppress them, then did God strike this
Popish-Army with such a panick Fear at the Approach of those poor Orphans, (as
they styled themselves at Zisca's Death) that they all fled from the Siege of
Misna, (before they saw the Faces of those Godly Orphans) leaving all their
Engines of War, and a great Booty behind them: and when the Emperor Sigismund,
(the Popes Creature) to Retrieve the Popes Credit (lost by the shameful flight
of his Army) Raises a vast Army of 40000 Horse (besides Foot) against them:
Then was that Word made good, [In thee the Fatherless finds Mercy, Hos. 14.
3. and that Word, [I will not leave you (...), Orphans, Fatherless, or
Comfortless, Joh. 14. 18. for God fought from Heaven for those poor Orphans,
striking the prodigious Host of their Enemies with a most prodigious Fright
that they all run away (at the very Report of the Protestants approach) without
staying to strike one stroke, and being speedily pursued, became a very great
prey to the pursuers. These Two Signal Testimonies from Heaven, did so Astonish
the Pope and Emperor, that they afterward fall upon ways of Fraud (when the
way of Force failed) to suppress them; and though by that Method and Means they
were much run down, yet God Raised them up again, by Raising up Undaunted
Luther, (the 3d. Angel, Rev. 14.9.) that Thunderbolt against the Pope, who
lighted his Candle at John Hus's Book, (sent to him by some Bohemians, when he
was in some strait,) This Candle gave light to all Germany. Mark here what an
Honor has God put upon this our Land in this Blessed Pedigree of Reformation,
wherein Germany may be Reckoned for the Son, Bohemia for the Father, but
England for the Grandfather; inasmuch as Luther received light from John Hus,
and he from our Wickliff: * May not this Encourage us? that it is a Land our God
cares for, Deuteronomy. 11. 11. and that He will yet have some Honorable Respect for
us, having more Honor from his People here, than in any other Land; and
notwithstanding our Unworthiness, may we not Hope, God will look more at his
own Cause and Glory, than at our Folly and Iniquity, otherwise the same sad
Calamities may overtake us the Grandfather, (that have over-taken both the Son
and the Grandson) and that by the Fag-end of this 3d. Plot, or Game, which the
Devil and the Pope began to lay and play as soon as this 3d. Angel (Luther, a
Boanerges or Son of Thunder) Sounding with so loud a Voice, had Awakened them,
Rev. 14. 8, 9. God gave him a mighty Heroic Spirit (every way Accomplished
with Grace, Learning, and Courage for a Gospel-Champion) to Preach Damnation
(not so much to those that receive the Name or Number of the Beast, (for 200 of
them may follow Antichrist, as they did Absalom, in the Simplicity of their
Hearts, knowing nothing of his Treason, 2 Samuel 15. 11. but) to all those that
Receive his Mark, pronouncing the Word [Damn] with such an Emphasis, (as our Mr
Perkins did) that it left a Doleful Echo in his Auditors Ears a long time
after, insomuch that like another Sampson, he pulled down some of the Pillars
of Babylon, and made Babels Whore (with all her Bald-Pate Panders, even Roar
for very Anguish,) gnash their Teeth, and gnaw their Tongues for Intolerable
Pain.

The Devils 3d. Design against the Church, in Protestants: Defeated by God.

CHAP. XXXIII.
THe Devils 3d. particular Design, (being the 3d. part of the last Plot) was
against the Protestants, in, and after Luther. This Book having already swelled
into a greater Bulk then at first Intended, (almost above a portable
Pocketbook) I must Referr my Reader to the Morient (or Dying) Period of
Antichrist, in my Discovery of Antichrist, page 81. to page 110. and Confine my
self by Constraint) to point out only the most Eminent Remarks of Divine
Providence which has Preserved the Church in those Two last Centuries, to wit,
the Fifteen and the Sixteen Hundred Y. of Christ, because it would require a
Distinct Volum to Speak Distinctly of every Passage and Providence therein.

The (1st.) Remark, was, The Harvest of the Earth, yea, and of Heaven too, was
fully Ripe, when God Raised up Luther to put in his sharp Sicle (1.) that of
Earth, the Kingdom of the Beast was so Debauched in that Day; as if Earth had
been turned into Hell, insomuch as Geffery Chaucer (that learned Poet in the
14th. Century) does notably Scourge the Romish-Church for Degenerating so
notoriously both in Doctrine and Discipline, both in Faith and Manners: (2.)
that of Heaven; the Kingdom of Christ had then a whole Harvest of Souls
(Chosen of God) to be effectually called, otherwise such a poor Friar (as
Luther was) could never have gone through so great a Work against so Great and
General Opposition with such Great Success.

The (2d.) Famous Remark, was, that Luther should be sent to Rome, as Messenger
of his Covent, for Deciding some Controversies therein, (about the Monks
Privileges) before the Pope, in the Y. 1510. where beholding the Base and
Abominable Manners of the Roman Clergy, of the Pope, and of his Palace, he
Returned from Rome with Utmost Detestation both of it, and of its Religion,
crying out often, Away with it, Away with it, and saying to his Friends, He
would not have been without that Journey to Rome for a 1000 Florens's. Thus God
by this Providence Unhinged him of his Romish Religion, and prepared him
thereby for a Great Reformation.

The (3) Remark, was, Pope Leo the 10th. through his Luxury wanted Money to
bestow a Dowry on his Sister (Magdalen,) and so did his Cardinal, to pay for
his New-Pall, both those Sums must be raised by Indulgences sent into Germany:
Tecelius (a Dominican Friar) brings them to be sold, saying, His Commission was
so large from the Pope, that if a Man had Defloured the Blessed Virgin, he
could Pardon the Sin for Money; yea, he could Pardon all Sins to come, as well
as any that were past; Indeed much what alike. Luther's Godly Zeal takes Fire
at those Popish-Cheats, Inveighs against the Popes Pardons that his Huckster
had brought, He cries down (after) the Popes Supremacy, and all his Popish
Trash, so Works (in God) a Wonderful Reformation.

The (4th.) Eminent Remark, was, that God should provide such a Protector (as
Frederick, the Duke of Saxony) to preserve poor persecuted Luther out of the
Hands of Pope Leo the 10th. and of the Emperor Charles the 5th. (whom the Pope
provoked against him) sometimes in his Patmos, (as he called Wartenburg-Castle)
and sometimes Disputing with Cardinal Caietan, and with those Devils in the
Court at Worms, yet was he kept secure by Gods good Providence, till he had
Fulfilled his Ministry, and Finished the Work his Father gave him to do, Living
to the Age of Sixty-Three, then Dyed in his Climacterical Year, Bequeathing his
Detestation of Popery to his Friends and Followers, with this Verse,

Pestis eram Vivus, Moriens ero Mors tua, Papa.

In English I Living, stopped Romes Breath,

In English And Dead, will be Romes Death.

The (5th.) Marvelous Remark, was, That not One of those Three Angels,
(forementioned) to wit, Waldus, Wickliff, and Luther, should Dye a Violent
Death; Considering the Rage of Rome and Hell against them all, That They should
all Three Dye quietly in their Beds in the midst of their mortal Enemies, to
whom they all Three were so mischievous, was little below a Miracle: Well,
therefore are they Named More than Men, even Angels, Rev. 14. 6, 8, 9. Bloody
Rome may Murder Men, but cannot Angels. Now when the Lord raised up Luther (the
3d. Angel) to thrust in his sharp Sickle into the Harvest of Reformation,
Revel. 14. 14, 15. and began to Reap Rome, which was now ready Ripe to have the
Seven Vials of Gods Indignation powered down upon her for the Wine of her
Fornication, wherewith she had made so many Nations Drunk; then Rome Raged with
her Red Letter, being prompted thereto by the Red Dragon; insomuch that the
Pope Roars against him as an Heretic with his Bull, the Emperor (stirred up
by the Pope) Wars against him as a Rebel with his Army, and King Henry the
8th. of England, Writes against him with his Pen, for which the Pope Dignifyed
him with [Defender of the Faith,] a Title which K. James better Deserved for
Writing against the Pope. Luther's Case (having all the World, the many as well
as the Mighty, against him) seemed now Desperate, so that Cranzius said to him
[Go into thy Cell, and cry,] Miserere Mei, for thou art an Undone Man: Yet
Behold! His Work being of God, he Weathers out the Point, Spreads the Gospel
into many Lands, and comes safe to Shore, and Dies in peace, (as before) after
he had exceeded the 12 Labors of Hercules, (as Beza says of him.)

Rome tamed the World, the Pope tamed Rome so great,
Rome Ruled by Power, the Pope by deep Deceit:
But how more large than theirs was Luther 's Fame?
Who with one Pen both Pope and Rome does Tame;
Go Fictious Greece, go tell Alcides then,
His Club is Nothing to Great Luther 's Pen.
Observe again the Footsteps of Providence following Luther. The 1st. Remark,
is, the Miraculous Increase of the Gospel, after this 3d: Angel, Revel. 14. 9.
we Read of another Angel, v. 17. and of another Angel, v. 18. and of Seven
Angels too, Revel. 15. 1. such as Melancton, Zuinglius, Zanchy, Beza, Marlorat,
etc: and above all, Calvin, who at Twenty-Five Y. Old, Writ his Institutions,
(to Mall Rome withal) of which Book this High Encomium is given.

Praeter Apostolic as post Christi tempora Chartas,
Huic peperere Libro Saecula nulla parem.
Since Christ and the Apostles time, no such Book was ever Writ, as Paulus
Melissus long since Sang: In a Word, at that time the Lord Raised a whole Army
of braye Heroic and Angelical Men, or Angels, (as Melchior Adamus, and
Illyricus, largely Demonstrate) at least preparing to power out the Seven Vials
(being the several parts of the Seventh Trumpet,) for the Fall of Babylon,
Revel. 14. 8. and 15. 1. for in the 2d. Angel's time Babylon began to Fall, and
some Countries did fall off from Rome, but when the 3d. Angel came, and with
him an Army of many other Angels, then was the Temple (to wit, the Church of
Rome) filled with Smoke, Revel. 15. 8. The Temple (wherein the Man of Sin is
said to sit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.) is not now filled with a Cloud, as Solomon's Temple
was, 1 Kin. 8. 10. 2 Chronicles. 5. 13. and as Moses Tabernacle was, Exodus 40. 34.
but with Smoke, (which accompanies Consuming Fire that God is to Babylon, Hebr.
12. last, Revel. 14. 11. Psalm. 18. 8. and 74. 1.) Denoting how the Church of
Rome shall be filled with Darkness and Confusion, and consequently with the
Wrath of God. The 2d. Memorable Remark, is, the prodigious Progress of the
Gospel, which came first from Jerusalem by the Apostles, and so may well be
called the Jerusalem-Artichoke, a Plant that Over-runs the Ground wheresoever
it is planted. So was the Gospel carried as on Angels Wings wonderfully over
all the World at first by the Apostles, and now again by the late Reformers, as
by those Three Angels aforesaid, Waldus, Wickliff, and Luther: our Wickliff
Wrote more than Two Hundred Volums against the Pope before Luther was Born; and
Q. Ann, Wife to our Richard the 2d. and Sister to Wenceslaus K. of Bohemia, by
living here became acquainted with the Gospel, yea, many Bohemian Courtiers
coming to the English Court, conveyed Wickliff's Books into Bohemia, whereby a
Good Foundation was laid for a future Reformation. After this John Hus and
Jerome of Prague did so notably Propagate the Truth in that Kingdom, that in the
Y. 1451. the Church of Christ at Constantinople Congratulates the Happy
Beginnings in the University of Prague, and Exhorts them to perseverance in
persecution, which the raging Romanists soon raised against them; though Q.
Sophia (who favored them) had by her Mediation with the King procured a free
Exercise of their Religion throughout the Realm; and though the Popish
Persecutors could say no more of them than this, [In their Lives they are
Modest, in their Love one to another Fervent, and in their Speeches True, but
their Religion is stark Naught,] says Jacobus Leilenstemus the Dominican: and
why is it so Naughty? Reinerius (another of their persecutors) shall tell you,
[1. Because of so long Standing. 2. because so far Spread. and 3. for their
appearance of Purity, etc.] Alsted. Chronol. page 375. and Jacob. Revius de
Vit. Pont. page 151. This Paved the way for the Great Work of Luther in
Germany, begun Y. 1517. which was Wonderfully carried on (even in a little
time) through all Germany, and some Foreign Countries, as it were upon Angels
Wings, though by weak means, yea, by casual and cross means, (as here by Henry
the 8ths Scruple about his Marriage) and afterward further promoted 1. by
Public and powerful Preaching. 2. by Printing good Books. 3. by Translating
the Bible into Vulgar Tongues. 4. by Catechizing of Youth. 5. by Offering open
Disputations. 6. by Martyrologies, and all this was done against the Powers of
a most potent and politic Adversary. This was such a Miracle of Mercy, as the
former Age Despaired of, the present Age Admireth, and the future Following Age
shall be struck with Astonishment at. The 3d. Marvelous Remark, was, the
Strange Removal of Remora's, or Impediments; God was much seen in [Removendo
prohibentia] Rouling away the great Stones that lay in the way of the passage
and progress of Reformation: as (1st.) when all Men's minds (as it were) stood
upon their Tip-toes, gazing to see the Issue of Pope Leo's Rage, and of
Luther's Courage: This Leo the 10th. Throws his Thunderbolts at Luthers Head;
Brave Luther Braves it out, bravely protesting [Quo Magis Ille furit, eo
Amplius procedo,] the more Mad the Pope is in his outrageous Pelting me with
his Pot-Guns, the more Courageous I am both to proceed and to prosper: Hereupon
he casts the Popes Bull into the Fire and Burns it, saying, [Because thou
Troublest Christ, (the Holy One of God) therefore Eternal Fire shall Trouble
thee.] Now while the whole World was wondering and waiting what all this would
end in, Behold Pope Leo (who would have Thunderstruck Luther with his (but
Imaginary) Thunderbolts) was himself Thunderstruck with a real one by God out
of Heaven, He Dies, and Luther Lives: He Dies without Comfort, (which Bembus
offered him out of the Gospel,) Blasphemously Rejecting it, saying, [Apage is it
as Nug as de Christo,] Away with those Triffles of Christ: Here he was
Antichrist indeed, who had said to this Cardinal Bembus at the Return of those
Vast Sums raised by his Indulgencies, (the occasion of Luther's Revolt from
Rome,) Quantum nobis profuit haec de Christo Fabula, This Fable of the Gospel
brings us in much Gain. This Wretch Dies like a Toad with Earth in his Claw,
yet without Hope from (his Fable) the Gospel, and his Plot (against Luther)
Dies with him, in Y. 1521. the same Y. Luther Lives, and goes Resolvedly to the
Court at Worms, (as before) and did much Service to the Church many (even
Twenty-Five) Y. after. (2ly.) After the Pope, the Emperor; for good Orders
sake, not so much, because Lords Spiritual are placed before Temporal, as
because Accessorium sequitur Principale. The Pope was the Principal, (in
Obstructing Reformation) the Emperor was but the Popes Accessory: This
Emperor Charles the 5th. (by the Popes continual Instigations) carried an Hard
Hand against the Protestants: As to himself and to his own Inclinations,
(Candid enough) all Christendom had not a more prudent Prince, yet through
Romes Influence upon him, the Church of Christ (scarce) had a sorer Enemy: but
the same power and providence which had removed the great Rub, that great
Stumbling-Stone (Pope Leo the Great) gives this Great Emperor 1. a Diversion,
and 2. a Cessation from being the Popes Drudge in persecuting Work: 1. God
Diverts him, by his being called into Spain, to Suppress Seditions there, and
afterward was so taken up in his Wars with the French King, that he had no
leisure to look after Luther. After this, having taken the French King
Prisoner, he released him, upon Condition he would join with him in rooting out
the Protestants; but God broke this Design, for the French-King returning Home
from his Confinement in Spain, and Considering the Conditions of his Release
were unequal, he Consederates with Pope Clement the 7th. and the State of
Venice against the Emperor, who upon this provocation Abolishes the Popes
power (though he had called Knave first) over all Spain, and sends his Armies
against him under the Duke of Burbon, who Sacks Rome, Claps up the Pope (with
his Cardinals) close Prisoners in the Castle of St. Angelo. This Evil Spirit
(the Lord sent betwixt Abimelech and the House of Shechem, or the
Romish-Church) gave an Opportunity for the Reformed Religion to get Ground, all
these Providence did fall out rather for the furtherance of the Gospel, Phil.
1. 12. I might Tire both my Self and my Reader in Relating all those strange
Diversions God gave this Great Prince from his Doing Romes Drudgery, as the
Avocation he had by the Great Turks Invading the Skirts of his Empire: How the
Project of the Interim (which was a Hodg-podg of the Romish and Reformed
Religion mingled together an Inter-Religion, not unlike our Comprehension-Bill,
the Devil will Compound when he cannot Conquer) was broken, with all other
Popish-plots by the Patience and Perseverance of the Protestants at Passaw's
Pacifical. Transaction: Many Intervenient Crosses took off his Edge: it is very
Observable, This mighty Conqueror (who in Wageing Fifteen Wars, was for the
most part Successful) never prosper'd in any Undertaking after he had
Imprisoned the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgrave of Hassia, those Two Prime
Patriots of the Protestants. After all those Diversions, God brings him 1st. to
a Voluntary Cessation, for being Wearied with the Worlds Incessant Troubles, he
Divests himself of his Imperial Authority, and betakes him to the Repose of a
Monastery, where the 2d. Cessation (that is Unavoidable) seizes soon on him,
to wit, Death. The 4th. Eminent Remark, was, in Raising up Patriots and
Promoters of Religion; God was much seen in this, [Applicando Adiutoria,] as
after Charles the 5th. God sends good Ferdinand to Succeed, who quite Spoiled
the Project of the Trent-Councel, [Cum magna Moliuntur,] while they carried on
their Consults against the Simplicity of Christ, with such Infinite Guile and
Craft, as that themselves will even Smile in the Triumphs of their own Wits,
(when they hear it but mentioned) as at a Master-Stratagem: Insomuch that it
passed in France (on which that Council could never be Imposed) in manner of a
Proverb, that the Synod of Trent had more Authority than that of the Apostles,
Act. 15. because their own Pleasure was a Sufficient Ground for their Decrees,
without Admitting the Holy Ghost; yet this good Emperor, Ferdinand the 1st.
Granted Liberty of Conscience to all the Professors of the Augustan Confession
in Germany, and it was granted to them in Bohemia also for receiving the Lords
Supper in both Kinds. This put a Curb upon that Trent-Conventicle, who had now
no power to Disturb any Imperial City upon the Account of Religion; and then
Maximilian the 2d. Curbed them still more, by his Constancy to that Tenent
[That Men's Consciences ought not to be Compelled in Matters of Religion, for
that is, (says he) to Invade Heavens-right, etc. And after him God raised up
Rodulphus the 2d. in Y. 1610. a good Patriot too: And after him Matthias, under
whom the Protestants kept a Jubilee, in Y. 1617. And not to overlook our own
Land in this time; it is marvelous to consider how God Used Henry the 8th. as an
Instrument in this Work, though He had Writ against Luther, and though the
Reformed Religion (which he scornfully called The New Sumpsinius) he Envyed,
yet the Romish Religion [calling it Sarcastically, The Old Mumpsimus,] he
Despised: The Occasion was the Bone of Contention God cast betwixt Him and the
Pope; Clement the 7th. about the Y. 1528. Deluded him in the Divorce from his
Brothers Wife Q. Katherine, his great Stomach not enduring to be crossed,
Hereupon casts off the Popes Supremacy; he went so far as would serve his own
Turn, and though he still persisted in being a Papist himself, yet commanded
others (under great Penalties) to be no Papists; and while by the Six Articles,
(that Whip with Six Lashes) he on the one side of the Hedge Burned Protestants
for Denving the Transubstantiation, etc. yet on the other side of the Hedge he
Hanged Papists for Denying his Supremacy: but God raised up his Son Edward the
6th. to purge the Church from Popery, and to settle the Reformed Religion: And
this Series of Divine Providence toward the English-Church is very Observable,
that though Henry the 7th. Courted the Pope, yet Henry the 8th. Vnhors'd him,
Edward the 6th. Banished him, and though Q. Mary recalled him, and with some
Hot-Waters Revived him; yet brave Q. Elizabeth set him packing again, and K.
James so Stabbed and Branded him with his Pen, that he could never since be
permitted to have any public Countenance, much less any firm Settlement in
this Land. The 5th. Remark, is, the Marvelous Preservation of Persons, Places,
and People, from the utmost Craft and Cruelty of their Implacable Enemies. (1)
Instances of Gods Hiding Holy Persons (as he hid Jeremy and Baruc, those Two
Innocent Subjects, from their Enraged Sovereign, Jerem. 36. 26.) from the Hands
of those Bloodhounds that Hunted for their very Lives, are (indeed)
Innumerable; even in all Ages God has provided an Hiding Place for some of his
Servants in some good Man's House or other, or in some safe Land or other, when
the Case has been such, that there has been no Fence but Flight, no Council
nor Cover but Concealment to Secure them, as was that Case of Jeremy and
Baruc's. (2) As to Places, I shall Instance only in that of Geneva, which is
at this Day but a very small place yet Environed round about with their
Inveterate Adversaries, as French, Spanish, Savoy, Italy, and the Pope; yea,
it is Barred out from all Assistance of Neighbors, Cities, Churches;
notwithstanding, by the Mighty Arm of God, it is as strangely and strongly
Upheld and Defended as Judea (that Land of Promise) was, though Surrounded on
the North, with Syrians, Assyrians, and Babylonians: on the East, with Moab and
Ammon: on the South, with Edom and Egypt: and on the West with the
Philistines: (3) As to People, Christ preserved a Church (even in the Bloody
times of Q. Mary) here in London, Congregating (sometimes 100, sometimes 200)
to serve the Lord in Power and Purity; and an Informer being sent (as our
Martyrologist says) to Espy out their Liberty, Gal. 2. 4. and to take their
Names, as Ezra 5. 4. 10. yet He being among them to Catch, was Catched, and
Converted, yea, and cried them all Mercy: Besides, in the beginning of her
Reign, almost all the Prisons in England were become right Christian-Churches,
wherein the Word was Preached, and Sacraments were Administered; and God had his
Remnant Reserved (in Foreign Lands) for Royal Use to return under Q.
Elixabeth, yea, and in other Nations, (as well as in this) God Reserved a
Remnant for himself, even in Spain and Italy, (both which are most Rammishly
Romish) there being no fewer than Twenty Thousand Protestants in Cevil the
Chief City of Spain, and in Italy (the very Nest of Antichrist) there be full
four Thousand professed Protestants, according to Sands his Relation. Thus this
Lilly among Thorns, Cant. 2. 2. is preserved by a Miraculous Power, so as that
it could never be (nor ever shall be) cut up by the Sword of Persecution, nor
Burnt down by the Fire of Martyrdom. Behold and Admire the Churches Picture, to
wit, a poor Helpless Damosel sitting in a Wood or Wilderness, compassed about
with Hungry Wolves, Lions, Leopards, Bores, and Bears, yea, with all sorts of
Bloody Beasts, and in the midst of many monstrous and mischievous Men, all
running upon Her with open Mouth every moment and minute to Worry this Maid:
must it not be said, that this Virgin is preserved by a Miracle? it is the
Messiah who Rescue* this Maid from all those Monsters. Both Time and Room fail
for Enlarging upon the other following Famous Remarks, to wit, The 6th. is the
Remarkable Vengeance God has Executed on all the Churches grand Enemies; not
only Inferiors, as Morgan (the Judge) who Dyed Raving, Twiford the
Executioner, who Rotted above Ground, Bonner the Bloody Bishop, who was Buried
among common Thieves and Murderers, as one Hated of God and Man: Steven
Gardener, who Dying, outragiously cried out He was Damned, as well as his
Tongue (hanging out all black and swollen) could express it, and many more too
long to Relate: but also on Superiors, as Falix of Wartenburg, Minerius, (the
Popes prime Champions,) Charles the 9th. of France, (the Author of the Parisian
Massacre) who were all Choked with their own Blood for Drinking the Blood of
Saints: Yea, and our Q. Mary was not only punished with Barrenness, but also
with an Untimely Death, for Sacrificeing the Lives of 800 Innocents to her
Idols, therefore Q. Mary's Reign was one of the shortest of all the other after
the Conquest, Bloody ones shall not live out half their Days, Psalm. 55. 23. The
Churches Motto is, [Nemo me Impune Lacessit,] No Man can be her Enemy, and
escape Scot-free. They may Read their own Destiny in that Cup of Trembling,
Burdensome Stone, and Hearth of Fire, mentioned Zech. 12. 2, 3, 6. The 7th.
Notable Remark is, The Churches Valor and Victory in all her Sufferings: her
Posie is [Nec Premor, nec Perimor,] Nothing Hurts or Hinders me; for she
Conquereth, even when Conquered, her Lord Christ over came as well by Patience
as by Power: Oh what a Spirit of Glory Rested on the holy Martyrs, 1 Pet. 4.
14. which plainly Transported them beyond themselves, so that their
Suffering-Work, was thereby made as Contenting and Delightful to them, as ever
their Doing Work had been, or (which is more) their Receiving Wages would be:
it is Wonderful to Observe, How the Valor of the Martyrs, and the Villainy of
their Tormentors, strove together, till both, exceeding Nature and Belief, did
breed Wonder and Astonishment both in Beholders and Auditors; still Sanguis
Martyrum was Semen Ecclesiae, the Church won Ground by every (even the forest)
Persecution, while the Lord shortly after brought their worst and greatest
Persecutors (by some Signal Disease or Disaster) to the Terrors of Death, and
to the Torments of Hell. The 8th. and last Remark, is, The marvelous
Deliverances God has given to his Church, and Disappointment to her Enemies,
in those Two last Centuries: as (1.) God Hammered Charles the 5th. to this
Frame, that when he had Melancton, Pomeran, and other Eminent Preachers in his
Hand, he Treated them gently, Jer. 15. 11. and sent them away, not so much as
once forbidding them to publish their Doctrine of Reformation; yea, and he laid
down the Empire in great Discontent, (as Diocletian had done before him)
Observing that the Church could not be Suppressed. (2.) The Gospel having
Spread much all over Germany, under those good Emperors, Ferdinand, Maximilian,
Rodulphus, and Matthias, until 1619. the Jesuits Stirrs up Ferdinand the 2d. to
change the Churches long Peace into a Violent Persecution, which was the more
Hightened by the Bohemians Rejecting him, and Electing Frederick Palatine in
his place: Now when all the Protestant-Princes and People were wearyed, and
almost worn out in Wars, God sends them Gustavus Adolphus to give them (at
least) a sweet Breathing time, and a little Rest and Respite, who overran
(almost) all Germany from the Baltick-Sea to Mentz with his Victorious Army in
one Y. and after his Solemn Thanks to God, he restores the Reformed Religion.
(3.) Though in the Netherlands that bloody butcher Duke De Alva brought the
Spanish Inquisition, and the Trent-Council-Execution, about Y. 1570. whereby he
made Havoc of the Church, like another Breathing Devil, (exceeding all Turks
and Pagans in Brutish Inhumanity) boasted he had been the Death of above 18000
persons, yet at Six Y* end God gave him an Avocation from that Work. At length
they having shaken off the Spanish Yoke, notwithstanding all Ambrose Spinola's
Endeavors to the contrary) are Declared Free-States by Albert Duke of Austria,
since which time God has had a Numerous Church there unto this Day, maugre the
Malice of Men and Devils. (4.) Though the Church has suffered Hard things in
France, ever since Y. 1524. but more especially in that Parisian Massaere upon
black Bartholomew-Day, in Y. 1572. which was Introduced by the most Divelish
Dissimulation of Friendship (Popish-like) to draw the Grandee-Protestants into
the Net: The matter of this Hellish Plot was managed under a Pretense of a
Marriage between the Prince of Navar, and the Lady Margaret, Sister to the
French-King; Coligni is highly Courted, and Guise (the Protestants Deadly
Enemy) is Banished from Court, yea, some few Papists were Executed for
Murdering some Protestants at Roan) by the Kings special Order: yet while all
this Specious Kindness is pretended, a most Barbarous Killing and Massacre is
Intended in this Bloody Charles the 9th's Heart, by whose Commission above
30000 were Murdered in Three Months, some say 70000. yet God was not Silent at
all this prodigious Villainy, but comes forth as a Swift Witness to take
Vengeance upon those Horrid Murderers: as 1. upon this Bloody King Charles the
9th. in the Flower of his Age (at Y. 24.) God struck him (as before) with such
an Erruption of Blood out of diverse parts of his Body, insomuch that he (who
had lately Wallowed in the Blood of Protestants) was made now to Wallow in his
own Blood, and so was Choked. (2.) Upon the Bloody Duke, God paid him home in
his own Coin, for as he had got (the Admiral) Coligni, etc. Decoyed into a
Snare by a pretended Courtship for their Destruction: So Henry the 3d. (who
Succeeded Charles the 9th.) did Invite the Duke of Guise and his Brother to a
Friendly Conferrence, and there commands his Guard to Kill them, for Curbing
him in his Kingship. (3.) Upon all the Chief Persons who had been Employed in
this Bloody Massacre at Paris, and other Places, whom Gods Providence drew
forth to the Siege of Rochel, where they received the Reward of all their
Wickedness, as the Duke D' Aumale and Cosseins, the Field-Marshal, (who first
Entered the Admiral's Lodging,) Three Masters of the Camp, diverse great Lords
and Gentlemen, 60 Captains, 60 Lieutenants, 60 Ensigns, 20000 common Soldiers,
all Cut off at that Siege, (besides Gods Judgments on the Duke of Aniou, etc.)
whereas the Besieged Rochellers were miraculously relieved by a Shoal of
Shellfish cast upon their Shore (never before or after seen in that Haven) at
every Tide, and the Siege was as marvelously Raised by an Edict of Peace,
procured by the Ambassadors of Poland; and to this Day God preserves his Church
there in her Being, though he suffer her (out of his Unsearchable Wisdom) to be
now much Impaired in her Well-being, notwithstanding the many Edicts of most of
the Kings to the contrary. (5.) Such Instances might be given in many other
Lands where God has been Teaching all Tyrants the Nature of Christ's Church,
How the more they Spurn against it, the more it Flourishes, the more Molested,
the more Multiplied: to Name no more but our own Land, It Is very Remarkable,
that since the Royal Laws were Enacted for Establishing the Reformed Religion
here by K. Edward the 6th. God has Laughed all the Romish Plots (for
recovering Us to Popery) to Nothing: It Is True, It met with some short Repulse
and Repugnancy in Q. Mary's Reign, yet God made it therefore but a Short Reign,
he Immediately brought her Sister Q. Elizabeth to the Throne, whose Reign was
(almost) Ten times longer; and wherein it Appeared that the Good Cause of
Religion had lost no Credit by Q. Mary's short Opposition, for presently the
Gospel was Springing up and Spreading it self to many Lands (besides our own)
in her Day; none of the Popes Nuncio's did she ever suffer to set Footing in
England, which Sped the better for it ever after, she Banished Popish Idolatry,
and Restored the Reformed Religion, for which Pope Pius the 4th. Designed to
Excommunicate her, but that was put by, by some By-Respects; yet Pope Pius the
5th. did it by a Bull, which Desperate Felton fixed upon the Bp. of Londons
Gate, where and for which he was Executed, and the Popes Bull was so Baited by
Bp. Jewel's Pen, that his Unholy Holiness Dared not to Reply, yet had he his
Unholy Hand in most of the Treasons against Her, when he saw his Bull proved
but a Calf: However, (through the Popes Influence) Innumerable Plots and
Insurrections were promoted against her Person and State, (which all ended with
the Ruin of the Rebels and Plotters) the greatest of all was, that Spanish
Armado (which was styled, Invincible, but proved Vincible, (notwithstanding the
Popes Blessing upon it) to little purpose, and his Nameing Twelve of his
greatest Ships by the Names of the twelve Apostles, to less purpose, for God
fought from Heaven against them with a Scattering Storm, (insomuch as they
Blasphemously said, God was turned Lutheran,) and the Queens Fireships Fired
them, her great Guns Battered them so, as they were beaten Home with both Shame
and Loss of the better half: in short, for Gods protecting her, for her
protecting the Netherlands, for procureing a Settlement to Henry the 4th. of
France in his Kingdom, (until he turned Romanist, and then was soon turned out
of his Life by the Romanists,) for quelling the Irish Rebels, for Conquering
this (supposed) Unconquerable Armado, etc. She was highly Honored both by Turk
and Pope; the proud Turk Desired her Amity by his Ambassadors, and the proud
Pope, (Sixtus the 5th.) whom Bellarmin sagely Censures thus at his Death;
[Quantum Sapio, quantum Capio, Dominus noster Papa Descendit in Infernum;] Oh
strange! how can Holiness (of his Holiness) go to Hell: Yet this same Pope (as
bad as he was) could Commend Q. Elizabeth for an Excellent Governess, yea, she
became Renowned throughout the World, as the Glory of her Sex, and the Luster
of her Land, and a Poet styles her, on Earth the first Virgin, (or Chief, as
she was a Queen) and in Heaven, the second, next to the Virgin Mary; yea, at
Venice she was termed St. Elizabeth, whereupon the Lord Carleton
(English-Embassador there) said, Although he were a Papist, he would never pray
to any other Saint but to that St. Elizabeth: Assuredly, her Zeal for the
Reformed Religion Sainted and Renowned Her most of all. No sooner was K. James
come to the Crown, but the Roman-Conclave Consult against him: Pope Clement the
8th. out of his Clemency had success against Henry the 4th. of France, and
Hopes for the same against King James, by Interdicting him from the Crown
without his License, but it proved not to be at the Popes Disposal, his Gowty
Golls, or Toes, (which Archduke Maximilian could not Cure by Kissing them)
served to carry him off the Stage, after Watson and Clark (Two Priests, the
former Designed to be Lord Chancelour, etc. just as our present Plotters had
Distributed Honors and Offices,) with others (some of good Rank) seduced by
them, had Complotted against this King, knowing his Ability to Maintain the
Truth of the Gospel against Popery; but this 1st. Plot being Blasted by the
Execution of the Two Priests and their Accomplices. The Conclave Projects that
most prodigious Plot of the Gunpowder Villainy; Pope Paul the 5th. Employed
Garnet the Jesuit, Catesby, Piercy, Faux, and many other Cronies to Blow up the
King and whole State in the Parliament; but this 2d. Plot was Blown up (it
self) by a blind Letter, which marvelously brought all to light; and though
afterward, this same Pope by his Breves, forbad that Allegiance (which the
King justly required of his Subjects, yet his own Learned Pen did so Vindicate
his own Undoubted Right, that his Holiness soon Declined the Encounter, yea,
and God made Use of this Kings Pen and Power to Baffle those Two lesser Games
of Socinus and Arminius: How God has likewise Confounded (hitherto) all the
Popish Plots, both in the Reign of Charles the 1st. and of the 2d. (as yet) may
be better Remembered (it being yet fresh in the Minds and Memories of many still
Living) than can be fully Related. In the Reign of King Charles the 1st. the
Conclave of Rampant Jesuits (those Cup-bearers of Romes Wine of Fornication,
and Froggs going out to the Kings of the Earth, Revel. 16. 12.) had their
Consult to bring Brittany to Babylon, or those Three Kingdoms into Confusion,
as they had done the Palatinate, Bohemia, and Germany, etc. Hereupon Card.
Barbarino dispatches Cunaeus (the Popes Legate) to London, and joins with him an
Assistant (one not only bred up in the Romish Church, but preferred in it, and
promised greater preferment upon his Diligence in the Design) to Reduce those
Three Realms to Rome; In Order hereto, It was Resolved, that the King, and
Archbishop should both be Cut off for Standing then in the way of that Work.
This Cunaeus showing to His Assistant an Indian Nut stuffed full of the
strongest Poison, and Boasting, they would with that Dispatch the King, as they
had done his Father. The Horrible Nature of this Bloody Plot, God set so Home
upon this Assistants Conscience, that he had no Rest from his Remorse, until he
had revealed this Damnable Design to (the Q. of Bohemia's Physician) Andreas ab
Habernfield, that he might Disclose it to (the English-Embassador at the Hague)
Sir William Boswel, who Informs the Archbishop of it, and He the King; this
was a most Admirable Act of Divine Providence, that this Assistant (sent from
Rome to be a Principal Promoter of this Hellish Plot) should be Overruled by
Almighty God, (through his own Remorse) to become the Prime Discoverer, not
only of the Plot it self, but also of the Persons, Places, Time, Method, and
Manner thereof, as Dr. Habernfield's Latin Letter does fully Demonstrate:
Jacula praevisa minus feriunt, Darts foreseen (if warily shunned) are Dintless:
It Is true, Prevision here (not Rightly Improved) was not Prevention, neither of
the Kingdoms Misery, in those late Civil (Uncivil) Wars, nor of the Kings
Death, at which a Grand Jesuit Triumphed, saying, Now is the Enemy of God, and
of his Church fallen: yet the Lord preserved his Church in Despite of the Devil.
Now in the Reign of K. Charles the 2d. that the like Damnable Design has been
Hatched by the same Heads, Hearts, and Hands, it is supersluous to Declare,
seeing there be about Ten several Narratives hereof, (even by such as should
have been Actors in it) and this so confirmed by the Kings many Proclamations,
by the Testimony of Two several Parliaments, by the Sentence of so many Judges,
and by the Execution of so many Plotters, etc. The like Miracle of Mercy that
made Remorse to Discover the former, has done no less in this latter, and to
Disappoint hitherto the Popes Design; though He has Deposed the King as an
Heretic, sent Card. Howard to possess (for him) his Consiscate Kingdoms, etc.
yet still the Church is Marvelously preserved, yea, Undoubtedly shall be so,
though this Discovery (through Maladministration) may cause the Church to
have many Sharp Throws in her Travel, (as in the former) before She can bring
forth the Man-Child of Reformation; Alas! the Child is come to the Birth, and
there is not Strength to bring forth, 2 Kin. 19. 3. Heavens Hand will Help at a
Dead Lift; Where Man ends, there God begins, Psalm. 21. 13. Much more might be
Added, were there not a [Noli m^ Tangere] in the Case: Controversal Truth
seldom goes without a Scratched Face: I shall Conclude the Historical part with
some Memorable Remarks. (1) The Pope (who is the Devils By-blow) was Worthily
Thrust out of England, (as he was also out of France and Arragon,) it being
said of him, That He was like a Mouse in the Sachel, or like a Snake in the
Bosom. Speed, page 622. England had been long his Ass. Otto (the Popes
Mouse-catcher) so Drained this Land of Money, that he left not so much behind
him, as he carried hence to Rome with him, or sent thither before him; but at
length this Ass cast her Rider, and would no longer bear his Burdens: One
would think England (e're this) should be so Awakened, and made Wiser, than
ever to become the Popes Ass any more. A 2d. Remark is, Those Princes, who
have Trusted God with their Lives and Lands, and kept Rome, etc. at Distance
and Defiance, has Speeded the Best, and Flourished the most, and the longest,
in their large Dominions. Q. Elizabeth is a pregnant Instance hereof, who could
never be persuaded to Favor the Papists, (though she was to Disfavour the
Puritans) but she ever kept a Vigilant Eye over the former, as being rightly
Informed, that they (and not the latter) were the worst Enemies to Royal Power;
and God Wonderfully Preserved this Heroic Lady from all the Romish Bulls,
Interdicts, Poysonings, Assassinations, etc. as before. A 3d. Remark, is, Such
Princes, as Relied upon their own politic Projects, (in Conniving at, if not
Complying with the Romish Interest) for their personal preservation, have ever
fared the Worst; to omit K. James, who (though not blown up) yet was so Shaken
(as some say, How True I know not) with the Powder Plot, that his (naturally)
Timorous Spirit was drawn into some Connivences, etc. Point Blank against
Arch-Bp. Abbot's Advice, and not long after he was taken out of the way, by
whose Hands God only knows: But Henry the 4th. of France is a clear Instance,
who, being bred up a Protestant, Turned Papist upon politic Grounds, and being
Disuaded by a great Duke from re-Admitting the Jesuits, (which justly had been
Banished the Realm) he Angrily Answered, [Give me then Security for my Life.]
Hereupon he not only Restores them, but Demolisheth the Pillar Erected in
Paris as a Standing Monument of their Treasons against their Sovereigns, yea,
received them into his Bosom, giving them his Palace for their College, and
(in a public Speech) saying, That they were Timothys in the House, Chrysostoms
in the Chair, and Augustins in the Schools, etc. But what was the Issue? Those
Timothys proved Judas's, those Chrysostoms, Cataline's, and those Augustins,
Assassins: one of those Slaughter-Slaves Stabbed him in the Mouth, another in
the Heart: Thus things, Men Fear, come upon them by trusting their own
Politics more than Gods Providence. Lastly, Other Nations, that have seen so
little of their Wiles and Wickedness, have seen enough as not to trust them, as
China it self. God forbid that We who have Felt so much, should See so little
as now to be Cheated with them, especially, after such a Chain of Providence
linked together (on which we may Hang our Hope) for prevention thereof: In a
Word, Gods Word is his Will, and his Will is his Work, and neither Man nor
Devil can Disappoint it: The good Lord give still more Evinceing Proofs of his
Providence.

The Scripture-Prophecy, Showing how the Church shall be Preserved to the End
of the World. CHAP.

XXXIV.
HAving shown How it has been with the Church from the Beginning of the World
to this present time, let me now make a short-Inspection How it shall be with
Her Until Time shall be no more, but turned into Eternity. A Narrative hereof
cannot be Deduced out of any Chronicle or History, (either Civil, or Sacred)
but out of the Apocalypse or Revelation, which Book is a Manifestation of many
Mysteries by the Mediator to John, who had the Mind of Christ showed to him,
that he might show it to the Church what things should shortly come to pass,
Revel. 1. 1, 19, 20. and 4. 1. and 1 Cor. 2. 16. The Divine Project of John
therein, is a Contiguous and Continued Prophecy of the Churches Progress
through all Times after Christ to his 2d. Coming, as that of Daniel was before
Christ to his 1st. Coming; both of them Divinely Declaring how God would
preserve his Church in the Worst Times of Apostasy, both under Antiochus before
Christ, and under Antichrist after Him, (as is aforesaid) and that in no Age,
shall ever the Gates of Hell prevail against the Church, Matthew. 16. 18. on
which both their Books be a Conspicuous Comment.

I have already shown how John's Seal-Prophecy, and his Trumpet-Prophecy, has
had their Exact Accomplishment in our foregoing Ages, and how Time (the best
Expounder of Dark Prophecies) has turned those abstruse Mysteries into plain
and legible Histories. Now I come unto the Book-Prophecy that Ushers in the
7th. Trumpet, Revel. 10. 2, 7. and 11. 15. and the Seven Vials (having the
Seven last Plagues) which are the several parts of that 7th. Trumpet, Chap. 15.
1, 7. Here (for brevity's sake) take those following Famous Remarks. The (1st.)
is, The Church of God is always under some special Prophecy, Promise, and
Providence, and therefore is her State so steadfast and Unmovable, as the
Mountains of Brass, Zech. 6.1. neither Men nor Devils can remove her, Psalm.
125. 1, 2. The 2d. Remark, is, The Book (which made John Weep) is called,
[(...)] a Book of some Bulk and bigness, while it had all the Seven Seals upon
it, and the great Concerns of the Six Trumpets within it, Rev. 5. 2. But now,
when the Seal-Prophecy was Accomplished in its Events, as likewise Six parts of
the Trumpet-Prophecy, it is called, [(...),] the Word is a double Diminutive,
signifying a little, little Book, or a very little Book, containing only the
Seven last Plagues, whereby Gods last Wrath should be filled up on the
Antichristian-State, and Time should be no longer for him, Rev. 10. 2, 6, 7.
and 11. 15. and 15. 1. The 3d. Famous Remark, is, such is Christ's Compassion to
his Church and Chosen, that in the worst of times he leaves her not
comfortless, Joh. 14. 18. but Secures her (from Swounding) with Sovereign
Cordials, as (1st.) He gave the Comforts of the Fifth Seal, and the
Intercession of Christ, (giving Acceptance to that Prayer, Rev. 6. 10.) Chapter 8.
3. under the Evils of the former and following Seals. (2ly.) While the Church
lay under the Wo-Trumpets, Christ gave the comforting Vision of Revel. the
10th, where the Churches Redeemer is Represented as supreme Lord of Sea and
Land, and that he sets his Feet (as a Conqueror) upon the Neck of that
Double-Beast, the Political (Rising out of the Earth) and the Ecclesiastical
(Rising out of the Sea) Limiting the Time, and Finishing the Lease of that
Mystery of Iniquity, and in the mean time Christ keeps his Right foot upon
Antichrists Clergy, and his Left foot upon his Layity, so that all their
Exploits are what Christ (not what Antichrist) Wills, 3ly. Under the 3d.
Wo-Trumpet, (where there is a Recounting of the Churches Evils both by the
Beast and by the Dragon, Chap. 11. and 12. and 13. yet some Allays of Comfort
are Annexed. Chap. 11. 14. etc and Chapter 14 2, 3, 12, 13. and Chapter 15. 3. The 4th.
Remark, is, The little, little Book in the Hand of Christ, shows, tkat he
has but a little more Work to do in the World after the Seal and
Trumpet-Prophecies be fulfilled: Christ has then but a few Things more to
Accomplish, to wit, 1. The Calling and Conversion of the Jews. 2. A bringing in
(at least a few more, or) the Fullness of the Gentiles. 3. The Pulling down of
the Kingdom of Antichrist. 4. The Setting up his own Kingdom above all the
Kingdoms of the World. Now the 3d. of these Works of Christ (the Destruction of
the Beasts-Kingdom) must be done by the 7 last Plagues, so called, only
because they are the last in this present Life (or perishing World) to be
Inflicted, though there be far Worse Plagues reserved for the Branded
Bondslaves of the Beast in Hell, and in the World to come: The Seven Golden
Vials lets fall (as it were) only the Leaves of the Wrath of God, yet so, as
gradually to Destroy them as with so many Hailstones shot at them; but the
whole Trees thereof shall fall foul upon those Reprobates afterward, yet are
those Vials called the last Plagues, because to be poured out in the last Age
of the World, being the Third Period of Events, as the Seal-Prophecy was the
first, and the Trumpet-Prophecy was the 2d. Period, and had Plagues therein,
Chap. 9. 20. And as the former Plagues Destroyed the Dragon and Rome-Heathen,
Rev. 12. so those latter Plagues shall Destroy the Double Beast that rises out
of the Ruins of the Dragon, to wit, Rome Antichristian, Rev. 16. yet his fall
shall be gradual, as his rising, See for this at large, my Discovery of
Antichrist, Chap. 8 and 9. The 5th. Memorable Remark, is, The pulling down of
the Beasts Kingdom, which is the 3d. of those four few Works, etc. Herein the
Series and Order of the Vials, is very Observable, The first is powered out upon
the Earth, that is, upon the Popes Footstool, his Stigmatized Slaves, or
Branded Vassals; This made them Sick of the Devils Disease, to wit, Malice and
Rage at the Reformation: The 2d. upon the Sea, that is, on the Popish Councils,
(especially that of Trent) to which Prelates Ran as Rivers to the Sea, and
Consulted how to Retard the Begun Reformation with their Deadly Decrees there,
which occasioned many to Dye to them, and to Cast off the Roman Yoke. The 3d.
upon the Rivers, their Brackish Clergy, (which Corrupt the Sea of Rome)
especially the Jesuits, who have Blood given them to Drink (by the Law of
Nations) for they are Worthy, Rev. 16. 2, 3, 4, 6. The 4th. upon the Sun, the
House of Austria, the Great Luminary of the Romish-Firmament, which being
Incorporated with Spain, has given Light and Sustentation to the Tottering
Kingdom of the Beast; and not only so, but has by the Indies Treasure aspired
after the 5th. or Absolute Monarchy, (as France does now,) but that Word of
God, [There must be Ten Horns] Way-lays them, so that One Horn cannot lick up
the Nine. And who cannot but Wonder to behold how much the Splendor of that
Luminary is now Eclipsed by an Interposition, how the Legs, whereon the Image
of Babel (or Babylonish Beast) stands, do now Clash and Knock one against
another; insomuch that the Christian (of France) has got the Catholic (of
Spain) under his Girdle, and at his Devotion; Yea, the Austrian Eagle begins to
Truckle under him, so that the Kingdom of the Beast, [(...)] is Darkened with a
Scottish mist, Rev. 16. 8, 10. This makes them Gnaw their Tongues, Blaspheming,
(as Faux did, when taken, saying, It was not God* but the Devil, that brought
to light and to naught their Powder Treason.) When the 5th. Vial is powered out
[(...)] upon the Throne of the Beast, (which the Dragon had given him, Rev. 13.
2.) this can be no other than Rome, for here Christ Speaks without a Parable,
that then it may be Conspicuous to every common Eye, which of the Vials are
past, and which to come, and what Vial we now Live under, is Doubtful; yet this
is beyond Doubt, that as the 5th. Trumpet placed Antichrist in his Usurped
Throne, Rev. 9. 1. (with the Key of the Bottomless-Pit at his Girdle) so the
5th. Vial Dethrones him, though not Destroys him, for the Beast is reserved for
a worse Ruin after his Throne (Rome) be Ruined, Chapter 17, and 18. His Throne or
Seat (Rome) shall first be Ruined: This is so plain, both from the Sibyls
Prophecy,

[(...). Tota eris in Cineres quasi nunquam Roma (fuisses.] And from the
Universal consent of all Chronicles, that, though Rome while Heathen was never
taken but by the Gauls, but since it became Antichristian, it has been made a
Prey to all barbarous Nations, and never was Besieged by any, who took it not;
and assuredly it shall be taken again shortly to purpose. This is Confessed by
some of the very Jesuits, (Bellarmin, Ribera, Alcasar, etc.) who begin to
Prophecy, [De Romae Excidio, and de Papae Exilio.] of Romes Ruin, and the
Popes Banishment from Rome. Ribera says, that Rome [Non solum ob pristinam
Impietatem, etc.] not only for her old Impiety, but also for her late
Iniquity, shall be Destroyed with an Horrible Fire: this is so plain and
evident, (says He) that he must needs be a Fool that goes but about to deny
it. Oh that God would put it into the Hearts of some of those Ten Kings, to
Loath her and Burn her for an Old Stinking Bawd, as is Prophesied of her, Rev.
17. 16. Tota est jam Roma Lupanar; it is now become a great Brothel-House,
having this Brand.

Roma Vale, Vidi, satis est Vidisse, Revertar, Cum Leno, aut Meretrix, scurra
Cinaedus ^ro. Vile Rome Adieu, I did thee View,
But Hence no more will see;
Till Pimp or Punk, or Jade or Spade,
I do Resolve to be.
Charles the 5th. took it, and would have Burnt it, had not his Soldiers been
restrained by an Overruling Hand (because Gods time was not then come) in the
15th. Century, Her Iniquity was not then full: And Lewis the 12th, of France
(being Excommunicated by Pope Julius the 2d.) bid Defiance to his Holiness, and
Coined Money with this Inscription, [Perdam Babylonem,] I will Destroy Babylon.
How far further this present French-King. (Lewis the 14th.) God may put into
his Heart to go, We yet know not, especially (1) If the concern of Casal (which
is the Key into Italy, as Corinth is into Greece) do Revive and Succeed. (2) If
France were the 1st of the Ten Horns, for which see my Discovery of Antichrist,
page 158. (3) If Rev. 17. 16. be meant one of the Ten, Synecdochically, as
Judge. 12. 7. 2. Chro. 35. 24. Matthew. 27. 44. the Thieves Mocked, that is, One
of Thieves, Luke 23. 39. So Cities and Sepulchers, for one of the Cities and
Sepulchers; then this Martial French-King stands fairest of all the Ten Horns
in our Day to do to Rome what Attilas (that Scourge of the World) did, tho
(according to the Politics of France) he be now Rough to the Hugonots, as
Joseph seemed to be to the Patriarks, Genesis 42. 7. His Severity against them may
be only to Avoid Suspicion of Heresy. Hereupon the 5th. Vial is reassumed,
and further and fullier explained in Revel. Chap. 17. and Chapter 18. in both which
the Great Damnation of the Damnable Whore is Angelically and Evangelically
Described; showing with much perspicuity (for the Earth was Lightened with that
Angels Glory, Revel. 18. 2.) how Christ will crush the Crown of that Proud
Prelat of Rome with a Woe, as Isa. 28. 1. So that Ribera (the Jesuit)
Confesses Romes Ruin shall be Manifest to all Men; whereof there was a fair
Omen in Y. 1619. when Peter's Image (in Peter's Church at Rome) had a Massy
Stone fell down upon it, and not only knocked the Keys out of the Image's
Hands, but so Shattered the Image and its Inscription, that not a Letter (of
that Sentence, whereon Rome Grounds her Claim) was left Legible, save only,
[Aedisicabo Ecclesiam,] I will Build my Church, which might teach those
Popelings, it shall be done on the Ruins of their Rotten Title. How much more
shall the Romish Religion (which is but an Image, a mere Shadow and Ceremony)
be Broken all to pieces, when the little Stone (cut out of the Mountain (of
Heaven) without Hands) does fall foul upon it, Dan. 2. 35. 44, 45. If Christ
once fall upon Rome with his whole Weight, he will Crush it to pieces, yea,
Grind it to Powder, Matthew. 21. 44. The Elder Rome is, the baser, as one of her
own Sons (Theodoric Vrias) said Y. 1414. sadly of her, That of Gold she was
become Silver, of Silver Iron, of Iron Earth, [Superesse, ut in Stercus
abiret,] She would turn next into Dung, to be cast out to the Dunghill; She is
now come to her Toes of Clay, which while part of Iron did no less than
Stagger. When Phillip the Fair K. of France, (not many Ages since) broke open
the Gates of Rome, Demolished the Walls, Dispersed the Cardinals and Citizens,
yea, and Doomed the Pope to a Dark Dungeon, and Loading him there with many
Scoffs and Curses: This was Boniface the 8th. in the 12th. Century: And the
Realm of France not many Years since, was ready to Shake off the Papal Yoke,
and to erect the Archbishop of Burges (as their proper Patriark,) because
Gregory the 14th. would not be Reconciled to Henry the 4th. of France, no, not
when he turned to the Romish Religion; And had not the Pope hastened his
Benediction, the Parliament of Paris (which Burnt the Popes Bull by the Hands
of the Hangman) had utterly withdrawn from the Vassalage of Rome: Yea, our King
Henry the 8th. and the French-King, (a little before their Deaths) were at a
point to change the Mass into a Communion, and to have Rooted out the Prelat of
Rome out of both their Realms; and they were so thoroughly resolved herein, that
they meant to require the Emperors Concurrence, or otherwise to break off from
his Alliance. Act. and Monum. Fol. 11 35. If Rome Staggered thus at that time,
surely a cold Sweat stands upon all the Limbs of the Beast at this time, when
his Toes of Clay cannot long Support him; and how far God may Honor this Realm
toward Romes Ruin, we know not, seeing it was the first that Shook off the
Romish Yoke. However, as sure as Rome Heathen is Destroyed, so shall Rome
Antichristian surely be, Christ (the true Jehoiada) will cast this Whore
(Athaliah) out of the Temple, and Burn her for an Old Bawd, because she has
burnt the Seed-Royal, put down Kings at her pleasure, Usurped the Government of
the Church, set up Altars and Images to Baalim and Ashtaroth, to He- and
She-Saints, and called them Traitors who would set the Crown on Christ's Head,
then all Saints will rejoice, 2 Chronicles. 23. 21. Revel. 18. 20. The 6th. Notable
Remark, is, The 6th. Vial brings in Conversion to the Jews, as soon as the 5th.
Vial does bring on Confusion to the Popelings. The first of those Four few
Works aforesaid, to wit, The Call of the Jews, which cannot be till Antichrists
Seat be Destroyed; for nothing does Stumble that poor People at Christianity,
more than the Idolatry of those Mock-Christians the Romanists, (whom the very
Turks, for their Image Worship, call Idolaters, and therefore Abhorrs them for
their Breach of the 2d. Commandment.) Hereupon Antichrist must be removed from
his Throne, before the People of the God of Abraham be Converted. No sooner is
the Euphrates of Mystical Babylon Dried up, (the Markets of Romish Merchandise
must Fall, Kings will not be such Babies (as H. 8. said) as to let about Nine
Tun of Gold go Yearly hence to Rome by Peter Pence, etc. and to loose their
Points to be Lashed by the Pope as they had been, Revel. 18. 11. No Doubt but
the 5th. Vial Drys up, and Diverts the Euphrates of Rome, (Tyber, Romes River,
being so named, as Rome is Babylon, both Mystically) in throwing down not only
Rome (it self,) but also its Riches and Revenues. Hence may we Comfortably
Hope, that the 5th. Vial is begun, inasmuch as the Heat of that Plague has
already Dried up many Golden Streams that ran to Rome out of all Popish
Kingdoms, the Ten Horns of the Beast; but now (praised be the Lord) none of
those Ten Kingdoms, (except Spain and Italy) but they have all (more or less)
Diverted the Euphrates of Rome, and turned the Vast Riches and Revenues (that
ran Yearly thither) toward the Maintenance of Godly Schools and
Gospel-preaching; when Literal Babylon had a Drought upon her Waters, Jerem.
50. 38. and her Passages were stopped, Jerem. 51. 32. She was taken soon after,
accordingly Rome (that Mystical Babylon) shall shortly be Sacked and Ransacked,
this being a forerunner of it.

But still Christ has the Eastern Antichrist (the Turk) to Tread down Under
the 6th. Vial, which produces Three Grand Effects: (1.) The Drying up of
Euphrates. 2. The Warlike Preparation by the Influence of the Jesuits, those
Frogs, coming out of the Mouths of the Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet,
Revel. 16. 12, 13. (3.) The Destruction of the Churches Enemies by Christ, v.
16. It Is True, all the Vials do Concern the Beasts Kingdom, yet not only so;
some think that the Western Antichrist (upon the Ruin of Rome by the 5th.
Vial) shall run to the Eastern Antichrist (the Turk) for Succor, and Gog (the
Pope) or Covert Enemy of Christ, shall join with Magog (the Turk,) or the Overt
and open Enemy, as the Two Names do signify; Therefore the 6th. Vial is powered
out upon Euphrates, or Turkish Empire, to Dry it up so far, that another Army
of New Christians (the Converted Jews) may make War against the Beast also;
Their Conversion is Hindered by a Double Bar. 1. The Popes Idolatry. 2. The
Turks Insolency: Now as the 5th. Trumpet brought on the former bar, so the 5th.
Vial takes it off: and as the 6th. Trumpet set on the latter bar, (by loosing
the Turk from Euphrates, Revel. 9. 14.) so the 6th. Vial carries it off, by
drying up his Euphrates or Empire, that the way of the Jews may be open to
Christianity, to Canaan, and to the Battle at Armageddon. Here Note (1) the
Jews are called Kings of the East: 1. Christ makes all Christians to be Kings
in general, Rev. 1.6. but 2. Those Converted Jews in special, Isa. 24. 21, 22,
23. Where (upon their Conversion) they are called Kings. 3. Then shall the
Kingdom of Christ be most Gloriously Erected among them, Zech. 12. 8. and they
Reign with Christ, Zech. 14.6, 7. Isa. 60.20. and 62. 1, 2, 3. [of the East,]
because they (most) live there, in Turkey, Tartary, (the Ten Tribes especially,)
and China, which is called the Land of Sinim, Isa. 49. 12. or Shinar, Zech. 5
11. (2) That the Jews shall be Converted in the latter Age, both Old and New
Testam. foretell it; this must be under the 6th. Vial, for under the 7th. Vial,
[All is Done, Rev, 16. 17. both the Mystery of Iniquity is Abolished, and the
Mystery of Godliness is then Accomplished. 2. Their Conversion is Described
with the same Phrase of Drying up the River, Isa. 11. 15, 16. (3) The Hebrew
Phrases, (used here and no where else) as Armageddon, Rev. 16. 16. and
Allelujah, Rev. 19. 1, 3, 4, 6. (where the 6th. Vial is reassumed and further
explained) does show, that the Jews are come in and joins with the Christian
Gentiles in praising God for the Ruin of Rome, Christ Commands to praise God
for it, Chapter 18. 20. the Gentile-Churches do readily Obey, and cry with a great
Voice, [Hallelujah,] Chap. 19. 1. This Awakens the Dull Daughters of Jerusalem,
(especially the Voice of the Lamb, ver. 5.) to seek their Beloved with them,
Cant. 5. 9. and 6. 1. Then comes the Jewish Church out of her opened Grave,
Ezekiel. 37. 12. As the Morning, (out of the East, and after a long Night) Cant.
6. 10. out of Her Wilderness: She is somewhat Moved and Mollified by the Two
first Hallelujahs, v. 1. 3. but more by the 3d. wherein the 4 living Wights,
and the 24 Elders jointly and publicly sounded their Hallelujah, v. 4. yet
most of all by the Lambs Voice was she roused and raised from the Dead; 'twas
Christ that did powerfully pull the Vail from off her Heart, v. 5. so that now
she joins with the Gentile-Churches in the 4th. Hallelujah, to Concelebrate
that great Mercy of Romes Ruin, (whose Idolatry had long been her
Stumbling Block.) Now all the Saints (Jew and Gentile) join with one Consent to
Praise the Lord, v. 6. Hence it is called the Voice of a great Multitude of many
Waters, and of mighty Thunders. Thus the Believing Gentiles do all they are
able to bring Christ into their Mothers House, (the Jewish Church,) Cant. 3. 4.
The Gentile Church was Conceived in the Chambers of the Jewish, Joh. 4. 22. And
now the Jewish Church (after a long Divorce) has the Robes of a Bride bestowed
on her, Chap. 19.8. that in Conjunction with the Gentile Church, both may be
Married to the Lamb; and because Christ will not Marry this New Bride, but as a
Conqueror, therefore is his Conquest Related after the Conqueror is
Described, v. 11, 20. Christ Drew his Sword, when he began his War against the
Cursed Canaanites, Josh. 5. 13, 14. and he will never put up his Drawn Sword
till he has made all his Foes his Footstool. The Dragon cannot prevail against
Michael our Prince, Rev. 12. 8. Here the Beast (that bears the Whore) is Taken,
(notwithstanding all his Fraud and Force) and with him the False Prophet, and
both cast Alive into the Lake of Fire that burns with Brimstone, (which is
the most exquisite and most unquenchable burning) Rev. 19. 19, 20. The Beast
(in respect of his Civil or Temporal power) and the False Prophet, (in respect
of his Spiritual or Ecclesiastic power) makes up one Antichrist, whom Christ,
as soon as he comes into the Field, Conquers, [Venit, Vidit, Vicit.] Catches,
Casts him away with Indignation, yea, comes upon him as out of an Engine, while
he is most Secure and Insulting, (when he says, I sit as a God, and shall see
no sorrow, Chapter 18. 7.) and hurls him Headlong into Hell, where he shall have
Burning for Burning; as he has burnt Alive many of Gods Martyrs with a
Temporal fire, so he shall be burnt alive (himself) with Eternal fire. And the
Kings (that are Antichrist's Auxiliaries with their Armies) shall be slain with
the Sword, v. 21. at Armageddon, (which signifies a Treacherous Army, or an
Unfortunate Troop, or rather, a Mountain of Men cut in pieces, as Sisera's Army
was at the Waters of Megiddo, Judge. 5.19.) Revel. 16.16. These are not so
Deeply Damned as the Beast, etc. yet are they made a Prey to the Infernal
Vulturs. The 7th. Memorable Remark, is, the 7th. Vial, which is powered out upon
the Air, that is, on the Kingdom of Satan that Prince of the Air, who had
hitherto Upheld the Beasts Kingdom. Now, It is Done, Chapter 16, 17. to wit, the
Dragon's or Devils Deputy (Antichrist, Chap. 13.2.) is Undone and utterly
Destroyed; Note (1.) the Instruments of this Destruction, Heaven and Earth
Conspire together for that Work, v. 18. (2) The Object of this Destruction is
the whole Antichristian Church and State, ver. 19. the 10th. part whereof is
said to fall at the Rise of the Witnesses, Chapter 11.13. here the Nine parts
remaining do fall in a Tripartite Ruin, This Earthquake pulls it all into
Three pieces, and all Confederate Places and People are either Converted or
Confounded, whether Continent Countries or Islands, See Ezekiel. 5. 11, 12. Zech.
14.4, 5. some may Flee away, v. 20. and Chap. 18.4. by true Penitency; but such
as remain in their Stubborn Impenitency, Christ will Brain them (with bigger
Hailstones than those Josh. 10. each of them being an 100 Weight, v. 21.) or
those that knocked down the Jesuits Church at Blois in France, yet marvelously
passed over the Protestant Church there without the least Harm, as Exodus 9. 25.
or bigger than those which fell here this 18th. of May, which knocked so many
Rooks on the Head, etc.) That the Prophecy of the 7th. Vial (poured out on the
Air) is Reassumed in Revel. 20. (as the 5th. and 6th. Vials are, Chapter 17.18,
19.) has the common consent of the Learned, though many of them do conceive
it is no more than an Historical Repetition of things formerly done; yet we may
(with many others) as probably Conclude that it is a Prophetic Relation of
things to come; Considering (1) the Connection of this Vision, Chap. 20. with
the former, Chapter 19. 19, 20, 21. John says [And (or Afterward) I saw, etc. Chapter
20. 1. to wit, After I had seen the Beast and the False Prophet cast into the
Lake, then had I this following Vision. (2) It Is rational to expect the Doom of
the Dragon or Devil, after the Doom of the Beast, who was but the Devil's
Deputy, Rome (both Imperial and Papal) Acting all by and under the Dragon,
Revel. 13. 3. Christ (indeed) fought with the Dragon and Foiled him, Chapter 12.
whereupon he Resigns his Throne and Power to the Beast, (which did his Masters
work thoroughly) Chapter 13. till the Lamb conquered and cast him into the Lake,
Chap. 19. Till then the Dragon was not only a Spectator, but also an
Instigator, Hissing on the Beast to his Beastly Work, till he got his Beastly
Wages, Slaughter at last. Now after the Judgment of the Beast, comes that of
the Dragon, the Master of his Misrule. (3) As the 5th. Vial is Reassumed to
declare the Ruin of Rome more fully after, Chapter 17. 18. and the 6th. Vial, that
of the Beast, after that, Chapter 19. So this 7th. that of the Dragon, (who set
them on work) Chapter 20. for it would be Improper to relate so largely the Ruin
of the Instruments, and to say nothing of the Principal Agent: Our Michael has
something to say to and do with the Devil, (as well as to and with Antichrist)
to wit, (1) Something before the 1000 Y. when a gradual Doom is Executed upon
him: as 1st. Christ in fury Arrests the same Dragon whom he had cast into the
Earth before, Rev. 12. 9. 2ly. He Chains him up, as Men do mad Mastives, for a
long time. 3ly. He claps him close Prisoner in the Abyss, which before he
feared, Luke 8. 31. and 4ly. He set a Seal upon him, as Dan. 6. 17. and Matthew.
27. last. that his Range abroad might not Molest Christ's Reign for a 1000 Y.
Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3. Where the Church has as good Security for a long-lasting
Tranquillity, as Christ (who keeps the Ensureing Office) can possibly give her.
(2) Something after the 1000 Y. when he was loosed for a little season, v. 3.7.
to Engage Gog and Magog (or all covert and overt Enemies) in a War against the
Church, v. 8, 9. then Fire from Heaven falls upon the Devils Army, and consumes
them in the very Attempt, and the Devil (himself) is Arrested the 2d time, and
then cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, (whither the Beast and False
Prophet were cast before) there to be Tormented for ever, whence he shall never
any more be loosed to Torment the Church after this: Thus as the Plots against
the Church did begin in the Devil, Chapter the 1st. of this Church History, so they
all End in and with the Devil in this: The Gates of Hell cannot prevail against
Her; When Pope, Turk and Devil, are all gone and in Torments, The Church (that
New Jerusalem, consisting of the Converted Jews, and Fullness of the Gentiles)
remains after All in a Flourishing State, and is Married as a Bride to the
Lamb, Rev. 21.7, 22. where the Triumphant Estate of the Church (after her
Militant Estate, at the Destruction of all her Enemies, is ended) is most
Graphically Described, 1st. Generally, 1. by things seen, as a New (1) Heaven,
(2) New Earth, Chapter 21. 1. (3) New Jerusalem, Descending from Heaven, v. 2. and
10. 2. By things Heard, as (1) of Gods Presence with Men, v. 3. (2d.) of
removing all fears and tears, v. 4. (3d.) of making all things new, v. 5. 2ly.
More particularly, the Transcendent Glory of the Church has a most Exact and
Special Delineation, as (1st.) her Advancement above all Hills, ver. 9. 10, 11.
Isa. 2. 2, (2ly.) her Dimensions of Longitude and Latitude, etc. v. 12, to 17.
(3ly.) her rich Materials of Gold and Jewels, v. 9, to 22. (4ly.) The
Confluence of the Gentiles to this New Jerusalem, v. 24, 26. Isa. 60. 3, etc.
(5ly.) The Affluence and plenty of all things that may make the Church State
Happy, Typify'd (1) by the River of living Water, Chapter 22. 1. (2) by the Tree of
Life, (a Type of Christ) that bears Fruit every Month, v. 2. (6ly.) The
Perpetuity of this Happy Estate, which is Illustrated 1st. by a freedom from
all Evil, not only from Sorrow, Death, etc. Chapter 21.4. but also 1. from Danger,
v. 25. 2. from Sin, v. 27. and 3. from the Curse, Chapter 22. 3. and 2ly. by a
Fruition of all Good; as 1. an Immediate Communion with God and Christ, who
will be 1. a Temple. 2. a Light, (Chapter 21.22, 23.) 3. A Throne (Chapter 22. 1, 3.)
to this Holy City; 2. A Beatifical Vision of both, They shall see the face,
etc. v. 4. As the former Evils had disturbed, so those Good Privileges will
Preserve the Churches peace to perpetuity. 3. yea, Reign for Ever, ver. 5.
Finally, Those few Remarks shall shut up the Whole.

The (1st.) is, The marvelous Manifestation of Christ's love to his Church, in
Revealing to her [the Fata Ecelesiae] all that should befall her in all Ages to
the end of the World, this he does as her Prophet and Mediator, Chapter 22. 16.

2ly. That what Christ Revealed herein should be Written [Litera Scripta
Manet,] for the Churches Comfort at Christ's command, Chap. 21. 5. and 14. 13.
and 19.9. The Spouse has the Heart-love of Christ with her, better then
Dalilah had Samsons, Judge. 16. 15. and therefore she shall know (even out of
his Fathers Bosom, Joh. 1. 18.) all that is in his Heart, and have it also
Under his Hand upon Record, as Her Cordial always.

3ly. That this Writing must not be Shut up, or Sealed, (as Daniels was, Dan.
8. 26. and 12. 4, 9. till 300 Y. after) for Sealing is concealing, but here
John is bid, Not to Seal this Prophecy, (as he had the Seven Thunders, Revel.
10. 4.) Chap 22. 10. because the Time was at Hand, and All this he must not
Monopolize to himself, but Show them to Christ's Servants, Rev. 1. 1.

4ly. This Prophecy is Faithful and True in all its parts, Chapter 22. 6. as much
as the History (from Genesis to this Revelation) is, and as sure as the former
part of this Prophecy (in the Seals and Trumpets) is performed already, so sure
shall the latter part (of the Vials, and of the Brides Marriage) be
Accomplished also; The Scripture-Testimony of it self is true.

5ly. This Prophecy Symbolizeth with that of Ezekiel, who (in his latter End)
has a Resurrection, Ezekiel. 37. a Gog and Magog, Chap. 38, and 39. and a New
Jerusalem, Chapter 40, and forward: So in the latter end of the Revelation, There
is a Resurrection, Chapter 20. 5. a Gog and Magog, v. 8. and a New Jerusalem, Chapter
21, and 22. And as sure as that was fulfilled (in part) by Ezra, etc. so shall
this be.

6ly. This Book, as it was last Writ, so it contains a Revelation of the whole
will of God, concerning the Riches of the Church, as well as the Ruin of all
her Enemies: as it is said of the latter, [It is Done,] Rev. 16.17. All the
Churches Foes are Undone by the 7th. Vial; So, of the former, [It is Done,] Chapter
21.6. As to the Riches and Reward of the Righteous, Christ Swore, that Time
should be no longer, Chapter 10.6, 7. to wit, of Delaying (beyond the 7th. Trumpet)
the Execution of those Divine Mysteries, (1) the Call of the Jews, Romans 11.25.
(2) the Fullness of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 3.3, 4, 6. (3) the Kingdom of the
Saints, Dan. 7.18. Rev. 20.4. and 22.5. (4) All Kingdoms of the World become
Christ's, Chapter 11.15.

7ly. As we are not to expect any New Revelation, (no more than any New Gospel)
so we ought only to believe and pray for the Accomplishment of all that is
revealed, being assured (from Truth it self, Rev. 1.5.) that (1) ^he who was
the Alpha to confound the 1st. Plot, Genesis 3. will be the Omega to conquer the
last, Rev. 22.13. (2) the Kings of the Earth, that gave their power to the
Beast, shall bring their Glory to the Church. Rev. 17.13. and 21.24. (3) The
Brides Feast and Felicity shall be, either in Heaven as Piscator, or on Earth,
as Alsted, or in both, as Perkins say: it is good in either place, Refer that to
God, making a Common and Constant Cry, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, to
Accomplish all that is Unaccomplished, 1 These. 1.10. Rev. 22.20, 21.

FINIS.
BOOKS Published BY THE AVTHOR.
1. THe Crown and Glory of a Christian. 2. A Christian's Walk and Work on
Earth, till he come to Heaven. 3. A Protestant-Antidote against the Poison of
Popery. 4. A Crystal Mirror, or Christian-Looking-Glass; discovering the
Treason and Treachery of the Heart. 5. A Distinct Discourse and Discovery of
the Person and Period of Antichrist. 6. This Complete and Compendious
Church History.

