A KEY (With the WHIP) To open the Mystery and Iniquity OF THE POEM CALLED,
ABSALOM and ACHITOPHEL: Showing its Scurrilous Reflections Upon both KING and
KINGDOM.

Published by Richard Ianeway, 1682.

A KEY (With the WHIP) To open the MYSTERY and INIQUITY OF THE POEM CALLED
ABSALOM and ACHITOPHEL.
THus far His Braz'd faced Preface (a vile Design)
Called for a Comment Rugged, yet Divine,
His Book's no better, Head and Body too
Of Polypus s^inks on, to the Realm Undo;
As Full of Hell, as Ink, sublimely Base,
If it the Impartial Or (...) step by step do Trace.
View but distinctly's Jewish Allegories,
Allusions of both's English Whigs, and Tories.
Never were the Harp, and the Harrow more unlike,
Not Even, but Odd All his Two's do strike;
Jewish and English the vast Disparity
Next View betwixt, but no Congruity:
Had Plutarch made such parallels as This
^ond Poet does, he had deserved an Hiss;
K. Charles.
First to begin with his Top-Comparison
Of Holy David to our Sovereign.
The Type of Christ he makes our Charles's Type,
Yet draws foul Figures of the Antitype;
As if embracing Queans over all his Land,
Instead of's Royal Queen with his Royal Hand:
It Is true this Godly King had many Wives,
Yet neither He, nor the Rest leading such Lives,
Can be excused from Sin, unless he will prove,
A Divine Dispensation did them move,
But not one word; suppose God Tolerated
This ill for good, yet not Anticipated
Is his first Law hereby, it stands in ^orce
Against all Exceptions, and all Fal^e Divorce;
First one to one was the first blessed Confinement,
More is a Monster, and a Cursed consignment;
Man then was bid to cleave unto his Wife, Mat. 19.5.

Not unto Wives, and this was during Life,
If neither of the two have power over
Their Bodies, 1 Cor. 7.4.
then they cannot give to another.
Though David did excel all other Kings,
His Virtues shone, Save only in the Things
Of's brave Vriah, 1 King. 15.5.
whose Cade lamb he took
Unto his Flock, and so Gods Law forsook*
This Wicked Poet, one of the Devils Imps,
Over looks all the Good, and like a Prince of Pimps
Fixes on's Fault, propounds 't for Imitation,
A Pattern prompt for a Kings Gloriation.
( Scarabeus like) he flies over fragrant Flowers;
And falls on stinking Dung, which he Impowers
A Princes President, like Machiavel,
Propounds a Pattern prompting toward Hell
Thus fawning Sycophants do bolster up
Their Lords in ill, their spittle they will sup.
Those Cur Dogs, currying Kindness, suck the Blood
While they but lick the wound, as pleasing Food,
Kind Murderers of Souls in Court are these,
Aiones, and Negones, what you please:
Next is our English Queen the Poets Scorn, Q Katherine.

Because she is Barren, She must be forlorn:
Though mocking Michals may have barren Wombs,
Imposed as the Curse of God to cut their Combs
For Scorning Piety, 2 Samuel 6.23.
yet Daughters of
Sarah as well as Saul (whom he does huff)
May Barren be; Man is not in Gods stead, Genesis 30.1.

The Key of Wombs is at Gods Girdle ti'd:
How dare this black-mouthed wretch blaspheme a Queen,
To Afflict the Afflicted base has even been:
Near to the King he falls on Monmouth next, D. of Monmouth.

Makes the Story of proud Absalom his Text.
This Noble Duke he makes his Absalon,
As if a Traitor to the King and Crown;
Oh thou Incongruous Fool, what parallel
That Is Congruous 'twixt these two can thou tell?
Josephus and the Scripture ^imn to life
Thy vile Ambitionists most restless Strife
To Rape the Crown before his Fathers Death, 2 Samuel 16.11.

Sick of his life, he sought to stop his Breath.
A Graphical Description of this Type,
Set out in 'ts Colors, Epithets most Ripe;
Stands upon Record with this ugly Brand,
A complete Rogue, Ambitious, Arrogant,
Ungrateful, Lying, a Dissembling Wretch,
Who the Reins of lustful Reins did lewdly stretch,
Traitor to's Father, Rebel to his King,
Subverter of the People, every thing
Accomplishing a Villain Sublimate
Without a parallel in Realm, or State:
And must brave Monmouth be his parallel,
By Renegado Wits of old Cromwell.
Five hundred Guinnies makes him sell his Sense,
His King and Country, and his Conscience:
Oh lump of Impudence, where can thou find
That e're Pride budded Ezekiel. 7.^0.
thus in Monmouths mind?
Was e're he hammering and hatching out,
For two full years any Rebellious Rout?
As did thy Absalom: did e're this Duke
His Fathers Judges Brand in open Rebuke 2 Samuel, 15.3.
,
Josephus. ^ V ^
Affecting to be made Judge in the Land;
Soothing all Plaintiffs that their Cause would stand
Right, or Wrong, smooth them up with gaudy words,
To steal away their Hearts, while War and Swords
Were in his Heart against his Fathers Crown,
Fit to be made a Chanc'lour of Renown:
When did this Noble Duke aspire a Train
Of Princely Port like a Successors Aim?
When did he Court, Collogue, Crouch, Cring to the Rabble?
All Is true of Absalom, of the Duke a Babble:
Stolen has he many Hearts, unto the King,
But never any from him, That Is the thing
Thou do traduce him with, as basely by
Counterfeit Court'sy stooped to climb on high:
A Votary when seemed he for Religion,
Only to palliate Designed Rebellion?
When did he send his Spies abroad the Land
To feel the Peoples Pulses, bring to Hand,
Their Hands and Hearts to his Conspiracy;
Though some attend him in Simplicity:
Much more Dispar'ty might be Blazoned on,
'Twixt our Young Hero, and this Rebel Son,
Thy Type and Antitype Concords no better,
In 'ts Starched Verse, and Dedicated Letter.
More clear 'twill be in thy Achitophel, E. of Shaftesbury.

Sage Shaftesbury thou makes his Parallel.
The only hit is both were Oracles,
All the rest are empty sounds, and idle Kackles:
Thy Type pernicious Counsel did infuse,
That the Rebel-Son a princely pomp might use
Chariots and Horsemen, fifty Footmen, all
The vulgar to perstringe, and them enthrall,
Must rise up early, call the Plaintiff to him,
Show Zeal to Right from those that would undo hi^*
Must meet all Suitors, say their Cause was good,
Though nere so bad, yet none deputed stood,
In's Courts to Right them, he must undertake,
Promise Redress from Griefs for Justice sake,
Though never meant it, but to gain their Loan,
From David's Carcass he might step to the Throne.
With many more insinuating Tricks,
Impatient of delays, the Mock-Sun to fix.
In's Royal Orb before the True Sun was set,
Present Possession of the Crown to get:
Did e're our Earl Brisk Monmouth thus advise,
For a prepost'rous Throne to Tantalize,
His Fathers Person, Justice to Traduce,
To the Rabble say, His Courts were of no Use,
To hear their cause, and to Redress their wrong,
Such Poison 's not transfused into his Tongue:
When did he teach this Duke to Vilify
His Fathers Magistrates for Villainy,
To vulgar Ears, His Dote Age-Government,
Yet the People praise even to the firmament,
Sordidly fawn them from their Wit and Reason,
And deep involve them into horrid Treason;
That Subtil-Fox, the true Achitophel,
Was at the bottom of this Cursed Spell;
(Though he lay lurking in his hole unseen)
To black and blast th'Kings fame (from spiteful spleen,)
As if he had no care to execute
Justice himself, nor others did depute,
To do it under him, nor did he blame
Those that neglected it, to h's Kingdoms shame,
A Shameless Slander of a Graceless Son,
( Justice to all (God testifies 2 Samuel 8.15.
) was done)
Which that old lurking Fox had foisted in
To his Ambition, the Rising Sun to win.
The Setting Sun found him a wicked Man,
Unconscionable POLITICIAN;
So breaks with him, who hereupon withdraws,
Lays close at Giloh, yet puts forth his paws,
Paved a way by h's close persuasion,
Prompting the simple to Rebellion.
This crafty Ape draws Nuts out of the Fire,
With the Cats paw to save his own entire:
Thus the Coadjutor of this Damned Plot,
Made Hellish Bolts, by fools then to be shot,
(If not its Author) yet plays least in sight,
Lurking at home, disguised from the Light,
In's Country House, that it might not be known,
His Hand did manage this Rebellious Son;
Wherein his Head and Heart were deep engaged,
Engaging vulgar Hands, being sore enraged,
Against David who cashierd him from his Place;
(When Is Roguish Craft was seen with open Face)
Revenge he will take, though at the first behind,
The Curtain undiscerned, but's wicked mind,
(Twice dipped in the Devils Dy-fat, the Scarlet die)
Makes him appear amongst the Rebels publicly,
Then gave he Absalom those damned Designs,
First to act Incest on the Kings Concubines;
Oh Hellish Tongue worthy to be cut out,
And shred in Gobbets, and thrust down his Throat,
That thus misused it, prompting his new King,
To such Unpardonable, Villainous a Thing;
Besides the hazard of's Immortal Soul,
Which Flagrant Sin wise Council would control,
This pestilent Advice was, that the Son
Might be abhorred of h's Father, thereupon
All Hands of the Rebel Rout resolved would be,
When reconcilement they no hope could see:
This matchless Fact was done (at his Advice)
Before the Sun, before all Isreal's Eyes,
Thus he who is called Gods Oracle, this Time
Was the Devils to promote this Crying Crime.
The next Design of this Arch-Rebel was
To surprise David, ere he succor has,
As not enough to be the Kings Principal,
In Council, He Will be Captain General.
Counsel most Politic, yet Pestilent,
To make the Rebel thrive* but David s^ent.
Oh how he pleased himself, and the Rebel-Son,
Thus to contrive the Death of 's Sovereign:
But God over rules, that Counsel much applauded,
(Man's mutable) becomes betimes exploded;
Now ( Wretch) review all this which God does tell
Of Absalom, and of Achitophel:
Compare thy scurrilous Libel with all this,
Thy Lines, not parallel, they run amiss.
Here thou may see thy mercenary Babble,
Thy Cento Talmud's a fond Jewish Fable:
Mark all the parts of thy cursed Character;
Thou do not hit in one, all interfere:
I read not that e're the Jews Achitophel,
Had modern Match, save only Machiavel.
That crafty Florentine, both the Devils Slaves,
He was their Master, taught them in his Traves.
To bolster up great Princes in their Sin,
That their Applause and Treasure they might win:
In all the shop of Hell, no Anuile can
Be found so set, as the Matchiavillian.
Whereon to forge some choice mischievous piece,
No Engine Fitter to transact with Geese:
How well this Hebrew name with sense does sound,
[ A Fools my Brother [ Achi] My Brother, and [ Tophel] a Fool- Hebr.
] though in wit profound.
Most wicked wits are the Devils chiefest Tools,
Which ever in the Issue God Befools:
Can thy Compare (vile Varlet) once hold true,
Of the Loyal Lord, and this Disloyal Jew,
Was e're our English Earl under Disgrace,
And as Unconscionable put out of place?
Has he laid lurking in his Country House,
To plot Rebellions, as one Factious?
Thy Bog-trot Bloodhounds Hunted have this Stagg,
Yet cannot fasten their foul fangs, they Flagg*
Why did not thou bring in thy Evidence
( With them) to rectify the Brave Iuries sense,
And so prevent the Ignoramus, nay
Thou wast Cock-sure he would be damned for Ay,
Without thy presence, thou was then employed,
To Brand him, against he came to be Destroyed:
Before hand preparing him for the Hangmans Ax,
Had not the Witnesses been found so Lax;
Did e're this Earl our Duke (vain Poetaster)
Advise to bring his Father to Disaster?
To seek his life, and to be sick on it too,
As being too long a life, no more ado,
But up in Arms, proclaim himself the King,
Banish his Father, yea every evil thing:
Advised he Him to climb his Fathers Bed,
To Rape his Concubines on Tops of Lead?
In view of all our English Israel?
He hates his Acts, yet's made his Parallel:
Would he have him to be a Graceless Son?
A Bloody Rebel? wish his Fathers Throne?
Yea and his Death who ever had been kind?
No, no, in none such faults can thou him find:
When did this Earl a Band of Men require,
(As Captain) to cut off his Royal Sire?
No, there is no room in the Earl to give, in the Duke,
To take such pestilent Advice; they look
At higher, and more honest things than Plots,
Unlike the Areh Rebel Jews, thy Two By-gots:
Mark (Fool) thy Crimes, so many as thy Themes,
Thou Sports on Sacred Writ, and thou Blasphemes
Both God and Men, yea Great as well as Small,
Magnatum scandal makes no bones at all.
Thy ven^m'd Quill spares neither Earl nor Duke,
Nor Queen, nor King, in thy pernicious Book:
But how ( mad Poet) comes this to pass,
That thy Achitophel so branded was;
In thy wild Poem's first Impression, where
His ^haracters most Black, most Beastly were,
A Fiend of Hell, Cursed to all Ages, He
With more ^oul stuff in stigmatized by thee;
But do on second thoughts twelve lines rehearse,
All to correct thy Saucy Satyr-Verse:
Thou breaks the Earls Head, a Plaster then thou offers,
When for thy doing so, thou would filled thy Coffers:
Thou ( Battus Bantling) can blow hot and cold,
All with one breath, like the Roman Bird of old,
Has [(...)] [(...)] too
As pleased, or displeased were 'twixt two.
Thy Fawning or thy Faulting Talent comes,
As Fools, or Knaves thee with their Talents Crowns
Thy tickling, or thy scratching gift do u^e,
As Men thee pay, if not, thou wilt Best abuse;
Thy mercenary Tongue can say, unsay
Of the [ C.] or [ O. C.] any one for pay:
This shows, thou art of the Cursed Jewish Race,
Hosannahs, Crucifies can cry apace.
As the Tide does turn, can praise, or the Earl dispraise,
Can cast him down, and up again him raise.
First wounds him with thy scandalizing Gin,
Then salves him as a matchless Abbeth di^;
Vnbrib'd, Unsought, the Wretched to Redress,
Swift of Dispatch, and easy of Access.
He Fame deserved, no Enemy can Grudge,
And had clear Eyes, clean Hands, while he was Judge:
Oh Proteus, Changling, thus to change thy Note,
Thy frothy Fancy flies, thy Brain's affloat.
How comes thy Head to be vertiginous,
In a Diameter thou drolling thus?
Was it because the Ignoramus wind
Whirl's the Weathercock about thy twelve to find?
Or was it because Apollo and his Muses
Had Worm'd thy Tongue to work off thy Abuses?
Or was it the Oil of Crab Tree, which Anoints,
(As in Rose-Ally once) thy nasty Joints?
No better Antidote is found to fetch
That plaguey poison out of the Whiffling-Wretch;
If this Beasts Tongue be not cut out and dried,
Or the Head hanged up, in Tyburn Tippit ti'd.
Why do thou not thy Parable pursue?
Make this Earl hang himself, a Death his due;
Were he so base as thy Achitophel,
Not hope for Heaven, nor yet fear an Hell.
No, no, thy after-wit in the Earl espied,
Instead of Sadling's Ass, (and him Bestride,)
His Anger he could bridle, all Affronts
He calmly puts up, never vengeance Haunts;
Though harmless, to himself not conscious,
Not as Judge Belknap, Self-condemn`d, said thus,
There only wants an Hurdle, Horse, and Halter,
To do me right, and present State to Alter.
Had such despairing phrenzy him subdued,
Such Hony-drops thy malice had bedewed;
Thy Romanizing mind, Romantic Eye,
Had glutted been with this sad Tragedy.
No less had been, had the Jury found the Bill.
By the Fatal Ax his Noble Blood to Spill;
Had the Deed been done by Self, or by Jack Ketch,
It Canonized would be a Romish Fetch:
But both's defeated, now is thy After Game,
(Seeing his Sun break forth from the Cloud of Shame)
With twelve inserted Lines t'Insinuate,
Whom (before this) thou did Recriminate:
Why do not thou hang up thy Absolon,
Upon some forked Oak; that Rebel-Son.
Hung by the Head between the Earth and Heaven,
Both scorned that Wretch, a lump of Cursed Leaven.
The Oak's his Throne, and twisted Hair his Crown*
Three Darts through's Heart, his Scepter of Renown:
Thus art thou lame in both thy Parallels,
Thy Absoloms, and thy Achitophels.
Thy Similies run not Upon four feet,
Are foully founderd, and do lamely meet,
What ever likeness in their Heads may be,
Yet do their Feet most grossly disagree;
Nor have their Bodies better Harmony.
Nor in thy Zimri happier is thy Hit;
D. of Buck.
Whom Buckingham thou basely makes to Fit:
Thy Monmouths Type is a base public pest,
Whose foulest Soul's in a fair Body dressed,
And an Incorrigible PARRICIDE,
Whom Heaven and Earth a Room at last denied:
Next, this Duke with thy Dirt must be defiled,
As if his Grace most Graceless were and vil'd.
And having lost all is love to's Israel,
Which of the two Zimri's He Is, thou can not tell.
Not Cozhi's Rogue he is, nor Ela's Traitor,
Neither of these agree in mode or matter.
The first (that cursed Simeonite) he is not,
(Who brought on Israel that flagrant Blot Number. 25.14, 15.
)
By Balaams Counsel) He was Young, this old,
He hugged Outlandish, this true English Mold:
A Foreign Whore, and a Domestic Wife,
Differs them much in Law as well as Life.
He and his Whore in th* flagrancy of Lust,
By Phinehas Javelin were both through thrust;
Thy Sagan Phinehas never durst show
Such Vengeance on this Zimri, bold and true,
To the English Interest, no Popish chatter,
Therefore thou do so foully him bespatter;
Suppose him too extravagant, and kind,
Still has he a right Noble English Mind:
Thou coins fine Speeches for thy Absalon,
For thy Achitophel, still drolling on.
Why do not thou as old Josephus does,
Coin a fine Speech for thy False Zimri's, both
Against God and Moses, palliate his Sin,
And boldly Mann his Crime through thick and thin:
Zimri in Hebrew [ cut off] signifies
As the Vine's superfluous Branches pruned lies,
This Graceful English Vine-branch stands upright,
Still uncut off by Romish Rage and Spite;
Though he affronteth them in Deed, and Word,
Saying, fond Romanists do eat their Lord,
Could they but eat the Devil too, said He,
A Romanist with the first i will surely be:
Thy wanton Zimri was old Salu's Son,
That is, [ trod under foot] in the Hebrew Tongue;
His Name, and Fate harmoniously agree,
Yet on this Duke no such Fate can thou see:
Cozbi (his Whore) in Hebrew is [a lie]
His Duchess to be such, all will deny.
Cozbi [ a lie] was Balaams Tool to draw
Israel from God, and from his Holy Law;
But can thou say Balaam of Rome has used
His Duchess, and by her his lies transfused:
Thus no congruity collateral,
Can correspond this Parallel at all;
If the Duke be not the first Zimri, the second less,
(His Masters Murderer in Drunkenness 1 Kin. 16.9.18.20.
)
As cruel to himself as to his Master;
Burns the House over his own Head: no such disaster,
Befalls this Noble Duke, whom thou despises,
And, as thy Fellow scoundrel; Scandalizes:
Blacks him with lines blacker with Hell than Ink,
Him worse Buffoon than thee, to make Men think.
Beggerd by Fools, and to b' enriched by Knaves,
The first are weak, the latter Wicked Slaves:
But who is the Fool, that dare a Star so spatter,
(For all thy Guinnies) with thy stinking blatter:
Were It not below so great a luminary,
To mark such Barking Curs, thy case would vary;
There Is noise in Town of a strange Whipping Tom,
But the greatest noise makes this true whipping John;
The first (it is said) does only Women whip,
This would make Men, yea greatest Men to skip
Under his Lashes, but they scorn his worst,
Wellknowing he (of all Men) is accursed.
Right Son of Ishmael, whose Hand's against
All Men, yea great Men never so high Advanced:
Lord Huntington.
Next, he falls foul on the brave Lord Huntington,
Whom he calls Well-hung Balaam in Derision,
As if this Patriot, were the old Priapus,
Whom the Poets feign vastly Venereous.
But why a Balaam must he called be?
I never heard him blamed for Sorcery*
Nor ever that my Lord a Prophet was,
Or that he used to ride upon an Ass:
The hit lays here, one Rhiming Ass Reproves him,
Another railing Ass with Kicks be- Hoofs him.
Publishing slanders, as to be believed,
Had not three Noble Peers his truth retrieved:
By Balaam, Balak, the Rabbis represents,
Rome's Church in Priestly, and in Regal Tents;
Thou'st got thy Balaam, though not of the right Coat,
But where is thy Balak, Rogers Romish Goat:
E. of Essex.
Next comes the Noble Earl of Essex, and
Is called by thee [ cold Caleb] as his Brand,
But why? since Caleb is a name of note,
It Is (Hebrew) Hearty, and does well denote
This Hearty lover of his Liege, and Land,
What e're black-mouths to the contrary him brand;
Yet Cordial ^aleb is reproached as cold,
Is it, because for Children he is too old?
Or is it, cause He is not in Gods stead,
To give himself an Heir on the Marriage bed?
Sure I am that his Zeal's not cold for good,
Both for the England.
Cross, and Ireland.
Harp he briskly stood,
We will suppose him cold to Popish tricks,
To the damned Designs of Rome he cannot fix:
Next comes to be traduced that Noble Lord
Howard of Escrick, L. Howard,
whom he can afford
No better name than Canting Nadab, though
Both his Abilities, and Interest Men know.
Yet damns he him into Oblivions Grave,
Who would a sinking King and Kingdom save:
Here once again this quibling Poet leaves
His Reader in the dark, and subt'lly weaves
Another slippery name, Ambiguous,
Or Priest, or Prince, it may be taken thus:
There was a Nadab, Ieroboams Son,
By whose lewd life old Israel was undone:
Prince Nadab cannot be the Lord's Parallel,
Lambs Wool, and Golden Calves agree not well:
He for's contagious Sin 1 Kin. ^ 5.25.26. and Josephus.
by's friend was Slain,
Cast out to the Dogs from his short sinful Reign:
Will the Harp and the Harrow hang together here,
'Twixt such a Miscreant, and our Brave Peer?
No, it is Priest Nadab Levit. 10.1.
Aarons Eldest Son,
Who offered God strange Fire, when first begun
His Priestly Office, and happly in overjoy,
Was overwarmd with Wine at's new Employ:
Can thou make these together symbolize,
Whilst thou with wicked wit does temporize,
No, Nadabs Fire will lick up this Lords Pottage,
(Wherewith thou slanders him in thy old dotage)
As did Elijahs Fire drink up the water,
Concur they cannot in Person, nor in matter:
Make thou no difference 'twixt Lords Spiritual,
And those of the Layity, Lords Temporal,
Thy Nadab was a Priest, and had he lived,
He Would been High Priest, as the eldest Son survived:
Lord Howard never was, nor ever hope
To be thy Sagan, Zadock, Priest or Pope,
Strange Fire does slay thy Priest in's Youth and Sonless,
This Lord does live for all thy Porridge senseless;
No better hits thy B^ll faced Jonas Sir Will. Jonas.
next,
I Am sure thy comment does confound the Text:
Why must Sir William Jones thy Jonas be?
Is it because the Storm Raiser's only He;
What is the Storm which makes thee thus to foam?
Is It: 'cause the Ship will not steer right to Rome:
As Paul's Ship, when she ran between two Sands,
The Real, and the Sham-Plots of three Lands:
Or Jonas he is, to be cast over Board,
Will this in the See of Rome a calm affoard?
Without a Whale to Ship him safe to Shore,
No, thou would drown him to be seen no more:
Nor this alone would quell thy Romish storm,
Thou Wilt find more Ionas's to drown or burn:
What bold-fac^d Bard art thou that dares to call*
This Sage [ Bull faced,] as if God made not all:
Did he make Treason Law, well to propose
The Habeas-corpus Bill for Friends and Foes?
Sher. Bethel.
Thy Shimei's next on whom thou quibbles worst,
As if his King he had most curs'dly cursed,
Turning good Bethel to Beth-aven vile,
The worst of Mankind by thy frothy style;
Did ever thy Mock Shimei call the King
A Bloody Belialist, or some such thing,
As mad with Malice, threw he e're a Stone,
As well as Curses, at God's Nointed one?
So Shimei did, venting his hellish words,
And venturing his life to David's Swords;
Oh how that dead Dog barked 2 Samuel 16.7.
[ come out, come out]
Thou cursed King: Thus desperately stout;
Had Bethel been* he had been Soundly Banged,
Yea long before this day been Roundly Hanged:
All his rare Virtues thou turns into Vice,
His hopeful Youth, Zeal, Piety and rise
To Shrievalty, thou makes a Ridicule,
Makes the City choose a Knave, if not a Fool;
His Juries Damns, though none were panneld more
In Honesty, and Honor e're before:
And though thou scoff at his frugality,
Yet not a word, how he set Prisoners free:
Had his Rome plaguing courage been but cold,
His Kitchins coldness never had been told;
This Shrieve to Babel brats gave plaguey Times,
His Chain bound them to Tyburn, There Is his Crimes:
Corah Dr. Oats.
comes last, brings up thy railing Rear,
And suffers slashes by thy slandering Jeer;
But why is Doctor Oats this Rebel Grand,
Who with an Accent does recorded stand,
Whom thy Caduceum transformed has,
Into Nehushtan, monumental Brass;
Oh wonder working Mercury, can thus
Oats into Pillars metamorphose us;
As high as the Dragon, on Bow-Steeple stands,
To save from Romish Plots three Sister Lands:
This thy Mercurial Wit can do, yet loose
Thy Oaten Pipes thereby, that please thy Muse:
But oh how ugly seems thy Metaphor,
Thus to cast Dirt on Englands Savior;
That was the name the Earl of Danby gave him,
As the Arch. Attestor thou (in scorn) God save him*
Who saved us from that Damned Popish Plot,
For which thou scoffs, and does his Scutcheon blot:
Nay, all the rest that therein with him join,
Thou makes them suborned Rogues for love or Coin.
Though the King, four Parliaments do all adjust
Their Evidence, as well deserving Trust:
Where did he with affronts the King Annoy,
Or threaten him his Agag.
Brother to Destroy?
As Samuel did Saul for Agags Death,
Him thou makes Oats and Corah with one breath;
Can the Doctor be Corah, and Samuel,
The last not first is a fit parallel.
Corah (in Hebrew) signifies [ Bald]
Thus the Doctor Corah never's better called,
While he was in Corahs Conspiracy,
With his Bald Crown among Priests in Treachery:
Now he is come off from Corahs Tents, Romes Lord,
(If not at Moses, at Messiah word)
Discovers the Grandees of the Conspiracy,
Styled Corah still he should not be by thee:
Oh how far wide thou shoots in this, thy Type
(of thy two Corahs) Jars with the Antitype,
They suit in nothing, save both Levites be
A Rebel That, but Loyal This all see:
Save he that is blind, or wilfully does wink,
Thus King and Parliaments did truly think:
Corah the Jew a chief Ringleader was,
Of black Rebellion a most sturdy Ass,
Nor God, nor Moses will be warned by,
But will be Captain o^ the Conspiracy:
He Is not content to be a Levite bare,
He Will have the Priesthood too, and the Ephod wear:
Moses and Aaron both shall stoop to me,
I Will be both Prince, and Priest, (proudly said he)
The meekest Man on Earth was moved much,
To hear the Arch-Rebels Mouth out-belchi(...)
Blasphemous words, proclaiming the P^^ple (...),
They might turn Priests, and not be blamed for Folly.
This Leveller dies not a common Death,
Consuming Fire and Earthquake stops his Breath,
When but one day he and his Company,
(Like Children) had blown up their Bubbles high;
No sooner are blown up, but are blown out,
And fall on the Eyes and Heads of the Rebel Rout.
Now (vain Poematist) how can thou take
Right measures here, and an hit happy make
'Twixt thy two Corahs in the Act or End,
Vast difference in both thou may attend:
How can thy Jingles jump in any one
Of Corahs Acts (Ramm'd with Rebellion)
With this brave Doctors brisk Discovery
Of the Rude-Romish-Rebel's Treachery:
Has he aspired thy Zadock to Vngrace,
And to assume the High Priesthood as his place?
Where are his Priests and Princes to Conspire
Against Meek Moses, for Iehovah's Ire?
When did his Dathans and Abirams Rail
At our Mild Moses, scorn his Royal Call? Numb. 16.12.13, 14.

None say, They Will not come up to Parliament,
When Moses Royal Writs to them are sent:
None style that Bondage House a flowing Land,
With Honey, Milk, none for returning stand,
If thus the Acts do miss, much more the End,
Rome cannot Oats to Purgatory send:
'Cause the sturdy Rebels [ they will not come up] said,
They did go down into the Dolesom Shade
Of Earth, and Death* but the Doctor stands his Ground,
Though the Hue and Cry has made its empty Sound:
(...) whereof happ'ly blew off his Gown,
(...) Romes Breath from Whitehall blew to Town:
(...) Romanists have him blown up,
In London, yet he may both Dine and Sup;
And they have him blown down from the Palace Royal,
Yet the City shelters him as Truly Loyal;
There thou and thine must let the Doctor rest,
Unswallowed up alive by Popish Pest,
Conclude with this remark, the Beast of Rome,
To a strange Surfeit now by Oats is come:
When this (Poematist) has doomed his Whiggs,
He hands his Tories in with dainty Iiggs:
Thy very front has a most happy hit,
Ireland was first the proper Tories Seat:
Thy Van thou rankest Good Barzillai E. of Ormond.
old,
I wish that Earl as good, yea more, twice told:
Thou say, the rising Rebels he withstood,
But say not, whether those of the Irish Brood,
Or of the English; sure, it was his Glory,
(H^s name will shine in everlasting Story)
So far as he the Irish Rebels hushed,
Who many thousand Protestants had crushed:
But much disparity thou wilt surely find,
'Twixt this old Jew, and the Earl of Irish kind;
Why must this Noble Earl Barzillai be,
Neither in Names, nor Natures they agree;
The Name [ as hard as Iron] signifies,
But thou cries up thy Earl for Charities;
[Large was his wealth, but larger was his Heart.]
He Is Charactered by thy own jingling Art:
Nor does their Natures better here Accord,
Barzillai passed not over Iordans Ford:
Nor did he with his God like Prince return
Unto Jerusalem, (though he did mourn,
With him in exile) as for Mirth, 2 Samuel 19.33.35.
and Treasures,
He judged himself unfit for Courtly Pleasures:
His Soul was so Divine, he could not breath,
But where, retired, V. 36.
he might prepare for Death,
And lay hold also on Eternal Life; 1 Timothy 6.19.

I would this were all Aged Peoples strife:
But why's not Eldest Hope E. of Oss^^ry.
called Chimham here,
Whose Blood was brisk, and thought not Death was near.
Was it'cause Chimham was not snatched away
As He, but lived in Court all David's Day:
But now thy wanton Wit rants over wild,
Thou seem a frothy Fool, or Pagan Child;
Profanely says, to snatch in Manhood prime,
This Hopeful Earl, was Providence's Crime,
And an unequal Fate: Black Blasphemy!
Branding Gods Wisdom, and his Purity:
He that does all things well, must he be blamed?
His ways are not unequal, yet defamed,
Must Humane Folly Divine Wisdom thwart?
Must the Sun corrected be by the Dyals Art?
God of his matters never gives Account,
His Will's a Law, as He Is Lord Paramount:
But why do thou from grave Barzillai fly.
Next unto Zadock so prepost'rously;
None 'twixt that Prince, and this Priest can thou find?
Distressed David had one Princely Friend;
Ittai the Gittite, P. Rupert.
the King of Gath his Son,
Stuck close to David (against Absolon)
Who was an Exile yet tho Hebrew Faith
Asserted, and its King (the Scripture says 2 Samuel 15.18.19.20.
)
Third part of the Army to his Conduct was
Committed by the King, Chapter 18.2.
and Triumph has:
Strong was his Name, my Sign, and Plowshare too,
In the Holy Tongue, all the Rebels to undo:
How came thou this Brave Prince to overlook,
(Before thy Zadock in thy pedantick Book,
May be; 'twas wilful blindness not to trace
A Parallel to suit Prince Rupert's case,
Of Royal Extract, and an Exile is,
Through By got Papists, yet he is Englands Bliss,
Stoutly asserteth the Reformed Faith
Against Wind and Tide (with David) weathered has:
Third part of the Army was his Commission,
True has he been to the Father, and to the Son:
Nor has he wanted Triumphs in his Days,
God Grant he may our Faith to Triumph raise:
Had thou Hit here on this Right Parallel,
It might have qualified some Errors well:
But thou do leap over him to Zadock A. B. of Canterbury.
next,
Yet there is thy Comment shorter than the Text, 2. Sam. 15. from 24. to 30.

Neither in this, lines Parallel can run,
Abiathar (then High Priest) had not done,
Zadock was then but Sagan under him,
Whom Solomon displaced, placed Zadok in:
Whose lowly mind raised not to Grace or Place,
'Twas 'cause descended right of Aarons Race:
Had thou thy Talmud well consulted, there
Thou might have found a Law that does declare,
None High Priest can be, till he is Sagan first,
But the English Zadock's Leap oppose who durst?
Having a Royal Hand to help him over,
All the Bishops Heads, though he was none before,
Much less the Sagan, which he should have been
Before (by the Talmud) Metropolitene:
Next comes thy Sagan, B. of London.
whom thou hop'st to see,
Thy Zadock, that his Poet thou may be,
Or better dignified, would the old Man die,
And leave for him his Lambeth Dignity:
Hence it is, a Distich must thy Zadock starve,
Eight lines (no less) must thy Young Sagan serve;
Wherein thou Skews him off with motly Colors,
Hoping to have his Crowns, if not his Dollars,
Yea better, Angels, Guinnies, all in Sums,
When from Annas to Caiphas he comes:
Thy next is Adriel, E. of Mowgrave.
I cannot guess,
How he suits David's Worthies more or less;
The Jewish Adriel of Ephraim,
In Marrying Merab was most false to Him; 1 Samuel 18.19.

Twice Saul to David had her promised,
Yet Adriel dare take her to his Bed;
By whom he had five Sons, 2 Samuel 21.
all which were hanged;
Whereby perfidiousness was briskly banged:
Can this Man represent our David's Friend;
More like he is a Foe or a Damned Fiend:
It Is true, he has some Honors, lately took
From the Dutiful, (not Disobedient) Duke;
The Hebrew name [ the Flock of God] does sound,
I wish him [ of it] and [ in it] be found:
Next Iotham E. of Hallifax.
comes, who [ perfect] signifies,
Thou makes him so, 'cause he both Parties Tri's;
Iotham was one, who could declare his Mind,
Yet so in Parables, Judge. 9.7.8. etc. 2.22.
as few could find
His meaning, till became fixed Mercury,
Before e're in motion, never rest quietly:
Iotham was one who Curses could pour forth,
(Even on the Mount of Blessing) looking North:
Iotham was one who fled away and went, Judge. 9.21.

As if affrighted with a Parliament.
Thy Parallel may meet in these, in more,
Yet differs it, for he was long before
King David, so he could not be his Friend,
Slain were his Brethren by a Bastard-Hind:
He was but young, thine old, a Savior's Son
Was he, and had Gods Inspiration;
For^^lli^g Fates, that fell upon his Foes,
He (...) bloody Bramble to oppose:
Quadrate these cannot in thy Parallel,
No better hit have Hushai, Ammiel:
Next Hushai L. Hyde.
comes [Hebrew that meaning min^
Hasting to Honors, to vain Poets kind;
Thy wild harangue therefore does Varnish thus,
[Most Frugal he is, and yet most Bounteous:]
Thy Type is blamed for Deep Dissimulation,
And for Equivocating Reservation;
Pretending Service, but Intending Slips*
Is T^is (...) Lettuc^ for thy ^^attering (...)?
Or will ^his w^^^ thy Ant^^^pe agree^
Perhaps His sta^^h't Oration^ thou may see
That to Ambition are adapted well,
His Friend's for a Fool's Paradise to sell:
Thy Ammiel L. Seimor.
comes the last, brings up the Rear,
And (could he say) [ God with me Hebrew Ammiel.
] well it were;
The Poet says, that Sca^ comes hindermost;
Why will thou Thrust Him last on whom's thy Boast?
As if all other Chairmen, Charioteers
Were but fond Phaetons to Him, none steers
(Like this Brave Pilot) the Ship, the Sanedrim,
That since Run wrong, because they Question Him,
Which of the Scripture Ammiels as He?
But barely Named, then where is thy Harmony?
One is Cold Caleb's Comrade, the other is
Achitophel's Ally, so not thy Bliss:
Thy Wearied Muse (thou say) must bear the Blame
For Hobbling thus at th'closing of the Game:
Thy Mingles (both of Paint and Dirt) are much,
Thy Cap'ring Jumps, and Cogging Dy's are such,
That (with thy Muse) My Muse is wearied;
It Is time for both now to betake to Bed,
There Acquiesce in Hope of Parliaments
That may chastize thy Senseless Sentiments.
FINIS.

