A Rich TREASURE At an easy Rate: Or, The ready way to true Content.

A short and pleasant Discourse manifestly showing how inconsistent Riches is
with Piety usually, and how Opposite Poverty is often.

TOGETHER WITH The happy Agreement and Conjunction of Honest Labor, Real
Godliness, and Soul-Content.

By. N. D.

The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words (words of delight) and that
which was written was upright, even words of Truth, Eccles. 10. 12 Omne tulit
Punctum, qui miscuit utile Dulci.

The Fifth Edition.

London, Printed by T. M^^b^urn, and are to be Sold by I. Clark, in Mercers
Chapel, at the Lower end of Cheapside, 1678.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THe Wisdom of the Ancients was wont to be laid out much in Parables, and
AEnigma's; wherein they thought they did much affect their Hearers and Readers.
Herein was their Learning couched, their Morality contained, their Divinity
comprehended. Not to mention the Heathen Philosophers and Poets, nothing is
more familiar in Scripture. What is Jotham's Discourse of the Trees going to
choose a King, other than an Allegory? what Ezekiel's comparing Jerusalem and
Samaria to two Harlots, named Aholah and Aholibah? Israel, to a Lyoness and her
whelps. What are they, say I, but Parables? And it is certain, in this respect,
That, Symbolical Divinity is most Argumentative: easily passing through the
Understanding, and deeply penetrating the Mind and Memory. What are those
Visions in Daniel, and the Apocalypse full of, but under the descriptions and
denomination of sundry Beasts so many misterious Parables and Divine
Predictions? What are those Discourses of the Sower, Merchant, Leaven,
Mustard Seed; of the Wedding-Supper, Virgins, Talents; yea, of Dives and
Lazarus? not Historical sure, and Literal, but Allegorical; Quod figurate
dicitur, non est mendacium: Omnis enim enunciatio ad id, quod dicitur,
referenda est. Aug. ad c^ncent.
which yet are not to be reckoned among Fictions, becanse no man will once
imagine we go about to affirm that to be so in the Letter, which we do deliver:
but by these Similies, we would affect the more the duller understanding. Yea,
I find many of the Fathers, and Bernard especially, (see his Sermons de Pugna
Spirituali) much delighted in this kind of Discourse. With no more Apology: I
heartily pray that thou may make better use of others more serious labors;
and I wish thou may make no ill use of this my Leisure and Diversion. Only
know, that had I known of any greater treasure, I would have given thee notice,
and desired to have made thee possessor of it; and could I have devised to have
made the Value, and the Volume less here, I had also done it: yet I never
heard, that a good purchase was only refused for the cheapness; nor did the
Israelites refuse to ronsack the Syrians Tents, where was such store of
treasure, because they had it for fetching, without delving, fighting, or
adventuring so much as did those poor Lepers, who gave them the first notice. I
promise thee, thou have it for l^ss than it cost me; but much good may it do
thee; I desire not to be a gainer, But by thy Prayers, and thy eternal welfare;
which is all can be desired by.

Thy Friend, N. D.

A RICH TREASURE At an easy Rate: Or, The ready way to true CONTENT
Chap. 1. The old Neighborhood of Riches and Poverty, their disagreement after
a while, and their unkind parting thereupon.
THere dwelt once, as has been said, Two Inhabitants in one Town, the one
called Riches, the other Poverty. Riches and Poverty at first neighbors.
These two could not long agree; for Riches would ever be insulting over
Poverty, either wronging and oppressing him, or scoffing at him, and abusing
him; and became so stately, that after a while he disdained to look upon or
speak to him: though his next Neighbor, Poverty, was as much to blame too;
They cannot agree.
for he was as stout as Riches, for the heart of him; and very foul mouthed,
and could never afford Riches a good word behind his back; and grew full of
envy and bitterness against him. Their p^^ting.
Upon these continual jars, one of them must be gone. Riches would not stir,
Poverty must; and gets him to the further end of all the Town, and dwelt a
while there: in a sorry ruinous Cottage; which shortly after fell to the ground,
and he was never able to repair it.

Chap. 2. The Neighborhood of Riches and Godliness, and their falling out.
THere happened to come into those parts a stranger, nobly born, and of a far
better descent than either of the former two; his name was Godliness, of a most
ancient Family: he is said to have been before the fall of Adam. His means were
not great, for his Family was much decayed by many sad Calamities they had
undergone in some evil and troublous times; Riches and Godliness are neighbors
a while.
yet was he of so quiet, peaceable, and sweet a disposition, that he thought he
could agree with any reasonable Neighbor in the world, if the sault were not
his own. He came and took a House near Riches first; and long thus agreed, and
had not so much as an unkind word passed between them, till Riches gave the
first occasion. Godliness was very industrious in his calling, The Character of
godliness.
meddled with no Man's business but his own: Besides, was very patient, pitiful,
and charitable; and, next to his constant care to please God, his desire was to
live without giving any just offense to any man living; for he would not wrong
the least Child. But Riches grew every day more high and stately and then more
strange and sour; at last so insolent and outragiously wicked, as was not by
Godliness to be endured, yet must he not be told of it neither. Godliness had
born long: at length taking just offense at some of the ill ways of Riches,
told him mildly of it. But Riches said, he would not be controlled nor so
affronted by the greatest Godliness in the world: But brake out to him in the
words the Sodomites used to Lot: Riches souls out with godliness.
This fellow came in to so journ here a while ago, and he must needs become a
Judge and a Lord; But I will not take it at thy hands.

Chap, 3. The Servants and Officers of Riches.
BEsides, Riches had a many lewd and loose servants, all bitter enemies to
Godliness: their names were, Pride, Oppression, Covetousness, luxury, riot,
prodigality, Malice, Flattery, Calumny, and Laziness. Riches his many bad
Servants, and their Names.
Every one had his office but Laziness, who said he would wait on his Master at
all turns, but he would undertake no other employment. Oppression was his chief
servant, and steward of his house; a cruel Enemy to the poor. Their (...)
Offices.
Covetousness was his Bayliffe, Pride was his Tailor, yet no good workman
neither; for let him take his measure how he would, and make his garment with
all the skill he had, the making, or the stuff, or the color, or the fashion,
or the trimming, or the putting on, did not please; at least, if they did one
day, did not two days together, neither him nor his wife (her name was Iezabel,
so was her mother's before her, (...), and her waiting woman.
who learnt her to Paint, and to Patch, and to Powder; and her Waiting Woman
Mistress Light-skirt Curiosity.) Prodigality was upper Butler, and under him
Riot; and the Cup they all drunk in was called Excess; a foul great Cup it was:
Riches his Cup.
and looking on it, to see what mark it had, I observed three letters, but all
three D's; but yet not standing together, But the one near the brim, the second
in the middle, the third in the bottom, Many would guess what these three
letters might mean; some said it was Donum Domini Divitiarum. The name of the
Donour. But they of the house said the first D. was Delight, the second
Drunkenness, and the third was Drowziness. But there dwelt an old Man not far
off, whose name was Gravity, a comely old Man, of much Learning, and great
experience; upon whose Counsel all the neighbors did much rely; yea I have
known when Labor and Godliness, and Content too, have gone to advise with him;
But he had been discharged from looking into Riches his house: he told me these
three letters were set on by the same hand that wrote the three words on
Belshazzar's wall, and that the first D. did signify Disease, the second D.
Death, and the third he was sure was Damnation.

And were it not too long a Digression, I could tell you what Children Riches
had, and what Grandchildren: And since, I hear what is become of all. Riches
was now an old Man, he had had two Sons, and two Daughters. Both his Sons died
without issue in their Fathers life, so that he saw his name was like to
perish, whatever became of the estate. The eldest Son was called Honor, the
Fathers darling, and the hopes of all the Family; but a weakly Child he was,
and never likely to be long lived: he died young, and put all the House into
Mourning; they lament the loss of Honor to this day. The younger Son was
called Ambition, one of an haughty and aspiring mind, and of a working
restless spirit; he was one still in every desperate and mischievous plot; was
betrayed, and came to an untimely and shameful end, and no Man pitied him. The
two Daughters were Delicacy, the elder (more like the Mother) and Avarice the
younger (more like the Father.) The elder was always an unruly and wanton Girl,
never like to come to good; and when her Mother had provided a great match for
her preferment, she had cast her self away upon one of her fathers servingmen
called Prodigality (they agreed like dogs and cats) And Grand children.
and they had an only daughter whose name was Infamy. Avarice was resolved to
be ruled by her Father, and by his persuasion, she was bestowed on his Steward
oppression, his chief servant, whom he said he loved as dearly as if he had
been his own child: he told his daughter Avarice he would make the best husband
for her in the world; that they were sure never to want, they not theirs; for
if she could but save, the husband would be sure to get. But they had not a
good day together neither, but lived quite besides what they had; and they had
an only daughter, whose name was Misery. These two Grandchildren, Infamy and
Misery, are all that at present are left of Riches Race; they are yet living,
and like to live many a day.

But to return to his Servants again. Luxury was his Cook, Gluttony his Carver,
Malice was his Secretary: But he made most of two above all the rest; Flattery
the one, his greatest favorite; and Calumny the other: These two had the
length of his foot; the one could make him angry, and the other pleased with
whom they would, and whenever they listed. I had like to have forgot his
Chaplain; Riches his Chaplain.
for he would be thought to be religious too; his name was Sir John Reader. He
was no Scholar at all, though he said he had taken a degree in the University.
But he had two properties which gave general content to all the house: he could
mumble them over a few short Prayers out of the Book; and when he had done, he
could bowl, and drink, and swear with the best of them, all the day after. Now
the house being stored with such servants, there was nothing but disorder to be
seen: they could none of them endure Godliness, They are (...) Enemies to
godliness.
but made songs of him, scoffed and jeered at him and all his actions; yea,
made themselves merry with his very gestures, and quarreled with his Children
and Servants. Nor did they well agree among themselves: for there would be
often swearing, cursing, banning, and fighting among themselves. Prodigality
and Covetousness could never agree, They fall out among themselves too.
though Covetousness and oppression ever held together. Malice, Calumny and
Flattery, often jarred and differed. And as for Riot, he could agree with never
a one of them, but only Pride.

Chap. 4. Godliness Complains to Riches of his Servants, and is ill entreated.
Godliness comes to Riches in a courteous way, and tells him privately of their
miscarriages; and withal tells him, if he keep these Servants longer, they
will undo him for ever; peswades him to reform his Family, because he wished
him well, and to turn away these old Servants, and he would commend better to
him, which should be more for his Credit and Profit too. But Riches grew very
hot, and would not hear him speak; but fell foul on Godliness, and fell from
railing to striking, and then calls his Servants to help him; and first of all,
his Chaplain, who was no ways able to hold Argument with Godliness, but he
could out-wrangle, and out-rail Godliness and Gravity both: he would needs
bring Scripture to consute Godliness; and he had one place very ready, and it
was all the Scripture he was acquainted with, Eccles. 7. 16. Be not righteous
over much neither make thy self overwise: for why should thou destroy thy
self, or desolate they self, and lose thy neighbors and thy friends? Here he
had thought he had knocked Godliness down. But instantly Godliness had his
answer ready and bad him read the next words: Be not overmuch wicked, neither
be thou foolish: why should thou die before the time? Sir John was presently
non-plust, that he had not a word of Scripture more, but fell to downright
railing. Then did Riches call for his other servants to second his Chaplain;
and bad Pride and Malice, and Calumny, to pay him soundly; and if they four
were not able to do it, he would send for Oppression to set him further off;
and he vowed he would never endure him while he lived, nor suffer him to live
quietly by him; for next his old mortal enemy Poverty, whom he had sent
packing, he protested to hate Godliness more than any creature alive; yea, he
swore to it two, that he hated him more than he did the very Devil. And old
Iezabel looking out of her Window, cried, Spare him not, knock him down, or
send him packing; for I cannot abide the very looks of him.

Chap 5. Godliness his servants and Pedigree: Riches Servants and his, fall out.
NOw Godliness had a few Servants of his own training up, well bred, fit to
serve the best Nobleman in the Land; but he had not many to spare: He had
tried to breed up more, but he could do no good on many of them, or they would
not tarry with him. Such a one was Ignorance; but he resolved not to be taught,
and he said he never came thither to be Catechized. Error would have dwelt
with Godliness too, as he said; but he must have the liberty of his Conscience,
as he called it. Singularity made offer of his service; but he would indent
with him, to go hear when and where he pleased. Hypocrisy was more importunate
than any one, to be his chief Servant, and companion too; and with his fair
language, and Scripture-expressions, he had wrought himself for a while into a
fair Opinion with Godliness: Oh he had such a tongue, that he was able to
deceive any Man alive! and indeed he began so well, that had his deed been as
good as his word, and had he held out as he began, he had been an extraordinary
good servant: yea, Hypocrisy would fain have been exercising his gift; and
said, he had spoken often in private meetings, with great applause; but he
never cared for joining in prayer with other; and they could never perceive
that he used any private Prayer by himself; therefore his Master fell into
Suspicion of him; first for his much Talk, and his many Brags; and having set
two of his old tried Servants to observe him, Humility and Sincerity, they
informed their Master, they found him out to be a very Cheat, a notorious Liar,
and such a cunning Dissembler, that ye could not tell when to believe him: yea,
they set him out to be such a dangerous fellow, that he was enough to spoil
the whole Family, at least to bring up an ill Report against them all;
therefore they desired their Master to rid the House speedily of him, or there
was no staying for them. Godliness presently calls for him, admonishes him to
mend his Manners; and in a great Passion (for it was said he was never so much
moved with any one in all his life) he charged him to be presently put out of
doors, and never to come near his House, unless he brought Repentance and
Experience along to pass their word for him, that he was now another man; nay,
Godliness was so passionate, that for his sake, he said he would never have any
one of that name come into his Family again.

And would you think it? Idleness had a mind to the service; but he asked great
wages, and yet would do nothing; nor would he so much as promise to mend. But
he had a few faithful servants, Godliness his Servants.
, whose names were Faith, Hope, Charity Repentance, Experience, Humility,
Sincerity, Temperance, Sobriety, etc. He had also many good friends, all the
old Patriarks and holy Apostles and Prophets, where his near kinsmen and
intimate acquaintance; and he is said to derive his Pedigree from the second
Adam, from whom he is lineally descended: and his Wives Name was Philadelphia.
But his servants he keeps all hard to work, and among them is not the least
difference or discord in the world; but they lived in the greatest peace and
quietness that could be, till, Riches Servants and those meeting, there would
be old falling out presently; for the disordered company that Riches kept,
would be still offering some Abuse or other to them: and upon Complaint made to
their Master, he said, he would maintain them in it; and had set them on of
purpose to weary out Godliness; and that he was a^ the charge of a Chaplain,
only to oppose the Power of Godliness.

Chap. 6. Godliness and Poverty fall out.
GOdliness, thus driven away by Riches's means, and his servant Oppression,
removes to the very end of all the town, where Poverty dwelt, in an old ruinous
Shed, Poverties Description.
without either Door or Window, or Fire, or Chiemney, or so much as a Bed to
lie upon; yet extreme stout, often boasting of his Family, and what his
Ancestors had been, as good as Riches: and I think no less; for wherea^ Riches
could pretend t^ no higher Pedigree tha^ Nabal, of whom he wa^ begotten when he
lay sick of the Stone in hi^ Heart, Riches his Pedigree, and Poverties compared.
and died a few days after, whence a^ the Posterity have ha^ that disease
hereditarily cleaving to them more or less; Poverty would vaunt often that h^
could derive his Pedigree from Noah, for Cham his Son was his great
Grandfather; and his Motto he keeps to this day, A Servant of Servants. But I
rather think he may carry his Pedigree beyond Noah, and derive himself from the
elder Son of Father Adam, whose name was Cain, who after he was ^riven from the
pre^ence of the Lord, had his Legacy given him, that he and all his Posterity
should be Vaga^onds and Runagates. Godliness, I say, remo^ing hither, did
expect ^o have enjoyed more peace and quietness; for he meant not to wrong
Poverty one farthing, but to do him all the good he could; but he was much
disappointed. Poverty was very stout and scornful, not to be spoken to neither;
and Sloth his wife was a very nasty slut, and a terrible Scold withal: a many
poor Children they had all in rags, bred up to nothing in the earth but
Idleness, lying, b^gging, and pilfering. He had now ever a Servant, nor had had
many a day: for when once he had one whose name was Wast all, he had little for
him to do; nor would he stay at home to see what he did, but left him to
himself; and he ran away with the best Coat he had. This Poverty was a very ill
husband; if he got a penny, he must to the Alehouse next door, and there he
spent it, and came home as drunk as a beggar. He was ever abroad, yet kept none
but bad company; and besides, he loved his bed and his belly out of all cry. He
had been at first, I was informed, put to a trade; but he would never stay with
his Master, nor would he like any trade at all: then he turned Soldier; there
for a while he swaggered, and of a Beggar was now become a Gentleman; and had
his two Men waiting on him, and both horsed; their names were Stroyal and
Lowal; and while his Pay, Free Quarter, and Plunder lasted, they ruffled it in
Buffs and Beavers, and Scarlets, and Gold-lace. A little after, his Father
died, and left him a little Lumber; and that he soon spent, or pawned and made
it away. Godliness comes to him, and tells him, if he will but hearken to him,
and they two may live together, he will put him in a way to thrive; tells him
what he would advise him to: but he finds Poverty altogether as cross as Riches
was before; and there was no living by him neither.

Chap. 7. A digression, telling the short story of Stroyal and Lowal.
I Could tell yon a long story of those two companions I named in the last
Chapter, viz. Stroyal and Lowal, if I thought it were not too far a digression
from Godliness, whom we left all alone, driven both from Riches and Poverty too.

I hope there are none but friends here; and if there be no Jesuits, we are
well enough. The design of this short and innocent Paper, being only to relate
the many Trials and Travels, and Discoveries and Experiments of Godliness,
before he met with Content, whom he so much enquired for; and it would not
willingly grieve any the least friend of Godliness

They were called Stroy-al and Low-al, I told you: But their right Names
Stroyalla and Loyola (outlandish men by their names.) Stroyalla had by custom,
and for brevity sake, contracted his name into Stroyal. And Loyola, because his
grandfather Ignatius had made his name odious, would have his name contracted
too into Loyal: which he was called by a while; but when he understood that
name was grown into disrepute, and it was not for his Interest to be known
always by the same name; he changed it once again, and would not be called
Loyola nor Loyal, but Lowal: a true Catholic he was, a Man for all Interests
and Opinions, indeed none could tell what he was, he was so reserved, so
mutable, and so subtle: But for these two, I think they were two as unlucky
Birds, as were ever hatched. They were not so different in their Names, as
agreeing in their Principles, Aims, and Dispositions; and Stroyal of the two
was not half so mischievous to the State, as Lowal was pernicious to the
Church. I hope I need not suspect, that any rational Man will imagine any
reflection intended here, upon the honest and Religious English Soldier, who
is, abroad, the honor of the Military profession all the World over, and at
home is looked upon by all well-affected, as the Chariots and horsemen of the
Land. But to put you out of doubt, I shall tell you, they were neither of them
Englishmen; not so much as of any the reformed Churches of the Protestant
Religion, Stroyal came out of Turkey; his Ancestors had been Christians; but he
in hope of preferment had renounced the Christian Faith, and had been
circumcised. And as for Lowal, no body could tell what he was, and whither he
would: he was, by the best intelligence I could get, by descent a Mungril-Moor,
Born and Christened in Spain, confirmed at Rome; and for the pregnancy of his
Parts commended to the Jesuits College, hoping he might prove as useful an
Instrument, as old Ignatius had been. Into their College he was admitted:
there in a short time he had gone through the Arts, had gained diverse
Languages, and could so perfectly conform to all Men's Tempers and behaviors,
as never a Father of them all was more versed in their greatest Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, than he was ready in the practice of their greatest art,
Self-transformation. He could come familiarly into all the Assemblies and
private Meetings of Men, of whatever persuasion: and if he were a learner but a
day or two, the third day he was an inspired Speaker, and would so deliver
himself, as he procured not more disrepute to the old Teachers in the Country,
than he gained Reputation to himself. Yet he was in some places a little
suspected; he so often changed his Habit, as often his Name, as often his opinion: He
would tell some of his intimate Friends, Though he went under the name of
Lowal, his right name was Loyola. The Commander in chief, under whom he and all
his Countrymen served, was General Desolation, a Scythian some said; but sure
he was an Edomite rather; which was manifest by the feeling of his rough hand;
whose Ancestors were all Dukes and great Commanders; among whom I tell you true
I wondered, when of late I found Duke d' Alve in his Pedigree, Genesis 36. 40.
till then, I knew not what Countryman he was. The Lieutenant General was his
own brother (for they were Twins, their Mother was a Babilonian Lady) his name
was Abomination. Desolation was the Elder; but so like they were, as scarce to
be known the one from the other; only Desolation was thought to be the abler
Man of his hands, and Abomination the greater head-peice, for plotting and
contriving the most devilish and cursed devices, Plots and Designs. Ahitophel
or Machiavel were but punies to him. Shall I tell you what became of these two
comrades? Stroyal, after the War ended, became as poor as Poverty himself; he
had saved nothing, but made all away as fast as he got it fain he would have
been preferred into some Hospital; but that failing, he was fain to beg a while
from Door to Door; weary of that life he turned High-way-man; was soon
apprehended, committed to ^he conmmon Jayle, endited the following Assizes,
convicted, condemmed, and after executed: There Is an end of Stroyal.

But Lowal was a more crafty Companion, he had more Trades than one: Turn him
loose, he would live in any ground, shift in any time, Come Wars, come Peace; a
cunning Pa^e he had of his own: During the War, it was not his ordinary pay he
served for; he had a Pension from Rome, another from Spain, and good
Contribution from his like judgmented friends. He was afterward thought worthy
of Preferment; he had a good Office bestowed on him, wherein for a while he
carried himself very fair, but was afterward discovered to be a very Cheat;
then he was cashiered, and having once been found out, and his reputation lost,
no Man would after trust him; There Is an end of Lowal.

But now to return: let us see what is become of Godliness, whom we left
parting from Poverty.

Chap. 8. Several motions made to Godliness about his settling; and what he
resolved thereupon.
GOdliness being thus unkindly dealt with, and driven out of Town (as you have
heard) both by Riches and Poverty, was a while much perplexed whither he should
remove to find a resting place, and where to meet Content his best Friend on
Earth; which was his first design. He was once wished by a Friend, that had
observed his lovely Aspect, and his sweet Behavior, to go to the Court,
whither all Men go to seek Preferment; and if any did rise, it were pity but
such a one as he should be promoted: How much good might he do his Frrends and
himself, if he were in place?

But Godliness replied he had been bred up in a plain and private way; he had
not much means, nor many Friends, without which, what is to be expected at
Court? nor colud he skill of the Court Language and Complements, Godliness
persuaded (...) to the Court, but he refuses.
neither was he at all acquainted with those Arts of Simulation and
Dissimulation, which are said to be all in all in a perfect Courtier: Therefore
he resolved, all the Preferments in the World should not entice him to do any
thing against his Conscience.

Next he was by some Friends wished to go and list himself in the Army (there
being then Wars in the Country) he answered, Of all lives, he liked that least
though he would not prescribe to others, Or to go into the Army
nor censure any that followed that profession (and indeed this was noted to be
one constant property of Godliness, he was ever more charitable than
censorious) yet for his part, he said, besides the hazard such run in the wars,
he was not well satisfied in the Justice of the cause, either on the one side
or other. And he judged the Soldiers calling to be only warrantable, when the
cause was plain and clear, and so long as Necessity puts them into Arms, and no
longer. He professed he for his part loved the Soldiers so well, that he did
wish with all his heart, that all the Soldiers would turn Godly; but he loved
Godliness so well, that he could not wish all Godly men to turn Soldiers.

Then he was by some persuaded to go abroad into the World and Travel; Or to
travel.
then might he observe the diverse manners and fashions of other Countries, grow
acquainted with their several Religions and Languages. That he was not a
Gentleman who had not traveiled, nor was any a complete man without this. He
presently replied, he had been a Traveller already a long time toward Heaven;
and his own Country was as near, or nearer a way thither, than any other: His
design was to grow in Grace, and that he feared was not to be promoted by going
into Foreign Parts: and for their Languages, let others affect them; if he
could learn the old Language of Canaan, it was enough for him, and though he
would judge no man, he had observed few returned better by Travels, as to their
Religion: yea, he remembered of the Twelve chosen men of Israel, that were sent
out to view other Countries, there were but two who returned the same Men they
went out; the rest had cast off God, were corrupt in their Principles, and did
much mischief to their Countrymen, when they returned.

He was once set upon on by a Friar, Or to go into a Closter.
who tempted him to go into a Cloister; and to induce him thereunto, he was
urgent with him to go see their Chapel how it was adorned, and to hear their
Music: and he would fain have persuaded him to believe, if any where in the
World, there was to be seen Devotion and Sanctity. He presently replied with
indignation, Away with your Devotion and Sanctity: Sanctity so utterly opposite
to Sincerity, and Devotion, totally destructive to the power of Godliness.

He had at last, as to his settling in this world, a temptation (and he was
seldom free from temptations in one kind or other) and that was to get him out
of the World, and to sequester himself in some nook, in a solitary manner, Or
into a Desert.
out of all commerce with others. There might he hope quietly to retire
himself, be free from Persecutions, which he saw did every where attend him;
there might he be out of the sight of open Profaneness (more grievous to a Godly
mind than persecution it self) there might he enjoy God, the liberty of his
Conscience, and pour out his Soul in incessant Prayers; and enjoy communion
with his Soul-beloved Savior: This was mighty pleasing But he remembered that
Man was made for Society; and he had those Scriptures came to his mind: None of
us live to our selves, We are members one of another; None of us are to seek
our own things only, but every one the good of others. And he called to mind
how prejudicial, Solitude had ever been to the best of Men; That God had said,
It was not good for the first-Adam, no not in Innocence, to be alone; nor was
it safe for the first-Woman to be alone, even in Paradise: Nor was it safe for
the Second-Adam, the first begotten of the whole Creation, and the only
Conqueror of the Devil, to be alone in a Wilderness: He concluded therefore,
That (...) was Excess of Passion and Zeal, which transported David and Jeremy,
to wish themselves into a Wilderness; and doubtless that it was unavoidable
Persecutions which drove Elias and others, into their Caves and Solitudes: for
his part, he thought he was bound to honor God, as much as was possible, by
doing good to humane Society.

Chap. 9. Godliness advises with Gravity about his settling.
AFter some time spent in this unsettled condition, it pleased God to bring
Godliness acquainted with Father-Gravity, of whom I made mention before; a
true Friend and faithful Counselor to all who advised with him. A comely old
Man, and of much Experience: he knew both Court and Country; and there was
scarcely any passage of note in his time, or long before, but he was well
acquainted with it.

Godliness was much cheared, when he saw his amiable and lovely Countenance,
and his long gray Hairs; Discourses much with him, and receives the best
Satisfaction from him, that he had met with many a day: After much good and
serious Conference, he enquireth of him, if he could inform him where a
Convenient House might be had for Money, Town or Country. He tells him, He was
glad he asked, that he might both help a Neighbor to so good a Tenant, and him
(though a stranger as yet) to so good Accommodations. He bids him return to the
Town again, and about the middle of it, turn aside a little out of the Road;
there dwelt just mid way, as he could guess, between Riches and Poverty, old
Labor, a good honest neighbor, and the best Housekeeper in all the Parish;
He had a convenient house so let, and would be glad of a good Tenant; for he
was loath any thing should lie dead upon his hands.

Chap. 10. Godliness becomes Neighbor to Labor.
THither then he goes, as he was directed; and when he came to knock at his
Door, he found him within: he was seldom abroad; and he had been hard at work,
with his Wife Prudence, (a comely Woman, and a very cleanly house wife) sitting
close to her Wheell; and the Children all of them doing somewhat. They were all
in a handsome Habit of good Broad-Cloth; no Lace or Trimming that was costly,
but whole and handsome. The House without well built, and in good Rapair;
within very neat, every Room well furnished. ^^^ours ancient and honorable
Pedigree.
Besides, Labors Pedigree was very Ancient; he came of Adam's second Son,
innocent Abel, who learnt him first to keep Sheep, them to spin the Wool; and
Labor was all the Issue he left behind him, when he died. This Labor said
moreover, That his Ancestors had done the greatest exploits that the World had
ever seen: That they had built all those great and ancient Cities in the World,
all Towns, Forts, Castles, and Bridges: That Ninive, Babylon, Rome,
Constantinople, Jerusalem, were all built by Labors own hands: That Labor had
fought many a sore Battle, gained many famous Victories, conquered most
Nations, gained the greatest Dominions, Stablished the wholsomest Laws and
Rules of Government; had traveled all Countries; had been at the Indies, and
thence brought and transported all their richest Pearls, Spices and
Commodities, and Traffiqued with them into all other Countries: That the
Pyramides of Egypt, and all the other Wonders of the World, were of Labors own
handiwork and foundation: That he had invented Tillage, improved Lands
levelled Mountains drayned Fenns, Invented all Arts and Sciences, bred the best
Scholars, and the most excellent Books extant, were of his composing. Godliness
tells him he had heard much good of him, and that his Ancestors and Labors
were old accquaintance, and had loved dearly, living neighbourly together; and
therefore he desired to take that house he had to let, and that he would be as
good a Tenant as he could let it to; and promised him he should lose nothing by
him. He told him moreover, it was Godliness which learnt Labor the first way
of thriving, and that it was their two Fathers together, who had performed the
most Renowned Undertakings. Labor indeed had done very much, but by
Godliness's Directions and Expense. The most Pious and Beneficial Acts, witness
Noah's Ark, and Solomon's Temple; The one built by Labors Hands, but at the
sole Charge, and by the Divine Direction of Godliness; and the other, though
every Stone and piece of Timber was hewed and made ^^^dy, and joined together
by Labors pains; yet it was Godliness's Purse that paid for all, and
maintained the Service, and sound the Daily Sacrifice: It was Labor indeed
that setcht the Stone and Timber from Lebanon; but it was only Godliness,
without Labor, that fetched the Fire from Heaven. And if the Commonwealth was
upheld by Labor, it was only Godliness, the Church was raised, supported, and
preserved by. It was Godliness that spread the Gospel, converted Infidels,
continually assisted all the famous Prophets and Apostles; and does to this day
enable the faithful Ministers in the happy employment and success in their
Ministry. And if Labor had at any time put forth any useful Writings, yet the
best Books which were in the World, were all of Godliness's putting forth.

Chap.II. The happy agreement of Godliness and Labor.
THey were soon agreed, and agreed most lovingly together, and resolved never
to part. Labors house stood in a very wholesome Air, Labors house.
near the Church; which made Godliness like it the better: the whole house very
healthful; seldom was any sick there, nor did they die till full of days. The
children looked all with ruddy and lively countenances: you might know whose
Children they were, by their very faces. A few servants there were, called
Forecast, Diligence, Expedition, Cheerfulness, and Perseverance; good Ri^e^s
all, and tough Workmen: But Labor set many poor People a work, and paid them
duly, and by that means enabled many (poor before) to pay their Debts, and to
provide comfortably for themselves and their Famlies, and to relieve the Poor;
yea, Labor provided Stocks and Pensions for the Widows and Children of such,
who had been honest and careful in their Business.

Labor had lived well before; but when Godliness became his Neighbor, you
would wonder how he came on and increased, as if Jacob had been come again into
Labans Fields, or Joseph into Potiphar's House, or the Ark into Obed-Edom. For,
Godliness taught him how to seek, and get a Blessing for him and his; brought
him to pray in his Family, to instruct his Children and Servants in
Catechizing, to call upon God as duly as to rise out of their beds; and to flee
lying, swearing, profaneness, and irreligiousness, as much as Idleness. And he
told him withal, there was a friend of his was shortly to come that way (for
he had a good promise for it) who would make them both happy: His name was
Content.

I should have told you also, That though there was an Old Church hard by
Labor's house, when Godliness came thither, yet it was much gone to decay; and
which was more trouble to Godliness, there was no Minister: there had been one
it seems some years before (a Godly ancient man, and very painful:) Labor told
him he Preached, Catechized, and Expounded constantly; he did not think there
was a Parish in a good way, better ordered: it would have done you good to see
how people loved the Church, kept the Sabbath, and what love was among
Neighbors. But that good old Man was dead, and now Nobody cared whether they
had a Minister or no: They thought Anybody that could speak, might Preach; and
as for Prayer, and reading the Scripture, singing of Psalms, and the
Sacraments, he saw there were few did regard them now adays; and if the Church
should fall down to the Ground, he knew none would take care to repair it.
There were many sufficient Men in the Parish, he said; but they loved their
Money too well: and there was one above all the rest, called Riches, worth
Thousands; but he was neither Friend to the Poor, nor the Church; but would
rather spend an hundred Pounds on his Pride, Luxury, and Riot, than allow forty
Shillings toward the maintenance of a good Minister. But as for me, said
Labor, as poor a Man as I am, if my Neighbors would be ruled by me, we would
not for shame let the Church fall, and live like Heathens, without one to guide
us: whosoever will be at the cost, I would bestow my pains; and it should go
heard; but I would find somewhat for such a good work. Gods blessing on thy
heart, said Godliness; I shall love thee the better for it while I know thee:
we will between us, see to get the Church fitted, and then look out for a
Minister; and if thou will be at the pains; I Will bear all the charges
whatsoever it cost, though I leave the less to my Children.

My Ancestors have always been great friends to the Church and a godly
Ministry; They have at their own charge, built many Churches from the ground,
and richly endowed them for the comfortable maintaining of the Minister, when
they had done. One of my Progenitors, called Obadiah, had alone provided for an
hundred Prophets in a time of Famine, fed them with bread and water by fisty in
a cave; which was as good fare as he had himself; and he believed none of his
Friends were ever the poorer for such good Works; but still God had blessed
them the more abundantly. He for his part, were not worthy to be called by the
Name of Godliness, if he should be backward in such a Business: And his Wife
Philadelphia, he was sure, would put to her helping Hand; for she was own
Sister to Dorcas, that was so full of good Works and Alms-deeds, which she did;
and was so much lamented when she was dead and gone. To be short, They
concluded between them to fall upon the work; and the Church was but newly
repaired in a plain and decent manner, and a good Minister settled in the
place, when Content came.

Chap 12. Content seeks for a dwelling, and finds one no where, till he comes
to Godliness.
THis Content is not of Earthly Extraction, never came out of the Loins of Adam
at all; But I suppose, might be that Melchizedeck, Contents extraction
who had neither Father or Mother recorded on Earth: and sure I am it was
Melchizedeck which blessed Abraham and his Posterity. Certain I am, he was with
Adam in Paradise, before his Fall, and before his Creation, among the Angels;
and before their Creation, had been with the blessed Trinity from all Eternity.
He was not often seen on Earth since Adam's Exile out of Paradise; yet now and
then has he given a visit to some of Labors Friends, and Godliness's
Acqnaintance. He is always attended with many Gallant Followers: His chief
Friends, I well remember, of whom he made most account, were called, Contents
friends.
Justification,, Adoption; Sanctification, and Assurance; and one above all the
rest, called Peace of Conscience. He was wont also often to speak of a great
Benefactor, His great Benefactor.
long since Deceased, to whom he was infinitely obliged, who had been the Maker
of him: He would say, how dearly he had loved him; he still called him his Lord
and Savior at every word (sure then it could be no other, than the Son of God)
how he had done and suffered much for his sake, who had never deserved the
least savor from him; that had it not been for his singular Bounty, and
extreme Sufferings, his Name had never been Content; but Sin, Misery, and
Despair; for he had been in great Distress and Danger, having many great
Enemies to deal with, and many unconceivable Calamities lay upon him. But by
flying to him, acquaintance with him, and submission to his Yoke, he had found
this unexpressible Rest, i^ his Soul. He related also, how he had bestowed on
him on a Coat of diverse Colors; one so pure White, as no Fuller on Earth could
whiten; which is the clean Linen and white, the Righteousness of Saints,
called, the Righteousness of Sanctification. The other so Red, as the purest
Blood on Earth, (not the Blood of Abel,) could make so pure Red. This is the
Righteousness of Believers, known by the Name of, The Righteousness of
Justification before the Throne of God. And that he had, besides much Grace
already bestowed, promised him a rich Robe, and Crown of Glory. He had also
many good Servants, all Nobly descended, Contents servants.
which ever waited on him, called, Faith, Hope, Charity, Humility, Patience,
Long-suffering, and Perseverance; and two trusty Counselors, His two
Counselors.
who in all difficulties assisted him, called Prayer and Promises. He and his
Retinue, make that Place and Family happy, wheresoever they do but Lodge. This
Noble Content, in his return Homewards, called in at Poverties Shed, enquiring
if there were any Room for such guests, they said no; Poverty no Friend to
Content
but likely at the further end of the Town, where Riches dwelt, there they
might find entertainment. Thither they hastened, and desired entrance; but
were answered, That none neither knew him or any of his Company, Riches no
Friend to Content.
nor ever heard of such names, unless at a house midway between this and
Poverties, called Godlinesses, next door to Labors. There they had heard of
some such unusual and outlandish names, as Sobriety, Temperance, etc. so shut
the Door upon him; only one of the Family said, He would do him the Courtesy
to show him the Way, though he would not go along with him. Thither this Noble
Man comes; and viewing Labor's Buildings, Orchards, and Gardens; Content
Friend Labor.
he liked all well. But the next Door he was told, was Godliness's Dwelling;
there he knocks: They were then at Prayers; he stays till all was done: Then
comes Godliness to the Door, and knew him as soon as he heard his voice: He
told him, he had long expected his Company; that he had had a Promise, that he
was to come that way: Now, he was welcome, and there was Room enough for him
and all his Company. Content replied, A little Room is enough for thee and me;
Content comes to Godliness's House.
and any Provision that Godliness could make would please him, were it never so
homely: We have not long to stay here, away we must; and at our Father's House,
is that will make amends for All. Had you seen their Meeting, you would have
thought you had seen Melchizedeck meet Abraham again, Their meeting and
embraces.
to bless him; or Isaac blessing Jacob; or Jacob falling on Ioseph's Neck, and
saying, I have enough, since I have seen thy Face; or that you had seen Peter
entering into Cornelius his House, who had been long waiting for him.

Chap. 13. The happy agreement and cohabitation of Content, Godliness, and
Labor.
THere he entered and stayed, and together they dwelt; and now was that little
corner out of the way, the happiest place in the World, and a new Paradise; for
it was no other than the Suburbs of Heaven: a little distant from it, whence
along a narrow way leading over a narrow Bridge, and a strait Gate, was an
entrance into a stately City, full of beautiful and uniform Buildings, and a
most goodly Temple. The best Room in Riches House, was not comparable to the
meanest Lodging there; nor was Solomon's Temple comparable to this. That was
built by Man, Labor and Godliness joining in the work; This by God himself,
built and inhabited. But now did Labor think himself happy, that ever
Godliness came to be his Neighbor, and teach him his Mystery: He had never
prayed before; but now Godliness had thoroughly instructed him, and taught him a
better Art, and the way of thriving. And Godliness himself was much happier,
than he was before, since Content came to dwell with him, who not only joined
with him in Prayer, and all other Duties of his Secular and Religious Calling
too; but taught him to praise God, to sing, rejoice, and depend on God, yea, to
joy in God, and in all he put his Hand unto, more than ever he had done before.
There they continued together, and are at present; for there I left them, when
I came out to call Thee (Reader.) So that, if thou know any, that ask the
way to Contentment's Lodgings; A direction to such as seek for content, where
they shall find him
let him not go to Riches Palace, or think to find him in Poverties Shed: But
about the midway, between them, in an Inner-room of Godliness's, called
Sincerity, hung round with Purity of Heart; having the lively Image of Christ
in every side, and beset thick with the rich Jewels of Saving Graces, of
several kinds interwoven, the very next Door to honest Labors: There I desire
thee to go and rest thee, promising to come to thee as soon as I can, where I
am sure we shall be merry, and more than so, happy: For what can make a Man so
happy on Earth, as Godliness with Content, which is the greatest Gain; having
not only the Promises of the Life which now is, but of that which is to come;
through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who is the Crown of Crowns to Content, as
Content is the Crown of Godliness, and Godliness the Crown of Labor; where
there shall be no

FINIS.

But, (...).

HEre five in a Town divided we see;
Three against two, two against three.
Riches and Poverty cannot agree,
Nor can Riches abide true Piety:
Riches and Labor cannot accord:
Content cannot stay where Riches is Lord.
Proud Poverty too, must needs disagree
With Labor, Content, Piety, all three.
But these Three last,
Together hold fast.
Where they do meet,
Green Herbs are sweet:
A Treasure they bring
'Bove that of a King.
To Heaven they t^d,
There let me end.
N. D.

