A New Bull-Bayting: OR, A Match Played at the TOWN-BULL OF ELY.

BY TWELVE MUNGRILLS.

VIZ. 4 ENGLISH DOGS. 4 IRISH DOGS. 4 SCOTCH DOGS.


John Lilburn, Richard Overton, Thomas Prince, and William Wa^wyn, to Stave and
Nose.

With his last Will and Testament, and several Legacies bequeathed to the
Iuncto, the Council of State, and Army.

Too him my Dog; ha -- loo there; now he is down:
Bayted to death, and forfeit to the Crown.
NOD-NOL. Printed at the sign of the by the Hill on the whim-wham side of the
Beare-Garden, for the good of the State.

The Actors Names.
English Waller and Brown. with 4 Mastiffs; Prynne, Burges, Love, and Poynze.

Scotch Louden and Leisly. with 4 Mastiffs; Sybalds, Heldersham, Fleming, and
Archy.

Irish Ormond and Iochiquin. with 4 Mastiffs; Owen Roe, Young Coot, Mack-O-Neal,
And Towzer, The Man in the Moons Dog.

Overton, Lilburn, Prince, and Walwyn, Bear-wards.


These to be Coursed Three several times, fairly at the Nose of NOL, the Town
BULL; for 3 Crowns.
It is desired, that all Gentlemen, Citizens and others that shall come to see
this Bull-bayting, come not within the compass of his Roape for fear of a
mischief, for this Beast is so bloody and dangerous; that he bath with his
powrfull horns goared diverse to death; therefore if they presume to come
within his Reach, (and have a fair warning before hand;) the Bear-wards are
blameless.

Vivat-Rex.

A New Bull-Baiting: OR, A Match Played at the TOWN-BULL OF ELY.
Enter Noll, drawn to the Stake by the four Bear-wards; his Horns all bloody,
and a Garland on his Head; with Carnation, Scarlet, and other Changable
Colors. Lilburn. COme along Taurus; Now you shall answer for all your
Villainies: Be sure to ^e him fast, that he get not loose; for it is a dangerous
Be^st that has goar'd to death the best men in England; nay, in the world.
Which Dog has the first Course?


Overton. The Man in the Moon's Dog, they say he is Old, and bites sore.


Prince. Set him on fair, and let him do his best; Ha -- looe, ha -- looe
Towzer; he has him by the Nose already: Hold thy hold Towzer, hold thy hold
Towzer; O brave Towzer, uds-futt, he makes him Roar, and Shite, as if the
Devil were in him: So, so, enough; stave him off, stave him off, we shall loose
out Bull else.


Walwyn. Let him alone Brethren; Towzer does bravely; he holds his hold for a
Crown; lugge him soundly: he has him down of his knees as if he were begging
for his life; O brave Towzer! he shall have a Seagreen Ribband in his ear,
and turn Leveller: if Lockier had had but half the Mettel in him, he had been a
living man to this day: he holds him still, as if he would make him answer for
all his Murders, his Roberies, and Perjuries; how he paws and dungs, as if he
would dis-gorge himself of all his-Vilanies; and driviling at the mouth, as if
he were watering all his Equivocations, Oaths, and Perjuries, through the
Arches of his pocky NOSE, with his own snot, and snivel.


Overton. No matter; mad him thoroughly: here is a Nettle to put under his rail;
perhaps it will make him void Gold, for he has devoured a whole Mine within
this 7 years, and yet is now in as much want as ever he was; still hungery,
though he has fed on the flesh of King and Nobles, and drunk their blood; has
devoured a Crown, a Kingdom, a People, whole Churches, Chansels, Steeples at a
morsel; and now would have us pay him Tithes, in stead of the Priests; a pox on
him, he is tangl'd in his own roape; it is no matter, we must have an end of
him, better here then at a worse place.


Lilburn. Let him have roape enough, and he will hang himself, and save the
Kingdom a labor.


Overton. It had been good he had gone to the Butchers so soon as he had been
Calv'd, for he has so Bull'd poor England, that she lies calving and laboring
in most bitter panges of Calamity and Poverty, whilst he Junkets, Feasts, and
Kings it in his Chariot with six Flanders Mares, and ruffl's in Suits of 500
pounds a piece; she languishes and mourns in Sack cloth, and yet I see no hopes
of her recovery; her people denied their just and reasonable Petitions; their
Agreement slighted by a bloody Iuncto; and a Tyranical Council of Estate
erected, more unjust then ever was the Star Chamber, High Commission, or
Spanish Injuisition; that knows to do no right, nor will take no wrong; these
are all Calves of this Town-Bulls be getting; that by usurping sway to
themselves, do what their lust prompts them to, though never so much against
Sense and Reason: Now Stave off Towzer, he has done well for one course; I
never saw a Dog do better; he has brought away a piece of his Nose; will done
Towzer; Spit in his mouth, and stroke him on the back.


Lilburn. What are those that creep with such black heads in his blood?


Overton. An Army of Maggots, that took a pocky delight to live in the wramth
of his Snowt; and when he breathed out his Hypocrisies and Blasphemies, then
these Cattle went to dinner; Foh, what a breath he has? 'twill infect the whole
Kingdom with plagues, and his Nose set fire to it, till it becomes more
miserable then Sodom and Gomorah: Cain was the first Gentleman of his Family;
Indas was the second that bore Arms (three Elder-trees, and a Halter;) Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, his Uncles by the Mothers side; Achan his God father;
Absalom his Schoolmaster; the two wicked Elders his Tutors; Machiavel his
Counselor; Faux and Fairfaud his Companions in evil: He was begotten by the
Spirit in a Brewers Stoke-hole; Conceived by a Witch; brought forth about the
time the Globe was a fire, got the sulphire into his Nose by his inordinate
devouring his fathers new Wort, coming to London, got the Naples scabb, and the
looseness of his joints; having got his Fathers Maid with Child, he was forced
to Marry her, which made him bear a deadly hate against the high Commission: he
had left him by his Father some 12 Acres of Fee Simple, which formerly
belonging to the Crown, made him cast about how he might murder his King; he
brewed Smal-beer in the Isle of Ely, till he had six Wenches with Child at one
time; from whom he run, because he would break and cozen the Malt-men, who
curse him to this day, because by his perfidious dealings, he so broke them,
that they were never able to trade in Malt to this very day: His first be
gotten he put out to live with an Usurer in Fetter lane; who keeping him
hungry, made him cast about, how he might poison his Master to rob him of his
Money; which he happily effected, and eased the Kingdom of two plagues an
Usurer, and a Thief: before his Execution he conveyed his Father a considerable
Sum of his Masters Money, which he employed so warily, that he became rich, and
was at last chosen for a Parliamentman, in hopes he would have been warned by
his Son to be more honest: no sooner was he in the House of Commons, but he
was like Eelzebubb amongst the inferior Devils, and sent out his Agents and
spies to work mischief; he first got the Earl of Essex to be poisoned, and wone
Fairfax to be Head of his Faction, till he had brought his Plots to perfection;
he has taken the Oath of his Allegiance, Supremacy, the Solemn League and
Covenant; looked up to Heaven, called God to behold his Hypocrisy, and the
Angels to witness his perjury; he has broken all Oaths himself, and caused
others to do the like; he caused the King to be seized on at Holmby, where he
made Protestations, That what he did, was for the good of the King and Country;
and that he would bring him to Westminster, and Establish him in his Throne in
Ieace: At Hampton Court by his Jesuitical policy, he juggled his Majesty into
the Isle of Wight, where he hired Rolf to Murder him; which being discovered,
and finding his Plot like to fail, and a Treaty to take effect with his
Majesty at London, and so his Majesty like to come into other men's power; made
him set all his Enginers of mischief a working; took Counsel of Jack Bradshaw,
as arrant a Villain as himself: one that when he was a boy, run from his
Father, and followed a Pedlar to sell Laces and Points, where he learnt to
Cannot, creep in at windows, and rob Hen-roosts; returning home full fraught
with Villainy; his father kept him at School, and with a little Scholar ship and
roguery together, thought him a fit instrument to make a knavish lawyer; and
sent him up to Grayes-Inne, where he frequented on Sundays Hollands Leaguer,
and in the week days Bloomsbury; would Drum with his fists till he Carrowsed
healths on his knees to him he afterward murdered, biting in too every Glass,
and slinging it to the Walls; would familiarly let out his Blood to write Love
Letters to his Whores; his great Grand. Father lay with his own Daughter,
committed Incest, got her with Child, and then with advice of his Wife,
poysened her, and was himself hanged in Chains on a Heath in Cheshire, and his
Wife executed for consenting to the murder: this precious Counselor was hired
and bribed by the Bull of Ely, and brought in to assist them in the
Confederacy, Dorrislaw, Ask, and Cook, who were all sworn to secrecy: A Letter
is directed from Cromwell to the General, and another to the Iuncto for Justice
on some Capital Offenders; whereof the King must be one; a party sent to seize
on him; frustrate the Treaty; and commit his Majesty close Prisoner to Hurst
Castle; the Army must advance to London; seized on thirty Members of Parliament
at one time, and Secluded a hundred more; set a Guard upon the Juncto; put in,
and thrust out whom he list; forced them to sit, vote, make Laws, and give
Judgment on whom he list; called a Court of Mock-justice by his own Authority,
against the peoples will, or advice: and hired knaves to cry Justice, justice;
directly against the Law of God, and his own former Oaths and Protestations,
took off the Kings head, abolished Monarchy, erected a Popular Government of
himself, his hired Servants, and combined Creatures; besides the infringment of
the Fundamental Law^ of the Kingdom, the just Rights of the Crown, and Liberty
and Propriety of the Subjects; broken several Orders, Ordinances,
Protestations, Covenants, and Oaths which he first thrust upon the people, and
forced them to take; yet afterward, (as his Designs ripened) not only brook
them himself, but compelld, hired, and corrupted other knaves and Traitors to
do the like: and this he has done in dispight of Gospel or Law, first
commanding or causing that to be done, directly forbidden, and not to do that
was enjoined and commanded therein; and so having usurped Gods Authority, as
well as the Kings, has established a Monstrous Government, without head or
tail; rule or President; law or Reason; and commanded all People under pain of
high treason, to acknowledge just, and be subject unto it; abolish the Kingly
Office and proclaimed the undoubted Heir to the Crown, (with the Duke of York
his Brother) Traitors.


Prince. This you have said Mr. Overton is true; but your self at first held
with his Ways, and styled him Faithful Cromwell.


Overton. I prosess I did; but he has (by swerving from his first principles)
deceived me, and thousands more; and therefore I Will have one course more at him,
hit or miss; A Dog, a Dog, a Dog; a Kingdom for a good Dog: Hy -- day!
Whose Crop-ear'd Curris this? O he was bred up at Lincoln's Inn; I know him of
old; they say his teeth be poison by reason of an Asp, that lies under his
tongue.


Lilburn. No matter, so much the better; let him slip, Ha -- looe -- Crap; A
pox take him for a Curre, he has him by the Genitals; they will burn his mouth;
pull him off by the tail, and set him on sair; Ha -- looe -- Crap for a second
Course, for thy Master Jack Presbyters credit: Alas poor Crap; he has him on
his horus; Save him for pity: Foh, how he stinks! Oh, he has beshitt my
fingers; give me some of his Wasle Paper to wipe them; the Popish Royal
Favorite will do the deed: Hang him, this is a Cur, and looks like one of
Envies whelps; it is pity to save him; pull off his Collar, and set him going.


Overton. Let him gore his gutts our; hang him for a Cur he is not worth the
saving.


Prince. O save him for Mercies sake; Pray Col. Lilburn stave him off for old
acquaintance sake, he has had punishment enough by loosing his Ears, and
being marked for a Cur.


Lilburn. For your sake I Will take him off.


Walwyn. Try another; this Crap is a Dog that will bite the hand that feeds
him; give him two or three kicks and send him going.


Overton. Here Is another grizly Cur of the same breed; Set him on: This Dog
was ty'de up in the Pulpit in Paul's when the Army came in; he looks as if he
were got between a Dog-Fox, and a Spannel Bitch; a Laodicean whelp, neither
hot, nor cold; he looks as if he were going rather to hanging, then to a
Match; sure he has lost his 4001. per annum: draw him forward; Come along
Good-Cole; how he fawns, as if he would suck Eggs; this Tyke, when he perceives
you going, will run at you as fierce as if he would eat you: but stand but
still, and he Retires back: run from him, and he will follow you, barking,
bawling, and snarling, and perchance give you a bite behind.


Lilburn. On with him, let him be what he will; he bawles as if he were
wondrous eager.


Overton. Hang him, he will snarle against the Moon, yet keep his bone; they say
he will run at Sheep: lets preserve him from hanging, because he will give
warning; he first bawld at the Bishops, to set us on.


Prince. I, that was because they had him up in the bawdy-Court, and put him to
his Compurgators.


Walwyn. He dares not so much as touch the Bulls-tayle; he is good for nothing;
give him a crust, and let him seek a Master; you know not but a mangy Curre may
in the end prove a good Dog.


Lilburn. Lets set on another, this is a lovely Dog with a thin pair of
Chaps; another of Sir John Presbyters breed, better to hang then to keep; how
he drivels out Nonscence and Tautoligies; sure he has wasted his Lungs in
confuting a May Pole, and entered into a dispute with the Maid-marrian in a
Morrice-dance, about the unlawfulness of that innocent pastime; till the
Hobbyhorse confuted him with his tail, and retorted his rebuke with his heels.


Walwyn. Stroke him and LOVE him; methinks 'twould make a pretty foysting-bound
for an Aldenmans daughter; he can turn after his tail; take a Tythe-pigge by
the care, fawn on any body, and bark when his Masters bids him; stand up on his
hind-leggs, or do any thing Sir John Presbyter will have him; he was once in
request with the Iuncto, though now he be out of service.


Overton. Do they not feed him; he must do tricks or something for it; do ye
think they will keep a Dog and bark themselves? or maintain a Dog that will
bark against themselves? that were the way to make the People mistrust them for
Thieves: he was counted a good house. Dog when he came from Vxbridge, but now
he fawns not so much as formerly, that makes him out of request, and miss of
their LOVE.


Lilburn. Try another; if they all prove such Curs, no matter if they were all
hanged; they are fitter for a Wood-yard, then a Bear-Garden: Set on Poynze, and
see what he will do.


Prince. He has slipped his Collar, and run away we know not whether.


Overton. Bring a Northern Trunkle-tayle; Are they of the same mettle?


Lilburn. All Curs, all Curs; try them on, and if a Dog fastens, I Will care him
whole; they bark and bawle as the other, but will be hanged before they will
fasten.


Prince. I have heard that your English Mastiffs have been the best mettle in
the World, and would beat all Countries.


Overton. They are so good mattle, that if it were possible, they would pull
God out of heaven, and murder him as they have worried and killed their King,
and most of the true hearted Nobility of the Land; they make no more to pull
out the throats of their own Dammes, or worry their own Litter, then the Man in
the Moon's Dog does to snap a Rebol by the shins, or to lap Milk when he is a
hungry; they can find none else to fight with that can master them, and that
makes them to kill and devour one another.


Lilburn. These Curs are not of the right breed then.


Overton. No, hang them, these are but Mungorills that bawle to set on the rest
to fight, and that is all they can'do; bark for the Cause; the blessed work of
Reformation; the godly Army, the self-denying Army; the holy Army; and
pronounce Dawnation on them that did not come out, and fight for the Cause of
the Lawrd, though it was but to kill and rob one another; and this was all the
Cause, and blessed reformation, that the Cornelian Cathedral-keeper prayed
might be carried on in their Iunctoes bands so long as the Sun and Moon-endured.


Lilburn. A good Prayer I Will promise you, and deserves a 500 pounds per annum,
and some three or four hundred Acres of Deanes and Chapters Lands besides: But
did they not reward him?


Overton. Yes, with 400 pounds per annum, and the Dean of Paul's his house,
besides the stones that he plundered out of the Walks, enough to build himself
a Palace.


Prince. No marvel, that the people be so foolish as to bite one another (when
such bawling Curs set them on) but I hope now they will learn the wisdom to
agree together, fear: God, and love their Prince; and for these Changelings,
hang them up, that England may no more be called, Th: Kingdom of Blind men,
because they cannot discern a Head from a Nose: but now I talk of Noses, our
Bull expects another Dog.


Lilburn. Put on another; let loose all the Scotch-breed on him at once.


Overton. He has so tossed them lately, that they dare not come near him; yet
we will try them, Ha -- loo -- Trundle-tayles; I told you so; not a Dog will
fasten, only Archy, has him by the Tail; Has kicked out his teeth; how he
howles, as if he mourned for the breach of their Covenant, or to call in his
dear Brethren for the rest of our Guds; sure they have nere another King to
fell, have they?


Lilburn. No, he is too wise for them, and will keep out of their Marketplace;
trust a Scot, and trust the Devil; they were perfidious from the beginning; it
would not ask much labor to prove Noll a right Scot, that the like Camelian
can change his hew to what color and shape he list: in the Parliament. House
he is a fawning Spannel; in the Church, the picture of a Saint; In Counsel, a
deep dissembling Hypocrite; in the Field, a Caine; in the Court, a Judas; as
barren of all charity, as hell is of honesty; as malicious as mischief can make
him; his ears bigger then Midas; a double face like Ianus, one looking to the
people, the other after his own gain and profit, picking the peoples purses,
whilst he stares them in the faces: What is become think you of all the
Contributions, Subsidies, Twentieth-Parts, Loans, Meale-money, Excise,
Bishops-Lands, Deans and Chapters-Lands, Composition Moneys, Sequestrations,
and now the Kings Navy, Customs and Revenues, Honors, Manners, Castles, Houses,
Messuages, Parks, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Royalties, Privileges,
Franchises, and Immunities belonging to the late King, the Duchy of Lancaster,
all the Goods and Lands belonging to the Queen, the Prince, and Duke of York,
the Dukedom of Cornwall, or Earldom of Chester; besides what they have retained
to themselves, and yet not half enough; a hundred thousand pound sent for more
in his late Letter from Bristol, and the Continuation of the Assessement of
90000 pounds per mensem, notwithstanding Excise, and all this before mentioned;
sure this Bull has a better stomach then Bell and the Dragon, to devour all
this, and yet be hungry: Set on all the Irish Pack on him at once; if they will
not do it, we will knock him down with our Clubbs. Prongs, and Staves.


Overton. Sir William and Brown have fairly lost Jockey is Bull'd with an
Urchin; the Irish will be the death of them; Ormond and Inchiquin have Dundalk
and Dublin already, which makes him Paw with his Cloven-hoffe, as if he
intended to fill the Boggs up with Gravil; 40000 Irish are in a readiness to
wait his landing; he flies to the Welsh mountains, and wishes them to fall on
him, to bury his Infamy.


Prince. This is the last Course shall speed him; Ha -- looe Towzer; he Noses
again; they have him with his heels upwards; his Puddings come forth; send for
a Scrivener presently to make his Will; in manner and form following


His last Will and Testament.
In the Name of Pluto, Amen.
I Noll. Cromwell, alias, the Town Bull of Ely, Lord Chief Governor of Ireland;
Grand Plotter and Contriver of all Mischiefs in England; Lord of Mis-rule;
Knight of the Order of Regicides; Thief-tenant General of the Rebels at
Westminster; Duke of Devilishness; Ensign of Evil; Scout-Master-General to his
Infernal Majesty; being wickedly disposed in Mind; of abhorred Memory; do make
this My Last Will and Testament, in manner and form following;

I Nprimis, I give my Soul to the Father of Rebels; and my Body to be disposed
of for the several uses of these persons following;

I give my Brains to the Order of Jesuits, that with them they may Contrive
the Ruin of Princes, the overthrow of Kingdoms and Subversion of States.

I give my Skin to the Aldermen of the City to make them Night-Cownes;
provided, that they wear them on Festival-Dayes, on Forseiture (of every
Alderman, that has them not on, according to the true intent and meaning of
this Will) one undred pounds.

I give my Horns to the Council of State, to preserve them from their Enemies,
which are likely to be many; provided that they Goare with them to death
Charles the Second, and his Brother the Duke of York: And likewise, that they
may be added to the Arms of the Commonwealth; and quattered in the new Coin,
or fairly placed on the top of their new Mace.

I give my Ears to all the Brethren of the Separation, that they may bear of
nothing but what is for the benefit of themselves and Faction: Provided, That
they may be stopped against all the just Complaints, and Grievances of the
People.

I give my Eyes to the New Keepers of the peoples Liberties, that with them
they may see to receive their Money; as Taxes, Excize, etc. and foresee to
prevent what their own perficiousness is bringing upon them; and that they may
see to suppress all Tumults, insurrections, and Risings of the People, that
they may no more be like the blind leading the blind, till they all tumble in
the ditch.

I give my NOSE, that it may be a Light to the Council of State, and the
Iuncto, that they may hold it up in the Wind to smell out all Plots and
Conspiracies that shall be hatched or contrived against the present Government.

I give my Breath to all Flatterers and Parasites in the House of Commons, that
with it they may breath our new Oaths, Covenants, Protestations, and Vows; and
abrogate and break them at pleasure.

I give my Tongue to all Detractors and Parasites in the Supreme Authority, to
bewitch the poor people withal; and persuade them to their Ruin: but
especially, to John Bradshaw Esquire, Rogue President of the Council of State,
that with it he may pronounce Sentence on any that shall be more honest, more
wise, or richer then himself, that so there may be store of new Delinquents;
and by that means, more Lands and Moneys fall to the use of the State:
provided, that before his death, he blaspheme God, as he has pronounced Death
to his King; and that it may answer in part for the same here, by rotting out
of his mouth; and hereafter be dried in Dives Chimney, till it always plead,
and be denied the least drop to cool it.

I give my Winde-pipe and Lungs to all zealous Levites of the Prosbytery, that
have wasted their own, by crying out for the Cause.

I give my Liver to Towzer the Man of the Moons Dog, that he may become
hearry to bayte all the Regicides and Knaves in the Iuncto, as he has done me.

I give my Heart to the Fraternity in Iniquity, the Common-Traytors Convened at
Westminster, that it may be preserved as a holy Relic to swear by, and lay
their hands on when they Conspire mischief against Gods Anointed, or any of his
faithful Subjects or Servants.

I give my Pizle to the Lord General Fairfax, to beat his Wife into more
honesty.

I give my Stones to Harry Martin, to tabor the pouches of all his Worships
sinners in the Suburbs; provided, that first they be employed for the service
of my Wife, or the Wife of any Member of Parliament.

I give my Bladder to the City, to see if they can keep the Remainder of their
Gold in it; and incase it be too little, that they make use of Colon, or that
Gutt commonly called Tom of townsend, or the Arse-gutt; Provided, If there be
to spare, that their Wives have the Remainder to make them Pudding-Baggs.

I give my Joule with the hair on it, to make the City a new Cap of MAINTENANCE
against the next Lord-Mayors Day.

I give my Legs and Hooffs to Thomas Lord Fairfax, that when the Gowt, and the
Morbus have devoured his own, he may make use of these at pleasure.

I give the lowermost Tip of my Tail to my beloved Wife, to make her a Fan
to keep the Flies from her painted face: The upper part I Ordain, shall go to
the Beast called the Juncto at Westminster; that though it has no head, yet it
may be said to have the more tail; and have this property, to draw the third
part of this City after it, to their own destruction.

I give my Midriffe to make my Lord Mayor of London a Ruff to wear to the
Spittle.

I give my Cheeks to Feast all those at Christmasse that I have made poor,
undone, and caused to go a begging for want of sustinance.

I give my Teeth to the devouring Catterpillers of the Commonwealth, viz.
Committees, Sequestrators, and Excize-men; that as they have begun, they may
make a quick dispatch, till they have devoured us; because the expectation of
evil, is in many more then the evil it self.

I give my Neck to all Citizens and Merchants to seed their Servants withal.

I give my Mary-bones to the Regenerate Sisters, that they may thereby be made
the stronger to bear, increase, and multiply; and the lustier to exeacise their
bodily Gifts, and so bring forth the sruits of the Spirit.

I give my Chines to the Commanders of the Army, to make them hearty to fight
against Ormond and Inchiquin; and to employ the remainder of their strength on
strange women.

For all my good Qualities (which I profess are but a few) I desire they may
be Registered in the Chronicle of the Free-States of England; to be had in
perpetual remembrance, till King Charles the Second shall come to the Crown.

I give my Faith to the Common Counsel, that they may look up and believe, when
the Iuncto and Council of State wants more Money.

I give my Religion to the Fraternity of Ignatius Loyalla, from whence it was
at first derived; provided, that the Brethren of the Separation act those
Tenants on Bishops and Kings which the Jesuits do instruct them in, for the
propagation of Heresy and Rebellion.

I give my Bellowing to Hugh Peter's to pronounce Damnation with; and my Inwards
to the Butchers wife that robbed her good man, to relieve him.

I leave all my Children to the Tuition of William Lo, to see them brought up
to read their Neck-verse, and to Commence at Doctor Stories Cap, receiving
first the Ceremony of their Order in their hands.

I give the Roape that I am bayted with, to hang up all Traitors and Regicides;
provided, that John Bradshaw have the first use of it, and after him, Cook,
A^ke, Steel, and all and every Member of the High Court of mock-Justice, by
what means or Titles soever distinguished; and afterward to come to Teuch,
Tue, and the rest of the Rogues that were hired to cry Justice against the King.

Lastly, I Will and Ordain my Offall to be buried in the Abbey of Westminster,
and to have a Tomb raised over them with mystatue; and underneath these Verses
following:

And this my last Will and Testament to stand in full Force and Virtue,
Renouncing all former Wills, Bills, Bonds, Promises, Grants; or the like, in
any wise not withstanding.

Oliver Crum-Well.
Witnesses,

Tho. L. Fairfax. Phil. Pembroke. Job. Bradshaw, Hen. Mildmay.




His EPITAPH.
HEre lies (the Devil take his Soul)
One, for whom no Bell would towl:
He lived a Murderer, died a Knave;
Deserved a Halter, not a Grave.
Some called him Noll, some the Town- bull,
Or Iron-sides, that the Land filled full
Of Athiests, Shismaitcks, and Heretics,
That Ruined Kingdoms; undid Bishoprics,
Despised his God, killed his King, broke the Laws,
Eat up our labors with devouring jaws;
Cozened the People, spoiled all the Land;
Had Lives and Goods at his Command.
You that Make-water, pray now stay,
Piss on his Grave, and go away.
That they that purge, may for his grace
Un-truss, and S -- upon his face.
FINIS.

