THE REPLY Of the STATES GENERAL Of the UNITED PROVINCES Of the Low Countries,
To the LETTER Of the KING of GREAT BRITAIN.

Anno 1673.

To The King of Great Britain the 9/19 of December. 1673.
SIR,
WHat ever may have induced your Majesty to write us the Letter, which the
Trumpetter we had sent you has delivered us from your Majesty dated the 7/17
November., we do think ourselves bound to return you our thanks, for the honor
you have been pleased to do us; But we cannot but let you know, at the same
time, how much we are troubled to see your Majesty so prepossessed against us,
and that those Ministers, whom you most trust, have hitherto had the skill to
influence your Majesty so far as we see they have done, by persuading you to
aver so many things, which they supposed were out of your Majesty's memory, and
which they know in their own consciences to be contrary to all truth.

For this reason, SIR, we do not think fit to give a particular answer to all
the heads of the Letter, your Majesty has written to us, that we may not give
a new occasion to those that have so possessed your Majesty, to exasperate you
further: But referring ourselves to the Deduction, which we are necessitated to
set forth in answer to the Manifest, which was published in your Majesty's
Name, we shall satisfy ourselves with declaring here unto your Majesty, that as
we have alleged nothing in the Letter we had written to your Majesty, whereof
we have not in our hands authentic and undeniable proofs, so we shall be ready
at all times to produce them before your Majesty, whenever you will be
pleased to give us a fitter opportunity for it. And withal since your Majesty
(supposing that what information you had received from your Ministers was more
faithful,) has complained to your Parliament of our obstinate averseness to
Peace, and that the House of Commons according to their wonted prudence, have
been pleased to suspend their judgment therein, and to give us thereby an
occasion to lay our innocence more open, and to give more public and
convincing proofs of the sincerity of our intentions; We have thought it
necessary to add, that to let your Majesty, and all your Kingdom see, that we
do not affect to speak of Peace (as is laid to our charge) without really
desiring the same, and that we are far from entrenching ourselves within
general words, without coming to any particular overtures, We are ready to
renew with your Majesty the Treaty which you concluded with us at Breda in the
year 1667, and to explain the 19. Article concerning the Flagg, in such a
manner as may prevent any further dispute for the future, and that may regulate
and settle the practice thereof without any ambiguity. And being your Majesty
judged the said Treaty so just and so equitable, that for some years after we
received more proofs of your Majesty's friendship, and you entered with us into
stricter Alliances than ever, we do propose the same as the most solid
foundation of a firm and durable Peace, and we hope your Majesty will not
refuse to return to your former amity with us, upon the same terms which you
have heretofore approved of; the rather because the interest of the Protestant
Religion, and many other respects relating to the good of both Nations, ought
to be a strong argument on both sides to unite us again the sooner. Moreover
because some have endeavored to persuade your Majesty that we have violated
our Treatyes, and committed several injustices for which satisfaction is
demanded, we are also ready to send forthwith our Ambassadors to your Majesty,
to give you a more faithful account of the truth than you have received from
our Ennemies, and to examine in your presence all the infractions that are laid
to our charge, with a solemn promise to repair and give satisfaction, for all
the wrongs or injuries, which either your Majesty or your Subjects, may have
received from us or from our Officers, since the aforesaid Treaty of Breda till
the beginning of this War.

And to the end that this inquiry may not retard the conclusion of a Peace
which we so earnestly desire, and which is so necessary for the good of all
Christendom; We do offer to your Majesty, for a greater security, the Guarantie
of our Allies for the exact and punctual performance of the promise we make
here, and which we are willing to have inserted in the Treaty, which shall be
concluded, to make the same so much the more authentic.

Lastly, to demonstrate to your Majesty how far we value your friendship; We
do profer you likewise, to restore the New Netherlands, with any other Place or
Colony, our arms may have conquered during this War; not doubting but that
your Majesty will not refuse reciprocally to engage, to restore to us what
Territoryes or Forts your Majesty may have conquerred.

But because your Majesty seems above all to complain, that we do highly
offend you, by proposing to your Majesty to leave your Allies, to whom you have
promised not to treat separately, whilst we do establish it for a fundamental
point, that we cannot break the word we have given ours, without wronging our
honor, as if your Majesty was to value yours less; We beseech your Majesty to
consider, there is a vast difference between your engagements and ours, as well
as in the carriage of those we are respectively allied with: And your Majesty
may with as much Justice as glory quench a fire, which has already spread it
self much further than you did think at first; whereas we could not forsake our
Allies, without being guilty of the greatest ingratitude, and without
destroying Europe by destroying ourselves. When your Majesty did at first join
with our Ennemies, you did seem to intend only to bring our Commonwealth low;
But now the War is grown a general one; and the Spanish Netherlands for the
preservation of which your Majesty has always appeared so zealous, are no
less concerned in it than our selves, as well as the greatest part of the
Empire.

Besides, your Majesty has so much the less reason to continue in your former
Alliance, since your Allies themselves have altered the nature of this War, and
have forced our friends to declare so much the sooner in our behalf, whilst
neither his Imperial Majesty nor the most Serene King of Spain, could bear no
longer with the hostilityes the French committed every day in all the Low
Countries, and in several Provinces of the Empire, where they had already
mastered an Electorall Town. But not to enter into these particulars, and
laying aside several other arguments of the same kind, your Majesty, SIR, has
but to much cause to forsake an Allye that has sought nothing in this War but
his own private advantage, and who in the most important occasions has taken
care of nothing less than of your Majestys concerns, not to say worse: And if
your Majesty do still doubt the truth of it, let not your Majesty rely upon
what those that are Friends to France do tell you; But be pleased duly to
examine what passed at Utrecht the last year between the French Ministers and
our Deputys, and you will see plainly how upright the carriage of your Allies has
been. To be convinced of it, it is even sufficient to read the Proposalls which
France made then to us, wherein there is not the least word relating to your
Majesty; and whilst our other Deputys were kept at Hampton Court without
granting them any Audience, we were pressed hard at Utrecht to agree upon, and
conclude a Treaty without your Majesty's participation: And to quicken us the
more, we were told that unless we granted within five days what was then
demanded of us, they would afterward raise their demands higher. We might add
to this several other overtures which have since been made to us, wherein as
little care was taken of your Majesty: But by reason these have been less
public how real soever they were, we shall not insist upon them, and will
only for a final proof of the obligations your Allies have laid upon your
Majesty, put you in mind of what has passed in the Sea Fights; whereof we will
have no other witnesses, and appeal to no other Judges, but those that have had
the command of your Majesty's Fleets, with the rest of the Officers and Seamen.
But as for us, seeing our Allies have carried themselves in a manner so
different; that they have laid upon us such Obligations as we cannot
sufficiently express; that withal we are entered with them into this Alliance
out of an unavoidable necessity, and for the good of all Europe; And lastly (as
we have said it before) that we cannot leave them without undoing ourselves,
and exposing to an eminent danger the safety of Christendom; Your Majesty ought
not to wonder if we cannot consent to break our word to them, nor take it ill,
if we endeavor to persuade your Majesty to follow your true interest, and to
take a resolution which would be as generous and as just, as it would prove
beneficial to your Kingdoms, and to your Majesty's Neighbors.

To which we may add, that a separate Treaty is so much the more necessary and
warrantable, by reason of the absolute stop which is put to the Conferences at
Collen, by the obstinate denial the French have made, some months since, to
grant the necessary Passes to the Ministers of the Duke of Lorraine (one of our
Allies) and to admit him a Principal in (...) Negotiation of Peace.

This, SIR, is what we have thought fit both to represent, and to offer unto
your Majesty, in answer to what was most essential in your Letter. And we
conceive hopes that if your Majesty will never so little reflect upon the same,
you will own, that nothing more can in justice be demanded of us; Neither can
we persuade ourselves that your Majesty will without need, as well as without
advantage, countenance any longer the arms of the French not only against us,
but also against some other of your ancientest Allies, who are engaged to run
the same fortune with us; And to endanger still both all Europe and the
Protestant Religion. We Will expect with great impatience your Majesty's
resolution, upon which the rest and the prosperity of so many Nations does
depend. In the mean time we pray God,

SIR, To crown your Majesty's Reign with felicity, and to bless your Royal
Person with health and long life. At the Hague the 19. of December 1673. Your
Majesty's most humble Servants, The States General of the United Provinces of
the Low Countries, GASP. FAGEL.
By Command of the abovesaid, H. FAGEL.


EXTRACT, Uyt 't Register der Resolutien vande Hoogh Mogende Heeren Staten
Generael der Vereenighde Nederlanden.
Mercurij den 24 Iulij. 1658.
SYnde ter Vergaderinge overwoogen den innehouden vande Brieven vande
Directeurs over den Levantschen handel / end navigatie inde Middelantsche Zee
/ hier bevoorens onefangen / under anderen raeckende de c^mportementen vande
Consuls vande Nederlantsche Natie in 't generael / Ce weten in all de plaetsen
van Spaignen / Vranckrijck / Italie^n / enaen de gheheele Middelantsche Zee
(uytgesondere alleen het Turcx ghebiet) residerende / end de Reglementen
dienthalven gheprojecteert. Is naer deliberatie goet ghevonden end verstaen /
mits desen te arresteren end vast te stellen / de hier naervolgende poincten
end Articulen / om te dienen voor even generael Reglement / naer den inhout van
't welcke hun de Consuls inde voor-verhaelde plaetsen in Christenrijck sullen
hebben te gedragen / so ten regard vande rechten by de selve te genieten /
als andersints / Teweten:

Eerstelijck / Dat all de Consulaet Rechten vande voorsz Consuls / in all de
plaetsen voornoemt / end alomme gereguleert sullen werden op Realen van Achten
/ zijnde de selve door de gantsche Middelandtsche Zee ganghbaer / end over den
prijs end valeur van de welcke geen disputen konnen vallen.

Ten tweeden / Dat de Consuls niet mere voor haer recht en sullen mogen trecken
/ gelijck hun well expresselick verboden were mits desen / als vier / often ten
hoochsten vijf Realen van achten / naer advenant de groote van yeder Schip / in
hun respecrive districten komende te arriveren / mitsgaders last te breecken /
often aldaer ladinge in te nemen / sonder dat de Schepen alleenlick daer komende
om water te halen / often andersints ergens in gehouden fullen wesen.

Ten derden / Dat de gheseyde Consuls haer geen authoriteyt / often eenige
Jurisdictie sullen hebben aen te matigen / often poogen t'exerceren / over de
persoonen vande Coopluyden / often der selver effecten.

End ten vierden / In cas het mochte ghebeuren dat de Consuls hun door de
Schippers lieren gebruycken / end emploperen in eenige extraordinaris
besoignes / 'tzy in het bevorderen end beleyden van eenige Processen /
beslissen van eenige differenten / dat syluyden in soodanige ghelegentheyt /
voor hun salaris den Schippers niet meerder sullen vermogen te done betalen /
als volgens d'arbitragie van d'aenwesende Nederlantsche Coopluyden / geoordeelt
sal werden hun te competeren. Welck Reglement copielick toegesonden sal worden
aen all hare Ho: Mo: Consuls inde boven-verhaelde quartieren residerende / met
last end order vanden inhouden van dien precise end punctuelick naer te komen
/ mitsgaders door den druck ghemeen gemaeckt / op dat even yeder / de selve
behoevende / daer van kennisse match bekomen. Gelijck oock Extract van dese
Resolutie gesonden sal werden aende respective Collegien ter Admiraliteyt /
midtsgaders aen de voornoemde Directeurs vanden Levantschen handel / end
navigatie inde Middelantsche Zee / om te strecken tot der selver narichtinge.
Was geparapheert / Joan vander Beecke, vt.

Accordeert met 'tvoorsz Register. End geteeckent / N. Ruysch.

IN 'sGRAVEN-HAGE, By de Weduwe, end Erfgenamen van wylen Hillebrandt Jacobsz
van Wouw, Ordinaris Druckers vande Hoogh Mog: Heeren Staten Generael der
Vereenighde Nederlanden. Anno 1658.


