A Divine Legacy, Bequeathed unto all MANKIND, OF ALL Ranks, Ages and Sexes:
Directing How we may live Holily in the Fear of God, and how we may die happily
in the Favor of God; both which Duties are of Universal Concern. The Rules
here are, how to be Truly Valourous in warring a good Warfare, and in fighting
the the good Fight of Faith while we Live, and to be Blessedly Victorious when
we Die.

By Christopher Ness, Minister of the Gospel in London.

Exitus Acta probat, and Finis Coronat Opus, says the Philosopher. Our Last
Works should be our Best Works, says our Lord, Rev. 2.19. London, Printed by
T. S. and sold by T. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, and
J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Candid Christian,
I Have been now (through the Grace and Mercy of my good God) a Labourer in my
Lord's Harvest, and a Vine-dresser in my Master's Vineyard almost Threescore
Years, wanting but a very little of it; and in the space of those last Twenty
Years I have (through the good hand of my God upon me, as Ezra's phrase is
Chap. 7.6,9.) been enabled to publish to the World this following Catalogue of
Books, little and great. As, 1. The Crown and Glory of a Christian, in the Year
76. 2. A Christian Walk and Work on Earth, till he come to Heaven, in the Year
77. 3. The Crystal Mirror, or Christian's Looking-Glass, showing the Treachery
of the Heart, in the Year 78. 4. An Antidote against the Poison of Popery, in
the Year, 78, 79. 5. A Discovery of Antichrist in his Rise, Reign and Ruin, in
the Year 79. 6. The Devil's Patriarch, in the Life of Pope Innocent XI. in the
Year 80. 7. A Spiritual Legacy to Young Ones, in the Year 81. 8. A
Church History, from Adam to this Day, and a Scripture-Prophecy to the End of
the World, in the Year 81, 82. 9. A New Years Gift for Children in the Year 83.
10. The Wonderful Signs of Wonderful Times, in the Year 84. 11. An Half Sheet
upon the Comet, or Blazing-Star. 12. Three Sheets enlarged upon the same
Subject. 13. A Whip for the Fools Back, who did Ridicule God's Holy Ordinance
of Marriage. etc. 14. A Key with the Whip, unsolding the Intreagues of Absalom
and Achitophel; both these latter are writ in Satirical Verse. 15. Advice to
the Painter, about the Earl of Shaftsbury's enlargement from the Tower, in
smoother Verse. 16. An Astrological and Theological Discourse, upon the great
Conjunction ushered in with a great Comet, etc. 17. A Strange and Wonderful
Trinity or Triplicity of Stupendous Prodigies, namely, consisting of a
Wonderful Eclipse, of a Wonderful Comet, and of a Wonderful Conjunction; all
these without Date, were written between the Year 82, and 89. 18. My First
Volume in Folio, called a Complete History and Mystery of the Old and
New Testament, both Logically discussed, and Theologically improved, beginning
at Adam, and ending at Moses. 19. The Second Volume in Folio, (having the same
Title with the first) begins with Joshuah, and ends at Solomon's Birth. 20. The
Third Volume in Folio, (with the same Title) begins at Solomon's Life, and ends
at the end of the Old Testament. 21. The Fourth Volume in Folio, (with the same
Title) begins at the Birth of Christ, and ends at the Death of John the Divine;
which is an Exposition of the whole New-Testamen: All these Four Volumes are
now commended to the World by Three of our Learned and Judicious Divines,
namely, Mr. Matthew Barker, M. George Griffith, and Mr. Samuel Slater; which
Testimonial is printed at the bottom of the Dedicatory Epistle to the Fourth
Volume, under their own Three Hands, Tria sunt omnia, and instar omnium, etc.
this Work has taken me wholly up from the Year 89, to this Year 99. And now
22. This Divine Legacy, which is (...), multum in parvo, much in a little.
Isocrates wrote his best Book the last, and Plato died at 81, with his Pen in
his Hand; and Demosthenes desired to do so, etc. Yet have we better Examples
than those Philosophers, for Joshuah when he was going the way of all the
Earth, and stricken in years, Josh. 23.2, and 14. did then give most grave and
godly Counsel to the Old Testament Church Chap. 23. and 24. And Paul the Aged,
wrote the more effectually to young Philemon, under that Title of Veneration,
Philem. ver. 9. And the Beloved Disciple John, who (while Young, leaned upon
his Lord's Bosom, Joh. 13.23,25.) did under the Venerable Name of Elder. 2 John
1. and 3 John 1. write his first General Epistle to Children, Young Men and
Fathers, in the New Testament, 1 John 2.12,13,14. but above all, God himself
thunders out threatenings against Children, Young Men and Aged, Jer. 6.11,12,13.
In congruity to those perfect Patterns, I (an Old Servant of Christ) have drawn
up this Directory ( talis, qualis est) to all Ages, especially to us that are
Old, adding only, ( 1.) That Old Age is a dead weight: It Is then a difficult
Duty to turn unto God, when we have been turning and running from him all our
former Days. No Spur can move a Foundered Horse, and Hard Wax takes no
impression. When the Body is weak, and Presumption is strong, to say [ God is
merciful] is said truly, but not safely. Therefore, ( 2) All must be careful to
live well while Young, and then shall we die well, whether Young or Old. ( 3.)
When we have seen an end of all worldly Perfections, then may we best see, that
God's Commands are exceeding broad, and all our Obedience to be exceeding
narrow, Psalm. 119.96. The Good Lord grant that this Legacy may come to you in
the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15.29. Amen.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS Divine Legacy.
CHAP. I. COntains fallen Man's Malady and Danger, page 1. to 42. CHAP. II. Fallen
Mam's Remedy, and Deliverer, p. 43, to 63. CHAP. III. The Redeemed are
Conquerors, by their Strong Redemer, p. 54, 120. CHAP. IV. Advice to Young and
Old, to war a good Warfare in God's Armor, and Watching unto Prayer, p. 130,
to 177. CHAP. V. The Characters of True Conquerors, through the strength of
Christ, p. 177, to 232. CHAP. VI. Advice to the Aged, for saving the Soul, p.
232, to 319. CHAP. VII. The Holy Means for making Old Age, to become a Good
Age, p. 320, to 357. CHAP. VIII. Contains both Counsel and Comfort. (1.)
Against the Evils of Old Age. (2.) Against the Fears of the Hour of Death. And,
(3.) Against the Terrors of the Day of Judgment, p. 358, to the last.
CHAP. I. Man's Malady and Danger.
MAN's Life is a Warfare, Job 7.1. Margin, which the Septuagint reads (...), to
signify a place of Pirates, as Paul was in perils often both by Sea and Land,
2 Cor. 11.26. so are we all while in this lower World; for Satan is both a
Robber by Land, that seeks not for Straw, but for Gold (as Chrysostom's Thief
did say of himself) and he is a Pirate at Sea, hanging out false Colors to get
in with us, he seeks not whom to bite, out whom to devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. the word
[(...)] signifies to swallow up at one mouth-full, and that no less than our
precious and immortal Souls; therefore is he called Abaddon, Hebr. A bad one
indeed, or the wicked one, and (...), Greek, Rev. 9.3. both which names
signify a Destroyer: He is a broken Bankrupt himself, and ordained for
Destruction, and therefore his whole work is to involve all Mankind in his own
Misery, accounting it some comfort to have Companions therein. Solamen miseris
socios adhibere Doloris. He hunts not (as Nimrod that Cruel Hunter) for our
moneys, houses, lands or liberties, but for our very lives (as the Harlot does,
Prove. 7.23. yea to steal away our Souls from God, and the Crown of Glory from
us, he is called in Scripture by such names as are all of a destroying nature,
as (1.) A Draggon, Rev. 12.7. (2.) A Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. (3.) A Serpent, Isa.
27.1. (4.) A Wolf, Jobn 10.12. (5.) A Murderer, John 8.44. (6.) A Tormentor,
Matthew. 18.34. (7.) A Fowler and Hunter, Psalm. 91.3. (8.) Beelzebub, Mat. 10.25.
and 12.24,27, (9.) Devil, quasi Do evil often, and therefore it is no less than
a Miracle of Mercy that we are not all of us destroyed by him through his craft
and cruelty, his power and policy, especially considering how he has the upper
ground of us, as he is Prince of the Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. when we are
but weak and worthless Worms crawling here below upon the Earth, insomuch that
his Territories lay betwixt us and Heaven, which is our Fathers House,
therefore was Lazarus's Soul carried by Angels through the Regions of the Air
into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22. Beside, it ought to be considered with
seriousness how Satan our Adversary (as it signifies) proved too hard for the
Innocentest Man Adam, too hard for the Strongest Man, Samson, and too hard for
the Wisest Man Solomon: If he could over-master all these Three, who were green
Trees, what can we dry Trees expect? Luke 23.31. If this Strong Man, yea and
Armed too, even with Armor of proof, Luke 11.21. became a Conqueror over Adam
in his state of Innocence; how much more may he more easily master the best of
us? [ Si hoc Adamo in Paradiso contigisset, quid nobis in sterquibunt] says
Bernard, If this foul fall befell Adam in the Garden of Eden, oh what may
befall us who are now cast out of Paradise upon the dirty Dunghill of this
present evil World! Gal. 1.4. It may be said of the best of us, as it was said
of young Troilus's grappling with great Achilles, There was Impar congressus, a
very unfit and an unequal match betwixt them: Yea so bold and daring is this
Devil, that he dared to Assault the Second Adam (as he had done before the
First Adam, hoping for the same success.) Even the Son of God himself, who only
could indeed over-match him, not only for himself, but more especially for all
his Redeemed: Moreover Satan is a Restless Adversary out of his unspeakable
hatred against God and all goodness; as it is said of the Scorpion, there is
not one minute of Time, wherein he does not thrust out his Sting, but keeps it
in a continual and speedy motion of poisoning and destroying whatever he can
reach; even so and much more that Old Serpent will watch night and day to sting
our Souls worse than the Fiery Serpents did the Bodies of Israel, Numb. 21.

Consider also how Satan is an Ubiquitary Adversary; his Circuit he walks is
the whole Earth, Job 1.7. and 2.2. he is called the God of this World, 2. Cor.
4.4. which lays in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. As the True God in the beginning
did but speak the word by his Creating Power, and every Creature in the whole
Creation was perfectly wrought; so if Satan do but hold up his finger, or give
but the least whisper to his Vassals, they are at his beck and obedience; he
leads them captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. Yea and this he does all over the
World; no Land or Island is free from him, but the whole Universe may be called
(as one part of it is) Terra Diaboli, the Devil's Land; he is the Ruler of the
Darkness of this World, Ephesians. 6.12. He is a God in this sense, because there is
no fleeing from his presence, etc. as Psa. 139.7,8,9. our base hearts and a
busy Devil will meet in all Lands. Add likewise to the abovesaid, how He is an
Everlasting Adversary both 1. In respect of the great World; He began betimes
with the first Man and Woman in the World, and he has continued ever since to
this present time, and he will continue even to the end, until our Lord lays
hold on him, and chain him up for a 1000 years, Rev. 20. And 2. In respect of
the little World, Man, who is as an Epitome of the great World, etc. Satan
begins betimes, even at our very Conception; for as the Serpent was more subtle
than all the Beasts of tbe Field, Genesis 3.1. so Satan's subtlety was most
manifest in this matter, that when his Luciferian Pride had metamorphos'd him
from a glorious Angel (as he was created) into a damned Devil, and therefore
was cast out of Heaven into Hell, and understanding how God designed to fill up
that Habitation (which he had left with his Angels, Jude verse 6. by a Remnant
Redeemed out of Mankind. Hereupon he is said to be come down (or rather cast
down) having great Wrath and Malice against Mankind, Rev. 12.12. hating Man's
Redeemer with a perfect hatred, and sinning that unpardonable sin against the
Holy Ghost every moment, etc. and that his Cruelty to us is managed with the
profoundest Craft and Policy, as is apparent in this, that he stayed not to
pour his poison into every Vessel, as it was brought forth into the World, but
he pours it into the Fountain or Spring head of Mankind, well knowing that in
poisoning our first Parents, he likewise poisoned all their Posterity in all
succeeding Ages to the end of the World: Thus, says the Apostle [ by one Man,
Sin entered into the World, Romans 5.12. and Death by Sin, and so Death passed
upon all Men, for that all have sinned, and v. 14. Death has Reigned from Adam
to Moses (and so down to us in our day, etc.) even over them that had not
sinned after the similitude of Adam's Transgression:] So that Infants are no
Innocents, being born with Original Sin, the first Sheet wherein they are
wrapped, is woven of sin, shame, blood and filth, Ezekiel. 16.4,6, etc. They are
said to sin as they were in the loins of Adam; sust as Levi is said to pay
Tithes to Melchisedech, even in the loins of his Fore-father Abraham, Heb.
7.9,10. otherwise Infants would not die, for Death is the wages of sin, Romans
6.23. and the Reign of Death is procured by the Reign of sin, which has
reigned over all Mankind, except Christ: All are sinners, infected with the
guilt and filth of sin, the Rot (according to the Vulgar saying) over-runneth
the whole Flock. Hence David reflects upon Original Sin as the Original cause
of all his Actuals, saying, [ Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did
my Mother conceive me, Psalm. 51.5.

Thus Man's Malady begins betimes, even in our Conception; this subtle Serpent
sowed his Tares very early, so that we are all born in our sin, Joh. 9.34. Adam
begat a Son in his own Image, Genesis 5.3. and his Childrens Teeth are set on Edge
after he had eaten the sour Fruit of the forbidden Tree, Ezekiel. 18.2. The same
Hand that was reached forth to that forbidden Fruit, reached out both Sin and
Death to the Fruit of his Loins wherein that Fruit was seminally, as the
Branches are in a Common Stock; the actual Sin did not determine the bound of
Misery in himself, but it brought a second Misery with it, even the Misery of
the whole Nature of Mankind. Adam was the Representative or public Person
representing the whole mass of Mankind, (as a Parliament Man represents the
whole Country he is chosen for) while Adam stood, we all stood in him; while he
kept his Obedience in his state of Innocence, he kept his whole Estate and
Nature safe and entire; but when he fell we all fell in him; in Adam all die, 1
Cor. 15.22. Though we did not choose him, yet God did choose him for us, as our
Representative; and his Sin was the greatest Sin (next to that Sin against the
Holy Ghost) as it had many aggravations against the greatest Light, and the
greatest Love that ever was vouchsafed to any man, and therefore it was just
with God so to punish, not only himself, but his whole Nature also for that
sinful Act. Hereby all the Sons and Daughters of Adam came to be deprived of
Original Righteousness; we are all alienated from the Life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
born the Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and come short both of God's Glory, and
of our own Duty, Romans 3.23.

Adam first defiled the Nature of Mankind, and ever since the defiled Nature
has defiled the whole Offspring thereof, leaving them under the Curse of God,
and liable unto Death in the latitude of it, even unto Death, Temporal,
Spiritual and Eternal: The Fall of Adam was the Death of himself, and the Death
of us; yea, and also it was the Death of our dear Redeemer to redeem us from
Spiritual and Eternal Death. Now as is the Root, so are the Branches; as is the
Fountain, so are the Waters that flow from it: [ Generatum sequitur Naturam
Generantis,] that which is begotten does follow the Nature of that which
begets; who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one, Job 14.4.
that which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, Joh. 3.6. [ Corruptus parit
Corruptum] one corrupt thing brings forth another; yea, the Sower sows clean
Grain, yet even that brings forth Chaff, (as well as Wheat) from which it was
winnowed before it was Sown.

Father Augustine says, There is nothing more certain than Original Sin, yet
nothing more secret and hard to be understood how it is conveyed from Parents
to Children. Many Disputes there be about the manner how Sin is propagated from
Adam to his Offspring; some of which deserve no better Character than that of
Aristotle de Vacuo [(...)] such discourses upon the empty place are but empty
things: It Is sufficient for us to know, that God by a just imputation does
realize the Infection into the whole Race of Adam, in whom we were, as in a
common lump, and in his Leaven we are all sowred. We know that leprous Parents
do beget leprous Children, and there be Diseases which are called hereditary,
and incurable by man; we took this Infection from our Parents, and we transmit
it to our Children; so come we to be called a Seed of Evil Doers, Children that
are Corrupters, as well as corrupted, Isai. c. 1. v. 4. I have read the story
of some foolish People, who falling all together into a deep Pit, fell a
disputing one with another how they came there, etc. but one wiser than the
rest advised them to lay aside those Niceties, and rather consult about some
proper means whereby they might all be delivered out of that danger, without
which they were in all probability like to perish: Even such are those vain
Ventilations about this abstruce point of Sins entrance into the World, whether
by that one person Adam's fall, or by every ones fall in his own person, the
frothy Wits of the Arminians do fondly deny Original Sin. But such as are wise
to Salvation have learnt better Lessons in Christ's School, and they feel
otherwise in the School of their own smarting experience. Therefore we ought
all seriously to consider, how the Greek Fathers call it (...), the Seed-plot
of all Actual Transgressions, etc. and the Latin Fathers call it Fomes Peccati,
the lasting Fuel that feeds the Fire of our burning Lusts; but above all, how
the Holy Scriptures does Charactarize it, calling it the Body of Sin, Romans 6.6.
and the Sin that dwells in us, Romans 7.17. and the Law of the Members, ver. 23.
and that which so easily besets us, Hebr. 12.1. and David calls it the Iniquity
of the Heels, (which was ready to trip him up, and to lay him all along upon
the ground at every turn and return of the Tempter upon him) Psalm. 49.5. And if
we do as little Zacheus did, namely, climb up the Sycamore Tree to take a full
prospect of his lovely Lord from top to toe, Luke 19.3,4, etc. so if we get up
into the Mount of the Old and New Testament, and take a full view of the
foulness of Original Sin. The right Scriptural Account of Original Sin is this,

1. That man who had been God's delight before, Prove. 8.31. became both hated
of God, Psalm. 5.5. and an hater of God, Romans 1.30. the Greek is (...),
signifying to hate God as Hell.

2. That fallen man is become intensively evil, protensively only evil, and
extensively always and continually evil in the thoughts and imaginations of his
heart, Genesis 6.5.

3. That man's Heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
Jer. 17.9.

4. His Thoughts are Thoughts of iniquity, Isa. 59.7.

5. He walks in the vanity of his Mind, Ephesians. 4.17. having his understanding
darkened, and his Heart blinded, ver. 18.

6. His Conscience is defiled, Tit. 1.15.

7. His Eyes are full of Adultery, and he cannot cease from Sin, 2 Pet. 2.14.

8. His Throat an open Sepulcher, the poison of Asps upon his Tongue and Lips,
etc. Romans 3.13,14.

9. In a word, all man's Members and Faculties are marred and maimed by the fall
of Adam (as might more largely be demonstrated from Scripture) the first man
defiled Nature, and ever since Nature has defiled every man; his whole Frame
is out of frame; whole evil is in man, and whole man is in evil: As in Noah's
Flood, not any one part of the Earth could be seen dry. So nor any one part of
man can be found that is not infected with this Original Pollution; and the
chief cause of all our Actual Sins, is charged, not upon Satan, but upon this
Evil Concupiscence that is inbred in us, Jam. 1.15. The Tempter might strike
Fire long enough in vain, if we did not find him dry Tinder for his Sparks to
fall upon: We cannot say as our sinless Lord said [the Prince of this World
comes and finds nothing in me,] that is, to favor his Temptation, Joh. 14.30.
But alas, when he comes to tempt us, he finds a Treacherous Party within, this
Birth-sin of ours, which betrays us oftentimes into his hands, as has happened
unto some Cities besieged, whose Gates have been opened by some Traitorous
Citizens within for a free entrance of the Enemy that were besieging it round
about. Hence is it, that all men are said in Holy Scripture to be dead in sin,
Ephesians. 2.1. and Bondslaves to Satan, Heb. 2.15. and subject to all Calamities
of this Life under the Curse of God, Gal. 3.10. Yea and good men, even the best
of men are but men at the best; for Original Sin in them is stronger than their
Grace; for if God should leave us with our stock of Grace that he has
graciously given us, and let us be alone but a while in the hands of our own
Counsels, this sin of our Nature would easily swallow up our stock of Grace; woe
to us when God departs from us, Hos. 9.12. The Reason is, because Grace given
to us is like the putting of Hot Water into that which is Cold: Though this will
warm it for the present, yet the Water will reduce it self into its own natural
temper of Coldness, unless Fire be kept continually under it. Take another
Example, as a River would run ( caeter^s paribus) the nighest way to the Sea^,
(which is the Receptacle of all Rivers) were it let alone to its own tendency
by nature; but we see the various situation of the Earth, (in some places
higher than others) and by the Art and Industry of Man the most Rapid River is
madd to run in crooked Streams (in and out) to break its forcible passage; even
so this Original Sin would drive all persons the nighest way to Hell, were it
not that it meets with not only the several Tempers and Dispositions of Nature
in the Sons and Daughters of Mankind, which makes it work variously according
to their various Constitutions, as David says [ I have kept my self from my
iniquity] Psalm. 18.23. that is, from my Constitution sin, etc. but also, and
that more especially, through the overruling Power of God, and that by two
ways; 1. Either by giving Restraining Grace, even to Pagans, as he did to that
Pagan King Abimelech, Genesis 20.6. whereby God kept him at a modest distance from
meddling with Sarah, Abraham's wife, which otherwise he would have undoubtedly
defiled, seeing so many Kings (though called Christian) make it their too common
practice; or, 2. By giving Renewing Grace, even to his own chosen and called
ones, whereby he changes their Natures so, that one of the Ancient Fathers
tells this Story of a Young Man, who had been for some time entangled with an
Harlot, and meeting with some Remorse of Conscience, he withdrew from her upom
some occasions he had in another Country, and after a ^ittle time returning
home, this impudent Whore meets him, takes hold of him, and said to him [ Ego
sum Ego] I am the same Woman I was when you left me; at which he smartly
replied to her, [ sed ego non sum ego] but I am not the same Man I was, through
the Grace of God, whereby he said with David [ The Snare is broken, and my Soul
is delivered] Psa. 124.7. therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature, old things are past away, behold all things are become new, 2 Cor.
5.17. Where Christ comes, he says, [ Behold I make all things new] Rev. 21.5.
both all the Members of the Body, and all the Faculties of the Soul: These all
were formerly [(...)] weapons of wickedness unto sin, but now become weapons of
Righteousness unto Holiness, Romans 6.13,17,18,19. so that Christ makes new
understandings, new wills, new memories, new consciences, etc. in the inner
man; yea and new tongues, hands and feet, etc. to talk, walk and work for God
in the outward man.

Let this likewise be well weighed, how this Original pollution of the fallen
Nature is like the first Confused Chaos at the Creation of the World, which had
the seeds of all several kinds of Creatures in it, and that prolifick Virtue
continues unto this day; even so in Original Sin, lays the Spawn of all several
kinds of sins which lasts all our lives, until death destroy this body of
Death at the last, as the other will last while the World lasts: So This
fretting Leprosy of sin is typically described in the Law of that Plague,
Levit. 14.41.43,44,45. The house which has that Contagion, all the scraping of
the Walls within it will not cleanse it until the house it self, with the
Stones and Timber of it be broken down, yea and it begins betimes as well as it
lasts long. This sour Leaven does leaven the whole lump with its sowrness, and
spreads it self over all the Ages of Man, as Infancy, Childhood, Youth, and old
Age. 1. Infancy. Austin's story [ Vidi Zelantem parvulum:] I my self saw a
little one rise up in Rage against his fellow-suckling for beguiling him of his
Mothers Milk; from whence that Ancient Father proves and confesses, that sin
began betimes both in himself and in others. 2. Childhood; there is much folly
bound up in the heart of a Child, Prove. 22. v. 15. as fardles or packs are
bound upon the Carriers Horses back, and these bonds of Iniquity keeps him fast
in the gall of bitterness, Acts 8.23. so makes not only Childhood, but also, 3.
Youth to be not only Vanity, but likewise often abounds with Villainy, Eccles.
11.9,10. with 12.1. where the Preacher presses upon Youth to indulge
themselves in their youthful lusts, if they dare do so, adding a stinging [
But] which marrs the Yonkers mirth, God will judge thee for all thy Tricks of
youth; account them not Trifles, which both Job and David so bitterly bewailed,
Job 13.26. and Psalm. 25.7. Therefore he exhorts such to remember their Creators
at that time, as Psalm. 119.9. before 4 ly. Old Age come, which is an Evil Age
both for sin and misery.

But more plainly, this Truth of Man's Malady and Danger is held forth in that
Text [ The strong Man armed, etc.] which declares Man's Malady and Danger, Luke
11.21. where Satan is described, 1. By his Kind or Sex, neither a weak Worm, or
a weak Woman, but a Man, one of the stronger Sex, and not of the weaker. 2. By
his Quality, a strong Man, (...), one that can do all things, Phil. 4.13. where
the word is used Ben Chaiil, Heb. a Man of Valor, so strong, that he is able
to Trudge over all the World in his Travels, notwithstanding his long
continuance in this round walk, he walked it in Job's days, Job 1.7. and 2.2.
as he says of himself, when God summons him in to appear before him, as in his
High Court of Justice, and he held on the same, walking round about without
weariness, even in Peter's days, 1 Pet. 5.8. the word is (...), a Peripatetick,
as before; yea and he holds up still in the same walk and work, even in our
days; for who among us cannot experience that a busy Devil, and a base Heart,
do not daily meet together to work us Woe in our Way to Heaven. This he still
is able to do on Earth, though he was hurled out of Heaven (as Jude verse 6.) now
almost six thousand years ago; yea and he will carry on the same Cursed Course,
even to the end of the Old World, until our Lord come to lay hold upon this Old
Dragon, and bind him for a thousand years, and so shut him up, and set a Seal
upon him that he should deceive the Nations no more, till the 1000 years be
fulfilled, and after that he must be loosed a little season, Rev. 20.3. We read
indeed of a sort of Philosophers that are called Peripateticks (which signifies
Round Walkers) but none like this strong Trudgover, who has not only
out-lasted and outlived, but also (as it may be feared) has finally deceived
all those Pagan Peripateticks, etc. 3. He is described by his Qualifications;
he is not only thus qualified as a strong Traveller, but also as a strong
Warrior, therefore he is said to be [(...)] i. e. Armed, and not barely so,
for (...) in composition signifies Valde or Valide, completely Armed, such are
his Accoutrements and Habiliments of War, that he is Armed Cap-a-pee (as the
phrase is) a Capite ad Calcem, from Head to Foot; so that he is (as Achilles
was said to be) in all parts impenetrable, and not only so, but as he is a
Spirit he is impassive also, as to man; for it is neither man's Words, nor man's
Blows that can wound this Spiritual Adversary, who is hereupon found to be the
more mortal an Enemy to man's Soul and Salvation. Of this point I have spoke in
the beginning of this Chapter. If it be farther enquired how this strong
Adversary is armed? To this I answer in general, He is verily a Goliath, an
Achitophel and a Doeg, all in one together; more particularly,

1. He is Armed with an Arm of Strength as Goliath was, so it may be said to the
best of men, what Saul said to David, 1 Samuel 17.33. thou art not able to fight
with this Philistin, for thou art but a Stripling, and he a Man of War from his
Youth; as Amnon was too strong for Tamar, and so Ravished her, etc. 2 Samuel
13.12,13. And as the Betrothed Damsel could not stand before a man that rose up
against her in the Field, Deuteronomy. 22.26,27,28. Even so is this matter, no man,
not the best of men, (who are but men at the best, as before) can be able to
match this matchless Goliath, no more than the silly Dove without Heart or
Grace, (as Ephraim is called, Hos. 7.11.) can match the strong Eagle, or the
simple Lamb the fierce Lion, etc. no more can any man (who is but a poor worm,
Psalm. 22.6.) make any effectual Resistance against this Prince, Fowl of the
Air, Ephesians. 2.2. or against this Roaring Lion, who has still his concreated
Strength of an Angel, Zech. 12.8. for though he lost by his fall in his Morals,
yet not in his Naturals, he is so strong still (says Luther) that he is able
to destroy the whole World in the space of one hour, if the Lord would but
permit him to lay forth his Angelical (or rather Diabolical) Strength to the
utmost for such an end. This strong man has conquered all Persons, (yea even
Adam, Samson and Solomon, as before) and all People, all Nations and Languages;
he has with Saul slain his thousands, and with David his ten thousands, yea
and with the Harlot, Prove. 7.26. has cast down and wounded both the many and
the mighty: He is the Master of Harlots, as Rome is called the Mother of
Harlots, Rev. 17.5. Nor do we find in any Age of the World, that any mere
Mortal Man was ever able to match him at all times by any strength of his own,
none but that God-Man Jesus Christ was ever able to stand before him: yet is it
worth our observation; Oh! what a prevailing Power had this strong man, (by
Divine Permssion) even over the pure sinless Body of our Savior himself; first
in driving it into the Wilderness, Mark 1.12,13. then in hugging it up to the
top of the Pinnacle of the Temple, Matt. 4.5. and then in carrying it up
likewise unto the top of an exceeding high Mountain, Matt. 4.8. wherein this
strong man did far outdo Goliath, who could not do so to David's Body.
Nevertheless Christ became the stronger man, (as he is called) Luke 11.22. and
did conquer him completely in all his three Temptations.

2. As Satan is a Goliath for Strength and Power, so he is an Achitophel for
Craft and Policy; he can over-wit us as well as overpower us: It Is said [ now
the Serpent was more subtle than all the Beasts of the Field] Genesis 3.1. So that
old Serpent the Devil, (as he is called, Rev. 12.9. and 20.2.) is more crafty
than all Mortals in the World; this must needs be because the Wit of the
Angelical Nature does vastly transcend the Wit of the best Humane Nature.
Insomuch as his Wit is not so clogged and clouded with fleshly impediments,
which often make the Mind of man to become a dim, dark and confused Chaos, by
imprisoning the Truth and detaining it in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. that is,
the knowledge of Truth sometimes is (as it were) so locked up under restraint,
that our Consciences (which are as a Prophet to the soul of man) may not
trouble us in our secure sinning against the Lord; whereas the Wit and
Understanding of Satan may be called Spiritual as he is a Spirit, and not
fettered with Flesh, (as we are) therefore acts more freely and without
disturbance, so is more quick and piercing, whereby he can more easily feel the
Pulses of mankind, and fit them all a suitable Temptation unto every Person's
Natural Temper; he well knew what an Apple would do to Eve, what a Grape would
do to Noah, what a Wedge of Gold would do to Achan, what a Talent of Silver
would do to Gehazi; and many more such instances might be added, all to show
how Satan is (...), ingeniose nequam, wittily wicked in preparing penniworths
for all Persons according to their several Conditions and Dispositions; and
what he cannot carry and conquer by strength, he will do it by subtilty; having
not only the wit of an Angel, but also the wisdom of a God, as he is called the
God of this World, 2 Cor. 4.4. NB. Observe how the Holy Scripture describes his
Furniture.

1. He has his (...), which signifies Sophistical Counsels, pretending one
thing, and intending another, [ lest Satan should beguile and get an advantage
against us, for we are not ignorant of his devices,] 2 Cor. 2.11. where the
Apostle uses [(...)] for getting advantage, which signifies to overreach in
Bargains, for getting more gain than belongs to him, this Satan does; when that
Serpent would hurt and destroy those herbs of grace that grow in God's Holy
Mountain, and will not be confined to feed upon Dust, (the World that lies in
wickedness) which is his limited Diet, Isa. 65.25. Satan had got an advantage
against the Church of Corinth in their over-rigorous Discipline against the
Incestuous Person, 2 Cor. 2.7. And now he cautions them, that this grand
Cheater may not cheat them also in the exercise of their Gifts and Graces one
toward another, ver. 10, 11.

2. Satan has his (...), which signifies a cunning crafty dealing among
mankind; thus the same Apostle uses this phrase to the same Church, saying [I
am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, etc. for I fear, lest by any means,
as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty (or cunning Craft), so your
Minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ] 2 Cor. 11.2,3.
Intimating that Satan is an old Sophister and Blood-Sucker (who devoureth not
Widows Houses with the Pharisees, but the precious souls of most Parsons) has
had the long experience of some thousands of years, and knew then well enough
how to over-wit, and overreach them in that time; therefore does he thus
caution them to be upon their watch against his wily Craft. How much more is
this Old Doctor in our Day (now almost 6000 years old) strong in his so long
experiences to feel the pulses of all Persons after the most critical manner,
and the better to suit every ones Humor and Disposition, he understands what
has been successful, and what not. Hence it is, that he so seldom miscarrieth
in any of his Diabolical Attempts, unless it be when our dear Redeemer (the
stronger Man) does engage himself against him for us.

3. Satan has likewise his (...), his Wiles and Methods as the same Apostle
says, [ Finally, my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might, put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
Wiles of the Devil,] Ephesians. 6.11. this Greek word for Methods or Wiles, is
derived of (...) and (...), that is, by the way, because of his way-layings
with his Stratagems and Ambushments which are often more successful than force of
Arms, as Josh. 8.2,5,15, etc. the Greek Word is an Allusion unto Dan's Adder in
the path, Genesis 49.17. So does this Serpent, he lies lurking in the way, and
bites the Heels of Passengers, whereby he transfuses his poison to the very
Head and Heart. The Holy Patriarch Jacob compared his Son to an Adder,
foreseeing by his Spirit of Prophecy, how the Tribe of Dan would subtilely and
suddenly surprise the men of Laish, who lived securely and carelessly, having no
Magistrate (or Heir of Restraint, Hebr.) to put them unto shame, Judge. 18.7,10.
Even so and much more than so, does that Old Serpent Satan set upon such Souls
as are most lulled asleep in the Cradle of carnal Security: He has the sudden
jumps of a Lion sometimes, and when the Lion's Hide will not serve his turn in
his jumping Assaults, he can then piece it with the Fox's Skin, or with the
Serpent's Slough; so that when the sudden jumps of a Lion do fail him, he has
still the secret lurkings of a Serpent, his subtle windings and turnings to
circumvent us, and to assault us at unawares, and to set upon us unexpectedly
on our Backs, with his furious Conveyances, as he did upon David when he
thought his Mountain was so strong, that he could never be moved, Psalm. 30.6,7.
yet how did this subtle Serpent secretly convey his Venom into his Heart, not
only in the matter of both his Adultery and Murder, 2 Samuel 11.4,27. but also
when this Satan provoked David to number the people at the latter end of his
Reign, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Provoked, that is, Satan would not let him rest, till he
had prevailed.

In the third place I come to show how this strong man Satan is not only a
Goliath for Strength and Power, as also an Achitophel for Craft and Policy, but
likewise a Doeg for Malice and Mischief; he is a more mighty Hunter than the
great Nimrod, Genesis 10.9. who died some thousands of years ago; but this cruel
Hunter lived long before Nimrod, even from the beginning of the World, and
lives still, yea and is like to last until the last end of the World, and
therefore he is called Kako-Daemon, the Envious One, or Enemy, (...), Matt.
13.25,28. having many cursed Properties. As

1. He is anciently Malicious, therefore our Lord calls him a Murderer from the
Beginning, Joh. 8.44. he has drove this damnable Trade from Adam till now.

2. This malignant Adversary is mischievously Malicious, he seeks not whom he
may scratch, or bite, or wound only, but whom he may devour, (as before) 1 Pet.
5.8. How maliciously Mischievous he is to the Body of Man, as in the case of
that miserable Demoniack, whole Body he violently threw into those two
merciless Elements, sometimes into the Fire, and sometimes into the Water, yea
and cutting and rending it when he was constrained to leave it, Mark 9.22. How
mischievous he is also to the Estates of Men, as he was to Job's Estate, which
he destroyed by Fire and Storms, etc. as he was afterward to his Body, smiting
it with Biles from top to Toe, and every Bile (or Blain) (the Rabbis say) had
each of them a Devil in them: Moreover (to mention no more instances) see how
maliciously Mischievous was Satan likewise unto Job's good Name, which he would
have blasted even to the All-knowing God, in calling Job God's self-seeking
Servant; as if Job had been only biased with the gain of his Godliness; thus
he did sordidly calumniate what he could not possibly contradict: How was it
then, that Clodius accusat Moechos, Vice it self undertook to correct but a
falsely called Sin: Whereas the blessedness of an Angel (wherewith Satan was at
first created) could not engage himself to continue the Servant of his Creator
as the Holy Angels which fell not with him, did and do so to this day: But more
especially he is mischievous to the Souls of Mankind. It may be said that the
Sword of this Strong Man reaches even unto the very soul, as Jer. 4.10. He
both slashes and wounds the Soul, and does ambitiously aspire like Lucifer to
be like the Most High, Isa. 14.14. and to have a power to kill the Soul (as
well as Body, Estate and Good Name) which is God's Prerogative only, Matt.
10.28. However his main Mark Satan aims at is to procure evil against our
Souls, Jer. 26.19. and therefore as the Syrians were commanded to fight against
neither small nor great, but against the King of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 18.30. So our
fleshly lusts are those Syrians and Soldiers whom Satan commands to war
principally against the precious Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. and his Malice is mostly to
be mischievous to Saints more than to Sinners; for he tempted David ( a man
after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14.) to grosser and greater sins than ever he
did, not only Saul, who died in his Sin, even of self-murder, yet never fell
into such foul acts of sin as David did, but also than ever he did tempt Ahab,
though he sold himself to work wickedness, 1 King. 21.25. yet this nonesuch
Sinner was only tempted to covet his Neighbors Vineyard, and not his
Neighbors Wife, yea and life too, as David did. The reason is this, because
Satan is satisfied with the evil state that Sinners remain in, so he needs not
to tempt them to evil Acts, well knowing, that such Actions will as naturally
flow from them, as Water does from a Fountain: Thus David says to Saul [
wickedness proceeds (even naturally) from the wicked] 1 Samuel 24.13. as if
they needed no Tempter, but will Tempt themselves, Jam. 1.14,15. Satan matters
not for Actions, but only where he cannot secure persons and still keep them
captive in an evil State. NB. This Reason may be rendered, why some civil
Moralists do lead more blameless and more spotless lives, than some Saints and
sanctified Souls, (who sometimes may be left of God to Satan's buffeting
Messengers to humble them, as 2 Cor. 12.7,8.) because it is enough for the
Temper to know that these mere moral men do still abide in a Christless-state,
but as to such as are delivered from the power of Belial, and are translated
into the Kingdom of Grace, Col. 1.12,13,14. Those be they against whom this
Envious One is most maliciously mischievous, and when he sees that he cannot
keep them from Heaven, he will do them all the mischief he possibly can; he
will send them (if possible) even haulting to Heaven. Herein Pharaoh (that
Dragon of Egypt, so called, Ezekiel. 29.3. was a Type and Figure of this old Red
Dragon the Devil, who was calm and quiet enough with God's Israel, while he
found they could be content to be his Bondslaves in Mortar-Work, etc. but when
they begin to be gone out of his Kingdom, etc. then he rages and pursues them
with his Chariots and Horsemen, etc. As Pharaoh pursued Israel as they were
passing toward the Earthly Canaan, so Satan pursues us in our passage toward
the Heavenly Canaan; and as Pharaoh in his pursuit of Israel was at length
drowned in the Red Sea: So this may be for strong Consolation to us, that this
Saint-pursuing Satan shall at last be drowned in the Red Sea of our blessed
Savior's Blood; for we are told to our Comfort, that our Redeeming Angel will
come down from Heaven, having the Key of the bottomless Pit, and a great Chain
in his hand, and will lay hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent, the Devil, and
not only bind him for a thousand years, but he will cast him likewise into the
lake of Fire and Brimstone, where he (together with the Beast, and the False
Prophet) shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever, Rev. 20.1,2,3, and
10, verses. In the mean time we must expect, that this Serpent and Dragon will
be spetting forth the Poison of his Malice against us; for such is his Malice
to all the Saints, that he will first tempt them to Sin, and then he will
accuse them for Sin; as it is storied of the Russians, they are so malicious
one against another, that sometimes a man will hide some of his own Goods in
the House of him whom he hates, and then accuse him for the stealing of them;
just so does the Devil deal many times with God's dearest Servants; thus
Joseph's Steward first foisted his Lord's Cup into Benjamin's Sack, and then
accused him for stealing it, Genesis 44.2,4. So that tempted Souls may say to
Satan, (when he would tempt them to sin, and after will accuse them of sin) as
the young Soldier said to Joab his General, [ Though I should receive a thousand
Shekels of Silver, yet will I not dare to do what thou (Satan) would draw me
into, for the King of Kings has charged me to the contrary; and should I do
otherwise, I shall then work falsehood against my own life; for there is no
matter that can be hid from the King, and thou thy self would set thy self
against me, 2 Samuel 18.12,13, etc. Thus Satan dealt with Jehoshua the
High Priest, accusing him for wearing those very Garments that himself had
soiled, Zech. 3.1,2,3,4. yea, and thus Satan dealt with our Dear Savior
himself, to whom he made an offer of his giving to him all the Kingdoms of the
World, and the Glories of them, if he would fall down and worship him, Matt.
4.8. yet afterward this Accuser of the Brethren (as he is called Rev. 12.10.)
does by his Instruments accuse our Lord for aspiring after one of the least of
those Kingdoms of the World, namely, that little Kingdom of Judaea, Matt.
27.11,29,37. and this is the Tempters Method with all tempted Souls; he will
always extenuate sin in the time of his Temptation to it, but after the
Commission of it, he will aggravate it in his accusation for it, that he may
drive the Soul into despair, etc. Thus he dealt with King Saul, whom he first
persuaded to spare Amalek, under the notion of a good Deed or Work of Mercy;
hereby he tempted him, and prevailed to spare King Agag, and the fattest of the
Flock, 1 Samuel 15.8,9. Yet this same Satan comes to Saul in the likeness of
Samuel, and notoriously aggravates this Action (which before he had presented
to him in a plausible Dress of candor and kindness to the Creature, etc.) and
sets it home with weight upon Readiness Conscience; especially when he saw him
almost overwhelmed with deepest Distresses, now representing the same Action as
most horrible, heinous and damning, and all to drive him down at-once into the
Pit of Desperation, 1 Samuel 28.11,19,20. And thus by Divine permission the Devil
deals with many Souls, which are far more dear to God, than this Saul was, etc.

Hereby the third cursed property of this Doeg the Devil is made manifest,
namely, that he is not only anciently, maliciously, but also universally
mischievous to all Mankind, even to all Saints, and to all Sinners, at the
least intentionally against every individual person of both sorts, only with
this difference; as first for Sinners, he makes them to become his
Hackney-Horses, according to Tertullian's phrase [ Impii persecutores
insessorem Diabolum habent] all wicked Persecutors have the Devil Riding upon
their backs, whom he whips and spurrs end-ways into an high Gallop, even all
the days of their lives, and then, when the Night of their Deaths comes upon
them, he lodges them at last in the Hot Stables of Hell: And thus Satan made
Saul his Hackney, upon whom he sat as his Rider, and spurred him forward for
many days in his persecuting of David, and to whom he gave but this very cold
Comfort at his Death [ To morrow thou shall be with me, etc.] 1 Samuel 28.19,20.
which indeed was no better a place to lodge his Hackney in at his Night of
Death, than in the Hot Rooms of Hellfire. But secondly, As to the Saints (who
are not the Devil's Vassals as Sinners are, but be indeed the Impropriated and
Honorable Vessels of their dear Redeemer) Satan will do all the mischief he
can to those Vasa signatu, or Sealed Vessels, as Tertullian calls them; those
he cannot touch with any of his Deadly Touches [ Non Tactu qualitativo] as
Cajetan interprets [ The wicked one touches him not] 1 John 5.19. He cannot
cause them to fall finally. The Serpent is confined to feed upon the Dust or
Dirt of the Earth (that is, the wicked) he is not allowed to devour the Herbs
of Grace, or to destroy any Plants on God's holy Mountain, Isa. 65.25. God has
set the godly man apart for himself, Psalm. 4.3. and God's charge is upon the
God of this World (as the Devil is called, 2 Cor. 4.4. as well as upon the
Kings of the Earth, to whom those words were spoken [ Touch not mine Anointed
ones, and do my Prophets no harm] Psalm. 105.15. To say, this is spoken of
Kings, and not to Kings, is a false interpretation. How far this wicked one may
touch a Saint of God, and that maliciovsly and mischievously; yea how far he
touched our Savior himself, is abovesaid. Now the Enquiry is, seeing Satan is
so universally mischievous both to Saints, as well as to Sinners, how far Satan
can force a Saint to sin against God? Ans. We have all great cause to bless the
Lord our good God, that this Power of Darkness cannot force us to any work of
Darkness; no, God has left this Power of constraining us to sin out of the
Devil's Charter; he has no Commission to force the Will of Man; he has indeed
a persuading slight, but he has not any enforcing might. It Is true, we read
[that Satan provoked David to sin against God] 1 Chronicles. 21.1. that is, he so
dogged David daily with his Temptation, and would never let him alone in any
Rest, until he had fastened it upon his heart, and gained his consent. However,
the Great God had his holy hand in all this, who still held this Dog, this
Doeg, the Devil, in his Chain, 2 Samuel 24.1, God did, and Satan did also, but
how? it was thus, God was angry with Israel for abusing their Peace and Plenty,
etc. and with David for his privy Pride and Creature-confidence, so he lets
loose his Dog the Devil upon David, and he left David to himself so, as at last
after his being very long provoked unto this curiosity of numbering the People,
he yielded his consent to that Satanical suggestion, which brought the
Destroying Angel upon his sinful Subjects, like as the Dog may be said to Bait
the Beast at the Stake, while the owner of the Bast does stand by, looks on,
and suffers his Beast to be Baited. This plain similitude may serve to explain
the difficulty, and to understand aright, that though it be said, that God moved
David, and Satan moved him likewise, yet these two phrases are not
contradictory. Terms; they are not Adverse, but only Diverse, the latter being
subordinate to the former, as all 2d Causes are subaltern, to the first Cause.
But still Satan is held in God's Chain, and he cannot without Divine permission
do the least damage to the Soul of a Saint; he cannot force us to sin, with all
his most powerful provocations, as appears most plainly in the case of Job,
against whom Satan made so many violent and furious Thrusts to make him curse
God to his face; yet could he not conquer Job with all his provocations; but
this good man comes off at last with flying Colors, and by the help of his God
gets his Tempter trodden under his feet, as Romans 16.20. And though the beginning
of the Conflict and Combat was Satan's, yet the End in the Conquest was the
Lord's; as it is said, James 5.11. This therefore may be very comfortable for us
seriously to consider, that the Tempter may strike fire long enough to no
purpose, if we do not meet him with Dry Tinder for his sparks to fall upon; for
it is our own Concupiscence that carries the chiefest sway; it is our own carnal
Corruptions wherewith we are drawn aside and enticed, James 1.14,15. where the
word is [(...)] which signifies, we are caught as the silly Fish by the
Fisher-man's Bait. Satan is a crafty Fisher, and knows what Baits will best
tempt and take every ones Constitution and Humor; and though Satan be a Spirit,
and therefore can have commerce with our Spirits, yea and may fix vain thoughts
upon our fancies, yet he cannot force the Consent of the Will thereunto; for as
he cannot know the Heart, (which is only God's prerogative, Acts 1.24.) so he
cannot compel the heart much less to any act of sin, unless the Eve in us does
betray us into the Tempters hands, as Adam hearkened unto the Voice of his Wife,
Genesis 3,17. Thus every Son and Daughter of Adam has still an Eve (his Tempter)
in their own bosoms, and if Satan's Temptation do fall passively only on our
part upon the Tables of our hearts; it is indeed our Cross, but not our sin, if
we consent not to it; for it is our consent to it, that makes it our sin; as it
was in the case of Benjamin before-said; he never consented to the putting of
the Divining Cup into the mouth of his Sack; so it was his cross only, but not
at all his sin: Therefore ought we in an hour of Temptation to do these two
great Duties.

1 st. To give no place to the Tempter, Ephesians. 4.27. no, not for an hour, Gal.
2.5. by way of subjection. And,

2 ly. To resist him, and he will flee from from us, James 4.7. especially if
we resist him steadfast in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5.8,9. even with a Resolved
Negative, No, No, etc. However, such is Satan's Hatred to all the Saints, that
he will be universally mischievous to them, and do them all the Damage and
Detriment that he possibly can do; and as we may learn from the Story of Balaam
the Southsayer (who was Satan's Servant, when he cannot curse the whole Camp of
Israel, he will do his utmost endeavor to curse some part thereof, Numb.
23.13,27.

The 4 th Cursed Character and Property of this Adversary of Mankind is, he is
uncessantly as well as universally mischievous. It Is said of the Scorpion, that
there is no minute of Time, wherein he does not thrust out his Sting, but he
keeps it in a continual motion for a speedy poisoning of all whatsoever he can
reach with it as before; even so this Old Serpent or Scorpion the Devil, is
restless night and day, and puts forth his poisonful Sting without ceasing to
wound us in our Heels (according to his Commission, Genesis 3.15.) that thereby he
may transfuse his Venom from our Heels to our Hearts, etc. And it is his
constant custom to Assault us both sleeping and waking, for he keeps no holy
day (as the Vulgar saying is) nor will he make any Truce, or Cessation of Arms
with us; and he will set upon us, both in our Natural, and in our Civil
Actions; yea and most of all in those that are Religious. He does not only
tempt us to excess in our Food and Raiment; but he will disturb us also in the
Duties of our particular Callings, yet higher above all we meet with most
Disturbances in the Duties of our general Callings; so that we can never serve
the Lord (either publicly or privately) without Distraction from this
Adversary, 1 Cor. 7.35. Neither Weekday nor Sabbath Day; nay, upon the Sabbath
(which signifies a Rest) is this Satan the most Restless; for while we are the
busiest about God's Service, and the concerns of our Souls, then will he be a
most Busy Devil with our Base Hearts, to interrupt our Communion with Heaven,
etc. This may have its Illustration from Drexelius his Vision, whereof he gives
us this account, [that he saw but one Devil at a Market upon the Weekday, but
he saw ten Devils present at a Sermon upon the Sabbath-day] and being asked the
reason of this difference of the number of Devils, the good old Man thus
answered, That in a Market there was no need of any more than one Devil; for
there one Man would tempt another fast enough, the Buyer, the Seller, and the
Seller the Buyer, etc. but at a Sermon, where all men do solemnly Devote
themselves to God's Worship, then ten Devils were few enough to distract them
therein. Thus we read how Satan thrust in among the Sons of God, Job 1.6. and
2.1. and 1 Kings 21.10,13. As Satan ever since the Fall of Lucifer never had
Rest, Matthew. 12.43,44,45. so he never would have Rest night or day, unless he
be in a sinner's heart, etc.

The 5 th Cursed Character and Property of this our Adversary, is, that he is
likewise irresistibly mischievous as to any Humane Power for Resisting him.
This is related before, how the Innocentest Man Adam, the strongest Man Samson,
and the wisest Man Solomon, were none of them able to resist the Assaults of
this strong Man Armed; the reason is, because his Angelical (though now
Diabolical) Nature is too strong for any mere Humane Nature, we are all as
unable to withstand him, (1.) As the feeble Fly is the cunning Spider, which
most easily entangles her in his clammy Threads (spun out of his own bowels)
whose first work is to intoxicate her (as soon as entangled) by infusing his
poison into her head, and then with more ease he draws her into his Den, and
there he sucks out her blood and her life both together. Nor are we poor
Mortals more able to resist this Strong Man Armed, than (2.) The silly Dove is
to withstand the furious Assaults of the strong Eagle, etc. Thus the Devil is
represented in Ephesians. 2.3. as a Prince-Fowl of the Air (who has the upper ground
of us sorry Worms crawling upon the Earth) and prying about like a Bird of
prey, to espy what silly Doves without hearts (or understandings, as Junius
renders that, Hos. 7.11.) as are wandering abroad for him to be preyed upon,
etc. Nor (3.) The simple Lamb can withstand the furious Lion, when found
wandering astray from the Sheepfold, etc. These similitudes do illustrate how
Irresistible is our Adversary as to us, to which many more may be added; As
(4.) He is like the Hunter with his Nets. (5.) Like the Fowler with his Snares.
And (6.) Like the Fisherman with his Angling-Rods. All these do most easily
overpower the Beasts, the Birds, and the Fishes they meet with; and so does
Satan overpower us; yea and much more than so, insomuch as he finds something
in us which betrays us into his hands; though it be otherwise said of our sinless
Savior, to whom Satan came and found Nothing in him, John 14.30.

The 6 th Cursed Character of Satan, he is everlastingly mischievous; as he was
a Murderer from the beginning, John 8.44. so he will continue to be so to the
end of the World, as is hinted before. Oh what a long Lease has our Lord lent
this Roaring Lion! The number of this Infernal Beast is much above the number
of the Apocalyptick Beast, which was 666 years, Rev. 13.18. or that longer
Lease of 1260 years, Rev. 11.3. This Beast has already lasted above five
thousand years, and will ever last (out-living all the Sons and Daughters of
Men) until Time shall be no more; for as he is a Spirit, so he cannot Die, as
we mortals daily Die, etc. therefore Man's Malady and Danger is like to last so
long as there is a Man living to be tempted by this everlasting Tempter, until
our Lord chain him up, etc.

CHAP. II. Man's Remedy and Deliverer.
HAving showed at large Man's Malady and Danger in the first Chapter, I come
now in this second Chapter to show Man's Remedy and Deliverer, who is no other
but our Blessed Lord, whom Jacob calls his Redeeming Angel [ the Angel that
Redeemed him from all evil] Genesis 48.16. and who was named Jesus, because he
came into the World upon this only Errand, [ that he might save us from our
sins] Matthew. c. 1. v. 21. This Name Jesus may be derived from the Greek word
[(...)] sano to heal, or rather from the Hebrew word [ Jashang] which signifies
to save; from hence Joshua is called Jesus, in Acts 7.45. for both those names
do signify Saviors; and as that Joshuah saved Israel by bringing them out of
the Wilderness into the Earthly Canaan; so our Lord Jesus does bring all the
Israel of God (his Redeemed ones) out of the Wilderness of this present Evil
World, Gal. 1. v. 4. (which is here below) into that heavenly Canaan which is
above: And thus the Lord says [ Vaani Jehovah Rophekah] which signifies [I am
a mighty Giant like Healer of thee, Exodus 15.26. upon which Text Tertullian
makes this learned and Holy Descant [ Omnipotenti Medico nullus insanabilis
occurrit Morbus] unto such an All-sufficient Healer as our Lord Jesus is, there
is no kind of Disease can be found Incurable; and thus the Prophet says [ By
his stripes we are all healed] Isa. 53.5. and though man have for his Mallady
Satan who is called [(...)] a roaring Lion seeking whom he may (not only bite
or scratch but Devour, or drink up at one Draught, or swallow down at one
Mouthful (as the word [(...) signifies) 1. Pet. 5.8. Yet this is our comfort,
that our Blessed Savior (who is also [a Lion, of the Tribe of Judah] Revel.
5.5. He is called [(...)] one who saves us from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1
10. Thus Man's Remedy against all his Malady is his blessed Redeemer; but more
particularly even from the mouth of our dear Redemer himself in his excellent
Parable concerning the strong Man's peaceable possession of his house, until
the stronger Man came upon him with a writ of Ejectment and dispossession of
him, etc. Luke 11.21.22. As the former of those two Verses holds forth Man's
Malady and Danger (which is at large discoursed upon and discovered) so the
latter Verse gives a most clear demonstration of Man's Remedy and Deliverer,
namely himself, whom he calls the stronger Man, and most amply accomplished to
effect a complete Deliverance and Salvation for us sorry Mortals out of all the
before-named Miseries. In both those Verses we may behold (as in a clear
Looking-glass) and discern whose we are and whom we Serve (as the Apostles
phrase is, Acts 27.23. whether we belong to Satan; or to our Savior, etc. as
we find the witnessings of Gods Spirit with our Spirits, Romans 8.16. Concerning
this possession of the strong Man and the Dispossession of him by the stronger
Man, etc. as our Savior calls himself in ver. 22. which does represent Gods,
Champion coming forth to redeem man fallen into misery by the wiles of Satan,
and one who will not be baffled in any of his Undertakings, for our Lord is
called [ Man's Undertaker] Isa. 38.14. and he says likewise [ Oh Mankind, thou
has Destroyed thy self, but in me is thy Help] Hos. 13.9. or as another
paraphrastick Reading runs [ what has Destroyed thee even the mutability of
thy will, Deceived by the grand Deceiver, who was by his Creation an Angel of
Light, and propably one of those Sons of the Morning who sung Praises to the
great Creator for the Creation of the Heavens Job. 38.7. Yet afterward by his
Luciferian pride, Isa. 14.14. was changed into the prince of Darkness, Ephesians.
6.12. that glorius Angel was Turned into a Damned Devil, and who first set
himself against the great Creator himself, saying with proud Lucifer. Isa.
14.13,14. [ Ero sicut Altissimus, I will be like the most High] and when he
found that the thing formed was too weak for Him that formed it, and that the
Potter had power over the Clay, etc. Romans 9.20 21. So that the Creature could
not prevail against his Creator, then Satan falls foul upon God's Creature [
Man] whom he saw Created in the Image of God, wherein he Acted like that
malicious Traitor, who when his devilish design was disappointed of
Assassinating the Kings Royal Person himself, he then falls foul upon the Kings
Picture, and tears it all to pieces. Thus the Devil did with the first Adam
(who was Gods Picture by his Creation) and prevailed, yea and so, as that he
prevailed not only against Adams Person, but also against all Adams Posterity,
by pouring his Poison into the Springhead or fountain (as is demonstrated
before) as Adam was the public Person, and Rrepresentative of all the whole
Race of mankind, hereby we are all born Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Enquiry,
how did the Creator take this Affront and Indignity done to him by the Devil in
rending his Picture into pieces, etc. was God unconcerned?

Answer the (1 st) Indeed it was once at the least a seeming Divine
dispensation concerning bloody Herod's Imprisoning and Beheading John the
Baptist, that famous forerunner of the Worlds Reedemer, yet all that time God
seemed to be silent, as if not at all concerned therein, by any External or
sensible Providence of God to testify his dislike and Abhorrency of such a
Barbarous murder, Mat. 14,3,4,5, to the 13.th notwithstanding Gods seeming
silence as to outwrrd Judgments upon those malicious murderers, the Lord gave
an Inward plague in perplexing Herod's conscience for this bloody Butchery, Luke
9.7. where the word [(...)] signifies, that Herod [ pendebat] stood amused and
amazed and stuck fast in the mud (as it were) and could not stir his feet, but
was ready to hang himself, as the words import; so in an angry Conscience Herod
heard an angry God, etc. But, Answer the 2d. As to this Original Affront of
Satan to his Maker, in Defacing the Kings Image, by putting the first Adam to
the Foil, and to that foul Fall, the King of Kings is most highly concerned,
and comes immediately to the very place and spot of ground where this very
Villainy was newly perpretrated, Summons the Offenders personally to Appear, and
He says to Satan [well Satan, thou have prevailed indeed over the first Adam,
notwithstanding I have my Glorious ends in it. So to overruled it as to bring
forth the greatest good out of that greatest evil by the Chemical Art of my
Unsearchable Wisdom; but be it known to thee, I will send the Second Adam into
the world, who shall not only match thee, but also over-match thee, he shall
disposseses thee of this thy new possession. The seed of the woman shall break
thy Head, though thou (by thy Serpentine subtlety) has now bruised man's Heel,
and put him into a limping and halting posture, Genesis 3.15. I will send my Son
in the Similitude of sinful Flesh, who through his Death shall Destroy him that
had the power of Death, that is, the Devil Hebr. 2.14. and though thou have
sinned from the beginning; yet, for this purpose the Son of God shall be
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, (as well as the Devil
himself) 1 John 3.8. Thus the Everlasting Gospel (as it is called, Revel.
14.6.) was preached even by God himself in Paradise; and seeing God himself was
the first Preacher of the Gospel, therefore that employ of God's Ambassadors is
very honorable Work, and not so contemptible as the blind World does
unworthily account it to be, etc.

Behold here, how our most Gracious Father in Heaven provides and prepares a
most Sovereign Plaster (made up of the warm Blood of our Blessed and Bleeding
Redeemer, who was the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, Revel.
13.8.) So soon as the Strong Man armed had given this mortal Wound to the Root
of Mankind, even to Innocent Adam in his Paradise-Estate, and this Gospel of
Peace our good God himself did preach thus early, that none of the Spirits of
his dear Children (though corrupted by the fallen Nature) might sink in them.
N.B. Note well, Gospel, quasi God's Spell, as if it were a Divine Spell of
God's own ordaining, wherewith to catch that Old Serpent, the Devil, the good
Lord teaches us to spell out the Glad Tidings out of this Everlasting Gospel. [
When Men are cast down, then shall thou say, there is a lifting up, Job 22.29.]
As the design of the first Chapter in this little Book was to cast down, and to
humble us miserable Mortals under the saving Sense of Man's Malady and Danger
by the fall of the first Adam, by the deceitfulness of the Devil; and oh that
many more of us were so sensibly cast down and duly humbled. Accordingly the
Drift and Scope of this Second Chapter, is for a seasonable lifting up of such
humble Souls with the Comforts of the Gospel, by representing the true and only
Remedy against this matchless Malady, to wit, our dear Redeemer. And to the
same purpose is the purport of many Gospel Parables, as those Three of the lost
Sheep, the lost Groat, and the lost Son, from the History of all which, I have
opened (through Grace) the Mystery in my Fourth Volume, upon Luke the 15th. But
here I shall only demonstrate how our Lord's Parable in Luke 11.21,22. has the
same tendency, holding forth to us, that though our Malady be strong, yet our
Remedy is stronger; that our Lord Jesus is stronger to Save us, than Satan is
to Destroy us; notwithstanding this Prince of Darkness be a strong Man armed as
to himself, and has likewise a whole Kingdom of Devils at his command to help
him; yea, and moreover his fully furnished Shop of this present evil World,
wherein he has at hand to take out all his tempting Tools, such as the
Scripture calls the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and Pride of
Life, etc. 1 John 2.16. I may say here as our Lord said, [ What went ye out to
see, not a Reed shaken with the wind, etc. Matthew. 11.7. Behold here is One
greater and stronger than John the Baptist, Joh. 1. v. 27. That famous Duel
wherein David conquered the Great Goliath, was a resemblance of this very
Parable; and so was that sharp Contest betwixt Michael the Archangel, and the
Devil, Jude, ver. 9. but with this difference, that was only an earnest
Disputation about the literal Body of Moses; but this represents both a
Conflict and a Conquest also concerning the Mystical Body of the Messiah. But
that most Renowned Narrative and History of the Monomachia or Duel, which was
fought Hand to Hand, betwixt the two Persons of Cursed Satan and our Blessed
Savior, as it is largely related in three several Rencounters, Matthew.
4.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10, etc. All that whole History, (wherein the very
Abstracts and Quintessence of Power and Policy, and of Strength and Subtilty
were engaged to their utmost one against the other, etc.) was a most evident
Interpretation of the Mystery of this Parable, concerning the Strong Man armed,
and this Stronger Man, the Lord Jesus, who is brought in there as God's
Champion in the behalf of fallen Man, who drove away the Devil from him, and
defeated him in all his three Temptations, Matthew. 4, etc. And the same Champion
does likewise dispossess him of his Palace here, which Dispossession of the
Strong Man by the Stronger Man, Luke 11.22. is most elegantly illustrated by
five famous Illustrations. As,

(1 st.) By the Quality and Endowments of the Dispossessor; Christ is stronger
to help us, than Satan is to harm us.

(2 dly.) By his Assault and Battery, he makes upon the Strong Man, possessing
his Palace. [ He comes upon him, etc.]

(3 dly.) From his Conquest and Victory [ He overcomes him.]

(4 thly.) From our Lord's disarming hi^ Enemy. And

(5 thly.) From his dividing the Spoil wit^ the strong; as Isa. 53.12.

Thus it is made manifest how Chri^ comes to be called Man's Mystical J^shuah
and David, our Goel, our Redeeme^ who delivers us from Wrath to come^ 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Luke 1.75. And being delivered by him, therefore must we serve him
in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. and that all the days of our
lives; and that we may serve him the more cheerfully without fear, we have this
great encouragement, that He who is in us, is stronger than he that is in the
World, 1 John 4.4. This great Truth that Christ is the Stronger Man, may be
thus demonstrated: First, That it is so: And Secondly, Why it must be so: For
several Reasons:

1 st. Of the First, That it is so, this is an apparent Truth, because this
Prince of Light did never Encounter with this Prince of Darkness, but he ever
proved too strong for him, and put him always to a most shameful Foil. As,

(1 st.) Our Lord met him in Heaven, and thrust him out for his Pride from that
Holy Place. N.B. Note well, What was this Sin of Lucifer and his Angels? And
what was the special Object of their proud Motion at the first in them? There
be Three differing Opinions: The First is, That Lucifer did Affect and Aspire
after an Equality with the most High God, Isa. 14.13,14. The Second Opinion is,
That he ambitiously endeavored to enjoy a Felicity in himself, without any
dependency upon his Maker: He would have had an Independent Blessedness, like
that of God himself, etc. And the Third Opinion is, That he presumed to have
the Honor of the Hypostatical Union, which appertained only to the Second
Person in the Trinity, namely, to the Son of God. The ground of this Opinion
is, (as some say) That presently after the Creation of Angels, the Creator did
reveal this his purpose of making a certain Man, to whom the Second Person in
the Godhead must be united, and that all the Angels must Worship this God-man,
as the Savior of the World; no sooner did the Prince of the Apostate Angels
understand this Revelation of the Will of God, but he refused to submit unto
this Law, and rather did challenge this Honor as due to himself. And this
Conjecture seems to be the more probable, considering, that as God did give his
command to Man, (as soon as he was created) and that a positive Law, [ Thou
shall not eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, etc.] and this Law was
given to him for the trial of his Obedience to his Maker, etc. Even so God
might give some positive Law likewise to the Angels, as soon as he had created
them, upon the first Day of the Creation with the Light, etc. Now no positive
Law can more likely be supposed, the this (of worshipping the Son of God und^
his Incarnation) to be imposed upon the Angels; and if so, then this Lucifer,
the Devil, did most directly oppose himself against the Person of Christ; and
therefore Christ, to show himself the stronger of the two, did violently hurl
him out of Heaven, and together with him, all those other Angels, who consented
to his Ambition, and were Fellow-Conspirators with him in his Rebellion against
his Maker. And

(2 dly.) When our Lord had cast Satan out of Heaven, he afterward did often meet
with him upon Earth; yea, even personally, and proved stronger than he, putting
him to the foil at every turn. For thus we are told, how our Savior did
encounter Satan first in a barren Wilderness in his first Temptation; and then
upon a Pinnacle of the Temple in the second; and after this, upon an exceeding
High Mountain in his third Conflict, yet our Lord Christ came off a Conqueror
in all those three Combats, so immediately succeeding one another, as they are
related by the Evangelists. Some may say here by way of enquiry, how could
Satan become so bold and daring, as to grapple with the same Antagonist upon
Earth, whom he had found too strong for him in Heaven, etc?

The Answer to it is this, That our Lord now appeared as a mere Man, and
therefore all the Tempters assaults ran, Thus, [if thou be the Son of God,
etc.] now Satan had found himself not only a Match, but also an Over-match for
the first Adam, and therefore he thought that he was strong enough to grapple
with the strongest of Adam's Offspring; especially, considering how he had
long before this been able to master strong Sampson, etc. which might make him
hope of prevailing against our Savior, who now appeared only in the Form of a
Servant, Phil. 2.6,7. and having his Visage marred more than any Man's, Isa.
52.14. and 53.2,3. Insomuch that the taunting Jews took him to be about Fifty
years old, when he was not yet little more than Thirty, Joh. 8.57. Hereupon
Satan ventures to assault his Person with three various Weapons; to wit, the
Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, hoping that
though one of them did fail, yet the other might prevail, and the rather,
because he had found all these wicked Weapons so successful altogether against
our First Parents; concerning whom we are told, how this same Tempter made them
long for the forbidden Fruit, (there was Lust of the Flesh) and he captivated
and bewitched their Sight with the Beauty and Loveliness of the Apple (there
was Lust of the Eyes); and lastly, he persuaded them that their eating thereof
would wonderfully Metamorphose and Change them from their present Humane into a
Divine Nature, saying, Ye shall be as Gods, etc. there was the Pride of Life.
Accordingly Satan improveth to his utmost, this self same Method against our
Blessed Savior, the Second Adam; for first, he tempts him with turning Stones
into Bread, when he was very Hungry after a forty Days fast, there was [ Lust
of the Flesh]; though Christ could and would have done it at God's command, yet
he abhors to do it at the Devil's bidding, as all Satan's Slaves do, who win
their Bread by Cheating, Oppression, etc. Satan's second Assault against our
Savior, was concerning Lust of the Eyes, when he showed a Map of all the
glittering Glories of this Evil World to our Savior's sight, saying to him,
[Haec omnia tibi Dabo; All these will I give thee]. Our Lord looked upon them,
as indeed they were, meet Shows and Shadows, and just nothing, no more than
bare Apparitions and Resemblances of Worldly Glory, which is expressed [(...)]
Acts 24.23. All Agrippa's Pomp was but a mere Fancy. Though all these Glories
were no more than sorry Schemes or Mathematical Figures without any Solidity or
Substance to affect our Savior's sight; yet he tells us himself, how his
Spouse did ravish his Heart with the Beauty of one Saving Grace, Cant. 4.9. Our
Lord valued this Image of God more than that offer of Satan to him, to make him
the Great Pope, as some do Interpret that place, Luke 4. ver. 5, 6, 7. Now,
when our Savior had put Satan to the foil in this Second Assault, as the
Evangelist Luke does rank them in his Sacred Record, Luke 4. After this the
Tempter takes Christ up again, and sets him upon a Pinnacle of the Temple, etc.
Ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. and tempts him to fly in the Air, (as Simon Magus was said
to do, etc.) and then would he act like the Son of God indeed, and appear to be
so unto others also; and he promises to him that the Angels would protect and
preserve him from harm in that presumptious Action, etc. This was the Devil's
thrust at our Dear Redeemer, though this Master-fly, Beelzebub had been beaten
off once and again, yet returns he the third time to the same place, and like
Potiphar's Wife to Joseph, will be impo^unate and impudent notwithstanding all
former flat denials, he sets upon and s^es our Savior here unto that Sin,
[(...) ^ide of Life] but being vanquished (...) Christ this third time also, he
at our (...) Rebuke and Command to depart, (...) vanished away, and Angels came
to him to comfort him with Food, etc.

Then (3 dly.) When (...) had conquered Satan in his own Pe^ both in Heaven and
on Earth, he com^ (...) as Man's Champion, and as the C^ (...) our Salvation,
Heb. 2.10: ev^ (...) Corporal Presence to Conquer hi^ (...) Cast him forth out
of others who^ (...) met any that were distressed by (...) etc. It is said
indeed [that S^ (...) from our Savior (who h^ (...) him thrice in his own
Perfor^ (...)) only for a season, Luke 4.^ showing how restless this Tempter
is, ^th with Christ himself, and with all Christians; after one Assault or two,
or three, be over, we must expect he will still renew his Assaults and
Batteries upon us; and therefore in a Calm we ought always to provide well for
a Storm. Thus our Lord met the Devil again at many times, and in many places,
having taken possession of many Demoniacks while he was here present upon
Earth, and wherever Christ met him, he did evermore Dispossess him, as Matthew.
8.29,30,31,32. and Mark 5.4,5,6,9. And many more Instances might be added to
declare it; but this one may suffice, showing how a whole Legion of Strong
Devils, (which by common Computation amounts to the number of Six thousand
armed Soldiers) all do jointly stoop and truckle to the Command of this one
Christ, called the Stronger Man, Luke 9.27,30,32,33.

But (4 thly.) and Lastly, As Christ's Bodily Presence was of such a powerful
and victorious Influence over Satan, during all the time that he Tabernacled
among Men, as the word [(...), John 1.14.] does signify, no less does his
Gracious and Spiritual Presence with his Church and Children, to whom he says,
[Lo, I am with you to the end of the World,] Matthew. 28.27,29. that is, I will
still charm and chase away Devils from you my Redeemed ones, I will not suffer
Satan to devour so much as one of my Lambs; I will lose none of that number
which the Father has given me, John 6.39. and 17.12. I will preserve you from
your Adversaries, I will prosper you in your Enterprises, I will protect you,
direct you, comfort you; yea, I will carry on the Work of Grace in you, and at
the last Crown you with Glory. All this, and more is included in this precious
Promise, etc.

Now having dispatched the first Demonstration, showing how it is made manifest
in a manifold manner; namely, in a fourfold Respect, both in Heaven and upon
Earth, both in his Person and in his Spirit, etc. that Christ is the stronger
Man, and too strong for this strong Man, Satan, though he be armed Cap-a-pee from
head to foot. Now I come to the Second Demonstration, to show the Reason why it
must be so.

The first Reason is, The Creator must be too strong for the Creature: Now that
Christ was the Devil's Creator, appears by many Scriptures; as by John 1.3.
and by Col. 1.16. and by Heb. 1.2,3. All which places do declare the Deity of
Christ, for none can have a Creating-power, save only the Omnipotent God, who
can bring all things out of nothing: Now all things, whether Visible or
Invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, (which is
one of Satan's names, Ephesians. 6.12.) or Powers; all things were created not only
by him, but also for him, Col. 1.16. and if so, it must follow, that the Devil
is one of Christ's Creatures, and not only made by him, but also for him, that
is, for accomplishing the ends of Christ's Glorious Will, or as it is
expressed, [all were created for the Pleasure of Christ] Revel. 4.11. Now
should the Devil be too strong for Christ, this could not be Christ's Pleasure,
but his Pain and Torment to be mastered by another, and brought into
Subjection, etc. This the Adversary himself does acknowledge in his saying to
Christ, [ Art thou come to Torment us before the time?] Mat. 8.29. wherein he
owned not only that Christ was over-powerful for him, but also that to be
overpowered, and to be dispossessed too, could not be accounted any pleasure
to him, but his great torment to be cast out of his Palace, and to lose the
place of his pleasure. Thus it may easily be concluded, that Christ must be
stronger than his Creature, otherwise the Creature would not be for his
Pleasure; it must be Pain for a Superior to be subdued by an Inferior: A noble
Prince by a base Peasant, a Prisoner, etc.

The second Reason, why Christ must be stronger than Satan, is, because Christ
is likewise the Upholder of all created Beings; it is said, [ Christ upholdeth
all things by the Word of his Power, Hebr. 1.3. As it is said, [The Father made
the Worlds by his Son] ver. 2. and [ without him nothing was made that was
created] John 1.3. The Son of God was not idle, or unconcerned in the first
Creation, but was a Co-Agent with the Father, and the Spirit in that Almighty
Work, etc. So here he is brought in as an upholder of all things by the Word of
his Power, in the Almighty Works of his Providence; and he upholds all created
Things, both Secundum suum esse, and secundum suum operari, (as the Schoolmen's
Phrase is) that is, Christ upholds all things, both as to their Beings and
Essence, and as to their Actings and Operations. So that the Fire cannot burn,
etc. without the Divine Concourse of Christ, as both in the Case of Moses Bush
which burned, but was not consumed, Exodus 3.2. And in the Case of those three
Nobles of Babylon, who were cast into the exceeding hot fiery Furnace, but the
Fire had no power over their Bodies, nor was one Hair of their Head singed,
etc. Dan. 3.23, etc. How came this to pass? We are told there, that the Son of
God made the fourth Man among them, and restrained the fury of those Flames, so
that not any smell of burning was upon them, Ver. 24, 25, 26, 27. Where we are
told how Nebuchadnezzar heard the three Men praising God in the Fire, (as the
Septuagint says there) and he saw the fourth as their Redeemer. All which do
clearly declare, That the Devil (but a Creature) is upheld by Christ, both in
his Being, and in his Acting: He could not harm an Hog without asking leave
from his Lord, [suffer us to go, etc. Matthew. 8.30,31,32.] much less any Lamb of
Christ, who lends him his leave, etc. Now the Borrowing-power can never be too
strong for the Lending-power, etc.

CHAP. III. The Redeemed are Conquerors.
THis Third Chapter does demonstrate that Christ is still the stronger Man by
his Spiritual Presence in all his Redeemed, making them more than Conquerors,
through his Love to them, Romans 8.37. and he will continue to be so with them to
the end of the World, Matthew. 28.20. The Reason whereof is rendered, [ For he
that is in us, is greater than he that is in the World] 1 John 4.4. The Greek
word is, [(...)] that is, greater in Strength; of the same Sense with [(...)]
the stronger Man, Luke 11.22. Who enabled the Apostle to say, [(...)] I can do
all things through Christ that strengthens me] Phil. 4.13. And thus our Lord
out of love does strengthen all his Members, (as he is their Head) to conquer
and overcome all those Difficulties that they meet withal in running their Race
which is set before them, Hebr. 12.2. That no man (nor Devil) may take their
Crown, Rev. 3.11. The first Enquiry is, What be the cases of Difficulty,
wherein the strong Redeemer does assist his weak redeemed Ones to become
Conquerors by his assisting Love? Answer, This Work of Love he works for us
in Seven several Cases. As

First, Christ enables us for performing of Duties, which should be wrought in
God, John 3.21. both quoad fontem, from a right Principle; and quoad finem, for
a right End; yea, and quoad regulam, by a right Rule also; otherwise, while we
write up Service, God may write up Sin; splendida peccata, shining Sins in a
silken Suit, etc. Zech. 7.8. When we go not forth in the strength of the Lord
to Preach, Pray, etc. Psalm. 71.16. The Lord helps the Levites to bear the
Ark, etc. 1 Chronicles. 15.26. And God's Spirit helps our Infirmities in
praying-work, Romans 8.26. The word [(...)] which is translated only [ helpeth]
signifies much more; namely, to bear up the heavier end of our praying-work.
And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty and freedom for
performing of Duty, 2 Cor. 3.17. If Christ free us, we are free indeed, John
8.36.

Secondly, For exercising of Graces; it is not enough for us to have the Habits
of Grace, but it is Christ's work to actuate them, and to draw them forth into
acts and exercises, not one grace can suspirare [breathe forth any fragrancy,
unless Christ's Spirit do inspirare [breathe upon them. Alas, all Habits of
Grace do lay dormant in us in the case of Divine Desertion (as those in holy
David did while God was departed from him during his ten Months, etc.] and the
Spouse was sensible of this danger, when she so earnestly prayed [ Awake, O
North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof
may flow forth] Cant. 4.16. Never did the ground stand in more need of the
sweet Influences of the Pleiades, Joh 38.31. or Garden of April showers to
bring forth May flowers, etc. than our Hearts and our Habits of Grace do of the
Spirit's Influence to come down upon us like Dew upon the mown Grass, and like
Showers that water the Earth, Psalm. 72.6. It Is said [ the Spirit of God did
move upon the face of the first deformed Chaos, and Genesis 1.2. and thereby
brought forth gradually a Beautiful World: So no better are our Hearts and
Habits, until the Spirit descends as a Dove upon us, and give more grace, James
4.6.

Thirdly, Our Lord stengthens us for bearing Affliction, which every good
Soldier of Jesus Christ ought to do, 2 Timothy 2.3. (...)] endure all evils. Now
this cannot be done but by virtue of having fellowship with Christ in his
sufferings, Phil. 3.10. and where there is not first an Union, there cannot be
any Communion or fellowship; we must first be united to Christ as to our Head,
and then he communicates ability to his Members, even to trust in a killing
God, as Job did, c. 13.15. because Christ bears up the heavier end of the
Cross, as is showed in that Resemblance of Simon's bearing the Cross after
Jesus, Luke 23.26. The heavier end of the Cross lay upon Christ's own
shoulders, So Simon (in his fellowship with his Savior in his sufferings) did
but carry the small lighter end of the Cross after him: Thus our Lord does more
than line our Crosses for us, to make them softer, and less galling to our
tender Tempers, but he has taken away the Curse of every Cross, and has made
them more Medicinal than Paenal; so that we may now read Divine Faithfulness in
them, as David did, Psalm. 119.71,75. It Is a filling up Christ's Afflictions,
Col. 1.24. A Chip of Christ's Cross does dulcifie the bitter Waters, as that
Tree did Marah, Exodus 15.25,26. That Glukuzar or Liquorice Tree, might be a
Type of the Cross whereon Christ was Crucified: And we find upon Record, how
the sweet presence of Christ with the Three Nobles of Israel's Captives in
Babylon, did even sweeten to them those Bitter Flames in the Furnace of Fire,
as before, Dan. 3.25,28.

Fourthly, Christ the strong Redeemer causes his Redeemed Ones to be
Conquerours also in Resisting Temptations; for he having before hand broken the
Serpent's Head, Genesis 3.15. does only leave Tail-Temptations for the exercise of
their Graces, and not for the destruction of their Souls. He has engaged his
own Holiness and Fidelity for assuring us of this great Truth, in that truly
Golden Promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. where he says [That we shall not be tempted
above what we are able, for he is faithful, and he will make a way to escape,
(though we cannot make any such way for our own Deliverance) and that none such
Trials shall come upon us, but what are common and incident to God's dearest
Children. He will not lead us into any untrodden paths, but only into such
ways, wherein the great Friends and Favorites of Heaven have gone before us,
whose footsteps we are commanded to follow, Cant. 1.8. and Heb. 6.12.] Yea and
he has assured praying Souls, [that his Grace shall be sufficient for us] 2
Cor. 12.7,8. and that he will Rebuke Satan that Resists us, Zech. 3.1,2,3, etc.
which he can easily do, as having him in a Chain; and it is but taking up a Link
or two thereof, then our Souls are safe, etc.

Fifthly, He makes them Conquerours in mortifying Corruptions; from which none
(even those of the highest Form) are not exempted; Elijah, Paul and Barnabas
were subject to the like passions with others, Acts 14.15. and James 5.17. The
best of Men are but Men at the best: Therefore it is as great an act of
miraculous Power to keep our little spark of Grace alive in the midst of such a
vast Sea of Corruption, as it would be to keep a Coal-fire burning upon the
surface of the Main Ocean. Our Graces (like the Army of Israel) are very small,
when our corruptions, like the Syrians, are so numerous as to fill the whole
Country of the Isle of Man, 1 Kings 20.27. therefore is it said, that the
Righteous are scarcely saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. that is, they have much ado, and
meet with many difficulties before they can reach to Heaven; and Solomon says,
[He that trusts his own heart is a fool] Prove. 28.26. Notwithstanding all this,
though our corruptions have Iron Charets, and be too strong for us, yet are they
not too strong for this stronger Man, Josh. 17.16,18. and Judge. 1.19. We must
say with John Baptist [He is (...), mighty or stronger than I] Mat. 3.11. And
what Anakims or Gyant-like corruptions were ever able to stand before his
Mortifying Spirit? Romans 8.13. his Promise, [he will subdue our Iniquities]
Mich. 7.19. where the Hebrew word [ Chabash] does not signify simply to
subdue, but vi, and violentia subjugabit and conculcabit] that is, [ Jikbosh
Gnavonthenu, Hebr.] he will tread our Corruptions down by force and violence,
and will perform with his hand, what his mouth has spoken; He will do what he
has said, 2 Samuel 7.25. 1 Kings 8.15. And, which is more than all this, God
sometimes does give pardoning Mercy, where he has denied prevailing Grace; as
this latter has been withdrawn to humble the Saints; so the former is granted
to comfort them, as in that double case of David and Peter; but then there must
be some proportion betwixt sinning and sorrowing; Manasseh had greatly sinned,
and was as greatly humbled. Oh! let all bless the Lord for this, that [ sin
has not Dominion over us] Romans 6.14. It may play the Tyrant, but never Rex or
chosen King; it may come as a Traveller, as 2 Samuel 12.4. but it cannot be an
Home-dweller, or Master of the House, in any truly gracious Heart, etc.

Sixthly, The next Case of Difficulty, wherein the Redeemer assists the
Redeemed to become Conquerors also, is in maintaining their Communion with God.
Alas, how heavy are our Hearts, [ Leve sursum, grave deorsum] heavy things hang
downward, as light things press upward, which our Hearts cannot do, having the
Stone in them, the Spouse was sensible hereof, when she prayed, [ draw me, and
we shall run after thee] Cant. 1.3. Anselm's Bird with a Stone tied to its
foot, is a lively Representation of this Case, no sooner did the Bird essay to
mount up toward Heaven; but the Stone at her foot did presently pluck her down
to the Earth. It may well be said, [Oh, how weak are our Hearts!] Ezekiel. 16.30.
Christ says to his Disciples [ Can ye not watch with me one Hour, the Spirit
indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak] Matthew. 26.41. As if our Lord had said
with the kindest Candor to them, seeing I find willingness of Spirit (so far
as you are renewed in the Inner-man by the Law of the Mind) I will either
strengthen you against the weakness of the Flesh, or I will pardon it; and not
only so, but I will accept of your willingness to Watch and Pray, wherein your
unrenewed part by the Law of your Members does discover so much weakness. Thus
our Lord excuses their frailties of Flesh, whereof he minds them, lest they
should presume, yet he most graciously owns and acknowledges the Bent of their
Spirits, lest they should despair: The purpose of our Hearts must be to cleave
unto the Lord, Acts 11.23. and because we cannot duly perform it, for we cannot
serve the Lord without Distraction, 1 Cor. 7.35. Therefore we ought to pray
with David, [ Lord, unite my heart to serve thee] Psalm. 86.11. For a loose
Heart, (that is not tied fast to God, can never abide at the Mark, but will
start aside like a deceitful Bow, Psalm. 78.57. and Hos. 7.16. Alas, never did
the unruly Bullock stand in more need to be bound fast with Cords to the Horns
of the Altar, Psalm. 118.27. than our Hearts do to be bound fast to God with the
golden Cords of Christ's Love in our Communion with him. And thus our Lord
speaks, [ With everlasting kindness have I drawn thee] Jer. 31.3. And [ I
drew them with the Cords of a (or suitable to a) Man, even with Bands of Love]
Hos. 11.4. Whereas God had complained of his People a little before this, [
that their hearts were divided] Hos. 10.2. because Anima dispersa fit minor;
says the Philosopher, when the Soul is dispersed among various Objects, it is
thereby much weakened in its Actings. Whereas on the other hand, [ Vis unita
est fortior] an Heart united and firmly fixed to God, [as David's Phrase is) is
thereby so strengthened, as [to cleave close to the Lord, for he is our Life,
and the Length of our Days] Deuteronomy. 30.20. Oh! happy are such Souls that can
carry on their Communion with God, be able to say, [ My heart is fixed] as
David says three several times, Psalm. 57.7. and 108.1. and 112.7. Yea, and can
drive away wandering Thoughts in the Worship of God, as Abraham drove away the
Fowls which did disturb him in his sacrificing Work, Genesis 15.11. And likewise
can answer distracting Fancies, as Nehemiah did his Adversaries, [ I am about a
great Work, and cannot attend you, why should God's Work cease, whilst I leave
it, and come down to you] Neh. 6.3. It Is observable that Honey while it is
boiling hot, will not be blown upon by any filthy Flies; nor would our Hearts
be fly-blown by Beelzebub, the Prince of Flies, (as the Name signifies). If we
could but keep them in a fervent Frame, enditing good Matter, as David did his
heart, Psalm. 45.1. Hebr. Margent, God commands us to be fervent in Spirit,
serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. or we cannot keep in Communion with God; but
neither this Work, nor any other can we do by any strength of our own, yet may
we be able to do all the Works of a Christian through Christ, the stronger Man)
that strengthens us, Phil. 4.13.

The Seventh and last Case of Difficulty in which the Redeemer strengthens his
Redeemed with a conquering Power, is in making their Passage forward, and their
Progress perfect through the wayless and waterless Wilderness of this present
evil World, (so called, Gal. 1.4.) even into the Heavenly Canaan, yea, and home
to their Father's House. 'Twas God's Command, [ say to the Children of Israel
that they go forward, etc.] Exodus 14.15,16. Though there be a Red Sea before,
and an Enemy behind, and mighty Mountains round about; yet was there no cause
of fear, because Christ in the Cloudy-Pillar went along with them, and was
present both in the Van and in the Rear. The same Office of Love does the
strengthening Presence of Christ do still unto all the true Israel of God. This
is showed in Hosea 11.1,2,3,4: where Ephraim the Child, the Lord taught him to
go, or as [(...)] the Septuagint word there signifies) to pace, leaving his
natural Trot in ways of Sin, intimating how God put him (as it were) into the
Traces, as Horse-Masters do young Colts to teach them to Pace, etc. So God does
here [taking the Child Ephraim by the Arms, etc. Where beside that notable
Notion of teaching to Pace or Amble from the Greek Version, the Hebrew Text
represents Christ as a Nurse, bearing the Nursling by the Arms, whereby she
supports the weight of his Body, then she teaches him how to move his Legs
forward step by step. Thus our Lord is said, [to guide our feet in the way of
Peace] Luke 1.79. He does strengthen our feeble Knees, drawing us [ fortiter
tamen suaviter, strongly, yet sweetly] through the Quagmires of Crosses by the
Cords of a Man, Hos. 11.4. that is, he Drags us not along like Beasts, but he
draws us gently endways by Means and Motives, suitable to the rational Nature
of Man, even with Bands of Love, irresistibly by the effectual workings of his
Holy Spirit; which he has promised to bestow upon us, John 6.44. and 12.32.
and which the Spouse prayed for, when she found some Back-biasses, that made
her hang backward in her Progress toward Heaven, Cant. 1.4. Oh, blessed are
they whose strength is in the Lord, they pass on from strength to strength,
Psalm. 84.5,7. and grow stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. Such do pass from
Mithcah to Cashnonah, Numb. 33.29. that is, from Sweetness unto Swiftness, as
those two Hebrew names do signify. They lift up their feet, and walk lustily
toward Canaan, as Jacob did after his refreshing Bait of the Ladder at Bethel,
Genesis 28.12, etc. with 29.1. Margent. Oh! happy is that Man [whose right hand
the Lord upholdeth in his whole Work, as he did for Cyrus, Isa. 45.1. though
Abraham knew not whither he went, Hebr. 11.8. yet he well knew with whom he
went] for he walked with God, as a Child in a Fathers hand, who has promised
to save to the utmost, Heb. 7.25.

The Second Enquiry is, What Conditions does our strong Redeemer require of his
Redeemed, that he may cause them to become Conquerors, etc. Answer, The
Conditions are Twofold.

(1 st.) We must keep constantly in God's Arms, etc. And

(2 dly.) We must wholly put on God's Armor.

First, On the (1 st.) of these briefly, we must keep constantly in God's Arms,
for the Eternal God is our Refuge, and his Everlasting Arms must be underneath
us, Deuteronomy. 33.27. God tells us, [that our Hearts are weak] Ezekiel. 16.30. And
David from his sense hereof, cries [ Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am
weak] Psalm 6.2. And hereupon it is the Churches Prayer, [ Lord be thou our Arm
every Morning] Isa. 33.2. otherwise we shall do nothing but stumble and fall,
like weak Children, that love not to keep constantly in their Fathers Arms, but
will presumptuously be venturing to go alone, and so gets many a knock and
blow, etc. oh how severe was God's Law against such, saying, [ That Soul which
dare do any thing presumptuously, does reproach the Lord (as if such scorned
his helping hand) and shall be cut off from among his People] Numb. 15.30. Our
Lord tells us, That [ without Christ we can do nothing] John 15.5. that is,
nothing after a gracious manner, neither acceptably or effectually, and
therefore are we bid to abide in the Vine, ver. 7. and to abide in him, 1 John
2.28. and yet we can do all things by Christ's strengthening prefence, Phil.
4.13. Alas, our Bow (like that of Joseph's) cannot abide in strength, unless it
be strengthened by the Arms of the hands of the Mighty God of Jacob, Genesis
49.24. 'Twas not enough for Joash to put his hand upon the Bow alone, no, but
the Prophet of God (who represented God himself) must lay his hands upon the
King's hand alo, otherwise there can be no shooting to any purpose the Arrows
of God's Deliverance, etc. 2 King. 13.16. We are like little Boys learning to
write, who must have their hand guided by their Masters hand. But Secondly, we
must put on the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.12, etc. The Reason is, our
Adversary is a strong Man armed even Cap-a-pee, from head to foot; and woe to
us, if at any time he assault us when weak men and naked, such are easily
overcome by High-way-men in their Travelling-Journeys. It Is sad to be
insensible of our own nakedness, Rev. 3.17,18. Woeful is our case if this Thief
in the night find us naked, Rev. 16.15. The first Adam made himself and all his
Posterity naked by eating forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.7. he lost the Robe of
Original Righteousness, both for himself, and for all that were in his Loins,
as he was a public Person and Representative of all Mankind, Adam's Nakedness
made him Run from God to Satan in his sinful excuses of his sin, and in his
Fig-leave coverings, etc. Genesis 3.10,12, etc. Now while we remain in this
corrupt Root the first Adam, we are easily taken by this mighty Hunter, and led
captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. The Greek word there [(...)] signifies
taken alive in Hunting by this Nimrod] not to be preserved alive, but to be
destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12. without Repentance unto Life, Acts 11.18. Thus likewise
we are told [ How Aaron made the People naked] Exodus 32.25. so that a double
Nakedness was upon them, both that from Adam's sin, and also by their own sin
of Idolatry, wherein Aaron was their Instrument. This Golden Calf did divest
them of Divine protection, and exposed them to the Wrath both of God and Man,
as Numb. 14.9. we become a Breakfast to Satan, etc. And this our Nakedness God
minds us of it. Again, Ezekiel. 16.22. where both Gnaram, and Gnarah Hebrew, be
used to intimate we are (in the fallen Nature) not only polluted in our Blood (as
is at large expressed in the beginning of that Chapter) but that we are both
naked and bare too, that is, without Apparel as well as without Armor also; oh
great misery, etc!

N.B. Note well, seeing we are both naked and bare in the fallen Estate, to wit,
we are destitute both of Apparel and of Armor; Therefore in the first place,
we must look out for some Tight Apparel, not only to cover our Nakedness, but
also such as may secure us from those Storms which Satan (that Prince of the
Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2,3.) will assuredly raise up against us: This our
Lord shows in his Parable, Matthew. 7.25. saying, [ The Rain will descend upon
our Spiritual Buildings, etc. Many a sharp Shower will beat upon us and batter
us; and because the Fig-leave Aprons (which our first Parents made for
themselves) was not a sufficient security to them. Hereupon the Lord made Coats
of Skins and clothed them, Genesis 3.21. which was there a shadowing Emblem of
the Fleece and Skin of the Lamb of God, we must be counseled to buy of him
white Raiment that we may be clothed, and that the shame of our Nakedness may
not appear, Rev. 3.17,18. We must be covered with a Covering of Christ's
Spirit, Isa. 30.1. and apparelled with the Robes of his Righteousness, which is
called the Best Robe, Luke 15.22. and thus the Bride the Lamb's Wife had
granted to her to be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white, which is [(...)]
the Righteousnesses of the Saints, to wit, the Grace of Justification, and the
Grace of Sanctification; and therefore the Greek word is put into the plural
Number, Rev. 19.8,9. Oh pray over that Promise [ I will spread the skirts of my
Merit over thee to cover thy Nakedness, etc.] Ezekiel. 16.8. and look upon it as a
shameful thing, that we can (all of us) be wise enough to secure both our
Bodies and our dwelling houses from all annoyances and harms to them, yet not
be so wise for our Souls, but leave them exposed to all evil; whereas we have
need to be like Noah's Ark, that was pitched within and without, that it might
be able to Ride out the Storm, Genesis 6.14.

Now in the second place, This double Malady must have a double Remedy, as we
are both naked and bare, Ezekiel. 16.22, etc. So when we are remedied of being
naked of Apparel, then may we not remain still bare of Armor; and this
Spiritual or Mystical Armor wherewith we ought to be furnished and fortified,
do fall under three distinct denominations in sacred Scripture; the first is,
it is called the Armor of Light, Romans 13.12. so named, because first, It Is only
the Children of Light, so called, Luke 16.8. Ephesians. 5.8. 1 These. 5.5. who are
blessed and beautified with this blessed Armor; all the Children of Darkness
abide both naked and bare, and continue Slaves and Vassals to Satan, that
Prince of Darkness, as before, 2 Timothy 2.26, etc. But secondly, Because those
Children are (or at least ought to be) careful to keep this Armor lightsom,
bright, and glistering, as indeed all the parts of this Armor are when they
come first to them out of God's own Heavenly Armory, and of God's own
furbushing and polishment. Now this very name [ Armor of Light] does most
clearly teach us, that we ought to Exercise all the parts of this Armor duly
and daily, and to keep them in perpetual Use, and never (out of any security or
presumption) dare to let them become Rusty or soiled by our careless Disuse of
them. Yea and (3 dly) this is called [the Armor of Light] because it gives a
light and luster to such as wear it; for the light of Divine knowledge teaches
us to walk [(...)] Handsomely and of the best form and fashion as the Greek
word signifies, Romans 13.13. Intimating, that we ought by the help of this
Armor to lead such convincing lives, walk as children of light, Ephesians. 5.8. that
all who behold us, may then Acknowledge us, that we are a seed which the Lord
has blessed, Isa. 61.9. and our Light should so shine before Men, so, etc. as
that they may see our good works and Glorify our Heavenly father, Mat. 5 16. We
ought to shine as Lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation,
Phil. 2 15. and so, as not only to stop the mouths of gainsayers from
Reproaching us, 1 Pet. 3.16. but also (to force their Mouths open in commending
our comely Conversation in Christ.

The second Denomination of this mystical Armor is, the Armor of
Righteousness, which we are to put on us for our Defense both upon our right
Hand, and upon our left, 2 Cor. 6.7. It Is so called there, (1 st.) Because by
the Blessed benefit hereof we are kept and confirmed in the way of
Righteousness and true Holiness, Prove. 16.31. Ephesians. 4.24. And (2 dly.) Because
Satan does batter us both upon our Right hand and upon our Left, on purpose to
drive us out of the good old and middle way, into the Extremes upon either
hand; for this is the Tempter's wily Method, at the first to assault us with
his Flatteries and Allurements, and when he finds himself baffled herein by
this Impenetrable Armor, then his second Assault is more furious with his
Frowns and Affrightments; this was the Tempter's way of Tempting famous Luther,
whom the Devil's Patriarch (the Pope) first enticed with great promises of
preferring him to a Cardinals Cap, etc. if he would turn Papist, etc. but when
this great promise, etc. could not fasten upon him, then the Pope turned his
Tone and Tune, and sent forth his Thundering Bull, and dreadfully threatened to
fall upon him foully with fire and sword, if he persisted in his obstinacy,
etc. But brave Luther, being fortified with this Armor of Righteousness; on
his Right hand and Left returns this Answer [ Contemptus ad me Romanus and
favor and furor] that is, I do cordially scorn both the favor and fury of that
Romish Beast, etc. Yea and the same Heroic Soul says farther, [ Valde
protestatus sum me nolle sic a Deo satiari] that is, I have solemnly protested
that my God shall not put me off with such low things as those are which the
Mock-Vicar of Christ does now tempt me with.

But the Third Denomination hereof, it is called [the Armor of God] Ephesians.
6.10,11,12. that we may be made strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might, we are commanded to put on the Armor of God. It has this name upon it;
First, Because God (who is called [(...)] Heb. 11.10. signifying a most curious
Artificer) is the framer of them, as well as of the Worlds, and of that City
Celestial and without Foundations. What was said of Moses's Tables of Stone
wherein the Decalogue was written, that All was the Workmanship of God, Exodus
32.16. The same may be said of this Spiritual Armor; All the Furniture and
Armory of Evangelical Graces wherewith we are defended from all our Spiritual
Enemies, as they are called the Gifts of God, Ephesians. 2.8. so they are truly the
Workmanship of God, whereby we are said to be created in Christ, etc. verse 10.
and become partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. And Secondly, We are bid
to put this Armor of God upon us, because we have a most Dangerous Devil to
deal with, who is completely Armed to Do Evil to us (according to the Descant
upon his name [ Devil, quasi Do-Evil] yea and he can do evil to us [ eminus]
that is, at distance with his Fiery Darts, afar off, Ephesians. 6.16. as well as [
cominus] that is, hand to hand, by his Buffetings, that the Messenger of Satan
is said to give the blessed Apostle (as it were face to face, 2 Cor. 12.6,7,
etc.) which plainly demonstrates that the Devil ^s got near at hand to us, and
now does grapple with us as a Wrestler, who takes ^old of the Arms of him with
whom he wrestles; and thus it is said [ We wrestle ^ot with flesh and blood, but
with principa^ties and powers, etc.] Ephesians. 6.12. so that he does evil to us, not
only at a distance, as he is Prince of the power of the Air, (and so has the
upper ground of us poor Worms crawling upon the Earth) from whence he throws
his fiery Darts at us, as Saul did his Javelin several times at David, etc. but
also near hand; for Job by Divine permission was within Satan's Touch, Job
1.11. and 2.5. where Satan begs leave of the Lord to let him touch Job's person
as well as his goods and children with some of his pernicious Touches; but though
we be within the Tempter's Touchings (in his walking to and fro seeking whom he
may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.) yet blessed be the Lord for his Divine Grace, that
this wicked one cannot Touch such as are born of God with any of his Deadly
Touches, 1 John 5.18,19. However is most highly concerns us, that we be no^
found of him naked and unarmed. Alas how easily did Cain prevail against Abe^
whom he found in the Field unprepare for Resistance, etc? and how easily di^
Simeon and Levi (those two Brethren i^ Iniquity) prevail against Shechem and
hi^ Citizens whom they surprised at u^ awares, and altogether unable to defen^
themselves, being still very sore wit^ their Circumcision, Genesis 34.25. Solomon
says [ Poverty shall come upon Idle on^ like an Armed Man, Hebr. A Man of
Shields] Prove. 6.11. that is, it comes with so much force and violence, as it
cannot be either avoided or averted, etc. Now if so much be said of such a
thing as Poverty or Want; how much more may be affirmed of such a person as
this Prince of Devils, and Darkness, and the God of this World, Matthew. 12.24.
and 2 Cor. 4.4. who is such a Mark's man as can sling his Stones of Temptation
even to an hair's-breadth and not miss, as Judge. 20.16. yea and can shoot his
Arrows with so much accuracy and exactness, as to wound us between the Joints
of our Harness, as as Ahab was, 1 Kings 22.34. And if so, then much more when
he surprizeth us either Napping or Naked, or both: Therefore our Lord makes an
open proclamation [ What I say unto you, I say unto all, watch, that none be
found sleeping] Mark 13.36,37. And the Apostle Peter publishes by sounding of
his Trumpet, and crying, Arm, Arm, Arm, your selves, [(...)] 1 Pet. 4.1. in
general to all.

This brings us to the third particular, to wit, we must not only Arm our
selves, and put on the Armor of Light and of Righteousness; but we must put on
the whole Armor of God, as they are distinctly described in order one after
another, Ephesians. 6.11, to 19. where the Apostle having before appointed all sorts
of Christians their Ranks in all their respective Relations, and had declared
to them their Relative Duties in their several Respects; then he pursues his
Divine Documents, how they must be completely armed Cap-a-pee, from Top to Toe,
intimating, that without this whole Armor, we can neither keep our Relative
Ranks religiously, nor do our respective Duties (as those that are Superior of
Parents, Masters and Husbands, etc. and Inseriour, as Wives, Children and
Servants, etc. or equal, etc.) in a way either pleasing to God, or profitable
to man, etc. from ver. 22, of Chap. 5. to ver. 10 of Chap. 6.

Now this Christian Armor (so highly honored with those three Titles, the
Armor of Light, of Righteousness, and of God) the same Apostle lets us know
all the parts of the whole, which he bids us to put on, particularly both those
parts.

1. That are Defensive; and then,

2. Those that are Offensive: And first he begins with the Mystical Belt, or
Girdle of Truth, ver. 14. wherein he alludeth to that Military Belt which the
Roman Soldiers did commonly wear, that was made up of Durable Stuff, beset with
many Iron and Brass Plates, whereby their Loins, and the upper part of the
Belly (which is most easily wounded) were well armed and secured from Harm: By
this he resembles that Golden Girdle of Truth and Sincerity, wherewith every
True Christian ought to gird up the Loins of his Mind, Luke 12.35. 1 Pet. 1.13.
The Loins of our Worldly Affections may not be loose and hanging down, etc.
like loose Garments down to the Feet, which will hinder the nimble motion of
our Feet in running the Race that is set before us, Heb. 12.1. Therefore we
must gird them up with this Girdle of Truth, which makes us firm and stable in
all our Religious Undertakings. That vulgar Proverb [ Ungir^ Unblest] does
assuredly hold true here, if ever; for they prove but loose Professors, who
want this Golden Girdle, and only wear the Garment of Holiness like a loose
Gown or Garment, to be put on or cast off at pleasure; such an one is called [
omnium horarum Homo] a man that can turn with the Times, and can shift and suit
his Sails to all Winds and Seasons, etc. whereas our Lord says, that all his
sincere Servants must first gird themselves, (to wit with this Golden Girdle of
Sincerity) otherwise we can never serve our Master as we ought to do, Luke 17.8.

The second piece of Defensive Armor is, the Breast Plate of Righteousness,
ver. 14. which is the principal Defense for the Heart, the least wound whereof
is mortal: It Is the primum vivens, and the ultimum moriens, the first that
lives, and the last that dies in the ordinary course of Nature; and therefore
extraordinary care is universally taken to secure that Fort-Royal of Life the
Heart. Now seeing the Heart does signify the Conscience, [ if our hearts
condemn us, etc. that is, our Consciences, 1 John 3.20. therefore how careful
was this same Apostle to secure it with this Breast Plate of Righteousness,
saying [I have lived in all good Conscience] Act. 23.1. because it was good
with the goodness of Integrity, therefore was it good also with the goodness of
Tranquillity: And he farther tells us, how he made it his daily Exercise and
Recreation (as (...) signifies) to keep his Conscience void of offense both
toward God and toward man,] Act. 24.16. Moreover he says [ our rejoicing is
this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our Conversation
in the World, and more abundantly to you ward,] 2 Cor. 1.12. but more of this
after to this same purpose. Nonesuch Job says [ My Righteousness I hold fast,
and will not let it go, my Heart shall not reproach me, so long as I live,] Job
27.6. And John adds his Verdict to this point likewise, saying, [ He that
has Righteousness, is Righteous, etc.] 1 John 3.7. that is, such as have both
the Righteousness imputed in the Grace of Justification, and likewise that
which is imparted in the Grace of Sanctification; these two are called [(...)]
the Righteousness of the Saints, Rev. 19.8. The original reading there is in
the plural number: We all ought to be unto God what we seem to be unto men, and
that at all times and in all places, and our Consciences must bear witness
hereof in the Holy Ghost, Romans 9.1. If so, this will be (...), an Impenetrable
Coat of Mail, and Armor of Proof, a most blessed Breast Plate. Thus far the
Light and Law of Nature enabled the Pagan Poet to sing, -- Hic Murus Aheneus
esto
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa;
that is, a clear Conscience is as a Brazen Wall, which will beat back the Shots
of a thousand Reproaches and Slanders, etc. and the Apostle better tells us,
that this is an Evidence of our Election, 2 Pet. 1.5,6,7,8,9,10. If all be well
within us, it cannot well be ill without us. Whereas on the contrary, if
Conscience be galled, it is with us, as with those who have the Skin of their
Backs rubbed off; or their Shoulder Blade disjointed; any lightsome load is
very burdensome to them, etc. This Consideration caused Paul (who was in perils
often, etc.) so careful of not making Shipwreck of Faith and of a good
Conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19. for Faith is the Jewel, and Conscience is the Cabinet
wherein it is kept; and if this be safe, all loads on us will be lighter, etc.

The Third piece of Defensive Armor is, [ having our Feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace,] ver. 15. that is, seeing there is much
hard Ground as Etham signifies, betwixt us and Canaan, as it was Israel's third
Stage [from Raamses to Succoth, and from Succoth to Etham, Exodus 13.20. and
Numb. 33.6. yea, and many snares of Satan in our way to Heaven; and indeed
every place in our passage thither is full of Briars and Bramble bushes, so
that we have great need to be well-shod with Gospel-shoes of magnanimity and
patience, or we shall prove unlike to the Right Brood of Travelers, who travel
lustily home to their Fathers House. We read in Scripture how Goliath had
Greeves or Boots of Brass, 1 Samuel 17.6. And thus Homer charactarizeth his
Graecians, not only to be (...), Iron-sides (as is the Phrase of our times) but
also (...), well-booted Soldiers, whose Legs and Feet were well secured from
Hazards and Harms by Shots. Thus Christians ought to be well fortified with
Gospel-comforts, (whereby God creates peace in the Soul, Isai. 57.19.) then may
they trudge over hard ground with alacrity; yea, tread upon not only Briars and
Brambles, but also upon Lions and Adders with safety; yea, that old Dragon the
Devil himself, they shall trample under foot, Psalm. 91.13. Mar. 16.18. and Romans
16.20. Paul shaked the Viper from off his Hand into the Fire, Act. 28.4,5.
Whereas on the other hand, oh how soon are the ignorant, the timorous, and such
as become ashamed of their Profession, put to the Foil by that old subtle
Serpent, (who has a liberty in his Commission to bruise the Heel of the Seed
of the Woman, Genesis 3.15.) because they are no better shod with the Shoes of
Gospel-peace: This is known by common experience, that those who are
tender-footed, or whose Feet are either beaten or blistered, cannot tread upon
Stones or Thorns; they are Halters betwixt God and Baal.

The fourth piece of Defensive Armor, is the Shield of Faith, verse 16. which
we are bidden [(...)] above all, or over and upon all, to take and be armed
with; intimating, that whatever other part of this Mystical Armor we want, we
must in no wise want this principal part thereof, for this does cover and
defend all the other pieces of the Defensive Armor, because a firm Trust and
Confidence in God by Christ does after a special manner shelter, and
over-shadow the imperfections of all our other Graces: And indeed this Shield
of Faith does not only defend our other Graces, but our selves also, as it
takes hold of that precious Promise of God to Abraham [ I am thy Shield, fear
not, etc.] Genesis 15.1. As if God had said [thine Enemies shall first strike
through me thy Shield, before they can come to reach and wound thee, I will
stand betwixt thee and all Danger] and the like privilege of safety God
vouchsafed unto Israel, saying, [as the Eagle bears her young upon her wings,
so has the Lord born you, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.11,12. which allusion does imply, that
no Shot can come to harm the young Eagles so carried, but it must first pierce
and pass through the body of the Old one. By all this it is apparent, how
safely does Faith lodge the Soul under the shadow of the wings of Almighty God,
Psalm. 91.1,2,3,4, to 14. The just do live by their Faith, Hab. 2.4. Nor is this
all that the Shield of Faith does for us, in securing us from the Assaults of
Satan, but it also repels and beats back those Darts that he casts at us; yea
and yet higher, it moreover does quench that Hell fire they bring along with
them; for Satan's Darts are like those (that History mentions) of the
Scythians, which were not only pointed and hardened in the fire, but they were
also dipped in the poison of Asps, and in the venom of Vipers, that they might
the more horribly torture and torment those Bodies that were wounded with them;
even so Satan would torture and torment our Souls with his poisoned fiery
Darts: The Lord strengthen our Faith, whereby we may quench the fire, and
antidote the poison, etc.

The fifth piece of Defensive Armor, is the Helmet of Salvation, verse 17.
which the same Apostle helps to interpret this place, saying, [ Take for an
Helmet the Hope of Salvation] 1 These. 5.8. So that this Helmet here is the
Grace of Hope, the office whereof is, to hold up our heads above Water, and
raises up the Soul ( with an outstretched neck, as the Greek word [(...)] Romans
8.23. signifies, which we read, waiting with groans for the Adoption, to wit,
the Redemption of the Body. And the next words there are [ for we are saved by
hope, etc. and if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait
for it] verse 24, 25. Hope is the Daughter of Faith, its Mother; yet is it as a
staff for its Aged Mother to lean upon: By Faith we believe the Truth of, and
our own Title to those blessings that we are not yet possessed of, and by Hope
we patiently wait for that which we believe shall surely come to pass: And when
they but begin to do so, then Hope looks up and lifts up the head, because
our Redemption draws nigh, Luke 21.28. It Is the excellency of Hope to take
her Turns in walking round about the Streets of the New Jerusalem, and
sometimes to sit still and sing [ adhuc mea Messis in Herba est] there is yet
an happy Harvest that is hastening in its season for me; the Lord will hasten
it in his time, Isa. 60.22. So I will hope against Hope, Romans 4.18. Yet more,
this Hope is so excellent, that it is not only our Helmet by Land, but it is
also our Anchor by Sea, Heb. 6.19. By Hope we have our Safety here, and our
Salvation hereafter, both are purchased by Christ, who has secured a full
Victory over this strong Man for us.

Thus far the five pieces of the Christian Defensive Armor reaches; now the
two following parts, namely, the Sixth and Seventh, are indeed Offensive
Weapons, as well as Defensive Armor. As the former five were merely, and
solely for our Defense; so these two latter are not only for our own Defense,
but they are also for Offense of our Spiritual Foes, to wit, the Sword of the
Spirit, and Darts of Prayer.

The Sixth Apostolical Direction here for our being completely Armed in our
Spiritual Warfare, is, Take likewise to you the Sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God] Ephesians. 6.17. As there is a literal and a Carnal Sword, so there
is a Mystical and a Spiritual Sword: Which Truth may be demonstrated, First, By
that Example in Scripture-Record [And it shall come to pass, that him who
escapes the Sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay; and him that escapes from the
Sword of Jehu, shall Elisha slay.] 1 Kings 19.17. the Interpretation whereof
must most plainly imply, that Elisha had his Slaying Sword, as well as Hazael
and Jehu: And though their Slaying Swords were both of them Carnal, yet this of
Elisha must be Spiritual, as he was a Prophet of the Lord, and more; yea and
weilded no other Sword, but that which is called here the Word of God: And in
congruity with this sense the Lord himself speaks Secondly, [ Therefore I
have hewed them by my Prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth]
Hos. 6.5. Moreover a Third sacred Instance gives a farther Illustration unto
this Mystical Interpretation, namely, [ If any man will dare to hurt my two
Witnesses, I will give such a power to my Servants, that Fire shall proceed out
of their mouths, which shall devour their Enemies; and if any man (though never
so many or so mighty) will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.] Rev.
11.3,5. And yet to all those three Quotations abovenamed, this Scripture is
most express for this Mystical sense, saying [ Take the Sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word of God.] There be several cogent and ponderous Reasons, why
the Word of God is called the Sword of the Spirit, etc.

The first is, Because the Spirit was the Artificer, the curious Contriver, who
framed and fashioned this Spiritual Sword, the Holy Spirit has the honor of
making this excellent weapon ready to our hands; for thus we are told [That no
Prophecy of Scripture came in old Time by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, etc.] 2 Pet. 1.20,21. The word
[(...)] signifies that the Scriptures are God's breath, God made them as well
as the Heavens, etc. Heb. 11.10. with the Breath of his Mouth.

The Second Reason is, because the word of God is sharper than any two edged
Sword, and pierces to the dividing of the Soul and Spirit, etc. Heb. 4.12. the
Greek words (...), signifies it is quick, lively, cutting, powerful and
energetical, when the power of the Spirit goes along with it, as Luke 5.17,
etc. It will then ransack the hearts even of wicked men, as it did to Herod,
Luke 9.7. it made him stick fast in the mud, as the original word [(...)]
signifies, and as it did to Foelix, who was made to tremble thereby, Acts
24.25. But as to the Godly who tremble at his Word and Judgments (as David did,
Psalm. 119.120.) God promises to lend a look of Love toward them, Isai. 66.3.

The Third Reason why the Word is called a Sword, is, because this Weapon of
our Warfare, is not weak as Flesh (often called the old man for weakness) is, but
it is mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, and casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.4,5. Therefore Alexander's Sword wherewith he could cut the Gordian
Knot, (as it is famous in History) is nothing comparable to this Spiritual
Sword that can work all those Wonders before mentioned. We must say the same of
this Sword, what David said of Goliah's Sword, there is none like it, let it be
given to us, 1 Samuel 21.9.

But the Fourth Reason above all is, this was the Weapon wherewith our Lord
Christ did defeat and discomsit the Devil himself when he warred this good
Warfare against Satan's very Person, and that upon the Devil's own Dunghill, as
he is called the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4.4. We find in Matt. 4. and in the
other Evangelists likewise, how our Lord (in his Duel with the Devil) made use
of no other Weapon, but this Sword of the Spirit, the word of God, wherewith in
three several assaults of Satan upon him, he repelled his Antagonist three
sundry times one after another, and that by answering all the three Temptations
of the Tempter, only with [ scriptum est, it is written] three times over: and
which is remarkable, all those three Scriptures wherewith our Savior conquered
Satan, were drawn out of the Fifth Book of Moses called Deuteronomy. This, even
this was the great and strong Sword wherewith our Lord slashed, and cut in
pieces that lofty Leviathan, that old and crooked piercing Serpent, as Isai.
27.1. As David (our Lord's Father and Figure) did choose some smooth Stones out
of the Waterbrooks wherewith he fought the good fight of Faith against that
monstrous Philistin, etc. 2 Samuel 17.40. and he slings these Stones (out of the
Sling of Faith also) at the very Face of the Great Goliath, and God himself
going along with the Stone, it gave him a mortal wound, and made him fall flat
down to the ground, so that the weight of his bulky Body, (especially so loaded
with so much heavy Armor) must make an horrible Earthquake by his fall. Even
so our mystical David here does choose those three smooth Stones out of the
Silver Streams of the Sacred Scriptures, and with these, being slung by a
Divine Art and Hand, he likewise knocks down the Great Goliath of Hell. All this
does teach us, that the Books of the Holy Scriptures are a blessed Armory, (far
beyond that of Solomon's, Cant. 4.4. The Tower of David was famous for a fully
furnished Armory, as the Tower of London is now accounted the most famous
Armory in the World for all sorts of Armor, so comely fixed in a most beautiful
order, which my Eyes have beheld with admiration) whither we ought to hasten in
an hour of Temptation, and there we shall be furnished with this Sword to
defeat the Devil, etc.

NB. Note well, (1 st) That this Sword may have saving effects for our Souls
good; we must learn from David to draw the Sword out of its Sheath, as he did,
1 Samuel 17.51. that is, we must draw this Sword of the Spirit out of the Sheath
of the Letter, and not make a Charm of the bare words thereof; for it is said
[the Letter kills, but it is the Spirit that gives life, 2 Cor. 3.6. Yet it is
the Foppery of Popery to use only a wooden Dagger, and a leaden Sword in
undertaking to drive away the Devil, by making Spells of some certain Syllables
of the Scripture, and by crossing themselves with the sign of the Cross, and by
being sprinkled with their Holy Water; yea, and by ringing their Baptized
Bells, etc. Whereas, alas, it is not the dead sign of the Cross, but the living
Word of the Cross, 1 Cor. 1.23,24. the power of God, etc. that drives away the
Devil; it is our being sprinkled with Water of Life, even with Water and the
Spirit, Joh. 3.3,5. and it is the ringing of Aaron's Bells, which typified the
preaching of the Word of God) and which the Devil can no more abide than the
Owl can abide the Light of the Sun, because he is a Bird of Darkness. This was
very apparent in New England, (as Mr. Elliot relates the story) that when the
Sunshine of the Gospel first came into that Country, it so molested the Devil
in his former quiet Habitations, that he departed thence with most horrible
signs of his Displeasure; and thus it is said, that [ God smites the Earth with
the Rod of his Mouth,] Isa. 11.4. and likewise that [the man of Sin shall be
destroyed with the Breath of Christ's Mouth, and with the Brightness of his
Coming,] 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. it is the Breath, or Spirit (both which are of the same
signification) of Christ, that goes along with his Word, which destroys the
Devil and his Works, Heb. 2.14. and 1 John 3.8. Luke 5.17.

N B. Note well, (2 ly) How highly does it concern us all to comply cordially
with that Apostolical command [ let the Word of Christ dwell in you Richly,
Col. 3.16. The Greek word [(...)] there does intimate, that we ought to have an
Holy Covetousness of heaping up an hoard of the Sacred Scriptures, and locking
them up in the Cabinet of a Sanctified Memory, etc. as we all naturally can be
careful and covetous enough for heaping up the Coin of Gold and Silver, and
securing the same under Locks and Bolts, etc. As we do this latter, that we may
duly and daily fetch out of our Treasure so much thereof as will supply all our
wants, [ for Money answers all things,] Eccles. 10.19. even so we all ought to
be (as Appollos was, Acts 18.24.) mighty in the Scriptures; we should have a
mighty stock of the knowledge of them, that so, whenever a busy Devil comes
to Buffet our Base Hearts, then must we have a smooth Stone of the Holy
Scripture ready to hurl at the very Head of our Adversary, as David did at the
Head of Goliath. Now as we are told how David gathered many more smooth Stones
than he had occasion to make use of in his Sling, for he gathered five of them,
and put them into his Bag, 1 Samuel 17.40. yet we find he slung in his Sling only
one of these Stones at Goliah's Forehead, [ he put his Hand into his Bag, and
took thence only one Stone (in the singular number) and slung it with such a
force, that it sunk in the Forehead of the Philistine, and he fell upon his
Face to the Earth] v. 49. No doubt but David did sling God himself along with
the Stone (as before) whereby it became so speedily effectual for the killing
of that Monster of Mankind, etc. even so we ought to be furnished with a large
Stock of Sacred Scriptures in the Bag of our Minds and Memories, though possibly
one single smooth Stone of them may serve our present turn to drive away the
Devil from us in an hour of temptation, especially if we sling this one
Scripture at Satan's Forehead out of the Sling of Faith, and God himself go
along with that Scripture in our behalf, as he did with the Stone in the behalf
of David. May we but thus ( through Grace) resist the Devil, he must then
unavoidably flee from us, Jam. 4.7. for what created Power can resist the Power
of the Great Creator of all Beings? [ who has resisted his Will?] Romans
9.19,21. Notwithstanding though one of those smooth Stones of Sacred Scripture
may thus serve us, and save us out of Satan's Hands at one time, yet
considering that Satan is not slain outright in our Victories over him, as
Goliath was in David's Victory over that Giant: For as Satan did but depart from
our Redeemer, (after he had conquered him in his Three successive Assaults)
only for a Season, Luke 4.13. still designing to return upon him again with
fresh and renewed Attempts when he could espy out an advantage, or any
opportunity: So Satan does depart from the Redeemed (after their Victories at
any time over him) only for a season; he resolves to return again, and hence is
occasioned the Apostle's caution, [lest Satan should get an advantage of us,
for we are not ignorant of his Wiles and Devices,] 2 Cor. 2.11. Upon this
account therefore we ought always to keep our Bag full of those smooth Stones,
that we may have them in readiness both as Defensive to our selves, and as
Offensive to Satan in his fresh and frequent assaulting us, etc.

3 dly NB. We must set the Word of God against the Temptations of Satan, (as
our Lord taught us by his own pattern and practice, Matt. 4.) and then say to
the Tempter, [I may not, I cannot, I dare not do what thou tempts me to do,]
and we must be sure to bring such suitable Scriptures as afford a full Answer
to our Tempter's Temptation, (as Christ did in all his Three Conflicts,)
saying, [this Sin, (oh Satan) that thou tempts me to, is forbidden in such a
place, and again in such a place; and we must be sure to have such Scriptures
all at hand in our Bag ready for our hand, as David had his smooth Stones
ready: Thus we are commanded [ to be ready for every good Work,] Tit. 3.1. and
[ to be in readiness to revenge all disobedience,] 2 Cor. 10.6. yea and [ the
Man of God must be fully furnished for all good Works, 2 Timothy 3.17. as our
Adversary the Strong Man is fully furnished for all evil Works. We should be as
ready to Resist, as he is to Assault; and we should have this Sword of the
Spirit ready and at hand, as Saul had his Spear ready at his head, [ being
stuck in the ground at his Bolster,] 1 Samuel 26.7. but God forbid that such a
dead sleep should fall upon us to let this Sword be taken from us, as did upon
him, whereby his Spear was taken from him, and he not sensible thereof; some
Son of Zerviah will be too hard for us, as it was in his case, ver. 11, 12.
It Is the practice of some persons (who are Masters of great Families) to stick
up their Swords in the upper Floor, and there to hang it at their Beds Head all
the night, that the Weapon might be ready for their hand in case of any
Assault, by Robbers, in the dead time of the Night. Oh, that we could be so
wise, in hanging this Spiritual Sword so ready Night and Day, at home and
abroad, etc. more especially the Decalogue, (or the Ten Commandments,) which is
an Abridgment of the Law and the Prophets; wherein all sorts of sins are
prohibited, even in the lowest degree of them, etc. Yea, and all sorts of
Duties (both to God and to Man) are required, etc. There is none like this
Sword that can cut asunder every Knot, wherewith Satan would bind our Souls to
any sort of Sin, etc. Beside this, let me acquaint you what other particular
Scriptures (over and above the Two Tables) the Lord has helped me to use as a
sharp Sword, wherewith to withstand the violent Assaults of the Tempter, etc.

As (1 st) that of Joseph, [ How can I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God?] Genesis 39.9. No, he was hedged in with contrary Principles, and so
said [I cannot do it.]

And (2 ly) that of the Sons of Jacob, [ we cannot do this thing, to give our
Sister unto one that is Uncircumcised, for that would be a Reproach to us, Genesis
34.14.

And (3 ly) that of Nehemiah [ shall such a Man as I, sin, who is there, that
being as I am, would do it, I will not do it?] Neh. 6.11. Here is only a small
variation of words, but none at all of sense; for his fleeing from God's Work
at that time, would have been his sinning against his God. Though I might add
many more, yet for brevity sake I shall mention another only, which made indeed
a mighty sound in the Ears of my Inner Man, and as mighty an impression upon
the Tables of my Heart, to wit, the loud Outcry of God himself, saying, [ Oh!
do not this abominable thing which I hate,] Jer. 44.4. And indeed as to the
main course of my Life ( excepting these Bonds, as the Apostle's phrase is,
Acts 26.29. namely my manifold Infirmities) I have evermore endeavored to
observe this as my standing Rule, [ where God presses, there to perform; and
where God forbids, there to forbear.] And to know this double Duty, what to
perform, and when to forbear; it is even absolutely necessary, that the word of
Christ must dwell in us Richly, Col. 3.16. as before. The knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures does make wise unto salvation, and is profitable in all the concerns
of a Christian, yea, and compleateth the Man of God for his Generation-work, as
before, 2 Timothy 3.15,16,17. and therefore every good Soldier of Jesus Christ
(such as young Timothy was, 2 Timothy 2.3.) must by all means be girded about with
this Sword of the Spirit, hanging fast at the Golden Girdle of Truth; and I
must say, that one of those four Scriptures, before named, or any other single
Sentence of God's Word (when spiritually improved) may do us more service in
out Christian warfare, than all the witty sayings of Pagan Philosophers, or any
of the superstitious Charms of the Popish Mountebanks. Assuredly David ( a man
after God's own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14.) had a Divine Inspiration, when he
prescribed that Sovereign Salve, and Sacred Antidote, and preservative against
sin, saying, [ thy word, oh my God, I have hid in my heart, that I might not
sin against thee,] Psalm. 119.11. All which do plainly demonstrate, what an
excellent Weapon the Word of God is, etc.

Now I come to discourse upon the Seventh and Last piece of this Mystical
Armor, which is likewise the Second of the Two Offensive Weapons, (as the Five
former were merely Defensive) namely, we must not only be Armed with the Sword
of the Spirit, but we must be furnished also with the Spiritual Darts of
Prayer, ver. 18. which Duty of Praying has here subjoined to it the Duty of
Watching; but of that afterward. The same Apostle tells us, that Satan has
his Darts, and those fiery ones, to throw at us, ver. 16. And here he comes in
ver. 18. to show, that we must have our Darts also, and that fiery ones too, to
throw at him; for one fire sucks out another, as is often tried in Burnings, etc.
so the fire from Heaven in Prayer, sucks out the Fire of Hell, etc. otherwise
we cannot retaliate, nor can our Remedy carry a proportion to our Malady.

This Seventh piece of Armor, is not only a part of our Spiritual Armor, but
also it enableth us to make a right improvement of all the rest, for it was at
David's Prayer [that the Lord taught his Fingers to fight, and his Hands to
War, etc. Psalm. 18.29,34. and 144.1.] Prayer is our City of Refuge, to which we
flee when all other Refuges fail us. Prayer has a double excellency, as it
has a prevailing power, not only over the Devil, but in some sort over God
himself.

First, Over the Devil, as it is an holy Charm against that crooked Serpent,
Isa. 26.16. and 27.1. When Israel was afflicted by Satan and his Instruments,
they then poured out their Prayers to God, Heb. secret Speeches as Charms, and
thereby the Devil was enchanted by their Prayers. Hence Father Chrysostom calls
Prayer [ Flagellum Diaboli] a Whip to drive the Devil away, (which is more than
a mere Charm, to tie his Hands from harming us.) This torments him, yea and
forcibly thrusts him (as it were) into another Hell, especially when our Darts
of Prayer (that we cast at him) be fiery (as his are against us,) and have the
fire of Heaven in them, (as his Darts have the fire of Hell, etc.) It Is another
high Expression of the same Father, that praying Souls should be [ tanquam
Leones ignem expuentes,] which is well englished, Rev. 11.5. of the two famous
Witnesses it is said there, [that Fire proceeds out of their Mouths, which
devoureth their Adversary,] like the Flame that devoureth the Stubble which
stands in its way. Thus Samson's Firebrarnds in his Foxes Tails, burnt up the
Standing Corn, etc. of the Philistines, Judge. 15.5. and if the Firebrarnds had
been fixed in the Foxes Mouths, (as they were in their Tails,) it would have
been in some respect a more suitable Resemblance of this devouring Fire that
broke forth like a Flame out of the Mouths of those two Holy Martyrs, which
must be meant of their Ardent Prayers that they poured forth for the confusion
of their Enemies; The Queen of Scots said, she feared more Mr. Knock's fervent
Prayers, than an Army of Twenty Thousand Soldiers. And the Duke of Saxony once
said, that he durst not fight against a Praying Army.
and this is the more probable, because all Praying-Souls are commanded to be
fervent in Spirit (the Greek word is [(...)] which signifies Seething Hot)
serving the Lord, and to continue insant in Prayer] Romans 12.11,12. And thus
likewise David kept his Heart warm in his Praying-work, yea, boiling hot in
this good Matter, as the Hebrew Margent reads, Psalm. 45.1. And could we but
keep our Hearts thus in a boiling frame while we are at Praying-work, this
would be the best, and the most blessed expedient against wandering thoughts, etc.
as before; for Beelzebub, that Prince of Flies dare not fly-blow Honey while it
is boiling hot, etc. and the Prayer-hearing God loves not to hear cold Prayers,
etc. And the Rabbis render this Reason why the Shewbread in their
Tabernacle-worship was taken off from the Table when it was cold, and the Hot
Bread was placed before the Lord in its stead, because the Lord loves not cold
Dishes, cold Prayers, etc. 1 Samuel 21.6.

But, Secondly, As fervent Prayer has a prevailing Power over the Devil, etc.
so it has by Divine Condescension a prevailing Power even over God himself,
who is the Devil's maker, and will be his Rebuker for us, etc. for so gracious
is our Prayer-hearing God, that he is pleased to command us, [ that we shall
command him, concerning we Work of his Hands] Isai. 45.11. and that [ the Seed
of Jacob ( who had power over God, and prevailed by his wrestling with him,
Genesis 32.26. and Hos. 12.4.) shall never seek the Lord in vain, Isa. 45.19. I
have showed at large in my Christian Walk upon Prayer, how it has a kind of
Omnipotency in commanding all the Four Elements, etc. yea, and over God himself
by Moses's Prayer for his People; at which the Lord says to Moses, [ let me
alone, that I may consume them, etc.] Exodus 32.10. where God (as it were) begs
his own freedom, as if Moses's Devotion had proved too strong for God's
Indignation; as if Moses's Prayer had bound up the Hands of Omnipotency it
self; and therefore the Omnipotent God does (as it were) entreat Moses to let
him alone to his own liberty, etc. Now if so, the Argument [ a majori ad minus]
from the greater to the lesser, it undeniably concludes, that if Fervent
Prayer can prevail with God himself, how much more may it prevail against
Satan, who is but one of God's Creatures, and at the command of his Creator!
However, this is a most manifest Truth, that when we are in any sore Conflict
with Satan, insomuch that this Strong Man is like to prove too strong for us,
and in all probability will soon conquer us, then fervent Prayer must be our
winged Messenger to send and call for help from Heaven; and this is our strong
Consolation, that our Messenger will ^s easily prevail over our Blessed Jesus
to come speedily for succouring us against Satan, as those Messengers which ^he
Gibeonites did send for that Great General Joshua, saying, [ Slack not thy Hand
from thy Servants, ( who are now entered into Covenant with thee) but come ^o us
quickly and save us, for all the Kings of ^he Amorites, that dwell in the
Mountains, are gathered together against us,] Josh. 10.6, etc. Upon this
earnest and affectionate Message and Outcry, General Joshuah immediately comes
from Gilgal, (the place of rolling away Reproach, as the word signifies,) and
falls upon the cursed Kings and Canaanites unexpectedly, and surprises them all
suddenly: Yea, and the Lord himself likewise threw down great Hailstones out
of Heaven upon them, and ^hereby all those formidable Adversaries were quite
destroyed; accordingly this is very often our own case. Alas! how weak ^re our
Hearts, Ezekiel. 16.30. when this Strong Man armed makes his furious Assaults
upon us. David did acknowledge himself as unable to resist his strong
Adversaries, (when he cried [ have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak, etc.
(...) Psalm. 6.2,3,4.) as the Gibeonites did t^ withstand the Forces of the
Kings of the Mountains, etc. much more may we b^ sensible of our own
insufficiency to stand before the violent shoks of this Strong Man Satan; no
mere mortal man is sufficient o^ himself for that withstanding work, ((...) not
the Innocentest Man Adam, nor the Strongest Man Samson, no nor the Wisest Man
Solomon (as elsewhere) [ but trul^ all our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5*
and therefore must we send our winged Messengers of fervent Prayers to him, and
make out our strong Cries unto Christ Jesus, as the Gibeonites did unto that
great General Joshuah, saying, [oh our dear Lord Jesus, slack not thy Hand from
thy Servants, (who are, through thy Grace, brought into the bonds of the
Covenant of Grace with thy blessed self;) oh make no delay, let our extremity
be thy opportunity; not only the Philistines are fallen upon us, as upon Samson,
but even the Kings of the Mountains, even Spiritual Wickednesses in high
Places, called Principalities and Powers do make their furious Assaults upon
us. We have put our selves (oh Lord) under thy blessed Protection. Therefore
hasten to succor us, and make no long tarrying, oh our good God, Psalm. 40.17.]
then may we hope to hear the sound of God's goings upon the Tops of the
Mulberry-Trees, 2 Samuel 5.24. and we may have cause to sing with the Spouse,
saying, ['tis the Voice of our Beloved, behold he comes, leaping over
Mountains, and skipping over Hills,] Cant. 2.8. He is coming, he is coming to
bring the supplies of the Spirit of Christ to relieve our Souls, Phil. 1.19.
and he will pour down great Hail Stones out of Heaven upon the Heads of our
Spiritual Enemies, and discomfit them, though Satan and a whole Kingdom of Devils
be engaged against us.

This 7 th piece of Armor is called Armatura Armaturae, the Armor of Armor,
named last, because it buckles all the rest on, and helps to a right
improvement of all, both for Defense and Offense, etc. Thus David had such
Outcries as these, saying, [ This poor Man cried, and the Lord heard him, and
saved him, etc.] Psalm 34.6. And thus Paul had such Outcries also, saying, [ Oh
wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me? and then thanketh he his Lord
Christ for delivering him, etc.] Romans 7.24,25. And thus the Betrothed Damsel
cried out, when she was assaulted by one too strong for her; and though she found
no Deliverer, yet is she assured that she shall not die, because she crie^ out,
Deuteronomy. 22.27. But the Virgin, Daughter of Sion, fared better, for she had he^
Savior to come and succor her at he^ Outcries after Him, who put a Bridle
upon that unruly Beast her Adversary, and so comforted her heart as to make her
able even to laugh him to scorn, etc. Isa. 37.22,28,29. In short, all these
premises do abundantly demonstrate the excellency of this last part of the
Christian Armor, namely, Darts of Prayer, which drives the Devil out of the
Field (in our warring this good Warfare) and constrains him to flee from us as
one conquered by us. NB. When our own Prayers prevail not, Note well, the
Prayer of Christ saved Peter from Satan's Snare, Luke 22.31,32. more especially
if we join Fasting to Praying; though Homer tell^ us, how Nestor in the Wars of
Troy mus^ take his Breakfast in the Morning to animate himself the more for his
fighting-work: Yet our Lord does better tell us, tha^ there be some Devils of
such a malignan^ Nature, that they cannot be cast out bu^ by Fasting and
Prayer, Matt. 17.21. How well therefore does the Apostle command us to be [
praying always with al^ Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit,] Ephesians. 6.18. that
is, all sorts of Prayer yea the best sort of Prayer, both that which is edged
and animated with Fasting, and more especially that of [ praying in the Holy
Ghost,] Jude ver. 20. for fervent Prayer is a clear Stream that flows solely
from the pure Spring of the Spirit of Grace, etc. and that this Praying-work
may be the more effectually performed, the Apostle subjoins the Duty of [
watching thereunto with all perseverance, etc.] ver. 18. that we may not be
surprised at unawares, because the Devil watches us, and walks his Round
Night and Day uncessantly to take us napping, 1 Pet. 5.8. seeking whom he may
devour, as before; therefore is watching so necessary, that it is so often
recorded in Scripture as an universal Duty, (as above) and most needful in
praying work: Hereupon our Lord joins them both together, [ Watch and Pray lest
ye enter into Temptation,] Matthew. 26.41. as the Apostle does here; for if we be
not upon our Guard continually, and even Watch while we do Pray, both over
Satan's Temptations without, and over our own Corruptions within, Satan will be
interrupting us, as the Pythoness (his Instrument) did interrupt Paul in his
Praying-work, Acts 16.16. and as the Fowls of the Air (which is the Devil's
Territories, Ephesians. 1.2,3.) did interrupt Father Abraham in his
Sacrificing-work, Genesis 15.11. Yea, and as the Adversaries ( Sanballat, etc.)
did molest good Nehemiah in his Building-work, Neh. 41.3. It Is a certain
observation, that amongst all Actions Satan will be busiest in the best of
Actions, and mostly most busy in the best part of that best Action, as toward
the closure of Prayer, when the Heart should be closing it self up with the
sweetest comforts, etc. therefore are we bid to Watch and Pray, and to Pray and
Watch, that Satan may not draw us out of our Trenches, as Joshuah did the Men
of Ai, Josh. 8.6. therefore our Lord exhorts us to abide in the Vine, Joh.
15.4,7. and his beloved Disciple says, [ little Children abide in him,] 1 John
2.28. that is, keep Home, keep close, under the shadow of your Father's Wing,
Psalm. 91.1. Our Lord says [ O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered my Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
Wings, etc.] Matthew. 23.37. which intimates, that those are fond Chickens that
dare to straggle at distance from under the Wing of their Dam, and expose
themselves to the ravenous Claws of the Kite. Naturalists relate of the Bird
Onocratulus, which is so much inured with the Hawk's grapling with her, that
she alwavs sleeps with her Beak or Bill advanced for her own defense, etc.
Now when the Law of Nature or Instict can teach those irrational Creatures such
prudence to save themselves from the Birds of Prey, etc. how much more ought
the light of Grace to teach us [who are Rational] how to stand always upon our
guard against that Prince, Fowl of the Air, etc. We read that chaste Joseph did
so, Genesis 39.7, etc. where it is said [ after these things, etc] that is, after
he had lived safe from Temptations about ten or eleven Years (rising all along
from a lower to an higher station) in Potiphar's House, yet then was he
assaulted by Satan in his wanton and wicked Mistress, etc. but still the good
Man kept constant upon his watch, and so drove away the Devil, etc. ver. 9. But
so did not Dinah, who out of curiosity, did wander from her Father's House to
view the Daughters of the Land, and so was surprised by Shechem too strong for
her, etc. Genesis 34.1,2. nor was David likely upon his watch, when he looked on,
and lusted after Bathshebah, etc. 2 Samuel 11.2, etc. Though this holy David had
been (all along before this) upon his watch, and kept himself from this his
iniquity, Psalm. 18.23. both while he was many years persecuted by Saul, and
while he Reigned much longer as King, and employed in cont^nual wars; all this
long time he lived i^ God's fear, and had Respect to all God'^ Precepts, Psalm.
119.6. but at last arriving to Ease and Idleness, (one of SODOM^ sins, Ezekiel.
16.49.) the Strong Man found him then neglecting his watch, and pushe^ him
down, giving him such a foul Fal^ as broke his Bones, which caused his writing
his famous Penitential Psalms, etc and thus likewise this watchful Adversary,
Satan, found Peter neglecting his watch, got him into his Sieve, and shaked him
to and fro to make Chaff of him, Luke 22.31,32. and this he would have
effected, had not the Prayer of Christ for him most graciously prevented it,
etc. alas, a busy Devil and a base Heart did deceive him, when he said, [tho'
all forsake thee, Lord, yet will not I,] Mark 14.20. Matt. 26.33. (as had been
Orpah's case before, Ruth 1.10.) therefore did Peter watch that weakest part of
his Heart, where Satan had broke in upon him, with utmost care ever after; and
hence is it, that this penitent Peter (who, after his sin, went out and wept
bitterly, Luke 22.63.) gives us so many watch words in his Epistles, as (1.) Be
ye always ready, etc. 1 Pet. 3.16. And (2.) Be sober, and watch unto Prayer,
Chap. 4.7. Yea, and (3) Be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil is
hunting for you, etc. Chap. 5.8. whom resist steadfast in the Faith, etc. ver.
9. and our Lord says, [ I say unto all watch, Mark 13.35,36.37. It Is very
remarkable how the Apostle Peter does symbolize, keeps harmony and concurreth
with his beloved Brother Paul, as he calls him, 2 Pet. 3.14,15,17,18.) about
completing this Christian Warfare, and yet with a little addition; for whereas
Paul's phrase is [ give not place to the Devil,] Ephesians. 4.27. no not for an
hour, Gal. 2.5. but stand and withstand, Ephesians. 6.11,13,14. as the Apostle
James says downright, [ Resist him, and he will flee from you,] James 4.7. so
this Apostle Peter steps higher, saying, [ Resist this roaring and devouring
Lion, [ (...)] steadfast in the Faith,] 1 Pet. 5.8,9. that is, we must do our
utmost under the shield of Faith, not only to defend our selves, but also to
offend our Adversary, which we can never do, but first by right means, and 2 ly
In a right manner. 1 st Of the 1 st. First, The right means are not (1 st)
Negatively, nor (1.) any wit or policy of our own to argue Satan away from us
by parlying with him, for this subtle Serpent does far exceed and excel us in
Craft and Sophistry; as it plainly appeared in our Great Grandmother Eve daring
to parley with him, Genesis 3.1,2,3,4,5,6. Oh, how cunning was this Tempter to
begin his parlying with her who was the weaker Vessel, which was according to
that old saying, [ where the Hedge is the lowest, there the mischievous Beast
will leap over.] Alas, we do but shoot with Satan in his own Bow, (wherein he
can easily beguile us) when we attempt to push back our Tempter only by
parlying with him. If he proved too hard for Eve therein in her state of
Innocence, and to so green a Tree; how much more hard for us poor dry Trees, in
the fallen estate! It Is an assured great Truth, that Satan is better believed
away, and prayed away, than parlied or argued away: Nor (2.) is it any majesty
or authority either in our awful Looks, or in our hectoring Words that will
afright him away from us; the Devil is not a Dog to be scared away so, either
with an angry Aspect, or with threatening Language, saying, [ Avaunt Satan, and
Devil do thy worst, I defy thee and all thy works.] But 2 ly Positively, the
right means we must resist him with, is by our putting on the Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 13.14. and the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11,13. wherein we
must stand our ground, and withstand his Wiles, etc.

Secondly, as to the right manner, we must not be like secure Laish, Judge.
18.27. nor like careless Babylon, Rev. 18.7,8. but be always upon our watch and
guard, for he comes cunningly like a sly Serpent, with Honey in his Mouth, etc.
but when he leaves us, he then leaves behind him the Sting in his Tail, and
departs like a bloody Lion, tearing in pieces those he overcomes. Nor can we
escape by fleeing from him, were we like Asahel, as swift as a Roe, etc. 2 Samuel
2.18. for this great old Red Dragon, Rev. 12.3. has great Wings wherewith he
can easily overtake us, and then is our greatest danger upon a double Account
and Reason.

For (1 st) NB. Note well, Among all this Spiritual Armor before-named, there
is no part or piece thereof prescribed for protecting the Back, which when
Satan finds unarmed in his pursuit after us, he most easily pierces us with
his fiery Darts through our bare Backs, even to our very Hearts, etc.

And the (2 d) Reason is, we then do not only flee from the Devil, but from God
too, who has bid us stand and withstand, and has promised to protect us in
doing those Duties: Therefore all Apostates and Backsliders, who run away from
under God's protection, [ his Soul can have no pleasure in them,] Heb. 10.38.
the Lord will deliver up such into Satan's hands, 1 Timothy 1.20. and woe to us
when God departs from us, Hos. 9.12. then all evil comes upon us, etc. It
follows then, that the Duty of Resisting must likewise be done, as an
additional Duty unto Watching and Praying; and we must spend our whole lives in
the work of watching, praying and resisting to our dying day, etc. Upon those
few following Considerations, over and above the Arguments beforementioned.

As (1 st) Consider well, that the Devil is like the Crocodile, of whom Pliny
relates, that if men pursue him, he will flee from them, but if men flee from
him, he will then pursue after them, etc.

2 ly Consider there is indeed a playing upon the hole of the Asp, and a
putting the hand upon the Cockatrice Den, which Christ has promised he will
secure little Children from the danger thereof, Isa. 11.8. when he comes to
create the new Heavens and the new earth, wherein shall dwell all
righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. But we may not do so now; for if we dally with the
Devil, in leading our selves into Places and Companies of Temptation, (whereas
we pray that the Lord may not lead us into Temptation, in the Lord's Prayer)
this is foolish presumption, and a plain tempting of the Tempter.

(3 ly) Consider what is required of us ^n this Resisting Duty, it is only a
strong ^egative, resolving in Christ's strength to ^nswer the Tempter with an
holy and pe^emptory No, No, I may not, I cannot, I ^are not do it; to give
Satan a flat de^ial is no difficult Duty, and it is not resisting unto blood.
Heb. 12.4.

(4 ly) Consider, if we resist not, but ^ield, (contrary to that Apostolical
command) [ yield not your Members as weapons of wickedness unto sin (as the
Greek word [(...)] signifies,) Romans 6.13,14,19. ^hen are we taken Captives by
Satan, and ^ed about by him, as his Slaves, at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. and not
taken to be preserved alive (as before) but to be destroyed, etc. 2 Pet. 2.12.
Oh woeful condition, etc.

(5 ly) Consider, that he who now tempts us to sin, will accuse us afterward
for that sin, (as elsewhere;) yea, and those very Snares of Sin (wherewith
Satan at present does entangle us,) will at the last become Chains of Darkness
in Hell, etc.

(6 ly) Consider, this striving against sin, Heb. 12.4. must be constant, and
last so long as life does last; we should resist wholly with this whole Armor
of God, because when we have overcome the profane Devil, a worldly Devil may
prevail against us: Or if we have been mad^ able to master a Swearing Devil,
then (...) Lying Devil may prove too hard for us and if we can conquer all
those and man^ more Devils, etc. After the subduing o^ all these, then may the
Devil of Prid^ rise up and prevail over us; for that ol^ saying of Bernard's, [
Tot Daemonia, qu^ Crimina, so many sins as do reign over us so many Devils do
rule in us; seeing every such sin has a Devil in it: Now this si^ of Pride, as
it is the first that is learn^ so it is the last that is lest; for there is
something of Pride even in the bes^ Hearts; even good Hezekiah's was lifted up
in pride, 2 Chronicles. 32.25,31.

(7 ly) Consider for our Comfort, that ou^ constant conflict against Sin and
Satan is a better evidence of true sanctifying and saving grace, than any
perfection of Holiness that can be found in the most sanctified souls. Paul
himself, who, though he had been raped up into the Third Heavens, and into
Paradise it self, 2 Cor. 12.2,4* yet he after this complains of a Thorn in
the Flesh, a Messenger of Satan to buffet him, etc. ver. 7, 8, 9. and he says
of himself, [ not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect, but
I press after it, etc. Phil. 3.11,12,13,14. and cries, [ Oh wretched man, etc.
Romans 7.24.

8 ly and lastly, Let us consider, and better consider for our comfort, if we
can but know that Christ is in us, 2 Cor. 13.5. then Christ in us is stronger
for us, than this Strong Man Satan can be against us, Luke 11.21,22. If our
Lord be for us, it is no matter who or what is against us, Romans 8.31. Stronger
is he in us, than he that is in the World, 1 John 4.4. As our Lord has
conquered Satan (as before) in his own Person, so he has promised to do the
same in all his sincere Members; he will not lose so much as one of them, John
6.39. and 17.12. Oh pray, pray, pray, that Christ may strengthen us, Phil.
4.13. that we may shake this Viper (the Old Serpent) from off our Hearts, as
Paul did the Viper from off his Hands into the fire of Hell, Acts 28. ver. 4,
5, 6, etc.

CHAP. IV. Showing the way to Complete a Conquest in God's Armor. Advice to
Young and Old, etc.
THere be Two Grand Duties (that concern all Mankind, Male and Female, Rich and
Poor, Young and Old, etc.) which are coupled together in that one Verse, 1 Timothy
6.19. to wit,

(1 st) A laying up in store for our selves a good foundation against the time
to come. And

(2 dly) A laying hold on Eternal Life.

First, of the 1 st [ Lay a good Foundation, etc.] This is always looked upon
by Wise Men as a Work of great weight, we ought all to be Builders of the Tower
of Godliness, Luke 14.28. It Is compared to a Tower upon manifold accounts. As,
(1.) It Is an high Building. (2.) Stately. (3.) Difficult. (4.) Exposed to
Storms which plain Ground is not obvious unto. (5.) Costly, far beyond Hutts or
Cottages, etc. (6.) Godliness has all the parts of an Aedifice, as Foundation,
Corners, and the Roof or Top, etc. Now this Good Foundation, is not either Good
Meanings, or General Mercy, or an External Profession; these are all Sandy,
Matthew. 7.24,26. but it is the Rock Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Acts 4.12. Col. 1.15,17.
1 Pet. 1.20. Rev. 13.8, etc.

Now if we fail in the Foundation, which is the first of those two great
Duties, we can never obtain any solid ground of Hope for the Second, of laying
hold on Eternal Life, which is the Top of that Mystical Tower, of which it may
be truy said, even without any Hyperbole, what is said of the Tower of Babel,
that the Top of it reaches up into Heaven, Genesis 11.4. An Ancient Popish Limner
or Painter drew Solomon's Picture, in this Posture, of his being one half in
Heaven, and the other half in Hell, etc. Thus the Man that sets one of his Feet
upon a Rock, but his other Foot upon a Quagmire, (contiguous to the Rock)
whereby he Sinketh down with his whole Body into the Dirt, etc. Thus likewise
will it befall us, if we make not Christ our All, and in All, Col. 3.11. but
lean partly upon God, and partly upon the World; if we halt betwixt the Flesh
and the Spirit, alas we then seem to hang (as it were) equally poised betwixt
our fear of Hell, and our hope of Heaven, with S^lomon's Picture, etc.

NB. Note well, All true Christian (whether Young or Old) should man serious
Reflections upon the remainder (...) the Body of Sin, or the unrenewed p^ in
them, even in the sincerest Conve^ and in the soundest Believers, which w^ make
us like the Kine that carried t^ Ark of God to Bethshemesh, (which sig^fies the
House of the Sun,) they w^ all along lowing, as they went, etc. 1 Sa^ 6.12.
Thus the Apostle phraseth it, [(...) this Earthly Tabernacle we groan earn^ly,
etc.] 2 Cor. 5.2. and he cries o^ [ Oh wretched man, etc.] Romans 7.^ Thus if we
be truly and thoroughly se^ble of the indwellings of sin in us, t^ we still keep
this straight way to t^ House of the Son of Righteousness, a^ neither turn to
the Right Hand or L^ (as is said of the Kine above) yet (...) smarting
experience of so much reli^ of original pollution in us, will cause (...) to go
along groaning to our very Grav^ This likewise was one great point of G^ly
Agur's prayer, [remove, Lord, far fr^ me both vanity and villainy before I die,
(...) Prove. 30.7,8.] he durst not trust his o^ heart either with Poverty or
Riches, w^ knowing what Solomon had said befo^ [ He that trusts in his own
heart, is a Fool,] Prove. 28.26. And it must be bewailingly acknowledged, that
sin (like its Father the Devil, having the whole World For its Walk, etc.) is
the most Heart-grieving, and the worst Companion that we can have or meet with
in our way to Heaven; hereupon we are exhorted [ to take heed of an evil Heart,
of an evil Heart of unbelief, etc.] Heb. 3.12. [ because of the deceitfulness
of Sin,] ver. 13. All which imports, that sin of it self is so deceitful as
easily to deceive us; and our own Hearts are deceitful above all things, Jer.
17.9. yet so as to be easily deceived by deceitful sin, etc. Insomuch as we can
see small ground for security, (though some for safety as kept by Christ, Jude
ver. 1.) while we are on this side Heaven, etc. It Is our caution and fear of
falling that in Christ contributes much to our standing. The grace of fear is a
great preserver of the Soul, not only all the day long, Prove. 23.17. but even
all our life long also in God's fear, and in God's favor too, etc. He that
keeps alive the fear of God in him, cannot well want the favor of God on
him; though he may sometimes lose this latter, in respect of Vision, (as in cases
of Desertion, etc. yet he never wants it in respect of Union. Thus David lost
not his salvation by his sin, he had only lo^ the joy of his salvation; which
he beseeche^ the Lord to restore to him, Psalm. 51.12 The grand concern of every
Christian is how to live well, and how to die well^ how to live in God's fear,
and how t^ die in God's favor, etc. In order hereunto, our Lord has most
graciously granted us many Divine Rules, both i^ the Old and in the New
Testament Namely,

(1 st) That of the Prophet, [ What do^ the Lord require of thee, O Man, but t^
do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God,] Mic. 6.8. This
comprehends the sum and substance of the Ten Commandments, and is a compend^um
of the Law and the Prophets, etc. T^ name no more but a few;

(2 dly) That of the Apostle, [ Keep thy Conscience void of offense, both
toward God, and toward Man always, etc.] Acts 24,16. unto which let me add
the same Apostles three Adverbs, etc. [ The Grace of God teaches us to live
Soberly, Righteously and Holily in this present World Tit. 2.12. Haec tria
perpetuo meditare Adverbia Paul^
Haec tria sunt vitae regula sancta tuae.
I shall add no more than this one of our Lord, (who is Lord both of the
Prophets, and of the Apostles aforementioned,) namely, his general precept and
prescription to every particular and individual Believer, [ Watch and Pray,
that ye enter not into Temptation,] Matthew. 26.41. wherein the practick part of
all true Christians is clearly prescribed, demonstrating, First, The Antidote
or Preservative. And Secondly, The Disease we are in danger to fall into by our
neglect of the Duty. This Text is a part of Christ's Swan-like Song a little
before his Death; they are the living words of this greatest of dying Prophets,
a Divine Lecture or Lesson taught by a Dying Christ for all living Christians
to learn. For,

(1 st) The danger is universal [(...)] lest ye enter, etc. this implies a
possibility, yea and more than a probability, not only of entering into
Temptation, but also to be often within the verges and circumferences of it; yea,
and sometimes to fall by the power of it, and too often; for if we make an
impartial inquiry into the Book of our own experiences, we shall there find,
that we are more, and oftener in Temptation than out of it; whereas it should be
Christ's day, and Satan's hour, (according to those two Scripture Phrases, Luke
22.53. 1 Cor. 1.8. Rev. 1.10. Alas, how often is it quite contrary, that Satan
has a whole Day, when Christ has but an Hour with us; yea, and not that
little time without distraction, 1 Cor. 7.35. How often may our Lord say to us,
as he said to his sleepy Disciples here, [ What, could ye not watch with me one
hour!] Matthew. 26.40. for he had bidden them [ watch with me,] ver. 38. NB. Note
well, Those Three Peter, James and John had seen their Master's Glory in his
Transfiguration, Matthew. 17.1,2. and now they must be Eyewitnesses of his
behavior in his Agony also; so our Lord bids them [ watch with him:] he bids
them not [ pray for him,] for he needed not their Prayers, etc. He was to tread
the Wine Press alone Isai. 63.3. Observe what miserable Comforters were those
sleepy and slippery Disciples unto their sweet Savior, who was deeply
concerned for them in the midst of his Agony, as he was after upon his Cross,
to grant the Prayer of the Penitent Thief, and to lend a look of Love on Peter,
the Backslider, Luke 22.11. And both these he did, while himself was paying the
Redemption of the World for his Fellow-sufferer, Luke 23.42,43. as he had done
before for poor Peter, while he was answering his Adversaries for his own Life.
Thus we find those Three Disciples were not only in danger of entering into
Temptation, but they were also got into it, and fallen by it, which is the
Distemper and Disease it self; for their Savior found that Satan had lulled
them all fast asleep, whereas they should have watched with him, and prayed for
themselves, (though not for him that needed no Mediators (seeing they were so
near to become scattered Sheep at the smiting of their Shepherd. Our Lord had
some lucid intervals, and a little breathing time in the midst of his Agony,
wherein he comes to them once and again, and finds he may tread the Wine Press
alone for any comfort from them. And,

(1 st) He sharply rebukes them for their former vain conceit of themselves,
promising to do great things, etc. Matthew. 26.33,35. but they were so far from
dying with him, that they could not so much as watch with him, etc. And,

(2 dly) He gravely exhorts them to this double Duty of Watching and Praying.

Then (3 dly) He heartily and kindly comforts them against their outward
weakness by his owning, acknowledging and accepting of their inward
willingness; the Spirit is willing, though Flesh be weak. Oh, who would not love
this sweet Savior, that puts such a candid Construction upon his Saints
Infirmities; alas, how often may our Lord come and catch us napping, and often
offering up no better than yawning Devotion. Alas, how often a bare waft of the
Footmen (in lesser Temptations) have thrown us down, as was Jeremy's case, Jer.
12.5. How then shall we be able to contend with the Horsemen of stronger
Temptations! While we live in this lower Region, we are exposed to so many
violent Temptations from the Tempter, that Prince of the Power of the Air,
Ephesians. 2.2,3. therefore are we called to come up higher, and to be Upper-region
persons, and to lead loftier lives than the men of the World can do in an
unconverted condition: [the way of life is above to the wise, that he may
depart from Hell beneath] Prove. 15.24. Were but our conversation more in
Heaven, Phil. 3.20. while our commemoration is here on Earth, we should then be
raised up above the reach of Storms, etc. and [ if we be risen with Christ, we
must set our affections upon things above, etc. Col. 3.1,2,3. for ye are dead
(namely to Sin, and to the World,) and your life is hid with Christ in God. Now
to attain unto this happy estate of living above the reach of the Poison of the
Old Serpent, (whereof we are in perils often, and in Jeopardy every hour, as
the Apostle phraseth it,) our Lord has prescribed in the (2 d) place a double
Antidote or Remedy to this before-named Poison or Malady, namely, to lead a
life made up of constant and continual Watching and Praying; and this is the
way (having put on the whole Armor of God, as is aforesaid,) to secure our
Souls from both entering into, coming in, and falling by every Temptation; and
not only so, but also to be Conquerors, yea more than so, Romans 8.37. even to be
Triumphers in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14. NB. Note well, The seventh and last part of
our Spiritual Armor (as described in Ephesians. 6.18.) has a concurring
concordancy with Christ's Command, [ Watch and Pray,] Matthew. 26.41. and
likewise imports the frequency, constancy and continuance of those two
necessary, but too much neglected Duties, in an additional phrase of [ Praying
always, and Watching thereunto with all perseverance, etc.] that is, as we must
pray always, so we must watch always, even all our lives long. The whole life
of a Christian consists wholly of Watching and Prayer, etc.

Beside this first difference betwixt those two Texts, which respects Time,
those two Duties must be done always, even all our Days. There is a Second
Difference that respects Order, for our Lord places Watching before Praying,
Matt. 26.41. but his Apostle places Praying before Watching, Ephesians. 6.18. Now
all the Inference to be deduced from this difference is this only, that we must
Watch and Pray as our Lord bids us; and we must Pray and Watch as his
Apostle requires us, and that all the days of our lives. The sum of the whole
is this in short:

(1 st) Man's Malady and Danger; all men, even the best of men are obnoxious,
and lay evermore exposed to the evil of manifold Temptations, even from a
threefold original, to wit from the Flesh, from the World, and from the Devil:
Thus even those Three Disciples who had beheld Christ's Glory in his
Transfiguration, (as above) and therefore they might the more have been able to
cleave closer to him now; yet even those of the highest Rank were not only in
the Danger, but in the very Disease it self; yea, and which is much more, we
are told, that [ our Lord was tempted like unto us in all things, sin only
excepted, Heb. 4.15. And if this was done to such a Green Tree, what may such
Dry Trees as we are expect! Luke 23.31. no place, nor time for security to the
best.

(2 dly) The Remedy and Deliverance is by a double Duty, (understood under
Christ our Deliverer, as above at large;) The first is Watch, and the second is
Pray, as in Matthew. 26.41. and in Luke 21.36. our Lord makes an addition, namely
Watch and Pray always; to which the Apostle's phrase, Ephesians. 6.18. Col. 4.2.
and 1 These. 5.17. do well agree.

First, of the first of those Duties, It Is the duty of all Christ's Disciples
to watch. Reasons.

(1 st) It Is a necessary Duty upon a double Account, (1.) Necessitate Medii, as
necessary means for our safety. And, (2.) Necessitate Praecepti, as it is
commanded by the Lord.

(1 st) It Is necessary as a means whereby we are preserved from Danger, for our
life is a warfare, Job 7.1. Margent, and we can never accomplish this warfare,
Isai. 40.1. without watching, every Christian is a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2.3. who is
listed under Christ their Captain, Josh. 5.14. Heb. 2.10. Now no Man can be a
good Soldier that watches not; how soon is he cut off by a surprising
Adversary both Visible and Invisible, non Regium est in Belli tempore indulgere
Somno, says Plutarch, Christ has made us Kings, Rev. 1.6. and it is not
King-like to foster sleeping in a time of War: Baanah and Rechah took off
Ishbosheth's Head while he slept upon his Bed at Noon, 2 Samuel 4.5,6. So Jael
slew Siscera when fast asleep, nailing him fast to the ground, Judge. 4.21.

(2 dly) It Is necessary in our obedience to the Great Lawgiver, who has often
commanded us to watch in Scripture, as Mark 13. ver. last. 1 Cor. 16.13. 1
These. 5.6. 1 Pet. 4.7. and 5.8. Rev. 3.2. and 16.15, etc.

Reason the Second; they are pronounced to be blessed Souls that do this Duty
of watching, beside that in Rev. 16.15. see Luke 12.37,38,43. terque, quaterque
beati, faelices ter and amplius, they are three times blessed there by Christ,
who was sent into the world to bless both believing Jews and Gentiles that
watch, Acts 3.26. Yea, such are not only blessed Saints, but they are also
blessed Angels; for Angels are called [(...)] Watchers, Dan. 4.13. Heaven is
the Watchtower of those Holy Ones, that never sleep, nor are ever wearied with
labor as we Bodily Creatures are; not do they Eat or Drink as we do, whereby
our sleep is procured, etc. So that this Watching-work, is likewise an
Angelical as well as an Evangelical Duty, and to be [(...)] like Angels, as
Christ has promised, Luke 20.36. is to enjoy an Heavenly State here, while
upon Earth.

Reason the Third; The very Name and Nature of Saintship or Christianity is to
be found in this Duty of Watching; for Saints are called the Children ( not of
the Night, which is the proper time of sleeping, but) of the light and of the
day, which is the appointed season for Watching, Walking and Working, 1 These.
5.5,6,7. Such as are quickened by the Grace of Christ, Ephesians. 2.1. and are
awaked out of the sleep and State of sin, Ephesians. 5.14. never after this can
sleep the sleep of Death, Psalm. 13.3. The Spouse of Christ did indeed sleep,
(when she should have been upon her watch) but her heart was then awake; so
that she could tell all those Titles of Love, ( verbatim word for word) that
her beloved Lord had saluted her with, even while she was in her half-sleep;
she aggravates the foulness of her fault for her refusing such sweet embraces
offered them to her, Cant. 5.2,4,5. And the five wise Virgins indeed nodded and
napped a little, they slumbred, but they did not sleep, (as the five foolish
Virgins did) for it was only by Candlelight, their Lamps were still burning,
and they had Oil in their Vessels, as well as in their Lamps, Matthew. 25.4,5.
etc. The conclusion of that Parable is, [ Watch therefore, for ye know not when
the Lord will come, ver. 13. Thus the choicest and chiefest Saints may
sometimes be taken napping: yet the hidden man of the heart (as the phrase is,
1 Pet. 3.4.) is still kept awake in them, as it was with the Spouse above.

The Fourth Reason for our Watching is drawn from several Emblems of this Duty,
etc. First the Hare and the Lion are given by the learned Critics as the two
Hieoroglificks or Representations, and Resemblances of true Christians, because
Naturalists do observe, that those two Animals always sleep with their Eyes
wide open, etc.

Thus likewise Secondly; The Modern Jews use to sacrifice a white Cock upon New
Years Day, whose intrails they ordain a Raven to fly away with into the Fields,
and then to devour them, etc. This is another Emblem of Christian Vigilance;
and in this History there is this Mystery, the Cock is known to be the most
watchful creature, and therefore the Cock crowing gives a denomination to the
third part of the Night in Sacred Scripture, Evening, Midnight, Cock-crow, and
Morning,] Mar. 13.35. and so is a fit Resemblance of the watchful Christian;
and yet the more fit, insomuch as the Sacrifice must be a white Cock, to
represent how Christians are washed white in the Blood of Christ, Rev. 7.14.
And there is congruity in the parallel of the Raven flying away with the white
Cock's Intrails likewise; for one of the Spouses commendable Characters of her
Beloved is, [ His locks are bushy, and black as a Raven,] Cant. 5.11. Thus
Christ is the mystical Raven, that flies away with the infirmities and sins of
every watchful, white-washed Christian, etc. Christ is the true Antitype of
that Typical Scapegoat that did carry away all the Iniquities, Transgressions
and Sins of Israel into the Land of everlasting forgetfulness, Lev. 16.21. They
shall all be blotted out, Isa. 43.25. and none of them remembered any more, Heb.
8.12. Now having answered the first inquiry, in showing the Reasons why we
ought all to be watchful ones.

The Second Inquiry is, what is this kind of Watching which our Lord does
command us to be found in?

Answer. There be three Kinds or Sorts of Watching: The (1 st) is that which is
Corporeal Watching, or that of the Body, which is in some cases highly
commendable, as in those Shepherds that brought tidings of Christ's Birth, Luke
2.8,9,10, etc. They were not only Vigilantes, but also were [(...)] they abode
in the field, keeping watch over their Flock by Night: Though they had but sorry
Lodging there, yet had they a most Curious Canopy over their Heads, to wit, the
Heavens, or stately Firmament, most richly bespangled with glittering and
glorious Stars; nor was this all the blessing that those Bodily Watchers had,
but they were near a better Blessing, even that Glorious Angel Gabriel appeared
to them only, and not to any of the great men of Jerusalem, etc. no nor to
either of those good men, Zechary or Simeon, etc. with these glad Tidings of
the Birth of the Worlds Redeemer, etc. Therefore these Pastors, or Shepherds,
(of whom it is said [(...),] custodiebant custodias, they watched their Flocks,
Luke 2.8.) may be a blessed Pattern for all good Pastors, or Gospel Ministers,
to take heed of their Ministry, which they have received in the Lord, that they
fulfill it, Col. 4.17. The Angel Gabriel may the sooner appear to them; as this
Corporeal or Bodily Watching was thus richly rewarded in those watchful
Shepherds; so the want of this first kind of watching was sharply rebuked by
our Lord Jesus, saying to his sleepy and slippery Disciples, [ What, cannot ye
watch with me so much as one hour? Matt. 26.40.

The Second Sort of Watching is Diabolical, as [ the Wicked watches the
Righteous, Psalm. 37.32. of this David often complains, how they every day
wrested his words, Psalm. 56.5. And thus they watched our dear Lord, (of whom
David was both Father and Figure, as we read [(...)] Mark 3.2. These wicked
ones lay catching and carping at his words, as the Greek word signifies, and
that other Greek word [(...)] used in Luke 14.1. intimates that they pryed as
narrowly into Christ's Actions, as ever Laban did into Jacob's Stuff for his
Teraphims, Genesis 31.33,34. Thus Saul sent his Spies to watch David, 1 Samuel
19.11. to kill him. Thus was it the sad complaint of the Prophet Jeremy [ all
my Familiars watched for my Halting, etc.] Jer. 20.10. This is a watching that
has the Devil for its Father, as John 8.44. begotten upon a depraved Spirit
which lusts to envy, Jam. 4.5. as upon the Mother of it, God bless us from
this, etc.

But the Third kind of Watching, is that which is truly Divine and Spiritual,
and which is not born of the Flesh, but of the Spirit, John. 3.6. and therefore
this third sort is not Carnal, much less Diabolical or Devilish, but it is born
from Heaven, and is an effectual means to help us to Heaven, if we live out our
Lives, in a careful and conscientious obedience to this great Command of our
Lord Christ, saying, [ watch] Matthew. 24.42. and 26.41. Mark 13. last, and Luke
12.37,38,43, etc.

The Third Inquiry is, What is this true Christian Vigilance, or Spiritual
Watching Christ requires here?

Answer, It is (in short) Christian Prudence, vigorously actuated, or the
actual and lively exercise of that Divine Wisdom which the Lord graciously
grants to such as are made wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. In those, and those
only is found a cautelous care, and a very wary watchful attention to heed and
observe all such matters as our Lord and Maker bids to be well heeded and
observed. The similitude runs in parallel lines betwixt the two kinds of
Sleeping and Watching, both of that which is Natural, and of that which is
Spiritual: For as in natural or literal Sleep, that immortal part of man (the
precious Soul) lays (as it were) dead and buried in an House of Clay; all its
noble parts and gifts seem then to be lost, and Man (all the time he lies
asleep) does differ very little either from a Beast or a dead Carcass, which
made that famous General, Epaminondas, say, [ Qualem inveni, talem reliqui,]
when he was blamed for cruelty in killing his Sentinel, whom he found sleaping,
to the hazard of the whole Army, etc. and his Apology was, [ I left him, but as
I found him, etc.] He looked upon him as one dead, while he lay asleep, etc.
But when those Vapors that cause Sleep are digested and consumed by the Natural
Heat of our Animal Spirits, and when those Obstructions of all our Senses are
thereby removed, then (says the Philosopher) [ Panduntur Meatus, Reditque opus
Sensationis, id est, Vigilia, quae est Sensuum Actio and Motus, quem Calor and
Spiritus (in omnia Membra effusus) efficit;] that is, the Heat and Spirit being
then defused into all our Members from Head to Foot, all the passages of our
Senses are opened, etc. and then we awake from our Sleep, etc. Even thus it is
with us in that which is called a Mystical and Spiritual Sleeping, and awaking
out of it: It was corrupt Humors that caused both the Spouse, and the Wise
Virgins to fall into a slumber, and those Vapors do arise out of the Body of
Sin, that unrenewed part in us, which do for a time obstruct the operations of
a Spiritual Life in us: But when the Spirit of Grace (which is called the
Spirit of Burning, Isa. 4.4.) reviveth and burns up those corrupt Humors in
us, then is it that we awake, arise and go forth to shake our selves as Samson
did when the Philistines were upon him, Judge. 16.20. This is called our awaking
unto Righteousness, 1 Cor. 15.34. and standing up from the Dead, Ephesians. 5.14.
Awake, Awake, says the Lord, Isa. 52.1. and Arise, Shine, etc. Isa. 60.1.

The Fourth Inquiry is, what is the proper Object or Subject of this Spiritual
Watching?

Answer, This Christian Vigilance is most highly concerned in this
Watching-work, as it has a Respect and Relation to a double Trinity; the first
is a Trinity of Friends, to wit, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: And
the Second is, a Trinity of Foes, namely, the World, the Flesh and the Devil.
All these both Friends and Foes are to be duly and daily watched in our warring
the good Warfare, 1 Timothy 1.18. and in fighting the good Fight of Faith, 1 Timothy
6.12.

First, of the first, The Trinity of Friends that must be watched is, 1 st God
the Father must be watched; this Lesson we should learn from Christ, who did
so, saying, We speak that we know, and testify that we have seen, Joh. 3.11.
and farther, [ The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father
do, Joh. 5.19. and [ the Father loves his Son, and shows him all thing that
himself does,] ver. 20. And [as I hear, I do, not doing mine own, will, but the
will of my Father who sent me,] ver. 30. Now if Christ (that holy Child)
watched what he saw and heard from the Father, by that Divine and Unspeakable
Communication between them, etc. how ought Christians to watch likewise, having
an Unction from the Holy God, that teaches all things, 1 John 2.20. It is said
of Israel, [ Veshameru Mishmereth] Custodiebant Custodiam, they watched the
Motions of the Lord in the Cloudy Pillar, Numb. 9.19. they kept Watch and Ward
Night and Day to see when the Cloud would arise, that they might be at every
hour ready for removing. Thus David set God always before him, Psalm. 16.8. So
ought we to do that we may learn to be holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15.
Children should learn to be like their Father, Matthew. 5. last, in the Quality
of Holiness, though we cannot come up to an Equality of his Holiness. Thus we
ought to pass more and more into the likeness of that Heavenly Pattern. If our
Eyes wait upon the Lord, as the Eyes of a Servant upon his Master, etc. Psalm.
123.1,2. then is there Hope concerning both our Conformity to God, and our
Communion with God: We ought to watch God's Pillar of Providence, as Israel did
the Cloudy Pillar; for there is God's Voice in the work of his Providence: Were
we but Men of Wisdom, to watch, hear and undestand it aright, Mic. 6.9. we
should learn the sooner to follow Providence the better; the neglect whereof
does often bring damage and detriment to us, etc. But though God's Providence may
be too dark and deep for our dim Eyes to see, and for our dull Ears to hear;
yet blessed be God, his Precepts and his Promises are all so plain, that he who
runs may read and hear them; and our not watching them, makes us neglect
Godliness.

The (2 d) Friend is God the Son must be watched, for we know not either the
Day or the Hour wherein he will call us either to Death, or to the Day of
Judgment; every Man's Death-day is his particular Doomsday, etc. as before,
and because we cannot foresee it, therefore must we ever expect it, and spend
every day as if it were our last day. Hereupon we are all commanded to be
always upon our watch, and to be also ready for his coming, Matthew. 24.42,44.
where our Lord uses seven Argument from ver. 37. to the end of that Chapter,
as so many motives to stir us up unto watchfulness; the day and hour knows no
man, etc. ver. 36. ideo latet unus dies, ut observentur omnes, that we might
watch continually for that uncertain certain day. The Harlot grew bold to sin
on this account, because she knew her Lord would not return till such an
appointed time, Prove. 7.10,18,19,20. Whereas secure Sinners may hear, [ Thou
Fool, this night shall thy Soul be taken from thee, Luke 12.20. He will come
unlooked for, and Dichotomize, cut asunder, and tear his Soul from his Body by
force, etc. Matthew. 24.50,51. It Is a blessed Badge, pinned (as it were) upon
sanctified Souls Sleeves, that they wait for the coming of the Lord Jesus, 1
Cor. 1.2,7. 1 These. 1.10. as it was the character of Old Testament Saints, that
they waited for the consolation of Israel in Christ's first coming, Luke 2.25.
how much more ought we to lift up our Heads and Eyes for beholding the comfort
of his second coming, Luke 21.28. looking for, and hastening unto it, (as
desirous to meet him in the way,) 2 Pet. 3.12. crying continually, [ O mora,
Christo veni,] come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Rev. 22.20. All such as have
taken many sweet Turns in communion with Christ upon the Mountain of Spices, to
wit, ( Gospel Ordinances, will cry, [ come, and be like a Roe for swiftness,]
Cant. 8. last. Upon such Christ comes not as a Thief in the night, 1 These. 5.3.
for they love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. and they are blessed, Rev. 16.15. Such
as fear to live and see that day, shall not see it to live, etc.

The Third great Friend we must watch is the Holy Ghost, for it is a Divine
Precept, [ He that has Ears to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto
the Churches,] Rev. 2.7. And this is said again and again, both in the 2 d and
in the 3 d Chapter to all the Seven Golden Candlesticks, seven times over; the
sense whereof is, we must watch and hearken what God the Holy Spirit will
speak, Psalm. 85.8. not so much with the Gristle on the Head, but more by the
Ear of the Heart; for God may speak once and twice, and man perceive it not,
Job 33.14. until God bore our Ears, as he did David's, Psalm. 40.6. and open our
Hearts as he did Lydias, Acts 16.14. and until our Lord put his Finger into the
Hole of our Ear, and looking up to Heaven, he cry, [ Ephphatha] that is, be
opened, as he did to the Man that was possessed with a deaf Devil, Mark 7.34.
We must pray with the Spouse for this purpose, saying, [ Lord, thy Companions
hearken to thy Voice, cause me to hear it also,] Cant. 8.13. when this
Quickening Spirit, (as he is called* Joh. 6.63.) even this Spirit of Truth
comes, he guides us into all Truth, Joh. 16.13. and blessed is that Soul
which watches the Motions of this Holy Spirit in a Sanctified Conscience, and
can discern a difference of such persuasions as come not from him that calls
us, Gal. 5.8. The Steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, Psalm. 37.23.
Blessed are they that hear the joyful sound, (of this breathing Spirit) they
shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy Countenance, Psalm. 89.15. they follow
the footsteps of his Anointed, ver. 51. and David must then bestir himself,
when he heard the sound of God's goings upon the Tops of the Mulberry Trees, 2 Samuel 5.24. This Holy Spirit is a delicate thing, Psalm. 143.10. as Junius reads
it, and therefore must not be vexed, Isa. 63.10. nor grieved, Ephesians. 4.30. much
less quenched in its motions, 1 These. 5.19. they that are led by the Spirit are
the Sons of God, Romans 8.14. as Paul was, Acts 16.6,7. and Simeon was led by the
Spirit into the Temple, Luke 2.27. Yea, and our Lord Jesus himself was led up
by the Spirit into the Wilderness to conquer the Tempter in a Duel upon the
Devil's own ground, Matthew. 4.1. Thus Abraham (that Father of the faithful) went
out, he knew not whether, nor* when he should return, nor how he should
subsist, etc. yet he well knew with whom he went, Heb. 11.8. for he put himself
as a Child into his Father's hand who called him, and the conduct of the Holy
Spirit carried him dry-shod to the last. Thus likewise if we be the Sons and
Daughters of Abraham, the Holy Spirit will teach us all things, John 14.26.
that blessed Anointing is our best Instructor, 1 John, 2.20.27. We should lay
our selves (as Instruments) open to the Touchings of this Holy Spirit, and
submit to his Discipline, (which requires much self-denial,) then shall we
bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22,23. which is in all Goodness
and Righteousness, and Truth, Ephesians. 5.9. And could we but watch its
whisperings more and better, so as to obey them, we should not so often be found
in Fundo Diaboli, upon the Devil's ground in places of Temptation; but as the
Spirit suffered not Paul, etc. to go unto such and such Places, Acts 16.6,7.
even so would it be with us, could we but put our Souls wholly under the
conduct of this Holy Spirit. If once we dare presume to break this Divine
Hedge, that Old Serpent will surely bite us, Eccles. 10.8. We may not live at
Random, and without a Rule, but we must mind and watch the Teachings of this
Divine Unction, which never teaches us any thing, but what is consonant to the
Holy Scripture, endited by it, 2 Pet. 1.19,20,21.

Now come we to the Second Trinity, or three sorts of Foes or Enemies to be
duly and daily watched.

The first Foe is the World, which is a woeful Witch, and must be burned for a
Witch at the Last Day, 2 Pet. 3.7,10. and therefore ought we to watch this
Witch well, that we may not be bewitched by it. It is well known that such
persons as are bewitched, do not only lose their Likeness and Beauty, but also
do suffer many sad Paroxysms and Fits of strange Distempers, etc. As all this
holds true literally to bewitched Bodies, etc. so no less is it true mystically
to bewitched Souls, which are captivated by the two fair Breasts, (or rather
Botches;) this Witch the World exposes to their view, namely, Pleasure and
Profit: Such have horrible Fits of Madness, as Saul had, when the Evil Spirit
came upon him. 1 Samuel 16.14,23, etc. and such have Leanness sent into their
Souls. Psalm. 106.15. Besides the World must be well watched, because it is such
an Enemy as continually besieges us, and we cannot flee from it while we live
in it; therefore we must be sure to have a Lid or Covering for our Hearts:
Those Vessels that wanted Coverings, the Law doomed them Unclean, Numb. 19.15.
and so are our Hearts without a Covering of the Spirit, Isa. 30.1. The Dirt of
a dirty World will unavoidably be often falling into an open uncovered Heart,
whereby both Mind and Conscience are defiled, Tit. 1.15. We should keep the
World under our Feet, where God placed it, Psalm. 8.6. and not set it in our
Hearts, Eccles. 3.11.

The Second Foe to be watched is Satan, who is called [ the God of this World,]
2 Cor. 4.4. and deals with Worldlings, as unlucky Boys do with silly Horses;
they first catch them with a little Provender, and then backs them, whips and
spurs them into an High Gallop, and rides them till they be tired, and at last
lodges them in the Stable at night, etc. We are told how Satan considered Job,
and better considered him, Job 1.8. and 2.3. that is, he watched all Advantages
to Tempt that nonesuch Saint, and Servant of God, etc. Oh then, how much more
ought such weak worms (as we are to consider him, who so much consi^ers us, and
watches us to take all advantages against us, for we are not ignorant of his
Devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. We read of Rizpah, how she watched her Royal Seed upon
the Rock, etc. and suffered neither the Birds of the Air to rest on them by
day, nor the Beasts of the Field by night,] 2 Samuel 21.10. Thus every Believer
ought to do as Rizpah did in watching the Royal Seed, even the Seed of God in
them, that it be not wronged either by night or day, by Satan, who is called
both a Prince, Fowl of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. and likewise a Beast of the Field,
as he is a Roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. and therefore are we there bidden to be
vigilant, lest we be devoured by him. When this Tempter comes to us, he has a
Threefold Errand.

(1 st) To find something of his own Work in us, as he found nothing thereof in
our sinless Savior, Joh. 14.30.

(2 dly To get betwixt us and out strong Hold, Prove. 18.10. where is safety,
drawing us out of our Trenches, etc. as Joshuah did the men of Ai, Josh. 8.6.
And,

(3 dly) To gain some Harbor and House room in any corner of our Hearts. NB.
Note well, Though he may have power over our Naturals, yet he can have no power
over our Morals without our consent. He cannot make his passage into us, unless
we sign his Pass, etc. We must watch well hereupon, etc.

The Third Foe we must therefore watch the more is our own Hearts, which are
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, etc. Jer. 17.9. Hereupon we
are commanded [ to keep our Hearts with all diligence, even with the best of
our keeping, because the issues of Life, yea and of Death too, flows from that
Fountain, according to the goodness or badness of it,] Prove. 4.23,24,25,26,27.
and Deuteronomy. 4.9,10, etc. This Hidden Man of the Heart, (as it is called,) 1 Pet.
3.4. must be well watched, because it is like a troubled Sea, always casting
forth Mire and Dirt, Isa. 57.20,21. It Is Job's phrase, [ am I a Sea, etc. that
thou set a watch over me?] Job 7.12. Abundance of evil Thoughts, etc.
proceed from the Heart, Matthew. 15.18,19,20. The Tempter can only knock at the
Door, he can neither Fire it, nor Force it open; it is his gaining our consent,
that lets down the Drawbridge, and lets him enter, etc. therefore it is not
enough to have our Hearts, well watched only, but they must be well washed
also, as God says, [ Wash thine Heart from wickedness, that thou may be
saved; how long shall thy vain Thoughts lodge within thee,] Jer. 4.14. Those
evil Thoughts ought to ho watched, and strictly examined, yea and clapped up
close Prisoners, otherwise they will abuse us, (the Fathers of them) as Lot's
Daughters, did him, their Father; they were awake, when he was fast asleep, and
how busy were they to make him drunk, etc. Genesis 19.31, to 38. Alas how often do
vain Imaginations abuse our Harlot-like Hearts all the night long until the
morning, as those men of Belial in the City of Gibeah did the Levite Concubine,
Judge. 19.25, etc. Upon this consideration, we ought to watch well our own
Hearts, which is the Source and Seed-plot of all our sins; for thoughts beget
delight, delight, begets consent, consent brings forth action, action produces
custom, and custom concludes with laying a law of necessity in sinning against
God, principiis obsta, venienti occurito morbo, begin betimes to watch Diseases
of the Body, etc. how much more those of the Soul; ill principles breed ill
practices.

The Inferences concerning the Duty of watching.

(1 st) It Is an universal Duty, no Persons, no Time, no Place are excepted from
it, [ all watch,] Mark 13.37.

(2 dly) Every Person must watch the whole Man, both all the Members of the
Body, and all the Faculties of the Soul Alas, all have been [(...)] weapons of
wickedness, Romans 6.13,19. No Roman General was allowed the Honor of a Triumph,
until they had won five Victories; so nor may we truly Triumph, before we have
conquered our five Senses: How ought we to watch them; many have died of a
wound in the Eye, etc.] Job covered his Eye with a Covenant, Job 31.1. Psalm.
119.37. If our Eye offend us, we must pull it out of the Old Adam, and get it
set into the New Man, etc. How ought we watch our Tongues, Psalm. 39.1,2. and
141.3. Eccles. 5.1,2,3. Jam. 3.2, etc.

(3 dly) Secure Souls, that dare neglect their watch, consider not that their
way is dark and slippery, Psalm. 35.6. and that this world is liKe the Vale of
Siddim, full of Slime-pits, Genesis 14.10. into which we may slip before we be
aware; therefore ought we [(...), to walk warily] Gal. 2.14. signifying, that
we lift not up one Foot, until we find firm footing for the other; and we ought
to [ walk circumspectly] Ephesians. 5.15. the word [(...)] signify to walk
exactly, by Line and by Rule; its Etymology is [(...) a going up to the very
top of Godliness, walking along as in a Frame, and keeping the King's high way,
not turning to right hand or left, Prove. 4.27.

(4 thly) We must learn from the Prophet to say, [ I will stand upon my watch,
and set me upon the Watchtower, and will watch to see what God will say unto
me, etc.] Hab. 2.1,2,3. Now there is no watching without Eyes, which when
Samson had lost, then a little Boy could lead him. Solomon says, that [ a
prudent man foreseeth an evil and hides himself, etc.] Prove. 22.3. It Is a good
observation, the Greek word [(...)] a wise man is derived from the Hebrew word
[ Tsopheh] speculator, one standing always upon his watch.

(5 thly) Let us rejoice in this, that when we neglect to watch over our
selves, we have a gracious God, to watch over us night and day, etc. Isai.
27.3. and keeps the Feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2.9. 1 Pet. 1.5. Jude ver. 1. we
may be lost, Respectu Rei, (of our selves) not Respectu Dei ( of God) Joh.
6.39. and 10.28,29. and 17.12. Jude ver. 24. 2 Timothy 1.12. The Apostle Peter
says, [ the end of all things is at hand, therefore we must be so^er and wateh
unto Prayer,] 1 Pet. 4.7. This is the last part of our Spiritual Armor, Ephesians.
6.18. Matthew. 26.41. which if (by the helping hand of our gracious God) we be
made able to improve aright in our Christian Warfare, then shall we be blessed to
rejoice with the blessed Spouse of Christ, crying [ It is the Voice of my
Beloved, behold he comes leaping over Mountains, and skipping over Hills,]
Cant. 2.8. Remarks upon it are,

(1 st) Watching and Praying Souls have this, and hear this [ Kol-Dodi Heb. the
Voice of their Beloved; thus the Watching and Praying Prophet had his joyful
tidings of the ruin of Babylon, and of the restoration of Sion, Hab. 2.1,3.
and Chap. 3. and this was likewise the Spouse's work here, when she was brought
into the Bridegrooms Banqueting House, and his Banner of Lo^ was over her,
Cant. 2.4. yea, and his left Hand was under her Head, and his right hand
embraced her after she had prayed for some of Christ's Cordials to be handed in
to her Soul which was sick o^ Love, ver. 5, 6. and though she charged others not
to awaken him, etc. ver. 7. yet she does it her self, but not before he pleased
for immediately he brings the Flagons o^ Wine and Apples of Comfort, she s^
earnestly cried for; and this she does acknowledge in this Divine Rapture [ Ko^
Dodi,] it is the Voice of my Beloved, ver. ^ and in Chap. 5.2. Also,

Remark the Second; As Christ's Face is comely to the Eyes of gracious Souls, [
White and Ruddy, Cant. 5.10. yea, and altogether Lovely (as well as all
asunder,) ver. 11, 12, etc. 16. So Christ's Voice is comfortable to their Ears:
Oh how the very hearing of it put the Spouse into a Transport, having a present
sense of her Lord's approaching to make some gracious discoveries of himself to
her by his Voice. Oh how wonderfully refreshing, yea ravishing was it to this
Lovesick Spouse, and it is no less to Lovesick Souls. And

The (3 d) Remark is, among all the five Senses, the Sense of Hearing has this
surpassing Excellency, that God has ordained the great grace of Faith must
come by bearing, Romans 10.17. As Satan had made Man's Ear the instrument of
Man's destruction, when our first Parents listened sooner to the Tempters base
Lies (who was a Liar from the beginning, Joh. 8.44.) than to the blessed Truths
of the God of Truth; even so our Gracious Father has made the same sense of
hearing to be the Organ of Man's Salvation, etc.

The (4 th) Remarke is, There is a natural Deafness in fallen mankind: It Is not
not so much God's Silence, as it is our Dullness; for [ God speaks once and
twice, and Man perceives it not,] Job 33.14. or it may be our Childishness, as
it was in the young Child Samuel, when he mistook God's call for old Ely's, 1 Samuel 3.4,6,8,10. It Is worst of all to be like the Deaf Adder, that will not
hearken, etc. Psalm. 58.4,5. This is our case, until Christ come and cry [
Ephphatha J Ears be opened, Mark 7.34,35.

The (5 th) Remark is, It is a sad dispensation to lie any long time under
Divine Desertions, and not to hear the Voice of our Beloved neither Weekday,
nor Lord's Day. This was David's outcry, [ My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, I cry night and day, but thou hear me not,] (so as not to
answer me with thy Voice,) Psalm. 22.1,2. yet he keeps high and honorable
Thoughts of even a silent God, saying, [but thou art Holy, and inhabits
Praises, etc.] ver. 3. and he complains also, [ Lord, how long will thou be
Angry against the Prayers of thy People?] Psalm. 80.4. And thus it was with the
Spouse, complaining, [I called him, but he gave me no answer, Cant. 5.6. this
is sad to Lovesick Souls, etc.

The (6 th) Remark is, The Lovesick Spouse, even while slumbering, can know
the Voice of her Beloved, Cant. 5.2,3, etc. where she says, [ it is the Voice
of my Beloved that knocks, etc.] not only because it was but an half-sleep,
for the hidden, man of her heart, (so called, 1 Pet. 3.4.) was awake; but also
because of her former frequent knowledge and acquaintance with this [ Kol-Dodi]
or her Beloved's Voice. Thus it is common among us, that we know whose Voice it
is that calls us, when foregoing Acquaintance has made it familiar to us,
though we be betwixt sleeping and waking, especially if we shake our selves as
Samson did, Judge. 16.20.

The (7 th) Remark is, When we have not been so dutiful and attentive to
Christ's Voice, as we ought to be, so as to obey his Call, etc. yet then must
we make serious reflections upon our own negligence, and severely censure our
selves for refusing such blessed Embracements as the Soul-sick Spouse did,
repeating with regret every Title of Love, and every Accent he had given her,
and every Action he had done in order to his own reception with her: All along
aggravating her own fault and folly, that a King should court a Beggar and be
rejected, Cant. 5.3,5,8.

The (8 th) Remark is, This Kol-Dodi, etc. is an abrupt passage, proceeding
from a pang of Love, whereof she was sick, and now lies (as it were)
languishing at Hope's Hospital, ever listening and Harkening to hear her
Bridegrooms Voice; and when she heard it, she rejoiced at it, not only as the
Damsel Rhoda did to hear the Voice of Peter, Acts 12.14. but as Elizabeth did
when our Lord's Mother saluted her, as her Babe, so the Spouses Heart leaped
within her, Luke 1.40,41.

The (9 th) Remark from the Text, Cant. 2.8. is, The Voice of Christ is a very
precious Voice unto all gracious hearts; as here to the Spouse: she first heard
his Voice, and then cries, behold he comes. John Baptist was called a Voice to
prepare a way for Christ's coming, Mark 1.2,3. So the Spouse here looks upon
Christ's Voice as a forerunner of himself, and of his coming to her to
communicate more of his Graces and Comforts to her Lovesick Soul. No sooner
does Christ's sweet Voice enter into our Ears, and sinks down into our Hearts,
but presently we are made to hear of Joy and Gladness, and our broken Bones
begin to Rejoice] Psalm. 51.8. the Spouse tells her Friends so, etc.

Enquiry how we may know the Voice of Christ, our Beeloved, from the Voice of
False Lovers, etc.

Answer the (1 st) There is much difficulty oftentimes to discern a difference,
because Satan can imitate the Servants of God, his Magicians did the like to
Moses's Miracle with their Enchantments, Exodus 7.11. until God did convince
them, Exodus 8.19. yea, and plagued themselves also for their Cheat, Exodus 9.11.
nor could Samuel himself have spoken more gravely, more devoutly, and more
divinely than Satan did unto Saul, who hired the Witch of Endor to conjure him
up in Samuel's similitude, 1 Samuel 28.15, to 20. Satan himself is transformed
into an Angel of Light; it is no marvel then, if his Ministers, False Apostles,
Deceitful Workers, transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ, etc. 2
Cor. 11.13,14,15. and the cry of Folly is like the cry of Wisdom, Prove. 9.4,16.
the Voices are alike, and the Words are the same in both, [ Whosoever is simple,
let him turn in hither, etc. yet are they distinguishable by many Characters.

Answer the (2 d) The Voice of our Beloved does differ from the Voice of
Strangers, (which Christ' sheep will not hear, nor follow, John 10.4,5,8.) By
these few Discriminations, The first Discriminating Character is, Christ's
Voice has in it self a self-discovering property; it is the excellency of it,
to bring along with it its own Evidence; how do we know that Light is Light,
but by that evidence of Light which it has in it self, etc. and thus Fire does
discover it self by its own Heat, as well as Light.

The Second Character is, Christ's Voice is attended with Authority and Power,
insomuch as his Hearers stood astonished at his Doctrine, Luke 4.32. and they
were amazed, saying, What a Word is this? for with Authority and Power he
casts out Devils, ver. 36. Thus David tells us, [the Voice of the Lord is
powerful, and full of Majesty, it breaks the tallest Cedars, and the
strongest Oaks, etc. it makes the Hindes to Calve, (which is the most
difficult Birth of all Females, Job 39.1. they being so narrow-made Creatures,
etc.) And the Voice of the Lord stilleth the Rage of Rivers and Seas, by
sitting upon the Floods, and keeping them under his Call,] Psalm. 29.4,5,6,7, to
11.

The Third Character is, The Voice of Christ reaches the Heart, it makes
manifest the Secrets of the Hearts of Unbelievers at a Sermon-hearing, and
causes them to fall down and worship God, and to say, that God is in his
Prophets of a truth,] 1 Cor. 14.24,25. Thus when Christ speaks with a strong
hand (as he did to the Prophet, Isa. 8.11.) to any person, then Christ opens
the Heart, (as he did the Heart of Lydia, Acts 16.14.) though it be called a
small still Voice, 1 Kings 19.12. yet having the Lord in it, it is mighty in
its Operations for pulling down of the strong holds of Satan, and casting down
every high thing, that exalts its self against God in us, 2 Cor. 10.4,5.
Christ's Voice has Spirit and Life in it, John 6.63. and therefore is it only
effectual to break the heart for sin, to dissolve the Stone, and to mortify
sin in it, and to quicken it for God, and to change it into the Image of God,
etc. 2 Cor. 3.18.

The Fourth Character is, Christ's Voice calls from evil to good, from ways
of wickedness to ways of holiness, it always cries, [ come up hither to God]
Rev. 11.12. but never [ go down thither to sin,] this latter is the Voice of an
Egyptian, and when we meet it, we must (with Moses) slay it; but the former is
an Hebrew Voice, which we must save alive as he did, Exodus 2.11,12. Christ's
Breath or Spirit is called a Spirit of Holiness, Romans 1.3. and always calls us
to be Holy as he is Holy, 1 Pet. 1.15. and 2 Pet. 3.11. Truth calls to forsake
the Foolish, Prove. 9.6. but Error calls to Fleshly Delights, ver. 15, 16, 17.
therefore we must reject that Voice, which promotes not the power of Godliness.

The Fifth Character is, Christ's Voice is always consonant to the Light and Law
of Nature. This is the remainder of God's Image in fallen mankind, some sherd
whereof do still remain after Adam's fall, whereby Cain knew that Murder,
Joseph that Adultery, his Brethren that Theft, etc. were all heinous sins, long
before the Law was given by Moses. Hereby likewise [the Gentiles who have not
the Law, do by Nature the things contained in the Law; these are a Law to
themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their Hearts, their
Conscience bearing witness, and either excusing, or accusing, etc.] Romans
2.14,15. Therefore that Voice which crosses the Voice of an awakened
Conscience is not Christ's Voice.

The Sixth Character is, the Voice of Christ is always congruous to the Light
and Law of the Holy Scripture; for Christ (who is called the word, John 1.1.)
cannot contradict himself, He is not Yea and Nay, but in him was Yea, etc. 2
Cor. 1.17,18,19,20. He is the same both in his Voice that is spoken, and in his
Word that is written; therefore our Lord says, [ to the Law and to the
Testimony, if any speak not according to this word, it is because they have no
Light in them,] Isa. 8.20. The Word written must be the Rule of our Lives,
because it shall be our Judge after Death, as our Lord says, [the word that I
have spoken, the same shall judge you at the last day,] John 12.48. Romans 2.16.
according to my Gospel: So that if any pretended Voice of Christ come to us,
which holds not congruity with the Scipture of Truth, Dan. 10.21. 1 John 4.1.
we must look on it as a Delusion, etc.

The Seventh Character is, The Voice of Christ always calls to weighty matters,
and that in order, etc. but never to trifling Deeds, and in disorder and
confusion. Thus Nehemiah perceived it was none of God's call, that called him
from God's work, no fewer than five or six times, to trifling discourses with
them in private, etc. Neh. 6.4,5,6,12. and thus Paul was exasperated against
the Divining Damsel for disturbing them many days from their Praying work, etc.
Acts 16.16,17,18.

The Eighth and Last Character, (to mention no more for brevity sake) is,
Christ's Voice does put the Right Hearer of it into an acting frame and doing
posture; for thus he says, [ Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things
that I say, Luke 6.46. It Is not Hearers, but Doers whom God respects, Romans
2.13. Hearers only and not Doers deceive themselves, Jam. 1.22. It Is not the
hearing and talking, but the walking and working Christian that Christ loves,
etc.

Inferences from hence, (1 st) That we may hear the Voice of Christ, we must
come to every Ordinance in public, and to every Duty in private in an
harkening posture; [ I will hearken what the Lord will say, etc. Psalm. 85.8. [
Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears,] 1 Samuel 3.19. [ To hearken is better than
the fat of Rams, 1 Samuel 15.22. [ To day if you will hear his Voice, harden not
your hearts,] Heb. 3.7. but listen and hearken with bored Ears, Psalm. 40.6, etc.

(2 dly) Pray for a Discerning Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.10. that we mistake not the
Younger for the Elder, as blind Isaac did, Genesis 27,21,22. The Voice may be
Jacob's, when the Hands may be like the rough Hands of Esau, etc. and we may
think that we are embracing our beloved Rachel all the night, when in the
morning-light, it proves a Blear-eyed Leah, as it was imposed upon Jacob by
churlish Laban, Genesis 29.25. and therefore must we pray for God's Spirit to lead
us into all truth, John 14.26. if it do witness with our Spirits, Romans 8.16.
This is the ultimum, or last appeal, then may we say with the Apostle, [ I have
the mind of Christ,] 1 Cor. 2.16. and with the Prophet, [ If I be deceived, my
God has deceived me, Jer. 20.7. For the Spirit of Truth does not only assure
us of our interest in Christ, but also of the truth of the Voice of Christ to
us, to prevent mistakes, etc.

(3 dly) Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. Try
before we trust, take nothing upon trust; he was a fond Philosopher that said,
[he had rather err with Plato, than follow the Truth with others;] whereas [ we
should follow any that follow Christ,] 1 Cor. 11.1. [ Woe to them that call evil
good, etc.] Isa. 5.20. therefore should we say with Isaac, [ Come near my Son,
that I may feel thee,] Genesis 27.21. And John turned to see the Voice of him that
spoke to him, Rev. 1.12. And the same Apostle says, [ our Hands have handled
of the word of Life,] 1 John 1.1. the Ear tries words, etc. Job. 12.11. As
Timothy must lay hands sudddenly on no man, 1 Timothy 5.22. So we on no Thing, no
Voice, etc. for we may hear a noise only of Christ, but not the distinct
articulate Voice of Christ, etc. as those that journied with Paul did, etc.
Acts 9.7. with Acts 22.9. and it is said of those Christ-killers, [ that they
knew not the Voices of the Prophets, etc. Acts 13.27.

(4 thly) The true Voice of Christ discovers it self by its effects, as (1) It
makes our hearts leap at it within us, as the Babe leaped in Elizabeth's Womb,
when only the Mother of our Lord saluted her, Luke 1.44. much more when our
Lord himself saluteth us, etc. our Hearts then must leap for Joy, etc. (2) It
makes our Hearts b^rn within us, as it did to those two Disciples, Luke 24.32.
Christ's Voice ever makes a warm Heart, etc.

(5 thly) If we be of God, we shall hear the Voice of Christ, and his word will
have room in us, John 8.37,47. and every one that is of the Truth hears
Christ's Voice, John 18.37. by this we may know both whose and what we are as
to our State, etc.

(6 thly) and Lastly, A Lovesick Soul cannot bear any long silence from
Christ, etc. there was silence in Heaven only for half an hour, Rev. 8.1. that
was a wonder, but to hear nothing of Christ's Voice for whole Days, Weeks and
Months, etc. is a great grievance to a gracious Heart; this made David cry, [
Hide not thy Face from thy Servant, for I am in trouble; hear me speedily,]
Psalm. 69.17. And the Spouse said, [ Thy Companions hear thy Voice, Oh, cause me
to hear it also,] Cant. 8.13. [ Hope deferred, makes the Heart sick,] Prove.
13.12. Unless God say to us, as he said to Moses, [ speak no more to me
concerning this matter,] Deuteronomy. 3.25,26. Thus God sometimes says so to us in
his Works, when he declares his Will contrary to our Wills. Thus David prayed
for the Life of his Child, when God had decreed its Death, 2 Samuel 12.16,17,18.
And our Savior himself prayed [ let this Cup pass from me, yet with submission
to his Fathers Will, Matthew. 26.19, etc.

CHAP. V. The Characters of True Conquerors through the Strength of Christ.
THE Enquiry is, How may this Conquest be made manifest to us, that we may sing
victoria with Deborah, saying, [ Oh, my Soul, thou have trodden down strength,]
Judge. 5.21. and say with Paul, [ I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me,] Phil. 4.13. and we are more than Conquerors in [ all these
things through him that loved us,] Romans 8.37.

Answer, This may be known by many manifest Characters.

As the (1 st) Character is, Can we say in the witnessings of the Holy Ghost,
together with the witness of our own Consciences, as Romans 9.1. that we find the
Lord has performed (in some measure) that first Gospel-promise of Christ's
breaking the Serpents Head in us? Genesis 3.15. Has Satan lost his Headship or
Dominion over us, Romans 6.14. he is limited, and must have leave to hurt Hogs,
etc. This Text, Genesis 3.15. the Romish Church has most grossly corrupted,
ascribing that Honorable Act to the Virgin Mary; the Hebrew is, [ Hu
Jeshupheka Resh] ille conteret Caput, not illa; for [ Hu] is the Masculine
Gender, signifies He, not [ Hi] the Feminine, which signifies [ She:] and so
Zerah, Hebr. for Seed, is Masculine also. Therefore the Popish Reading [ She
for He] must needs be notoriously false, because it gives the Glory of Christ
to her, who her self (as well as we) was saved by the Merit, Value and Virtue
of Christ, as She her self does acknowledge, saying, [ My Spirit rejoiceth in
the Lord my Savior,] Luke 1.47. Had She had no sin (as the Romanists say,]
then had She no need of this Savior, whom She called [ my Savior;] and why
did She (if stood in no need of him) so rejoice in him: The Greek word is
[(...),] signifying, as if She danced a Gallyard in her transports of joy in
him, reckoning that her interest in this her Savior did make it [ Hilary
Term,] that is, a Merry Time with her: Then if She her self stood in need of a
Savior, how absurd it is in the Papists to pray to her as to a Savior for
others. Chrysostom says, [had not that blessed Virgin carried Christ [(...)]
in her Heart, as well as [(...)] in her Arms, (as well as before in her Womb,)
She had never her self got into Heaven; therefore we must not set the Crown
upon the wrong Head, upon the Mother of our Lord. but upon the Lord himself, to
break the Serpents Head; and a wound in the Head is most dangerous and mortal,
and therefore the Serpent does secure his Head with the hazard of his whole
Body, knowing that his Life lies in his Head mostly, [ Intorto Capite, sequitur
Corpus,] if the Serpent can screw in his Head, he can easily wrest in his Body.
Now the Phrase [ Conterit Caput,] signifies he shall knock thee on the Head, he
shall crack thy Crown; therefore this must be our serious enquiry, Whether
Christ, in us, the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. (who dwells in our Hearts by
Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. and who is the Stronger Man) has yet come upon this Strong
Man, and overcome him, and taken from his Armor wherein he trusted, etc. Luke
11.21,22. Has our Lord, in us, drawn the Dragon out of his Den, where he lived
long peaceably, that is, in our Heatrs all the time of our ignorance? Acts
17.30. And has he broke the Head of the Tempter, so that he leaves nothing for
us to combat with, save only Tail-Temptations! And Christ strengthens his
Members both to carry on, and to complete this Spiritual Combat, and to become
more than Conquerors at the last, as blessed Paul acknowledges in three places
of Holy Scripture. The first is, [ It is not I that lives, but it is Christ
that lives in me, etc. Gal. 2.20.] The Second Place is Romans 8.37. where he
ascribes the Honor of our being Conquerors (as before to the Life of Christ
in him, so) to the Love of Christ to him, and to all true Christians: And the
third place is Phil. 4.13. where he gives the glory of his one sort of
Omnipotency to the power of Christ in him.

The (2 d) Character of a Conqueror is, If we find, by real experience, that we
do gain ground of our Spiritual Enemies, (those Tail-Temptations) as Joshuah
did win ground upon the cursed Canaanites in his daily Wars against them:
First, he conquered that Land which lay upon the far side of Jordan, and then
passing over that River, he conquered them on the other side also, having the
blessed Messiah along with him, who said to Joshuah, [as Captain of the Lord's
Host am I come,] Josh. 5.15. yet sometimes we find how hardly he got the
Victory over the City Ai, when Achan's sin proved too strong for Joshuah's
prowess, Josh. 7.5. Insomuch that he won ground of the Enemy (as it were) by
Inches only, according to the word of the Lord, saving, [ The Lord thy God will
drive out those Nations, before thee, by little and little, and not all at
once, etc.] Deuteronomy. 7.22. and the Lord did order and overruled it there for
Isreal's good. Thus it is in our Spiritual Warfare, though God's promise is to
tread down Satan under our Feet shortly, Romans 16.20. yet God will not make his
promises good too soon. It was for their own good, as in that forenamed
Scripture, [ lest the Beasts of the Field increase upon thee,] for he is a God
of Judgment, and waits to give us his Mercies, when they may do us most good;
and therefore [ blessed are they that wait for him,] Isa. 30.18. He gives his
Mercy in the best Season, though not so soon as we do desire; we long to conquer
our Corruptions (those cursed Canaanites) in one day, which our Lord has
ordered and ordained to be the work of our whole Lives; our Corruptions, as the
Canaanites, are left yet unsubdued, only to prove us in our owning God, etc.
Judge. 2.21,22. and Judge. 3.4. This mortifying of sin, (as well as fortifying of
grace,) is pensum Diurnum and Perpe^uum, both a daily and a perpetual Task. God
will keep a Tedder at our Foot to keep us humble. Paul must have a Thorn in the
Flesh, a Messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should be exalted above
measure with his late Rapture into Paradise, 2 Cor. 12.2,3,4,7. There will be
work enough for the exercise of Grace, till it be turned into Glory.
Notwithstanding the Canaanites, with their Iron Chariots, were so strong, that
Israel could not drive them out, Josh. 17.16. yet the faithful God, (as he is
called,) Deuteronomy. 7.9. and who will not be slack, ver. 10. did promise that they
should drive them out, though they had Iron Chariots, and though they were strong,
Josh. 17.18. the Lord of Hosts was too mighty for them. Thus we complain
concerning our Corruptions, that they fall not fast enough by mortifying Grace;
but we must know for our Comfort, [our Faithful God will not be slack, (as
before) for killing our cursed Canaanites. He indeed may seem to be slow in our
thoughts, yet he is never slack, but will be ever sure; he will not suffer his
faithfulness to fail, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his Lips, Psalm.
89.33. what he speaks with his Mouth, he fulfils with his Hand, 1 Kings 8.24.
he will do what he has said, 2 Samuel 7.25. whether ancient promises, Tit.
1.1,2. which never failed in any Age; no nor his Menaces neither, Zeph. 3.5.
nor will he fail in this of treading Satan under our Feet shortly, Prove. 16.20.
In the mean time let us enquire, Do we gain ground of our Spiritual Enemies?
does the House of Saul in us wax weaker and weaker, and the House of David in
us grow stronger and stronger, as 2 Samuel 3.1. can we feel our Lord a destroying
the works of the Devil in us, Heb. 2.14. 1 John 3.8. though as yet they be not
altogether destroyed? Are we daily dying to sin, though not as yet wholly dead to
it? even this may ensure us of Victory at last; let us compare time with time:
may we but experience, how heretofore the fleshly law in thee had thy Sabbaths,
thy Time, thy Strength, yea thy very Heart and Affections; but now by the power
of Renewing Grace) the Law of the Spirit in thee has rescued (at laest) a
little of all the aforesaid, and subjected that little under the Law of the
Spirit; so that thou finds those two contrary Laws now in thee, to wit, the Law
of the Members, and the Law of the Mind, warring against each other, etc. Romans
7.15, to 23. which makes thee cry out, (as the betrothed Damself did in the
field, when she was assaulted by a man too strong for her, Deuteronomy. 22.27. as
Amnon was too strong for Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.14.) so do thou cry out with Paul,
[ Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of Death? and
thank God (with him) that Jesus Christ our Lord is thy Deliverer; saying
likewise, (as he did) so then with the Mind I my self do serve the Law of God,
but with the Flesh the Law of Sin, Romans 7.24,25. If we find our selves in no
worse a condition than that of the Holy Apostle himself, this cannot be
uncomfortable and discouraging to us; the same conflict betwixt two contrary
Laws is common to all Christians: For as Paul had informed the believing Romans
of it as above: So he affirms, yea, and Confirms the same Truth to the
believing Galatians, saying, [ walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lusts thereof; for the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the Flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do
the things that ye would, etc.] Gal. 5.16,17. The meaning whereof is, that as
we cannot do the good which we would do, because the Flesh does hinder us; so
we cannot do the evil which we would (by the unrenewed part of our wills) do,
because the Spirit hinders us. Now may we but find by sound experience that the
Law of the Spirit gains ground of the Law of the Flesh in us; this is a
comfortable Character, that we shall be Conquerors in this Spiritual Conflict.
Thus Satan's Assaults now are feebler than heretofore against us, like that of
the old Gauls, of whom it is said, prior impetus est plusquam Virorum,
posterior minus quam faeminarum, more than Men at first, but less than Women at
last.

The Third Comfortable Character of a Conqueror is, that he is able to break
the Ranks of the Vanguard, or Forefront of his Enemies, and so force them to
draw back. It Is a great encouragement to a General to set his Feet, and the
Feet of his Army upon the same ground where his Adversaries pitched their
Battalia's against him; he knows, if once they begin to flinch, they will soon
also begin to flee, especially if he can gain their most advantageous ground
from which (as from an higher standing) they did mostly annoy him: but much
more if he can shatter and disorder their Front, where the men of greatest
Gallantry are ever most politickly placed; if once they come into confusion,
and be (as we say) hand over head, then he does more easily break in upon them,
and so rout them out of the field. It was once a notable stratagem of an
English General, that when he came up close to the face of his Foes, he ordered
his Army to make a loud and universal outcry [they run, in the Rear, they run,
they run;] this Cry did so daunt the Front, (who feared it to be true) that
thereby both the Van and the Rear did run away indeed. Thus is it with us in
our Spiritual Warfare; our Spiritual Enemies do not war against us as is done
in a Duel, (but one to one) but here is many against one; those fleshly lusts
that fight against our Souls are not one only, but many in the plural number, 1
Pet. 2.11. And the manifest works of the Flesh are many: There be no fewer than
seventeen of them reckoned up, Gal. 5.19,20,21. and yet not all by much, for
Paul comes off with (and such like, etc.] Yea the same Apostle calls our
Adversary, [ A Body of Sin,] Romans 6.6. because it wars against us in a full
Body, made up of many of Satan's Warriors, a very great Army. Now if we go out
in the strength of the Lord as David did, Psalm. 71.16. and take the Captain of
our Salvation, Heb. 2.10. along with us, (who teaches our hands to war, and
our fingers to fight, Psalm. 144.1.) then are we made able to run through a
Troop with David, Psalm. 18.29. and to leap over the Wall, yea and to break even
a Bow of Steel by our Arms, ver. 34. Alas, we have all cause to cry (as Leah
did, Genesis 30.11. behold a Troop comes, yea such a Troop of fleshly Lusts as
overcomes Gad) for a while; but this is our comfort, that Gad does overcome at
last, Genesis 49.19. If we can but break the Ranks of our Spiritual Enemies, so
that they cannot come up in a full Body against us as formerly, then is there
hope in Israel concerning this thing, that we shall better conquer them one
after another when they are scattered asunder, ( divide and impera, divide and
rule said Machiavel; but vis unita fortior est, strength united is strong;)
especially having God's promise of a Conquest, as the King of Babylon had to
conquer Egypt, in whose behalf God says, [ I will put my Sword into his Hand,
and will strengthen his Arms, but I will break Pharaoh's Arms, and he shall
groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man,] Ezekiel. 30.24.
accordingly if we can but say, that the Lord has put his Sword into our Hands,
even the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. (wherewith
our Savior himself conquered Satan in all his three Assaults, Matthew. 4.4,7,10.
saying, Scriptum est, it is Written, against them all) then the Devil will
leave us, as he did our Lord, ver. 11. (at least for a Season, L^ke 4.13.) and
Angels came to bring Food to him after his forty days fasting. Thus likewise if
the Lord will strengthen our Arms also (as well as put his Sword into our
Hands,) yea and break the Arms of that Great Dragon, Pharaoh, as he is called,
Ezekiel. 29.3. then shall he lie groaning before us, (as in the example aforesaid)
with the groanings of a deadly wounded man. According both to the Church's
Prayer, [ awake, awake, thou Arm of the Lord, art thou not it that cut Rahab in
pieces, and wounded the Dragon; Oh put on strength as in the days of old,]
Isai. 51.9. and 27.1. and according also to God's promise, [ thou shall tread
upon the Lion and the Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample
under Foot,] Psalm. 91.13. because he has set his love upon me, therefore will
I deliver him, etc. ver. 14. yea and according to Christ's promise likewise;
[They shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly Poison, it shall not
hurt them, etc.] Mark 16.17,18. NB. Note well, This extraordinary Gift lasted
until Christ was publicly professed in the World: Indeed this great Red Dragon
will be wrongful to the Woman, (the Church) and to her Seed, Rev.
12.3,4,7,9,16,17. until our Lord come and lay hold on him, and chain him up,
etc. Rev. 20.2,3. and tread down Satan under our Feet shortly, Romans 16.20. In
the mean time we must endeavor to say with David, even three times over, [tho'
our Spiritual Enemies be as many as are all the Nations which compass us about,
(even the Philistines, Ammon, and Amaleck, etc.) yet in the Name of the Lord we
will destroy them; yea though they be so numerous as to compass us about; yea and
again, they compass us round about, yet in the Name of the Lord we will destroy
them: yet higher, though they compass us about like a swarm of Bees that carry
poisonful Stings with them, which in revenge they will lose, and often their very
lives together, or at least become Drones ever after; (just so to Satan's Imps,
who matter not, care not if they undo and damn themselves for ever, so they may
but spend their venomous Spite upon the poor Servants of God,) yet even of
those also, we must say on with David, that in the Name of the Lord we will
destroy them, even three times over, Psalm. 118.10,11,12. and that with David's
faith likewise, who says before his Victory over them; [they are already
quenched as the fire of Thorns,] ver. 12. alluding to what he had before said
of his Enemies, [ before your Pots can feel the Thorns, he shall take them away
as with a Whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath,] Psalm. 58.9. This is here a
Comparison taken from Raw-flesh, which is pulled out of the Pot, before it has
felt the full force of the Fire; God's wrath shall sweep them away, when they
seem to be most vigorous and vivacious to look upon; David foresaw their sudden
destruction: Oh that it were so with us, as it was with David, whose Faith was
above his Fear; and Oh that we could foresee the Fall of our Spiritual Enemies,
as he did his Temporal, as it infallibly will be so, if the Seed of God be but
really in us. Oh, what a shame it is, that a Pagan Dame Zeresh could foresee
the future Fall of her haughty Husband Haman, saying, [ If Mordecai ^e of the
Seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail
against him, but shall surely fall before him,] Esth. 6.13. the Hebrew is, [
falling thou shall fall,] that is, irrecoverably: This she spoke like a prudent
Woman, that had observed how the Jews were noted for a Nation which was very
dear to God, and which was oftentimes by an high hand delivered by him from
their Enemies, as from Pharaoh, etc. possibly the Devil might put this Prophecy
into her Mouth, (as Satan in the similitude of Samuel had long before preached
Readiness Funeral Sermon, 1 Samuel 28. from ver. 16, to 20.) However she told Haman
the truth, though it might come from the old Liar the Devil, yet was it for
Devilish ends; for as she had been a bad Counselor to her Husband heretofore;
so now she becomes a most sad and cold Comforter to him. If this poor Pagan
could argue thus aright from humane prudence, how much more may true
Christians, who learn better Lessons in Christ's School, Ephesians. 4.20. where we
are taught to believe, that [ whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin,
for the Seed of God remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God,] 1 John 3.9. (...), that is, he dare not drive the Trade of Sin, the Seed
will bring forth Fruit like it self, so far as he is made a partaker of the
Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. He cannot sin sinningly, so as to be transformed
into the image of sin; he cannot do wickedly with both hands earnestly, Mic.
7.3. he is not past feeling to work all uncleanness with greediness, for he
has not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4.19,20. Sin cannot carry it away without
some Counter-Buffs. So it is farther said, [ We know that whosoever is born of
God, sins not; (to wit, that sin unto Death, the unpardonable sin; no not
other sins, as other Sinners that are the Slaves of Satan,) but he keeps
himself so, as that the wicked one cannot touch him, (that is, with any of his
deadly touches: He cannot thrust in his venomous Sting so far as to destroy the
Seed of God in him, that is begotten of God, as he does into the very Spirits
of those called the Serpents Seed, even the World that lies in wickedness, 1
John. 5.18,19. with ver. 16. From whence we may argue, and upon better grounds
than that Pagan Dame, before-named, did; that if the Seed of God be in us, if
we be begotten and born of God, none of those Principalities and Powers of
Hell, nor any of those Rulers of the Darkness of this World, nor any Spiritual
Wickedness in high places, (as the phrase is, Ephesians. 6.12.) shall ever be able
to prevail against us, but they shall surely fall before us. They may indeed
sometimes (in case of some Divine Desertion) put us foully to the Foil, but
they can never give us a total and a final Fall; for God so puts his fear into
the hearts of his Covenanted People, that they shall not depart from him; but
he will cause them to fear him for ever, Jer. 32.39,40,41. for here lies the
Riches of the Covenant of Grace, that though (for some glorious ends of
unsearchable Divine Wisdom) it sometimes does permit a fall, even in the
choicest and chiefest of the Favorites of Heaven; yet it always does ensure
Repentance after the Fall, as it was in the case both of David and Peter; they
both did fall foully, but neither of them did fall finally, they both got up
again by the helping hand of their Heavenly Father: And this may be a little
illustrated by the example aforementioned of Mordecai and Haman. If a Jew fall
before a Persian, (as Mordecai did before Haman,) yet may he get up again and
prevail, as did Mordecai against Haman; but if a Persian or any Gentile does
but begin to fall before a Jew, he shall not be able to stop from falling down,
nor to rise up again, as did Haman before Mordecai; he did fall to the lowest
and utmost ebb of disgrace and misery; yea and though he was advanced on high
upon the highest Gallows, (that we read or hear of) which he had erected for
the Jew Mordecai, yet he did most fatally fall into the bottomless Pit of Hell
also, to be an eternal Companion with proud Lucifer, and his fallen Angels, etc.
All this may afford matter of great encouragement to us in our Christian
Warfare, that the Seed of God, in us, will spring up gradually,
(notwithstanding the many bitter Blasts of Hail and Snow that fall upon it) and
will in due season bring fortn a most happy Harvest, as Psalm. 126.5,6. but we
must be careful to war this good warfare, 1 Timothy 1.18. and fight this good
fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. both in God's Arms, (which makes our Bow to abide
in strength, Genesis 49.24. and which strengthens us with a kind of omnipotency in
doing all things, Phil. 4.13.) yea and in God's Armor also, Ephesians. 6.12. to
19. whereby we may be able not only to stand our ground, but also to quench all
the fiery Darts of the Devil; yea and if we resist him steadfast in the Faith,
we shall put him to the flight, and win the Day, and so wear the Crown of
Conquerors, Jam. 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.8,9. Let us all along observe the Apostle's
Rule, [ Whatsoever we do in Word and Deed, let all be done in the Name of the
Lord Jesus,] Col. 3.17. David acknowledges, it was by God's strength, and not
by his own, etc. In all those forenamed places of the Psalms, and in 2 Samuel
22.30,33,34,35,36,37, etc. wherein he says, [that God was his strength, and
that girded him with strength, so to rout the Ranks of his Enemies, and so to
beat them down that they could never rise up any more, etc.] and this was when
he hurled (as it were) the force of God himself at the Face of great Goliath; he
ascribes all the Glory both of his Valor and of his Victory unto God's
strength, and not unto his own, etc.

The 4 th Character of a Conqueror is, to take the Conquered captive, and to
clap them up close Prisoners, as Joshuah did with his five conquered Kings,
shutting them up in the Cave at Makedah, and rolling great Stones to the Mouth
of the Cave, that they might be kept there close Prisoners, until the time of
their execution, Josh. 10.18. and when he brought them to be executed, he made
his Captains to set their Feet upon the Necks of those five Kings, and then he
hanged them up upon five Trees, ver. 24, 26, etc. Even so our Joshuah, or
Jesus, does all those Offices of Love for us, as that Joshuah did for Israel;
our Lord ascends up on high, he leads captivity Captive, etc. Psalm. 68.18.
and Ephesians. 4.8. and then he says afterward, [as for those my Enemies, that
would not have me to reign over them, bring them forth, and slay them before
me,] Luke 19.27. This phrase [of leading captivity captive] is an allusion to
the Roman Conquerors, who rode through the City, ( Rome) up to the Capitol in
their Triumphant Chariots, leading their conquered Captives all along, with
their Hands bound behind them, to be disposed of afterward according to the
pleasure of the Conqueror, either to present Death, or to perpetual
Imprisonment. Thus likewise our Lord, (who rides on Conquering, and to Conquer
upon the white Horse of the Gospel, Rev. 6.2.) does lead Captivity Captive,
that is, those Spiritual Enemies that formerly did captivate us: Our Lord does
now (through grace) captivate them, and they are principally Three, (which make
up this Captivity,) that our Lord leads Captive for us:

The First is the Flesh, whereof Paul complains, that the Law of the Members
did not only war against the Law of his Mind; but it also brought him into
Captivity to the Law of Sin, and made him cry out, Oh wretched man, etc. yet
did he look through this Black Cloud at Christ his Deliverer, Romans 7.23,24,25.
as it is said, If we be in Christ, and he in us, then have we crucified the
Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24. When Christ came into the
World, it was our sins that crucified Christ; and so when Christ comes into our
Hearts, he likewise crucifies our sinful Flesh in us; as the body of sin did
crucify Christ, so Christ does crucify the body of sin: Now to crucify is
not to kill outright at one blow, but it is to put to a long and lingering
Death, no Member being free from pain; so if the mortifying grace of Christ,
(which is the virtue and power of his Dea^, as an holy Life is the virtue and
power of his Resurrection, Phil. 3.10.) be in our Hearts by the indwellings of
Christ there, Ephesians. 3.17. then the Body of Sin is nailed so fast, that it
cannot stir either Hands or Feet, insomuch as it will certainly die, though it be
not presently dead; yea though it suffer many sore throbs before it perfectly
die: It Is like those Beasts in Daniel, [ whose Dominions were taken away, yet
their Lives were prolonged for a Time and a Season,] Dan. 7.12. Now Repentance
is the Nail, that pierces this Body of Sin; and the renewing of our Repentance
does put the Old Man in us to new Torments, till at last it die.

The Second Enemy (which Christ conquers and captivates in us, and for us) is
the World, for he says to us, [be of good cheer, I have overcome the World,]
John 16.33. hence the Apostle uses the word [(...) which signifies, we are
more than Conquerors by Christ's Love,] Romans 8.37. because all our work that
Christ has left us to do, is only to conquer an Adversary which is already
conquered to our hand, before hand: Just as Joshuah did to his Captains, he
delivers the five conquered Kings to them, (as above) and they had no more to
do, than to set their ^eet upon the Necks of the conquered; even so our Jesus
has subdued our Iniquities, Mic. 7.19. and has overcome the World, John
16.33. already for us, so that we are made sure of Victory before hand, in our
head Christ, Phil. 4.13. and we now have need to do no more, but to trample all
things under our Feet, ( where the most wise God did at first place them, Psalm.
8.6,7,8.) and over which we should triumph in Christ, as the Apostle says,
[now thanks be unto God, who causes us always to triumph in Christ,] 2 Cor.
2.14. And indeed to be a Triumpher, is to be more than a Conqueror, for
Conquering goes before, and Triumphing always follows after; and such a
Triumpher was this same Apostle, who says, [ God forbid that I should glory,
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World is crucified unto
me, and I unto the World,] Gal. 6.14. as if he had said, the World and I do
well agree; as it cares not for me, so I care as little for it; I look upon it
only as a dead thing, as an overgrown Dunghill; I love not to suck her two fair
Breasts (or rather her two foul Botches) of Profit and Pleasure. He had learnt
that high Lesson in Christ's School, of knowing both how to abound with
Humility, and how to want with content, etc. Phil. 4.12,13. It Is said when the
World is set in our Hearts, Eccless. 3.11. (which ought to be under our Feet,
as before;) when we are given up to the carking cares about things of this
present evil World, (as it is called, Gal. 1.4.) alas, how sick are some
(called Saints) of this dry dropsy, etc! May we not well say, there is as yet
no fitness that the Saints should rule the World, (according to the Notion of
some Opinionists,) while the World so much does rule the Saints. It may be
feared that it is no easy matter to find, among many Professors, any such
mortified men as Paul was, and such a Crucifix of Mortification, who could cry
Quits with the World, as before it is said. The Scripture indeed tells us, [
whosoever is born of God, overcomes the World, and who is he that overcomes
the World, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God; and this is the
Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith,] 1 John 5.4,5. This is not
only because by our faith in Christ, we are assured of the Victory before we
have accomplished our good fight of Faith; but also because it is the Nature of
Faith to put the Soul upon more noble Exploits, as well as Projects, than those
that are about the base things of this lower World: It Is said, that Christ has
made us Kings and Priests unto God his Father, Rev. 1.6. which is called a
Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. So that this faith in Christ gives the Soul such
a Royal Spirit, as raises it above those things that are below, as worldly
things are styled, Col. 3.1,2. If ye be risen with Christ, seek and set your
affections upon things that are above, and not upon things that are below upon
the Earth. Faith lifts up the Soul above both the frownings and the flatterings
of the World; when we are affrigh^d with the Frowns of the World, Fa^ presents
the Torments of Hell to us, which are far worse than what the most frowning
World can inflict upon us; and on the other hand, when we are allured and
enticed with the Flatteries of the World, then Faith represents to us the Joys
of Heaven, which do infinitely transcend all the glittering Glories of this
sublunary perishing World; as Scipio Affricanus said, [ Vellem, si non essem
Imperator,] I would, were I not an Emperor; and Themistocles [take thou it up,
for thou art not a General;] so it should be below Christians, etc. Yea, and
Faith gives us not only a sight and taste of the Grapes of Canaan, the most
lovely and desirable Fruits thereof, but also feeds us with Hidden Manna, Rev.
2.17. If we be but overcomers, as we pass along through this Wilderness to our
Heavenly Canaan: Thus Moses by Faith despised the Treasures and Pleasures of
Egypt, when he chose to suffer affliction with the People of God, rather than
to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season; esteeming the Reproach of Christ
greater Riches than all the Treasures of that Land, (which had been the Granary
of the World but a little before in Joseph's time;) for he had respect unto the
Recompense of Reward; and by the Eye of his Faith he saw him that was
invisible, Heb. 11.24,25,26,27. that whole Chapter demonstrateth by numerous
Instances, how Faith is a World-conquering Grace: And thus it was also with
Caleb and Joshuah, who no sooner had tasted of the goodly Grapes of Canaan, but
they presently loathed the Garlic and Onions of Egypt; they longed not at all
after them, as the other Murmurers did, even the whole Multitude, Numb.
14.6,7,8. saying, it is a Land worth all our Hazards, etc. How much more is
Heaven worth all our Hardships! Thus our Lord says, [the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by force, Matthew. 11.12. Such a
Violent and Valiant Conqueror was Luther, (as before) who when the Pope tempted
him with a Cardinal's Cap, to take him off from promoting Reformation, he
bravely answered [ Valde protestatus sum, me nolle sic a Deo satiari, that is,
my God shall not put me off with such petty things; for I breath after better,
I am born to better things by my New Birth. And long before Luther, even Origin
did make the same choice that Moses had made before him, in choosing rather to
be a poor Preacher (or Catechist) in Alexandria, than he would deny the Faith
and turn Apostate, as his fellow-pupil Plotinus did, to procure to himself the
great Grandeur and Splendour of this World: As likewise I cannot but record it
here, how the Strengthening power of Christ made my self able to do the like,
etc. when the Duke of York had imprisoned me; and after a long time the Duke of
Buckingham came to release me; he then did offer to me one of the fattest
Benefices in the Church of England, if I would conform, for he was informed by
my Patron, and his Father-in-law (the Lord Fairfax) that I was a great Scholar,
and had knowledge in all the learned Languages, etc. as he was pleased to use
these Phrases, and many more to the same purpose, adding, how much advantage
might redound to our Church, (as well as to my self) might I but be one of
them, etc. My Answer then was this, [ I thank your Grace for your Great Offers,
but I could not buy my Repentance at so dear a rate, in wronging the Light of
my own Conscience; for I make it my Exercise, ( my Recreation) to keep it void
of Offense both toward God, and toward Man, Acts 24.16. All the Favor I
request of your Grace at this time, is only my Releasement from Prison,] at
which the Lord so inclined his Heart to release me, and that without putting
any Bonds upon me, etc. Ever since that time my prayer has been that of Agur,
[ Lord, give me neither Poverty nor Riches, but feed me with Food convenient
for me, etc. as Prove. 30.6,7,8. Indeed it is a shame the World should captivate
us, when we should captivate the World.

The Third Enemy that Christ captivateth for us, is the Devil himself, who
makes use of our fleshly Lusts as his Soldiers that he presses, yea and
presses forward too to war against our Souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. and this present
evil World, Gal. 1.4. is this Tempter's large Shop, where he is fully furnished
with all sorts of Tempting Tools; his Bag for the Covetous, his Bed for the
Lascivious, and his Board for the Luxurious, Lust of the Flesh, Lust of the
Eyes, and Pride of Life, as before. Now when this Stronger Man (our Lord Jesus)
comes upon this Strong Man thus armed, Satan, and overcomes him, etc. Luke
11.22. he spoils him with all his Principalities and Powers, he leads Captivity
Captive, Ephesians. 4.8. and makes a show of him openly, as Tam^rlane did Bajazet
the Great Turk, whom he shut up in an Iron Cage, made like a Grate, and formed
in such a sort, as that on every side he might be seen, and so carried him up
and down to be scorned and derided by his own People as he passed along through
all Asia. Thus our Lord, and our Champion made the Devil a public spectacle of
scorn and derision, triumphing over him in it, Col. 2.15. He has already
conquered him, taken his Armor from him wherein this Strong Man trusted; he
has won the Field, and has trodden him under his own Feet before hand for us,
and he will tread Satan under our Feet shortly, Romans 16.20. and he will give to
us the same privilege that Joshuah did to his Captains, namely, to set our
Feet upon the Necks of all our Spiritual Enemies, for this is God's doom upon
all our Spoilers, that [ when they have done their spoling-work, they
themselves shall be spoiled, Isai. 33.1. As Satan formerly took us alive [as
(...)] signifies, and led us captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. So he himself
shall be led captive, as our Lord has long ago promised, Rev. 13.10. as if he
had said [be of good cheer,] your Spiritual Adversaries, (yea even Antichrist
himself) shall all meet with their match, as Goliath did with David, and this
Strong Man with the Stronger Man; as they have been long leading you into
Captivity, so they themselves shall be led into Captivity, they shall all Drink
as they have Brewed; they shall have Blood to drink, for they are worthy,
because they have sucked the Blood of God's Saints, Rev. 16.6. Talia quisque
luat, qualia quisque facit, God will pay them home in their own Coins. [It is a
righteous thing with God, to recompense Tribulation to them that trouble us,] 2
These. 1.6. to fill them with the evil of their own ways, as Prove. 14.14. and
God will trouble those Troublers of Israel, yea and that to all Eternity,
because if they and we could live together, they would trouble us for ever in
this lower World. Now this is the blessed privilege of every New Creature,
whereas sin and Satan did formerly lord it over the Soul, the Soul by this
happy change becomes (through Grace) to lord it over sin and Satan, and then it
is, that the Lord says to us, as he said by the Mouth of Moses unto Israel,
[Those Egyptians, that pursue you thus this day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever, Exodus 14.13. unless it be as they lay dead upon the shore. Thus
converting Grace gives a mortal Wound to the Body of Sin, and causes it to lie
a dying ever after; and how can such as are dead (or at least dying) to sin,
live any longer therein, and continue in it! Romans 6.1,2. Oh that we may be able
to say (our Consciences bearing witness in the Holy Ghost, Romans 9.1. that
Christ in us has led Captivity captive for us, etc.

The Fifth Character of a Conqueror is, to pull down the Strong Holds of the
Conquered: He will in no wise suffer those noisome Nests of Rebellion to be kept
standing any longer, but with all expedition he labors to demolish them, to
pull them down from Top to Bottom, and to leave them all level with the ground.
We ought all of us to make a most strict scrutiny, and a most serious enquiry,
whether this Stronger Man, (the Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2.10.) has made
the Weapons of our Spiritual Warfare even strong enough and mighty through God,
for the pulling down of the Strong Holds of Satan in us, and casting down all
vain imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
Knowledge of God; yea and bringing into Captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ in us,] 2 Cor. 10.4,5.

NB. Note well here, (1 st) The Apostle's modesty, not we (says he) but our
Weapons are mighty, and not through us that wield them, but it is through God
that works in and by them; it is not I, says he, but the grace of God in me, 1
Cor. 15.10.

(2 dly) The Strong Holds of Satan in us are many; it is in the plural number;
there be sundry strong Forts, Castles, Trenches, Bulwarks, all Cages of Unclean
Beasts, inhabiting in our Hearts; we have naturally in us a whole legion of
Domestic Devils, as the Man in the Gospel had, Mar. 5.2,9. We are top-full of
evil Imaginations, of carnal Reasonings, and wholly filled with all
unrighteousness, Romans 1.29. so that [ quisque sibi Satan est] every Man becomes
a tempting Devil to himself, and is drawn away of his own Lust, and enticed,
Jam. 1.14,15. Satan has only a persuading slight, but not any enforcing might;
it is our own carnal Concupiscence that carries the chiefest stroke in all our
sins, which indeed is a compound of many Fleshly Lusts, that all war against
our Souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. as we read of Joshuah, how he conquered one and thirty
Kings of the cursed Canaanites, houghing all their Horses, and burning all
their Chariots with fire (as before) yea, and those Kings of Canaan are named
one by one, Josh. 12.9, to 24. And as we also read of David, how one Giant
after another did fall by his hands, Goliath one, Jeshbibenob one, Sippii one,
Lahmi one, and then that Monster of Mankind is mentioned, who was a double
Monster, both in his Stature, and in the number of his Fingers and Toes, having
upon each Hands and Feet a Finger and a Toe more than ordinary, twenty four in
all; yet all those monstrous Giants fell by the Hands of David, and by the
Hands of his Servants, 1 Chronicles. 20.4,6,8. Thus the same may be said so of those
Souls upon whom Christ (this Stronger Man) has made a Conquest, and resides
there as a Conqueror; that Soul may reckon up (one by one) all the conquered
Tyrants who have ruled over it formerly with rigor. As,

(1 st) With Joshuah, Pride, and its King, one, Passion, and its King, one;
Concupiscence, and its King, one; Covetousness, and its King, one; Unbelief,
and its King, one; Hypocrisy, and its King, one; and so on forward, until the
same number amount up to the number of one and thirty, as in Josh. 12.9, to 24.
and so likewise the Soul may,

(2 dly) Reckon with David, many monstrous Temptations have been conquered by
Christ in me the hope of Glory, Col 1.27. I have had monstrous temptations to
Atheism, to Blasphemy, to Self-murder, to Filthy Uncleanness, and to many more
such Abominations, etc. as 1 Chronicles. 20.4, to 8* But now blessed be the Free
Grace of God toward me, my spiritual Joshua, my spiritual David, even my dear
Redeemer, the Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle, Psalm. 24.8.
that Elshaddai, (which Abenezra reads, that Conqueror) the King of Glory, even
he has conquered and captivated all those monstrous Tyrants and Tempters; he
has pulled down also their Strong Holds in me, and for me: And though as some
Castles (wherein the Enemy seated themselves in our late Civil Uncivil Wars)
proved so strong, that a double Difficulty did attend them. For,

(1 st) It was a Work of great Difficulty to conquer those so strongly
fortified Forts; they stood it out many a long Siege, and cost the Lives of
many brave Soldiers, yet at the last were taken by the besieging Commander: And
then, when public Authority commanded that those Receptacles of Rebellion must
be demolished, and raced down to the very Foundation. Then,

(2 dly) Appeared another Difficulty in pulling them down; it was found the
Stones were so strongly cemented together, that they did abide many a lusty
Blow, and they did bear many a strong Stroke, yea much Time, Cost and Pains
were spent, yet all would not do, no not any Undermining of the Walls, until at
the last the whole Fabric was blown up with many Barrels of Gunpowder,
prudently lodged in the very Bowels of them; and all this little enough to
level them even with the ground; for we have a plain prospect of the Scars of
those Castles still remaining unto this day; even so it is with the Strong
Holds of Satan in us: As it is a Work of great Difficulty to overcome them; so
it is no less to level them, and quite to bring them down to an utter
demolishment, some Scars will still remain in us. Wherefore how ought we to
double our Diligence in that most Necessary, yet much Neglected Duty of
Self-examination! the Apostle uses a double Spur to stir us up unto a serious
Self-trial, saying, [(...)] prove your selves, and try your selves, as the
Goldsmiths does his Coin, or the Lapidary his Stones upon a lydius lapis, or
Touchstone, to discover them from such as be counterfeit. The fineal Trial of
our Eternal Estate does indeed belong immediately (...) solely to the Court of
Heaven, but the discerning of our sincerity and singleness of Soul Godward,
appertain to the Court of our own Consciences for our own comfort; for if our
own Hearts condemn us, God is greater than our Hearts, and will condemn us much
more, etc. 1 John 3.20,21. As the Decisive part belongs to God, so the
Disquisitive part belongs to us: Therefore it is added, [ know ye not, that
Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates,] 2 Cor. 13.5. which follows that of
the same Apostle [about the pulling down of the Strong Holds of Satan, etc. 2
Cor. 10.4,5. through the indwellings of Christ. This is so needful a Duty, that
the Precept is double, Zeph. 2.1. Gather up your selves, gather up your
thoughts, excutite vos, iterum excutite, (as Tremellius renders it, shake your
selves, and better shake your selves in Self-examination; the omission whereof,
as it is much easy, so it is most dangerous. How happy are such Souls, who can
say in the witnessings of the Holy Ghost, that this Stronger Man has raised
Batteries, and sprung several Mines against the Strong Holds of Satan in them,
that the Lord has battered the Walls thereof with his Battering Rams, and with
his Great Cannon of a Soul-searching Ministry, and with his Spirit of Burning
(so called, Isai. 4.4. because it burns up the combustible matter of our
Corruptions, refining our Dross, and kindling up Repentance unto Life, etc.)
and that Christ has been lustily hammering the Sides and Corners of those
Strong Holds, with the great Hammer of his Word, and with the strong Hand of
his Spirit; thus says the Lord, [ Is not my word like as a Fire, and like an
Hammer that breaks the Rock in pieces,] Jer. 23.29. the Workman's Hammer,
which Jael took in her Right Hand to nail great Sisera fast to the ground,
Judge. 4.21. and 5.26. was a fair resemblance of this mighty Work of the Right
Hand of the Almighty God upon this Strong Man Satan. All such Souls (I say) who
can truly experience those effectual operations of an indwelling Christ in
them, must not be discouraged, although they find and feel this work of
Mortification, or putting to Death (as the word (...) signifies, Romans 8.13.) to
be an hard and tedious Work; and although after the Walls, be in part
demolished, yet some Relics will remain, and much Rubbish we meet with to be
removed, (for we may say with Joshuah, that we are not yet cleansed from the
iniquity of Baal-peor, that Idol of opening, in Lustful Contemplations, and
Heart-adulteries, Matthew. 5.28. even unto this very day, Josh. 22.17.)
notwithstanding all these difficulties, yet may we be well assured that the
Strong Tower of Babel in us, shall ^n due time tumble down, etc. for all the
Works of God are perfect Works, Deuteronomy* 32.4. That work which the Lord begins, he
will certainly finish, Phil. 1.6. He will not leave his Work done to half part
only, and so to be carried on to perfection by some other hand, etc. for our
Lord does save to the utmost all that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25. The Angel
of the Covenant will redeem us, as he did ou^ Father Jacob, from all evil, Genesis
48.16 and deliver our Souls, as he did David's out of all adversity, 2 Samuel
4.9. and the Lord that stood with Paul, strengthne^ him, and delivered him out
of the Mout^ of the Lion, and (as he says) shall deliver me farther from every
evil work 2 Timothy 4.17,18. This is great encouragement to us, if indeed we be
seriously at the work of battering down the Wall of Satan's Strong Holds in us;
and i^ order of doing this the more effectually we must place our Souls under
the mos^ powerful Ministry, so that every Sabbat^ and every Sermon may promote,
in some measure, the battering down of its Wall^ If those two Brethren in
Iniquity did di^ down the Wall of Shechem's House wit^ a wicked Mind for
defiling their Siste^ Genesis 49.6. How much more ought w^ with a godly Mind to be
digging dow^ the Walls of the Strong Holds of Satan who has defiled, and is
still in defiling our precious Souls, so as to damn them for ever. From the
History of the Walls of Jericho we may learn this Divine Lesson, or this
Mystery of Godliness, as Joshua did compass round about Jericho with the Ark of
God, and his Conquering Army, the complete time of six days, every day once;
yet the Walls did not fall all that time, though they might be shattered, and put
into a trembling posture, and severely shaken, while this was in doing; but
upon the seventh, or Sabbath Day, they then did compass it seven times, as
before they had compassed it but once every six days, Josh. 6.2,3,4. and then
it was, that together with the Priests blowing of the Trumpets, and the loud
Shoutings of the People, that the Walls of Jericho fell flat to the ground, so
that the People round about went up into the City, every Man straight before
him, and took the City, ver. 5, and 20. and all this is said to be effected by
Faith, [ by Faith the Walls of Jericho fell, after it had been compassed seven
days,] Heb. 11.30. So after the same manner may the Walls of our Mystical
accursed Jericho within us, fall: If the Ark of God's Presence be with us, and
we pass all along before it, as they did, Josh. 6.8. and if we spend our time
in Spiritual Meditation, and not make any Noise with our Vo^s, until our
blessed Joshuah bid us Shout, as it was there, ver. 10. and if the Pri sts
blowing the Trumpets of Rams Ho^s, keep going on continually with us, as ver.
13. which shows, how there must be the grace of perseverance; we must hold
up, hold on, and hold out to the end; and the nearer we draw to our long Home,
then ought we to be much more laboring for a complete Conquest, as it was in
Isreal's case there. Their toil and travel was not greatly troublesome in their
compassing Jericho, but once at a time in all the six days; but upon the
seventh day, they had the Task of compassing the City seven times, one
immediately after another, and therefore it is said [that they rose up early at
the dawning of that day,] ver. 25. even so ought we to lay out our continual
endeavors to pull down the Walls of the Strong Holds of Satan, even all the
six days of our Lives; yet shall we not find this demolishing work perfectly
effected, until the evening of our eternal Sabbath. Whence we learn likewise,
that as upon every Sabbath Day we should take seven times more pains for the
mortifying of sin, and for the fortifying of grace, than we do upon all the six
days of the Week, etc. So when our last Sabbath approaches, we should stir up
our selves to the utmost of our ability, that we may then work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. that we may make our Calling and
Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. and that we may make sure work for a better World,
before we go hence to be seen no more, etc. All this must be done by Faith
also, then down goes our Jericho. Then our Lord Christ will say of us, as he
said of his Golden Church at Thyatira, [I know thy Works, that thy last be
better than thy first,] Rev. 2.19. Though our beginning was but small, yet our
latter end should greatly increase, Job 8.7. Our last days should be our best
days in our earnest pursuit for Heaven. As the Stone descending from an high
Tower, the nearer it approaches to its center, the faster it flies and falls;
so the nearer we come to the end of our Race, we ought to run with the greater
speed, that no Man, no Devil, no Thing, may take our Crown from us; which is
promised only to those that overcome, Rev. 3.11.12. For as old David literally
spoke to his Captains, [ whosoever gets up into the Gutter, and smites the
Jebusites, and the Blind and the Lame (Idols) the hatred of David's Soul, he
shall be my General, etc.] 2 Samuel 5.8. This Royal Motion Joab embraces, (that
he might recover the King's Favor which he had lost by his barbarous Murdering
of brave Abner,) 1 Chronicles. 11.6. and he conquered the City out of the hands of
the cursed Jebusites, which was after called Sion, and the City of David. So
our David Mystical makes a more Royal Motion to us, saying, [ To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame,
and am set down with my Father in his Throne,] Rev. 3.21. in which place
[(...)] for [(...),] that is, [even as] for [because,] so the sense is,
[because I also overcame,] therefore is it from Christ's love to us that we are
made to over, overcome, (as (...) signifies,) Romans 8.37. it was his helping
hand that made David able to run through a Troop, and to leap over the Wall,
Psalm. 18.29,34. as before. And here is a greater Reward promised than Joab's
Generalship, which soon perished with himself. But here is a Crown (with this
Inscription upon it) [ Vincenti dabo] to him that overcomes will I give it,
Rev. 2.10. and 6.2. and not only to wear a Crown among Royal Heads, but also to
sit upon Thrones above all Chairs of State. Therefore it most highly concerns
us to enquire, whether (with Joab) we have scaled the Walls of the Strong Holds
of Satan, whether we have gained the Gutter, which is done when we are blessed
with an hearing Ear to the word of Life; for the Ear is (as it were) the Gutter
that conveys even the Waters of Life into the Soul of Man; for thus it is said,
[ Hear and your Souls shall live] Isai. 55.3. and [ Faith comes by Hearing the
Word of God,] Romans 10.17. We must enquire likewise, whether (with Joab also) we
have smitten those cursed Canaanites (the Jebusites) namely our own Carnal
Corruptions; enquire (I say) what Rule we have obtained over our own Spirits;
[he that is slow to Anger, is better than the Mighty; and he that rules his
Spirit, is more honorable than he that conquereth a City,] Prove. 16.32. This
is not only Manly, but Godly also: Whereas he that has no Rule over his own
Spirit, is like a City that is broken down and without Walls, Prove. 25.28. Such
persons are like secure Hazor, that had neither Gates nor Bars, Jer. 49.31.
those Souls are not fenced in with the fear of God; and the Strong Man Satan,
well armed, and furnished for every evil Work, (as the Man of God is furnished
for every good Work, as before, 2 Timothy 3.17.) keeps still the possession of his
Strong Hold in them, and they were never yet blessed with a Visit from that
blessed Stronger Man, (the Lord Jesus) to dispossess him. Oh thrice happy are
they, to whom Christ says (as he did to that Demoniack, Mark 9.25.) [ Come out
of the Man, thou Unclean Spirit, and enter no more into him.] As none by the
Roman Law were allowed to have the honor of riding Triumphantly in the City of
Rome, until he had obtained five Victories in the Field over his Enemies, etc.
So none of us can ever expect to triumph as Conquerors in Heaven, unless we
have got the Victory over all our five Senses; for even all the Members of our
Bodies, as well as all the Faculties of our Souls, must be rescued from Satan,
and brought into obedience to Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.

The Sixth Character of a Conqueror is, Wholly to disarm the Conquered. Thus
the Stronger Man, when he had come upon the Strong Man, and had overcome him,
he took away all his Armor wherein he trusted, Luke 11.22. that is, those that
were his offensive Weapons, to wit, the World, Sin and Death, wherewith he has
prevailed over all the Sons and Daughters of fallen Adam, (after he had foiled
Adam himself) for some thousands of Years unto this day. And Satan, finding all
these Weapons so successful, is said to trust in them, as Goliath did in his
Armor, which made him triumph before his Victory, saying to David, [come, and
I will give thy Flesh to the Fowls of the Air, and to the Beasts of the Field,]
1 Samuel 17.44. as if David had been some Boy, to be frighted with his big Boasts
of his Carnal Confidence: and in ver. 45. David tells us how Goliath trusted in
his Armor, saying to him, [thou come unto me with a Sword and Spear, etc.]
that is, thou trustest in thy own Strength, and in thy Armor, etc. [but I come
to thee in the Name of the Lord, etc. who will deliver thee this day into my
hand,] ver. 46, 47. which was accordingly accomplished. Thus he who is called
both David's Son, and David's Lord, Mat. 22.45. The Stronger Man encounters the
Strong Man, that trusts in his Armor, and spoils him thereof, Col. 2.15. even
in a Duel too as David did Goliath; for Christ trod the Winepress alone, Isai.
63.1,2,3. When the fullness of time came, this ruddy David appeared with his
Garments dyed Red with the Blood of his Enemies; and as David put Goliah's
Armor in his Tent, 1 Samuel 17.54. so our David has buried all the Damning
Power of the Devil's Armor in his own Grave, Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. Thus this
Alligory may be farther enlarged, as David carried the Head of Goliath to
Jerusalem, and (as some suppose) set it up upon a Pinnacle of the Temple, (where
Satan set our Savior by God's permission afterward) as an high Monument of
his Happy Victory: This David did, after he had showed this same Head to Saul,
ver. 57. And as for Goliah's Sword (wherewith David had beheaded the Giant with
his own Weapon,) this likewise was laid up in the Tabernacle, wrapped in a
Cloth behind the Ephod, 1 Samuel 21.9. where we are told, how David prevailed
with the High Priest Ahimeleck to restore it to him again, as before it had
been his own, won by his Valor, and therefore he accounted no other Sword like
that, which would be a standing Remembrancer of his former Achievements by the
mighty presence of the Lord his God, wherewith he did encourage himself in the
day of his great Distress, 1 Samuel 30.6. even so our Mystical David destroyed
him who had the power of Death, that is, the Devil, with his own Weapon, Heb.
2.14. Christ's Death was the Death of Death, and of the Devil also, who had the
power of it; Christ came to this end, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil, 1 John. 3.8. Accordingly, Oh how happy are those Christians, who,
(through Christ that strengthens them) have got the head of the Tempter, or of
some strong Temptation into their Hand, as David had the Head of Goliath in his
Hand,) and can show it to the King of Kings, as he did to the King of Israel,
as before; and who have got also those [(...)] Weapons of Wickedness (as the
Greek word signifies, Romans 6.13.) which formerly warred against their Souls, 1
Pet. 2.11. But now are wrapped up in a Cloth behind the Ephod in the Tabernacle
of the Lord; and who likewise go (with David) to the High Priest of our
Profession, (as Christ is called, Heb. 3.1.) and have got a better Sword of
him, than that of Goliath, even the Sword of the Spirit, which it the Word of
God, Ephesians. 6.17. of which it may be better said, than was said of the other, [
there is none like that;] for if the word of Christ do but dwell richly in us,
as it ought to do in all wisdom, Col. 3.16. and as it did in Christ himself, (
aeque equally for Quality, non equaliter, not equally for Quantity;) for then
we may comfortably hope, that with this Sword we shall conquer the great Goliath
of Hell, as our Lotd did only by hurling three smooth Stones of Sacred
Scriptures at his Head, as David did at the Head of Goliath, and gave him his
mortal wound. Then indeed are we Conquerors in Christ, and then may we say with
David also, [the Snare is broken, and our Souls are delivered,] Psalm. 124.7. We
should be careful to keep all our Monuments and Remembrancers of our former
Conquests over both Satan's Temptations, and of our own Carnal Corruptions, as
wrapped up in a Napkin behind the Ephod of a Sanctified Memory, even in
everlasting Remembrances; then former experience may strengthen our present
Faith, Psalm. 77.10,11. and then no Weapon formed against us can ever prosper,
as the Lord has promised, Isai. 54.17.

The Seventh Character of a Conqueror is, to put his Laws upon the Conquered
according to his will and pleasure; as Jehoshaphat and Jehoram did by the
assistance of Elisha, who said to them, [ this is but a light thing with the
Lord (to give you Water in your want,) but he will deliver the Moabites into
your hands,] 2 Kings 3.17,18. [but ye shall smite every fenced City, and shall
fell every good Tree, and stop all Wells of Water, and mar (Hebr. grieve) every
good piece of Land with Stones,] (as if it were a grief to any good Soil to
become useless and unfruitful,) ver. 19. all this was done to Moab, ver. 24,
25. Thus also if we be Conquerors, we must endeavor to batter down all the
strong holds of Satan in us with Sling-stones, (as was the custom of that time,
which is now done by mighty Bullets out of the Mouths of great Cannons.) The
Slingers went about Kirhareseth, and broke down only the Towers of it; this was
the will and pleasure of the Conqueror, not quite to demolish the Walls of it,
as he did the other Cities: It were well if we could sling such smooth Stones
(as David did at Goliah's Head) especially such of the Holy Scriptures as our
Mistical David did at the Devils Head, Matthew. 4.3,7,10. So ought we to sling
such Stones at the Tempter, that we may knock down the Turrets of Pride and
Presumption, etc. which Glory is our Shame, Phil. 3.19. This we must do at the
least, though we cannot quite demolish the Walls and Foundation. Oh that we could
go thus far, and Oh that we could (with those Conquerors of Israel,) cut down
every tall Tree, (which are of the Devil's planting and watering) that bring
forth only wild and sower Grapes, paltry Hedge fruit, as Crabs and such Trash
in us; and Oh that we could mar* (or grieve every piece of ( Terra Diaboli) the
Devil's Land in us, (as one part of America is called) which bears no Fruit,
but the unfruitful works of Darkness, so called Ephesians. 5.11. And Oh that it
were a grief to us (as before) to become useless and unfruitful in our Places
and Stations; Oh that we could mar or grieve every inordinate Affection in us,
which do mar or grieve our precious Souls: Yet farther, Oh that we could
likewise stop up every Well of Water, namely, all those filthy Issues of Sin,
which nothing can heal us of, save only a believing Touch of our dear Lord
Jesus, Matthew. 9.20. And yet a little higher, Oh that we could sow those Lands
(we have already conquered out of the hand of the Strong Man, by the helping
hand of the Stronger Man, our precious Redeemer, our Goel) with no other thing
but Salt as Abimelech did, Judge. 9.45. the City of Sechem, which he not only
pulled down, but he also sowed it with Salt, as a token of its utter
extirpation. This was the custom of Conquerors which they used against Cities
of greatest provocation and affronts to them, because Salt is taken in
Scripture, not only for a Sign, but also for a Cause of Barrenness, Genesis 19.26.
Deuteronomy. 29.23. Judge. 9.45. Psalm. 107.34. and Zeph. 2.9. for Salt made the Land in
those hot and dry Countries utterly barren and desolate when it was sown upon
it; as nothing but Nettles and Salt Pits were found in Moab, when it was
devoted to perpetual Desolation. And thus it is with all Spiritual Conquerors,
(through Christ's love to them, and his strength in them;) they pray to the
Lord that all their fleshly Lusts, (which war against their Souls, 1 Pet.
2.11.) may even every one, the best beloved of them may be put to death, (as
the word (...), Romans 8.13. signifies.) In order hereunto, when those Spiritual
Enemies have received their Mortal Wound, whereof they must die, though it be of
a long lingering death, (like those People that die of Consumptions;) and this
Deadly Wound is always given to them at our first Conversion; yet all along (if
we be right Conquerors in Christ) we must still pray to the Lord, that the
Deadly Wound (then given) may never be healed any more, as that was which the
Apocaliptick Beast had gotten, and was healed again, Rev. 13.3. Our earnest
Petition to the Lord must be, that he may put the same Curse upon our Lusts,
which he put upon the fruitless Fig Tree, saying, [ Let no Fruit grow on thee
henceforward for ever, and immediately the Fig Tree withered away,] Matthew.
21.19. at which his Disciples marvelled, etc. ver. 20. Accordingly we should
desire an everlasting Barrenness may come upon those wild Olive Trees (our
fleshly Lusts so called, Romans 11.24.) wild by Nature, yea and upon that Root of
Bitterness, (to wit, original Concupiscence) which springs up (too too often)
to trouble us, Heb. 12.15. We must beg hard of the Lord, that all these sinful
Soils may be sowed with Salt, even to a perpetual Destruction, that we may
learn (in Christ's School) to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, (which is
the negative part of a Christian,) and likewise to live soberly (as to our
selves,) justly, (as to all men) and holily (as to the great God) in this
present World, Tit. 2.12. This is the positive part of a Christian; where, Note
well, that three Adverbs ( Sobre, Just and Pie) do much exceed the three
Adjectives ( Sobrius, Justus and Pius,) for in those latter are included only
Acts of Grace; but in the former are included the Habits of Grace; for it is
not one single Act or two, but a constant Habit of Grace, (notwithstanding some
interruptions in our way) that gives the denomination of a true Christian. Now
this excellent state can never be attained, unless we first become Conquerors,
(through Christ) so as to be able to give Laws to our Lusts, (which are called
deceitful Lusts, Ephesians. 4.22.) and deal with them as Joshuah dealt with the
Gibeonites, who made them [ hewers of Wood, and drawers of Water,] Josh. 9.21.
Though they had deceived him but once, yet our deceitful Lusts have deceived us
even times, and days without number; and in all other Scripture-instances, we
find that evermore the conquered become Tributaries to the Conqueror. As,

(1 st) Those Canaanites that could not be driven out, yet they did serve
Israel under Tribute, Josh. 16.10. according to the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 20.11.

(2.) Thus the Tribes of Israel, when they became strong, did put the
Canaanites to Tribute, as Ephraim, Judge. 1.28. and Napthali, ver. 33. and the
Danites, (by the help of Joseph his Brother) ver. 35.

(3.) Thus likewise did David unto Moab, after he had cast his Shoe over it,
etc. Psalm. 60.8. as its Conqueror, treading them under foot; then the Moabites
became David's Servants, and they brought him Gifts, 1 Chronicles. 18.2. And this
was a prodigious Gift unto David's Successor, namely, an hundred thousand
Lambs, and an hundred thousand Rams with their Wool, 2 King. 3.4. The King of
Moab was a great Sheep-Master, and his Tribute he paid yearly was this vast
number of Lambs, (with all their Dams also,) and this vast number of Rams, in
such a season of the Year, when their Wool was best grown upon their Backs; and
many more such examples of Tribute might be added. Oh that we could ask our own
Hearts, whether our Affections have been conquered by the Lord Jesus, the
Stronger Man and Conqueror: NB. Are all our Affections turned into Graces, as
the Affection of Fear into the Grace of Fear, and the Affection of Love into
the Grace of Love, and so of the rest; then our Lord has laid his Laws upon
them, and they pay each of them their Tribute to Christ. Oh blessed is that
Soul, that pays so many thousand Lambs (or devout Prayers) to Christ the King
of Glory, which must needs be numerous, if both Occasional and Appointed
Prayers, if public and private Prayers, both in our Closets, and in our
Families, for the space of one whole year, be reckoned up all together. If we
do all these things, then this Great King will greatly delight in our Beauty,
Psalm. 45.10.11. and give us Victory over our last Enemy, Death, which Christ
will destroy, 1 Cor. 15.26.55,56,57.

CHAP. VI. Advice to the Aged, for saving the Soul.
IT IS the Sacred Sentence and Saying of Solomon, the wisest of Men, that [ The
Hoary Head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness,]
Prove. 16.31. Which words do discover a most clear Character of a complete
Conqueror through Christ's love to us, Romans 8.37. whereby he strengthens us to
a kind of Omnipotency, to wit, of an ability to do all things which ought to be
done by us both in Active and Passive Obedience, Phil. 4.13. The word [
Proverbs] in the Hebrew, is [ Mashalim] which is derived of Mashal, signifying
to Command. Oh that this Divine Proverb may have a commanding power and
influence over all us Aged Persons, so that all our [ Gray Hairs may become a
Crown of Glory to us, by their being found in the way of Righteousness.] This
Text is a compound of two principal Parts, to wit, a Thesis, and an Hypothesis,
or a Position, and a Supposition: The Position is first; it is positively
asserted, that [Gray Hairs are a Crown of Glory,] and then the Supposition
follows, [if it be found in the way of Righteousness.] There be three Enquiries
here to be answered, the first, What is meant by that Phrase of [ Gray Hairs,
or Hoary Head,] to which the Answer is,

(1 st) Gray Hairs, and Hoary Hairs or Head, are promiscuously taken in
Scripture for one and the same thing, as in Levit. 19.32. 1 Kings 2.6, and 9.
Isai. 46.4. Genesis 42.38. and 44.29,31. Prove. 16.31. and 20.29. 2 Samuel 12.2. Job
15.10. Deuteronomy. 32.25. Hos. 7.9. Psalm. 71.18, etc.

Answer the 2 d is, That Gray Hairs, Gray Headed and Hoary Hairs or Head, are
all Synonymical Expressions with Old Age, with all those afore-quoted
Scriptures. Thus the Ancient of Days, Dan. 7.9. and Everlasting Father, Isai.
9.6. is described to have Hair as white as Wool, Rev. 1.14. so Levit. 19.32.
There this Phrase [ Hoary Head] is used [with the Old Man] for Doctus in Lege,
one that is learned in the Law of God.

The 2 d Enquiry is, What is meant by [the Crown of Glory.]

Answer 1 st. This signifies the highest Honor that can be conferred upon
Mankind, a Crown is above a Garland, a Miter, etc. a Crowned Head is a Title of
the highest of all Humane Honors, and there is a great affinity in the Greek
Tongue betwixt [(...)] Old Age, and [(...)] Honor; and thus the Lord
commanded, [that the Aged should be honored,] Levit. 19.32. That Silver Crown
of Hoary Hairs, which the Finger of God does set upon the Head of Aged Persons,
does render them Venerable, and to be Reverenced of all, even in all Places and
Companies where they come: 'Twas a caution of Restraint in Rome, Cato Videt,
etc. much more Deus Videt, etc. insomuch that they (as it were) carry an awful
Majesty and Authority along with them, both for suppressing of Vice, and for
encouraging of Virtue in their presence, (where too much familiarity, yea and
too much folly with it, do not breed contempt.)

Answer the 2 d This Crown is of the best kind of Crowns; it is not only a Crown
of Silver, (as before) or a Crown of Gold, the best sort of earthly Crowns, but
it is a Crown of Glory, and that in a double Kingdom, namely in the Kingdom of
Grace here, (which is often in Scripture called Heaven,) and also in the Kingdom
of Glory hereafter. So that such Aged Persons as are found to be God's Friends
and Favorites, (as Old Abraham had that very Title given to him no fewer than
three times of being God's Friend, 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Isai. 41.8. and Jam. 2.23.)
they shall have a double Crown of Glory, first in this Life, they shall have
the Crown of Reverence and Veneration from all, as Old Abraham was thus
Crowned, whom the very Heathens the Hittites most highly honored, saying to
him, [thou art a Prince of God, Hebr. or a Mighty Prince amongst us,] Genesis
23.6. even the Natural Conscience cannot choose but stoop to the Image of God,
stampted upon, and shining forth in both the Persons, and Actions of such as
are eminent for Godliness, as Abraham was; and so it had been done to him
before, by King Abimelech, and by Phicol the chief Captain of his Host, Genesis
21.22,23. where they (with all imaginable Reverence) make their most Humble
Address to Father Abraham, that he might make an everlasting League with them,
and with their Posterity, etc. For both this King and his Captain, as also did
the Hittites, all plainly see in him a behavior that was more than ordinary to
Mankind: They were afraid of that Name of God, even that Glorious and fearful
Name, put upon him, and called upon by him, and by all his Seed also, Deuteronomy.
28.9,10,58. yea still the Sons and Daughters of Abraham, even all God's People
are called Princes in all Lands, Psalm. 45.16. The Righteous are more excellent
than their Neighbors, Prove. 12.26. though they be never so great that dwell by
them, if they have only Greatness without Goodness. The Jewish Rabins say, that
those Seventy Souls, which went down with Jacob into Egypt, were of much more
worth than all the Seventy Nations whereof the whole known World consists:
Christ makes all his Saints to be Kings, Rev. 1.6. and to be Conquerors also,
Romans 8.37. they are his Glory, Isai. 4.5. 2 Cor. 8.23. and therefore this Crown
of Glory is given to them, even in this World; and if we can but become
faithful unto Death, then shall we have given us the Crown of Life in a better
World, Rev. 2.10. and we may the more have hope hereof, because we are not kept
by any power of our own, (which is no better than weakness it self.) Though David
said, [I have kept my self from mine Iniquity,] Psalm. 18.21,23. and the born of
God keeps himself, 1 John 5.19. but [ we are kept by the power of God, through
faith, unto Salvation, and we are kept for Heaven, as Heaven is kept for us, 1
Pet. 1.4,5. that we may receive the end of our Faith, even the salvation of our
Souls, ver. 9. This great work of a double keeping, is wrought by the great
Grace of God given freely to us, whereby we are made partakers of the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

The 3 d Enquiry is, the Supposition, If we be found in the way of
Righteousness.

Answer. To understand the true meaning of this Phrase, we must know, that it
is not enough for us, to begin well, but we must end well also, [ Exitus Acta
probat,] it is the End that Crowns the Action: The Old Father of the Church
says, some are [ Sancti Juvenes, sed Satanici Senes,] Young Saints, yet at
last prove no better than Old Devils; who begin in the Spirit but end in the
Flesh, as the Apostle's Phrase is, Gal. 3.3. Those foolish ones were like
Nebuchadnezzar's Image, whose Golden Head ended in Dirty Feet: They did Run
well at the first, but the Devil hindered them in the way, Gal. 5.7. not only
making them stop, and step back, but also to step aside into crooked Paths,
Psalm. 125.5. and ran a whoring from God, Psalm. 73.27. therefore the Lord will
lead them sorth with the workers of iniquity: The doom of such is denounced
[the backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways,] Prove. 14.14. As he
has made a match with Mischief, so he shall soon have his Belly full of it; as
he has sold himself to work wickedness, as Ahab did, 1 Kings 21.25. so he
shall be sure of a sad Payment at last. He has drawn back unto perdition, and
God says, [ My Soul shall have no pleasure in you,] Heb. 10.37,38. Such as
steal away from their Colors, run from their Captain, and revolt from Christ,
must expect no better than Martial Law; Apostates indeed are Renegadoes, they
run away, but it is into the Mouth of Hell; so a worse condition they cannot
choose for themselves: Whereas the Righteous (on the contrary) do hold on in
their way, (both in their Youth, and in their Old Age,) and grow stronger and
stronger, Job 17.9. He may indeed stumble sometimes upon some Stumbling-stone
or Block, that is laid in his way, as David himself had his Stumbling-time, at
the prosperity of the Wicked, and his own Adversity, Psalm. 73.13,14,15. where
we find his stumble was so deep and dangerous, that he was ready to repent of
his Repentance; but as he that stumbles, and falls not, gains ground by his
stumbling in taking a longer stride thereby, so did David here, who upon second
thoughts, (ever better than the first) recoiling and reflecting upon himself,
saying, [ this is my Infirmity,] and Oh how he be beasts himself for so
stumbling! ver. 22. so foolish was I, and Ignorant, and even as a Beast before
thee, my God,] the Hebrew word for Beast is Behemoth; which is the plural
feminine Hebrew, signifying a Big-bellied Beast, full of Young Ones, (which is
a clear resemblance of Original Sin in us, the Mother of all Actual Sins,) and
the same word [ Behemoth] the Lord uses in his Humbling Speech to Job, Job
40.15, to 24: whereby is expressed, that Monster of Beasts, the Beast of
Beasts, the Elephant. By this (and by other Speeches of the same tendency) God
so humbled Job, as to make him [ abhor himself, and to repent in Dust and
Ashes,] Job 42.5. Thus likewise that Holy Man Agur, who vilifies, yea nullifies
himself to the utmost, saying, [ surely I am more brutish than any Man, and I
have not the understanding of a Man, etc.] Prove. 30.2,3. Here was true
Humility, which is derived ab Humo, signifying the Ground, because this Grace
lays us flat on the ground; thus these godly persons (and many more upon
Scripture-record) did indeed stumble in the way of Righteousness, yea and some
of them very foully, yet none of them did so stumble, as to fall finally from
that blessed way; they all did recover themselves by Repentance, they all did
return to this way of Righteousness; and they all did persevere therein to
their dying day: So their Gray Hairs became a Crown of Glory to them, being all
found in the way of Righteousness, Note well, we must all be found in that way,
when both Old Age and Death also come to find us. Old Father Chrysostom said, [
Canities tunc Venerabilis est, quando ea gerit quae canitiem decent, to wit,
then is Old Age most worthily Venerable, then is Hoariness of Hairs most truly
Honorable, when only such Deeds are done by it, that does well become it both
in the sight of God and Men: We Old Ones ought to make it our exercise which
the blessed Apostle made his, saying, [(...)] Herein do, I do recreate my self,
(as the word signifies) to keep a Conscience void of offense, both toward God
and toward Man,] Acts 24.16. Oh that we could make this same our Exercise, yea
even our Recreation both Night and Day; using our utmost Diligence, Skill, Will
and Affections, disciplining and inuring our selves herein, and thereby we
shall neither be ashamed to live, nor afraid to die. We must live (as that
Apostle did) in all good Conscience, Acts 23.1. Good, both with the goodness of
Integrity, and with the goodness of Tranquillity; we must keep our Consciences
clear and clean, better offend all the World, yea all the Witches in the World,
than offend our own Consciences; for Conscience is God's Spy, and it is Man's
Overseer; as it is God's Deputy-Judge, so it is Man's Domestic Chaplain,
bearing witness of all our Doings and desirings; and accordingly excusing or
accusing, absolving or condemning; yea comforting or tormenting us: And [if our
own Hearts (or Consciences) do condemn us, God is greater than our Hearts, and
will condemn us much more,] 1 John. 3.20. Whereas on the contrary, when Hoary
Hairs are not found in the way of Righteousness, that Hoariness is so far from
being Honorable, that it is rather Mucor than Canities, a nasty Mouldiness, and
not a venerable Hoariness. It Is sad with such, that the older they grow, they
wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. and do no better than stink above ground,
being Dead while they Live, 1 Timothy 5.6. What can be more odious than an old
Lascivious Goat, than an old Fornicator, having Eyes full of Adultery, and that
cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.14, etc. Gray Hairs and Green Thoughts make an
abominable agreement, such are Heteroclites in declining Nature, and Monsters
of Mankind in the World; in whom it is so far gone with them, and Lust has
such an unlimited power over them, that neither strength of Grace, as Genesis
39.9. in Young Joseph, strong Grace kept him from that great wickedness and sin
against his God: nor decays of Nature can restrain them from their Youthful
Extravagancy, as Genesis 18.12. Sarah said, (after I am old, shall Hust,) old and
cold is our English Proverb. It was the aggravation of Solomon's sin that he
was in his Old Age so easily drawn away from God and godliness by his
Idolatrous Wives, 1 Kings 11.4. Oh how ridiculous it is to behold a sinner, a
Child of Fourscore or an hundred years old! yet such shameful sights as these
are denounced accursed, Isa. 65.20. But if we indeed be the true Sons and
Daughters of Abraham, we ought to do what he did, of whom it is said, that he
went to his Grave in a good Old Age, or as the Hebrew has it, with a good Gray
Head, Genesis 25.8. We must imitate him in this herein, even all we that are Old,
that we may be Good as well as Old, that we may both Live and and Die in a good
Old Age as he did; for unless we walk in Abraham's steps in this World while we
live, we can never expect to lodge in Abraham's Bosom when we die. Abraham died
an Old Man and full of Years, Genesis 25.8. He was as fully satisfied to leave the
World, as men are wont to be willing to rise from the Table, when satisfied to
the full with Food: And thus Job said, I would not live always, Job 7.16. but
more of this after. It was the saying of Augustus Caesar, (that Great Emperor,
in whose Reign our Lord Jesus was born) Audite me Senem vos Juvenes, quem
Juvenem multi Senes audierunt, be pleased, Oh ye Young Men, to hearken
diligently unto me, who am now Old, whom many Old Men did hear attentively when
I was but Young. David says, I have been Young, and now am Old; come ye
Children, hearken to me, and I will teach you the fear of the Loed, Psalm.
34.11. and 37.25. Accordingly, I say in all humbleness of Soul, Oh that all
People (both Young and Old) may lend an hearing Ear to me who am now very Old,
whom all Persons of all Ages did savingly hearken to, when I was Young; so that
the Lord by his Grace made me a Spiritual Father to many Souls both Young and
Old, Male and Female, Rich and Poor, yea Bond and Free, All these are one in
Jesus Christ, Col. 3.11. whom I have begotten in the Gospel, (as the Apostle
does phrase it,) 1 Cor. 4.15. who all rise up and call me their Spiritual
Father in Christ; amongst whom there is one remarkable Passage I cannot but
record, which indeed is worthy to be kept in everlasting remembrance, namely,
While I was Minister at Cottingham near Hull, that Ministerial Charge being
resigned over to me by Famous Dr. Winter, when he went over into Ireland to be
the Provost of the College at Dublin,) there it pleased the Lord so to bless my
Ministry, as to honor me with the Conversion of many Souls, both in that
place, and in other places round about. But above all, there was one Thomas
Raspin, an Old Man, and one of the most substantial Men in that great Town, who
(through grace) had most evidently and most eminently a new work of Conversion
wrought upon his heart in his Old Age, and when Gray Hairs were upon him, which
indeed made him a most lively Servant of Christ to his dying day, bringing
forth sresh Fruit in his Old Age, etc. Psalm. 92.14. whose Funeral Sermon I then
preached, wherein I observed what a rare work of God this was to be effectually
called in our Old Age; for beside Abraham in the Old Testament, and Nicodemus
in the New Testament, who were both called home from Idolatry, and from
Ignorance, when they were Old Men: And very few more such Instances can be
found out upon Record in either Testament. Now seeing this signal and singular
Favor of God was vouchsafed to such a worthless Worm as me, about fifty years
ago, when I had been but about seven years employed in the work of the
Ministry; if the Lord was then pleased to cause Old Persons so savingly to
hearken unto my Ministerial Voice, while I was so Young; how much more may I
hope now, that all Persons of all Ages will give their most diligent Attention
unto that most weighty Advice, (for I cordially profess to speak no otherwise
than as an Oracle of God, unto all Aged ones, which cannot prove unseasonable
to any that are Young; because, if the Lord delight in them to lengthen out
their Lives, (and not cut them off for their wickedness in the midst of their
days, Psalm. 55.23.) they must come to be Aged also: And therefore let all lend
an hearing Ear unto that grave Counsel which I (an Old Servant of Christ) does
declare at this time to you in the Name of the Lord. We are told how Moses was
fourscore Years Old when God sent him with God's Message to Pharaoh, Exodus 7.7.
to show, that the words of an Old Messenger of God ought to take a deep
impression upon the Hearts of all Hearers, in case they be not Case-hardened as
Pharaoh was, over and over again, both by himself, and by God, and likewise by
the Devil. But I hope this is not the Case of any of you, (as Heb. 6.9.) though I
mention the Case of Pharaoh. Now I who am very near Fourscore may likewise say,
[ I am persuaded better things of you, though I thus speak.] 'Twas Zuinglius his
practice, when he had been inveighing against Vice, to come off with these soft
words, [ Probe Vir, hoc nihil ad te,] this is nothing to thee, Oh thou Honest
Man. So my present prospect through Grace is, that I may prevail with many,
either to hasten into, or to keep close in the way of Righteousness, if in it
already; how forcible are right words, Job 6.25. especially to prepared Hearts,
more especially when multitude of Days and Years does teach Wisdom? Job 32.7. I
have made a long discourse in discovering the many Characters of the true
Conquerors through the Love of Christ. Now seeing every Conqueror does win a
Crown, which has this Inscription upon it, [ Vincenti Dabo, to him that
overcomes, will I give it, Rev. 2.7,10,26. and 3.5,21. and 21.7. but my
present Task is to show some Instances of such Conquerors, to wit, such Aged
Ones as are found in the way of Righteousness, the Crown of Life, the Crown of
Glory shall be assuredly set and seated upon their Hoary Heads. After the
general Discourse upon this Subject aforesaid, that all us Aged Persons may
come both to win and wear this blessed Crown, I shall speak more particularly
upon that Theme of Old Age, concerning its Nature and its Accidents, and
concerning those Duties which ought to attend it, whereby it may be made (like
Abraham's aforesaid) a good Old Age, etc. It Is said to the honor of Young Men,
that ^acy had overcome the Wicked One, 1 John 2.13. Though youthful Passions be
most rapid in them, then it is a shame for us Aged ones to fall short of these,
etc.

First of the 1 st of these, namely, its Nature, Old Age is, without all
controversy, a real Blessing of God, in, and of it self, otherwise God would
never have made it the matter of this exceeding great and precious Promise,
which he was pleased to annex to the Fifth Commandment, [ Honor thy Father and
Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives
thee,] Exodus 20.12. Matthew. 15.4. Ephesians. 6.2,3. This Duty of Children to obey
their Parents in the Lord, the Apostle calls it a Right Duty, Ephesians. 6.1. and
commends it moreover as a Duty, not only good before Men, but acceptable also
unto God, 1 Timothy 5.4. This Fifth Commandment is called the First Commandment
with Promise, Ephesians. 6.2. that is, the First Affirmative Commandment, or the
First in the Second Table, or the First of all the Ten, with such a Special
Promise of Long Life in the Land of the Living, [ that thou may live long,]
Ephesians. 6.3. As good Children do help to lengthen their Parents days, (so Joseph
did Jacob's etc.) So God for encouraging them in their Duty, does promise to
lengthen their Days; and if at any time God take this Long Lease from them
here, he grants them a Freehold-Estate of a greater Value hereafter. If God do
deny to give them the Silver of a Temporal Life in this lower World, he will be
sure to pay them most plentifully with the Gold of an Eternal Life in the upper
and better World; whereas on the contrary, such as are stubborn and undutiful
Children, as they shorten their Parents Lives, and bring down their Gray Hairs
with sorrow to their Graves: So God often does shorten the Lives of such wicked
Children, and cuts them off in the midst of their Days, as God did to wicked
Abimelech, of whom it is said, that the Lord rendered upon him the Evil which he
had done unto his Father Gideon, Judge. 9.56. Yea, and Solomon says, [the Eve
that mocketh at his Father, (as cursed Cham did at Noah) and despises to obey
his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick out that mocking Eye,] Prove.
30.17. God takes notice of the offending Member, and appoints this Punishment
for it, and a sad one too; if this be understood of the Infernal-Ravens, those
Black Devils of Hell, those are cursed with a witness, whom the Holy Ghost thus
curses with such emphatical expressions, and in such exquisite Terms: Those
Ravens of the Valley are said to be most ravenous, and the first thing they do
to a Carcass, is to pick out the Eyes, as Horace says, Effossos Oculos Voret
Atro Guttare Corvus.
And our Savior adds to the saying of Solomon, [He that curses Father or
Mother, let him die the Death,] Matthew. 15.4. All this does make it manifest,
that as a short Life is a Curse, so a long Life is a Blessing; otherwise as on
the one hand Godliness would never have left to it by the Lord, so many
precious Promises, as these, (to name but a few of the many) beside the
aforementioned.

(1.) God promises to his people (1.) [ That he will fulfill the number of
their days,] Exodus 23.26. that is, they shall dye full of days as Abraham, Genesis
25.8. as Isaac, Genesis 35.29. and as David did, 1 Chronicles. 29.28. They all did fall
like full-ripe Apples into the hands of God the right Owner, and the great
Gatherer of them.

(2.) That [ He will take away Sickness from them,] Deuteronomy 7.15. that is, he will
bestow the great blessing of Health upon them, which is the best of Temporal
Blessings; for a sickly Life is a lifeless Life, and no better than a lingering
Death: Non est Vivere, sed Valere, Vita, says Martial, Health is the Reward of
Piety, Prove. 3.8.

(3.) That [they shall be blessed in the City, and blessed in the Country,
blessed every where,] Deuteronomy. 28.2,3, etc. mercy and goodness follows them all
the days of their Lives, as David says of himself, Psalm. 23.6. as before he
had said, [he asked Life of thee, and thou gave it him, even length of Days,
etc. Psalm. 21.4. and he describing the State of a godly Man in Psalm. 91. he
reckons up the mighty Power of God in preserving his Person from manifold
Calamities, so far as it consists with God's Glory, and the godly Man's good;
yea though he die of the Plague, (for the best are not exempted from common
Calamities) yet shall he be saved from the plague of the Plague, and with long
Life will I satisfy him, Psalm. 91.16.

(4.) Another Divine Promise is, [ cleave unto the Lord, for He is thy Life,
and the length of thy Days.] Deuteronomy. 30.20. Agreeable unto this is, that Godly
Wisdom shall add both length of Days and a long Life, and Peace unto such as
are blessed with it, Prove. 3.2. an thus God told wise Solomon, [seeing thou have
not asked long Life, etc. but Wisdom of me, yet if thou will keep my Commands,
I will add length of Days to thee,] 1 King. 3.11,14. Many more Promises of
along Life might be added, but to avoid prolixity this shall suffice, adding
only that length of Days is a transcendent privilege, and desirable in general
by all Mankind. This was David's Doctrine, which he proclaims with a
challenge to the whole World, crying (as it were) with sound of Trumpet, [ What
Man is he that desires Life, and loves many days that he may see Good,] Psalm.
34.12. Augustine brings all sorts of Mortal Men and Women, who all unanimously
answered to David's Question, saying with much eagerness, every one for
themselves, [ Ego and Ego,] I would, and I would, etc. All Persons do desire a
long Life, many happy Days, and a comfortable Enjoyment of all: But alas how
few there be, that take right Courses to obtain the true Happiness according to
that wholesome Counsel which David does prescribe for the compassing of it, ver.
13, 14, 15, etc. Again,

2 dly. What a blessing is long Life, may be farther demonstrated by the many
direful Threatenings which the Lord has denounced against wickedness, (as
before his precious Promises to Godliness, etc.) that the Wicked shall not live
out half his days, Psalm. 55.24. and in many more Scriptures too long here to
relate, all showing that a short Life is a curse, etc. yet know that in some
cases it is a blessing, as to those who are taken away from the evil to come, 1
King. 14.13. and Isai. 57.1. Just as when a Fire breaks forth in an House, then
Men carry forth their Jewels, but God conveys his Cabinet into a better World,
their Souls enter into Rest and pass to Heaven.

The Conclusion of this 1 st Point then is this, That seeing a long Life is
promised by the Lord to the Godly, and short Life is threatened by Him to the
Wicked, therefore it must necessarily follow from these two aforenamed
premises, that a good Old Age, and to go the Grave full of Years, and full of
Graces as well as Years, (as Abraham did) is a great blessing of God as to its
own Nature and Substance, etc.

The 2 d Point I have to discourse upon, is the Accidents of this Nature and
Substance of Old Age, which are principally two, namely, (1 st) The Quantity;
and (2dly) The Quality of it.

First, Concerning the Quantity of it, and this is twofold.

1 st That which was more special and peculiar to the Antedeluvian Patriarchs.
And,

(2 dly) That which is most General and Universal to all the Post-diluvian
generation of Mankind ever since Noah's Flood, not only unto this day, but also
to the end of the World.

1 st As to the Patriarchs, They indeed lived very long, and to a very great
Old Age, yet they all did die at last; for the God of Nature did ordain, (upon
the Fall of Adam) that Nature should decay and die at last. NB. Note well, That
none of the Patriarchs did live out completely a Thousand Years; for that term
of Time is reck^d as one Day, 2 Pet. 3.8. and if any of those Patriarchs had
lived out their Thousand Years, then that Divine Doom upon fallen Mankind, [ in
the Day, thou eatest the forbidden Fruit, thou shall surely Die,] Genesis 2.17.
Now if any one of those had lived beyond a Thousand Years, then Man had not
died within the compass of that Mystical Day, etc. The Patriarchs indeed had a
very large Quantity, and a long Lease of their Lives; and this was for many
weighty Reasons, of four several sorts: (1.) Natural. (2.) Civil. (3.) Moral.
(4.) Theological.

The 1 st is Natural, because (1.) There was much virtue in those Herbs upon
which they constantly made their daily Meals.

(2 dly) The Climate where they lived had a most temperate Air, and every way
most congruous to their Constitutions.

But (3 dly) above all, their own Temperance from Surfeiting and Drunkenness,
for the Old Adage is, [ Plures pereunt Gula, quam Gladio,] more Persons do die
by Intemperance, than by the Sword, etc. These Three are the Natural Reasons.

In the (2 d) Place, the Civil Reasons are,

(1 st) They lived so long both for the better populating of the World. And,

(2 dly) For the better spreading of the Church of God, (out of the White Line)
in the World; they lived thus long to beget Sons and Daughters for this purpose.

Then in the 3 d Place, the Moral Reasons are,

(1 st) For the better institution of all Arts and Sciences, etc. And,

(2 dly) For the more promoting of their own Experimental knowledge, because
they wanted those Books and Libraries which we in our days do enjoy; therefore
the Lord lent them such long Leases of Eight or Nine Hundred Years, whereby
they got the greater stock of Knowledge by such long Experience.

And in the 4 th Place, The Theological Reason is, For the propagation of the
True Religion in the World, (as was hinted above) in the White Line, the
Posteririty of Seth, as the Black Line was the Offspring of cursed Cain, as is
made apparent in the draught of ancient Genealogies which are drawn with a
White and a Black Line, all along to distinguish the Church from the World.

NB. Note well, (1.) As the longest Day has the shortest Night, so the longest
Life of those Patriarchs had the shortest Death; for the night of Death came
upon them at the last; we read of no Agonies they had in their Dying, etc.

NB. Note well, (2.) As the Microcosm, or great World was drowned (as it were)
with a Dropsy, in Neal's deluge, and shall at last be burned (as it were) with
a burning Fever; even so the Microcosm, or Man, who is called [the little
World.] More of this afterward.

But 2 dly as to the Quantity of Lease of Man's Life, (since the Patriarchs
time) which is now general and universal over all Mankind, we must know, that
as the long Lives of those Patriarchs, near the beginning of the World (though
now fallen under sin) does intimate to us, and give us a guess, how long Man
night have lived upon the Earth, (had he not sinned) before he had been
translated into Heaven, as Enoch was: So that the Age of Man began to be
shortened after Noah's Flood, and more especially after the confusion of Tongues
at the building of Babel; for Peleg (which signifies Division, so called
because Tongues were divided in that day) and his Son Regu, and those born
after them, lived not above half the time of those than were born before them,
as Porcus notes well in his Medulla Histor. Eccles. page 15. NB. Note well, May
not we in our Day call our Sons [ Peleg] as Heber did his Son; for in a color
of building up Sion, it is rather a Babel, because of the Confusion of Tongues
amongst us, not understanding one another Languages, Prob Dolor, this is for
Lamentation, etc. Know likewise, that after this diminution of Man's Age at the
Confusion of Tongues, Moses comes and mentions a shorter cut of the Lease of
Man's Life, as we are told in the Ninetieth Psalm, which is called the Prayer
of Moses, that he made most probably when he saw the Carcases of the People
fall so fast in the Wilderness, and committed to Writing for the instruction of
those that were left alive, yet were doomed to Death, as Numb. 14. at large
relates; and this Prayer of Moses is fitly placed next to the eighty ninth
Psalm, that it might be an illustration of that passage, [ What Man is he that
lives, and shall not see Death? shall he deliver his Soul from the Hand of the
Grave?] Psalm. 89.48. After this verse, Moses reads a Divine Lecture upon Man's
Mortality, showing how God turns, Man to destruction, Psalm. 90.3. that is, God
by turning loose upon Man diverse Diseases, turns him now soon out of the Worlds
And when Moses had set forth the misery of Man's Life by many similitudes, as a
Watch, a Flood, a Sleep, Flower, etc.) which indeed is such a Misery, as cannot
sufficiently be set forth by any similitudes, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. He at last
comes to determine how short a Lease God gives Man of his Life, saying, [the
days of our Years, are Threescore Years and Ten,] ver. 10. that is, as if he
had said, Though the Fathers lived much longer, yet as wickedness increased in
the World, so Men's Days decreased; and now their Lives are daily shortened, and
one Generation soon dispatched away after another: All Men have a quick
dimission from their appearance upon the Stage of the World, and all this is
done, that the World it self may come the sooner to its perpetual period. And
though some [by reason of a more robust Constitution than others have, and
therefore may attain to fourscore Years,] yet few exceed seventy, and fewer
attain to it; and such as live longer, do pay interest of Pains, Sorrow and
Misery for their enlargement beyond the generality of Mankind, because the Body
is then much decayed, and filled with Diseases, etc. And thus Barzillai
accounted himself a very Aged Man, when he had attained to the age of fourscore
Years old, 2 Samuel 19.32. saying of himself [How long have I to live, can I taste
what I eat or drink, etc? and [ how long have I to live] ver. 34. that is, my
Breath is corrupt, or my Spirits are Spent, my Days are extinct, and the Grave
is ready for me, as Job speaks of himself, Job 17.1. He was Senex quasi
Seminex, half dead, and felt himself pedetentim mori, to die by peace-meal,
even sensim sine sensu, insensibly yielding every day somewhat to Death, and
therefore he tells David with a most thankful Heart, that it was not advisable
for him to embrace his Royal Offer of a Courtly Life to him, who was now
superannuated, and was already (as it were) dead both to Meat and Music, all
such delights of the Sons of Men, Eccles. 2.8. Those days (says he) are come
upon me wherein I can have no pleasure, Eccles. 12.2,3,4. Therefore it is high
time now for me, and for all such Aged Ones as I am, to make and pack up our
Fardles, and prepare to pass hence into that better Country, which is Heaven,
(as the Holy Patriarchs did, Heb. 11.13,14,15,16.) My continuance can be but
short here in this World, (says old Barzillai to David) and therefore I would
not now leave my Habitation, (where I may retire and rest me from the Noise of
the World) but now my whole work is, a firm resolve to make ready for Death,
and to lay hold on Eternal Life, 2 Samuel 19.35,36,37. 1 Timothy 6.19. And indeed
this is the indispensable Duty, not only of such as are Old, but it is necessary
for all that are Young to do so likewise, because this Quantity, and the length
of the Lives of all Persons, in all Ages, is very uncertain; the Proverb says,
as soon goes the Lambs Skin to the Market, as that of the Old Sheep; the Young
may die, as well as the Old must die: And it is an old observation, yea and a
true one, that there be more of Mankind, which die under Ten Years old, than
they which live above Sixty Years. We all live in Houses of Clay, and our
Foundation is in the Dust, easily crushed as the Moth, with the least touch of
Man's Finger; and much sooner are we crushed with the Finger of God,) Job.
4.19. If our Cottages of Clay had a Foundation of Brass or Marble, they might
possibly stand some time in the World; but seeing our best Foundation is no
better than Dust, called Terra Fricabilis, which is so easily crumbled asunder
in the Hand of a Child: Oh it is no less than a Miracle of Mercy, that some of
us do subsist so long alive upon the Earth, seeing the Walls of our Earthly
Tabernacles (as Paul calls the Body, 2 Cor 5.2.) are weak, and the Foundation
of our Clay-House is far weaker, being but Dust, light, flying and unstable
Dust, which is soon wherried and whirled about with every puff of Wind: Hence
Man is not only a Clod of Clay, neatly made up by a skilful Potter, as was the
first Man Adam, [ of the Earth, Earthy,] 1 Cor. 15.47. and a Lump of Dust. Genesis
3.19. but also he is but an heap of Vanity, yea at his best estate [ Kol-Adam,
Kol-Abel] omnis Adam est totus Abel, every Adam or Man, is wholly Abel or
Vanity, even when he seems to be well underlaid on all sides, and most settled
and likeliest to live, Psalm. 39.5,11. And again Adam Abel's compar est, Adam is
Abel's Mate: Man is like to Vanity, and as a Shadow that has no substance in
it, or subsistence at all, Psalm. 144.4. and he not only consumes away like a
Moth, as Psalm. 39.11. as before, with the least touch the Moth is crushed; but
it is said further, [ that Man is crushed before the Moth, Job 4.19. It is not
said there, before the Lion, (that would be no wonder) but it is said [ before
the Moth,] to show what a poor thing Man is, when a Moth can crush him, that a
Fly can choke him, as it did Pope Alexander; that an Hair in a Mess of Milk may
stifle him, as it did great Marius the Roman General, and (as some say) Pope
Adrian also. Thus Druslus (the Emperor, Claudius's Son,) was suffocated with a
Pear that was cast up and catched by his Mouth in sport only. Thus Aemilius
Lepidus was destroyed by a light bruise upon his Toe. Many such Stories I might
relate, of this Nature; but to be short, let me add only one more, which I can
both affirm and confirm upon my own knowledge, that a great Lord of this Land,
(who was my Patron, etc.) that was brought to his Death, only by paring a Corn
upon his Toe, which did after Gangreen, and struck upwards, whereof at last he
died. All these Instances (with many more which might be added) do demonstrate
the uncertainty of our Lives, as there is nothing more certain than our Deaths,
(for that is established by the great Statute of Heaven, that all Men must once
die, Heb. 9.27.) yet as to the time of it, there is nothing more uncertain,
especially considering [how Man is destroyed from Morning to Evening,] Job
4.20. the Hebrew reading is, he is beaten to pieces as in a Mortar, with one
Misery upon another, until the very Breath be beaten out of his Body at length;
yea and all this from Morning to Evening, that is, not only all the day long,
but even all the life long; which is here (for its brevity) compared to an
Artificial Day, and such as no Man can be sure he shall have twelve hours to
his Day: For how many are there, whose Sun has set at High-noon, even in the
prime and pride of their Days they have been snatched away by the Hand of Death;
yea, yet higher, how many do we see whose Sun does set at its very rising; so
that they are carried from the Grave of the Womb, to the Womb of the Grave,
even from their Birth to their Burial: And assuredly we all every Hour, as well
as every Day, do yield somewhat unto Death, and nearer and nearer do we
approach to our latter end; yea and the longest liver of us has but a short
cut from the first Rising of our Sun, to its last Setting, from our Birth to
our Burial: The Psalmist says, that [the Sun knows the time of its going
down,] Psalm. 104.19. But this cannot be said of any of the Sons of Men, that
they know the time of their going down to the Grave; good Isaac knew it not,
Genesis 27.1,2. (except only Hezekiah, who by a special dispensation from God,
knew it;) much less can we, that are old, know the time of our going down, or
the Quantity of our Old Age. The Jewish Rabbis do mention three Steps or
Degrees in the measure of Old Age; the first they call [ Senes,] the second
they name [ Annosi] and the third they style [ Decrepidi;] and thus they
reckon, when a Man comes to be Sixty Years old, such an one they reckoned to be
reached only to the Borders of Old Age, passing along until he stepped on unto
Seventy Years of Age, at which Age David died, see after: Then Secondly, They
accounted him among the Annosos, an Old Man indeed, who lived up from Seventy
to Eighty Years of Age; such a Man was got a great way into that far Country of
Old Age, even into that Hyperborean cold and frozen Climate, where the Snow of
Hoary Hairs lay continually upon his Head undissolved. But Thirdly, The highest
Step and Degree, is such an one as lives above Eighty Years old; those they
number among Decrepid Ones, that then are Superannuated, declining to a
Doteage, in whom all the Senses of the Body, yea, and all the Faculties of the
Soul begin daily to decay, (as in Old Barzillai before-named, according to his
own confession unto David;) such very Aged Persons are accounted wondrous Old,
as is the Expression in the Old Singing Psalms, Psalm. 90.10. for it falls out
most commonly, that in this wondrous Old Age, we pay the deep interest of Pains
in dolorous Distempers, being the time wherein, (as Solomon says) we can have
no Pleasure, Eccles. 12.1,2, etc. and according to the Old Adage, [ bis Pueri
Senes] Old Persons are twice Children; as after their Birth, so before their
Death they become merely Childish, which once did occasion my self to say, when
I saw a very Old Woman, (one past all other Work (rocking the Cradle, that had
a very Young Babe in it, behold, there is one Child rocking another; and
thereupon I gave her the best advice I could, how it was high time for her to
make sure work for a better World. Moreover, beside this Rabinical
Animadversion thus Spiritually Improved, we have another more Critical and
Christian Calculation of Man's Life, made by one of our English Martyrs, who
left behind this curious Criticism, saying, [because the common term of Humane
Life, in the ordinary course of Nature, is but Threescore Years and Ten,
according to Moses (that Man of God's) computation, Psalm. 90.10. Now if we
divide those Seventy Years into four Equal Parts, then must it necessarily
follow, that every Man is three parts Dead, when he does but arrive at the Age
of Fifty Years. This solid Observation does much sooner mind us of our
Mortality, than that before of the Jewish Rabbis; and to the same purpose I my
self have (both publicly and privately) taught the like Lesson upon the end of
my four Fingers and the Thumb, showing to the Eyes of those I spoke to, how the
top of the little Finger represents our Childhood, the top of the next Finger
shows our Youth, the top of the longest Finger demonstrates our Middle Age,
when we come to our (...), or fullness of Height and Health; then the top of the
fore Finger, (which is a little lower than the middle Finger) declares our
beginning to decline by little and little; but lastly from the top of the fore
Finger to the top of the Thumb there is a great fall, and hence is it that we
usually say, such an Aged Person breaks fast in a little time; the Lord help us
to learn this Lesson upon our Fingers ends. NB. Note well, The God of Nature
has ordained, that Nature in all his created Beings must decay; yet this is
the Sovereign Power of the Creator over all his Creatures to determine the
Time, measure and Quantity, when the period of Nature shall come to decay, and
be dissolved. Thus Job acknowledges this Divine Rule and Dominion of God over
all Mankind, saying, [ his Days are determined, the number of his Months are
with God; thou have appointed his Bounds that he cannot pass, etc.] Job 14.5,6.
that is, God has set every Man the Bounds of his Time, (whether shorter)
called here [his Days] or longer, [the number of his Months;] and whether
shorter or longer, they have both their Bounds which they cannot pass, no more
than the unruly Ocean can pass the Bounds that its Maker has set it, Job
38.8,9,10,11. We should think the same of the Waters of Afflictions that the
Lord does limit them, saying, [ thus far shall thou go, and no sarther, and
here shall thy proud Waves be staid.] This Sovereign Rule and Dominion of God
over Man, in determining his Time upon Earth, is made manifest, in ordering
such long Leases of Life to the Patriarchs, and such a short Term to the Lives
of the following Ages: This is elegantly expressed thus by Tertullian, [ Vitae
Jugera illis, sed nobis tantum Spithamas Deus dedit illi Gigantes fuere, nos
vero Pugiones, etc.] God gave to the Patriarchs whole and long Acres of Life,
but to us only a Span-breadth thereof; they were lofty Giants, but we are puny
Dwarfs; yea, and this Divine Dominion is daily apparent, as the only
overruling Reason why some, likely to live long, do die soon; while others
that are more weak with daily Distempers, do live longer than they; as well as
it is the Will and Wisdom of God, that we see the Sons and Daughters of Men do
die daily in all Ages, in Childhood, Youth, Middle Age, as well as Old Age: And
as God has set Bounds to Man's Time, so has he determined Man's Task
likewise; thus John Baptist had his Course to fulfill, Acts 13.25. the word for
Course in Greek is [(...),] from whence the Dromedary has his Name, which is a
swift Creature, and will run an hundred miles in a day: Thus the Baptist, though
he lived not long, but was cut off by Herod, yet he lived much in a little
space; he wrought hard, and made haste in his Work, as not willing to be taken
with his Task undone. Thus it is said of David also in Acts 13.36. that he
served out his Generation, and then he fell asleep after he had done his
Generation-work according to the will of God. There is an appointed time to Man
upon the Earth, Job 7.1. both for his Time, and for his Task; and he who bears
up the Heavens, prescribes such a Pillar before Man, (with this Inscription
writ upon it, [ ne plus ultra] thou shall pass no farther: [ stat sua cuique
dies] said Virgil of old, every Man has his Day set him wherein he must die,
his last Day stands, but all the rest of his days to that Day are in a running
posture. Some Lutherans indeed do teach, that God has not determined the
period of Men's Days, but that it is in Man's power either to lengthen or to
shorten them: But many Scriptures teach the contrary, that God has set the
Bounds of every Man's Life to a very Day (as well as his Place of Dwelling,
Genesis 49.13. Acts 17.26.) and though thofe Bounds may be passed, which our Natural
Constitution in the ordinary course of Nature sets, yet those Bounds which
the Almighty Power and Providence of God sets us, we can never pass: For Job
uses two Metaphors.

(1 st) That of an Hireling, Job 7.1. and 14.6. Now we agree with Hirelings to
work with us for a day, and therefore are they called Day-labourers.

The 2 d Metaphor is, Tsaba,, warfare, (...), Sept. Job 4.1. because man's life
is exposed to Pirates, as before: Now if our life be a warfare, it is well known
how Soldiers have their time of fighting, and their time of resting according
to the Commands of their Captain General. They must obey his Order for both
falling on, and for falling back as he pleases, stat pro Ratione Voluntas, his
Will is a Law to them. And thus every good Soldier of Jesus Christ, (as Timothy
is called, 2 Timothy 2.3.) must be willing either to Act or to Rest according to
the Commands of the Captain of our Salvation, (as Christ is called Heb. 2.10.)
whether private Christian or public Minister, we must all resign up our Wills
into his Will, as we read in Ecclesiastic History of a famous Minister,
(called Martinus) who being by the Lord seized upon with Sickness, it is
recorded how he prayed, [ Decumbens dico, Domine, si adhuc populo tuo sim
necessarius, laborem tuum non recuso, etc.] that is, Lord, serve thy self of
me, for thy Service is sweet to me; if thou have no more Service to command me,
then, O Father, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit, etc. This was piously
spoken, yet Old Simeon, (as we read Luke 2.29,30.) spoke better, saying, [
Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace.] Now this good Old Man, having
laid in his Heart, what he lapt in his Arms, (the most blessed Armful that he
ever met with, even the Beautiful Babe of Bethleh^m) he then sung the [ nunc
Dimittas] so called, even his Soul out of his Body, saying, I fear no Sin, I
dread no Death, I have lived enough, I have my Life, I have longed enough, I
have my Love, I have seen enough, I have my Light, I have served enough, I have
my satisfaction, I have sorrowed enough, I have my consolation, (even the
consolation of Israel,) whom I and other Believers have long waited for, ver.
25. even the Messiah, that Menachem or Comforter, mentioned, Lam. 1 16. and yet
singing farther, Oh, sweet Babe, let this Psalm serve for a Lullaby to thee,
and for a Funeral for me; Oh sleep in my Arms, and let me sleep in thy Peace.
All this sweet Song Simeon concludes, with the procuring cause of his Sacred
Music, saying, [ for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.] This was his great
satisfaction, that he had accomplished his Service to his Most Honorable Lord
and Master, who had employed him all his Life in most Honorable Work, and who
(he was assured) was going to pay him most Honorable Wages; seeing he had got
his Savior, (...) in his Heart, as well as (...) in his Hand, as it is said of
the Blessed Virgin, who therefore is said to rejoice, Greek (...), danced a
Gallyard, and to magnify the Lord her Savior, as well as ours, Luke 1.47. But
far above those two Instances aforesaid, to wit, ( Ancient Martinus, and the
good Old Man Simeon) our sinless Savior says best of all concerning himself,
in his last Prayer before his Death, saying, [ Mine Hour is now come, O Father,
Glorify thy Son, etc. I have Glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the Work
thou gave me to do, and now, O Father, Glorify me with thy Self, that is, my
Manhood, with the same Glory which my Godhead had before the World was made,
John 17.1,4,5, etc. Our Lord did not did not ask his Wages before his Work was
done; his Time was now come, and he was now Ripe and Ready to be gone into his
Fathers Kingdom. This holy practice of our precious Redeemer is left upon
Record, on purpose, for our instruction and comfort, Romans 15.4. that it may be
a Pattern to avoid that precipitancy, which prevailed over those two famous
Prophets (men of God) Elijah and Jonah, who both of them in a strong Pang of
Passion, desired to Die before their Hour of Dying was come; and therefore are
we told, that these great Servants of God were subject to the like Passions as
we are, Acts 14.15. Jam. 5.17. It is a sinful desire for any who would be gone
to Heaven, before their Work be done on Earth; we must rather say, [ O Father,
if thou have any further Service for me to do, I am willing to live longer,
etc. the Will of the Lord be done, Acts 21.14.

Having thus far discoursed upon the first Accident of Old Age, (after its
Nature) namely, the Quantity or Measure of it, which we have observed to be
Uncertain and Various, either long or short, according to the Statute Law of
the great Lawgiver, the Lord of Lords, etc. [who has appointed all men once
to die, etc.] Heb. 9.27. even Methusalem, (who was the longest liver, upon
Scripture-record, and who came the nearest to be a Thousand Years Old, which is
reckoned a number of perfection, never attained to by any mere man.) Though he
lived many Hundred Years, even near to a Thousand, and begat Sons and
Daughters, yet he died at the last; see my first Volume of the History and
Mystery of the Holy Scriptures of Him at large.

Now I come to the Second Accident of Old Age, to wit, the Quality or Manner of
it, which is either Good or Evil. Concerning the first, How it is a good Old
Age in its own Nature, and by God's blessing upon it, I have already
demonstrated in the foregoing Discourse; and I do design to enlarge much more
upon that Point, when I arrive at the Third Part, (after its Nature and
Accidents) to declare the Dues to, and the Duties of Aged Ones, whereby Old Age
may become good indeed.

Now as touching the latter of these two, That Old Age is an Evil Age, that
Senium and Malum convertuntur: These two are convertible Terms; Solomon the
Wise does sufficiently evince and evidence, in his saying, [ Oh, Young Ones,
remember your Creator, before Evil Days come, and the Years draw nigh, wherein
you shall say, I have no pleasure in them,] Eccles. 12.1. Wherein he begins to
describe,

First, The wearisom evils of Old Age, from the latter end of ver. 1. to the
last end of ver. 6. Then,

Secondly, Of the evils of Death, ver. 7. both which he brings in as two strong
motives, to urge Young ones to be mindful of their Duty.

For, First in the General, All Authors, both those that be Civil, as well as
those that be Sacred, do unanimously concur in this point, That Old Age and
Misery are very seldom found separated. As,

(1.) Plutarch says, Senectus ut Africa semper aliquid Novi adportat, as
Africa is never without some Monster, so Old Age is never without some Ailment.

(2). Cato says, [ Solet Senectus esse, Deformis, Infirma, Obliviosa,
Edulenta, Lucrosa, Indocilis and Molesta,] that is, Old Age uses to be
Deformed, Feeble, Forgetful, Toothless, Covetous, Unteachable and Unquiet.

(3.) Horace says, [ Multa Senem circumveniunt Incommoda,] Many are the
Inconveniences that do encompass Old Persons, etc.

(4.) Seneca says in his Epistle 58. and that out of his own Experience, [ How
are our last Days the very Dregs and Lees of our Lives,] when the clearer part
is drawn out and spent, then the worst part does sink down to the bottom.

To add no more of Pagan Authors, save only Epictetus, (5.) calls Old Age, [
Vita Mors, Cadaver Spirans, and Mobile Cadaver,] that is, Old Age is a Living
Death, it is a Breathing Corpse, yea a moving Carcass.

Now hear what Sacred Authors say better than those aforesaid, is too long to
quote together in this place, seeing so much has been showed hereof already.
The Book of our own smarting Experiences speak loud enough to convince us of
the Evil of Old Age. How many Bodily Infirmities does daily attend us that are
Aged, what Aches of the Bones, what Pains in the Joints, what Convulsions of
the Sinews, what Torments of the Bowels; how dolorous are those Diseases of
Colic, Stone and Strangury in Old Persons; what Hollow Coughs, Distillations
of Rhume, what Debility of Nature incroaches daily upon all our Senses of Body,
and upon all the Faculties of the Mind, our Appetites to Food, our Digestions
of Food both feeble; so that in a word, Old Age is like the Common-Sewer, into
which all Diseases do empty themselves; and therefore Old Age may well be
called an Evil Age.

Secondly, After this General, more particularly the, The Evils of Old Age may
be reduced to Three Heads, to wit, Natural, Moral and Spiritual.

(1 st) The Evils that are Natural to it. And (1.) As to the Body, Many
Distempers do attend it, as those even now named, and many more beside, whereof
Barzillai complained, as before, 2 Samuel 19.34,35. All Aged Persons do smartly
feel the Burden of it, as that ancient Woman in Plautus, who being wished by
her Friends (that were walking along with her) to hasten and amend her pace,
smartly ^nswered, that she could not do so, for ^he carried a great Burden upon
her Back; and when no Burden did (as they said) appear to their Eyes, she
replied again, that Threescore Years were passed over her Head, and that was
her Burden. And the same may be said by those, whose Spirits are much spent,
and whose Strength is much wasted even at that Age; for then Age it self alone
is a Burden, much more in those that live up even to a Doteage and Uselesness.
This is made more manifest by Solomon, Eccles. 12. where he declares the Decays
accompanying Old Age; he says according to our English Translation, [then the
Grasshopper shall be a Burden,] ver. 5. but the original word, Hebrew, signifies
[the curvature or crookedness of the Back, which in Old Persons stands bent
like a Grasshopper; and this makes the motions of such as are crooked with Age
to be the more burdensome, or the Phrase there is Hyperbolical, intimating,
that every light matter will oppress those with their Burden, who are already
become a Burden to themselves: And beside this Natural Evil of Old Age, as to
the Body, there is a second as to the Estate, many Losses and Crosses do come
upon them; as the loss of some of their nearest and dearest Relations, and such
like, complaining as Old Jacob did, [who mourned for his lost Son many days,
and refused to be Comforted,] Genesis 37.34,35. and again, [ Joseph is not, and
Simeon is not, and must I lose my dear Benjamin too, as he had lost Rachel,
etc? Genesis 42.36. Though Jacob's mourning was only for supposed losses, yet he had
real ones also, as of his beloved Rachel, etc. Many more instances may be
mentioned, as of David mourning for the real loss of his Son Absalom, for whom
he made so deep a lamentation, etc. This loss of Relations is the greater
Natural Evil, because it is against the course of Nature for Parents to bury
Children, whereas Children use to bury Parents, for one Generation passes
away, when another comes; so that a Generation of Children does (as it were)
thrust out of the World a Generation of Parents by Natures Law. To all this let
me add my own exercise with this Evil, who have lived to bury eight Children
out of nine, etc. And yet there is a third Natural Evil attending Old Age, as
to their respect and reverence from the Younger Sort; alas, how are they as
Lamps despised, as Old Job complains, Job 12.4,5. and more fully Job
19.15,16,17,18. and 30.1, to 11, 12, 13. where he sighs out these sad words,
saying, [ Upon my Right Hand rise the Young, they push away my Feet, etc.]
which explaineth what he had said, ver. 1. that Younger than he was, did not
only deride him, and laughed him to scorn, (though they were no better than
Shagrag Dog-keepers, as he calls them, and most miserably poor, ver. 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10.) Yet these Young Scoundrils dared to kick him with their Feet, or
trip up his Heels to lay him along. Job was wont to have the chiefest Seats in
the Temple, and lowly Salutations in the Marketplace: He was now Ancient, and
had been Honorable, as he had set forth at large in Chap. 29. but here he
bewails his Misery, that he cannot have a Room in any Place to stand in, but
every paltry Boy is ready to push him down, etc. Thus likewise those Ill-bred
and Mistaught Children did petulantly deride that Old Prophet Elisha, yelling
out those impudent words, [ go up thou Bald-pate, etc.] 2 Kings 2.23. Having
nothing worse to upbraid him with, they taunt that Head with their Scorns,
which God had crowned with Honor, Prove. 16.31. And the same God who had thus
honored his Servant Elisha, does likewise vindicate this dishonor cast upon
him, ordering two She Bears (possibly robbed of their Whelps) to worry forty
and two of those Ill-natured Children: As their Childhood did not excuse them,
so their Idolatrous Parents were punished in being writ Childless, for giving
them no better Education; see more of this in my Third Volume on this same
History. NB. Note well, Suppose any of us Aged Ones be at any time derided by
Younger ones, this may allay our Grief, that God does not lead us into any
untrodden Path, for our Betters have gone before us therein, etc.

The Second and Third Evils, to wit, Moral and Spiritual, which do attend Old
Age, may be put together, and briefly improved. As,

(1 st) The Moral Evils are, (1.) An over-eagerness in a greedy seeking of
Wealth, and yet a niggardly unwillingness to spend what is gotten; no not
sometimes to supply the Necessities of Nature, etc.

(2.) A dull, slow and cold pace in all proceedings of Business, yea with a
timorous and fearful temper of Mind, and yet fretting and chafing at the same
dullness and backwardness that he beholds in others under him.

(3.) The Old Man is of a morose Mind, hard to be pleased himself, and as hard
to please others; a froward Spirit is easily displeased, (as we see in Babes at
the Breast. etc.) yet are not so easily pleased again.

(4.) Another Moral Evil in the Aged is, to complain of present Times, but
praising former Days of old, which the Old Men of those Days did as much
complain of, as he does of these: Whereas indeed the fault lies not in the
Times, (either present, or former,) but in the Persons that lives in those
Times, for in every Age, better Hearts and Lives would make better Times.

Then (2 dly) After these Moral Vices do follow Spiritual Sins, which are found
in Old Age, such as (1.) Ignorance, a mere Child for knowledge, no Fool like to
an Old Fool; and therefore though this silly Child be an hundred Years old, he is
denounced by a Divine Mouth to be accursed, Isai. 65.20. Thus the Old Age of
that silly Child Shimei, (who childishly played away his own Life) could not
exempt him from Justice; for it was David's charge to his Son Solomon, [ let
not his Hoary Head go down to the Grave in peace,] 1 Kings 2.6.

(2.) An indocible, untractable Frame attends Old Age to learn the great
Mysteries of Godliness, as appeared in Old Nicodemus, though a Master in Israel,
and could not but have read of a New Heart, which God promised to give, etc. in
the Prophet Ezekiel, and in other places of the Old Testament; yet how awkward
was he in entertaining the Doctrine of Regeneration, objecting against it;
First, [ How can a Man be born again?] And after Christ had told him, that the
way of the Spirits working this work, was incomprehensible, etc. yet comes he
off again with his ( How can these things be?] John 3.4,10. This Old Man, (nay
an Old Master in teaching work) understood no more of the Mystery of the New
Birth, than a rude Rustic can comprehend the profoundest Points of the
Mathematics, which be no better than Gibberish to him when he hears them: NB.
However it is no matter how dull the Scholar is, when Christ himself will
become the Teacher, as here; for this Nicodemus, who had long been a
Night-bird, during the Life of Christ, did at the last break forth as the Sun
from under a Cloud, to manifest his Love to his Lord after his Death, John
19.39.

(3.) To illustrate this farther, Old Age is Self-conceited, and cannot easily
be convinced, through Pride of Spirit rooted in it, he is too wise to learn,
therefore was it that Solomon preferred [a poor and wise Child, before an Old
and Foolish King, who abhors to be admonished,] Eccles. 4.13,14. for the Young
Child is apt to learn, and ready to receive Instruction, and will be as careful
to follow it; and all this is true Wisdom: Whereas an Old and Foolish King is
not only weak, but also wilful, and his Pride is the ground of his Wilfulness;
as he is short-sighted in his Mind, so he is stubborn and unconvincible in his
Will: There have been such Kings in the World, who in their Old Age, have
showed themselves so self-willed, and so wedded to their own vain Opinions,
that they never endured to ask Advice, and if any were given them, what they
fancied not, they assuredly rejected it; though they sometimes, yea very seldom
ask Counsel, yet never follow any but their own, until they ruin themselves and
their People.

(4.) As the Three former brings Ruin, etc. to the Bodies, not only of Old and
Foolish Kings, but also of Old and Foolish Subjects, who do harden their Hearts
against all good Counsel; yea, and that which is worst of all, these Three
aforementioned, bring destruction to their Souls likewise, by their living and
dying in that great sin of Unbelief, and final Impenitency, which their custom
in sin (taking away all conscience of sin) does at last seal them up in, where
the superabounding Grace of God does not interpose to disappoint it. This
refractory and untoward, untractable Temper of abhorring to be taught, has
been a long time observed, universally to accompany Old Age; insomuch that this
was the first ground of that Old Greek Adage, [ (...),] Senum Doctor, a Teacher
of Old Persons; by which Phrase the Wisdom of the Ancients used to express any
labor in vain, like those other Phrases, [ Aethiopem lavare] to wash a
Blackmore white, which Phrase is used in Scripture, Jer. 13.23. And to the same
purpose is that Adage used by Pagan Authors, [ Sysiphi saxum voluere,] a
Poetical Fiction, that this Sysiphus was doomed unto as a punishment for his
former Faults, that he was to roll an heavy Stone up the Hill, which then did
run down again of it self with its own weight; and when it came to the bottom,
his work was to roll it up again; yea, and that which was the Mischief and
Misery of this Man in this Work, it must be his only and continual Task for all
his time, etc. All these Adages do demonstrate the unteachableness of Old Age,
and that if we do not (through the Grace of God) remember our Creator in the
days of our Youth, while that tractable Temper continues with us, but still
drive it off until Old, then become we so slow, so oblivious, and so settled
upon the Lees, etc. insomuch that the Ministry of the Word (that they sit
under) is labor in vain to such, and Christ's Ministers may complain with the
Prophet, (as to such as hate to be reformed, and are incorrigible,) [ I have
labored in vain, and I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain,] Isai.
49.4. NB. Note well, how besotted, and even bewitched are such Persons, to make
that the Task of their Old Age, which ought to be the Trade of our whole Life,
and to settle their everlasting, and surest making or marring upon so sandy and
sinking a Foundation, as Old Age is, well called an Evil Age, for Reasons
aforesaid.

Now the next and Second Point to be discoursed upon is, How this Evil Old Age,
may become a Good Old Age, as was Abraham's, Genesis 25.8. and Isaac's, Genesis 35.29.
and David's, 1 Chronicles. 29.28. [ hic labor, hoc opus est,] this is an high, and an
hard undertaking; for the accomplishment whereof, let this be the method. As,

(1 st) The [(...)] that it may be so, seeing the Evil Old Age (which is so in
it self, and by decays of Nature,) has been made a good Old Age by the power
of Grace, as in those three aforenamed.

(2 dly) The [(...)] the Reasons why it ought to be made so, because our
eternal Weal or Woe hangs upon it. And,

(3 dly) The [(...)] the means whereby this marvelous change from Evil to good
may be wrought.

First, of the 1 st, That it may be so, it is clear, not only from the many
Examples of Holy Men and Women upon Record, in both the Old and New Testament,
who all lived holily to a good Old Age, and died happily at the last; and the
Scripture gives this honorable Character concerning Mnason, that he was an Old
Disciple of Christ, Acts 21.16. And the Ancient and Honorable are joined
together, Isai. 9.18. nor could Hoary Hairs be a Crown of Glory, as Soloman
says, Prove. 16.31. nor could a Gray Head be an Old Man's Beauty, Prove. 20.29.
if not found in the way of Righteousness: A gray headed experienced Christian
is called a Father 1 John 2.13. such, as whose due, is the highest veneration,
Levit. 19.32. especially such as are described in Psalm. 92.12,13,14. Such are
of the highest Form in Christ's School; for, NB. Note well, a Christian has
his degrees of Growth, distinctly described in the Word of God. As,

(1 st) We have his Conception, Gal. 4.19.

(2 dly) His Birth, 1 Pet. 1.23.

(3 dly) His Childhood, 1 Cor. 3.1,2.

(4 thly) His Youth, or well-grown Age, when he is past the Spoon, 1 John 2.13.

(5 thly) His full-grown Age, Ephesians. 4.13. And,

(6 thly) His Old Age, as 1 John 2.13. Acts 21.16, etc. Job 29.8. and 32.4,6,7.
Romans 16 5,7. and 1 Timothy 5.1,2. Unto all these Scriptures, showing how a Good
Old Age ought to be highly valued and reverenced, I may add the Testimony of a
Pagan Poet, who extolls that Golden Age, wherein he lived, having only the
Light and Law of Nature to conduct them in their Lives; yet thus he writes,
Credebant hoc grande Nefas and Morte piandum,
Si Juvenis Vetulo, non assurexerit, and si
Barbato cuicunque Puer, licet esse videret,
Plura Domi farra, and majores Glandis Acervos;
Tam venerabile erat praecedere quatuor Annis.
These are the Verses of Juvenal in his 13 th Satyr, the sense whereof, in
short, is this, That in this Pagan Poet's time; all Men looked upon it as a
Capital Crime, and counted it punishable by the Judges, if Young People did not
rise up, and reverence such as had Hoary Heads, though the Young were rich, and
the Aged were poor, etc. which is a clear demonstration, that the Law and Light
of Nature did concur, and taught the same Truth with the Law and Light of
Scripture, Levit. 19.32. and the rest aforementioned, especially when this Evil
Age in it self becomes by Grace a Good Old Age, it is to be honored, etc.

(2 dly) The [(...)] why it must be so, the Reasons be these over and above
that beforementioned, namely, that Old Age must be a good thing of it self,
and in its own Nature and Substance, (although it is made an evil thing, in too
many, by accident, as before,) because it is a Blessing which the Lord has
both graciously promised, and performed to many of his Servants, etc. And a
short Life is a Curse, which the same God severely threatens unto the Wicked;
yea, and long Life it self is also a Curse unto all Christless ones, though they
live until they attain to the Age of an Hundred Years, Isai. 65.20. Moreover,
the Reasons that demonstrate this great Truth, [we must be careful and
conscientious in making our Old Age a Good Age,] are principally Three: The
first is, because this doing as it ought to be done, will be a blessed Remedy
against those three woeful maladies of Old Age, to wit, the Natural, Moral and
Spiritual Evils aforementioned; therefore Solomon prescribes, the Remembrance
of God in the days of Youth, as a most comfortable preservative against all
those Evils which commonly Old Age is attended with, and makes it an
unpleasant time. As,

(1 st) A Good Old Age is a Sovereign Antidote against the Natural Evils
accompanying it. As,

(1.) Against the loss of Bodily strength, then the Grace of Faith, in the Good
Old Age, does put Strength, in Weakness, Health in Sickness, and Ease in Pain;
this comes to pass by the sorce of Faith, Heb. 11.34. Joshuah is one of those
that was strengthened in the weakness of Old Age, which he acknowledges,
saying, [and now behold the Lord has kept me alive,] Josh. 14.10,11. which
mercy was the greater, because he outlived many Thousands of other Israelites,
whose Carcases did fall in the Wilderness: Yet then he says of himself, [ I am
this day fourscore and five years old, yet lo, I am as strong this day as I was
in the day that Moses sent me (to spy out the Land of Promise, Numb. 13. which
was forty five years ago,) as my strength was then (when I was but forty years
old) even so is my strength now (at fourscore and five) for War, both to go out
and to come in,] Viridis and Vegeta Senectus, singular Dei Donum est; a fresh
and vigorous Ability for Generation-work in Old Age, is a singular Gift of God.
This Gift God gave to Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.7. and to Paul the Aged, (as he calls
himself, Phil. v. 9.) whose strength was perfect in weakness; and when he was
weak in Nature, then was he strong in Grace, 2 Cor. 12.9,10. and thus that
seeming Contradiction is reconciled. And this Gift God gave likewise to famous
Mr. Dod, in our days, who, as he was another Moses for meekness, (which is a
great prolonger of Life,) so he was not unlike him and Joshuah in Health and
Strength of Body, when he arrived to an exstream Old Age; this was a Mercy
which that Good Man most highly valued: So that it is said of him, [ Desicere
potius quam Desinere Visus est,] that is, he seemed rather to decay, dissolve
and melt away by Inches, than to die by any Agony of Death. It Is my frequent
and fervent prayer to God, that he would grant us an easy passage out of this
World, and an open passage into the better World; and to die like a Lamb is
universally esteemed as a great Gift of God. An exemption from the Torturing
Torments of the Stone, of the Strangury, of the Gripes and of the Gout, etc. is
my Singular Mercy.

(2.) As to the loss of their younger, near and dear Relations, this Good Old
Age wants not sufficient Cordials wherewith to sweeten the Bitterness, and
allay the Grief of this great Evil also; as good Old Abraham did comfort his
own Spirit, saying, [ let me bury my Dead out of my Sight, etc.] when he had
lost a precious Rib out of his Side, in the death of his dear Wife Sarah; not
only dear to him, but also very dear to God himself: Insomuch that God gave
this Honor unto her, above all other Women in Scripture Record, that the Age
of her life is Recorded, and of Her only, etc. Genesis 23.1,2. Why the length of
the Life of any other Woman (save only Sarah's) is not Recorded by God's Pen in
Scripture, our Divines render this Reason, that it was to humble that Sex,
which was first in bringing Sin and Death into the World, 1 Timothy 2.13,14,15.
and therefore deserved not to have the continuance of their Lives mentioned in
Sacred Writ by the unsearchable Will and Wisdom of God. It Is said indeed, that
Abraham mourned for her Death; and she was the first also, (that we read of)
who was mourned for, when she died; as well as the only one of that Sex, whose
term of Life is related by the Holy Ghost; and both these were done, for the
greate^ Honor of this Lady, (as Sarah, Hebrew, signifies) who was a Type of
the Gospel Church, Gal. 4.22, to 31. and she was the Wife of that greatest of
Patriarchs, who is called [the Father of the Faithful,] and whose Bosom is the
Synonymon with Mansions of Glory, Romans 4.16. Luke 16.22. Yet his mourning for
her was moderate, and not as without Hope, 1 These. 4.13. Her Death had not made
any such divorce from him, but there still remained a blessed conjunction
betwixt them; therefore he calls her [ his Dead] eight several times over in
Genesis 23.3, etc. to show he had not lost her, nor lost his interest in her, and
that he had only lent her to the Lord, he had only bid her [ good night] in
hope to see her Alive again in the Morning of the Resurrection; she was only
fallen [ asleep in Jesus,] 1 These. 4.13,14. the Union was not dissolved by Death.
As this consideration was comfortable to this Good Old Abraham, so it was no
less a comfort to that Good Prophet Ezekiel, when the Lord took from him [the
Desire of his Eyes,] Ezekiel. 24.16. even that sweet Companion of his Life: And
this may likewise be the Comfort of all Godly Couples, and of Friends also,
when God is pleased to make a separation one from another; it is only for a
time, and not for ever: Our present meetings together in this World, are joined
with some short partings asunder; but our Hope in the Lord is, we shall at last
meet together again in a better World, so as never to part asunder any more;
for then we shall be with the Lord for ever and for ever, wherefore let us
comfort one another with these words, 1 These. 4.17,18. Oh blessed Hour, Oh
thrice happy Union! There is but a Sleep for a Time, for a Night of Death only;
as by Sleep the Body is refreshed, so by Death the Body is refined: Let it be
our care to cleave close to Christ at the instant of Death, then shall we sleep
in Jesus, and he will be our Gain both in Life and Death, Phil. 1.21,22,23.
After this Night of Sleep, comes the Daybreak of Eternal Brightness; and after
this Union here below, comes an Everlasting Communion in Heaven above. Those
Scripture Comforts should come home to our Hearts; therefore ought we to
comfort one another with them, by Christian Communication, and then may they
afford us more strong Consolation than all the Comforts of Philosophy, (of
which Cicero said on his Deathbed,] Nescio quo modo imbecillior Medicina quam
Morbus est,] that is, I know not how it comes, that the Medicine is too weak
for my Disease.] None can say so of those Sripture Cordials, which the Lord
does ordinarily water with the Dews of his Divine Blessing The same Cordial did
serve to satisfy Job likewise in the loss of his Children, looking upon them
not as lost, but only lent to the Lord, who had before but lent them unto him,
and had called his own only home to himself: He still looked on them as his,
Dead as well as Living, they were still his, [ his Dead] (as Abraham's phrase
was so often of his Dead Wife) after they were Dead and Buried. How else could it
be said [that God gave to Job twice as much of every thing as he had before,
seeing he had but the same number of Children afterward, that he had before,
to wit Seven Sons, and Three Daughters, Job 42.10,13. He reckoned there
remained still a blessed Union and Conjunction between him and them, which was
founded upon his hope of an Happy Resurrection. In a word, learn we to say, our
Godly Relations are not lost, they are only gone before us, and we are hastening
after them; they are only removed out of one Room into another, out of the
Outhouses and Kitchen of this World, into the Presence Chamber and Palace of
Heaven: They have changed their Place, but not their Company, as Good Dr.
Preston said upon his Deathbed. They are only gathered like Lillies, Cant.
6.2. by the Hand of Christ, who has transplanted them into the Paradise of
God. Our Lord said to the penitent Thief, [ this day thou shall be with me in
Paradise,] Luke 23.43. NB. Oh Matchless Love in our Dear Redeemer, to speak
thus lovingly to this poor Penitent, while he was in horrible Torture himself
upon the Cross, and paying so unspeakably dear for Man's sin! yet rejected he
not this Malefactor's Petition, ver. 42. How much more may we now hope he will
hear our Prayers, and answer them with good words and comfortable, Zech. 1.13.
seeing the Debt is now all paid, and the whole work of Redemption is now
finished.

3 dly Suppose the Third Natural Evil do come upon us, to be as Lamps despised,
and a scorn to Young Scoundrils, etc. (as Job complained before) in our Old
Age, yet is there a blessed Remedy to this wretched Malady, namely, that
precious Promise, [commit thy way unto the Lord, etc. and he shall bring forth
thy Righteousness (in which way thou must still be found) as the Light, and thy
Judgments as the Noonday,] Psalm. 37.5,6. that is, we must in the first place
mind the Condition of this Promise, to wit, of rolling our selves upon the
Lord, (as the Hebrew word signifies) and depend wholly upon him, both for
safety and for success in all our undertakings: Kimchi reads it, Volue and
exonera, unload thy self by casting thy Burden upon the Lord, (as David
explains it, Psalm. 55.22.) that is, ease thy Mind to God by Prayer, and resign
up thy All by Faith unto his care and conduct, [ Trust also in him;] this is of
the same import with Commit, but repeated to take better impression, and to
beget more encouragement; then whatsoever we commit to him, he will bring it to
pass in the general, ver. 5. Then follows the particular part of this Promise
in the Second Place about Slanders, ver. 6. saying, God will so oil thy good
Name, (which is, as precious Ointment, Eccles. 7.1. Prove. 15.30. and 22.1.)
that no defaming Infamy shall stick to it; Dirt will stick upon a Mud-wall, but
it cannot do so upon Marble: Suppose we be slandered without Cause, as God
tells Satan he slandered Job without Cause, Job 2.3. with 1.9. and we lie under
those Blacknings for a time; but consider how the Earth lies under Darkness
all the Night long; yet as the Morning by its sudden arising drives away that
Darkness, so shall the Lord clear up our wronged Innocence; and as the Moon
wadeth from under a Cloud, and from under an Eclipse, by the interposition of
the shadow of the Earth betwixt her and the Sun, so shall we in God's time get
over all our Evils of this kind, or of any other, if we still be found in the
way of Righteousness; God will clear up the innocence of his slandered
Servants, and bring it to light like the Sun at Noonday; but assuredly this
will be done at the day of Judgment however, if not sooner; for then there
shall surely be a Resurrection of Names, as well as of Bodies, etc. NB. Note
well, we must often be pondering in our Minds that great Text aforenamed, Prove.
16.31. which runs thus in the Hebrew, [ Gnetereth Sephereth Shebai bederek
Tsedakah Timetseh:] which in Latin is thus expressed, [ Diadema Gloriae
Canities, in Via Justitiae Invenietur:] this in English is read thus, [ the
Hoary Head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness,]
which at ^rge is treated on before. This great Text, (I say again) all we Aged
Ones ought to make the constant Rule of our whole Conversations unto the day of
our Deaths, and then will come the Crown of Life, etc.

(2 dly) As the Good Old Age has its Comforts against these Natural Evils, so
it wants not Cordials against Moral and Spiritual Evils; (let us put them both
together;) for then,

(1.) Our Corruptions now are more mortified than ever they were before: Thus
Paul the Aged, (as he calls himself, Philem. ver. 9.) could then say of
himself, [ I have fought the good fight, etc.] 2 Timothy 4.7. He found that Thorn
in the Flesh, which he had so sorely complained of, 2 Cor. 12.7. to be now
conquered, and his fighting against it (he found) was then as good as finished,
because in a Good Old Age.

(2.) Grace is then fortified, as well as Lust mortified; Grace is now more
vigorous, more lively and more powerful than heretofore, while it was clogged
and overloaded with many youthful Lusts; but [ as the Outward Man decays, so
the Inner Man ought to revive day by day,] 2 Cor. 4.16. This is the Godly Man's
Motto, as that good old Minister Peter Martyr said upon his Dying Bed, [ My
Body is weak, but my Soul is well; it is well for the present, but it will be
better hereafter; it is well in the Kingdom of Grace, having overcome the Flesh,
World and Devil, but it shall be best of all in the Kingdom of Glory:] The
Inner Man in Old Age ought to be not only more brisk and powerful, but also
more fruitful in the fruits of Righteousness and true Holiness, or Holiness of
Truth, as it is in Greek, [(...),] opposite to formality, Ephesians. 4.24. this is
God's Promise to the Good Old Man, [ He shall bring forth fruit in his Old Age:
He shall be fat and flourishing, being planted in the Courts of his God,] Psalm.
92.12,13,14. that is, he being rooted and grounded in Christ, and living under
the droppings of the Sanctuary, shall flourish like the Palm, (which is noted
to grow very Tall, (always Green, etc, though it has many weights at the Top,
and many Snakes at the Bottom, (though it be not known to grow in our cold
Climate,) and like a Cedar, wherewith Lebanon flourished, and whereon the
Temple of Solomon was built; it is not said, [ he shall grow like the Grass,] as
it is said, [ the Wicked spring as the Grass,] Psalm. 92.7. for if that proud
Grass grow never so great and lofty, they shall be mowed down with the Sith of
God's wrath, seeing there is one higher than the highest of them, Eccles. 5.8.
and in things wherein they deal proudly the Lord God is above them, Exodus
18.11. Now we Aged ones ought to make a serious search, and an earnest enquiry,
whether we bring forth Fruit in our Old Age, whether we be fat and flourishing,
especially if we have been long planted in the House of our God; it is a shame
to us, that we should be like the lean Kine of Egypt, which eat up the fat
Kine, and still remain as lean and as ill fa^ed as heretofore, Genesis 41.3,20.
it is a sad Judgment of God, when he gives us meat to the full, yet sends
leanness into our Souls, Psalm. 106.15. When God sends among fat ones, leanness,
Isai. 10.16. woe to us, if yet we cry out [our Leanness, our Leanness,] Isai.
24.16. We should all be like Wine, which the older it is, the better it is; our
Graces, like good Liquor, should run fresh to the bottom, etc. our last works
should be our best works, Rev. 2.19. Though our beginning was but small, yet our
latter end should greatly increase, Job 8.7. and we should hold on in the way
of Righteousness, and grow stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. Veteres non
veterascent, though we grow old and weak in Nature, yet ought we not only to
retain our former vigor and verdure of Grace, but also to grow in Grace, 2
Pet. 3.16. from one degree of Grace to another, that is, to the highest degree,
Ephesians. 4.13. We must grow above our Corruptions, especially our
Constitution-sins, the sins of our Nature, our darling sins, our best beloved
Lust. Oh God forbid, that Erasmus his Character be upon us, which he put upon
the Bribanti or Flemmings, (of whom he says,) [ Quo magis Senescunt; eo magis
Stultescunt,] the older they grow, the foolisher they become,) Oh, God forbid
(I say) that any of us should do so; it is the sign of an Hypocrite, who takes
no deep Root, when planted seemingly in God's Courts, (as the sincere Servants
of Christ do, and grow into Fruit-bearing in its Season, etc.) whereas the
Hypocrite is only thrust in like a Stake into the Earth, and never grows. How
then ought we all Aged Persons to fear and tremble, that we do not run out our
Lives in Hypocrisy, and so die like Fools at the last: And therefore for the
undeceiving of our own precious Souls, and for the better settling, and
comforting of our own immortal Spirits, concerning our sincerity in the sight
of God, let us compare Time with Time; can we say in the witnessing of the Holy
Ghost, that time was, when the Assaults of Satan upon my Soul have been very
violent, but through Grace, since that time, I have found them feebler than
heretofore; yea, and through the abundant Grace of my dear Lord strengthening
me, these Assaults of Satan are become less daring, and more cowardly in my Old
Age: As I hinted before, let me enlarge upon it here; if it be said to the
honor of Young Men, (in whom youthful passions are very pregnant, rapid, and
often precipitant and preposterous, etc.) that they had overcome the Wicked One,
1 John 2.13. Oh then what a shame and dishonor it is for us, who are ranked
and reckned among Fathers, to fall short of the younger and lower Rank, and
still remain Slaves to our Lusts, in whom Nature is decayed, and so less grace
is required to resist the Tempter, and to bridle in the Temptation. May we not
say, that now by the strengthening Love of Christ upon us, we can more easily
shake off that Viper (the Old Serpent) from off our Hearts, as Paul the Aged
did easily shake off that venomous Viper from off his Hands into the Fire, Acts
28.3,4.5. and that without receiving any harm thereby, even so we ought to
bless the Lord for that Miracle of Mercy, that no deadly ^oison of Satan does
now harm us, as our Lord did promise unto all Believers after his Resurrection,
Mark 16.17,18. Oh that all we Aged Ones could sincerely praise the Lord for
this high Favor, that (...) now find by sweet experience, we can better resist
the Devil now, so as to make him flee from us, Jam. 4.7. We can now resist him
more steadfastly in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5.8,9. than we were able to do in our
youthful days; and though we be able (through Grace) to say this, yet out of an
Holy Jealousy over our own Hearts, we must still make a farther enquiry, what
is the principal procuring Cause of such an happy and easy Conquest over our
own Corruptions, and Satan's Temptations, now in our Old Age, whether we be not
more beholden herein unto the decays of our own Natures in us, than to any
strength of God's Grace freely given to us, because we may die to sin by the
deficiency of our natural strength of Body, when sin does not die to us,
through those powerful Operations of the mortifying Spirit of Grace, Romans 8.13.
but more of this after, etc.

Now come we to the Second Reason, why a Good Old Age is a great blessing,
because the goodness of it, is not only a blessed Antidote and Preservative
against those threfold Evils before-named, but also it is a blessed Preparative
for Death at the end of our Old Age, and of our Lives. This preparation for
Death is not only an universal, but also an indispensable Duty, for after death
comes the Judgment, Heb. 9.27. then is the time of Reckoning, which our Lord
Requires after his Returning, (however long or short it be) wherein all Mankind
(both the good and the bad Servants) must [ Reddere Rationem,] or give an exact
account of their Stewardship, whether they have wasted or improved their Lord
and Master's Goods, Matthew. 25.14,19. Luke 16.1,2. and 19.15, etc. as I show at
large in my Fourth Volume of the History and Mystery of that Parable, page 185,
186. Now every Man's Death-day is his particular Doomsday, for then the Spirit
returns to God who gave it, Eccles. 12.7. when the Body returns to Dust, of
which it was first made, Genesis 2.7. by rotting in the Grave, etc. Then the Soul
goes to God, not to dwell with him (for there the Speech is made of all Men,
both bad and good, but to be disposed of by him for his Final Estate; then is
the Soul (or Spirit, as being there opposed to the Body,) to receive its Final
Doom, either for Everlasting Weal, or for Everlasting Woe. Therefore to prepare
for Death is a most necessary (though it be a much neglected) Duty. Now such as
be good in Old Age, their goodness consists in being always prepared for it,
both Habitually and Actually; they learn to die daily, 1 Cor. 15.31. and makes
Death familiar to them, both at Bed and Board. Their Conversation is in Heaven,
while their Commoration is here on Earth, Phil. 3.20. They labor and learn to
live with dying Though^s, because they hope at last to die with more living
comforts. They have Heaven (as an happy Harbor of Rest) in the Eyes of their
Hope, which serves to season and sweeten all Sorrows and Sufferings to them, as
it was with blessed Paul, who had his Eye fixed upon that Crown of Glory which
was laid up for him, and for all Believers, 2 Timothy 4.8. and therefore he was
not at all discouraged at his light Afflictions, which were but for a moment,
in comparison of that exceeding and eternal weight of Glory,] 2 Cor. 4.17.
where we have a most elegant Antithesis or opposition, and a double Hyperbole,
beyond the reach of our English Translation. As thus, (1.) For Affliction, here
is Glory. (2.) For light Affliction, here is a weight of Glory. And, (3.) For
momentary Affliction, here is Eternal Glory; and the sight of this by an Eye of
Faith, put Paul upon his [ Cupio Dissolvi,] I desire to be dissolved, Phil.
1.21,22,23. [(...),] there signifies, to loose off from the shore of this
Mortal Life, and to launch out into the Ocean of Immortality, which he
accounted (...), that is, far, far better, and best of all. Thus this
preparation for Death had caused Old Simeon, (before this Apostle,) even to
sing his Soul out of his Body, as before. This likewise made that Good Old Man
Job to say, [ I would not live always,] Job 7.16. for he hoped to behold his
Redeemer, etc. Job 19.25. Thus may we accordingly say, [ we would not be Young
always,] because we have been so hampered and pestered with many youthful
Lusts, which now through Grace] a Good Old Age has weakened. An Hoary Head
that is found in the way of Righteousness, does ripen fast, (like good Fruit
upon the Tree of Life in its Autumn,) and becomes day by day more mellow for
Death, and has nothing th^n to do, but to die, being able (through Mercy) to
say with his sweet Savior, [ Father, I have finished my work, which the^
gave me to do in the World,] John 17.5. Oh, how ready was David, how willing,
and how prepared to die, and to fall asleep in Jesus, 1 These. 4.14. when he
could say, ( his Conscience bearing witness with him in the Holy Ghost, as Romans
9.1.) that he had served out his Generation,) in his whole Generation-work)
according to the will of God, Acts 13.36.

The Third Reason why a Good Old Age is a most rich Blessing, and Benefit to
the Sons and Daughters of Mankind, is, because it does privilege them with a
true Title unto Mansions of Glory, prepared for them in a better World: Such as
have continued in ways of Holiness all their Life, and become faithful unto
death, Rev. 2.10. they shall assuredly at the last arrive at the Haven of
Heaven and Happiness when they die; for God himself has assured us, (and God
Keeps the best and surest Ensuring Office,) that having our Fruit unto
Holiness, then our end shall be Eternal Life, Romans 6.22,23. for then comes
first the Joy of Harvest, as when fruitful Fields are white unto Harvest, John
4.35. then comes the Husbandman with his Sith or Sickle, and cuts down his
Corn, binds it up in Bundles, and carries it Home to his Barn, etc. even so,
God the great Husbandman, (as Christ calls him, John 15.1.) when he sees his
old Servants, (as it were) white unto Harvest with Hoary Heads, and fully
ripened in the way of Righteousness; then does he take them down by the hand of
Death, and gathers them Home into his heavenly Garners. Our Lord does certify
this great Truth to us, over and over again, saying, [that Heaven is surely
secured for us, and we are likewise safely secured for Heaven by the mighty
Power of God, the word there [(...)] signifies we are kept as with a Guard,
and in a Garrison, and that at the last, [we shall receive the end of our
Faith, even the salvation of our Souls, 1 Pet. 1.4,5,9. Insomuch that Death,
which is in it self no other than Nature's Divorce, the Bodies Prison, the
Soul's Banishment, the Arrest of Judgment, the Curse of Sin, and the King of
Terrors, (as well as the Terror of Kings,) Job 18.14. unto all Mankind in
General; yet such a change does the power of Godliness (both in Young and Old,
that are chosen and called,) make in their Changes from one World to another;
that their Death's is only their (1.) Harvest or Ingatherings into God's
Garner, etc. (2). It Is the Joy of Marriage, which is called a Rest in the House
of the Husband, Ruth 3.1. so Death is our Rest, A Rest from their Labors, Rev.
14.13. they shall Rest,

(1 st) From their Labors of Necessity, their Needs of Nature shall then cease
for ever, they shall Hunger no more, they shall Thirst no more, etc. as they
have done while in the Body.

(2 dly) They shall Rest from their Labors of Infirmity, they shall never
complain of any more Aches and Pains in any one of the parts of the Body, as
they have done frequently heretofore in the time of their Mortality.

(3 dly) From the Labors of their Callings, etc. they shall toil no more in
the Sweats of either their Brows or their Brains, etc.

And (4 thly) Which is above all, they shall Rest from their Labors of
Iniquity, a Laboribus Peccati, as well as Officii; they shall never sin any
more, whereas heretofore, in the time of their sojourning upon Earth, they had
this weight upon them, which they could never lay aside, nor cast it off; and
sin did then easily beset them, so that they could not run the Race that was
set before them, Heb. 12.1. Because of the Law of the Members, that did
continually war against the Law of their Minds, and often bringing them into
Captivity; yea, and as often making them to cry out, [ Oh wretched Man that I am,
who shall deliver me, etc. Romans 7.23,24. But now Christ is come to them, and
knocked off all their Fetters, (which formerly clogged them, etc.) and sets
them at perfect liberty, Isai. 61.1. and those whom the Son of God does free,
they are free indeed, John. 8.36.

(3. Death, to those that die in the Lord, and in a Good Old Age also, is not
only the Christians Harvest, Marriage and Rest, as before, but it is likewise
their Conquest over all their Spiritual Enemies; so they have also the Joy of
Victory as well as of Harvest, of Marriage and of Rest. They are become by
their Holy Life and Happy Death more than Conquerors, Romans 8.37. even
Triumphers in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14. and so as they have won the Crown of Glory,
by their overcoming the Wicked one, through the strengthening Love of Christ
upon them, so they shall wear it, as Kings, Rev. 1.6. and as Conquerors, for
evermore. It Is said [the last Enemy to be destroyed is Death,] 1 Cor. 15.26.
Now to all true Believers, Death is already swallowed up in Victory, ver. 55.
as Fuel is swallowed up by the Fire, and as the Sorcerers Serpents were
swallowed up by Moses his Serpent; so that they can say to Death, when it comes
to them, as Jacob said to Esau, [ surely I have seen thy Face, as the Face of
God] Genesis 33.4,10. Thus that Esau ( Death) does meet a Member of Christ with
Kissing, rather than with Killing, or so much as Frowns, yea and guards him
home to his Father's House, as Esau guarded his Brother Jacob Home to Canaan
after his long absence from it; [ he went before Jacob as his Lifeguard,] ver.
12. Thus after a long Conflict by the Indwellings of Sin all our Life, comes
the Conquest at the last in our Death: Alas, we cannot beat sin out of Doors as
Sarah did the Bondwoman Hagar; but this Fretting Leprosy, sin, can never be
either washed out, or scraped off from the Walls of our Earthly Tabernacles,
until the House, that is infected with that Plague, be demolished by Death, and
the Stones and Timber thereof be altogether taken down: As it was thus in the
Type under the Law concerning the House of Leprosy, Levit. 14.43,44. So it is
with our Houses of Clay as the Antitype, which can no way be Amended, but must
be Renewed; and this is only done in part while we are in the Kingdom of Grace:
But this cleansing Work is completely perfected, when Death gives us a
dismission from hence into the Kingdom of Glory. The belief of this, made Old
Simeon sing his Soul out of his Body, and Paul the Aged, Phil. v. 9. was not
only a Conqueror, but (which was more) even a Triumpher in Christ, as before,
for he sang a Triumphant Song over Death and the Grave, singing as well as
saying, [ Oh Death, where is thy Sing, and Oh Grave, where is thy Victory!] 1
Cor 15.55. This is the boldest, and the bravest Challenge, that ever any Mortal
Man did ring in the Ears of Death, in which words he (as it were) out-braved
it, calling it Craven to its Face, as the Vulgar saying is, and bids it do its
worst to him that it could do, like the Philosopher Anaxarchus, who with an
undaunted Courage told the Tyrant, (who was beating his Body to pieces with a
great Iron Pestle in a large Mortar, made purposely for that Barbarous
Butchery,) in the very Act of his Martyrdom, he most confidently cried out to
his Tormentor, Tunde, Tunde Tyranne, Vasculum frangis, sed Anaxarchum non
Laedis,] Beat on, beat on thou Brutish Tyrant, thou indeed does break the
Vessel of the Man, but thou can never hurt Anaxarchus the Man himself. Much
more might this blessed Apostle insult over this greatest of Tyrants, that
universal Destroyer of Mankind, to wit, Death with his Javelin in his hand,
seeing he was so able as to render such weighty Reasons for his Triumphing
Insultation as he says, [the Sting of Death is Sin, etc. ver. 56. signifying
hereby, that our dear Redeemer had been the Death of Death by his Death. Mors
Mortis, Morti, Mortem quoque Morte dedisset.The Death of Christ gave Death its
Death, as it was prophesied of him, [Oh Death, I will be thy Death, etc.] Hos.
13.14. thus our Savior did disarm Death, and took out the Sting from this
Venomous Serpent; so that we may now as safely put Death into our Bosoms, (in a
serious Meditation of dying Daily) as some men (whom I have seen) have (with
enough of safety) put into their Bosoms a Snake, whose Sting was before pulled
out. If Death do now shoot out any Sting at us, we may thank our selves, for
our not being more constantly sound in the way of Righteousness: If at any time
we turn aside to cr^ked Paths, there will the old crooked Serpent meet us, and
he will not only sting us there, but also leave his Sting behind him in us, (as
the Be does to those that are stung by it,) and this may be the procuring
Cause of many sad effects, namely, of much smartings, burning pains and
sorrows, if that Sting be not timely d^awn out by the Grace of true Repentance:
The Lord himself p^ed that Stinging Sermon unto Cain, [ I^ thou do well,
shall thou not be accep^d? but if thou do evil, then sin lies at thy (...)]
that is, like a mighty Mastiff-D^g, which lies sleeping at the Door, and if
once awakened, he is there ready to pull out the Throat of the Soul, Genesis 4.7.
And Moses tells the People, (agreeable to this caution of the great God to
Cain,) [ and surely your sin will find you out,] Numb. 32.23. that is, the
Guilt of sin will ha^ you at your Heels like a Blood-Hound* and the punishment
of it will ov^ke you, etc. Yet such as do surely and ^t their sin by an
unfeigned Repen^ce, before their sin thus fearfully find (...) them, even all
such as c^nfesseth and ^keth their sin, shall fi^d (...), Pro^. 28.13. Then if
Death at (...) ^orth ^y Sting at us, 'ti^ no m^re harm^ul than an enchan^d
Sti^g^ like those Serpents which the (...) raised up by their En^ments, Exodus
^.12. they were (...) really Serpents* but in appearan^ only, and ^o their
Stings were like themselves more Ph^ms, which could not (...) sting any one
true Israelite; and as (...) M^k-Serpents were swallowed up by Moses his real
one, even so Christ (who is Life Essential) has swallowed up Death in Victory,
as before. So that now, (through the Grace of Christ) though Death may buzz about
our Ears, like a Drone-Bee that has lost its Sting, yet it cannot sting us
with any mortal Sting, for that is quite lost in the death of Christ for all
his Redeemed; as Christ has taken away, not sin it self, but the Guilt of sin:
So nor has he taken away Death it self, but the Sting of it. Thus Augustine
does phrase this double Purchase of Christ for us, both in respect of Sin, and
in respect of Death, saying, [ Christus tollit, and Peccatum, and Mortem nonne
sint, sed ne obsint,] our Lord indeed does take away both Sin and Death from
us, yet not that they should not be at all, but that they should not be hurtful
to those for whom he died: And it is for this glorious Privilege that the
Apostle Paul (as one of Christ's chief Heralds) proclaims openly to the
World, and that with a world of Solemnity and Triumph, his own Victory over
Death by his dear Redeemer, 1 Cor. 15.57. and therefore exhorts us to be always
steadfast and unmovable, and always abounding in the work of the Lord,
well-knowing that our Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, ver. 58. The
same Apostle says with such a firm Faith, (which both took Root downward, and
brought forth Fruit upward,) that for him to live was Christ, and to die was
gain; and he longed to be dissolved, Phil. 1.21,22,23.

(5 thly) It Is his returning Home to his Father's House, etc. because death to
a Good Man is the daybreak of an eternal Brightness; it is as the Valley of
Achor, as a Door of Hope into the celestial Canaan, Josh. 7.24,27. and 15.7.
Hos. 2.15. even into that Heavenly Country unto which the Holy Patriarchs so
earnestly pressed to enter, Heb. 11.13,14,15. and (as it were) hastened Home
thither, where their Father was, and their All also. Hereupon for them to die,
was no more but repaterasse, (as Father Bernard phraseth it) that is, to go
Home again to their Father's House, whither when they come, they are assured of
a most hearty, and of a most happy welcome. The Parable of the penitent
Prodigal, and his compassionate Father's meeting together at Home with Feasting
and exceeding great Joy, Luke 15.20,23,24. does illustrate this. The Prodigal
only came, but the Father ran and fell upon his Neck, and kissed him, and
killed the fatted Calf for him, and put the best Robe upon him, etc. to make
him welcome; yet all this was but a dim shadow of that exceeding, excessive and
eternal meeting of our Heavenly Father with his dear Children, to whom Christ
most lovingly speaks, [ Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, from the foundation of the World, Matthew. 25.34. Oh the
infinite Bowels of a Father yerning over his Adopted Sons and Daughters, as if
he had thus said, [ Where have you been, my dear Darlings, all this time of my
long absence from you, and of yours from me, come n^w, and heartily welcome;
come now into my Bosom, which is now wide open to receive you, as the welcomest
Guests that over accosted me; ye shall lie warm in my Bosom to all Eternity,
etc. and with Crowns of Glory upon your Heads, ye shall sing Hallelujahs unto
the Lord for ever and ever.] NB. Note well, To know this upon a dying Bed,
c^nnot but be a Rich Cordial, to know that death is only Perta Coeli, and Janua
Vi^* the Post^rn Gate to the Heavenly City, and the Narrow Door to Everlasting
Life; that it is our restoration into a better Paradise, than that was out of
which the first Adam was banished at first by his sinning* but this Heavenly
Paradise. The Second Adam purchased for us by his suffering that death does now
(by the purchase of Christ) bring to us both, [ Malorum omium Ademptionem, and
Bon^rum omnium Adentionem,] that is, the r^moving of all that is evil, and the
receiving of all that is good. This consideration brought Paul out of his
S^r^it, (when he had been musing and ^hting) and knew not what he should
ch^ose, ^ether Life or Death: at last he (...) ^orth into this resolve, [
(...),] I desire to be diss^lved, and to return (...) to my Father's House,
from whom I expect to hear, [ Well done the good and faithful Servant, enter
(...) into the Joy of thy Lord,] Matthew. 24.21,23. which is a Joy so big, so
great, that it cann^ enter into us, [ Quicquid Recipitur, recipitur ad Modum
Recipientis,] says the ^losopher, the Vessel receiving m^ (...) Measure
congruous to, and c^ (...) the Matter received. Now (...) ou^ Vess^ls are not
large en^ (...) Joy to enter into us, the (...) that we must enter into (...)
it is such a Joy, as is more m^ (...) Lord and Master, than for (...) yet such
a liberal Lord do w^ (...) as will honor his Servants with (...) matchless
Joy. We serve a most Hono^rable Master, who employs us in most Honorable Work,
and will at last pay us with most Honorable Wages.

Unto all this aforesaid, let me add the Christian's Charter, as another
precious Cordial unto a dying Saint, namely, the large Inventory which the
blessed Apostle distinctly describes, that belongs to every true Believer,
saying, [ all things are yours, whether the World, (and so you lose nothing
when you leave the World) or Life, or Death; or things present, or things to
come, all are yours; and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's,] 1 Cor.
3.21,22,23. that is, the World is theirs, though not in possession; yet by way of
Reduction, ye shall have Food and Raiment convenient for you, Prove. 30.8. Heb.
13.5. and ye shall have the best things of a better World, in a way of
Reversion, seeing you are Christ's and Christ is God's. And it is no trifling
part of this Inventory neither, that Death is theirs; for that is of great
value with God himself, as it is said, [ precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of his Saints,] Psalm. 116.15. Nor is the Title, the Term and the
Tenure that the Christian holds this part of his Character and Inventory by,
but (as the Apostle there observes) the fullest, the longest, and the surest
of all others. For,

(1.) The Title is the fullest, as it is both by Purchase, and by Conquest. Also,

(2.) The Term is the lastingest, as it includes both time present, and to
come; not only Possession, but Reversion too. And,

(3.) The Tenure is the safest, as it is the highest; it is a Tenure in Capite,
entailed for greater security upon the Crown; therefore is this Famous Clause
added, all are yours, ( safe enough) because you are Christ's, and Christ is
God's, etc.

CHAP. VII. Means for making Old Age, to become a Good Age.
NOW I come to the Third Particular, after,

(1 st) The [(...)] that Old Age may be a Good Age. And after,

(2 dly) The [(...)] Or Reasons why it must be so, etc. Then,

(3 dly) The [(...)] Or the Means and Manner how this Age which is Evil, in,
and of it self, may be made a Good Age. In order hereunto, we must,

First, Consider the Dues, which by a Divine Appointment ought to be duly paid
unto Old Age. And,

Secondly, We must consider the Duties, which likewise by a Divine Appointment
ought to be daily pra^tised in our Old Age. NB. Note well, The former of these
two has its Dependency upon the latter of them; for if those Duties prescribed
by God's Precept, be not daily practiced in our Old Age, then those Dues (of
Honor and Reverence) which are propounded also by God's Promise, can never be
duly paid to our Old Age; but the contrary, even Scorn and Contempt.

First, Of the first of these, namely, the Dues that are the Due Homage and
Divine Debt which God commands all Mankind to pay unto Old Age. As,

(1.) In Levit. 19.32. (which has been spoken to before,) where God's Charge
runs in this Sense, [ Do thou Honor the Face of the Old Man, if thou fear
God, who will surely punish thee, if thou do it not.] And,

(2.) God took it heinously at the Hands of the King of Babylon, saying to him,
[ Upon the Ancients have thou very heavily laid thy Yoke, and showed them no
Mercy,] Isai. 47.6.

(3.) God did reckon it as a great and grievous Crime to have the Aged and
Ancient Ones despised by the Younger Sort, and therefore he threatens this as a
punishment to the stubborn Jews, [that the Child shall behave himself proudly
against the Ancient,] Isai. 3.5. Such sins as are threatened for punishments,
are usually great sins; and had not the saucy Carriage of Children toward the
Aged, (especially toward their own Aged Parents,) been a notorious injury unto
Old Persons; it would never have been threatened as a Curse and Punishment. If
it were a great wrong, it was also a great sin; and if it were a great sin, it
must expect a great Plague and Punishment. Many more Scriptures might here be
added, with a short descant upon them; but to be short, this brief following
Reference shall suffice.

As, (4) Prove. 20.29.

(5.) Lam. 5.12.

(6.) Job 29.8. and 32.4,6,7. And,

(7.) Romans 16.3.

( Lastly,) 1 Timothy 5.1,2. All which Scriptures do plainly hold forth, what
Respect and Reverence ought to be given, and is commanded by the great God to
be given unto Aged Persons, even in those Purest times of the Old and New
Testaments, and how can we learn to write after a more perfect Pattern, and a
more infallible Copy. Yea, and upon a brief search of the Ancient Fathers of
the Church, soon after those pure Scripture times, I do find this grave and
solid Testimony concerning this very Point of the Honor of Old Age, in Clemens
Alexandrinus his Book, called Paedagogus, written in the Year of our Lord, 194*
who in his Third Book of that before-named Title, speaks thus, [ Non est malum
Senem videri, cum hoc quod sis, celare non possis: Quo ergo magis Homo festinat
ad finem, tanto est vere Venerabilior, ut qui Deum solum habeat se Seniorem,
nam ille quoque est Aeternus S^nex, qui est iis quae sunt Antiquior. Antiquum
Dierum illum vocavit Propheta.] That is in English thus, [It is no evil to seem
Old, seeing such as be so, cannot conceal it with any Paintings, (as the same
Father, a little before this, says, such painters of themselves cannot put off
Old Age, as the Serpent does his Slough, etc.) For by how much the more a Man
hastneth unto his end, by so much the more he becomes Venerable, and the more
to be Honored, as one who has God alone to be more Ancient than he, who is
likewise Eternally Old; and the Prophet Daniel calls him the Ancient of Days.]
And the same Father adds, [ Senum Corona e multa experientia, etc.] That the
Crown of Old Men, is much Prudence and Experience, etc. To omit the other
Fathers, for avoiding prolixity, let me only add two more Testimonies to this
great Truth.

The First is, That Critic Philosopher, who says, [ Cognata sunt, (...).] The
former word signifies Old Age, and the latter, Honor; so these two are of ^ear
a Kin in the Greek Language; and agreeable hereunto is the Hebrew reading,
Isai. 9.15. where the Ancient and the Honorable are joined together.

The Second Testimony is that of the great Historian Livy, in his 26th Book,
speaking of an Army, how the Younger Bands gave place to the Elder,) uses
these words, [ Vix ut verisimile est, Parentum quoque hoc seculo vilis,
levisque apud Liberos Authoritas,] that is, the Report of former purer golden
Times when the Younger had such a Veneration for the Elder, seems almost
incredible for now we see this present Age is of another Metal than Gold,
wherein we behold the disrespect that is commonly showed, not only to Old Men,
bu^ also to Old Parents, (whose Authority over their Children is often vile and
contemptible, etc.) yea slighting them most when they should respect them most
much unlike to young Joseph, who nourished his Old Father Jacob in his Old Age,
and made the last Seventeen Year^ of his Life, the best and most comfortable
part of his whole Time, that he lived in the World. Nor is this all, to wit,
disrespect to Old Parents, etc. bu^ there is likewise a disrespect to Old
P^stors, who are thought by Young Novice^ to be no better than Fools; whereas
(according to the vulgar saying) the Old ^re sure that those Young Ones are so,
etc. Thus it appears, that we now live in that last Iron Age, even in the
very Dregs of Time, and we must expect, [ ultima Senescentis Mundi deliria,]
the last and the worst dotages of a decrepid, and of a dying World, etc.

The Second Part is, the Duties which ^re to be done by all of us, in our Old
Age, that we may not be deprived of that Double Crown of Glory, both of that ^n
the Kingdom of Grace here, and of that in the Kingdom of Glory hereafter;
seeing those two Crowns are the proper Dues of a Good Old Age, by a Divine
Promise, wherein the great God has made himself a Debtor unto all godly Aged
Ones: And if any of us be not such, we shall not only lose the former of these
Crowns, to wit, that of Respect and Reverence, but be despised for our Dotage,
etc. Let no Man take that Crown, Rev. 3.11. ^n this Life; but that which is
worst of ^ll, we shall lose likewise the latter, and the better Crown in the
Life to come. Therefore to prevent this double loss, many Duties are to be done.

The First Duty is, We must examine ^ur States, and Standings Godward, etc.
whether we be still in the State of Nature, and yet not broken off from the
Wild Olive, or we be in the State of Grace, and now engraffed into that blessed
and bleeding Vine the Lord Jesus, Romans 11.17. The great Apostle does earnestly
press us to the right doing of this first Duty, 2 Cor. 13.5. where he uses a
double Expressions, [(...) and (...),] that is, Try your selves, and Prove your
selves; know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates.] Wherein he
alludeth both unto Goldsmiths, and unto Lapidaries, who have their Lydius
Lapis, or Touchstone, whereby they discover true Gold from tha^ which is
Copper or Counterfeit, and Natural Diamonds from Artificial Bristol-stones And
those double Terms of Art are to stir us up, that we may redouble our diligence
in that most needful (yet much neglected) Duty of Self-examination; for though
the decisive and final Trial of our Eternal Estate does immediately and solely
appertain to God, in the Court of Heaven, yet the Disquisitive, and
Soul-Comforting part does belong to our selves in the Court of our own
Consciences* And therefore as an Omission, or an Error here is most easy, so
it is of mos^ dangerous consequence in filling our Spirits full of doubts and
fears, what shall become of our Souls, when our Bodies drop down into the
Grave. Hereupon the Divine Precept is doubled, both in this Apostles Charge,
and in that of the Prophets also, [ Excutite vos, iterumque excutite,] as
Tremellius renders the words, Zeph. 2.1.

The Second Duty is, That we should make good proof of our Graces, especially
of that Foundation-grace of Repentance unto Life, as it is called Acts 11.18. (
granted unto us Gentiles,) for where right Repentance toward God is given,
it is always accompanied with faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20.21.
This Grace of Repentance is so exceeding necessary, that both our Lord himself,
and his Forerunner, John the Baptist, began their Ministry with this
indispensable Doctrine, [ Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand,] Matthew.
3.2. and 4.17. and Mark 1.15. Join Repent and Believe both together. Now seeing
the Tree is known by its Fruit, whether it be good or bad, Matthew. 12.33. Luke
6.44. If we be no better than Bramble-Bushes, no Grapes of Grace can grow upon
us; but if we be Trees of Righteousness of the Lord's planting and watering, as
Isai. 61.3. then shall we bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, Matthew. 3.8.
Now the true Notion and Nature of this Grace of Repentance is, our turning from
Darkness to Light, Acts 26.18. and our returning from the fallen Estate by the
first Adam into a renewed Estate by the Second Adam: As we are all Metaphorical
Trees. Aristotle calls Man Arbor inversa, a Tree turned upward, making the Head
as Root, and the Arms and Legs the Branches of this Tree, etc. Bernard calls
Man [ Inversus Decalogus,] as quite contrary to God's Law, therefore must he be
turned up-side down, as the Picture of the Horse, and then right, etc. We have
our Standing Time in our Life, and we must have our Falling Time at our Death;
the Ax whereof is laid to the Root of us in those manifold Distempers which
attend Old Age, as if God were taking his Aim where to cut us up, and how to
hew us down, Matthew. 3.10. Now as all Trees, be they strong Oaks, or lofty
Cedars, must have their time of falling; so all Mankind, be they of never so
robust a Constitution, and be they of never so high, either of State or of
Stature, must have a time of dying, Heb. 9.27. and as Trees, what way they
mostly lean, that way they usually fall, whether it be Southward or Northward,
Eccles. 11.3. So we ought to examine our selves, which way our Wills and
Affections do lean, whether Southward toward the Sun of Righteousness, Mal.
4.2. As it is recorded of Abraham, (who walked with God) [that his Journyings
were still toward the South,] toward the Sun, Genesis 12.9. So all the Sons and
Daughters of Abraham, should hang Heavenward, and should lean Southward; then
may there be good grounds of a lively Hope, that when we die, we shall fall
upon the Right Hand of Christ, among the fruitful Sheep, and shall hear those
comfortable words, [ Come, ye blessed of my Father, etc.] Matthew. 25.33,34. But
if on the other hand we do not find, that we have with David, [ considered our
former evil ways, and turned our Feet (our Affections) toward God's
Testimonies,] Psalm. 119.59. If yet we are not returned to God by Repentance,
but are still journying toward the North, toward that cold Country, where
there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of Teeth for cold, (though it be a
fiery Furnace for heat,] Matthew. 13.42,50. If we lean Northward, and hang
Hellward, we shall surely fall upon the Left Hand of the Judge among the
s^nking Goats, and receive that sad Sentence, [ Depart ye Cursed, etc.] Matthew.
25.41. As the Tree, where it falls, Northward or Southward, there it lies,
Eccles. 11.3. even so where we fall at our Deaths, whether Northward, upon the
Left Hand of our Judge; or Southward, upon the Right Hand of our Redeemer,
there we shall lie until the Resurrection-day; for after Death comes the Day of
Judgment, Heb. 9.27. Then all both good and bad shall rise again, etc.

The Third Duty of us Aged Ones is, Not to dally or delay that weighty Work of
making our Peace with God, according to that Divine Counsel, [ Acquaint now thy
self with God, and be at Peace with him, and thereby good shall come unto
thee,] Job 22.21. This great Duty must be now done, we have been asleep, or
Strangers to God long enough, Ephesians. 2.12. and 4.18. 1 Pet. 4.3. Now is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. There be Times of
Grace, while the Word of the Gospel is preached to us; and there be Seasons of
Grace, when the Spirit of God goes along with God's Word, and convinces of
sin, etc. John 16.8. Now such a season is the most beautiful part of time, and
[how can we escape if we neglect so great salvation!] Heb. 2.3. This is a
quenching the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. Opportunities are Headlong, and once lost
and past, may never be recovered. Therefore does God in Scripture so earnestly
press upon this [(...),] this Now or Time present, because so many persons are
[ Semper Victuri,] as Seneca says, they promise to themselves, that they shall
yet live a little longer, saying, [ in Space will come Grace;] so they trifle
out their Time, and puts off the making of their Peace with God for the future,
and future their Duty so long, until at last they fool away their own
Salvation; whereas delays are dangerous, qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus
erit, he that is not fit to day, will be less fit to morrow; as the hinder
Wheels of a Coach do pursue the former Wheels thereof all the day long, and
though they be much larger than the other, and but at a very small distance (of a
yard or two) from them, yet they never overtake them: Even so it is in this
case, one delay (of making our Peace with God) does beget another from day to
day, and the latter Promise of Repenting pursues the former from time to time,
but never overtakes it; [ Post est Occasio Calva, Time has no Lock behind its
Head for us to take hold of, whereby the hinder and the former part thereof may
be made to meet together: And know, God will not always serve Men for a
Sinning-stock from time to time; and as Dr. Preston well observes, that in
these Times of Grace, the Lord is more quick and Peremptory in rejecting of
such as dally with the Tenders of Peace: God's time of tendering it, is shorter
now, he will not wait so long, as he was wont to do, he will not suffer us to
neglect it twice; but if once past, it will never dawn again. It Is true, [the
long-suffering of God is Salvation,] Romans 2.4. and 2 Pet. 3.15. but [ laesa
patientia fit furor,] if we presume to abuse God's Patience, then it turns into
Fury, and we are but treasuring up to our selves wrath, against the day of
wrath, Romans 2.5. and therefore we ought to catch at present Opportunities; as
Millers and Mariners do catch at present Gales, and make use of them when they
come; and as Watermen take the opportunity of the Tide, all well-knowing, that
neither Wind, nor Tide, nor Time will stay no Man's Leisure or Pleasure; they
all are in God's fist, Prove. 30.4. (who has alone the Royalty of these his
Creatures,) and not in the power of Man: We ought therefore to catch at the
Season of Grace, as we hear the Echo does at the Voice, loudly spoken in
Places of Reverberation, even in the very nick of Time. Thus we find David did,
[ no sooner had he heard God speaking, [ seek ye my Face,] but immediately his
Heart (being inspired by the Spirit to a gracious compliance,) did (as it were)
echo back again, [ thy Face, Lord, will I seek,] Psalm. 27.8. And the like
Echo, or quick Answer we find in the Church to her Lord, who no sooner had
said to her [ Return, ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your
backslidings; She presently Answers, [ Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art
the Lord our God,] Jer. 3.22. The Church was thus moved to yield her ready
Obedience unto her Lord's Command, because [ the power of the Lord was present
to heal her,] as Luke 5.17. And indeed every godly person has, as it were, the
duplicate and counter-part of God's Law written in his Heart, and is willingly
cast into the Mold of his Word, as Romans 6.17. may be read, to wit, [ ye have
obeyed from the heart, that Form, ( Type or Mold) of Doctrine into which ye
were cast.] The Doctrine of the Gospel is the Mold, and the Hearts of Hearers
is the Metal, which when sufficiently melted in the Furnace, being purged from
the Dross, etc. is then poured into the Mold, and willingly receives that Form
and Figure of that Type or Vessel that it is cast into, taking Impression from
it in one part as well as another, and receives its Form in the whole. Oh that
it may be so with us, to acquaint now our selves with God, while he calls us,
and be at peace with him: This is done, if we return to God speedily by
Repentance from whom we have so shamefully revolted, and against whom we have
so notoriously rebelled; our Lord calls loudly upon us, duly and daily, [ To
day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts,] Psalm. 95.7,8. Heb.
3.7,8. as in the day of Provocation. It must be done to day, while the Gales of
Grace continue blowing and breathing; it is the Cry of that unclean Bird, the
Crow, [ Cras, Cras,] that is, to Morrow, to Morrow will be soon enough. If we
harden our own Hearts by Unbelief, as our choice to day, God may lay Hardness
of Heart upon us, as our Judgment to morrow; so that neither Ministry, nor
Misery, nor Miracle, nor Mercy may possibly Mollify them.

But on the other hand, if the Lord move our Hearts, to make such a quick
Echo, and gracious Answer to God's Call and Command, as Samuel did by the
Instruction of Good Old Eli, [ speak, Lord, for thy Servant now hears,] 1 Samuel 3.9,10. and as Saul said, [ Lord, what will thou have me to do?] Acts 9.6.
This is a blessed evidence, that God has [ bored our Ears,] and we shall say
then, [ Lo, we come to do thy will, O God, and we delight in doing it,] Psalm.
40.6,7,8. Christ's people are willing in the day of Christ's power, Psalm.
110.3. they then will make haste and not delay, Psalm. 119.59,60. yea, it should
be our Meat and Drink to do God's Will, as it was to our Lord, Joh. 4.34. Now
if we can but find any promptness in our Wills and Affections to turn our
Hearts from sin, and return to God without delays, we shall then be at peace
with him, and he with us, yea, and thereby good shall come unto us, Job. 22.21.
we shall be happy, and it shall be well with us, Psalm. 128.2. We shall have a
Cornucopia, even a confluence of all manner of contentments and comforts, even
good Temporal, good Spiritual and good Eternal; then Peace will be within our
Walls, and Prosperity within our Tabernacles, Psalm. 122.7. To conclude this
Point, if we, who are Aged, have delayed hitherto to make our peace with God,
we have burnt Daylight too much already, it is high time to use expedition. The
putting off of this day, and the next, and half a day, cost the Levite very
dear, Judge. 19,7,8, etc. As that Old Man courted and cozened that Levite, so
Satan cozens us when we have a mind to look toward Heaven; our Foe, saying to
us, [ be content, I pray you, etc. what haste, hereafter is soon enough, etc.]
but we must be peremptory, for the Evening hastes on us a-pace, etc. and God
forbid we should go to Bed (the Grave) at last, without saving Light, when the
night of Death comes on us.

The Fourth Duty of all Aged Ones is, seriously to consider the many wearisom
Evils, which Old Age is now about to bring upon us, whereof Solomon gives a
particular description of, after he had styled Old Age an Evil Age in the
general, Eccles. 12.1. Then he proceeds to describe more distinctly what
those decays of Nature in Old Persons be, which make their days so evil and
unpleasant, ver. 2, to 7. and these be of three sorts of Infirmities.

First, Some such as do befall the former part of Old Age, while as yet we are
able to go abroad, ver. 2. to the former part of ver. 5.

Secondly, Other Decays that attend our Decrepid Old Age, when Death is very
near approaching to us, and our selves are drawing fast toward it, in the
latter part of ver. 5, with ver. 6, 7.

Thirdly and Lastly, He describes Death it self, ver. 7. All this distinct
description does the wisest of Men leave upon Divine Record, that it might the
more awaken us to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.
to make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. That we all may with all
expedition make sure work for a better World, before we go hence to be seen no
more.

Now the Decays of Old Age, in its former part, whilst as yet we are able to
walk abroad; be,

(1 st) The Darkness of all the Lights that are about us, whether they be
Natural, as of the Sun, Moon and Stars, etc. or Artificial Lights, such as
Candles, Torches, etc. This Darkness comes not not from any Decay of those
Lights, but from the Dimness of our own Sight; hence comes our need of
Spectacles, etc. It implies also, that all the comforts and and contentments
which we formerly enjoyed in our Younger Years, are now turned into
Discomforts, into Diseases, Aches and Pains, which darken greater and lesser
Comforts. We then see through a Glass Darkly, as the Apostle says in another
case, 1 Cor. 13.12. The defluction of Rheum, which trickleth down the Cheeks,
(I here speak my own experience) does continually distill it self out of the
Head, and as it were [the returning of the Clouds after the Rain,] ver. 2. as
it falls out in our April weather, no sooner is one Shower unburdened, but
another is Brewed, much more in the Winter of Old Age: And thus likewise [ Deep
calls upon Deep, at the noise of the Water-spouts,] Psalm. 42.7. that is, one
Affliction comes upon the Neck of another without intermission, like the
Billows of the Sea, that come rolling and tumbling one after another; yea, and
like Job's Messengers, that hastened with their evil Tidings to him, so as that
they were even ready to tread upon the Heels one of another. Thus it falls out
more especially where Old Age is the Successor, and a wild wanton Youth has
been its Predecessor, from whence many a violent Storm has been long battering
and beating upon this House of Clay: So that if the Saddle be set upon the
right Horse, we ought to blame the Vanity (if not Villainy) of our Youth, for
all the Sorrows and Infirmities, yea sufferings in our Old Age.

The (2 d) Decay that Solomon says attends Old Age, of the first Rank or
Degree is, ver. 3. that the Keepers of the House shall Tremble, to wit, the
Arms and Hands which are our defense for the Head and whole Body, (called an
House often in Scripture,) from any harm impending upon us, for maintaining our
Lives, which are therefore called the Lives of our Hands, Isai. 57.10. because
our Lives are upheld by the labor of our Hands; but alas how little labor can
the trembling Hands of Old Age (which often brings Palsi^s, and other weaknesses)
accomplish. Thus the Preacher does Draw to the Life the very Picture of Old
Age, and most elegantly continues, and carries on this Mystical Allegory,
adding here the

(3 d) Decay, [The Strong Men shall bow themselves,] that is, the Legs and
Thighs shall then begin to bend and buckle in the Knees, cripling and crinkling
under us; so that they sometimes be unable to bear the burden of the Body;
insomuch that one of the five Characters of Old Persons is, to have a Leg in
their Hand, to support their feeble and tottering Tabernacles (the Body)
therewith; they stand in need of a Staff or Crutch: Hence Hesiod calls them
(...), which signifies [ Three Legged:] And Virgil's Phrase is, Genua Labant,
the Knees do languish, etc. And, Membra levant Baculis Tardique Senilibus Annis.
Slow-paced Seniors stay up their Sides with Staves in their Hands.

The (4 th) Decay in this Allegory and Allusion is, [the Grinders shall cease,
because they are few,] that is, the Teeth shall then be unable to chew any
Meat, because they are either loose or lost with Age; for as Teeth come not
with us into the World when we are born, so they commonly leave us in Old Age,
before we leave the World when we die. And this is another of the five
Characters of Old Persons, that they wear their Teeth at their Girdle, to wit,
the Knife that is stuck there, to be drawn at the Table out of its Sheath, for
shredding their Meat very small with it, and make Food fit for manducation;
because Meat must be well masticated, (before it be transmitted into the
Stomach) for a more mature Digestion: And Teeth are as hard as Stones,
therefore are they fitly compared to Milstones for their Grinding-work, as they
are called Grinders here. Hereupon Juvenal wittily alludeth, Frangendos misero
Gingiva Panis Inermi.
which is in English, It Is a misery to Old People, that they must break their
Bread with Toothless Gums.

The (5 th) Decay is, [when those that look out at the Windows are darkened,]
that is, the Eyes grown dim or blind as they did in Old Isaac, Genesis 27.1, etc.
who could not discern a difference betwixt his two Sons, Esau and Jacob, etc.
and as they did also in Old Jacob, [ whose Eyes were dim for Age,] Genesis 48.10,
etc. Where good Joseph thought that his Father Jacob had made such a mistake of
Ephraim for Manasseh, as his Grandfather Isaac had done before, through his
dimness of Eyes, in his blessing Jacob, the Younger, for Esau, the Elder, etc.
This dimness of Sight is assuredly a very heavy affliction, ver. 3. which is a
degree of Darkness, higher than that which is mentioned in ver. 2. when our
very Spectacles are become helpless to us. But it is the greatest Affliction to
such as have had their Eyes full of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. because in that case
our sin is writ upon our Punishment; and our own guilty Consciences do put a
Sting into that Darkness upon our Windows of Wantonness and Wickedness. This
must needs be a Prick and a Thorn to torment Blind Eyes.

The Sixth Evil of Old Age is, [and the Doors shall be shut in the Streets,
when the sound of the Grinding is low,] ver. 4. which some interpret the Ears,
that then grow dull of Hearing, and at last Deaf; because Hearing is caused by
two Bones, placed within the inside of the Ear; whereof the one stands still,
and the other moves like the nether and upper Grindstones of a Mill: And as
the Ear was a Door, by which Death first entered into the World, when our first
Parents gave a listening Ear, more to the Old Liar, than to the God of Truth. So
the Lord has appointed it as a suitable Antidote, that the Ear should be a
Door to let in Life and Salvation now, as it had done Death and Damnation
before; for God says in the Old Testament, [ incline your Ear to me, hear, and
your Soul shall live, etc.] Isai. 55.3. And he says in the New Testament,
[that Faith comes by Hearing, etc. Romans 10.17. But alas, the Deaf cannot hear
the word, the Door is shut, yea, the Young as well as Old, while in the state
of Sin, all are possessed with a Deaf Devil, until Christ come and cry
Ephphatha, that is, be opened, Mark. 7.34. and straightway his Ears were
opened, ver. 35.

But others do understand those Metaphorical Doors in Eccles. 12.4. to be the
Lips of Man's Mouth, because of David's expression in his Prayer, [ Lord, keep
the Door of my Lips, etc.] Psalm. 141.3. These Doors, the Lips, are said to be
shut without, because the sound of the Grinding is low, that is, (say they) the
Lips are shut close together, when for want of Teeth to grind their Food with,
the Meat is rolled and chavelled up and down the Mouth; and if the Lips be not
kept close shut, the Meat, in tumbling to and fro, would drop out of the Mouth.

There is yet a Third Interpretation of this Allusion (which I cannot omit) of
those words, [The Doors shall be shut in the Streets,] that is, these Aged Ones
shall keep home, avoiding the company and society of Mankind, such as Feastings
and Merry Meetings, [ when the sound of the Grinding is low,] that is, when
neither his Teeth, nor his Stomach and Appetite can any longer serve him for
much feeding or feasting, as in Old Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19.35.

The (7 th) Decay in Old Age is, [ and he shall rise at the Voice of the Bird,]
that is, the least noise of a Swallow that nests in the Chimney top, etc. or
any little Bird will waken Old Persons, especially the crowing of the Cock,
which is not caused by any quickness in their Hearing, (that then is dull, as
before,) but from the dryness of their Brains, which causes badness of
sleeping, from coldness of Blood, and deficiency of Moisture; therefore is it
said, [the Old Man rises up at the least Noise,] because being awakened, and
weary with lying along, and unable to turn his Body in his Bed, he must rise to
change his posture, for his ease, etc.

The (8 th) Evil of Old Age is, [ all the Daughters of Music shall be brought
low], that is, they shall neither have any Voices wherewith to sing of
themselves, nor take any delight to hear others (that have Voices) to sing,
ver. 4. for as their Instruments of Speaking, (which make Music) do fail, so
their Instruments of Hearing, (for receiving Music) do fail also. Homer
observes, that Old People cannot themselves sing, [ Propter Raucam Vocem,] for
their unpleasant Voice, which is no better than Creaking and Screaming. And
Juvenal expresses it thus, [ nam quae Cantante Voluptas,] what pleasure can
the Old find, either in singing themselves, or in hearing others sing? as they
themselves cannot sing Tuneably with distinction of Sounds, so they can take no
delight in hearing the Melodious Notes of other Singers, as Old Barzillai did
acknowledge to King David, (who was that sweet Singer of Israel,) 2 Samuel 19.35.
As their dullness of Hearing disinables them from discerning the Melody; so the
lowness of their Spirits makes them melancholic, insomuch that they cannot
affect Music: And this is very remarkable here, that Old Men, whose Hearing is
so quick, as to be awakenned with any little Noise of a Bird, etc. yet the
exquisiteness of the sense of Hearing (to delight in the sound of Music) is
quite gone from them.

The (9 th) Evil of Old Age, [ they shall be afraid of that which is high, and
fear shall be in the way,] ver. 5. that is, they shall be very fearful to walk
upon high places, where there may be any danger of falling; and they being very
timorous themselves, will shrink and tremble, yea cry out, when they behold
Young Ones over bold and venturous, etc. As they are themselves afraid of
climbing up aloft, because of the stiffness of their Joints, and the
unweildiness of their Bodies. So they dare not stand in any high place, because
a Vertigo, a giddiness or swimming of the Brain does soon seize upon them,
Their Heads are as weak as their Hamms, they can neither climb up, because they
are short winded; and when they are got up, they dare not look down for fear of
falling, etc. Yea, they are afraid of every Hillock, or little Stone standing
up in their way, for fear of stumbling on it, because of the unnimbleness of
their Limbs. They fear to be cast down by careless People, riding or running,
and carrying Burdens to and fro, etc.

The (10 th) Evil of Old Age is, [ the Almond Tree then flourishes,] that is,
when their Heads grow Gray and Hoary, which is of it self a Crown of Glory, (a
flourishing Ornament) if found in the way of Righteousness, Prove. 16.31. But it
is an undeniable evidence of the decay of our Radical Moisture, which should
duly nourish the Hairs, both of our Heads and Beards. The Almond Tree is the
first that flourishes, Jer. 1.11,12. The Prophet there saw this as a sign of
Gods hastening the execution of his Judgments against a sinful Nation; for this
Tree Blossometh before any other Tree. Natural Philosophy tells us, that the
Almond Tree does Blossom in January, while it is yet Winter, and its Fruit is
ripe in March, when it is but early Spring, etc. and therefore it has its Name
from its early appearance both of Buds, Blossoms and Fruit; but here it is made
a Resemblance of an Hoary Head, yet with this difference,

(1 st) The Almond flourishes in the Spring, but the Hoary Head in the Winter
of our Old Age.

(2 dly) That Tree has all its white Blossoming Flowers before the Fruit, but
we have our white Hairs after our Fruit-bearing to God in our Generation-work.
Notwithstanding this double Disparity, there is this one Congruity that runs
parallel betwixt them, namely, that the Hoary Head found in the way of
Righteousness, is the flourishing Crown of the Old Man, in the Spring of a
better World, unto which he is hastening with white Snow, or Churchyard
Flowers upon his Head. This makes up another of the five Characters
aforementioned, that Old Age has White Sugar in its Hair, as it is
Gray Headed, etc.

The (11 th) Evil of Old Age is, [ then the Grasshopper or Locust shall be a
Burden,] that is, the Old Man cannot bear the least Weight or Burden, no not
the Weight or Burden of a Locust or Grasshopper, because he is already become a
Burden to himself, by manifold Distempers upon him, as Gout, Phthisick, etc.
But another learned Expositor interprets this Clause, neither by the noise of
the Locust, (for that is intimated before, ver. 4. in the Voice of the Bird,)
nor by its weight, Hyperbolically spoken, to signify that the lightest Burden
is a Load to Old People; but most fitly, (as he says) it is meant of the
slowness of the Aged's digestion: For though the Locust be a clean and wholesome
Food, Levit. 11.22. and much used in those Hot Countries, especially by the
poorer sort of People, Matthew. 3.4. yet even this Light Meat proves heavy and
burdensome to the Old Man's Stomach.

The (12 th) Evil of Old Age is, that [ then Desire shall fail,] that is, not
only Appetite either to Meat or to Drink, (as was in Barzillai aforementioned, but
also all vehement and strong Affections to the common Pleasures of this Life,
(called the Delights of the Sons of Men, Eccles. 2.8.) such as are the Lusts of
the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, all these shall be
taken away, etc. Hence famous Tully reckons this as one great Benefit by Old
Age, [ quod Hominem a libidinis aestu, velut a quodam Tyranno liberabit,] that
it sets a Man free from the Fire and Flagrancy of Lust, as from a great Tyrant.
And this also implied in that Etymology of [(...),] (which signifies an Elder,)
derived from [(...),] ignis, and [(...),] extinguo, to wit, the Quenching of
Fire.

Thus far go the First sort of Evils, attending the former part of Old Age,
while we are yet able to walk abroad, now follow the Second Sort that do
accompany our Decrepit Age, which are the symptoms and forerunners of
approaching Death; and then it is that we are said to have one Foot in the
Grave. There is yet one of the Five Characters behind, to be now mentioned,
namely, the Old Man has also an Almanac in his Bones, (as well as Eyes) (or
Spectacles in his Pocket,) a Leg (or Staff) in his Hand, Sugar or Snow in his
Hoary Head, and Teeth or Knife at his Girdle.) Now this Almanac is, the many
Aches and Pains all over his Body, which makes him Weather-wise, and wiser than
his Almanac, and can better prognosticate that ill weather is near at hand,
when he begins to feel many pungent pricking Pains, infesting the Humors of
several parts of his Body; the like Prognostics (as the Lord Bacon, in his
Natural History, tells us) are found in some certain Weather-wise Fowls,
which against stormy Seasons will make most doleful Ditties, and sad Outcries*
and the Reason hereof, (as that learned Nobleman renders it) is, because then
the purified Air penetrates into the Quils of their Feathers, which puts them
to much Anguish, and causes them to cry out after^ an hiddious manner. Thus it
is with us, in our Decrepid Age, such Cramps and Convulsions do come upon us,
as do foretell the Storm of Death is drawing nigh, and that we are going apace
to our long home, Eccles. 12.5. And therefore the Moral of the Apologue is very
weighty, and well worthy of serious consideration. The Story in the Fable runs
thus, [There was a Man, who made this Bargain with Death, not to come for
taking away his Life, and sending him away into another World, until he had due
notice and warning hereof before hand. Death agrees, and the Bargain was struck
up between them both. After this the Man lives a long time, yet not altogether
without some Ailments and Illments; all standing memorials of Mortality: At the
last Death comes in good earnest, as God's Sergeant to Arrest him, and to carry
him to the Prison of the Grave. Nay (says the Man to Death) Hold now thy Hand,
for I must bind thee to thy Bargain, wherein thou bound thy self to give me
timely notice, and due warning of thy coming. To this Death smartly replied, [
Oh Man, how many Harbingers have thou had concerning my coming, in those sundry
Distempers of Toothache, Headache, and such like; all which were my
Forerunners, but thou minded them not;] therefore [ Thou Fool, at this Time thy
Soul shall be required of thee,] as Luke 12.20. whereupon Death cast his fatal
Javeling at him, struck him down dead, and hurried him away to his place in
another World. The Moral of this Mystical Fable is this, That even all the
Infirmities of the First Sort, namely, not only the Five Characters of Old Age
forementioned, with all the other Decays of Nature, which the Eldest Son of
Wisdom, Solomon, records, Eccles. 12.1,2,3,4,5. they are all Summons sent
from Heaven to us, that we may be making ready for our departure from this
Earth: But more especially those of this latter Sort, which do more immediately
introduce Death it self. The two First whereof be external, in the last of part
ver. 5. As,

(1 st) Man is just a going to his long Home, Gnal Beth Gnalamo, Hebrew, the
House of his Age, the Grave, where he shall rest until the Day of his
Resurrection, Job 14.12. Now the Sentence of Death is seen by many indicant
Signs, to writ upon him, as 2 Cor. 1.9. and he lies sighing out those sad words
of Job, [ My Spirit is spent, my Days are extinct, the Graves are ready for
me,] Job 17.1.

(2 dly) The Mourners go about the Streets, that is, his Friends and Neighbors
run to see him die, and to close up his Eyes, making many mournful Moans and
Lamentations over him, to provoke others to lament with them, Amos 5.16. and
Jer. 22.18. This is one of the dues of the Dead, so it be done aright. The Four
following Decays are Internal, ver. 6. in the very Act of Dying, namely, the
dissolution, and perishing of those principal parts, wherein the life and
strength of Nature do inwardly consist. As,

(1 st) Or [ ever the Silver Cord be loosed,] that is, the Marrow of the
Backbone, which runs from the Brain through the Neck, to the bottom of the
Back through twenty four Joints, and takes in therewith all the Sinews of the
other parts of the Body, and which are the Ligaments of all the Members. Now as
this Marrow is of a Silver Color, and is therefore called [a Silver Cord;] so
as it is a Cord that ties all the whole Body together: Now when this Cord comes
to loosened, the Back bends, Motion becomes slow, and Feeling daily fails,
etc.

(2 dly) [ Or the Golden Bowl be broken,] that is, the Heart, (as some sense
it) which is the primum Vivens, and ultimum Moriens, the first that Lives, and
the last that Dies; therefore is it called the Fort-Royal of Life: Or the
Pericardium about the Heart* which the Soldier pierced with his Spear in our
Savior's side, from whence there came forth Blood and Water, John 19.34. and 1
John 5.6. But others do interpret it to be rather the Head or Skull, called the
Brain-pan, for the Brains are contained within the Meninges thereof; and the
Piamater covers them like a Swathing Cloth, or the inner Rind of a Tree, as
in a Cup or Bowl; and a wound in this is ever mortal. Now the Hebrew word here,
being the same with Golgotha, which signifies a Skull, 2 Kings 9.35. Matthew.
27.33. and Judge. 9.53.) all this make the latter Interpretation the more
probable; for when Death comes with his Javelin or Dart to wound the Brain-pan,
or Skull, (which is round like a Cup or Bowl, and is called here Golden,
because of its color,) then the Sutures or Seams of the Skull are parted
asunder; from whence it comes to pass, that the Chaps of Dying Persons do fall,
and the Almonds of their Ears are stopped, etc. Oh what cause have we break
forth into David's words, saying, [ We are wonderfully framed,] Psalm. 139.14.
If the precious Office of this Golden Bowl for preserving the Brain, etc. be
well considered.

(3 dly) [Or the Pitcher be broken at the Fountain,] that is, either the Veins
at the Liver, (as some say) which is the Shop of Sanguification or
Blood-making; those Veins carry Blood from the Liver into all parts of the Body
by way of Circulation, etc. Or as others understand it, the Arteries which
carry Spirits from the Heart, and conveys Nourishment, Sense and Motion from
one part to another, etc. There is yet a Third Sense put upon this Pitcher,
that is, the Bladder is broken at the Spring of Water or Urin, etc. Now as when
either the Veins at the Liver, especially the Vena Cava, and Vena Porta, (as
the Anatomists name them,) or the Arteries at the Heart, do come once to lose
their drawing, and distributing Office and Virtue, then the Body does
immediately decay, and. even so, when the Muscle at the Neck of the Bladder
comes to be broken, and loses its Retentive Faculty, then the Water (or Urin)
does run insensibly from a Dying Person without stay.

(4 thly) [Or the Wheel is broken at the Cistern,] that is, according to the
Sentiments of some Expositors, the Head which draws all the Operations of
Life from the Heart; and hence it is, that when any dreadful Fright is
apprehended by our Heads, and suddenly does surprise us, we presently are
struck with a Paleness, because all the Blood in our Faces does run back to the
Heart, as to the Fountain of Life, etc. But others are of opinion, [that by
this Wheel broken at the Cistern] must be meant, the Lungs broken off from
their double Office, and Motion of Inspiration, and Respiration; and this
Breaking or Obstruction is caused by Phlegmn from the Stomach, which is as a
Cistern from all parts of the Body, etc. The Lungs are as a Wheel, transmitting
the Air in and out, by a Motion up and down, like to that of a pair of Bellows,
which Men learnt to make from the posture and operations of Men's Lungs that
were of God's making; and thus indeed Man learns all other Artifices from God,
the great Artificer: God instructs the Husbandman, Isai. 28.26. and all others
also. Now though there be no open Passage betwixt the Stomach and the Lungs, and
(therefore there is no ordinary purging of the Lungs, but upwards, by spitting
and coughing;) yet when the Stomach is overcharged with Phlegm, the former
distilleth the latter into the Lungs, and thereby stops them in their
Motion. This may be exemplified thus, when a Man or Beast is dead, there
seems no way of entrance for Water into the Bladder, no not so much as for
any Air; for if we blow the Bladder full of Wind, none of it will issue out;
and yet while Life lasts in the Body, both Water and Sand does pass through
little Veins (called Valvulas) into the Bladder; even so by some such like
secret passages, does the Cistern of the Stomach convey Phlegm into the Lungs,
yea sometimes to the very stifling of them; and upon this stoppage of the Lungs
with Phlegm so, that the Wheel cannot turn the Air (or breath) up and down, and
in and out to the Nostrils: Then from this obstruction of the Lobes, (whereof
the Lungs do consist) so that their Motion, like a pair of broken Bellows, is
broken off; then follows the Rutling in the Throat, which is the common
Herald, proclaiming that Death is at Hand, etc. NB. Note well, How Solomon
(the Eldest Son of Wisdom) has left upon Record in Eccles. 12. a most sublime
Lecture of Anatomy, as well as of Divinity, in his Dissection of the infirm
Body of Old Age, which he sweetly sets forth by a continued Allegory [ Ubi
quot Lumina, imo Flumina Orationis,] that is, containing so many Lights, yea
and Floods of Eloquence; and all this Solomon did, not so much to demonstrate
his own excellent Skill, and unparalled Prudence, but more especially and
principally to instruct, yea and to provoke all Mankind to become wise unto
Salvation, and to remember our Creator early, before any of these Evils of Old
Age come upon us, etc.

CHAP. VIII. Counsel and Comfort to Young and Old, against the Evils of Old
Age, the Fear of Death, and the Terror of the Day of Judgment.
THIS Eight Chapter consists as well of Comforts (as of Counsel) against the
Evils of Old Age, against the Fear of Death, and against the Terror of the Day
of Judgment.

First, The Comforts against the Evils of Old Age: It Is a Time desired by all,
(who are they that would not live long, etc?) but it is welcomed by few, because
of the Burden of Distempers that it brings along with it, etc. If God bless us
to live up to Old Age, we ought not to complain of it, for it is a blessing we
must bless God for, [ Length of days is from the Right Hand, Riches and Honor
from the Left, Prove. 3.16. And God promised to his Jerusalem after its
Restoration, [that there should be Old Men and Old Women in the Streets of it,
with Staves in their Hands,] Zech. 8.4. yea and it was God's Curse upon the
House of Ely, [that not any that were Old should be found in it,] 1 Samuel 2.32.
Therefore if God do still preserve the rotten Thread of our Lives, and draw it
out to last so long, and yet the Clue have a little more Yarn upon the Botton;
Oh how thankfully ought we to welcome this Guest of Gods own sending, and not
to complain of it as our great Burden, but entertain it cheerfully with
God-praising hearts! It Is true, though Old Age be a rich Blessing of God in it
self, (as is largely demonstrated before) and yet is called an Evil Age, for
Reasons aforementioned. Notwithstanding, God has not left it comfortless, as it is
said, John 14.18. But the Spirit (who is the Comforter, has left upon
Scripture-Record so many Cordials, as are truly Sovereign against all the Evils
that attend it; insomuch as Old Age may be an easy Age, a calm and quiet
Harbor, if Youth has done it no disservice in filling its bones with the sins
of Youth beforehand; and if Intemperance (which is like the Thief in the
Candle, wasting it away) has not weakened its Head or Feet, etc. In this case
Old Age has cause to complain of the evil of the Man, and not the Man to
murmr at the Evils of Old Age. Thus Old Job often complains of the Misery of
his Old Age, saying, [ Lord, thou changest our Countenances, and sendest us
away,] Job 14.20. and many myriads of such Sighs, (too long to relate) do ever
and anon issue out of his Mouth. And he himself tells us, the ground of all his
grief was, [ that God made him to possess the sins of his Youth] Job 13.26.
therefore (says he) thou writest bitter things against me, etc. Thus likewise
Old David complained, [ I am become like a Bottle in the Smoke,] Psalm. 119.83.
and much more in many other Psalms, etc. which drove him to groan out that
Petition, [ Lord, remember not against me the Transgressions of my Youth, for
thy tender Mercies have been of old, etc. Psalm. 25.6,7. Both those Instances
were Holy Persons, who after those and many more such Complaints, were (both of
them) comforted by the God of all Comforts, 2 Cor. 1.3. and had their Old Age
marvelously sweetened to them, and had their best Wine at the last. both those
Good Men had remembered their Creator in the days of their Youth, Eccles. 12.1.
and though their Youth-Time had been a very rough Voyage through a surging stormy
Sea, yet their last Years were their best Years, as it was to Good Old Jacob,
who after a long Life of manifold Miseries, did enjoy seventeen Years of sweet
Tranquillity and Comfort, etc. But alas, this Mercy can never be expected by
those who never had God, neither in their Heads, Psalm. 10.4. nor in their
Hearts, Psalm. 14.1. nor in their Words, Psalm. 12.4. no nor in their Works, Tit.
1.16. and such as drive a Through-Trade all their Lives in Weaving the Web of
Wickedness, having been twice dipped in the Devils Dye-Tub, (as the Greek word
[(...),] for Scarlet Sins, does sig^ie,) namely, in the Wool of their Youth,
and in the Web of their Elder Years; those can never expect any comfort in Old
Age. Pliny tells us, [ Serpens, Serpentem devorans, fit Draco,] as that
Serpent, which commonly devoureth other Serpents, becomes to be a Dragon at
last: So a long swallower of many Sins, becomes at the length a most Monstrous
Sinner, etc. that Old and true saying, [that if Persons prove not Fair at
twenty, Strong at thirty, Wise at forto, Rich at fifty, and Religious at sixty
Years of Age, such will never prove either Fair, or Strong, or Wise, or
Wealthy, or Holy Ones all the days of their Lives.] This ancient Adage holds a
most apt congruity with that saying of Solomon, [ such as seek me early, shall
find me,] Prove. 8.17. Whereas the Habitual Sinner, (to whom God has given the
Space of Repentance many times, but never the Grace of it, Rev. 2.21,23.) leads
the Life of sin: Thoughts beget Delight, Delight begets Consent, Consent begets
Action, Action begets Custom, and lastly, Custom begets Necessity; so that he
brings himself under a Law of an unavoidable Sinning against his maker, and as
David tells Saul, [ wickedness proceeds from the wicked, as naturally as
Water from the Fountain,] 1 Samuel 24.13. Satan is not satisfied to have Men
Sinners only, but he will have them also to abound in sin, and to be like the
Crocodile (that grows while it lives,) in growing greater and grosser Sinners
to the end of their Lives; Alas, this is but the laying of a bad (and not a
good) foundation for the time to come: As we are commanded to lay up a better
store against Old Age and Death, and to lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6.19.
NB. Note well, Our Lord tells Peter what Miseries he should meet withal when he
came to be Old, John 21.18. He had the manner of his Death foretold him, that
he should glorify God by Martyrdom, ver. 19. and observe what an holy
Improvement he made of this Precaution; he had made his Solemn Appeal to an
All-knowing Lord, saying, [ thou know all things, thou know that I love
thee,] ver. 17. and to testify his Love to his Lord in feeding his Lambs, he
wrote those two famous Epistles General to the Churches of Christ; and in the
latter of them he says, [ I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance, etc. Yea, I think it meet, while I am in this Tabernacle, to stir
you up, etc. knowing that shortly I must put off this Tabernacle, even as our
Lord Jesus Christ has showed me,] 2 Pet. 1.12,13,14,15. He knew that his Tent
or Tabernacle must soon be taken down, his Earthly House, (as Paul, who was a
Tent-maker, calls the Body a Tent, 2 Cor. 5.1. So both these two great Apostles
did truly and duly endeavor to magnify, and to glorify Christ, both in Life
and at Death, John 21.19. and Phil. 1.20. Thus both Peter the Elder, and Paul
the Aged (as they style themselves, 1 Pet. 5.1. and Phil. ver. 9.) were well
in-laid and fortified beforehand, to undergo the Evils that attended them both
in their Old Age, etc. May we but get Hearts to own God while we are Young,
then God will not forget us, but own us when Old; and as our days are, so shall
our strength be, Deuteronomy. 33.25. Now more particularly, the Comforts against the
Evils of Old Age are,

First, That then the Law of our Members cannot so easily lead us into
captivity unto sin, Romans 7.23. as formerly in the Heat and Vanity of our Youth.
Indeed the Witty Fable runs thus, [ Cupid (that Pagan God of Love,) and Mors,
that is, Death happened to meet together, and to lodge all Night, (both of them
in one and the same Inn,) but in the Morning they chanced to mistake each
others Quivers filled with Darts. Hereupon Cupid (after this) shot the frozen
Darts of Death at many Young People in their briskest time of their Loving and
Lusting, whereby many Young Gallants and Tempting Ladies were brought unto an
untimely Death, etc. But on the contrary, Mors did shoot the Fiery Darts of
Cupid, at the Aged Persons, who in the Course of Nature were hastening to the
Grave; and hereby arose that wantonness of Old People for Marriage, etc. by
which means it may be said (as to Second Causes) some have shortened their own
Lives, etc. Though the Moral of this Fable hold true in some singular Instances,
yet for the General, it is an undeniable truth, that Old Age may comfort it self
with this blessed freedom from Youthful Lusts; Aged People cannot be so Eye-sick,
nor so Heart-sick of Lustful Desires, as the Young are, but are then arrived
into a more quiet Harbor from the furious Tempests of Carnal Concupiscence

Secondly., The Aged may comfort themselves with their long experience in the
World, for experimental Knowledge does far exceed, and excel that which is
merely Notional; and upon this account it is truly said, [Tho' Young Men think
Old Men Fools, yet the Old are sure, that the Young are Fools, for want of
experience:] For as Experience is called the Mistress of Fools, so it truly is
the Mother of Prudence. It was a Profane Saying of a Pagan Poet, that Prudence
was above Destiny; but a Christian may safely say, that next to Divine
Providence, Humane Prudence may challenge the highest place in the management
of Humane Matters; and that Old Age has the chiefest interest in that
Prudence. Young Elihu did acknowledge this for a great Truth, saying [
multitude of Years should teach Wisdom,] Job 32.7. And Musicians do experience,
that Old Lutes make a sweeter Sound than New Ones. The not knowing of this
Truth was both the Folly and the Ruin of that Foolish King Rehoboam, [who
choosd to follow the Counsel of his Green-heads that stood before him, rather
than of those Grave Senators who had stood before his wiser Father,] 1 Kings
12.6,7,8,9,10, etc. As Young Men are properly for Action, so Old Men are
principally for Advice; and therefore the Roman Senate consisted of Senators,
(so called for their Age) which became so famous in the World, that it
occasioned that saying, [ Romani Sedendo Vincunt,] as if the Advice of their
sitting Senate did contribute more to all their Glorious Conquests, than all
the brave Actions of their Fighting Soldiers; and thus the Heads of Cities,
etc. are hence called Aldermen, etc.

Thirdly, The Aged may comfort their own Hearts with this Consideration
likewise, that they have so long weathered the point under the conduct of their
Gracious God, through such a broad and tempestuous Sea of a most troublesome
Life. Oh, happy are those that can say, [ many have been my Troubles, but the
Lord has delivered me out of them all,] Psalm. 34.19. and God's Angel has
redeemed us from all our Evils, in our whole Lives hitherto,] Genesis 48.16. and
that the Pillar of Divine Providence has hitherto been our Guide in the
Wilderness of this lower World, (as the Cloudy Pillar did guide Israel in that
wayless, Waterless Wilderness, in their many motions and mutations,) and we
have walked all along as Helpless Children, in the Hands of our Heavenly
Father, whom we have sometimes followed (as it were) blindfold, like Abraham
the Father of the Faithful, [ who went out, not knowing whither he went,] Heb.
11.8. who though he knew not whither he went, yet he well knew with whom he went,
for he was ever as a Child in his Father's Hand. Happy are such as can say,
[Lord, thou have been our King of old,] Psalm. 74.12. and [we have been Young,
but now are Old, yet never saw the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed, though
begging Bread,] Psalm. 37.25. and [we will Remember the days of Old, etc.] Psalm.
143.5. and [ this God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our Guide even
unto Death,] Psalm. 48.14.

Fourthly, The Aged may comfort themselves, that now they are approaching near
the end of their troublesome Voyage, through a dangerous Sea, both of manifold
Tribulations, and of many Temptations also; yea, and nigh to the end of their
Toilsom Travel, and Wanderings in the Wilderness of this lower World, and now
drawing nigh toward their Harbor and Haven of Eternal Happiness in Heaven. The
end of all Motion is Rest, and the nearer we come to our Center, the more
active and hastening we ought to be, that we may contradict that uncharitable
Proverb, [ Juvenis in Sanctis, Senibus Satanizat in Annis,] that is, Young
Saints sometimes prove no better than Old Devils; whereas such as are Saints
while they are Young, ought to become Angels when they come to be Old; for [the
Path of the Just is like a Shining Light, that shines more and more to a
perfect day,] Prove. 4.18. Plutarch affirms concerning the Laborious Be, that
it never degenerates into an idle Drone: And Augustin's Character of a true
Christian is, [ Semel Electus, Semper Dilectus,] once Elected, and ever
Beloved; this therefore makes our Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. As we draw daily
nearer our best Home, then to hunger after it, and hasten toward it so much the
more, etc.

Fifthly, The Old Disciples of Christ may comfort themselves with this
consideration, that the Lord loves his Mnasons, Acts 21.16. even when they are
past their work; forasmuch as they have taken heed to fulfill their Ministry
they received in the Lord, Col. 4.17. Hitherto to the best of their Abilities,
their Consciences bearing Witness hereto in the Holy Ghost, Romans 9.1. 2 Cor.
1.12. Acts 23.1. and 24.16. they are still beloved of God, for what work they
have already wrought for his Glory, and for the good of many Saints; the
reflection of this cannot but conduce much to the Comfort of their own Souls:
Though now they be like Travelers that ride upon Tired Horses, they can proceed
no farther in public Generation-work, yet they can say with Paul the Aged,
Philem. ver. 9. [ to will, is present with us, but how to perform, we find
not,] Romans 7.18. And now their only work is to Ripen fast, and to become fully
Mellow to be gathered home, etc. NB. Note well, The Lord's tender
loving kindness to the godly Levites under the Law, [in giving them leave, when
Old, to retire from that Laborious Service of his Sanctuary,] Numb. 8.23,24,25.
yet were they as Judges, etc. all which may comfort us under the Gospel, etc.
Still God commands, [ let the Younger submit to the Elder,] 1 Pet. 5.5. and as
David was kind to Young Chimham, for Old Barzillai's sake, 2 Samuel 19.38. So the
Lord is kind to the Offspring of his Old Servants, who are Children of many
Prayers, etc. Thus, though they be laid aside, as Old Almanacks, useless by Men,
they are not so by their loving God, etc.

Secondly, The Cordials and Comforts that the Lord has left us upon Record
against the Fear of Death. If we would get good Gold, we must go to Ophir; good
Balm, we must go to Gilead, etc. So if we would get good Comfort, we must go to
the God of all True Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. and to the Book of God, which consists
of those full Breasts of Consolation which we are commanded to suck and be
satisfied against all our Fears, etc. Isai. 66.11. Job calls Death the King of
Terrors, chap. 18.14. and so it is indeed a Terror to Kings too; the
Philosopher calls [(...),] the most formidable of Formidables, and Nature in
the best does find it frightful enough; yet our Lord says, [ I will not leave
you Comfortless,] John 14.18.

The First Comfort against the Fear of Death, and that our Lord has left us
for our Relief, is 1 Cor. 15.55. that Christ has unstinged that Serpent, and
that now his Redeemed may triumph over it. Moses first fled from the Serpent;
but being better informed, he took it by the Tail, and then it became an Useful
Rod in his Hand, Exodus 4.3,4. Thus Israel at first fled from Goliath, as
affrighted with the sight of such a Monster of Mankind, but so soon as they
understood that David had slain him, and laid him along without his Head upon
the ground, then did they run as fast to him to trample upon him, etc. as they
had before run away from him sore affrighted, 1 Samuel 17.24,52. So could we but
believe that Christ, our Lord David had swallowed up Death in Victory, (as we
are assured, Isai. 25.8. and that Christ's Death is the Death of Death, Hos.
13.14.) then might we sing a Triumphant Song (with the Apostle) over both Death
and the Grave, etc.

A Second Breast of Comfort against the Fear of Death is, that precious Promise
of God, [ Thou shall not be afraid, when Destruction or Death comes,] Job
5.21. and thus God said to Old Jacob, [ fear not to go down to Egypt, for I
will be with thee, and I will bring thee back again, etc.] Genesis 46.3,4.
Accordingly our Savior says to his sanctified ones, Isai. 13.3. [ Fear not to
go down among the Dead, (which is a going the way of all the Earth, Josh.
23.14.) for I will go down with thee, and I will assuredly also bring thee back
again, as one of my Children of the Resurrection, Luke 20.36.] as if he had
said [ I will bring you without failure from the Jaws of Death to the Joys of
Heaven, as surely as Ezra and Nehemiah brought all the Captive Jews out of the
Captivity of Babylon; and we must consider for our Comfort, that Death seizes
upon the Body only, which we derive from the First Adam, as Joseph's Mistress
seized only upon Joseph's Garment, his Person escaped; so the precious Soul is
returned to God that gave it, Eccles. 12.7.

A Third Breast of Consolation for Saints to suck against the Fear of Death is,
[the Righteous has Hope in his Death,] Prove. 14.32. Death to a Believer is as
the Valley of Achor, Josh. 7.24,27. Israel's entrance into the Land of Promise,
a Door of Hope, Hos. 2.15. into the Heavenly Canaan, there to sing Hallelujah's
to the Lord for ever. Death indeed to Sinners is but a Trap-door that drops
them down into Hell, Psalm. 9.17. When that Grim-Sergeant Arrests them, (by
God's Permission and Commission,) in the Devil's Name, and hurls them into an
Infinite Ocean of Hellfire, Oh what Dreadful Skreaks does that Guilty Soul
give when it is hurried away and hurled into Everlasting Burnings Isai. 33.14.
and to swim naked as i^ Scalding Lead and Liquor for evermore But blessed be
God it is better with the Saints, whose Debts are all paid by their Dear
Redeemer, they are not afraid of the Arrest of Death, but looks upon it as
God's Officer, sent to give them possession of a Mansion of Glory, and
therefore their Hearts are not troubled when their Lord sends for them to be
ever with him in Heavenly Happiness, John 14.1,2,3,4. and 16.7. and 1 These.
4.17.18. Oh, how willing was Old Jacob to go down into Egypt, when it was only
to see his younger Son Joseph, whom he had not seen for many years, etc. How
much more willing, yea desirous ought we to be to go up to Heaven, a far better
place than Egypt) there to see our Elder Brother Jesus Christ! How glad were
those Three Wise Men of the East to take a long Journey, when it was only to
see the Babe of Bethlehem, Christ in the Cradle, etc! Now if we can but say as
those Wise Men said, [ We have seen his Star, etc. Matthew. 2.2,11.] how much
more ought we to long for this Journey, etc. that we may behold our Lord Christ
advanced upon the Throne of his Glory, and to behold his Face in Righteousness,
Psalm. 17.15, etc. which is a Beatifical Vision; a Sight far exceeding those
Three, [ Romam in Flore, Paulum in Ore, and Christum in Carne,] which Father
Augustine so earnestly wished to see, namely, Rome in its Glory, Paul in the
Pulpit, and Christ in the Flesh. Alas, all those Sights are infinitely below
the beholding him in his Glory, 1 John 3.2. It was a good Prayer of the same
Augustine, saying, [ Lord, can no Man see thy Face, and live? O then let me die,
that I may see it, etc.]

A Fourth Cordial against the Fear of Death is, [ Better is the day of our
Death, than the day of our Birth,] Eccles. 7.12. It Is better every way: For,

(1.) Our Birth begins our Miseries, but our Death ends them; if we die in the
Lord, we are blessed, Rev. 14.13. Whereas Man born of a Woman, is born to
trouble, etc. Job 14.1. Yea miserable so soon as warm in the Womb at
Conception, Psalm. 51.5. Birth is our entrance into this lower present Evil
World, Gal. 1.4. but Death in Christ is our entrance into the best and blessed
World.

(2.) We come crying into this World, etc. but some Saints have gone singing
and triumphing out of it into a better World, hoping that their Death was but
the Daybreak of Eternal Brightness, etc.

A Fifth Cordial is, that Death cannot separate us from the Love of God, Romans
8.28. It Is so far from destroying the Union, that it is called a sleeping in
Jesus, 1 These. 4.14. And as by sleep the frame of the Body is refreshed, so by
Death the Union of the Soul is refined. Now when we are wearied with our days
Labor, we are not afraid to go take our rest: When Lazarus died, our Lord
said, [ our Friend Lazarus sleeps,] John 11.11. and he said the same of
Jairus's Daughter, Matthew. 9.24. and this is the frequent Phrase in Scripture,
to call Death a Sleep, Job 7.21. 2 Samuel 7.12. 1 Cor. 11.30. Now as Sleep does
not separate Friends but only for a time, betwixt [ good Night] and [ good
Morrow,] so no more does Death, which is but a bidding [ good Night,] for after
sleeping in the Grave, (as in a Bed, Isai. 57.2.) the Morning comes to rise
again.

The Sixth Cordial is, 2 Cor. 5.1,2,3, to 9. [ We know,] it is not, we think, or
we hope only; this is the true Triumph of our Trusting in Christ, our leaning
upon the Lord, Isai. 50.10. [that when our Clayie Cottages moulder down, we
have a Mansion of Glory to go to.] While we abide in those tottering
Tabernacles, [ we groan earnestly, being Burdened,] ver. 2.4. that is, both
with Sin and Misery, whereof we have here our Back-burdens, Now who would not
but be disburdened, and be at Ease and Rest; in the Grave the Weary find Rest,
Job 3.17. but the Rest that is found in Christ, Matthew. 11.28,29,30. is for the
Soul as well as Body, etc. Rev. 14.13. and who would not be willing to put off
Rotten Rags, and to put on Royal Robes, etc. Many more Cordials might be
mentioned; as,

(7 thly) For me (says Paul) to die, is Gain, Phil. 1.21. because Death to a
good Man brings freedom from all Evil, and a fruition of all Good: And hereupon
he

(8 thly) He desired to be dissolved, etc. ver. 23. The Greek word [(...),]
signifies, to launch forth, to loose off from the Shore of Life, and to launch
out into the Ocean of Immortality and Glory; this was all his Song, he longed
to be with Christ, ever after he had been wrapped up to the Third Heaven.

(9 thly) Yea, and Old Simeon thought it best of all (with Paul) to die, when
he sang that sweet Song, [ Lord, now let thy Servant depart in peace, etc. Luke
2.29. as is largely spoke to before; adding only this here, he only saw the
Lord's-Christ in weakness, with an Eye of Sense; but we see him in Glory, with
an Eye of Faith, therefore may better depart, not in Peace only, but also in
Joy and Comfort.

(10 thly) How courageous was that Proto-Martyr, Stephen, against the Terrors
of a most Terrible Death, after he had seen the Heavens opened, and Christ
standing at the Right Hand of God, Acts 7.56. The like Prospect we have offered
to our Faith, which is the Key that opens Heaven, and may we but fix our
Spiritual Eyes upon that Glorious Object, this would wonderfully enable us to
lay down our Mortal Bodies in peace, and send up our Immortal Souls into the
Hands of him that bought it, crying, [ Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit.]

( Lastly) But thanks be to God, who gives us the Victory, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57. with 55, 56.

Thirdly, The Cordials against Terrors of the Day of Judgment, which surely
follows Death, Heb. 9.27. and which is called a Terrible and Dreadful Day, very
often in Scripture; as that Day shall burn like an Oven, Mal. 4.1. the Sun
turned into Darkness, and Moon into Blood, Acts 2.20. and Elements shall melt
with fervent Heat, etc. 2 Pet. 3.10. and the Lord will come in flaming Fire,
etc. 2 These. 1.7,8. and with Fire and Sword will God plead with all Flesh, etc.
Isai. 66.15,16. see likewise Joel 2.31. Matthew. 25.31,32. Rev. 1.7, etc. Now if
a Crack of Thunder, and a Flash of Lightning, at the breaking of a single sorry
Cloud, do so affright us, how much more when the whole Heavens break, and drop
down like Scalding Bell-Mettal about our Ears, etc.

Yet, Note well, (1 st) There is Comfort for the Chosen Ones, they shall be
caught up in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall ever be with
the Lord, and therefore comfort your selves, etc. 1 These. 4,16,17,18.

(2 dly) As Death leaves us, so the Day of Judgment will find us; as the Tree
falls toward the South, or toward the North, there it lies, Eccles. 11.3.
Even so (as is before observed) if we fall by Death upon the Right Hand of
Christ, among his precious Sheep, then are we called upon to lift up our Heads,
for the Day of our Redemption is come, Luke 21.28. Ephesians. 4.30. that way the
Tree leans, that way it falls; Oh, that while we live we may lean to Christ.

(3 dly) The due Observation of the main end of Life, is to be useful to the
end of our Lives; we should be ever ready, Matthew. 24.44. May we but become
good Stewards, then blessed is that Servant, whom his Master shall find so
doing, ver. 46.

(4 thly) Though we be conscious to our selves, that our Obedience has been
exceeding narrow to God's Commandments, which are exceeding broad, Psalm.
119.96. yet may we rejoice with Trembling, Phil. 2.11. because our Judge is our
Advocate, who became sin for us, etc. that we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 John 2.1,2.

(5 thly) May we but upon good grounds be persuaded, that [we are justified by
Faith, then have we peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord,] Romans 5.1.
this is known, if we be sanctified by the Spirit, 2 These. 2.13. For this latter
does evidence the former; and having got God's Seal and Earnest, which he never
gives to a Reprobate, then fear not, Genesis 15.1.

(6 thly) Be sure to have the Line of Scarlet Thread bound to our Windows, as
Rahab had, Josh. 2.18. this was the saving Color, a Red Cord: Thus Israel's
Door-posts must be Red with Blood when the destroying Angel passed over Egypt,
Rahab made haste and delayed not, as Psalm. 119.60. So soon as she dismissed the
Spies, long before Jericho fell, etc. Oh, could we get this Scarlet Line, the
Blood of Christ fixed upon our Hearts; this Sign saved Rahab, and made her
famous, Heb. 11.31. and Jam. 2.25. then our Joshuah will save us, and say to us
also, [ Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit, etc.] Matthew. 25.34. In the mean
time we Aged Ones must be ever praying, [ Lord cast me not off in my Old Age,
and forsake me not when strength fails me, Psalm. 71.9.

Laus Ei Soli tribuatur omnes,
Cujus Afflatu Labor extat omnis,
Fructus ut Vitae reserantur omnes;
-- orbis in Oras.

FINIS.
portrait of Christopher Nesse Christopher Nesse aetatis suae 56: 1678
Minnister of the Gospel in fleet Street London.



