The New ART OF THRIVING: Or, The Way to GET and KEEP MONEY.
Being a Seasonable CAUTION against the Extravagancies of these Times:
Containing Sixteen Excellent RULES and OBSERVATIONS for promoting Good
Husbandry, and banishing Idleness and Profuseness, the certain Parents of
Poverty; with a TABLE of EXPENSES: Principally intended for an Admonition to
YOUTH, but necessary to be practiced by All Persons in these Hard Times, and to
be set up in every FAMILY.
THOUGH Complaints of Poverty and Scarcity of Money are unhappily become no less
general than lamentable, so that, wherever we go, our Ears are assaulted with
the sad Rhetoric of Beggary, and our Eyes with deplorable Objects of Pity; yet
it must be acknowledged, that we rail impertinently at the Hardness of the
Times, since it is ourselves that make them such; Men, generally, by Sloth or
Vanity, Pride, Negligence, or Extravagancy, twisting those Chains of Necessity
wherein they lie entangled: wherefore, since Diseases are not cured with our
Cries, nor Miseries redressed by Lamentations, let every one wipe his Eyes, and
make use of his Head and his Hands to preserve or recover him out of the
Quagmire of Want; it being certain that, still, every Man in Health and
Strength may acquire a Fortune by Industry and Frugality, and obtain (though not
yet a splendid) a comfortable Subsistence.

The general Cause of Poverty is either Profuseness, or not Improving those
Talents GOD has lent us. Of the first kind we may reckon up.

I. Gaudiness in Apparel; and we will rank it first because it is most visible.
How many do shipwreck their Credits, and score vast sums in Silkmen's, Mercers,
Drapers, Tailors, or Sempstresses Books, only to follow some foolish new
Fashion, and make themselves ridiculous Apes; or, at best, but like the
Cinnamon-tree, whose Bark is worth more than its Body; when a thrifty wise
person can accouter himself with good, decent, and creditable Apparel, for
Half, or a Third Part of the others Charge? Can our best-studied Fashionmongers
tell us what use there is of Perriwigs of six, seven, or eight, nay twenty or
thirty Pounds a Wig; or of daubing of Coats or Petticoats with Silver Lace?
Persons, that have the Kernel of Wisdom and Magnanimity, seldom give much
regard to the Shell of gaudy Apparel; and a Gentleman in a plain Cloth Suit,
well made, may decently appear in the Presence of the greatest Monarch in
Christendom. II. A Liquorish Tooth, or Extravagant Diet. What Waste do our
young Gallants make at their Treats at a Tavern or French Ordinary. I have
known three or four of them spend forty or fifty Shillings a piece for a Dinner
or Supper, when two Dishes, of seven or eight Shillings Price would have been
as pleasant, and much more nourishing and wholesome. No less vain is
Extravagancy in ordinary House keeping; the Variety of Dishes does but oppress
Nature and disturb Digestion. The Belly never balances Accounts: what Madness
is it therefore to keep such a Stir to gratify it; especi^lly where all Things
are to be bought in by the Penny, and Servants are trusted to be our Purveyors.
III. Drinking, or (as they nickname it) Good-fellowship, is not only a shrewd
Drainer of the Purse, but a great Consumer of Time, thereby causing Neglect of
Business, and many times rendering one incapable of doing any thing some Days
after: besides, it weakens the Body, impairs the Intellectuals, brings one into
ill Company, ruins one's Credit, and leads to a thousand Inconveniences; for
what Folly, Mischief, or Villainy will not a man engage in when he is drunk?
IV. Courting of Women. Experienced Solomon calls a Whore a deep Ditch; and,
certainly, whoever follows her Enticements, though his Way seems paved with
Delight, greads the Paths of Destruction; and, though he have never so plentiful
an Estate, shall, in a short Time, find Emptiness in his Purse, Rottenness in
his Bones, Horror in his Conscience, and Infamy entailed on his Memory. Nor is
it any other than a foolish Vanity to treat any Women often at extraordinary
Expenses; for, if they be virtuous, they will not expect it; if otherwise, they
do not deserve it. V. Gaming is the Highway to Beggar's Bush; a bewitching
Vanity, that will not suffer a Man to keep his Money in his Pocket, without
putting it to the Hazard of a Throw, whether it shall continue his own or
another's. I have known a poor Citizen so besotted with this Itch of Shaking
his Elbow, that no sooner could he get Half a Piece, but away he must go, till
he had played it away every Farthing; though his poor Wife and Half a Dozen
small Children were ready, in the mean while, to starve for Want of Bread, and
himself glad ^o drink Water or Small Beer for a Fortnight after. VI. Suretiship
has been an eminent Gulf to swallow fair Estates; so much the more lamentable,
because it falls upon Persons of the best Nature, easily enveigled by crafty
Knaves to engage for their own Debts, which they never design to pay
themselves. That ^ld Emblem I have seen, was very significant in such Cases, of
a brisk gallant young Heir sliding down the great End of a Hunter's Horn with
Ease, but cruelly pinched and tattered at the coming forth at the small End;
with one of his Brother-fools standing hard by, laughing at him, and this
Motto: -Faciles descensus Averni;
At revocare gradum, etc.
It Is easy into Hell to fall;
But to get back from thence is all.
VII. Trusting to Servants. We use to say, The Eye of the Master makes the
Horse fat: sure I am, the not having an Eye to Servants, will make his Purse
lean. What with Idleness, Waste, and Embezzlements, he will find a sensible
Consumption in his Estate, if he do not well examine their Accounts, and
continually inspect their Doings. VIII. In short, whoever would thrive, must
continually have an eye to Frugality, a Virtue that is the Root of all
Liberality: for that, by retrenching all unnecessary Expenses, avoiding much
Buying, continual Borrowing, superfluous Buildings, vexatious Lawsuits for
Trifles, chargeable Recreations, and expensive Studies, as the Philosopher's
Stone, etc. preserves and maintains a plentiful Estate, which not only renders
the Owner's Life comfortable, but also serves as a Spring, whence he can send
forth Streams of Bounty upon any necessary Occasion; which Prodigality would
soon dry up, and leave him miserable himself, and useless to others. Thus sings
the witty Randolph: Spare not, nor spend too much; be th^s thy Care,
Spare but to spend, and only spend to spare:
Who spends too much must want, and so complain;
But he spends best that spares to spend again.
IX. Defects of improving what we have, Proceed from Sloth, one of the greatest
Baits the Devil has to all Kinds of Wickedness. He that will not work, deserves
not to eat, by the Apostle's Rule. Remember (...) End of the Sluggard is
miserable Beggary. Be curious sometimes to see the Morning Star draw the
Curtains of the Day, or behold the Sun in Summer scatter Glories as he climbs
over the Eastern Hills. What a Shame is it to spend half one's Lifetime in
Dreams and Slumbers! Leave your Bed therefore, ^hen first Sleep has lest you,
left Custom render your Body sluggish, or (what is worse) your Mind a Cage of
unclean Thoughts. Account no Labor Slavery,
If honest Gain accrue thereby.
X. Man is born to Labor as the Sparks fly upwards, faith Job. And he shall
only fill his Throat with Air, that sits lazily expecting Fortune to drop an
Estate out of the Clouds into his Mouth, when it can only be attained by the
Care of a vigilant Hand, and the Sweat of a laborious Brow; so it is a most
foolish proud Humor to continue in a wretched, sharking, necessitous
Condition, rather than embrace any honest Employment, that might be
advantageous merely because it is not so neat and genteel as you would have it:
Just as if a condemned Malefactor should refuse a gracious Reprieve, because it
is not brought to him in a Silver Box, or by the Hands of a Privy Counselor.
XI. The serious Spaniard, when he would bestow the bitterest Curse upon an
Enemy, is wont to wish, He may be a Beggar when he is old. And truly there can
scarce be a greater Misery in this Life, than to be then in Want, when all the
Faculties, both of Mind and Body, being disabled to labor for supplying our
Necessities, leave us without so much as Hope ever to raise ourselves again.
The Consideration of which should effectually warn all. while Youth and
Strength last, not to trifle them away in Vanity and Debauchery, but endeavor
to lay up something as a Reserve for Gray Hairs and a Bed of Sickness: not to
speak of a thousand other cross Accidents that, happening suddenly, may utterly
ruin a person, if he be not a little beforehand in the World. Most true is the
Proverb; In Summer of Youth take Pains with the Ant,
Or in Winter of Age live poor and in Want.
XII. The general Means of thriving are, for a Man to be diligent ( nulla Dies
sine linea) always employed in some honest Calling, or Designs suitable to his
Condition, advantageous in themselves, and feasible for him to accomplish; to
be vigilant, and way-lay Opportunities, there being, undoubtedly, some offered
in the Course of every Man's Life, that may make him reasonably happy, if he
has but the Wit to nick them luckily. Add to this a Wariness in his Expenses
and Bargainings, buying, if possible, with Ready-money; preserving his Credit,
by keeping Touch when he appoints any Payments; Affability and an obliging
Carriage to all in Matters that cannot damnify him, but to avoid all
Engagements for any to his Prejudice, nor to concern himself in another's
Matters; not to go to Law but upon Necessity; then first to take good Advice on
his Case, and afterward prosecute it with all imaginable Vigor, that so the
Success may make others afraid to contend with him unjustly. Besides all this,
discreetly for to wive,
Is held by wise Men a main help to thrive.
XIII. I am not ignorant with what Clamor the Libertines of the Age decry that
sacred Institution; but those that fancy Wedlock so insupportable a Yoke, may
fancy their Garters to be Shackles, and their Neckcloths Halters. I fear not
many have so fully received the Gift of Continence, as to observe a single Life
with a pure and inviolated Chastity (thrice happy are those that can): but if
they do fly out, most certain I am, besides the Wounds to their Souls, it is no
small Prejudice to their Estates and Business, having always esteemed a
Mistress a more chargeable Convenience than a Wife; the first having still an
Eye to her own Profit, left her Gallant should forsake her; whereas the
interest of the l^st is inseparably twisted with that of her Husband: nor is
she of small Advantage to him in the Management of his Affairs. Hear old Tusser
on the Point: The Care of the Husbandman enricheth the Hutch,
The Eye of the Housewife avails as much.
What he does provide with Money his Drudge,
She still must look which Way it does trudge.
XIV. As to the Choice of a Wife, having little Experience myself, let me
advise you in the Words of the same Poet, Though Love in choosing far better than
Gold,
Let Love come with somewhat, the better to hold.
It Is the most critical Action of a Man's Life; not only his own Happiness or
Ruin, but his Relations and Posterity are concerned in it; and since it can be
done but once, it concerns us to consider more than twice before we undertake
it. The Fear of God, Consent of Parents, and a Fitness between the Parties for
each other, are requisite: a true and mutual Affection above all Things should
preceed; for nothing can be a greater Torment than a loathed Bed. Yet since
Love is a Flame, it is convenient to have Fuel of an Estate, lest the Damps of
Necessity should extinguish it. He that weds merely for Money, turns Marriage
into a Bargain and Sale, and he that marries one wholly portionless does the
worst of Drudgeries for nothing. I would take the Woman for her own Sake, but
welcome a Bag or two as good Additions; considering Wealth, in relation to her,
as Ciphers in Arithmetic, which, though signifying nothing themselves, do yet
much vary the Signification of those Figures wherewith they are joined. XV.
Another Way whereby some ruin themselves, is Folly, undertaking Things
impossible or dangerous, or suffering themselves to be cheated of what they
have: for the Prevention whereof, there is no better Way than to deal as
securely with all men as if they were the veriest Knaves; then, let them prove
as they will, you are safe. If a Man impose on you once, it is his Fault, if
twice your own. Always suspect the smoothest Tongues and fairest Pretenders; in
this Sense, many a man is saved by h^s Infidelity. XVI. Above all, to thrive,
be very punctual in your Accounts: register all Receipts and Disbursements, and
often delight to balance them; never contemn little Advantages, nor slight
small Expenses. The Scotch Proverb says well, Every little makes a mickle; and
the Wise Man tells you plainly, He that despises a little shall fall by little
and little. What vast Sums do some Men trifle away insensibly. Hang it, one
Pint with such a Friend; the other Pot with such an Acquaintance; its but
twelve-pence; its but twopence; whereas, if these superfluous Expenses had
been but laid up together, they might have paid the Rent at the Year's End, or
stopped some other Gap; for which now, perhaps, thy Goods are like to be
feized, or thy Person hauled away to Gaol.-That none way pretend Ignorance, for
Want of Arithmetic, we shall here insert, A TABLE of Expenses, whereby knowing
what is for one Day, you may see what it is in a Week, Month, or Year.
By the Day Week Month Year. Pence. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1 0 0 7 0 2 4 1
10 5 2 0 1 2 0 4 8 3 0 10 3 0 1 9 0 7 0 4 11 3 4 0 2 4 0 9 4 6 1 8 5 0 2 11 0
11 8 7 12 1 6 0 3 6 0 14 0 9 2 6 7 0 4 1 0 16 4 10 12 11 8 0 4 8 0 18 8 12 3 4
9 0 5 3 1 1 0 13 13 9 10 0 5 10 1 3 4 15 4 2 11 0 6 5 1 5 8 16 14 9 Shillings.
l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1 0 7 0 1 8 0 18 5 0 2 0 14 0 2 16 0 36 10 0 3 1 1 0
4 4 0 54 15 0 4 1 8 0 5 12 0 73 0 0 5 1 15 0 7 0 0 91 5 0 6 2 2 0 8 8 0 109 10
0 7 2 9 0 9 16 0 127 15 0 8 2 16 0 11 4 0 146 0 0 9 3 3 0 12 12 0 164 5 0 10 3
10 0 14 0 0 182 10 0 11 3 17 0 15 8 0 200 15 0 12 4 4 0 16 16 0 219 0 0 13 4 11
0 18 4 0 237 5 0 14 4 18 0 19 12 0 255 10 0 15 5 5 0 21 0 0 273 15 0 16 5 12 0
22 8 0 292 0 0 17 5 19 0 23 16 0 310 5 0 18 6 6 0 25 4 0 328 10 0 19 6 13 0 26
12 0 346 15 0 20 7 0 0 28 0 0 365 0 0

This Table is so plain the meanest Capacity may understand it. Find the Sum of
Pence or Shillings spent in one Day, in the first Column on the Left Hand, and
just against it you have the Sum in Pounds, Shillings, and Pence, that it makes
by the Week, Month, or Year, according to the respective Titles above.

Hereby it appears, that One Penny a Day comes to 1l. 10s. 5d. in a Year; and
therefore, in 21 Years, it will come to 31l. 10s. 9d. only by the Saving
thereof. But if you employ this so, that you may gain after the Rate of Five in
the Hundred, it will amount above 43l. in the said Time, which may be a good
Portion for a Man's Child.

A Penny is a small regardless Sum,
Yet in a while we see to Pounds 'twill come;
He then that carelessly his Pence does spend,
Will quickly bring his Pounds unto an End.

But to conclude: take these Words of Advice.
First worship God, his Blessing to obtain,
For without that, Man toils and moils in vain.
These Lessons approved, if wisely ye note,
May save and advantage you many a Groat;
Which if you can follow, Occasion found,
Then every Lesson may save thee a Pound.
Spare in thy Youth, lest Age should find thee poor,
When Time is past, and thou can spare no more:
No coupled Misery so great as either,
As Age and Want, when both do meet together.
Sold by S. GAMIDGE, in WORCESTER.


