AN English Inquisition FOR A HERETIC. OR, The Punishment due to Heretics.

Together with the Nature and Causes of Heresy.

Declared in a SERMON, Preached at a Visitation at WARE, Upon the 19th. of
April 1672.

By Robert Neville, B. D. late Fellow of Kings-Colledge in Cambridge, and now
Rector of Ansty in the County of Hertford.

LONDON, Printed by S. and B. G. for Benj. Took, and are to be sold at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1673.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL My Noble and Worthy Patron Sr ROWLAND LYTTON, Of
Knebworth in the County of HERTFORD.
Right Worshipful Sir,
WHen I first put on Resolutions of making this Discourse Public, I found no
Dispute within my self to whom the Dedication of it was a just Debt; the Sense
of my many Obligations to you soon put me in mind, that the Discourse and the
Author might deservedly Own the same Patron: the chief Errand upon which it
came abroad, being to make my grateful Resentments of them as well known to
the World, as those great Endearments and noble Vsages you have past upon me,
have been to all, both our Clergy and Gentry, on this side of the County of
Hertford: It Is by your Donation that I enjoy a Comfortable Subsistence; it is
you alone that have been the Author of the most visible Contentment I receive
in this World; and not then to have paid you the just Tribute of my Duty and
Thanks, in the Dedication of this Discourse, had been a palpable Contradiction
to it, and made the Author himself a Heretic, at least in Morals, and an
unpardonable Schismatic and Separatist, both from Gratitude and Civility; for
which he might have justly been Excommunicated from your good thoughts, which
(next to that dreadful Excommunication from the Church) would, in his eye, be
the greatest misfortune that could befall him. What title this Sermon had to a
Visitation, it held from you in Capite; for it was by your means that the
Author of it was admitted (I will not so lessen your kindness as to say a
Member) to be the Head and Rector of the Church of Ansty; it was you alone that
preserved him, I cannot say from Schism, or Separation from the Church of
England, (for be ever resolved to live and dye a dutiful Son to that indulgent
Mother) but from a Separation from the Church of Ansty. I am not ignorant how
unfit a Present this Trifle is to be offered to such a Personage as Sir R. L.
nor do I swell so much in my own conceit, as to think it any part of a just
Return; I only desire it may pass as a small acknowledgment of those many great
favors you have heaped upon me, in the same manner as of old a pair of Doves
were accepted from those, whose abilities could not reach to a Lamb: and unless
that great God, who was pleased to employ you as a great Minister of his
Providence to me and mine, shall enable me, beyond either my deservings, or
expectancies, to pay my great Debt I owe you, I must run further upon the Score
with you, and in the deepest sense of duty and affection, court and grasp all
opportunities of owning how much I am

Your obliged and indebted Orator, and humble Servant, R. NEVILLE.
From my Study at Ansty, this 20th. day of December 1672.
AN English Inquisition FOR A HERETIC.
Tit. 3. Verse. 10. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
admonition reject.


THE Spirit of God did not without good reason resemble the Church to a Lilly
among Thorns, Cant. 2.2. as being made up of good and bad, a Compound of both;
and this truth may be demonstrated from the first Infancy of the world, from
the early time of our Father Adam; and those days, wherein the Church was
confined within the narrow bounds and limits of the Families of the Patriarchs:
a wicked Cain was to be found in it, as well as a good Abel; a profane Esau
might have been seen under the same roof with religious Jacob: This truth is
also further confirmed to us, by, that famous Type of the Church, Noah's Ark; in
which were Creatures of all kinds, Beasts both clean and unclean: Gods Church
has in all ages had Chaff as well as good Corn; and in the very College of the
Apostles, Christ's College, which, at its being first Founded, had but twelve
Scholars, twelve Disciples, there was one Judas, one Traitor, one Devil, John
6.70. and the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Sardis, and Laodicea, were
overrun with Errors and Heresies: And in the Church of Crete, of which Titus
(to whom St. Paul wrote this Epistle) was Archbishop, there was such a nest of
Heretics, known by the name of Gnostics, who employed themselves in compiling
a new Model of Divinity, made up of foolish Disputes, and Heathen notions of
Poetical Genealogies, and contentions about observing the Mosaical Law; that
St. Paul was forced to write to Titus, that it was his Office, as a Bishop,
first to admonish him, who made any such Division in the Church, or taught any
Doctrine contrary to that, which was delivered by Christ and his Apostles; and
if after the first and second admonition, there was no amendment; then to
proceed to Ecclesiastical Censures, to which he is prompted and excited, in
these words of my Text, A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
admonition reject. In which words are these two General parts.

First, A Punishment to be inflicted, namely, the Censures of the Church, or
Excommunication; for says the Text, (...), avoid, or reject, after the first
and second admonition, i. e. Excommunicate, and proceed to Censures against him.

Secondly, The Offender upon whom these heavy Censures were to be laid, [A man
that is an Heretic.]

First, on the first, or the Punishment to be inflicted, namely the Censures of
the Church, or Excommunication; for says the Text, [after the first and second
admonition reject,] that is, Excommunicate, and proceed to Censures against
him: for by these words, [after the first and second admonition] St. Paul
referrs to the method prescribed by Christ, in proceeding against Christian
Offenders, Mat. 18.5. but in some circumstances differs from it: for in that
forecited place of St. Matthew there is mention made of a threefold admonition:
one, by the injured person alone; a second, by two or three taken with him; a
third, by the Church: but here in my Text is only mention, of a First and
Second admonition: the Cause of this difference is to be taken from the Quality
of the Person, to whom this was spoken; namely, his being a Bishop; whereas in
St. Matthew the speech was addressed to every private Christian. Here in the
Text, the first admonition of the Bishop carries with it an Authority, far
above that of the private person, and the two or three with him, and so may
well supply the place of both those: and then the second admonition here in the
Text, will be parallel to the third admonition St. Matthew speaks of; and so,
after that is despised and contemned, it is seasonable to proceed to Censures,
and to Excommunicate the person so offending. Thus 2 Cor. 13.2. immediately
after the second admonition delivered by St. Paul in these words, I foretell
you the second time; he tells the offenders, (...), I will not spare you; and
verse. 10. he assures them, that this Admonition is, (...), that he may not
proceed to Excision, or Cutting off, which in the last word of that verse, he
calls (...), taking away; the word ordinarily used in the Canons for
Excommunication. The true meaning of these words [after the first and second
admonition reject] being discovered to you, and thereby the Censures or
punishment due to Heretics being declared; I shall dismiss this First General,
and lay hold on the Second, where we have

2ly. The Offender, upon whom these heavy Censures were to be laid, namely, [a
man that is an Heretic:] in the handling whereof, I shall pursue this method.

First, I shall show what Heresy is.

Secondly, From what Fountain it springs or proceeds.

First, I shall show what Heresy is: Although the word Heresy, in it self,
signifies neither good nor bad; and therefore, in Eusebius, Constantine applys
it to the Christian Religion, calling it Heresy; yet in Ecclesiastical
Writers, if not constantly in the Scriptures, it is used in a bad sense, and
signifies an Election or adhering to a way of our own devising, and not that
which was commanded by God in his Holy Word: and therefore Hesychius the
Grammarian, defines a Heretic thus, (...), He that chooses some other Doctrine
or Opinion besides the Truth: but that we may not dwell always in Cortice
nominis, in the Bark or Outside of the mere name, I shall describe the Thing it
self to you: for the effecting whereof, I shall out of the large Harvest of
those Authors that treat of it, glean this description of Heresy. So Cardinal
Tolet l. 4. c. 3. de instruct. and our own Country man Francis Mason l. 2. c 10
p 164 c. 13. p. 197. 198. de ministerio Anglicano, have described it; and
Alphonsus a Castro, advers. Haereses. lib 1. p 4 defines it, Dogma falsum fidei
Orthodoxae repugnans.
Heresy is an obstinate Error in a Christian man in some part contrary to the
Catholic Faith; for the better understanding whereof, I shall enquire after
these two particulars: 1. What things Heresy supposes. 2ly. What things it
implys and includes: and 1. I shall enquire what things Heresy supposes: as
namely, 1. A mere superficial knowledge of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
delivered and acknowledged in the Church of God: hence we read in 1 Cor. 11.19.
there must be Heresies amongst you, you (...), you Corinthians, who are Members
of the Visible Church. True and Orthodox Religion always goes before Heresy:
Is est Haereticus qui jam suscepto Baptismi Sacramento, Haeresin amplexus est;
addimus autem (suscepto Baptismi Sacramento) quia qui contraria fidei dogmata
sequitur, nec unquam in Ecclesiam catumque Dei receptus est, Infidelis potius
quam Haereticus est appellandus. Danaeus Haeres. cap. 3.
Danaeus therefore tells us, that a man must first have bound and obliged
himself to the Christian Faith, and have received the Sacrament of
Christianity, before he can properly be called an Heretic. Hence it is that
Antichrist, that man of Sin, is said to sit in the Temple of God, 2 These. 2.4.
that is, in the bosom of the Church: Heresy therefore is an Error, not of any
kind of men, but of those, who in appearance, and as far as the outward
Profession of it, made their pretenses to the Christian Faith, from some part
or Article whereof they afterward revolted and fell away: and hereby we may
easily distinguish between Heresy and Schism; Heresy maintains a perverse
Opinion or Doctrine in the Church; Schism makes a rash and needless Separation
from the Church: Heresy is a desertion of Ecclesiastical Verity; Schism a
breach of Ecclesiastical Unity.

2ly. Heresy supposes that some things may be retained, which in some
particular savor of the Christian Faith; although it has long since been
accounted an axiom in Divinity, quod Articuli Fidei sint copulativi, that the
Articles of Faith are copulative; and (as Part 2. q. 159. memb. 7.
Alexander Hales tells us) Faith extends it self ad omnia Credibilia, to all
things that are Credible: so that he who denies One Article of Faith, in nullo
sanus judicetur, as 2. 2 q. 5. a t. 3. in corp
Aquinas tells us, can be thought sound in none. Yet no Heretic did ever
abjure the whole Creed or Foundation of Faith, in every Article or part of it:
De Baptism. contra Donatist. l. 1. c 1.
St. Augustine affirms this of the Donatists themselves, that in many things
they concurred with him, though he left them in several Errors and Heresies:
for a Heretic in this, that though he reject many things, yet retains some,
differs from a total and absolute Apostate, who falls and revolts, not from
some part only, but from the whole Evangelical Truth, which he before
acknowledged.

3ly. Heresy supposes that the Scripture, or some part of it, at least as to
the letter, is to be retained as the Common Principle of disputing. This
Vincentius Lirinensis observed of Heretics, saying, Mos est Haereticorum
Scripturarum umbraculis errores suos pessimos obtegere Vinc. Lit c. 35. 36, 37.
in commonitor. advers Haer.
It Is the custom of Heretics to shade and shelter their foul Errors under the
Covert of Scripture. Those notorious Heretics, Arrius, Pelagius, and the
Manichees, did not universally deny the Authority of the Scripture, but
attempted the Defense of their Errors by Scripture, though impertinently
alleged by them: they dealt with the Scriptures, as Chemists deal with Natural
Bodies, torturing them to extract that out of them, which God and Nature never
put in them: and as he that bought Orpheus his Harp, thought it would of it
self make most admirable Music, how unskilfully soever he touched it; so these
men supposed, that Scripture would sound wonderful Musically, if they did but
handle it, with how great incongruity soever it was. And thus having discovered
to you what things Heresy supposes; I now come to show,

Secondly, What things it implys and includes: and

First, It includes an error of Judgment, not of Manners: being placed in the
Reason or Judgment, not in Deeds or Actions: according to that known saying,
Factum sine Errore non facit Haereticum; no Matter of Fact without an Error in
the Judgment can make a Heretic: which I shall confirm and illustrate by this
instance; Adoration paid to Devils, though it be Idolatry in the highest
degree, and to be abominated like Hell it self; yet if it be done without any
Opinion of Divinity existing in those Infernal Spirits, it is not to be called
Heresy; Res enim effecta absque judicio intellectus definientis, peccatum esse
potest. Haeresis autem minime Alphons. a Castro lib 1. advers Haeres. p. 3.
For a thing done without the judgment of the Understanding, may be a Sin, but
not a Heresy, says Alphonsus a Castro.

2ly. Heresy, as it is an Error of Judgment, not of Manners; so it has for
its Object a Matter of Faith, or the Doctrine of the Gospel. There may be great
Errors in the Mathematics, in Natural, or in Moral Philosophy, but those who
are entangled in these Errors, must not be put into the List and Catalogue of
Heretics; for they are only such, who have corrupt Judgments in matters of the
Christian Faith. And as they have Matters of Faith for their Object, so

3ly. Have they those Points of Faith, which are Essentials and Fundamentals,
(...), such as are necessarily and explicitly, to be believed by all: and
therefore Heretics may be said to be such, as Col. 2.19. Hold not the head:
without which there is no Salvation. Heretics (as Quaest. 11. Artic. 2 part 2.
2.
Aquinas tells us) are such, as harbor a false Opinion of those things, quae
ad Fidem pertinent, which belong to Faith; to which any thing may belong, two
ways; either directly and principally, as do all the Articles of Faith: or else
indirectly and secondarily, as do all those Points, to the denying whereof, the
Corruption of some Fundamental Article is a necessary Consequent.

4ly. To all these Obstinacy or Contumacy may be superadded, which is the
Specifical Difference of Heresy, the chief Constituent part that makes up this
Sin; to which we may referr that known saying of St. Augustine, Errare possum
Haereticus esse nolo.
I may err, but I will not be a Heretic: for there is always required to
Heresy, not only an Erroneous Judgment, but also an Obstinate Will. I shall
conclude this particular, with those words of St. Augustine, against the
Manichees. Qui in Ecclesia Christi pr^vum aliquid sapiunt, si correpti ut sanum
rectumque sapiant, resistunt contumaciter, suaque pestifera Dogma^a defendere
persistunt Heretici sunt l 18. de Civ Dei. cap. 51.
They who savor of, or maintain any false or corrupt Doctrine in the Church of
Christ, if after a rebuke, or admonition to forsake their Error, and embrace
the Truth, they shall out of Contumacy stand out, and persist to defend their
poisonous Doctrines, they are Heretics.

And thus having shown what Heresy is, I shall proceed to evince, 2ly From
what Fountain it springs and proceeds. Now this Sin of Heresy, like the River
Nilus, has many Heads, many Fountains, as namely.

First, Pride: (...). l. 1 Haeres. 75. Edit. Petav.
Epiphanius tells us of that Arch-heretick Arrius, that being high and lofty in
his own thoughts, he went out of the right way, and departed from the Truth.
And Eusebius. Ecclesiast Hist. lib 4 cap. 21.
Thebulis, the first Heretic in the Church of Jerusalem, fell into Heresy,
because he was not permitted to succeed Simeon in that Bishopric; his pride
and ambition could not brook the loss and defeat of so high a place in the
Church. You will find a^l Heretics perching upon the same Pinnacle, the Devil
stood, the High Pinnacle of Pride: the Heretic Aerius (if we will believe
Epiphanius) had (...). l. 1. Haer. 75. lib. 4. cap. 21.
an ambition to be exalted; and though he wanted merit to advance him from a
Presbyter to a Bishop, yet he wanted not arrogance to lessen the Bishop into a
Presbyter: and this was the bane of Origin, a man of as great Learning, as ever
that Age, he lived in, gave birth to; who, in his Comments upon the Scripture,
conceiving (out of the high opinion of his own Wit and Parts) strange Meteors,
and aerie Speculations, brought forth those dangerous Errors, which drew upon
his Person the heaviest Lamentation of Origin, in Eusebius. lib. 7. Eccles. Hist.
cap. 1. p 122.
Censures of the Church, and upon Posterity the loss of some of his Writings.
And Eccles Hist. lib. 7. c. 29. p 140.
Eusebius tells us, that, that blasphemous Heretic, Paulus Samosatenus, who
denied the Divinity of Christ, was pufft up with Pride, and usurped Secular
Dignities: and, even in the times of the Apostles, there was a proud
Diotrephes, who 3 Epist. John 9. loved to have prehentinence among them.

2ly. Heresy proceeds from Affectation of Novelty; whether it be 1. In our
Opinions: or 2ly. In our Words and Phrases.

1. Heresy proceeds from Affectation of Novelty in our Opinions: The Nature of
men, especially of such as are Heretically inclined, is greedy of Novelty; and
Lib. 7. cap. 32 p. 369. Eccl. Hist.
Socrates observes of the Heretic Nestorius, that he scorned to peruse the
Works of the Ancient Fathers; preferring himself, and his own Novel Opinions,
before them all. That we may therefore stop this Inlet to Heresy, Affectation
of Novelty, let us call to mind the advice of the Prophet, Jer. 6.16. Stand ye
in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths: the Old way is the Safe way.
In Christianity there can be no Concerning Truth which is not Ancient; and
whatsoever is truly new, is certainly false: Look then for Purity in the
Fountain, and strive to embrace the first Faith. There are but few things, so
little, or so great, either in Art or Nature, which are not willing to take
advantage from the mere credit of their Antiquity: in Religion also the case is
clear, That which is first is truest, as Id verius quod prius Tertul. advers.
Marc. lib. 4. cap. 5
Tertullian well observes. And as Heresy sometimes proceeds from Affectation
of Novelty in our Opinions, so

2ly. Does it proceed from Affectation of Novelty in our Words and Phrases; An
unusual and new Form, or Mode of speaking in the Doctrine of Faith, opens a
Window, if not a Door, to Heresy: A Solecisme in Words sometimes turns to a
Solecisme in Doctrine: The Heretic Nestorius (as Eccles. Hist. lib 7. cap 32.
Socrates tells us) because he would not allow the Virgin Mary to be called
(...), the Mother of God, but quarreled with that form of speech, which the
Practice and Custom of the Church had stamped for current; chose rather to deny
the Unity of Christ's Person in his Theanthropy, than to speak in the Phrase and
Language of the Ancient Church.

3ly. Heresy sometimes proceeds from Weakness and Ignorance: simple and
unlearned Souls, trained up by men of Contentious Spirits, have had strength
enough to be the Authors of dangerous Heresies. Eusebius. Ecclesiast Hist. lib 5
cap. 13.
Priscilla and Maximilla, two silly women, laden with iniquity, were the chief
Ringleaders in the Error of the Montanists: what one said of Civil
Contentions, holds true also of Heresies, audacia etiam valet singulorum, no
man is too weak, I say not to do a mischief, but to be a Principal Agent and
Leader in Heresy. Ignorance is usually the Mother of Confidence, and makes men
venture upon things, above the Sphere of their low capacities, leap from the
Shop-board to the Pulpit, and become ex tempore Teachers and Interpreters of
Scripture, which, being unlearned, they wrest unto their own destruction, 2
Pet. 3.16. it was Sola Scripturarum ars est quam omnes passim sibi vendicant:
in Epistol. ad Paulin.
St. Hieroms complaint, (and I wish it might not still be ours) that
Practitioners of other Arts could contain themselves within the bounds of their
own Profession, but that every one pretends to the Art and skill of
interpreting Scripture.

4ly. Heresy sometimes proceeds from a desire in men, to shroud themselves
under the great name of some famous person; Jud. 16. Having men's persons in
admiration: Hence sprang that Rhapsody of Heresies, with which the Church did
ever abound, the Cerinthians, Nicolaitans, Arrians, Manichees, Pelagians,
Socinians, etc. both the time and your patience would fail me, if I should
recite all those, which Irenaeus, Epiphanius, St. Augustine, Alphonsus a
Castro, and others have taken the pains to reckon up: Such men as those which I
but now named to you, usually place the Founder of that Heresy, to which they
are Retainers, as a Star in the Firmament, and walk by the Light which he
casts, and by no other, though it come from the Sun it self. So that it were
not amiss to advise them to take up that excellent Resolution of Haec sententia
mihi stat, nallius hominis praeterquam Jesu Christi nobis a Coelesti Patre
commendati, nomen far, nulli me mancipare. Vorstii Epist. ad Chr. Per. p. 79.
inter Epist. Theol. Praest. ac erud v^^orum.
Vorstius, to bear no other Name but that of Christ; wear no Title but that of
Christian: for why should the Truth be built upon a Name? which, though it be
glorious in the world, is but the name of a Man, who is subject to Error. Toll
mihi e causa nomen Catonis, says Tully; Cato was a Name in great repute, and
that carried Authority with it; and therefore the Orator did not think fit to
have him a Witness against his Client Murena: so, toll mihi e causa nomen
Calvini aut Socini, take away the name of Calvin, or Socinus, if you would
discover the Truth: There is but one name by which you can be saved, Act. 4.12.
and his name alone must prevail with you.

5ly. Heresy oftentimes grows from Covetousness, which 1 Timothy 6.10. is the
Root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the
Faith: thus lib. 5 c 3^.
Theodoret tells us of Vlphila Bishop of the Goths, who being enticed and
allured by money, drew all the Barbarians into Communion with the Arrian
Heretics: and holy (...). Ignat. Epistol ad Magnes.
Ignatius, describing some Heretics that did then infest the Church, tells us
that they were, Covetous of other men's goods, and greedy of wealth: This sent
that swarm of Flies and Locusts, the Novatians, the Puritans of those times,
Disciples of Novatus, who would needs be styled (...), pure; but as pure as he
pretended to be, he was (says Nazianzen) (...), a Covetous person. This Sin is
the great Coiner of Heresies, which are nothing else but the inventions of
worldlyminded men, working out of the Elaboratory of their Fancy, some new
Doctrine, which may favor and feed their Covetous humor, and make them rich
and great in the world: this built a Throne for the Pope, and a Consistory for
the Disciplinarian: this has stated many Questions, and sat as President at
most Councils: for, be the man what he will, private Interest is commonly the
Doctor of the Chair, and e Cathedra determines all things; and whatsoever is
once found advantageous, shall soon be determined sound and Orthodox.

6ly. Heresy sometimes proceeds from exalting Reason too high in matters of
pure Faith: I say matters of pure Faith; for those Principles which the
Scripture contains, are of two sorts; Mixed, and Pure; the Mixed are those that
are both discovered by Reason, and declared by Revelation, and so are
Principles both of Reason and Faith: of this kind are the Attributes of God,
Moral Good and Evil, and the Soul's Immortality. The Principles of pure Faith
are such, as are known only by the Divine Testimony, as, the Miraculous
Conception, the Incarnation, and the Trinity: and to this purpose has Eulogius
an excellent Oration, against those who think to be able to comprehend those
sublime Truths in Scripture that concern the Trinity, (...), by the Wit or
Reason of man: these Principles of pure Revelation, Reason cannot immediately
demonstrate; nor can we expect it should, for they are matters of Divine
Testimony; all that it can do herein, is to assert the Credibility and Truth of
those testimonies that relate such matters, in proving the Divine Authority of
the Scriptures: and it is no more disparagement to our Reasons, that they
cannot evince these Sacred Truths of pure Revelation by their own strength;
than it is a disgrace to them, that they cannot know that there are such things
as Colors, without the help of our eyes; or that there are Sounds, without the
Faculty of hearing. Reason in these things must strike sail to Faith: and, many
times, because she refuses to borrow Spectacles of Faith to look into these
Mysteries, she runs men into Heresy. Thus the Socinians, by exalting Reason
too high, and making it the Standard of Divine Truths, and Principles of pure
Revelation, fell into that dangerous Heresy of denying Christ's Divinity,
denying that he is the true, great, and eternal God.

7ly. Heresy proceeds from a wilful wresting and distorting the Scripture:
Scripture is either mangled by Heretics, or put upon the Rack: used as
Procrustes used his Guests, either cut off in some part of it, or stretched too
far; and is interpreted by them, as Jonathan shot his arrows, sometimes beyond,
sometimes beside, sometimes short of the sense of it: they are so much in love
with their own Heretical Opinions, that they will let the Scripture speak no
sense but theirs; and (like the Harlot in the Book of Kings) they take their
dead and putrefied fancies, and lay them in the Bosom of Scripture: and as
Euphranor the Painter, having wearied his Art and Fancy, in drawing the
Pictures of the lesser Gods, failed and came short in setting out the Majesty
of Jupiter; so these men having wearied their Art and skill, in drawing the
Pictures of their own little fancies and conceits, fall short of the true
interpretation of Scripture; and will not be persuaded, that it has too much
(...), sublimity, and Majesty in it, to stoop to such low, and mean Phansies,
as they would pin and fasten upon it: from whence it comes to pass, that when
they find the Scripture run counter to them, rather than submit to it, they
will be guilty of Scripture-Slaughter, as Tertullian calls it; Marcion exerte
and palam machaera non stylo usus est; quoniam ad materiam suam caedem
Scripturarum confecit. Tert. de praescript. Haereticor. c. 38. And the same
Author speaking of other Heretics goes on to the same purpose as follows; De
verbi autem administratione quid dicam; cum hoc fit negotium illis, non
ethnicos convertendi, sed nostros evertendi? hanc magis gloriam captant, si
stantibus ruinam, non si jacentibus elevationem operentur; quoniam opus eorum
non de suo proprio aedificio venit, sed de veritatis destructione. de
praescript. Haeret c. 42.
Marcion (says he) draws his Sword, and cuts off a part of the Scripture: so
that it is no wonder that these men who handle the Scripture with such rude and
violent hands, force it to look which way they would have it; it being no hard
thing for a man of parts, who is resolved never to be divorced from an espoused
Opinion, to find some places of Scripture, which by skillful handling, will be
persuaded to cast a favorable countenance upon it. Tully tells us of a
Musician, who being asked what the Soul was, answered, that it was a Harmony;
and is a principiis artis suae non recessit; and he knew not (says he) how to
leave the Principles of his own Art. Again, Plato's Scholars had been trained
up in Arithmetic, and the knowledge of Numbers, and hence it came, that when
afterward they diverted their Studies, either to Natural or Moral Philosophy,
they still fancied to themselves somewhat like unto Numbers, and thereupon fell
upon a conceit, that Numbers were the Principles of all things: so when these
men come to read the Scripture, it fares much with them as it did with Tully's
Musician, or Plato's Scholars; they cannot forsake those erroneous Principles,
and false Opinions, in which they have been brought up and educated: and as to
those, who are sick of the Jaundies, all things seem yellow and discolored; so
to these men, all those parts of the Scripture they look upon, seem of the same
Color and Complexion with their own Opinions. They Lacquy the Scriptures to
their own private thoughts and sentiments.

8ly. Heresy sometimes proceeds from Corruption in Morals, from Looseness of
life and manners; which oftentimes point out a Heretic, and help us to find
him out with more Certainty, than the Inquisition does the supposed Heretic.
Those that are Followers of their own Lusts, have often been found
Haeresiarchae, Leaders in Heresy, 2 Pet. 2, 14. having eyes full of adultery,
and that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls; and verse. 15. have
forsaken the right way, and gone astray. Thus Simon Magus went about with a
famous Strumpet called Helena, whom he styled (...), his first Conception, and
preached up the lawfulness of all manner of Filthiness: thus Dionysius of
Alexandria tells us, that that Arch-Heretick Cerinthus, taught this Doctrine,
(...). lib. 2. (...).
that Christ's Kingdom should be an earthly one; and, agreeable to his fancy who
was (says my Author) (...), a very Carnal man, that it should consist in
satisfying the Paunch, and Lust, in Meats and Drinks, and Sensual Pleasures.
And Ignatius speaking of some Heretics of his Age, tells us that they were,
(...). Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes.
Corrupters and Defilers of Women: I could tell you also of those shameless
Lusts of the Nicolaitans, who, as Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, (...). Clem
Alex. Stromat. l. 3.
Commit all kinds of Filthiness without shame, saying that they must (...).
ibid. vide etiam Eusebius Eccles. Histor. l. 3 cap 26.
Fight with, and affront and abuse the flesh: to which I might add the Heresies
of Menander and Carpocrates, were they not too filthy for chaste and modest ears.

9ly. And lastly, They that are Enthusiasts, and leaving the Word of God,
pretend to the Spirit, to Extatical Raptures and Transportations, may be said
to be, if not Heretics, yet in a ready way to Heresy. Thus we read of that
Arch-Heretick Montanus, that he pretended to have received a Comforter from
Heaven, and two Prophetesses, Priscilla and Maximilla, and that he received
certain Visions and Revelations both by himself and his Followers; and l 1.
Haer. 74.
Epiphanius tells us, that those Heretics, the Nazaraei, did boast of their
(...), their Enthusiasms; and l. 2. c. 20.
Irenaeus tells us of that Arch-Heretick Cerinthus, that teaching his Disciples
(...), some Doctrines of Filthiness, not to be named, he pretended to have
received them in Revelations. Lucian in his (...), or False Prophet, makes
mention of a Mountebank Cheater, who that he might the more artificially
deceive the People, set up an Oracle of his own contrivance, and like the
Priests of the true Oracles, (whence the Sybil never gave answer but in an
Ecstasy) he had his Sacred Furies, his Holy Trances, and appeared to all as
inspired by some Deity; and so our Heretical Enthusiasts pretend to Spiritual
Transports, and Inspired Raptures, as often as they would give birth to any
erroneous Doctrine; and feign to themselves as great a familiarity with God, as
ever Numa did with his Goddess Egeria: but let me tell them, notwithstanding
their Seraphical pretensions to the Spirit, that the same may be said of their
Meeting Houses, which was once said in scorn of the Conclave of Cardinals, when
they clasht for the space of two years about the choice of a Pope, They had
need to uncover the roof of the house, to make way for the Holy Ghost to come
upon them: and with such persons as these is this our Age too much infested,
who are both Heretical Schismatics, and Schismatical Heretics; they separate
from us by Schism, and (to fill up the measure of their iniquity) they add to
their Schism many dangerous and damnable Heresies; and instead of the tried
silver of Gods Word, they stamp the Name and Character of God upon Nehushtan,
upon brazen stuff of their own: So that what Alexander Borgia was wont to say
of the Expedition of the French into Naples, [that they came with Chalk in
their hands to mark out their Lodgings, and not with Weapons to fight for them]
may be said of these men who pretend to such Infallibility in interpreting
Scripture, they mark out their Conclusions whereon they may rest, without
producing any rational premises which may force an assent; and whereas
Scripture should be as the Seal to be set upon all their Doctrines and
Positions, to make them pass for Sound and Warrantable; they make it as Wax, to
receive the impressions of their own wild Fancies, and cause the Sheaf of
Scripture to bow to their Sheaf: these Enthusiasts, with almost all other
Sectaries, may very fitly be put in the number (if not of Heretics) yet of
those that are in a fair way to Heresy; there being scarce any Sect among
them, which may not derive its Pedigree from some ancient Heretic: the Eusebius.
Feel. Hist. l 3 c. 5.
Millenaries, from Papias; the Irenaeus l. 1 c. 24 p. 79. Excus. 1570.
Ranters, from Carpocrates, whose Doctrine it was, that there was no other way
of appeasing the (...), the Princes of this World, but by paying them their
dues by all their (...), unnatural filthiness: the Anabaptists may derive their
Sect from Agrippinus, as Contra Donatist. Tom 7. lib. 2. p. 369. Edit Basil
St. Augustine clearly demonstrates: the Epiph. Haer. 75 p. 904. Tom 1. Edit.
Petav.
Anti-episcopal Disciplinarians, from the Heretic Aerius: the Epiph Haer. 62
p. 513.
Socinians bear date from Sabellius: the Irenaeus l 1. c. 10 p. 48, etc.
Irrespective Reprobatarian, from Simon Magus and the Manichees, as we may see
in Iraeneus: so that having traced our Modern Sectaries to their first Parents,
the ancient Heretics, I have made my way easier to demonstrate to you, that
many times Heretics and Schismatics hunt in Couples; and though of
disagreeing and different Principles, yet they agree and combine in their
wicked designs against the Church, the one to corrupt her Doctrine, the other
to break her Unity; which that I may evince, I shall show you that Schism flows
from the same Fountains, that I have already proved Heresy does: amongst
which, I shall at present instance only in these three.

First, Pride. Secondly, Affectation of Novelty in Words and Phrases. Thirdly,
Bold Ignorance. And
1. Schism flows from the same Fountain of Pride that Heresy does: so that
what St. Hierom said of Heretics, is also true of Schismatics, Matrem habent
iniquitatis sue superbiam dum in Ecclesiae contumeliam debacchantur. Hicronym.
Comment. in Hos. verse. 5.
[they have pride the mother of their iniquity, whilst they rage to the
contumely and reproach of the Church:] and this made Iraeneus join them
together, who calls them, Scindentes elatos, and sibi placentes. Iren. adversus
Haeres lib. 4. cap. 3.
Schismatical, proud, and self-pleasing men; who out of a high opinion of their
own gifts and perfections, undertake to dictate to Church Governors, and teach
those Captains of the Church Militant, their several Postures in the Service of
the Lord of Hosts: Cynthius aurem vellit and admonuit; their Spiritual Pride
makes them pretend to Inspiration, and (like the Pea in Mahomets ear) brings
the Dove, the Holy Dove, to whisper to them, what is most fit and convenient.
And as I told you Heresy did, so also

2ly. Does Schism flow from Affectation of Novelty in Words and Phrases: O how
happy and peaceable had the affairs of Christendom been! if men had not too
much affected new Words and Phrases, and too nicely sifted and winnow'd
Divinity, by not contenting themselves with the general forms and ways of
expressing the Truth; and has not this our Age been acquainted with many? who,
that they might make the Church look more like Joseph's party-colored Coat,
than our Lord and Saviors, which had neither Seam nor Rent in it, make use of
Canting Phrases, calculated for the Climate of their Exotic Divinity, and
obtruded upon the world in lieu of better. They speak the language of Ashdod,
rather than that of Canaan, and separate from us in their very words and
phrases; you may know them by their Thou and Thee in their ordinary discourses,
as the Gileadites might distinguish their Enemies from their Friends, by the
pronouncing of Shibboleth. And then,

3ly. Schism (as well as Heresy) proceeds from Bold Ignorance; because these
ignorant Zealots have not Light proportionable to their Heat, and want
Knowledge to hold a Candle to them, they become Schismatical: St. Paul indeed
tells us, Gal. 4.18. that it is good to be zealously affected, but it be (...),
in a good thing; and not only so, for he speaks of some who had the best of
zeals, the zeal of God, and yet in them too there was something wanting, they
had it not according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. I will take a step into St.
Augustines path, and add a third possible defect, and that is, in the
Qualification or Condition of the persons, according to which (as he observes)
zeal will admit of a directly opposite Specification, in bonitate and malitia,
and therefore he commends it as good in David, who was a wise King, when he
said, the zeal of thy house has eaten me up; but on the other side, condemns
it as bad, and mis-beseeming the ignorant multitude, (the Arm of whose
discretion and judgment was not able to weild a weapon of that size) when it is
said of them, Zelus occupavit plebem ineruditam. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 20. c.
12.
Zeal has possessed an ignorant people: I have read of the Ambassadors of the
Sarmatae, that attending Hist. of the Roman Emp. vita V lentin. p. 341.
Valentinian the First, and telling him that (as basely clad as they were) they
were the prime men of that Nation; he fell into such a Passion for waging War
with so base a people, that he dyed suddenly: So if Religion in these days did
but view well the Grandees of Schism in their Mechanic Habits, and seriously
consider, with what a Ragged Regiment of ignorance, and impudence, she has so
long encountered, she would leave and forsake us out of indignation. And thus
having too clearly demonstrated, how nearly related and allied Schismatics and
Heretics are, as being derived from the same Fountains; I shall make my humble
address to those, who have power to inflict that punishment my Text
appropriates to such offenders, in those words which Tully spoke of Catiline's
Conspiracy, Orat. 2. in Catilina. ^.
Lenitati jam non est locus, severitatem res ipsa flagitat, there is no place
left for lenity and gentleness, Severity is now a necessary piece of Justice;
for he is a bad Surgeon, that out of pity spares the part corrupted, till
the Gangrene spread; and all the body perish: He who is merciful to the bad,
is cruel to the good; the keys of Ecclesiastical Censures must therefore always
be in your Hands, and not only hang at your Girdles; they must not lie rusting
by you, but be kept bright by constant use: for tame mercy is the Breast that
suckles Schism and Heresy, till ( Hydra-like) they multiply their heads, and
become insuperable; it is therefore incumbent upon all (who are entrusted with
this power) to see that such Offenders be soundly scourged with the Pastoral
Rod; that they be cut off from the body of the Church, with the Spiritual Sword
of Excommunication; of which I may say the same that David did of Goliah's
Sword, there is none like it; and that especially, because it does not cut a
member off from the Inward Communion, but from the Outward only; and that, to
the end he may be brought in again; delivering only to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. this weapon, this blow, hurts not but where it meets with
a stiff neck: it drives out Offenders that it may draw them in, it
Anathematizes that it may Canonize; it puts them to shame, that they may be
ashamed to stay out, but return again into the Bosom of the Church: To this
purpose God of his mercy dispose the minds of all that have lived in Error, to
the entertainment of the Truth, that so we may at last with one consent, with
one heart, and voice, send up to God this Petition of our Litany, with which I
shall conclude, From all false Doctrine, Heresy, and Schism, Good Lord deliver
us.

FINIS.

