New Advice to a PAINTER; A Poetical Essay describing the last Sea-Engagement
with the DUTCH: MAY the 28th. 1673.
By an Eyewitness.
STrike up, bold Muse, loud as the trumpet sounds
And wade through smoke and thunder, blood and wounds:
Let wanton strains of the soft airy Lute,
Yield to the triumphs of the Warlike Flute;
Now shall Lepanto's Conflict be forgot,
The Service there could not be half so hot.
No sooner the Brave Prince his Flags assembled,
But Neptune duckt under a wave, and trembled;
A frightful prospect unto all that see it,
The Elements of fire and water meet;
Nor should a man have prejudiced his sense,
Or reason, to derive the Thunder thence;
Such a red Sea you round about discover,
The Ocean swelled with blood, seemed to run over.
By which orewhelm'd, the Dutch may hope stop more
Incursions of the French with floods of gore.
Some flaming Ships men into the water sent
For death, to escape that fiercer Element;
And hundreds swimming destitute of hope,
To save their lives wished for a lucky Rope;
Some sink to rights, and with a dismal cry,
Sail in a moment to Eternity
A thousand various Horoscopes agree,
To puzzle Art in one Catastrophe;
Born under different STARS like Fate they have,
The Ship's their Coffin, and the Sea their Grave.
The smoke (like that of Sodom) did aspire,
As if the very Sea had been on Fire;
Whilst each Broadside, until again ore-blown,
Did make a dismal Midnight of High Noon;
A darkness so Egyptian, you would have thought,
That every Ship by her own Fire-light fought;
Or that we might their flying Frigates miss,
The Dutch sighed up a Fog as dark as this.
But what could tempt them fight at such a rate?
Sure the last Sink has made them desperate;
For this renders their misery much worse,
We only fight for right, they upon force.
Their wretched State to this sad pass being come,
There Is death abroad, and worse, despair at home.
The Gallant Prince that in all dangers came,
Wonders performd too great for the mouth of Fame;
Though they are entrenched with Sand, he thinks it meet,
To fight, not dully to besiege a Fleet.
Ruyter looked pale at an assault so brave,
And Trump had much ado to escape a Grave;
Of Common Boors such numbers breathless float,
Their grosser Souls will sure sink Charon's Boat;
For to avoid Englands victorious Standard,
Their shattered Squadrons in disorder wandered:
And were so sensible of certain loss,
The Belgic Lion couched before the Cross.
The Panegyricks our Captains deserved,
At large their own Swords in Dutch bosoms carved.
So fought the French, they shall for future stand,
Renoun'd for Arts at Sea as well as Land.
But oh! with what deserving Eulogies,
Shall we Embalm the glorious memories
Of noble Worden, Fowls, Finch, and the rest,
Snatched hence by Fate to the Regions of the Blessed?
That Hero-Troop never to be praised enough,
Whose Bodies fell, but Souls were Canon proof;
Those Miracles of Valor, Honors Sons,
Brave bold Contemners of grim Deaths great Guns;
Those more than Worthies for their Countries good
Who were so prodigal of their best Blood;
Their Fame with us in story shall remain,
Till Bodies reunite with Souls again.
Whilst baffled Hogens quit the open main,
And Mare Clausum we have proved again:
It Is fit our Monarchs happy Birthday be
Still ushered in with Joys of Victory.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXXIII.


