A New and Exact DESCRIPTION OF MOSCOVY.

(1.) Containing its State Ancient and Modern, Situation, Extent, Latitude,
Division into Provinces, Rivers, Soil, Sterility, and Fertility, with the
Commoditys, and Observations on the Extreamitys of Weather Hot and Cold.

(2.) Of the Citys and Towns, Fortification and manner of Building. The first
Discovery made by the English; Populousness of the Country, Wild Beasts, and
Disposition of the Natives.

(3.) Of their Religion, Marriages, Obedience of the Women to their Husbands,
Divorce, Burials, and other Ceremonies. Their Diet, Liquors, Stoves,
Hot-houses, Habits, etc.

(4.) Of the Government of the Provinces and Shires, their Courts of Justice,
holding Parliaments, etc.

(5.) Their Millitary Affairs, Degrees and Order in it, Arms, Discipline, with
other matters.

(6.) The Revenues of the CZAR, Coins, Weights, Measurs, Tradeing, and of the
Raritys of Moscovy.

(7.) The Succession of the Royal House of Moscovy to the present CZAR, being a
Historical ^ccount of all the Material Transactions happening for 1600 years.
The manner of the CZAR's Coronation, Arms of Moscovy, and Degrees of the
Nobility, etc.

The whole containing all that is necessary to be known concerning that VAST
EMPIRE.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, and Sold by mo^^ Booksellers, School.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
THe following Sheets will Accomodate you with the Pleasure of surveying the
Famed and Spacious Dominions of the Renowned CZAR of Moscovy, in which you may
rightly Inform your self of all that is Rare or Admirable in that Northern
Track, which for many Ages has been the Theater of great Actions, and undergone
diverse notable Revolutions; a Country every where spoken of by Travelers, and
a Trade or Commerce sought with it eagerly by distant Nations. Here you have
the State of things so Compact and Lively represented that these few Sheets
cannot miss of their end, in being exceeding Satisfactory, because I may be
bold to say, I have not omitted whatever can be reasonably required in such an
undertaking, even in the Minutest matters the Curious searchers after the
Knowledge of Remote Regions are apt to pry into, and thereby satiate their
Curiosity with variety,

I shall not trouble you with my Reasons (as many too formally do on the like
occasions) for this undertaking, but rather leave you to your own Conjectures;
yet one thing I cannot pass over in silence, which is, that it may not prove
only pleasant in Reading, but very profitable and advantageous to such as
Trade, or may happen to Travel, in so large a part of the World, because it
contains something of History as well as description, interweaving Antiquity
with Modern speculation, costing no small pains to produce so fair a birth,
when such slender accounts were to be had (from those that have resided there)
to form it. It is true many Splendid Embassyes have been sent and returned in
precedent Reigns; The understanding Men of our Nation have Traveled there, and
seen the face of that Earth Glazed with Snow in Winter, and in Summer found it
Fruitful to Admiration, yet their enquiry has been but little into the State of
Affairs, or the Produce of diverse kinds, as not being sufficiently Sedulous to
inform themselves and others; But here you will find the curtain drawn, and
what lay long in obscurity presented by a larger Industry than what has before
been undertaken, and so banishing all Scruples that may arise to prejudice
yours or my Expation in the Success of this Book; I am,

Your Friend and Servant, The Author.

A New and Exact DESCRIPTION OF Moscovy, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of Moscovy Ancient and Modern: Its Situation, Extent, Division into Provinces,
Rivers, Soil, Latitude, Sterility and Fertility of the Fruits, Corn, and other
Commodities it produces, with Observations on the Extreme Cold and Heat
Incident to this spacious Country, etc.

WE find by Experience, that God in his Infinite Wisdom has Framed and Posited
the Globe of Earth and Waters, with the Dependant Elements, so Admirable in
every part, that Man cannot but be surpised with wonder when he considers the
Harmony in all the spacious Mass, and his Curiosity would be tired with a too
tedious search into every particular. Let it suffice then that Modern
Discoveries have brought to light, what former Ages knew little (or were
altogether Ignorant) of. I shall not insist on the American, or New World (so
termed by many) That, but a few Ages past, all Europe, and, I may with reason
say, the then two other Divisions of the Supposed Total Universe were strangers
to; for, my business at present not lying that way, I shall bend it on the vast
Northern Track of Country, anciently hinted at, and now so well discovered by
the Name of Russia; but more properly, to follow the Modern Writers M^scovy, as
the far nobler, and most accepted Name of that part of Earth, producing great
advantages to such as Trade with it, and an Improvement of Knowledge to those
that Travel its Spacious Limits.

The Famed Country of Muscovy, or as some will have it Russia, is bounded on
the East with the River Ob, or Oby, and the Negayan Tartars; on the West with
Lithuania, Livonia and Poand; on the North with Lapland and the Ocean; on the
South with a part of Tartary, called the Crimee: It was formerly called
Sarmatia, and, as most suppose, changed its Name (because it was divided into
diverse small, but Absolute Governments) to that of Russia; for, in their
Language the Word signifies a Parting, or Dividing.

When this Country was called Sarmatia, it was divided into Two Principal
Parts, the White and Black. The first of these contained all that lies
toward the North, and on the part of Liefland, viz. (as now the Provinces are
named) Vagha, Duyna, Vologda, Vstio, Carga, Polia, Novogrodia, and some others
of lesser note. As for the Black Sarmatia of the Ancients, It comprehended the
Southern part, toward the Euxine, or Black Sea, viz. The Dukedomes of Mosco,
Volodemar, Rezan, and some others. Since this it has been enlarged by Addition
and Conquest, and is at present under a single Government, notwithstanding all
the Efforts the Tartars, and other bordering Countries have made to hinder the
flourishing of it, and to share the Frontires amongst them; to which end they
have made Cruel Wars and Inroads, shedding much Blood, Plundering, Burning, and
committing many othet Outrages.

The Principal Provinces of Moscovy (for so I must properly call it) are
Volodemar, Moscow, Plesco, Nisnovogrod, Smolensco, Novogrod-velica (or Novogrod
of the Lower Country) Moschora, Rostove, Ghaletsa, Vstuga, Vagha, Cargapolia,
Yaruslave, Bealo, Zera, Bezan, and Duyna. These, with their Dependancies, are
very Large, far exceeding our Shires in England; and though they are termed the
Natural Provinces, there yet remain others gained by Enlarging their Borders,
viz. Twerra, Youghoria, Condora, Permia, Abdoria, Vedska, Boulghoria, Cheringo,
Oudoria, comprehending Siberia, Cazan and Astracan, with some others now
Dependant on the Government of Moscovy: So that this spacious Country, from
North to South, Measured from Cola to Astracan, which bends somewhat Eastward,
is in Length about 4260 Verst, a Verst being something more than 3 quarters of
an English Mile; and Northward beyond Cola are other Territories, but the
Extreme Cold is there very Oppressive, so that they are not much Fertile when
their Coat of Snow is dissolved by the Sun in the Four Hot Summer Months. The
Breadth from that part which lies the farthest West from the Narve side to the
part of Siberia Eastward, is, in a manner, equal to the Length.

Moscovy is Watered by many large Rivers, most of them, when the Weather is
open being Navigable, some by lesser and some by larger Vessels that procure a
considerable Trade, but in the Ridged Season they are frozen over so that
Sleads and Carriages pass on them from place to place, they abound in Fish, and
the Volga is famous for the great quantity of Sturgeon taken in it. It is about
2800 Verst in length, an English Mile in most places over, and empties its
Waters into the Caspian Sea, running by Astracan, and other Towns of Note, to
which it brings a considerable Trade. The other Rivers of Note, are the
Boristhenes, that divides the Country from Lithuania, and falls into the
Euxine Sea. The Tanais, or Don, the Ancient boundary between Europe and Asia,
falling into the great Lake of Moeotis, by the City of Azou, Duyna falling unto
the Bay of St. Nicholas, Northward, and to be brief, a great many more, as
Moscow running thorough the City of that Name, and about ten others very large,
besides smaller Streams, the least for length and breadth comparable to the
River of Thames; and from these proceed many Branches; so that take the Country
in general, it is as well Watered as can be desired, and accomodated with
several good Ports and Havens.

The Soil of this Spacious Country cannot be reasonably expected, no more than
others, Fertile in all places alike, and in some parts particularly, by reason
of its Northern Situation, lying from 33 to 69 degrees and some Minutes North
Latititude: Yet is it wonderful to see how God has ordered things here to the
Advantage and for the Subsistence of the Inhabitants. The Earth, for the most
part, is of a slight Sandy Mould, but not alike for producing such things as
spring up Northwards, toward St. Nicholas and Cola, and North-East toward
Siberia, there is an indifferent Sterility, the Country there being full of
Deserts and vast Forests, by reason of the extreamety of the Climate in the
colder Season; but from the Volga, which lies almost 1700 verst from the Port
of St. Nicholas, down toward Moscow, and so the Southern parts that border on
the Crimee, that contains near the like space, the Country is very Fruitful in
the proper Season, yiedling Pasture, Corn, Flowers, pleasant Fruits, and Woods
in great plenty; and so it is between Rezan and Novogrod that lies South-East
from Moscow and other parts, as between Moscow and Smolensko, that lies
South-West toward Littuania; insomuch that one would wonder to see the great
alteration between Winter and Summer in Moscovy. In the former the whole
Country is covered by a continual falling Snow, that is sometimes a yard or two
in deepness in the Southern parts, but more excessive in the North; and the
Cold is so extreme, that the Rivers and other Waters are Frozen to a vast
thickness, and this usually continues for five Months, viz. from the beginning
of November till toward the end of March, at what time the Suns warm beams
returning, the Snow begins to melt away, which makes the face of the Country
look very frightful, and the Ways on the Thaw, for a time unpracticable. But
then, as it were, on a sudden, the face of Nature is changed (for though a
little before Water thrown up in the Air would descend in Ice drops, and any
Metal grasped fast in ones hand stick to the Skin and make it blister if taken
abroad, and many People venturing too far were frozen to death in the Streets,
and on their Jorneys in the Sleads.) Now the Woods (that are mostly of Birch
and Firr) give a pleasing sight, the Meddows and Pastures look green and grow
apace, variety of Flowers appear in the Fields, and the Birds make a pleasing
Harmony, the Nightingals there in abundance have a clearer Note than with us,
and this sudden growth of things proceeds from the Benefit of the Snow which
lying so long keeps off the Rigor of the Frost, and disolving so thoroughly,
drenches and soaks the Earth, that the Sun coming hot as it were on a sudden
into a cold Climate, the Plants and Herbs, etc. find such a Norishment that
they sooner shoot forth than in warmer Countries; and indeed, considering the
past cold, the heat is greater than usually with us in June, July and August
which produces store of Aples, Pears, Plums, Cherrys Black and Red, a Fruit
like a Musk-Mellion but more pleasant in taste; Cucumbers, Gowrds, Rasps,
Strawberrys, Hurtle-berrys and many other Berrys; also Wheat, Rye, Barley,
Pease, Buskway, Psnytha, tasting somewhat like Rice, and sometimes they have
such plenty that Wheat is sold at two English Pence a Bushel, the Rye is sowed
before the Frost, all other Grain for the most part the beginning of May, but
the Northern parts are usually served in a great degree by the Southern with
Corn as being more Steril.

This Country above others is noted for Rich Furs which they get by hunting
diverse creatures, as also Hides, Tallow, Wax, Honey, Flax, Hemp, Tar, and other
valuable Commoditys.

CHAP. II.
Of the Cities and Towns of Moscovy, their Situation, Fortification, Manner of
Building. The Discovery of the North-east Passage by the English, their Factory
Settled at Archangel, etc. The Populousness of the Country, considering the
Wastes in it: The Danger of Wild Beasts, and the Disposition of the Natives.

OF the Creatures of this Country I shall Treat particularly in due place; But
now pursuing the Method I propose to lay down, The next thing that offers is
the Cities, Towns, and the like, that Adorn and Beautify the Country, and those
of Note are,

Moscow the Metropolis, from which the Country at present seems to take its
Name, as that City does from the River, on whose Bounds it stands: It is about
12 Miles in compass, and may contain about 41500 Families, Convents, Churches,
and Chapels: The Houses in general are built with VVood, Plastered with
Mortar and Straw, done over with Lime brought from Smolensko, etc. and then
covered over with Boards and Bark of Trees, which renders them cooler in
Summer, and warmer in VVinter, but subjects them more to Fire, of which they
have had many Fatal Experiments; for An. 1571. The Tartars Burnt it, and in it
destroyed about 80000 Persons. Anno 1611. the Polanders Fired it. Anno 1676. an
Accidental Fire happened, and sunk 5000 Houses in the Conflagration: But since
care has been taken to Rebuild those Devastations, for the most part, and at
present it is reckoned among the Flourishing Cities of Europe, and Guards are
appointed to prevent the Progress of that Raging Element as much as lies in
them, for the future preserving the Building.

The Churches and Houses of the Persons of Quality are Built with Stone and
Brick; some of the Principal Churches Covered with Guilt Copper, or Tin, and
Adorned with many Large Globes of the same Metal. There is a Bell Raised on a
Tower, I conceive the Largest in the World, for it is held to Weigh 176 Tun,
though it has been Clipped, and some Tuns of Metal taken from it to make it
sound the better, it is 24 Foot in height, and the Clapper 21 Foot. By pulling
the Clapper, and striking against the sides it is Rung on particular occasions.
The Form of this Great City is in a manner Round, with Three Strong Walls
Circling the one within the other, the Streets lying between, whereof the
Inmost Enclosure in the Heart of the City, is all accounted the CZAR, or Great
Duke's Castle; and the River Accommodates it with a Sufficiency of Water, store
of Fish, and other Provisions. The Castle is Apiece, Situate on a Hill Two
Miles about, with Brick-walls very high, and a vast Thickness; it has Sixteen
Gates, and as many Bulwarks: The Chief Markets are kept here, and on the River,
when it is Glazed with Ice, this River encloses the Castle on the
South-west-side, and in it are Nine Fair Churches with Guilt Spires.

The next City of Note is Novograde, but not so Stately as Moscow. The Houses
are Built with Timber Layed-in, and Fastened with Dents, or Notches; and so
fastened together holds well. The Streets, in stead of Paving, are Planked with
Firr, and other Timber very neatly, of which Providence has plentifully stored
them, so that a House may be Built for a very little matter, as 20 or 30
Rubbles. This City Boasts of the Famed Story of the Scythian Bondmen, who
Rebelling against their Masters, and Seazing the City, their Effects, Wives,
etc. in their Absence, and Overthrowing them on their Return, in a Bloody
Battle; were, at length, nevertheless Discomfited and brought under by their
Masters coming upon them only with Horse-whips, which put them in Mind of the
Chain of Servitude they had so lately broken, and consequently Terrified them
into Obedience; and, upon this Account they have a Coin bearing the Impression
of a Horseman, shaking a Whip at a Flying Slave, Current all over Moscovy.

The other Citys of great note are Rostove, Volodomar, Smolensko, Plesco,
Yaruslave, Vologda, Perislave, Nisnovogrod, Astracan, Cargapolia, Columna,
Vstiue, Cazan, Golmigreo, and of these Astracan, Yaruslave, and Cazan, have the
precedence by reason of their convenient Situation on the borders so
commodiously near the Volga. Yaruslave exceeds the rest for (besides the plenty
of Pasture and Corn the Soil yields) it has a great Trade by the River, being
plesantly Situated on a high Bank overlooking it, and from its Situation it
seems to take its Name, for that in the Russ Language signifies a fair Bank,
though they boast it from Vlademira Surnamed Yaruslave, who Married the
Daughter of Harold King of England, by the Mediation of Sueno the Dane, An.
1067. To these of Note I may add Vobsko and Smolen^ko, which in some measure,
stand in competition with them; Vologda is a pretty large City taking its Name
from the River that passes through it. It has a Castle in it walled with Brick
and Stone and many Churches but mostly built of Wood, and whereas there are two
for a Parish, one is so contrived that it may be heated with Stoves in the
Winter, it is a Town of much Trade though lying far from any Sea port.

There are many considerable Towns, as Colmogro standing on the River Duyna,
which is a great Town though without Walls, the Building is somewhat
scattering, and near the Bay of St. Nicholas (so called from an Abbey seated
there when the English made a discovery of this Country) stands Archangel,
where they have a Factory and convenient Buildings, which lies in about 64
degrees North-Latitude, and on the Banks of the River Duyna stands the Castle;
the English have likewise Lands hereabouts asign'd them, and in this Cold part
(so pleasant is the Country when the Snow is cleared, which it is doing 2
Months, and then the Ground in 14 days is dry) the Grass is soon knee deep; and
in an Island in St. Nicholas Bay 7 or 8 Miles in Circuit, called Rose Island,
grow Damask and Red Rose, Violets, Wild Rosemary and other pleasant things, so
that to be brief I cannot but conceive this Country as to its many Wastes and
Barren places, has been Misrepresented, and perhaps by some envious Neighbors
because the English had the Honor and Advantage first to discover the
North-East Passage by Sea, which was done by one Chancelour an Englishman,
Anno. 1553 Sir Hugh Willoughby and others miscarrying in that tedious and
painful Search; but since it has been easiy and Practicable, not only to us but
other Nations: The English above others have found Encouragement upon the
account of their being the first discoverers, for before the trade lay thorough
Poland and other Hostil Territories. But not to make any long digression I
shall proceed in my intended Brevetie.

This Country considering its largeness is well Peopled, where the huge Lakes
and Deserts take not up the spaces, and Woods render it Impracticable, yet
these are advantageous to them in afoarding store of Fish, Fowl and wild
Beasts, that yield the Natives great advantage, their Flesh for Food, and their
Skins, Feathers, Tallow, etc. for Merchandise; the Lakes are very large, most
of them Navigable, but not very commodious to live near by reason of great Fogs
and Damps that arise from them, and as for Towns and Villages near the great
Forests and Woods, the Inhabitants must be in some apprehension of danger from
the great number of Wolves and Bears that Rove about for Prey, which Ravenous
Creatures pinched in the excessive rigor of Winter with cold and hunger,
contemning the fear of Dogs or Firearms, will come out in Troops, and make a
fearful havoc among the People and their Cattle.

The Natives of this Country are very industrious and Patient of Hunger,
yiedling a profound Homage and Respect to their Prince, paying their Taxes with
a willing and cheerful obedience, and run readily to the Wars on the first
command or summons; where it is strange to see what hardship they will endure,
for when the ground is covered with Snow frozen very thick, the common Soldier
will lie in the Field without a Tent or covering over his head, only he hangs
up his Mantle against that part from whence the Weather drives, and kindling a
little Fire lies down before it, his Food Oatmeal or Pulse, and his Drink the
cold Stream, his Horse feeding on green Wood and Bark, and yet do the Service
of the War, or Travel as well as those that are Pampered in Stables with more
convenient Provender, tho the Horse has no other Covering than the Canopy of
Heaven; and those Soldiers that bear hardship the best, and deserve well by
Memorable Exploits, are rewarded sometimes with Money, and at others with
certain Lands Assigned them during Life, which the CZAR of Moscovy always has
in his Donation in one part or other of his Country for this purpose.

CHAP. III.
Of their Religion, Wooing, Marriages. The Moscovit Women's Obedience to their
Husbands. Divorce, Burial of the Dead, and other Ceremonies. Their Feeding,
Diet, Liquors, Stoves, Hothouses, Habits of Men and Women, etc.

THeir Religion properly is that of the Greek Church, differing in many things
from the Roman and Reformed Churches; their Service is in their own Language;
they Receive the Eucharist in both Kinds, observe Four Lents, and have Service
Daily in their Churches. They have many Monasteries Possessed by Monks and
Friars, which have considerable Revenues in Land and Houses belonging to them,
and likewise deal in Merchandise: When two Friends meet in the Easter Holy
Days, they, in a Solemn manner, join Hands, one of them thereupon saying, The
Lord is Risen: Then the other Answers, It is so of a Truth, and then they Kiss.
They have a Metropolitan, or Patriarch, who is in High Estimation among them,
and Reverenced as the Pope among the Roman Catholics; they have a Veneration
for our Lady, St. Nicholas, and other Saints.

Their manner of Wooing is but short; for when they make Love, the Man sends
Presents to the Woman, and she Accepting them, the Match is soon Agreed; but if
they are returned, it is a sign she likes not the Party that makes the Proffer;
and among other Presents sometimes a Whip is sent, to let the Woman know what
she has to trust to if she be disobedient, or break her Marriage Vows; and for
the generality, they are so far from resenting it as an Affront, that when
Married, the Wife Loves her Husband the better if sometimes he Corrects her;
and concludes, he Loves her not, if he altogether declines it: But this proved
fatal once to an English Shoemaker, who Marrying a Russ Woman, and settling in
that Country, thinking to gain her Love to a high pitch this way, upon being
informed that her peevishness proceeded from the want of it, he so Over-loaded
her with his Kindness, that she dyed, for which he lost his own Life by the
hand of an Executiooner. The Women indeed are very Obedient to their Husbands,
and the better sort especially seldom stir abroad but on particular occasions
-- And now as to their Marriages, because the Ceremony is Novel to us, I shall
mention the most particular matters relating to it.

The Day being come, the Bride puts on her Head a kind of a Hood made of fine
Lawn, or Knit-work, that Veiles her to the Middle, and so with her Friends and
the Bridegroom with his, they go to the Church on Horseback, though it be near
at hand. They Marry with a Ring, and the words of Contract and Ceremony much
agrees with ours. The Ring put on, and the Contract Pronounced, the Brides hand
is delivered into the hand of the Bridegroom, standing this while on one side
of the Altar, or Table, and the Bride on the other. The Knot being thus Knit by
the Priest, she comes about with the Bridegroom to the end of the Table, and
falling down at his Feet, knocks her head upon his Shoo, in token of Subjection
and Obedience; then the Bridegroom casts the Lap of his Gown over her,
signifying his Duty to Protect and Cherish her. Then the Brides Father and
Friends Bow to the Bridegroom, and his to the Bride, in token of Love and
Affinity between the Two Kindreds. This done, the Bridegroom's Father delivers
the Priest a Loaf of Bread, who presently returns it, upon a Solemn Promise
that the Dowry shall be delivered at the Day Appointed, and that Friendship
shall continue between one Kindred and another: so the Bread is broken, and
they eat it amongst them, to testify their True and sincere Meaning for
performing the Charge and Promise, and thenceforth to become as Crumbs of one
Loaf, or Men of one Table.

They use Divorce among them, and it is often practiced on slender pretenses.
For a Man may go to a Monastery and shave himself a Friar, in a Pretended
Devotion, and Quit himself of his Wife, and leave her to her Shifts. Yet this
is mostly among the Vulgar, the Women of Quality are held in more Esteem, yet
without distinction they are very obedient, and pay a profound Respect to their
Husbands.

As for the Burials of their Dead, it is done with much Ceremony. They put them
on New Shoes, and put a Letter in their Hands Directed to St. Nicholas,
intimating the Party to be a Russ-Man, or Woman, dying in the True Faith: when
the Ground is Frozen that no Spade can enter it, they lay up their Dead in
Houses, which they call God's Houses, and when the Ground is practicable, they
bury them in their Clothes, causing Prayers to be said over them; and beside
the Relations there are other Women Mourners, who are employed to that purpose.
They have Great Veneration for the Cross, Images, and Holy Water; once a year
the Rivers are Hollowed with much Ceremony by the Bishops, and then there is
Great Struggling among the People for the Water, and some leap into it, though
in a bitter Season, and Women Dip their Tender Infants, concluding there is now
a Great Virtue in it; and often it is Given to the Sick in order to recover
them, or cleanse them.

They keep many Vigils, and other days set apart, and are very Zealous in their
way of Worship; their Patriarch wears a Globe on his Mitre, seeming to signify
his Universality over the Church. In their Religious Worship, etc. They use a
great many Ceremonies, too many here to enumerate; The vulgar sort little
affect Learning, and are not much knowing in the Affairs of other Countries,
bending their Studyes or Industry on Tillage, Handicrafts, and other Inferior
Offices, little affecting Travel, though their Merchants Journey and Trade in
diverse Countries of Europe and Asia, having great advantage in the Latter by
reason of the Commodious Situation of the Caspian Sea, into which the River
Volga carrys them, falling with such violence that it keeps its stream for some
Leagues in the Salt Water.

The Moscovits are generally very Burley, much affecting a Plump Fleshy
Corpulency, and this may happen by reason of their feeding, which they do very
plentifully among the better sort, and such as are able to keep Good Tables,
though their Diet is rather much, than overcurious. They commonly begin with a
Chark, or Small-Cup of Aquavitae, which they call Russ-wine, and after that
drink not till toward the end of Meals, and then they are not sparing. They
have variety of Dishes, the first are their Baked Meats, for Roast-meat they
little affect, and then their Brothes or Pottage; After Dinner they usually
sleep on Benches The Drink of the Better sort is Mead, but the poorer (...)
content with a thin Drink, called Quas, not exceeding our Small Beer, which
many Drink. The Women are mostly of Gross Bodies, and not so comely as in many
European Countries; Wherefore knowing their Natural Defect, to be the more
B^lov'd of their Husbands, they use Art to mend their Co^^^exions, but their
Paint and Washes are easily discerned, bu^ (...) being the Fashion, it is
rather Commended than Reproved, ^^d the Husbands Allow their Wives and
Daughters a comp^^^^^ to buy Red and White Colors to this purpose; but th^^
(...) the heat of their Stoves, which are almost in every House, much drys and
wrinkles them, making them look old before they arrive to it; and for their
Health, or rather to preserve it, they use Bath-stoves, or Hot-Houses commonly
twice a week. Their Houses, by heating their Peaches, which are made like
German Bath-stoves, and their Potlads, like Ovens, are never without a
considerable heat, though many times they will come out of them Sweating, and
sometimes plundge into the Water when they are foaming-hot, which would
certainly kill any but those that have Innur'd their Bodies to the two
extreameties of Heat and Cold, which few or no other Nations do, equal to them.

As for their Habits, they are generally after the Greek Fashion. The better
sort go decently and very Richly clad, and their Habit in some measure shows a
distinction of degrees by some or other little variation. They shave their
heads close, unless fallen under the Princes displeasure, and then let the hair
grow as a Mark of dejectedness or Sorrow so to have offended as to be out of
favor; but their Garments differ in Stuffs, though little in fashion; the
Women affect Rich ones as well as the Men, as Cloth, Rich Furs, Silks, Cloth
of Gold, or Interwoven with it, and usually down to their Ancles or Heels,
though their Summer Garments are much lighter than those they wear in Winter,
the latter being always well lined with costly Furs, as Black Fox, Ermin,
Martin, Gray, Squirel, etc. of which Creatures, and many others yiedling Furs,
they have abundance in the several Provinces. But the Mousic and his Wife go
meanly clad, yet will not be out of Court Fashion as near as may be; their
upper Garments are Course Cloth, and their under ones perhaps Sheeps Skin with
the Wool on, though so dressed that they are very warm and pliable; but this is
for Winter, for in the Summer the Man goes in his Shirt and the Woman in a
Linen Garment, called two Shirts. Thus as I hope having given a Satisfatory
account of this matter I proceed to others --

CHAP. IV.
Of the Government of the Provinces and Shires. The Courts of Judicature. Their
Jurisdictions, and the manner of Proceeding in them. Of the Chief Assembly, or
Parliament. Their Justice, etc.

HAving proceeded thus far in Generals and Particulars Relateing to Moscovy, I
now come more closely to the latter, as to what remains more Materialy to be
discovered; and first of the Government of the Provinces and Shires, of this
large Dominion.

They are properly divided into four parts, which they call Chetfirds, or
Tetrearchies, every part contains diverse Shires, and is anex'd to the several
Offices from whence it derives the Name.

The First bears the name of Pososkoy Chetfird, or the Jurisdiction of the
Office of Ambassages, and the standing Salary to the Officer is yearly 100
Rubbles or Marks, beside great advantages accruing.

The Second is called Roseradney Chetfird, because it is proper to the
Roserade, or High Constable, who has a like Sallary with the former.

The Third is Pomeslenoy Chetfird, as appartaining to that Office; and here is
kept a Register of all the Lands given by the Prince for service to his
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others. This Office gives out and takes in all the
Assurances for them, and the Chief Officer has 500 Rubbles per Annum.

The Fourth is called Cassanskoy-deworets, as being apropriated to the Office
which has the Jurisdiction of the Kingdoms of Astracan and Cazan, with the
Cities and Towns lying on the Volga, and is stipen'd at 150 Rubbles per Annum,
and from the Jurisdiction of th^^^ Offices, but a very few places are
priveledg'd, or exempted, except the CZAR's Inheritance, or Vochin, as they
call it; for that it pertained from ancient time to the House of Beala. This
stands of 36 Towns, with their Bounds or Teritories, and some other
particular Royalty: These great Officers reside at Court, and carry their
Offices with them wherever they go: They receive all Complaints and Actions
that are brought out of the several Chetfirds, and Quarters, to exhibit them to
the CZAR's Council and send back, and to send direction to those that officiate
under them in the Provinces for all matters given in charge by the Prince, or
his Council, to be done or put in Execution within their precincts; and each of
the Dukes of lower Nobility in head Towns, has in Commission with him a Dyack
or Secretary to assist and advise him the better to Regulate and order matters
as they fall out, and are directed, and their Commission is to this Effect, viz.

(1.) To Hear and determine all Civil matters between Man and Man, and to that
purpose have under them many Substitute Officers.

(2.) They have Cognizance of all Criminal matters, as Theft, Murder, Treason,
etc. but there lies an Appeal from them to the CZAR's Council; and though they
take the Evidence in this case, they must draw up the Evidence and Information
of the cause, and send it ready digested to the Officer of the Chetfird
whereunto the Province belongs, by whom it is prefered and propounded to the
Council; for they are not to determine Criminal matters, or do Execution on the
offender without the Councils order.

(3.) If within the Province there be any public Service required, as the
Publishing of a Law, or Common Order, by way of Proclamation, Mustering
Soldiers, Collecting Taxes or Impositions, etc. it is proper to them.

These Dukes and Dyacks are appointed by the CZAR but for a year, and then at
his pleasure he may change them; which is usually done, unless by Merit or
Intercession any are continued Longer; and though their highest Sallary is but
100 Rubbles per Annum, yet coming bare into these places, in one year they very
much enrich themselves.

For ordinary matters, there are many other ^fficers that hold Inferior
Courts, and otherways look after ^^e affair, not much differing in the main
from what is practiced in England, so that the Provinces are carefully
regarded, and known Bribery is severly punished.

As for the Courts of Civil Justice in Moscovy for matters of Contract, and
others of like sort, beside the former they are of three kinds, and by way of
Appeal one is subjected to the other; the lowest of these appointed for the
Ease of the Subject, is the Office of the Gubnoy Starust, which signifies in
their Language an Alderman, and of the Solsky Starust, or Baylif of the Soak,
or Hundred; these have power to determine matters within their Soaks or
Hundreds under the Dukes and Dyacks of the Province before whom the Causes may
be removed if not agreed or determined.

The second is held in the head Towns of the Provinces, Shires, before the
Deputies of the Lords of the Chetfirds, and from these they have a Privilege
to Appeal or remove their Causes to the Third or Chief Court held at Moscow,
where usually reside the Officers of the Chetfrids. These are the Chief
Justices or Judges, every one of them in Civil Matters, that arise within their
several Chetfird or Quarter; and may be either commenced originaly before them,
or prosecuted out of the Inferior Courts of the Shires by way of Appeal.

Their Commencing and Proceeding in Civil Actions is in this wise; The Plantif
delivers his Supplycation, wherein he sets forth the Merit of his Cause, or
wrong done to him; then, if alow'd, a Reepis or Warrant is granted, which he
delivers to the Prestave or Sergeant, who hereupon Arrests the Defendant who
must put in Surety to Answer or else be kept in Custody, and often on this
account laden with Irons; when they come before the Judge, the Plantif pleads
his own Cause, and the Defendant make his Defense; as for Attorneys and
Councillors they are not known in these Courts, when the Evidence, if they
have any, is heard, Judgment is given, but if the matter remains doubtful, then
the Judge demands of either party, whom he thinks sit, whether he will kiss
the Cross upon that which he denies or avoucheth; and he who consents to do it
is carried by an Officer to the Church, where he does it in a devout manner,
and this is held a very Sacred Oath; and hereupon if it be the Defendant he is
declared free of the Debt, paying 20 pence charges; but if both demand this
priveledg, then they draw Lots, and he that has the best is only allowed it; and
thus by short proceeding with a little charge the Controversy is ended; but if
the Defendant be condemned and not able to pay, his case is miserable.

Notwithstanding all I have said of these Courts, there is yet another
superior to them; and this is called Zabore, or the Public Assembly, which
properly is termed a Parliament. The States and Degrees of Persons that are
present, are, 1. The CZAR. 2. The Nobility of Council. 3. The Clergy, for I do
not find the Commons have any peculiar Representatives in this Zabore, or
Parliament, which is held briefly after this manner.

The Prince causes the Nobility to be summoned together, with the Patriarch,
who Convocates his Clergy, viz. the two Metropolites, or Archbishops, with
other Bishops, Abbots and Friars, as are most Learned, and of best repute:
These assemble in the Court at Moscow, and then the day is appointed when the
Sessions shall begin.

The day being come, the Clergy Assemble before, sitting at a place called the
Stollie, and when the CZAR approaches with his Nobility then all the Clergy
arise, and bowing themselves, pass on with their Patriarch to meet him. Then
the Patriarch blesses him with his two Fingers, laying them on his Forehead,
and the sides of his Face, then he Kisses him on the Right-side of his Breast.

These Ceremonies ended, they pass to the Parliament House, which is not very
stately, and there they place themselves in this order, The CZAR Seats him in a
Throne on one side the Chamber, and not far from him is a little square Table,
and at it sit the Patriarch with the Chief of his Clergy, and Principal
Nobility of the Council; also two Dyacks, or Secretaries, called Dumnoy Dyacks,
who write down what passes, or is to be Enacted. The rest take their places on
Benches that Encompass the Chamber.

Being placed in this order, one of the Dumnoy Dyacks, who represents a
Speaker, declares the cause of the Assembly, and Propounds, as he has it in
Writing, the Principal Matters they are to proceed on, and the points being
opened, the Patriarch and his Clergy have the Priority of speaking, and giving
their Opinions or Advice; but they usualy, out of a kind of Modesty, refuse it,
and desire, these things, being matters of State, and other advantage to the
Commonwealth, that the CZAR and his Nobles, who are more knowing and learned
therein, would order these weighty Affairs, whilst they that are Churchmen
would assist them with their Prayers, and so one by one they answer to that
Effect. After this, the matters propounded are agreed to sometimes entire, and
at others with little variation; for without much difficulty every one gives
his consent. Then the Clergy take their leaves, blessing the CZAR, who conducts
the Patriarch to the next Room, and then returns to his Seat, till things are
prepared for his return to his Palace.

The Acts that pass in this manner, the Dyacks, or Secretaries draw up into
form of Proclamation, which are sent, and directed to be Published in the
Provinces and head Towns by the Dukes and Dyacks or Secretarys of those places,
and so the Sessions ended, after a Splendid Entertainment, every one has leave
to depart.

CHAP. V.
Of the Millitary Affairs of Moscovy, the Degrees and Order of the Soldiers,
Officers. Their Abilities and Warlike Discipline, and other things at Large
relating to Martial Enterprises, etc.

THe next thing I shall Treat of is the Millitary Affairs of Moscovy, which is
a thing very well worth noting; and first of their Forces for the War, and
Chief Officers.

The Soldiers are called Sinabojarsky, or the Sons of Gentlemen, being all, or
mostly of that Degree, by virtue of their Military Profession; for when they
are of years to bear Arms, they come to the Reserade, or Great Constable, who,
at their request, enters their Names, alotting them a Maintenance to support
their Charge, there being Lands Assigned for this purpose, annexed to this
Office, which cannot be Alienated, so that there is, as I may term it, a
Succession of Soldiers, and usually the whole number in continual Pay is as
follows.

First. The Dworany, or Pensionary-Guards of the Princes Person, who are 15000
Horsemen, with their proper Officers, and are always in Readiness; but of these
there are Three Degrees, who differ as well in Estimation, as Wages, viz. The
Dworany-Bulshey, or Head-Pensioners. The Serendany Dworany, or the Middle-Rank
of Pensioners. The Dyta Boiarsky, or the Lower Rank. These have from 100 to 20
Rubbles per Annum, lessening according to their Station; one half is paid at
Mosco, and the other by the General in the Field; besides this, they have
proportionable Lands Alloted them, from the greatest to the least.

There are other Horsemen, to the number of 110, much like the Roman Praetorian
Soldiers, who have the more immediate care of the CZAR's Person when he goes
the Wars, all of special Account for their Trust and Nobility, which he chooses
himself, and causes their Names to be Registered; and for their Large Revenues
in Pension-places, they are to bring to the Wars 65000 Horsemen, with their
Furniture and other Necessaries; and once a Year, if there be no Wars, they are
to make their Appearance on the Tartar Frontiers, so there seldom fails of
being 80000, a few more or less, when they are required to take the Field; and
greater Forces are speedily Raised on any occasion out of the supernumerary
Sinabojarsky, that are not in Pay till called upon necessary occasions, and all
willingly flock to the Regal Standard, upon the first Notice; and if a
competent number be wanting, the Noblemen that hold Lands of the Crown, are to
make them up with their Servants and Tenants, called Colophey, which when the
Service is over, lay down their Weapons, and return to their Servil
Occupations. Over and above the Horsemen mentioned, there are seldom less than
12000 Foot in Pay, that bear Firearms, or Gunners, called Strelseys, and these
are appointed to their several Posts, some to Guard the City of Mosco, and the
Palace, others are disposed of in Garrisons till there be further occasion for
them. There are likewise in his Service a competent number of Strangers, and
these are Europeans of diverse Nations, being chiefly employed against the
Tartars.

The Commanders in Chief of these Great Forces are the Voyavod Bulshaia, Great
Captain, or Lieutenant General under the CZAR, usually chosen out of the Four
Houses of the Chief Nobility; he has joined with him Lieutenant Generals of
great Experience. Beside, there are Four Officers that have the Marshaling of
the Army divided among them, called Marshals of the Field, every one has his
Quarters or fourth part. The first is called Prava Polskoy, or the Right-wing,
the second is Levoy Polskoy, or the Left-wing. The third Rusnoy Polskoy, or the
broken Band, because there are Detachments made from it on any necessary
occasion. The fourth Storeshovoy, or the Warding Band; These have each Two
Marshals under them, who are to Muster and Train the Soldiers, and do Justice
on Offenders; and these are commonly chosen out of the 110 I have before
mentioned. They receive and deliver Pay to the Army; under them are the
Gulavoy, or Captains of Thousands, Five hundreds, and Hundreds. The
Petydesetskoy, or Captains of Fifty, and the Decetskiss, or Captains of Tens.

There are, beside the Lieutenant General, two other Voiavods, one Master of
the Ordinance, who has diverse Underofficers necessary for the Service, and
the Walking-Captain, or Scouts-Master, who has under him 1000 Expert Horsemen
to go out on Parties, and Spy the Enemy; so that a Moscovite Army appears very
Formidable: And indeed they have done many brave. Exploits, they have lately
taken Asoph, a very Important place, and the last Year, in a Set-Battel,
Overthrown and Ruined a Great Army of Turks and Tartars, going completely
Armed, and well understanding the use of Firearms; Whereas formerly their
Weapons were but slight, mostly Bows and Arrows, Marching in good Order more
than ever, as having learned the Art of War more perfectly from the Poles, and
other Neighboring Nations. They also Encamp, Entrench and Lodge Advantageously,
being very patient of Hunger, Thirst and Cold, Obedient to their Officers, and
Ready to Charge the Enemy on all occasions. They had in use a Moving Castle, as
they call it, which mainly defended them against the Tartars Arrows, and gave
them a more secure Opportunity to Offend their Enemies. This was Framed Wood,
carried on Numerous Carts, which, upon Occasion, was easily put together, and
made a Standing Wall of Seven Miles, or as few as they thought fit, with
Loopholes in it, to discharge their Shot, or dart their Arrows; but I am not
well assured, whether they have so cumbersome a Machin now in use or not, for
it is little or no defense against Great Artillery, which the Turks, Assisting
the Tartars, use. The Muscovites are very Expert at Defending Garrisons, and
are accounted there better Soldiers than in the Field; however by their Wars
they have greatly Enlarged their Borders, almost on all sides them; Especially
since they have entertained Expert Officers of diverse Warlike Nations, who
have, by their Experience and Valorous Examples, Cultivated and Animated the
Soldiery; but not too tediously to dwell on this Particular. I Will now proceed
to other Matters, as worthy of Note, so that taking altogether, I cannot doubt
but I shall give the Reader all the Reasonable Satisfaction he can desire of a
Country, that but a few Ages past we were in a manner Ingorant of.

CHAP. VI.
Some Account of the Vast Revenues of the CZAR, by Customs, and other ways
arising. The Coin, Weights, Measures, and other matters Relating to Trade. The
strange sorts of Fish, Beasts, Fowl, and other Rarities of Moscovy.

THe Customs and Revenues that Maintain so Great a Charge in War and Peace, are
very considerable; and, by a few, one may guess at the rest. That at Moscow
amounted to 12000 Rubbles Yearly; Smolensko 8000; Vobsko 12000; Novogrod-Velica
6000; Sturrarouse, by Salt, and other Commodities, 18000; Torshock 800; Otfer
700; Yaruslave 1200; Costrome 1800; Nisna Novogrod 7000; Casa 11000; Vologda
12000: A Rubble is a Mark English. And thus stands the Ancient Account, since
the stating of which Trade is greatly increased. Besides this, the Province of
Volsko pays yearly for Tagla and Podat 18000 Rubbles; Novogrod 35000; Torshock
and Otser 8000; Razan 3000; Morum 12000; Colmigroe and Duyna 8000; Vologda
12000; Cuzan 28000; Vstiuga 30000; Rostove 50000. The City of Mosco 40000;
Siberskoy 20000; Castrome 12000.

The former in the Citys are for Custom, and these latter, viz. The Tagla is a
Yearly Imposition, raised on every Wite or Measure of Grain within the
Provinces, gathered by Shozen-men; a Wite contains 60 Chetfrids, every Chetfrid
is Three Bushels English, or little less. The Podat is an ordinary Rent,
imposed on every Hundred. There comes in a Vast Sum Yearly by the Vochin, or
Crown Lands. The CZAR's Inheritance containing 36 Large Towns, with their
Territories, or Hundreds belonging, and a vast quantity of other Lands, that
bring great Incomes to the Crown. The Tithes of Furs, and Customs on Goods, of
Strangers by Navigation, or otherways, very much Increase the Revenue, beside
other things and ways to Raise Money, too Numerous to mention; and for these
there are Offices and Officers respectively appointed, who have considerable
Salarys, so that the Riches of this Large Northern Kingdom appears very great,
and the Princes Vast Revenues very difficult to be Summed up: And since I am
come to this part of Relation, I shall speak briefly of the Coin, Weights and
Measures, that are so necessary in Trade, and vary so much from ours, that so
Merchants and Travelers may the better understand them, when their Occasions,
or Curiosity shall make them useful.

The Merchants Accounts are kept at Moscow the chief City diverse ways, as by
those of England, in Rubbles and Pence, called by the Moscovites Muscofskins,
two hundred of them going to a Rubble. The Duthby Grevens and Muscofskins, 20
of the latter going to the former, so 10 Grevens make the Rubble, which is held
an imaginary Coin; for the Current Money is the Capeck worth a Stiver Flemish,
and something more in value than an English Peney, 10 of them make a Greven, 3
Capecks are call, d an Altine, by which Contracts and Bargains are usually
made; 33 Altines and one Capeck make a Rubble.

At Archangel there is an Exchange practiced, and the Price of Russ Money bears
as the scarcety or plenty will allow. The Receipts begin in August to return in
London about the latter end of December.

The Weights chiefly in use, are the Pood, by which all fine Goods are weighed,
as Beaver, Silk, Wool, etc. but for gross Goods they have a Weight called the
Berzovet, accounted 10 Poods, or the Russship-Pound, computed to be 360 Pound
Averdupois; so that all Goods bought by this Weight are accounted to be 10 Per
cent profit; so that many have recon'd Goods so bought to pay the Freight with
over-weight, and all Goods bought by the Pood to be 10 Per cent less.

The Measure of length is called the Archin, and is accounted 28 English
Inches, so that 100 Archins are supposed to produce Incirca, 78 yards of London
Measure, Oil, mostly Fish-Oyle, they sell by the Barrel, each Barrel accounted
half a Hogshead. Concave Measures are little used in Trade; As for their Furs,
of which they have many sorts, as Bever, Otter, White, Red Black and Dun Fox,
Sables, Martins, Minever, etc. they are usually sold by the Timber Weight, or
Tale, and much coveted by Merchant Strangers who purchase them at dear rates,
and send them into most Countries of Europe, and Asia, and into the other parts
of the World.

They take upon the Coast abundance of Seals, which is done in this manner;
they carry their Boats over the Ice to open Water, and finding their haunts
where they lie basking on huge Flakes of Ice, in a Sunshiney day coming out of
the Sea for that purpose, they hem them in, with their Boats, and with great
Clubs, striking them on the Nose quickly kill them; their Skins are good
Merchandice, and of their Fat they make a sort of Redish Oil.

There is another Sea-Creature called a Morse, who has Teeth about a foot long,
by the help of which he clambers up Rocks to seek for Prey, and for the sake of
his Teeth they take him, which exceeds Ivory, and are of great esteem among
them. They have in some parts of the Country White Fox, Gray and Red Squirrils,
a large Water-Rat, whose Skin smells naturaly like Musk. They have also
Wulberins: They have likewise a Beast called Losh or Buff, whose Skin turns to
very good account.

They have a Fish called Ribzuba, whose Teeth are as fine as Ivory, and used
for heads of Knives, Sword-hafts, etc. Likewise some use the Powder to Antedote
Poison, as the Unicorns horn; this I hold to be the same with the Morse: The
word Ribzuba in their Language rather signifieing the Tooth than the Fish, for
it is caught about Pecliora, or Petzora, some of them have been found with
their Teeth of 2 foot long, weighing 11 Pound, or more. They have in the Woods
and Mountains many wild Horses, also flying Squirils, having Tufts of hair
growing to their Shouldiers, like Wings, which makes them seem to fly when they
take vast leaps from one Tree to another; their Tails are much broader than
others, which shakes and spreads as they leap, and so facilitates them in their
Agillity. They have Hares the color of ours in Summer, but in Winter they
change their Coats into Milk-white, and the Squirils the like, from a Redish
unto a Gray, whereof comes the Calaber. They have store of Deer, Roe-Bucks and
Goats, in some parts Elks on which the Semoids on their borders Ride, and cause
their Sleads to be drawn by Hearts, or Ollins large Dogs, etc.

Their Horses and Sheep are but small, yet both good in their kind. As for
Fowl, they have great plenty, as the Egle-Hawks of several kinds, The Swan Wild
and Tame, the Stork and Crane, the Tedder of the color of a Phesant, but much
biger, living in the Firr-woods: of Phesant and Partridge they have great
plenty. The Owls in Moscovy are exceeding large, their Ears as big as a Man's,
and much like them. They have many River-Fish common with ours, as Pike, Carp,
Roaeh, Tench, etc. but others altogether strange to us, as the Behlouga or
Bellougiva, 4 or 5 Else long. The Severinga or Sterledy, somewhat in fashion
and taste like a Sturgeon, but not so thick nor long. The Ribela or White
Salmon, these are found in great plenty in the River Volga, and other Rivers;
in a River near the Town of Perislave they take a Fish, like our Herring, but
not so big. They have abundance of Salt-wells turning to great advantage in
making Salt, and near Astracan the Seawater being thrown up among the Rocks in
the hot weather, the Sun makes it into Hills of Salt; they have in this Country
a Lucid Slate cut out of a Rock, which being split into thin slivers serves as
Trasparent Glass, and in the Rivers near the Bay of St. Nicholas, several Rocks
of Alablaster; but not to wade too far in matters that to some may seem Trival,
I intend to close with what may yet seem more worthy of Note.

CHAP. VII.
The Succession of the Royal Houses of Moscovy for about 1600 years, to the
present CZAR, giving an Historical account of their Victorys, Enlarging their
Dominions, the Revolutions that have happened in the State. The manner of the
Corronation, and other things of the like nature. The CZAR or great Duke of
Moscovys Honorable Titles. The Impress of the Broad Seal. Degrees of Nobility,
etc.

THe Succession of the Government of that vast Country now called Moscovy, in
part, and in the whole has been of Ancient standing, as will appear in the
following brief History, brought down to the present CZAR, Peter Alexowitz.

The Dukes of Moscovy are held, though it may be thought something doubtful,
from Augustus Caesar the second Roman Emperor; however according to other
Historians Writing of this matter, I shall trace it from hence to an undoubted
certainty, as the times came nearer to us, and briefly touch on what memorably
happened by the way.

They tell us that Augustus Caesar sent some of his near Kindred to be
Governors in these Parts; and amongst them one Prussus, who Named his Province
or Government Prussia, which lay on the Eastern Baltic Shore, by the River
Wixel; of whom Rurek Sirianus, and Truvrio decending, by the fourth Generation,
were by the Russians, then living without Civil Government, sent for Anno. Dom.
573 to bear Rule over them, at the persuasion of Gostomislius, chief Magistrate
of Novogrod; and taking with them Olechus their Kinsman, they had by common
Consent, the Government of those Countries divided amongst them, and all but
Rurek dying without Issue, Vorson his Son succeeded him in the whole
Government, as it had been Agreed amongst them, who took to Wife Olba Daughter
to a Citizen of Plesco, who brought him a Son called Stoslaus, who succeeded
him, and was slain in Battle. He left behind him 3 Sons, to wit Teropolehus,
Olega and Volodimir. The latter supplanted the two first, and took the whole
Government upon him, and Married Anna Sister to Basilius the Eastern Emperor;
and with all his People, in the year 988. was Baptized, as Historians say, upon
a Miracle performed by a Greek Bishop, viz. his throwing the Book of the Gospel
into the Fire, and its remaining there a considerable time untouched by the
force of that consuming Element.

Volodimir left behind him 11 Sons, among whom he divided his Dominions; but
Jaroslaus one of them, by reason of a division among them got the sole
Government into his hands; and Volodimir his Son succeeded him, holding his
Court at Kiow on the River Boristhenes, and had great Wars much enlargeing his
Borders, and was the first that had the Title of CZAR, or Caesar conferred on
him by Constan the Greek Emperor, who sent him many Rich Gifts. After him in
descent, were Vuszevolodus, George, Demetrius.

Then George his Son, who in the year 1237 by Bathy a Tartar Prince, brought
Moscovy under his Subjection, making it Tributary to him; and the Russ say this
Bathy was Father to Tamerlain, whom they call Temirkutla.

Then succeeded Iaroslaus Brother of George; and to him Alexander his Son. Then
Daniel his Son, who first made Moscow his Royal Seat, builded the Castle, and
took on him the Title of great Duke, and was succeeded by John his Son Sirnam'd
Kaleta or Scrip, as the word signifies, because he usually carried one about
him and dealt his Alms out of it to the poor. He left the Government to John
his Brother, and John left it to Demetrius his Son; who had two Sons Basilius
and George. The first Reigning had a Son, but doubting his Legitimacy, by
reason of his Wives Incontinency, he left his Brother to succeed him. But
George dying prefered his Nephew, whose Name was Basilius, before his own Sons
Andrew and Demetrius, which occasioned much disturbance in the State, for they
wared on their Cousen, took him and put out his Eyes; yet the Nobles kept their
Allegiance; and John Vasilwich his Son succeeded him. This was he who by his
Prudence and Valor first brought the Name of his Country out of obscurity, and
made it Renowned in Europe and Asia; Stileing himself great Duke of Volodimir,
Moscovy, Novogrod and CZAR of all Russia; he won Plosco, the then only Walled
City in all Moscovy, and shook off the Tartar Yoke, doing many other brave
Exploits; so that the Poles, and bordering Nations on either side courted his
Friendship.

Gabriel his Son succeeded him, who changed his Name to Basilius, he recovered
a great part of Moscovy from Vitoldus Duke of Lithuania; won Smolensko and many
other Citys, Anno. 1514.

Iuan Vasiliwich his Son, a Child, succeeded him; but growing up, he stripped the
Tartars out of the Kingdoms of Cazan and Astracan, and took the Princes
Captive; he made vigorous Wars in Livonia pretending a Right to that Country by
Inheritance; and did many other admirable things, but enclining much to oppress
his Nobles, they conspired and called in the Cri n Tartars, who committed great
Outrages, Besieged and burnt the City of Moscow, and in it about 80000 people
perished, mostly by the Flames. This Prince Reigned 54 years, he had 3 Sons; in
his Reign the English came the first time by Sea into the North parts of
Russia; his Eldest Son dyed before him.

Pheodor his Second Son succeeding, he was, being a Minor, left under the
Tuition of Boris, Brother to the Empress, and Boris by the Deceased's Will
adopted third Son to him; and here once for all it will not be amiss to give a
brief account of the Ceremony in Crowning this great CZAR.

Forty days Mourning for his Father expired, he came from his Palace, attended
by his Clergy and Nobility, to the Church of Blaueshin, or Blessedness, and
hearing Service there, proceeded to the Church of St Michael, then to that of
our Lady, being the Cathedral. There he was placed in a Chair of State, his
Robe of Goldsmiths Work, all Gold, set with Precious Stones and Pearl. The
Imperial Crown was then placed on his head by the Metropolitan, who, in doing
it, Read Exhortations to him of Justice and Peaceable Government. Then rising
he was Invested with another Robe much Richer than the former; his Train born
up by 6 Dukes, the Staff he held was of a Vnicorns-horn, 3 foot and a half
long, curiously Polished, and set with Precious Stones; a Globe and 6 Crowns
were carried before him by Princes of the Blood; His Horse waited at the Church
door, covered with an Embrodery of Pearl, and the Saddle suitable, to the value
of 3000 Rubbles There was a kind of Bridge made 3 ways, 150 Fathom in length, 3
foot high and 2 Fathom broad, whereon the CZAR, with his Train passed from one
Church to another above the vast throng of People. The Churches were spread
with Cloth of Gold, and the Porches with Red Velvet. The Bridges with Scarlet,
and Flannel Cloth, which the People got among them, when the CZAR had passed,
and a great many new Coins of Gold and Silver were thrown among them, from the
Church; the Cerimony ended, he returned to the Parliament House, where a
stately Banquet, after the Russ manner was served up by Noblemen in Plate of
Gold and Silver, 2 standing on either side his Chair with Battle Axes of Gold.
This Triumph lasted a Week with many Shows and Pastimes; after which Election
was made of the Nobles to new Offices and Dignities, and all concluded with a
peal of 170 Brass Ordinance, and 20000 Harquibusses twice discharged, as he
passed with a Train of about 50000 to his Palace.

This CZAR Conquered the large Country of Siberia, and took the King Prisoner,
overawing the Tartars, and doing many other great matters: But Boris his
Guardian aspiring to the Throne by Treatchery, first made away Demetrius, the
CZAR's Brother, and then the CZAR himself, and usurped the Royal Seat. But a
Counterfit Demetrius, set up by the Poles Invading Moscovy and every where
prevailing, Boris, as it is thought, Poisoned himself; for after a full Meal he
dyed suddenly in his Palace; and his Wife drinking Poison made her Son and
Daughter pledge her, of which she and the former dyed, but the latter only
lightly sipping recovered.

Demetrius Evonowich hereupon was Proclaimed and Crowned, and kept about him
Polish-Guards for his securety, but had a short and troublesome Reign, for
being suspected an Imposture, the Moscovites Conspired against him, rushed into
his Palace before break of day, draged him out of his Bed, and Slew him, with
many of his Guards and Favorits.

To him Succeeded Vasily Evanowich Shusky, who had been mainly Instrumental in
his destruction, and had not long before been at the Block for reporting to
have seen the True Demetrius Buried; but he was recalled by him he deposed, and
advanced to be the Instrument of his Ruin: It Is reported the Impostor's True
Name was Gryfcha, the Son of a mean Gentleman. Nor did the New CZAR long hold
the Throne, for the Poles raised up another Demetrius, who Besieged him in the
Castle of Moscow, and wrought him Great Troubles; so that being hardly pressed,
he betook him to a Monastery, and so the Polish Army became Master of the City;
who having got the Spoil, Quarreled with their Upstart Demetrius, and he flying
to seek Shelter, was slain by a Tartar's Shusk, who was carried into Poland,
and there died miserably in Prison. Yet the Poles were soon after Starved, and
driven out of all the places they had Garrisoned in Moscovy, and much Confusion
happened in this Interregnum, till at length taking Advice to settle matters,
Michalowich, or Michael Pheodorowich was Chosen CZAR, a Youth whom Shusky much
feared, and had put several of the Name to Death, upon a Presage one of that
Name should Succeed him; and having been Raised by the Valor of Pozarsky, and
Boris Licin, he made them the Generals of his Forces, and Joined with them
another Great Commander of the Cossacks, who had very much Assisted him, and
raised to Honor many other of his Friends, so that soon after a Peace was
Concluded between the Muscovites and Poles, partly by the Mediation of King
James the First of England, he was Elected Anno 1615. and Managed his Dominions
in a more constant way of Peace with the Turks, Tartars, Polanders and Swedes,
than any of his Predecessors had done before him.

Feodor Alexowitz, or Alexis, Succeeded him, who did many brave Actions, and
secured his Borders against Invaders, and Reigned to the Year 1682. Who then
dying left Two Sons behind, John and Peter, who were Joint- CZARS of Muscovy
till the first dying, the Whole Government devolved on the Latter, who now
Reigns Successfully and Victoriously, being a Wise and Judicious Prince, of a
sound discerning Judgment, Courteous and Affable, having Enlarged his
Territories by the taking Asoph, and giving the Turks and Tartars many
Overthrows; his Understanding Refined, and much Improved by Learning and
Travel; The Delight of Princes, and the Joy and Safety of his own People.

THIS Princes Style is very Magnificent, viz. CZAR and Great DVKE of all the
Great and Lesser White Russia, Moscovy, Kiovia, Volodomir, Novogrod; CZAR of
Casan; CZAR of Astracan; CZAR of Siberia, LORD of Plesko; Great DUKE of
Smolensko, Twer, Inhor, Permo, Westquia, Bulgaria and others; LORD and Great
DUKE of the Inferior Novogrod, of Tzerni, Kiovia, Resens, Rostof, Jeroslaw,
Bielejezorvedor, Obdor, Condomir, and of all the Northern Part; LORD of Iberia;
CZAR of Cartalania, Garsinea; DUKE of Cababadin; DUKE of the Dukes of Circassia
and Georgia, and of several other Oriental, Septentrional, and Occidental
Lordships and Estates; PATERNAL, Great PATERNAL Heir, SUCCESSOR, LORD aad RULER.

The Great Seal of Moscovy is an Eagle displayed Sable in a Field, Or, bearing
on its Breast a Shield the Field being Gules, Charged with a St. George Argent,
holding a Lance piercing a Dragon; between the Heads of the Eagle are 3 Crowns
placed, one over another, which are said to signify Moscovy, and the two
Kingdoms of Cazan and Astracan.

The Nobility of Moscovy are of different Ranks, those of the Ancient Nobility,
and such as have been raised by Favor or otherways for their Noble
Attchievements, viz. of four sorts, The Chief for Birth Authority and Revenue
are called Vdelney Knazey, that is, the Exempt or Priveledged Dukes. The
second, the Bojarens Raised to Honor by the CZAR, beside their Nobility, with
the Title of Counselers. The Third are the Voyavodey, such as have been
Generals of Armies under their Prince. The Fourth are such as bear the Name of
Knazey, or Dukes, but come of the younger Brothers of the Chief Houses through
many descents. And thus I doubt not but I have given a Satisfactory Account of
this Famed Country.

FINIS.

