THE Poor Scholar. A COMEDY.

Written by Robert Nevile, Fellow of Kings College in CAMBRIDGE.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?

Hor. de Art. Poet. LONDON: Printed by Tho. Johnson, for Francis Kirkman, and
Henry Marsh, and are to be sold at their shop, at the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane. 1662.

To his ingenuous Friend; upon his Play called, The Poor Scholar.
THe Boy of Macedon that wept outright,
Erough to drown it is f^mous S^ag^yrite,
Because like Thetis warlike issue, he
No Homer had to write his Hist^r^e,
Mistook his aim, for had his wish obtained
With the easy Goas, his actions had been stained;
His Life had been Romance, and he been made
Some errant Knight of the Enchanted Blade.
Poets Substract, whilst they would Multiply,
There Is nor dispraise like an Hyperbole.
This thus premised, I may prove at last
Because no Poet, The Encomiast.
Others may over-praise thy Book, (for we
The best things often over-rated see)
My careless Phrase and words that lie neglected,
This virtue have, that they will not be suspected.
So what I write will aequi distant lie
From polisht Wit, and servile Flattery.
Bees from a bruisedox, says Maro, breed,
But thou draw'st honey from a tattered Weed.
Seeing thy wit's so pure, thy Phrase so clean,
Thy sense so weighty, that each Line's a Scene,
We Will change the Song, and cry as truly too
Whither may not this thy Poor Scholar go?
This fault the best nosed Critics only smell
That thy Poor Scholar is attired too well.
Ben's Auditors were once in such a mood,
That he was forced to swear his Play was good;
Thy Play then his, does far more current go,
For without swearing, we will believe thine so.
E.M.

To my friend Mr. R. N. on his excellent Play, The Poor Scholar.
LEt thy Poor Scholar now no longer wait
For thy probation to be Graduate,
Let him commence Master of's Art; for he
H^'s kept his Acts in Wits Academy.
T. L.

To my very good friend, upon his excellent Play, called, The Poor Scholar.
Filled with rich fancy, golden Eloquence,
This thy (Poor Scholar) can have no pretense
To plead that he is poor, let those complain
Rather of poverty, whose empty Brain
Measures its slow-pac't fancies by the glass,
And when it has served 'um out cannot make 'um pass
For current Wi^, but are adulterate:
And such as flow from every Common pate;
But when the Ventricles of thy pregnant Brain,
Give birth to such an issue without pain,
And it in ten days space can wholly vent,
Nor force thee bite thy fingers excrement,
Like some dull Animals, whose barren seed
(Like Women's) ^i^^ months space requires to breed
Some poor Abortive Birth that dreads the light,
And fears to be exposed to public sight)
Thy play (like a young true born Eagle) may
Behold the Sun in public at Noon day.
W. W.

Drammatis Personae.
EUgenes Senior, Uncle to Eugenes Junior, and President of the College, a
very passionate man, although a Clergy man. Eugenes Junior, the Poor Scholar.
Eugenes junior's Father; a Citizen Demosthenes, Tutour to Eugenes Junior. Pege,
a young student, Chamber-fellow to Eugenes junior, a Woman-hater. Philos, a
friend to Eugenes Senior, and one that discovered his Nephews rambles to him, a
Fellow of the same College. Aphobos, a mad Rakel, afterward married to
Anaiskuntia. Eutrapelus, a quibbling fellow of Eugenes junior's acquaintance.
Morphe, a beautiful Lady, but of a low fortune, to whom Eugenes junior was a
servant. Anaiskuntia her Maid, an impudent scoffing Lass, to whom Aphobos was a
servant. Eugeneia, sister to Eugenes junior, and courted by Eutrapelus.
Uperephania her maid, a proud wench, and a great hater of men. Two Scholars.
Three Fellows of the College.
The Prologue to be spoken by Eugenes Junior, the Poor Scholar
WHat? have our City Wits be^n ^uelt? that the y
Of late a'n'^able to beget a Play?
Or rather (troubl^d with Fears Quaking Fits)
Is London frighted out of all its Wits*
By the Phanatick Crews late Insurrection?
Or have they been molested with the infection
Of the dull City air? with which the^r brains
Perhaps do sympathize, and take more pains
Now to produce a Play, then Randolphs Quill
Would have required the Theater to fill;
Have London wits drank down some deadly pot^on?
Are only Academick Wits in motion?
Must Genus, Species, which of you were will not
To trudge a foot, at last be forced to mount
The Muses' Paegasus? then I Will spur on
And ride a Scholars pace from Helicon
To the City Theater, and humbly beg
Your courteous audience with a scrape, or leg,
(Though It be but Scholar-like performed,) and dare
My wants in the hearing of you all declare,
I Will tell you, that I hope you are not so
Cruel, as to let Wit a begging go,
And that, if you will grant me your approbation
I shall be richer then the Indian Nation.
THE POOR SCHOLAR.
ACT. 1.
SCENE I.
Eugenes Jun. and Pege. Eug. J. HOw now Pege, do not think I was possessed
With a Prophetic spirit, and spoke as infallibly
As an Oracle? When I told thee
That were I never so exact a Chemist,
I could not extract one grain of gold out of
My fathers coffers: he graspes his coin as fast
As drowning men do those on whom they fix their clutches
When they are the third time sinking:
Thy aid I prithee; what Engine? what stratagem
Shall I use t'open the floodgates of his Liberality?
For (as I am a Scholar and a poor one)
My empty pockets no less require a flash
From the golden Tagus of his wealth,
Then the most heavy-loaded Barge at
Lowest water; there is no danger that my pockets
Should prodigally overflow their bancks,
I having not wherewithal I may procure
A competency of liquor to fill an Arch
Of my least hollow tooth, or wet my whistle.

Pege. What will thy aged father neither vouchsafe
To shine upon thee with a golden ray,
Or water thee with a golden shower?
What neither rain nor sunshine?
Then certainly thou can not but be barren:
And thy pockets must necessarily be as dry
As thy old fathers quite-exhausted bones:
What does he sordidly engross all his revenues
To himself? if so, he does deserve
To have's gray beard puckt for its silver hairs,
As geese are plucked by schoolboys for their quills.

Eug. Jun. O Pege; there is thunder in the name of Father:
He trembled less that stole Joves golden Scepter,
And scraped the ivory thigh of Hercules
Armed with his club, then I, when I but spend
A thought on so unnatural an act, as to profane
The silver shrine of those gray hairs,
Whose very age gives them a title to respect and reverence.

Pege. If you will stand forsooth, upon nice points
Of Religion, you may still continue as poor
As one o'th Mendicant Friars, and like an Anchorite
Live and die under a ruined and demolisht-wal;
And for want of coin to pay the Sexton,
Be forced to dig your grave with (Natures Mathookes)
Your long nails.

Eugen. J. Ah Pege, I Would rather dye in some remote
And solitary desert; and have no other grave,
Then what the pitiful and tender hearted bird
(With the red Stomacher) is wont to give us;
(Which is no other then a mass of leaves heaped
On a carkase) then bury the remembrance of
Reverence and Duty to a Father.

Pege. Thou have a noble spirit (Eugenes) and I Am
Induced to think, that (like Jove on Danae)
Some noble Deity descended on thy mother,
And having given earnest for thy birth in drams
Of heavenly pleasure, retired again to the spangled
Canopy; could such a noble branch as thy brave self
Spring from (that root of evil) Avarice?
So open and liberal a hand as thine, consist of
The same flesh and blood, as thy close-fisted and
Tenacious father? it seems to me a Prodigy in nature.

Eug. Jun. Father? -- sighs
I dare as soon (like those accursed sons of
Earth the giants) plot and imagine treason
Against heaven, as let the smallest ventricle of my
Heart conceive one thought of disobedience to my
Father! let me conjure thee therefore by the sacred tie
Of our unfeigned amity and friendship, never for the future
To mention my dearest fathers sacred name
But with some swelling titles of dignity and honor.

Pege. As he is thy father (Noble Eugenes)
He Is worthy to be deify'd and adored, I could not
Safer err in any Labyrinth, then when I lost
My self in his deserved Encomiums, but if's
Relation to thee be forgotten, I must and will
Forget to tender him respect and reverence:
But we must cut the thread of this discourse,
For here comes merry Eutrapelus; let us indulge
Our selves in jovial mirth, and make enquiry
What entertainment Eugeneia was pleased to afford
His courtship. God save you
Enter Eutrapelus. Merry Eutrapelus.

Eutrap. Your servant Pege; your vassal also noble Eugenes,
I have been laying close siege to the noble Eugeneia,
But (by Venus'es happy Region the Middle) all
The flashes of my sparkling wit cannot burn the fort of her
Strong resolutions against Marriage; she takes of nothing
Else but Nunneries, of Vestaes sacred order, and wishes
That all men (like Cybele's priests) were
Castrated and guelt, she is another Lucretia
For her squeamish coyness, and I Am afraid
She Will sooner stab her self then let me
Pass a thrust upon her.

Eug. Jun. Why? are you so well armed and accoustr'd
Eutrapelus, that you talk of passing a thrust?

Eutrapel. I have as good a mettall'd dagger as that
Which youthful Paris used to stab his Helena,
When Venus promised him her best assistance;
And (like Achille's Spear) it does no sooner
Wound a Lady, but 't can as speedily perform the cure;
I have obtained a license to wound young Ladies
(As Mountebanckes do their servants)
To make experiment of my art, of curing
Them again with my so famous Weapon-salve.

Pege. Now you talk of Mountebankes, I shrowdly suspect
You're a Mountebank, and promise greater cures
Then your abilities will suffer you to perform.

Eutrapel. I am not a Mountebank in your sense (Pege,)
But I wish I were in another; and that I
Might Mount the Banks of Eugenia's pleasant
River, and yet I think were I upon the banks
I quickly should fall in, and were I but well in,
She could not fall out with me, were she
More squeamish then she is.

Eug. Iun. Well, since you must needs be riding,
I Will back your mare, I Will make her pliant
And gentle for your turn; I Will muster up
All the inducements and arguments I can,
To make her grant you a fair
And courteous audience, I Will sound the trumpet
Of your loud merits in her ear, and so
Blazon the coat of your noble extraction and descent,
That she (as Bucephalus would admit of
No rider but Alexander) shall suffer none
To ride her but your self.

Eutrapel. Prithee then be speedy, for I Am in such have
That I could willingly rid Post upon her,
Which till you have accomplished, farewell.
Exit Eutrapelus.
Eug. Jun. Being he talks of riding Post, I hope my
Sister (if he marry her) will create him a
Cuckold, and give him a Horn or two to blow.
But here comes my uncle with my tutour;
Be you gone Pege.
Exit Pege. And I Will retire behind the hangings, and hear
What commentaries they will write upon my actions.

ACT. 1. SCENE 2.
Enter Eugenes senior, Demosthenes. Eug. Sen. DId ever Africa produce so
strange a monster
As my ungrateful Nephew? he is ingratitude
In the abstract; I brought him to the College
Thinking withal to bring him to my lure,
And that he would readily perform what I enjoined him;
But since his most unfortunate arrival,
Obedience to me is his smallest care;
He performs my commands with the same willingness
As heavy Bodies move from their own center,
Or malefactors go to execution.

Demosthen. I am dissolved in admiration at this news,
For unto my commands he has been all obedience;
I never read to Pupil yet which did receive the
Dictates I instilled into him with a more facile
Promptness; what? has a got a pair of faces?
Does one frown upon you with a contracted
Supercilious brow? the other smile on me
With a benign and more placid aspect?
Is he made up of contradictions? this surfets
My weak faith; I cannot digest and thoroughly
Concoct into a firm belief such strange impossibilities as these.

Eug. Sen. Impossibilities? you will then maintain him in's
Rebellion, will you?

Demosth. You must remember (Sir) that youthful blood
Is hot and fiery, and if you will be peevish
And morose, and (Touch wood-like) receive ill
Sparks of discontent it offers, you will quickly be
Reduced (to the worst of ills) Annihilation,
And burnt to dust and ashes.

Eug. Sen. Though youthful blood be hot,
Yet it must be allayed and cooled by snowy age;
And those of elder years ought to restrain
It Is violent and impetuous course.

Demosth. I, but with this caution and proviso,
That the restraint be not unseasonable:
It Is a received opinion among Anatomists,
That the ligature and binding of a member
If seasonably applied, preserves the heart
From violent influxes of the blood;
But if the application be untimely, it causes
Gangrenes and Haemorrhagies;
So youthful blood if checked unseasonably,
Becomes more insolent and impetuous, more vitiated and
Corrupt, then if its natural course had not been hindered;
The age of youth is the strong Rein of
Passion, and vice does ride in triumph
Upon the wheels of vehement desire,
Which run with infinite celerity
When the Boy drives the chariot,
They cannot be stopped on a sudden,
Art and deliberation must be used.

Eug. Sen. I think you have entered a league with
Your pupil to abet him in debauchery,
And cloak his lewdness and wild rogueries;
I am resolved to acquaint his father that
You rescue and protect him from my just
Rage, you are his sanctuary and Asylum.

Demosth. Could you but view your self now in
A glass, and see how you're transformed into
A horrid monster, how your lips shake and
Tremble, your veins and arteries swell
With the inflammations of your furious blood,
And your eyes sparkle as if they were
The only seat of fire, and at each glance
Would start a Salamander by their
Excessive heat; you would not (like Narcissus)
Be in the least transported with the love
Of your own person, but rather (like Actaeon)
Stand amazed, when you perceive your self
Transformed into a beast by Passion;
You would I Am sure abhor and hate your
Self, worse then you do or can your
Nephew, pray then by patient.

Eug. Sen. I Will make patience as great a stranger
To my breast a a a as. --
He stammers and can go no further
Eug. Jun. aside. To your breast a, a, a, as goodness
For I never discovered any in it yet:

Eug. Sen. O, now I have recovered my lost senses;
I mean I Will make patience as great a stranger
To my breast, as I resolve to make my Nephew to my love.

Eug. Jun. aside. A Pox choke you, have you hit it at last?

Demosth. O groundless and inveterate Hatred!

Eug. Sen. Groundless? Groundless? are these the praecepts
Of morality you instill into him? to teach him
How to be rebellious? I Am sorry I so much
Disparaged my own judgment as to commit him
To your care and charge: could you by
The clue of truth dive into all his winding
Labyrinths of impiety, you would think him a worse
Monster then the inhumane Minotaur,
And hire another Theseus to destroy him;
You Would wish your self all arm and weapon
To cut him off: Ha you rogue!
Eugenes Junior discovered peeping. What? a secret auditor of our
Discourse? an Evesdropper? you see my Shorthand
Can sufficiently write your Character,
You Have heard your own.
Eugenes Junior enters.
Eug. Jun. Reverend and worthy Sir,
turning to Demosthenes his tutour. It may perhaps seem strange to you that
Having a relation so near (I wish I could say
Dear) unto me as an uncle present, I should
Address my self first unto you;
But (Sir) he is so deformed and strangely altered
By his brutish passion, that I forget he is my
Uncle, he makes me of Pythagoras'es Sect,
And firmly to believe the souls of Brutes
Do by a transmigration animate and inform
Our human bodies, as often as I reflect upon
His fierce and savage nature.

Demosthenes. But I should have entertained better thoughts
Of you, my Eugenes, had you first attempted
To pacify your uncle, it may be though you now
Stinck in his thoughts worse then your excrement
Would do in's nose, and your memorial be to him
As odious as swines flesh to a Jew, yet by
Your flowers of Rhetoric you might have
Seemed sweet again and pleasant.

Eug. Jun. I had as good go court the air, or plow the sand,
Sweet smells will make his head ache,
And flowers of Rhetoric would to him be
As offensive as perfumes are to those who are
Affected with fits of the Mother.

Eug. Sen. Sirrah, for this your malepert and saucy
Language, I Will make you troubled with fits
Of the father, I Will lay your close and secret
Vices as open to him as is the Sun in's high
Meridian at Noonday.

Demosth. Young Eugenes, I plainly see that you're become
So odious to your Uncle, that if you do but speak
Or breath in's presence, you will kindle and inflame
His hottest fury, wherefore avoid the room.

Eug. Jun. I willingly submit to your commands.

Exit. Eug. Sen. Could one blast of your mouth blow him away?
I might have spent my lungs and sworn at him
These two hours to be gone, and all in vain;
And at one small entreaty from your lips
He vanishes, and flies like lightning.

Demosth. My charity prompts me (Sir) to think that
He so far resembles heaven, as rather to be
Conquered by prayers then full-mouthed oaths,
You must use soft and downy words, if you
Would break his flinty heart; I know him well.

Eug. Sen. I wish he would know himself so well, or if he wont,
That I had never known him.

Demost. Well, I Will go and sift him thoroughly,
I Will refine him I warrant you, and new mold him.

Exeunt both severally Eug. Sen. Pray use your best endeavors, and adieu.

ACT. 1. SCENE 3.
Morphe, Anaiskuntia, Eugenes Junior. Morphe. I Wonder Anaiskuntia, that
Eugenes has been
So great a stranger to us.

Anaisk Madam, you must think, that Scholars are as
Fickle and unconstant in reading Ladies faces,
As their books, they scarce have half perused one
But they make scrutiny and enquiry after others,
They seldom write one style, one language, long.
They court Variety (the mother of Delight)
As travelers that resolve to put a girdle about
The world, after they have viewed one fair
And amiable place, pass to another: So Scholars after they have
cast a slight and transparent glance on some transcendent face
And orient Beauty, pass on unto another;
They would have as many Ladies to exercise
Their Courtship on, as there are months; nay
Weeks in the Almanac; and if a Lady would
Give them content and satisfaction, she must be forced
To change her face, as often as the Moon does hers;
They are delighted with the newest books,
And chiefly, when they are in Sheets,
And till they first write in them, they will never
Bind 'um to themselves in Matrimony (that excellent Cover)
For Lusts deep characters and impressions.

Mor. Fie upon you! does this discourse
Become one of your Sex?

Anaisk. Of my Sex Madam? that is a frivolous question:
I know all Scholars humors as well as the
Best Laundress of 'um all, I know 'um as well
As woman can know a man.

Mor. How Impudence? you will confess your self
A common prostitute presently? why wa'nt
To purge the Students reins?

Anaisk. Nay Madam, hold me excused there,
Your Commentaries on my words transgress the bounds of
Charity: for where I say I know 'um; I mean this only,
That they will take cognizance and notice of me,
Salute, embrace me when I meet 'um.

Mor. You're in your old Bawdy tune again.

Anaisk. You are too waggish Madam, and by too foul
Interpretations of my words, stain my unspotted innocence;
When I vaunt, they will embrace me
My meaning's this, they will kiss, and a-la-mode
Take me by the hand: and if a sorry kiss be
Thought sufficient to christen women whores,
They Would curse their Destinies; and (as I Have
Heard some Scholars curse Augustius for
Publishing an Edict against kissi^g
So should I those who dare denominate all
As common strumpets, who will kiss as closs as
Cockles: you justly therefore may be taxed
With indiscretion for catching at my words,
For words they are but wind, and those that
Think to grasp the wind, you know the
Proverb nominates indiscreet.

Mor. I Am sure the Sages of the world thought otherwise,
When they prescribed us this experienced Axiom:
A Bird is known by the tune, a Beagle by
His mouth, Man by his words;
A stinking breath is not a surer symptom
Of putred lungs, then an obscene tongue of an
Impure heart, 'twere better that clock (thy tongue)
Would never strike, except it were to better purpose,
Then to excite and raise thy lusts; 'twere more
Expedient that clapper should stand still, then
Echo forth such sounds, which grate
All neighboring ears; I prithee let it rather (like the
Curfew Bell) warn thee to smother all the
Sparks of fiery lust; be silent, here is Eugenes,
Sure it is his tread: how now Eugenes!
Enter Eugenes jun. What new object have you found out of late to fix your
Eyes upon, that you so seldom deign to visit us?

Eng. jun. Madam, I thank my stars I am not yet so barren,
But I can coin in the mintage of my brain a plausible
Excuse, and make it pass for current, by stamping
It with the impress of your divine Effigies;
I thought my self not Eagle-ey'd enough often to
Contemplate so bright a Sun; and though I often
Threatened you many visits, I was too much a
Coward in my own thoughts to stand to what I had
Determined, and not prove an apostate from my resolutions.

Mor. Fie Eugenes I you speak too Scholar-like,
I mean, you use too high Hyperbole's, to which
My merits can bear no proportion:
This too much favors of complement and flattery.

Eug. jug. Madam, your merits are too high for me to
Take their true and exact Altitude,
I Am not Astronomer good enough to do it.

Mor. But Eugenes, pray' give me leave to turn Critic,
And carp at your expressions; your plea you made
For your long absence from me was thus ushered in;
You did pretend you dared not frequently
Contemplate me, because I was too bright a Sun;
It Is strange methinkes; for had you thought me so,
You would have supplicated and humbly requested
Me to shine upon you with a benign smiling
Influence, and if I should be maskt or hooded,
You Would pray me to disperse those sable clouds
With my bright rays, that you might see your long
Desired Sun, and then you would solemnly protest,
That I create bright days when I appear
With beams displayed in your Hemisphere.

Eug. jun. Madam, since you are pleased to censure me
As a delinquent, I am content to stand to
Your determinations; but yet my error is so
Sweet and pleasing to me, that I must court it
And continue in it, and as before I nominated
You my Bright and glorious Sun, now (Persian-like)
I will adore your beauties orient splendor:
And as those Persians did consecrate and sacrifice
A horse unto their Sun. --

Anaisk. aside. (You Will consecrate an ass? your self? will you?)

Eug. jun. As a true Emblem, of their devotion's winged
Speed and swiftness, so will I sacrifice my
Paegasus (the Muses horse) unto your service,
I Will compose Panegyrickes on your praise,
And make my Muse your Waiting woman,
As here I do my self your humble and devoted servant.

Mor. Sir, I had rather you would make any thing
The subject of your discourse, then my commendation.

Eug. jun. Now Madam, I Am your vassal more then
Ever, you have captivated all my faculties,
And made me wholly yours. I cannot but
Highly applaud this your so politic stratagem
To level my too rowring and aspiring thoughts,
In daring to make you the subject of my weak
And faint Encomiums, who are Queen Regent
Of Beauty, Virtue, and other excellent
Perfections, which (though but scattered and
Dispersed to other Ladies) are all united and combined in you,

Mor. Well Eugenes, give a Supersedeas to complements,
The clock has spoke nine times, to advertise you
That you must retire to College, it stands
Not with my reputation or with yours
That you should be detained here
At so unseasonable an hour as this, and therefore I must
Crave your pardon, as well for this my own abrupt
Departure, as for desiring yours.

Exit with Anaiskuntia. Eug. jun. Jun. jun. Guard her you Powers above,
Let no distracting ghastly dream dare to
Assault or discompose her divine soul;
Let her bed seem as soft as any summers
Cloud, that it may ease her softer limbs,
And if (as the Heliotrope her leaves unto the Sun)
She open and displayes them in her dreams;
O let her be quite ravished with delight,
And plunged into a gentle ecstasy of pleasant
Raptures; that when she wakes from that
Sweet Antepast of heavenly bliss, she
May desire real fruitions of that pleasure
Which she but in a dream enjoyed.

Exit. ACT. 1. SCENE 4.
Two Scholars (in tattered gowns,) Aphobos, Anaiskuntia. 1 Schol. BUt Aphobus,
is she such a merry jeering
Lass as thou proclaim'st her?

Aph. Jeering! Her jeers like Aquafortis, will
Eat thorough any thing, they will penetrate
Your very heart: she will never show her
Teeth and laugh at you, but she will be sure
To bite, and that is as bad, as when thou art
Besieged with all thy troops of vermin
Mustered together and united: she is a
Very Badger in the Art of jereing, and never
Bites, but she will make her grinders meet:
Take heed you don't provoke her till she falls foul upon you.

2 Schol. She shall fall foul upon me, if she will but
Let me fall foul upon her, nay if she will.
But permit me to give her a fair fall

Aphob. If thou should once fall upon her, though
Never so fairly, thou would come but foully off,
Thou Would scarce get up again, thy nerves
Would be so empty and invalid;
Faith here she comes; now you Rogues quake
And run like London Train-bands when the
Phanaticks were in arms.

Enter Anaiskuntia. Anaisk. What gibbet have you robbed Aphobos, for these
Gentlemen of the ragged regiment? they are as maigre
As if they had been hung six months at Tiburn,
Turned round with every puff of wind, and then cut
Down to be hung up again for Skeletons;
How their rags hang about 'um, deliberating
Whether they should drop off or no; what have
They robbed some Papermils lately? confess ingenously,
There Is no danger of their being hanged for it,
For both their cloths and joints are now so rotten,
They cannot hang together; they look as if
They were out of joint, seem as pellucid as glass,
And no less brittle; and fall would break 'um all to pieces.

1. Schol. If you please Lady, I Will venture a fall with you.
Me thinks I can as well endure one, as your cracked
Chamber-maid-ship.

Anaisk. Sir, I believe you would recant your challenge,
And (as you may well for Hunger) eat your
Words, if that you fell not soft and upon me,
Nay, and then too, I believe you would if not break all
Your bones, yet break your back:
But I pray' Aphobos upon what adventure
Are you come? you are Night Rablers I suppose,
Or (in better terms) you're a knight Errant,
And these two your Squires.

Aphob. True Lady.

Anaisk. Methinkes they are in a mean Livery.

Aphob. Their old rags (Lady) are badges of Honor:
A Coat of Arms the older it is and plainer,
It Is the more honorable; their habit does
Declare unto the world that they have been
In hot and furious skirmishes, they are so
Slasht and cut.

Anaisk. I suspect Aphobos, that (like degenerate Cowards
Which rob themselves and falsely sue the country)
They pretend to have 'ought invincibly,
When they dared as soon run into a scabberd
As draw a sword: they looked as if they' had
Broken prison, and being eagerly persu'd,
By the assistance of their rotten clothes, made
Their escape, leaving a sleeve in one man's hand,
And a remnant of their breeches in another,
There Is not a Tenter-hook (I Will warrant) in the
Street, but wears their Livery.

Aphob. I must confess Lady, they are the stoutest
Combatants in Cupids camp, they vaunt
That then they are invincible.

Anaisk. Invincible? I Will undertake that one weak
Silly woman shall cool their courage.

2 Schol. No Lady, Women are rather apt to heat
Then cool us, they are as hot as Hecuba
Who (as the Poets tell us) was delivered
Of a Firebrand: these Helenaes are hot enough
To burn all Troy; they don't (like glowworms)
Carry a seeming heat, nor are so cool as Cynthia
Was when she embraced Endymion;
But they that touch 'um, find that entertainment
The Satyr did, who kiss't the fiery coal,
They Are soundly burnt for it.

Anaisk. Nay, and we are cool too Sir, but then
(Like snow) though cool at first, we burn
More vehemently with an after Clap.

Aphob. Though you burn n'ere so much, yet I Am
As cool as any Salamander, and love to dwell
In your hot flames, I can and dare
By your permission and leave,
Inhabit your most Torrid Zone.

Anaisk. I Am not as yet disposed to make it habitable,
I will not yet untye my virgin Zone.

Aphob. You unty it? No Lady, I Will save you that labor,
I Will (as Alexander did the Gordion knot) either unty, or cut it.

Anaisk. Are you so sharp set in faith, then I leave you, I dare not meddle
with Edge-tooles.


Aphob. That Is huge pity, you're good flesh, and fit to be cut up, I Will warrant
you as tender as a London Pullet, and no less full of juice and gravey.


Anaisk. If you intend to make me your Pullet, and cut me up, you must not be a
Capon in performance.


Aphob. Lady, I Will tread you as well as ever Cock trod Hen, I Will make you
quickly big with egg.


Anaisk. Then you must first eat eggs your self to make you vigorous and
active.


Aphob. I am a too high mettall'd nag to need such helps and spurs, or want
such incitements.


Anaisk. But Gentlemen, the day appears, and (the Suns Harbinger) the morning
Star twinckles, and winks upon me to retire unto my Ladies chamber, lest this
my absence be discovered to her, for this time therefore I Will bid you Adieu.


Exit. Aphob. Come my Boys, we will scale the College walls, take an hours Nap
upon our Beds, and then to Chapel, where

That our vagaries be concealed, we will pray,
Whilst we by Night do ramble, sleep by Day.

ACT. 1. SCENE 5.
Eugen. Sen. Eugenes Juniors father, Eugenes Junior. Eug. Jun. fath. I AM
plunged in amazement at the Relation of my rebellious sons behavior; he stands
eternally obliged to you for making him a member of that College whereof
you're Head and President, what dares he scratch his head? or make it ache, by
his ill qualities and corrupted humors? I should extremly doubt whether he
were my lawful issue, or some ignoble spurious By-Blow, were I not well assured
of's Mother obstinate and invincible Chastity, who though she was in her young
days, a beautiful and comely Venus, and therefore might excite ill motions in
all her Beholders, yet was she too chaste a Diana, and awfully cooled and
discountenanced 'um; no sooner, were they raised, but she standing in the circle
of her many virtues, conjured 'um down again.


Eug. Sen. To open my mind plainly to you; he is an useless, nay a dangerous
member, and if he be'n't lopt off, it is to be feared he will corrupt others of the
Body of our Society; he is turned a Rambler; I Am in suspense, whether I shall
expel him, or try him further.


Eug. J. fath. Pray' Brother bee'nt so far transported with your Passion, as to
proceed to that extremity of rigor.


Eug. Sen. I summoned him to appear in's own defense, and advertised him too,
that you would be here; O here he is. En. Jun. Jun.


Eug. Jun. fath. Ha thou ungracious villain! what? turned Night-bird? and, when
you should be in your nest, or (which I Would rather) at your study, must you be
flying after Ladybirds? I Will clip your wings IN faith: I Will put a-ne-plus-ultra
to your rambles, I know of 'um all.


Eug. Jun. I believe (Sir) you know of more then I do.


Eug. J. fath. That Is very probable; for, your too liberally quafft off bowls
of liquor (like Lethe water) have washed their memory out off your head; your
understanding's light is clouded and obscured by your black deeds, and works of
Darkness; you have eclipsed its wonted splendor: on what night I pray' sir,
held you your last Rendezvous?


Eug. J. It Is so long since sir, I have quite forgot it.


Eug. Jun. fath. What? your Travels and rambles were so long? that (as Sir
Francis Drake in's travels lost a day) so you have lost a night? you have
forgot it (forsooth?)


Eug. Sen. weeps. Sir, should I steep these words in crocodiles and a tificial
tears scru'd from my eyes, they could not challenge your belief, and so I
should be in despair first of your audience, and then of pardon; but (Sir) my
innocence, which is as pure as that of Babes, when newly washed from their
original stain, keeps me from sinking in this deluge of profound misery.


Eug. Sen. O Sir, you are he that stickl'd not to say, Sweet smells would make
my head ache, but I think now, I Have made your heart ache for it. These tears of
yours I hope will make some seeds of virtue but forth apace, and cause you to
grow better as well as bigger, like April showers they may produce those
flowers (of Rhetoric) which you lately told me, would be offensive to me; I
hope your tears will not (like those drops of rain which fall near the Line,)
leave a corrupt steam behind 'um: now whilst they are in motion, and trickle
down your rosy cheeks, they are sweeter then Rose Water to my sense; O that it
rained thus sweetly all the year! then, then, it may be some seeds of
obedience, might grow with your rebellious weeds.


Eug. Jun. Know sir, that though a fathers awful anger can open all the
floodgates of my eyes, yet I like April can look clear and merrily, wipes his
face and laughs'. as well as weep; I still can laugh at you, whilst I behold
your Rainbow eyes, it is time for me to cease from raining showers of tears.


Eug. J. fath. O horrid! I cannot hear this, and bear it, farewell brother for a
while turns to his Son. I must be gone, I must avoid the place, (...) But you
for your part, never see my face.


Exit. Eug. Sen. Do you see sir, how you have frighted away your father with
your rebellious practices?


Eug. Jun. No sir, it is rather you have don't; he took you for some savage
beast, some mad and furious dog, and thought you would worry him, as y' have done
me.


Eug. Sen. Sirrah, if you intend to keep still in the College, keep in your
tongue.


Eug. Jun. I will not, cannot do it; should you serve me as the tyrant Tereus
served Philomel, and cut it out, I Would use some other art to vent my fury, I Would
write it in your blood; I should be happier, were I out of the College, as long
as you are in it: If you continue in, out I must go, (...) I cannot cohabit with
a mortal foe.


Exit Eug. J. Eug. Sen. Oh! how I burn with raging fury! how sharp a Paroxysm
of feverish Passion does affect me? it cannot be cured but by (that cooling
Remedy) Moderation, which yet has never dwelt within this so hot Climate of my
Breast; when Hercules was clad with the Centaures coat, he could not feel such
vehement flames; I have a Hell within me, and the heat of my Passion's as
unquenchable; my strong affections have (like Phaetons wild Coursers) enflamed
my little world of Man, my Microcosm; my soul must change her lodging, and
leave this earthly Vehicle my Body, to cool her self in the blessed Elysian
shades; like flame-eructing Aetna, I belch forch fire: well, I Will retire and
read a Lecture of Philosophy to conjure down this Devil, Passion.


Exit. ACT. I. SCENE 6.
Demosthenes, Philos. Demosth. YOu acted indiscreetly (Philos) thus to betray
young Eugenes rambles to his uncle; you know there ever have been private feuds
and discontents betwixt 'um; thorough's unckles means, his father has with
drawn most of 's allowance, he watered him before with small and inconsiderable
drops, from's golden river; and they came from him, like so many drops of
blood; and if he should (as certainly he will) hear once of this miscarriage,
he will utterly discard him.


Philos. I acted (I Will assure you) on good an a honest principles, not out of
malice to his Nephew; I only ascertained him in general, that his nephew
frequented Ladies company, and was no less brought up in Cupids Academy, then
in ours; that he loved to taste the Marmala de of a Ladies lips, was equally
delighted with the roses of their cheeks, and with the Lillies of their hands,
he loved to rob the pleasant Garden of a Ladies face, gather the cherries of
her lips, the blushing red-cheekt apples of her cheeks, handle her azure
veins like violets, or that he would walk about with a she-Hawk on's fist, and
loved to bring her to his lure: what harm was there in this?


Demosth. If it had been to one, not biased with Passion and prejudice, there
had been none; but in betraying it to such a one, as he is, you have betrayed
your weakness: had you acquainted me alone with his defects and errors, I
would with greater lenity, and to better effect, have attempted to reform 'um.


Philos. Well Demosthenes, words have wings, and, as soon as (their Cage) the
mouth is opened, out they fly, and mount beyond our reach and past recovery;
like lightning, they cannot be stopped, but break their passage th'rough the
smallest cranies, and penetrate sometimes the thickest walls; their nature's as
expansive as the Light, like Sun beams they are darted many miles from their
first source; but I Will assure you, for the future if I obtain more cognizance
of his actions, before his uncle I Will be as silent, secret, as the Night, and
cloak his actions with obscurity; but to you, I Will open and reveal 'um all, I Will
be as clear as day; I Will draw them in a line from the Circumference of my mouth
unto your ear, as to their center, where I am sure they will rest, and go no
further. I know old Eugenes is presently incensed at every petty peccadilio,
I Will always therefore make him stranger to my thoughts, in matters of this
importance.


Demosth. Be sure you're constant to your words, in the interim I Will go in and
give him some good counsel.


Exit. Philos. It Is true, I cannot deny, but I love old Eugenes unfeignedly; but
I shall be a torment to him, if I discover his Nephews vices to him any more; a
whisperer, and informer, is an odious creature, I shall abhor my self, if I
don't speedily forsake these practices, all whispering winds are usually
forerunners of a storm, I Will not (like a Fly) be always buzzing in old Eugenes
ears, I shall corrupt 'um; I Will seek him out, and unravel all that I have done,
I Will make his nephew master again of his affections.


Exit. Finis Actus primi.
ACT. 2.
SCENE 1.
Eugenes Jun. Eugeneia, Vperephania. Eugeneia. BRother, I wonder you should be
so importunate in the suit of that same Cock-brain'd fellow Eutrapelus, he is
composed of levity, I dare not speak a syllable, but he will convert it to his
own advantage, he will sometimes make such use of all my answers, that I shall
seem rather to court his fool-ship, then he to offer's Courtship unto me.


Eug. Jun. Sister, though he is light himself, yet he has store of heavy gold;
which is as sparkling as his wit; I Will warrant, he will protract, and certainly
produce your life's small thread to the duration of seven years longer; he will
tickle your ears with wit, as well as something else with genial pleasures:
besides, he does derive his pedigree from many anicent and noble families.


Vpereph. Yes I believe he can derive it as far, as from Will. Summers King
Henry the 8ths fool, Scoggin the Jester, or the wise men of Goatam, I believe
his pedigree is ancient, for his coat he wears, is old, and plain enough, and
may be blazoned with 12 Lice Rampant in the field Or of his yellow skin, his
crest, is a Cocks-comb, for if there be one in the world, it is he.


Eugeneia. Dy' hear how admirably she blazons his Coat?


Eug. Jun. Hang her jade, because she wears an ugly vizard her self, and
frights men from being her servants, and is constrained to walk alone,
whispering her self away, she would draw other proselites to her religion, she would
have all turn Nuns, and be confined to a Cloister, and (with her Ladyships Apes
face) lead apes in hell.


Eugeneia. But Brother, I Have heard you often talk how the Romans conferred
certain dignities on vestal virgins, who kept their virgin fruits pure and
^ngather'd.


Eug. Jun. But yet the number of those vestals was but small, the dignities and
privileges which they enjoyed, were only these, that they in state were
rendered equal to married wives.


Eugeneia. But, what if I have solemnly protested to live and dye a virgin?


Eug. Jun. Then you must as solemnly break that oath; such temerarious and
imprudent vows are better broke then kept; for none can by an ordinary way
perceive, whether they have that special gift of continency, as to be able to
live and die unmarri'd; what woman has so sailed about the world of her own
heart, sounded each creek, surveyed each corner, but that still there may
remain much Terra Incognita to her self; besides concupiscences too much
restrained, will swell the more, had Danae not been kept b'a brazen door, sh'
had died a harmless Virgin, not a whore.


Vperephan. Madam, I hope you will not be guilty of foul perjury, what you have
vowed, perform; never be confined to one man's humors. Be still as free as your
unlimited thoughts.


Eug. Jun. Out! you lascivious queen; because you're not your self content to
be confined to one man, would you dissuade her from it? would you have your
mistress like your self? as common as the Sea, as Air, and no less light; would
you have her let all Night-birds build their nests in her thick Bush? and make
her self a Warehouse for all sorts of Commodities? a Publican to receive all
Tribute she can get? you would have as many men (it may be) to gratify (I cannot
say) satisfy your lust, as the great Turk has women in's Seraglio; you cannot
feed upon one sort of flesh, you must be pampered with variety.


Vperephan. You Are mistaken Sir in me; I Am not so weary of my life, or so well
prepared to die, as to desire yet to be press't to death by any man, I Will first
be hanged.


Eug. Jun. Hang y'u Jade, but then you will choose your gallows. The door is open
and invites you to go out, your absence at this time will be to us more
acceptable then your presence, for here comes merry Eutrapelus. You Will spoil his
sport if you stay here.


Vperephan. I Will make no longer stay then, but yet I am resolved to make my
Mistress ( Penelope-like) unravel all by night Eutrapelus does by day. I Will
make men know (let 'um do what they can) A woman can persist to hate a man.


Exit. ACT. 2. SCENE 2.
Manent Eugenes J. Eugeneia, Enter Eutrapelus. Eug. Jun You Are welcome to me my
Eutrapelus, your company makes me happy.


Eutrap. Thanks Noble Eugenes; but yet I should be swelled with bigger, and
more large conceptions of my worth, if I were thought so by the fair Eugeneia;
could I but merit one smile of hers, I Would wrack my brains, and cause each
ventricle thereof to be in labor for a jest, and they should first conceive,
and then bring forth all their conceits.


Eugeneia. Sir, your merits sound so loud in each expression of my brothers,
that they require that portion of respect which otherwise I should deny you.


Eutrapel. Madam, I should be bless't for ever, if their sound should prove
harmonious, and make good music in your ears; or, like the pleasant lays of
Orpheus, attract all things and sexes after 'um, and (more peculiarly) your
sacred self.


Eugeneia. Sir, now you are a Note too high, you will overstrain your voice in
canting forth your own deserts, this is the way to raise a discord between you,
and your best friends.


Eutrap. T'has been observed that discord makes the sweetest Harmony: but yet
because I may not seem a Schismatic in love, I Am for a perfect union, we will
(if you please) concorporate, we will make up a complete Hermaphrodite, and be
inseparably glu'd together, and when we are met we'el stick so close, that
nothing but omnipotence it self shall ever Divorce us from our nuptial
pleasures.


Eugeneia. Rome was not built (Sir) in a day, and things of so great
consequence as marriage, are not to be resolved on in a minute, this ordinance
(like the laws of the Medes and Persians) is unchangeable, what is once done
here and concluded on, can never be unravelled or undone.


Eutrap. Fear not undoing Madam, for we'el be always doing, when we are married;
I Will always be in Action; and if this suite prevail with you, I Will then clap
action upon you after action, I Will first arrest you in your bed, and n'ere be
nonsuited in Cupids Court, till my endeavors for an heir obtain a happy issue;
pray give your verdict (Madam) in this case.


Eugeneia. My verdict sir is this, that you are nonsuited in the court of my
affections, your plea cannot any more be heard, you have lost your suite, your
Rights and titles, to make me your Tenement, are forfeited.


Eutrap. Then, Madam, I Will renew my suite, and make your Brother my advocate in
this cause.


Eugeneia. He Will take Bribes Sir, and therefore (like a common Barreter) he
shall obtain no audience, I Will therefore now adjourn Great Cupids Court, and put
a period to your amorous sport;


Exit. Eutrap. Don't I look simply Eugenes? and seem in as deplorable a state,
as a young heir beset with Sergeants? When the large sails of's Debts are ready
to sink and over-whelm the small Bark of his poor estate; Marsy as (after
Apollo flead him) never looked so simply, if he did, I Will be flead; I Will
undertake a whole Nights lodging, and hard Jobb-Journey-workes of darkness,
would not have cooled my courage, as this repulse has done; sh' has made my
eyes as hollow as her heart.


Eug. Jun. I took thee not (Eutrapelus) for so notorious a Coward, as to be
daunted with the first denial,

Take thou but Courage, and be bold, my Boy,
And all thy grief shall terminate in joy,
Coward never won fair Lady, stand this shock,
And thou shall have her in a surer Lock.

Eutrap. I wish I had her in so sure a Lock, as to give her a fall, and then,
I Would make her belly rise before her.


Eug. Jun. Take heed that (like Antaeus) she grow not stronger by her fall, and
getting up before you, throw you off for ever. But I must crave your absence
for a while, each minute I expect my tutour.


Eutrap. I Will be gone then I faith, least if he find us here together, he
should read us a Juniper or Crabtree lecture;


Exit Eu. ACT. 2. SCENE 3.
Eugenes Junior, Demosthenes. Eug. J. ODs' so, here he comes. he perceives
Demosthenes entering. Well, now I must be thunder-proof, his brows are clouded,
and presage a storm, pray God't be but an April shower, as soon ended as begun,
or (if he thunder) God send that (like the air) he be the better cleared from
Angers fumes and fiery exhalations: for otherwise, he will blast me with his
breath; but (now I think on it) he shall find me reading. He pulls a book out of
his pocket, and reads softly.


Demosth. I Am glad to see you thus studiously employed, your actions in some
measure contradict that flying rumor which proclaimed you remiss and
negligent; you do well to defeat black-mouthed obloquy, and vindicate your
reputation from those aspersions, with which it has been blended and defaced, I
pray continue it in its proper luster, and suffer't not to be eclipsed by any
spots of a debaucht and vicious conversation.


Eug. Jun. aside. Pray' God he does not change his tune presently, this is too
sweet to last long.


Demosth. Though other men may cherish in their bosoms sinister thoughts of all
your actions, yet I Will be charitable in my constructions on 'um, But -- shakes
his head.


Eug. Jun. aside. Nay 'faith, if he talks of Butting, then 'war Horns; I Am the
But he'el shoot at.


Demosth. Well, I must display my thoughts unto you, I must not, dare not
flatter you too much, for such a fawning spaniel is worse then a dumb dog, I Will
bark to fright you, although I bite the less.


Eug. Jun. aside. I Would rather heat a Dog bark, then him speak now.


Demosth. I am informed that you give frequent visits to your Ladies, and
though, (as it is confess't) your stipend and allowance be but small, you spend
it vainly in their company; it is now no wonder, your complaints of poverty are
so loud; for they who keep such costly and expensive mares as women, (like
those that kept Sejanus' horse) will soon decay in their estates and fortunes.


Eug. Jun. Sir, you may easily accusea man, though never so innocent; I would
request you therefore to produce that man who dares be so maliciously bold and
wicked, as to accuse me face to face; there is none I know dare do it, my looks
would prove as fatal to him, as a Basiliskes, or as Medusaes snaky locks to her
Beholders who e're he be, he can as soon with open and undazl'd eyes look on
the Sun, as upon me, with this false accusation in his mouth; if there are gods
above and divine justice, his inquinated breath will rot his teeth, his tongue
will leap out of his mouth, before he can give birth to so prodigious an
untruth as this; besides, you may be pleased sir to consider, how it is
improbable that I, who cannot disburse enough for Necessaries, and have been
always pincht by extreme want, should gain admittance into Ladies company.


Demosth. Sometimes a golden tongue may be as prevalent as a golden shower of
money; you have perhaps some winning complements, and they will pass more
current with young Ladies then the coin of some Gallants, whose heads are empty,
though their pockets full.


Eug. Jun. You cannot expect that they should be Great Wits, who have small
purses, they usually sympathize together, Wit is expensive, it must be dieted
with delicaties, it must be suckl'd with the richest wines, or else it will
grow flat and dull.


Demost. I don't like these principles in you, I now suspect you more then
ever, and be assured, my eye shall be always over you: I Will make the friends I
have as so many prospectives, to take a perfect view of your deportment, and as
I am informed, I Will act.


Exit. Eug. Jun. I hope then your friends will look th'rough the wrong end
of the Prospective, and all my faults will seem but Peccadilios and Venial
slips. But here comes Pege.


Enter Pege. ACT. 2. SCENE 4.
Pege, Eugenes Junior. Pege. WHat? poor still, Eugenes? are not thy fathers
coffers open yet? Have not with the herb Lunaria picked his locks? Does he
(like Nero) still delight to wallow on his flloores covered, and (as 'twere)
paved with money? wont he allow thy pockets a guard of tutelar angels to keep
the devil out?


Eug. Jun. Not one; the devil has so long possess't 'um, he will never be cast
out, but by the omnipotent aid of sacred Gold, of which I Am destitute: I dare
not go to Church for fear of being encountered by a Brief, and if I am admitted
into company unknown to me, my first complement is this, Prithee lend me six
pence: in sum, my head's as full of care for money, as my pocket's empty of
it. Let Us put our heads together, and by the conjunction of our Brains beget a
plot, let us endeavor to undermine my father.


Pege. Is that your last refuge then? Have you no books to sell? cannot you live
by your learning?


Eug. Jun. No faith, not one, that is worth the selling, necessity forced me to
look gold in my Dictionary as I used to do Latin, and I chose rather to make
it yield me money, then only give me good words; my Greek Lexicon I parted with
for the procuring of one Greek word called Krusos (Gold:) Blind Homer, because
he was a poor Poet, and brought me nothing, I turned out of doors for a small
bribe of twelve pence, and as the Song goes.

My Euclids Elements did pack
For the better element of Sack.
My Ovids Metamorphosis is Metamorphos'd into silver, and of my Grammar, which
should teach me to make true Latin, I have made true and lawful money. My
Metaphysics are abstracted from my study, and it is no matter, because they do
abitract (all they treat of) from matter; my Astronomy books are all exposed to
sale, for liquor, only to make experiment of the Earth's motion when my Brains
(like my blood) perform their circulation: and now I am so good a Philosopher
as to carry all I have about me, and my sole study is how to get more.


Pege. I Am big with plot, of which when I am once delivered, I question not but
you will be delivered from your poverty for a time, you will get a truce with it.


Eug. Jun. Let Us hear't I pri'thee.


Pege. Thus you must steer your course, step to a Booksellers, and give him
this angel, pulls money out of's pocket. which I Will lend you, for the use of
(the many-languag'd Bibles lately published) for a week, their price is 12
pound, when you have once got 'um in your study, invite your father to your
chamber, show him your Library, and tell him you are 12 l. out of purse for
those large volumes.


Eug. Jun. But Pege, my shelves which heretofore were crammed like Capons, are
now empty, I Have sold almost all my books.


Pege. I Will lend thee as many books of mine as shall fill up their room.


Eug. Jun. Well thought of my politic Headpiece, my Matchiavel, my Richlieu,
my Mazarine,

I Will to the Booksellers, and when I Have got
The Books, I Will laugh, and say, God speed the plot.

Exit. Pege. Unto what sordid and ignoble shift do parents put their children?
when they prefer their pelf before 'um, and love it more; they will not allow
'um one small creek of all their wealth to sail in; and therefore (after their
long wished for death) they sail top and top Gallant in the large Ocean of their
wealth, till they make Shipwreck of their fortunes, and split against that
dangerous rock of Prodigality; they will sput out whole cellars of wine, as fast
as their old parents could swallow and concoct their gains got by extortoin, or
any indirect unlawful means; they will not be-Tantaliz'd; they will drink their
liquour when it is at their nose; they will make their golden apples (like those of
Sodom) molter away if they can come to touch 'um; and open all their Locks of
golden water so often, till they are quite exhausted. But what is the matter
with Aphobos? he comes thus puffing and sweating. Ent. Aphobos.


ACT. 2. SCENE 5.
Without a gown, Aphobos, Pege. Aphobos. O Pege, I Am undone!


Pege. Why, what is the matter?


Aphobos. The matter! why, I Will tell thee, with some others of my acquaintance
I Have been to night upon the watch.


Pege. How upon the watch? I thought you had rather been a peace breaker, then
a keeper of the peace.


Aphob. You Are in the right; for when I say, we were upon the watch, I mean, we
fell upon 'um and beat 'um roundly: and whilst we were deeply engaged in the
skirmish, I, that I might bestir my self the nimbler, threw of my gown, and
being at length overpowered, by a fresh supply of their Assistants, I was
forced to leave my gown behind me, and think a pair of heels worth two pair of
hands; the damned rogues persued me closer then my other company, and observing
me to scale our College walls, this morning brought my gown to the president,
and he is resolved to make a diligent search after the owner; thou have (I
hear) two gowns, I pri'thee lend me one, and I will ever style thee my grand
Deliverer and Protector; fetch it quickly for fear he should surprise me, thus
unarmed and, unprovided.


Pege. I Will out, and fetch one for you.


Exit. Aphob. Under what dismal and unfortunate planet was I born? that when
(in imitation of the Planets) I wandered up and down, from sign to sign, from
house to house, all my irregular motions should be so perfectly discovered: one
of the watchman, that saw me come from Anaiskuntiaes house, was (as I think) a
Blacksmith; but yet I hope this Vulcan, will not divulge't abroad, that I,
like Mars, was in conjunction with my Venus; if he does, I Will blame him, and
make him a right Vulcan; I Will give him a worse fall, then Jove gave that other
Vulcan, whom (as Poets tell us) he flung from heaven to earth. But I wish this
Pege were come with his gown, I think though I hear him coming. Enter Pege with a
gown in's hand.


Pege. You Rogue you, put it on quickly; the President have called a
congregation of Fellows, and 's a searching all the students chambers, to find
which of 'um it is has shed his skin; they will instantly be here.


Aphob. I Will on with 't then. he puts it on.


Pege. It Is well it is on, for here they are all.


ACT. 2. SCENE 6.
Manent Pege, Aphobos, enter Eugenes senior Pres. with Aphobos's gown in's
hand; Demosthenes, Philos, three other Fellow of the College. Eug. Sen. WHat
skabby sheep is it that has dropped this rotten Fleece? who e're he be, he must be
taken notice of left he spoil the whole flock: do you know this gown, Aphobos?


Aphob. A'n't please you sir, I never saw't before; and (aside) if I could help
it, I would nere see it again.


Eug. sen. What Is that you mumble to your self, you would not do?


Aphob. I said Sir, that I never saw't before, and if I had, I would not
conceal the owner.


Eug. sen. What say you Pege? do you know it?


Pege. Not I sir, I never thought so torn a gown as this worth taking notice
of: it seems to have been stolen out of a Beggars Wardrobe.


Eug. Sen. The Watchmen took it up in the street, and brought it to me, assuring
me that it was a young Scholar's of our College.


Demost. The watch take it up? it is not worth taking up in the high away; but if
we knew the owner, we'd take him down to the butterie, and give him due
correction.


Aphob. aside. Under correction sir, if you're for the butteries with me, I Will
lie as close as Diogenes in Dolio, I Will creep in at the Bung-hole before I Will
mount a Barrel, and have my hole bung'd; if they catch me now, I must expect to
be whipped like a brewers horse.


Eug. sen. What Is that you mutter, sir?


Aphob. I say sir, if 't be mine I shall desire no more favor then to be whipped
like a brewers horse.


Philos. Certainly, I Have seen this robe worn by some of our Undergraduates,
I Have seen't on some body's back, that belongs to our College.


Aphob aside. I had better (like Hercules) have worn the Centaures poisoned
coat, then have it proved, that I e're wore it: if it be known this robe was
mine, they will make me wear a scarlet robe; they will dye my skin in my own blood,
and mangle it as bad, as that gown is torn.


1 Fellow Sure Aphobos you're a conjuring, you make such motions with your
lips, and yet speak not a word that can be heard; but Aphobos, I will not say
absolutely it is your gown, but I am confident, I Have seen you wear it.


Aphobos. Sir you will as difficultly make it sit me, as Mercury's garment did
the Moor, who was always either waxing or waning, and so the garment was either
too little or too big.


3 Fellow. You're something like the Moon, your self, you are as pale (with
fear) as she is; and we will try whether 'twill sit you or no, come put off that
gown you wear.


Aphobos aside. I had rather put you off with an excuse, if I had a good one.


3 Fellow. What is it you say?


Aphob. I say sir, I had rather put it off then not.


Eug. sen. Off with it then, and put on this.

he gives him the gown, and he puts it on.
2 Fellow. It fits him, as if it were his own.


Aphob. aside. A pox take you, you have fitted me with a witness.


2 Fellow. Aphobos, This gown was made for you.


Aphob. side. I thank my good wit for it, I have hit upon a pretty excuse now.


3 Fellow. What say you sir?


Aphob. I say sir, that I have no excuse for my self, and must ingeniously
confess that once it was my gown, but having another, and urged by want of
money, I sold it to one of another College, who since has left the College,
and (as I conceive) sold it another, and that other may have left it where
'twas found.


Pege aside. What a brave subtle rogue it is; faith, this excuse will stand him
in noble stead; 'twill hold water, and keep him from sinking.


1 Fellow. What witness can you produce you sold it to that party?


Aphob aside. 'S'lid I hope that the rogue Pege will be true to me if I cite
him.


1 Fellow. Who do you say?


Pege aside. I commend thee for thy wit, Boy; I Will rescue thee now.


Eug. sen. Can you witness this Pege?


Pege. Yes sir.


Demosth. This will be tried (Sir) presently, let one of us examine Pege apart,
another, Aphobus, for how many shillings he sold it.


Aphob. I have the price, Sir, at my fingers ends.

He shakes his ten fingers, and winks on Pege.
Pege. aside. I know his meaning; I must say as many shillings as he has
fingers.


Demost. Whisper softly, and tell me Aphobos.


Aphob. I had ten shillings for it sir.


1 Fellow. What say you, Pege?


Pege. He sold it for an Angel sir.


Apho. aside. O my good Angel; well said.


1. Fell. They both concur, sir, in the same price don't, they?


Demosth. Yes, they do sir.


Eug. Sen. Well, Gentlemen, we will make a further search when time permits us; I
have urgent occasions call me away, let us depart.

Exeunt all but Pege and Aphob.
Pege. Now, my Boy, you are out of gunshot; you are excellent at coining
excuses in the mintage of thy brain, and by stamping 'um with the counterfeit
impress of truth; know how to make 'um pass for current; thou can hammer
out a lie in the forge of thy brain (the best that ever I knew) thou have a
good extempore Wit that way.


Aphob. I had need then have had my wits about me, for had I been once in the
Butteries, they would have their rods about me. But Pege, let us, for joy that I Am
escaped, go to the three Tuns, and drink a pint of wine, and laugh away our
cares.

Sings. We Will carouse in Bacchus's fountains, hang your Beer and muddly Ale:
It Is only Sack infuses courage, when our spirits droop and fail;
It Is drinking at the Tuns, that keeps, us from ascending Buttery Barrels;
It Is this that safely brings us off, when we are engaged in feuds and quarrels.

Pege. Come away Boy.


Exeunt. Finis Actus secundi.
ACT. 3.
SCENE 1.
Eugenes Jun. Anaiskuntia, Morphe. Eug. Jun. I Thank my stars I have recruited
my decayed Library, and I hope that it will recruit my empty pockets: Twelve
pounds! It Is a sum my pockets were never before guilty of, and had not been so
now, had not my father proved a golden Ass; now me thinks I could venture
the other fit of my angry uncle, to see my Morphe; What care I though he frowns,
so she but smiles; let him show himself a fierce and angry Mars, so she will but
prove a smiling Venus; If he thunders, she is my Daphne, my Laurel, that can
protect me from being thunderstruck; I Will never prove a coward in this my
Amorous War; And though my uncle should discharge whole volleys of peircing
words against me, he could not change my countenance with pale-faced fear, much
less my resolutions; but I think I see Anaiskuntia coming.

speaks to her, Enter Anaiskuntia as passing over the Stage. Pri'thee sweet
heart let me detain you a little, how does your Mistress, the fair and virtuous
Morphe? Is she so much at leisure, as to vouchsafe me a small conference with
her; I should be very proud if I could merit the noble title of her servant.


Anaiskun. Sir, I presume that she is never so much employed, but your company
may make her put a period to all her other business.


Eug. Jun. Now thou transport'st me into a pleasant ecstasy of joy; thou make
me be all ear, whilst you distill these words which so much savor of
blandishment and sweet delights; now I Am as light as Air, and am resolved to
make all troubles strangers to my breast.


Anaiskuntia. I cannot, sir, but admire this your immovable and undaunted
spirit, that you can (like the Weather) sing in tempests, and those so great
ones, which your uncle raised, after he heard you did frequent my Mistriss's,
house.


Eug. Jun. Why Anaiskuntia? Has fame with her swift pinions divulged it thus
far?


Anaisk. It Is as I tell you sir.


Eug. Jun. Let me tell thee then Anaiskuntia, that though wave after wave of
misery should fall upon me, by those storms my uncle raises; though all
adversitie's most blustering winds should be united and conspire against me,
like AEolus, I Would quell 'um all; or if I could not, I Would laugh at 'um, and dare
'um to do their worst.


Anaisk. aside. I see there is something in the wind now, and that he loves my
mistress.


Eug. Jun. They should not put an end unto my voyage, the attractive and
magnetic virtue of her beauty's so strong and potent; by her as by my Polar
Star, I Will so direct my course, that though I were invelop'd with Nights black
sable mantle, I Would safely stear my course, till my designs arrive to her as to
their wished for Haven.


Anaisk. Sir, you have now rendered me yours, more then ever; before, I
entertained but low and abject thoughts of your deserts, now, on the contrary,
I am become a great adorer of your worth, and promise you my best assistance,
toward the purchase of your desired ends, what e're they be.


Eug. Jun Thanks for thy love my Anaiskuntia, Here Is a small gratuity, as an
acknowledgement that I think my self gives her money. much obliged to thee for
it, and, if occasion be, I Will make experiment and trial of it; but is not this
your Mistress, the fair Morphe? I think it is: assist me now you Muses.


ACT. 3. SCENE 2.
Enter Morphe. Morphe. WHat? are you here Eugenes? I thought you had been
barricado'd up in your study, cloysterd up like a Monk, and condemned to a
twelve months penance by your uncle, to expiate that crime you committed
lately in giving me a visit.


Eug. Jun. Madam, I am confined I must confess, but it is only to your self; I
am your vassal, and not a little ambitious to do you any service, that is
within the Sphere of my small power: I am not yet, and never will be cloistered
up, or lead a Monkish life: I am resolved (if possible) to enter the sacred
bonds of Marriage.


Morphe. What? then will you be clogged to a silly woman? that is the worst sort
of confinement, and I believe will not prove agreeable to your nature.


Eug. Jun. Madam, I Am now a Captive, and am desirous that my thoughts may have
the benefit of a Jail-delivery.


Morph. How? a Captive Eugenes?


Eug. Jun. I Am your Captive, Madam, and shall never think my self at liberty,
till you bind me in the fetters of your arms; that bondage to me will seem
liberty.


Morphe. You speak Riddles, and Mysteries, Eugenes, which are beyond the Sphere
of my low capacity; I want an interpreter.


Anaisk. We women are such silly Asses, we don't know when we are well offered;
we will not understand what is good for us, until its too late: any one that is not
(like an Ass) void of all Reason, may know that you're the mark he shoots at,
and that, if he might, he would stick his Arrow in the middle of you.


Morph. You saucy slut, be silent, we must not take your salfe inter pretations
on men's words.


Eug. Jun. What modesty would have forced me fondly to conceal, she has
revealed unto you: I Am glad I had so eloquent a speaker to express my vast
affections to you: Sh'has made an excellent Commentary on my words.


Morphe. Truly, Sir, her Commentary seems obscurer to me, then the Text on
which she made it.


Anaisk. Then Sir, go to your Application, and (as an Application ought to be)
let it be plain and practical.


Eug. Jun. Madam, I Will now no longer use vain Circumlocutions: I Will not be
always conversant about those outward circumstances, of that action Marriage,
called Complements; I Will take the shortest Cut, and tell you plainly, that I Am
so much enamored both to the beauty of your Mind and Body, that I must
utterly despair of any happiness, unless you will please to perfect and complete
my wishes in yielding your consent to Marriage.


Anairk. Now, Sir, you speak (Soldier like) plainly and boldly: I Will warrant
you a special Striker in Cupids Camp.


Morphe. Though, Sir, I am so much a woman, as that I cannot conceal those high
respects I have reserved for you, yet I Would not have you think, they are
prevalent enough to terminate in Nuptial Love; I shall desire you therefore to
desist from importuning me with such vain motions.


Anaisk. Vain motions! I should think 'um good motions, were they directed to
me, as to their proper Center; but we women forsooth, are all for Circular
motions: first we will, and then we will not,

We will not, we will; we will, we will not again,
Until at last our Coyness prove our bain.

Eug. Jun. Well, Madam, your repulse has kept me off for a time, but it will
make me come on again a fresh, with doubled vigor: All happiness dwell with
you.


Exit. Morphe. Come, Anaiskuntia, Let us go dispatch the business I spoke to
you of.


Anaisk. Madam, I Will wait upon you.


Exeunt both. ACT. 3. SCENE 3.
Pege, Eugenes Junior. Peg. I Think I was born to succor and relieve
distressed persons: Aphobos, had it not been for me, had been severly punished;
and young Eugenes would have been in as poor a condition, as a wandering
Pilgrim: His pockets would have been sufficient Arguments to prove a Vacuum in
Nature: I Am glad that I can be so instrumental to my friends; it is no small
satisfaction to me. But here comes Eugenes, I believe, with his heart as light,
as his pockets are heavy. What has my plot thrived Eugenes?


Enter Eugenes. Eug. Jun. Thrived! Thou art fit to be Privy Councellor to a
King, my Boy; thou have so many winding Labyrinths in thy brain, that none will
ever track thy grand designs: Joves secrets may as easily be discovered, as
thine: Omnipotence it self would be fore puzzled to dive into the depths of all
thy stratagems.


Pege. Well, I Am glad I Have pleasurd you, and if it lie within the Sphere of my
weak power to help you, you may command me. But no more of this; here comes
Eutrapelus, he will make us merry after our plotting.


ACT. 3. SCENE 4.
Enter Eutrapelus. Eutrap. HOw is it Gentlemen? Jovial, and blithe?


Eug. Jun. How can we be otherwise in your company, Eutrapelus; you are the
Genius of the place in which you are, and inspire your company with a spirit of
mirth: Your presence (like the Suns) clears us from Melancholy's dismal clouds:
you banish Grief (that Traitor to all mirth) from our breasts: you calm the
rugged waters of adverse Fortune, and make their surface smooth and even: in
short, you are the soul of the Company, and animate us with your lively presence.


Eutrap. I could wish, Eugenes, that I might (as it were) animate, and infuse a
soul into your sister, by the Act of Propagation.


Eug. Jun. Fear not, my Eutrapelus, but that thou (like her soul) shall dwell
within her: thou shall take up the best part in her body, for thy lodging.


Eutrap. I could dwell there willingly, all my life: I'se swear she is a Palace
for a King to dwell in: she is such good meat, that, were she set before a
King, he would have no taster; he would venture on her first himself.


Pege. Pri'thee Eutrapelus don't talk off these enameled bubbles, these
painted pieces of clay called women; who, were they not over curiously
expensive on themselves, they would resemble that misshapen clay ( Prometheus
used) before it was informed and animated; they have no beauty but what we
please either out of poetry'or complement to give 'um, these dim Cynthiaes
would be very obscure if they borrowed not that light they have from the Sun of
men's favor.


Eutrapel. O Pege, do not say they have no beauty, it is high treason, for I have
a Lady in chase; of that Royal beauty, that in her cheeks the White and Red
Roses of York and Lancaster, and Lilies of France are combined, I prithee then
let not thy sharp and thorny words be felt among these Roses.


Pege. Suppose Eutrapelus we should be so civil, and ingenuous as to grant them
beautiful, yet we may by experience see, that their beauty is like a much
desired banquet, which is no sooner tasted, but its delicious luxury is
swallowed up by oblivion: besides, there is no conformation of linements, no
composition of features, no simmetry of parts so well compacted in a woman, but
a judicious eye may perceive some imperfection: fair Helena when in a
Lookingglass she saw her own deformity, was forced to weep: pale Cynthia has
her Spots, and Venus her Moles and Warts.


Eutrapel. Because fair Ladies have their spots

Are they less beautiful? those beauty spots,
Will set 'um off with the more glorious Luster; But here comes Aphobos
smiling. What makes you look so merrily about the guils Aphobos? You are very
pleasant me thinks.


ACT. 4. SCENE. 5.
Enter Aphobos. Aphob. I Have had a miraculous deliverance lately, and have
reason to rejoice at it, I cannot but smile how I cheated the President with
Pege's gown.


Eug. Jun. It Was well thou scapedst his clutches, for had thou owned the
gown, he would have made thee ride (like Bacchus) on a barrel, and made you
show your fat cheeks; he would have made you a Montelions dial, and looked on your
backside, what a Clock it was when your gown was found, and (like the Sun on a
Dial) he would have dwelt upon it a whole day, and soundly heated it.


Aphoh. But I thank my good fortune, my actions did not come so much to light,
and shine so clear, as to let him look what 'twas a Clock in my Postern Dial.


Eutrapel. I believe had you been taken Aphobos, your clock would have struck
above once an hour; the President would have laid about him courageously; he would
have struck you every minute, and made use of his time.


Aphob. Yet he could not have much time to torture me; for he could not have
taken time by the forelock whilst he was on my backside; time's bald behind.


Eutrapel. I, but (like Musicians) he might have kept time with his hands.


Aphob. That would have been very unpleasant Music to my senses; 'twould have
made me squeek like the small strings of a Treble Viol.


Eug. Jun. Eutrapelus, if you intend to see my sister, retire quickly, lest she
be gone abroad upon a visit; my business calls me away.


Exit. Eutrap. I Will use the greatest speed I can to meet with her.


Exit. Pege. If you go to your wenches, I Will to my study; I shall at last reap
the greatest benefie.


Exit. ACT. 3. SCENE 6.
Manet Aphobos: Enter Anaiskuntia. Aphoh. I AM glad they are gone, for here is my
Anaiskuntia; how does my dearest soul?

Who holds all my affections as fast
Have, Taste, Cast, Last, Wast
As I do her about the slender wast.
He hugs her and kisses her.
Anaisk, Take heed sir, you will loose presently your sense in this great crowd of
words.


Aphob. Never fear it sweeting;
Thou Wilt see my sense and all my words,
Stick close together as Cheese-curds.

Anai^k. Where Is the cream of the jest there?


Aphob. It lies in the milky way betwixt those pleasant fontinels, your breasts.


Anaisk. What? Then your turned child? and must be suckl'd with breast-milk?


Aphob. I could hang upon those snowy Alps to eternity: if those were the two
topt Parnassus, Poets speak off, I Would turn a drolling Poet, and court thee in
Rhym that I might lie and sleep there.


Anaisk. Come, let me hear how you would Rhym?


Aphob. As often as at your breasts I nibble,
Methinks I am grown big with quibble;
Here Heaven must be, for most do say,
That there is in Heaven a milky way.

Anaik, Well Aphobos. I Am in have now, and must be gone; but I Will assure you,
that if ever I marry any, your are the man designed by me.


Exit. Aphob. I Have hopes enough now to enjoy her: well, I Will go and contrive
how to effect this business with secrecy and security.


Exit. Finis Actus tertio.
ACT. 4.
SCENE I.
Philos, Eugenes Senior. Philos. It Is true, I once resolved to conceal young
Eugenes's rambles from his Uncle, but now they are so frequently Echoed and
noised abroad, I cannot, dare not do it: should I cloud 'um in obscurity for a
time, they would (like thunderbolts too long Imprisoned in a cloud) break
forth with more impetuous violence; I therefore am resolved t'unload my breast,
and make old Eugenes bear his share of the news of's Nephews vitiousness: and
here he comes most opportunely for it:

Enter Eugen. Senier. Your servant Mr. President
I have a fresh supply of news concerning your wild Nephew;
His vices now are grown so great and loud,
That secrecy can them no longer cloud,

Eug. sen. Why Philos? What vices has Fame of late proclaimed him guilty of.


Philos. Before, she only in general declared him a notorious Rambler, but now
descends to particulars, and dilates her self more largely on his actions; she
reports that he is a continual visiter of Morphe, who, though a Gentlewoman,
yet of mean fortunes; besides, her maid is noted for a light and wanton slut,
she is a common Hackney; and may be hired at the same rate as Hackney Horses
are; Twelve pence a side makes her your own: for that price a man may up, and
ride her; She (like the Roman Curtizan Sempronia) If men refuse to Court her,
will not abstain from Courting them: she is somewhat fair indeed; but though
this beautiful Cyren have a woman's face, she ends in the Serpents Tail; stings
to the purpose. Though this unsatiable Harpy has a Virgins face, yet has she
cruel Talons too under her wings: she is one, whom neither Argus with his
hundred eyes, nor brazen walls, nor the most vigilant Guards, can e^re secure
from her incontinency: she tricks her self up with such variety of gauderies,
as if she exposed her body as a bait to bring the devil to her lure, and tempt
the very Tempter to embrace her.


Eug. Sen. My blood is curdl'd at this dismal news; the Rascal will be here
presently, to fetch some Books I promised to lend him: me thinks he makes a
long and tedious stay. O, here he comes.


Act. 4 SCENE 2.
Enter Eugenes Junior. Eugen. Jun. I Am come to wait upon you, Sir, to fetch
those
Books you promised to lend me.

Eugen. Sen. Books! What Books I pray, would you have? Ovids Amorum, or De Art
Amandi: there I believe lies the sum of your Studies, or in some other
obscene Drollist, as Martials Bawdy Epigrams, Propetius's Effeminate strains,
ot Petronius Arbiter's Whoreing Verses.


Eug. Jun. I am amazed at this discourse: whither it tends, I cannot conjecture:
to me it is a Riddle.


Eug. Sen. If it be (though I Am sure it is not) I believe your own Conscience is
a sufficient Oedipus to unriddle it.


Eug. Jun. My own Conscience! My Conscience is as incapable of wracking gripes
and fears, as heaven it self; it never yet was guilty of any foul enormity; and
therefore cannot be the Receptacle of Panick fears.


Eug. Sen. I see your impudence is so strong and daring, that of your self
you will confess nothing: Pri' thee Philos step into the Town, and fetch my
Brother, and then I Will vent my thoughts more freely.


Philos. I Will go with winged speed.


Exit. Eug. Jun. It Is not a Fathers presence can affright my pure and virgin
innocence.


Eug. Sen. Well, Sirrah, I have not patience to contain my self: I must
unbutton my breast to you, and tell you all. You are, I hear, a constant
visitant of one Morphe, a person of low Fortunes; and, if you do'nt pretend
Courtship to her, I fear you are guilty of a worse crime, and are too well
acquainted with that Whore her Maid.


Eug. Jun. As for her Maid, I ever scornd her as a base, abject, inferior
wench; but for her Mistress, the fair and virtuous Morphe, I have Altars, and
Temples in my heart, erected for her merits: her! I do, I will, maugre both men
and devils, love.


Eug. Sen. Well, Sir, we will cool your courage, as hot as you are-here's your
father, with Philos; I Will tell him all.


ACT. 4. SCENE 3.
Enter Philos, and Eugen. Juniors Father. Philos. I Have brought your Brother,
Sir.


Eug. Sen. I thank you Sir; but yet could wish his coming might be welcomed
with better news: I shall disturb, and discompose his thoughts with a Narration
of his sons debaucheries.


Eug. Jun. Father. Speak quickly, Brother, lest by your too long silence, I be
induced to think his vices are beyond expression, and fancy him a worse
Monster, then you will (it may be) represent him to me: I Am already persuaded,
that he is a burden to the earth he treads on: Wracks, I believe, and Halters
cannot extort more from him, then is guilty Conscience; he being conscious to
himself, that were his close breast glazed and pellucid, (according unto
Momuses desire) twould be a poor and idle sin, of which it had not been a
Receptacle. He looks like one surpised in a shameful act of Lust, or Theft: he
knows not what to say, or think, or do: his Spirits huddle consusedly together,
and would go somewhither, but know not where; do something, but they know not
what: were he to be arraigned before a Judge, his countenance would prove his
Executioner, and hang him. O! that I should e're give give birth to so
Prodigious a Rogue, who is forfeited so far to vice, as that no virtue can
redeem him; his heart, when it is besieged by a temptation, though never so
small, (like Rome when it was besieged) is always taken.


Eug. Jun. Sure, Sir, I could never be such a Monster as you represent me,
unless some of your vices were entailed upon me; because you (by
uncharitableness) have forgot you are my father, I must forget that I Am your
son, and speak my mind more plainly.


Eug. Sen. Nay, now I see he is arrived to the height of wickedness: he that
forgets his duty to a father, will not start back from the commission of the
most horrid crime: he will swallow smaller Gnats, that does not boggle at a
greater matter: his nature's so inured to wickedness, that (like poisons to
some bodies which are accustomed to 'um) it does become his food and
nourishment.


Eug. Jun. Fath. I beseech you, Brother, send for his Tutor, that we may all
consu^t how to restrain his wickedness.


Eug. Sen. Let me entreat you, Philos, to accept of the trouble of fetching
Demosthenes; his chamber is not far: desire him to vouchsafe us his presence
here.


Philos. I shall be proud to serve you, Sir. Exit.

aside. But when I Am out, I Will come no more.


Eug. Jun. Fath. Me thinks, Sir, that the sense of your vices should make you
tap your eyes, and drop a tear or two, which (as Mercury water does a Rock)
might dissolve your hard, your rocky heart, into a penitent confession of your
faults:

But when of sinning we have lost a sense,
We must expect final impenitence.

Eug. Sen. It Is very true, Brother; the villain is hardened in's wickedness; he
assumes confidence from his crimes, and (like your common prostitutes)
sinning's become his trade, he is not ashamed to glory of his shame, but his
Tutour is come now, he shall hear all, I made bold to trouble you Demosthenes;
here is a Pupil of yours has miscarried, and I fear, lost for ever.


ACT. 4. SCENE 4.
Enter Demosthenes. Demosth. LOst for ever? I Am almost lost in admiration at
this fatal news; I pray deliver me of that Timpany of expectation to hear his
vices, with which I Am big.


Eug. sen. He has commenced an acquaintance with that beggarly gentlewoman
called Morphe, who though she has a little skindeep beauty, yet she is
desperately poor and indigent, her beauties colors, like those in the Rainbow,
paesage a barrenness of Rain; no golden showers can come from her; she may (it
may be) like the Sun in the warm Summer, guild and refresh him with some few
golden rays, but they are so few and small, that in the Winter of adversity,
they will all be spent and quite exhausted; her estate (I fear) like Tholosanus's
gold, will ruin and undo those that enjoy it; it is too small to last long.


Demosth. I thought young Eugenes, I had sufficiently Catechis'd you about these
idle courses, will you never wear your virile gown, and be a man? Is this a fit
qualification for a student in Philosophy, to be a visitant of wenches? If you
would exercise your courtship, do it on that excellent Lady, Philosophy? she is
not coy, but with expanded hands, and open arms will entertain you: her
discourses are not (like other Lady's) only frothy and pleasing, but
profitable too; she is a fit object for your love.


Eug. Jun. Sir, your so tender, and father-like expressions have melted my
before congealed senses into tears, weeps. which all their Winter storms of
taunting words, would but have made the harder, but yet (to your and my own
grief) I plainly must acknowledge that I respect, and highly honor, and (which
is more) entirely love that exquisite piece of beauty, Morphe; in whom nature
has out-work't her self, and far transcended her own Idea's; she cannot be
paralle'ld by any art, much less by nature: she would baffle Painters to decypher
her exactly, as bad as Agues puzle Doctors; and you must know, that your
restraining me from her company will prove as fatal to me, as letting blood
does usually to those that are affected with the small pox, or as the small pox
to a fair face: I love her, and though I loose my fortune, nay, my life for it,
I will have her.


Demost. Consider, Eugenes, that Cupid's blind, and be not so imprudent as to
follow a blind guide. Show your self a Philosopher: and get the mastery over
that fond Pastion, Love.


Eug. Jun. Love cannot be mastered, Sir:
As soon as mastery comes, sweet Love anon
Takes his nimble wings, and soon is gone.

Demosth. Whip that fond Boy, Cupid, and that will make him, like a little
child, run away from you: then indeed, he will take's wings, and be gone.


Eug. Jun. Sir, he is armed with arrows, and for each blow, he will wou^d me to
the heart, as he has done already.


Eug. Jun. Fath. Well, Sir, if you will not hearken to your Tutors safe advice,
know, that before this company, I declare you disinherited, and leave you heir
to no more then twelve pence of my estate: and so farewell.


Exit. Eug. Sen. And that I may be no small assistant in reclaiming you from
your lewd courses, I Will command your chamber door key to be brought to me, your
door to be double locked: your chamber shall serve you both for Banqueting
house, and Bog-house; Parlour, and Privy-house. You shall be fed like a Caged
Bird: your victuals shall be given you through Grates, and thus I Will leave you:
come let us go Demosthenes.


Exeunt both. ACT. 4. SCENE 5.
Eugeneia, Vperephania, Eutrapelus. Vpereph. WEll, Madam, be advised by me,
never marry if you're wise: these men (when once married) are always licking
their wives lips, and by too frequent breathing on those Red Roses, make 'um at
last as blew as their own noses in a winter morning. Consider, That for a few
drams of Bestial pleasure, you must be wrack't to a confession that you have
been at your sport, by the untollerable Pangs of Childbed: your body, will
once in nine months, be unjoynted, after you have been glu'd unto a man: these
men (like Tinkers) will stop up one Hole in us, but make three for it, by
weakening our bodies: they will go abroad and drink o'th best, and vex their wives
at home, till they are drunk with their own tears. We women are the ships in
which men sail in the Ocean of this world; they will leap into us wislingly at
first, and come aboard, but when we leak, by reason of th'infirmities of age,
they will let us sink and perish, and leap as fast out of us the're trust, 'um
Mistress.


Eugen. You wan't my brother again to rattle you for these invectives against
marriage, pray hold your tongue.


Vperep. Well Madam, I am silent, and it is high time, for Eutrapelus is coming.


Enter Eutrapelus. Eutrapel. I hope now noble Madam, I have a lience to plead
again gain in Cupids Count, which lately you adjourned: it is not the long
vacation yet; let me request you therefore Madam to end my suit* let it not
last as long, as Law suites do in Chancery; one word of yours, whereby I may be
well assured of your affection, will set me out of miseries reach, I shall be
more invulnerable then Achilles, for he was wounded in the heel; but I shall be
armed Cap a Pee against all danger with one word of encouragement from you.


Eugeneia. What power I have over my self, I willingly resign to you
Eutrapelus, but yet there wants the main wheel to put your designs in motion,
I mean my fathers consent; and he has resolved to keep me in my Virgin state
these two years: How shall I extricate my self from these great difficulties?


Eutrapelus. Go but along with me and I Will secure you: I Will tell you what to do.


Eugenia. Well, I Will commit my self unto your trust.


Exeunt both. ACT. 4. SCENE 6.
Enter Aphobos, Anaiskuntia. Aphob. COme my Anaiskuntia, when shall we make a
conjunction Copulative? What will it always be nibbling at my fleshly Bait, and
never take it in?


Anaisk. Your hook appears too much, Sir, to make me taste the Bait; I Am afraid
you come upon the catch, only to try whether I Will bite or no; and if I do,
you will only tear open my mouth, make it bleed, and then leave me.


Aphob. Leave thee? give me but thy consent,
And I Will stick so close to thee, that every one
That see's us, shall swear we are but one;
Leave thee, Leave thee, I Will not leave thee,
he sings. O how loath am I to leave thee!

Anaisk. I scarce know how to trust you, you men are so accustomed to make your
thoughts strangers unto your words.


Aphob. Not how to trust me! Why, I Will give thee earnest my girl, I Will make
the cock sure.

be kisses her.
Anaisk. Come, stay your stomach a little with that kiss, you will fall too the
more heartily presently for it: as soon as the Priest has coupl'd us, do your
best and worst.


Aphob. Well, my Anaiskuntia, accompany me to my chamber, and we will contrive
the business there, there is another couple will be Married with us.


Exeunt both. Finis Actus Quarti.
ACT. 5.
SCENE 1.
Eugenes Junior solus. Eug. J. WHat would they have made me live immured, and
cag'd up in my chamber? This was (like a Nun that has had a Clap) to be buried
alive in a Coffin of a larger Volume, must I have walked up and down in my
Chamber like a pale Ghost, and (as't were be Magic Charms) be limited and
confined to walk no further? I Will make'um know, that it would prove as easy,
to manacle Omnipotence, or confine a Spirit, as me; although I could not, like
Dadalus, make me wings, and take my flight out of my cage, yet I could file a
Bar, and break my passage out of the chamber window; they should not have left
me an eye of light, had they intended to secure my person, I can creep th'rough
a window, eat Iron Bars thorough like Aquafortis, break th'rough the gaping
jaws of danger, for to obtain the sight of my dear Morphe; had they dispersed
serpents teeth, and sown 'um in my way, and ( Cadnius like) made them to spring
up armed men, I Would have encountered with 'um all; my breast already is too much
possess't with Love, to harbor slavish fear; I Will presently post to Morphe,
and give her the relation of all my travels, but whilst I talk, methinks I see
my glorious Sun appear, she comes and shines upon me sweetly, her countenance
wears a lovely smile; What makes the fairest Morphe so neatly dress her
countenance into a smile? May I presume to know the cause?

Enter Morphe.
ACT. 5. SCENE 2.
Morphe. TWo things there were that moved my laughter, first to see you, who
(as I heard) were kept close personer in your Chamber, secondly, that I have
lost (the precious jewel) my maid, some body has robbed me of her, much good
may't do 'um.


Eug. jun. Madam, you have sufficient grounds of smiling, but as smiling is but
a Prologue to perfect laughter, so coutship is to Marriage joys, let me desire
you therefore to make me leave off all vain Prologues, and fall to the sport,
and let me act Marriag'es merry Comedy with you; Ladies act Plays sometimes as
well as men.


Morphe. But I Am afraid (my dearst Eugenes,) (for now that Epithete thou do
deserve) our Comedy will prove a Tragedy to you, 'ith' Epilogue:


Eug. Jun. Never fear it Madam, but if it do, my strains (like those in
Tragedies) shall be high and lofty, I Will not cringe to the best of 'um all, but
talk as high as they, till at last, it prove but a Tragi Comedy at most,
beginning in sadness and ending in mirth.


Morphe. Well, my Eugenes, thy constancy has overcome me, I Am now your own; but
who shall marry us?


Eug. Jun. Why thus, my uncle you know is a Clergyman, we will go to him in a
disguise, and make him marry us, then, we'el laugh at him, and vex him as much
as he has done us.


Morphe. Let Us go then and accoustre our selves accordingly,
The world shall know that it is a thing above,
All human Power to over master Love.
Exeunt.
ACT. 5. SCENE 3.
Eug. sen. Eug. juniors father, Demosthenes. Eug. sen. DEmost henes, how does
your Pupil resent his confinement? You hear nothing of s repining at it, do you?


Demosth. Not a word, but I fear 'twil make him more desperate and resolute,
his nature will never brook it.


Eug. jun. father. You are too tender of him Demosthenes, he must be curbed and
bridled in, if ever you intend he should be stopped in the full career of his
debauchery.


Demosth. But sir, some horses the more you curb 'um in, will run the faster.


Eug. Juniors father. Sir, he is a rebellious Son, and (like Rebels) must
undergo a sharp confinement, before he will be reduced to 's due obedience.


Eug sen. You say true brother, he must have his wings clipped, and be cooped up,
if ever you expect to came him.

Enter Morphe Eugenes Jun. in rustic habits.
Who is it you would speak with good people? What Is your pleasure?

Eug. J. We come an't pleaze your Vorship to be Morried, I con love this fine
lass, and zhe provesses, zhe con do zo to me; will you zir, be pleased to yoke
us together.


Demosth. These are right country Bump-kins: they talk in a broad language,
much like the Dorick Dialect in Greek: they don't clip their words; but give
large London measure in their talk: enough for money.


Eug. Sen. What Is your name, I pray, honest man?


Eug. Jun. I am cleped, Sir, Villip Lovelass.


Eug. Sen. And do you love this lass?


Eug. Jun. I, by my vaith Sir, do I.


Eug. Sen. What Is your name, fair Maid?


Morph. My name is Mary Allcock, an't please your worship.


Eug. Sen. That Is a fit name for a Maid that is to be Married: here is a couple
will make a Philip and Mary coin.

But who have we here?

a^ they talk, Aphobos passes over the Stage with Anaiskuntia under his Gown,
and her legs in sight. Come hither Sir, come hither: What have you under your
Gown?


Aphob. A Saddle, an't please you, which I borrowed to ride out of Town on.


Eug. Sen. A Saddle, Sir!
points to her legs. And these are the Sirrups, are they?

Demosth. Sirrah, What? must you be riding upon a Flesh Saddle? Are these fit
courses for a Scholar?

Aphobos sets down the wench, and she slips away. Well, get you to your Chamber,

Tomorrow we will take a course with you.


Exit Aphob. Eug. sen. But d'y' hear Maiden, can you love this man?


Morphe. Yes forzooth can I, and none body else.


Eng. sen. aside. It Is a pretty Peat, to do the Feat; she heats my marrow:
methinks I could be young again, that I might enjoy her.


Demosth. You Would best marry 'um quickly, Mr. President, I believe they are
impatient of delay.


Eug. sen. Well Gentlemen, accompany me to our Chapel to th'marrying these
people.


Exeunt omnes. ACT. 5. SCENE 4.
Aphobos, Anaiskuntia. Aphob. THese women are always wilful; she would not put
on the clothes I prepared for her; but it is no matter, we were married before
they took us: they cannot spoil our sport now: my name too is cut out of the
College butteries; and I have now no title to the honor of mounting a Barrel:
but I wonder my Anaiskuntia states thus long: sure she is dressed in her man's
apparel by this time.

he is silent, and looks about the Stage a good while. What, no appearance yet?
it is strange!

O, now she is come.

Enter Anaiskuntia in a Scholars habit.
Anaisk. I cannot endure to wear men's clothes thus, methinks it is ugly to see a
woman wear the Breeches.


Aphob. I wonder whether Eugeneia and Eutrapelus are married yet or no, they
should be by this time, or else the Parson made not so quick dispatch with 'um
as he did with us; nay, now I conclude they 're married, for here they come.

Enter Eutrapelus with Eugeneia in a Scholars habit. How like you marriage joys
Eutrapelus?


Eutrap. O, they are an Antepast of Heaven: Mahomet I see was no fool, for
making his paradise a place for the fruition of Genial pleasures; He knew what
it was to be truly happy: But don't our wives look like fine smooth-faced Lads
in this man-like habit? I wonder Jupiter comes not from Heaven to make one of
'um his Cup Bearer, as he did Ganymed? come, lets sing a little.


They all sing. Come let us sing the time invites, our joys are now completed,
All oppositions are blasted and defeated.
Come let us kiss, my spirit's high, and fain would be in action,
Now we will laugh, and those defis, in Love who breed a Faction;
We will not fear an ill-look'd Dean, nor mirth-disturbing Proctor,
We Will now carouze, and sing and bouze, before the gravest Doctor.
ACT. 5. SCENE 5.
Whilst they are singing, enter Eugenes senior, Demosthenes, Eugenes juniors
Father. Eug. sen. WHat? are you all mad, you make such a disturbance in the
College? as for you two Eutrapelus. and Aphobos, we know you for notorious
Rogues, but these two pretty young lads, I believe were seduc't by you.

pointing to the women. Were you not Sweet-hearts?


Eugeneia. Yes Sir, we were led hither by 'um.


Eug. sen. Well, go your ways for this time, and come no more into this lewd
company.

Exeunt Eugeneia, Anaiskuntia. As for your part Aphobos, you were caught lately
with a wench, and one (who by report) was light enough either for you to bear
her, or her to bear you: she is in plain terms a common whore, and not fit
company for a Student.


Aphob. Sir, either give her a better Character, or I Will give her one written
in your warmest blood; she is my lawful wife, and he that blemishes her
reputation with the smallest scandal, I Will rip him up alive, and sacrifice him
to her honor, which ever was untainted and immaculate.


Eutrap. The other also was my wife, although invested in a Scholastic habit.


Eug. Sen. If you are married, you have forfeited your places.


Aphob. It is confessed, we have; nor do we now desire to keep 'um longer: our
names are out o'th Butteries, and our persons out of your dominions.


Eug. Jun. Fath. Here Is mad doings: but (I believe) my sons too fast for ever
getting out to marry.


Eug. Sen. But tell me true, were those your wives?


Eutrapel. They were Sir, and here they are again in their own habit and attire.

Enter Eugeneia and Anaiskuntia in loose morning gowns.
Eug. Sen. I wish you joy then, O my Niece, he turns to Eugeneia. are you
married too? You Are well provided for in having married Eutrapelus.


Eug. Jun. Fath. Well, 'twas happy that my son was kept close prisoner;
although my daughter has broke loose, he, I believe, is far from thoughts of
marriage:

whilst he speaks, enter Eug. Jun. leading Morphe. Oh! what a sad object do my
eyes behold? I Would rather have been deprived of the light, then e're have seen
this sight: How now, sir? How broke you loose, and got that wench?


ACT. 5. SCENE 6.
Eug. Jun. I Got her, Sir, by my Unckles means.

Eug. Sen. How, Sirrah! by my means? I never saw her in my life before; and
would sooner have seen you both hanged together: What? Do You make me your Pimp?


Eug. Jun. Nay, Sir, we are hanged together so fast, that there is no cutting the
rope now. Marriage cannot be dissolved until death.


Eug. Jun. Fath. What wicked wretch was it married you?


Eug. Jun. My Uncle, Sir.


Eug. Sen. It Is a notorious lie;
I never saw this woman before.

Morph. Yes, Sir, but you have: I was the Mary Allcock you married.


Eug. Jun. And I the Philip Lovelass, whom you asked whether I could love this
Lass or no, and then married us.


Eug. Jun. Fath. Well, Brother, I see now we are outwitted, and that young
people may see more with their eyes in their heads, then old men with their
eyes hanging at their girdle. We Will go in now, and seeing they are married,
prepare a feast for'um: I have a living at my disposal that I Will bequeath to
Aphobos, because he is poor: And as for you, Eugenes, because you have contrived
your Plot so well, I declare you my sole Heir: I Will not vex my self in vain.


To vex when mischiefs are quite past and gone,
Is the next way to bring more mischiefs on.
Finis Actus quinti.
Epilogue to the Spectators.
Eug. Jun.
BEfore you all, my Father does declare,
That he intends me for his lawful Heir.
My Poverty henceforth I Will not bewail,
For now I may, Top and Top gallant sail
In The Ocean of his wealth, not will I fear
The Shipwreck of my Fortunes, whilst I stear
My course, so you, like the Laplanders, will sell
A Gale of your Applause, my Sails to swell.
A Catalogues, o^ Books sold by Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane, lately Published.
THe English Lovers, or a Girl worth Gold, both parts, so often acted with
general applause, now newly formed into a Romance, by the accurate Pen of I. D.
Gent. A Compendious Chronicle of the Kingdom of Portugal, from Alphonso, the
first King, to Alphonso the sixth, now reigning. Those excellent Fancies
entitled, Don Juan Lamberto, or a Comical History of our late Times, first and
second Part, by Montelion Knight of the Oracle. A new English Grammar for
Foreigners to learn English, with a Grammar for the Spanish, or Castilian
Tongue, with special Remarks on the Portugues Dialect, for the service of her
Majesty, whom God preserve, by James Howel Esquire. The Life and Death of that
Reverend Divine, and excellent Historian, Dr. Thomas Fuller, lately deceased.
Studii Legalis Ratio, or Directions for the study of the Law, under these
heads, the Qualifications for the Nature, Means, Method, Time and place of the
Study, by W. Philips of Grayes Inn, etc. price 1^.
Books Published this Term.
RUmp, or an exact Collection of the choicest Songs and Poems, from 1639. to
1661. Relating to the late Times, by the most eminent Wits. A new discovery of
the French Disease, and Running of the Reins, their Causes, Signs, with plain
and easy directions, of perfect curing the same, by R. Bunworth, the second
Edition corrected with large Additionals. Fragmenta Aurli^a, or Court and State
Jests, in noble Drollery, True and Real, ascertained to the Times, Places, and
Persons, by T. S. Gent.
PLAYS.
Thracian Wonder. Gurtons Nedle. Catalogue of Plays Loves Mistress. Plutus.
Queen of Aragon Obstinate Lady. Maids Revenge. Lacivious Queen. Noble
Ingratitude Enchanted Lover. Amorous Fantasy. Poor Scholar.
FINIS.

