A PROTESTANT ANTIDOTE Against the POISON OF POPERY. CLEARLY Proving the
Religion of the Church of Rome, to be 1. Superstitious, 2. Idolatrous, 3.
Damnable, 4. Bloody, 5. Novel, 6. Inconsistent with the Public Peace, 7.
Irreconciliable to true Christianity.


Published for the Public Good.

By Christopher Nesse, Minister of the Gospel in Fleetstreet, London.

Every Plant which my heavenly Father has not Planted, shall be rooted up.

Matthew. 15.13. LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the
Poultrey. 1679.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons of England.
Right Honorable, etc.
IT IS a most Conspicuous and undeniable Truth, that You are the grand Patriots
and present Patrons of all that is near and dear to us, both as we are Men and
as we are Christians: You are our blessed Zerubbabels (which signifies Born in
Babel or far from Confusion; the good Lord grant, that however ye might be born
in it, ye may be graciously removed far from it) Or our sweet Shezbazzars,
(which signifies Joy in Tribulation, the good Lord make you no less to these
three Nations) whom God has raised up (in this critical conjuncture of
Babylonish Confusion) as Saviors upon Mount Sion to judge the Mount of Esau,
or Romish Edom; that the Kingdom may be the Lords, Obad, v. 21. Even a Kingdom
of Righteousness and true Holiness; wherein the Crown may be placed upon our
Lord Christ's (not Antichrists) Head, Cant. 3.11. 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Isai. 33.22.
that there may be a (...), a divine or holy Government; and that the Temple of
the Lord (which has been burnt and broken down) may be built again, that the
Lord our God may dwell amongst us. It must be acknowledged, that (as Zerubbabel
or Shezbazzar had in his way, so) you have in your way great Mountains, Zech.
4.7. Mountains of Prey, Psalm. 76.4, 5. Yea, destroying Mountains, Jerem. 51.25.
Though Babylon be called there a destroying Mountain, and seated upon a Rock
that is unaccessible and not underminable, yet God has promised (for your
encouragement) that he will level it and lay it low enough, v. 28. This
destroying Mountain God will make a burnt Mountain, like a great heap of
Rubbish and Ashes, as this City lately was when burned down by Babylonish
hands; the Lord will Retaliate, and pay Rome with her own Coin, as it is
foretold of her, (that Radix omnium malorum.) Rev. 17.16, 17.

Tota eris in Cineres quasi nunquam Roma fuisses, Woe, woe, woe to her, God will
make Rostmeat of her Flesh, and burn her (for an old Bawd) with fire: this
destroying Mountain shall be destroyed, when God comes to Thresh those
Mountains and beat them as small as Dust before him, Isa. 41.15. Oh that you
may be a new sharp Threshing Instrument (having Teeth) in the hand of the Lord,
to mash in pieces those mighty Mountains, and to level the loftyest of them
(that are set aloft, and overtopping the poor feeble Jews, Nehem. 4.2. the Seed
of God) and to bring them to the lowest place (which is fittest for them) to
wit, the Footstool of Christ: Surely every Mountain (though never so great)
shall become a Plain, or a Champiagne Passable Path, the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it, saying: Who art thou, O Great Mountain? before Gods Zerubbabels thou
shall become a Plain, Zech. 4.7. which is the Virgin Daughter of Sion's lofty
Interrogation, insulting over the defiled and defiling Daughter of Babylon,
notwithstanding her Greatness and Haughtiness, 2 Kin. 19.21. There is no
Mountain so strong but it may be moved, if not removed, by an Earthquake, when
God terribly shakes the Earth, Hag. 2.6. Nah. 2.3. Babylon meddles not with
her match, in meddling with a matchless God, who is more glorious and excellent
than all Mountains of Prey, Psalm. 76.4. All Mountains melt at his Presence,
Nah. 1.5. Psalm. 114.3, 6, 7. He that gives the gift of Miracles whereby to
remove Mountains, 1 Cor. 13.2. must needs have that power much more himself; A
quo aliquid tale est, illud est magis tale. The Rabbis say, that the Pillar of
Glory (which was Israel's Conduct from Egypt to Canaan) stubbed up every Bush,
and levelled every Mountain that lay in their way to the Land of Promise.

Right Honorable, The Lord of Hosts be with you, and the like Pillar of
Providence (to do the like Offices of Love for you in your difficult Work) go
before you: As the Temple (lately burnt) cannot be built again, until those
Mountains of Rubbish (which lies upon the ground) be removed; so the Temple of
God cannot be Repaired by you (our Zerubbabels) until this work be done: Your
Present and Primary Work is to remove Mountains of Rubbish, the [(...)] that
which now Lets will Let, until it be taken out of the way, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6, 7.
The Spirit of the Lord be upon you, that (as you have already given many hearty
lifts at the Rubbish, so) you may not only effectually remove it, but be able
also to cast it all into the Brook Kidron, 2 Chronicles. 29.16. and 30.14. and 2
Kin. 23.12. Oh! what good man will not assist you in casting such Trash into
the Town-ditch, (such a sordid place was Kidron,) that you may go on and
Prosper (as Asah, Hezekiah, and Josiah did,) in the Name of the Lord. What true
Englishman will not say, [The blessing of the Lord be upon you, Psalm. 129.
ult.] And say, [God speed your Plough,] that has so much fallow ground to
break up before you, that you may not sow among Thorns, Jer. 4.3. Alas! you do
meet with much Fallow Ground, a Mispah with its Snares, a Tabor with its Nets,
Hos. 5.1. A Beth-Aven, much Land of darkness, all Fallow Ground in England,
although it was ploughed up in Edward the Sixths, and in Queen Elizabeth's
time, etc. The Plough of the Gospel must go often over the Land, before it be fit
Soil for the Celestial Seed, from the best of Sowers, the blessed Seedsman, the
Lord Jesus: It Is for Woe and Lamentation, that our Land is grown fallow again,
and should it not (by your Plough) be broken up, our Nation would soon be
broken up: The breaking up of those bloody Romanists may prevent the breaking
up of this blessed Nation; should those cursed Thorns be suffered to grow up
again with their sharp Pricks, (as they did after the first Ploughing by Edward
the Sixth in the Marian days,) Oh! what dreadful Flames, Burnings, and bloody
Cruelties would fall upon us? Witness that [Praelibamen] or Foretast thereof,
not only in those frequent Fires, but also in that Barbarous Murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, before the Power of the Nation was made over to them.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Ploughing Work is a Work of great difficulty,
especially among tall, overgrown, deep rooted, and churlish Thorns; rending and
tearing up of Fallow Ground, and turning it upside down is a Work of great
Difficulty; yet the Removens prohibens, removing Remora's has most hardness in
it, when this is done, the Action will prove less difficult than the Agitation;
the Contrivance will be harder than the Accomplishment. The second Ploughing of
Fallow Ground is more easy than the first, and the third is more easy than
the second; the Ardua as well as Arcana Imperii are now before your Honors:
You are got into a Wood, Wilderness, and Labyrinth, (no less is your
Generation-work God has called you to) and were I as worthy as Jonathan, I
would do that Office of Love, yea duty for you, which he did for his dear
David, when he went into the [Wood] to him, and strengthened his hands in God, 1 Samuel 23.16. by minding and reminding you of the Promises, Providence, and
Protection of your God: My Cordial Prayers to God for you shall be constantly,
that you may be coming out of the [Wilderness,] leaning upon your Beloved,
Cant. 8.5. and going thence with our English Israel toward the Land of
Promise; yea, and I doubt not but you have a better Thread than that of
Ariadne, which helped Theseus out of the [Labyrinth,] even the Wisdom of the
wonderful Counselor, to extricate you out of all those Popish Intreagues you
are now involved in. And that I may the better Strengthen your hands in God, I
cannot hide from you those Presaging Providence of Gods Prevalent Actings, in
tendency to our deliverance from Popery at this juncture of time; all which
buoys up my Faith above my Fear, and (I hope) may do yours.

The first Presaging Providence is, Great Discoveries do presage great
Deliverances* God has marvellously brought to public light those private
Popish and Diabolical deeds of darkness: Prevision is [tantamont] Prevention,
both in Sacred and Civil History; praevisa jacula minus-feriunt, et premoniti,
premuniti; forewarned, forearm'd, and Darts foreseen are dintless. God has
shot three Arrows, (as in David's Case, 1 Samuel 20.21, 22.) three Witnesses, Mr.
Oats, Mr. Bedlow, and Mr. Prance, Arrows all, not to wound us but to warn us,
that the intentions of Bloody MEN were for our utter destruction. Thus when
Mordecai was Informed, or [ Jadang, Hebr.] came to know of the bloody Decree,
this was Gods means to break the Neck of cruel Haman's wicked design, Esth.
4.1. etc. Thus also the mavelous discovery of the Powder Plot (in this Land)
was (in Gods hand) the mavelous disappointment of it: And surely 'twas no bad
Argument, which Sampson's Mother used to his Father Manoah, If God would have
destroyed us, he would never have discovered these things unto us, Judge. 13.23.

The second Presaging Providence is, Division is the Mother of Destruction:
(God forbid it should be amongst us, sicollidimur, frangimur, if we clash we
break,) but now (praised be God) it is found among our Enemies: The Language of
Babel-Builders is divided and confounded; oh how do Priests and Jesuits now
divide and discover Priests and Jesuits, etc. Hereby their Nimrods or cruel
Hunters with all their cursed Chamites, are dispersed from their
Babel-Building, Genesis 11.7, 8, 9. Our Lord says, If Satan's Kingdom be divided
against it self it cannot possibly stand, Matthew. 12.25, 26.

The third Presaging Providence is, A Beginning has a Presaging Tendency to
the End. To this Zeresh ( Haman's Wife, and probably a prudent Woman) spoke
shrowdly and pertinently, saying: If Mordecai be of the Seed of the Jews before
whom thou have begun to fall; thou shall not be able to stand but thou shall
surely fall before him, Esth. 6.13. Principium per media tendit ad finem: Haman
was but barely begun to fall a little below Mordecai in honor. Hence his final
Fall was foretold, either by Divine Instinct as the Sybils and Caiphas, or only
by Humane Prudence, drawing this notable Conclusion from the common custom of
Rising and Falling Favorites: And may not we infer also, that seeing some of
Gods and the Kingdoms Adversaries have certainly begun to fall before you (the
true Mordecai's of our day) they shall not be able to stand, but shall surely
fall before us: Oh that it may be a final and an irrecoverable Fall.

The fourth Presaging Providence is, Persecution of Protestants peaceably
dissenting, is much turned into Justice upon Papists bloodily designing:
Whereby the Lord intimates, he will perform with his Hand what he has promised
with his Mouth, to wit, of taking the Cup of Trembling out of the hand of Sion,
and of putting it into the hand of Babylon, ( Isa. 51.17, 22, 23.) to make her
drink the very dregs of it, Rev. 14.10. Babylon shall drink not only unto
drunkenness but also unto madness, she shall Spue and Fall and rise no more.
Jer. 25.18, 21.

The fifth Presaging Providence is, A changing the Kings Word: This was a
Praesage of Deliverance to Gods Triary, the three Nobles of Babylon, that the
Kings Word or Counsel was changed; they had been taken into the Kings Council,
Dan. 1.20. and 2.49. but afterward were impeached and cast into the Furnace:
Those Servants of the most High God, were not only delivered, but promoted to
their former and greater Honors, Dan. 3.28, 30. In concurrence herewith, the
Kings Word (or Counsel) is now changed, some Persons of Honor (who have been
highly honored, but afterward Impeached and cast into the Tower) are again
Promoted to be of the Privy Council, and one* (as another Daniel) to be
President thereof: The Rising of New Favorites is always the Fall of Old ones,
as Mordecai's was of Haman's. No doubt the same God that has changed the Kings
Word (or Counsel) can influence his Heart as he did the Heart of Cyrus, Ezra
1.1. The Kings Heart is in the Hand of the Lord, Prove. 21.1. to turn it as
easily as the Ploughman does his Watercourse with his Paddle, or the Gardener
with his hand.

The sixth Presaging Providence is, The mighty Turn which is wrought upon the
Spirit of the Nation in General: It Is expressly said, that the [ Sibbah hebr.]
Circuit, Revolution, or turning about of the Spirit of the Ten Tribes was from
the Lord, 1 Kin. 12.15. As the Heart of the King so the Hearts of the Kingdom
are in the Hand of the Lord, and he orders all disorders, Judge. 9.23. 1 Samuel
8.19, 22. There is a Cry in our Ears at this day, Oh Wheel! And there is a
Wheel within a Wheel; Ezekiel. 10.10, 13. it is the Father of Spirits that sets on
or takes off the Spirits of People, and vox Populi est vox Dei.

To Sum up all, the seventh and last Presaging Providence is, God has put his
Hand to the Plough, and he will not look back, Luke 9. 62. The Wheel (of
Providence) goes straight forward, and returns not as it goes, Ezekiel. 1.9, 12,
17. But to the Place whither the Head looks, the Wheels follow it: They turned
not as they went, Ezekiel. 10.11. God positively Protests, When I begin I will
also make an end, 1 Samuel 3.12. When he once begins his Execution of Justice,
[quod Verbis minatur, reipsa praestabit,] he will perform with his Hand what
his Mouth has spoken, and go through stitch with his Work, he will neither
dally nor desist till it be done; and assuredly none can deny, but the Great
God has begun this his Great Work (called his strange Work, Isa. 28.21.) and
God will Accomplish his Fury, Ezekiel. 5.13. for All his Works are perfect, Deuteronomy.
32.4. He is not like the foolish Builder in the Gospel, that lays the
Foundation and has not wherewith to finish, Like 14.28, 30. But the good Work
that God has begun, he will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil.
1.6. Notwithstanding the pauses that Providence makes in its Passage and
Progress, such are but as so many Parenthese's which never interrupt (but
rather Illustrate) the Sense of a Sentence. Sometimes it is the Method of
Providence (in order to the fulfilling of Promises) to step backward; as David,
after he was Anointed the first time by Samuel, was brought to Readiness Court to
drive away the Evil Spirit from Saul, which could not but give him some hope of
the Crown God had promised him by Samuel, yet after this was David brought
thence to his Country Life of being a Shepherd. Notwithstanding Gods
Providence, as the Battering Ram (that steps backward) comes on with greater
Force again. Now,

My Lords and Gentlemen, Having all these Presaging Providence (humbly
Proposed, not peremptorily and Dictator like Imposed) for your Encouragement;
Arise and be doing for the Lord is with you, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. The sound of Gods
goings is gone out before you, ( the Footsteps of his Anointed, Psalm. 89.51.)
and you may hear an hurrying noise upon the very tops of those tall Cedats (you
have impeached) in the Tower; therefore now must you up and at it; and (with
holy David) bestir your selves (like Men, yea like Gods) against those
uncircumcised Philistines, 2 Samuel 5.23, 24. That the Lord may give you the Gift
of Miracles, not only for Removing those great Mountains that lie in your way,
but also to cast out those seven Unclean Spirits (mentioned in this Treatise)
out of the Land, so as never to return upon us any more, Mark 9.25. That God
may be your Arm every Morning, Isa. 33.2: And that the Arms of your Hands may
be strong by the blessing of the Everlasting God of Jacob, Genesis 49.24. and that
your Bow may abide in strength, until you have shot the Arrows of England's
Deliverance, 2 Kin. 13.17. So Prays,

Your Daily, and Most Devoted Grator, Christopher Nesse.

TO THE READER.
Candid and Christian Reader,
IN Common Calamities every one is bound (pro virili sua) to Contribute his
best Assistance, though it be but one Bucket full of Water to quench a general
Fire, or one sod of Earth to stop an universal Deluge, wherewith the sworn
Swordmen of Rome have now threatened us: I have therefore cast in my Mite into
the Common Treasury, (this [Opus Diei in die suo] a Word and Work in season) to
wit, a Graphical Description of the Romish Religion: How it is as the Empty
House (in the Parable, Matthew. 12.43, 44.) Possessed with seven unclean Spirits:
How seven Abominations are in the very Heart of it, Prove. 26.25, 26. all
Hateful to God and hurtful to men: How it is no better than the Babylonish Brat,
whose Father was an Amorite and Mother an Hittite, Ezekiel. 16.33, The Mother of
Harlots and of all Abominations, Rev. 17.5. How there is [Mors in Olla,] Death
in the Pot, 2 Kin. 4.40. and the Broth of Abominanable things in its Vessel,
Isa. 65.4. How [Mene Tekel] is writ upon its Wall, and being weighed in the
Balance of the Sanctuary, it is found light, Dan. 5.25. to be driven away by the
Breath of Christ's Mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. How this Foreign Plant is no better than
a stinking weed, that has never thriven in any Land, but where it has been
watered with Blood; and therefore is not to be Planted but to be Rooted up,
Matthew. 15.13. This Manual is made public, That such a cursed Plant may be
plucked up (Root and Branch) and never be Replanted in Immanuel's Land, Isa.
8.^.) or England; wherein God has so remarkably (even in capital Characters)
Recorded his Name, Exodus 20.24. And wherein this wretched Weed has had so many
mavelous Extirpations by our Princes, Parliaments, and People. That this
Nation so great ( by having God so nigh it, Deuteronomy. 4.7.) may never suffer such a
Notorious Witch to live in it, Exodus 22.18. (Nor this cursed Jezebel to
Prophecy in the Bosom of it, Revel. 2.20. That we may not (as the house in the
Parable) though swept of Moral Vices and garnished with moral Virtues, (which
God knows is not) yet be empty of the Power of Godliness, (which is the Intus
existens, prohibens alienum.) and so give an Opportunity for the unclean Spirit
(of Antichrist) to Reenter with those seven worse than the former, that Christ
within us ( If he be but here our Nation shall not dye, John 11.21, 32.) may
keep Antichrist without us. That Popery may never Return to us according to Dr.
Usher's Fear, and the Jesuit Campian's hope, (crying at Tyburn, Proculdubio
vincemus brevi, for our Multitude of Jesuits will be too hard for your
Parliaments, etc.) That this Jesuits Hope may be as the giving up of the Ghost
(which is but cold Comfort,) Job 11.20. That we may not (with fond Ixion)
Embrace a Cloud for Juno; nor (with blind Isaac) mistake the Younger Religion
for the Elder; nor (with cheated Jacob) Entertain blear-eyed Leah (the Romish)
for beautified Rachel (the Reformed Religion) nor call Evil Good and Good Evil,
Isa. 5.20. This, in Short, (I would not have you to catch Cold in the Poreh) is
the Unfeigned Prayer, and Utmost Endeavor of.

Your Brother, in The Best Bonds, Christopher Nesse.
From my Study in Fleetstreet London, J^^^ 1. 1679.
AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST POPERY.
1. REligion is the totum hominis, the whole duty of man; Eccles. 12.13. the
(...)etc.
one thing needful, which is what have we more than it, (as Judge. 18.24.) Which
blesses what we have to us?
that better past, that shall never be taken from him, Luke 10.42. therefore
should man choose it above all things, and among all our gettings we should get
this principal thing. Prove. 4.7. For God looks down from Heaven, not to see how
Rich, or Strong, or Beautiful we are; but principally how Righteous, how
Religious, Ps. 14.2. Romans 3.10

2. Religion gives not only a Relative, but also a real worth to them that
possess it; it makes them more excellent than their neighbors, Prove. 12.26.
Gods peculiar Treasure, Exodus 19.5. Precious Jewels, Mal. 3.17. Yea, such as
the World be pot worthy of, Heb. 11.38. While irreligious men be vile, those
are precious; they but Chaff, those Wheat; they reprobate Silver, those refined
Gold; they Briars and Thorns, those be noble Vines.

3. Yea while Strangers to Religion are but [terrae filii] base born ones,
those that are truly Religious are of the Blood Royal of Heaven, and (in a
word) not only in alliance but Union with the King of Kings and Lord of Lords;
although they be never so poor and despicable to men. God accepts of Religion
in Rags as well as in Robes, God is not (...) Act 10.24.
he is no respecter of Persons, Act. 10.34.

4. As Religion brings worth to persons, so it becomes safety to Nations: As it
is the beauty, so it proves the bulwark of Countries and Kingdoms, their
muniment as well as Ornament. It Is the sacred Anchor, by which the great Ship
of the Commonwealth is held fast, that she may not split either upon the Rocks
of Atheism, or Quicksands of Superstition; both which are of great provocation
to the Lord, and on which many Nations have been dashed in pieces.

5. What the Ark was to Israel, that Religion is to all Lands; while the Ark
abode in Shilon, Israel had no Ichabod, but the Kingdom flourisned in
Victories. Josh. 18.1. But afterward, as the Atheism of the Canaanites had
caused the Lord to root them out of that unclean Land, Ezra 9.11, 12. because
they were shameless sinners before him: So the Superstition of the Israelites
in their high places, etc: Psalm. 78.58. made God to forsake not only Shiloh, v.
60. but also the holy Land which they had polluted. Ezekiel. 8.6. Isa. 1.12, 21.

6. This Shiloh was in Ephraim, the Tribe of Joshua, where he had placed the
Ark by his own Palace, that the former might give Luster and safety to the
Latter: The stability of the Ark conferred stability upon [his] house, and upon
the whole house of Israel; and it is observable, that Tribe perished fist that
lost the Ark and Tabernacle first, Ps. 78.62. 2 King. 17.6, 9, etc. Samaria in
Ephraim falls before Judah.

7. Religion may truly be called the Chariots and Horsemen of Kingdoms, and an
Establishment of the true Religion, is the best way to an establishment of a
true Peace: Yea desolate Countries may say of Religion, as Mary said of our
Redeemer in another case; Oh! Religion, if thou had been here (in the truth
and power of it) our Nation had not dyed; for this is that blessed Cement
Religio a Religando, to bind.
that binds God and a people together in lasting love.

8. In Poetical Story, what the Palladium was to Troy, that Religion is to a
place and people: The Heathen Oracle told the Trojans, that so long as they
could secure this Image of Pallas, their City should not be destroyed; which
when crafty slysses heard of, he used his wiles to slay the keepers of it, and
so stole it away; and soon after destroyed the City. How are the crafty
Vlysses's of this Age using their wiles to slay the Keepers of our Religion, to
steal away our Palladium for our ruin.

9. In sacred Story; what Sampson's hair was to him, that is Religion to a
Nation; the strength of a Nation lies in it, as the strength of Sampson lay in
his hair; and as soon as his Locks were cut, his strength was gone: So if the
Locks of Religion be once cut off, our strength is abated.

10. How does the Delilahs of the Romish Philistims sing their Syrenian Songs,
to lull the Sampsons of our reformed Religion asleep, that they may cut off our
Locks, (wherein our strength lies) and that their uncircumcised ones may be
upon us. We have a sufficient Testimony hereof, in that late Proclamation which
was issued out in November, 1666. for suppressing the insolences of Papists
and for banishing their Priests and Jesuits out of the Nation, so long before
the discovery of this Plot now prosecuted in this year 1679.

11. The reformed Religion (like the Lord of it) is placed between two Thieves,
to wit, Atheism and Superstition. 1. Atheism on the left hand would lay wast
Religion, and trample upon it as a worthless thing, devised of men only in
terrorem: This left hand Thief steals away the holy Scriptures, and Instead
thereof sets up Lucian for the Old Testament, and Machiavel for the New. This
is the Fool Psalm. 14.1. The Saples Fellow. (...)
that says there is no God.

12. There is much of Satan in this left hand Thief, for the Devil is the grand
Romans 1.30.
(...) or God-hater, and would (if possible) destroy as well as deny the being
of God; Deicidii Reus est Diabolus: And yet though he do all he can to make men
either speculative or practical Atheists, he cannot make himself one; for the
Scripture says, he believes and trembles, Jam. 2.19.

13. We do not find that ever God wrought a miracle to convince Atheism,
because his ordinary works do convince it: The book of Nature confutes it as
well as that of Scripture; the glorious Fabric of the World must have a Maker,
for it could not make it self; and that Nature which is in man contradicts it:
for man naturally in all extremities runs to God. Aristotle, when the terrors
of death, (that (...), as he called it) was, up on him, cried, (...), and Causa
Causarum, miserere mei.

14. Yea Epicurus himself conceived an infinite space for his Atoms, and could
he imagine a greater ease to the Mind, in conceiving an Idea of that, than of
an Infinite Being? And Tully says of this Epicurus, that though he did Re
tollere Deos, yet he did Nomine ponere, imagining God Corporeal. [Nec quenquam
vidi, qui magis ea, quae timenda esse negaret, timeret; mottem dico et Deos.]
Epicurus was afraid of God and Death, though he denied them. Tully de Not.
deor. Tully de Natura Deorum, lib. 1. cab. 86.


15. Thus we see this great Patron of Atheism, though he prostituted his
Conscience to a denial of God and Religion; yet he could not silence it even in
Tully's opinion: And we may appeal to the Consciences of the worst Atheists, if
at some time they believe not a Deity.

16. The Consciences of the worst Atheists will tell us upon appeal to them,
that at some time of pangs or affrightments they have believed that there is a
God; Diagoras's words was rather votum than judicium, be wished there were no
God to punish his Sin.
though now either through incogitancy or reluctance, they have smothered those
Igniculos or Scintillas, which be easily put out as to any open manifestation:
strong corruption may pat out the light of Nature.

17. It were well if this Atheism were not so promoted by our divisions about
Religion, Lactan. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Lactantius speaks of Arcesilas, that pondering the many contradictions and
oppositions among Philosophers, he became a despiser of them. Thus carnal men
that are Atheistically minded, viewing the many differences and digladiations
amongst Professors in the matters of Religion (which is a stumbling block God
judicially lays in their way, Ezekiel 3.20.) they come to this resolve, to be of
no Religion at all.

18. Thus have we seen the first Thief that opposes Religion on the left hand;
I come now to the second Thief upon its Right Hand, to wit, Superstition, which
spoils Religion of its Native Beauty, and puts it into such a painted gaudy
dress, as makes it a ridiculous Puppet, and more meretricious than Matronlike.

19. Plutarch makes this right hand Thief the worst of the two, saying that
Atheism is better than Superstition; for the Superstitious do Worship sordid,
base, and cruel Gods: Insomuch that it were far better there were no Gods at
all, than such as they worship; it is lest impiety to say there is no God, than
to give divine honor to bloody Devils and senceless Stocks or stones.

20. And so he concludes, that Superstition is the cause of Atheism, because
men looking upon the ridiculous Gestures practiced in their Temples, that are
superstitious Worshippers; they conclude it were better to have no Gods, than
to give Gods facred honor to such abominable Deities. I had rather (says he)
men should say there is no Plutarch, than that they should say, that Plutarch
is what he is not. Plutarch de superstit.

Whether Plutarch be mistaken in this assertion altogether, I shall not here
determine: Such Problems as [utrum prastat non esse quam male esse] belongs to
the Schools to decide; and whether Superstition (which is a Nimiety Paul the
second Pope, ob nimiam Religionsm factus est Cardinalis (Pasciculus Temporis.)
and excess in Religion) be worse than Atheism, (which is a defect therein) is
not much Plutarch de superst. in Moral.
to our purpose, it is enough to discover them both as Thieves to Religion.

22. However there is not much difference 'twixt nequam and nequaquam, the
Proverb is, [as good never a whit as never the better] betwixt making Sin a
duty, and making a duty sin: Superstition makes sin a duty, Supperstition will
by all means hew the Stones of Gods Altar; as if whole Stones were not fine
enough for God though he command it so. Exodus 20.25. and Deuteronomy. 27.6.
Superstition despises those (...). septuag. which the Hebrew calls perfect
Stones. (...) Abanim Shelemoth.
in worshipping the true God after a false manner, Act. 26.9, 11. [I verily
thought with my self that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of
Jesus] and Atheism makes a duty sin in not worshipping God at all, as if it were
a sin to do it.

23. Thus Religion (with the Lord and Founder of it) suffers hard things
betwixt two Thieves, and it is not very easy to determine which of those two is
more injurious to Religion (and the Author of it) whether that which makes the
Principles of it to be questioned, or that which makes the practice of it to be
despised, as the superstitious worship of the Romish Church makes the Jews at
this day to contemn the Christian Religion.

24. This is a most certain truth, and taken [pro confesso of all, that
Superstition is a Reproach to Religion, and without a Vail is a very deformed
thing; though the Church of Rome would not willingly own any such deformity in
her, but like the Adulterous woman, Prove. 30.20. Eats and wipes her mouth, and
says I have done no wickedness, yet will be found guilty.

25. Superstition ( Grace (...)) is a Vice opposite to Religion according to
excess. Thus Aquinas in his Sec. Secundae quaest. 92. Art. 10. or thus.
Superstition is when worship which is only due to God, is not exhibited to him
in that manner as it ought; or when it is exhibited to him to whom it ought
not: Thus Mich. de Obellis. Or, it is a superfluous and vain devotion which God
allows not, 1. Neither by his Command, 2. Nor by any Apostolical Rule for
indifferent things; it is called also (...), a false Religion.

26. Polanus defines it thus: It Is a Vice inhering in the Mind, arising through
Satan's craft by which men departing from the word of God (contained in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles.) take up erroneous Opinions of God and
false ways of worshipping him, Polanus Syntag. Theol. lib. 9. cap. 3. page 579.
and Szegedin thus, Est opinio quae nec habet mandatum Dei, nec physicam
rationem; vel est nimia et superabundans pietas, sen Religio. Virgil brands
this Vice thus.

Vana superstitio veterumque ignara Deorum. 27. Superstition is caused (1.)
from the pravity of our Nature, which is over-desirous of forbidden evils,
whereby man is become [inversus decalogus] a diametrical opposite to God's holy
will. (2.) from the wisdom of the Flesh, which loves to be wise above that
which is written. (3.) Servile fear, for the Superstitious do fear where no
fear is, Psalm. 53.5. (4.) The insinuations of Satan, and (5.) the false Romish
Church; as the Devil begets them so the Mother of Harlots brings them forth.

28. Sometimes it is [falsely] applied to true Religion, Beza in Act. 25.19.
as Act. 25.19. but [truly] it is that Worship which God commanded not, nor came
into his mind. Jer. 7.31. A worshipping after our own hearts. Numb. 15.39. or a
doing that which is right in our own eyes. Deuteronomy. 12.8. Judge. 17.16. Or it is a
worshipping of that which God commanded not. Deuteronomy. 17.3. and 29.26. It Is an
observing of times, Deuteronomy. 18.10 14. Gal. 4.10. Levit. 19.26. or of Man's
traditions, Math. 15.3, 9. Marks 7.4, 7. or it is Will Worship that has more of
man's Will than of God in it. Col. 2.18, 21, 23.

29. The Gentiles were guilty of Superstition, Act. 17.22. (...), i. e. Fearers
of evil Spirits. Act. 17.22.
The Apostle says, they were too superstitious:So were the Israelites in not
eating of the sinew of common meat, because the sinew of Jacob's Thigh shrank,
Genesis 32.32. So were the Philistims in not daring to tread upon the Threshold of
Dagon's house, because Dagon brake his Neck upon it: 1 Samuel 5.4, 5.
So was Naaman in carrying two Mules load of Earth out of Canaan into his own
Country, to make an Altar of: 2 Kin. 5.17.
And lastly, so were the Scribes, Pharisees and Jews, not only in straining at
the Gnat of entering into the Judgment Hall, when they swallowed the Camel of
murdering Christ; Joh. 18.28. but also in all their Traditions.

30. As there is a Pagan Superstition (which I shall not speak to here, as
being beside my present purpose) so there is a Papagan Superstition, whereby
Papists think it a greater Crime to eat flesh on Friday, than to commit
Adultery; this is a being Righteous (or Religious) overmuch, Eccles. 7.17.

31. This Papagan Superstition consists either in the worship of the Creator,
or of the Creature. 1. In the worship of the Creator, a superstitious man does
frame to himself a worship of God out of his own Will and not out of Gods will,
which is called (...), Col. 2.23. and it is a Wonder how pleasing those forms of
worship are, that be of man's devising; when that which the wise God himself
prescribes is displeasing to men; but that which is highly esteemed among men
is abomination to God Luke 16.15.


32. Or 2. In the worship of the Creature, which is either the Creature of Gods
making, as Saints or Angels; or the Creature of man's making, as Images of Wood
or Stone, etc. of this see Infra at large. In the 2d part about Image Worship.
It Is clear that the Romanists do worship Saints and Angels with divine honor,
in dedicating Temples to them; which Augustine makes Sacrilege. Sacrilegium est
cuicunque Creaturae Templum extruere, upon 1 Corinthians. 6. And on Psalm. 94. he
says, Templa, sacrificia, Iustituti Sacerdotes non nisi uni Deo haec omnia
debentur.

33. Besides their dedicating of Temples and Altars to them, they call upon the
Saints and upon their Images; whereas Invocation is due to the only true God.
Cyril says, Sanctos Martyrs neque deos esse dicimus, neque eos adorare
consuevimus, etc. Contra Julian lib. 6. This is Popish Superstition to make
Images of Saints departed and to worship them with Masses, Fastings, Prayers,
Pilgrimages, etc.

34. As there is Superstition in Religious things, so likewise in civil
affairs; as 1. In seeking after the event of things: As how long a Man or Woman
shall live? or when they shall dye? what Prosperity or Adversity shall befall
them in their lives? or what manner of Wife or Husband they shall have, etc.
This is enquired after among the Superstitious either by Chiromancy (which is a
viewing the Tablelines of the hand) or by Physiognomy (which is a considering
the Countenance and other parts of the Body,) or by Necromancy, (consulting
with Ghosts) Dreams, Visions, etc.

35. They likewise that undertake to foretell by judiciary Astrology,
contingent future things; are guilty of this sin of Superstition: For they
enquire after hidden things by unlawful means, attributing to the Stars what
belongs to God, and reducing men to mere Gentilism: for the same things that
the Gentiles ascribed to Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury; they do to
the Stars of the same Name, and audaciously prognosticate the fates of Persons,
Families, and Empires, such as God has reserved to himself, Act. 1.7.

36. Superstition also carries men into Sorcery, and into all unlawful Arts
about healing the sick, with some charms hung about the Cum ergo in auribus
Evangelia nihil prosunt, quomoao possunt circa collum suspensa salvare?
Chrysostom. on Matthew. 23. The imperfect Work.
Neck, etc. And about finding lost goods (quick or dead) all which may be done
by collusion, God alone must be our healer in the use of all lawful things,
Exodus 15.26. Ps. 103.3. and such practices are contrary to the word of God as
Levit. 20.27. and Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. etc.

37. Of the same Alloy be those superstitious practices of driving away Devils
by the Sign of the Cross, practiced by Julian the Apostate, in the Year of
Christ 356. who (consulting with a Magician about obtaining the Empire, and
Devils appearing at the Magician's Conjuration) being stricken with fear,
signed his Forehead with the Sign of the Cross, whereupon the Devils presently
disappeared: But his Magician told him, that the Devils fled not away for his
Cross, but for hatred of his so doing. Osiand. lib. 3. cap. 12. Histor. Eccles.
Cent. 4. page 295.

38. I leave the Reader to judge concerning the truth of this miracle: Suppose
a truth in it, surely God would not teach us hereby, that a wicked and profane
wretch (such a one as Julian was) could drive away Devils; or that the Sign of
the Cross has any such power in it, to destroy the works of the Devil: For the
Scripture no where ascribes any such thing to the Sign of the Cross, nor can it
be imagined that the Devil is afraid of it.

39. It may rather be concluded that this was one of the Devils cheats, and
that those Devils by this counterfeit flight would confirm the superstition of
the Vulgar; as if by the Sign of the Cross the Devils might be driven away. Non
enim Diaboli (says Osiander in loco praedicto) crucis vel effigiem, vel
signum, sed crucifixum metuunt: Et, Christus crucifixus fide apprehensus,
Satanae terrori est non autem signum crucis. It is Christ crucified,
apprehended by Faith, that is a terror to Satan; not the Sign of the Cross.

40. And the same Osiander tells us, there is no less than foul Superstition in
those Bonefires that are kindled upon St. John's day; and in leaping through the
Flames of them, as if they were purged hereby from (I know not what) sins. This
(he says) is an honor done to Pluto the God of Hell, (as the heathen Poets
feigned) and such like wicked Ceremonies ought to be abolished in every
Christian state. Osian. Epitome Cent. 7. lib. 1. cap. 21. page 52.

41. He relates also the 65 Canon of the Council at Constantinople, that was
held under Justinian the Second, which is express against this superstitious
practice; saying, Qui rogos ante suas officinas accendunt supra quos inepte and
delire s^^tare solent, jubemus deinceps cessare; quisquis ergo tale quid
fecerit, si sit Clericus, deponatur; sin autem Laicus segregetur. Osiand. Epit.
Leut. 7. lib. 4. cap. 13. page 162. This Council degrades Clergymen and
excommunicates Laymen for this superstition.

42. He tells moreover in the same place, how such wicked customs were used in
Germany, upon the Feast of St. John Baptist; but their Godly Magistrates put
out those Fires, and drove out of the Streets all such superstitious people. It
were to be desired, that good Magistrates in all Countries (professing the
Reformed Religion) might suppress this and all other Superstition.

43. There be many more foolish Customs and Observances, wherein Superstition
consists, as the choice of lucky days, either for solemnizing Marriages, or for
building of houses, or for beginning of Journeys on; as also the falling of
Salt toward one at the Table, the crossing of a Traveller by a Hare in his
way, the chattering of Magpyes near a man's dwelling house, Cum multis aliis
quae nunc perscribere longum est. It would be too tedious to enumerate them.

44. I shall add but one instance more, as that of saying [God bless you] at
ones sneezing: Athenaeus speaks of this Custom of crying [(...), God help] when
a Neighbor sneez'd, and says there was some that hereby thought; that either
sneezing it self, or the Brain from which it came, to be a God; and so were
worshipped in this custom by men: See for this Dr. H. Hammond of Idolatry, page
171. in his practical Catechism, etc.

45. All those, and many more superstitious observances are found in the Romish
Church, and therefore this Right Hand Thief and Enemy to Christ and Religion
will be found there, although the same Dr. Hammond would help to wipe her
mouth, in saying that there can be no superstition in a bad sense, in any
unprescribed Ceremonies: Could this be made good, it would prove a notable
medium for wiping the Harlots mouth of Superstition.

46. The Dr. makes (...), or Superstition to be Daemonum cultus, a worshipping
the Poetical Gods, or of Angels or dead men; and yet he calls it a creditable
word, as also (...). How these things can be, I cannot understand; for as it is
a deifying of Demons, it cannot be a word that is creditable: But to say so,
belongs rather to the doctrine of Demons, which the Apostle condemns in 1 Timothy
4.1, 2.

47. And though the word may have an Euphemismus (or good sense) after the
Pagan Construction; for with them, Explicat Plutarchus esse nimium Deorum metum
unde exortae sunt superstitiosae Ceremoniae. Beza.
(...), is one that fears the Gods; but if we consider that the Pagan Gods were
no other but Devils, ( Moses called them so, Lev. 17.7. Deuteronomy. 32.17. and David,
Ps. 106.37. And more plainly the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.20. The Gentiles Sacrifice
to Devils. I see not how a word that indeed signifies a worshipper of Devils,
should be a creditable word in any Christian (though it may in Pagan)
construction.

48. The large Annotator on the 17 of the Acts v. 22. says, that there (as
commonly) it is taken in the evil sense, and he quotes Clemens Alexandr. for
signifying a superstitious man (by this word) such an one as Lactantius
describes a worshipper of the Images of his Ancestors, the Penates or household
Gods; this Virgil calls Vana Superstitio, etc. and not creditable.

49. Although the worshipping of Demons be indeed a Superstition (as it is a
(...), a false Religion) practiced amongst Pagans; yet [the] Superstition
(properly so called, quasi supra statutum, more than is appointed in the Law of
God) will upon enquiry be found among the Papagans, which the soundest Divinity
defines to be a Vice opposite to Religion Yea, Aquinas himself gives it this
Definition; ut supra.
according to excess, and a superstitious man to be rather Gods flatterer in
circumstantials, than his Friend inSubstantials.

50. Yea, there is a superstitious worship of the true God (as well as of false
Gods) when man either chooses a worship for God, or those things whereon divine
worship depends; or when he exceeds the measure in worshipping, and (as Polanus
says) Serviliter, Muliebriter, Pueriliter se gerit. Syntag. Theol. lib. 9.
cap. 3. page 580. To the same purpose speaks the Author of the Polyanthaea.
Polyanthaea (though a Papist) that Superstition is not called an excess in
Religion, because it gives more to divine worship than the true Religion does,
but more than it ought to do, de superst.

51 This superstitions worship of God is, when a certain singular force and
efficacy is ascribed (ex opere operato) to external Rites prescribed of God: As
when a power of driving away Devils and healing of Diseases, is attributed to
some words repeated, or writings hung about the Neck; whereas those words and
writings have no such power, neither from their own Nature nor from any divine
Institution*

52. To ascribe that to any thing, which it has no natural power unto, nor
divinely enabled for, is notorious. Superstition; as to attribute to the
Sacraments a power of themselves both of Sanctification and Salvation, from the
work done; or to so many prayers and vows, a virtue of well deserving at Gods
hand, or to give to some meats or days more sanctity than others beyond any
divine warrant: Yet all this Superstition and much more is found in the Church
of Rome, as will appear more plainly in the sequel of this Treatise.

53. Dr. Hammond acknowledges that Superstition is a nimiety or excess in
Religion; then are not those Romish Rites and unprescribed Ceremonies (which
are of a mystical signification) to use his own word, a nimiety? and is not a
placing of virtue in the sign of the Cross etc. an excess in Religion? why does
he then say it is a dogmatizing to abstain from unprohibited Ceremonies (as well
as from unprohibited Meats, Col. 2.) for to argue from a non-prohibition
(suppose they were not prohibited) is an argument ab authoritate negative, and
so of no force.

54. However this Dr. gratifies the Romanists in his charitable glosses upon
Superstition and Will Worship, or worshipping of Demons: I am sure learned
Mede does not so in his Doctrine of Demons, who applies it wholly to the
Popish Church in her bowing to breaden Idols and Crosses (like Demon pillars)
etc. all which make a lively Image of the Gentiles Theology of Demons.

55. Thus we see as Atheism is a defect in Religion) so Superstition is an
excess; it is a going super statutum (as Isidore says) beyond the precepts of
God which commands us to do only those things that he bids us do; whatsoever
thing I command you, observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto nor diminisb
from it. Deuteronomy. 12.32. with Chapter 4.2. If any man shall add unto those things
which God bath commanded, God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written
in the Book; and if any man shall take away from them, God will take away his
part out of the book of life. Rev. 22.18, 19. as Atheists are guilty of the
latter, so the Superstitious of the former.

56. Superstition is a being righteous (or religious) overmuch, Eccles. 7.16.
(as Atheism is a being righteous (or religious) over little;) as when men do
hot only believe that Christ is our satisfaction for sin, but also there is
need of Alms, Prayers, Fastings, Vows, etc. to satisfy for our sins; this is
an addition of our own merit to the merit of Christ, as if the righteousness of
Christ were not complete enough without the beggarly Eeke of our filthy
righteousness. This nimiety or excess is found in the Church of Rome.

57. Tertullian condemns all things to be vacuae observationis, et
superstitioni deputanda, quae fine ullius Dominici aut Apostolici praecepti
autoritate facta sunt. Tertul. de oratione, Chap. 12. V. It seems he was not of
the Dr.'s Opinion, that thinks it enough, that Ceremonies (though they be not
commanded) if not prohibited, may be embraced: Tertullian was for a divine
warrant, and I have showed in my Tractate of Ceremonies, that they are
prohibited in [thou shall not add.]

58. All divine Worship must have divine Warrant, and whatsoever exceeds divine
warrant is Superstition; the Commands of God ought diligently to be observed,
Matthew. 28.20. Act. 1.2. Revel. 12. last v. But to observe more than God
commands, is to be superstitiously wise above that which is written: Such were
the Pharisees in the Jewish Church, that Taught for Doctrines the Commandments
if Men, Matthew. 15.9. that their Laws must be observed though they were
inconsistent with Gods Law.

59. The Chaldee Paraphrast and the Syriack Version, renders those two
Scriptures, [ Isa. 29.13. Matthew. 15.9.] Reverentia, quam mihi exhibent, est ex
praecepto et documento humano; plainly unputing the reason of Gods rejecting
their worship to be, the want of a divine command: What the Scribes and
Pharisees did in the Jewish Church, that the Priests and Jesuits do in the
Romish Church, imposing upon people not only additions to, but also
inconsistencies with the Commands of God; therefore God rejects their worship,
as that of the Jews.

60. Finally, Superstition is an undue or ungrounded worship of God, not
grounded upon Gods word but upon man's wisdom not only for the manner but also
for the matter; or it is a putting more into the means, than God puts into them,
as the Jews put more into the Sabbath than God put into it, and many more
superstitious observances as I could transcribe out of Buxtorf's Jewish
Synagogue; whereby they do violate the Institutions of God with their
Inventions, and Amos. Co. 5. v. 26, 27. shows, they carried a Tabernacle for
Venus and Saturn, as well as for the true God.

61. Having now made this large discovery of this right hand Enemy of the true
Religion, it remains that I make known where this Thief has his principal
Residence, that would steal away from us our Religion, (which is a daughter to
the King of Heaven, and the beauty of all the Kingdoms of the Earth) and would
put such a cheat upon us, as Michael did upon Saul, 1 Samuel 19.12, 13. in
dismissing David and laying an Image (that was bedridden in his stead Supposed to
be the Teraphim that was made in the shape of a man: Hebr. Teraphim signifies
Images.


62. I shall now largely prove that as Atheism had its chief Residence in
Rome-Pagan, so Superstition has its principal seat in Rome-Anti-Christian:
This is the design of our present Treatise, for the preservation of our blessed
Religion (received from our godly Ancestors) to the salvation of our poor
posterity; and for the prevention of that Romish cheat in dismissing our David
[of the Reformed Religion] and laying the Image [of their own Religion] in the
room of it.

63. That I may the better manifest how the Romish Religion is but an Image of
Straw, (whereas the reformed Religion has the real David and Christ in it) I
shall use this method; discoursing 1. Generally, and then 2. Particularly of
it, and all to show, the rottennest of the Romish Faith (that threatens us so
much at this day) and to secure our own, as our best treasure.

CHAP. I. In General. The seven bad Properties of Popery, viz. 1.
Superstitious. 2. Idolatrous. 3. Damnable. 4. Bloody. 5. Novel. 6. Inconsistent
with public peace. 7. Irreconciliable to the Protestant Christian Religion.
Those seven bad Properties are as the seven Unclean Spirits which possessed the
empty house. Matthew. 12.43, 45
64. IN my disswasive from Popery, I shall I. show in general, the seven
wretched Properties of the Romish Faith, for which it may not be embraced but
rather to be abhorred. 1. Of the first, The Romish Religion is a superstitious
Religion: it is made up of a worship altogether supra statutum, as sundry
intimations hereof (before mentioned) do abundantly illustrate: it is so
notoriously clogged with Ceremonies of Humane invention, (while the Magnalia
legis lay neglected) that while they write up service, God writes up sin;
saying, who required those things at your hands? Isa. 1.12.

65. Superstition sprung up betimes in the Church of Rome; Satan sowed Tares
(so he is called, superseminator) very early. Many superstitious Doctrines from
this superseminator did the Bishops of Reme bring into the Church in the first
six hundred years after Christ; which signifies that Antichrist was then
growing up there until the time of his full maturity for his Revelation in that
place.

66. Alexander the First (Bishop of Rome) brought in the mingling of water with
the Sacramental Wine, and of Salt with water for benediction (agreeable to the
Pagans) about 112th year after Christ; After him about 20 years comes
Telesphorus, and ordained a Lent-Fast for seven weeks, about the year 130 after
Christ; and about the year of Christ 144. Pius the first appoints the
celebration of Easter upon the Lords day.

67. About the year of Christ 159. the (shaving of the Priests Crowns was
brought into the Church by Anicetus (the Bishop of Rome) to whom Polycarp came,
about composing the differences concerning the Celebration of Easter, because
it was pretended that the celebrating of it on Sunday, The dissenters were
called Quartadecimani.
as they called it, one Hermes received by Revelation from an Angel in a
Shepherds habit: This having of Crowns was a superstitious Custom, derived from
the practice of the Egyptian Priests of Isis.

68. This superstitious Shaving was condemned by diverse of the Fathers, as
Clemens of Alex. Paedagog. lib. 3. cap. 11. Optatus Contra Parmenionem lib. 2.
and Jerome on Ezekiel. 44. Yea, and the fourth Council of Toledo, cap. 40. About
the year of Christ 221. were also introduced into the Church the Fasts of four
times, by Calixtus the first; and about six years after, silver Cups were
brought into the Celebration of the Supper by Pope Vrbane.

69. About the year 240. It was ordained by Pope Fabian, that new Chrism should
be made every year, and that the old should be burnt at the Eucharist; then
about the year 277. Pope Foelix appoints Divine Service to be Celebrated upon
the Sepulchers of Martyrs: About five years after, Pope Eutychianus brings in
the Benediction of the fruits of the Earth upon the Altar; as if with the
Manichees they had held them unclean, until they were thus purified.

70. This Pope Eutychianus (the Tuscan) is said to bring in that custom, that
no Martyr should be buried but in the Vestment called Palmatica, and a Purple
Hood. Thus Superstition began to grow unto some strength in the Church of Rome
betimes, and that not only in matters of Ceremony but also of Doctrine, for
then began Temples to be built to the honor of the Virgin Mary, of the
Apostles and Martyrs, to the great dishonor of God in following Ages.

71. Augustine witnesses, that as all divine Worship is to be given to God; so
all Temples that are for the exercise of that worship, are to be erected to
him. Angust. contra Maxim. Arrian lib. 1. tit. 11. Yet Sylvester the first
persuaded Constantine to erect that Church in Rome dedicated to the honor of
St. Peter, himself digging the Foundation, and carrying away twelve Baskets
full of Earth, in honor of the twelve Apostles, upon his Imperial Shoulders;
and at his instance many other Churches were built to many other Saints. And
Ciricius about this time brought in that doctrine of Demons, forbidding the
Priests to marry, and commanding those that were married to repudiate their
Wives, urging it from that place; Qui sunt in Carne non possunt placere Deo.
Vide Chronicon Carionis, in the third Century.

72. In the year 336. Pope Marcus brought in the singing of the Nicene Creed,
and the superstitious Vestment (called the Pall) which was to be of Wool, not
of Silk or any other Stuff, to signify the Skin of the lost Sheep in Luke 15.
And in the year 367. Gloria Patri was brought in by Damasus, to close up every
Psalm: In the year 398. Anastasius brought in the standing up at the reading of
the Gospel.

73. In the year 417. Pope Zosimus brought in Tapers into the Church: In the
year 461. Pope Hilarious brought in the Letany and the Rogation week. In the
year 526. Foelix the fourth, brought in extreme Unction to be ministered to
dying people; and in the end of this fifth Century, Pope Gregory the Great
brought in Candles for Candlemas, and added four days to Lent, with many other
superstitious orders. Fuit enim superstitionum (tanquam Monachus) egregius
Patronus, ac ceremoniis and ritibus plusquam Judaicis, Ecclesiam Christi mirum
quantum eneravit Pareus Medull. Histor. Eccles. p. 210.


74. Thus we see in the first 600 years, how the man of sin prevailed in
bringing all those Superstitions one after another, before his full Revelation,
as appears at large in Osiander's Epitome. Pareus Medulla histor. Eccles. And
our own Dr. Prideaux's Introduction, who makes this Gregory the last of the
good, and the first of the bad Popes, to be signified by the Angel flying
between Heaven and Earth; for he gave his Testimony against Antichrist, though
he brought in many Superstitions of Antichrist.

75. After the sixth Century commenced, Superstition came not by drops, as
before, but whole floods of it, and that in Doctrine too as well as Ceremony:
Then entered in Invocation of Saints, Prayer for the dead, and Purgaory; the
Doctrine of Justification by the merit of works, of Traditions, of worshipping
Relics and Images, of the Mass, etc. Transubstantiation, etc. all which be
supra Statutum.

76. Thus were those Cockatrice Eggs hatched by degrees, out of which at length
came forth Antichrist (That Fiery Flying Serpent) into the world; and it is a
seasonable caution which the Prophet gives us in this case, Isaiah 59.5. They
that Eat of those Cockatrice Eggs shall dye. As men would therefore shun death,
so let them avoid those Eggs of Superstition in the Romish Church, because
(Mors in olla) Death is in them.

CHAP. II. The Second Property, is the Idolatry of the Romish Religion.
77. AS the Romish Religion is a Superstitions Religion, (exceeding all divine
warrant in those forecited Customs and Practices, which neither Christ nor any
of his Apostles, but such and such Popes in several Ages brought into the
Church) so 2. it is an Idolatrous Religion also. Plato himself could say, that
(...) is the Mother of all Superstitions in lib. 10. de legibus* So Polanus
affirms that Superstition is the Mother of Idolatry, and that this Daughter is
found in the Romish Church is evident, because she is called the great Whore;
and spiritual Whoredom is (in Scripture Phrase) Idolatry, Ezck. 16. often. and
Isa. 1.21.

78. It Is a very honorable undertaking of Mr. Thorndike (and other Reconcilers
to Rome) to wipe the Whores mouth of this Sin of Idolatry: But when those men
have said all they can, they can never unsay what the Champions of our Religion
have said to prove it; as Rivers, the nearer they come to the Sea; the more
brackish taste have they; so those men coming so near the Sea of Rome, discover
but a brackish Spirit.

79 That the Romish Church disowns the Paganish Idolatry, they may warrantably
justify; for the worships not those heathen Gods, such as Jupiter, Apollo,
Mars, Mercury, etc. yet the spirit of whoredom is among them, as Hos. 5.4. She
goes a whoring after other Idols, as Ezekiel. 6.9. and commits Adultery with
stocks and stones, as Jer. 3.9. and Isa. 16.17. Her Idolatry in worshipping of
Images, Relics, Crosses and the Host, is altogether as abominable as that of
the Pagans.

80. It is laid to Mr. Mountague's Charge by those Informers against him,
(supposed to be Mr. Ward and Mr. Yates) that in his gagging of the Gagger, he
says touching Images, they have these uses assigned them by your Popish
Schoolmen, [Institutionem Rudium, commonefactionem Historiae, et excitationem
devotionis.] Stay there (says he to the Jesuit) go no farther, and we charge
you not with Idolatry, you and we also give unto them these.

81. And yet this same Mr. Montague in his Appeal to Caesar, page 249.
ingeniously says; I do not, I cannot, I will not deny, that Idolatry is grossly
committed in the Church of Rome. The ruder sort (at least) go to it with
downright Idolatry, without any relative adoration, worshipping that which they
behold with their eyes; as the Image of the Virgin, etc. and the Crucifix, as
if Christ himself was present.

82. But Mr. Perkins more solidly and fully says, that the Romish Religion
(which he calls the great Italian Diana) is Idolatrous in many respects Perk.
Idolatry of last times, page 673.1. Vol.
1. As it presents to us a deformed Christ; spoiled both of his Manhood and of
his Offices: Of his Manhood, as if it could be made of the substance of Bread,
as well as of the substance of the Virgin; and as if a solid Body (of many foot
long) could be contained in a small round Cake of two or three Inches.

83. He goes on to show how it spoils him of his Offices; as of his Priesthood
by their own satisfactions, the Sacrifice of the Mass, etc. Of his Kingly
Office, by giving power to the Pope to pardon Sin, and to make binding Laws to
the Conscience. Lastly, of his Prophetical Office, by adding and detracting
from Christ's word, and making the Pope an Infallible Judge. The Popish abuses
herein, he calls notorious and detestable Idolatry. Perk. Idol. of last Times,
page 673, 674.

84. The second Respect, wherein the Church of Rome is Idolatrous, is her
worshipping God otherwise and by other means than he has revealed in his Word;
as in Images, Crucifixes, Host, etc. seeing spiritual Adoration is now only
required, John 4.21, 22, 23. Babylon is a Worshipper of Idols; Rome is Babylon,
Ergo.
And that worship which is tied to either place or thing on Earth, is by that
Scripture utterly abodished and forbidden. Then in a third Respect, she is
Idolatrous in giving Gods property to Creatures; as to the Virgin Mary, to
Saints and Angels, in her Invocating of them, and to the Pope in her flattering
Titles to him, of Infallible, Universal, etc.

85. For the better understanding of this, we must know, there is a two fold
Idolatry; as Peter Martyr says, loc. commun. cap. 4. page 197. Vnaest, qua
nobis Deum, qualem volumus, pravis doganatis in animo fingimus; altera vero qua
externum cultum non tantum ad Creaturas et Idola transferimus, verum illum
nostris inventis ac mendaciis vitiamus: which in plain English, is, not only to
worship a false God, but also to worship the true God by false means, is
Idolatry.

86. There is Idolatry of the First Commandment and Idolatry of the second;
when men esteem and adore any thing for God, which is not the true God, this is
Idolatry against the First Commandment: But when the True God is indeed
worshipped, but he is worshipped in Images, in Saints and Angels, and all false
Mediums, and not by means of Gods own prescribing; this is Idolatry against the
second, and there is great Affinity between them.

87. It Is said 2 Chronicles. 33.17. The People sacrificed in the high places, yet to
the Lord their God. Their Sacrificing formerly was Idolatry against the first
Command, but now 'twas Idolatry against the second; as failing and falling
short of the true manner in worshipping the true God. There is such a
resemblance 'twixt them, that they are one in Genere.

88. Their Sacrificing, now, in the high places, yet to the Lord; was, in
general, of the same kind, with their sacrificing (formerly) in those high
places to Baal. The scope of the second Command is to condemn all Willworship
as Idolatry, which is not warranted by the word of God. It Is said Deuteronomy. 12.4.
Thou shall not do so to the Lord thy God: It Is not said, thou shall not do so
to those Idols, but not so in that manner to the true God, as they did to their
Idols. v. 30, 31.

89. Polanus in his Syntagni. Theolig. lib. 9. cap. 3. makes two sorts of
Idolatry: The 1. he calls tectior et subtilior; when the true God is indeed
worshipped, but with another manner of worship than he has commanded himself,
to be worshipped in his word; as those that worship God by Statues and Images
are idolatrous, although they deny Centies millies (says he) that they worship
any thing beside the true God.

90. The second sort of Idolatry, which he calls Crassior et Apertior, is, when
any thing is religiously worshipped for the true God, which is not God: This
was the Idolatry of the Gentiles, worshipping Devils, Men, and other Creatures
with religious worship; and this is (says he) the Idolatry of the Papists, in
their religious worshipping of not only Saints and Angels, (yea the very Images
or Statues of them) but also of the Cross, Relics, yea of those that were,

Nequaquam Sancti aut nunquam in rerum Natura. 91. If this be so, that this
grosser sort of Idolatry be found in the Romish Church, how much more that
which is subtiler and of a finer spun thread, pretending they worship God in
their Images; as the worshipping of Jehovah by or in the golden Calf (which
Aaron made in the Wilderness) was plain Idolatry: In like manner as the
worshipping of God by the two Golden Calves (that Jeroboam set up at Dan and
Bethel) was flat Idolatry.

92. Although we find Aaron pretended that by or in that Calf they worshipped
Jehovah; that brought them out of the Land of Egypt. Exodus 32.4, 5. compared
with Nehem. 9.18. which says, This is thy God which brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt; they (or at least some of them) intended to worship the true
God in this false manner: Hence the Feast is not proclaimed to the Golden Calf,
but to Jehovah.

93. Suppose there be truth in Dr. Hammond's Notion, that the Golden Calf in
the Wilderness was made in the Figure of a Cherub, (after appointed to be in
the Tabernacle, Exodus 25.18. and of which, he says, Aaron might then have some
intimation) compare Ezekiel. 1.10. with 10.14. yet could not Israel be so
notoriously stupid as to believe, that either the Golden Cherub or Calf wrought
all those wonders in Egypt, and brought them thence.

94. And Jeroboam made the same pretense in his Calves, the same Phrase being
used, 1 Kin. 12.28. [ Behold! thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt.] meaning a representation of the true God of Israel, as if he
drew them not to worship any other God, than the God of their Fathers, which
brought them (as his Redeemed People) out of the Egyptian Bondage, for by this
Title God describes himself, Exodus 20.2. Ezekiel. 20.5, 6. Lev. 19.36. Amos 2.10.

95. And as Israel learnt this abomination among the Egyptians, (among whom
they had so long lived) and where the Idol Apis was worshipped in the shape of
an Ox; and Thus, it is said of Israel, they changed their glory, (to wit, their
God that redeemed them out of Egypt) into the similitude of an Ox that eats
Grass, Psalm 106.19, 20. So Jeroboam brought his Calf-making from Egypt too,
where he had lately lived, 1 Kin.. 11.40.

96. Although those worshippers of the Calves (both in Aaron and Jeroboam's
time) probably pretended, that they did not worship the Calf, but God in the
Calf; (as did also Jehu, 2 Kin. 10.16, 29. In having zeal for the Lord, yet
adhering to Jeroboam's Calves) their worship being not (as some excuse it) by
any means terminative in the Creature before their eyes; yet are they expressly
called Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10.7.

97. And though the Idolatry of Israel in the Wilderness, was indeed of a
deeper dye than the Idolatry of Jeroboam, because it was against greater means
and mercies; the Ten Tribes under Jeroboam, had not upon their hearts such a
fresh taste of Deliverance from Egypt, they had not the pillar of Glory, nor
the Tabernacle of Gods Presence; they had not a Moses that was faithful in all
the house of God, only Priests of the basest of the People, 1 Kin 13, 33. yet
the Idolatry of Rome is worse th^^ that in the Wilderness.

98. The Israelites in the Wilderness gave the Glory of Christ (who dwelt in a
Cloud and Pillar) unto a Calf or Cherub, but these Idolaters of the Church of
Rome, give the Glory of Christ; (when he is dwelling in our Flesh and glorified
in Heaven) to a Creature which they worship as God indeed, giving it to their
Crucifixes, Agnus Dei, etc. so there is a greater abomination. In this
Idolatry, than in the Idolatry of former times.

99. The Lord makes a comparison betwixt Aholah and Aholibah, Ezekiel. 2^.4, 5,
11. (...) A Tent.
Aholah had indeed played the Harlot, v. 5 (...) (...) My Tent in her. Hebr.
Aholibah was more corrupted than she, (...) So if we compare Aholah the Jewish
Church with Aholibah the Romish Church, that says [Gods Tent is in me] as the
word signifies in the Hebrew; we shall find her the greater Harlot of the two.

100. Thus we see the plea of the Romish Church for her worshipping God in
Images, (from the Israelites worshipping God in the Calves) falls to the
ground, and to worship God in, at, or before an Image is Idolatry; it is a
worshipping of the true God in a false manner: For 1. Such binds Gods Presence
and Influence of Grace to such places as God never bound his presence, etc.
unto. 2. There is neither precept nor promise for it. 3. It Is expressly
forbidden, Deuteronomy. 4.16, 17, 18, 19.

101. And though they say we intend not to worship the Image, but God in the
Image; this is not a sufficient salvo, for the Israelites worshipped not the
Calf but God in the Calf, yet are they said to worship the Molten Calf, and to
sacrifice unto it in Gods account. Exodus 32.8. God writes up sin where they
write up service, and it is no matter what their meaning is in their worship, so
long as God abhors the manner of their worship.

102. The Heathens in their Idolatry had such a meaning as this, (as Arnobius
contra gentes lib. 6. tells us) Deos per simulachra veneramur, just saying as
the Papists say at this day; The Athenians and other Gentiles worshipped the
true God, Act. 17.23. yet by false mediums and meanings; and if this
worshipping the true God falsely be not Idolatry, there has been little in the
World.

103. Oecumenius tells us, that the whole Inscription upon the Altar mentioned,
Act. 17.23. was (...), which intimates that besides Penates or household Gods,
for whom they had (...) or devout Adorations; they had also Gods of Asia,
Europe, and Lybia, which they religiously worshipped: Yet the ultimate end of
their adorations, was to the true God whom yet they knew not, dwelling in thick
darkness, 1 Kin. 8.12. Hereby Paul takes occasion to inform them, that the
worship of the true God consisted not in those made Gods, the work of men's
hands, but in Spirit and Truth, John 4.22, 23.

104. But to leave the Idolatry of the Gentiles, I have consulted Josephus
about that of the Jews in the days of Jeroboam, who says that Jeroboam
worshipped God in his Calves, yet was he esteemed an Idolater: Josephus Antiqu.
lib. 8. cap. 3, 4.
He brings in Jeroboam speaking thus, [God is in all places, in my two Temples
at Dan and Bethel, as well as in Solomon's Temple at Jerusalem; therefore I
have Consecrated two Golden Calves in those two places, to the end that ye may
adore God.] He does not say, [Adore my Calves.]

105. Yet when Jeroboam's Wife went to the Prophet about their sick Son; the
Prophet (as Josephus says) bids her tell Jeroboam from God, that he should be
rooted up for honoring his new Gods, and his people should be carried Captive
for adoring those Gods that he had forged: But more plainly and fully, 1 Kings
14.9. Thou have made thee other Gods, [not representations of God] though he
accounted them so, yet God did not so account of them, but was provoked to
anger by them; for no sin provokes God more to anger than Idolatry.

106. Whereas the Romanists plead, they do but worship God before their Images,
as Israel worshipped God before the Ark; I answer, Israel had an express Command
from God to worship before the Ark, and they had a promise also, that their
Persons and Prayers should be accepted there: When the Church of Rome shall
produce such a Precept and such a Promise for their worshipping God before an
Image, I shall then believe that* she is not herein guilty of Idolatry.

107 The Church of Rome indeed covers her Idolatry, with Coverings but not of
Gods Spirit, Isa. 30.1. rather with such Cobweb Coverings as that of the Harlot
Phaedra; who committing lewdness with Hypolitus, protested she embraced her
Husband Theseus in him, whom Hypolitus so nerely resembled. As this
protestation of Phaedra's would not free her from the guilt of Adultery, no
more will the protestation of the Whore of Rome (saying she embraces the Person
whom the Image nerely resembles, while she commits lewdness with the Image it
self) free her from the guilt of Idolatry.

Bishop Wren abandoning Scots Covenant, page 20.
Bishop Wren has a good Notion; saying, Every thing that is not the Covenant of
God, is Baal; let them nick name it what they will it is an Idol, and all the
worship they give it is flat Idolatry, no better than the worshipping of Baal:
That worship which is not found in the word or Covenant of God, is Baal worship
(in his account) no better than Idolatry; the Romanists be halters 'twixt God
and Baal.

109. They that halt do incline their Bodies now one way and now another, the
Romanists (as those Idolatrous Israelites 1 Kin. 18.21.) halt in their worship
'twixt God and their Images, inclining their minds now one way, and now
another; to worship two Gods is a sin against the first Commandment, but to mix
the means of Gods worship is a sin against the second.

110. That was a mixed Religion in 2 Kin. 17.28, 32, and 34. It Is said there,
that those Idolaters feared the Lord, and also that they feared not the Lord,
v. 25. because though they worshipped the true God, yet not according to his
Law, v. 38. (as Bishop Wren, page 31. Abandoning of Covenant.
Bishop Wren in libro supra dicto, page 31. says) they thrust into their new
model of Religion whatsoever pleased themselves, so it is accounted no fear at
all: They worshipped the true God and their own Gods too, there was right
worship of the true God, but it was mixed with tricks of their own.

111. That Mongrel Generation feared the Lord, (to wit) acknowledged Jehovah to
be a God, and did offer some slight services and sacrifices to him; yet it is
said they served their own Gods too, v. 33. called Graven Images, v. 41. Their
Adrammelech which signfies [a glorious King] yet made in the shape of an horse;
and their Anammeleck (or afflicting King] in the form of a Mule: Satan was
glorious in their esteem, yet afflicted them in the burning of their Sons to
him.

112. Those old Samaritans were halters betwixt two opinions: They would swear
by the Lord, and swear by Malcham too, Zeph. 1.5. They would consecrate
themselves as by Oath to the service of God; and yet they would worship Malcham
also, that Idol of the Ammonites (otherwise called Molech.) 1 Kin. 11.7. and 2
Kin. 23.10, 13. and Jer. 49.3. This is a joining light and darkness, or God and
Belial together, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.

113. Those worshippers of Malcham would not utterly renounce the true God, yet
would they set up Rivals with him to share of his honor which he will not give
to another, God cannot admit of any Corrivals: They mixed Gods worship with
their Idolatry, or they worshipped God in this Idolatrous way: as the
Israelites did, so the Papists do; that divides worship, some to God and some
to their Images they swear by God and by their Saints too, they pray to God and
to their Saints also, committing themselves to them (together with God) as to
Patrons of their protection.

114. Hereby the Church of Rome discovers her self not to be the true Mother of
the Child, viz. [Truth or Worship] because she is for dividing it; but God
accounts it an abomination when any part of his Worship is imparted to Idols or
Images; God will have all or none at all, and all Will Worship (devised out of
man's brain) whereby men warp either to the Right Hand or to the Left from Gods
prescribed Will, the Lord abhors.

115. The Just and Jealous God hates and plagueth all Lukewarmness and
Neutrality in Religion, all dough-baked Duties or mixtures of Religion, a
mingling of the Cup of the Lord with the Cup of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.21. The
Religion of the house of Micah mixed Gods worship ship with the Devils, Judge.
17.5. The Ephod (resembling that of the Highpriests) for the true worship of
God, and the The Teraphim was the Image of a man's head wrung from the Body,
salted and spiced; and under the Tongue spoke the Unclean Spirit: The King of
Babylon had his Teraphim to consult with, Ezekiel. 21.21. or Images.
Teraphim (or Images in man's shape to divine by) for the worship of the Devil.

116. It was not lawful to mix Judaism with Gentilism, Lev. 19.27. Ye shall not
round the corners of your heads, nor make any cutting in your flesh for the
dead, etc. These were the Ceremonies of the Heathen, therefore the Lord
prohibits his people from the observation of them, Such a practice had the
Egyptian Priests, who worshipped the Idols ( Isis and Anuhis) shaving round
their heads, or (as others say) had their Crowns shaven, as the Popish Priests
have at this day.

117. Thus the Religion of the Gergasites was a mixed Religion, who learned many
things of the Heathen, as to eat Swines flesh, (hence we read of herds of Swine
(which the Jews abhorred) in their Country) and not to circumcise, etc. And
such is the Religion of the Ebionites, who observe (both) the Jewish and the
Christian Sabbath.

118. Neither is it lawful to mingle Judaism with Christianism, as the
Galatians did, who would observe the Ceremonies of the Law in times of the
Gospel: Those Ceremonies were in their own time mortales, in Christ's time
(after he had said consummatum est) they were mortal, but in following times
they were mortiferae, and a denying of Christ's coming in the flesh; for if the
substance be come, those shadows must vanish away; yet those Galatians joined a
dead Law, the Law of Ceremonies, with a living Gospel.

119. The Church of Rome is the speckled Bird that has mingled Ceremonies with
Gospel worship above all that went before her, and surely Religion is past the
Meridian in that Church, where she can hardly be seen for the length of her own
shadow: The shadows of her Evening have been long a stretching out, and her day
is going away, Jerem. 6.4. Fuller, Abel Redivivus, page 72.
Erasmus in his time found Doctrine turned into Sophistry, and Discipline into
Ceremony.

120. The Romish Church has sowed diverse seeds in Gods Vineyard, she has
plowed with an Ox and an Ass in Gods Husbandry, She has worn Linsey-woolsey
Garments in the Temple of God, contrary to Levit. 19.19. She has set up Dagon
with the Ark of God; and though the Apostle forbid (...), to play the huckfter
with the word and worship of God; 2 Cor. 2.17. yet has she adulterated both.

121. Her Bastard Devotion ought not to be admitted (as Co-partner) with the
true worship of God, for it is opposite to the Nature of God, to wit, his Unity,
Sovereignty, and Al-sufficiency; as if there were more Gods than he, more
hearers of Prayer, more pardoners of Sin, and more Saviors from trouble than
he: And it is opposite also to the Nature of Religion, which is called a Bond;
(the Reubenites, may not build another Altar without warrant, Josh. 22.10.)
it is a spiritual marriage, so must be chaste or God will be jealous, 2 Cor. 11.2.

122. But the Romish Church has played the Harlot, and in the Revelation is
called the great Whore, with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed
Fornication; and who knows not but that by spiritual Fornication, is always in
holy Scripture understood Idolatry: And though indeed some of the Fathers say,
Antichrist shall be an hater of Idolatry, they must mean only Paganish
Idolatry; for his worshipping a piece of Paste for Christ etc. is as abominable
Idolatry as Paganism was.

123. That place in Dan. 11.38. literally meant of Antiochus, but Analogically
agrees to Antichrist; Junius and Tremel. reads it thus. [ As for the God of
Forces, he (to wit, Antiochus,) shall, in his Seat, worship with Gold, Silver,
etc. a God which his Fathers knew not. Thus the Pope has set up a new God in
the Church, To their breaden God they ascribe power to forgive sins, to protect
from evil, and to bring to Heaven.
namely a piece of bread in the Mass, which none of the Apostles knew, and
dedicates Gold etc. to it, yea burns all that will not bow to it.

124. It Is true the Romanists have found out sundry fine shifts to clear
themselves of this Idolatry, as their absolute and respective Adoration, and
their objectum quod and objectum quo: Absolute Adoration is when the worship is
terminated in the Creature, as objectum quod Adorationis, and the worship is
limited to the Creature; Respective Adoration is this, when worship is given to
dead and senseless things for the Examplar's sake.

125. Then the Exemplar or Pattern is the objectum quo, and the dead senseless
thing or Portraiture is the objectum quod; that is, they adore the Portraiture
for the Patterns sake, the dead and senseless thing for the sake of it which is
its Exemplar: As when homage is done to the Viceroy for the King, the Viceroy
is the objectum quod, and the King is the objectum quo; thus the most modest of
the Papists of old, made but their Image objectum quod Adorationis, and God
himself objectum quo.

126. But now they go further, and maintain that Images are not only to be
worshipped accidentally or improperly, but also by themselves and properly; so
that they end and terminate their worship as they are considered in themselves,
and not only as they are Pourtraitures of the Pattern represented; Gregor. di
Valen. disput. 6. quast. 11. punct. 6.
and Greg de Val. says, that the same worship which is due to God, is due to
the Image too, which he calls co^d^ratio or conjunct-worship.

127. Plutarch tells us of Sysigambis ( Darius's Mother) coming before
Alexander the Great, and mistaking Haephestion for Alexander, she fell down
before Haephestion; but perceiving her mistake she began to blush; but
Alexander said to her, Be not ashamed, Non errasti, Matter, nam Hephaestion est
etiam Alexander Thou art not mistaken, Mother, for Hephaestion is also
Alexander.
But if a Papist, falling down before an Image, and mistaking the Image for
Christ himself; Christ will not say to him, Be not ashamed, thou art not
mistaken, this Image is also Christ; for Christ is more jealous of his honor
than so, and will not give it to any Creature Isa. 48.11.


128. It is therefore the safest to come out from this Idolatrous Babylon,
seeing the great God calls us (even the Lord Almighty,) 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. and
Rev. 18.4. lest beside the infection of Sin, we partake also of the infliction
of Punishment; for they that sin together, are most like to suffer together:

Esto procul Roma qui cupis esse pius. Indeed such as go only to see Rome,
(though they be not really for Rome) are constrained by force to uncover the
head and bow the Knee at Mass, etc. which is not only too much connivence, but
even Adoration it self; therefore be not there lest God be angry, and ye
partake of her Plagues.

129. Separation from Rome is a commanded duty, [not only in heart but in body
too] for fundamental Errors are found in her; yea this gross Idolatry for which
she is to be destroyed, Revel. 14.8. [Because she has made all Nations drink
of the Wine of her Fornication.] Idolatry is called Wine, because it is sweet to
corrupt Nature and soon intoxicating; and it is spiritual Fornication (as it is
a going a whoring from God) not liberal, for Rome is a City or Church with whom
the Kings cannot commit liberal Fornication.

130. Whoever drinks of the Wine of her Fornication, shall be sure to drink of
the Wine of Gods Indignation, Revel. 18.8, 10. Therefore, Little Children, keep
your selves from these Idols, and from this Idolatry; lest the Lord render you
Wine for Wine, 1 John ^.21. The Apostle advises to avoid all Image Worship,
and not only palpable Idolatry, but all dealing with Idols: We should keep our
selves, at least negatively from them, (as those seven thousand in Israel, that
would not how the Knee to Baal) if not positively by a public profession of
our utter detestation of them, as Daniel and his three Companions did.

131. Idolatry has many cursed The Qualities of Idolatry.
Qualities in it, for which it ought to be abhorred: As 1. It Is a bewitching
Sin.
1. It Is a bewitching Sin; so it is compared to an intoxicating Cup: For as
Whores give enchanted Cups to their Lovers, to make them commit Fornication
with them; so has the Whore of Babylon bewitched the Nations with her spiced
Cup of damnable Idolatry: And how did the Idolatry of Micab's house bewitch the
whole Tribe of Dan? Judge. 18.36.

132. It is 2. A Covenant Breaking Sin.
2. a Covenant Breaking Sin: It breaks that holy Marriage-Covenant betwixt
Christ and his Church; he being a Jealous God will not suffer his Spouse to go
a whoring after other Gods; but would have her a chaste Virgin presented to him
and preserved for him: [ Abide for me and I will abide for thee, Hos. 3.3.]
like the Turtle-Dove (offered in Sacrifice) She must have but one Mate: Thus
Idolaters be called Adulterers, Jam. 4.4. and seeing Idolatry is a breaking the
Covenant of God, how stupidly blind was Micah that said the Lord would do him
good for it, Judge. 17.13. Their sorrows are multiplied that hasten after other
Gods, Psalm. 116.4.

133. And 3. a detestable Sin.
3. It Is an abominable Sin, detestable in the Eyes of God: he calls it the
abominable thing which he hates. Jerem. 44.4. and when the Scripture speaks of
Idols, it calls them Abominations, as the Abomination of the Moabites and of
the Ammonites, and Jupiter Olympius (or the spread-Eagle) set up in the Temple,
was called [(...)] the Abomination of Desolation Math. 24.15. I have seen an
horrible thing, (says God) Hose. 6.10. A thing to be started from and trembled
at.

134. God hates Sin worse than the Devil, for he hates the Devil for Sin's
sake, not Sin for the Devils sake: but of all kinds of Sin, the Sin of Idolatry
is most odious to God, because in it, the Devil sets up himself in the place of
God, and requires Men (as once he did Christ himself) to fall down and worship
him Deuteronomy. 32.17. 1. Cor. 10.20. Rev. 9.20. Yea it is peccatum laesae majestatis,
not only a common Transgression, or petty Treason, but it is high Treason against
the King of Kings; as Rebels, disclaiming their King and set up an Usurper in
his stead, commit the highest Treason: So do Idolaters in disclaiming God and
setting up an Idol in his place.

135. Yea 4. Besides many other cursed Qualities, It is It Is a Land-destroying
Sin.
a Land destroying Sin: it brought desolation upon Israel and made their Land
to spew them out. The Jews say at this Day, that in all their Punishments which
they still undergo, there is an Ounce of the golden Calls (which they made in
the Wilderness) given them. This Iniquity shall be Romes rain, she has fallen
culpably by Idolatry; and she shall fall penally by an utter Desolation: In one
Hour is she made Desolate for her Idolatry. Revel. 18.3.19.

136. The Lord sets his Attribute of Jealousy before the Church in the
second Commandment, to warn her, that she abstain from all Idolatry (both
absolute and relative, mediate or ultimate) because a Jealous God will Construe
it all to be no less then spiritual Adultery: and Jealousy is a strong
Passion, the most sublime Indignation is in it, a displeasure that is hotter
than Nebuchadnezzar's fiery Furnace. Dan. 3.19. Jealousy is cruel as the Grave
Cant. 8.6. The Grave spares no Man, and there is no Redemption from it. So
nothing will satisfy a Jealous Husband, a Jealous God, but destruction

137 As it is a dangerous thing to meet a Bear that is robbed of her Whelps,
Prove. 17.12. Or the Revenger of Blood, while his Heart is hot with Fury. Deuteronomy.
19.6. So it is to meet a jealous Man in his Rage: [Jealousie is the Rage of a
Man: therefore he will not spare in the Day of Vengeance, he will not regard
any Ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou give many Gifts.] Prove.
6.34.35. Says Solomon.

138. Thus we have the 5. Quality, A God-enraging Sin.
5. quality of Idolatry, it is a God enraging Sin, as it is one of the highest
Transgressions: God is angry for the breach of any Commandment, but he rages
with Jealousy at the breach of the Second Commandment, when his Worship is
corrupted and his Glory is given to the Creatures: Lovers of Idols are haters
of God, I am. 4.4. Exodus 20.5. and God will plague such to the third and fourth
Generation: Wherefore, little Children, keep your selves from Idols.

CHAP. III. The Third Property. It Is unsafe to Live and Dye in; Or, A Damuable
Religion.
139. THe Third Property is, The Romish Religion is an unsafe Religion to live
and dye in: We should fear and tremble to live in any Religion, that we are
afraid to dye in; for death may suddenly surprise us, Luke 12.20. It has been,
indeed, accounted an harsh Doctrine, to say that those which live and dye in
Popery be damned; we know how [ durus (...).
sermo] was replied to Christ himself, John 6.60. I shall discuss its harshness.

140. As it may be presumption in us to pry too much into the book of Life
(that is sealed from us) and into the decrees of Heaven about Salvation and
Damnation; for it is not given to the Sons of men to know infallibly who are
Elect and who Reprobate, who be for Hell and who for Heaven: So it is
pusillanimity and a putting off that (...) (that becomes the Ministers of God)
to strengthen the hands of the wicked, That he cares not to return by promising
him life, Ezekiel. 13.22.

141. It Is true, the Patrons of the Reformed Religion do affirm, that some in
the Church of Rome may be saved, to wit, such as do expect Salvation by Christ
and not by the merit of their own works, as the Trent Papists do: None (amongst
the Judicious) ever taught, that a Papist universally owning the Trent Faith
and Religion (living and dying so) could be saved.

142. The Romanists (indeed) make some advantage of our charitable Judgment
concerning them; saying, that some of our Reformed Religion acknowledge, that
the Papists hold all things necessary to Salvation, then it will follow by
necessary consequence, that a Papist (qua talis) may be saved. They especially
improve that saying of Luther, [that the Kernel of true Faith remains yet in
the Church of Rome] inferring from thence, that we take only the Shell of
Religion.

143. Dr. Sclater 's Exposition on 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. page 153.
Dr. Sclater tells us of his meeting once with a wandering Star, to wit, a
Traveller, that had been foraging France, Italy, to seek his Religion,) and
bewraying his Inclination to Popery, by preferring it in his choice upon this
ground; that a man may be saved, holding the Faith and Religion of Rome (quoth
he) our selves confess, that any can be saved in our heresy (as they term it)
Papists confidently deny: thus he argued.

144. But the Learned Dr. thus answered the Argument of this Planetick
Sophister: 1. That argues not that the Papists have more verity, but that we
(Protestants) have more Charity. 2. But who (amongst our judicious Divines.)
ever did confess, that a Papist (universally joining to the Tridentine Faith
and Religion) can be saved; nisi forte detur Regressus in viam. unless he make
an honorable Retreat.

145. Let the Romanists obferve, that our own Mr. Perkins (that Romanistarum
malleus) has solidly proved, that a Papist cannot go beyond a Reprobate; yea,
and Hunnius has writ a book to prove them no Christians, and it is the
concurring Opinion of all our profoundest Writers, that where Popery prevails
against the practical points of Christianity, and is predominant (even) in
Fundamentals, there can be no Salvation for such without Conversion.

146. We distinguish also betwixt affected and invincible Ignorance, that of
purae negationis and pravae dispositionis; there is a simple Ignorance, to wit,
where means of knowledge are wanting, as Act. 17.30. This God winks as, [the
Greek (...), over-looked it,] this may excuse a tanto but not a toto, it may
extenuate Sin but cannot annihilate it; one Sin cannot excuse another totally,
but rather (in some sense) doubles the Crime.

147. Not to do Gods Will is sin, and not to know Gods Will (as it were)
doubles the sin; for Ignorance is a sin of it self as well as Disobedience: Yet
Knowledge (in conjunction with Disobedience) is a greater aggravation to it,
than Ignorance is, Luke 12.47. Jam. 4.16, 17. and where Ignorance is affected
among means of Knowledge, this is worse with God, than where it is invincible
for want of means.

148. There must a difference be put, betwixt Papists in Spain and Papists in
England; those in Spain have indeed an Ignorance, but we call it [Ignor antiam
purae negationis, non praevae dispositionis] they are not guilty of that
Ignorance which has a perverse disposition in it, as those in England, that
live in the midst of blessed means of Knowledge, yet shuts their eyes
willingly, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them, those
are Devils to themselves, 2 Cor. 4.4.

149. The Papists in England have an affected Ignorance, because (as those
Peter speaks of 2 Pet. 3.5.) they are Willingly, or wilfully ignorant; Quando
habent a quo discant, et tamen non discunt: They put away knowledge (though God
offer it them) far from them; and, as Bernard says excellently, libenter
ignorant ut liberius peccent; light would stare in their faces and control
them in their unwarranted fooleries and Popish transgressions.

150. Indeed the Papists every where call Ignorance the Mother of Devotion, and
do embrace it with some affectation, as Children do a Mother; yet as it is no
Mother in Israel, if it be in Babylon, it is none in Sion: The Prophet tells us,
Hos. 4.6. It Is a Mother of Destruction, not of Devotion, [my People are
destroyed for want of knowledge:] So English Papists be the worst.

151. English Papists are not willing to know what they should and might do,
lest they should do what they would not, and what their Popish principles may
not allow of: (...), They have winked, Act. 28.27. They stubbornly shut their
Windows, lest the light of knowledge should spring in upon them: The word is
nigh them, they need not cross the Seas for it, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. (the Spanish
Papists have no such advantages) How then can they escape, if they neglect such
great Salvation, Heb. 2.3.

152. Spanish Papists have that Ignorance which is (...) ex negatione, because
the word of God is not nigh them in the preaching of the Gospel; they may
wander from Sea to Sea, and not meet with means of knowledge, as Amos 8.11, 12.
That Country is like the Mountains of Gilboa, that had neither Dew nor Rain
discending on them, 2 Samuel 1.21. Gods Doctrine does not drop as the Rain upon
it, nor bis Speech distill as the Dew, Deuteronomy. 32.2.

153. But English Papists have that Ignorance which is (...), which is of an
evil disposition, and which excuses not but aggravates: God rains down Manna at
their Tent doors, and they will not vouchsafe to go out to gather it, but
rather loathes it (as light bread) and prizes their own foolish trash before
Christ's precious Treasure.

154. Indeed, Francise. de Sancta Clara, Deus Natura et Gratia probl. 15. page
122, 123.
Franciscus de Clara (alias Damport) that quirking Scotist and Reconciler to
Rome, would confound these two kinds of Ignorance, and make them in some cases,
aqui Reatus, quoting Vega, lib. 6. cap. 18. in Trid. who says as Ignorantia
purae Negationis about many Articles of Faith may be without fault; so there is
the same reason of that Ignorance which is pravae dispositionis: This par ratio
is defended by him against the judgment of Gerson in lect. 4. de vita
spirituali, and of Hugo de Sacram. p. 6. c. 5.

155. And de Clara confesses that there are others, Qui asserebant Deum non
permissurum ut aliquis decipratur in aliqua veritate fidei absque sua culpa;
and then adds his opinion, [Ego ut ingenue meum sensum hac in part aperiam
etc. to speak my own sense freely: I think that the common people committing
themselves to the instruction of their Pastors (trusting their knowledge and
goodness) if they be deceived, it shall be accounted invincible Ignorance
[(...) saltem probabilis] which truly excuses from fault.

156. He goes on and says, Im^ aliqui Doctores tantum tribuunt instructioni
(...), quibus incumbit cura ovium, etc. that if those Pastors (on whom the care
of the Flock depends) do teach hic et nunc that God would be hated, the rude
Parishioner is bound to believe them: Azorius also says, Rusticus et Imperitus
qui parocho suo fidem babens, credet diquid contra articules fidei, excusatur a
peccate; where he cites Scotus and Gabriel to be of the same Opinion.

157. It Is true, If their Priests did infallibly keep knowledge, (as they
falsely sense those words in Mal. 2.7. saying further, that the Law given is
not a Law but in the mouth of the Priest,) then would it be the less sin to pin
their faith upon the Sleeves of their Priests, and the ignorance of their Laity
would be invincible ignorance for want of information from their Clergy; but we
find in Story how notoriously their Priests have fallen short of keeping
infallibly the knowledge of the Law of God.

158. It is manifest in Ecclesiastical History, that the Popish Priests, like
the Sons of Eli, are Sons of Belial, that knew not the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.12. nor
the Law of their God; witness that Acts and Monuments, Fox.
Popish Bishop of Dunkelden in Scotland, who boasted, yea thanked God, that he
never knew what the Old and New Testament were; and that he would care to know
nothing but his Portuise and his Pontifical: As, likewise, that Popish Priest
in Germany, who being asked by the Visitors, whether he taught his people the
Decalogue? answered, that he had not the Book so called.

159. And of our own Popish Priests in England, that were notorious
Ignoramuses, our Martyrology gives many examples; as that Priest that told
Justice Leland, that the New Testament (of Tindal's Translation) was plain
Heresy, and none worse than it; and bloody Bonner burning of Bibles, and his
Kinsman Darbyshire, that said the Scriptures were sufficient to Salvation but
not to Instruction, but I would not rake in this Kennel; Those Priests lips
kept knowledge well.

160. Chrysostom had long before discovered and lamented, [Multi Sacerdotes et
tamen pauci, multi in Nomine, pauci in opere:] and Petrarch complained in his
time, that the stench of that Sink (the Romish Clergy) was come up to heaven,
this Ribera bewails also: But above all, Famous Luther speaks home to this,
affirming that Hell is paved with the Skulls of those profane Popish Priests;
and Erasmus, likewise, lays them open in their colors, who did them more
mischief jocando, than Luther did stomachando: how can sober minds hang As Luke
19. last. (...).
their Ears at such lips as those?

161. But the Romanists falsify that Text in Mal. 2.7. reading it, [ The lips
of the Priests keep knowledge, making it a plea for their Infallibility, as if
all things knowable were locked up in the Cabinet of their Breasts,] whereas in
the Hebrew it is, [the Priests lips should keep knowledge,] which is not a
prophecy but a Commandment; by those words God does not foretell that the
Priests should never turn from the true Doctrine, but forbids them to turn
from it: It Is equally absurd to make Commands Prophesies, as to make Prophesies
Commands; Moulin's Buckler of Faith, page 65.
as if Christ's foretelling [One of you shall betray me] had been a bidding them
betray him.

162. And the following Verses in Mal. 2. plainly shows, how those Priests lips
had not preserved knowledge, but had seduced the people and corrupted the
Covenant of God: They had forsaken the way and caused many to stumble, v. 8.
and must the Law be only a Rule in their mouths, as if God were beholding to
them for owning it? Cajetan Com nent on Matthew.
Cardinal Cajetan confesses thus much of the Popish Priests, that they which
should have been (by their places) the Salt of the Earth, had lost their
savor; and minded nothing but the Rites and Revenues of the Church.

163. Now, are such Priests fit to be confided in, in matters of knowledge and
goodness? (as de Clara would bear us in hand:) must the people only believe as
they believe? must they look after no other knowledge and goodness, but what is
to be found in those doltish, profane Priests? Our Lord gives us better
direction (than this quirking Friar) in bidding us try the Spirits, 1 John 4.1.
and prove all things 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. as those noble Bereans did, Act. 17.11. and
in telling us, that if the Blind lead the Blind, both falls into the Ditch,
Math. 15.14.

164. Those blind guides indeed shall lie lowermost and have the worst of it,
but woe to them that follow their pernicious ways hoodwinked and blindfold: This
is their implicit faith, (believing as the Church believes,) and their blind
Obedience (walking in darkness, and they know not whither) but can never be
judged invincible Ignorance to excuse from blame, (although Franciscus de Clara
do affirm it) especially here in England; where so many Bibles, godly Books,
and so much powerful Preaching may be easily come to.

165. The holy Scriptures were written that we might believe, John 20.31. and
we are commanded to search them, John 5.39. (that (...), a more sure word, 2
Pet. 1.19.) upon the testimony of which we must depend primario, and not upon
the Church (as they say;) for this is to leave the Fountain, and a going to
broken Cisterns; and it is a damnable Religion that keeps ignorant of the
Scriptures: They have Moses and the Prophets, etc. Luke 16.29, 31.

166. It is worth our observation, to take notice what difference there is
betwixt the Apostolical and Antichristian Spirit; the Apostolical Spirit says
thus: [ Moreover, Brethren, I would not that you should be ignorant, 1 Cor.
10.1.] he would not have them ignorant in spiritual things, but would have them
zealous according to knowledge; but the Antichristian Spirit is well content,
that the Brethren should remain ignorant and continue in blind Devotion.

167. This Popish Religion is therefore a blind Religion, (so dangerous and
damnable) because it puts out the eye of knowledge: Thus Antichrist says to
the Inhabitants of the World, just as Nahash the Ammonite said to the men of
Jabesh-Gilead; [ On this Condition will I make a Covenant with you, if I may
thrust out all your Right Eyes; 1 Samuel 11.2. that they might have been
disenabled from taking up Arms, and so become his Vassals for ever: Thus does
the man of sin blow out the lights of the Gospel, and takes away all means of
knowledge.

168. The Romish Priests are much like those (...) (or Lawyers) that Christ
speaks of, Luke 11.52. that took away the Key of knowledge, and neither would
enter in themselves, nor suffer others that would have entered. Those Priests
take away all means of knowledge, by which (as by a Key) men are to have their
entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven; they interdict them the use of the
Scriptures, which is the way to Christ, and consequently of Christ which is the
way to Heaven.

169. Knowledge is so necessary to a true Christian, that there can be no sound
believing nor Salvation without it: It is required to the being of Saving
Faith, as a necessary Antecedent thereof; for though there may be Knowledge
without Faith, yet there can never be Faith without Knowledge; for one
ingredient of Faith is Assent, which is an action of the Understanding, the
object whereof is truth; and there must be some knowledge and apprehension of
this truth, before we can Assent to it.

170. Though Knowledge be not Faith, but an habit distinct from it, yet it does
concur to the being of Faith, for no Assent can be without it; as there is a
Faith to be added to Knowledge, (for men may have Knowledge and want Faith) so
there is a Knowledge to be added to Faith, 2 Pet. 1.5. to wit, a more full
understanding of heavenly Mysteries: Yet so blind is the Popish Religion, that
it opposes the first sort of Knowledge, (which is an Antecedent of Faith,) much
more this, which is a consequent of it.

171. Their implicit Faith, therefore (where by they give only a general Assent
to all the Doctrines of their Church and Churchmen, whilst they scarce know any
one Article of their Faith distinctly) is a mere brutish unreasonable thing;
(not (...), Reasonable Service.
Romans 12.1.) like the motion of a Beast that is ordered by his Driver, but
knows neither whither nor wherefore; how can their Laity give an account of
their Faith, 1 Pet. 3.15.

172. How can their service (which is not according to knowledge) be acceptable
to God? It Is our duty first to know God and then to worship him; Scientiae
praecedit and Religio sequitur, says Lactantius, Institu. lib. 4. cap. 4. Our
Understandings must first be informed and then our Affections reformed; there
must first be a scire facias, and then a fieri facias; how can a blind Papist
do the Will of God that knows it not? this brings upon him a double guilt, to
wit, of Ignorance and Disobedience, both which are damning.

173. Ignorance is a damning Sin of it self, for there is Vengeance to be
rendered on them that know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. it exposes us to the wrath
of that dreadful day; it makes men Aliens to the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
through the Ignorance that is in them: So becomes it, indeed, a Mother Sin, the
Mother of many Transgressions, not the Mother of any true Devotion: How did
this Mother Ignorance bring forth Blasphemy, Persecution, etc. in the Apostle,
1 Timothy 1.13. and in the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 12.2. Ignorance is the proper Element
of Sin: where Knowledge is, there Sin is, tanquam Piscis in Arido, out of its
Element upon dry Land.

174. All wicked men are under Satan, but ignorant ones are in his very
Dungeon; this Sin is a Leprosy in the Head) if it be affected) and such are to
be pronounced utterly unclean, Lev. 13.33. That Ignorance (which proceeds from
a perverse disposition, which will not know God as Pharaoh, Exodus 5.2.) is
worse than hatred of God; for such Ignorance is the cause of hatred, and in
Vices the cause must be worse than the effect; this Ignorance makes us haters
of God.

175. There is a natural Ignorance, which every child of Adam brings with him
into the World, forasmuch as every man's understanding is darkened; and this in
Infants (being a part of their Original Corruption) is more than purae
negationis, but is also pravae dispositionis, as being ill disposed to know by
their evil Nature: Now where this simple Ignorance is, (without any stubborn
and wilful neglect, and contempt of the means of knowledge) there Stripes are
due, Luke 12.48. It is a sin and deserves Death.

176. Ignorance in things revealed and commanded to be known, may incur Christ
died ((...)) for the not knowings of his people, Heb. 9.7. Only such to be
saved that come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 2.25.
eternal death, though not so much torment; it is only fewer stripes, and as
Austin says, all that simple Ignorance can profit us in that day is, ut mitius
ardeamus, that we may burn the slowlier; but wilful Ignorance shall have many
stripes they shall have the hottest place in Hell, and God expresses great
wrath against such; [They that are ignorant let them be ignorant still,] 1 Cor.
14.38. if they affect it let them perish in it.

177. It must follow then that the Popish Religion is a dangerous and damnable
Religion, that makes a direct profession of this shameful sin, as if it were
the best way to do our duty, not to know it at all; as if the faith of a
ghostly Father would save us without our own; has God wrath for Heathens that
know him not, who are left in the dark to grope after him, Jer. 10.25. then
double Damnation attends those Papists that reject means of knowledge, saying
depart from us, etc. God will say to them, depart from me; as they to him,
depart from us. Job. 21.14. John 3.19, 26.


178. The same Romanists that have so little charity for us, saying [that a
Protestant cannot be saved] have a great deal of charity for the Heathens (on
whom the Lord has said he will pour out his fury, because they know him not)
maintaining that Infidels may be saved, though they believe not the Articles of
the Christian Faith, as if that were not necessary to Salvation: Thus through
their partial and ungrounded censures, they cast out the Protestants, and
receive Infidels into the bosom of their Church.

179. But Christ tells us that Heathens are strangers to the true Church, and
not Members of it; and such as are excommunicate should be as the heathen,
Matthew. 18.17. and our best Writers hold that Negative Infidelity is a Sin, as
well as a punishment of Sin, (though Stapleton and others deny it, from John
15.22.) [If I had not come and spoke to them, they had not had sin:] The Pagans
never had Christ preached to them, and therefore they believe not; so it is not
their sin.

180. How can that Text be understood absolutely? then it would follow that if
Christ had not come amongst the Jews they had not been sinners, and Gentiles
that had not the Gospel were without sin, which be both absurd; but Austin in
Tract. 89. understands Sin there, the great Sin of Unbelief, under which all
Sins are comprehended; and says expressly, that though those which never had
the Gospel, have some excuse for their unbelief, yet none for other Sins.

181. The same Augustine proceeds, saying, such as amongst whom Christ came
not, may indeed have their excuse for sin, but yet are not thereby freed from
being damned for Sin; for the Apostle is plain, They which sinned without the
Law, shall perish without the Law, Romans 2.12. Yet there are degrees of
Punishments, as there be of Sins, which Humane conjectures cannot comprehend;
they to whom Christ came and spoke, shall want this excuse; they cannot say we
have not seen nor heard him.

182. And in Tract. 91. in Johan. he says, others that can thus excuse
themselves, if they be not delivered from all judgment, yet certainly their
judgment shall be somewhat lighter, than those that had seen his great works;
for Christ did works which none other did: As the feeding of five thousand with
a few Loaves and Fishes, his walking upon the Water and causing Peter to come
to him; his turning Water into Wine, and his opening the Eyes of the man that
was born blind, etc. for which he deserved their best love; but having hatred
for Love after all these great works, their Sin was inexcusable.

183. To this Purpose also Chrysostom, ( in Hom. 76. in Johan.) says; the Lord
Christ having according to Moses Law, confirmed his Doctrine by mavelous
works; shows, that the Jews withstanding him yet, should have no pardon: For
Moses had charged them to obey Christ wrought Miracles as a Master, by his own
Authority and Command: All others but as Servants.
him, who proved his Doctrine by miracles, such as none other ever did; yea
themselves restified, that John 9.32.
[There was never the like done in Israel, and since the World began was it
heard, that any opened the Eyes of one born blind.]

184. Seeing then, not to have heard any thing of Christ, does not sufficiently
excuse Infidelity, because it many times happens through men's own fault; God
justly punishing their own sin thereby, with a denial to them of the Preaching
of the Gospel. Polan. Synt. Theolog. lib. 9. cap. page 591.1 Col.
Polanus says well, Ignorantia non excusat eos, qui fidei capaces sant,
quandoquidem ignorantia in Adamo, in quo omnes peccarunt, voluntaria fuit, et
debent omnes et scire et credere.

185. He says also, that Negative Infidelity (vel sola) damnat et a Regno
coelorum arcet: It is no hard matter to prove, that even the want of a due
preaching of the Gospel, and of a right propounding of the knowledge of Christ
to them, is a punishment for their sin; and sin can never excuse sin: Infidels
ought themselves to seek after the knowledge of the truth; now if Negative
Infidelity do damn the Heathens; then Positive Infidelity (such as is in
Papists, that hear and believe not) must needs double damn them.

186. The Papists are despisers of most clear light, of the truth that has
been spread before them by many famous men; so they sin against knowledge, and
have no [(...),] or pretense for their Sin: Minor erat culpa, ubi erat culpae
Ignorantia, says Ambrose lib. 9. Ep. 71. But because they say they see, as the
Pharisees (that saw the works of Christ;) therefore their sin (of a (...),
Twice dipped Scarlet Sin.
double dye) remains John 9.41.


187. But to let pass their blind charity for blind Infidels (which is a mere
design for up holding their Kingdom, and palliating their opinions about an
implicit Faith) I come to their uncharitableness toward us, in making us worse
than Infidels, and passing this partial censure, that Protestants cannot be
saved, though Infidels may: Coster. Resp. ad Refut. Osiand. propos. 8.
Costerus says, Fierinequit ut Lutheranus moriens salvetur. This is a brave
Romish Dictator.

188. And it is determined by a general Council and the Pope, that no man can
be saved out of their Church, as headed by the Pope, [extra Ecclesiam Romanam
nulla est salus.] that it is necessary to Salvation to be a subject of the Pope
of Rome: Yet can they take in Infidels and lay the Church (as common) to the
world, for as many as will but believe in the Pope, though they believe not in
Christ, whose Vicar he pretends to be.

189. How can this Popish Censure be of any moment, that Judges no Salvation
can be among us, yet if we were Infidels we might be saved; so we had but an
implicit Faith and believed in the Pope: But the choicest Saint and Servant of
God, (that has an explicit Faith in Christ) cannot be saved, if he believe not
in the Pope and be of the Church of Rome: Is this a Judging according to God?

190. If it had been essential to Christianity, and necessary to salvation to
believe in the Pope or Church of Rome; then the Apostles would have preached it
for converting the People, and would have baptized the converted into the Pope
and Roman Church, and it would have been inserted in some of those ancient
Creeds, or in some of the expesitions of them; but there is not a word in
Scripture, or any Ecclesiastical History, that intimates any of those Premises;
and sure such a necessary point would not have been omitted.

191. But Thousands and Millions were saved in the Primitive times, without
ever believing in the Pope or Roman Church; and Paul and Silas were much
mistaken, when the Jailer cried to them; [Sirs! what must I do to be saved?] in
answering him, [Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and
thy house, Act. 16.30, 31. According to the doctrine of the Romanists, they
should have directed them thus: [Thou must believe in the Pope and in the Roman
Church, and thou shall be saved.]

192. It cannot be proved that one Christian believed in the Pope or Church of
Rome, for many an hundred year after Christ, much less that all believed so;
yet for want of this belief, not only we Protestants are all damned by the
Romish Church, but such is their uncharitableness, that they damn all the
Christians among the Greeks, Moscovites, Armenians, Abassines, Aethiopians,
Waldenses, etc. that believes not in the Pope.

193. Baxter's Key for Catholics, page 262.
Mr. Baxter very acutely retorts upon the Romanists for this uncharitableness,
saying; If Charity be the life of all the Graces or holy qualities of the Soul,
and that which above all others proves a man to be justified and in a state of
Salvation; then judge by this Argument of their own, whether our charitableness
to them, or their uncharitableness to us and to all other Christians, be the
better sign.

194. And whether it be safer to join with the charitable or uncharitable? yea,
with them that are so notoriously uncharitable, as to condemn the far greatest
part of the Church of Christ, merely because they are not Papists. Thus we see
how their Principles and Practices be not Relatives, but interfere with their
professions; for while they cry up the Grace of Charity as the most splendid
grace of their Religion, yet in the mean time they are the most uncharitable
people in the world.

195. Indeed the Romanists argue point blank to this, drawing this general
conclusion from the charitable opinion of some well disposed Protestants.
Answer to Mr. Fisher's Relation of a third Conference, at the end of Dr.
White's Reply to Fisher. page 68.
[We see the Protestants, (at least some) confess, there may be salvation in
our Church, we absolutely deny there may be salvation in theirs; therefore it is
safer to come to ours than to stay in theirs, to be where almost all grant
Salvation, than where the greatest part of the World deny it.]

196. It Is great pity that our Charity toward them (which is a grace they cry
up so much for the luster and glory of their own Church, and which is a grace
that hops all things, believes all things, etc. 1 Cor. 13.6, 7.) should be
so wrested to the hardening of their hearts in their evil way; it is pity our
charitable opinion of them should give any Papist occasion to live and dye in
the bosom of that damnable Religion; whereas we should rather warn them in the
Name of God, to come out of Babylon, left they be partakers of her Plagues Rev.
18.4.


197. But when we say a Papist may be saved, Baxter's Key for Catholics, p.
262.
Mr. Baxter shows, (in loco supradicto) that it is with all those limitations:
As 1. We say, that a Papist may be saved as a Christian, but not as a Papist;
as a man that has the Plague may live, but not by the Plague. 2. We say, that
Popery is a great enemy and hindrance to men's salvation; and therefore those
among them that are saved, must be saved from Popery and not by it.

198. And 3. We say, that therefore Salvation is a rarer thing among the
Papists, than among the reformed Protestants: Where it is most difficult there
it must be most rare; many more of the Protestants are like to be saved, than
of the Papists. And 4. we say, where Popery prevails against Christianity, and
so much mastereth the Heart and Life, that the Christian Doctrine is not
practically received, such cannot be saved without Conversion.

199. Thus with those and the like limitations, the charitable opinion
concerning them on our part (which they improve so to their advantage) must be
restrained; which does not amount to such a judgment of safety in their way as
they pretend: Our learned Whitaker ad Camp. Rat. 10.
Whitaker sends this Summons to their great Champion, [Survey Heaven and all
the Heavenly host, look well into all the Parts and Coasts of it while you
list, and you shall not find there (upon my word) one Jesuit or one Papist.

200. For (says he) none shall stand upon Mount Sion with the Lamb, that have
received the mark of the Beast, or belong to Antichrist: Thus this great
Scholar (even in Bellarmine's own Judgment, who kept his Picture by him; and
wrote under it, Quanquam Hareticum, doctum tamen habeo adversarium) had not an
overcharitable opinion of Jesuits, (which have the mark of the Beast, and are
their Ringleaders into Error) and of Papists, to wit, such as hold the
doctrine of the Modern Church of Rome, and Council of Trent.

201. And our famous Hooker in his Discourse of Justification.
Hooker also says, when we say that a Papist may be saved, we do not propose
to you a Pope with the Neck of an Emperor under his feet, or a Cardinal riding
his Horse up to the Bridle in the blood of Saints; but a Pope or Cardinal
penitent, disrobed, and not only stripped of his usurped power, but also
reclaimed from his Error: Let them and their Proselytes abjure all their
pervertings of the truth and be converted, let them fall down prostrate at
Christ's feet, and he will not kick them.

202. Although many Protestants have this charitable opinion toward such
Papists as fall under the foresaid Qualifications, yea and also toward all
such as by an invincible and compelled Ignorance, resign up their own
understandings to their Priests and Jesuits; and look through such Spectacles
as those temper for them, not daring to contradict the dictates of their
Teachers, but are led on hood-winked in an implicit Faith and blind Obedience.

203. Such Papists, I say, so long as they hold fast the true faith of Christ,
without opposing any fundamental point of the Christian Religion; and
furthermore do (according to the light and Grace given them) with purpose of
heart cleave unto the Lord, and rely wholly and solely on the merits and
mediation of Christ both for safety here and Salvation hereafter; such as those
may find mercy, because they adhere to the Romish Church in other things
ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1.14.

204. This is the most candid Construction that our Charity can afford them;
and yet here be two things very observable. 1. That such as those though they
live Papists, yet they dye Protestants, to wit, in the principal foundation of
our Faith, [Justification and Salvation by Christ:] This Bellarmine himself
(their great Bellarm. de Justif. lib. 5. cap. 7. [Tutissimum est, it is safest to
rely wholly on the mexits of Christ,] though he had taught in his health, that
partly our own merit, and partly the merit of Christ, gives right to heaven.
Champion) was driven to for succor, when the terrors of death were upon him.
2. In our Charity there is no certainty for them, only a possibility barely
stated; They may be saved.

205. Yet we have no such Charity for such Papists, as live in States and
Kingdoms, where the word of God is power fully preached, and the Sacraments of
Christ be purely administered, where also much care is taken for their better
information and means used for reclaiming them from their Error, and
instructing them in the knowledge of Christ and his ways. Such Papists, I say,
being willingly ignorant, and wilfully shatting their eyes against the light;
their state is more desperate and damnable.

206. Those Papists are guilty before the Lord of an affected Ignorance, and of
a wilful despising of the knowledge of the Lord, when they might attain to it:
It Is not a bare want of the means of Grace, but the contempt of them that
damus, says Ambrose. Those say, in effect, unto God, Job 11.14, 15.
[depart from us;] as if God were below them; and with the Swinish Gergasites
desire him to depart out of their Coasts: How just it is with God to fill them
with the evil of their own ways, and to say to them (as they to God) depart ye
cursed?

207. These desire not the knowledge of Gods ways, Romans 1.28.
they like not to retain God in their knowledge, because their minds are
reprobate and injudicious* they love darkness rather than light, and Cain like,
they get as far from God as they can: How Righteous is Gods Retaliation upon
all such Reprobates, in saying to them, Ye have rejected my Company, I will
also reject yours, and as you will not know my ways, I will not know your
persons at the last day, Luke 13.27.

208. This is the Character of those Roomanists that live in those Countries of
the reformed Religion, where many famous Churches are founded, worshipping God
after that manner, which the Romish Church calls Heresy, as Act. 24.14. yet
teaching no other Doctrine than what Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles have
spoken before them; and without controversy all people lie under an obligation
to resort thither for true knowledge, where the Mountain of the Lord is exalted
on the top of the Mountains; God teaches his ways there, Isa. 2.3.

209. We have a famous example of those in the Ten Tribes, whose hearts the
Lord had touched with the finger of his Spirit, in that universal depravation
of Religion under Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 11.14, 16. The Levites left their Suburbs
and their Possessions that belonged to them, [a great act of self denial,] and
came to Judah and Jerusalem to do the service of the Lord in the Temple there:
And after their example, many people out of all the Tribes of Israel, (that
abhorred Jeroboam's Idolatry) came thither also for the true worship of God.

210. Oh! that the Lord ( who persuaded Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem)
may persuade all such Romanists to forsake the Tents of the Romish Church, lest
they perish with her Come out of her my People, (to wit, all such as set their
hearts to seek God, as those Religiously disposed Jews did) lest ye perish in
the way and partake of her Plagues, Revel. 18.4. as those in the Tents of
Korah's Conspiracy.

211. Moreover in those Reformed Churches, God has raised up many famous
Witnesses, who have discoursed the controversies betwixt us and them at large,
the sound of whose writings has gone even to Rome it self, yea and their own
Champions have set down our Arguments against them in their writings of answers
to them, (for which some of them have met with interdictions for reprinting,
lest knowledge, of the truth should come to light thereby, as Bellarmine and
Gregory de Valentia, etc. so zealous are they to keep people in ignorance,) by
those helps might understand their own Errors.

212. Besides in those reformed Countries, many blessed Martyrs and Confessors
have made public Confessions of their Faith, (even in the Presence and
Audience of their persecuting Papists) such as loved not their lives for the
sake of the truth, by whom much light was communicated; for those Martyrdoms
and Massacres were not done in a Corner, but were famous even in the Popes
Palace, (as Phil. 1.13.) and in all places which administered occasion to all
persons for enquiring after the cause of such sufferings.

213. Now seeing those Romanists living in those Countries, have so many
advantages for knowing the truth, and yet shut their eyes against all in a
pertinacious and incorrigible hardness of heart; their Ignorance is affected,
and pravae dispositionis, there is a price put into their hinds, and like Fools
they have no heart to it: Satan has filled their hearts to believe Lies, they
are (...) * self-condemned. Tit. 3.10.

214. Sed quid opus est multis? We have many Scripture Characters and
Evidences, that the Popish Religion is damnable, all which will make it appear,
that it is but blind Charity; and not only foolish pity but also plain cruelty,
to promise Life and Salvation to such Papists as be impenitent and repent not
of their doctrines and doings; and it is but a mealy-mouthed soothing them up in
their sinful state and sowing pillows under their Elbows, in those that fear to
say to them, that living and dying Papists, they cannot be saved.

215. The 1. Scripture Evidence of the Damnableness of the Romish Religion.
The 1. Scripture Evidence is, they are decypher'd in graphical terms, to be
such whose Names are not written in the Lambs book of life, Rev. 13.8. Those
whose Names are not recorded in the book of life, those whom God has not
predestined to be saved, from all eternity by the death of Christ; those and
those only should be worshipers of the Beast: Those that dwell upon the Earth
(or stand upon earthly Principles and carnal Doctrines, such as that
flesh-pleasing Religion consists of) wonder after the Beast.

216. This [Inhabitants of the Earth] is contradistinct to Saints, whose
Conversations is in heaven, Phil. 3.20. Now if none of the Beasts worshipers
have their Names written in heaven; it concludes strongly, that there is no
Salvation for Papists, living and dying in their Popish State and Religion;
they are not Elect but Reprobate ones, a people devoted to destruction, see
also, Revel. 17.8.

217. The 2. Scripture Evidence.
The 2. Script. evidence is [ Revel. 14.9.10. If any man worship the beast etc.
The same shall Drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out
without mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, and he shall be tormented with
Fire and Brimstone, etc.] This plainly demonstrates, that all the obstinate
worship pers of the Beast (which in my treatise of Antichrist I have proved to
be the Pope) shall drink of the wine of gods Indignation, because they have
drank of the wine of the popes fornications.

218. They that love the wine of Idolatry must at length pledge in the wine of
Gods Anger and severest Judgment, and this Cup of Vengeance (which is prepared
for them) shall not be allayed with the water of mercy at all, Jam. 2.13. no
mixture of mercy in their misery, as in the afflictions wherewith God exercises
his own people in this world; wherein god in wrath remembers mercy, Hab. 3.1.
and Stirs not up all his wrath Psalm. 78.38. whereas the Saints sip only of the
top of the Cup, those Sinners drunk up the dreggs of the fiercness of his
Anger, Isa. 51.22.23.

219. Those worshippers of the beast shall be tormented with fire and Brimstone
in Hellfire where they shall have no intermission of their tortures, v. 11.
they shall have misery without mercy and torment without end in the presence of
the Angels, who shall not only be Spectators but executioners also, and in
presence of the Lamb, for all their Agnus Dei. etc.

220. The 3. Scrip. Evidence is 2. Thessal. 2.10. The 3. Scripture Evidence.
Those that the man of Sin (the grand Antichrist) seduces with his lying
wonders or Counterfeit miracles, are such as be in a perishing State [in them
that perish] those whom god makes no account to save, he gives them up to the
strong delusions of this under-working beast. But as for those, whom god has
ordained unto life be reserves them (as his Remnant according to the Election
of grace) from bowing of the knee to Baal, Romans 11.4.5. So that none of Gods
elect are given up to this perishing State Math. 24.24.

221. Thus popery is called here [Deceivableness] because it it is a grand
Imposture, a Farrago of all kind of falsities, as their feigning Apparitions of
Angels and Spirits, their forging decrees of Councils for countenancing their
Supremacy of the Romish Church, their corruptions of the ancient Fathers for
defense of their lying Doctrines; their Piae frauds (as they call them) and
dissembling of piety for advancing their Religion, and many more [(...)] Arts
of consenage and Legerdemain Tricks.

222. Popery is a Circle whose Circumference is all kind of Imposture, and
whose center is nothing but unrighteousness; So it is called [the deceivableness
of unrighteousness] and this Religious cheat Captivates only perishing Souls
such as are (...), Jude. v. 4. men destinated to damnation, God justly giving
them up to vile affections, and of belief of lies because they received not the
truth in the love of it; that great Gospel sin brings just Damnation.

223. The 4. Scripture Evidence.
The 4. Scrip. Evidence is 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.12. because Papists generally are
despisers of the truth; [God sends them strong delusions that they should
believe a lie that they all May be damned, who believed not the truth, but had
the pleasure of unrighteousness] They blind their own eyes sinfully, and god
blind their eyes penally, and because of this wilful obduration, he gives them
over to Satan to Captivate both their Judgments and persons as he will, and at
his pleasure. 2. Tim. 2. last.

224. Look what a besotted Infatuation was Iudicially inflicted upon the
Idolatrous Jews [God Shut their eyes that they could not see, and their hearts
that they could not understand; and a deceived heart turned them aside. Isai.
44.18.20 they hewed the tree, warmed themselves and roasted their meat with the
Chips and of all of it, and the Residue thereof they make a god of, worships
it, and prays to it, saying deliver me, for thou art my god etc.

225. Such like sottish Dotage is found among the Idolatrous papists, in their
prostrating before their breaden God: They know it to be the fruit of the
Earth, the workmanship of the Baker, they behold it, touch it, taste it to be
bread, that (for the substance of it) Perishes in the useing, and is cast out
into the draught ( as Math. 15.17.) Yet do they fall down before it and prays
unto it, saying deliver me for thou art my god. The like stupidity is in them
to their Crucifixes, Roods and Images of Saints.

226. These and many more strong delusions (which the holy Ghost calls (...),
the Efficacy of error) are the Romanists given up to: The time would fail in
producing the many Instances that may be found hereof, and which indeed more
Properly belongs to the 2. Part of this Diatribe about their Relics and
miracles. I shall give but one here; under what strong delusion are those
Papists of Geneva Wolph. mem. lect,
That show the asses tail (whereon Christ rode) as a divine Relic and
perform Divine worship to it.

227. Dr. Sclater on 2 Thessalonians. 2. page 167, 168.
Dr. Sclater upon this Scripture shows very Solidly how Popery is a pack of
lies; as that God loves to be suited unto by saints and Angels mediators, that
our works are meritorious being done in grace, that a man may Supererogate and
exceed in duty what he owes to god. That baptism takes away whatsoever has the
proper nature of sin, that Souls pass hence to pains of Purgatory, that Christ's
death takes only away mortal sins; all these he confutes substantially. And to
those I speak, in my 2. Part of this treatise.

228. And would we know the reason why Papists are given up to believe those
lies, the Apostle tells us, it is, that they all may be damned who believed not
the truth where (...) is put for (...), (Judged, for condemned) frequent in
Scripture as John. 3.17. and in others places; the penal issue then is
damnation not only because they despise the truth but also they delight in
unrighteousness, which is the highest pitch of impiety they can dispense with
all Sins.

229. The 5. Seripture Evidence.
5. Scrip. Evidence is Revel. 19.21. that shows, not only the Pope himself but
all his obstinate followers also, and sworn Swordmen and servants shall be
destroyed, and though they shall not be so deeply damned as the beast and the
false prophet, yet shall they be slain (even the Kings that asist him and
uphold his tottering Kingdom) as to be made a prey to the infernal vultures,
and the greatest Sinners shall be the greatest sufferers, there shall be no
reasoning of any with money, as Isa. 13.17.18.

230. It Is said there, [the Sword of Christ shall slay the Remnant] not any
shall escape, but a severe execution shall be on all that take part with
Antichrist, in this his last battle at Armageddon: And seeing this Sword is
said to [come out of the mouth of him that sits upon the horse] it must not
be taken for a material Sword, but for the breath of his mouth wherewith he
will destroy Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and for that Sentence of death that he
will pass upon all his followers, saying [go ye Cursed]

231. This place of Scripture is an allusion to Ezekiel. 39.4.17.20. where the
destruction of Gog and Magog (the grand enemies of the Chruch before Christ's
coming into the flesh) is recorded. Now as that Prophecy was fulfilled
literally on them (being made a feast for the fowls of the air) both great and
small: So shall this be fulfiled Allegorically upon all the worshippers of the
beast, which shall be made a feast to the fiends of Hell, and then that
Prince-fowl of the Air (the Devil) and his Spirits shall be glutted with them.

232. The 6. Scripture-Evidences
The 6. Scrip. Evidence is. 2. Pet. 2.1. where heresy is called a damnable
thing [(...)] Heresies of destruction or damnation: It Is an Hebraisme, as a man
of bloods. Ps. 5.6. is a bloody man. Now heresy is a doctrine Contrary to the
truth which men choose to follow and will not be Recalmed from it: If such
doctrine be Simply held, it is only etrour, but if obstinately and
pertinaciously persisted in (of this more fully in my treatise of Heresy) then
it is damnable Heresy.

233. Heresy is Leprosy in the head, which is utterly incurable Lev. 13.29.
And because it therefore destroys the soul, this Epithet [damnable] is joined
to it, not so much restrictive, as intimating, that there be some heresies
which are not damnable, (and so it is to be restrained to the worst sort of
Heresies only) but rather. descriptive, as describing what heresy is in Suo
Genere, that it has in it a downing nature: Especially when there is a
Concatenation of them, as in this place.

234. The holy Ghost uses the word here in the plural number to point out to us
that there should be many of them linked together: and indeed one heresy
persisted in with an obstinate mind, ushers in others. [dato vno absurdo, mill
sequntur] Thus some Etymologists derive the word Heresy ab Haerendo because of
'its Glutinous property, men do pertinaciously cleave to it, but it is rather a
Greek word so cannot have a (d) Latin Thema but comes (...) to chufe an Opinion.

235. It Is a choice that cannont be reclained.
Such be the Heresies of the Romish Religion, as they are damning in nature, so
they are many in number, as justification in part by the works of the law: This
is a damning heresy If Paul say true, Gal. 5.4. [such are fallen from Grace and
Christ shall profit them nothing:] as their doctrine of merits de Congrue et
Cendigno, which is not holding of the head, Col: 2, 19. But a despoiling of
Christ his plenteons Redemption, and becoming Saviouts to themselves.

236 As also their congruent merits afforded by nature, their freedom and
innate power of will excited to apply and determine it self to Gods gracious
persuasion; Their expiation of Sins both of quick and dead by the unbloody
Sacrifice of their Masses: And many others [ejusdem forma] Which are both
tanght and believed of the Romanists, whereof I shall speak more particularly
in the 2. part.

237 The 7. Scripture Evidence.
The 7. Scripture Evidence is Tim. 4.1. Popery teaches many [Doctrines of
devils] (as I have showed in my treatise of Antichrist) their forbidding of
meats and marriages, their teaching the lawfulness of Committing fornication
(which is the divelifh Doctrine of the Nicolaitans Revel. 2.15.) Or worshipping
Idols, of murdering Princes and of massacring Protestants, and that, because
they are Heretics: Now these Doctrines of Devils must needs carry them to the
Devil.

238. The Apostle in this 1. Epistle to Timothy speaks of latter times, and
in his 2. to Timothy 3.1. of the last times: In the latter times those
Doctrines of devils are broached, to wit, in the times of Antichrists rise and
revelation, when the Antichristian leaven shall be spreading it self over all
christian Churches as 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.10. but in the last times (which he says
shall be (...)) to wit, about Antichrists destruction, the harvest of those
devil Doctriners shall be ripe, and God will cut them down with his sharp
sickle and cast them in bundles to the devil in Hell, from whence they came.

239. Thus both those times in both those Epistles have relation to Antichrist,
and the older Antichrist grows, the worse and more perilous times shall be; For
those Doctrines of Devils shall (like an Epidemical and universal Pestilence)
be so Contagious and catching, that men (yea good men) will be put hard to it
how to secute themselves from that overspreading Abomination; then the
Righteous should scarcely be saved, were not their Names writ in the Lambo book
of Life.

240. But as for those dwellers upon the Earth, (whose Names are not found
written in that Book) these doctrines of Devils prevails with them, and brings
in that black bedroll of Sin, (whereof sinful self Love is the first of 19, (as
the Root of them all) and love of pleasures the last,) all which lead directly
to damnation, and are found most predominant in the Romish Church (above all
others) which has a form of Godliness, but denies its power, 2 Timothy 3.1. to 6.

241. Having thus from Scripture Evidences, made this clear demonstration, [how
dangerous a Religion the Popish Religion is to live and dye in,] how can we but
conclude, that the Romanists are in a damnable State: For, 1. Revel. 13.8.
Their Names are not found in the Lambs book of life, 2. Revel 14.9, 10, 11.
They must drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, 3. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
They are in a perishing State, 4. 11, 12.
And believe lies to be damned, 5. Rev. 19.21.
[Depart ye cursed] shall be denounced against them, 6. 2 Pet. 2.1.
They hold damnable Heresies, And 7. 1 Timothy 4.1.
They ^uch and believe doctrines of Devils.

242. But some will object here and say, this is to pass the same uncharitable
censure of them that they do of us, and this is to conclude all that ever have
dyed in Popery, to be in a state of damnation: To which I answer, 1. Their
censure of us may truly be termed uncharitable, because it is unwarrantable,
being not grounded upon any clear Scripture Evidence, but arising from their
obstinate blindness, which causes them to Jude v 10.
speak evil of what they know not.

243. And 2. I answer, it is not we but the Word of God that judges them, by
which they must be judged at the last day, John 12.48.3. As we do not conclude
all Pagans (whom God suffered to walk in their own ways, Act. 14. 16.) to be
damned, for God might have vessels of mercy among them, some became Proselytes;
so nor all those Papagans, for some have held the head, Col. 2.19. 1 Cor.
3.11.15.
and been sound in the Foundation, although they lose their stubble yet not
their Souls; neither did Popish Errors come to their height at first, but now
their Heresies be more damnable than ever.

244. I might have added several other Scripture Evidences, as 1 Cor. 6.9. No
Idolater shall inherit the Kingdom of God: And Revel. 21.8. All Idolaters and
all liars shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. Now that Popery is Idolatry, and a
Compound or Cento of many lying Doctrines, I have showed before; why then
should we be afraid to say, that Papists (living and dying in the Trent Faith
without Repentance) are Castaways, and destinated to damnation? Why strengthen
we the hands of the wicked, that he cares not to return by promising him life?
Ezekiel. 13.22.

245. What warrant from the Word of God can be found of any hope that such
damnable Heretics (as has been made apparent they are) can be saved? or such
plain Infidels? in as much as they believe not, either the Al-sufficiency of
Christ's meritorious Passion, or the incommunicable Propriety of his mediatory
Office, (in which two points lies the very life and soul of true Faith and
Religion) and thus far they are Infidels in saying, that men must satisfy for
their own venial sins, and that Saints and Angels meritoriously intercede for
us.

246. What probability is there, that such Infidels (as believe not the holy
Scriptures to be the word of God, because God, their Author, gives such a
Testimony; but only because their Church says so, which at the best begets but
an Humane Faith) can be saved? The formal object of their Faith is not veritas
prima, but the Testimony of their Church; now it is not any humane Faith that
makes a true believer, he is no better than an Infidel in respect of Divine
Faith, and he that believes not is damned Mark 16.16.


247. Let none wonder why I call them Infidels, for notwithstanding their
belief of the Creed which they profess in Words, yet they deny it in their
Principles and Practices; and though total Infidelity be not found in them, yet
there is a partial Infidelity, (whereby part of the Gospel and the full sense
of sundry Articles of the Creed are denied by them,) they are guilty of. But
the Book entitled [Paganopapismus] goes further than I do, proving that Papism
is flat Paganism, and that the Papist resembles Pagans in sevenscore several
particulars: Thus he accounts them Pagans.

248. As they are Heretics, Infidels, so are they impenitent ones, which seals
them up for damnation; for the sin of Impenitency is inflicted on them as a
judgment of God, Revel. 9.20. The Turks (this Scripture shows us) were sent for
a Plague of the Romish Idolatries, and this Character together with the
prediction, holds Congruity with the Romish Church.

249. For as the Romanists are great Fornicators, Murderers, Idolaters, and
worshipers of Devils in their Images, none like them in late days; so they
obstinately and impenitently persist in their Whoredoms, Massacres, and
Idolatries. Notwithstanding God has laid desolate the Eastern Church by the
Turks for Idolatry; yet Rome (the Western Church) repents not of the same Sin:
Proximus ardet Vcalegon, the Eastern Idolaters are laid waste, and can
stupefied impenitent Rome hope to be saved?

CHAP. IV. The Fourth Property, It Is a Bloody Religion.
250. AS the Romish Religion is a Superstitious, Idolatrous, and Damnable
Religion; so in the fourth place it is a Bloody Religion, which makes the fourth
Property: All its laws (like those of Draco's) have been writ in Letters of
Blood; the Romish Church has not only breathed out threatenings in all Ages
against those of the Reformed Religion, like Wolves greedy of their Prey, but
like so many devouring Cannibals, have eaten their Flesh and drunk their Blood
even to an Inebriation.

251. The representation of this Romish Church to John in a Vision, caused in
him great admiration, especially for her bloody cruelties, Joh. 17.6. He
wondered with great Admiration. There is a gradation in the words, 1. That a
woman should be drunk, that is a greater shame than for a man to be so: 2. That
no liquor would serve her to find sweetness in and to be drunk withal but
blood: And 3. That no Blood must inebriate this Whore, but the blood of Saints.

252. Luther says, Cain shall be killing his Brother Abel to the end of the
World, but he is most bloody in his old days: Malice is commonly hereditary and
runs in the blood, and (as we use to say of Runnet) the older it is, the
stronger: Mr. Jenkins shows at large how the Spirit of Cain is in the
Romanists, and what a murdering Religion it is to the true Abels. See his
second part on Jude in quarto, page 179, 180.

253. Rome has ever been the Slaughterhouse and Shambles of the Saints of God
in this latter Age of the world, as Jerusalem was before her: Matthew. 23.35. As
it was not possible that a Prophet should perish any where but in Jerusalem; so
in Rome is found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were
slain upon the Earth, Revel. 18.24. Rome has had a long hand and has stretched
it out into all Lands, to butcher the Saints by her Authority It Is credibly
related that in the space of eight hundred years, Rome has been the death of
twelve Millions: Idaea Reform. Antichr. tom. 1. part 2. sect. 2. cap 6. One
Pope ( Julius the 2,) in seven years time of his Papacy destroyed two hundred
thousand Christians: Baleus de Actis Romans Pontif. lib. 7.


254. Rome Heathen has indeed done much against the Church, slaying its
Thousands; but Rome Antichristian has done more, slaying its Ten Thousands:
And as Rome Heathen exceeded all the other Beasts, in Daniel, for fierceness
and cruelty; so Rome Antichristian is made up of all those Beasts, The Feet of
a Bear, the mouth of a Lion, himself like a Leopard, and the Dragon giving him
power, Revel. 13.2. as if all cruelties were concentred in him See more of this
in my Treatise of Antichrist.


255. The Romish Religion then is but a beastly Religion, not only for all
manner of brutish uncleanness, (both practiced and palliated in it) but
especially for that belluine cruelty that has evermore been found in it:
Nothing of the meekness of the Lamb that came down from Heaven, but all of the
bloodiness of the Beast that ascended out of the deep, nothing of that wisdom
from above that is first pure, then peaceable; but all earthly, sensual, and
devilish in its whole Platform. Jam. 3.15, 17.

256. It Is worth our observation, that of all the Enemies of the Church, those
that are Apostates be the cruellest: Thus it appears in the Devil himself, who
is an Apostate Angel, and he has great wrath against the Church, Rev. 12.12.
[(...)] the sublimest Indignation, containing in it both perturbation of mind
and the highest inflammation of Spirit; Satan is a malevolous Adversary, he was
of the Church but left his first habitation, Jude 6. and now has a malignant
Rage against it.

257. So the Jews were of the Church, a peculiar people in Covenant with God;
but when they did Apostatize, and [Ammi] became [loammi] unchurching and
uncovenanting themselves, then they did degenerate into the cruellest Enemies
that Christ and his Apostles had, and therefore the Holy Ghost has stigmatized
them with this brand, [They please not God, and are contrary to all men,] 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. as if they had lost all sense both of Deity and common Humanity;
and become rather Ishmaelites than Israelites, Genesis 16.12. Against every man.

258. Thus also, what a Monster of Men became Julian, after he Apostatized, and
drunk in a persecuting Principle? like that unrighteous Judge, Luke 18.2.
he feared not God nor reverenced Men, but blasphemed our Redeemer, (calling
him a Carpenters Son and a Galilean,) and made more havoc of the Church
(though in subtler ways) than any of his Predecessors.

259 Such an Apostate is Antichrist (as I have abundantly proved in my treatise
of Antichrist) a degenerate plant, who Contrary to that great Caesar [Romam
Invenit marmoream, sed reliquit lateritiam] has changed Romes gold into dross;
And the Philosophical Axiom holds good in this case also, that Corruption Optimi
est Pessima: Rome degenerating from Christian to Antichrstian, has done the
Church of god more hurt, then ever it did, while heathen.

260. It Is a good saying of one, that a man can scarce step one step nigh Rome,
but he must tread upon a Martyr, because so many have been Martyred in her
Dominions: And and it is a curious Speculation of another that said; He thought
the Martyrs under the New Testament have been as many in number, as the
sacrifices that were slain under the old Testament.

261. Oh what Myraids of sacrifices were slaughtered under the Law, when
Solomon at one time slew two and twenty Thousand Oxen, and an hundred and
twenty Thousand Sheep 1. Kin. 8.63. and if those Sacrifices (of a sweet Odor
to the Lord (to wit, the Martyrs, do carry Congruity in number under the
Gospel, how many hundred Thousands then have been butchered for the sake of
Christ? and Rome Antichristian has been the chief Butcherer of them.

262. The Romish religion is such a Religion as the seed must always be watered
with the blood of Saints, otherwise it would not take deep Root in any ground,
it would not thrive in any Country. This improvement of Husbandry the Romanists
have carefully observed in all lands, where they have gone about to plant their
Religion, inverting the sense of that golden Sentence, to wit, Sanguis Martyrum
est semen Ecclesiae.

263. Oh! what a blood-thirsty spirit has acted the Romanists in all countries
and Kingdoms, where they have got power and opportunity to discover themselves?
There needs no plainer proof for this, then those Conscientious Martyrologists,
who (I am confident) would not for a world wittingly and willingly leave any
lies upon record. At the reading those dismal storys of murders and Massacres
which they have Recorded, Quis temperet a Lacrymis?

264. To give but a Scantling and landscape of some of them [Horresco referens]
as of that bloody Massacre upon black Bartholomew at Paris: wherein the
Cardinal of Larrain (that great limb of Antichrist) butcherd thirty Thousand
Protestants in a month, an Hundred thousand in one year (some say, 300000) upon
the news of which the Pope proclaimed a Jubilee for joy. And the Cardinal
(brother to the Duke of Guise) gave the messenger a thousand Crown; this was
matchless Immanity.

265. And the worse because it was ushered in with such notorious dissimulation
of friendship; For a Marriage was pretended betwixt the Prince of Navarre, and
the Lady Margaree (Sister to the King of France) to draw the chiefest of the
Protestants to Paris, and the Admiral [Coligni] was honorably received of the
King, who calls him his father and protested to the Admiral that he had not
seen any day in his whole life more agreeable to his mind then that, where he
assured himself to see the end of all troubles, and the beginning of a firm
and lasting peace.

266. Yet at the same time this same King ( Charles the 9.) gave a Commssion to
the Duke of Guise to Massacre the Admiral and all the Protestants, which they
had decoyed into their Net. And when Coligni was accordingly murdered, his
head was Cut off and sent to the King and Queen Mother, who Embalmed it and
sent it as a grateful present to the Pope, who thereupon caused the Massacre to
be pictured in the Vatican-hall*

267. Under one side of the hall was pourtrayed, Colignii et Sociorum Caedes,
Il. Mercurio Italico 92.
and on the other, Rex Colignii Caedem probat: The King himself (beholding the
bloody bodies of those then Massacred, and feeding his eye on so woeful a
Spectacle) breathed out this bloody Speech [quam Bonus est odor hostis mortui]
how sweet is the smell of a slain enemy. This was cruelty beyond that of Simeon
and Levi, in a deep detestation whereof good Jacob cried out, Oh my Soul, come
not thou into their secret, cursed be their wrath for it was cruel. etc. Genesis
49.6.7.

268. So likewise in Germany (after the Gospel was spread there by the ministry
of Luther and his fellow laborers) the Romanists did exercise the like bloody
Inhumanity by the Popes instigation upon the Protestants, the History of which
persecution is so full of Popish Cruelties, that I must referr the Reader to
that book entitled [the lamentation of Germany] composed by Dr. Dr. Vincent
Lament. of Germ.
Vincent, who was an eye witness thereof; whose Relations would melt a heart of
stone.

269. He tells us how some of those Popish Croats or Crabats taught their
horses not only to kill men, but to eat Humane and Christians flesh: And
consulted how to find out torments more cruel and exquisite then ever. What
shall we say to those Devils (says he?) Phalaris, Nero, Dionysius, all other
Tyrants and Tyrannies are incomparable to those new Stratagematists and
Engineers: Cautasus bred them, Tigers fed them, Hell taught them, and thither
(says he) I remit them.

270. And in the Netherlands what unparalled cruelties did that bloody
Butcher (Duke de Alva execute upon the Protestants, of all sorts, (both of the
Nobility and Commonalty) to root out the Professors of the Gospel, he permitted
his Soldiers to Ravish grave Matrons and chaste Virgins, many times causing
their Husbands and Parents to stand by and behold their Villainies: This Duke de
Alva boasted at his Table, that besides those he had slain in War, he had
hanged above eighteen thousand in six years space.

271. How many matchless Cruelties did the Pope and his Accomplices exercise upon
the Waldenses and the Albigenses for many Centuries of Years, wherein the
Inquisitors exceeded the inhumanity of their own Bishops [of Aixe, Arles, and
Narbonne,] insomuch that the Bishops told them, the multitude of those people
(they had apprehended) was so vast, that as it was not possible to defray the
charge of their daily food, so nor to get Lime and Stone enough to build
Prisons for them.

272. If any did but convey a Cup of cold Water, or a Pad of Straw to those
poor Saints that lay in stinking Dungeons, he was brought to the same
extremities with them: Some that were hid in Caves, had the mouths of the Caves
stopped up (with much wood) by the Papists; which being set on fire, many were
choked there with Smoke, others burnt with the Fire. Some that broke out of
the mouth of the Caves were cruelly murdered; many more cruelties of the Lord
of Trinity to them, may be seen in the common Maps of Martyrology See Luther's
Forerunners, Fox and Clark's Martytologies.


273. But as a Compendium of all kind of Popish cruelty, the Spanish
Inquisition was invented by the Dominicans, at first erected to reclaim the
Jews and Moors, but soon turned against the faithful Servants of Christ for
suppressing the Gospel, whom the Romanist Inquisitors brought to their Rack,
standing in a dark Dungeon under ground, with many doors to pass through to
drown the shrieks of the Tormented: The Tormentor (when Torches are lighted)
comes disguised like a Devil, to terrify the more (with his black Vizard) the
tormented Soul.

274. The first kind of torment in their Inquisition, is the Jibbet to which
they carry men and women naked, not allowing them either Shirt or Smock (as if
that could hinder the violence of the Rack from tormenting them enough) the
Tormentors binding their hands with a Cord eight or ten times about (each time
harder than other) and their Thumbs extreme hard with a small line, so both
hands and Thumbs are fastened to a Pully which hangs on the Jibbet, then have
they great Bolts on their heels, and between their Feet certain weights of Iron
hung upon those Bolts, and so are hoised up.

275. The poor tormented Soul hanging in this woeful extremity, the Inquisitors
bids them to accuse themselves and all other Heretics they know of: Then they
Command him or her to be hoised up higher to the very Beam, till their Heads
touch the Pully; and having hung thus a good while, the Inquisitors command to
let them down again, and twice as much weight to be fastened to their heels, and
so to hoise them up again to the Pully: Then they bid the Executioner slip the
Rope, (that they may fall down with great force) and in the mid way to stop
them, which together with the Strappado (they give them then) Rends all their
Joints asunder.

276. And if they still remain Constant, so inhumane and unparalled is their
Popish cruelty, that they add more weight to their heels the third time, and
the poor Wretch (already half dead) is hoisted up again, and railingly called a
Dog and an Heretic; and if in all those pangs they cry out for Assistance to
Christ, for whose sake they are thus miserably tormented, then these Romish
Scoffers bids, [Let Christ alone, and tell them the truth, what a crying out
upon Christ make thou? etc.]

277. Those Torments are usually exercised upon them for three hours together,
after all which to affright the poor Creature the more, they ask the Jailer if
his other Torments be ready, telling them that all this is but a flea-biting in
comparison of what is yet to be suffered: Then the Jailer sets their Joints as
well as he can, and drags them away by their Legs or Arms most barbarously to
Prison, and when the Aching of their Joints be most painful, then are they
brought to the Rack again, where the Executioner appears like a Devil.

278. If they still remain constant, they are again stripped and hoisted up
with weights at their heels as before; besides which they add another cruel
Torment, to wit, as they hang at the Pully, those Tormeutors bind their Thighs
together, and Legs about the Calf with a small strong Cord; and with a short
piece of wood, they twist the Cord till it be shrunk into the Flesh out of
sight, and in this terrible torment they let the tormented lie for two or three
hours.

279. And as if all this were too little, they proceed to another kind of
Torture (called Aselli or the Trough) which is a piece of Timber somewhat
hollowed on the top like a Trough, about the middle whereof there is a sharp
bar going across, whereon a man's back rests, that it cannot go to the bottom;
and it is placed so that his heels shall lie higher than his head; then is the
naked Party laid thereon, his Arms, Thighs, and Legs bound with Cords.

280. Those binding Cords are both small and strong, and wrested with short
Truncheons till they pierce almost to the very bone; then they take a sine Lawn
Cloth, laying it upon the mouth of him or her thus tortured; (as they lie
upright on their back) so that it may stop the Nostrils also. Then this
barbarous Executioner pours down a long stream of water like a Thread from on
high, which drives the Cloth into the Throat of the Tormented, and puts them
into as great an Agony as any endure in the pains of death.

281. For in this Torture they cannot draw their breath, the water stopping
their Mouth and the Cloth their Nostrils; so that when the Cloth is drawn out
of the bottom of the Throat it brings out blood with it, and one would think
tears out the very Bowels: This is iterated as often as the Inquisitors please,
and as if this were not still cruelty savage enough, they take a pan of burning
Charcoal and set it just over against the Soles of the Parties Feet, just
before he goes to Rack, and that the Fire may have more force upon them they
bast them with Lard or Bacon.

282. Lastly, to fill up their Ephah with matchless bloody-mindedness; if those
tortured ones will not still deny the truth, they condemn them; and attiring
them in Sambenito's, (which is a long Garment painted all over with See the
Book called [The discovery of the Spanish Inquisition,] out of which Mr. Clark
Collects his description of it.
ugly Devils) and putting on their heads a long and high crowned Hat, whereon a
man is painted burning in the Fire, with many Devils about him plying him with
Fire and Faggot; thus are they led away to the stake to be burned, with a
cloven stick upon their Tongues to hinder them from speaking any thing: This
measure, Mr. Nicholas Burton; (Merchant of London) met with in Queen Mary's
days.

283. I have been longer in the description of this bloody Inquisition, So
dreadful is it to the People in Spain, that a poor Spaniard (of whom the
Inquisitors desired some of his Pears, which they had cast their Eye upon) for
fear of offending them, brought them his Pears, Tree and all by the Roots. Dr.
Heysis Geogr.
that my Countrymen, being informed of those prodigious, horrible, and
barbarous Tortures these Popish Tigers execute upon their Fellow Creatures, and
Christians (such as cannot be paralleled amongst either Turks or Pagans) may
abhor this Popish Religion, whose Principles and Practices be thus savage and
bloody, as will make an heart (if not all of Stone, if any tenderness in it) to
shrink and tremble at them.

284. To say nothing neither of bloody Bonner in Queen Mary's days, (whom Mr.
Woodman demonstrates to be drunk with Blood, Fox Act. and Monum. fol. 1800.)
and his Accomplices; nor of those bloody Rebels in Ireland (in the year 1642.)
whose merciless Rage extended it self beyond Expression to all Ages, Sexes,
Conditions, yea and to very brute Beasts; and the report of whose Cruelties do
yet astonish both the Readers and Relators, which yet cries for Vengeance, as
those apparitions did a long time at Portendown Bridge, and as the blood of
Abel (of old) did against Cain their Father. Nor of those merciless Butcheries
the Popish Spaniards committed upon the harmless Indians, Fifty Millions of
whom they murtherod in Forty Years, as their own Acosta (the Jesuit) testifies.


285. Those Histories are commonly known and therefore I omit them; by all
which it sufficiently appears, what blood-thirsty Monsters the Romanists are,
that could never satiate their deep thirst, but ever (as Tomyris said of Cyrus
Satia te sanguine quem sitisti, eujnsque insatiabills semper suisti: Justin.
) has been insatiable of Blood: The Rabbis well understand the Romanists,
(those false Brethren the Popes Bloodhounds) by the Edomites, That pursued
their Brethren with the Sword, and cast off all pity, their Anger tearing
perpetually, etc. Amos 1.11. See the Parallel in Dr. Taylor's Romish Edomite.
Dr. Taylor's Romish Edomite.

286. The Burden of Duma in Isa. 21.11. (which is Idumaea or Edom) the Hebrew
Rabbis apply it to Rome, reading Roma for Duma, for there is great affinity
betwixt their Daleth and Resh, and their Vau is likewise read sometimes V and
sometimes O; and they say, Quia vix acriores hosts experti sunt Judai quam
Idumaos, ideo Romanos illis infensissimos, vocarunt novos Idumaeos. Dr. Ellis
bellum in Idumaeos. page 7.
And they call the Kingdom of the Pope, Regnum Edom impium.

287. Now Edom signifies [Red,] a Name put upon Esan, Geu. 25.30. not only
because he was greedy of the Red Pottage, but also because lie was Red in
Complexion and color of his Body, ver. 25. being overgrown with Red Hair all
over, importing the bruitishness of the man and the monstrousness of his
manners, in whose person God prefigureth the bloody and barbarous disposition
of such as persecute his Church and dye their Garments Red with the blood of
his Children.

288. Such bloody Edomites are the Romanists, for as the Edomites had an
ancient, intestine, and inbred Enmity against the Seed of God in their first
Founder, Esau, against his Brother Jacob, continued, yea perpetuated in Esau's
Posterity, Amos 1.11. and that notwithstanding the neerness of kindred between
them, Mal. 1.2. and the fair and friendly Carriage of the Israelites toward
them in their passage to Canaan, Deuteronomy. 24.6. and the Laws made after in favor
of them, above other Neighbor Nations, Dent. 23.7. yet none were so spiteful
and cruel to Israel as they, Amos 1.11. Obad. 10.14. Psalm. 137.7.

289. So the Romish Edomites have been found a bloody Generation by smarting
experience in all ages, and in all countries, whose malignity against the seed
and Israel of god, has been so inveterate and implacable, that no obligations
either of Oaths, asseverations, yea or of execrations could bank it in, much
less have they been bounded in with bonds of either affinity or Consanguinity.
As Edom of old not at all remembering the brotherly Covenant Am. 1.9.

290. The tragedies they have acted in so many Kingdoms and commonwealths
(notwithstanding all professions and protestations, yea and obligations of
oaths, to the contrary) does abundantly. Evidence this, whose cruelties has
exceeded that of Diomedes (who fed his dogs with man's flesh) or that of
Perillus [who tormented men in an hot brazen bull] and (indeed) all paralells,
unheard of among Pagans, Turks, or any Barbarians.

191. They are found most notoriously true to that damned principle of their
Church, to wit, [Nulla fides cum Haereticis] Keep no leagues with heretics,
and it is no more Sin to kill one of them, then to kill a Dog: Yea all their
other Principles are steeped in blood, tollerating Rebellion against King and
Kingdom, murdering of Princes, blowing up of Parliaments, kindling coals of
Devision (hotter then coals of Juniper) between confederate states, wherein
they live in too much peace, Witness many Kingdoms at this day.

292. Oh what maps of blood are represented to us, of Germany, Ireland, France,
England, etc. All which they made Aceldama's or fields of blood, wherein those
bloody Papists (with their vizards pulled off) acted more like incarnate Devils
then men of reason and common Humanity, to show that they are of their Father
the Devil [ who was a murderer from the beginning] and John 8.44.
the works of their father they will do: And Ezekiel. 21.31.
that they are a Brutish people, skillful to destroy. Ezekiel. 21.31.

293. It would make ones ears tingle and ones bowels yerne to read or hear
related, what those Engineers of cruelty acted upon the Stage of those several
countries, making it their sport to torture poor Protestants, and striving
which of them could be most barbarously exquisite in tormenting them, as if it
had been some meritorious and supererogating work in those firebrarnds of Hell
(like bloody Vulters) to suck the blood of Saints.

294 Except we enter into the confines of Hell, where can we find a fellow to
that Bloodthirsty Monster Idaea Reform. Antichr. tom. 1. part. 2. cap. 6.
(Cardinal Farnesius) who desired to wade in the blood of the Lutherans up to
his Horse bridle: And to show that their Religion is founded in blood, the very
Doctrine of that bloody Molock (Antichrist] and his Clergy, thrusts Instruments
of cruelty into the hands of their vassals, saying an Heretic loses all right
to all that he has De paenis Heret. Azor. Instit. mor. li. 8.
And being declared Heretics, any one may kill them though Kings or Princes
Symancha Instit. lib. 23. Sect. 11. and Sanders de visib. Monarch. l. 2. cap. 4.
Yea though they change their Religion, as Henry the 4. of France, by Ravilliac.

295 And it is no wonder if ( Edom like) they trample under foot all Covenants,
when they are taught, that by heresy all bonds and obligations of Nature, of
Covenant, of Oaths, and of duties are (ipso facto) dissolved, and Heretics may
be slain by sword, or by treason, even with the destruction of many innocent
Catholics: Oh doctrine of devils! yea that Hell-born plott of the
Gunpowder-treason found an Apology from this same Eudamon, approbation from
Claudius Aquavina, excuse from Bellarmine, and absolution from Hamon, all
Jesuits.

296. To conclude this 4. cursed property of the Romish Religion, (the
Bloodiness and cruelty of it) which is the fourth of those seven unclean
Spirits that (like the empty house, Christ speaks of Math. 12.43.44. it is
completely (in this number of perfection) possessed with. And this is an
unclean spirit with an Emphasis, a Diabolical spirit, from the old Manslayer,
that red Dragon which both rules in, and rides on (even, whipping and spurring)
the rageing Romanists, who do not only walk, but even run in the way of Cain
(the Devil's eldest Partriarch and the first Apostate) Jude 11. in Agarius
Instit, moral. lib. 8. cap. 13.
Eudaemon's Apologa pro Gathil. cap. 4.
Pridtaur Sermon on the 5. of November.
murdering and Massacring their brethren in Christianity: Cain is still
butchering his brother Abel, and the older he grows the more bloody he becomes.
That Scarlet whore has made blood her drink in all Ages, and yet the more
withered and wrinkled she grows (as those persons in a Hydropical Consumption)
the more she drinks, the more she thirsts; she is now become more bloodthirsty
unto this land, then ever, witness those Nimrods of our day the mighty hunters
after the blood of men, who instead of Sacrificing their beast or beastly lusts
unto the Lord, they do sacrifice men (even the Lords servants) unto the beasts
and unto their own beastly lusts as Nimrod did.

297 Assuredly this present generation of Vipers (that would eat out the bowels
of their own mother, the land of their nativity) was baptized with fire and not
with water, with fire of Hell, not with water and the Spirit: They have nothing
of that Blessed Dove in them, which descended upon Christ at his Baptism; there
is more of the Serpent (yea of the Dragon) than of the Dove in them: otherwise
they had never actually muthered Sr. Edmonbury Godfrey after so Barbarous a
manner, and that only because he took but an examination according to his place
of the Kings Sworn justice etc. And otherwise they had never Intentionally
Contrived the Kings death with the Subversion of Religion and government, and
merely because they stood in the way of promoting the Cacolick (rather then
Catholic) cause, of the Malignant (rather than Militant) Church.

298. I know not any name more accommodated to the nature (even the savage
nature) of those Romanists of our times, than what Moses gave those terrible
monsters of men in his time whom he calls the [Zamzummims] Deuteronomy. 2.20. The
Hebrew Radix [Zamam] signifies [(...) an Abomination, and the doubling of the
Radical Letters do double the sense and signification, intimating those
presumptuously wicked ones were double Abomination, they were doubly Abominable
both for wicked craft and for wretched cruelty: So those Zamzummims of our day
are grown taller by the Head and Shoulders (as Saul was) than all their
Predecessors, breathing forth nothing but Fire and Sword, in their burning of
Cities and bloody Butcheries, wishing (with cruel Caligula) that the
Protestants had but one Neck, that they might dispatch them all at one blow;
this is a clear demonstration that we are fallen into the very dregs of time;
the bottom of Liquors is the worst, because most dreggy: Hence it is that these
Brats of Babylon (and of the Son of Perdition) are more brutish than their
Ancestors and more skilful to destroy, Ezekiel. 21.31. The last bitings of the
dying Beast are most mortiferous; and now this Scarlet color (of the Mother of
Harlots) which is called in the Greek [(...)] twice dipped, in the Wool and in
the Thread, must needs be of a deep dye indeed, being dipped over and over and
over again in the blood of the Saints.

299. As haughty Haman swelled like a Toad and glowed like a Devil, a breathing
Devil, because the Jew (which is by interpretation a Confessor) would not how
to him, Esther 3.5. and was not this a mighty matter to mad him, so much, but
that he was set on by that old Manslayer. A small Wind will raise a Bubble, and
Ambition rides without Reins, especially having [Insessorem Diabolum] as
Tertullian's Phrase is, They must needs Run whom the Devil drives, and 'twas
below this proud man to foul his fingers with one man alone, this was too
little for his revenge, no less than an utter extirpation of that people, of
whom (as concerning the Flesh) Christ was to come. The whole Nation must perish
to satiate his vindictive fury and Phrenzy: This cursed Amalekite (being no
better than dirt kneaded with blood) reckons to make but one breakfast of all
the people of God. In like manner those proud Hamans of our day, have contrived
an hellish Plot for the cutting off of all the Protestants that will not bow to
that man of Sin, and acknowledge Antichrist (Christ's Office, to wit,) the head
of the Church, whom they know to be Christ's grand Adversary in all his Offices;
and to be of that cursed stock of Amalek, whom the Lord will destroy with the
breath of his mouth, and with the brightness of his coming: Yea, and this
Diabolical design had as much security for success (against all Ages, Sizes and
Sexes) as the Devil could contribute to it, and as Haman's had, which if it had
gone on, what an Acheldama would England have been, a Field of Blood, and in a
short time a public Shambles: Yea, God knows what may yet befall us, for Haman
is not yet dead, and there are not a few still that carry Cain's Club about
them as a sacred thing, all red with the Blood of Abel. Oh! pray, pray, pray,
that their Plot may be quite defeated (as it has been hitherto deferred or
hindered) and that things may be turned to the contrary, as Esth. 9: 1. By
sending from heaven to save us, by sending his mercy and truth, Psalm 57.3, 4.
when Salvation it self (as it may seem to some) cannot save us, and that the
Devil (who kept their ensuring Office) may deceive them in their lucky time, as
he did Haman and his Accomplices in his bloody designed day.

300. It Is remarkable that Rome was first founded in Blood, for when Romulus
built it, he tempered his Mortar with the blood of his own Brother Rhemus; and
that City (both Rome Heathen and Rome Antichristian) has been all along (since
its first bloody foundation) drinking deep of the blood of Martyrs in all the
Centuries: Surely she is well nigh drunk by this time, and then must ^he spue
and fall. Woe to that bloody City, Nahum 3.1. as she began and continued in
blood, so shall her end be. The literal Babylon of Chaldea is branded for a
City of blood, and yet the mystical Babylon of Italy has far out done her,
being another Damascus, or Hebrew [Damesec] which signifies a bag of blood; no
City has been more sanguinary than Rome, not only drunk with the Blood of
Saints but also of her own Children: ( Hildebrand was the death of six Popes
successively within the space of thirteen Years, and sundry other Murders were
committed upon her own Members. Jacob. Revius de vita Pontif. page 119. and
270. and spec. Europ. etc.) So that blood touches blood in that bloody City,
above all the Cities of the world: There has been such a continuation, and (as
it were) a Concatenation of so many horrible Murders and execrable Massacres
in it and its Dominions, Hos. 4.2. Their hands are full of blood, Isa. 1.15.
Their very tender mercies (if any such thing was) were no better than
cruelties: Prove. 12.10. But alas! not common humanity has been found among
those Romish Edomites, Obad. v. 10, 14, 16. 'Twas said of bloody Bonner, he was
full of Guts but empty of Bowels, therefore Rome shall have judgment without
mercy, that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2.13. Prove. 28.27.

301. God will Remember Rome, Psalm. 137.7. and bring an Evil, an only Evil upon
her, Ezekiel. 7.5. and so set it on as no created Power shall be able to take it
off: God will give her blood to drink for she is worthy, Revel. 16.6. that her
end may be like her beginning and continuance; for in her is found the blood of
all the slain upon Earth, Revel. 18.24. She has an hand in all the Wars of
Europe, Rome has ever been the Slaughterhouse of the Saints, and if the blood
of men cry for Vengeance, the blood of Saints does roar for it; yea, and the
blood of Kings, Emperors, some of which they have actually murdered (more
intentionally) and some of which they have poisoned with the Bread in the
Sacrament: As she has done, so God will do unto her, Obad. v. 15, 16. God
loves to Retaliate and to give severity for cruelty, Psalm: 18.26. Levit. 26.18,
21. Prove. 14.14. Revel. 6.10. and 13.10. and 18.6. etc. If the Blood of one
Abel had so many tongues as drops, and every drop a Voice to cry for Vengeance;
Oh! then how loud is the cry of those many Thousands, yea Millions murdered by
her: [Tot ora, quot vulnera] God will not pardon her murders, 2 Kin. 24.4. but
fill her with the evil of her own ways, Prove. 14.14. Rome's Ruin hastneth, who
dare shake hands with her hands so imbrued in blood, horrible to God and Man.

CHAP. V. The Fifth Property is, The Novelty of Popery.
1. THe Fifth Character of the Romish Religion is the Novelty of it, for which
it ought to be abhorred: The Romanists do indeed (but unjustly impeach us of
Novelty,) which (in truth) is their own Crime. The Maxim is [Actori, non Reo
incumbit probatio] the Plaintiff that affirms, not the Defendant that denies,
should prove his Plea; they complain of our Novelty, we defend our Antiquity;
they do scornfully call us Novellers, and ask where our Religion was before
Luther; we answer, our Religion was always in the Sacred Scriptures, where
their Religion could never be found: We can look beyond Luther, even to the
true Catholic and Apostolical doctrine, wherewith ours holds consonancy in all
points; but their brags and boastings of Antiquity is no better than that Cheat
which the Gibeonites put upon Israel, with their old Shoes and moldy Bread,
Josh. 9.5. As they did work wilily, teaching their Tongues to lie, and covering
their Falsehood with Rags of Antiquity, even so do the Romanists in our day with
their old Shoes and clouted, with their old Sacks, old Bottles, and old
Garments, to delude the World with their lying Doctrines; for when they are put
to prove the Antiquity of their Religion, they can go no higher than about a
thousand years ago; and such an upstart Original as this, made great Athanasius
to deride Arrianism (the elder Sister to Antichristianism) for its Novelty,
because it had no higher a Rise than in such an Emperors Reign: [non erat sic
ab initio] It was not so from the beginning, Matthew. 19.8.

2. It Is a Romish Scoff, that Turkeys, Hops, and Heresy came into England all
together in one bottom, to wit, when Luther's Books and Tindal's Translation of
the Bible were brought hither; as if no such Man as blessed Wickliff (with many
other faithful Witnesses to the Truth) had ever been heard of, and as if the
Writings of that holy Martyr, John Husse, had never been brought hither, and
wrought much good here above an hundred years before Luther's time; and might
not the mockers of the Jewish Religion take up the same Taunt against the godly
Jews after the great defection in their Captivity of Literal Babylon; saying,
Where was your Religion before Ezra? and where was your Church before him? It
might have been answered then, Our Religion is in the word of God, in the five
Books of Moses; but our Church has been in the bondage of Babylon, from which
God has mercifully delivered it by his Servant Ezra: So we may answer, Our
Religion has been ever in Gods holy Word, and will ever remain so; but our
Church has been in the Bondage of Babylon Mystical, (as they of Babylon
Literal) which the Lord has been delivering out of this many Years, by many of
his Servants in many Ages: Yea, and might not the Scribes and Pharisees have
made the same Objection against our Lord Christ (himself) and his Gospel for an
upstart Religion: This is well Anticipated, 1 John 2.7. This is the old
Commandment which was from the beginning.

3. It Is true, the Scribes and Pharisees might have pleaded for their
Traditions to be of more account than Christ's own Instructions, (just as the
Romanists do against us) because of their Antiquity, Universality, etc. for
assuredly their Traditions had been received in the Jewish Church, and had an
universal Approbation amongst that degenerate Generation long before Christ was
born: Yea, and during his whole life, all the Jewish Clergy, the Priests,
Levites, Scribes and Pharisees consented together as one man to maintain their
own Superstitions, and to suppress the Religion of our Lord Jesus; they having
been (with the people that were their Proselytes) time out of mind the visible
Church: Yet were these men nothing so profound in their speculative Questions,
as the Romanists are in our day, to require a Catalogue from Christ, of all the
Names of such as had from time to time professed that same Religion which he
preached (so contrary to theirs) to his own time. Had they required this,
Christ must have confessed to them that for the last three hundred years at the
least, no such Succession could be demonstrated; and yet our Lord rectifies the
Extravagancies of those blind Guides, by reducing them to the first Institution
(which is the best Rule of all right Reformations) telling them that from the
beginning it was not so, Matthew. 19.8. Yea and the beloved Disciple (which lay
in Christ's Bosom) seems studiously to decline all suspicion of Novelty in
saying; I write unto you no new Commandment, 1 John 2.7. as if he would have us
to have a jealous eye upon new Notions, seeing Truth is like Wine, the Older
the Better. Luke. 5.39. Gods people are called the Ancient People, Isa. 44.7.
that stand in the old way, Jer. 6.17. and walk in the ancient Paths, Jer.
18.15. but Idolaters are said to sacrifice to New Gods, such as came newly up,
Deuteronomy. 32.17. And whether those many he-Saints and she-Saints which the
Romanists do worship, be not so many new Gods that be newly come up, the Sequel
may discover.

4. The Romish Religion being brought to the touchstone of the Word, cannot
justly become a Loadstone unto any Souls (after a true trial of it) to draw
them after it; we should prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Now the best Religion is that which is truly the oldest Religion,
according to that Axiom [Illud verissimum quod Antiquise simum] that Religion
is the truest which is the ancientest; [(...)] new things are nothings, or at
the best vain things, says the Greek Proverb: Of Witnesses Aristotle
witnesses, that the more Ancient they are, the more Credible and Creditable
they are, because less corrupted: (...), Arist. Rhet. lib. 1. Antiquity if it
be right, is of great Authority; and hence Moses sends the Israelites to
Antiquity: Remember the days of Old, Consider the years of many Generations;
Ask thy Father and he will show thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee, Deuteronomy.
32.7. as indeed they did tell them, Judge. 6.13. and Psalm. 44.1, 2. Thus Bildad
bids Job, Enquire of the former Age, Job 8.8 of their [Radmonim] as the Jews
called their Ancestors, whose heart (they said) was as the Gate of the Temple,
large and beautiful; but the heart of their Posterity was as the Eye of a
Needle, narrow and of no Receipt in comparison, and therefore they are referred
to their Progenitors for better Information.

5. Yet this Maxim [quod Antiquissimum Verissimum] that is truest which is
Ancientest, must be taken [in sano sensu, and cum grano salis] in a sound sense
and with a grain of Salt; therefore did I affirm before the Authority of
Antiquity with this caution, to wit, [when it is right Antiquity] it is the
Noble saying of a Noble Writer, that Antiquity must have no more Authority than
it can maintain with truth: Old Age (says Solomon) is (indeed) a Crown of
Glory; but it is only so, when it is found in the way of Righteousness, Prove.
16.31. and not otherwise: Antiquity disjoined from Verity is but a filthy
Hoariness, and deserves no more Reverence than an old Fornicator or
Malefactor, which because old, is so much the more odious; and as Manna, the
longer it was kept against the Command of God, the more it stank; so does
Error, Enormity, and Heresy. Custom without Truth is but moldy Error; though
the Romanists call their Religion the old Religion, (which is their common
decoy) yet is it a moldy, putrefied, and stinking Religion; having not the
Salt of Truth to preserve it, and it cannot truly be called the Old Religion,
because it cannot be found in the Scripture of Truth. This Bellarmine himself
confesses to part of the Popish Religion, to wit, Invocation of Saints, saying;
[Cum seriberentur soripturae, nondum caeperat usus vovendi sanctis.] there was
no vowing (nor bowing) to the Saints departed, when the Scriptures were
written. Bell* de Cult. Sanct. cap. 5.

6. Suppose it may be said of Popish Superstitions, as it is said 1 Chronicles. 4.23.
[These are ancient things] old and obsolete, never a whit the better for that.
It Is here at best as in Books, some of which are adoranda Rubiginis; of adored
rustiness, which are of more Antiquity than of Authority: Laban, the Idolater,
pretends Antiquity for his Gods, in his Oath to Jacob, wherein he appealed to
the Gods of Abraham, of Nahor, and of their Father Terah, (all which served
strange Gods, Josh. 24.2.) but Jacob (in his Oath) rises no higher than his
Father, (swearing only by the fear of his Father Isaac) Genesis 31.53. Though the
Idolater pretended the Antiquity of his Gods, in his going so high as his
Grandfather, etc. yet surely Jacob that pleaded it not, worshipped the truer God
and more rightly. Thus the Image at Ephesus (which occasioned such a tumult,
Act. 19.) had its Antiquity, and could not be spoken against by any reason, as
the Town Clerk told the people: And why? because it was wonderfully ancient, so
ancient that though the Temple of Diana had been seven several times
re-edifyed; yet this same Image was never altered, Pliny lib. 16. cap. 40. Yea
so ancient, that though it was made by Canetias a certain Artificer as Records
relate, yet for the great Antiquity of it, those covetous and idolatrous
Priests gave out, that it did fall down from Jupiter, to make it the more
venerable amongst the blind Heathens, Act. 19.35. And by a craft not much
unlike this of those Pagan Craftsmen, the Papagan or Popish Priests do now show
some shivers of the Cross whereon our Lord suffered, yea some shreds of the
tale of the Ass, whereupon he rode to Jerusalem: To go yet higher, sinning and
lying are ancient things, as ancient almost as the world; yet are they not the
better but worse for this Antiquity; neither does Christ hereby commend the
Devil in calling him a Murderer from the beginning, John 8.44. All ancient
things are not the best things.

7. But to come closer to the point, and to show that the Romish Religion is so
far from any true Antiquity, that it is no better than a Novice, Novelty, and a
mere Innovation, and therefore the charge of Novelty the Romanists would fasten
upon us, ought (indeed) to be retorted upon them; they do crastily to call
[Novellers] first, and it may be they learned this craft from Ahab (that sold
himself to work wickedly) who first called the Lords Prophet [Atroubler of
Israel,] but the Prophet retorts it back upon him saying, Thou and thy Fathers
house be the troublers of Israel, 1 Kin. 18.17. or rather, the Romanists might
learn this craft from Korah and his Conspirators, that accused Moses and Aaron
for taking too much upon them, when indeed it was their own Crime; and
therefore 'twas justly charged (by way of retortion) upon them by Moses, what
they had unjustly charged upon him and Aaron, Numb. 16.3, 7. And thus our
retorting upon Popery the charge of Novelty wherewith the Papists falsely
reflect upon us, is warranted by Scripture. And here I cannot omit how Scaliger
truly and trimly told the Jesuits, [Nos non sumus Novatores, sed vos estis
Veteratores.] we are not young Novellers, but sure I am; you are old Cheaters.
The truth of this learned man's Testimony will be more evident in handling the
Jesuits tricks in Chapter 6.

8. The Novelty of Popery appears in the sequel more particularly, although
we be able (as has been said) to look far beyond Luther, yet sure I am, the
Romanists (in their present faith) cannot look beyond Antichrist, I mean the
Western Antichrist, the Pope. Assuredly Popery rose not until the Star
[Wormwood] fell, which was not till the third Angel sounded, Revel. 8.10. which
must be after that great flood of Arrianism, that seemed to drown the World
again, insomuch that the good Father cried out totus mundus fit Arrianus. Now
this great Star, blazing Comet, or burning Meteor, must needs be that grand
Apostate of Rome, whom Phocas (the Parricide) set up in his Chair of
Pestilence, and this great Star is called [Wormwood] not only because he was in
the Gall of Bitterness himself, but also because he imbittered others, and
proved exceeding bitter to others: He was the Son of Perdition (so called) both
Actively and Passively, in working the destruction of others, and being for
destruction himself at last. After Gregory the Great (in the sixth Century) who
was the worst of all the Popes that went before him, and the best of all them
that came after him: Boniface the Third was his immediate Successor in whom
there was a great fall from Primitive Integrity into the deepest Gulf of
Impiety, and then arose the smoke of the Bottomless Pit, Revel. 9.1, 2. to wit,
Heretical Opinions; insomuch that all the old Heretics were said to flee and
hide themselves in the Popish Clergy. Then did the smoke of
School-Divinity-Notions darken the Sun or light of the Gospel, and this Star
falling by degrees so far as to adore St. Ignorance so much, that the works of
Bellarmine (their great Champion) and of Gregory de Valentia, were not allowed
to be sold in Italy, because the Arguments which the Protestant Authors use in
their own defense, are rehearsed in them. The longest look the Romanists can
take, is at this blazing Star, that Lieutenant General to the Dragon who sent
forth whole bands of Locusts, to wit, Monks, Friars, Priests, and Jesuits, both
numerous and voracious, Rev. 9.3.

9. Even their own Bellarmine speaks something that has a tendency to the
gradual falling of this Star [Wormwood] saying, Ab eo tempore quo per vos papa
Antichristus esse capit, non modo non erevit ejus imperium sed semper magis ac
magis decrevit, Bellarm. do Pap. Romans lib. 3. cap. 1. Since (says he) you
Protestants began to call the Pope Antichrist, he did not only not increase,
but a great part of his Command and Commodity has decreased, and is lost.
Whence I note by the way, it is not cautelously done by any of our Divines (in
my judgment) so much as to doubt at this day who is the Antichelst? Seeing we
have here their own great Champion, [quasi Reum pene si non plane confitentem]
as if guilty almost if not altogether confessing the thing, and the rather
because he does so ingeniously acknowledge that the very calling the Pope
Antichrist, has been an Ordinance in Gods hand to bring down the Kingdom of
the Beast and to make this bitter Star fall gradually: And how probable it is,
that the Key of the bottomless Pit was given to this falling Star (falling from
the heavenly doctrine of the Christian Church at Rome in the Apostles time, and
after down into the Carnal and Earthly Religion of the now Romish Antichristian
Church) with which Key he lets into the bottom less Pit Souls innumerable,
insomuch that in the days of Hildebrand (that Pope which was called The Brand
of Hell, alluding to his Name) some Letters were set forth as sent from Hell,
wherein the Devil and his Angels give the Popish Clergy many thanks for sending
them in so many Souls, as they never had in any Age before: Now if Popery began
at this Star, then it cannot be accounted an ancient thing.

10. I know the Romanists use to beguile people, by telling them that men of
their Religion built all the Churches, Colleges, Hospitals, etc. in all the
world. To which I answer, 'twas not men of the Popish but of the Christian
Religion, that did most of those things. Constantine built a Church on Mount
Calvary, and Justinian built another at Constantinople, and our Ethelbert built
Paul's here at London. These were all done before the fall of the Star
[Wormwood,] or before Popery was heard of in the World, and before the man of
Sin (that mystery of Iniquity) was revealed. It Is true indeed, Dolman, alias
Parsons, does labor in the very fire to defend the Antiquity of the Romish
Religion here, making all the three Conversions of England to be from Rome and
to the Romish Faith, but the absurdity hereof appears out of their own
Baronius. Who 1. confesses that Joseph of Arimathea came into England nine
years before Peter went to Rome, from whence it necessarily follows, that our
Church must be ancienter than that at Rome by nine years. 2. The Christians
here kept their Easter after the Eastern manner upon the fourteenth day, which
they would not have done had they received the faith from the Western Church
from Rome. 3. Pope Victor (in the second Century) would have altered this
custom, had this Land been then under his Jurisdiction. 4. The Mother of
Constantine [Helene] one of this Island, did not hold any such points of
Popery, as the Romish Church now holds.

11. To these add 5. Pelagius (one of this Island also) differed not from
Augustine (in the Third Century) only in Freewill and Original Sin, no other
Popish points were known to them or discussed between them. 6. Pope Elentherius
did acknowledge our King Lucius to be Gods Vicar in his own Land, which was far
from those Ambitious Popes (his Successors) who make themselves Gods Vicars in
all Lands: As to that pretended Conversion by Austin (that Arrogant Monk) which
Dolman would defend; it is answered, that factious fellow found much opposition
here about his imposing upon our Ancestors, those Romish Rites of Easter day,
Church-musick, Letany, single life of Priests, processions, etc. (though at
that time we read not a word of Pardons, Indulgencies, Transubstantiation, the
Sacrament in one kind, etc. all of them upstart things.) Hereupon Austin the
Monk (thus opposed) does conspire with King Ethelfred to cut off 1200 of his
Opposers, to wit, the holy Monks of Bangor, who were altogether unlike the
Monks in after Ages, for they lived by the sweat of their brows, and by the
labor of their hands, and gave themselves to Fasting and Prayer, not only lest
the Christian Britains should be overrun by the heathen Saxons, but also lest
they should be corrupted by the Romish Superstitions, which this insolent
Austin (whom they discerned and disowned, as no man of God, by his pride and
ambition) would have (from Gregory in the sixth Century) intruded upon them:
hence Gregorii Vicarius was justly styled Gregis Sicarius, and his Reformation
(so called) was rather a Deformation; yea, his Conversion (as Dolman terms it)
was rather a Perversion; and, which is worse (as much as in him lay) a plain
Eversion, in the slaughter of those holy men: so that, instead of a Prophet's
Reward, he better deserved the Punishment of a Murderer; Beda, lib. 2. cap. 2.
Isaac. Chronol, page 406. Fuller's Chur. Hist. 2. b. 10. Anno Dom. 605.

12. I might add many other Witnesses, which all do witness that the Christian
Religion (which is the same that we Protestants do protest to profess and
practice) was long before the Romish Religion (as now it is) found any footing
amongst us; and that many in this Island suffered Martyrdom for it in the time
of Diocletian the Emperor, long before this Austin; Beda hist. lib. 3. Bishop
Usher De Primord. Eccles. Britan, p. 102, and De Ecclesiae statu and Successu,
at large; and Aicentinus in his Annals lib. 3. to say nothing of Pareus,
Osorius, or of the Magdeburg Centurists (whom Dolman scornfully calls a
Quadrilio, or round Table, because writ by four men; Illyricus, Vigandus, Judex
and Faber) because prejudiced against them. Their own Gregory of Monmouth
confutes that fond opinion of Pope Gregory's sending this Austin to plant the
Christian Faith in this Island, seeing it had been planted here above four
hundred years before Austin's time, saying [In patria Britonum adhuc vigebat
Christianitas, qua ab Apostolorum tempore nunquam inter cos defecerat] it had
never failed amongst them since the Apostles times. And that Austin found many
great places, all furnished with good religious men, Greg. Monmouth de Britan.
Gestis lib. 8. To say nothing of look beyond Luther at large, and of Dr.
Humphrey, in his Prax. Jesuitismi, fol. 17. who shows how many witnesses Oxford
has afforded against the Romish Religion (which I speak largely of in my
Appendix to the Treatise of Antichrist.) I shall conclude this Paragraph with
setting Dolman against Dolman, who confesses ingeniously (in his page 19.)
that either Simon Zelotes (the Apostle) or Joseph of Arimathaea (the Disciple)
brought Religion into this Land from Jerusalem: Hence I Argue, if it came
hither first from Jerusalem, then it came not hither first from Rome, as he
elsewhere says.

13. Moreover, if we consider either the name or the thing, the Novelty hereof
will be more evident. 1. Consider the name [Papist] it is but a novel name, and
not found among the Ancients. What need any further Testimony of this, when
their own Father Bristow does confess it; saying (in his eighth Demand) that
the name [Papist] was never heard of till the time of Pope Lee, in the fifteen
hundredth year of Christ: Habemus reum Confitentem, it is enough. The Testimony
of an Adversary against himself is unquestionable. Secondly, Consider the thing
[Popery] in its Popish Points; which are all novel Points, and not known to the
ancient Church. We are able to show the first Authors of their corrupt
Doctrines, which were not received into the Church for six hundred years after
Christ: and, though we could not do this, yet would it not follow that the
Romish Church is the true ancient Church. For, first, Many Heresies did spring
up after the Apostles time, yet none knew how, 1 John 2.18. and 4.1. yea,
Popery (it self) began to work at that time, 2 These. 2.7. Secondly, The Head of
some Errors may be as hard to discover as the Head of the River Nilus; and the
rather, because Satan (that Super-Seminator) sows his Tares in the night, while
men slept, Mat. 13.15. They are so privily and so creepingly brought in, Gal.
2.4. 2 Timothy 3.6. 2 Pet. 2.1. and Jude 4. But, above all, that Grand Error of
Popery (in as much as it is called a Mystery of Iniquity) was foisted in less
discernably. Thirdly, The Romanists themselves do acknowledge, that there are
many Errors crept into the Church, the first Authors whereof cannot be named.
And Fourthly, It would be enough to discover the Novelty of Popery, by
demonstrating that it cannot be found in the Holy Scriptures, which is the
truest Antiquity.

14. I have already discovered the Novelty of many Popish Points of the Romish
Religion, in page 26. Paragraph. 65, 66. etc. of this Treatise. That they were
not from the beginning, but are all additions by the man of sin, and therefore
accursed, Revel. 22.18. My Additions therefore thereunto shall be such only, as
my brevity proposed can admit; to say but little to their inferior practick
Points; as of their Popish Beads, Holy Water, Missal Vestments, Latin Service,
etc. 1. The use of their Beads in their blind devotion, came not from Peter the
Apostle, but from Peter the Hermit, that Trumpet to the Holy War (so called)
who taught them the manner of praying with Beads, that thereby they might
reckon their Prayers: as if God should be verily in their Debt, for their so
many Pater Nosters and Ave Mary's; whereas true Devotion is not so much
[Numeranda ut Ponderanda] numbered as pondered with the Lord: he will have
weight and worth in right Prayer, and not Vain babbling, Mat. 6.3. Battilogia
Pentificia vel ipsum Satanam pudeat. Their vain Repetitions are so gross and
shameless, that the Devil himself (had he any shame in him) would be ashamed of
them, faith learned Beza. 2. Their Holy Water Polidor Virgil makes Pope
Alexander the first to be its Author, Anno Domini 118, or 121. see Prideaux his
Introduction, page 69. I confess they may go to Nama Pompilius and other
Heathens, for consecrated Water (long before this Pope Alexander) for they had
their (...) at their Idol-Temple doors; and their Baronius alleges Juvenal's
sixth Satyr for their Lustral Water. Surely this is not an Antiquity for the
Romanists to boast of, to borrow from Devil-worshippers.

15. It must not be denied that if their Holy Water be derived from Numa
Pompilins, it has Antiquity in it, because Numa was seven hundred years before
Christ; a good Warrant for Christian Holy Water: and in nothing better than in
this, that Numa was a reputed Conjurer, and so a fitter Author of that conjured
Water: It is truly called so from their own form of consecrating this Holy
Water; which is as follows [I conjure thee, O thou Creature, Water, in the
Name of God the Father Almighty, and in the Name of Jesus Christ the Son, and
by the power of the Holy Spirit] with certain Prayers mumbled over it; then
they blasphemously equal it to the blood of Christ for purging away sins, you
may suppose it is only such Sins as have no deep rooting in us, that a few drops
of this Holy Water can wash away. I wonder they should overlook that Holy Water
mentioned, Numb. 5.17. there is Antiquity indeed, (better than Baronius's sixth
Satyr of Juvenal. Baron, Annal. ann. 44.) but the mischief is, that was an Holy
Water that caused the Curse, Number. 5.21. Water is indeed an Element that God
has given us, both for Natural and Celestial use: the first in Household
Affairs, the second in the Sacrament of Baptism: these are truly ancient
things; but the Romanists converting it (beyond all Divine Ordination) by their
Exorcisms and Enchantments, to other Magic and Idolatrous Uses: This is a mere
Novelty and Nullity. The words of their Exorcisms run thus [Exorcizo te Aqua
Benedicta, ut fias aqua exercizata, etc.] that thou may have power to drive
away Devils. Oh ridiculous. Much more might I say to this point, but my Book
(intended little) swells much already.

16. So I must be abrupt in it, as likewise, 3. In their Missal Vestments,
wherein they do plainly Judaize; yea, more than so, or rather Heathenize it
therein: For, 1. They cannot plead the Garments of the Levitical Priesthood,
seeing this were to send the Messiah to Moses School, and so to deny that
Christ is come in the Flesh, Which is the spirit of Antichrist, 1 John 4.2, 3.
for Christ, by his coming, changed the Law of the Levitical Priesthood, Heb.
7.11. and, together with it, the Rites and Apparels; which glittering Garments
could not congruously correspond with the Simplicity of the Gospel. 2. Popish
Priests do more than Judaize, in as much as they abound more in their Holy
Garments than ever the Mosaical Priests did; for the High Priests had but seven
Garments appointed them, and the other Priests but two; yet the Popish Priests
have six, their Popish Prelates nine more, Ration. Divin. Offic. lib. 3. cap.
1. and Bellarm. lib. 2. de Miss. cap. 14. And the Popes in their Pontificalibus
(said Erasmus) may better be compared to Julius Caesar, Alexander and Croesus,
than to Christ, or to any of his Apostles; Illyricus Catal. Test. Verit. page
2052. Yea, Bernard (long before Erasmus) said, that the Pope in his pomp was
more like the Successor of Constantine, than of Peter, Idem ibidem 163. Greg.
Nazian. etc. 3. They do plainly Heathenize, which is worst of all; for
Tertullian says (de Corona Militis) [mihi creed, hoc Rita, habitu and Apparatu
Idolis immolatur:] In such like Vestments (believe me) the Heathens do
sacrifice to their Idols.

17. They do heathenize in their Holy Garments, in their Holy Water, and in
many other things, if we believe Baronius; who says, not only their Lustral
Water, and sprinkling of Sepulchers may be found in Juvenal's sixth Satyr (as
before) but also, their Lights in Sepulchers are mentioned in Suetonius his
Octavius; and their Lamps lighted upon Saturdays, in Seneca's 96th Epistle; and
distribution of Tapers among the people, in Macrobius's Saturnals, etc. Good
Warrants all; as if God had never said to his people [Be not like unto the
Heathen, do not conform to their customs] Matthew. 6.8. not so much as to name
their Gods (without abhorrency) Exodus 23.13. Psalm. 16.4. Yet Cardinal Bembus
most grossly affirms of their St. Francis [Quod in Numerum Deorum ab Ecclesia
Romana sit Relatus] that he was reckoned by the Romish Church among the number
of the Gods. This must be the Heathen Gods, for Christians know but one Only
and True God, 1 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6. The Gods of the Heathen are good fellows
(thirty thousand of them in Hesiod's time, (as his Verse snews) (...)) the
Romanists have made them a great Army since that time, with their St. Francis,
and many other Canonized Saints; much good may this good fellowship do St.
Francis. It was the Devil's Grammar that first taught to decline Deum in the
Plural Number [Ye shall be as Gods] Genesis 3.5.) but the true God is a jealous
God, and will not share his Glory with another, Isa. 43.10, 11. and 45.5, 6,
14. and 48.11. But to return to their Priestly Vestments.

Assuredly, such Vestments were not known in primitive times, nor were they
reputed among necessary things in that first Council, Act. 15. wherein the Holy
Ghost sat President. The necessary things are there mentioned, but not
Garments; and Paul bids Timothy be content with Food and Raiment, 1 Timothy 6.6,
7. but he bids him not load himself with Pontifical Raiment, yet speaks he of
Women's Raiment in Chap. 2. The Novelty hereof therefore appears that it is not
found in the Word, but only in the Synodal Acts of Anselm in the eleventh
Century, Anno Dom. 1106. as Authors show.

18. Fourthly, their Latin Service is a mere Novel Novice Device, which has
the Inscription of the Heathen Altar at Athens, Act. 17. upon it [to the
unknown God.] It is not a getting under the Tree of Knowledge, and looking
toward the Tree of Life; it is not a praying with the Understanding, and using
[(...), Words easy to be understood, 1 Cor. 14.9, etc. Thus its absurdity
appears; when a Popish Priest gets into a corner, and mumbles over his Latin
Services, which the people cannot so much as hear, much less understand; but
least of all, how can they say Amen to it, as Christ (in his Apostle) commands,
but Antichrist forbids? Their own Commentators confess it were more to
edifying, but the Church has allowed it upon weighty Grounds. Why do they not
preach in Latin as well as pray? Dr. Davenant Determ. page 185. and the Novelty
of it appears in this, that Pope Vitalianus appointed Latin Service^ in the
year 666. the Number of the Beast, Rev. 13. last. Magdeburg. Cent. 7. cap. 6.
page 141. and Osian. Cent. 7. cap. 10. page 191. etc. Balaeus, Cent. 1.

19. The Conclusion, Thus might I enlarge in showing the novelty of all the
other inferior, yea, and superior points of the Popish Doctrine and Practice;
but to avoid prolixity, I shall only make a reference of them to Authors: the
first Author is Duplessis, or Philip Mornaeus, De Sacra Eucharistia who shows
the Novelty of the foppery of Popery. He says first, that about the year 340.
they began to give [Panem Vino intinctum] Bread dipped in Wine before they took
away the Cup, page 270. which was not done till Thomas Aquinas time, page 257,
297, 298. the Eastern Church using both. 2. Worshipping of Images began from
the second Lateran Council, which established it, page 447. Which Council
brought in also, 3. the Canon of the private Mass, about the year 1200. page
605.4. Forbidding Priests Marriages (he shows) was from the Heathens, page 649,
667. and that Nicolaus Diaconus brought it into the Church, page 698. which was
after confirmed by Pope Hildebrand (that Brand of Hell) who, notwithstanding,
kept his Whore [Matildah] page 706. which caused a World of wickedness, page
712. and 717.5. Their Purgatory (he shows) was from the Heathens, page 1003.
and how it had its progress in the Romish Church, page 1059.6. Their Invocation
of Saints was not known in the Church for four hundred years after Christ, page
1215.7. Their Transubstantiation was not any Article of their Faith until the
Trent Council, page 1666 8. He shows also the foppery of their Altars, Crosses,
etc. and that they were unknown till a thousand years after Christ, page 382.
Cum multis aliis, etc. The second Author is famous Peter de Moulin; de Novitate
Papismi. (both French Worthies, He and Du-plessis) whose Book stands
unanswerable to the everlasting disgrace of the Romish Religion. The third
Author is honorable Bishop Usher, de Statu and Successu Ecclesiae, which can
never be answered. The fourth is Reverend Mr. Baxter, (both our own Countrymen)
who has challenged the Papists for Novelty in thirty two points, in his Key
for Catholics, page 143, 144. yet unanswered. The fifth Author learned Dr.
Willet in his Synopsis Papismi at large. The sixth Author Godly Hildersham upon
John, page 37. and page 141. Numb. 46. To say nothing of their Monks, Friars,
and Nuns, (see Dr. Willet on Romans page 711. Dr. Boy's Postil's in fol. page
572. Rosse's Panscheia, page 259. and many others of this and all other their
fooleries, all which show the Romish Religion is a Religion to be abhorred (as
an upstart Religion) of all sober minds. The last Author is King James, in his
Tortus lies confuted, where he shows the Novel Doctrines thereof, with a brief
declaration of their Novelty. See the Particulars.

CHAP. VI. The Sixth Property, Its Inconsistency with Public Peace.
1. THere is a threefold Inconsistency that the Romish Religion has as a
remark upon it: As 1. Its Inconsistency with holiness to God, as it both allows
of and wallows in a most impure worship, which is both contrary to his Holy
Nature, in their downright Idolatry; by Adoration of Images, and Invocation of
Saints and Angels; and contrary to his holy Scripture in the very Letter of it,
by their setting up another Head besides Christ, whom they rob of all his
Offices, Regal, Sacerdotal, and Prophetical; by establishing Free Will, Merit,
Sins (in their own nature) Venial, and by adding to and diminishing from the
Word of God in many points, as in their seven Sacraments, and other parts of
Popery; yea generally the whole System and Body of it (as such) being fully
contradictory to the Scripture of Truth, as my Second Part does plainly
demonstrate. (2.) Its Inconsistency with Righteousness to Man, by its
accounting all of any other Religions, Heretics, and that Faith is not to be
kept with such as they account so; also that force and violence (such as is
used in their bloody Inquisitions) yea and death it self may be inflicted upon
those they call Heretics, and that merely [qua tales] for their being such,
though otherwise they do nothing either in word or deed, either to disturb the
Peace or justly provoke the powers of those Popish Countries wherein they live,
see Dr. Heylin's large Geography, fol. 90. and 231. Popery lays such barbarous
Obligations upon every Papist, that he holds himself bound to kill any Son of
Adam whom he pleases to term an Heretic, contrary to the Laws of God, of
Nature, and of Nations: How can this be consistent with Righteousness to Man?

2. (3.) Its Inconsistency with public peace and common safety in States and
Kingdoms, (to say no more of the two former Inconsistencies) is the main matter
I would here demonstrate; and that by discovering how the very Principles
intrinsecally essential to Popery, are all of such dangerous Influence and
Consequence, (which their Religion binds them unto) by reason whereof, no
Protestant State or Kingdom (wherein Popish Priests and people live) can be
secure from disturbance by them, or yet ought to trust to the Loyalty of such,
as (by the very Religion they profess) may lawfully be disloyal when they
please; yea and not only may be, but must be disloyal, being bound to be so
when they are able and have advantage. Upon this very consideration undoubtedly
it was, that our own learned Dr. Davenant in his seventeenth Question
determines, that Jesuitiz'd Papists cannot possibly be good Subjects; saying:
[Non esse, extra controversiam est, etc.] That they are not so it is beyond all
Controversy, for their many heinous Conspiracies against Kings and Kingdoms do
make a clear demonstration. But (says he) all the question is, seeing it is
plain they are not) whether they can be good Subjects; in as much as their very
Principles which the Jesuits have imposed, and which all Jesuitiz'd Papists
have received, do necessarily hinder them from being so: Whoever therefore he
be that owns the Jesuits Principles, and not only approve them but also improve
them by drawing those Principles into practice; whether he be of the Clergy or
Laity (says he) such a one can by no means so much as have the very name of a
good Subject: Let us now take a view particularly of their Principles which are
Inconsistent with Peace. Their 1. Principle is, Their owning of and acting by a
Foreign Power, and disowning Subjection to the power of their Native Princes.
This dogmatical Principle (alone) makes all Romanists (especially their Priests
and Jesuits) to be so far incapable of being numbered amongst good Subjects, as
that they cannot be so much as reckoned as Subjects at all; in as much as they
hold themselves exempted from all secular Powers, and to be Subjects to none
but to their holy Father the Pope, quite contrary to the Doctrine of the Holy
Apostle, Romans 13.1. [ Let every Soul (whether Clergy or Laity) be subject to
the higher Powers: Surely Paul to the Romans could not mean the higher powers
of the Roman Pope, see ver. 3, 4. etc.

3. Their great Champion [Bellarmine] pleads this Exemption for his Romish
Clergy; saying, [They are not obliged to Civil Laws by any Coactive, but only
by a directive Obligation,] Bellarm. de Cler. lib. 1. Against this Dr. Davenant
acutely answers: But, What if they will not be directed, but trample the
Civil Laws under their Feet? Bellarmine replies, They cannot (notwithstanding)
be punished by the Civil Magistrate.] Our Dr. Davenant goes further, saying:
But what if they commit that grand wickedness of High Treason? To this Eudaemon
the Jesuit rejoyns saying, That Clergymen cannot properly commit Treason, and
their Zimanca expressly teaches, that a Clergy-mans Rebellion is not properly
High Treason, for he is not subject to the King. By this they cut the very
sinews of all Political Laws, while they plead this exemption from the Yoke of
all secular Power, and hereby it is manifest they are so far from being good
Subjects, that they do profess themselves no Subjects at all by this Exemption.
This is quite contrary to the Doctrine of Paul, of Peter, and of Christ. 1. Of
holy Paul, Romans 13.12, 4. Vbi Lex (aut Evangelium) non distinguit, ibi non est
distinguendum. The Apostle says, [Let every Soul be subject] without any
distinction, why do they make distinctions where God makes none; as if the
Generation of a Clerick were the Corruption of a Subject: (in this Exemption)
what is this but to make the Church to destroy the State? If the Magistrate be
a Minister ordained of God to punish Evil Doers (as this Apostle affirms;)
then Popish Clericks that are Evil Doers can (in no wise) be exempted from his
Cognizance, unless they do not acknowledge God (the Ordainer of that Power) to
be a Superior Power to theirs. 2. Of Holy Peter (their own pretended Head,) 1
Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to Kings and Governors. Chrysostom shows,
that this Command is to all Clergymen, yea even to the very Apostles and
Evangelists; and were it not so, it would be a loss unto Princes to have any of
their Subjects become Clergymen, if thereby he should lose that subjection
which was due to him before. But opposite to this, is that excellent Note which
Zanchy (that Magazine of Learning) gives in his Epistle Dedicatory to his
Miscelanea. In the Kingdom of Christ this is wonderful, that he Wills and
Commands all Princes and Potentates to be subject to his Kingdom, Psalm. 2.9,
11, 12. And yet he Wills and Commands likewise, that his Kingdom be subject to
the Kingdoms of the World, Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 17.

4. As this Principle of exemption is contrary to the Doctrine 1. Of Holy Paul,
and 2. Of Holy Peter, so 3. Of the Holy, Holy, Holy Christ; who Preached up
that Doctrine of Rendering to Caesar the things that were Caesar's, Matthew.
22.21. It Is observable, that not only the Mother of our Lord (though big
bellied, and so might have pleaded Exemption) goes up to the Chief City to be
taxed by Caesar, Luke 2.1, 3, 4. but also our Lord himself (who might (above
all) have pleaded his own freedom) paid his Tribute to Caesar, that so Caesar
should not think the Gospel to be a contradiction to his Government, Matthew.
17.27. Yea, and at the last our Lord Christ delivered up his person to Pilate
and Herod, without any words of derogation concerning their power over him,
John 19.10, 11. It Is likewise Remarkable, that Holy Paul made his Appeal from a
corrupt Ecclesiastic Court at Jerusalem (which professed to know God) unto an
Heathenish Civil Court at Rome (which knew not the Lord,) yea and that not only
in Civil, but in Ecclesiastic Affairs or Offenses, Acts 25.8, 9, 10. For,
says he, neither against the Law of the Jews, nor against the Temple, (those
were matters of Religion) nor yet against Caesar have I offended any thing.
Just contrary do the Romanists, surely Paul had never Appealed to Caesar, had
he not believed that Caesar had a Civil Power over him: But these men Appeal
from the Civil to the Ecclesiastic Power, and from their own Native or Natural
Prince or Caesar to their King ( Abaddon, Revel. 9.11.) at Rome, in which last
Circumstance of Place only, they do correspond with the Apostles Appeal, both
being made to Rome: And that you may not want a Royal Witness to these things,
King James (in his learned Premonition to all Kings, free Princes and States of
Christendom) tells them, that this very Principle exempts almost the third part
of their Subjects from that subjection they owe to them in temporal matters,
page 20. Showing also, how the very Laity (that are poisoned with their
Jesuitical Principles) may plead this Exemption, and make their Appeals from
their lawful Sovereign to that Foreign Power of the Pope, and so be no longer
obedient than till they be fully furnished with power sufficient to resist and
rebel, p. 115, 117, 121. It Is pity all Princes Read not this King James's
Premonition, etc.

5. This Royal Witness (aforesaid) lays great stress upon this Jesuitical
Principle, which makes all the Kings in Christendom to be mere Vassals to the
Pope; As if [Feed my Sheep] gave him so ample a power over Kings as to inthrone
them or dethrone them at pleasure. page 18. This he strenuously confutes, page
22. etc. And page 25. he instances in the Insolency of Pope Boniface the eighth
toward Philip le Bell King of France, called Philip the Fair, whom the Pope
handled foully, writing a Letter to him with this Scornful Salutation; [Sciat
tua maxima Fatuitas etc. Let your greatest Fondness know, that we are subject
to no man in temporal things.] And after other insolences of the Popes to this
French Kings Successors, the difference grew so high (says he, page 27.) that
Gerson (that famous Chancellor of Paris, who otherwise was a devout Roman
Catholic) wrote a Book [de Auferibilitate Papae] for taking away that [
trouble house or rather that trouble-world] both from his Temporal and
Ecclesiastic power; so far was he from granting that temporal Authority over
Kings. To those Royal Instances of the Popes Insolences, many more might be
added, if it would not too much swell this little Book; I shall add but one
more of a Popish Insolency to one of our own Kings, to wit, King Henry the
Second, whom the then English Popish Clergy scourged with a Rod, (as his
penance for Becket's death.) The Popes Legate said to the poor whipped King,
[Domine noli minari etc.] Sir, do not threaten us, for we fear not the menaces
of men, as being of such a Court which uses to command Kings and Emperors.
Jacob. Revius de Vit. Pontif. Alsted. Chronol. etc. Oh how has this little
Horn, at the first a poor Minister of the Romish Church till Constantine's
time, afterward he was only Primate of the Churches in Italy; none took him
for a Prince, no not when he began to write [Volumus and Jubemus] We Will and
Command, An. Dom. 606. Then got he cunningly among the Horns, and grew
gradually till he overtop'd them all; and then had he a mouth to speak these
great things, Dan. 7.8. As to say all Kings are his Vassals, and yet none of
his Vassals are subject to Kings; (this King James judges Abominable, page
115.) And then was stamped upon the Popes Coin, [That Nation and Country which
will not serve thee shall be rooted out.] This was the Hypocritical Language of
the pretended [Servant of Servants.]

6. The second pestilent Principle of Popery, which makes it Inconsistent with
public Peace, (next to their owning of a foreign Power, which is enough
insolent over Princes and Peasants) is this; That no Faith is to be kept with
Heretics. This is such a poisonful Position, that at one stroke it cuts in
pieces all the blessed Sinews of Humane Society, and all reciprocal duties
betwixt Natural, Civil, or Religious Relations; they are altogether strangled
at once hereby. Unworthily is that called a Religion (which signifies a binding
to duty) that at one blow plainly unties all duties taught mankind, either in
the School of Nature or Scripture: Yet this is a Principle of the Romish (so
called) Religion; by this Doctrine all duties that Husbands and Wives, Parents
and Children, Masters and Servants, Creditor and Debtor, Prince and Subject do
owe one to another, are all vacated, if either the one or the other may be but
reputed an Heretic. Thus their Popish Canon runs, Hereticus ab omni jure
Naturali, Civili, Politico, privatur: Zimancha's Justiti tit. 46. Sect. 74. By
Heresy a man is deprived of all his Jurisdiction, Natural, Civil, Politic,
and Religious. This Position has a Negative and a Positive part: 1. The
Negative Part is, hereby Parents may be discharged from loving their Children,
and Husbands their Wives, etc. And Children are discharged from obeying their
Parents, and Wives from performing due Benevolence to their Husbands, etc. yet
this is is not all though bad enough already. There is 2. a Positive Part of
this Principle, which is, they may hate each other, hale each other to the
bloody Inquision, yea Kill and Massacre, Parents their Children and Children
their Parents, Husbands their Wives and Wives their Husbands, and that merely
because they are Heretics, though there be no other provocation either in word
or deed, and though they have sworn never so solemnly for each others
preservation, yet that Oath is [ipso facto] void upon that Party's appearing an
Heretic; for no Faith (according to their Doctrine) must be held with
Heretics: Yea they do allow Subjects to murder their Sovereign
(notwithstanding all Oaths of Fidelity to the contrary) if they stand in their
way of Heresy (as they call Protestantism) as soon as opportunity serves, and
power come into their hands, which they most industriously endeavor after.

7. That this is their Principle Bellarmine boldly affirms, [Non licere
Christianos tolerare Regem Haereticum etc.] It Is not lawful for Cathoticks io
tolerate an Haeretical King, Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. Sect. 7. The like says
Suarez in lib. de Censuris, disp. 15. Sect. 6. page 262. And Zimancha speaks
out, [Protinus ejus subditi ab illius dominio liberantur,] their Subjects are
forthwith freed from their subjection, Ziman. Instit. tit 23. Sect. 11. And if
ye would know who it is that frees them from their Oath of Fidelity and
Subjection; Azorius (the Jesuit) tells you, [Pontificem se and alios posse
solvere a jusjurandi lege et Religione, non videtur negandum,] the Pope has
power (upon just cause as they judge, being a Protestant, to be) to absolve
from all Oaths both himself and all others, Az. moral. Instit. cap. 15. Sect.
6. But to stir no further in this stinking Dunghill of Foreign Authors, upon
this poisonful point and Principle; though many more might be named, let us see
what our own Countrymen Catholics say to it in plain English. 1. Sanders
speaks thus of all Kings in General, [That King which will not inthrall himself
to the Popes Authority, he ought not to be tolerated; but his Subjects
(especially his Bishops) ought to remove this Heretical King, and to set up
another as soon as they can, Sanders de Visib. Monarch. lib. 2. cap. 4. And
further he does constantly affirm, that all Kings are so far under Bishops and
Priests, that upon their obstinacy they may be deposed by them, from that
Temporal Authority they have over such Kings,] Idem ibidem. And he proves that
the Priests have this Temporal Authority over Kings, from the Anointing which
is poured upon the head of the King by the Priest at his Coronation, which (he
says) does plainly declare, that the King is inferior to the Priest, Sand. de
Clav. David lib. 5. cap. 2. To the same purpose our Countryman Parsons (alias
Dolman) says as confidently, [That it is certainly to be believed, every Prince
becoming an Heretic (that is a Protestant) does instantly forfeit all his
Power and Dignity, and that before the Pope do excommunicate him; yea and his
Subjects may and ought (if they be but able) to cast him out of his Dominion,
Philopat. Sect. 2. page 109. And further he flurts out like a grave Father, [
Whosoever shall consent to the Succession of a Protestant Prince, is a most
grievous and damnable Sinner, page 216. To this let me only add Father
Creswel's profound caution [Let Catholic Subjects be careful that they have
competent strength in this case of deposing and destroying Heretical Kings,
otherwise they may do very much prejudice to the Catholic Cause,] Cresw. in
suo Philopat. page 198, 199. [Incaute nimis hic effutiunt] he has played the
blab herein showing at unawares, that if ever the Roman Catholics behave
themselves peaceably under Protestant Princes, it is not for want of Will but
Power.

8. Those Premises considered, that Heresy destroys all Oaths and dissolves
all Bonds, that the Pope can absolve from subjection sworn to, that Subjects
ought to rebel against an heretical Prince when they can etc. [ejusdem
farinae,] of the same Bran; hence came it that the Romish Religion was called
(in express terms) plain Rebellion, Collect in the Liturgy for Gunpowder
Treason in King James's Reign. Hence was it that both Dr. Prideaux and Dr.
Davenant (both Professors of Divinity) do unanimously make this Conclusion,
that it is not possible for an absolute Papist living under a Protestant
Prince, and walking up to his own Jesuitical Principles, but he must be an
absolute Traitor, Dr. Pride. Sex. Higg. and Selah. And Dr. Dav. determ. 17
Quest. last Clause. Hence, Lastly, was it that King James says, that the Popes
Bulls and the Papists Principles and Practices, has laid an everlasting
slander upon all Papists, as if no zealous Papist could be a true Subject to
his Prince, and that the Profession of the Romish Religion and Temporal
Subjection to the Civil Magistrate, were [(...)] two repugnant and inconsistent
things in themselves. These are King James's very words in his Apology for the
Oath of Allegiance, p. 28. having, himself, pushed the horned Beast with a
double horned Argument, his Dilemma to the Pope, p. 27. saying, Either it is
lawful for Subjects to obey their Sovereign or not: 1. If lawful, why is the
Pope so cruel to his Catholics, as to put them upon sacrificing their Lives
and ruining their Families? their Blood must needs lie at his door. 2. If
unlawful, why does he not show it? and why does he not allow (or rather
Command) his Priests not to live under such Princes unto whom they owe no
Obedience? Finally, hence it is that this learned King sounds an Alarm to all
the Kings in Europe, saying to them; Awake while time is, and suffer not (by
your longer sleep) the strings of your Authority to be cut (in singulis) one by
one, to your general Ruin, which by your united Forces, would rather make a
strong Rope for the Adversary (with Achitophel) to hang himself, than that he
should ever be able to break it: Premonition to all Monarchs, p. 3. Ye are all
in the Popes fold, (though I be extra Caulam) and that great Pastor may lead
you as Sheep to the Slaughter when he pleases. The Asses Ears must be Horns if
the Lion says so, etc. p. 19. And what Briars and Thorns has the Pope in your
Dominions, a third part of your Subjects being Clergymen, having Church livings
from you, yet owe you no Subjection, page 21. and some of you have late proof
of the Popes usurping your power: Oh suffer not this encroaching Babylonish
Monarch to win ground of us, page 132, 134.

9. The third poysonful Principle that is Inconsistent with public Peace, is
Jesuitical Aequivocation or Mental Reservation, which are reckoned amongst the
Popes [piae frauds) holy Cheats, whereby his Catholics arc enabled to elude
any lawful Magistrate in his strictest Interrogatories, and to evade the
strongest Oaths imposed on them, with far more ease than the craftiest Monkey
can slip his Collar. By this means they can violate the most sacred Bond that
ever God appointed to Man for confirming Fidelity, and for concluding
differences, Jer. 4.4. Heb. 6.16. and which the very School of blind Nature
abhorred. [Fraus non dissolvit sed distringit perjuriam,] Craft in an Oath does
not lessen but strengthen the Perjury, says Tully. Hence King James justly
calls this new Catholic Doctrine the Devils Craft, Apology for the Oath of
Allegiance, p. 61. Judging it a very hard matter to make a fast bargain with
such loose and slippery Chapmen, as could bewitch themselves out of the
strictest Bonds whatsoever, (Civil or Sacred) by this way of Collusion, or (as
they call it) holy Fraud or Delusion: And might I presume to add any thing to
this Royal Testimony, (which calls it the Devils Craft,) I may show where the
Devil himself, showed more honesty and ingenuity than the Jesuits, in their
Doctrine of Equivocation, from 1 Kin. 22.6, 22. The sixth Verse shows, how the
Devil had his Equivocating Oracle, [Go up, for the Lord shall deliver it into
the hand of the King:] Yea, but of which King, oh thou quibling Oracle? 1.
Whether of King Ahab or of King Benhadad? The Answer must be Ambiguous, as
Ibis, redibis, etc. And Aio te Aeacida (as King James says right enough) they
learned it from the Devil, yet the Jesuits outdo the Devil himself in their
holy Fraud, for he calls his Equivocating Oracle in plain terms a lying Spirit.
v. 22. I will go and be a lying Spirit in the mouths of all these Prophets of
Baal, etc. But the Jesuits defend their holy Fraud to be no lying. But Mr.
Thomas Fuller has excellently evidenced that every Aequivocator is (at least)
a secret Liar, saying, that surely Speech is but the Copy of the heart; [Sermo
est index Animi] and that cannot be accounted or avouched for a true Copy, that
has less in it than the Original: Such an one is a secret Liar, as by Mental
Reservations and other tricks does deceive him to whom he speaks, being
lawfully called to deliver all the truth. Hence, says he, it often comes to pass,

Fuller's Profane State, page 390.

When Jesuits unto us answer Nay, Which in Greek does signify Yea.
They do not English speak it is Greek they say.
10. The late order of the Jesuits (whom King James calls [Papae mancipia]
Apology, p. 76. the Popes Manciples or rather Bloodhounds, or the Devils last
by-blow to uphold the tottering Kingdom of the Beast) has found out this
Arcanum or profound secret, as a Catholicon or universal Remedy and Salvo for
Catholic Consciences: Some conceit that it was shak'd by a Miracle out of
their St. Francis his Sleeve; for their Casuist [Navar] tells of him, that
being asked which way the murderer did flee that ran by him, St. Francis
putting his hand into his Sleeve; answered, he went not that way, meaning his
Sleeve, Navar tom. 3. cap. 12. But wheresoever the Jesuits so happily hit of it
I know not, yet surely this new trick they have abundantly exposed as a choice
and Sovereign Unction, and whereby they can slip all Examinations, all
Impositions, and all Oaths and Obligations whatsoever. Thus their casuistical
Rabbis teach their Novices and Disciples: If any man or Magistrate do examine
you, whether you did such a deed or no? Though you did it, yet may you answer I
did it not, provided you reserve in your mind that your meaning is, [not at
this time] (when he asks) or not to tell him, or some such like Evasions;
whereof they have plenty; and this they judge not only lawful but necessary.
This is their general Doctrine, whereby they quite overthrow not only the
nature of all humane Testimonies, but also the genuine Juncture of all Humane
Societies; as famous Sir Walter Rawleigh (upon his History of Joshua's Oath to
the Gibeonites) most excellently and amply shows, saying: That it admits of
no Evasion or distinction, neither leaves it any hole at all open to creep out
at, to that cunning perfidiousness and horrible deceit of this latter Age
called Aequivocation, that God-mocking Sin, (to swear one thing and mean
another) is found among Image worshippers (which are of an Apish Religion;)
they break no faith (says he) that have no Faith to break, whosoever has true
Faith and the fear of God, dare not do so: God will not be mocked, Gal. 6.7.
Gustavus, King of Sweden, told the Jesuits, they would neither preach Faith to
others nor keep Faith with others, they could play fast and loose with their
Equivocations.

11. The fourth Jesuitical Principle (destructive to common safety) is, Their
Oath of blind Obedience: It Is notoriously known that in all Popish Seminaries,
the old Foxes [The Fathers] impose an Oath of Obedience upon all their young
Plants and Novices wherein they Vow Obedience to their general Fathers in those
Schools, (as those General Fathers are all sworn Vassals to their Grandfather
the Pope) whatever Errand they send them they must walk and work, they must run
[per Mare per Terras etc.] even the Devils Round, Job. 1.7. and the Devils
Errands, and not dispute but dispatch what they are commanded without any
Hesitation. This Oath of blind Obedience (says that Royal Interpreter of
Revel. 13.16, 17. King James in his Premonition to all Princes, p. 93.) is the
mark of the Beast in their right hand, signifying their actual implicit
Obedience unto that Beast which thinks he cannot err, whatever the Pope (or
under him) their Superior commands them, their hand (that has received this
mark) must execute their Command, though it be to Rebel against, Depose or
Destroy rheir Natural King and Native Kingdoms, see much more to that purpose,
Idem ibidem. All this the Jesuits are sworn to (King James shows) in their Oath
de caeca Obedientia, and in the English Seminaries beyond Sea, the young
Jesuits take this Oath, to wit, to return to England and to Convert their
Countrymen and Kindred, when and as often as it shall seem good to the Superior
of that College, see Fuller's Church History, Cent. 16. Book 9. p. 92. This
Oath of blind Obedience [Jesuiticos Pontificios ad omnia Imperia, quantumvis
impia, superiorum spiritualium suorum Exequenda paratissimos Reddit] makes the
Jesuitiz'd Papists or Jesuits to be ready pressed for performing all the
Precepts of their spiritual Superiors, though never so wickedly heinous, for
those Superiors do sometimes enjoin conceited Coxcombs, (and that under the
opinion of some supererogating merit) such things as are very pernicious to
Kings and Kingdoms. Alas! there is too plain proof hereof in (both) former and
later years, both in this and other Kingdoms, see Dr. Davenant determ. Quaest.
17. p. 83. circa finem.

12. Hence it is that such swarms of Jesuits are poured in upon us out of those
foreign Seminaries, which do plainly threaten an inundation from the Sea of
Rome: The Royal Interpreter King James aforesaid, upon Revel. 16.13, 14. (in
his Premonition to all Princes, p. 96, 97.) makes the Jesuits to be the three
unclean Spirits, like Frogs coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, of the
Beast, and of the false Prophet. This Sect (he says) of unclean Spirits, were
raised up for the defense of the falling Throne of Antichrist by the ignorance
of its Priests, whereof few then were able to read Latin, much less to
understand it: Those Spirits thus spewed out from this threefold Authority,
(Satan, Antichrist, and the Apostate Church) for defense of their
Triple-Crown'd Monarch, are well likened to Frogs, for they are Amphibious, and
can live in either Element (Earth or Water) Church or State; for though they be
Churchmen by Profession, yet can they use the Trade of Politic Statesmen,
going to the Kings of the Earth, etc. And rather than fail (that they may with
less observation draw people off from Obedience, etc. by their subtle
Insinuations) they scruple not to change their Names, to put on laick Habits,
yea and undertake any Callings of Handy-craft, etc. either in City or Country;
so that a Jesuit may be found among all Ranks of men, even from the Noble Man
to the Dust Man, and of any Trade or Profession in England, yea in the Pulpit
also, and perhaps there more especially: And yet further, peradventure among
all persuasions, and that with such pretended Devotion and Affection too, as
the Devil himself can scarce act his part more cunningly, When he turns himself
into an Angel of Light: witness the Scot Ramsden [A Jesuit] that pretended
himself a Convert Jew, and joined himself to the Church at Hexham near
Newcastle. This is Vltimus Diaboli crepitus, (as one calls the Jesuits) the
last attempt of a daring Devil. These are the Popes Janissaries or Bloodhounds,
who have a Vow of Mission and Obedience upon them, whereby they are bound to
the Pope (ultimately) so as to go whithersoever and about whatsoever he sends
them; yea if it be to China or Peru, go they must, if it be to kill Kings and
to blow up Parliaments, do it they must. Hence happily they are called Spirits,
the Spirits of Devils or breathing Devils; never had any Conjurer more command
over his Spirits or Familiars, than the great Impostor of Rome (as Dr. Morton,
calls him) over those unclean Frogs.

13. The fifth Principle inconsistent with Peace is, [That the secret of a
Sacramental Confession ought not to be revealed, no not for the eschewing of
whatsoever Evil. This Bellarmine defends in the behalf of the Powder Plotters,
that thought it their Duty and Conscience (according to their Catholic
Doctrine that obliges to Secrecy) to conceal that horrible Treason, and that
Romish Goliath (Bellarmine) over imperiously applauds the Arch-Traitor [Garnet]
for choosing to suffer the most bitter death, rather than to violate the Seal of
so great a Sacrament, (which indeed is no Sacrament at all, as I have showed in
my Walk of a Christian, in Chapter of Sacraments) and frankly bestows upon him
the Crown of Martyrdom. In this fatal point King James makes his Appeal to all
Christian Monarchs, free Princes and States (in his Premonition, p. 124.)
leaving it unto them to judge, how damnahle this Doctrine is, and how
dangerously prejudicial to public Peace; and he learnedly shows, that though
the Schoolmen (stepping up as Doctors of the Church) did mar the old Divinity
of the Fathers, by mingling therewith their Philosophical distinctions, yet
none of them do maintain this poysonful Position among the old Schoolmen, they
go no further than concealing of Names (in some cases) but not of matters, the
concealing whereof may conduce to a public danger. This, he says, is the
upstart conceit of some three or four new Jesuited Doctors, and as it is a new,
so it is such a dangerous Doctrine, as no King or State can live in security,
where such a cursed Position is maintained, p. 125. And he (with a right Royal
Spirit) proves Cardinal Bellarmine a liar de facto as well as de jure, p. 126,
127. and Tortus lies confuted, the third Novel Doctrine about this very point.
Indeed their Jesuit Eudaemon teaches them this damnable Doctrine; that such
things as are told under the Seal of Confession, ought not to be revealed, [Nec
pro Capite Regis, nec pro totius Reipublicae salute,] Neither for saving the
Kings life nor the whole Kingdom, Eudaem. Apolog. p. 355. It Is without all
difficulty to judge how Inconsistent this Jesuitical Principle is with public
Peace and common Safety, and what manner of good Subjects those are, that will
rather Sacrifice both the King and a whole Kingdom, than (in the least) to
rescind that fictitious Seal of Confession, preferring their own idle
Jesuitical Dreams before the Weal of a Commonweal, which should be the Supreme
Law, as Dr. Davenant shows, determ. quest. 17. p. 82. bringing in the Testimony
of our Halensis (the Prince of Schoolmen) in this point, saying: A Priest is
not bound to shut up all under his Seal of Confession that are revealed to him,
but only those things that ought to be so, etc. [Haec autem sunt perpetrata non
perpetranda] these things also must be such as are past and done, and not such
things as are in doing, as the hatching of Treason, etc.

14. The sixth Principle of Popery Inconsistent with Peace is, Their Doctrine
of Dispensations: Such is the implicit Faith and blind Belief of the Romanists.
1. That their Lord, the Pope, has no less than the creating and all-Commanding
power of the Great God; And 2. That he can make any sin a duty and any duty a
sin, by virtue of his Omnipotent. Dispensation. As to the first of these, how
has this man of Sin exalted himself above all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians.
2.4. Pope Paul the Third, suffered himself to be blasphemously flattered with
the Title of the greatest God on Earth, Anno Dom. 1540. And Pope Paul the
Fifth, with the Title of Vice-God, Anno Dom. 1610. It should have been a
vicious Devil, who was called the Defender of the Papal Omnipotency: Yea
Hostiensis the Canonist ( cap. 4.) says, the Pope can do more than God; he
cannot only make something of nothing, but of wrong he can make right, and of
Vice he can make Virtue; see Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 4. He can
excommunicate the very Angels, as to the second he can dispense not only with
the Law of Nature and of Nations, but even with the word of God it self, when
the Pope sets and sends out his Bull, commonly he concludes thus: [Non
obstantibus constitutionibus Apostolicis etc.] The Ordinances of the Apostles
and all things else to the contrary, notwithstanding the Popes Interpretation
(though never so cross to the Text) must be (says Hosius) [ipsissimum Dei
verbum,] esteemed the very word of God; so that it is no matter though God
command Subjects to obey Rulers. If the Pope say they shall not and give a
dispensation, it is enough, this Bellarmine's answer to King James's Apology
defends, and all Jesuits say the Pope has power to dispense with duty: Is this
consistent with public Peace?

15. To all this may be added the Popes giving dispensations to his Catholics
in Protestant Kingdoms and Commonwealths; to take any Oath of Fidelity with
this Qualification, [Rebus sic stantibus, et dum vires deerint,] that is, while
you are unable to cast off the Yoke; (this was done both in Queen Elizabeth and
King James's Reign,) but when there is a fit opportunity, then the Popes Alarm
to his Champions is,

Vtere jure tuo (Caesar) sectamque Lutheri,
Ense, Rota, Ponto, Funibus Igne neca,
That is, when you can do it, my dear Sons, Root out this cursed Sect of the
Lutherans, torture them upon the Wheel till you pull Limb from Limb, run them
through with the Sword, drown them, hang them, burn them, as if any one of
these were not enough to these bloody Papists, but all these must be done to
them, especially the last which the Jesuits learned from their Father Ignatius,
as Beza's Epigram upon them shows,

-- Pater est Ignatius ille,
A te, cui admixto nomen ab igne dedit,
Ignatius begins with Ignis which signifies [Fire] hence Jesuits are Firebrands
in all Lands, Melchior Adamus p. 233. part 2. and 573. on Hemnitius: Nihil non
per fasque nefasque tentare solent, Dr. Humphrey at large, pars 1. Jesuitismi.
I might add how the Pope dispenses with his very Priests to marry (contrary to
their Canons and Constitutions) only to secure them from justice, by being
discovered to be Priests, Friars, Jesuits, in their single life, Bishop Jewel's
defense of the Apology, part 2. c. 8. divis. 3. p. 188. to 195. Yea, and Mr.
Prin shows how the Popes will dispense with any thing (almost) to avoid the
lash of the Law, in his New discovery of Romish Emissaries, p. 19, 20, 21, etc.
Insomuch that it was a watchword (in Queen Elizabeth's time) by Pope Gregory
the thirteenth. [My Son, give me thy heart,] that is, [Be but a Papist in
heart, and then go to Church, swear, dissemble, do what you list, etc.] If the
Devil can but get the heart it is enough, and so it is with the Devils Vicar and
eldest Son, that Son of Perdition; who knows not that there be amongst us (by
virtue of this dispensation) Monthly Popish Protestants and protesting Papists,
such as are [Moon Calves] of a Lunatic Religion, and [having fidem menstruam]
a menstruous or Monthly Faith, that waxes and waineth with the Moon, to wit,
such Roman Catholics as go to Church once in the Month, (more for fear of the
Law than for love of the Gospel,) and even then have more than a Months mind to
be out of the Church again.

16. The seventh Principle of Popery Inconsistent with public Peace is their
Doctrine of Canonizing Saints, as if their Almighty God (the Pope) had any
power to make the Devils devilishest Traitors on Earth, Christ's gloriousest
Martyrs in Heaven. Histories abound in this, the Pope highly honors the Traitor
that murdered Henry the third King of France, for that high and honorable
Act, far above (as he says) that of Judeth's murdering Holofernes; 'twas a
great and good Act, and done by the Assistance of Almighty God, etc. Christus
5tus Panegyric upon this Murder. The like honor had the young Knave (as King
James calls him) that murdered his Successor, Henry the fourth of France, the
Pope deluding all such Traitors with the hopes and promise of Salvation for
such high, meriting, and supererogating Villainies, King James Premonition, p.
104. and his Apology, p. 67. And he tells you how Garnet and Oldcorn (two
Priests hanged at Tyburn for the Powderplot) were yet Registered among English
Martyrs; as if Treasonable Practices should be accounted works of eminent
Piety, Premonition p. 122. And he challenges Bellarmine to tell him [whereever
did the Pope call any of those Traitors (that escaped) to an account, or
punished them for it.] This the Pope is so far from, that he promises to make
them Roman Cardinals if they lived, or Canonized Saints if they dyed by their
design, Apology p. 67. they must be Martyrs for the Faith, and their Blood must
work wonders, etc. Premon. p. 122. Hence he denounces Gods woe against them,
from Isa. 5.20. for calling good evil and evil good; showing withal, that no
Princes in Europe can be safe, while the Pope Patronizes such Treasonable
Practices, and if the Moralist may be trusted, [He that Commends them, Commits
them:] The Pope contracts all the guilt of those Treasons upon himself, (as of
the Parisian Massacre, by granting a Jubilee at the News,) and to be painted in
his Palace) altogether unlike Godly Jacob, that cried, Oh my Soul, enter not
into the secrets of those bloody Men, Genesis 49.6. Cursed be their Anger that was
both crafty and cruel: But it is blessed of the Pope, Garnet's Picture is set up
among the Saints in the Jesuits College at Rome, a Saint abroad is that chief
Powder-plotter at home; and while the Pope justifies, Approves, and Applauds
such Treasons; the public Peace can never be safe, but those Snakes (if warm
in our Bosoms) will certainly sting us as soon as they have an opportunity;
while the Pope hugs Traitors, no King can be safe from Treason, says King
James.

CHAP. VII. The Seventh and last Property is, Its Irreconciliableness to the
Protestant Religion.
1. THe Romish Religion is (in the seventh place) Irreconciliable to the
Protestant (which is the true Ancient Christian) Religion: I am not ignorant
that there have been some Pontificians, or (as the word signifies)
Bridge-makens on both sides, that have endeavored to make a passage over to
each others Religion. On the Popish part, Cassander and the Cassandrian
Papists, which are the French, who are far more moderate Papists than the
Spaniards and Italians are; for they would never yet receive the Confession of
the Council of Trent, nor the points of the Popes Infallibility, or his power
over General Councils, or over the Churches and Bishops of other Nations: Upon
the mixture of the French and English Blood, Franciscus de sancta Clara ( alias
Davenport, that quirking Scotist) makes a strong Essay to reconcile the thirty
nine Articles of the Church of England with the Trent Council, for so high must
he have us to go, or he can admit of no reconciliation. 2. On the Protestant
part, Hugo Grotius (a man of great Learning) who being imprisoned for the
Arminian Commotions in Holland, yet escaping (by being carried out in a Trunk)
became the Suedes Ambassador to the French King, and there was influenced by
the Jesuits (his great Familiars) to undertake the Reconciling of Papists and
Protestants in a Cassandrian Popery, and this he does with all his might.
Hereupon he publishes Cassander with his Notes, and writes his Vote for peace,
wherein he pleads for [(...)] or trans-elementation, in favor of the Popish
Transubstantiation) and says that [(...) or Bread worshippers, are no more to
be condemned than [(...)] or Ark-worshippers: Therein also he rails against
Calvin, and defends that Saints departed do know our Affairs on Earth, as
Elisha did Gehazi's: And as Ezekiel (in Chaldaea) did know what was done in the
Temple at Jerusalem: What was all this but a pleading for Baal? (whom Gideon's
Father would have to plead for himself) Insomuch that the Dutch Divines (in
their Synopsis purioris Theologiae) say with one consent, [Quod Hugo Grotius
papizat,] that Hugo Grotius plays the Papists part therein; he endeavored to
reduce us to the Trent Council, though not to the Opinion of their private
Doctors.

2. Such Bridg-makers as these have been amongst us some considerable time, who
would have made passage over to receive the Romish Religion into their Bosoms,
as the only way of Patronizing Unity and Antiquity: To cross this Project
famous Mr. Perkins wrote his Reformed Catholic, which broke the design of
Recomiling in his day, and conjured down that cursed Spirit. But alas! that
unclean Devil is raised up again in our day by the charms of the man of Sin: I
have sometime wondered at Bishop Bramhal (who had excellently told Monsieur
Melliteirs, that their Romish Church had 1. Error in her Faith, 2. Idolatry in
her Worship, And 3. Tyranny in her Government, and as excellently also that
Truth must not be sacrificed for Peace,) yet should hold the Pope to be
Principium Vnitatis to the Catholic Church, and that the Romish determinations
might stand, excepting those of the last four hundred years, p. 7, 8. And there
be many others (as Reverend Mr. Baxter shows, that be Protestant Reconcilers)
who do condescend thus far; But, says he, the Grotian Papists go farther,
making king the Church of Rome the Mistress of all other Churches, and the Pope
to be the Universal Head, as Thorndike, Pierce, and others, that defend
Grotius, who spoke things [Meliterio Consona] that the Romish Faith was [Vera
and Sincera] true and sound, see Mr. Baxter's Preface to five Disputatious, p.
31. and Saravins's Character of Grotius. But if we well consider the four
abominable things in that Church, (as Dr. Boys in his Postils, fol. p. 787.
calls them,) to wit, 1. Her unlimited Jurisdiction derogatory to all Princes.
2. Her insolent Titles, prejudicial to all Pastors. 3. Her corrupt Doctrine
injurious to all Christians. And 4. Her filthy Life detestable to all men: It
will confirm us that Bishop Hall was in the right, when considering her
Principles and Practices, he wrote his [No peace with Rome.]

3. Notwithstanding all the endeavors of former and latter Reconcilers, yet
there is such a [(...)] or great Gulf fixed, (as that in Luke 16.25.) by the
unmovable and immutable decree of God betwixt Papists and Protestants, as there
is 'twixt Light and Darkness, 'twixt Truth and Falsehood, so that no Bridge of
Reconciliation can be made over it. Not unlike to that vast hollowness of the
Valleys, betwixt those exceeding high Mountains (that Cambden speaks of) in
Merionethshire in Wales, whose hanging tops come so close together, that
Shepherds can audibly talk together from the tops of them, and yet will it be a
days Journey before they can meet personally to embrace one another. Thus, upon
sound and solid search such will be found that grand distance and remoteness
'twixt the Popish and Protestant Religion, (how nere soever they seem to be
represented, by the false glasses of our Reconcilers, and tending to an
Accommodation) that they can never be rightly Reconciled no more than Aaron's
Rod and the Magicians Rods, until the former of the Rods have swallowed up the
latter, Exodus 7.12. The real Rod did swallow up the seeming ones, and the true
Christian Religion will swallow up the Romish, (that only seems to be Christian
but is indeed Antichristian, a mere delusion and Phantasm) as Christ swallowed
up sin and death in victory, 1 Cor. 15.55. And though De Clara, Grotius,
Cassander, and others do seem to make fair proffers, yet these be more of the
nature of Baits than Gifts, especially seeing they have no Commission from the
Church of Rome to treat; and therefore, (should their Offers be accepted as
some would gladly do) yet the Romish Church would not look upon her self as
bound to pay their promises. Mr. Fuller further says, though we should go
ninety nine steps to meet them, yet the Romish Church will not vouchsafe the
odd one step to meet us, Full. holy State, p. 57. Besides this I add, though
the Church of Rome would reconcile, yet sure I am, the Court of Rome will never
do it.

4. It Is therefore no better than a labor in vain, to undertake any
Reconciliation with Rome, who will have either all or nothing: If not the
Church of Rome, yet the Court of Rome abhors all Accommodations. Hence some of
great Reading and Judgment doubt not to say, that our late Civil (uncivil)
Wars, were promoted by the Popes Influence, merely for breaking the Project of
Reconcilement that then was on foot; for had that design been successful, the
Pope (who will have all and will be absolute, the way of Peace he knows not and
hates) would have been safe no where: And therefore it is not improbably said
further, that King Charles the First was wickedly murdered by the Popes
Instigation, lest he and the French King, together with Christiana (Queen of
Sueden) should have constrained the Pope (by means of such an Accommodation
endeavored) to have lour'd his Top-Sail. In fine, it is as unpracticable to
Reconcile them as it is to Reconcile God and Baal,

[Quam male inequales veniunt ad Aratra Juvenci. Ovid. Epist. How can any
Concord be 'twixt Christ and Belial; an Ox and an Ass might not be coupled
together under the Law, Levit. 19.19. upon which Scripture the Doctors of Doway
give this notorious Note: Here (say they) all participation with Heretics is
prohibited, and they have no better mind to an Accommodation, than to a
Participation with us.

5. If we then seriously consider 1. The vast Opposition of the Popish Religion
to the true Christian Protestant Religion, almost in all the fundamental points
of Christianity, as Reverend Beza shows at large in the End of his Confessio
fidei Christianae, from p. 263. to 357. Almost an hundred Pages does that
learned Man write to show how the Romanists deny all truth, concerning God in
his Attributes, Christ in his Offices, Man's Fall, Law, Gospel, Faith, Works,
Sacraments, Ministry, etc. none of all which (he shows) they do know aright. 2.
Considering the Architects or Arch-Master builders of this Babel are Jesuits,
who make Princes find them Materials, persuading them that their work is
designed for the House of their Kingdom, and for the Honor of their Majesty:
Many hewers of Wood and drawers of Water they have, and such as tread Mortar
also, and rather than their Mortar should be over dry, they will have the blood
of Heretics to mingle it. This cursed Faction of the Jesuits is a most agile
sharp Sword, whose Blade is sheathed at pleasure in the Bowels of every
Commonwealth, but the handle of it reaches to Rome. They are uncessantly
sollicitous every where, (as if ubiquitarians) to subdue all to the Pope, and
the Pope to themselves. It Is a thousand pityes that such a sweet Name as Jefu
is, ( who went about doing good, Act. 10.38.) should be put upon this Viperous
brood, who go about doing evil, those Sons of Belial shall be all of them as
Thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands, says holy David,
2 Samuel 23.6, 7. How then can our Reconcilers handle those untractable Thorns
(that have been pricking Briars and grieving Thorns in the sides of all Nations
where they come, they are fitter for burning than for building withal, as they
are doomed, Revel. 19.20. Heb. 6.8. Josh. 4.13. And suppose they could handle
them, still Having is not Holding; what hold can they have of those Monkeys
that slips on a Collar for their Masters pleasure, and slips it off again for
their own. 3. Considering their Master the Popes Insolency, that can never
condescend that so much as one stone should be stirred out of his Babel Tower,
lest his yielding to the removal of that Stone, should endanger the fall of the
whole Fabric of his Papal Dignity, or at least shake it. These and many other
Considerations, do render Reconciliation no better than a Labor in vain.

6. Yet these are the Jesuitical Engines to reduce Britain to Babylon, those
restless Spirits the Jesuits (sent of God (as they say) to withstand Luther,
who was sent of the Devil to withstand the Pope) leave no Stone unturned to
promote the Catholic Cause, to which they are sworn Swordmen, and

[Flectere si nequeunt superos Acheronta movebunt,] If Heaven will not be
persuaded to become propitious to them, but the God of Heaven will needs turn
Lutheran, (as some of them most blasphemously said, when his Stars fought in
their courses against their Spanish invincible Armado) they will then conjure
up all the Devils in Hell with Beelzebub their Prince to assist them with
Auxiliaries, and therefore have they been the dread of Nations, entertaining
them more out of fear than Love, as Dr. Humphrey, de Jesuitismo, at large
demonstrates: Yet what Vegetius says of Chariots armed with Sithes and Hooks,
( lib. 1. cap. 24.) will be every day more and more applied to the Jesuits, [
At first they were a Terror, but afterward a Scorn. Their dissembled Sanctity
is double Iniquity, when those cunning Gamesters cannot play their Game at
first for an absolute Alteration, yet then (from pretended Sanctity) they do
influence some brackish Divines amongst us, (such Rivers as run nearer the Sea
(of Rome) the more brackish they become) and by these they bid fair to win
their Game by a plausible Accommodation: And those Moderators (for a
Correspondency with Popery) would make a goodly show were there no Bible; but
were they the wisest men in the World, and should live to the Worlds end; they
would be brought to their Wits end, before they could Accomplish this Works
end, to make a Reconciliation betwixt Christ and Antichrist, betwixt Papist and
Protestant.

7. Besides, what would those men shake hands withal? do they consider that
Popery is but a Patchery, a confused heap of Trash and Trumpecy; so that what
Josephus said of Appian's Writings, that they were [(...) an Hodg podg of
Shameless Untruths, a stinking Dunghill of Lies; and what Livy said of
Hannibal's Army, that it was made up [ex Colluvie omnium Gentium] of the very
Scum of all Nations. The same may be said of the body of Popery, it is but a
Patchery of Judaism, Paganism, and Heresy, devised and compounded secundum
artem Satanicam, prescribed and made up according to the Devils Art, as Dr.
Whitaker, Dr. Morton, Dr. Willet, and many others do largely show; and Dr.
Reynolds (de Idolatria) does prove it rank Idolatry so unanswerably, that their
own Weston said it made his Head ach to read that Book: Oh, that it might make
not only the Heads, but also the Hearts of those Reconcilers to ach, when they
so much as but think of shaking hands with Idolatry, and of loving those that
hate the Lord, (as all Idolaters do, Psalm. 139.22.) and in helping those
ungodly ones, which ought not to be done, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Popery is the most
fatal Heresy that ever was in the World, and has had the longest Reign, and
is no more but the Botch of Egypt or Plague Sore of the old Church of Rome,
(which once flourished in the Faith) and who dare touch such an unclean thing?
2 Cor. 6.17. The genuine Notion of Popery now is Apostasy, the Mother of it is
Infallibility, and the two Daughters be Implicit Faith and Blind Obedience; and
Theodoricus Vrias (one of Rome's good Sons in Germany) complains thus, An. Dom.
1414. That the Church of Rome was degenerated, of Gold was become Silver, of
Silver Iron, of Iron Earth; [Quid superest nisi ut Stercus abiret] what
remains, but that of Earth she would become Dung? This she is become already
(since his day) and stinks above ground, now rotting in its own Slime. Oh, then
what kind of handfuls would those Reconcilers have, that desires and endeavors
to take hold of her in their Accommodations: The Kings of the Earth shall burn
her for an old stinking Bawd, Rev. 17.16. She has been Carted already and
shame is come upon her; it is strange that any should be found under such
stupefactions as to be Courting this Whore, that for her shameless Filthinesses
has so long been Carted.

8. Thus it is made manifest that no Reconciliation with Rome can be made [de
facto,] it is not practicable or possible, the Romish Religion is not
Reconcilable, being as inconsistent with Truth as Dagon with the Ark; neither
ought any Accommodation to be made with it [de jure] it is neither lawful nor
expedient, if (together with the Premises) those following Arguments be well
weighed. As 1. We ought to say with Zerubbabel and Joshna to those Romish
Samaritans, [ Ye have nothing to do with us, to build with us, but we our
selves together will build, etc. Ezra 4.2, 3. That the Romanists are
Samaritans, Mr. Hildersham upon John 4. p. 36. excellently shows, saying, They
Resemble them most in Adoring Saints as they did St. Jacob, they say (just in
the Samaritan Language) St. Peter gave us this Authority, as they said St.
Jacob gave us this Well, John 4.12. And those new Samaritans say as the old
did, [Are the Founders of your Religion greater than our St. Peter, ( greater
than our St. Jacob,) that gave us this Religion? But it does appear, Jacob gave
no such Well, and Peter no such Religion as they boast, Hildersh* on John p.
37. Those Samaritans were a kind of Mongrels in Religion, 2 Kin. 17.24, 32, 33,
34. They did and they did not fear the Lord, their Religion was a Gallimaufrey,
a mixture of true and false, which is as good as none, for God will not divide
with the Devil Hence the Jews must have no dealing with the Samaritans, John
4.9. And they were called the Jews Adversaries, Ezra 4.2. having the disease
called [Noli me tangere] upon them. Hence 'twas answered them, [Ye shall not
build with us, etc.] They craftily offered their Cost and Pains, that mingling
with them they might foment differences amongst them, and so stop their work;
as the Jesuits now turn Lutherans, building with them seemingly, but blowing up
the Strife 'twixt them and Calvinists really.

9. The second Argument, Our running from Rome (and not our running to it in
plausible Reconciliation) is our duty; it is our Obedience to Gods Call and
Command, Isa. 52.11. Rev. 18.4. Run out of her my people, and partake not of
her Sins, lest ye also partake of her Plagues.

[Esto procul Roma qui cupis esse Pius.] Flee from this Mystical Babylon, as
you would a Pesthouse; the cause of our running from Rome lies (says learned
Perkins) in her self, namely the Cup of Fornication and of all Abomination that
the Whore holds in her hand, Perk Prolog. to his Reformed Catholic. To this a
Cloud of Witnesses might be added, all unanimously holding out that this is our
duty, and that upon pain of Damnation: see Wootton's Run from Rome at large.
The Command of God is upon us in respect to this Mystical Sodom (as was upon
Lot, Genesis 19.17.) Look not back or behind thee, neither tarry in all the Plain,
but flee for thy Life. Alas! those Reconcilers both look behind them and loiter
in the plains of Sodom, in their Cassandrian Enterprises; and therefore may
justly expect to be turned into Pillars of everlasting Shame and Obloquy, as
Lot's Wife. The third Argument in short is, [that played loath to depart] she
turned her about and she was turned, so may they be; we must neither turn
toward them nor return to them; for the Command of God is upon us that was
upon Jeremiah [ Let them Return to thee but do not thou return to them, Jer.
15.19.] Now Conformity (in some cases) is certainly the Christians duty, Be not
Conformed to this World, Romans 12.2. That is, to the corrupt Customs and Courses
of it, yea and in such cases as Gods Prophet stood in, God will not have him to
Chime in with Idolaters as the false Prophets did, but, says the Lord, let
them Conform to thee, and do not thou Conform to them; no nor meet them in the
half way as our Reconcilers do. The fourth Argument, we may not halt betwixt
two Opinions, 'twixt God and Baal, 1 Kin. 18.21. How long will ye halt, etc.
Those halters sprung from halting Jacob, that halted upon his Thigh as he
passed over Penuel, Genesis 32.31. So such Halters may be found among those that
pass over a profession of the Protestant Religion, who deserve not to carry the
Blessing as Jacob did, notwithstanding his halting, but rather the Halter for
being mystical Halters, in so far gratifying the man of Sin as to offer a
Reconcilement. Blessed Bradford, Martyr, could say with Elijah, If God be God
follow him, but if the Mass be God, let him that will, hear it, see it, be
present at it, and go to the Devil with it, Act and Monum. upon Bradford and
others.

10. The fifth Argument, The Ark and Dagon cannot stand together; the
Philistines brought the Ark of God into the House of Dagon, and set it by Dagon,
etc. 1 Samuel 5.1, 2. Behold, Dagon was fallen upon his Face, etc. v. 3, 4. As if
he had been bowing to the God of Israel. as if he had heard the Psalmists,
[Worship him all ye Gods,] they endeavor their Consistency the second time,
and then Dagon's fall was more fatal. He breaks off his Head the Seat of
Wisdom, and his Hands the Seat of Power, and then he lies upon the Threshold to
be trodden under Foot, (by his Worshippers at their entrance into the Temple) as
if no better worth, being unsavory Salt and a Dunghill Deity, v. 4. Surely they
wanted the wisdom of our Reconcilers to study out some handsome Accommodation,
and not have said, [The Ark of God shall not abide with us, v. 7.] They might
have taken up the Controversy, and never have cried [ What shall we do with
the Ark of God? v. 8.] They would have taught it the Rule of good Fellowship;
but assuredly, had those Philistines happily hit upon saying, [Away with Dagon]
instead of [Away with the Ark] and said to their Idols [ Get ye hence, Isa.
30.22. What have we any more to do with Dagon, that cannot save himself much
less us.] They had been wiser than our Reconcilers that will keep both. The
sixth Argument is, We should not be unequally Yoked, (as aforesaid) for what
Fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness? and what Communion has
Light with Darkness? And what Concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part
has he that believes with an Infidel? And what Agreement has the Temple of
God with Idols? 2. Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. These are the Apostles serious Questions,
all which he implicitly answers in the Negative, as appears by his Inference,
v. 17. Wherefore come out, says he, from among them, and be ye separate and
touch not the unclear thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a Father to
you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters says the Lord Almighty, v. 18. But
those profound Reconcilers (as if they had a knack beyond the blessed Apostle,
yea a reach above the only Wise God himself) do cry [(...)] with Archimedes, as
if they had found out the Arcanum or deep mystery ('it is surely of Iniquity) to
answer all those Apostolical Questions in the Affirmative, having invented an
Art (diabolical no doubt,) whereby to make an happy Composition of things
diametrically, contrary, notwithstanding the Philosopher's Maxim, [Contraria
sese mutuo expellunt a suo suscepibili] Contraries cannot consist together at
the same time in the same Subject: They can do Impossibles by their God
Almighty the Pope above the True God, and have found out the North East passage
to the West Indies, a shorter way to get into Gods Bosom as Sons and Daughters,
than ever either the Apostle (though wrapped up to the third Heaven) or God
himself thought of; and so it is indeed.

11. The seventh Argument (as the other following) I shall not thus enlarge
upon, seeing this Tractate (intended only as a little Manual) swells beyond
expectation: It Is this, if Christ say, Every Plant that the Father has not
Planted shall be plucked up; then Reconcilers ought not to establish such
Plants (by seeking to twist Truth with Falsehood) yea and to transplant them
into our Native Soil, which has been either too hot or too cold for that
Southern Plant: Christ says so, Matthew. 15.13. and Popery is so, is obvious to
every man that has his Eyes opened with Christ's Eye Salve; God never planted
it by his Divine Institution, nor watered it by his Divine Benediction; it is
not the Planting of the Lord, a Tree of Righteousness, Isa. 61-3. but it is
rather of the Devil's Planting and Watering, which never prospered in any Land
without being watered with the Blood of Saints and Heretics. The eighth
Argument, If John (divinely Inspired) called Rome aright, a Whore, a great
Whore, as if [Meretrix Meretricissima] worse than Thais, Lais, Phryne,
Messalina, or Pope Joun her self, (whom God permitted to Climb that Chair when
the Popes were most busy to subject the Kings of the Earth (as Vassals) to the
Triple Crown, that he might point out to them this Mother of Harlots) Revel.
17.15. Then this holy Mother Church (so called in the same sense that Hebrews
call Harlots holy) must have a Bill of Divorce, Hos. 2.2. Isa. 50.1. and not a
Diploma for Reconcilement: The Sons of that Church should plead with their
Mother, [Quae gremium nemini claudit] (which opens to all that will be her
Paramours, and let her sit upon their Consciences) to put away her Whoredoms
before Reconciliation, Jer. 3.1, 20, 22. She must first Repent, and then (with
God) you may Reconcile.

The ninth Argument, If Babylon be fallen, as certainly it is in Gods decree,
Revel. 18.2. and that with a double Fall; then it is both unreasonable and
unseasonable for any Reconcilers, to lend their Shoulders for supporting that
which God will have to fall, who has resisted his Will, Rom 9.19. Rome shall
fall certo, cito, and penitus, certainly, speedily, utterly: Their own Jesuits,
Ribera, and Corn. a Lapide, confess it: Yea Cotton the Jesuit acknowledges it is
now falling, for (he says) the Popes Authority is incomparably less than it
was, and that how their Catholic Church is but a diminutive; and Bellarmine
says also, that ever since the Pope has been called Antichrist, the Church of
Rome has been losing ground as before: Yea, it is evident what a cold Sweat
lies upon the Limbs of the Beast, from the growing greatness of the Protestant
Religion,

Roma diu titubans variis erroribus acta,
Corruit, et Mundi desinit esse Caput,
And had those Reconcilers the Shoulders of Sampson, they cannot shore up this
falling Temple of Dagon.

12. To those Scripture Arguments I might add many more had I room for it. As
the tenth Argument. Those Reconciling Modelators would set up a Linsey Woolsey
Religion, and would sow Gods Field with Miscelane or mingled Seeds. Levit.
19.19. and would teach to swear by God and Malcham, Zeph. 1.5. The eleventh
Argument, That which ought to be rejected and Renounced, ought not to be
Reconciled to; but Popery ought to be so because of its Heresy, Tit. 3.10. 2
ep. John v. 10. Leprosy in the Head made the Leper utterly Unclean, and to be
thrust out of the Camp, Levit. 13.43, 44, 45. Yet those Reconcilers would not
have such Lepers to live alone, they dare adventure among them, or meet them
the half way. The twelfth Argument, if such as have only a Form of Godliness,
but deny the power of it, must (according to Gods Command) be turned from 2 Timothy 3.5. then they ought not to be turned to by way of Reconciliation; but the
Romish Church has only a Form, etc. The thirteenth Argument, If H^^red be the
Affection that is due to the Romish Church, then it is not Reconciling Love; but
the Antecedent is true, Revel. 17.16. They shall hate the Whore. The fourteenth
Argument, If we must beware the Leaven, see Dr. Humphrey (of this Leaven) his
Conclusion ut supra, of the Pharisees, Luke 12.1. then we may not embrace it,
etc. To all these Scripture Arguments, some Reasons may be adjoined, As 1. If
she be Incurable no Reconcilers can mend her; and she is so, as Infallible, (so
she calls her self) and says she cannot err: Peter should not have said [I
perceive now, etc.] Act, 10.34. Should she yield up one pin of her Opinion to
the Reconcilers, she loses her Pillar of Infallibility. 2. She is
Irreconciliable to her self, such discord 'twixt Thomists and Scotists, etc. so
that their own Binnius (who was employed to take it up,) says, the foundation
of their Faith was shaken thereby; then less Reconciliable to those
Reconcilers. 3. Religion is a brittle thing, 'twill break (says Dr. Preston)
not bend, it cannot be Accommodated to those Reconcilers, Dr. Pressed. Pillar and
Ground, p. 16.4. All Protestants protest against it, so not to Reconcile to it.
5. Who dare take this Beast, this horned Beast into his Bosom? 6. So long as
the Pope has Paul's Sword as well as Peter's Keys, he scorns it. 7. He will
not write in black but in Blood, as Draco did, concluding all his Arguments in
Barbara and Ferio, or Blood-letting.

THE CONCLUSION.
THus I have drawn a summary Representation of the seven cursed Characters of
the Romish Religion; that, as by the Print of Hercules Foot, was guessed the
Stature of his whole Body; so by this scantling Landscape or Compendium, all
sober Minds may judge whether this be a Religion safely to be embraced, by any
true Englishman, that truly desires to be holy here and to be happy hereafter;
seeing it is a Religion which is,

1. Superstitious, and who will, can, or dare forsake the Substance for a mere
Shadow? He that makes a Bridge of the shadow of a Tree, shall be sure to fall
down into the Deep.

2. It Is Idolatrous, and who may, can, or dare own its Dunghill Deities, which
provoke the Great and Terrible God to the highest Jealonsie against Man; as the
second Commandment (which the Romish Catechism leaves out as none of the Ten)
plainly declares.

3. It Is a Bloody Religion: The Romanists would eat up Gods people as Bread,
Psalm. 14.3. and they would tear in pieces as if there were none to deliver,
Psalm. 50.22. But blessed be the Lord God of Mercy, when those wicked ones (our
Enemies) came upon us to eat up our Flesh, they stumbled and fell, Psalm. 27.2.
Had those bloody Romanists any power over our Bodies, they would send away our
Souls in Chariots of Fire. Their own Bannes speaks plainly, saying; English
Papists are excused for not Rebelling, only because they have not sufficient
strength: God Almighty grant they may ever want it: Cursed is their wrath for
it is Cruel etc. Genesis 49.7. Every true lover of the Land of his Nativity,
should hate this Religion as Rebellion it self, the very Collect (for Gunpowder
Treason day) calls that Religion no better than Rebellion. Yea, it is a Religion
that is not only cruel to others that oppose it, but also to themselves that
profess it, putting them upon Whippings, Scourgings, and self-Macerations, like
to those Priests of Baal, who cut and slashed their own Flesh, 1 Kin. 18.28.
How may, can, or dare any good man love this Religion?

4. It Is Desperate and Damnable, its whole Doctrine is a Doctrine of
Desperation, and can never afford any solid comfort to any Sinsick Soul;
because it sends them to Hepher and Arpad, (Rivers of Damascus or Babylon) to
wit, unto their Pennances and Pilgrimages; it sends Souls from Christ to Works,
from Scripture (which they do scornfully call, Ink and Paper-Divinity) unto
Tradition, etc. Thus Popery (which is but a foppery) altogether walks (like the
unclean Spirit wherewith she is possessed, Matthew. 12.44.) in dry places, and is
not only cruel to the Body, (as before) but it is no less to the Soul, by its
leaving it always in doubt and despair. Oh! who may, can, or dare love this
Desperate Religion, which is Damnable as well as desperate? Though some may be
saved in the Popish Church, yet none can be so by the Popish Faith, Purus-putus
Papist a non potest salvari, says Dr. Willet: And it is universally affirmed,
that a learned English Apostate Papist cannot be saved.

5. It Is a Novel Mushroom Religion, that springs out of the Earth, Bevel.
13.11. like a Mushroom or Toadstool (called by the Poets [(...)] or Earth born)
gradually and by little and little from Phoca's time, ascending out of the
Earth from small beginnings, not descending down from Heaven [ab initio] It was
not so from the beginning, Matthew. 19.8. Porphury, indeed, calls Toadstools
[Deorum filios] the Product of the Gods, because they spring up without Seed,
yet are they but the sweat and superfluity of putrefyed Earth; and therefore
never can continue many Months, Weeks, or Days, but soon shrivles into
Fuz-balls. This is the exact Resemblance of the Beast with seven Heads (to Plot
with) and ten Horns (to Push with) ascending out of the Earth, or Sea, or Hell,
Revel. 13.1.11. and Revel. 11.7. and of his Beastly Religion, that Smoke which
ascends out of the bottomless Pit, Revel. 9.2. with abundance of Craft and
Cruelty: Though the Romanists say of it, as the Town Clerk said of Diana's
Image, that it fell down from Jupiter, or (as the Syriack reads it) which
descended down from Heaven, Act. 19.35. yet Christ says to them, as John 8.23.
Vos Infernales estis, ye are from beneath, Earth-sprung as so many Mushrooms
and born from base Beginnings, God grant they may dwindle away into Fuz-balls;
yea into nothing, when their forty two Months (the Beasts Lease) are expired.
Assuredly, Christ will smite Antichrist, that Earthy one, that lump of Earth
(which is both cold and dry, heavy, and bearing downward toward Hell, as Earth)
with the Rod of his Mouth, Isa. 11.6. And if John Baptist could say, Christ
must increase but I must decrease; much more may this Earthy Antichrist, this
Toadstool Beast ( that only speaks of the Earth, not at all minding Heaven)
say so. John 3.30, 31.

6. It Is Inconsistent with Rublick Peace in its Principles and Practices,
Insomuch that the very Collect (for Gunpowder-Treason day in the Comon-Prayer
Book) calls the Romish Religion no better than absolute Rebellion. How then
can, may, or dare any sober mind do, but hate this Religion as Rebellion it
self, which is as the Sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23. Yea, Dr. Davenant and
Dr. Prideaux, (the two worthy Professors of our famous Universities) have both
determined that an absolute Papist, living under a Protestant Prince and
standing up to his own Principles, must be an absolute Traitor: And Mr. Fuller
(of later date) affirms, that an absolute Papist living under a Protestant
King, is battered with this two horned Dilemma, of being either a Traitor (if
he walk up to his own Popish Principles,) or an Heretic if he deny them, he
cannot serve two Masters, Matthew. 6.24. This cursed Achan (with his Babylonish
Garment, etc.) has troubled Israel's peace in all Lands, and therefore is to
be stoned and burned, Josh. 7.15. to 25. with ( Rev. 17.16.)

Lastly, It Is Irreconciliable, Implacable, Rom 1.31. that admits not of a
Truce, much less of a peace; like the old hatred of the Philistines to Israel,
Ezekiel. 25.15. or like the inveterate Enmity of the Seed of the Serpent against
the Seed of the Woman, that can never be reconciled, but will last as long as
the World lasts: When you hear that the Devil is reconciled to God, then may
you have the Romish Religion reconciled to the Reformed; it is not any Amicable
Reconciliation with Rome our Lord has foretold, but an utter extirpation. Oh!
then let not my Countrymen now Court the Whore which has been so long Carted
for a Whore; the affection that is due to the Beast and his beastly Religion,
is hatred and not love, Revel. 17.16. I conclude this first Part with a
lightsome story of a French Gentleman, that being asked merrily which was the
best Religion, the Romish or Reformed? Answered, I may best know for I have
been of both; and surely (says he) the Reformed (which I left) is the better;
for when I changed I had this Romish Religion and three hundred Crowns per year
to boot. Oh! pray that those seven unclean Spirits (with the Romish Religion)
may be cast out of England for ever, and never to return, Mark 9.25.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultrey.
THe Sinners last Sentence to Eternal Punishment for Sins of Omission; where is
discovered the Natuee, Causes, and Cure of those Sins, by George Swinock, price
2 s. 6 d.

Life in Gods Favor, a seasonable Discourse in Death-threatning times; being
the substance of sundry Sermons upon Psalm. 30.5. In his favor is life. By O.
Heywood Minister of the Gospel, price 1 s. 6 d.

A Protestants Resolution, showing his Reasons why he will not be a Papist;
digested into so plain a method of Question and Answer, that an ordinary
Capacity may be able to defend the Protestant Religion, against the most
cunning Jesuit or Popish Priest; useful for these times, price 6 d.

Twenty Sermons preached on several Texts, by that late Reverend, Pious, and
painful Preacher Mr. James Nalton, Minister of St. Leonard's Foster Lane in the
City of London, Published for Public Good, price 3 s.

A Christians Work and Walk on Earth until he attain to Heaven, which may serve
as a Practical Guide and a plain Direction in his Pilgrimage thither, through
his Personal and Relative duties; marvellously useful to all Persons and
Families of all Ranks and Qualities both in City and Country; by Christopher
Nesse Minister of the Gospel, price 1 s. 6 d.

The Crown and Glory of a Christian, consisting in a sound Conversion and a
well ordered Conversation, by Christopher Nesse, price 6 d.

Mr. Wadsworth's Last Legacy to his Friends, being a serious Exhortation to a
holy Life, or a Plea for the absolute necessity of Inherent Righteousness, in
those that hope to be saved; with an Elegy on the Authors Death, price 6 d.

A Call to Prayer in two Sermons, on that Subject lately Preached to a Country
Auditory, by John Cheney.

Paradise opened, or the Secrets, Mysteries, and Rarities of Divine Love, of
Infinite Wisdom, and of Wonderful Counsel; laid open to Publich View: Also the
Covenant of Grace, and the high and glorious Transactions of the Father and the
Son in the Covenant of Redemption, opened and improved at large; with the
Resolution of diverse important Questions, and Cases concerning both Covenants:
To which is added, a sober and serious Discourse about the favorable, signal
and eminent Presence of the Lord with his people in their greatest Troubles,
deepest Distresses, and most deadly Dangers, etc. By Thomas Brooks late
Preacher of the Gospel at Margaret's New Fish-Street.

Gospel Remission, or a Treatise showing that true Blessedness consists in
Pardon of Sin; wherein is discovered the many Gospel Mysteries therein
contained; the glorious Effects proceeding from it, the great Mistakes made
about it, the true Signs and Symptoms of it, the way and means to obtain it, by
Jeremiah Buroughs: Being several Sermons Preached immediately after those of
The Evil of Sin, by the same Author, and Published by Philip Nigh, William
Greenhil, William Bridge, William Adderly, Matthew Mead, and Helius, price 2 s.
6 d.

The True Way to the Tree of Life, or the Natural Man directed unto Christ, by
Francis Roberts, D. D. price 1 s.

The Arraignment and Conviction of Atheism, or an exact and clear Demonstration
by natural Arguments, that there is a God presented to the view of all; by
Joshua Bonhom, price 1 s. 6 d.

A description of the Islands of Jamaica, with the other Isles and Territories
in America, to which the English are Related, viz. Barbados, St. Christophers,
Nievis or Mevis, Anlego, St. Vincent, Dominica, Montserat, Anguilla, Barbada,
Bermudes, Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, New England, New York, New Found Land:
Published by Richard Blome, cogether with the Present State of Algiers,
Illustrated with several Maps of the Islands, price 2 s. 6 d.

A Practical Exposition of the Ten Commandments, with a Resolution of several
momentous Questions and Cases of Conscience, by the Learned, Laborious, and
Faithful Servant of Jesus Christ James Durham, late Minister of the Gospel in
Glasgow.

Believers Mortification of Sin by the Spirit or Gospel Holiness, advanced by
the Power of the Holy Ghost on the hearts of the Faithful: Whereunto is Added
the Authors three last Sermons on Genesis 3.15. By the Learned and Pious Mr.
Alexander Carmichael, formerly of Scotland, and late Preacher of the Gospel in
London, price 1 s. 6 d.

The Christian Man's Calling, or a Treatise of making Religion ones Business;
wherein the Christian is directed to perform in all Religious Duties, Natural
Actions, Particular Vacations, Family Directions, and in his own Recreations,
in all Relations, in all Conditions, in his dealings with all men, in the
choice of his Company both of Evil and Good, in solitude on a Week Day from
Morning till Night, in Visiting the Sick and on a dying Bed, by George Swinnock.

The Real Christian, or a Treatise of Effectual Calling, wherein the Work of
God in drawing the Soul to Christ, being opened according to the Holy
Scriptures; some things required by our late Divines, as necessary to a right
preparation for Christ, and a true closing with Christ, which have caused, and
do still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, and are with due
respects to those worthy men brought to the Balance of the Sanctuary, there
weighed, and accordingly judged: To which is added, a few words concerning
Socinianism; by Giles Fizimic sometimes Minister at Shalford in Essex.

Mount Pisgah. or a Prospect of Heaven, being an Exposition of the Fourth
Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessaloniants, by Tho. Case,
sometimes Student in Christ Church Oxon, and Minister of the Gospel, price 4 s.

A Grave for Controversies between a Romanist and a Protestant, lately
presented to the French King, price 6 d.

A Collection of Sermons Preached at the Morning Lecture in Southwark and
elsewhere, by N. Blaky.

Mr. Janeways last Legacy to his Friends, containing twenty seven famous
Instances of Gods Providence, in and about Sea dangers and deliverances, with
the Names of several that were Eye Witnesses to many of them; whereunto is
added a Sermon on the same Subject.

Memorials of Gods Judgments Spiritual and Temporal, or Sermons to call to
Remembrance, by Nicholas Teckyes Minister of the Gospel, price 1 s. 6 d.

The Morning Seeker, showing the benefit of being good betimes; with directions
to make safe work about early Religion, by John Ryther, price 1 s. 6 d.

The Interest of Reason in Religion, together with the import and use of
Scripture Metaphors, and the nature of the Union between Christ and Believers,
with Reflections on several late Writings, and especially Mr. Sherlock's
Discourse concerning the Knowledge of Christ modestly enquired into and stated.

A Guide to the true Religion, or a Discourse directing to make a wise choice
of that Religion men venture their Salvation upon, by John Clapham, price 1 s.

The Weavers Pocket Book, or Weaving spiritualized in a Discourse, wherein men
employed in that Occupation, are instructed how to raise heavenly Meditations
from the several parts of their work: To which is added some few Moral and
Spiritual Observations, Relating both to that and some other Trade, by J.
Collins D. D. price 1 s.

The Character of a weaned Christian, or the Evangelists Call, Art of
Self-denial, being an Essay alluding to the Severities and Advantages of Infant
weaning, both Pleasant and Profitable: By S. S. Minister of the Gospel in
London, price 1 s.

A true Relation of the sad Estate of the Reformed Churches in France, and
several Passages of the great Persecution they lie under; Collected out of the
several Addresses and Speeches in Print made unto the French King; as also in
some parts of Germany and Hungary, by Sir W. W. price 6 d.

FINIS.

