A NARRATIVE OF ALL THE Proceedings in the Drayning of the GREAT LEVEL of the
FENNS, Extending into the Counties of Northton. Lincoln, Norffolk, Suffolk,
Cambridge, and Huntington, and the ISLE of ELY; From the time of QUEEN
ELIZABETH, until this present MAY, 1661.

For the Information of all concerned.

By N. N.

LONDON, Printed by A. W. for the use of the Author, 1661.

A Narrative of all the proceedings in the Drayning of the Great Level, etc.
IN the 43. year of Queen Eliz. 43 Eliz.
an Act was made to encourage any that would undertake the Drayning of the said
great Level, which was attempted in several parts; by Carril for the Drayning
of Thorney; by Cocking and others for Londoners Fenns; which were both gained,
and lost again.

In the third year of King James, 3 Jac.
the whole was attempted to be Drayned by Sir John Popham Knight. Chief Justice,
Sir Thomas Fleming Chief Baron, Sir William Rumney Knight, and Alderman of
London, and John Eldred Citizen of London, who were to have had for their
recompense, 130000. acres, who did proceed, but could not effect that work.

In the 16th. year of King James, 16 Jac.
Sir William Ayloff Knight. and Anthony Thomas Esquire became undertakers to drain the
said Level, and were to have had two thirds of some, and half of other grounds
for their recompense; Camebridge Law, Feb. 20. 19 Jac. Sept. 6. Car. 1.
but this Drayning was without success.

Afterward King James himself by a Law of Sewers was declared Undertaker for
the Drayning the whole, and was to have had for his recompense, 120000. acres;
But this attempt likewise failed.

In the 6th. year of King Charles the first, (of blessed memory) The
Commissioners of Sewers for the said great Level, and parts adjacent, did agree
with one Sir Cornelius Vermuyden to undertake the Drayning the said Level, who
was to have had for his recompense, 95000. acres, but nothing was done, in
respect of his being an Alien.

After in the said 6th. Jan. 6 Car. 1.
year of King Charles, the then Commissioners of Sewers for the said Great
Level, and parts adjacent, did make it their request to Francis then Earl of
Bedford to undertake the said work, who was to have for his recompense, 95000.
acres, whereof the said King was to have 12000. acres for his Royal assent to
that Law, and concurrence to an Act of Parliament.

In pursuance whereof the said Earl undertook this great and hazardous work,
and for his assistance therein, and by an Indenture consisting of 14. parts,
Dated 27. Feb. 7. Car. 1o. Feb. 7. Car.
he took in diverse Adventurers, and Participants with him, who adventured for
these several shares following;

Viz. The said Francis Earl of Bedford for three, whole shares, or lots of
4000. acres to each lot. Oliver Earl of Bullingbrook for one lot of 4000.
Edward Lord Gorges for one. Sir Robert Heath Knight. for one. Sir Miles Sandys
Knight and Baronet for two. Sir William Russel Knight and Baronet for two. Sir
Robert Bevill Knight for one. Sir Tho. Terringham Knight. for two. Sir Philbert
Dernatt for one. William Sams Doctor at Law for one. Anthony Hamond Esquire for
two. Samuel Spalding Gent. for one. Andrew Burwell Gent. for one. Sir Robert
Lovet Knight, for one.
In all twenty lots, each of 4000. acres divided between the said 14. parties.

In, and by which said Indenture, amongst other things, it is agreed, as
follows.

That if any one of the aforesaid parties, or their Assigns, after notice,
should fail in the payment of such moneys, as from time to time should be
imposed on them, in pursuance of the said Indenture for the carrying on the
said work, that then it should be lawful to, and for the rest of the said
parties, or their Assigns, to supply the same, or to admit some other person,
or persons, to have the share of such defaulture, paying the sum imposed on
the said share, and that all such parties as aforesaid, by himself, or his
Assigns so failing, shall be wholly excluded, and for ever debarred from
demanding, or receiving, all, or any such sum, or sums of money, as any such
person, or persons had formerly disbursed, for, and toward the said work.

After the executing of the said 14th. part Indenture, diverse of those
Participants did assign and convey unto other persons several proportions of
their shares, and Adventures by them undertaken by the said Indenture.

By virtue of this Agreement, the said Adventuturers, and their Assigns
proceeded so far in this hazardous adventure, that after the expense of
100000l. therein, it was adjudged drayned at Peterborough. 12 Car.


And in October. 13 Car.
in the 13th. year of the said King Charles, by a Law of Sewers made at St.
Ives, the said 95000. acres was set out by descriptions and boundaries therein
mentioned, where, and how this 95000. acres should be taken out of each Parish,
or Landowners land in the whole Level, according to which setting forth, the
whole 95000. acres was thus divided and allotted.

First, 12000. acres thereof for the said late K. Charles.

And 80000. acres thereof was divided into twenty lots, each containing 4000.
acres, which was divided amongst the aforesaid parties to the 14th. part Deed,
and their Assigns, as aforesaid.

And 3000. acres did remain to be disposed of at the pleasure of the
Adventurers.

In pursuance of this Law, a great part of the said 95000. acres was divided
from the Country, and some of the said Adventurers had possession of some
parts of their said proportions, but had no conveyances, nor received but
little rent.

For that by a Law of Sewers made at Huntingdon in the 14th. 14 Car.
year of the said King Charles, upon complaint that the said Level was not
perfectly drayned, The said King Charles (of happy memory) was declared
undertaker to drain the same (inter alia) and was to have for his recompense,
not only the said 95000. acres set out unto the said Earl, but also 57000.
acres more out of the same Lands and Parishes within the said Level, and the
said Earl and his Participants were to have had 40000. acres of the said 95000.
acres freed from Taxes for their charges expended, which would have been of
more advantage to them, than the whole 95000. acres on the terms they have it.
After which Law the Inhabitants of the Country did re-enter upon the said
80000. acres, and 3000. acres, part of the said 95000. acres, and the said King
continued the possession of the said 12000 acres, but about the year 1641. 1641.
his said Majesty gave over his undertaking, and soon after the whole Level
became drowned again, and then the Country entered upon the said 12000. acres
also, and kept the whole in their own possession.

In this Condition the said Level returned to be as bad drowned as ever before,
with the loss of 100000l. to the said Earl, and his Participants; afterward a
Parliament being called in the year 1640. the said Earl and his Participants,
or their Assigns, did petition the said Parliament, that they would impowr the
said Earl to go on, and perfect the aforesaid work; and in 1641. their case was
committed. But the said Earl dying about the said year, and the late unhappy
wars being then begun, there was for some time a stop to the prosecution of the
said Act, till about the year 1646. when William now Earl of Bedford, son and
heir of the said Francis; the Honorable John Russell, and Edward Russell,
brothers to the said William Earl of Bedford; Sir Miles Sandys, Sir John
Marsham, Anthony Hamond, Robert Henley, Esquires, and others, in number and
interest, for the greatest part concerned in the said 83000 acres, did address
themselves to the Parliament then sitting, that they might be empowered by an
Act to prosecute the said work of Drayning, for the recovery of that vast and
lost Country, which after several hearings of all parties before a Committee,
the Act was ready to be presented to the house of Lords, but the late unhappy
differences prevented for that time its further progress.

Afterward about the year 1648. the said William Earl of Bedford, by the
assistance of Sir Miles Sandys, Robert Henley Esquires, and diverse others of
his said Participants, did prosecute the obtaining of an Act of that pretended
Parliament, in order to the drayning of the aforesaid Level. And after several
hearings of all parties, both of the Country, and Adventurers, before the
Committee, an Act passed in the said pretended Parliament in May 1649. By
color of which pretended Act, the said Earl and his Participants did meet
together in prosecution of the aofresaid 14 part Indenture: And accordingly the
Earl of Arrundel, (under whom Sir William Playter claims) Colonel John
Russell, and Edward Russell Esquires (brothers to the said Earl of Bedford) Sir
Miles Sandys, (under whom Colonel Samuel Sandys claims) Sir John Hewett, Sir
William Terringham, William Dodson, Sir John Marsham, Anthony Hamond, and
Robert Henley Esquires, and diverse others interessed in the said work of
Drayning, who had 7 parts of 8 in the said 83000 acres, finding themselves out
of possession, did in June following, resolve to raise moneys for carrying on
the said work in prosecution of the aforesaid 14th part Indenture, being
enabled thereto (as the times then were) by the said pretended Act. But several
persons failing in the due payment of their moneys, as aforesaid; the said
Earl, with the residue of his said Participants were necessitated about
November following, either to admit some other persons in the room of those who
failed to supply the payment of such moneys as was raised according to the said
Agreement, or otherwise to lose the whole.

By which means moneys being raised, the said work was carried on till Lady Day
1653. and then the whole Level being adjudged drayned, possession of the said
95000 acres was given to them accordingly, and by virtue of an Act made in the
Parliament begun the 25th. of April, 1660. it still continues.

Several Banks which together are above 200 miles in length, 70 miles whereof
are generally 9 foot high, and 60 foot wide at seat or bottom, the rest
generally 5 foot high, and 24 foot wide at seat; Besides, they have cut one
Navigable River 21 miles long, an 100 foot broad, besides diverse Sewers and
drains together above 400 miles in length, some 40 foot, some 30, some 20, none
under 12 foot wide; besides, they have made diverse great and Navigable Sasses
and Sluices, and Bridges, for the doing whereof, and in other expenses and
buildings, and improving the said Level, the said Earl and his Participants
have expended at least 500000l. and great sums it will yearly cost to maintain
it.

This being the true state of the Case, as indifferent to all interests, and as
an affectionate friend to the whole, I heartily wish and advise, that all
parties herein concerned, would so far recede from their own opinions, and
private interests, and for the preservation of the whole, unanimously submit
all differences to the determination of the Parliament, or to such persons as
they in their wisdoms shall think fit, whereby the whole may be preserved, and
all particular interest may receive Justice, according to the Equity of their
Cause.

FINIS.

