A New BOOK OF Knowledge; Treating of Things, Whereof some are Profitable, some
Precious, and some Pleasant and Delightful.

I. How to Write Secretly. II. To Write your Name on a Knife. III. To make Bone
or Wood Red for ever. IV. To make Ink. V. To Catch Fowls. VI. To keep Clothes
from Moths. VII. To make the Q. of Hungary's Water. VIII. To Fatten Fowl. IX.
To make Cock-Ale. 10. To make Lucatellus Balsam. XI. To Cure Corns. XII. To
Pickle French Beans, etc. XIII. To take Fish. XIV. To take Moles. XV. To take
Spots out of Linen, XVI. To make the Balsam sold by Mountebanks. XVII. To make
Pouder-Ink in an instant. XVIII. To make Pomatum and Wash-Balls. XIX. To make
Aqua Mirabilis. XX. To make Dr. Stephen's Water. With diverse other Notable
Things.

London, Printed for G. Conyers at the Golden Ring in Little-Britain, 1697.

A New Book, etc.
To Write Secretly.
TAke Alum, and beat it into Powder; then put some into a Sawcer of clean
Water, till it dissolve: write with this, and dry it by the fire; so you may
dispose of it how you please: but when you would read it, wet the Paper in
clean Water, and it will appear of a Bluish Color. There are diverse ways of
Writing privately, as with the Juice of Limons or Onions; but this exceeds all
in my opinion, by reason the others may be seen before the Light, when dry; but
this may not, if thoroughly dry.

To Write your Name on a Knife.
Warm your Knife over the Fire, then take Beeswax, and rub all over one side
thereof, about the thickness of Paper, in every place: when it is cool, write
your Name, or what else you please, on the Knife with a Needle put into a small
Stick; but you must Write so deep in the Wax, as to touch the Metal: having so
done, take Aqua Fortis with a Stick or Feather, and lay it all over that side
of the Knife and Writing; so let it stand for one hour: scrape off the Wax, and
it will be as it were Engraven, and will never wear out. This is called Etching.

To make Bone or Wood red for ever.
Take pounded Brazil, and put it in some Milk, so that you put not too much to
the Brazil, then lay in your Bone or Wood, letting it lie in for eight days;
then boil it a little over the Fire, and it will be Red for ever.

To make Yellow INK.
Take Saffron, and grind it very fine with weak Gumwater; you may put a little
Gambogia with it, if you please. This is a good Yellow.

To Draw out Splinters or Thorns.
Take common Turpentine, and spread it upon Leather, and apply a Plaster of
this to the place; it also Draws, and cleanses Sores and Ulcers.

To Catch CROWS.
Take white Pease, steep them eight or nine days in the Gall of an Ox, and lay
them in some place where they use to come.

To make COCK-ALE.
Take nine Gallons of Ale, and let it Work; and when done Working, have in
readiness four pound of Raisins of the Sun, stoned and bruised in a Mortar, two
Nutmegs, and as much Mace bruised; then take two Cocks, flea them, and take out
the Guts, then hold them in a pot of boiling Water, just to Plump them; then
break their Bones, and bruise them in a Mortar, so put them in a Vessel to your
Ale, (besure you put in all the Blade Fruit and Spice,) so stop them close: let
it stand a Fortnight; and when you Bottle it, put in every Bottle two or three
bits of Limon-Peel, and as much candied Ginger-Root, with a Lump of Sugar; stop
it close: let it stand a Fortnight or three Weeks, then drink it; it is very
pleasant, and good against Consumption.

To Cure Corns in the Feet.
Tender them with Plasters or warm Water, then pick them out with a Point of a
Penknife, and apply Vinegar and new Lime.

Another.
Cut them well and close; take out as much of the Coar as you can: then take
burnt Alum, and the Pith of an Oyster that sticks to the Shell, dried and
poudered, incorporate these with a little Venice Turpentine, put into the
Hollowness (if there be any) a little Tent of Lint dipped in Oil of Cloves, and
lay on the other as a Plaster, and in a Weeks time, with thrice renewing, takes
away the Corn, making Flesh arise, to f^^ the Hollowness.

Lady Boswells LUCATELLUS BALSAM^ or OINTMENT, admirable for Wounds.
Take Venice Turpentine one pound, a quart of Salle^ Oil, a dram of red Sanders
in fine Powder, six spoonfuls of Sack, one pound of yellow Bees Wax, natural
Balsam, and Oil of St. John's wort, of each an ounce^ first cut the Wax, and
melt it on the Fire in a wellheaded Pipkin, and then (lest it catch fire) take
^^ off, and put in the Turpentine to it, having first washed the Turpentine
thrice in Damask Rose Water, an^^ put in the Oil and Sack, stirring them on a
slow fire^^ and when it is cold, pour off the Sack, and melt it again, and put
in the natural Balsam, Red Sanders^ and Oil of St. John's Wort, stirring it
again on the fire^ till it almost boil, and strain it off, if you will, and
stir it till it is a little thickish, and put it in Pots for use.

Note, That if the Flame happen to catch any Ointment (in making,) clap a Cloth
or Paper over it, to damp the Flame.

The Virtues.
First, It is good to heal any Wound inward or outward, being squirted warm
into the inward Wound^ to an outward Wound, being applied with fine Lin^ or
Linen, anointing the Parts also thereabouts; i^ not only takes away the Pain,
but also keeps i^ from Inflammation, and draws forth Splinters o^ broken
Bones, or any thing else that may putrify ^ so as the Brain, Guts or Liver, be
not Wounded, it commonly heals the Wound in four or five times Dressing, so
that no other thing be applied thereto.

Secondly, It heals Burns or Scalds without a Scar.

Thirdly, It helps the Headache, by anointing the Nostrils and Temples.

Fourthly, It cures the Biting of a Mad Dog, used ^ot.

Fifthly, It is good in the time of Plague, Pox, etc. by anointing the Nostrils
and Lips every Morning.

Sixthly, In the beginning of the Plague, Smallpox or Measles, swallow about a
quarter of an ounce, and Sweat upon it three or four Mornings together.

Seventhly, It is good against the Colic, Stitches, etc. Bathing it well in,
and apply Flannel.

Eighthly, It heals Fistula^s, or other Ulcers and Cankers, used hot, taking
the longer time.

Ninthly, It helps Digestion, the Naval and Stomach being anointed going to Bed.

Tenthly, For Ulcers in the Bladder or Kidneys, and Bruises by Falls inward;
Take the quantity of a Field-Bean in Sack, or ^ills made thereof, rolled in
Sugar Morning and Night, and drink Ale-berry after it; but for the Stone, take
them at going to Bed in White Wind.

Eleventhly, Mix with Conserve of Roses, and Gum-Olibanum, cures old Coughs,
etc. if followed.

Of FLAX.
Flax will yield Thirty or forty pound an Acre: Barren, Sandy and Heathy
Ground is best for it; and after Flax, Turnips; one Acre of good Flax is
accounted worth three or four Acres of the best Wheat, and the Liquor has much
advanced the Goodness thereof. The best time for Sowing, is about the beginning
of April, presently after a Shower of Rain; which may abundantly be supplied by
the Engine, and much Water following. Some do usually sow Flax until the end of
May, and some after.

Cabages pulled up by the Roots, and set in Sand, in a Cellar, or some other
Room, may be kept all the Winter; or you may hang them up with Strings: and so
may you keep Artichokes, and other Plants a^^ Roots, for constant use, as
Caro^s, Parsnips and Turnips. In dry Weather, in October and November, ma^^ a
Layer of Sand, and a Layer of Carots, cutting aw^^ the Tops close to the Roots,
with some of the sm^^ ends of the Carots: and about the last of December^ when
there is no Frost, uncover them; and you m^^ keep them longer, if you pare off
the Shootings ^^ the upper end of the Roots, and lay them in Sand^ and so
Parsnips and Turnips.

To help a Chimney that is dangerously on Fire.
Let two or three Persons take a Blanket or Coverlet, and hold it close to the
Mouth of the Chimney that no Air may enter, and with a close Board, cov^^ the
Top of the Chimney; and the Fire, for want ^^ Air, will soon be Extinguished.

Chaff will Heat, and Ripen unripe Apples.

The Dross, or that which is left after the pressing out of Lint-seeds, is
exceeding profitable for the Fee^ing of Cattle, as the other Rape-seeds with
Turnips.

Hemp seeds given to Hens, in Winter, will make them Lay oftener than ordinary
Seeds or Corn.

Boil Butchers Blood, which is easily to be had, wit^ a good quantity of Bran
mingled therewith; o^ Grains, which is not so good until it come to the manner
of a Blood P^dding, which will feed you^ Fowl as fat as you will desire them to
be. Some d^ use to feed Fowl with Carots. Turnips, Parsnips an^ Pumpions
sodden, and mingled with Bran, or coar^^ Pollard.

Turkies will become very Fat in a short time, an^ prosper exceedingly, with
bruised Acorns.

You may soak Chippings, and other Crusts of Bread^ in broken Beer or Fletten
Milk, and feed your Hen^ and Capons fat presently.

Graft Apples upon Cherry-Stocks, and the Frui^ will be exceeding Red.

To make five sorts of Roses grow upon one Stock, without Inoculation.
When they begin to Knot, bore with an Awl under ^he Knot, and with a Feather
put Green in one, and Yellow in another, Red in a third, and Blew in ^he
fourth, and close up all the Holes handsomely.

To make Lillies become Red.
You must very neatly open the Clifts of the Roots, and fill the same with any
Red Color, then set them ^n fat Dunged Earth.

Graft Roses in the Bud, upon Sweet-Briar, and they will Smell most deliciously.

The Roots of Roses, with their Slips and Knots, removed and set amongst Broom,
will bring forth Yellow Roses.

Elm-Tree Chips set in Ditches, will in a short time become Young Trees, and
make a very good Fence: and the Slips that grow from the Roots of Elms being
taken off, will grow to great Perfection in few Years.

To keep Clothes from Moths.
Sees the Dregs, or Mother, or Foam of Oil, to the half, and therewith Anoint
the Bottom, Corners and Feet of any Chest or Press, and the Clothes that you
lay therein will be free from any Hurt with Moths; but before you put the
Clothes in the Chest or Press, it must be dry.

Provide store of Walnut leaves, and hang them upon Thread, one distant from
another; when they are thoroughly Dry, strip them in the Chest, or amongst the
Clothes and Beds, and within the Folds of every Garment: lay Wormwood or
Lavender amongst the Clothes, and they will be safe from Moths.

The Branches of Bay-Trees wrapped up, and laid amongst Clothes and Books, will
keep them safe from Moths and other Corruption.

To keep Apparel, Hangings, etc. from Moths.
Brush them several times in the Year, with a Brush made of Wormwood Tops, and
you may rub the^ with Wormwood, especially when you discern t^^ Moths to haunt
amongst the Hangings.

To destroy Caterpillars.
Besmear all the bottom of the Tree with Tar, the^ get great store of Ants; put
them in a Bag, and dra^^ the same with a Cord unto the Tree, and let it han^
there, so that it touch the Body of the Tree; and the Ants being prevented to
go from the Tree by reason of the Tar, will for want of Food, eat and destroy
the Caterpillars, without hurting any of the Fruit o^ Leaves.

To take FISH.
Set a Candle in a piece of Cork, as even as may b^ with the Water, which will
stupify and attract the Fishes to it, so that with a little Hoop Net, upon the
end of a Cane or Staff, you may take them with much facility; or with a
Shovel-Net, etc. which must be in the Night.

Where Mudd and Water is taken out of the Ponds if the Rainwater do after come
into them, there will become multitude of Eels in a short time; and by this
Course, you may abundantly increase Carps.

In May, dig up two Turffs of new grown Grass when the Dew is on them: then tie
the grassy side together, and place them in Water on the side of a Pond; then
let them remain there unmoved, about Ten days; and taking up the Turffs,
untying or loosing them, you shall find great store of Young Eel^ within the
Turffs, although there were not an Eel in the Pond before; and by tying the
Turffs together again, and placing them in the same manner, a greater increase
will come thereof.

To bring all the Fish in the Pond together.
Take Plattavia or Dioscorides, lay either of them in Honey, a Day and a Night;
then let them dry in the Sun: bind them to a String, and cast them into the
Pond, and all the Fish will come to it.

To take Moles.
Get a Pot or Glass that is narrow at the top, and ^ide at the bottom, and
place one of these deep in the ^ound in the Fields, where the Moles are; the
top (...) the Pot being even with the ground, and in the Pot (...) Glass, put a
stinking Crab, which they will eager^^ smell after, and so fall into the Pot,
and being im^^isoned, they will call for Aids of their Fellows. and to bring
them all to a place in this manner, fire ^^imstone in the like Pot so placed:
but first, put a ^^ve Mole therein, and she will call all the Moles that ^re
near, to come to her release; and so being ta^en, you may use only a live Mole
in the Pot, without the Crab or Brimstone.

To make good Vsquebaugh.
Take two Gallons of Aqua Vitae, four ounces of best liquorice bruised, four
ounces of Anniseeds bruised, ^ut them into a Glass, or Stone Vessel, and cover
them close, and so let them stand a Week; and then ^raw off the clearest with
Molosses, and keep it in another Vessel, and put in some Dates, Raisins stoned;
^eep it close from the Air.

To make pleasant Mead.
Put a Quart of Honey to a Gallon of Water, with about Ten Sprigs of sweet
Marjoram, and half so many Tops of Bays; boil all these well together, and when
it is cold, Bottle it up, and in Ten days it will be ready to drink.

To get Ink-Spots out of Linen.
Lay it in Urine immediately after the Ink has dropped on it, and there let it
lie all night, and the next day wash it out again; and in so doing two or three
times, you will find the Spots and Stains quite out.

To (...) Parsley spring up in few hours.
Steep the ^ee^^ in sweet Milk, and strew your Bed you mean to Sow with
unquench'd Lime three times, then sow your Seed, and strew once more of your
Lime upon it, and upon that Earth well prepared, then Water it well, and you
may according to disc^^tion enjoy your expectation.

To make a Powder, that will make Ink in an instant.
Take Galls and Copperas, of each a like quant^^^ beat it to Powder, and put it
in Water, and on a ^^^den it will be good Ink. Likewise, if you strew^^^ the
same Powder on white Paper, and write the^^^^ with Water, the Letters will
presently appear bl^^^^.

To make that Famous Balsam, sold by the Mountebanks (...) most parts of
England; exactly set down, for the (...) of the Country, as follows:
Take Linseed Oil 5 Quarts, 2 pound of Oil of Turpentine, 1 pound of
Sallet-Oil, 5 pound of Ro^^^ 2 pound of common Turpentine, 2 pound of Be^^ Wax,
1 ounce Ship-Pitch, 4 ounces Storax Liqu^^ 1 ounce Galbanum, 1 ounce Amoniacum,
Bdellium, Sa^^penum, of each half an ounce, 4 ounces Oil of Sp^^^ half an ounce
Natural Balsam, Burgundy Pitch a^^ Frankincense, of each two ounces: dissolve
yo^^ Gums in Vinegar, then melt them gently together and it is done.

The true and genuine Receipt, for making the Queen of Hungarys Water.
Take four pound of Rosemary Flowers, gather (...) in a fair Morning, two or
three hours after Sun-risin^^ and picked from all the green part: put them into
Cucurbite, and pour upon them three Quarts of Spirit of Wine well Rectified;
press down the Flowe^ into the said Spirit, and then cover the Cucurbite with
its Head and Alembick: lute well all the Ju^^ctu^e with Paste and Paper: then
place it in a Sa^^^ bath, and lute a Receiver to it, then leave it so (...) the
next morning: Then Distill it with ^o modera^^^ a (...), that whilst the Spirit
Distille^ (...) Head m^^^ no^ be so much as warm. Or, (...) the Distillation,
you may cover the Head with a Linen Clo^^^ doubled several times, and dipped
in cold Water (...) and dip again, and cool the Head several times. Continue
the Distillation, until you have drawn about three Quarts of Spirit, which will
be very pure, and charged with the best and volatile Substance of the Flower:
then take out all the fire, and let the Bath cool: unlute the Vessels, and put
the Spirit into a Bottle well stopped: then strain, and press out the Liquor
that remains in the Cucurbite, and clarify it. Then put into the Cucurbit
again, and Distill it, until it remains in the bottom, of the consistence
near as thick as Honey, or a thick Syrup, which put into a Pipkin well glazed,
and boil it over a gentle fire, to the thickness of an ordinary Extract; put
the last Spirit into a Bottle by it self.

Elixir Salutis, rightly prepared, as follows.
Take of Anniseeds, Coriander-seeds, Parsly-seeds, sweet Fennel-seeds, of each
2 ounces, 2 ounces of Spanish Liquorice, 2 ounces Senna, 2 ounces Rhubarb,
Elecampane 2 ounces, Guaiacum 2 ounces, Saffron 6 penny worth, Raisins of the
Sun stoned, 1 pound: mix all these together, put them into 3 Quarts of the
smallest Aqua Vitae, in a Stone or Glass Bottle. Let it stand, and insuse 14
days at least (but the longer the better) near the Fire, that it may receive
some warmth, for it will infuse the better, and sooner. Then pour off your
Liquor into a Vessel, and take your Druggs and press them as dry as you can,
and put the Liquor you squeeze out to the other; and so Bottle it up for use.

To make Wash-Balls.
Take Storax of both kinds, Benjamin, Calamus Aromaticus, Labdanum, of each
alike: bray them to Powder with Cloves and Orrice, beat them all with a
sufficient quantity of Soap, till it be stiff, then work it like Paste, and
make round Balls thereof.

To Pickle French-Beans.
String your Beans, boil them tender: take them off, let them stand till they
are cold; put them into Pickle of Beer, Vinegar, Salt, Cloves and Mace, with a
little Ginger.

To make Aqua Mirabilis.
Take Cloves, Cubebs, Cardamums, Galanga, Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger, of each a
dram, half a pound o^ Juice of Celandine, a pint of Spirit of Wine, 3 pints o^
White Wind, infuse them 24 hours, and draw off ^^ Quart with an Alembick.

Dr. Stephen's Water.
Take of Cinnamon, Ginger, Galanga, Cloves, Nutmegs, Grains of Paradise, Seeds
of Amse, Fennel^ Caraways, of each a dram: Herb of Time, Mother^ of Time, Mint,
Sage, Pennyroyal, Pellitory of the Wall, Rosemary, Flowers of Red-Roses,
Camomil Origanum, Lavender, of each a handful: infuse the^ 12 pints of Gascoign
Wine, then with an Alembi^ draw away 3 pints of the Strong.

To make Pomatum.
Take fresh Hogs-Suet cleansed from the Films, and washed in White Wind, one
pound: and as much Sheeps Suet washed in White Wind: then take about 16 Pomwater
Apples, cleansed and boiled in Rose-water^ add to these Rose-wood, Sasaffras,
Roots of Orrice Florentine, of each six Drams, of Benzoin, Storax, Calamita,
half an ounce of each, and so make it into an Ointment.

To take FISH.
Take Assa Fatida, Milk, Honey, Wheat Flour, and make an Ointment, and anoint
the Bait and Hook.

An Ointment to kill the ITCH.
Take a pennyworth of Black Soap, and a pennyworth of Boars-grease, beat them
together in Water, and anoint therewith when it itcheth.

For a Scald-Head.
Take Primrose-leaves, stamp them, and lay to it.

For a Ring-worm.
Take Mustard and Honey, and anoint the place three days.

FINIS.

