portrait of Christopher Ness Christopher Nelse aetatis suae 56: 1678 Minnister
of the Gospel in fleet street London.


AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Arminianism: OR, A Succinct DISCOVRSE, to Enervate and
Confute all the five Points thereof, to wit, Predestination grounded upon Man's
foreseen Works. Universal Redemption. Sufficient Grace in All. The Power of
Man's Free Will in Conversion, and The Possibility of True Saints falling away
Totally and Finally. All which are Demonstrated here to be Damnable Errors,
both by Scriptures and Reason, etc. All Undeniable and Uncontrollable.

Published for Public Good By CHRISTOPHER NESS, Author of the History and
Mystery of the Old and New Testament, and of many more Books, etc.

In magnis voluisse sat est.
Difficilium facilis est Venia.
LONDON, Printed by R. Tookey for Tho. Cockerill, at the Bible and Three Legs,
over against Grocers-Hall, in the Poultrey. 1700.

THE PREFACE.
Candid READER,
OBserve these Few Considerations: Although? this Enchiridion, or Small Manual and
Portable Pocketbook be very little in it Self and Substance, yet ought it not
therefore to be despised: For,

First, We read how the Mighty Angel of the Covenant, had a very little Book
open in his Hand, Rev. 10.2. The Greek Word is [(...)] not (...), but a
Threefold Diminutive, as Liber, Libellus and Libellunculus; yet this little
Book did contain in it, the great Concerns of the Redeemers little, little
Flock [(...)] a double Diminutive, as Christ calls them, Luke 12.32. The Bible
it self is but a little Book, in comparison of those vast Folio's of
School-Doctors and Popish Decretals, wherewith the World is pestered, etc. and
that little Book was not shut or sealed, but it was open by the Lamb's
Purchase: It Is the Work of Antichrist to keep it shut, yea, and it must also be
eaten, ver. 10. that is, it must go down and be Hid in our Hearts, Psalm.
119.11. then the simplest Soul may have right Conceptions of it, Deuteronomy. 30.11.

Secondly, This little Book has cost me great Study and Labor to compose it,
that it might contain the very Cream and Quintessence of the best Authors upon
this Subject: Moreover, It has cost me likewise many Ardent Prayers to God,
and many Earnest Wrestlings with God, that I might not be one of those that
rebel against the Light, Job 24.13. but that in His Light I might see Light,
Psalm. 36.9. and to have my Eyes anointed with Christ's Eye Salve, Rev. 3.18.
that I might see more clearly into these Profound Points, which has very much
puzzled so much of the Christian World. Insomuch that the Orthodox do complain
in our Day (only with a little Difference) as blessed Athanasius did in his
Day, who then sighed out those sad Words [ Totus Mundus est Arrianus] so it is
the sad sigh of our present Times, that [ Totus Mundus est Arminianus].

Thirdly, Lest this overflowing Deluge should bring Destruction upon us, there
is great need that some Servants of Christ should run to stop the farther
spreading of this Plague and Leprosy: Thus Moses, God's Servant, stood in the
Gap, and stopped the Destruction of Israel, Psalm. 106.23. and Numb.
14.10,11,12., to 20. And at another Time this Moses (who was quick-sighted by
his great Familiarity with God) did soon see that Wrath was gone out from the
Lord against Israel, then he commands Aaron to run, and take a Censer and offer
up an Atonement, etc. all which when Aaron had done, the Plague was stayed,
Numb. 16.46,47,48. And the Neglect of this Duty the Lord complains of, that He
found none of his Servants to stand in the Gap, etc. Ezekiel. 13.5. and 22.30.
While I was considering those Things, the Lord stirred up my Spirit, to do as
is done in Common Conflagrations, when every one runs with the best Bucket he
can get, wherewith to quench the Devouring Flames, and to stop them, that they
may not proceed to lay all waste before them.

Fourthly, When I had completed this short Compendium (which I drew up many
Years ago) I showed it to Dr. John Owen, Mr. Nicholas Lockier and Mr. George
Griffith; Who all Unanimously approved of it, and wrote an Epistle Commendatory
to it, subscribing it with all their Three Hands, which is too large here to
insert, because I am confined to but four Pages for my Preface, etc. the Truth
of the Premises I do affirm (as the Phrase is) In Verbo Sacerdotis, etc.

Fifthly and Lastly, As a Little Map does represent a Large Country at one
View, which will take up much Time to Travel over, etc. So this (...), Multum
in Parvo, read it seriously without Partiality, and the Lord give you
Understanding in all, etc.

So prays Yours in the best Bonds, Christo. Ness.
Sept. 30. 1700.
AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Arminianism.
CHAP. I. Of Arminianism in General.
IT has ever been the Lot of Truth (like the Lord of it) to be Crucified (at
least quoad conatum) between Right Hand and Lefthand Thieves: As Moral Virtue,
so Theological also, is found betwixt Two Extremes; (...). Expellunt Medium
Extremi uterque ad alterum, says Aristotle, Ethic. lib. 2. cap. 8. Agreeable
unto which, Thucidides has a Saying, (...), Those that be in the midst are
slain (or at least, assaulted) on both sides: But Veritas aeterna et valebit.

There is as much beyond the Truth, as on this side it; as much of Vain
Curiosity in out-running the flock of Christ, and the Lamb that leads them
(which exposes Men to the Watchful and Wrathful Canaanites) as there is of
Affected Ignorance in Straggling and Loitering behind, whereby they are in
Danger to be cut off by Cursed Amalek. Truth has Evermore observed the Golden
Mean, and the Poet's Counsel is good here, [ Medio tutissimus ibis] to keep a
Mediocrity; and the Character of the Sons of Truth is, Medium tenuere beati.

Truth's Enemies (on all hands) are Various; the Anti-scripturists make the
Bible a Legend of Lies and Faith a Fable. The Familists cry down Ordinances as
a Burden too heavey for a Freeborn Conscience, and too low and carnal for a
Seraphick Spirit The Socinians decry the Divinity of Christ and his
Satisfaction, as if his Sufferings were Exemplary only, not Explatory: The
Atheists deride all, and would lay waste Religion: The Romanists do turn the
True Worship of God into Will Worship, and teach their own Traditions for the
Commandments of God, spoiling God's Institutions with Man's Inventions.

The Arminians (not the least, though here the last of Truth's Adversaries) do
call the Justice of God to the Bar of Reason, and dare confidently wade in the
deep Ocean of Divine Mysteries, and in stating the Decrees of God, where
Blessed Paul could find no bottom; but found it Prosundum fine fundo, and cried
(...)! Oh! the Depth, etc. They dare undertake to fetch the Apostle off from
his Non plus, Romans 9.14. saying, God soresaw that Jacob would believe, and that
Esau would not believe; therefore the One was loved and the other hated: Thus
Arminius's School teaches deeper Divinity, than what Paul learnt in the Third
Heaven: And they do not only (with the Socinians) gratify the Pride of Man's
Reason, but also the Pride of Man's Will, in Extenuating both the Guilt and
Filth of Original Sin, as Popery (their Elder Sister) does gratify the Pride
of Outward Sense.

Hence Dr. Laighton Sion's Plea page 234.
calls Arminianism the Pope's Benjamin, the Last and Greatest Monster of the
Man of Sin, the Elixir of Antichristianism, the Mystery of the Mystery of
Iniquity, the Pope's Cabinet, and such a fine-spun Thread of Popery, that it
can scarce be discerned, the Quintessence of Equivocation, and Spain's Newfound
Passage into Brittany and the Low Countries. And Famous Mr. Fuller says,
Fuller's Chur. Hist. cent. 17. b. 10. page 61.
"We must sadly confess, that since the Synod at Dort, many English Souls have
taken a Cup too much of Belgic Wine in a Spiritual / Sense, whereby their
Heads have not only grown dizzy in Matters of lesser Moment, but their whole
Bodies do stagger in the Fundamentals of their Religion. Alike hereunto Mr.
Rous (the Master of Eaton-Colledge) adds, saying, " Arminianism is the Spawn
of Popery, which the Warmth of Favor may easily turn into the Frogs of the
Bottomless Pit: And what are the New Arminians, but the Varnished Offspring of
the Old Pelagians, that makes the Grace of God to lacquey it at the Foot (or
rather at or to the Will) of Man, that makes the Sheep (as it were) to keep the
Shepherd, that puts God into the same Extremity with Darius (in Dan. 6.) who
would gladly have saved Daniel, but could not. What else can their Doctrine De
Scientia media signify? Which they say is a Praescience in God, whose Truth
depends not on the Decree of God, but on the Free Will of the Creature; this is
to make the Creature have no Dependence on the Creator, and to fetter Divine
Providence. Thus that fatal Necessity (which they from our absolute Decree
would lay at our Doors) unavoidably remains at theirs; and God must say thus to
Miserable Man, Oh! my poor Creature, Ferenda non flenda est (quae vos laesit)
fortuna fatalis, etc. Rhaetor-fort. de divina Gratia. Ep. Dedicat. page 6.
That fatal Fortune (which has harmed you) must be endured more than bewailed,
for it was from all Eternity before my Providence, I could not hinder, I could
not but consent to those fatal Contingencies, unavoidable Fate has (whether I
will or no) pronounced the Inevitable Sentence: This is to make God like the
Heathen Jupiter, who (himself could not deliver [ his] Sarpedon out of his
Bonds, when he earnestly desired it, as Homer gives us the Relation: What else
is this, but to overthrow all those Graces of Faith, Hope, Patience,
Thankfulness, etc. to expectorate Religion, and to pull the great Jehovah
(himself) out of his Throne of Glory, setting up Dame Fortune to be worshipped
in his stead? These and many other great Abominations, have been discovered in
the Chambers of Imagery in our Days, which indeed are nothing but the Frothy
Exuberancies of Wanton Wits, measuring supernatural Mysteries and the
abstrusest Points of Divinity, with the Crooked Metewand of Degenerate Reason:
Luther
This Word "[ Quare] says Luther, has undone many a Soul, that must know a
Reason of all God's Actings; yea, of those too high for us, and wherein Reason
is a Fool; thus (says he) Men put themselves between the Door and the Hinges,
in searching into the Secret Counsels of God. But in these Points it was once
well said, Da mihi baptizatam Rationem, Give me a mortified Reason; for, to
prescribe to God's infinite Understanding, and to allow him no Reasons to guide
his Determinations by, but what we are acquainted withal, is Extremely Arrogant
and Supercilious: Stulta Dei sunt credenda (as sond Man calls them) et Impia
Dei sacienda; to wit, such as Carnal Reason accounts foolish, and wicked:
Reason says, Ex nihilo nihil fit, but Faith says, Ex nihilo omnia; Reason must
neither be the Rule to measure Faith by, nor the Judge: We may give a Reason of
our Believing, to wit, because it is Written; but not of all Things believed,
as why Jacob was loved and Esau hated, before they had done either Good or
Evil; this was the Counsel of God's own Will: Touching such sublime Mysteries,
our Faith stands upon Two sure Bottoms, the First is, that the Being, Wisdom
and Power of God does Infinitely transcend Ours, so may reveal Matters far
above our Reach: The Second is, That whatsoever God reveals is undoubtedly
true, and to be believed, although the Bottom of it cannot be sounded by the
Line of our Reason; because Man's Reason is not absolute, but variously
limited, perplexed with its own Frailty, and Defective in its own Actings.

CHAP. II. Of Predestination, which is the First Point in Controversy.
The Definition of it.
PRedestination is the Decree of God, whereby (according to the Counsel of his
own Will) he foreordained some of Mankind to Eternal Life, and refused or
passed by others for the Praise of his Glorious Mercy and Justice, Romans
9.22,23. Some are Vessels of Mercy, and others are Vessels of Wrath: In a great
House various Vessels are for Use and Ornament; both Vessels of Honor and
Vessels of Dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20. and the Master of the House can wisely use
all his Vessels [ For this cause did I raise up thee, etc.] God has his Use
even of Pharaoh, and of the Churches greatest Enemies; if it be but Skullion
work, to brighten Vessels of Mercy by them; and God has not appointed us to
Wrath, but to obtain Salvation, 1 These. 5. 9.

It is called Destination, as it comprehends a Determined Order of the Means to
the End, [ Destinatus ad finem, destinatus etiam ad media] and it is called
Predestination, because God appointed this Order in and with himself, before
the Actual Existence of those Things so ordered. The Greek Word (...),
signifies a Fore-separating for God's special Use; as Israle was separated from
among all the Nations of the World, to be God's peculiar Inheritance. So God
tells them, Levit. 20.24. (...), Hibdalti, which the Septuagint read (...), I
have separated you, to wit, in fullness of Time; so (...), I have separated you
from the common Mass of sinful Mankind to become Vessels of Mercy, Members of
Christ, and Temples of the Holy Ghost, before all time, even from all Eternity:
As Divine Prescience is sometimes largely taken for Predestination, Romans 11.2.
God has not cast off his People whom he did foreknow, [(...)] that is, whom he
did predestinate: So Augustine de bono perserveran. cap. 18. urges against the
Pelagians. In like manner, Predestination is taken strictly and
Synechdochically, for Election it self. Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 1.5 and accordingly I
shall handle it in this following Treatise, using the Word Election and
Predestination promiscuously.

It is also called in the Definition a Divine Decreo (as the Genus of it)
because it contains in it the Determinate Counsel of God, and the Counsel of
his own Will; Acts 4.29. Ephesians. 1.11. in bringing to pass such and such Ends, by
such and such Means. This is in Scripture Phrase (...) Acts 2.23. (...). The
Hand and Counsel of God, and (...), Beneplacitum, the good Pleasure of God; In
those places fore named, Ephesians. 1.9.

CHAP. III. Of the Properties, and First Eternal.
Eternal Property.
THis Divine Decree has various Properties, as, First, Eternal; which is thus
proved.

Reason 1.
The First Reason is, God's Internal and Imminent Acts are the same with his
Essence, such an Act is the Divine Decree; and therefore as God's Essence is
Eternal, so his Decree must be Eternal also: Quicquid est in Deo, est Deus. Now
the Decree is God's decreeing, because whatsoever is in God is God; it is God
himself by one Eternal Act, decreeing and determining whatsoever should come,
unto the Praise of his own Glory.

Reason 2.
The Second Reason is taken from the Simplicity of God, which is God considered
as one mere and perfect Act, without any Composition or Succession; there
cannot be in God Aliud et aliud; there can be no more a New Thought, a New
Intent, or a New Prupose in God, then there can be a New God. Whatever God
think: Whatever God purposes, he always purposed, and ever does and ill
purpose; as he cannot know any thing de Novo, neither can he intend any thing
de Novo; for his Name is [I Am] Exodus 3.14.
and takes not New Counsels, as Man does; and so draws up ( pro re nata) New
Determinations.

Reason 3.
The Third Reason is taken from Christ. If Christ was the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World (as he is called, Rev. 13.8.) then Predestination to
Life must needs be before Time, because Christ is the Foundation of Election,
we are Elected in him, Ephesians. 1.4,5. and predestined v. 5. by him. Christ is
the Means. Now the End cannot be of a latter Date and Determination, than the
Means to that End: They have Relation each to other. And if Christ be the
Eternal Purpose of the Father, then the Act of Electing in Christ must needs be
his Eternal Purpose.

Reason 4.
The Fourth Reason. The Scripture expressly proves it, saying, It was before the
World, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2. and before the Foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1.4.
and it was an Eternal Purpose which he purposed in Christ, Ephesians. 3.11. so that
we lay from all Eternity in the Womb of our Father, before the time we came
into our Mother's Womb.

Reason 5.
The Fifth Reason. It is the Royal Prerogative of the great Jehovah, to order
as well as appoint, things that are coming and that shall come, which the
Vanities (or Idols) of the Gentiles cannot do, Isa. 44.7. and none can appoint
God the Time, Jer. 50.44. Hence Time is said to Travel with those Eternal
Decrees of God, and brings forth the Accomplishent of them in their proper
Season: The Decree will bring forth, Zeph. 2.2. and it is big-belly'd till
then: Every Thing has its Accomplishment in Time, which was decreed to fall
out from all Eternity.

Reason 6.
The Sixth Reason. If Humane Concernments have this Encomium, that these are
Ancient Things, as 1 Chronicles. 4.22. How much more the Divine Decree, which is not
the Work of Yesterday, [(...)] of old ordained, Jude 4. If the Negative Part of
Predestination, then much more the positive part: God's purpose of loving
Jacob, as well as hating Esau; was before they had done either Good or Evil.

Object. Some Object, saying, We grant God's Prescience, or Foreknowledge to
be Eternal, but not his Predestination; that Choice or Election God mentions 1
Cor. 1.27,28,29. must be a Temporal, not Eternal Election.

Answ. 1. I Answer, First, This Prescience or Foreknowledge of Things that
[may] come to pass, does go before the Decree of Predestination; thus the
Apostle ranks them Romans 8.29,30. but the Foreknowledge of things that [Shall]
come to pass, must follow the Decree. For things must first be decreed, and
then foreseen in that Being which they have in the Decree. In this latter
Sense, Prescience presupposes Predestination. Known unto God are all his Works
from the Beginning of the World, Acts 15.18. God has not an Imperfect, but a
Thorough Foreknowledge of all future Things (both concerning the Terminum a
quo, and Terminum ad quem; the Means and the End) not only as they may be, but
also as they shall be by his Divine Determination.

Answ. 2. Praescience, or Foreknowledge, is taken for God's Love from
Eternity, [(...)] quos praeamavit, whom he fore-loved: So Zanchy reads it, Whom
he fore-knew, not only with the knowledge of Observation, but with the
knowledge of Approbation also; he fore-knew them to be his: So it is
Predestination it self, or (...), Romans 11.2. ut supra, page 5. and to grant an
Eternal Prescience without an Eternal Predestination, is to break the Links of
that Golden Chain in Romans 8.29,30.

Answ. 3. The Lutherans grant a Predestination Eternal to the Elect only, but
to the Non Elect only a Praescience or Naked Foresight (without any
Prae-ordination) least they should make God the Author of the Creatures Sin and
Ruin: But these Men fear where no Fear is, for the worst Evil Act that ever
was in the World (to wit, the Murdering of [the Prince of Glory] Jesus Christ)
did not only fall under the Foreknowledge of God, but also under his
Determinate Counsel, Acts 2.23. and 4.28. 'twas not barely fore-known, but
unchangeably determined.

Answ. 4. Though it be granted, that the Apostle speaks of an Election or
Choice Temporal, in that 1 Cor. 1.27, etc. yet that signifies no more but our
Vocation; and Temporal Reprobation intimates no more than Men's Obduration; the
Accomplishment of both which is granted to be in Time, so may not be consounded
with this Eternal Decree of God, but are Fruits and Effects of it.

Consectaries.
1. Has God given us a Room, in his Heart before we did any Good to him, even
from all Eternity; then how should we give God a Room (yea, the best Room) in
our Hearts, who never did evil to us? 2. Is God's Love Eternal [ a part ante]
then Satan cannot get beyond, or betwixt this Love of God and us, for it was
before the World was, and so before Satan was. 3. Austine tells a curious Fool
(that asked what God did before the World was made) that he made Hell for such
as him: But this teaches us, that God was choosing us to himself before the
World began: Oh wonderful! 4. If so, then thy Saintship and Sufferings have
Eternal Glory wrapped up in them; all this Comfort is lost in the contrary
Doctrine.
CHAP. IV. Of the Second Property of the Divine Decree, it is Unchangeable.
THE Second Property of the Divine Decree is, it is Unchangeable: Hence it is
compared to a Mountain of Brats, Zech. 6.1. and it is called (...), the
Immutability of his Counsel, Heb. 6.17. This is made Evident by sundry Reasons.
As,

Reason 1. The Divine Decree has an Unchangeable Fountain, to wit, the
Unchangeableness of God, Job 23.13. He is in one mind, and who can turn him?
[(...). Vehi beachad] Et ipse in uno. He desires and he does it, there is no
Created Being can interpose 'twixt the Desire and the Doing, to hinder their
Meeting together; Numb. 23.19. God is not a Man that he should lie, or the Son
of Man that he should repent: Mal. 3.6. I am God, I change not. Jam. 1.17. No
shadow of changing in him. The Counsel of the Lord shall stand, and the Thought
of his Heart to a Thousand Generations. Psalm. 33.11. Many Devices are in the
Hearts of Men, but the Counsel of the Lord shall stand. Prove. 19.21. Man is a
poor changeable Creature, and changes his Mind oftener than his Garment, both
from the Darkness of his Understanding and Perverseness of his Will; he sees
something that he saw not before; but there is no such Imperfection in God, All
things are maked before him, [(...)] dissected, or with their Faces upward,
Heb. 4.13. He knows ( quasi uno intuitu) all his Works (their Natures and
Circumstances) as perfectly in the Beginning of the World, as he will do at the
End of it; and he abides still in one Mind when his Dispensations are changed,
for he decreed the Change of them from all Eternity.

Reason 2. It stands upon an Unchangeable Foundation, to wit, that Rock of
Ages, Jesus Christ, the same Yesterday, to Day, and for Ever, Heb. 13.8. As the
first Adam was the Foundation stone in the Decree of Creation; so the Second
Adam was the Foundation stone in the Decree of Election: God has blessed us in
him, Ephesians. 1.3. [and we shall be blessed] he has chosen us in him, v. 4.
pardoned us in him, v. 7. feal'd us in him, v. 13. built us in up him, Col.
2.7. and completed us in him, v. 10. according to his Purpose and Grace which
was given us IN Christ Jesus before the World began; 2 Timothy 1.9. All those Acts
of Grace are said to be [ In] Christ, and Christ himself was under Divine
Ordination, 1 Pet. 1.20. and is called the Elect Stone, 1 Pet. 2.4. Christ is
the first Person Elected, ( Isa. 42.1. and Mat. 12.18. Behold my Servant whom I
have chosen) as Adam was the first Person created, Christ was chosen as the
Head, and we as his Members; therefore are we said to be given to Christ: John
17.2. Now so long as this Foundation stands sure, so long does the
Superstructure remain unchangeable; the Temple stood firmly upon those Two
Pillars [ Jachin and Boaz, i. e. Stability and Strength] so the Decree of
Election stands sure upon Christ the Foundation, and none can pluck an Elect
Soul from off this Foundation; None can pluck any of [ His] out of his Hands,
John 10.28. Christ will lose none that are given to him, John 6.39.

Reason 3. It Is Unchangeable, because it is a Decree written in Heaven; and so
above the Reach of either Angry Men, or Enraged Devils to cancel: God knows
who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. the Assembly of the Firstborn written in Heaven,
Heb. 12.23. Thence is it called the Lamb's Book of Life, which contains a
Catalogue of the Elect, determined by the Unalterable Counsel of God, which
Number has a fulfilling Time, Rev. 6.11. and can neither be increased nor
diminished. This is to be rejoiced in above Dominion over Devils, Luke 10.20.
which (if our Names may be written in Heaven to Day, and blotted out to Morrow)
would be no such Ground of Joy: If the Decrees of the Medes and Persians (which
were but Writings on Earth) were unalterable, Dan. 6.8. how much more the
Decrees of the great God written in Heaven must be Unchangeable? Must Pilate
say, Quod scripsi, scripsi; that is, my Writing shall not be altered; and shall
not God say so much more? I know (says Solomon) that what God does, it shall
be for ever; Eccles. 3.14. Nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from
it, his Counsel shall stand, Prove. 19.21. and the Sun may sooner be stopped in
his Course, than God hindered of his Work or in his Will: Nature, Angels,
Devils, Men, may all be resisted, and so miss of their Design; not so God, for
who has resisted his Will? All those Chariots of Humane Occurrences and
Dispensations, come forth from between those Mountains of Brass, the
Unalterable Decrees of God, Zech. 6.1. And should it be granted, that one Soul
may be blotted out of this Book of Life (this Writing in Heaven) then is it
possible that all may be so, and by consequence it may be supposed, that that
Book may become Empty and Useless as waste Paper, and that Christ may be an
Head without a Body.

Reason 4. It Is Unchangeable, for the Decree concerning the End includes the
Means to that End, and binds them all together with an Irrefragable Chain which
can never be broken, Romans 8.30. Therefore the Purpose of God concerning
Election must stand, Romans 9.11. God does not decree the End without the Means,
nor the Means without the End; but both together. As a Purpose for Building
includes the Hewing of Stone, and Squaring of Timber, and all other Materials
for Buildingwork: And as a Decree for War implies Arms, Horses, Ammunition, and
all Warlike Provisions: So here, all that are Elected to Salvation, are Elected
to Sanctification too; God ordains to the Means, as well as to the End. A^ts
13.48. As many as were ordained unto Life believed: God has before ordained
that we should walk in Good Works, Ephesians. 2.10. We are Elected unto Obedience,
through the Sanctification of the Spirit; 1 Pet. 1.2,4. and unto Faith, Tit.
1.1. and God has appointed Theological Virtue to be the Way to Glory, 2 Pet.
1.3. therefore God has promised to sanctify whom he has purposed to save: We
teach with Augustine, that Election is Preaeparatio et Gratiaeet Gloriae, it is
an Ordaining to Grace as well as to Glory; and if Grace and Glory meet not both
together [ aut vinceretur aut falleretur Deus] either God must be conquered or
deceived: In Predestination therefore, the Means of Salvation are no less
absolutely decreed then Salvation it self: We may not conceive, that God's
Decree runs after this Form, I will predestinate Peter to Salvation, if it
should happen so, that he does believe and persevere: But rather thus, I do
predestinate Peter to Salvation, which that he may infallibly obtain, I will
give him both Faith and Perseverance; otherwise God's Decree would not be
(...), and the Foundation would not stand sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. yea, and God's
Gifts would not be (...), without Repentance, Romans 18.29. and Men would not be
beloved according to the Election, v. 28. if God did not absolutely purpose to
give those Means that are conditional in the Execution of the Decree (to wit,
Faith and Perseverance) to his Elected Ones, and if he should not bestow on
them a Power and a Will to perform those Conditions, hereupon the Covenant of
Grace runs in this Tenure, I will be a God to you, and ye shall be a People
unto me; that is, I will make you so.

Consectaries.
1. A Name writ in Heaven (where no Thief, no Rust, no Moth comes to destroy
it) is better than to be enrolled in Metropolitan Corporations, or at Princely
Courts, it is a Name better than of Sons and Daughters, a free Denizon of
Heaven. 2. Though we be changeable Creatures, yet unchangeable Love is toward
us, that keeps faster hold of us than we of it. 3. It Is Infinite Condescension
that the Great God should hold a poor Lump of Clay so fast in his Hands, John
10.28,29. as to secure our Interest to all Eternity, 1 Pet. 1.4,5.
CHAP. V. Of the Third Property of the Decree, to wit, It is Absolute.
THE Third Property of the Divine Decree is, It is Absolute in respect of the
Efficient Impulsive Cause, which cannot be any Thing Extra Deum, these Reasons
evince.

Reason 1. If the Divine Decree be Eternal, it must be Absolute, for nothing
can be assigned before Eternal, to go before it as the Efficient Cause of it.
There can be no Cause of Predestination assigned Quoad actum praedestinantis,
for there cannot be a Cause of the Will of God Quoad actum volentis, because it
is actus prime primus, it is an Immanent Act of the Divine Will, and so not
only the Cause, but also the first Cause of all Created Beings; and therefore
cannot (in any good Sense) be said to depend upon foreseen Transient Acts in
the Creature, so by Consequence must be an Absolute Act, unless we will make
Volitiones Dei, etc. the Volitions of God to come behind the Created and
Temporary Volitions of Man; which is grossly absurd: And if those Contingent
Acts (of the Creatures believing and persevering) have a Futurition before
God's Decree, it does not only deny God to be the first Cause of all Things,
but it also quite disanuls the Eternity of God's Decree, which was proved to be
Eternal in Chap. the 3 d.

Reason 2. If God be God, if he be an Alnighty, Allwise, All-free and an
All-disposing God, then his Decree of Election must be Absolute; for a
conditional Decree makes a conditional God, and plainly ungods him, y ascribing
such Imperfections to him as are unworthy of his Majesty, and below his Divine
Being. As,

It opposes 1 st. his Omnipotency.
First, It opposes his Omnipotency: If some Conditions be Antecedaneous to the
Will of God, then the same are Antecedent also to the Power of God. This must
be true, for his Power (as determined by his Will) is the Cause of all things;
then it was not in God's Power to save more than are to be saved, or to damn
sewer than are to be damned; if the Decree of God be praedetermined by
contingent Acts in Men. If the Actings of Divine Omnipotency depend upon the
contingent Actings in the Creature, then God must say, I will elect all if they
will believe; then must God think, they can believe without him, and so he is
not Omnipotent. Is it not safer to say, that God will give us this Faith, that
brings us from the Conditional to the Absolute Decree? Besides, the former
Hypothesis puts a Lie upon Christ (who was Truth it self) both in saying, that
he could of very Stones raise up Children unto Abraham, and that he could send
for Legions of Angels to deliver him from his Enemies.

2 dly. It opposes his Wisdom.
Secondly, It takes away the Glory of Divine Wisdom, in ordering all
Occurrences of things, for if Peter must be willing to believe before God's
Decree concerning Peter, then Divine Wisdom does not (at all) determine about
the Order of things, but Order is absque primo ordinante, and that which
happens to Day might have happened Yesterday: And the Master of the Ass might
not have sent his Ass to Christ upon that same Day, when that Prophecy of
Christ's riding on an Ass to Jerusalem ( Zech. 9.9.) was to be fulfilled: Yea,
and Man might have fallen before the Angels, and many such Occurrences might
have happened otherwise in the World, whatever the Wisdom of God has
determined to the contrary.

3 dly. It opposes his Freedom.
Thirdly, It takes away the Glory of God's Absolute Liberty, of his
Arbitariness and Independency: For if Peter's Believing and Judas's not
Believing, must be antecedent to the Decree of God concerning them, then God
has not an Absolute Dominion over his own Creatures; but Peter and Judas make
themselves the formal Object of Election and Non-Election, and the Rotter has
not an Arbitrary Freedom, to make this Lump of Clay a Vessel of Honor, and
that a Vessel of Dishonor according to his Pleasure; but this Difference
arises more from the Quality of the Clay, then from the Will of the Potter; and
God's Will (herein) must have Dependency on the Will of Man for its
Determinations, which plainly overthrows the Independency of God.

4 ly. It opposes his Providence.
Fourthly, It takes away the Glory of his All-disposing Providence: If his
Decree be not Absolute, how can God (otherwise) be said wholly to dispose of
Lots, Prove. 16.38. that are cast into the Lap? Shall we say, that the Lot of
the Apostleship fell to Matthias by chance, and that it was not absolutely
ordained and ordered by the Lord, Acts 1.26. to whom the Apostles prayed, v.
24. and not to Dame Fortune? Thus the Lord found out Acban to be Israel's
Curse, and Saul to be Israel's King, by his whole Disposing of Lots in the Lap:
Thus God is said to deliver the Man into the Hands of the Hewer of Wood, to be
slain by the Head flying from the Helve upon his Head, Deuteronomy. 19.5. with Exodus
21.13. Homo proponit and Deus disponit, Man purposes but God disposes;
because God by an Absolute Decree has foreordained all things that do come to
pass: They do not fall out casually, and beyond God's Intention; thus it is
said, It behooved Christ to suffer, Luke 24.44,46. and to those things we are
appointed, 1 These. 3.3. and Goddess Fortune cannot make void the Counsel of
God, Isa. 14.27. and 46.10,11.

Reason 3. If the Will of the Potter be an Absolute Will over his Pots, then
much more, is the Will of God an Absolute Will over Mankind. It is God's own
Comparison, Romans 9.20. God does not compare himself in his Divine Decree to a
Goldsmith. For, 1. A Goldsmith has costly Materials, such as Silver and Gold,
which lays some Obligations upon him to make Honorable Vessels. 2. The
Goldsmith makes curious Vessels oft-times for the Pride and Luxury of Men, yea,
sometimes such as are redundant and superfluous; and Men's adoring the Gods of
Silver and of Gold in those Honored Vessels, does truly change them into
Vessels of Dishonor; but God is compared (by himself) to a Potter, for, 1. The
Materials of a Potter are Vile and Sordid, to wit, Clay. So more answering
fallen Mankind, out of which God makes his choice: We are not only Clay, Job
4.19. but sinful Clay, through the Fall. 2. The very Vessels of Dishonor which
the Potter makes, are for the Necessities and Conveniences of the Household, 2 Timothy 2.20. the great Householder must have Vessels of all sorts, some for
Inferior Uses, as well as others for Honorable Service. 3. The Potter does
not make this Difference among his Pots, from any foreseen inherent Goodness in
his Clay (for the whole Lump before him is of an Equal Temper and Quality) but
from the pleasure of his own Will: Thus the Potter's Power over his Materials
is clearer from Exception than that of the Goldsmith, so more illustrates the
Absoluteness of God's will in this choice both of Vessels of Honor and Vessels
of Dishonor.

Argum. a Minori, Why.
Yet is not the Argument a pari but a Minori; For, 1 st, The Distance 'twixt
the Clay and the Potter, is but a finite Distance, the Distance 'twixt one
Creature and another, animate and inanimate; but the Distance 'twixt God and
Mankind, is Infinite, not only the Natural Distance 'twixt God and us as we are
Creatures, but also the Moral Distance 'twixt God and Us as we are Sinners. 2
dly. The Potter must have his Clay made to his Hand, though he temper it for
his Work, when he has found it out; but the great God creates his own Clay. He
created the Earth out of which Man was formed, Genesis 1.1. and 2.7. It follows
then, that God has not only as much more Power over Mankind as the Potter has
over his Pots (which he makes Base or Noble according to his will) but much
more for those two Reasons aforesaid; if the Potter by an Absolute Will dispose
of his Pots, (...), much more God.

Consectaries.
1. If this Absolute Will of God be the Universal Cause of all things, then no
Event can fall beyond or besides God's Will, and Fortune (in the Sense of the
Gentiles) is but the Devil's Blasphemous Spitt upon Divine Providence. 2. God's
absolute Will cannot be resisted, Romans 9.19. as he has willed so it shall come
to pass, Isa. 14.24. Psalm. 115.3. Job 42.2. there is no hindering of the
Execution of his Will. 3. Then learn we Submission to the Will of God declared,
Proud (yet Brittle) Clay will be knocking their sides against the Absolute Will
of God till they break in pieces; so did Adonijah, 1 Kings 1.5. with 1 Chronicles.
22.9. when Solomon must rule.
CHAP. VI. Of the Fourth Property of the Divine Decree, it is Free.
THE Fourth Property of the Divine Decree, is the Freeness of it; as it is not
Conditional but Absolute, so it is not Necessary but Free as flowing only from
the Pleasure of God's Will. God is a Free Agent, and cannot fall under any
Obligation, so as to Necessitate him in any of his Emanations to the Creature,
but as he is graciously pleased out of his own Free Love to oblige himself.

Reason 1. The First Argument to prove the Freeness of the Divine Decree is,
Such a Decree as passes without any Obligation to Necessitate the passing of
it, must needs have the Property of Freeness; but thus it was with the Divine
Decree: Therefore, etc. If thore be any Obligation, it must be either in
respect of Objects, or of Acts, or of Motives; but God was not obliged in any
of those Respects. Therefore, etc.

Respect 1. Not in respect of Objects; for God was under no Necessity of having
either any Elect or any Reprobate, and was Happy in himself from all Eternity,
and would have been so for ever without either of them; Illud est perfectum cui
nihil potest addi; and to affirm, that God stood in need of any such Objects,
is to deny the Perfection of God: God was infinitely happy in himself, and
needed not to have looked out of himself for any additional Happiness, and
therefore it is called, an Humbling of himself to look down on Things in
Heaven, much more on Things on Earth; Psalm 113.5. It must needs therefore be
Granted that he needed them not, but would have been God blessed for Ever
without them.

Respect 2. Nor in respect of Acts as they are Necessary by a Moral Obligation;
God was under no Moral Obligation to Man, he had done Man no wrong if he had
never willed Man to be, much less to be Holy and Happy: God was not bound to
any of his Actions concerning Man, either Election, Vocation, Justification,
etc. for God cannot be a Debtor to Man any other way, than as he makes himself
a Debtor of his own good Pleasure: As in his Promises, his Love moved him to
make them, and his Truth binds him to perform them; otherwise those Actions
would be Actions of Debt and not Acts of Grace, contrary to the Tenure of many
Scriptures, that makes the whole Work of Man's Salvation to flow wholly from
the Free Grace of God.

Respect 3. Nor in respect of Motives: Neither, First, In the Creatures. Not,
Secondly, In Christ.

1. Not in the Creature.
First, Not in the Creature it self, for the Being of the Creature (much more
the Faith and Good Works of the Creature) was the Effect of the Decree of God,
so could not be the Motive thereof. God could not foresee any Faith or Works
antecedently to his own Purpose and Decree, but in his Purpose and Decree of
giving them both; In Massa corrupta (which the Arminius in the 1 st. of his
four Divine Decrees.
Arminians assent to) nothing that is good can be foreseen, but what is caused
by that Grace which was eternally prepared for them in the Decree of
Predestination, and actually applied in the Effectual Vocation: So that Faith
as foreseen is but a May-be, and the Decree or Will of God causes it to become
a Shall-be; and therefore it cannot (in any good Sense) be the Moving Cause of
the Decree, for then must it be the Cause of its own Cause: But of this Point
much more, when I come to confute the Conditional Decree.

2. Not in Christ.
Secondly, Nor is Christ himself the moving Cause of the Divine Decree; for
Christ is the Effect of God's Eternal Love, not the Cause of it, John 3.16, God
so loved the World that he gave his Son; There is a Sic without a Sicut, and
God's Love gives Christ; Christ is not the Cause of this Eternal Love, though he
be the Cause of our Salvation (which is the Application of the Divine Decree)
but not of the Decree of Love it self. Therefore we are said to be Elected in
Christ, but never for Christ; for Christ is an Elect One himself, as is showed
before; God wills to save us for Christ, but not for Christ wills he us to
be saved; according to that Thesis in the Schools, Deus vult hoc esse propter
hoc, non propter hoc vult hoc. Christ (indeed) was the first chosen, for the
Head comes first out of the Womb of Predestinating Love, and then the Members;
yet, though he be first chosen to that Glory which became him as an Head, he is
not the Cause why we are (also) chosen: Even as the first Alam is not the Cause
why God did love me, so that I should be a Man and have this Natural Being;
though in and through him I come to have this Being: So Christ is not the Cause
why God did love me, so that I should be a Christian and have a Supernatural
Being, a Life above Nature, even the Life of Grace, though I attain to it and
receive it through him, in him, and for his fake. The Love of God as
immediately comes from himself to me as to Christ, he was foreordained to be
our Head, 1 Pet. 1.20. as we to be his Members; Thus we are Christ's and Christ
is Gods, 1 Cor. 3 22,23. as the Effect of his Love to his Elect from all
Eternity.

Reason 2. The Second Argument to prove the Freeness of the Divine Decree is,
that which the Word of God affirms to be a Free Act, an Act of Grace and not of
Debt, an Act of Love and Special Favor founded upon the mere good Pleasure of
God, must be accordingly believed to be so by us, but the Word of God does all
this Ergo, Mat. 11.26. Even so, O Father, it pleased thee, Luke 12.32. It
pleases your Father to give you the Kingdom. 2 Timothy 1.9. It was a Gracious
Purpose in God from. all Eternity. Ephesians. 1.5,9,11. Paul's repeated Epiphonema
is, the Pleasure of his own Will, the Pleasure of his own Will, the Counsel of
his own Will, but more fully in that Romans 9.13,15. exemplifying this Truth in
Jacob and Esau: Both the Prophet and the Apostle makes this Instance the
fullest Exemplification of Free Election, Mal. 1.3. Romans 9.11. They do not
bring in for an Instance, that of Cain and Abol in the beginning of the Old
World; or that of Shem and Ham in the beginning of the New World; but this of
Jacob and Esau. For, (1.) These two were Fratres Utero (yet not Animo) at one
and the same time, they laid together in the same Womb, and were born at the
same time (for Jacob took hold of Esau's Heel) so the contrary Disposal of
these two does more illustrate the free Predestination of God, than of any
other two whatsoever. (2.) In Jacob there began to be a distinguished People
from all the World, even a Church unto God; as of Esau sprang also a
persecuting Seed, yet before they had done either Good or Evil, Jacob was loved
and Esau hated: God had no regard to Faith in the one, or Infidelity in the
other, whereby they might be differenced the One from the Other; they were at
that time (when God's Oracle passed upon them) already conceived in Sin in
their Mother's Womb, and if there were any Pre-eminence, Esau had it, as being
the Firstborn. What then did cast the Balance? Nothing else, but the good
Pleasure of God: Thus the Apostle determines it (according to that Wisdom given
to him, 2 Pet. 3.15.) God will have Mercy on whom be will have Mercy, and whom
he will be hardens: Indeed Carnal Reason says, It was because God foresaw
what they both would be. But if that had been the Cause, the Apostle (Divinely
Inspired) would have answered this Objection, v. 16. ( Is there then
Unrighteousne's with God?) according to that Hypothesis, which would not have
been (...) (as 2 Pet. 3.16.) but easy to be understood, and would not have
resolved all (as he does) into the Unsearchable Will of God: And as Jacob's
Person was thus loved freely, so was his Posterity, not because they were ex
xnmeliori luto; but God loved them because he loved them; Deuteronomy. 7.7,8. It was
choosing Love that he bare to them, and that is the best of the Kind; that is
the Favor which God bears to his People: As a Man loves his Goods and his
Servants with a common Love, but his Wife and Children with a Special Love; and
though Malachy instances only the Defolation of Esau's Country as the Evidences
of God's Hatred to Esau; yet the Apostle saw more in it than the spoiling of
his Earthly Inheritance, for in that very Desolation (as an Outward Pledge) he
reads God's Eternal Hatred toward him in the Decree of Reprobation.

Reason 3. The Third Argument to prove the Freeness of the Divine Decree is, If
God in all Ages has given us Examples of his free Receiving or Rejecting some
out of Mankind, then the Divine Decree must needs be free, but the Antecedent
is true, Ergo, the Consequent. This Assumption is plain in Scripture History,
for of Adam's three Sons, Cain, Abel, Seth; the [Eldest] was rejected: Of
Noah's three, Japhet, Shem and Ham; the [Youngest] was rejected: It appears
that Ham was the Youngest, Genesis 9.24 and Japhet the Eldest, Genesis 10.21. but of
Terah's three Sons, Abraham, Nahor and Haran, the [Middlemost] was rejected;
for Nahor was an Idolater, and Laban swear by his Idol, Genesis 31.53. Not by the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, but by the other Gods which Nahor served,
Josh. 24.2. Now why is this Picking and Choosing, this Receiving and Rejecting,
Eldest at one time, Youngest at another time, the Middlemost at a Third Time;
but to show, that neither Birth, nor Age, nor any Thing (either foreseen or
existing in the Creature) can make any Claim, but all lies in the Free Election
of God. We cannot give a Reason, why Pharaoh and Mebuchadnezzar (both being
engaged in the same Cause of Warring against Israel, the Church of God) had
differing Dispensations of Heaven upon them; forasmuch as the One was hardened,
and the other was humbled under the Mighty Hand of God: Nor why Pharaoh's Baker
was hanged, and yet his Butler restored to his Office again; Why two Men shall
be in one Bed, the One taken, and the Other left: Why two Women shall be
grinding at one Mill, the One taken, and the Other left: Why Aaron's Rod (of
all the Twelve) only blossomed. These and many more Instances, do sufficiently
demonstrate the Reason of all those Differences, is not any thing that can be
found in the Creature; but it is only the Free Election of God.

Reason 4. The Fourth Argument is, If the Fruits of the Divine Decree be freely
given, then the Decree it self must be a Free Decree; but the Antecedent is
true, Ergo, the Consequent is true also: The Proposition is Evident, for if I
give a Book or a Piece of Money freely, then I must needs purpose to give them
freely. The Assumption is as clear, For, 1. Our Vocation is from Free-Love,
Christ called the Sons, and leaves the Father with the Hired Servants, Mar.
1.20. and Called to him whom he would, Mar. 3.13. It is [given] to you to know
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but it is not [given] to them, Mat.
13.11. 1 John 5.20. and Mat. 11.26. 2. Our Justification is from free grace, We
are justified freely by his Grace. Romans 3.24. (3.) So is our Sanctification, Of
his own Will begot he us, Jam. 1.18. This Sanctifying Spirit breathes where it
lists, and the Wind at Sea is as much at our Command as the fresh gales of
this Renewing Spirit. (4.) Our Glorification. Eternal Life is the Gift of God,
Romans 6.23.
he does not sell it for foreseen Faith or Works, but he freely gives it. Now
if all those Fruits of Election be free, then Election it self to those Fruits,
must needs be free also; If God call such as have no Money to buy withal, Isa.
55.1. and blds them drink of the Water of Life freely, Rev. 21.6. If Faith be
the free Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and it is [given] to us not only to believe,
but to suffer for his Name, Phil. 1.29. then Predestination to Faith, must of
Necessity be free also; for God works [all things] according to the Counsel
of his own Will, Ephesians. 1.11.

Consectaries.
1. Admire Free grace in this Decree of Predestination, and cry, How is it
(Lord) that thou manifests thy Love to me and not to the World! John 14.22. 2.
Thou make not thy self to differ from others, but Free Grace does it for
thee, thou art a Lump of Clay in the Hands of the Potter (no better than
others) yea, pressed down to Hell by Adam's Fall; that God should lift thee up
to Heaven, be Thankful. 3. Rejoice with all thy Might, as David did, for
choosing him before Saul to an Earthly Kingdom, 2 Samuel 6.14,22. but thee to an
Heavenly Kingdom.
CHAP. VII. Of the Fifth Property of the Divine Decree, it is Discriminating.
THE Fifth Property of the Divine Decree, it is Discriminating and Particular,
not Universal or General.

Reason 1. The First Argument is, The Notation of the Word ( Election) confutes
the Universality of it: There can be no choice made, where all are taken and
nothing is left; that cannot in any good Sense be called Election, which is
equally Extended unto all Individuals. He does not elect, that does not prefer
some before others: God did not choose all the Thirty two Thousand Israelites
(that were with Gideon) but only the Three Hundred that lapped, to save Israel
by out of the Hands of Midian, Judge. 7.3,7. and God did not choose all the
Nations, but only Israel to be a special People to himself, above all People
that were upon the Earth, Deuteronomy. 7.6. It must therefore be Discriminating, and a
making of some to differ from others, He cannot be said to choose, that takes
all.

Reason 2. The Second Argument. The Scripture speaks expressly that only few are
chosen, Mat. 20.16. though many be called. It is only a little Flock, Luke
12.32. and but one of a Tribe and two of a Family, Jer. 3.14. Have not I (says
Christ) chosen you out of the World, John 15.19. and the Lord calls Paul a
chosen Vessel unto him, Acts 9.15. and 22.14. as a special (not common) Favor
vouchsased to him, and how ill it sounds in the Ears of a Gospel spirit to say,
that Pharaoh and Judas were Elected, as well as Paul and Barnabas; and that
Simon Magus was elected as well as Simon Peter; all which a General Election
(the Arminian Hypothesis) most Necessarily asserteth. How can those Reprobate
Silver pieces be (in any good Sense) termed chosen Vessels (as Paul was) to
know God's Will, and see the Just One.

Reason 3. The Third Argument. If Elections be general under a Condition of
believing, than Pilate, Caiaphas and Judas were elected under that Condition,
and so God is brought in to speak after this Manner; I have appointed to save
Pilate, Caiaphas and Judas, if they will believe in the Death of Christ; but if
they shall believe, Christ shall not be crucified, for those are the very Men
appointed by my determinate Counsel to put Christ to Death, Acts 2.23. and
4.28. Before that was done (according to this Hypothesis) those Men might have
believed, and so God's Decree about Christ's Death, should not have been
absolute, but depending upon a Condition which those Men might have fulfilled,
to wit, Believing in Christ's Death; which had they done, they had believed in
something, that would not have been at all: Thus Carnal Reason bespatters
Divine Wisdom.

Reason 4. The Fourth Argument. How can it be safely said, that God ever
intended the Salvation of any others, but of those who are or shall be
effectually saved? Otherwise God's Will would be frustrate, to wit, his Will of
Intention, and the Will of Man would anticipate the Will of God; contrary to
these Scriptures, God does in Heaven and on Earth whatsoever pleases him,
Psalm. 115.3. and Job knew that God could do every thing that he wills, Job
42.2. and no Man can resist the Will of God, Romans 9.19.

Reason 5. The Fifth Argument. The Apostle (that was singularly taught of God)
shows, that there is this Difference betwixt Man and Man founded in the
Breast of God, that some are chosen to Life, and therefore shall most certainly
obtain it; others are refused, and left in a perishing Condition, which they
shall as certainly not escape, Romans 11.7. The Election obtains it, but the
rest are blinded: The Difference is of God, according to the purpose of
Election, not as of him that foresees Faith or Works, but as of him that gives
both: Thus were Jacob and Esau discriminated the One from the Other, Romans 9.11.

Consectaries.
1. It is Distinguishing Love that our Potter has made us Men and Women, not
Toads or Loathsome Creatures: Much more Christians, and not left in that
perishing State. 2. It Is the Will of God that some be Poor and others Rich,
etc. So here, that some be Vessels of Honor and others of Dishonor. 3. Christ
raised not all up that were Dead, but Lazarus, etc. nor all that were born
blind, but him in John 9. Bless God, for raising thee up from Death, and
healing thy Blindness, and not others.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Sixth and Last Property of the Divine Decree, it is
Extensive.
THE Sixth Property of the Divine Decree is Extensive, there is a general
Decree that relates to all Created Beings, both Animate and Inanimate,
Celestial and Terrestrial; this indeed, extends it self to every Individual in
the whole Creation, for as it gave a Being to all Things, so it preserves them
in that Being while they continue in the World. The Creator is not herein like
the Carpenter, that builds an House and leaves the Preservation of it to the
Care of others, but the Work of Providence (which extends it self from Angels
down to Worms) succeeds the Work of Creation: But this special Decree of
Predestination is not Extensive (as the General is) to all Individuals, but is
discriminating and particular as before, and yet though it be not extended Ad
singula generum, yet is it Ad genera singulorum: Though the Exception lay not
in the Gospel (which is to be preached to every Creature) but in the Decree;
yet is the Decree an Extensive Thing; as it extends it self,

1. To all Ranks.
First, To all Sorts and Ranks of Men, to Princes and Peasants, to High and
Low, to Rich and Poor, to Bond and Free: It extends it self to Kings, 1 Timothy
2.4. for among them God has his chosen Vessels, his David's and his Solomon's.
Though the Scripture say, Not many Noble and Mighty, yet does it not say, not
any; for God has had some great Ones to own his Ways in all Ages: It extends
it self to Servants also, Tit. 2.9,11. for God bestows his Love on those in
Rags, as well as on those in Robes; and the Poor do receive the Gospel, Mat.
11.5. God is no Respecter of Persons.

2. To all Sexes.
Secondly, To all or both Sexes is the Decree extended, to Male and to Female,
God has his Elect Ladies, 2 John 1. and both Male and Female are one in Jesus
Christ, Gal. 3.28. Electing Love has appeared to both Sexes in the Old
Testament and in the New.

3. To all Ages.
Thirdly, To all Ages: To Young and to Old, to Children and to those of Riper
Years: Yea, to very Infants that lay in the Womb of the Eternal Decree, before
ever they come out of their Mother's Womb: Jeremy was sanctified and ordained
before he came from the Womb, Jerem. 1.5. and John Baptist was filled with the
Holy Ghost even from the Womb, Luke 1.15. and it is probable, David did believe
that his Child belonged to the Election of Grace, and that its Soul was bound
up in the Bundle of Life, when he comforted himself with this; I must go to it,
but he cannot come to me, 2 Samuel 12.23. David's going to the Grave to it, could
yield him very little Comfort.

4. To all Nations.
Fourthly, To all Nations: It is not immured in any one Nation but is extended
to Jew and Gentile, to Barbarian and Scythian, Col. 3.11. some of every Nation
under Heaven, Acts 2.5. This Predestinating Love effectually calls its Sons out
of all Quarters, Isa. 43.4,5,6. and threw down the Partition Wall betwixt Jew
and Gentile, saying, I have other Sheep that I must gather, John 10.16. Yea,
and while this Wall stood, this predestinating Love brought over it sundry
Proselites to the Church, as Jethro (who was the first Proselite that was added
to the Church in the Wilderness, as it became a Church) and many others.

5. To all Generations.
Fifthly, To all Generations does it extend it self: Predestinating Love is
like a River that runs under Ground, and breaks out in certain Places above the
Earth: So fresh Veins of Election breaks forth sometimes in One Generation,
and sometimes in another. It is not bound up as to Time, neither before the
Law, nor under the Law, nor after the Law; but in every Generation God has his
Church Visible on the Earth, and the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it.
As God is no Respecter of Persons, so nor of Places, Nations, nor of
Generations; but has his Hidden Ones to the Worlds End.

Consectaries.
1. If predestinating Love extend it self to all Degrees, then they which are
poor of Wealth may be Rich of Faith, and a Master's Servant may be the Lord's
Freeman. 2. If to both Sexes, then the Weaker Vessel may be a chosen Vessel,
and may be in Christ before the Stronger Vessel, as Priscilla was. 3. If to all
Ages, then Believing Parents may have Faith for their dying Children, they may
belong to the Election of Grace, and may be bound up in the Swaddling Bands of
the Covenant of Grace, so they are not as without Hope for them. 4. If to all
Nations, then the Ends of the Earth may look toward Christ (the Serpent lift
up on the Pole of the Gospel) and be saved, Isa. 45.22. 5. If to all
Generations, then predestinating Love is an Inexhaustible Fountain crying
always, Is there yet any of the House of Mankind, that I may show the Kindness
of God unto, 2 Samuel 9.3. as David's Love did.
CHAP. IX. In which are contained Arguments against the Conditional Decree.
Objection First.
THE First Objection against this Doctrine of the Divine Decree is, That it is
a Conditional One, upon the Foresight of Faith, Works, Perseverance, etc.

Answ. To this I answer, that the Divine Decree of Predestination cannot be
Conditional upon a Foresight of Faith, etc. for these following Reasons.

Argum. 1. That which the Scripture faith is the Cause and Ground of our
Election, that, and that only, must be the Cause and Ground thereof; but the
Scripture propounds the Good Pleasure of God, as the only Cause and Ground of
our Election, not any Foresight of Faith, etc. therefore, etc. that the
Scripture does so, appears in Ephesians. 1.5,9,11. Mat. 11.26. Romans 9.11,15. and
11.5. it is an Election of Grace, Exodus 33.16,17. 2 Timothy 1.9. all those Places
quoted do show us, that this Divine Decree flows only from the Absolute Will
and good Pleasure of God.

Argument 2. That which makes Election an Action of Debt, ought not to be
received, but this Doctrine of the Conditional Decree does so; Ergo, etc. the
Proposition is proved thus, an Action of Grace and an Action of Debt are
contradictory Terms, if Election be an Act of Grace (as those Scriptures
forecited evidence, and as the whole Work of Man's Salvation [ a capite ad
calcem] has been proved to be wholly and solely from Free Grace. Chap. 6.
Argum. 2.) then it is abominable, and to be rejected to make it an Act of Debt.
The Assumption is proved thus, If the Decree be Conditional upon Foreseen Faith
and Perseverance, then is it an Act of Debt and not of Grace, an Act of Justice
and not of Mercy, Ex debito et necessitate, non ex Dei bsneplacito, a Decree of
giving Glory to Believers persevering as their Reward, must be nothing else but
Remunerative Justice.

Argument 3. That which makes God go out of himself in his Immanent and Eternal
Actings, ought not to be received; but the Doctrine of the Conditional Decree
does so, Ergo; the Assumption is proved: For it makes God look upon this or
that in the Creature, upon which the Will of God is determined, this makes Man
to be Author of his own Salvation, and not God; and to assign a Cause of God's
Will [ extra Deum] is not only (...), but blasphemously ungods the great God,
and makes (as it were) a Mortal Man of an Immortal God. For this Doctrine of
the Conditional Decree sets God upon his Watchtower of Foreknowledge to espy
what Men will do, whether they will Believe or no, Obey or no, Persevere or no,
and according to his Observation of their Actings, so he determines his Will
concerning them, thus the Perfection both of the Divine Knowledge and Divine
Will, is with one Breath denied, and such Notions are fitter for the doting
Anthropomorphites then for well Instructed Divines, for Idea Dei non advenit ei
aliunde.

Argument 4. No Temporal Thing can be the Efficient Cause of our Eternal
Election, which has its Existency from all Eternity; but Faith, Obedience,
etc. are Temporal Things as they are wrought in us in their appointed Time:
Ergo, What is this, but to prefer Time before Eternity, and to set up a
Post-destination instead of Praedestination? Yea, it is a plain Denying the
Eternity of the Decree, for if the Volitions of God be placed behind the
Created and Temporary Volitions of Man, those Volitions of God cannot be
Eternal, the contrary whereunto was proved before.

Argument 5. That which is the Fruit and Effect of the Divine Decree, cannot be
the Efficient Cause thereof We may not make that an Antecedent to Election
which is but the Consequent of it.
, but Faith, Perseverance, etc. be the Fruits and Effects of the Decree, Ergo.
That the Assumption is true, appears from many Scriptures, Joh. 6.37. Such as
are given to Christ by this Decree, do come to Christ, and John 10.26. Others
that do not believe, the Cause is, because they are not of his Sheep, Acts
13.48. As mary as were ordained unto Life believed: We may not (according to
the Arminian Notion) read it, As many as believed were ordained unto Life, for
this would be a plain Hysterologia, a setting the Cart before the Horse, as if
the Means were ordained before the End. We are predestined that we should be
Holy, not because we are holy, Ephesians. 1.4. we are foreordained to walk in good
Works, not because we do so, Ephesians. 2.10. We are predestined to be conformed to
the Image of Christ, not because we are so, Romans 8.29. It is the Election that
obtains Faith, and not Faith that obtains the Election, Romans 11.7. and in 2 Timothy 1,9. the Apostle excludes all Works (both foreseen and existing) showing
that God's graclous Purpose is the Original of all: And Paul himself was
chosen, that he might know the Will of God, not that he was foreseen to do so,
Acts 22.14. and he tells the Thessalonians, That God had chosen them to
Salvation through Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth, 2
These. 2.13. so that we are elected to Faith, not for it, or from it. Paul
obtained Mercy to be Faithful, 1 Cor. 7.25. not because he was so; and Christ
chooses us to bring forth Fruit, Joh. 15.16.

Argument 6. That which sets up an Inferior Cause before a Superior, ought
not to be admitted; but the Conditional Decree does so, Ergo. It Is plain that
God is Causa Causarum (acknowledgld by Heathens) the Cause, and the first Cause
of all Things, and there can be thing no Being but from him, as there can be
nothing before him, Romans 11.36. Acts 17.28. Rev. 4.11. God is the Chief
Efficient Cause, and the Illtimate End of all Beings; but if any Being have an
Antecedency to the Determinations of God's Will, this plainly takes away the
Dignity of the Supreme Cause, and makes an Act of Man to be the Superior Cause
of an Act of God, yea, and of such an Act as is Immanent and Eternal: It must
needs therefore be a gross Mistake, to suppose a Cause of the Will of God
either before it, besides it, or without it; and to place a [ May be] (as Faith
and every Created Being only is, Ab Aeterno) which becomes a [ Shall be] merely
because God has decreed it to be so, before the Decree itself. Faith is a
Subalternal Cause of Salvation, not a Meritorious Cause (as Sin is of
Damnation) but a dispositive Cause, as it makes us meet Partakets of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light, but cannot be the Supreme Cause of Election.

Argument 7. That which takes away the Certainty and Unchangeableness of the
Divine Decree, ought not to be received; but the Conditienal Decree does so:
Ergo, etc. the Assumption is proved, if any thing in Man move God to choose
Man, then the Purpose of God cannot remain firm by him which calls (as in
Romans 9.11.) but depends on some contingent Act in Man, be it Faith, Works, or
Perseverance; and if it depend on our persevering in Faith, it cannot be firm,
as depending on such a Condition which to our last Breath (according to the
Arminian Doctrine of falling away) is uncertain. What is this, but to make the
Divine Decree more changeable than a Decree in Cha^cery, that is, for the
Plaintiff to day, and against him to Morrow? For the Arminian Hypothesi^ states
the Decree of God after this changeabl^ Dress, viz. I will save all if they
will obey me^ but I see they will sin, I must permit them, bu^ I will condemn
them all, yet this Decree shall not be peremptory, I will send Christ to redeem
all; to save all again if they will believe, bu^ I see they will not; I will
decree to save suc^ as I see will believe, and persevere in Believing* Thus
never any changeable Picture made suc^ changeable Representations as this
Conditiona^ Decree does of this Unchangeable Decree o^ God. This has been
proved before by many Irrefragable Arguments in Chap. 4.

Argument 8. That which makes us to choose God before God chooses us, ought
not to be received; but this Conditional Decree upon Faith foreseen does so:
Ergo, etc. The Assumption is plain according to the Arminian Doctrine, for if
God do not choose us before he foresee Faith in us, in that Grace of Faith we
make our Choice of God in Christ and cleave to him: Yea they say further, we
must be foreseen not only to believe but also to persevere in believing, that
is not only to choose God for our God, but also to continue in that Choice to
the last Moment, before we can be fit Objects of God's Choice or Election* Then
must it necessarily follow that we choose God before he chooses us, and we love
him before he loves us; contrary to these Scriptures John 15.16. and 1 John
4.19.

Argument 9. That which takes away the Mysteriousness of the Divine Decree,
ought to be ^ejected; but this Doctrine of Faith foreseen does ^o: Ergo. It is
dangerous Presumption for Men to ^ake upon them ( quasi (...)) with Unwashed
Hands, to unriddle the [ Arcana Imperij] or Deep Mysteries of God with their
Carnal Reason, where the great Apostle stands at the Gaze, cry^ng (...) and
(...) and (...). Oh! ^he Depth! How Unsearchable? and Who know^th the Mind of
the Lord? When Paul objects, ^s there Unrighteousness in God? Romans 9. 14. ^ad
he been of the Arminian Persuasion, he would have answered, Those are Elected
that ^re foreseen to believe and persevere: This answer would not have been
[(...)] or ^ard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16. Neither would it carry in it the
least Show of Unrighte^usness, but Paul was a Fool, and these Men are wiser
than the Holy Ghost, that tells us, our ^lection proceeds from the Will of the
Elector, (...) from any thing in the Elected; the Sove^eign Will of God is the
Supreme Rule of all ^ighteousness, He will have Mercy on whom he will have
Mercy, and whom he will he hardens; Had foreseen Faith and Perseverance been
the Antecedaneous Causes and Conditions of Election, ^here had been no Mystery
in it.

Argument 10. That Election which is sha^owed out to us, in God's Love to Jacob
(both ^erson and Nation) is the Election according ^o Truth, but that Election
was not upon fore^een Faith or Works: Ergo. (1.) Jacob the Person, Romans
9.12,13. was under Electing Love, all foresight of Faith and Works being
excluded to love Jacob, is to will unto him the greatest Good, even Eternal
Salvation and all things that do accompany it; this was before there was any
difference between him and Esau, for they were both alike in the Womb ( ut
supra) conceived in sin, had it been upon a foresight of their Works, that they
had God's Electing Love and Rejecting Hatred; then were they (themselves)
Carvers out of their own Eternal Conditions which depended on their Willing and
Running; and (by this Hypothesis) not upon the primitive Good Pleasure of God,
upon which our willing, running and obtaining hangs as the Apostle asserteth.
(2.) Jacob the Nation: Our Election is Typifyed by Gods Election of Israel
which plainly appears to be no Election upon foresight of any worthiness in
Israel but (all such being excluded) the Reason is rendered I loved thee,
because I loved thee; which is not the Reason of a weak Woman, but of a strong
God; Deuteronomy. 7.7,8. Not for thy Righteousness, Deuteronomy. 9.5.

Argument 11. That which sets up the rotten Dagon of Man's Free Will, before or
above the Ark of God's special predestinating Grace, ought to be rejected; but
this Conditional Decree does so Ergo. That it does so, appears, inasmuch as
their Doctrine of the Conditional Decree is grounded upon a Foresight of our
Wills, receiving or rejecting of Grace proposed, and so Man's Will is made the
Primum Mobile, and advanced above God's Will, and the Act of Predestination is
put in Potest^ Predestinati, not Predestinantis: Hereby ^he power of Ordering
Man's Salvation is (as ^t were) wrested out of God's Hands, and put into the
Hands of our Free Will; then Salvation is the Work of the Saved, not of the
Saver; and to will and to do, is not of God's good Pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Thus
Men wickedly think that God is such a One as themselves ( Psalm. 50.21.)
floating and fluctuating in his Counsels, and hanging in pendulous Suspences,
yea, taking up ( pro re nata) new Consultations as depending on the Will of
Men, and the Contingent Acts flowing from thence.

Argument 12. That which infers a Succession of Acts in God may not be
admitted, but Election upon Foresight does so; Ergo. This is apparent in the
Proposition, for God is one Act, and in him there can be no Succession, for
then he would not be [ I am] Deus est Natura simplex, nihil omnino admistionis
aut Successionis habens, sed ex omni part (...), Origin. The Assumption is
plain, for a Foresight of Faith does necessarily presuppose a foregoing Decree
concerning the Being of that Faith foreseen. For, 1. God must decree Faith to
be. 2. He foresees that Faith. 3. Then decrees to save upon that Foresight. So
that this Foresight comes necessarily betwixt two decrees, the First before it,
and the Second after it.

Argument 13. That Doctrine of Election, which stateth God as a Potter, framing
his Clay according to his mere pleasure, ought to be admitted and the contrary
to it rejected; but the Conditional Decree does not so, sed e contra; Ergo. The
Potter does set apart several Lumps of Clay for several Uses out of his mere
Will, he does not say, if all his Clay-lumps be fit to receive Noble Forms, he
will fashion them accordingly, and if not he will turn them otherwise, for then
the difference would proceed from the Quality of the Clay, not from the Will of
the Potter.

Argument 14. I might add many more, as, Foreseen Faith can have no place in
dying Infants, yet of such is the Kingdom of God, and the Names of some are
writ in the Book of Life, Rev. 20.12. and if glorified, they mu^ be
predestined; for Romans 8.30. is reciproca^ and of Equal Extent. Believers
cannot be the Object of Election, for there be many Believers that are not
elected (as those with Faith temporary) and many elected that are not
Believers, as Infants.

Argument 15. Christ foresaw the Men of Tire and Sidon would have repented,
etc. Mat. 11. 21. yet no decree depended on it.

Argument 16. A Conditional Decree makes a Conditional God, seeing the Decree
is God himself decreeing.

Argument 17. Then Salvation of any is uncertain, for a Conditional Proposition
affirms not any thing certainly.

CHAP. X. Objections against the Absolute Decree.
THE Objections (which the Arminians raise against this Doctrine) follow to be
answered: They deal with this Doctrine, as the Heathen Emperors did with the
Primitive Christians in the Ten first Persecutions; who wrapped them up in the
Skins of Beasts, and then exposed them to be torn in pieces by their fierce
Band-Dogs: So do the Arminians with this great Truth, first dress it up in an
ugly Shape with their own false Glosses upon it; and then lets fly at it one
Cynical Sarcasm after another, saying, This is to accuse God, not only of
Injustice, but also of Cruelty, and of Dissembling Hypocrisy.

Objection 1. Of Injustice, in giving to Equal Persons Unequal Thing; and if
so, there is Respect of Persons with God.

Answer 1. This is Objected against Paul's Doctrine, Romans 9.14. and seeing the
Apostle brings it in as the Cavil of Carnal Reason against God's Decree, in
that we have sufficient Ground to reject it. God must not lose the Honor of
his Righteousness, because the Reason of it appears not to our shallow
Understandings: We may not reprehend what we cannot comprehend, his Justice
must not be measured by the Standard of our Reason; what is this but a speaking
wickedly for God, Job 13.7. and a plain robbing him of all Righteousness that
is not Consonant to our Model: We must not devise a Righteousness for God (that
is the Work of his own Will, which is never severed from his Wisdom) much less
draw it down to the Determinations of God's greatest Enemy, to wit, Carnal
Reason.

2. God is Righteousness it self, and Darkness may sooner come from the Sun
(which is the Fountain of Light) then any Unrighteous A^ from God, who is the
Abstract of Righteousness as he is the Summum Bonum, so he is the Primus
Justum; Primum in aliquo Genere est Regula Posteriorum. God's Will is not only
Recta but Regula, yea, Regula regulans, the Rule ruling, not Regula regulata,
as if regulated by Man's Depraved Reason: So that God's Ways are always equal,
though Men think otherwise of them Ezekiel. 18.25. and though they be sometimes
secret (as Romans 11.33.) yet are they always just* God is too kind to do us
harm, and too just to do us wrong.

3. Qui suo Jure utitur Nemini facit Injuriam, i^ the Law (indeed) of Reason:
Jacob and Esa^ were equal in the Womb, yet had an Unequa^ Disposing Decree
concerning them; this was God's Right and Power to do: This the Apostle
demonstrates, 1 st. From Moses Testimony, Exodus 33.16,19. God will be gracious
to whom he will, etc. i^ is his Right to do so. And 2 dly. From the Example of
the Potter, who has [(...)] Power over his Pots, yet less than God over hi^
Creatures; supra Now that which the Pot cannot do with the Potter, that Man may
not do with his Maker; but the Pot (suppose it could speak) could not blame the
Potter of Injustice, in appointing Equal Lumps to Unequal Ends. Ergo.

4. God's Decree is not an Act of Justice, but of Lordship and Sovereignty;
Justice always presupposes Debt, but God (who was perfect in himself from all
Eternity) could not be a Debtor to Man, who was not, and had his [ All] from
God. The Decree is not a Matter of Right and Wrong, but of free Favor; Grace
is God's own, he may do what he will with it, Mat. 20.15. If he give it to some
and not to others, it is no Wrong in him, that is not bound to give it to any.

5. God is not [(...)] a Respecter of Persons, because he does not choose Men
for their Works sake; but before Jacob and Esau had done either Good or Evil;
he finds all alike in Massa corrupta, and nothing to cast the Balance of his
Choice but his own mere Pleasure; not as partial Judges, that respect the Rich
(for their Bribes) more than the Poor, when their Causes are Equal, or worse;
but God is a Free Agent, and under no Law in giving Grace.

Objection 2. Sarcasmus Diabolicus
Of Cruelty, as if God were worse to his Creatures than Tigers to their Young,
than Rat-catchers, who stops up all Holes, then hunts them with their Dogs, to
make them fly in their Faces: Or, Lastly, than Tiberius, who (because it was
unlawful to strangle Virgins) caused the Hangman first to deflour them, and
then strangle them: Quod libet licet, bad been a more Congruous Instance.

Answ. 1. This is a charging God foolishly, seeing no Act of God can be a Means
to damn Men, but Acts of Men, to wit, the fulfilling their own Lusts; the
Negative Will of God (and no more is the Decree of Non-Election) cannot be the
Cause of Man's Destruction, but the positive Will of Man does it. Reprobatio
nil point in reprobato: As Reprobation gives not such a Grace as infallibly to
make them better, so it works nothing in them whereby to make them the worse.

2. It Is a mere Fallacy, a [ Non causa pro causa] as if the Decree of
Non-Election were the procuring Cause of Man's Damnation; which is an
Antecedent only, but not the Cause; as Sin is the Consequent of Reprobation,
but not the Effect of it, so Sin is the Cause of Damnation, and only the
Consequent of Reprobation. David's Order to Solomon concerning Joab and Shimei,
1 Kings 2.5. was not the Cause, why either the One or the other came to an
Untimely End, but it was Treason against Solomon in Joab, and running from
Jerusalem in Shimei, procured their Ends, v. 28, 40, 42. Death precedes
Resurrection, but procures it not.

3. It Is a false Hypoehesis to suppose, that God in the Decree of Non Election
does by as Effectual Means intend to bring Men to Damnation, as in the Decree
of Election to bring others to Salvation; for Salvation is a Favor undue to
any Man, so God may absolutely give it or deny it to any; but Damnation is a
Punishment, so has Relation to a Fault: Means to the former are Bona gratuita,
but to the latter Mala voluntaria; it is God that fitteth Peter for Salvation,
but Judas firs himself for Damnation.

4 God does not make the Creature to damn it, for if that were God's End, he
gives it a Nature and Quality to sit it for that End; but that comes from the
voluntary defection of Men's own Will, to fit themselves for Destruction, Romans
9.22. God endures it, but does not insuse it. Judas fitted himself for his own
place, Acts 1.25. and the Carnal Jews filled up the Measure of their Fathers,
Mat. 23.32. Vessels of Wrath fills their Measure of Sin, and then God fills
them with such a Measure of Wrath: As Man is from God, he is capable of
Salvation; so not made for Damnation.

5. Should God constrain the Creature to sin, and then damn him for it, he
delighted in the Destruction of his Creature, contrary to Ezekiel. 18.23. and 33
11. but God did not thrust Adam (unwillingly) into his Sin, as he thrust him
(after it) out of Paradise, but his Sin came freely from himself and God's
Delight is not terminated in the destruction of his Creature, but in the
Manifestation of his own Glory, Hos. 14.9. Man's Punishment is from God, as a
Judge; but Man's Destruction is from himself, as a Sinner.

6. God does not reprobate Innocent Creatures: No Man is unworthy to be
predertinated unto death; God might have reprobated all fallen Mankind, as he
did all the fallen Angels, without Cruelty; for none deserved better at God's
Hands; it is not Cruelty in the Potter to make Vessels of Dishonor, Praestat
esse matulam Principis, quam simplex lutum: Thus this [ durus Sermo] was urged
to Christ.

Objection 3. It is Objected against the Absolute Decree, That it makes God
guilty of Dissimulation, in calling such as are under the Negative part of it
to repent, etc. which is, as if God should bid blind Men (whose Eyes he had
closed) to judge of Colors: This cannot (say they) be done serio but simulate.

Answer 1. The Non-Elect's not repenting is not only from want of Power, Joh. 6
44. but also from want of Will; John 5.40. None are damned because they can do
no better, but because they will do no better. If there were not Will, there
would be no Hell; and this will be the very Hell of Hells, that they have been
Self-destroyers Felones de se.
. Cesset voluntas propria, et non erit Insernas: That never dying Worm is
nothing else but a continual Remorse and furious Reffection of the Soul upon
its own (once) wilful Folly, as well as upon its (now) wosul Misery; but more
of this in its place.

2. Paul did not dissemble in bidding the Philippians work out their Salvation,
yet tells them (withal) they could neither will nor do of themselves, Phil.
2.12,13. no more than he sets up a Tyrannical Power in God, when he tells us,
that God does all Things out of mere Will and Pleasure, and so with him [ Quod
libet, licet]

3. Man had a Power in Adam, God gave Knowledge in his Understanding, Rectitude
in his Will, Purity in his Affections, etc. those are lost by the Fall. God
must not lose his Authority to command, because Man has lost his Ability to
obey: A Landlord may require his Rent, when his Tenant disenables himself to
pay it.

4. While God commands, he gives Power to obey: God's Commands are not like
those in Jam. 2.16. bids be warmed, fed and clothed, but gives not wherewith;
for here is something given as well as required: When God bids, he does not
only Verba dare, sed Rem; as when Christ bad the Man stretch out the Hand that
was withered, and Lazarus to come forth out of the Grave. The Call and Command
of God, is the Virtutis Vehiculum, the Conduit Pipe of Strength and Ability; as
when Paul was bid to receive his Sight, he was enabled the same Moment to look
up, Acts 22.13. and being commanded to wash away his Sins, had the Blood of
Christ ready provided to do it, v. 16.

5. God commands us what we are unable to perform, to convince us of our
Weakness; as we bid our little Children rise, which by their own fault fell, to
convince them of their Inability, and that they may know, they are the more
beholden to us to help them up again; the Duty is ours, but the Ability is the
Lords.

6. The Voluntas Praecepti, or declaring Will of God, shows that it is the Duty
of all (as well of Judas and Cain, as of David and Peter) to repent; for it
declares what ought to be: But the Voluntas Propositi, or decreeing Will of
God, determines what shall be; not that all shall repent and believe, but such
only as receives his special Grace, 2 Timothy 2.25. God does intend it should be
their known Duty to repent, not that they shall do so, for this would overthrow
his Omnipotency, Who has resisted his will? Romans 9.19.

7. God commands to try, not to deceive; as Abraham to offer up Isaac, and
Pharaoh to let Israel go; these two Wills may have a Consistency without
Fraudulency: The One says, Thou shall not murder, and the other that Christ
shall be murdered, Acts 2.23. Besides, the Decreeing Will of God (as it is not
ad Alterum) can have no Dissimulation in it.

But it may be more truly said that the Arminians charge God with Folly in
their Antecedent and Consequent Will of God, representing God in that
Distinction, as disappointed of his purpose, bringing him in as speaking thus;
I do indeed earnestly desire to save you, but ye hinder, that I cannot do what
I desire; I would, if ye would; therefore seeing I am frustrated of my
Intention (by you) in my Antecedent Will, I will change my purpose of saving
you, and my Consequent Will shall be a Determination to destroy you. What is
this but to make God Unwise (as well as Unable) to manage his own Platforms and
Designs in the World; and to rank him with Jupiter, that knew not how to
deliver his Sarpedon out of Bonds; and with Neptune, that know not how to
binder Vlysses's Return to his Country; yea, and with Darius, that would gladly
have delivered Daniel, but could not? There Vorstius says, Vorstius Disp. ae
Deo.
"Things may happen, that may bring to God some Grief, having tried all Things
in Vain. This is to speak with the Alcaron, Alcaron Chap. 43.
"God and his Angels wish well to Mahomet, but cannot free him from Death. And
with the Blind Talmud, Dr. Owen on Hebr. page 73. Doctr. Fidei Jud. Ord. 5.
Tract. 8. and Ord. 1. Tract. Disp. 7.
"That God lamented over fallen Man, and over the Burnt Temple, pouring out two
Tears every day into the Ocean, and for Grief smiting his Breast with both his
Hands. This is a thinking wickedly that God is such a One as our selves, Psalm.
50.21. fond Men that goes not wisely about our Works, so often fail of our
purpose; and to will that Judas and the Jews should believe in Christ's Death
(which if they had done, Christ had not dyed) is to will that they should
believe in nothing: Thus is the only Wise God abased by the Blasphemous Notions
of Men, fitter for Anthropomorphites than true Gospellers.

Objection 4. God's Decree cannot be Absolute and Infallible, because it might
have been frustrated by the Possibility of Adam' s Standing.

Answer 1. It is granted, that Adam had a Posse non cadere, but not a Non posse
cadere; his standing was possible Respectu Rei, but not Respectu Dei. To say,
that Adam might not have finned, is a Caregorical and Simple Proposition, and
will hold true in Sensu diviso, as Adam is considered in himself, as clothed
with a Freedom of his own Will; and to say it could not be, but that Adam would
sin, is as True in Sensu composito, considering Adam as subordinate to the
Decree of God determining, what Adam would do out of the Freedom of his own
Will: This latter Proposition is modal and qualified, so not not of the same
kind with the former, and therefore not opposite to it, for Opposita should be
Ejusdem Generis: As for Instance, 2 Kings 8.10. [ Thou may certainly
recover] was true Respectu Rei and in Sensu diviso, because his Disease was of
it is own Nature curable; and yet [ Thou shall surely dye] was true also
Respectu Dei, and in Sensu composito, as subordinate to the Divine Decree
fore-ordaming that Hazael should stisle him by the Occasion of this Disease; so
it is a plain Fallacia Divisionis, a Fallacy of Division.

2. Adam might have stood (as well as fallen) Respectu Rei, for God gave not his
Creature a Law only, but furnished him with Power sufficient to keep that Law
also, if he would; and if Man had not been mutable, he had been God and not
Man, for not to be mutable is peculiar to God, whereby he is distinguished from
all Created Beings: Yet respectu Dei, it was not possible he should stand; for
in God's Decree it was certain, that Man being left to the mutability of his
own Will (upon Saran's tempting, and God's permitting) would voluntarily
incline to Evil; and this was a Certainty or Necessity of Infalsibility, Quoad
eventum, but not of Compulsion, Quoad modum agendi et eveniendi.

3. Adam sinned freely in respect of himself, yet necessarily in respect of
God; he acted as freely therein, as if there had been no Decree; and yet as
infallibly, as if there had been no Liberty: God's Decree took not away Man's
Liberty. God decreed that Man should act freely in the Fall, and not by any
Compulsion from his Decree [ Non per Coactionem a principio externo eligebat,
sed perlubentem Inclinationem a principio interno] though God decreed it to be,
yea, and concurred also as the Universal Cause, yet Man exercised the proper
Motions of his own Will, says Austin: The Liberty of Man (though subordinate to
God's Decree) freely wills the Self-same Thing, and no other, than what it
would have willed, if (upon supposition of an Impossibility) that there had
been no Decree.

4. It was a Truth from Eternity (before there was either Man or Sin) that Man
should certainly sin, yet the Sin it self was but possible in it self;
nevertheless that Possibility passed into a futurition by the Will of God; for
God wills that Sin should be [ quia bonum est malum esse, non vult ipsum malum,
quia bonum non est ipsum malum] because it is good Sin should be; but God wills
not the Sin it self, for Sin it self is not good: Therefore God by decreeing
Adam's Sin, did not subtract from Adam any Grace that he had, for he decreed
that he should sin voluntarily, so did not diminish any power that he was
endued with, but only he super-added not that Grace whereby Adam would
infallibly not have fallen, which Grace was no way due to Man, nor was God any
way bound to bestow it on him; so it was according to God's Will (not from it)
for what God simply would not have done, that cannot be done at all.

5. If Man can determine his own Will, and not destroy the Liberty of it, how
much more may God do so that is [ Intimior intimo nostro] more inward with us,
then we with our selves. The Will is its own free Mover, yet is not the first
Mover; it is only a second Free Agent, and God the first: So the subordinate
Free Agent (the thing being yet to do) may either do or not do the same Act;
although which of the two Man will freely incline to, be infallibly
soreordained: Thus Adam might stand in respect of himself, yet certainly fall
in respect of God.

6. The Jews might have broke Christ's Bones in respect of their own Free Will
in such Actions, yet was it not possible they should do so, as the Will of Man
is subordinate to the Will of God: John 19.36.
It was possible respectu rei, that Christ should be delivered from his Passion
by a Legion of Angels, yet impossible respectu Dei, for God had decreed that
Christ should dye: It was possible in respect of the thing, that God might have
pardoned Sinners without a Christ; but impossible it was, as God had decreed
Christ to be the Ransom: And to argue on their Hypothesis of Freewill, respectu
Rei, it is possible none may be saved, or none may be damned; yet respectu Dei,
both are impossible, for then either Heaven or Hell would be superfluous Things.

Objection 5. The Fifth Objection is The Predestinarians cannot agree about
stating their Decree, some stating it before the Fall, as the Supralapsarian (
such be Creabilitarians and Existentialists) and Others after the Fall, as the
Sublapsarians.

Answer 1. The Arminians by the Law of Re^liation may be called Submortuarians,
for their holding no full Election 'till Men dye, and Postdestinarians, for
placing the Eternal Decree behind the Race of Man's Life: This plainly inverts
the Apostle's Order, Romans 8. 30. putting Predestination behind Vocation and
Justification: Surely when Believers dye, they are Subjects of Glorification
and not of Election, Paul expected then a Crown of Righteousness; and Christ
should have said (upon this Hypothesis) to the penitent Thief, This day [ thou
shall be fully elected] not Thou shall be with me in Paradise: And may they not
also be styled Relapsarians, for saying, that the Elect may totally and finally
fall away, and that he who is a Child of God to day, may be a Child of the
Devil to Morrow?

2. Those Notions of Sub and Suprd, are but Intellectus nostri fictiones (as
Dr. Davenant says) Humane Conceptions of the Order of the Divine Decree, which
so far transcends our Understandings, that our weak Capacities cannot
comprehend it, but after the Manner of Men; and those two Opinions of sub and
suprd, do not differ In Re, sed tantum in modo explicandi; for if Mankind be
considered (whether massa nondum condita, or condita sed pura et nondum
corrupta, or massa condita et corrupta) in a common equal Estate to be the
Object of Predestination, there is no such material Difference as is pretended,
seeing all Men are looked on In pari statu both ways, especially when one of
these Persuasions does not speak Exclusively of the other.

3. The Arminians do worse in founding the Divine Decree not In statu integro,
nor In statu lapso, but In statu reparato, et tantum non glorificatos, in
making Believers the adequate Object of Election; which cannot be, for there be
many that believe, yet are are not Elect Ones (as Simon Magus, etc. that
believed, yet had not the Faith of God's Elect) and there be many that are
elected yet believe not, as Children: This Mistake makes them say, that
Apostates aeque vere sideles sunt non aeque dici, that he who perseveres is not
more elected than the Apostate, only he is longer so.

4. Yet far worse is their Platform, in Marshalling this Eternal Immanent Act
of God into First, Second, Third and Fourth; which must needs (says Dr.
Davenant) be a weak Imagination of Man's Brain; and so Uncertain, that amongst
many who give us such Delineations, not Two of Twenty can be found agreeing in
Numbering and Ordering their Decrees; but where One makes Four, another makes
Five, Six or Seven, etc. and that which one sets the first, another sets the
last; therefore here Clodius accusat Moechos, till themselves be better agreed,
they should not upbraid us with Differences.

5. Those several States of Man before and after the Fall, are not in the
Divine Understanding as they are in ours (by a Succession of Acts one after
another) but God [ uno Intuitu videt omnia] by one single Act orders all
things, and the Divine Idaea in the Decree is a Representation of all those
States at once; they are not Subordinanda, but Co-ordinanda, not this after
that, but altogether in one Instant of Eternity, for Non datur et posterius in
Deo; therefore we should not contend about Priorities and Posteriorities in
God, which are but Humane Conceptions.

Objection 6. The Positive Part of the Divine Decree makes Men remiss in Duty,
saying, Si salvabor, salvabor; However I live, live as I list, I shall be saved.

Answer 1. God's Decree stablishes Means, but removes them not, unless by
Accident, as the Gospel hardens: For it does not only ordain the End, but the
Means to the End; it is a mere fallacy of Division to sever the Means from the
End: As in Acts 27.30. Except ye abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved; a
Decree was past for their Safety, that not a Man of them should perish, v. 22.
yet they must abide in the Ship: It was true in Sensu Composito, to wit, in the
Connection of the End and Means, but not In sensu diviso, either that the
Shipmen should not abide in the Ship, or that any Man in the Ship should not be
saved.

2. Ludovicus the Eleventh King of France under this Temptation, was convinced
in his Sickness of his fond Saying [ Si salvabor, salvabor] by his Wise
Physician, who told him, If your Time be come, no Physic (I can give) will do
you good: The King pondering that Saying, cries out, Must I use means for the
good of my Body, and not of my Soul? Hereupon became he (upon further
Conference and taking Physic) to be cured of Soul and Body.

3. God's Decree does not nullify the Property of Secondary Causes in Natural
Things, but includes them, and disposes of them to their Proper, End; and so in
Things Spiritual, God decrees that the Earth should be fruitful, this does not
exclude, but include, that the Sun must shine upon it, Showers must water it,
and the Husbandman must till it, as his God instructs him. Isa. 28.26. God
decrees that fifteen Years shall be added to Hezekiah's Life, this made him
neither careless of his Health, nor negligent of his Food; he said not, Though
I run into the Fire, or into the Water, or drink Poison, I shall live so long;
but Natural Providence in the due Use of Means co works so, as to bring him
on to that Period of Time pre-ordained for him: Man's Industry is subservient
to God's Decree; it is called the Life of [our] Hands, Isa 57.10. we may not
tempt the Lord our God, Ora labora, and admota manu Invocanda est Minerva.

4. The Golden Chain has so linked the Means to the End, and Sanctification in
order to Salvation, that God does infallibly stir up the Elect to the Use of
the Means, as well as bring them to the End by the Means; therefore he promises
to sanctify whom he purposes to save, Ezekiel. 36.26,27. two of those Links (to
wit, Predestination and Glorification) are kept fast in God's Hand, but the
Middle Links are let down from Heaven to us on Earth, that we should catch hold
on them: We may not pluck those Parts of the Chain out of God's Hands, or break
the Chain to make it Useless: The Elect Lady must look to her self, 2 John ver.
8. though the Decree be absolute, the Execution of it is not, which two may not
be confounded.

5. The Arminian Eternal Prescience iufers as absolute a Certainty and
Necessity of Events as our Predestination does; for Things must be
fore-ordain'd to be, before they can be foreseen that they shall be, ut suprd;
so Men may argue from their Grounds, If I be Eternally foreseen to believe, I
shall believe and be saved: And o contra, yet further, they teach Men to say, I
can repent when I will, I may be elected though I live still in Lewdness, I
have a Free Will to repent on my Deathbed, so I may be saved: This will make
Men remiss indeed, but to read the Heart of God toward us thus Absolutely,
Everlastingly, Effectually, and Peculiarly, does constrain and unite our Hearts
to God for ever, Luke 1.74,75. and 1 Cor. 6.20. Cyrus acts freely, finding
himself foreordained, Isa. 44.21.

Objection 7. Reprobation (as absolute) makes Men desperate, Si damnabor,
damnabor; Let me do what I can, I shall be danmed, I am under a fatal Necessity.

Answer 1. This is to suck Poison out of a sweet Flower, and to dash against
the Rock of Ages; this is to Stumble at the Word, 1 Pet. 2.8. whereunto they
were appointed; and like profane Beasts to fall into the Pit that was diggd
for better purposes: why has God ordered all things by an Absolute Decree for
ever? It is that Men should fear before him, and not make such desperate
Inferences, Eccles. 3.14.

2. The Stoical Opinion of Fate, puts God in Subjection to Nature (as in
Homer's Jupiter and Neptune, ut supra, overpowered by Fate) but the absolute
Decree ( e contra) puts Nature in subjection to God, and does not necessitate
Men to do so much Evil, and no more Good tha they do (as before largely) for
God as an Infinite Cause can influence the Will of Man, Prove. 21.1. and
determine it so as not to destroy the Liberty of it, because he determines it
in a way suitable to it is own Nature; God acting freely as the First Cause, and
Man acting freely as the Second Cause, in Concurrence, not by Constraint.

3. No Man may judge himself a Reprobate in this Life (excepting in that sin
unto Death) and so to grow desperate; for final Disobedience (the infallible
Evidence of Reprobation) cannot be discovered till Death: We are not to
question the Secret Will of God (which is the Rule of Events) but to mind his
Revealed Will (which is the Rule of Endeavors) and to lay our Souls under his
Commands: One may fulfill the secret Will of God and do ill, as Judas and the
Jews in killing Christ, Acts 2.23. and one may cross the secret Will of God,
and do well, as David in praying for the Life of his Child, which God had
decreed should then dye: We must look into our own Bosoms, and so know what we
are in the Bosom of God.

4. The Arminian Doctrine [ God foresaw what good Courses I would take out of
my Free Will, so did elect me] is miserable Comfort to one, whose Heart is
privy to Myriads of Deviations from God; and to tell Men they may be justified
and sanctified, etc. yet (for all this) may become Reprobates and be damned in
the end, is desperate Doctrine: Whereas our Doctrine is only liable to false
Inferences, as Christ's was, Luke 18.25. [ Who then can be saved] not of it
self, but by corrupt Consequences drawn from it.

CHAP. XI. The Second Point. Universal Redemption, in the sense of the
Arminians, cannot be a Gospel Truth, for these following Arguments and Reason.
Argument 1. OPera Trinitatis ad extrasunt oequalia: God (the Father's)
Election; God (the Son's) Redemption; and God (the Holy Ghost's)
Sanctification; must be all of equal Extent and Latitude: But Universal
Redemption in the Arminian Sense makes these unequal; therefore, etc. The
Proposition is clear, for the Father, Word and Spirit are one, as in Essence,
so in Willing, Working and Witnessing the Redemption of Sinners: Upon Earth
Blood is not alone, nor Witnesses alone, but where Water and Spirit are also:
So in Heaven the Word witnesses not alone, but the Father and Holy Ghost also,
these three agree in one, 1 John 5.6,7,8. Whom the Father elects, the Son
redeems, and the Holy Ghost sanctifies: If then there be an Universal
Redemption, then there must be an Universal Election, and an Universal
Sanctification, and so (by consequence) an Universal Salvation too. That the
Son redeems no more than the Father elects, is evident from two Scriptures, the
first is John 5.23. the Son must be honored as the Father, but to say [that
the Son redeemed all, and the Father elected but few] is to give greater Honor
to the Second Person than to the first, and to make an Inequality in their
Operations; the Second Scripture is John 17.9,10. All thine are mine, and all
mine are thine, etc. They were the Father's by Election, before they be the
Son's by Redemption; Thine they were, and thou gave them me, v. 6, 8. Christ
redeems only those whom God gave him to redeem. Hence God's Book of Life
(wherein the Number of the Elect is recorded) is called also the Lamb's Book of
Life, to intimate that the Number of those Elected by the Father, is
commensurate with those redeemed by the Son. And that Christ redeems no more
but whom the Spirit sanctifies, appears likewise from 1 John 5.6,7. there must
be Water to sanctify, where there is Blood to redeem: Christ's Oblation is not
of a larger Extent than the Spirit's Operation. Thus it is made apparent, that
all the Three Persons in the Trinity have all one Object and Design of Love;
the Son's design for Redemption has not a greater Latitude then the Father's
for Election, and the Spirit's for Sanctification; all equal in Essence, Honor
and Operation.

Argument 2. The Benefits of Christ's Death and Resurrection are of equal
Extent in their Objects, but the Benefit of Christ's Resurrection is not
extended to all; Ergo: Nor the Benefit of his Death. The Assumption [to wit,
that the Benefit of Christ's Resurrection is not extended to all and every one
alike, but is peculiar to Believers] is acknowledged by the Arminians. The
Proposition therefore is only to be proved. That the Benefits of both the Death
and Resurrection of Christ are of equal Extent in their Objects, is evident
from Romans 8.34. if we partake of Christ's Death, we must of his Resurrection
too, Romans 6 5. they are both put together, and a [ rather] added to the latter,
Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect (for whom Christ died?)
Who can condemn those for whom Christ was raised? There is an equal Extent both
of the one and of the other. Those whom Christ died and rose again for, cannot
be condemned; but this cannot be said of all, for the Wrath of God [(...)]
abides on many, John 3 last, and from Romans 4. last; He dyed for our sins, and
was raised again for our justification. They are both so joined together, that
they cannot be severed either in Act, Object, or Effecr; for no Man is made
Partaker of the Death of Christ but by his Resurrection, 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Cor.
15.17. Those that have the Fruit of the Battle, in this have the fruit of the
Victory, too which cannot be all; for the Wrath of God abides on some, which
the Death of Christ never took away from them. Christ did not dye for some Men,
for whom he did not overcome Death.

Argument 3. The Benefits of Christ's Death and Intercession are of equal
Extent in their Objects; but the Benefit of Christ's Intercession is not to
all; Ergo. The Assumption is express Scripture, John 17.9. his Intercession is
only for those that the Father has given him, not for the World; and Reason
confirms it, for if Christ interceded for Judas, Pilate, etc. then had he a
Repulse, and was not always heard of the Father, contrary to John 11.42. The
Proposition is true, for Christ is an High Priest, and the two parts of his
Sacerdotal Office (to wit, Oblation and Presentation) cannot be separated one
from another, and they have a part in the Latter, that have a part in the
Former; for Presentation does necessarily imply the Oblation, and gives a
perpetual Force and Vigor to it in the sight of God, Heb. 9.12. It is not
enough to prepare the Price of Redemption, but it must be presented also to the
Father, Heb. 9.24. Yea, Disput. Publ. 14. These. 14.
Arminius (himself) grants, that Presentation is a part of the Oblation; Christ
must be an Intercessor for those to whom he is a Reconciler, and his
Intercession in Heaven is not a Vocal Praying, but a personal Presenting of
himself and his five Wounds to the Father, in the behalf of those whom he
personated on the Cross; as the High Priest of Israel in slaying the Sacrifice,
put not the Sins of the Gentiles upon the Head of the Beast, but the Sins of
Israel only; and in his going into the Sanctum Sanctorum, he did not represent
the Gentiles to God, but the Twelve Tribes of Israel written upon his
Breast Plate. Thus Christ is only a Priest to satisfy (both in his Oblation
and Presentation) for (...) only to whom he is a Prophet to teach, and a King
to rule; otherwise we shall make an Inequality in [his] Offices, as well as in
the Persons of the Trinity: We cannot say, there be some Men for whom Christ
offered himself upon Earth, but does not offer himself for them in Heaven; this
is to make Christ but an half Priest to some, and so is not a faithful
High Priest, contrary to sundry Scriptures, Isa. 53. 11,12. 1 John 2.1,2. Heb.
9.11,12. and 10.19,20,21.

Argument 4. Those for whom Christ dyed, have Christ for their Surety; but all
have not Christ for a Surety; Ergo. He dyed not for all. The Proposition is
evident; for every Sinner must dye for eating forbidden fruit, either in
himself, or in his Sponsor and Surety, the Wages of Sin is Death: Herein
consists the Suretiship of Christ, that he dies for us, 2 Samuel 18.33. Romans
5.7. and 9.3 the very Phrase of dying for one, demonstrates it. The Word
[(...)] Thacath, vice, loco, in the place and stead. So the Septuagint, Syriack
Version, and Chaldee Paraphrase, reads David's Desire, I would I had dyed in
thy stead, and thou remained alive; otherwise Christ's Death had not been a
counter Ransom [(...)] Mark 1^ 45. Mat. 20.28. which the Syriack reads (...),
vice multorium: Thus Christ is made a Curse for us, i. e. in our stead. The
[(...) and (...)] in the Greek Testament are frequently used in this Sense:
Thus Judah was Surety for Benjamin's Sasety, Genesis 44.32. and Christ is the
[(...)] Surety of the New Covenant, Heb. 7.22. taking upon him our Sins in his
Death, Isa. 53.5,6,7. 1 Pet. 2.24. and was made Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. which
intimates a Commutation of Persons, the one being accepted in the room of
another: The Assumption is as plain, for were he a Surety for all, then had he
satisfied for all, in becoming Sin, and bearing the Curse and Wrath of God in
their stead. This is not done for all: For, 1. God will require of some the
utmost Farthing, Mat. 5.26. unless his Satisfaction was rejected as
insufficient. 2. Many were in Hell at that time (when Christ dyed) actually
tormented. 3. Christ knows not Workers of Iniquity, Mat. 7.23. so as he knows
his Sheep, to lay down his Life for them, John 10.11,14,15. the latter is the
Evidence of the former. 4. Christ could not intend to waste the Blood of his
Covenant (whereof he was the Surety) upon Cain and Pharaoh (damned long before
his Death) in direct Opposition to the Eternal Decree of his own Deity: There
cannot be a Surrogation of Christ's Person in the room of the damned.

Argument 5. If the Covenant of Grace be not to all, then Christ dyed not for
all; but the Anrecedent is true; therefore, etc. the Consequence is proved
thus, Christ's Blood is called the Blood of the Covenant, Heb. 9.20. with 8.13.
and Exodus 24.8. and the Blood of the New Testament, Mat. 26.28. the Covenant
and the Seal of the Covenant have a necessary Connection together, and Men's
Covenants are Insignificant without a Seal: Moreover, where a Testament is,
there must also be the Death of the Testator; otherwise it is of no force while
the Testator lives, Heb. 9.16,17. The New Testament and New Covenant are
undoubted Synonima's, and are in Scripture of the same sense and signification:
The Assumption (to wit, the Covenant of Grace is not to all) is true, some are
without the Covenant, Ephesians. 2.12. Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus, and Salvation is
of the Jews, John 4 22. for it is made with the House of Israel only, Jer.
31.31,32. it is only with those in whom the Condition (not only required, as in
that of Works, but absolutely promised) is effectually wrought, to wit, a
putting his fear in their Hearts, and writing his Law in their Minds, which the
Election only obtains: And if we enquire after the first giving of this
Covenant in Paradise, Genesis 3.15. None dare say, that God entered into a
Covenant of Grace with the Seed of the Serpent, but only with those whose Heel
the Serpent hurts; and it would seem a Mocking of Mankind to make a Covenant
with all, and not to make it known to the greatest part of them; the word of
Reconciliation is not preached to all, Psalm. 147.19,20. Acts 14.16. and 16.6.
None can be Partaker of the Covenant without Faith, and Faith comes by Hearing,
which the greatest part of the World have not, Romans 10.14,17.

Argument 6. If Christ died for his Sheep, for his Friends, and for his Church
only, then he dyed not for all; but the Antecedent is true, therefore the
Consequent is true also: The Assumption is plain in several Scriptures, John
10.11,15. and 15.13 Acts 20.28. Eth. 5.25. Tit. 2.14. such as were Paul and
Titus, not such as were Pharaoh and Judas who were Goats and not Sheep, Mat.
25.33. Psalm. 33.12. and 144.15. Hosea 2.23. Mat. 1.21. [ his People from their
sins] John 11.51,52. for the Children of God, called Psalm. 107.2. The redeemed
of the Lord. Now seeing those (for whom Christ dyed) are such as Hear his Voice
and follow him, to whom He gives Eternal Life, John 10.27,28 Such as He
sanctifies and cleanses, and presents them to himself without spot or wrinkle,
Ephesians. 5.23. Such as are Redeemed from all Iniquity to purify them to himself a
peculiar People, Titus 2.14. such as are his People, his Chosen, his Children,
etc. It cannot be intended for all, unless we will say, either that Pharaoh,
Judas, etc. were of the Sheep, Friends, and Church of Christ, or that Christ
missed of his End intended in his Death; Redemption and Remission of Sins are
the Inheritance of the Saints, and of such as are made Heirs of the Kingdom of
Christ, Col. 1.12,13,14. It Is true, he dyed for Enemies, Romans 5.10. but it was
to reconcile them to God; such as Paul (who had been an Enemy to Christ) and
the Believing Romans, which Christ (before that) had called Sheep, John 10.16.
(though then not actually converted) because in his Eternal Decree he purposed
to give them Faith, by which they might be gathered to his Fold; so that
condition (to come) was already present in the Eternal Purpose, for the Father
had given them to Christ from all Eternity; but Pharaoh, Judas, etc. can in, no
such sense be called the Saints of Christ, or Friends of God, as Abraham and
the Disciples were.

Argument 7. Quibus intenditur mors Christi, ijs applicatur, Those for whom
Christ's Death was intended to them it must be applied; but it is not applied
to all, therefore it is not intended for all: The Proposition is thus proved,
If the Application of Christ's Death be according to the Intention of God,
concerning the Latitude and Extent of it, then it is applied to all for whom it
is intended; but the Antecedent is true, Ergo, etc. The Truth of the Antecedent
appears thus, That which is according to the Will and Purpose of God, is
according to his Intention, but the Application of the Death of Christ, is
according to the Will and Purpose of God concerning the latitude of it, Ergo.
The Application of Christ's Death is according to God's Intention as to the
Latitude of it. The Assumption is proved, if the Efficacy of the Means of Grace
be according to the Will and Purpose of God concerning the Latitude of it, then
is also the Application of the Death of Christ, etc. but the former is true;
for the good Pleasure and Purpose of God is the Cause ruling and measuring this
Efficacy, so this Efficacy must be according to God's good Pleasure and Purpose
in the Extent of it, Mat. 11.26. Romans 9.15,18. Ephesians. 1.5,11. proves it
sufficiently, Ergo, the latter must be granted as true also.

Argument 8. If Christ dyed for all, then must all be actually reconciled to
God; but all are not so, Ergo, etc. The Proposition is proved, nothing but sin
hinders Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. Romans 5.19. and 11.15. Christ's Death
merits Reconciliation with God as it is [(...)] a Ransom and [(...)] a
Propitiation, so that all for whom Christ died must be reconciled to God, for
Posita causa, ponitur et Effectus, the Death of Christ is the Cause, and
Reconciliation (the Effect) must follow it. The Assumption is Evident, for then
(if all be reconciled) all must be saved, Remissa culpa, remittitur et poena,
and nothing can be laid to the charge of any; take away the Sin, and you acquit
the Sinner; and to grant such an Acquittance and Reconciliation to all, brings
in many Absurdities; Paul rejoiced in his Reconciliation by Christ, Romans 5.11.
which he would not have done, had it been a common Benefit to Herod and Pilate,
as well as to himself: For upon this Hypothesis it follows, 1. That Cain,
Pharaoh, etc. were reconciled to God by Christ's Death, when they were (at the
time of Christ's dying) in the Torments of Hell, and never to be delivered from
them. 2. That God damns reconciled Persons. 3. That God takes double Pay for
one Fault, in punishing both the Surety and the Debtor, whereas Nemo bis
tenetur pro uno delicto. 4. That Christ's reconciling of some is ineffectual,
etc. But those whom Christ dies for, he gives to them Repentance and Remission
of Sins, Acts 5.31. Freedom from the slavery of Sin, and Regeneration to
Newness of Life, Romans 6.5,6. 2 Cor. 5.15. Heb. 2.14,15. Jer. 31.33,34.
Purifying Grace, Acts 15.9. Heb. 9.13,14. and Eternal Life, John 10.15,28.
those Fruits evidence our Reconciling by Christ's Death.

Argument 9. Those whom Christ dyed for, have the greatest Love of Christ; but
all have not the greatest Love of Christ, Ergo, etc. The Proposition is clear
from John 15.13. and 1 John 3.16. Friends cannot be more loved, than by dying
for them: Herein is the Love of Redemption advanced above the Love of Creation;
in the latter, God gave the Creature to Man; but in the former, Himself; than
which no greater Love can be shown. The Assumption is clear also, for Pilate,
Judas, yea, Cain and Pharaoh, (then in Hell) could not have the greatest Love
of Christ in his Death, seeing the chief Evidence hereof is, to give Men Grace
here, and Glory hereafter; Praying for them, and Together with himself freely
gives us all things, Romans 8.32. all spiritual Blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. Love
(especially, greatest Love) is a willing to one the greatest Good, which cannot
be a common Kindness, but special and peculiar Favor, Psalm. 106.4. and
119.132. If Christ willed the greatest Good to Esau, how can it be said, Esau
have I hated? yet under this greatest Love of Christ dying for him, according
to this Hypothesis.

Argument 10. If Christ dyed for all Mankind and obtained Reconciliation for
them, then all Infants are reconciled, their Sin is forgiven them, and so by
Consequence are saved dying in their Infancy; but this cannot be affirmed of
all Infants, Ergo, etc. The Assumption is proved, It is the Judgment of the
Catholic Church, that the Infants of Pagans (God's Secrets being still
reserved to himself) are destitute of Supernatural and Saving Grace, and they
are not only born Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. but are altogether Strangers to
the Covenant of Grace, and upon this account are esteemed unclean, 1 Cor. 7.14.
so dying are bound under the damnable guilt of Original Sin. This is
acknowledged by the Romanists (themselves) saying, Bannez. in 1. Quest. 23.
Parvulos Paganorum filios nihil auxilij supernaturalis recepisse in seipsis;
but if all were reconciled by Christ's Death, then none of them could be born
Children of Wrath, and subject to the Curse, and it would be a Privilege to
them to be killed in their Cradles, rather than to be kept alive, and brought
up in Paganism, whereby they must undoubtedly perish to all Eternity: Besides,
if all be reconciled, then none can be born [without the Covenant] contrary to
Ephesians. 2.3,12.

Argument 11. That cannot be a Truth which the Scripture of Truth no where
affirms; but it no where asserts, that Christ dyed for all Men, much less for
all and every Man individually, (between which two there is a vast difference)
therefore it is not a Truth. To explain the Assumption: It is true, Christ is
said to give his Life a Ransom for all; but not for all Men, or for every Man
individually: The Scripture is the best Expounder of it self, and that [ All]
is interpreted to be [ Many] Mat. 20.28. and 26.28. Mark 10.45. and it is so
frequently restrained to his Sheep, Friends, Church, Believers, Chosen; and
such as are given to Christ, that it must be meant [some of all sorts] which in
equivalent Terms is expressed clearly Rev. 5.9,10. Thou have redeemed us out of
every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation: And I cannot see how the
Arminians can have any part in that New Song there mentioned, which say they
are no more beholden to Christ for their Redemption than Cain and Judas was.
The Word [ All] therefore, must be taken for all the Elect, all his Church, all
his Children that the Father has given him, etc. not all Men universally, and
every Man individually: Those places [1 Timothy 2.4,6. Tit. 2.11,14. plainly show,
that it is some of all sorts, Princes and Peasants, Kings and Servants, and of
such only as he brings to the knowledge of the Truth (whereby the Universality
of the Expression is plainly restrained in the Connection of that Clause) for
God gives not, nor (so much as) offers the Knowledge of Truth to all.

Argument 12. That which opposes the Attributes of God, ought not to be
received; but the Universal Point does so, Ergo, etc. The Assumption appears,
as, 1. His Justice: Numerari pretium and captivum non redimi adversatur
Justitiae: If Christ paid the Price for Pharaoh and Judas, etc. then reconciled
Souls are unjustly damned, ut supra. This Hypothesis sets the Death of Christ
in a direct Opposition to God's Justice, and how could Christ dye for Judas's
Sin, when Christ's Death was his very Sin; as if Christ should say, Father,
receive into thy Favor those whom I know thou will never do so (being before
of old ordained to destruction, Jude 4.) This is to make Religion a
Laughingstock. 2. His Wisdom: As if God should love and hate the same Person at
the same Time; Esau must be loved, in giving Christ to dye for him, yet hated,
as being ordained to Death from all Eternity; and what is this but Childrens
play, in giving Judas a Ransom with one Hand, and sending him to his place for
his (satisfiedfor, and remitted) Sin, with the other Hand? 3. His Power: If
Christ died intentionally (as to God) for all, then God's Intentions are
frustrate, (seeing all are not saved) and then he is not Omnipotent, if crossed
in his Designs by the Work of his own Hands; and to say, that Freedom was
obtained by Christ's Death for one, but not that he should be freed, is
ridiculous.

Objection 1. It is Objected, Impetration is Universal, though the Application
be not so, Christ obtained for all, though it be not applied to all.

Answer 1. This Distinction cannot hold true in God, who grants nothing but
what he bestows, for he cannot repent of his Grantings.

2. The End cannot be severed from the Action: if God willed that Redemption
might be obtained of him, it was, that it might be applied to some; and if to
some and not to all, then there is some Disparity in the Impetration it self,
and in the Intention of it, and not in the Application only; and so the
Distinction falls.

3. This Distinction has no place in the purpose of Christ, for therein they
are both united, Christ's aim being to bestow what he obtains, he obtains
nothing but what he applies, for does he apply any thing which he did not
obtain, Deus et Natura nil faciunt frustra.

4. It is absurd to say that Redemption is obtained, when both he that obtains,
and he of whom it is obtained, do know it shall never be applied; nor ever
profit those for whom (they say) it is obtained.

5. It bespatters the unvaluable Price of the Blood of God, as if Christ should
obtain Food for such as were never to be sed with it, and Freedom for those
that were never to be freed by it; then Christ obtains of his Father that which
will never profit; this is a goodly Purchase.

6. If Christ made God placabilem, and not placatum, then God is not a pure
act, neither is he Unchangeable, both which Absurdities this Distinction
implies.

7. Then Christ is only a Preparer but not a Giver of Salvation, and he
purchased a power in that placability for God; and not for us contrary to John
1.12. To them he gave [(...)] power [(...)] Heavenly Honor, to become the Sons
of God.

8. If Christ made God appeaseable only, then was Redemption Work (like the
Cast of a Die) an uncertain Thing whether it had been applied to any or no.

9. If we grant a severing of Impetration and Application in some, we may
suppose a separating them in all, and so make Christ to dye in vain, and to be
such a Mediator as reconciles God to no Body, which cannot be.

10. If there be an Impetration of Redemption to some without the Application
of it, then is Christ but an half Mediator to those; which is a mere Chimaera,
and not to be found in Scripture.

11. The Intention of God cannot be conditional (on our believing) for our
believing adds nothing to the Intrinsical Sufficiency of Christ's Satisfaction,
neither does our not believing diminish it. God laid on Christ the Iniquity of
us all, and made him sin for us, from his absolute Will, whether we believe or
no; if otherwise our Act of Faith must perfect the Satisfaction of Christ, and
caustively make it ours.

12. Faith is indeed the Condition of Salvation, yet it is absolutely promised
by God, and procured by Christ's Death; and shall the Application of good
obtained, depend on a Condition, not made known to the Tenth part of the World,
and not at all to Infants that dye in Infancy?

13. This distinction cannot hold true in Infants, for they must say, Either
that they are all damned dying in Infancy, or that the Impetration of Salvation
for them differs not from the Application of it.

14. To say, That Christ dyed for all, and obtained Redemption for all upon
this Condition, if they do believe; is plainly to yield that Christ died for
Believers only, and to say, God grants Redemption if Men do believe, is plainly
to hold out that the Grant is only to Believers to whom it is given.

15. They are both joined together, Romans 4.25. and 5.18. Isa. 53.11,12. Romans
8.32,33,34.

16. Christ's Intercession is that what he obtains may be applied, John 17 per
totum

17. If there be a Jus, there must be a Factum; especially where the Condition
is equally purchased with the Privilege.

Objection 2. Quod unusquisque tenetu credere, verum est; What every One is
bound to believe, is true; but every one is bound to believe that Christ died
for them. Ergo,

Answer 1. The Arminians boast much of this Argument, as if Achilloean and
Invincible; suppose we should grant it for Truth; would it not be poor Comfort
for a distressed Soul, to believe that Christ died for it no more than for
Judas, and for all the Damned in Hell? They would still be but miserable
Comforters, and Physicians of no Value, to such a Soul; Christ dyed for all,
thou art a Man, Ergo, he dyed for thee, might comfort Cain and Judas in their
Despair.

2. But in Truth, the Minor of this Argument is false, for they to whom the
Gospel never came, nor have ever heard ought of the Death of Christ, are not
bound to believe that Christ dyed for them, Ubi nulla Lex, nulla Transgressio.

3. Neither is every One that has the Gospel bound to believe it absolutely,
but on this Condition, If they be weary and heavy laden with sin; such only
Christ calls to him, and such only are bound to believe, not all promiscuously.
For if Men abide in Impenitency, they are bound to believe that the Death of
Christ belongs not to them.

4. The Agument is a plain Paralogism, and a Sophistical Fallacy, having [
Quatuor Terminos] four Terms in it, for the [(...)] the Word [ believe] in the
Major Proposition, is taken for a fiducial Embracing of the Truth with the
Heart, which is Faith properly; but in the Minor, or Assumption, it is only a
certain Practical Collection (which is not Faith but Improperly) as if it were
the Intention of God, that this or that Man (suppose Judas, etc.) should
believe.

5. We are all bound to believe, that what God reveals is true, and [ thus
says the Lord] is the Object of Faith; but God no where reveals, or faith that
it is his Intention that Judas shall believe, or that all should believe.

6. The Word [ Unusquisque] is also Vox oequivoca, or every One, and must have
its Limitation; to wit, every one that is Penitent, Hungry, Thirsty, etc.
otherwise it could not be Morally and Theologically true, for it is revealed,
that Christ died for Sheep, Friends, Church only, he is the Savior of the
Body. Ephesians. 5.23.

7. Christ is a Deed of Gift, but this Deed runs not with a [ Noverint
Universi] in an Unlimited Sense, but it is [ Omnibus Christi fidelibus] I have
given and granted upon sundry and certain good Considerations.

8. It Is true, the Commission is, Go preach the Gospel to every Creature, Mark
16.15. and accordingly we hold out a Tender of Christ to all promiscuously, but
it is not, because Christ is intentionally given to all, but because we know
not the Elect from the Reprobate, which is a Secret, and Afacto ad jus non
valet Consequentia.

Objection 3. The Word [All] used often in Scripture, must be taken Universally.

Answer 1. [ All] must not be taken for an Universal Affirmative collectively,
for every Man individually in the common quoted Scriptures, but distributively,
as in Luke 12.42. Omne Olus, is any manner of Herb, and Mat. 9.35. Omnem
asorbum, any kind of Disease, for Christ healed not every Disease individually,
and Col. 1.28. where all is taken distributively three times over, with
Restrictions to those he preached to.

2. All in 1 Timothy 2.4. cannot be taken for all collectively, and for every
individual Man; for the Word of God forbids us to pray for those that sin the
Sin unto Death, 1 John 5.16. therefore pray for all Men, cannot be taken for
all individually.

3. All in 1 Timothy 2.4. cannot be taken collectively; for then either all shall
be saved, if God will have it so; or God fails of his own Will, which is
absurd: It must therefore be meant not of the Will of his Purpose, but of his
Precept, whereby he invites Men of all sorts, and excludes none, for there is
no Exception in the Gospel. We know not the Exception in the Decree; hence Paul
doubts not to tell the Jailer (who was a bloody Boisterous Fellow) that if he
believed, he should be saved, Acts 16.24,27,31.

4. The Word [(...)] Aristotle (in his Fol. lib. 2. cap. 2.) shows, is not
taken strictly always, for every Man individually, and so (...), Heb. 2.9. is
restrained to Sons brought to Glory, v. 10. and to sanctified Ones, v. 11. the
Hebrews appropriated the Messiah to themselves, as if not for the Gentiles too.

5. When we say all Men travel such a way to London, we mean not that every Man
travels thither, but such as do travel thither, travel such a way: The Prophet
says, All men are Liars, take the Word strictly, and he must be a Liar that
said so. Thus other Scriptures frequently restrain [ All.]

6. 1 Cor. 15.22. is meant of the Resurrection, and of those that are Christ's,
v. 23. or the Sense is, No man is made alive but by him; as Aristotle taught
all Men Philosophy, i. e. no Man learned Philosophy but by him, not all
individually.

Objection 4. God gave Christ to the World, John 3.16. and for the Sins of the
whole World, 1 John 2.2.

Answer 1. N. B. Contrary Scriptures are to be considered both at once, and by
the Scope of the whole are to be interpreted; it is not Concordia discors
betwixt Romans 3.28. and Jam. 2.24. but Discordia concors: Luther said,
Grammatica Theologiae cedat, Words must give place to Matter, Matter is not for
words, but e contra, words for matter.
The Word [ World] is (...), of various Significations, John 3.16. cannot be
meant of the World containing, for that is not a Subject capable of Salvation,
nor of the World contained in a strict Sense; for so Brids, Beasts and Fishes,
and all Inanimate Things are comprehended, which cannot have Everlasting Life;
nor can it be the World of Men, but as he is the (...), or Preserver of Man and
Beast, Psalm. 36.6. there is God's (...), or Love to Creatures, (...), his Love
to Men, and (...), his Love to good Men: God's Love was the Cause (...) of
sending Christ: Not the first of these, nor the Second properly, but as an
Evidence that some out of Mankind was saveable, which was not granted to the
fallen Angels; and the Word [ Whosoever] plainly restrains this Love of God to
some, not to others; Whosoever (in this World) believes, etc. and in v. 17.
it is meant the saved World, which must be God's People; for many of the World
were damned (at the time of God's sending Christ) and some had been so 4000
Years; as he was not sent to reverse God's Decree (for then the Pains of Hell
were not Endless) so nor did his Death cross the Decree. It must therefore be
properly God's Love to good Men, the third Love, not such as he found so, but
such as he made so, out of his Love to them.

2. It must be meant of that World whereof Abraham is said to be the Heir, Romans
11.13. which is explained to be of all Believers, v. 11. both Jews and
Gentiles, in every Nation through the World. In this sense it is taken John 6.33.
as Manna was only for Israel, so Christ (the Bread from Heaven) gives Life to
the World of Believers only, 1 Timothy 3.16. Christ was believed on in the World
of Believers only, Heb. 2.5. that World which is made subject to Christ, the
reconciled World, 2 Cor. 5.19. and that World, to which Christ was a special
Savior, John 4.42.

3. [ World] cannot be taken for all and every Man, for then he would send his
Word to them, and work his Grace in them; that this Love of God might not be
fruitless, and it must follow that either God loves the Damned in Hell, or that
he loved them while in the World, but He is now changed.

4. It is granted that God has a Respect for all Mankind (above Devils) in
offering a Savior to them, and Christ is the Savior of all Men, 1 Timothy 4.10.
Omnes redimuntur per Christum, i. e. all that are redeemed, Sed soli Electi
sunt in Christo.
not of Eternal Preservation, but of Temporal Reservation, for the Wages of Sin
would be paid at Birth, and the World (through confusion by sin) would have
fallen about Adam's Ears, had not Christ been the Glorious Undertaker.

5. That in 1 John 2.2. signifies, that the sins of no Man in the whole World
are remitted, but by Christ; There is no other Name under Heaven wherely we can
be saved, Acts 4.12 John wrote to the Jews, Gal. 2.9. and he tells them, Christ
is not a Propitiation for them only, but for the Gentiles too; as Acts 10.35.
Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11. for Christ is not ( Heb. Copher) a Cover for the Sins of
all and every Man, and seeing John comforts them against Sin, this cannot be
done from the Impetration of Atonement, but from the Application of it, which
none ever said was Universal, therefore, etc.

6. Christ was sufficient as a Medicine to save the whole World, as the Brazen
Serpent was to heal all Israel, yet only those that looked up were healed: So
it is only those that apply this Medicine 1 John 5.11,12.
, Habet in se quod omnibus prosit, sed si non bibitur non medetur. Prosper.

Objection 5. Christ has as much Essicacy to save, as Adam to damn, Romans 5.18.

Answer 1. There is a Difference betwixt a Necessary Extensiveness and a
Voluntary One: The Efficacy of Adam's sin was Extensive necessarily, but that
of Christ's Death is of Freegrace, and wholly at God's Pleasure, and therefore
it is called the free Gist, Romans 5.15. not of the same manner.

2. Christ is no where compared to Adam (...) the Extent of his Object, but
only in the Efficacy of his Obedience, and more Merit is required to the saving
of one Soul, than of Demerit for the losing of Ten Thousand.

3. As all the Off spring of Adam did fall by his Sin, so all the Off spring of
Christ are saved by his Death: All and every one are not in Christ radically,
as they were in Adam; and all are not given to Christ; John 17.19
but As many (says Christ) as thou have given me: The Seed of the Woman could
not be made the Head and Root of the Seed of the Serpent; Christ represented
not Cain, Pharaoh, etc. (then God had been well pleased with Christ for them,
Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. Ephesians. 5.2. and they should not have been damned) as Adam
represented all Mankind; As all (that are in Adam) dye, so all (that are in
Christ) are made alive.

4. This Romans 5.18. is spoken of such as receive much Grace and Justification,
v. 17. which the Arminians cannot say, All and Every Man do.

Objection 6. Romans 14.15. says, Destroy not him for whom Christ dyed: And 2
Pet. 2.1. Denying the Lord that bought them.

Answer 1. Destroy is not there to condemn but to scandalize (which as much as
in us lies) leads them to Destruction, 2 Cor. 10.8. but to destroy them
absolutely, is not in Man's Power.

2. Those were Prefessors of the Gospel, so were those in Heb. 10.29. he says
not, that Saints could crucify the Lord afresh, etc. Suppositio nil ponit in
esse: Though Professors in the Judgment of Charity be reckoned the Redeemed
Ones, and called there Weak Brethren, yet what is this to the whole Word that
lies in Wickedness, and far short of Professors?

3. Those false Prophets in Peter, were not bought by Christ from Eternal
Death, but from the Pollutions of that Age, neither is [(...), Herus] a Name of
Christ as Mediator, but it is God's Title.

4. Grant the Premises, it follows, that such as think themselves Redeemed, or
are thought so by others, may blaspheme and perish; yet this makes not all the
World redeemed.

The Third and Fourth Point, concerning Free Will and Conversion, follow.
First in General.
ARminianisme implies, That the Fruit of Christ's Death depends on the
Contingent Assent of Man's Free Will, that not withstanding his Death, it was
possible in respect of Free Will that all should perish; that now by his Death
for all, true Grace is given to all; that all Pagans are reconciled to God,
that in Man is no Original Sin, but all are born in a State of Innocence: Some
affirm, that Nature without Grace will save, through the Direction of Right
Reason: Others say, that Grace depends on Nature. Others, that the Fall took
not away the Power of the Mind, but it is Exercise only; so that the Mind is as
bound in Fetters only, and that in the first Acts of Grace (as well as in
posterior Acts) Nature and Grace do concur, and walk hand in hand together; but
what is all this seeming Zeal for God? (In maintaining General Redemption, left
God should mock in his Promises; and Free Will to Good, lest God should mock in
his Precepts) but a speaking wickedly for God and an accepting of his Person,
Job 13.7,8. It Is indeed an Advancing of his Mercy, but not of his Truth in the
former, and of the Will of Man, (Embalming a dead Carcass) above the Wiil of
God in the latter. The Will of Man is Naturally a self-determining Power and
Principle, and bears God's Image, as it has a Dominion over the whole Man; but
since the Fall has the strong Byasse of Sin upon it. Freedom is Radically and
Originally in the Will (not in the Understanding) and it is an Essential
Property of it, that it cannot be compelled by any Created, External Agent [ In
actu elicito] in its own free Choice, yet [ In actu imperato] in the commanding
Act it may suffer force, as the Martyrs were dragged against their Wills to
Idol-worship, and Christ tells Peter, They shall carry thee whither thou
would not, John 21.18. Now it is no Wonder, if many Mistakes arise about this
great Engine of the Almighty, seeing the Soul knows not it self but by
Reflection, and though we know its Qualities and Operations, yet cannot we know
its Essence.

Man is considered in a fourfold State, 1. The State of Creation or Generation,
therein he had Free Will either to Good or Evil, but was necessitated to
neither. 2. The State of Degeneration, wherein he is a Servant to Sin, and
necessitated to Evil. 3. The State of Regeneration, wherein he is freed from
the Slavery of Sin, but not from the Necessity of it. 4. The State of
Glorification, wherein Man is both freely and necessarily good, and is not free
Liberate Indisserentioe (as Adam before the Fall) for that in cludes a
Mutability in it: In the First Estate Man is Liber, free; in the Second Servus,
a Slave; in the Third Liberatus, set free; in the Fourth Liberrimus, having a
Glorious Liberty: The Controve: sie lies concerning the Second State, wherein
we say, that Man is under a Necessity of Sinning, yet free from Coaction; he is
free to Evil, but not to Good; which appears by these following Arguments.

Argument 1. To prove that there is no Freewill to Good in the fallen Estate,
is taken from the Fall it self: If Man in the Fall lost his Free Will to Good,
then it cannot be found in the fallen Estate, but the Antecedent is true, Ergo,
etc. to prove the Antecedent, were it not so, it could not properly be called a
Fall; it implies a Loss of that Original Righteousness and Perfection wherein
he was created: And if the Fall did deprave the other Faculties of the Soul,
and deprive them of their Primitive Luster, then must the Will be a Sharer also
in that Depravation: Now the Depravation of the Will (it self) by the Fall does
further appear, by the Good it has lost, and by the Evil it has got, through
Adam's Sin. The Good it has lost, is sixtold: Power, Order, Stability,
Prudence, Obedience, Liberty. The Evil it has got, is threefold (in Opposition
to the Obedience it lost) a threefold Rebellion, 1. Against the Counsel of the
Mind. 2. Against the Controuls of, Conscience. 3. Against the Commands of God:
Besides all the other Vices wherein Original Sin consists. This King of the
Isle of Man, when he came first out of God's Mint, was a curious Silver-piece,
and shone most gloriously (being clothed with Excellent Jewels and Properties)
but now being fallen among Thieves, is robbed of all, has Ashes for Beauty,
etc. and is a Tyrant upon a Dunghill, yea, is free from Righteousness, and a
very Slave to Sin, Romans 6.17,18,20. before the Fall, the Will had Liberty both
[ Contrarietatis and Contradictionis] to Good or Evil; to do or not to do: But
since the Fall, the Will is evil, only evil, and continually evil, Genesis 6. 5.
the whole Heart is evil Extensively, only evil Intensively, and cortinually
evil Protensively.

Argument 2. If Conversion be a New Creation, then fallen Man has not a
Free Will to Good, but the Antecedent is true, Ergo, etc. that the Antecedent
is true, appears; a Convert is called (...), Gal. 6.15. 2 Cor 5.17. a New
Creature, or a New Creation: Now Creatio est ex Nihilo, Creation is a
Production of something out of nothing, but if there be a Free Will to Good in
Man before Conversion, then there is something (that is of its own Nature
spiritually good) in Man unconverted toward the Work of Conversion, so can it
not be called a New Creation: Sure I am, every Experienced Soul finds the
contrary in that Work: The whole Frame is out of Frame in the Unconverted
Estate, and Man is ( Tohu va pohu) a confused Chaos, and a vast Emptiness, when
this Creating Power comes upon him: Yea, a greater Power is required to
re-create this little World, than was first to create the greater; for in this
though there be no pre-existing (yet there is resisting) Matter: The Creation
of the great World was the Work of God's Word, Psalm. 33.6. of his Fingers,
Psalm. 8.3. or of his Hands, Psalm. 102.25. but to restore (the little World) MAN
requires God's Arm, Luke 1.51. Nay, Christ set his sides to it (in his sweating
Drops or Clods of Blood, Grumos sanguinis) Luke 22.44. It cost Christ both
Tears and Blood, and Blood often, at his Circumcision, in his Agony, and at his
Passion: This is Creatio continuans (as the first was Creatio transiens) The
Father works hitherto, and I work) John 5.17. New Qualities and Operations
are created in us (though the Substance and Faculties of the Soul remain) both
the Will to will well, and the Power to do well, are ascribed to this Creating
Almighty Power, Phil. 2.13.

Argument 3. If Conversion be a New begetting or Generation, then fallen Man
has no Freewill to Good, but the Antecedent is true, Ergo, etc. To give Light
and Proof to this Argument, we must know, that Generatio est motus ad Essentiam
et processus in esse, Generation is the Motion to a Being, and a proceeding
into a Being; this presupposes, that there is no Being before, for we are not,
we are nothing, before we be begotten; as it holds true in Generation, so
likewise in Regeneration; Of his own Will begat he us, Jam. 1.18. It Is not said
that God begat us of our Wills (yet this should be said were there in us a
Free Will to Good) but of God's Will, and 'till then we are not, 1 Cor. 1.28.
Unconverted Men are things that are not, Nothing-Creatures. Fallen Man is, 1. A
Natural-Nothing: We are all [ Nihili Nepotes] as Austin faith; what is the
great Womb whence all things come, but Nothing? 2. A Moral Nothing, [ Abel]
Vanity and Nothing is writ upon us by Sin Naturally, but we are Morally worse
than Nothing; that is [ Enosh] miserable: As Nothing at the first was the
Mother of all things, so Sin is now the Mother of Nothing: Man is Vanity (or as
in the Hebrew, Adam is Abel) Psalm. 39.5. and a Lie, Psalm. 62.9. and but (as it
were) Something, as in Rev. 9.7,8. not in respect of his Substance and
Faculties, but in respect of the Purity of them; The Heart of the Wicked is
little Worth, Prove. 10.20. 1. Usu, for Use and Service; as a Shadow is not
useful for War, nor a Statue for Prayer, so nor fallen Man for the Service of
God: Quod nulli usui prodest, nihil est, says the Philosopher; his best
Actions are Sin. 2. Effectu, Vanum est, quod frustra est, Sinners toil for
Vanity, Hab. 2.13. they dream of catching Golden Fishes, as the Man in
Theocritus did; Sin disappoints us of our End, to wit, Happiness; Man labors
for the Wind, Eccles. 5.16. and is but in a Dream, Isa. 29.7,8. this shows we
are nothing, and have not Free Will to Good, till begotten of God.

Argument 4. If Conversion be a New Birth, than fallen Man has not a Free Will
to Good; but the Antecedent is true, Ergo, etc. The Truth of this appears, for
Non a nobis orimur, we cannot have our Birth of our selves, a Babe cannot be
born of it self, Quicquid paritur (says Philosophy) non a se, sed ab alio
oritur, Nothing can have its Original from its self, Nihil amplius potest esse
et causa, et effectum, ita seipso esset prius, et posterius, It would then be
before and after it self, Simul sit et non sit, it would be and not be at the
same time. Thus we are taught to look up (above, our selves) for our New Birth,
John 3.3. Except a Man be born again [(...)] or from above; we are born, Not of
the Flesh, but of the Spirit; v. 6. Our First Birth is of the Earth, Earthy;
our Second Birth is from the Lord, Heavenly; 1 John 3. 9. Born of God: We may
give Semen Carnis et Sanguinis to the first Birth, but not Semen Spiritus to
the Second: There be Children potentially in the Loins of many Men that never
beget Children; yet in this there is a Disparity, for though as Men we be
possible Members of Christ, yet are we not actual, nor ever shall be, unless
begotten and born of God wholly.

Argument 5. If Conversion be a quickening one that is dead in Sin, then fallen
Man has no Free Will to Good; but the former is true, Ergo, the latter. This
is proved from Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were dead, etc. he does not
say, half dead, as the Man was that fell among Thieves, Luke 10.30. but he
means, stark dead, as to Spiritual Life: There is no manner of good thing in
us, Romans 7.18. And we are not sufficient of our selves to think a good thought,
2 Cor. 3.5. till Christ (who is Life and a Quickening Spirit) come to quicken
us; Without him we can do nothing, John 15.5. he does not say, many things or
few things, but nothing; From him is our Fruit found, Hos. 14.8. both the Bud
of good Desires, the Blossom of good Purposes, and the Fruit of good Actions.
Aaron's Rod (a dry stick without a Root) is a fit Emblem; it budded, blossomed
and brought forth Almonds; this was not done by any Inward Principle or Power
of Nature, but it was solely and wholly the Work of God: So Ezekiel's dry Bones
were made to live; nothing of that Life was from themselves, but all from God.
Thus it is in this Spiritual Vivification, we cannot contribute any thing (no
not the hundred Part that, is ejusdem naturae, of the same Nature with the 99.)
to this Glorious Work; we have no Internum Principium, whereby to dispose our
selves to will that which is truly good; we cannot so much as call Christ Lord,
but by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.3. If there be no Life, but through Union with
Christ, then till we be engrafted into that blessed and bleeding Vine, we
cannot bring sorth any fruit unto God; and it is not any Natural Power or
Principle in us that can Engraft us into Christ, for Faith is the Engrafting
Grace, and that is the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. the Grace whereby the Just live,
Hab. 2.5. and whereby Christ dwells in our Hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. till then we are
dead, and have no Free Will to Good. It Is indeed sometimes called a Sleep, but
it is the Sleep of Death, Psalm. 13.3.

Argument 6. If Regeneration, or Recovery from the State of Degeneration, be a
Resurrection, then fallen Man has no Free Will to Good; but the former is
true, Ergo, the latter. The Antecedent is manifest, from John 5.25. Ephesians. 2.5.
and 5.14. Rev. 20.5. It requires as much Power as to raise Christ from the
dead, Ephesians. 1.19. 2 These. 1.11. Col. 2.12,13. 2 Pet. 1.3. Such an Energetical
Power as cannot be resisted; to raise up Christ and to work Faith in us
requires [(...)] the super-excellent Greatness of his Power, Ephesians. 1.19. Here
are three Gradations, Power, Greatness of Power, and superexcellent Greatness
of Power; and, as if that were too little, the Apostle adds other three,
[(...)] According to the working of his mighty Power; here is (...), which
signifies, not only a Working, but an effectual force in Working, this is the
fourth Gradation; then (...) (of (...), which signifies such strength as is in
the Arms of Valiant Men that can do great Exploits) is the fifth; Lastly, (...)
(a Power that can do all things) his Power, an Omnipotent Power; and surely had
there been an Internum Principium in us toward this great Work, or any
Free Will to Good, Paul would not have used all those Gradations, nor such a
lofty Emphatical Heap of most Divine and Significant Expressions: This Work of
Regeneration would not then have required, the effectual forcible Power of the
Valiant Arm of God, even such a Power as raised up Christ from the dead,
whereby he was declared to be the Son of God, Acts 2.24. Romans 1.4. Cadaver
fricatione nuda seipsum non resuscitat. I need say nothing of the raising up of
Ezekiel's dry Bones wherein the Spirit was the Favonian Wind, that wholly and
solely caused new Life in them: Nor of the raising of Lazarus out of the Grave,
which cost Christ a Prayer above all his other Miracles working, and Lazarus
contributed no thing to the Work.

Argument 7. If Moral Persuasion be altogether insufficient (of it self) to
recover Man from his fallen Estate, then fallen Man has no Free Will to good;
but the Antecedent is true, Ergo, The Consequent: This appears because then God
would be only a Moral Cause of Man's Conversion, but Man needs more from God,
and God therein is more to Man; therefore, etc. Then Faith would be (...), an
Easy Work, and not require such Mighty Power, as Ephesians. 1.19, etc. Causes are of
three Sorts, 1. A Moral Cause, which is Improperly and Metaphorically (only) a
Cause, because it produces not properly an Effect, only it proposes Arguments
to induce and persuade. 2. A Physical Cause, which really and truly produces
and Effect; this the Schools call an Effectual-Cause. 3. A Miraculous Cause, is
that which works above the Course of Nature in producing Effects. God in
Man's Conversion cannot be only a Moral Cause, for these Reasons.

Reason 1. Then the Working of Faith in us needs not the putting forth of any
such Energetical Power, as was in raising of Christ from the dead. God did more
to Christ, than Morally persuade him to come out of the Grave; and Christ did
more to the raising of Lazarus: Besides, as such like Swasions are (alone)
Ineffectual, so dead Carcasses are incapable of them alone; in Christ's saying
[ Lazarus come forth] there was a mighty Power went along with the Command:
Dixit and sactum est, God does not Verba dare sed rem. Reason 2. Moral
Persuasions cannot be sufficient to bring sorth supernatural Effects, Qualis
causa, tale causatum; as when a Child has an Apple held out by its Father to
come to him, the Child is only allured, but not enabled thereby to come; it is
not enough to persuade a Prisoner to come forth, but his Chains must be struck
off, and the Prison Doors must be opened, Acts 12.6,7,10. so must have a
Physical Cause also, Phil. 2.13. Reason 3. Yet Man is more than a Prisoner, and
stands therefore in need of a better Plaster for his Sore than a Moral
Swasion; which is not so much as a Removens prohibens (which is only a Causa
sine qua non, and so no proper Cause at all) for he is dead in sin, so must not
have only Gratiam excitantem et moraliter suadentem, but also Gratiam sanantem
et vivificantem, an healing and quickening Grace, which this can never do. Nemo
fortunoe suae faber est nifi subordinate. Reason 4. Then God has no greater
Influence in converting Man than Satan has in perverting him to his
Destruction; he has a persuading Slight, but no Enforcing Might; he may
solicit, but he cannot compel; Infirmus hostis est, qui non potest vincere,
nifi volentem, says Hierom, hence we are bid to resist him with peremptory
Negatives, and then he cannot touch us [ tactu qualitativo] with his deadly
touches: Now to ascribe no more Power to the Creator, than to his Creature
(Satan) is to narrow it below Divine Majesty, and to derogate exceedingly from
Omnipotency.
Argument 8. The Eighth Argument further illustrates this Truth, that more than
a Moral Swasion is necessary to recover fallen Man: if Christ be All in All [in
Matters of Salvation] to us, then Man is nothing in himself, as to that Work
and has not a Freewill to Good, so must stand in need of more than moral
Swasions; but the Antecedent is true, Col. 3.11. Christ is (...), Ergo, the
Consequent. This is manifest for these Reasons following.

Reason 1. Christ's first Work (in order to Salvation) is to bore the Ear,
which is stopped (like the Adders) to the Charms of the Charmer, Psalm. 58.4,5.
Christ gives the Understanding Ear, Deuteronomy. 29.4. Psalm 40.6. Job 36.10. Is^
50.4. This moral Persuasion cannot (alone) remove, we naturally reject the
Counsel of God, Luke 7.30. Reason 2. Christ opens not only the Ear, but also
the Heart, Acts 16.14. The Lord opened the Heart of Lydia, not she her own
Heart, which she might have done if she had a Freewill to Good; the Key of the
Heart (as does the Keys of the Heavens, of Hell, and of the Womb) hangs at
Christ's Girdle, He soutteth, and no Man can open; no, not our selves our own
Hearts: Much less will moral Swasion be effectual. Reason 3. Besides Christ
there is no Savior, but this Hypothesis makes Man a Co-savior with Christ; as
if there were an halfing of it 'twixt the Grace of Christ and the Will of Man,
and the latter dividing the Spoil with the former; yea, deserving the greater
share; for if Christ be only a Monitor, and persuade to Good, then Man's own
Will is the principal Author of its own Goodness, and he makes himself to
differ from others, has something that he received not at Conversion, 1 Cor.
4.7. and whereof to boast of before God, Romans 11.18. Swasion leaves the
admonished Will to its own Indifferency (not changing it at all) so Man becomes
his own Savior, not Christ; or however, not Christ only; how then is Christ
All in All? Then Christ is not our Creditor, but we are Debtors to Freewill.
Argument 9. The Ninth Argument (still adding more Luster and Light to the
former) is, If fallen Man must be drawn to Goodness, then has he no Free Will
to Good, and moral Swasion cannot be sufficient alone; but the former is true,
John 6.44. and 12.32. Cant. 1.3. Ergo, the latter. The Antecedent is proved,
Drawing is a Bringing of any thing out of its proper Course and Channel, by a
Violent and Over-pouring Influence from without, and not from an Innate Power
or Principle from within: Jet draws Straw, the Lodestone Iron, and the
Northpole the Sea-man's Compass, so the Sun the Heliotrope. It is not said [
Lead] but [ Draw] in Drawing there is less Will, and more Violence, than in
Leading; and though God draws us [ fortiter] strongly, yet he does it [
suaviter] sweetly: (...), says Chrysostom: As we are drawn, we have not a
Freewill to Gond, for then Adam had lost in his Understanding only, and not in
his Will: Yet are we Volunteers, Psalm. 110.3. not that Christ finds us so, but
makes us so, in the Day of his Power, and when he speaks to us with a strong
Hand, as Isa. 8.11. We are Naturally Haters of God, and at Enmity with him,
Romans 1.30. and 8.7. but Divine Grace does Violence to the Corrupt Qualities of
the Soul, and puts the Will on moving when its Corruptions are removed; the
Spirit gives a New Power, and then acts that Power to Good, so draws (as it
were, a Camel through the Eye of a Needle, Luke 18.25.) a Godhater to love him;
this is more then a bare Persuasion to a Stone to be warm, and to go out of its
place, for God takes away the Heart of Stone and gives an Heart of Flesh, Ezekiel.
36.26. which cannot hang on a mere Entreaty: Sccrater. said, He was but as a
Midwife to his Scholars (she helps forth the Birth already conceived) so he
drew forth that which was Naturally in them; but this is a begetting us anew in
Christ Jesus through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. and Christ finds nothing that is
Good in us, Romans 7.18 Quis trabitur (says Austin) August. cont 2 Ep. Pelag.
lib. 1. c. 19.
si iam volebat, et tamen venit nisi qui velit, etc. Non ut Homines (quod fieri
non potest) nolentes credant, sed ut ex nolentibus volentes fiant. God gives
the very Power of Coming to Christ. Man's Will is made pedissequa, but not
praevia; attending Grace, but not going before it, Co-operando persuit Deus
quod operando incepit, Austin. Grace is Dux and Comes, and the Will a
Subordinate Agent under Grace; and it being moved, afterward does move it self.

Argument 10. If the Soul of Man be passive in Effectual Vocation, then there
is in fallen Man no Free Will to good; but the former is true, Ergo, the
latter. The Truth of the Antecedent appears, The Spirit of Grace is compared to
a precious Liquor that is infused; and the called and chosen of God are styled
Vessels of Mercy, now a Vessel is a Passive Receiver of this precious Liquor
poured into it, Zach. 12.10. Romans 5.5. [(...)] poured out and infused into
God's Vessels, Romans 9.21,23. 2 Timothy 2.20,21. The Will of Man (in respect of
this first Reception of Grace, has neither Concourse nor Cooperation active,
but is actuated to an Obediential Subjection, and is made capable and apt to
receive Impression; as the Air is passive when it receives an Enlightening, as
Adam's Body was a passive Receiver of Life, when God inspired it thereinto,
Genesis 2.17. Though it was formed and Organized, yet was it lifeless and
breathless: And as the Soul of Nebuchadnczzir (when deprived of Reason)
received the Impression of the Agent (God Almighty) in causing his Reason to
return to him again; so in this Case, Christ infuses Grace into us against our
Wills, and it is an Hell to us to be brought from Hell, though it be an Hell to
us to stay, after God has opened our Eyes and touched our Hears: Corrupt
Nature cannot contribute any thing to destroy it self in its own Corruptions:
We are without Ability (in our selves) to put forth any Causal Virtue in Order
to such an Effect, and accordingly we have no Power to resist the Impression
and Effect which proceeds from a supernatural Cause: In the first Work the
Will moves not it self, but is only moved by God. The Will as a Creature must
obey its Creator; yet as a sinful, deprayed Will, it obeys not God willingly
till made willing; so it is not a Collateral Agent: The Water descends
Naturally, yet Ne detur vacuum it ascends. Man's Will is the Untamed Heiser, or
Wild Asses Colt; Christ the Rider tames it, and brings it to his Yoke. Nolie
est a Carne, vells a Spiritu. Luther.

Argument 11. To deny Grace, special Grace, and gracious Dispensations, is
abominable; but the Doctrine of Free will denies these, for they say, If a Man
improves his Naturals, God is bound to give him Spirituals; what is this bat a
turning Grace Non est gratia ullo modo, si non sit gratuita omni modo.
into Debt, and a Symbolizing with the Jesuits, Meritum de congruo, if not
condigno: And to say, That the Reason why one believes, and another does not
believe, is from the Cooperation of the Freewill of him that believes, is
quite to destroy special Grace peculiar to the Elect, Special Grace is
irresistible, for it is not two of equal force, but as Michael too hard for
Satan; so the stronger Man Christ too hard for the strong Man our own Will.
contrary to these Scriptures, John 6.37,45. and 12.39,40. and 14.17,22. Romans
8.14. 1 Cor. 1.23,24. 1 John 4.13. and many others: Neither can there be (if
this Hypothefis be granted) any gracious Dispensation, either in Respect of
Person, Place, Time, or Means; all which God freely makes choice of. As,

1. Of Person: He quickens whom he will, John 5.21. Romans 9.18. Then Wise Men
would be Evangeliz'd, nor the Poor and Foolish, for they have the best
understandings to guide their Freewilts.
The Heart of one Sinner melts like Wax before the Fire, and receives God's
Seal, while the Heart of another remains as unmovable as Marble, and as the
Rock that cannot be shaken, this is the work of Gracious Dispensation. 2. Of
the Place: No Child can choose the Place where to be begot or born in, nor We
for our Conversion; The Spirit blows where it lists, John 3.8. 3. Of the
Time: A Child cannot choose the Time of its Begetting or Birth, no more than of
the Place; so nor We of our New Birth: God may drop in Grace with Life, and
regenerate a Babe before it be brought forth, Luke 1.15. and yet that Saying
hold true, Christiani non nascuntur sed fiunt; and others may be cast into the
Womb of the New Birth when dropping out of the World, even at the Eleventh Hour
of the Day, as the Penitent Thief, Oh! who can order the Ways of Grace, and set
Bounds to the Spirit of God, in its Breathings on Man! 4. And of Means: Out of
the mouths of Babes God ordains Strength, Psalm. 8.2. The Iberians were
converted by a Woman, the likeliest Persons have not always Children, a Child
cannot choose its own Father, nor We who shall beget us to God: All these are
special Dispensations of God's Good Will to Men, and so depends not on the
Free Will of Man: Ergo,
Argument 12. The Twelsth Argument ab Incommodo, That which brings along with
it many Absurdities, may not be received, but the Doctrine of Free Will to Good
does so. Man's Will is the Principium quod, not the Principium quo; that is,
Grace. We must be renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, Ephesians. 4.23.


Absurd. 1. It makes Man the Proximate and Immediate Cause of his own
Salvation. 2. It puts Grace into Man's Power, not Man's Will under the Power of
Grace. 3. It robs God of that Honor, in making one to differ from another, and
ascribes it to Man. 4. It allows Man a Liberty of Boasting to God, saying, God,
I thank thee, that thou gave me Power to will (but that thou gave to Judas
as well as to me) but I thank my self for the Act of Willingness, yet I
received from God no more than Judas did. 5. It [ tantamount] exempts the
Creature from the Power of God, as if Man (like the Spider) could spin a Thread
out of his own Bowels, whereon to climb to Heaven, saying, Mihi soli debeo,
and as if he were bidden to do as he will. 6. It makes Man the Cause why God
wills this or that, so God must attend on the Will of Man, and not be
infallible in his Decrees, nor working all things according to the Counsel of
his own Will, Ephesians. 1.11. Psalm 115.3. and 135.6. 7. It supposes a Power of
Believing (in all the Blind Nations of the World) on Jesus Christ, of whom they
have not heard, Romans 10.14. but especially in those under the Gospel, contrary
to Deuteronomy. 20.4. and Mat. 13.11. 8. Then James lied in saying, (...), etc. Every
good Gift is from God, Jam. 1.17. If there be something in Man already before
Conversion, v. 18. 9. Then Paul was mistaken also, Romans 9.18, etc. who should
have said, It is of Man that wills and runs, and not of God that shows
mercy: They dare not give Potentiam credendi to Man, the Posse velle et ipsum
velle convertere est a Deo.
Objection 1. There is a Law writ in the Hearts of fallen Mankind, Romans 2.14.

Answer 1. Adam begat a Son in his own Image, Genesis 5.3. not only as a Man, but
as a Sinner; Generatus sequitur Naturam Generantis, That which is born of the
Flesh is Flesh, John 3.6. Job 14.4. The Originale Originans ( Adam's Sin)
brought forth Originale Originatum, Original Corruption in us, which spreads
over the whole Man, and puts the whole Frame out of Frame, so cannot do any
thing that accompanies Salvation; Man had Divine Wisdom to direct, and Divine
Wlllingness to follow that Direction, now nothing able to direct, nothing
willing to follow that Direction.
there is an Impotency in the Will of the Flesh; while we are Christless, we
are without Strength, Romans 5.6.

2. Those Relics in the Gentiles are sufficient only to leave them (...),
Romans 1.20. and may stir them up to External Work, as to Matter, but not as to
Form, either in the Mind or Manner of right Doing; all their Works are but
Splendida Peccata, being faulty Quoad foniem and quoad finem; Without Faith
it is not possible to please God, Heb. 11. 6.

3. The Devils have more Light than Men, yet are they altogether dead in Sin,
though They believe and tremble, Jam. 2.19. and confess Christ, etc. Luke 4.34.
Mark 1.24. They sin freely, yet cannot avoid it, but must sin; and though it be
necessary, yet it is Sin, and voluntary too.

Objection 2. Why is Man blamed for resisting the Spirit, Acts 7.51. Heb.
10.29. Mat. 23.37. if no Free Will?

Answer 1. They resisted the Outward Means (as is declared in the following
Words) not the Inward Work: As the Creature cannot hinder (nor further) his own
Creation, nor the Child his own Generation, nor the Dead Man his own
Resurrection, etc. nor Man his Conversion.

2. That resisting the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29. is the Sin against the
Holy Ghost; for which (he says) There is no Sacrifice: Yet that Grace they
resisted was not the Grace of Regeneration, Adoption, etc. peculiar to the
Elect, and will not Authorize the Arminian Universal Grace, 2 Pet. 2.21.

3. How often would I, Mat. 23.37. is only Voluntas Praecepti, an Inviting by
an Outward Calling. Jerusalem i. e. Her Rulers, believed not, yet many of her
Children were gathered to Christ; to wit, as many as Christ would, Voluntate
Propositi; the City is one Thing, and her Children another, this proves not the
Point.

4. It Is one Thing to resist, and another to overcome; the Latter is denied,
not the Former.

Objection 3. Why does God say, What could I do more to my Vineyard? Isa. 5.4.

Answer 1. God did enough in making Man upright, and if he has lost his
sufficient Grace, he must thank himself, and not blame God, who is not bound to
restore it. Man now has a Treacherous Heart inventing. Evil against God, and
against his own Soul.


2. This was said to Israel, a Type of the Church, God dealt not so with other
Nations, Psalm. 147.19.20. Acts 14.16. Ephesians. 2.12. this is far from Universal
Grace.

3. It Is only meant of External Helps, which the Prophet reckons; not a Warm
Sun, Good Air, fruitful Rain, Vital Juice, or Vegetative Faculty; those
signify Inward Grace.

4. Neither does he speak of Grace that God gives to particular Men peculiarly,
as saving Grace, the Power of believing, etc. but of that given to a whole
Nation altogether.

5. It cannot be said, God had done all he could strictly (though all they could
challenge) for he could have given them saving Grace, To will and to do, 2 Cor.
4.13. Acts 11.17, etc.

6. The Pagans, and the World that lies in Wickedness, is not God's Vineyard,
and have not sufficient Grace (wanting sufficient Means) much more their
Children, and so no Universal Grace.

Objection 4. Then God mocks in his Commands, if he would reap where he has
not sown.

Answer 1. See more of this in the 1 st. Point about Predestination in
Objection 3, 4.
God's Commands are the Rule of our Duty, not the Measure of our Ability: God
bids us make a New Heart, Ezekiel. 18. 31. yet promises to give it, Ezekiel. 36.26.
so Jer. 31.18. Deuteronomy. 10.16. with 30.6. We are bid work out our Salvation, but
with Power from God, Phil. 2.12,13.

2. God seriously declares in those Commands what is pleasing to himself, and
what is our Duty, and what he will work in his Elect, for the Election obtains
those Graces required; we do not learn in the Law what we are able to do, but
what we were able before the Fall.

3. Commands are upon Devils, which can do nothing else but sin, yet would it
not be sin, were they under no Command: Much more Unbelievers, that can
outwardly reform.

Objection 5. Man's Will cannot be determined ab extra, being a Self
determining Principle.

Answer 1. Irresistible Grace takes not away that Natural Liberty which the
Will has by Creation, but the Pravity of it only; knocking off its Fetters,
but not destroying its Nature; God gives not such an Insolency of Will, as to
will whether God will or no.

2. Man never enjoys his will so much, as when God's will over rules ours: If
Man can determine his own will, and not destroy the Liberty of it, much more
may God, who is the Maker of it, and Intimior Intimo nostro; the Watch-maker
can turn any Wheel. God can invincibly turn the Will without Violation to its
Natural Freedom, which was his own Gift.

3. It Is free in Natural and Civil Things, yea, and in Onward Acts of Spiritual
Things too, assisted with Common Grace; yet can it not do them in a Spiritual
Manner without the Assistance of Special Grace, nor any thing that immediately
accompanies Salvation.

4. To will is from Nature, to will well is from Grace; Spiritual Fruit must
spring from a Spiritual Root, Non ideo currit Rota ut Rotunda sit, sed quia
Rotunda; says Austin, most Elegantly.

Of Perseverance of the Saints.
HAving dispatched the Third and Fourth Point (which are Ejusdem farinoe, and
Congenial) touching Freewill in the Fallen Estate, and Effectual Vocation, or
Conversion to God: I come to the Fifth Point, to wit. The Perseverance of the
Saints. This is not (...), an idle Point.
The Position to be defended is this That True and Saving Grace cannot be
totally and finally lost: For the better Understanding of this the

First Enquiry is, What is this Saving Grace?

Answer 1. Negatively.

First, It is not the Grace of Nature, or the which is Natural, which is
Twofold.

(1.) In the pure Estate wherein this Free Spiritual Gift of Original
Righteousness was concreated with, and infused into the Soul so soo^ as it had
its Being in pure Nature; therefore it is called both Grace and Natural Grace.
(2.) In the fallen Estate, it is the Remainder of the Image of God (after the
Fall) in the Soul of Man, Romans 2.14,15. The Gentiles d^ by Nature, etc. this is
Gratia gratis data, but no^ Gratia gratum faciens: Nor,
Secondly, Is it Supernatural Common Grace which is called Supernatural, as not
attainabl^ by the Power of Nature or Free Will; and Common, as given to the
Elected and to the Non-elected: As Dexterity in Callings, (given by the Spirit
to Bezaleel and Aholiab) superficial Illuminations, (given to Hypocrites)
Ministerial Gifts, (given to Judas) Delight in hearing the Word, (as the stony
Ground and Herod) These Tastes of Heavenly Things are given to Servants as well
as to Sons, so differs from Saving Grace.

1. In the Subject, which is proper and peculiar to the Elect only, and is no
wider than Election it self. 2. In the Original, Common Grace flows from Christ
as a Redeemer, but not as their Redeemer; and from the Spirit of Christ
assisting, but not indwelling. 3. In the Efficacy, Common Grace may qualify
for a common Profession, where there is a Form of Knowledge, Romans 2.20. and a
Form of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. which neither does renew the Heart, nor raise it
up above a common Frame, yet may do much for God (with the stony Ground) and
suffer much for God (with the thorny Ground) and yet not be Special Grace,
Which the World cannot receive, John 14.17. and which revives and reigns so
that Sin cannot have Dominion, Romans 6.14. Gifts are but as dead Graces, but
Graces are living Gifts. 4. In the Property or Nature, Common Grace is but the
Ornament, not the Substance of a Christian; Gifts indeed may beautify Grace,
but Grace only sanctifies Gifts; as the Gold beautified the Temple, but it was
the Temple that sanctified the Gold, Mat. 23. 17. for the Eminency of Gifts,
and the Prevalency of Sin, a Form of Godliness and the Power of Sin may consist
together. 5. In their Duration: Common Grace (we acknowledge) may wither away,
it is not [(...)] a Gift that God repents not of, as that Gift of Effectual
Calling is, Romans 11.29, whereas the least Drop of Saving Grace shall grow to a
River, but the greatest Flood of Spiritual Gifts may decay to less than a Drop;
thus the Spirit (in Gifts of Prowess and Government) departed from Saul, 1 Samuel
16.14. and Ministerial Gifts (as the Right Arm and Right Eye) may be withered
up, Zecb. 11.17. this may be lost. 6 In the Event and Issue at last: Common
Grace aggravates Condemnation; as a sinking Ship, the more it is laden with
Gold, the deeper it sinks: So the more Men are laden with Gifts (without Grace)
the deeper they sink into Hell; as a Harlot may have Children, but no Credit
nor Comfort of them, because they are Bastards. So Bastard Graces (which Christ
begets not in us) such as false Hope, Faith, Love, etc. (if we be not married
to Christ) never ends in Joy: Parelii, or Mock Suns, as they continue not in
the Cloud, so they give no true Light of themselves; Verisimilia are not Vera:
This is not Childrens Bread, but Crumbs falling to those under the Table. Our
purblind Souls had need say therefore (with blind Isaac) Com^ near, my Son,
that I may feel thee, for the Voi^ may be Jacob's, yet the rough Hand may be
Esau's. W^ may bless our selves with Thoughts of embracin beautiful Rachel (as
Jacob did) when in the Morning (of the Resurrection) it proves but ^lear Eyed
Leah, Jam. 1.26.
Thirdly, Supernatural Saving Grace, which is the Sanctification of the Spirit,
Renewing in us the Image of God, and Guiding and Strengthening us to Obedience,
and in Obedience to the End, Romans 6.14. 2 Cor. 12.9. Acts 14.26. 1 Cor. 15.10,
etc. This is the Effectual Working of the Spirit of God on the Hearts of the
Elect, to quicken them when dead in Sin, and to give to them a certain
continued Connection of all Spiritual Blessings, which manages them onward even
to a State of Glory, Romans 8.30. Col. 1.12. Insomuch that Sanctificatio est
Incboata glorisicatio: The Effects of it does accompany Salvation, being
permanent Effects, both on the Soul, in Justification, Adoption; and in the
Soul, in Vocation, Sanctification, Perseverance to Glorification: This Grace
differs not from Glory in Kind, but in Degree: Grace is Glory Militant, as
Glory is Grace Triumphant; as Glory is Grace In Patria, so Grace is Glory In
Via ad Patriam, therefore it is called The Riches of his Glory; Romans 9.23. As it
is the most Glorious Creature of the Father of Lights flowing immediately from
his blessed Face: This is that Grace which cannot be totally and finally lost;
fail it may, but so fall it cannot, 2 Pet. 1.10.

Enquiry 2. What is it to fall Totally and Finally?

Answer 1. To fall totally is, to have Grace together dead in us, both in the
Act and in the Habit; no Life either in Branches, Bole or Root; no Seed
remaining in us, nor Root of the Matter.

2. Finally to fall, is never to rise again, never to recover by Repentance
(that Secund a post Naufragium Tabula) but to dye in Sin unrepented of,
unpardoned.

Enquiry 3. What Arguments or Reasons be there, to evidence that this special
saving Grace cannot be Totally and Finally lost?

Answer. The Reasons follow, why the Chosen of God cannot totally and finally
fall away from Grace.

Argument 1. The first Argument is taken from God the Father: If the Love of
the Father to his Chosen Ones be a Love unchangeable, then his chosen Ones
cannot totally and finally fail away: But the Antecedent is true, John 16.27.
and 13.1. Jer. 31.3. Jam. 1.17. John 10.29. Neither the Force nor Fraud of Hell
can prevail against the Father's Electing Love, which runs parallel with the
longest Line of Eternity; therefore the Consequence must be true also: This is
further illustrated, God is Love, 1 John 4.8. Then Everlasting Love must needs
flow from an Everliving God: Hence Paul (having spoken of some Apostates fallen
away) comforts the weak Minds of Believers* saying, that their Standing is
firm, because (...) Election, 2 Timothy 2.21. this he compares to (...) Foundation
and to a Seal (two Things of greate^ Validity and Security) they stand as upon
(...) stable Rock and Mountain of Brass, so cannot totally and finally fall;
for the Father is not inconstant in his Love, to love to Day, and hate to
Morrow.

Argument 2. The Second Argument is taken from God the Son in his Redeeming
Love (as from God the Father in his Electing Love) which is Unalterable also;
for thereby all the Members of Christ [ Agglutinantur] are glewed into Christ
their Head, 1 Cor. 6.17. and None ^an pluck them out of Christ's hands, John
10.28. they shall never perish. No Principalities nor Powers, etc. shall be
able to separate them from the Love ^f God in Christ, Romans 8.38. And the Gates
of Hell cannot prevail against it, Mat. 16.18. If one Member may be broke off
from Christ, then all may be (one having no more Privilege than another, in
respect of their State and Standing) ^o Christ may be supposed (upon this
Hypothesis) to be an Head without a Body, or any Members; and Christ also might
have dyed in ^ain; both which are grossly absurd. Besides, ^he Certainty of this
Redemption appears fur^her; Inasmuch as Christ (1 st.) purchased Perseverance
for his, if he purchased for them all spiritual Blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. then this
great Blessing of Perseverance, and Christ will not lose one of his purchased
Inheritance, the (...), 1 Pet. 2.9. (2 dly.) He prayed for it, Luke 22.32. that
Peter's Faith should not fail, and that all his Disciples should be kept from
Evil, John 17.15. yea, and all Believers, ver. 20. and what Christ prays for,
he is always heard therein, Joh. 11.41,42. (3 dly.) Christ promises it, John
6.37. That he will in no wise cast Believers out after they come in unto him,
Mat. 16.18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against them, 2 Samuel 7.14,15.
He will not utterly withdraw his Mercy from them under their severest
Correction, Psalm. 89.31. but his Faithfulness shall not fail toward them, Isa.
54.8,10. (4 thly.) He performs it also to all those that the Father has given
him, John 17.12. and loses not one of them, John 6.39. and 13.1. 1 Cor. 1.8.
Ephesians. 5.23. He is a Savior to all Parts of the Body, Saints are in Christ's
hands, Rev. 1.16. and it is as easy to pluck a Star out of Heaven, as to pluck
a Saint out of Christ's Hands, John 10.28. Jude 1. 1 Timothy 1.12. 1 Pet. 1.5.

Argument 3. The Third Argument is taken from God the Holy Ghost, in his
Sanctification, -- Love. If the Operation of the Spirit on the Hearts of
Believers be a sure and certain Operation, then true Believers cannot totally
and finally fall away: But the Antecedent is true, Ergo, The Consequent. The
Truth of the Antecedent appears, in that the Spirit's Operation is compared in
Scripture. First, To an Earnest. Secondly, To a Seal. Thirdly, To a Witness.


First, To an Earnest: 2 Cor. 5.5. It Is the Earnest Penny of our Salvation, not
the Pawn or Pledge, which is to be returned again [ Pignus redditur, Arrha
retinetur. Jerome.] The Earnest part of the Bargain, and the first Fruits of
Heaven which we have here In Pretio, Promissis et in Primicijs: Now the Earnest
would quite be lost, if the Bargain of Salvation stand not and he that has the
Earnest be not saved; and if such a One be damned, he carries the Earnest of
the Spirit along with him into Hell, which must needs be absurd.

Secondly, To a Seal: Assurance is God's Seal as Faith is our Seal, John 3.33.
Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30. They first believed, and then were sealed, i. e. fully
assured: God honors our sealing to his Truth, by his sealing with his Spirit;
as the Earnest makes the Bargain, so the Seal ratifies and confirms it; and the
Broad Seal of Heaven must needs be more unalterable than that of the Medes and
Persians.

Thirdly, To a Witness: 1 John 5.10. and such a Witness as cannot be excepted
against, The Spirit of Truth, and this Witness abides for ever in the Elect,
John 14.16. 1 John 2.27. and 3.9. so called an Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. a
Witness that cannot dye nor lie; so that the Temple of the Holy Ghost cannot
become an Habitation of Devils; this would make Satan rejoice and insult over
God (as if stronger than he) could he dispossess him, as he is often dispossessed
by him, Luke 11.21,22.

Argument 4. The Fourth Argument is taken from Spiritual Enemies: If no
Spiritual Enemy can prevail against a true Believer totally and sinally, then a
true Believer cannot totally and finally fall away: But the Antecedent is true,
Ergo etc.

1. Satan cannot make Believers fall so, for that Wicked One cannot touch them
[ tactu qualitativo] with any of his deadly Touches, 1 John 5.18. but God
treads him under their feet, Romans 16.20. The Seed of the Serpent may nibble at
the Heels of the Seed of the Woman, but cannot mortally wound the Heart, Genesis
3.15. Christ takes his Armor from him, Luke 11.21. and destroys his Works,
Heb. 2.14. Christ in them (the Hope of Glory) is stronger than he that is in
the World, 1 John 4.4. 2. Not the World, for Christ gives them Faith to conquer
the World, 1 John 5.4. and Overcomes the World for them in himself, John 16.33.
and makes them Kings unto God, viz. gives them a Royal Spirit to live above the
Frowns and Flatteries of the World: He makes them to be higher-Region-Men,
above all Storms, Prove. 15.24. having the Moon (the Emblem of the World) and
All things under their feet, Psalm. 8.6,7,8. Rev. 12.1. 3. Nor their fleshly
Lusts, which have not Dominion over those that are under Grace, Romans 6.14. The
Army of the Spirit wars against them, Cant. 6.13. Gal. 5.17. so that they
cannot be as sinful as sometime they would, and though a Troop overcome God
sometimes ( coming about him like Bees, as David's Phrase is) yet Gad overcomes
at last, Genesis 49. 18. and they become More than Conquerors (to wit, Triumphers,
(...)) over all their Enemies, Romans 8.35. 2 Cor. 2.14. for no Created Power can
prevail against them, Romans 8.38.
Argument 5. The Fifth Argument is taken from the Nature of Saintship: If
Saintship be a Service, Subjection, Sonship and Marriage, then Saints cannot
fall away totally and finally: But the Antecedent is true, Ergo, etc. For,

1. It is a Service: The Service of God transcends all other Services, Men take
a Servant for a Year, and an Apprentice for Seven Years, but our Heavenly
Master for Term of Life, Luke 1.74,75. We are to serve God in Holiness and
Righteousness all the Days of our Lives; so that a Servant of God is like the
Jewish Servant that was bored through the Ear, in Token of his abiding there for
ever, Deuteronomy. 15.17. Religion (of Religando) is a perpetual Obligation. 2. It Is a
Subjection: It sets up God to be our King, Mal. 1.14. Psalm. 48.2. Mat. 5.35.
and our Allegiance is for Life, it cannot be disclaimed: If we be born
Subjects, we must dye Subjects to this great King, for there is no flying out
of his Territories; the Law will pass upon us if we disown it, Luke 19.27. 3.
It Is a Sonship: If the two former Similitudes will not Currere quatuor
Pedibus, and quadrare in Omnibus; because a Servant may be at Liberty when his
Time is expired, and a Subject may change his Sovereign by removing out of his
Native Country; yet a Son cannot change his Father, and he Abides in the House
for ever, John 8 35. Now as God has begot us of his own Will by the Spirit of
Regeneration, he is our Father, Mal. 1.6. Jer. 31.9. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Gal. 3.26.
hence called The Children of God. 4. It Is a Marriage-state, and that is for
Life too; Hos. 2.19. Isa. 54.5. Rev. 19.7. Mat. 22.2. 2 Cor. 11.2. and Romans
7.4. and in this state God hates putting away, Mal. 2.16.
Argument 6. The Sixth Argument is taken from the Saints themselves: If their
Names be written in Heaven, if they be kept for Heaven by the Power of God, as
well as Heaven is kept for them; and if they be compared to Things that fade
not nor fail, then they cannot totally and finally fall: But the former is
true, Ergo, the latter. That it is so, appears,

1. Their Names are writ in Heaven, Phil. 4.3. Dan. 12.1. Luke 10.20. and to be
enrolled in the Book of Life must needs bold out Perseverance, for there is no
Blotting or Blurring of that Book; Satan cannot (for it is out of his reach) and
God will not, for then his Work would not be Perfect and Glorious, if it should
admit of Blottings; but this is spoken to in the first Point. 2. Saints are
kept as in a double Garrison [(...)] or, as with a Guard, Heaven for them, and
they for Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4,5. Christ is their Lord Keeper, and if God had
intended the Loss of one Saint, he would not have given Christ all Power in
Heaven and Earth (so that nothing can over-match Christ) Mat. 11.27. to
undertake for his Children, He saves them to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25. 3. They
are compared to a Tree that fades not, Psalm. 1.2. to a Cedar in Lebanon, Psalm.
92.12. Hos. 14.5. to Mount Sion that cannot be moved, Psalm. 125.1. to an House
built on a Rod, Mat. 7.24. Though they fall, God raises them up, Psalm. 37.24.
Prove. 24.16. is with them in their Old Age, Isa. 46.4. yea, unto Death, Psalm.
48. list; so cannot totally and finally fall.
Argument 7. The Seventh Argument is taken from the Unchangeableness of the
Covenant of Grace, therefore, etc. this Enthymema proves it. That the Covenant
is unchangeable is proved thus, That which stands upon two Unchangeable
Bottoms, made betwixt two Unchangeable Persons, and ratified before an
Unchangeable Witness, must be Unchangeable it self; but the Covenant of Grace
is so, therefore, etc.

First, It stands upon two Unchangeable Bottoms (as the Assumption affirms) to
wit, the Word and Oath of God, Heb. 6.17,18. 1. God's Word is as Gold purified,
which ( Chemists say) will lose nothing of its Weight, though cast a thousand
Times into the Fire; the bare Word of an Honest Man ( That will not lie, Isa.
63.8.) is as good (we say) as a Bond; how much more the Word of that God of
Truth that cannot lie. Much more, 2. When it is confirmed with an Oath, when
God swears by his Holiness, that he will not alter the Thing that is gone out
of his Lips.

Secondly, It Is made between two Unchangeable Persons, Mal. 3.5. Heb. 13.8. In
this Covenant there is a Mutual Stipulation, God the Father covenants to give
to Christ a People, both Jews and Gentiles, Psalm. 2.8. Isa. 49.6. John
17.6,7,9,10,12,24. God the Son confederates to take Man's Nature upon him, and
shed so much Blood, Tears and Prayers for us, Psalm. 40.6,7. Heb. 10.5,7. Ephesians.
5.26,27. hence it is called the Blood of the Covenant.

Thirdly, It Is ratified before an Unchangeable Witness, to wit, the Holy Ghost,
There be three that bear Witness in Heaven, 1 John 5.7. Indeed the Father and
the Son are their own Witnesses, John 5.32,36,37. yet the Holy Ghost is the
Witness of that Stipulation betwixt them, as Christ has a greater Witness than
that of Man, so has the Covenant, even the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. as
Eternal, so Unchangeable; thus the Covenant is called Everlasting, Heb. 13.20.
Isa. 54.8,10. Jer. 32.38,40. The sure mercies of David, Isa. 55.3. Sure on
God's part, who cannot tail in his good Will to the Elect, and sure on their
part too; who shall have no Will to depart from God. This on Man's part is
covenanted for, as well as that on God's part; therefore, though the Covenant
permits a Fall, yet it always ensures Repentance after the Fall, as in David
and Peter, etc. so the Falls of the Elect cannot be Total and Final. The
Covenant does Absolutely promise the Grace of Perseverance, and all things that
accompany Salvation to the Elect, even to the End of their Lives.

Argument 8. The Eighth Argument is taken from the Nature of Saving Grace: If
saving Grace be of a permanent Nature and not subject to Corruption; then the
Elect cannot fall from it totally and finally; but the Antecedent is true,
Ergo, etc. The Truth of the Antecedent appears, insomuch as it is called a Seed
remaining in those that are born of God, 1 John 3.9. an Immortal Seed, 1 Pet.
1.23. which abides in us for ever; Christ never dies in his People, no more
then he does (or can do) at the Right Hand of God; John 14.16. and the Joy of
it none can take from us, John 16.22. Grace never differs from it self (says
One) though a Gracious Man does from himself; this Fire burns always on God's
Altar, Levit. 6.12. Corresponding with this is the Vestal Fire of the Poets,
which the Vestal Virgins (lighted first from the Sun) kept alive in its place
Night and Day: And if at any time it be covered up under Ashes, we are bid
[(...)] to stir up the sparkles again, 2 Timothy 1.6. Gratia in Electorum Cordibus
inextinguibilis manet, says the Father. Habitus non amittitur, Actus
intermittur, Gradus autem remittitur, is the Distinction in the Schools: The
plenary Habits of saving Grace cannot be lost, the Acts and Operations of it
may admit (though not an utter Loss, yet) an Intermission, as in Sleep we lose
not the Faculty but the Use of Sense; and in Drunkenness (or in some
transporting Passion) Men lose not the Faculty, but the Use of Reason: Lastly,
Degrees and Measures of Grace (formerly attained to) may be lost, as Rev. 2.4.
[ Non amisit ipsam Charitatem, sed Charitatis fervore aliquid remisit] He had
not lost the Habit, or wholly the Exercise of that Grace, but only that Vigor
and Heat that once appeared in him.

Argument 9. The Ninth Argument is taken from the Type of a True Christian, to
wit, the ^elite that was not to alienate his Inheritance in the Land of
Promise, Lev. 25.23,24. If this were so in the Type, then must it hold true
also in the Antitype; Naboth an Example, 1 Kings 21.3.
to wit that a true Christian cannot alienate his Inheritance in Heaven: Now
the Deeds concerning this Inheritance are written, sealed, and Possession is
given accordingly both by way of Seisin, in part given Here in this Life, and
in part respited till Hereafter, Jer. 34.40. [ I will put my fear in their
Hearts] there is Possission of the state of Grace [ That they shall not depart
from me] there is the res^ed Estate of Glory, and this state of Reversion is
put into Christ's Hands for us as a Feoffee in Trust, 2 Timothy 1.12. [(...)] He
is able to keep the Depositum (though we be not) against that Day: We might
forfeit all, as Adam did, and we in him; Christ is not only our Goel, or Near
Kinsman, to redeem our Mortgaged Heaven for us, but he is our Feoffee in Trust
also, to keep Heaven for Us, and Us for Heaven; and he abides Faithful, 2 Timothy
2.13. both in Drawing, that we should come to him; and in Holding, that we
should not depart from him; so as not to sin unto Death, but be saved to the
Uttermost, Heb. 7.25. for he is the Supervison of his own Will, himself seeing
all his Legacies bestowed according to it, Heb. 9.15.

Argument 10. The Tenth Argument is taken from the contrary: If those that fall
totally and finally be not (nor ever were) true Believers, then it follows (by
the Rule of Contraries) that such as are true Believers cannot do so: But the
Antecedent is true, Ergo, etc. the Truth of the Antecedent appears from John
8.31. They are only Christ's true Disciples that continue in his Word, Non
quaeruntur in Christianis Initia, sed finis. Jerome. [(...)] That which is but
almost done, is not done, Basil. Such as wholly fall away have but the
Flashings of a Temporary Faith, which (like a Land-Flood) fills the Country
with Innundations, yet at last comes to Nothing: From 1 John 2.19. They went
out from us, because they were not of us: They were no more of the Church then
Wens and Botches be of the Body: All true Believers continue to the End with
the Church, Holding fast the Confidence firm unto the End, Heb. 3.6,14. Those
are God's House and Partakers of Christ indeed, and they only.

Argument 11. The Eleventh Argument is taken from the Subject of Prayer.
Whatsoever true believers ask of God, in the Name of Christ, according to his
will, shall certainly be obtained; but they ask of God in the Name of Christ
the Grace of Perseverance; therefore, etc. The Proposition is proved from John
14.13,14. and 16.23. and 1 John 5.14,15. [ Whatsoever and Any Thing] are
Comprehensive Expressions: The Assumption is Manifest from the constant
petition of every praying Soul [ Lead me not into temptation, but deliver me
from Evil] daily perseverance in Grace is begged therein: Not to be left in
temptation but to be delivered from it, Gods promises are the ground of our
Prayers: he promises [(...), etc.] God is faithful and will not suffer us to
be Tempted above what we are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. The seed of Jacob never Seeks
the Lord in Vain, Isa. 45.19.

Argument 12. The Twelsth Argument is taken from Testimony both of Scriptures
and Fathers: 1. Scripture-Testimony. Some have Computed them to 600, as Dr.
Moulin, these may suffice. Mat. 24.24. Romans 11.29. and 16.25. John 10.28,29.
Luke 22.32. Romans 8.30,38. 1 John 2.19,27. 2 Pet. 1.3,10. 2 Cor. 1.21,22. Ephesians.
4.30 etc. 2. Testimony of Fathers. Qui facit bonos, facit perseverare in bone,
Austin. Tdlis est Dei Timor in Cordibus Piorum ut Deo perseveranter adhareant
idem: Quos Charitas Christi Complectitur, facit ei Inseparabiles, et dona
Vocationis (to wit Effectual) Non rescindir nec revocat Deus, Ambrose. Proprium
est sidei, quod nunquam penitus deturbatur, Chrysostom Translated Fides vera
est perpetua, et ideo perpetua quia vera: Luther. Fides concuti potess non
excuti, sauciari, non occidi aut tonitus amditti, Bucer. Cum multis alijs, etc.

Objection 1. To teach, that Grace cannot be lost, will beget Looseness in
Professors.

Answer 1. Grace must be considered either in its (...), or in its (...); Being
or Wellbeing of it. There is Grace that is certain, and the feeling of Grace
that is uncertain.
It Is either Radical and Fundamental, tending to the Being of a Saint, as
Faith, Hope and Love: Or Secondary, flowing from these for his Wellbeing only;
as Joy of Faith, Confidence of Hope, Zeal and Fervency of Love; these are the
Luster and Radiancy of the Radical; the Beams of the Sun, as those the Body of
it; the Leaves of the Trees, as those the Sap and Substance; the Back of Steel,
that may be put on the Bow or taken off, as the former are the Bow it self: The
Latter we may lose, and perhaps irrecoverably, Psalm. 51.12. not so the Former,
which like the Good House-wife's Candle never goes out, Prove. 31.18. The Root
Remains though Reins be Consumed, Job 19.27,28. It Is a well of Water springing
up to Everlasting Life, John 4.14. and 7.38,39.

2. There is a Divine Purpose to be holy even to the End; this is a Law that is
written in every renewed Will, and is always present according to the Apostle's
Phrase. 2 dly, There is a Divine Performance or Prosecution of this Purpose,
this is not always sound in a Gracious Heart, Romans 7.18. This ebbs and flows
according to the Spirit's Influence on us: Modo intenditur, modo remittitur;
for our Life is not hid in our selves, but it is Hid with Christ in God, Col.
3.3. this requires our daily Dependence on his Spirit, Phil. 1.6. and 2.13. and
4.13. In the practick Part a partial Decay may befall our Judgments (as in the
bewitched Galanians, Gal. 3.1.) and our Affections (as in the cooling
Ephesians, Rev. 2. 4.) Christ's Spouse may fall asleep in the Abatement of her
Acts, yet her Heart awakes, Cant. 5.2. Grace seems to be lost when it is not so
indeed, some have sought for that they have had in their Hands, so Mary did
Christ.

3. The Sun may be Eclipsed, yet wade out of it into his former Luster; the
Tree may lose all its Leaves and Fruit in Winter, yet have fresh Budding, at
Spring; the Sea may ebb and retire from its Banks, ye the next Tide return to
them again: The Babe may live, though it spring not always in the Womb. uzziah
by his Leprosy lost his Jus aptitudinale to his Crown and Kingdom, but not his
Jus Haereditarium: Nebuchadnezzar, when deposed, was as a Tree that is lopped,
yet his Root springs up again in his returning to the Throne. The Romans (faith
the Historian) lost several Battles, but never any War: Israel flies once and
twice before their Enemies, yet conquer they the Land of Promise. A Troop
overcomes Gad, yet Gad overcomes at last, Genesis 49.19. Hot Water has a
Principle in it self to reduce it (when removed from the Fire) to its natural
Coldness: Thus some Saints may be (...), as Phil. 2.27. but not (...), as John
11.14. They may fall as Mephibosheth to lame them, and as Eutichus to hurt
them, but not as Eli to kill them. That is great Displeasure where such a Rout
is, as admits of no raliying.

4. Sin make a Forfeiture of all into God's Hands, and he might make a Seizure
if he pleased; as two Tenants for Non-payment of Rent forfeit their Leases, and
their Landlord may seize on the one, and not on the other pro arbitrio: We
incur Divine Displeasure (in every Act of Sin) Demeritorie, though not
effective; and yet though God do not disinherit us according to our Demerit,
nor blot us out of the Book of Life, yet does he withdraw his Favor, and
imbitter all our Comforts; as to Peter, Mat. 26.75. he makes Relations (that
should be Comforts) to become Scourges to us; as to David, 2 Samuel 12.11. He may
fill us with Anguish, Psalm. 38.3,4. which are strong and sufficient Curbs to
any more new Out-bursts from God; seeing the Evil we smart under, after Sin, is
commensurate to the Pleasure found in Sin: Could David have foreseen the Evil
Consequences of his Sin (which Nathan foretold him of) he might have said to
his Sin, A dear bought Sin thou art like to be to me: Yea, sometimes (as need
is) God adds Apprehensions of Eternal Wrath, Psalm 88.6,7. without any Hope of
being eased: Upon these Considerations this Doctrine begets no Looseness in any
of the Reformed Churches.

Objection 2. Some suffer Shipwreck, of Faith and Conscience, the Prodigal (a
Child) yet dead in sin.

Answer 1. That Scripture 1 Timothy 1.19. holds out no more than what is granted,
that as a false Faith may be lost in the whole, so a true Faith may be lost in
part; though a Shipwreck be sustained, yet there is Secunda post Naufragium
Tabula, as in Acts 27. no Life lost.

2. That of the Prodigal is but a Parable, and Dicta Symbolica non sunt
Argumentativa; It may illustrate, but cannot proves besides, he was but a lost
and dead Son in his Father's Account only, and seemingly in his own: So God's
Children may (in their own Sense and in the Opinion of others) seem lost, yet
truly and indeed not be so.

3. If one cease to be a Son, because he commits Sin, then Saints, as often as
they sin, so often are they out of Son ship, and liable to Death Eternal, the
Wages of Sin, and so can have neither Certainty nor Comfort in their Estate;
unless it could be shown what Sins rend this Relation, and what not; so come to
the Popish Notion of Mortal and Venial Sins.

Objection 3. Angels and Adam did fall from Grace, Ergo, etc.

Answer 1. That Grace which was Creationlove was loseable; but that which flows
from Redemption-love is not so: Neither Angels nor Adam were under the Grace of
the New Testament, nor were they righteous by Faith in Christ, nor were they at
all justified, because they did not perform the Condition required, that they
might be justified before God.

2. The Case is altered now in the New Covenant made with the Elect (both Men
and Angels) they stood not by a Mediator, as Saints do now: Neither did Christ
pray for them, as in John 17.15,20. Luke 22.32. nor promise to them, that The
Gates of Hell should not prevail against them; as Mat. 16.18.

3. The Example of Angels is Nihil ad Rbombum, for the [(...)] or Question, i^
concerning Men; nor is that of Adam to the Point, for he had not that
Evangelical Justifying Faith, which (we say) cannot be utterly lost.

Objection 4. Saul, Judas and Esau lost Grace. Ergo,

Answer 1. They could not lose what they never had, what they had were only
Illuminations, and such as Balaam (the Sorcerer) had: We grant that Common
Grace is loseable, Gratia gratis datae sunt amissibiles.

2. The Romanists in the Vulgar Latin, read 1 Samuel 9.2. concerning Saul, that
he was Bonus et Electus; yet their own Vatablus reads [ Bachur and Tob] as we
do; A Choice Young Man and a Goodly; for Grace consists not in the Beauty of
the Body but of Soul.

3. Judas was only Elected to the Apostleship (not to Salvation) and that by
one who knew how to make good Use of Evil Men, even of Vessels of Dishonor in
his Household.

4. Who can say that Profane Esau (so he is branded) ever had a true Justifying
Faith?

Objection 5. David and Peter fell totally, and Solomon finally. Ergo, etc.

Answer 1. They all fell foully, yet none of them finally, because they all
repented, and are called Holy Men of God 2 Pet. 1.21. ^y the Holy Ghost:
Neither did they fall to^lly, because that Grace remained in them, by which
they repented: Thus where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound.

2. That Solomon fell not finally, appears, (1.) In being called [ Jedidiah]
Beloved of God, 2 Samuel 12.24,25. which is not a Name given to any Reprobate. A
Seal, though dim and defaced, will pass in Acts of Record, so Evidences for
Heaven.
(2.) He is of the Holy Prophets, that Sits down in the Kingdom of God, Luke
13.28. (3.) He was a Type of Christ, so never was any Reprobate. (4.) God took
not his Mercy clean from him, 2 Samuel 7.14,15. (5) Ecclesiastes is his Book of
Repentance, and never any that repented could perish, Luke 13.3. (6.) Koheleth
signifies his being joined again to the Church by Repentance, which is the
Hebrew Word for Ecclesiastes; [Kohelleth Nephesh] A Soul added to the
Congregation.

3. Their own Cornelius a Lapide says, Petrus non perdidit fidem peccato suo.
So that Jesuit answers Bellarmine, yea, he answers himself accordingly, lib.
4. cap 4. Lest Peter's Fall should cut off the Entail of the Pope's
Inheritance; to say nothing of David, who writ so many Penitential Psalms.

Objection 6. Heb. 6.5. and 10.20,26. Ezekiel 18.24,26. proves a Falling from
Grace.

Answer 1. Suppositio nil ponit in esse, suppose Saints should do so, this
proves not that they will or may do so; there may be a Supposin^ Quod non est
Supponendum. As for Ezekiel. 8.24. it (...) to be understood of Hypocrites, Ezekiel.
3.20. and 3^ 12,13.

2. It Is spoke Heb. 6.10, etc. of such as only taste, but digest not; that have
their Minds informed, not their Hearts reformed; sactified in Profession, not
in Power; that had Fidem Dogmaticam, not Salvisicam.

3. It Is spoke of that Sin unto Death (for which, There is no Sacrifice) from
Devilish Malice, not Humane Frailty; Saints can never thus sin to waste
Conscience unto Death.

Objection 7. Saints may lose Grace totally, but not finally.

Answer 1. As Christ once dead, dies no more: So in his Members, the Life of
Grace cannot dye totally, ut supra, Romans 6.8,9. The Seed remains. 1 Cor. 5.5.
That his Spirit might be saved, that remained still in him, though foully fallen;
as Paul says of Eutichus [ He is not dead] Acts 10.9. When Peter repented, Non
novum infulit habitum sed suscitavit.

2. Then there must be a new Engrafting into Christ, and a Renewing of Baptism
as often as this is done; Faith is but once given to the Saints, Jude 3. as we
are but once born, so but once born again.

3. Those Saints may fall so, as to lose Jus ad Rem, yet not Jus in Re; the
Spirit blows upon the Sparks that lurk under the Ashes of Sin.

Objection 8. Then to what purpose be Admonitions? etc. It destroys Humility,
etc.

Answer 1. None say Saints cannot sin, save that unto Death, 1 John 1.8,9. with
3.9. so Useful enough.

2. He was not proud, that said, God will deliver me from every Evil Work, 2 Timothy 4.18. Romans 8.38.

3. But rather those that boast of having sufficient Grace, both in Converting
and Confirming Work.

FINIS.

