A New PROPHECY OF Several strange and wonderful Revolutions that shall happen
to the Kingdom of ENGLAND in or about an Hundred Years hence.
To a New Playhouse Tune.
I.
ALL you that can find Ears, and you that have None,
(But not to mistake me, I mean that have One)
Come listen awhile, and l'le tell you a Tale
Which with Jugler's Knot, you shall have by Retail;
And therefore I hope it will not give Offense,
Since they are all to be over an Hundred Years hence.
II.
With drooping Whitefryers we then shall begin,
Where Wit now does multiply as does their Sin;
For it is so increased that We never can fail
Of a Dozen of Wits, for a Doz'n of Ale.
By the Votes it is plain that they must pack thence,
And that long before Half an hundred Years hence.
III.
To Lewis le Grand we now find every Widgeon
From cheating all Mankind, to fly for Religion;
All Martyrs they will bellow, Alsatia's their own,
And they will get them both when James gets a Crown;
All Which, if we live, we shall see to commence
But a few days before an Hundred Years hence.
IV.
But I doubt long before they will all be forgotten,
And James with his Beggarly Crew will lie rotten;
And such Popish Kittens we vow to restore,
When Poets and Jacobites nere shall be Poor;
All this and much more will appear to our Sense,
If ever it comes it is an Hundred Years hence.
V.
Our Taxes are great, but they may save our Throats,
Or from Lewis who makes'em pay for their Coats,
Or damnable Rome that we may not adore,
Who piously forces Excise for a Whore;
Our Money we'll give for our Noble Defense,
That we may be Happy an Hundred Years hence.
VI.
We Children will get then, and pay for their Heads,
That they may not be damned for handling of Beads;
We'll turn up our Doxies, and Soldiers procure,
That the Bald-pated Tribe we may not endure;
We'll deal with our Damsels that we may from thence
Have Broods that will stand to it an Hundred Years hence.
VII.
We this will perform, and now pay for the Work
To keep out the Devil, the Pope and the Turk,
That Jemmy the Elder may never reign more,
Or Jemmy the Younger may never come over;
All which to prevent, our Pounds, Shillings and Pence,
Shall willingly fly till an Hundred Years hence.
VIII.
But -- Room for Cuckolds without any Jest-O,
Advance Pater Patria with Manifesto,
Which had better instead of Count Dada's Tarse,
Have served to wipe Sacred Modena's Arse,
From whence daily issues such choice Frankincense,
As may give an Hogo an Hundred Years hence.
IX.
Our Halls stusst with Monks, and our Towns lose their Charters,
And Rome once again shall set up her Head Quarters;
In Smithfield once more at the Stake we shall burn,
And Berwick and Peter's shall make a Return,
Dragoon'd we shall be out of Cash and our Sense,
By the Bastards beyond Sea, an Hundred Years hence.
X.
We to Faux and the glorious Raviliac shall pray,
And England be blessed with a Saint for each day,
When Sir John and Sir William's great Fame amount
In Red Letters by the Gregorian Account;
When St. Paul's shall be changed to St. Peter's Immense,
No doubt this will happen an Hundred Years hence.
XI.
With a Glass of rich Burdeux, or a Cup of Nantz,
We shortly from thence will supply all our Wants;
All this I predict without help of a Star,
By a General Peace, or a General War:
This WILLIAM secures us in the Present Tense,
That we may not be Bug-beard an Hundred Years hence.
FINIS.
LONDON Printed, and Sold by John Mayos at the Golden Cross in Thames Street
near Queenhithe: 1697.


