A NEW PLOT, OR THE VVHIG and TORY United Being a DIALOGUE Between Titus Oats
and Saxon the Perjured Evidence.
Oats Well, met Dear Friend, I joy to see
The Consort of my misery.

Saxon, I humbly deign to ask your Name,
(And beg you would excuse the same.)

Oats, Is It possible you should not know;
Can I be thus concealed from you?

Saxon, Oh! now I recollect my thoughts,
You are I think -- Oats, Doctor Oats.

Oats, The very same, I Am even he,
A near Relation unto thee.

Saxon, Avast! Cursed Traitor, is it you,
The Author of the Nations Woe;
Stand off Vile Scarecrow, for I Swear,
Thy very Breath Corrupts the Air.

Oats, Pray calm your Passion, it is unmeet,
That you should be so indiscreet.

Saxon, Base Villan cease, you are Perjured over,
Ten Thousand times twice told and more;
Thou wretched Scoundrel, thou art he,
Has forced this heavy Yoke on me,
'Twas you Coined Traitors at your pleasure,
Whose fostered Lies (beyond all measure)
Procured you Credit, brought you Gain,
Made you the Idol of the Train:
Of all the Factious Rout, that Crew,
By numerous Bribes did buoy up you:
You swore Estates and Lives away,
And thus by swearing won the day.
Five at a clap, thou Monstrous Elf
(When you deserved it more your self,)
Were Doomed unto the Fatal Tree,
By such an Hellish Rogue as thee.
I will not mention any more,
You know for what, and whom you swore,
And how you are perjured over and over.

Oats, Rave on, you will have done at last,
But yet, methinks you run too fast.

Saxon, It Is but an Amble to the speed
That you have made in time of need,
When in a trice you crossed the Seas,
Were here or there, or how you please:
Consider but what you have done,
How you asperst the King and Crown;
The Queen, the Peers, and all Degree
Of most unshaken Loyalty.
Cease cruel Fury, Hell never knew,
The half the Plagues and Crimes which you
Have perpetrated, you full well
Have amplify'd the Gates of Hell:
Taught me the way to my Damnation,
Unless I find Commiseration.

Oats, Sum up thy Reason, for I fear,
Thou lt fall into some mad despair.
Recrute thy Spirits, ease thy Breath,
There Is no Damnation after Death;
Wait but a little, and you will see,
The Scene will metamorphis'd be.

Saxon, The change I fear will yet be worse,
I next must stride the three Legged Horse.
Ah me! unhappy and forlorn,
The Ridicule and public scorn
of all the World, might I but have
My Wish, I Would supplicate a Grave.

Oats, Avert these omens, reassume
A Courage that will more become
The Grandeur of thy quondam mien,
And all these trifling Follys Skreen;
It Is all the same, he equal shares,
That Is only in, or up to the Ears.

Saxon, I Grieve and Sigh for what I Have done,
And would thou yet have me sin on
Against the Sacred Deities,
Hell spews at such like Crimes as these,
I Will rather bare all Miseries.

Oats, You Are either mad, or not the same,
That Is trumpeted to me by Fame;
I Have heard that thou, even thou alone,
Could turn the World quite up-side down,
That Armed by such stable Buff,
Thy Courage was full Cannon Proof.

Saxon, Time was, I could have out-bravd all
The Fiends of Hell, the Deel would craul
To pay me Homage with submission,
But now I Have altered my Condition;
The Furies awe me, and I swear,
I Am tortured with intestine fear.

Oats, Banish that Bugbear fear, good Fate
Henceforth be thy Associate;
Learn but of me, I glory in,
The termed Commission of a Sin;
It Is my content in what is evil,
I vie and brave the very Devil:
Mischief's my sweet'st and best repose,
In which I Have triumphed over my Foes.

Sax. Doctor I Am yours, you have won my heart,
I Am now resolved to make 'em smart;
Revenge is sweet, I now will doom,
My Pity and Compassion down,
Into the most devouring Tomb,
Though I at length like Samson dye,
A Victim with my Enemy.

Oats, Brave and Heroic Soul, I swear
Thy last Resolves most Noble are,
In which if thou will but persever,
I Will be thy nimble Trout for ever.

Saxon, Grave Doctor, to begin the Section,
I now submit to your Direction;
Make me your Engine, and I Will play,
The Deel himself to vvin the Day.

Oats, Persist kind Friend I Will lead the van,
And give you all the advice I can;
I Will Conjure Tony's Ghost and try
By an unerring Policy,
To play my Cards Clubs must be Trumps,
Hye for the Giblins and the Rumps.

Saxon, Propose the Methods I must use,
I now can play at Fast and Loose;
Propose but what, and where and how,
I Am all Obedience at your bow.

Oats, Without delay I thus begin,
You first must triumph over Sin;
It Is but a Cipher, Naught and Naught,
Will give no Number I am taught,
In order unto which first you,
Must disengage your cruel Foe;
Take off the Cause the Effect will follow,
No want of means, the Gib or Gallow
Do always groan whilst unmanur'd,
By such which Fate has them ensur'd:
If this wont do then tack about,
Reverse your Steps they will lead you out
There Is other measures may be made,
A Poison, Strangle, or a Stab.
If those should fail, observe these Notes,
There Is Drowning, Burning, Cutting Throats.
Here lies the pinch, you must provide
Always against the turn of the Tide:
Should 'your Intrigues be brought to light,
You must observe your Cards aright;
When ever your Cause does go to wrack,
Then lay it on your Sumpters Back;
Which when you have done, forthwith you must,
Be sure to cry out Murder first,
Stop thief, stop thief, or else the Traitor,
Then swear 'twas he, you know his feature:
Prepare your Vouchers, have good store,
Then swear it home, swear't over and over.
It Is this will purchase Reputation
Honor, Wealth, and Admiration,
And style you Savior of the Nation.
This made me great, 'twas this alone,
Made me long triumph over ROME,
And Honored throughout Christiandom*
I Am now ecclipst I cannot deny
Your Fate and Mine run equally
Witness the groaning Pillory.
Yet shall I rise to that degree,
That none shall dare to envy me,
So great will be my Liberty.
And you my Friend shall win Renown,
Beyond the Bubles of a Crown.

Saxon, Cease worthy Sir, I ask no more
May I but have that blessed store,

Oats, With Duplications, over, and over.

This may be Printed, R.P. March the 9th. 1686.

London; Printed for. D. Mallet, at the Sign of the Black-Ball, near
Bridewell-Bridge. 1686.


