FIGURE OF SIX.

Containing these Six things; Wit, Mirth, Pleasure, pretty Observations, new
Conceits, and merry Jests.

When days are long, this Figure may
Help you to pass the time away:
And it will breed you much delight,
To pass away the Winters night.
LONDON, ^^^nted for John Wright at the Kings head in the Old Bayley. 1652.

TO make a larg preface to a small Volume, were as ridiculous, as to set and
Aldermans Gate before a poor Cottage; for as the one would show a great
diproportion in building, so the other would tire the Reader to no purpose; and
therefore I intend not to use many words to entreat thy acceptance of this
Figure of Six, because it may be, some delight more in dry Thistles, then in
the weetest Flowers that can be gathered out of the Garden of Invention: but
let them enjoy their humor, for I know there are Six kinds of Readers: the
pain Readers; the ignorant Reader, the scoffing Reader, the conceited Reader,
the carping Reader, and the kind Reader. Now to the last of these Six, namely
to the kind Reader, I commend this Figure of Six: and if he like it, I care
not for the rest, and so I rest.

Thy Friend, D. N.
This Book is like a Pair of Dice,
That does run still upon the sice,
And two pence of it is the price.
The Figure of Six is liked well,
For it is six to one but it will sell.


THE FIGURE OF SIX.
1. SIx things are very hard to do to pray heartily, to forgive willingly, to
suffer patiently, to love moderatly, to love wisely, and to spend thriftily.

2. Six things are much abused: Wine, Women, Weapons, Wit, Wealth, and a poor
man in want.

3. Six heads are without Brains: an Arrow head, a Horse head, a Nails head,
a Hammers head, a Beds head, and a Maiden head.

4. Six things are best when they are broken: A cunning Scrivener, a Nut a
Cake, a Lobster, an Egg, and a good Jest.

5 Six things do blind judgment Affection, Passion, Ignorance, Opinion,
Hatred, and Bribery.

6. Six cruel long Bills: A Forest Bill, a Stewards Bill, a Watchmans Bill, a
Chancery Bill, a Woodcocks Bill, and a Tailors Bill.

7. Six great helps belong to a Poet the help of Invention, the help of
nature, the help of Art the help of Reading, the help of the Muses, and the
help of Money.

8 Six chief Herbs in the Garden: Sage, Time, Thrift, Batchelors Buttons,
Rosemary, and the Herb of Grace.

9 Six figures of Six: The figure of Six in Arithmetic, the figure six in
small Beer, the figure of Six in a horses mouth, the figure of Six upon Cards,
the figure of Six in this Book, and the figure of Six in silver

10. Six very painful Letters: The head H, the tooth H, the back H, the belly
H, the horn H, and the halter H:

11 Six things are necessary for school, boys: a Penknife, Quils, Paper,
Inke-Books, and sometimes Birch.

Fear, Hope Idleness Jealousy, Sadness and Madness.

13. Six things do live in a several Elements, A Camelion in the air, a
Salamander in the fire, a Mole in the earth, a Fish in the water, a Fool in
the Court, and a Drunkard in his Ale.

14. Six things are good in cold weather: good Fare, good Fires, good Drink,
good company, good jests, and a she Bedfellow

15 Six degrees of misery: To be out of Clothes, to be out of Money, to be out
of Friends, to be out of Credit, to be out of house and home, and to be out of
one senses.

16. Six goodly fights: to see a Tree full of fruit, a Garden full of Flowers,
a field full of Cattle, a Barn full of Corn a woman with child, and a ship
under sail.

17. Six light things do make man heavy hearted: Light penny-worths light
pots, light purses light gold, light suppers, and light wives.

18. Six things are necessary to Life: Meat, drink, clothing, lodging, health
and some wealth.

19. Six things do make no show to the world: Wit in a blunt man, Learning in
a wise man, strength in a valiant man, wealth in a r^ch man, Religion in a good
man, and virtue in a poor man.

20. Six things are much alike: The fawning of a Dog, the flattering of a
Knave, the scratching of an Ass, the greasing of a Sow, the cackling of a
Goose, and the kindness of an Host^^.

21. Six blind things: a blind Man, a blind Mold, a blind Buzzard, a blind
Beetle, Homer the blind Writer, and Cupid the blind Archer.

22 Six things are n^cessary in a Christian life: Faith, Hope, and Charity,
Love, Peace, and Unity.

23. Six kinds of Prodigals: The fine Prodigal* the kind Pr^digall, the
drunken Prodigal, the dicing Prodigal, the wit^y Prodigal, and the wenching
P^odigall

24 Six pleasant Fruits: Cherries, S^rawberries, Plumbs, Peaches* Pears and
the fruit of Love.

25. Six angry things: A sick man, a proud man, a conceited man* an upstart
Officer, a waspe, and a woman.

26. Six things are too much used: much eating, much drinking, much sleeping
much swearing, much prating, and much lying.

27. Six things are very dangerous to take up: hot Iron, whole Pots, a seal
from a Bond, dice among Cheaters, money upon Usury, and a Maids petticoat.

28. Six kinds of Worms: a Mal^worme a Muck-worme, a Mud worm, an Earth
worm, a fruit-worme, and a Wood-worme.

29. Six things there are which drink of other men: cost: an Host, an Hostis, a
Tossed, a T^pster, a Fly, and a sharker.

30. Six bad humers: a scoffing humor, a quarrelling humor, a proud humor, a
zealous humor, a mad humor, and a melancholy humor.

31. Six great menders: Tailors, Cobblers, Semsters, Tinkers, Glasse-menders,
and Bellowes^menders.

32. Six things do soon vanish Youth, Beauty, Strength, Mirth, Pleasure, and
hasty Love.

33. Six things are very sharp fighted: an Eagle a Hawke, a Hearne, a needle, a
jealous eye, and a hungry man.

34 Six things are well matched together: A slut and a sloven, a knave and a
fool, a scould and a deaf man, a whore and a blind man, a Bride and a
Bridegroom, an ass and a flatterer.

35 Six Schools are much frequented: A Grammar school, a Writing school, a
Drinking Shoole, a Dancing school a Fencing, school, and a Vaulting school

36 Six ill sounds: The scraping of trenchers, the rubbing of iron the howling
of a Dog, the creaking of a wheel the crying of Cats, and the sco^lding of a
shrew.

37 Six kinds of tame foul live in London, prating Dawes, gossiping Magpies,
cheating Rookes, young Woodcocks, old Dottrels, and wanton Wagtayles.

38 Six essential parts belong to a Gallant: To wear good clothes, to swear
great oaths, to spend soundly, to drink profoundly, to complement with a
friend, and to court a wench.

39 Six things are soon dry: A ditch in summer, a tap when the drink is out, a
complementing Ass, a poor mands ^urse, an Ap^ill shower and a widows ears.

40 Six things are much desired, but seldom found: A happy Life, a good wife,
a careful servant, an honest Pettifogger, a conscionable man, and a constant
friend.

41 Six cracked things are never good: a cracked Glass, a cracked Bottle, a
cracked Fiddle a cracked Groat, a cracked crown, and a a cracked Maidenhead.

42 Six things are very tedious: To fit by an ill fire, to hear a long tale,
to court a coy wench, to ride on a jade, to expect the return of a slow
carryer, and to lie in bead and look for a sweetheart.

43 Six Items are reckoned in Innes: Item for meat, Item for bread, Item for
drink, Item for fruit and cheese, Item for fire, and Item for kissing Hostis

44 Six chief faculities belong to the reasonable soul: Speech, Laughter,
Reason, Understanding, Will, and Election of good and bad.

45 Six renowned Greek Poets: Pindaries, Euripides, Non^ius, Theognis, He
flod, and Hom^r.

46. Six kinds of water: cold wate^ hot water, strong water, stomach wate^ Rose
water, and Rose the Chamber^ maids water.

47. Six things belong to a Husband^ man to manure his ground, to plough his
ground, to sow his Corn, to reap his Corn, to thresh his Corn, and to sell
his Corn

48. Six steps bring men to Tyburne^ Idleness brings men to ill company, ill
company brings wasteful spending, wastfull spending brings want, want brings
stealing* and stealing brings them to the Gallows.

49. Six things do desire to meet: a foe with his foe in the Field, a friend
with his friend, the jet with straw, the Load stone with Iron, the Male with
the Female, and the Lover with his sweet heart.

50. Six things are required in a Gentleman: Birth, Education, Learning,
Virtue, Courtesy and Courage.

51. ^ix comfortable things do belong to a Traveller; a good horse, good
company, good boots good wa^es good store of money, and a good Inn at night.

52. Six in inferior ignorant Artists: A ^inker to a Brasier a Cobbler to a
Shoo^aker a Clarke to a Lawyer, an Apo^^ecary to a Physian* a Botcher to a
^aylor, and a Rimer to a Poet.

53. Six things are never satisfied. The ^^irstinesse of the Sea the
covetousness ^f an Usuer, I^ell, Ambition, the Grave, (...) an insatiate woman

54. Six necessary charges belong to ^oore house keepers: Firing Candle, ^read*
Drink Food* and to pay their ^and-Lords Rent,

55. Six things are that are good in ^eep: his Wool for cloths, his skin for
^archment his dung to fat the ground, is flesh for meat his bones for dice, and
his guts for Fiddle-strings.

56. Six kind of Runners are much ^sed: A running Footman a running ^ckey, a
running head a running vessel, running horse, a running hound, and running
banquet

57 Six things will make a man weep ^hen he has no cause of sorrow: To ^eele
Onions and Garlike, to sit by a ^moaking fire, to drink Bottle-ale, to ^at
Mustard, and to sup hot broth.

58 Six things there are which the g^eatest Orator cannot persuade: (...)
persuade a fool from his folly, a (...) to hear a scould to be quiet, a man
that has a cold to leave coughing a ma^^ to leave her sweet heart* and a man
(...) pay the reckoning that has no money.

59 Six things do make an (...) be well customed: good lodging goo^ horsem^at,
good attendance good usag^ a fine ^^o^tis and a fine sign.

60 Six great Talkers are seldom b^^leeved: a fortune tellers, a Traveller a
Midwife, an old man, a Lawyer and an Irish man.

61. Six commendations belong to good Horse: to be well metled to have a good
pace, a good color a (...) man^ a fair tail, and to be well marked

62 Six Games are much used: Irish Ticktack, Bowling, Shooting, Ruff^ and In
and In

63 Six things there are which Maid desire: to be praised to be wooed, to b^
fl^tter'd, to be kis'd by their swee^ heart, to be married, to be refreshed
etc.

64 Six kinds of wanton creature Apes, Munkies, Kitlings, young Whelps Parrots,
and wanton wenches.

65. Six things are seldom or never seen: A white Crow* a black Sw^n, a
faithless Turtle^dove, an Owl in the day time, a Swallow in Winter, and a
Friend in adversity.

66 Six kinds of Hooks* Fish^ hooks, Flesh-hooks, Tenter hooks, Doorehooks,
Pot-hooks, and shouder-hooks, or Sergeants.

67. Six essential properties belong to a Lover: to love truly to love
honestly, to love discreetly, to love chastely* to love faithfully and to love
constantly.

68 Six things are unpossible to be done: to catch a shower of Hayle in a
bottle, ^o empt the Sea with a spoone, to tell the hair of ones head, to find
a needle in a bundle of Hay, to find a Maidenhead in the court Russes, and to
turn a windmill sails with a pair of Bellows

69 Six things do commonly ^oe together: lying and swearing, drinking and
quarrelling, pride and beggary, love and idleness, wit and wilfulness, beauty
and wantonness.

70. S^x kinds of people not to be believed: Horse-cour^ers. Broker^
Travelers, Petty-foggers, Beggars, and Soldiers

71. Six things do make an excellen^ receipt for the recovery of Maidenheads:
The Brains of a Beetle the heart of an humble Be. ^an handful of (...) with
an ounce of Lond^n deliverance, boiled over the fire of a low worm, with the
water of Pumicestone, which at the second taking will restore it, (...) never.

72. Six things belong to a shepherd a Hook a Scrip, a ^ottle, a, Tarbox, a
Bag-pite, an old cloak, and a young wench wrapped in it

73. Six chief businesses belong to a Housewife: Brewing baking, spinning,
Carding* Washing and Milking.

74. ^ix very unconstant things: the Wind, for that is always turning, the
Moon, for that is always changing, the Sea, for that is always ebbing and
flowing, a gliding stream, for that is always running, a Child, for he is
always craving* and a woman, for she is always wavering.

57 Six things do bring men to want: Carelessness, Unthriftinesse,
Idlenessesse, Wantonness, Pride and prodigality.

76. Six things can never hold our long: drinking without eating, watching
without sleeping, eating without drinking, clothes without mending giving
without recovering, and spending without getting.

77 Six things are required in a well shaped Gray hound: to be backed like a
Beam, sided like a Breame, footed like a Cat, tayled like a Rat, breasted like
^ Drage, and headed like a Snake.

78. Six things would make a man laugh: to see a Fox turn Lawyer to see Geese
turn Clyents, to hear an Owl sing, to see an Ape play his tricks, to see a
Cat play on the Fiddle, and to see a Goose dance to the Music.

79 Six hard steps lead to Heaven: Crosses, Afflictions, Troubles, Con^empt of
men, Want and Poverty.

80 Six helps there are to climb these steps; Prayer, Patience, Humility,
Faith, Zale, and hope in God

81 Six moral virtues are of chief note: Valor, Prudence, Temporance,
Liberaltie, Magnificence and Justice.

82 Six shadows are often taken for substance: The shadow of Frenchmen, which
is Complements, The shadow of Learning, which is plausible Discourse; The
shadow of love, which are amorous vows; the shadow of Honor, Which is Wealth,
the shadow of Wit, which are Jests: and the shadow of Life, which is mere
shadow.

82 Six things belong to a good sire: a pare of And^orns, a pair of Bellows, a
pair of Tongs, a Shewell, good company, and a pot of Ale.

84. Six things are not respected when they are out of date: An old Horse, an
old Hound, an old servingman, old Boots, an old Maid, and an old Almanac.

85 Six things deserve hanging: w^^ Clothes, good Bells, a rope of Onions, a
door on the hooks, a Usurer, and a Theife.

26. Six kinds of humors are much noted, a merry humor, a melancholy humor,
a prodigal humor, a jealous humor, a sco^ng humor, and a sullen humor.

87 Six things can never be recalled, being once mis-pent: a word from (...)
Mouth, an Arrow from the Bow, Money, Time, Youth once past, and a Maidenhead
once lost.

88. Six things declare a true Friend: to help one in necessity, to speak
well of one in absence, to keep ones counsel, to suppress his anger to give
counsel, and be constant to the end.

89. Six sorts of Drunkards, and nere a good one, a sowish Drunkard, a sheepish
Drunkard, a loving Drunkard, a goat Drunkard an a pish Drunkard, and a Fox
Drunkard.

90 Six ways can never be found out: Via evis the way of a Bird. Via navis the
way of a ship, Via v^^is the way of worm Via sapientis, the way of a wise man
Via sagitta the way of an Arrow, and Via juvenis, the way of a young man and
maid.

91. Six things are very unseemly: to drink with a foul mouth, to cut bread
with a foul knife, to feed swinishly, to talk bawdily, to scratch ones
breech, and to gnaw meat.

92. Six sweet meats have sour sauce: Pleasure, Prodigality, Pride, Idleness,
Scorning, and Whoring.

93. Six notes to be observed in love: to love wisely, love warily, chastely,
discreetly, virtuously and constantly.

49 Six things comfort a man's heart: Wine, Company, Good News, good Ale, good
Clothes, and Money in purse.

95 Six things are well macht together: A Lawyer and his Clyent, a Maid and her
Love, Money and Wit, a blew Coat and a Cognizance, a Physician and his
Patient, and a cup of Ale and a Tossed.

96. Six things deserve no pity: a lazy Beggar, a Drunkards headache, a
counterfeit Cripple, a Prodigal wanting a Woman weeping, and Goose going
barefoot.

97 Six things will take a man by the No^^ before he be aware: Bottle Ale,
sneezing Powder. Tobacco, Pepper, (...) and ill sm^ls.

(...) things are very sweet and pleasant Food to a hungry man, drink ^o a
thirsty: man, sleep to a weary man ^ealth to a sick man, the shore to a sea,
man, and Money to a poor man.

99 Six heads are very good meat: A Pigs head, a Rabbets head, a Lambs head, a
sheeps head, a Calves head, and Cods head.

100. Six things are very headstrong: ^ head strong horse, an unruly child,
^n unruly, Young Man, a Tempest at ^ea, a Cuckold and a Bull.

101. Six notes do show a virtuous mind: to live temperately, to love ones
friend faithfully, to speak courteously, ^o heal honestly, to bear Adversity
patiently, and to follow goodness con^tantly.

102. Six outsides are more fair and beautiful then their infides: A fair
Whore apainted Tomb a gilded Cup, ^ rotten Nut, the bark of a Cinnamon ^ree,
and a Gallant in a new suit.

103. Six good Dishes in a country house are always in readiness: a piece of
Bacon, a piece of hung beef, White Meats, Cake and Cheese, Pudding and (...).

104. Six Birds do hant and frequent Country house^ a Martin, a Swallow, a
Robin-rod breast, an owl a Daw and a Dove.

105 Six things are great wasters of time: Eating, drinking, sleeping. Tobacco
taking, Discoursing, and Idleness

106. Six things are hard to do: To row against the stream, to run against a
hill to force a woman against her, will, to kick against thorns, and to strive
against a great man.

107 Six Caps are of great note: the scholars Cap the tradsemans Cap, the
seamans Cap the night Cap, the foole^ Cap and the fudling Cap.

108. Six Touchstones do try six several qualities: Money is the Touch^stone
of Honesty. Temptations of beauty. Adversity of Patience, Prosp^rity of
wisdom Necessity of Friendship, and Time of Truth*

109. Six Dishes belong to a married man's table: three of flesh, and three of
fish; a Tongue a Dotrell, a Raylt, a Pout* a Carb, and a Carpe.

110. Six notes for a wise man* To are injuries to moderate his passion bestow
his gifts warily: to deal ho^^stly, to live cheerfully, and dye wil^^gly.

111. Six things are good to the end good Man, a good tale, a good friend,
(...) good Book, a good Play, and a good ^udding.

112. Six things are very pleasing to ^e five senses, good cheer and good
^rinke to the tasting, Money to the ^^ght, music to the ear flowers to the
^mell, scratching to the leg to the touch and to kiss a Maid.

113. Six empty things are never good ^mpty Brains, empty Barnes* empty Pots,
empty Platters, empty Pockets, and empty purses.

114 Six Buts do spoil fix good con^itions: A fair Maid, but unchaste, an
^onest man but poor; a good Tailor, ^ut a thief; a good workman, but an ill
^usband; a good huswife but a scould; ^ kind natured man but a Cuckold.

115 ^ix days* three good, and three bad belong to a married man: the three
good are his wedding day, the Christi^ing day, and her burial day* the three
bad are washing days, scouring days, and scolding days.

116. Six bad ways of being between; between two Sergeant, to sit between
two doors, to halt between two opinions to be between a Whores arms,
between a pair of foul sheets, and beteewne Hawke and Buzzard.

FINIS.

