A new PLAY Called CANTERBURY His Change of Diot. Which shows variety of wit
and mirth: privately acted near the Palace-yard at Westminster. (...)uth
1 Act, the Bishop of Canterbury having variety of dainties, is not satisfied
till he be fed with tippets of men's ears. 2 Act, he has his nose held to the
Grinde-stone. 3 Act, he is put into a bird Cage with the Confessor. 4 Act, The
Jester tells the King the Story.




Printed Anno Domini, 1641.

THE FIRST ACT.
Enter the Bishop of Canterbury, and with him a Doctor of Physic, a Lawyer,
and a Divine; who being set down, they bring him variety of Dishes to his
Table,

CAnterbury, is here all the dishes, that are provided?

Doct. My Lord, there is all: and it is enough, were for a Princes table,
There Is 24. several dainty dishes, and all rare.

B, Cant. Are these rare: no, no, they please me not,
Give me a Carbinadoed cheek or a tippet of a Cocks comb:
None of all this, here is meat for my Pallet.

Lawyer. My Lord, here is both Cock and Phesant,
Quail and Partridge, and the best varieties the shambles yield.

B. Cant. Shambles, I am not tied to such a strait,
Give not me common things, that are in the shambles;
Let me have of the rarest dainties, dressed after the Italian fashion.

Divine. My Lord, here are nothing but rarities; please you to give me leave to
crave a blessing,
That your Lordship may fall too and eat.
My Lord, is it your pleasure I shall.

B. Cant. you vex me,
He knocking there enter diverse Bishops with muskets on their neeks,
bandeleeres, and swords by their sides. Ho, ho, come away,
These Rascals torment me.

Bishop. What is the matter my Lord: wherefore do you call us.

Cant. call you quoth I:
It is time to call I think, when I am feign to wait:
Nay call and ask, yet cannot have what I desire.

Bishop. What would you have my Lord?

Cant. Them fellows, bring them to me.

Doct. What will your Lordship do with me.
The Doctor is brought to bim.
Cant. Only cut off your ears.

Doct. That would be an unchristian action, a practice without a precede^t.
O cruelty, tyranny! Hold me, hold me, or else J dye:
He cuts of his ears. Heavens support me under this tyrant.

Cant. Come Lawyer, your two ears will make me.
He cuts of the Lawyers ears. That is almost a little dish for rarity.

Divine. Will your Lordship be so cruel.
Then he cuts of the Divines ears. Our blood will be required at your hands.

Cant. This J do, to make you examples,
That others may be more careful to please my palate.
Henceforth, let my servants know: that what I will, I will have done,
What ere is under heavens Sun.
He sends them all away, and commands the ears to be dressed for his supper, and
after a low courtsie, follows himself. Exeunt.
The second Act.
Enter the Bishop of Canterbury into a Carpenters yard by the water side, where
he is going to take water, and seeing a Grindle-stone, draws his knife, and
goes thither to whet it, and the Carpenter follows him.
Carpinter. What mkes your Grace here, my Lord.

Cant. My knife is something dull friend:
Therefore I make bold to sharpen it here,
Because an opportunity is here so ready.

Carp. Excuse me, Sir, you shall not do it:
What reason have you to sharpen your knife on my stone: you will serve me, as you
did the other three? No, stay!
I Will make you free of the Grinde-stone, before you go away.
He ties his nose to the Grindle-stone


Cant. Oh man what do you mean.

Carpen. Hold down your head, it will blood you bravely;
By the brushing of your nostrils, you shall know what the paring of an ear
is, Turn Boy.
The Carpenters boy turns the stone, and grinds his nose.
Cant. O hold, hold, hold.
Turn, quoth. I, here is turning indeed, such turning will soon deform my face:
O I bleed, I bleed, and am extremely sore..

Carp. But who regarded hold before, remember the cruelty you have used to
others, whose blood cries out for vengeance.
Were not their ears to them, as precious as your nostrils can be to you^
If such dishes must be your fare, let me be your Cook,
I Will invent you rare sippets.

Jesuit. Right Reverend Sir,
What makes your Grace
In such a sad condition?
Enter a Jesuit, a Confessor, and washes his face with Holy water, and bind
up his sore in a cloth.
B. Cant. It Is sad indeed, time was, when all the land was swayed by me:
But I am now despised, bound fast, and scorned you see?
What shall I do for ease.

Jesuit. I Will try conclusions for you;
I Will go in to him, and to his wife; i will woo them both, i will speak them
fair,
I Will tell them things they never knew, and if I can, I will procure your
liberty:
That so your Grace, may escape this danger.

B. Cant, There will be great difficulty in it?
What shall I do, my joys are gone;
My face defaced, and all my comforts left.

Jesuit. Fear not, there is yet hope: comfort your self.
I have a force, may chance, make Rome to flourish:
That your gray hairs, may once more sit in Glory,
Which England little dreams of.
The Carpenter ties the Bishop, and leads him away.
The third Act.
Enter the Bishop of Canterbury, and the Jesuit in a great Bird Cage together,
and a fool standing by, and laughing at them, Ha, ha, ha, ha, who is the fool
now.


Carpenters wife. O good husband, put in these Cormorants into this Cage;
They that have cut of ears at the first bout,
God knows what they may cut off next: put them in, put them in.

Cant. What mean you by this,
He takes the Cage, and puts them into it.
Carpenter. Only to teach you to sing.

Jesuit. Alas. we cannot sing, we are not Nightingales.

Carpen. wife. Come, come, husband;
We Will make them sing, before they come out again:
A Blackbird, and a Canary-bird, will sing best together.

Cant. Why should they be so strict to us.

Jesuit. Yet if we still abide it: though we dye, we dye in honor,
Our merits we shall leave for others wants, when we are gone.

Carpen. Mirth quoth I:
If Tower Hill and Tyburne had their due,
We should have less Jesuits, and fewer Mass Priests?
There is many a man, that have merited a rope,
That have not yet met with an halter.
Exeunt,
The fourth Act.
Enter the King and his Jester.
Iester. O my King ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, I cannot forbear laughing.

King. Why what is the matter Sirrah;

Iester. O the strangest sight, that ever I saw,
They have put the B. of Canterbury, and the Confessor into a Cage together.
Did you ever see the like,
The one looks like a Crow, and the other like a Mag-pye:
I waited long to hear them sing, and at last (...) did,

King. What note did they sing,

Iester. What note, I am sure it was 9 Notes and an half lower then they use
to sing at Court.

King. What was the Song,

Jest. One sung thus:
I would I was at Court again for me,
Then the other answered,
I would I was at Rome again with thee

King. Well sirrah, you will never leave your flouts.

Jest. If I should, my Liege, I were not fit to be a Jester.
Exeunt.
The Gig between a Paritor and the Fool.
PAritor, What news sir, what news, I pray you know you,

Fool, Correction does wait sir, to catch up his due.

Par. His due sir, what is that, I pray you tell me,

Foole' not blew cap, nor red cap, but cap of the Sea,

Par. What caps are these pray you, shall I never know,

Foole' The caps that would us, and our Church overthrow,

They both sing, O wellady, wellady, what shall we do then.
Weel wear tippet fool caps, and never undo men.

Paritor, Did you never hear pray, of Lambeth great Pair.
Where white puddings were sold for two shillings a pair.

Fool, Yes Sir I tell you I heard it and wept,
I think you are broke e're since it was kept,

Par. Broke I am not, you fool I am poor.

Fool, your master is sick you are turned out of door,

They both sing, O wellady, wellady, etc.

Paritor, I might have been Iester once as well as you,

Fool) you Iested too much, which now you do rue,

Par. wherein have I jested, like a fool in place,

Fool, to work projects for such, who practice disgrace,

Par. you fool will not profit make any thing done,

Fool, such profit make fools, son after to run,

Both together, O wellady, wellady, etc.

FINIS.

