Certain QUERIES Humbly proposed In order to a quiet and Christian submission
To His Highness the LORD PROTECTOR And to the present Government.

BY S. N. Gent.

Ordinem non dari nisi cum ratione ad aliquid primum.

Averroes. Mihi pax omni cum civibus bello civili utilior videtur.

Cicero. It is to be noted in a controverted case that a private man by no
means ought to take upon himself to judge, but follow the possession: so did
Christ command tribute to be paid to Caesar, because the money bare his Image,
that is, says he, because he was in possession of the Empire.

H. Grotius. LONDON, Printed for P. L. and are to be sold at any Booksellers
shop in London and Westminster Hall. 1658.

Querie I.
Whether that good and sober men of any Nation may not be too apt and ready
through their own incogitancy and unadvisedness to murmr and repine at their
Governors and Government, and that without a cause: The reason of this Querie
is grounded both upon president and experience: the presidents are to be found
amongst the people of Israel; As that saying of theirs unto Moses, who made
thee a Ruler and a judge over us? And again, when Moses smote the Egyptian, he
supposed that his brethren would have understood that God by his hand would
deliver them, yet we see they did not: the experience has been in our own
land, how have we admired both Governors and Government? nay we have been like
unto those S. Paul speaks of, that would have plucked out their own eyes and
have given them unto him; even so we counted not our lives too dear to be
sacrificed for them; and yet we have seen our selves disappointed in our
expectations: Now then if those high and confident thoughts of heart concerning
the goodness and benefit of Governors and Government have suffered a
frustration; then by the same Rule may the too mean and hard thoughts either of
Governor or Government, receive the like check, shame and disappointment as the
Israelites did concerning Moses, and according to that maxim, Contraria
contrariorum sunt consequentia.

2. Whether that the sedition and division daily sown and fomented be not
fruits of the flesh, and the seeds-men thereof render themselves exceeding
culpable, both before God and all considering men: and whether such persons may
not claim the titles, or at least be justly conferred upon them, mentioned in
the Epistle of Jude 8.2 Pet. 2.10. 2 Timothy 3.3, 4. viz. to be murmurers,
complainers, traitors, high-minded, who despise Government, presumptuous,
self-willed, and also not afraid to speak evil of dignities: now all these
several transgressors are doubtless very offensive unto God, yet the last seems
to carry a greater emphasis in it, As not to be afraid to speak evil of
dignities: it is a certain kind of boldness to blaspheme, for every kind of
Authority has a divine stamp upon it; and the greater and higher any Authority
is, the greater is the sin and the nearer to blasphemy indeed; now for a man to
be bold and daring in a wickedness, imports a strange kind of estrangement from
God, and of a prostituted conscience; therefore men versed in this evil
occupation had need to consider whether (according to our Saviors saying) the
word above mentioned will not judge them at the great day, and before also, for
commonly they have part in hand until the whole be paid. Now whether the sin be
not yet greater being done and and perpetrated i the name of God, and many
times in places where better things should be both spoken and heard, and
whether that makes it not more abominable: as then old saying is,

In nomine Domini incipit omne malum. 3. Whether that God Almighty the King of
Kings has not manifested and declared as with an audible voice from heaven,
that amongst all the son of Iesse, this is that David that he has chosen to be
King of our Israel: else what is the meaning of all those defeats and
disappointments of Treason, War and Blood, and of all those signal
preservations, even to the admiration of all that love him, and to the terror
of those that seek his hurt, if that the Lord that preserved Daniel in the
Lions den was not with him? His enemies they neither wanted will nor power nor
subtilty to bring it to pass, but God kept an opportunity out of their way. I
confess, there is a wicked mind amongst many, which say now adays as the Jews
did by our Saviors miracles, that either they were not at all, or else done by
an evil spirit; whether such men had not need to be careful lest they fight
against God, as they also did.

To whom did God Almighty ever do more, or give greater testimony unto then
unto the present Lord Protector? has not God crowned him with as many signal
tokens of his favor as ever he did any the Kings of Israel? much less
doubtless did he ever take pleasure in any of the Kings of England after such a
manner: now then if that God Almighty has owned and peculiarized him from
amongst so many Worthies, and has made him to tread upon Scorpions, and suffer
no deadly thing to hurt him, and has poured contempt, disgrace and ruin upon
all his adversaries, why then should not any man's conscience give him leave to
say, this is Gods Anointed, and him will we obey and pray for?

4. Whether the principal ends of freedom and liberty formerly engaged for be
not in the letter and by interpretation fully answered in the present
Government.

The first and main end was, the liberty of conscience, which the late King and
Bishops did infringe: that was the pad in the straw, which did so disease there
was ship money, and some other extra-legal taxes; but that which made those
mole-hils seem mountains was, that they must not only prostitute their purses
but their consciences also: as likewise it is apparent that upon all turns and
breaches both with the Scots, and with the Parliament, it was because the one
did absolutely desire rule and domination in things Ecclesiastic, and the
other was at least suspected to have an itch that way; which could not be born
at any hand: had it not been for this great thing called liberty of conscience,
a hundred things would not have been so much insisted upon, and would have been
easily swallowed without those various combustions and stirs.

Now then in this our mouths may be wide open, and say what is wanting to any,
or who can justly complain (except it be in liberty to sin;) There is no
lowing of the Oxen nor Bleating of the sheep in this case to any that is so
much as morally civil, but all at perfect peace and liberty, as if God was come
down among men: only the Arminian party complain they are brow-beaten, which
is a little too apparent I confess in some cases, but blessed be God they may
notwithstanding say their lot is fallen in a good ground. Doubtless the
controversy is not for every understanding to reach or fadome; but whether it
be not more easy to be believed then refuted, I leave to others: for my own
part, I cannot but believe that there may be an election of some particular
persons more then others: Yet withal I cannot discern from the Scriptures nor
Reason how those terrible and doleful decrees of particular persons to be
damned from eternity should be supported: Now then if conscience be free, and
no restraint either to the weak or the strong in well doing. In this have you
not all, or once would it not have been esteemed so: Let every man then examine
his own conscience, and say plainly what is it he wants (saving the casting out
of that unclean spirit of pride, Arrogancy and Ingratitude) and then doubtless
he is either a man that is well, or may be if he himself see cause.

5 Whether the present taxes be any ground at all of the least discontent to
any sort of men whatsoever. Because First, as to the Parliament Party and those
under that head, they have the greatest reason to sit down not with patience
only but with satisfaction, for two reasons at least: First, because by the
late quarrel they have not diminished their estates and treasure, but I may
safely say (and speak no parable) they have increased them, and have with their
blows received suitable encouragement; yet those of that sort that staid by the
stuff have been best rewarded. Therefore for these Gentlemen that have reapt
so good a crop and so plentiful harvest to scruple the payment of their dues,
and to spare a little out of their abundance, were high ingratitude to God and
men; Considering there is nothing in all these present transactions but what
themselves have had some hand in to effect.

Secondly, If there were nothing else but that peaceable enjoyment of their own
minds in Gods worship and service, it were sufficient, because they would in
time past have purchased it at a dearer rate when they were worse able to bear
it.

And as to others as well as to the generation mentioned, I mean all the
Protestants of England as they are both Christians and English men, have not
the least ground of discontent. For the quarrel now is become the old
Protestant cause that ever was afoot since the Reformation; it has pleased God
through his infinite wisdom to end all our private and national quarrels, and
settle it at that point of the compass where doubtless God Almighty expects we
should all agree.

Although the charge has been great, and some men's lives have expired in the
quarrel, yet if men would be but ingenuous, there is much done already toward
the charge against the Romish usurpation, viz. what think you of the peace with
Portugal, and the freedom from the Inquisition there? whereof our merchants and
seamen already feel the benefit: and I doubt not but the King of Spain also
will hearken to those most noble and Christian terms proposed by his Highness
ere it be long. Therefore having put our hands to the plough let us not look
back, but rather rejoice that God Almighty still takes pleasure in England to
produce such Worthies as shall be the worlds reformers, as Constantine the
first Christian Emperor borne at York, and Lucius the first Christian King:
and who cannot but discern, as Constantine was a blessed Instrument of Gods to
discharge the world from many of those gross Idolatries and superstitions of
the heathens, but that his Highness is a man exalted and raised on purpose to
purge, as by fire, the corruptions, Idolatries and heathenish superstitions of
the Church of Rome. Considering also that God has made many promises to
extirpate all that is or may be called Antichristian; now for us to be
negligent, and murmr at so good a work, and not rather be thankful though it
cost us our all, is as much as to say to the Lord, Depart from us, for we would
serve other masters, would not this be to draw a sackcloth over the sun, and to
pour contempt and shame upon our own heads! whom God and Christ would have
lifted up, and would it not make us like unto Jerusalem as a carcass without a
soul so soon as the Lord had left them, we know the eagles? I mean the Romans
(whose ensign was mottoed with an eagle) soon made a prey of them. And further
were it any ignoble design or personal quarrel or point of honor, we might
well say then what needs this wast? but where there is not the least
composition or ingredient that is not honorable, but a common protestant cause
and for the whole worlds reformation, let us not grudge lest God repent.

6 Whether it were not more Christian and better becoming the ministry to leave
their obscure prayers, as when they pray for the supreme Authority, for the
Chief magistrate, for those in Authority etc. and to pray in plain and
intelligible English for his Highness the Lord Protector of England, Scotland
and Ireland and the territories thereunto belonging, and for the Lords of his
Council, and for his family, etc. for by the former terms of Art no man knows
whom they mean, whether his Highness or the vagator on the other side: If I may
be so bold I think they have as much reason as the Kings Clergy, for they enjoy
the same benefit with many an Augmentation: besides, it would tend much to a
through settling and a quenching of foolish and vain hopes.

I hope there is no such root of bitterness as to imagine they want
encouragement, and men of other minds are tolerated, etc. to be the cause of
this strange kind of obscure, uncouth and cloudy prayers: Alas his Highness is
the father of us all, a father of a family does not discourage or upbraid any
for not being so straight, so tall, so good memory, so quick of discerning; no
more can his Highness to the people of several and various minds, if he should
it would render him unnatural: for it is much for any magistrate to keep
himself free from the charge in the poet, Dat veniam corvis, vexat censura
columbas, which I doubt not his Highness will have regard unto as hitherto.

7 Whether the inflicting the severest punishment upon traitors, conspirators,
etc. be any cause of dissatisfaction to any, but rather by far of the greatest
content and submission: for have not those Gentlemen that have been known by
the name of the Kings party been favorably dealt with, considered as
conquered? their penances for their faults have been very tolerable, and I know
upon good grounds that many are so ingenuous as to acknowledge it, and will say
they believe they should not have shown so much favor as is received; his
Highness in this imitates God Almighty in such a demeanor of himself, for if
mercy, forbearance, patience nay and long-sufferance will not do, then he
pours out his wrath and indignation upon the disobedient. Now all that seems
hard is that so many worthy Gentlemen who its believed has had neither
intention heart nor hand in any Treasonable Act, should be secured and kept
under restraint; the equity and reason of that is plain, because a plot or
conspiracy being discovered concerning a party, and many known to be guilty
which in appearance seemed as harmless, and much more also then many of the
rest: what would they themselves do but think and be very jealous of the whole,
and so secure the nation and free the persons if innocent from a temptation and
keep them out of harms way? Now if his Highness should hearken too much to his
own clemency in such cases, whether he would not, first sin against God in not
inflicting punishment; secondly, against the Nation; thirdly against himself.

8. Whether that any people in the world (to speak without any flattery) have
Magistrates so free from all manner of corruption as we have? what Prince
spends so many hours in prayer and devotion as ours? what King has a Council
so free from vice? no debauchery, no luxury is to be heard of amongst them; but
are all examples of a holy religious life to the nation round about: how
impartial in justice? I have not heard so much as one amongst many thosands
that can say justice is denied him. And the Court governed according to David's
pattern, not a man that is a liar must abide under his roof, or any that have
dependency upon him: now then if so, can we hope to be better, to have more
justice under any other way or person? do you think we shall have better
examples, better Counselors, easier Access, freer from bribery, justice more
equally distributed? if we do, it must be when the Millenary kingdom comes to
pass, for my part I expect it not.

9. Whether there be any cause for the plea of inheritance to the Gentleman on
the other side, so as to disturb the thoughts of any: you know that the entail
of an estate may be cut off, and is amongst us daily: so God and men have
agreed to cut off his; though I think there was enough in all equity and reason
to cut off his father, yet some do surmise, and many believe that there was a
greater judgment followed him then the things he died for: therefore I could
wish that no man would be so daring and presumptuous as to think otherwise then
that the justice of God and the justice of men met together to cut off that
line: as he did concerning Eli, he promised he and his should be priests for
ever, yet we see for sin and transgression the line was cut off. Now its true
the seed is escaped with their lives, I am apt to think the reason is they are
not of so sanguine a constitution though in justice by the wise dispensations
of God thought meet to undergo the misery of being vagators upon the face of
the earth.

FINIS.

