PALAEMON, OR, The Grand Reconciler: Composing the great Difference and
Disputes about Church Government. AND Discovering the Primitive Government of
Churches, built upon the Word of God, and the practice of the Apostles.

Compiled by one who labors for the Peace of the Church.

(...). Can. Conc. Nic. JEREM. 6.16. Ask for the old way, which is the good
way.

Anno MDCXLVI.

THE PREFACE To all true-hearted Christians and good Subjects, who desire a
blessed Conjuncture of Truth and Peace, and an happy Reformation in the State
and Church.
AS Sufferers may complain, and Sorrowers speak, so we Divines who are Seers
ought not to be silent, when we discover a Quick-sand of error, or any rocks
of sin, at which a soul may dash to its eternal perdition. There is a Coward
in the field, who is like the Wise-mans fool, his heart is at his mouth, and
he knows not what he does profess, forgetting even that he wears a Sword for
his defense. There is likewise a Coward in his faith, who is like a fool that
seems wise, for his mouth is in his heart, and he dares not profess what he
knows, not remembering that God has committed to him the publication of his
Word; at which the men of this world take offense, and had rather be fed with
pleasing truths to their destruction, then hear of true Doctrine which crosses
them in their pride and ambition. I am persuaded this ensuing Treatise will
offend those who being of Aerius his spirit, oppose moderated Episcopacie, for
no other end but that they themselves might Lord it over Gods heritage with a
Tyrannical Insolency. The Character which Chrysostom fastens upon some proud
Heretics in his time, Hom. 8. in Genesis
will fit with such men's arrogant conditions, (...). They pretend Piety and
Moderation, but if they were thoroughly sifted, and their thoughts ripped up, we
should find a Lions heart under a Sheeps skin. That which they do but
pretend, is our total aim, and that is Moderation; a Virtue so admired by
that Secretary of a French King, that being commanded by his Sovereign to set
down in writing the best word that he ever met with in all his reading, he
writ in a sheet of paper the French word which is suitable with our English,
Moderation.

It is for want of this, that men (as Chrysostom speaks) run headlong into
precipices of Schisms and Divisions. (...). In Genesis
It is for want of this, that to repair an accident, the substance is
destroyed; as when instead of paring a man's nails, one should cut off his head.

It is for want of this that a Calling found and built upon the Scriptures,
allowed of by all Councels, and for 1500. years settled without gainsaying in
all Reformed Churches, should now be cried down as illegitimate and spurious,
and all for the defect of some Persons.

Let us then have no Generals, because some have been found tardie in the
execution of their Commissions: Let us have no more Captains, because some
have been faulty in the discharge of their duties: No more Judges, because some
have perverted the Laws by their false glosses.

I speak this with grief; Considering what a shame it will be to our Nation,
when it shall be reported in After-Ages, that instead of taking off the moss,
and scraping off the mould, that adhered to the fabric of our Churches admired
government, the whole building was destroyed, and another set up greater in
bulk, and not consisting with Monarchy and the liberty of the Subject, such is
a Presbytery. Which I could prove, and which Idol I would court and labor to
set up, if I were an Aerian, i.e. ambitious, if I desired (...), Aristoph. in
Nub.
to ride upon the necks of the Gentry, and the shoulders of my Parishioners;
being thus mounted I should be shot at with envy and hatred, which would be a
means to hinder the passage of the Gospel, and choke the seed of the Word,
which takes root in those hearts only that are garnished with love and liking
to their Ministers.

Again, when I consider with sorrow and tears the sad distempers, the many
Schisms and Heresies under which the Church now labors with shame and scorn
from its enemies, I must needs submit to the judgment of a wise man, who
concludes of an impossibility to settle these disorders, to suppress the
daring boldness of Anabaptists and other Schismatickes, unless there be set
over the Presbyters in every Province grave and wise Overseers, i.e. Bishops to
restrain by their authority grounded upon the Law such men's bold. attempts,
who fly even at the Crown, and sow the seeds of errors in the minds of
poor Christians, who swallow all doctrines, if ushered with a seeming
authority from the Scriptures.

And sorasmuch as every Sect will be busy in tempting others after it, and so
make a fatal rupture in the body, and tear the Church in pieces by their
multiplied divisions; no better way is conceived to prevent these fearful,
mischiefs, and to re-establish Unity both in Doctrine and Worship, in the
Church, then to invest one with power, who not meddling with temporal affairs,
shall (with the advice and consent of a few grave Presbyters, assisting him in
his monthly Visitation) strangle Schism in the Cradle, nip it in the bud, and
see that all inferior Ministers discharge their functions both in Doctrine and
Life. The last of which (as the Chancellor of Paris once said) is the best
Orator to persuade, Gerson.
and the best Comment upon the Word, and therefore it is most necessary that
every Minister be reformed himself, if he means to instruct others in the way
to heaven and happiness.

Episcopacy moderated promises this reformation in the Church. It was that
whereby Crathilinth King of Scotland, who succeeded Donald, settled the Gospel
of Christ in his Kingdom, with the extirpation of idolatry, which the Druides
those idolatrous Priests had set up in those parts. The godly Ministers, by
whose aid and assistance the King did this, were termed Colidei or Culdees;
Veteres Scotorum Episcopi^e Monasteriis electi cum ad huc non honor is and
lucri, sed sanctitatis and doctrinae certamen inter eos esset, etc. Buch. hist.
who, as Buchanan himself asserts, chose out of themselves eminent men in
piety and knowledge, to oversee the rest, and to keep them to the performance
of their ministerial offices, with a discreet carriage of each one toward
another in their several Societies; those Overseers Buchanan calls Episcopos,
Bishops, not Superintendants.

In a word, Episcopacy thus moderated will be (by Gods blessing) a means to
reduce things and persons to that purity which God expects of us, and which
once acquired the Sword shall turn again into the scabard, our Wars will
cease.

I know that middle counsels ever displeased both parties that were at ods and
variance: Hist. c. 1. p. 437.
a proof hereof we have in Pope Pius (rather Impius) the 4. in the Council
(or rather Conventicle) of Trent; and I doubt not but by propounding this way
of moderation I shall purchase many enemies, and lose more friends: However I
shall comfort my self with that saying of the Apostle, If I seek to please
men I am not the servant of Christ. And I shall entreat all my fellow laborers
in Geds Vineyard, the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, V. 3, 4, 5.
to look into the 13. Chapter of Ezekiel, where a woe is pronounced against
those Prophets, who are like the Foxes in the Deserts, i.e. hide their heads,
which go not up into the gaps, neither make up the hedge of the house of
Israel. This Text set a spur to my backward intentions; it stirred me up to
snatch a Candle out of another man's hand to give light to them that are in
darkness, and are misled with corrupt and blind Teachers; whose aim is to
pull others out of their seats that they may step into them themselves: and
when such giddy-braine Drivers shall get into the Chariot box, when men led
with Fancy and Ambition shall sit at the Helm of our Church, then woe be to
the State, woe be to the Kingdom. I fear they will increase our misery and
confusion. To prevent all which, and their inevitable ruin, I desire all good
men to join with me in their prayers to God for an happy and an honorable
Union between the King and his Subjects, that Mercy and Truth may meet
together, Righteousness and Peace kiss each other.

Amen.

T. N.

Faults escaped, correct thus:

Page 2. line 2. read (...). p. 6. l. 2. read ( i.e. the Presbytery) to see
it ratified. p. 8. l. 23. read, this inference.

PALAEMON: OR, THE GRAND RECONCILER.
I Remember a passage in the Preface of a judicious Work written by Mr. H. one
of the Assembly, against the Independents:

In that Preface he humbly beseeches the Honorable Houses of Parliament to
settle a Government in the Church, and that with all speed, fearing lest that
if it should continue long without a fence, and without Dressers and Pruners to
purge and weed it, to defend and guard it, Psalm. 80.13.
this Vineyard. would be rooted up by the wild Bores out of the wood: Rome is
a wood full of perplexities and errors; The Jesuited Papists are wild Bores
full of cruelty and malice: And besides these, the little Foxes (the
Schismatics) which we are commanded to take and kill, Cant. 2.15.
these would devour the grapes of the Vineyard, and trample all good Orders
under their feet, by which means there would be laid open a wide gap for all
damnable Heresies, Schisms, and Errors, which in a short time would spring up
and cover the face of the Church. The truth of this we have now found by sad
experience. Two black Devils, Heresy and Schism, attended with a train of
horrid opinions raised from Hell that region of darkness, have marched in
triumph with great boldness in all quarters of our Land, and spawned the
poison of their contagious Tenets, which have been silenced for many ages, and
scarce heard of till this. And thus whilst we are disputing what government is
best, our Ship is sinking; and the Church may rightly say with some alteration,
what the Mariners once to certain Philosophers, (sporting with their danger,
and prating De ente, and non ente in a storm whilst they were perishing)
(...); Do you sport with your pens and tongues whilst my enemies are diving
into my bowels with their swords, and raking in my wounds? And well may the
Church take up that sad lamentation of the Prophet Jeremy, Lam. 4.1.
How is the gold become dim, and the most fine gold changed, and the stones of
the Sanctuary are scattered in every corner of the streets? How is the beauty
of our Jerusalem defaced? How are the beautiful flowers of this our Garden
wasted? I could spend many sheets in such mournful Quomodos: But as it is the
property of a good Physician not to fill his Patients ears with (...), but to
apply a remedy or a fit cure (and that with care and speed) for his grief or
malady; so it is as vain to weep over a gasping and dying Church, and not to
propose a Medicine to prevent its ruin. I dare not be so bold as to prescribe
of my self what Cordial is fittest for a bleeding State, and to advise how
the ruins of this our Vineyard may be repaired: Only this I dare in all
humility assert, that there are two Fences most expedient; the one to keep Gods
wrath out, and that is our hearty sorrow for our sins; the other, good
government, to keep good order in, and with it to maintain quietness and
peace within our walls, which peace is Religions Nurse: My earnest and hearty
desire of which happy peace (by a blessed reunion of the disjoynted members of
this Kingdom to their King) moved me to take courage, notwithstanding the
Tobiahs and Sanballats that oppose it, to collect, as was once desired, out of
the approved Work of Mr. Thorndike, The Book is entitled, The Primitive
Government of Churches.
a model of the best and most ancient Church government, settled by the
Apostles in the East and Western Churches, for which we have a full and clear
authority out of the holy Scriptures, and which I doubt not will satisfy all
parties but the Independents, who would turn Christian liberty into
licentiousness, not allowing any Government either in the State or Church.

The Government which that worthy man labors to commend to the judgment of our
Nehemiahs our State-Governours, is that which is most consistent with the
Crown and the Supremacy of the King, which (as his Majesty himself confesses
in his Answer to the Nineteen Propositions) is tempered and allayed with an
Aristocracie, i. e. the Authority of a Parliament His great Council to advise
Him in all affairs which concern the welfare of the State. In reference to
which, the Government of the Church founded by the Apostles, and which is
certainly the only remedy to prevent disorders in Ecclesiastic and Lay
persons, is a mixed Government, consisting of Bishops and Presbyters: Which that
it was established by the Apostles, he evidences by many ensuing arguments;
laying down first these four undeniable Truths, on which he builds the fabric
of his learned Discourse: 1. That the Apostles during the time of their
continuance upon earth, took upon them the oversight of those Churches which
they planted, 2. That each Apostle fixed his abode in, and placed his care upon
some one particular Church, though all the world were to them a Diocesle; in
that they undertook to preach the Gospel to all Nations. 3. That the Apostles
were Bishops of their several Churches, which they took into their care and
charge. 4. That the Bishops were successors to the Apostles; Because they were
trusted with the oversight of one Church, which the Apostles for their own
time afforded to all within their Quarters.


SECT. I.
TO illustrate the truth of these four Positions, and withal to prove that
the Churches were at first governed by Bishops and Presbyters, he begins with
the first Church, the Church of Jerusalem, Mother of all Churches, from whence
the sound of the Gospel went out into all the world. This Church was under the
charge of James, the son of Alpheus, one of the Apostles, and his Presbyters;
No doubt by the consent and appointment of the other Apostles, providing for
the Church there before their departure into other coa^^s. This is comirmed too
by Ignatius and Clem. Alexandrinus.
This appears by many pregnant passages of the Scriptures, as, Galar 1.18.
Gal. 2.9. Act. 15.1, 13, 19. Gal. 2.12. All these places prove that Saint James
had the charge of that Church, as being the chief of that first Council held
there, of which we read, Acts 15. and And when James. Peter and John, etc.
nominated by S. Paul (in that forenamed Epistle to the Gal. 2.9.) before the
rest of the Apostles, some of whose names we find there recorded; To denote
his preheminencie and precedencie in that place.

And that he had Presbyters for his Assistants, appears by the second verse of
the forecited Chapter of the Acts. and chapter 21. v. 19. where we find that S.
Paul at his last coming to Jerusalem, Acts 15.
went in to James, where all the Elders were present, to advise with him that
had the care of that Church, about the great business then in hand, how to
behave himself toward those of the Circumcision who believed.

Of the College of Presbyters at Jerusalem, and of their concurrence and
assistance with S. James in the Government of that Church, we have two
unreprovable Arguments in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 11.30. Act. 15.4, 6,
22, 23.

SECT. II.
THis pattern thus settled in Jerusalem, the Apostles followed in other
Churches, which they converted to the Faith by preaching to them the Word of
Life. These Churches were first founded in Cities, as appears by Tert. lib. de
Praescrip. c. 20. Ac proinde Ecclesias apud unainquamque civitatem condiderunt.
Tertullian, which is most worthy our observation. For because they could not
bestow their pains equally in all places, reason required they should labor
most to plant the faith of Christ in the most populous: From whence it was
propagated through the Towns and Countries which were adjacent to those
Cities, which therefore in time became and were called the Territories,
Parishes, or Dioceses of such or such Churches. Now the form of Government
estated by S. Paul over these Churches, is pointed out to us, Act. 14.23. where
we read that Paul and Barnabas ordained them Presbyters in every Viz. in
Lystra and Derbe, Cities of Lyconia, and in Iconium.
Church. i. e. Colleges, Bodies or Companies of Presbyters, to order with
common advice and joint consent the Churches planted by them in several
Cities. This appears too by the 20. of Act. 17. where we find that there was a
Bench of Elders at Ephesus, for which Paul sent to Miletus. Philip 1.
Thus in the Church of Philippi, you shall find that the Apostle directed his
Epistle to the Bishops and Deacons there, which must be to the College of
Presbyters next above the Order of Deacons. So when the Apostle writes to the
Thestalonians, 1 These. 12. And we beseech you brethren to know them which
labor among you, and are over you in the Lord: The multitude whereof he
speaks is to be understood like wise of the body or company of the
Presbyters. And in all Church Writers you shall find continual remembrance of
these Presbyters, whenever there is speech of Mother Churches in Mother
Cities.

Now the Presbyters being styled in the holy Scriptures by the name of Bishops,

We must needs answer Negatively: Resp.
And the truth of this will appear out of Act. 20.17. where the Apostle using
these words to the Presbyters of Ephesus, Take heed to your selves, and to the
whole flock, over whom the holy Ghost has made you EPISCOPOS, Bishops, or
Overseers. Where, as he gives the name of Bishops to the Bresbyters, so he
addresseth his instructions to none befides. From whence we may probably infer,
That at that time there were no Bishops; If there had been any, S. Paul would
have mentioned them with respect to the eminency of their office.

So we find none at Philippi, Phil. 1.6.
as is evident by the Epigraph or Inscription of that Epistle to the
Philippians: None in the Church of Corinth, as is collected by S. Ambrose, and
others, from the many and great disorders which the Apostle sharply taxes, 1
Cor. 11.21. All which happened, Vide Tert. de Praeserip. c 36. where he calls
the forenamed Churches Apostoloram Cathedras. By which it appears that the
Apostles sat there as chief.
because there was no Bishop to compose the differences of that Church in the
Apostles absence.

It seems then, that the Apostle himself had taken the chief charge and
oversight of those Churches wherein he had planted bodies of Presbyters. This
appears by that place in the 2 Cor. 11.28. Besides those things which are
without, that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches. See
Acts 15 36. 1 Cor. 5.4. where he proceeds in the sentence of Excommunication
against the incestuous person, and requires of the church ( i.e. the
Presbyter) to see it satisfied. And the whole frame of his Epistles contains
the Acts of his Spiritual Government, which he reserved to himself in chief
over the Churches which he himself had planted. The like may be asserted of
Saint Peter, in respect of those Churches committed to his charge. Vid. 1 Pet.
5.1. where he directs his exhortation of feeding the flock to none but
Presbyters, which St. Hierome long since has maintained out of the 13. to the
Hebrews 17. where the Apostle writes in the plural number, Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your selves, etc.

SECT. III
THings being thus settled, when the Apostles by reason of that multitude of
business, had not leisure to attend in person upon the Churches which they had
planted, they appointed certain Heads or Superintendents over the company of
Presbyters, which Heads ever since have retained the name of Bishop.

Thus were Timothy and Titus made Bishops over the Churches of Crete and Asia,
Whose Mother Church was Ephesus.
when it was revealed to the Apostle S. Paul, that from thenceforth he was to
make the Western parts of the world his Diocese, vid. Act. 19.21. And it was
at Ephesus where S. Paul thus bespake the Elders, Act. 20.25. And now behold, I
know that all you among whom I have gone preaching the Kingdom of God shall
see my face no more. And knowing by revelation, that he was to serve God no
more in those Eastern parts, Vid. Tit. 1.5.
he appointed those two Disciples Timothy and Titus to be in his stead over
those Churches: And that their charge was as great as that of Bishops is not
questioned by those who are versed in the most ancient Records of our Church.
Quid est Episcopus nisi primus Presbyterorum, says St. Augustine: Therefore if
Timothy and Titus had a full power and authority to ordain Presbyters and
Deacons, and to fit them with instructions to manage their several offices, we
may not doubt out of a ^ond nicety to style them Bishops, or Overscers, for
that they were the Heads of their several Presbyters, and had a directive and
coercive power over them in their particular charges, which might be proved by
many places in the holy Scriptures. We may conclude then that S. Paul, in that
he placed two of his prime Disciples in two principal Cities Of Crete and
Ephesus.
in which there were Presbyters, and gave them in charge to ordain Presbyters
in every City, as there should be need: Hence (I say) we may infer, that our
Apostle thus settling the Eastern Churches, and appointing them their Heads and
Bodies of Ecclesiastical Governors, Rev. 2.3. chap. This is also manifest by
Ignatius his Epistle, who was S. John's Disciple, who likewise makes often
mention of Bishops and Presbyters.
intended to leave a pattern which afterward should be followed in all Ages.
And that this Government was settled in Asia under Timothies charge, it appears
by S. John's seven Epistles sent from our Lord to the 7. Churches, and directed
to the Angels there, who no doubt were Bishops. And that act of his in
directing his Epistles to one in the name and behalf of the whole Church,
argues the eminency of the Head fit to answer for the body it represents.

SECT. IV.
ANd that the same form of Government which was settled in Jerusalem and the
forenamed Churches, was likewise established in the Church of Antioch, may be
proved by that Text in the 13. of Acts, where we read, Act. 12.2.
that there were in the Church of Antiochia certain Prophets and Teachers, and
as they ministered unto the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them; and when they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands upon them, they sent them away. It is
safe to affirm, that these Prophets and Teachers were no other then that rank
and order of Presbyters, because we read, that they ministered unto the Lord
and gave imposition of hands, which was the work of ordinary Ministers, though
that particular imposition of hands upon Paul and Barnabas was not an
ordination of Paul and Barnabas, but a separation of them, v. 2. and
destinating them to distinct Countries. The Heads of the Church were S. Paul
and Peter, as appears by Ignatius in his Epistle ad Magn. where we have these
words For at Antiochia the Disciples were first called Christians, Paul and
Peter founding the Church. But to untwist a doubt which some may make, that is,
How it came to pass, that there were two Heads of that Church? Gal. 2.9, 10.
We may answer, that there were two several congregations at one and the same
time there; the one of the Gentiles, called by the Apostle Uncircumcision; the
other of the Jews; the care of the one was committed to Peter, the other to S.
Paul. These two Apostles being called away by their employments in other parts,
took the same course with this Church which before was done by S. Paul with
those which he commended to the care of Timothy and Titus: For, both
congregations being by that time united together in a sweet harmony of Love and
Peace, he commended them jointly to the care of Euodius the Bishop, who was
predecessor to Ignatius. To maintain yet further the truth of the position we
are assured by the authority of Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, that Dionysius the
Areopagite, S. Paul's Convert, was Bishop of Athens. In Alexandria, Act. 17.34.
from Mark the Evangelist (who was first set over that Church) there was a
continued succession of Bishops and Presbyters, even until the times of
Heraclas and Dionysius, as Saint Hierome witnesses in his Epistle to Euagrius.

SECT. V.
HAving proved that the Apostles ordained Presbyters to govern the Churches
planted by their care and pains, the Heads whereof after their departure were
Bishops; from this proof we may easily draw this influence, That the
government of the Churches was for a long time upheld in common by Bishops and
Presbyters, as from the beginning the Presbyters governed jointly with the
Apostles. This inference Mr. Th. confirms at large by many demonstrative and
undeniable arguments, viz. p. 69, 70, 71. where out of Ignatius his Epistle ad
Tra^^ianos, and the Commentaries under S. Ambrose his name upon 1 Timothy 5.1. he
proves what has been asserted. Nothing was done in the Churchly the Bishop
without his Presbyters advice and consent.
S. Ambrose his words are these, Apud omnes utique gentes honorabilis est
senectus, unde and Synagoga and postea Ecclesia seniores habuit sine quorum
consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia.

This likewise is confirmed by S. Hierome upon Titus 1.5. and by the Authority
of S. Cyprian, Ep. 6. And by reason of this concurrence of the Presbyters with
the Bishops in the Government of the Church, it is, that the most ancient
Church Writers comprised both Bishops and Prebyters under the same titles,
entitling the Bishops Presbyters, not because there were then no Bishops (as
some fondly deem) but because both concurred (as has been said) in a joint
care of managing the affairs of the Church.

That their names were confounded Mr. Th. proves out of the Epistle of Clemens,
vide p. 54. and out of Ignatius his Epistle to Hero his Deacon; Vi. Eusebius. Ecc.
Hist. p. 3. c. 23. where one and the same is called (...) and (...).
and also out of Tertul. de praescrip. c. 3. The Apostle S. Peter styles
himself an Elder, 1 Pet. 1.5. of which no other reason can be given but this,
that he so terms himself both in regard of his age, and in regard of his
office, which was common in the care of the Church with the Presbyters. To
evince farther that there was ever a co^munity of names, though a distinction
in the order and office of Bishops and Presbyters, he cites a place out of
Tertull: in his Apol. c. 39. Praesident probati quicque seniores, etc. where by
the name of Elders or Presbyters, is to be understood the order of Bishops;
With this of Tertullian accords that of S. Ambrose, in his 1. Book de Offic.
vid. c. 20. and of Irenaeus, l. 4. c. 43. both which authorities you may read
at large in Mr. Th. book, p. 77, 78, 79. And that both ranks or orders of
Bishops and Presbyters were comprised under the name of Praepositi and
Praesidentes, is clear, as appears by that place of Tertull. de Cor. Mil. c.
3. Eucharistiae Sacramentum nec de aliorum manu quam Praesidentium sumimus. The
like we find in S. Cyprian, Ep. 62. By all which it is manifest, that both
orders had common Names in regard of the community of their office and charge.

As for the form it self, of this Church-consistory, the mixed Government of
Bishops and Presbyters, it relates to a pattern in the Synagogue of the Jews,
for it resembles their public Court of Justice, which they called the
Sanedrin, a great part whereof were Priests and Levites, and had the hearing of
all sorts of causes. We have S. Jerome for our Advocate to confirm this
resemblance between the Bishops and Presbyters, and that high Court of the
Jews.

He in his Comment upon Titus, speaking of Bishops conjoined with Presbyters,
says thus, Imitantur Moysen qui cum haberet in potestate sua praeesse populo
Israeletico septunginta elegit cum quibus populum judicavit. Vid. R. Moses in
Halacoth Sanedrin. c. 1.
But when Moses was dead, a President was chosen over and above the seventy
whom they called the Nasi, who from age to age supplied Moses place, and such
as the Nasi was over the Seventy, is a Bishop over the Presbyters, i. e. chief
both in Dignity and Office; of which there are two parts, (...) and (...), to
rule the Church, ( i. e. to keep those that be under him in obedience to good
Laws) and to perform divine service, to Pray and Preach, and to administer
the Sacraments.

SECT. VI.
NOw because there be some who draw this comparison into consequence, laboring
to prove that the Presbyteries ought to consist part of Elders of the people,
and part of Church Ministers, as the Sanedrin was made up of Priests, Levites,
and Laikes. They must know that the Sanedrin consisted of the chief of the
People, as well as Priests and Levites, because the chief causes of the
Commonwealth as well as of Religion, passed through their hands, and were
referred to their judgments. The Church in all temporal matters is subject to
the Laws and authority of the Commonwealth: But in those things which concern
the Soul, can we imagine that our Lord did leave her to the charge of any but
to those who are trusted with the Keys of his House, who are spiritual men,
set apart and appointed for the cure of souls? But to prove that the
Presbyteries then in use consisted of none but Ministers of the Church, it will
not be amiss, first to clear that Text in Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.17.
which they urge who labor to maintain that Lay persons were in the Apostles
times admitted into Presbyteries. Let the Elders that rule well be counted
worthy of double honor, especially those that labor in the Word and Doctrine.
These words carry at the first sound an appearance of two sorts of Elders, the
one of which they would have Preachers, the other only Rulers. 1 Pet. 5.2.
But we must answer this Objection, first by an undeniable assertion taken out
of St. Peter's exhortation to his Presbyters, and out of St. Paul's charge to the
Presbyters of Ephesus, Act. 20. Act. 20.28.
Both their exhortations imply thus much, That the Presbyters duty did consist
in this, to feed the Flock of Christ, and to oversee it. We assert therefore
that their office was both to govern and to teach; both which are plainly
intimated in those qualities which the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.2, 5. ascribes as
proper to Bishops, i. e. (as Mr. Th. acknowledges) to Presbyters. Both too are
contained in that very passage which is alleged to evince the necessity of
Lay Elders; for those Elders that rule well are such as labor in the Word and
Doctrine. Secondly, to the objection we answer thus, That in that place the
Apostle intended only to difference the Presbyters by the execution of their
functions, and not to make any difference in the functions themselves: Read
Mr. Mede his exposition upon that Text of 1 Timothy 5.17. Vid. Medes Diatr.
For the function and office was one and the same, belonging to one and the
same Ecclesiastique person, his office was to rule and teach; this latter was
rightly accounted the most eminent point of that Function; he that took
special pains in this, (which the word (...) implies) and withal did rule
well, was worthy of double honor in the judgment of St. Paul, and this in the
judgment of the most learned Interpreters is conceived to be the meaning of
the Text.

Again, what if we should not deny, Ephesians. 4.4. etc. Romans 12.6. 1 Cor. 12.28.
but confess what is evident and clear by many Texts, that the Holy Ghost
distributed in that infancy of the Church many personal gifts and special
endowments on several persons to be employed in the edification of particular
Assemblies; amongst which gifts this of ruling might be one, which the Holy
Ghost might bestow on some to assist the Presbyters in their government.
Although this be granted to have been in the time of the Apostles, yet if any
man should now presume to draw their example into imitation, I would ask him
this question; What commission he or any man has to turn temporary indowments
into perpetual places? I am sure he has none. What might be expedient in the
Apostles days, may not be thought convenient in ours. And if we should
endeavor to do now what then was done, I fear the world would be turned
upside down, and all things brought to confusion. But to conclude this grand
Controversy between England and Geneva; Mr. Th. who comes not short of any in
the skill of Antiquity, assures us that we shall never find in any ancient
Author the least mention of Lay Elders in the government of the Church in that
manner as is practiced by the Genevists. The contrary he proves out of
Tertullian, Page 106.108.
and out of the Commentaries under St. Ambrose his name upon Titus: by which it
is manifest that the Elders then in use were Doctores, such as were employed in
the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments.

SECT. VII.
THis great doubt being, I suppose, cleared, and it being sufficiently proved,
that Lay Elders have no right to the ordering of Church affairs, or meddling
with spiritual things which concern the good and welfare of men's souls: Mr.
Th. proceeds to discover out of the most ancient Authors what were the bounds
of the office of Bishop and Presbyter, and in what cases the Bishop had the
preeminence.

He tells us that the office of Divine Service, i. e. of Teaching or Preaching
and administering the Sacraments, were wont to be reserved to the Bishop in
honor of his place and eminency of it. i. e. when he came into any Church the
Presbyter ever gave way to him to preach.
This is witnessed by Just. Martyr, who relates in plain terms that the
Sermon used to be made, and the Eucharist celebrated by the (...), or Bishop;
so that the Presbyters did not preach but when the Bishop was absent, and
administered not the Sacraments, i. e. did not consecrate in his presence. This
is evident in the life of St. Austin, by the story of Valerius, a Greek Bishop,
who coming into St. Austines Church at Hippo, desired Saint Austine (who was
not then a Bishop) to officiate, in regard that he was not well skilled in the
African, nor the people in the knowledge of the Greek tongue. Tertullian
affirms the same, l. de Bapt. c. 17. so does Ignatius in Epist. ad Smyrn.
Where to show the preeminence of the Bishop he proves, that as by the ancient
constitutions of the Church the Presbyters ought not to do any thing without
the consent of the Bishop, nor the Bishop in great matters without the consent
and advice of his Presbyters, so neither ought the Laity to do any thing in
the Church without the Bishop and Presbyters approbation or liking. This may be
farther proved out of Ignatius in his Epist. ad Trall. And so still in Ignatius
the Presbyters are assistant to the Bishop in all things. Which is likewise
confirmed by the sixth Canon of the Council of Gangra. Vi. Mr. Th. p. 118,
119. Where he also proves that the Deacons were not suijuris, i. e. had not
the sole disposing of the maintenance of the Church and poor, but did only
execute the will and judgment of the Bishop and Presbyters, and distributed
the Churches alms to those whom they appointed.

SECT. VIII.
HAving thus declared in part the preeminence of the Bishop over the
Presbyters, i. e. the privilege he has in some cases above these, and also
that the Deacons as well as the Lay-persons are subject to the power of both
the former, Mr. Th. proceeds to discourse of two particulars in the Office
common to Bishops and Presbyters, wherein the people have a share, and may
claim an interesse.

The one is the discipline of Penance; The other the ordaining of Ministers.
And first of all by way of manuduction to his discourse, he explaines that
Text, Matthew. 16.19. And I will give thee the keys of heaven: And whatsoever
thou bindest on earth shall be bound in heaven; whatsoever thou shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Which power of binding and loosing he
affirms to be the same with that given to the Apostles, John 20.24. Whosoever
sins ye remit they are remitted unto him: and whose soever sins ye retain they
are retained. The Bishop and Presbyters that exercised this power of binding
and loosing, remitting and retaining sins, represented the office of Judges and
Physicians: Lapsis fratribus per poenitentiam medela quaeratur. Firmil. in Ep.
ad Cypr. Ep. 75.
Judges they were in shutting Gods house upon offenders, and binding their
sins upon their consciences; Physicians, in prescribing the medicine of
repentance: And in that respect alone are said to remit sins; (as a Physician
who does no more but prescribe the medicine, or at the most see it prescribed,
is said to cure a man's disease.) And having a spiritual eye to judge when
repentance is sound and unfeigned, upon due knowledge of this they may assure
men that their sins are pardoned, and pronounce their absolution
declaratively, whereby they unloose that knot wherewith their consciences were
tied.

The medicine of Repentance prescribed to a delinquent, was wont to be
strengthened with the prayers and intercession of the Congregation, but in the
chief place of the Bishop and Presbyters, whose prayers were correspondent to
that which is given to make physic work. Vi. Mat. 18.19. out of which text
following that wherein Christ gives to the Apostles power of binding and
loosing, may be proved that the Congregation interceding by their prayers with
God for a sinner, in this respect bore a part, and had a share with the Church,
(the Bishop and Presbyters) in the discipline of penance which these imposed
upon delinquents; but i. e. The congregation or people.
they meddled not with the keys of Gods house, i. e. they did not (as the Jews
were wont to do) usurp the power of Excommunication upon causes of their
particular interesse, but left that wholly to the Church, i. e. to the
Eccelesiasticall Governors, to whom only that power did belong. Dic Ecclesiae,
Matthew. 18.17. implies as much. That censure of Excommunication (as appears by
1 Cor. 5.13.) did cut men off from the conversation of Christians, (for that
such persons forfeited by their heinous sins the privilege of Gods sons)
and so delivered them over to the power of Satan, to be led captive by him at
his will and pleasure: As those among the Israelites that lodged without the
Camp were in danger to be lickt up and devoured by the Amalekites. That course
of Excommunication as it was a preservative in regard of those that were not
tainted, yet might be, so was it medicinal in respect of the sick which were
usually restored to their former soundness by shame and grief: Vi. 1 Cor. 5.6
1 Timothy 1.20.
and this power of excommunicating was exercised in common by the Bishops and
Presbyters: which practice was a good gloss upon the words of our Savior to
Peter, Behold, I give thee the keys of heaven: for what was promised to Peter
was given to his fellow Apostles, but was to rest in the Church throughout all
ages. Witness that of Saint Austine, Ep. 79. Si hoc in Ecclesia fit, Petrus
quando claves accepit Ecclesiam sanctam significavit. Vid. Mr. Th. p. 143.
where you shall find for the confirmation of this an authority out of Tertull.
Apol. c. 39. and another out of St. Aust. Homil. ult. ex 50. Hom. c. 11.

How because the Church cannot proceed in their Censures effectually or to any
good purpose, but by virtue of those laws which are put in force and
maintained by the Secular powers; and because it cannot be expected that the
people should yield a voluntary submission to the Discipline of the Church,
farther then it is enabled by the Laws of the Realm to exercise it; Therefore
it is much to be wished that those wholesome and useful Laws, by which the
Ministers of the Church are enabled, directed, and constrained to exercise and
discharge this necessary part of their office, may be revived and put into act;
that so the power of the Keys given to the Church by our Lord, being assisted
and strengthened by the Secular arm, may be enabled to reduce all notorious
offenders to a good life and conversation by the Discipline of penance, and to
cut them off from the Church that refuse it. Then this Discipline of penance
there is not a more puissant way to beat down Vice, and to discountenance
Malefactors in a Christian Commonwealth: In regard that when they have
satisfied the Laws of the Kingdom with the loss of goods and reputation, or
have escaped death by the connivence and gentleness of their Judges.
Nevertheless if the discipline of the Church were exercised upon them, they
should not communicate with the people of God, till the Church were satisfied
of their correction and amendment. This also would give satisfaction to the
tender consciences of those good Christians, who like to those in St. Cpyrians
time are scandalized when they see them admitted to the Communion who live
(without any the least amendment) in a constant practice and profession of
sin. There being then so much good, Cypr. Ep. 551.
and the prevention of so much ill contained in the Discipline of penance, let
it be the hearty desire of all knowing and well-affected Christians toward the
State and Church, that the Discipline commended to us by our Savior, and
practiced by the Apostles, may be with all care and speed reformed and brought
again into use.

SECT. IX.
HAving thus unfolded the nature of that power wherewith Christ invested his
Apostles, and from them derived it to his Church, and that is the power of the
Keys, whereof there be two appendixes, Excommunication and the Discipline of
Penance, Mr. Th. proceeds to the discovery of the other part of the Churches
Office, and that is the constituting and ordaining of Ministers, of which there
be some vestigia or footsteps left for our imitation in the holy Scriptures,
as, when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent
them away, Act. 13.3. Act. 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift that was
given thee by Prophecy, with the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery:
which words are expounded, 2 Timothy 1.6. by imposition of my hands; so likewise 1 Timothy 5.22. To which we may add the choice of Matthias, Act. 1.23. and that
passage in the choice of the seven Deacons, Act. 6.3. Look ye out among you
seven men of honest report: and verse 5. and 6. They chose Steven and the rest,
and set them before the Apostles, and when they had prayed they laid their
hands upon them. Which place is alleged by St. Cyprian to prove that the
people have an interesse, and ought to have a share in the ordination of
Ministers. And that this was the custom and practice of the Primitive Church
to publish the names of those persons who were to be ordained, that so the
people discussing their lives and manners, might by their approbation ratify
the ordination of such whom they knew to be men well gifted, and of an holy
conversation. This appears by a remarkable passage in the life of Alexander
Severus, by an excellent saying of St. Cyprian to this purpose, Ordinationes
Sacerdotum sub populi assistentis conscientia fieci. Cypr.
and by the 6. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon. By all which it is evident
that the people did not nominate, but only approve by their common suffrage
and consent the persons who were to be ordained. And that the Bishop did advise
with his Presbyters about the nomination of those who were to be ordained
Deacons or Ministers, this is clear by those words of St. Cyprian, Ep. 54.
where he excuses himself to his Clergy, that he had ordained Saturus and
Optatus alone, without their consent and approbation. By this we may collect
what was practiced in that age of the Church.

First, there was a nomination or publication of the persons names to the
people. Secondly, upon their knowledge and approbation of the persons to be
ordained, there followed imposition of hands, wherein consisted the
accomplishment of the whole work, which is therefore called (...) in Greek.
Concerning the Ordination of Bishops only this may be averred out of Saint
Hierome, who has recorded that in the Church of Alexandria the Presbyters were
wont to choose a Bishop out of their own Classis or rank: yet we must not deny
that the first constitution of a Bishop there, who was Hanania, was made by
Mark the Evangelist, as we may see in Eutichius, lately set forth by Mr.
Seldom. And it is evident out of many other Authors, that they nominated the
person to be approved of by the people, and to be ordained by the neighbor
Bishops. This too is maintained by Saint Ambrose in his Comment. upon Ephesians.
4.2. Where we must understand by those words, Multorum Sacerdotum judicium,
Non ordo sed meritum creabat Episcopum multorum Sacerdotum judicio constitutum
etc. Vi. Can. 19. Council. Antioc.
as well the judgment of the Presbyters by whom the Bishop was elected, as of
the Bishops of other Churches by whom he was ordained, and with whom he was to
preserve the unity of the Church. And unless three Bishops at the least were
present, it was not usual to ordain one. Thus without consent of the Bishops
all proceedings of the Clergy and people were quite disabled, and to no purpose
in the Primitive times.

And although the Bishops in some Churches usurped the power of Ordination of
Ministers without the consent of their Presbyters, Vi. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in 1 Timothy
It. Hieron. in Ep. ad Euagr.
however it is manifest by the joint consent of the Fathers (who witness that
the Presbytery was a Bench assistant to the Bishop, without advice whereof
nothing of moment was done or acted) and by the practice of the Apostles, that
the Presbyters ought to have a share with the Bishop in the imposition of
hands. 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 16.
Timothy received imposition of hands from Saint Paul and the Presbyters of
Autiochia. This last Thesis may be confirmed by the authority of Saint Cyprian,
who often expresses himself in this particular, That he would never ordain any
without the advice of his Presbyters, and consent of the people: which advice
implies that they concurred with him in the Ordination of Ministers. And as for
imposition of hands, that the Presbyters also conjoined with the Bishops in
this, it is evident by the 22. Episcopus sine Concilio Clericorum suorum
Clericos non ordinet; ita ut civium assensum and testimonium quaerat.
Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage, and by the aforesaid Epistle of
Firmilianus Bishop of Cesarea Cappadocia: as also by Ignatius his Epistle to
Hero.

By all these authorities it evidently appears that the Presbyters concurred
with the Bishops in the act of Ordination, assisting them by their prayers,
gracing them by their presence, and countenancing their act by a joint consent
in their Suffrages.

The like is affirmed in the fourth Council of Carthage, c. 3. where it is
provided and appointed, that when the Bishop gives imposition of hands, the
Presbyters also shall impose theirs by his, which they did to argue their
consent to what was done by the Bishop. In which act the people had no share.
And this joint act of the Bishop and Presbyters in laying their hands upon the
heads of the Ministers, signified the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, which
they then prayed might light upon them who are to be ordained.

As for the constituting and ordaining of Bishops, the advice of Mr. Th. is
most observable and weighty. He advises in the first place, that with all
circumspection and providence great care be used in ordering the choice of
them. His meaning is that if the people in the primitive Church had an
interesse or share in giving consent to those who were to be ordained
Presbyters, much more must we think it very just and fit, that the votes of the
Presbyters and consent of the people should now precede and concur in the
designing of such persons, under whom and with whom they are to guide and be
guided in spiritual affairs; such persons are Bishops who should be men most
holy in their life, and most eminent for learning. Most happy would this Nation
be if all our Prelates were such; and if that prescribed method were duly
observed in the choice, such would there always or for the most part be, who
should fit at the Helm of this poor distracted Church, now like to that Ship
in which Peter was tossed, and ready to sink for want of good Pilots.

SECT. X.
LAst of all, because this Apostolical government by Bishops and Presbyters is
chiefly exercised in Ordination and Penance, a question may arise, Whether it
belongs to the Bishop alone, without his Presbyters, to censure the offenses
(whether in doctrine or manners) of those persons who have received holy
orders. Mr. Th. clearing first that place in 1 Timothy 5.19, 20. answers the
question, Against an Elder receive not an accusation but under 2. or 3.
witnesses, etc.
That without all doubt it was the practice of the primitive times for the
Bishop with his Presbyters to take the examination of offending Ministers,
whom, being convicted of their offense by the mouth, ( i. e. the asseveration)
of 2. or 3. witnesses, he in the presence of his Presbyters did rebuke before
all in the sight and hearing of the congregation, that others thereby might be
stricken with fear to offend God and his people by their scandalous
conversation. If this course had been taken formerly with Ministers and
Deacons, it might have so pleased God that the Church should not now have layen
bleeding and gasping in this fatal ruin: Neither would there have been given
to our enemies so just an occasion of relating sad truths in Gath and Askelon.

Thus following the method of that most learned Gentleman, I have cast his
larger Model into a lesser frame, that the cmmon people may hereby be better
instructed and advised not to think of destroying Bishops, but rather labor
and wish for the restoring of their Presbyteries; which form of government
being set down and delivered in the holy Scriptures, is commended and
countenanced by the agreement of historical Truth, and primitive practice, as
of the Apostles and other succeeding ages. And seeing that the Bishops
succeeded the Apostles in place and function, I cannot but wonder that those
should endeavor to destroy them, those who are Sons of the Apostles Faith and
Doctrine. S. Hierom of all Church Writers least favorable to the Order of
Bishops, is nevertheless most large in acknowledging that without it the peace
of particular Churches could not be preserved. In witness whereof we may
appeal to those many and happy days which our Church since the Reformation by
means of it has enjoyed, without such ruptures and factions which have
happened in a neighboring Church, whose people were always observed to be of
all others most daring, in matters of Religion, to innovate opinions, and break
the bonds of peace, by which the good and welfare of Church and State is
promoted. To re-establish which blessed peace (after which we groan in our
prayers with panting desires) it could be wished that we might see the Heads
of our Church, the Bishops, stand (as Mr. Th. expresses it well) in their right
places, being set over Bodies or Colleges of Presbyteries, which should
consist of men conform to the Church both in Doctrine and Discipline. To the
want of which government, although some have attributed those many
inconvenciences wherewith the Church is cumbred, yet most of the Clergymen
that are versed in the affairs of the Church, wishing its prosperity and
peace, do acknowledge and confess with a protestation against it, That there
is one in convenience now settled in the Church, which has done much mischief,
and cannot be redressed without a public Act of Parliament: It is the
committing of Jurisdiction at large (even that which by the power of the Keys
received from Christ is proper and essential to the Church) to Lay persons, as
Chancellors and Commissaries etc. who may still retain that office and rank
they hold in regard of those other points of Jurisdiction in charitable causes
annexed by the favor of Princes and Laws of Commonwealths to the Church, As
the probat of Wills, etc.
which is fittest to judge and determine in such cases, yet may be nonplust
sometimes for want of knowledge in the Civil Law, and therefore may and must
have need of such assistants; who, if they moved only in the lower Sphere of
the Law, and meddled not with that Primum mobile, the great wheel of the
Church, the discipline of penance, but did leave the execution of this to the
Bishop and Presbyters. If this were once amended, and officers duly censured by
the Bps and their Presbyters openly in the Church, or in any public place of
Justice: And besides the exercise of this discipline, if they enjoined their
joint pains and parts in the trial and examination of persons who come for
Ordination, providing that none be ordained but those who are either Assistants
of, and are presented to Cures (according to our Laws) if this were faithfully
done, and Ministers without connivence censured who should offend either in
life or doctrine, then should we see Righteousness run down like a stream in
our streets, and Peace would flourish within our walls, and Plenty in our
palaces.

This is my daily prayer, and it is the desire of all good Christians: Da pacem
Domine in diebus nostris.
Give peace in our time O Lord.
O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.


FINIS.
Kind Reader,
The Authors of this Book being by multiplicity of employments detained from
meeting together to revise the whole before the impression was finished, the
Errata swell to a greater number then may stand with the credit of the Book,
but if thou please before the reading of it, with thy pen to correct these
ensuing, we hope it will tend the more to thy satisfaction.

PAge 1. line 5. 1 John 5.22. read Joh. 5.22. p. 5. l. 26. blot out [is]. p. 6.
l. 22. in some Copies [comparing] r. conforming. p. 52. l. 19. three, r. two.
and l. 20. blot out these words [3. It is an exercised power] p. 73. l. 6. in
margin [potentissima] r. potissima. p. 75. l. 7. serve r. swear. p. 82. l. 3.
conventies. r. conventions. and l. 34. essential r. several. p. 84. l. 14.
subject, r. directly and properly subordinate. p. 85. l. 33. essential r.
several. p. 87. l 4. seeing, r. preaching. p. 95. l. 36, 37. blot out those
words [God has not given us the spirit of fear but of power, Tit. 1.7.] p.
96. l. 25. 1 Cor. 19. r. 1 Cor. 14. p. 103. l. 2. (...) r. (...) p. 111. l. 1.
to 5. blot out the sentence from [supposing] to the period. and l. 10. perfect,
r. professed. p. 111. l. 7. because in no. r. but a. p. 115. l. 5. blot out
[joyntly]. p. 118. l. 3. blot out these words [3. He that shows mercy, i. e.
such as were to entertain strangers, relieve the sick, etc. ver. 8.] p. 121. l.
10. blot out [yet] p. 123. l. 34. blot out [well] p. 169. l. 11. 1 Cor. 4.21.
r. 1 Cor. 4.20. p. 172. l. 17. blot out [of the Church] p. 195. l. 5. a
multitude r. multitudes. p. 214. l. 28. blot out [greater], and l. 29. r.
(...). Other literal faults will be pardoned of course.


