NEW PLOTS Discovered, against the PARLIAMENT, And the PEACE of the KINGDOM.

In two Letters, the one sent from the Marquis of Hartford, to Sir Ralph
Hopton, the other sent from Sir Ralph Hopton to ^he said Marquis.

Also an exact relation of the Treachery of Master Mountague, kinsman to the
Lord Privy Seal, who (notwithstanding his Excellence had commanded the
contrary) delivered Banbury to the Cavaliers, without resistance

Also declaring how the Kings Majesty in his own Person, caused the
inhabitants to be disarmed, imprisoning the Bayliffe, and other well-affected
persons.

LONDON Printed by T. FAUCET. for I. R. Nov. 3. 1642.

The Copy of a Letter sent from the Marquis of Hartford to Sir Ralph Hopton.
Sir Ralph Hopton,
I I have acquainted his Majesty of our disastrous fortune at Minieard, and
Dunstar, occasioned by the multitude of your Countrimens evil dispositions;
and cowardly behavior in them, upon which I remembered a reverent speech of
that worthy Soldier Swin^^n who was General of Ostend in the time of the
Infanta, Arch-Dutchesse of Flanders, (who said that our English nation stood
too much upon their own conceit, and valor, and that he would with a
considerable Army run through our whole Kingdom, knowing the vulgar sort of
our Nation to be faint he^rted and unexperienced in Martial discipline, this
relation of the Generals happened to be true, for in our best actions, and in
the midst of our hopeful success, Captain Digbies, Sir John Sto^^ls, and
your own Soldiers ran cowardly away from us, insomuch that had it not been
for that small number of my own Horse and Foot, we had lost our Ordnances,
hazarded our persons, and lo^t the honor of that days work, I have heard
that you have many stout and courageous Gentlemen at this present on your side,
to wit, the Lord Mohone, Mr. Arrundell, Sir Bevill Greenvill, and others, whom
I hope will not wag with every blast of wind, but with wisdom stand firm,
constant, and faithful to God, their Prince and Country, I desire you to let
me understand the number of your Forces in those parts, that I may assure his
Majesty therewith, and if any occasion you shall have of my furtherance, you
shall not need thereof, in the Interim be steadfast in your resolution, and
manage those places under your Command, with valiant men, and no doubt but God
will prosper you herein, and perpetually favor you and yours, Vale.

HARTFORD.

Sir Ralph Hoptons Answer to the Marquis.
May it please your Lordship with humble pardon, according to my weak ability
I have considered your worthy advertisements and to vindicate my self and
Country of your Lordships mistake, I shall make it appear, that my actions and
those under my Command have bin concurrant to your Lordships Command and I have
in brief devoted my self to answer to every particular of your Lordships
Letter.

First, whereas your Lordship condemned our endeavors and cowardly behavior at
Miniard and Dunstar, your Lordship may well remember and saw three to one of
the Earl of Bedfords forces forsaken him, then those of our County under your
Lordship might see that his Majesty's forces under your Lordships command had
good success considering the great odds (five to one.)

Secondly, that whereas your Lordship remembered me of the General his speech
of Ostend, that our Nation stood too much upon our own strength and valor and
that he would with a few experienced soldiers run through our Kingdom. My Lord,
the question herein is not disputable, for nature at home binds filial
affection, and one Brother or one Nation to fight against another is not
warrantable by Gods laws, and in that respect there might be faint-heartednes
in our Nation, but my Lordlet the General of Ostead or any other foreign
Princes invade this our land. I know that your Lordship believes that our
Nation will not run, or give one foot of ground to such an Enemy, for we are
all sencible with whom we quarrel, the father against the Son, and the Son
against the Father, and if Alexander the great, or the Emperor of Persia were
now alive, whose Armies drank Rivers of water, yet my Lord it would daunt the
hearts of these gallants to destroy their own blood.

3. Whereas your Lordship has desire to know the number of our Forces in these
parts, my Lord since the Earl of Bath his apprehending, our soldiers have
revolted, yet we have a considerable strength at Peasants, Foy, Lanceston, and
other places, about the number of 5000. and upwards, and upon all occasions we
can betake our selves to Sea, and so to land where we please, therefore your
Lordship may stand upon firm ground in these parts, if you please to hazard
your noble person among us.

My Lord, Nature and Nature, Fortune and Fortune, Action and Action, State and
State, Time past, and Time present, your Lordship now seeeth, I will here
break off, for I find that I have exceeded the convenient length of a Letter,
and come short of such discourse at this Subject does deserve, your Lordship
may perhaps find many things in this Letter superfluous, and most of it lame, J
will as well as I can supply that defect upon your Lordships second writing, if
your Lordship call me to an account, what confusion soever your Lordship finds
in my order and method, is not only my fault, whose wits are confounded with
too much business, but the fault of the season* which confusion and disorder
has not only bin wincked at, but warranted, if there be but any one thing
which your Lordship may make use of, J think my pains well bestowed in all,
and howsoever my Council may be weak, yet my wishes shall be as strong as any
man's for your Lordships happiness.

Your Lordships obedient Servant, Ralph Hopton.
A Coppie of a Letter sent to to Mr. Gorge, from Joseph Johnson at Warrington
in Oxfordshire.
COzen Gorge, since the last Post, his Majesty on Thursday night came to
Banbury, with 4000. soldiers, and immediately sent Sir Charles Lucas to demand
entrance into the Town, Mr. Mountague a kinsman of the Lord Privie-Seales, as
is reported, had the total trust and charge thereof by command from the Lord
General, made little or no opposition, but betrayed the trust and the Town he
had in charge, into his Majesty's hands, though the Earl of Essex commanded
him to use his endeavor to resist the Cavaliers but one 4 hours and he would
relieve him, nevertheless his Majesty had free entrance without any
opposition, and his Majesty seized on 3000. men's Armor, and have left the
inhabitants therein quite naked to defend, or offend, and the Cavaliers have so
strengthened it, that it is invinicble for the art of man to take it, the Four
thorough-fares or passages thereto are made so little that it is impossible for
two men to march on a breast, and this has bin done in two days, and for the
Town it self, it is wholly paved and strewed with Hey-forkes, blocks of wood,
pickaxes, spades, and all manner of rusty implements that the wit of man cannot
invent the like.

The Bayliffe and others of the better sort are imprisoned, his Majesty is at
this present at VVoodflocke, and the Lord General his Army at Warrington, I
have nothing for the present more to write, only I will entreat you write the
business of Sir John Conyers, and who is in his room, so I leave you to Gods
protection, and rest,

Your assured Friend and Kinsman Joseph Johnson.
Bletchington, October. 29. 1642.
FINIS.

