A NEW PLEA FOR THE PARLIAMENT. AND THE Reserved MAN resolved: From the serious
consideration of the state of Controversy between the KING and the PARLIAMENT.
Together with Several Answers to some common Objections about this SUBJECT.
As also, Advice to those who are yet unsettled in their thoughts hereabout.
By a Wel-willer to KING and PARLIAMENT.
AS Zeal without Knowledge argues the weakness of the Head; so does Knowledge
without Zeal the rottenness of the Heart: the lightness of the Head, and the
unfoundnesse of the Heart, are the two Epidemicall Diseases of this Kingdom:
Ignorance and Hypocrisy as they are the greatest Enemies to Truth and Piety,
so are they the chief causes of the Kingdoms misery; all men would sceme to
be what few men are in truth: but though Dissemblers are great in number; yet
are the upright stronger in power: there is nothing that has more pretended
friends and real enemies then Peace and Truth; though the Heart of the wicked
hates the Power yet the conviction of their Head would feign palliate their
wickedness with the Form of Godliness: all would wear RELIGIONS Livery. but
few will observe Religions Laws; if Picty be good in profession it is better
in practice; but the profession commands almost every man, and the practice
scarce any at all: of the things of this World men had rather have the
substance then the shadow; but of the things of Heaven, the shadow gives
generally better content then the substance; the form rather then the power of
Godliness: every man by profession will make Christ a King; but by practice
crowns him with Thorns; the Gospel and the Kingdom have few Enemies in show,
but fewer Friends in truth.

The whole Kingdom is divided into two parts, both professing contention for
one common Cause; every man has his Sword in his hand, and would fight for God
and the Kingdom, but knows not where to rank himself: Law and Religion, the
Kingdom and Gospel, are the mutual pleas of each party; who but a villain
will fight against his King? who but a Devil will fight against his GOD? who
but a Rebel, will strike at his King? who but a Rascal will strike at his
Country? A good King is the breath of our nostrilts, the God of goodness, the
life of our souls; our Kingdom is divided; so says King and Parliament; it
cannot long so stand; so faith God and Reason: our Kingdom is in danger, so
says King and Parliament; we must not sit still, so says Law and Conscience:
I would defend both, and offend neither, but if I now sit still I am not a
friend to either; here are two Armies each against other to which to join my
self I know not whether; I am called to help by the one and the other, and
therefore I must not now be a Newter, they both prefesse they fight for to
preserve the same Religion, the same Law; I must not judge the heart, what
shall I do?

1. For resolution of this doubt let us consider these 2 parts.

First what is this 1. Law? 2. Religion?

2. How may I most probably judge, which party is cordial, with whom I ought
to join my self?

First by Law, as is controverted, is meant, all those former Acts of
Parliament never yet reversed, together with the Privileges of Parliament,
(the fountain and life of Law) the chiefest whereof, is to reverse, repeal,
ordain and enact what Laws and Statutes, old and new, they shall think fit,
for the present benefit and welfare of King and Kingdom.

This is the Law now in controversy, viz. The Statute Law of the Land, the
Power and Privilege of Parliament, which is the great Inheritance of the
Kingdom, and that which does distinguish us from slaves and vassalls.

Secondly, by Religion is meant the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
God, as they have, and shall find it agreeable to the word of God.

This is that Religion which they both say they fight for.

God and the Kingdom; is this the Cause? Religion and Law, is this the
Quarrel? Piety and Humanity, grace and iugenuity will not admit of an unworthy
newtrality. I will fight for God for I haa rather die a believing Christian,
then live an Atheist, or Papist: I will fight for my Country, for I had rather
die a freeman, then live a slave or vassal; but if both Parties fight in the
behalf of the same Cause, whence is the rise of the Quarrel?

The Parliament affirms their Adversaries to be a Malignant Party, which often
apart, and now together do strongly oppose the life and power of Religion and
Laws and this is affirmed by the adverse Party against the Parliament.

Both affirm the same thing, I am where I was, I cannot Judge the heart, what
shall I do.

For further direction herein, consider the second Part and that is.

How may I judge which Party is cordial, with whom I ought to jonee?

For Answer hereunto, consider two things.

First, who and what are the Parties on each side.

Secondly, what are their practices in the managing of their Quarrel.

First, for the Parties on each side: On the one side, we have a lawful
freechosen Parliament, consisting of the King, Lords and Commons of the Land;
(we will not understand the King as the head of a Faction) we have moreover all
known, godly learned Ministers of the Kingdom, together with all godly
conscieneious People. both Gentry and Commons, of all sorts, ranks and
conditions whatsoever.

2. On the other side, we have most of the Papists of the Kingdom many whereof
are chief Commanders, together with the Popish party of Lords, Gentry and
Commons, with all the Praelaticall Faction of Bishops, with their Dependants,
all Popish superstitious, idle, deboist, scandalous Ministers, Priests and
Cathedral finging-fellowes in the Land, with diverse proclaimed Traitors, once
fled from the Justice of the Parliament, and now in great power and Office in
their Forces: as also some lately in Rebellion in Ireland together with the
quondam grinding oppressing Judges, Pattentees; all Delinquents, never
Parliament proof, with many ignorant, silly and not a few curling, swearing
banning blaspheming wretches of all qualities from the Kings Court, to the
Country Cart. These are the Parties on each side.

Are these the Parties? Malignity in the one party is as hard to be believed as
Sincerity in the other; that the one party should intent mischief, and the
other preservation to Law and Religion; it is hard to say which is the greatest
wonder, that there should such a general Apostasy from Religion, and morality
to baseness, and impiety, as is implied in the Parliaments party, was never
known, no not in the days of Julian: and such a general conversion, from
prophannesse, and malignity, to grace and ingennity as is implied in the second
party, was never known, no, not in the dates of Peter, that such an Apostasy
of the one party, and such a conversion of the other, should at once meet
together, seems as strange, as if the Inhabitants of Heaven and Hell, should
change qualities and habitations; well, once Angels, are now Devils, once
Devils, are now Saints the later days shall produce great matters of this
nature, the first shall be last, the last shall be first, I am still where I
was, how shall I judge? For further direction herein:

Consider secondly, having seen the Parties; what are their practices in the
managing of the Controversy; here let us observe two things.

First how each Enemy has been detected to other.

Secondly, how each Enemy has proceeded against other.

First, the Parliament Party etc. by the several complaints, cries and
Petitions of the People for redress has found out their Adversaries, utterly
mallignant against Religion and Law.

Religion, in Doctrine, in Discipline.

In Doctrine, they arfirme and appeal to the knowledge and experience of al
men to give testimony to the truth hereof, that their Adversaries in the chief
and prime Leaders, have for a long season endeavored to undermine the
fundamental points of the Protestant Religion, by silencing our godly, learned
and painful Ministers by corrupting our Universities with Popish and Arminian
Governors in most Colleges by placing superstitious, idle, scandalous
ignorant, non resident and non-preaching Ministers, throughout the Kingdom; by
committing the power of Printing and the Key of the Presles, into the hands of
Popish, Praelaticall, Arminian, Domestic Chaplains: by tolerating, and
countenancing preaching, and printing Popish, Arminian, and licentious Tenets:
that the Pope is not Antichrist, nor Rome Babylon; with the like Popish Tenets:
that men may fall from grace, and be for heaven to day, and for hell to morrow,
with the like Arminian Tenets: That Sunday is no Sabbath, and men may spend it
in pastimes and sports with such like licentious Tenets, etc.

Thus they have been malignant against the Doctrine of the Church.

In Discipline:

Secondly, they likewise affirm (with the like appeal) to the knowledge of
all men, that their adversaries have been always malignant unto Religion, as
in Doctrine, so in Discipline; by prescribing altering, and corrupting forms
of prayer in the Church, by turning Tables into Altars, and placing greater
degree of holiness in one part of the Church than another, by command in
cringings, bowings, duckings: by introducing many guegaws and ridiculous
Innovations of copes, pictures, crucifixes, crosses candle-stickes, tapers,
etc. into the worship of God. Thus they say, they have been malignant against
Religion, in Doctrine, in Worship,

Secondly, they have discovered their adversaries malignant against Law, by
endeavoring to bring in an Arbitrary government, as is evident in in the charge
of Srafford and Canterbury, prime quondam agents of this present faction, which
has had a being, and a working in capite long ago: and we know that operaetio
alicujus rei conseq^^tur essere^; by pleading for and pressing Ship moneys,
coat and conduct moneys. Arbitrarie taxations Monopolies, Pat^n^s, almost for
every thing by re^arding Parliaments (the only remedy of the Kingdoms
misery) before we had one by endeavoring and bringing to pass the
dissolution of them when we had any; and now the destruction of this present
Parliament which they connot dissolve:

Thus the one party has discovered their enemy.

Secondly, the other Party affirm the same against the Parliament etc. viz.
that they are enemies unto Religion, and unto Law; unto Religion here they
alleadg nothing in poyn of Doctrine, but for discipline, they say that they go
about to al^er and change the well ordered Government of the Church by Bishops
with their dependants, a Government honored for so many hundred years
antiquity with so many godly and learned Divines, which has made this Church
famous in the world, with so many Martyrs, and holy men, etc. Moreover, they
affirm, that their Adversaries now discourage Learning, favor ignorant
fellows, Preachers in Tubs. etc. countenance Brownists. Anabaptists,
Schismatics, Separatists, Sectaries, etc Thus they are Malignant against
Religion.

Secondly they say; they are malignant against Law going about to bring in an
Arbitrary Government by voting and making Ordinances, as binding, without the
King and by virtue thereof, to seize upon what is the Kings; therefore the
Subjects may now look to themselves, by compelling men, that are not willing
^o assist in this quarrel, by demanding the twentieth part of their Estates,
by voting men Malignants who have not and do not according to their Estate,
contribute freely to their assistance, by seizing upon their Horses, Arms,
Plate, Money, casting their persons into Prisons, etc.

Thus are they malignant against the Laws of the Land; and thus each Party
has found out his Enemy.

Is this thy case? Alas poor England, thy wound is deep, thy remedy
dangerous; why have thou taught thy Children no better? Do all plead for
truth? Does Truth plead for all? Truth is one, and so are her Children; how is
it they are now fallen out? Truth makes peace, Error contention: all is not
well; where is the fault? good is the Cause and one party with it; each is not
right: one party must fall; I guess which it is; I know what I think, but I
may be deceived; I Will suspend my opinion till know their proceedings.

2. For further satisfaction herein, consider, how each Party, having
discovered, pursues their Enemy.

First, the Parliament, etc. have pursued the Cause of Religion, in point of
Doctrine, after this method, by opening the mouths of godly, learned, and
silenced Ministers, by granting liberty without interruption, for the frequent
and powerful preaching of the Word, wherever men will maintain it; by
promising and preparing for the removal and just punishment of wicked
scandalous Ministers, by discountenancing Popish Arminians, and encouraging
known, godly, and Orthodox Preachers.

Secondly, they pursue the Cause of Religion, in point of worship, after this
Method; by prohibiting all Popish superstitious Innovations, by tolerating the
bare omission of Ceremonies, confessed to be unnecessary, and but indifferent
things; and therefore not to be pressed upon any men whose consciences cannot
bear them; by resolving upon the best means they can think of, to find out the
will of God concerning his worship, being very doubtfully disputed amongst the
godly and learned Ministers viz the choosing of an assembly of godly and
learned Ministers of different judgments in that point to study, dispute and
the best way they can to find out the will of God herein, whose power is only
declarative and therefore can there be no prejudice by the overtopping number
of any of one judgment by voting the abolishing of Bishops, being found a
chief spring of all our troubles, in the three Kingdoms: and therefore this
Kingdom has as much reason with joy and gratulation to accept of this Act and
the King to confirm it here in this Kingdom, as in the Kingdom of Scotland
and our King in Scotlans had in the same case and upon the same grounds.

Thus they have pursued the Cause of the Kingdom in respect of Religion.

Secondly in respect of Law, they have taken this course, by taking notice of
all these incursions, which have been made upon the Law, by illegal taxations.
and oppressions of the Subjects, by finding out and removing the roots, springs
and causes thereof, as the Star chamber, high Commission, etc. by discovering,
and bringing to condign^ punishment the underminers of Law, whereof there have
been Nobles Bishops Lawyers, Judges, Pattentees. Delinquents of all ranks some
whereof have fled away beyond Seas, and others into diverse parts of this
Kingdom, have endeavored to raise up forces and strength to over-aw, and
overthrow this present Parliament, and have brought t^is design to great
perfection; all which is known and evident in the sight of all men: For the
suppressing of which power, and the further prevention of their increase by
foreign force; the Parliament has endeavored the best way they can, by
securing the Ships and Seaports of the Kingdom in the hands of a faithful
and trusty Admiral, and other Officers, by disarming known Papists and
Malignants interested and active in the Quarrel against them, and by raising
up an Army for the suppressing of that Malignant party, raised up for the ruin
of Religion, and Laws of the Kingdom.

Thus the one Party has managed their Controversy against their Adversary.

Secondly, the other Party has prosecuted the purity of Religion before the
Parliament in point of Doctrine; by advancing, and encouraging Arminian and
Popish fellows, and Tenets throughout the Kingdom as all men know.

Secondly, in point of worship; by introducing, and maintaining many foolish,
superstitious, and ridiculous Ceremonies, and Innovations, as is likewise hid
from no man, and their method, since they have gotten into an Army, in the
prosecuting the purity of Religion, is by cursing, banning, blaspheming,
swearing God sink me, God dam me, the Devil ram me etc. with such like horrid
oaths, as I tremble to think of; together with mocking, jeering, scoffing and
deriding at those who make conscience of their ways, calling them Puritans,
Roundheads, Schismatics, Separatists, Brownists, Sectaries, etc. the very
name of an honest man, that will not swear, lie and profane the Lords day, is
ground enough for their cruel and inhumane dealings against them, where ever
they come. Thus they prosecute the purity of Religion.

2. They have endeavored to maintain the life and power of the Law, Liberty
of the Subject, and Privilege of Parliament before the Parliament by all kind
of injury, against Law, Subjects and Parliaments, as all men know: and sithence
the Parliament by disarming the Countries under the pretense of (a most
illegal) Commission of Array, which none of the Lawyers and Judges of the
Kingdom dare avouch; but we must believe the Kings word for it, though he say
he is no Lawyer: well, the Country's disarmed, and their Arms put into the
hands of Papists and Malignants now in the Army, hereby they are disinabled to
defend themselves, but now must quietly suffer themselves to be plundered,
robbed and undone, the Countries assest to pay so much now and so much then; and
an Army on foot to compel them to pay it, (as absolute tyrranny as any is in
Turkey) and a taste of the Law of the Land, and Liberty of the Subject, which we
are like to have hereafter, if this Party get head: Again, they (having by
wicked Counsel gotten the King from his Parliament, and so sheltring
themselves under him) have prevailed with him, without the least pretended
cause, to put honest and blameless well affected Justices of Peace, out of the
Commission, throughout the Kingdom, (a sad Omen of the Subjects good to any
discerning eye) and put in known Malignants in their room, to prick men for
Sheriffs, throughout the Kingdom, known likewise to be Malignants etc. and
for the Privileges of Parliament, they maintain these by declaring and
publishing both Houses guilty of high treason, and the Earl of Essex General
of the Forces, raised for the defense of King, Parliament, and Kingdom, a
Traitor, and all his assistants, (comprehending thereby the Parliament) to be
Rebels and Traitors; by prevailing with the King, to cast off his great
Council the Parliament, in all matters of Church, and State, to keep from the
judicature of the Parliament, known Traitors, and Delinquents, accused by the
Parliament, the Privileges of the Parliament have been maintained, by abusing,
beating and scorning messengers sent from the Parliament, by calling those that
stand for the good of the Kingdom, and Parliament, Rogues, Parliament dogs,
etc. in all these things, and in many more of this nature, doubtless, the Law
of the Land, the Liberty of the Subject, the Privileges of Parliament, are
aimed at, and endeavored with all sincerity, and truth of heart, and let any
man of the meanest capacity judge the contrary.

Thus we see how each Party has discovered, and pursues their Enemy.

Is this the cause? are these the Parties? are these their practices? what but
stupidity can now be deceived? Will Traitors fight, for justice? Delinquents,
for the Law? the thief, for the halter? Papists, for purity of Religion? How
is the World turned upside down? is Religion preserved by transgression?
Piety, by iniquity? Purity, by Popery? then is the Devil become a convert. Is
the law maintained by illegality? the Subject by oppession? the Parliament by
destruction? then are the Turks as free as the English. Shall I now question
which side is right? then let me question my judgment and reason. I will fight
for my God, who gave me my being; I will fight for my Country, who gave me my
breeding: God and my Country gave what I have; God and my Country shall have
what they gave: Religion binds me unto God, Duty to my King, Nature to my
Country: If the King calls me to fight against, and the Parliament for God and
my Country; I cannot obey my King, I dare not deny the Parliament. That this
is our case, is as clear as the Sun; let us hears what Objections can say to
the contrary.

Objections are some in reference to the King some in reference to the
Parliament, first in reference to the King.





Secondly, we question not the Kings intent against God and the Kingdom; but
we know that the Army raised up by his Authority is for the subversion both of
Religion and Laws; and that those that are now the Kings Counselors, have
always and now do endeavor the rooting up of both.

Thirdly the King may be deceived by false Prophets and wicked Lawyers, who may
suggest this to be Religion, and that to be Law, which is nothing but Popery,
and illegality, and so he may protest, and that from his heart (being deceived)
that he intends nothing more than such Religion and Laws.

Fourthly, it is not unknown what Protestations were made to maintain
Religion and Law, the Property of the Subjects, etc. even in the height of all
former Popish Innovations and illegal taxations.





Secondly, if it were bought by the Kings proper moneys, it was bought for the
good or hurt of the Kingdom, if for the hurt of the Kingdom, the
representative Kingdom, that knows no Law, but salutem populi, apprehending
our misery ought to prevent it by seizing upon their Ammunitions; for if a
Master of a Family, by Neighbors, should be stirred up against his Family,
even to kill and murder his own Famaly* is it not lawful for his servants to
seize upon those weapons which he had bought for the same purpose, and prevent
such a design?

Secondly, the Parliament is the Kings greatest Counsel, by whose advice he
ought to be guided; if he will suffer himself to be ruled by a known
Malignant Party against the Parliament, and by this means they procure the
strength of the Kingdom into their own hands to ruin and destroy the
Parliament: is it not lawful to prevent it by securing the Ammunition? Just so
is our case as may be at large showed.

Thirdly, the Parliament is to judge both what is good for the King and
Kingdoms welfare: if Enemies to the King and Kingdom shall by secret
insinuations get into his favor and suggest those Designs which will utterly
undo the Kingdom, and the King shall with all Preparations address himself,
according to these suggestions; ought not the Parliament (if possibly, out of
loyalty to the King, and love to the Kingdom) to prevent this by seizing upon
those weapons, that may further the same?

Militia is not in the Parliaments power, and that the Parliament cannot do it
without the King.

Parliaments Declarations already: but now for the rationality and equity of
it, much may be said: the King has been sought unto for his consent therein,
and will not not grant it; what must be done?

Either the King must settle it without the Parliament or the Parliament
without the King; the Parliament cannot consent to the King to settle it
without them; because he will not hearken unto their advice (as he should) but
unto the advice of those who will settle it to the Kingdoms ruin: for let men
of any indifferent judgment give out their opinions into whose hanes the
Militia had been settled and what the issue thereof had been before this day,
if the King (misled by such a Counsel as he is) had settled it, surely the
Commissioners of Array will dictate to any discerning eye what kind of parties
they should have been* therefore the Parliament, necessitatis causa, and ad
salutem populi, (their only rule) must settle it without the King.

Mary's days, etc. and the very Cavaliers demand with what conscience can we
take up Arms against the King etc.



Secondly, it is good to observe all what interest they have in the Cause it
self; surely if the Cause be against Popery and Praelacie it is no mervaile
that the Popish and Praelaticall faction (who knows little Conscience out of
their own Cause) pleads conscience so much; enquire of them whether it be
lawful to join with the worship of God corrupted with superstitious and
humane inventions; they wll tell you you are more precise than wise. and what
need you be so scrupulous, etc. but now they are of another mind, and it is
observable, that men of no Religion or Conscience in Gods Cause would feign
make Religion and Conscience plead for them in their own Cause.

Thirdly It is good also to see how careful these men have been to inform the
^ing in his duty (having the best opportunity hereunto) and in matters of
Conscience about this War; no in this case, as in the controversy with our
Brethren the Scots, they say to our King as the 400. false Prophets said to
Ahab go up to Ra^ot^ Gilead and prosper; and it is observable also, that these
men (who pretend so much zeal are most seditious factious and schismatic
fellows in the Kingdom and chief causers of the present divisions amongst us.

Fourthly, Those Preachers that plead it to be Rebellion to take up Arms in
this Cause against the King (as they please to miscall it) do not plead it
rebellion in the States of Holland nor in the Prince or Orange to be the Rebel
general against the King of Spain, although they take up Arms against him,
and although we have every way as much warrant from the Law of God, our Nation
and Nature it self so do as they have, they know this Doctrine is repugnant
to their designs and will not please.

Fifthly, as for their instances of holy Martyrs in the time of Queen Mary's
days (after whose example they would have us yield passive obedience, and not
resist as they themselves have followed the steps of those who did persecute
these holy Martyrs ever since to their power) they are to little purpose; for
the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom are altered and reversed which gave life
unto this Argument: and that which was lawful then is unlawful now, and that
which is lawful now, was unlawful then; for which we may thank a Parliament:
and in fighting for the Parliaments Cause, we fight not against, but to defend
Authority, and for the King and not against him, having what Authority he has
confirmed and established by the Parliament.

Sixthly, there have been sufficient Answers to this Objection, to prove the
lawfulness of taking up Arms in this Cause, for the satisfaction of truly
tender Consciences, by diverse Books made by godly and learned Ministers, viz.

Book entitled Anticavalier s^^e, made by Mr. John Goodwin, and Mr. Buraough
his Postscript to his last Book upon the name of the Lord of Hosts; in Answer
to Doctor Fern etc. Besides many other Books and Sermons of this kind, where
men might have satisfaction in abundance; etc.

Seventhly, as for an Answer to the Cavaliers themselves, who demand with what
Conscience we can fight against the King as they are taught to miscall it) they
are capable of no other but this; that when they will satisfy you with what
Conscience they will drink and be drunk whore and be damned, and choose
rather to go to Hell with their Comrades, than to Heaven with the Roundheads,
with what conscience they blaspheame God, curse, swear, rob, plunder, kill,
murder, etc? Then will you tell them, with what conscience you take up Arms
in this Cause, surely. if the tongues of all the blasphemers amongst them were
bored with an hot iron, and of the Swearers were clipped, you should hardly from
the greatest to the least of them understand whether they speak English in
asking, with what Conscience you do so.

These were the Objections concerning the King.

There are likewise Objections concerning the Parliament.



Parliament? they will not t^tidem verbis affirm this: they have more wit^ but
they would have others make that inference; for they buz this abroad, that the
greatest part of the Parliament are with the King, and many now in the
Parliament do not consent to the Votes that are past; and yet they put forth
their Votes. Ordinances etc. in the name of both Houses of Parliament; and
therefore they would have you make the inference, viz. that they are not the
Parliament; therefore it is not amiss to answer this tacit and silent
Objection; for Answer therefore.

First they were a Parliament, none will deny that.

Secondly, an Act has been past that they shall not be dissolved but by an Act
made in Parliament by the major Vote; and is there such an Act yet past? no man
can prove that.

Thirdly though many are not in the Parliament, which are Members, vet they
should be there, and they have been summoned to be there: and it is their
delinquency and carelesenesse of, or malignity to their Countries good, that
they are not there; and some of them most unworthily and unnaturally are in
actual War against the Parliament are they no Parliament, because such as
these are absent?

Fourthly, the King does always call them his Houses of Parliament, and
therefore who can question it? but the truth is, they suggest many things to
deceive the common people, as if we were the only Nation of Fools in the world.



greatest part of the commons, of weakness, if not of absolute folly, that
they should be led by a few factious spirits in all their Votes and
determinations?

Secondly, were not the unjust and illegal dissolutions of Parliaments
grounded upon exceptions against some particular Members, under the name of a
few factious and seditious persons? as all men know.

Thirdly, suppose that the rest were advised and misled by the Counsels of
those few, against their own judgments who are called factious and seditious
(which can never be granted until a Parliament be chosen of such as will
believe it) are they not the Votes of the Parliament, when the major part shall
pass them? truly, ^^argues they want matter of accusation that make use of
such silly shifts as there are.





Secondly, it is reformation of government (confessed on all hands to be
corrupted) which they endeavor; and if there be no need of Reformation, why
were there so many complaints made hereabout?

Thirdly, suppose they should go about to alter Religion (which we will never
grant, except they were such as their accusers) who could hinder them? may not
they (if they see cause) alter Religion as well as former Parliaments?

Fourthly, as for those scandals of their intentions to bring in Brownisme, and
Anabaptisme. etc. it is notoriously known that under the name of Brownist, and
Anabaptist. by the Praelaticall Party (the Oracles of the Court) are always
understood all such who dare not out of Conscience submit to those unwarranted
Ceremonies by them introduced into the worship of God. Men that will not swear
and lie, blaspheame Gods name and profane his day, are the Sectaries,
Brownists, and Anabaptists of these times.

Lastly these men either understand not what Anabaptists are; or else speak
very unadvisedly in charging the Parliament with Anabaptisme: for one of the
maine points of Anabaptisme, is that no man ought to take up Arms in the cause
of God at all, but rather to suffer, to plead and contend for the truth by no
other weapon than lachrymis and precibus, and if the Magistrate should take
away our Religion, yea cut our throats in that cause, we must patiently submit,
etc. Now if we consider what Doctrine of this kind the Praelaticall Party have
lately broached abroad, they may better learn to charge Anabaptisme.

Lastly, Consider which of these two parties are most likely to go about to
alter Religion, either that party that consists of known Orthodox, Godly and
Religions men, whose judgments and practices have always been toward piety
and purity? or that party which consists of the Popish and Arminian faction?
and whereunto all the Papists of the Kingdom personally and vertually come to
yield their assistance: which is the very case of the adverse party against the
Parliament; that there is a going about to alter Religion by them is evident
and therefore if Popery be worth fighting for let them not be ashamed of it,
but let them speak plainly by their words, as well as their actions: but the
truth is, if they should do so, they could not procu e so many to help the
whore as they do.



They pleaded for Property; lo where is Property?

1. We have committed unto them all that we have; to be disposed of for the
public good as being confident of their love unto us; which we never did to
the King: We have committed unto them the safety of the Kingdom, and that is
the Rule they should walk by (if they discharge that trust committed to them)
suppose the King misled by wicked Council, should make War against his
Kingdom; the Parliament must endeavor to preserve the Kingdom; this they
cannot do, but by forces raised to that purpose; and this will require moneys
and the King will never grant moneys to be raised for any such defigne, will
he think you? If the Parliament has nor power therefore to impose raxations to
raise moneys to maintain the Wars, for the preservation of the Kingdom
especially when men will not voluntarily give their assistance; then is the
Kingdom without a Remedy in such cases, and so a Parliament is but a mere
cipher and of no use.

2. Suppose that a wicked faction should counsel the King to set up
Preregative above Law, and to make his will the Law of the Land; and they tell
him he has but the name, and not the power of a Prince, except he does so:
Well, it is replied this cannot be done except that power be conterred up on
him by Parliament otherwise the People will not bear it. They advise him
further to call a Parliament and tell him they will use such means for the
election of such throughout the Kingdom which shall be willing to such a
design: well the King calls a Parliament their design in election fails; this
Parliament now called seek not the subversion but the confirmation of the Law
of the Land Liberty of the Subjects etc. Well these wicked Councillors sugg^^r
unto the King, to take away five or fix at a time of the chief Members (whom
they conceive to stand so much against this design) under pretense of accufing
them of high Treason etc so that the rest may fear, and yield to his well:
well this Council is taken but the Parliament will not part with their Members
in any such ill g^il way; what must be done now? well, they tell the King they
will raise some Forces for they are many and great Persons, and if the King
will be with them in this design they have a thousand lies to deceive the
people; the Counseil is taken an Army raised, they grow big, and appear
strong; if the Parliament now has no power to tax the Kingdom without the
King in this case to raise moneys to maintain an Army for its defense, then is
the Kingdom utterly undon.

3. The Army raised up against the Kingdom consists of our own unnatural
Countrymen and the maintenance thereof has an influence throughout the
Kingdom; it concerns therefore the Parliament to find out and Consure
Delinquen's herein Now having a long time required voluntary assistance from
the Subjects for the defense of the Kingdom, they Vote (as very well they may,
being the only Judges in this case) those to be Delinquents that have not lent
the 20th. part of their Estate, and directly or indirectly to assist the
adverse Party of our unnatural brood, who endeavor the destruction of the
Kingdom and I hope in such cases at least they may censure such Delinquency,
and seize upon their Arms, Horses, Moneys, and Plate, and secure their persons,
lest they prove our ruin and destruction.

4. Let all men consider, whether the Subjects good and benefit be the ground
of all those cautions and caveats concerning the Parliament, which we have from
many Declarations and Expressures set forth under the Kings name; surely if we
look back upon the demands of no less then 12. Subsidies to undo u in
maintaining the War against the Scots; If we look upon the present illegal
assessing of several Counties, and compelling them by an Army on foot to pay
it etc. we have very little reason to judge any such matter.

These, and many the like objections are made and easily answered by any
judicious and reasonable man.

My present satisfaction is beyond my present doubt; could I always thus be
satissie in my doubts, I should not be to seek in my Resolutions, but thus is
my case; what purposes are built up by such as is my present satisfaction are
thrown down again by politic and cunning future Declarations and
expressares from the adverse Party.

A present continual remedy for that will be the sudden summoning up of your
experience in these short and brief considerations.

1. Of what the Parliament has done already for us, which malice it self
cannot deny. 2. Of what they may do every day against us if they please. 3. Of
the sad consequences of their dissolution, as the case of the Kingdom stands.
4. Of the sad usage of those, in several parts of the Kingdom, who have been
deceived by their Declarations and promises, where ever they come. 5. Of the
qualify, Religon and practices of the adverse party, and their relation both by
Religion and otherwise to the Rebels in Ireland. 6. Of former like
Procestations Imprecations, promises cunning and politic Declarations, in the
cant oversie between us and the Scots etc. Digest these and the like
consultations seriously in your thoughts, and when you can perceive
satisfaction herein be deceived if you can.
From the present state of the Kingdom, we cannot but take notice of these
particulars.

1. We now see the grounds, ends and aims of the over spreading of this
Kingdom with ignorant and non preaching or Popish and superstitious Ministers;
namely that by the ignorance of some and idolatry of others this design of
bringing in Popery and slavery into the Kingdom might prosper; for none but
ignorant fools will fight for slavery and inperstitious Formalists for Popery,
or superstition.

Where prayers and preaching are all in formabey, where Sabaths are spent in
sports and sensuality there is a foundation laid for Popery and slavery: and by
these weapons has the Pope subdued the greatest part of the Christian world:
God and the Kingdom have now no such enemies; as where men have bin poisoned
with a superstitions ignorant Ministry.

2. From the State of the Kingdom we may observe the great Hypocrisy of these
times: Lies and Hypocrifie have begotten an Army against Truth and Sincerity;
Nature asequaur semina quisque sua. Its no marvane that that party speak lies
in hypocrifie in all their words; write lies in hypocrifie in all their
Declarations, act lies in hypocrifie in all their conversations; fight for lies
and hypocrifie in their contentions, which is begotten and maintained by lies
in hypocrifie; this party where ever they come it is for the good of that
place, the preservation of those Countries, if you will believe lies and
hypocrifie: this party if you will yeeled your selves up to them, will not
plunder you, will not prejudice you will pay for all that they have, do no man
wrong: If you will believe lies and hypocrifie; this party fights for the true
Protestant Religion, the Law of the Land, Privileges of Parliament Liberty of
the Subjects: If you will believe lies and hypocrifie this party say the
Parliament would make you slaves, change your Religion, destroy your King undo
your Kingdom: If you will believe lies and hypocrifie: This party where ever
they come, will tell you, that they have prospered in all the Controversy, had
the better by much at Keynton Battle, that they might have easily come to
London when they came to Braiford if they pleased: but they had not the least
thought of plundering the City if you will believe lies and hypocrifie: This
party will tell the places where they are, that London is divided, and cutting
of one another throats; that they have 30 or 40 thousand there on their siaes;
that London is almost starved for want of Victuals, if they will believe lies
in hypocrisy: Never such an Army of profane liers and hypocrites, but its no
marvel since lies and hypocrifie brought them together.

3. The present state of the Kingdom shows the great and dreadful
bloodguiltinesse of our times; the blood of Christ the blood of Saints, the
blood of many poor ignorant people lies heavy upon some great Persons and
Families in this Kingdom: when the blood or Christ, of Caine, of good, of bad
shall jointly sorich in Gods ears, how shall he not hear? The cry of the
Widows and Fatherless calls for vengeance, how shall he not hear? What
murder did ever swim to Heaven in blood? Murder (though secret, and but once)
seldom escapes underected, unrevenged; what vengeance might those expect, who
have been the proper causes of the bloodshed of thousands? God give repentance
unto life, that blood-guiltinesse follow them not to death.

4. From the State of Kingdom we may observe, the damnable contempt of the
Gospel of grace in this Kingdom: O ye wretches! what injury has the Gospel of
Grace done you? wherefore go you about to kill it? many good works it has done
for you, for which of these would you destroy it? Is it because it would teach
you to be happy for ever? Is it because it would save you? Is it because it
has brought along with it peace, plenty preservation? Is it because it has
made you the only Canaan of the World? the envy of Nations? a terror to your
enemies? the delight of your friends? for which of those good works would you
destroy it? Have you not wronged it enough already by stopping the current of
it? hindering the progress? darkning the glory? banishing, imprisoning abufing,
mocking and persecuting the Children of it? But must you now seek the life of?
and will you do this under the pretense of fighting for it? What? Indas with a
Kiss? What? Crown Christ with Thorns again, in opposing his Truth.? spit in
his face again, in despising his Word? dissemble like jews with Hail, Hail,
and hang him on the Cross? take heed, the Gospel may save those that killed
Christ; but Christ will never save those that kill his Gospel: has not this
tied fast the three Crowns upon the head of your King? succeeded you in all
your enterprises? made you famous in all the world? has the Gospel or its
Children done you any hurt, that you now go about to ruin both? have you not
finnes enough to plead against you? but you must engage Christ, and his Gospel,
and his people against you at the great day? would you make sure the deepest,
the hottest, the dreadfullest part of Hell? is this your ambition? What? is
your aim at the heart of God, his Gospel? at the eye of God, his people? God
give repentance unto life, before this also pursue you to eternal death.

5. From the present State of the Kingdom we may with admiration behold Gods
mercy to unworthy England, O England wherefore art thou not destroyed? is it
from the cart of thy Governors? the wiled me of thy Counselors? the
faithfulness of thy State Officers? is it because thou have wanted enemies
abrord? have no Traitors at home? art at union with thy self, that thou art not
destroyed? is it because thy Prophets have been fatchfull? thy Judges
impartial? Gods worship purely administered? his Sabbaths sanctified? is it
because thou have been thankful under mercies? Truthfull under means?
kindly entreated Gods Ministers? loved his people? if not for these; wherefore
art thou not destroyed? have thy Pilots sought to split thee upon the Rocks?
and yet art thou not destroyed? have those who should have bin thy Fathers, thy
protectors ^^ld thee, tempered with other Nations for thy ruin? and yet art
thou not destroyed? have all the (...) of ruin been upon thee? and ye art thou
not destroyed? have thou b^n more sinful then many Nations laid in the out,
and yet are thou not destroyed? have there bin so many plots and projects, so
contrived, to carried on, and ye nor destroyed? have thou bin so near; (...)
many times, and yet not lost? have there bin so many factors for the
destruction, so many Traitor to thy pea^^, scattered throughout the three
Kingdoms, and yet preserved? If thou have any ingenuity, any morasity, any
grace, admire Gods mercy and be thankful.

6. From the present State of the Kingdom we see what will suddenly become of
us, if God does not give us hearts to prevent it; all you that would not be
Papists, stand forth now, if ever and fight for your Religion, all you that
would not be slaves stand forth now or never, and fight for your liberty.
Consider the consequenees.

1. Of losing The day. 2. Of getting The day.


1. If you lose the day, you lose all; you are undone in your estates, undone
in your liberties, undone in your poor posterity; you and they were as good
be in Turkey, nay which is worst of all undone in your Religion, you may write
Ichabod upon all.

2. If you get the day, you and yours are made for ever, your freedoms will be
recovered, and confirmed, your estates secured, Religion purified; you shall
see such days of light and life, as will make you forget all your nights of
grief and sorrow.

Thirdly consider, Christ has forewarned us of the sorrows of latter days, of
Wars and rumors of Wars; that the Father should be against the Child and the
Child against the Father, that his cause should make a breach in the nearest
relations, and of many troubles; but withal advises us not to be troubled,
but to rejoice and to be exceeding glad, because our Redemption draws nigh;
out of this eater will came sweetness and light out of this darkness the
immediate forerunner of a clear and warm day is a misty morning: Christ
ascended from his Cross to his Crown, so shall his Churches, though now for a
little while the cry of the Churches of Christ be; how long Lord, how long,
etc. yet suddenly their songs shall be; Babylon the great is fisten, is
fallen; he will shortly take down your harpes from the Willow Trees, and teach
you to warble out the Songs of Sion in the Land of Canaan.

Fourthly, consider that God will do his great wonders of judgment upon the
wicked of the World by his Church and people etc. at a time when they shall be
most confident of utter ruinating his Church; the whole current of the
Scriptures declares that God will make his Church his battle dxe and weapons of
his Warfare; that by his Churches be will beat in pi^^es all the Nations of the
Earth and that he will make Sions horns Iron, and her hooses Brass etc. and
that Ieralclem shall be a cup of trembling and a hu^chen-s me si ne, and that
all that harthen themselves with it, shall be broken to pieces by it and though
men gather themselves (...) formed, and for the time of it, it shall be when
they say ^^^our our eye look upon zi^n and let her be defiled: It shall be
then, when all the who^^ Eaten shall be filled, with admiration both of the
suddenness and irrecoverablenesse of their ruin.

Firstly, Consider that the state of this present time, and the face of things
now does abundantly intimate, that this cannot be long, and that the very
quarrel in which Antichrist shall fall, and the Churches of Christ shall rise
is now begun in this Kingdom: For

First, the cause is purely the glory of Jesus Christ his Word and Worship,
this is the very quarrel between Christ and ^ntic^rist, M^^^^eil and the
Dragon as the word in imates.

Secondly, the followers and fig^^ers in this Battle are the Angels of Michael
and the Dragon, who rank themselves on the one side, but gouly honest men, etc.
and on the other, but Papists and Atheists etc.

Thirdly, this quarrel is general, as the last and greatest quarrel must be;
for the good Party now through the Christian world waits with prayers and
tears for a good success here in England; and the Pepish party also with all
their endeavors, in Spane, France, Ireland, Denmark etc. seek the surtherance
of success on their sides.

Fourthly, God has hitnerto managed and followed the Cause after the same
method as he will in that quarrel: Michael will not go but with his Angels
but yet he will so manage the business as that it shall appear that he is
Michael, the mighty God: and has he not done so in all the Battles hitherto in
this present Controversy? Has he not appeared in glory at Keynton Battle, to
the terror and amazement of the Adversaries (though like hardened Pharash's)
they will not acknowledge Gods wonders, how did he appear a Brainford? though
our Advertaries brag at the sucess thereof? as they may with everlasting shame
and reproach for their Treachery Cruelty and Cowardizc when they came with a
full intent to be drunk with our blood and to swell with our wealth to plunder
our City (though they have the face to deny it; when some of the chiefest of
them sent word to some of their friends in London to change their lodging, and
secure themselves in such and such places, intimating their intentions of
blood, etc.) yet how did God drive them away by two broken unprovided Regiments
though they came intentionally; the whole Army consisting of many thousands,
etc. how has God appeared at Winchester? at Chichester, etc. surely all this
does afford matter of encouragements in this Cause.

Therefore, if any considerations of the right or left hand. Liberty or
Religion, inward or outward man will take held upon us, we should hold on in
the work, and give out our selves in our Prayers Estates and Persons now or
never; better it is to part with some now like men then with all hereafter like
slaves; did you but know the consequences of this War, you would count it the
best Husbandry to spare from your backs and bellies to maintain it: be not
deceived with conceits of a Peace and an Accommodation; let the hateful memory
of that man be written in blood who delights in blood; yea let him have blood
to drink for he is worthy; let in ward and outward trouble be his portion that
desires not Peace with truth and holiness: but there is all improbability (at
least as yet) of any such Peace; for the interruption of the Protestant cause
in Ireland occasioned by, if not aimed at in these present distractions, the
insurrections of the Papists and the risings up of several Armies throughout
the Kingdom (besides the greater Body with the King) to wit, the Earls of
Newcastle, Cumberland, Wo^cester, Sir Ralph Hoprens, etc. the continual
Discoveries of Preparations beyond Seas by Factors gone over to that purpose
for Arms and Ammunition, etc. are sufficient intimators to any man of the me
nest capacity, that it is very unlikely that we shall have a good Peace from
them, as the case now stands. The Peace of the Gospel and of the Kingdom is
the Crown we fight for; and therefore our Parliament Worthes are now laboring
for such a Peace without any more shedding of blood; which if it could be
attained, would be the joy of every honest heart; only this we fear, our
Enemies Design in pretending a desire of Peace, is to delay (if possibly
until the Spring, in which time they hope to gather strength, and recover that
blood, which (though they will not confess) they lost in the Fall. Happily
they intend to make up their number again with an Army of Irish Rebels; (for
doubtless the Irish and English Rebellion against the Peace of the two
Kingdoms is all of a blood and breeding:) but let them come we fear nothing,
that blood is as corrputed as the former, and God will let it out: Our Cause is
good, God is with us, and their Rock is not as ours, our enemies themselves
being Judges: He has showed himself glorious in his belinesse, fearful in
praises working wonders: He has thrown down mountains filled up valleys,
renewed his works of Workers: Be bold and confident, that believing in his Name
without fear, he (...) leave us, until we do enjoy the glory of God in
Canaan.

FINIS.

