The New Oath Examined, and found Guilty.
SInce Oaths are Solemn, Serious Things,
The best Security to Kings;
And since we'ave all Allegiance swore
To J -- as King, or Successor;
I cannot imagine, how we may
Swear that or Fealty away.
Naught sure but Death or Resignation
Can free us from that Obligation.
All Oaths are vain, both those and these,
If we may break 'em, as we please.
And did I fairly swallow both,
Who'de give a Farthing for my Oath?
If you affirm, as many do,
They both consistent are, and true.
I ask, Can you Two Masters serve,
And never from your Duty swerve?
Or can you True Allegiance bear
To Two at once, and not forswear?
What Is due to J -- if W -- have,
And J -- have what you W -- gave?
It Is plain, you're false to both, and should
Or take no Oaths, or make 'em good,
Which here you cannot, if you would.
Nor will these Oaths, as some contend,
To your own private Meaning bend.
You swear to each as to a King,
And ought to mean the self same Thing.
And it is Allegiance Full and True
Is sworn to both, to both as due.
To say, The People have a Right
Kings to depose, as they see fit,
Is Pop'ry, or as bad as it.
There is no Law, or Charter for it:
Kings cannot be tried in any Court.
Bradshaw's High Court had but the Name
Of Justice, and was Bradshaw's Shame.
But that is by all condemned --
Or he that dares such Presidents plead,
Deserves, like him, to lose his Head,
And hang for it, or alive or dead.
Now to condemn the King untried,
Seems something worse than Bradshaw did.
It Is English Privilege, to be heard
Before the Judge can give Award.
I know, some Conquest plead, and say,
The King was driven and forced away.
Convention though pleads Abdication,
Because unforced he left the Nation.
Hard it is these Things to reconcile:
He chose to leave us ' against his Will.
These Pleas and Proofs are opposite,
And cannot both be True and Right:
A Sign their Cause is desperate,
They Would something say, but know not what,
Their Non-agreement is enough
To show each Plea of theirs wants proof.
Now as for Conquest, Why should we
Make Slaves of People that are Free?
Why should we make so much ado
'Bout what Prince never pretended to?
He from Convention took the Crown:
Convention placed him in the Throne:
Convention gave him all his Power:
Convention made the Oaths you swore.
And therefore if to him we'de swear,
It Is as their High Commissioner.
And if they have no Right to choose,
We may Allegiance refuse.
We may and ought to keep't entire
For Lawful King, and Lawful Heir.
If People say, they have such Right:
They ought to show how they came by it.
If People made their Sovereign Lord,
They ought to show it by Record.
The Law of the Land says no such Thing:
By Law Succession makes the King.
They cannot plead Scripture, if they would;
The Scripture says, All Pow'r's from God.
God says himself, By me Kings Reign;
It Is he does Higher Pow'ers Ordain.
It Is he does make them all Supreme;
The People's Choice is People's Dream.
Nor can you prove by Law of Nature,
That Princes are the People's Creature.
It Is plain, the People never gave
What they never had, nor could they have;
I mean, the Power, which Princes bear:
If People had it, make it appear,
And tell us who, and when, and where.
Our King has Power over Subjects Lives,
By Law he takes away, or gives.
The Sword the People never bore,
They never over their own Lives had Power,
Self-Murder never was allowed
By Law of Nature, or of God.
Wherefore the Power which Kings have now.
The People never could bestow.
Indeed for Self-Defence to fight
Against private Foes was Nature's Right.
They ever had it, and still have it,
And therefore to their Prince never gave it.
Besides, the Magistrate's empowr'd
In other cases t'use the Sword.
Though Vengeance is the Subject's Crime,
It Is very innocent in him.
Vengeance belongs to God alone:
Who has it not from God, has none.
In state of Nature People were
All free and equal, and could never
That Power possess, much less confer.
No, it is the Prince God's place supplies:
It Is his Prerogative to chasti^e
The Evil, redress Injuries.
If Rulers are for public Good
Their Jus divinum's understood.
Unerring Wisdom cannot be thought
To leave the Choice to giddy Rout.
But granting Peoples Right, I say,
They ought not, could not give't away.
In vain had they such Right from Heaven,
If they should part with it, 'soon as given.
It were Impiety and Sin
To give away a Right Divine.
Nor is it like, they would all consent
To lose their share of Government.
Nor could they meet all for a Choice,
That every Man might give his Voice.
Some might be Busy, others Sick;
Some their Proceedings might dislike.
Now if they all were free before,
How could those, who did never concur,
Lose that their Liberty and Power?
These K^^^^ and such like I d^fy
Pretended Patriots to unty.
Be sure they cannot: And then their Cause
Is grown much weaker by the Laws.
The Laws which own our Kings Divine,
And tie the Crown to Royal Line.
The Laws, which make Allegiance due
Without your Oaths, or theirs to you.
The Laws, which give to every Man his own,
To People their Estates, to Kings their Crown.
Some idly fancy, That protection
Does nat'rally infer Subjection.
To which, I say, if this were True,
Subjection were ev'en Cromwell's due.
He was Protector, (Name and Thing)
He did the whole Office of a King.
No, it is a Right for to Protect us,
Can only Lawfully Subject us.
Who has no Right to Englands Throne,
To Englands Fealty can have none.
And when the lawful King's turned out,
(Whose will to govern is past doubt.)
It is not Merit, but a Crime
His People to Protect against him.
It is to keep him from his Right
Who would Protect us, if he might.
It is to make himself Supreme,
And to Protect himself, not them.
It Is to maintain his Usurpation,
And to entail on Captive Nation
A lasting War, and Desolation.
And is this such a mighty Favor,
As to deserve the Name of Savior?
For my part, I should give him rather
A harder Name than that of Father.
And with the Cynick wish him gone,
Not stand betwixt me and the Sun.
If where it is due, we pay Subjection,
My Friends, we shall not want Protection.
And now, I think I Have made it clear.
We cannot with good Conscience swear.
We cannot take Oaths Old and New,
And to both Faithful prove, and True.
And if I must Starve or Comply:
Be sure, I would not swear, I Would dir.
I Would suffer ought for my dear Savior's Laws,
Who died for me --
I cannot well suffer in a better Case.
FINIS.

