The New Scotch-Jigg: OR, The Bonny Cravat.
Johnny wooed Jenny to tie his Cravat;
But Jenny perceiving what he would be at,
With delays put him off, till she found out his mind;
And then afterward she proved more kind:
At length, both Parties were well agreed,
And went to the Kirk to be Wed with all speed.
Tune of, Jenny come tie my, etc.




AS Johnny met Jenny a going to play,
Nuoth Johnny to Jenny, I prithee love stay:
Since thou art my honey, my joy, and delight,
I Will love thee all day. and I Will please thee at night.
Jenny come tie my, Jenny come tie my,
Jenny come tie my bonny Cravat.
I have tied it behind, and I Have tied it before,
I Have tied it so often, I Will tie it no more.
O say not so Jenny, nor do me not scorn,
For better poor Johnny had never been born:
O kill not my Heart with being unkind,
I Will ever endeavor to pleasure thy mind.
Jenny come tie my, etc.
But Johnny I ken it, although to my grief,
When you stole my heart away like a sly thief,
You promised me Marriage, with many things more
Which yet is not wiped out off the old score,
Jenny come tie my, etc.
O Jenny, let none of this trouble thy mind,
For now thou shall see, I Will be loving and kind:
A little forgetful I was, I confess,
But all shall be mended that now is amiss.
Jenny come tie my, Jenny come tie my,
Jenny come tie my bonny Cravat.
I have tied it behind, and I Have tied it before,
I Have tied it so often, I Will tie it no more.


I Will buy thee a Gown, and a Scarf, and a Hood:
If thou will believe me, I Will ever be good:
For Rings,and for Ribbonds, never matter for that,
If thou art but willing to tie my Cravat.
Jenny come tie my, Jenny come tie my,
Jenny come tie my bonny Cravat.
I have tied it behind, and I Have tied it before
I Have tied it so often, I Will tie it no more.
All this you did promise me often before,
If I would but tie it one time, or two more;
But yet you were never so good as your word,
Therefore for to tie it I cannot afford.
Jenny come tie my, etc.
My Jenny if thou will be ruled by me,
It shall not be long ere we wedded will be:
For I have got Money, and House, and good Land,
Which all shall be ready at Jenny's Command.
Jenny come tie my, etc.
Bestoes, on the Common I have got a Cow
To give us some Milk, and bonny black You;
I like wise at Heam have a Dog and a Cat,
Then prithee good Jenny come tie my Cravat.
Jenny come tie my, etc.
Your House, I believe, is not often repaired;
And as for your Land, it lies in the Churchyard:
Your Money, if any such thing you may have,
With it keep you honest, and prove not a Knave,
Jenny come tie my, etc.
Your Cow on the Common that grazes you say,
May wheedle another your will to obey:
Then prithee make much of your dog and your Cat,
For I am not willing to tie your Cravat.
Jenny come tie my, etc.
O Jenny, why art thou so hard of belief?
I fear thou art minded to kill me with grief:
Before thee I Will open my Heart to the life.
I tell thee I mean for to make thee my Wife.
Jenny come tie my, Jenny come tie my,
Jenny come tie my bonny Cravat.
I have tied it behind, and I Have tied it before,
I Have tied it so often. I Will tie it no more.
Then do not thou slout me, but freely comply,
Nothing shall be wanting for Jenny and I:
Then give me my Jenny, thy heart and thy hand,
For I will be ever at Jenny's command.
Jenny come tie, etc.
O Johnny! I fear thou do flatter me now,
Or else I could love thee, I swear and I vow:
But with fair delusions I may be undone,
Therefore from thy Jenny good Johnny begone.
Jenny come tie, etc
A Maid by her choice she may soon be destroyed
And left in the lurch, when she has bin injoyd:
But if you be honest, declare is in brief,
And let me not languish in sorrow and grief.
Jenny come tie, etc.
My Jenny, then prithe take one word for all,
I never will leave thee what ever befall:
In Sickness and Health I will for thee provide
And at the next K^rk, I will make thee my bride.
Jeeny come tie, etc.
Then Jonny I love thee as dear as my Life,
And I am contented for to be thy Wife:
And we will married to both our content,
I hope we shall never have cause to repent.
Jenny come tie my, Jenny come tie my,
Jenny come tie my bonny Cravat.
I have tied it behind, and I Have tied it before,
And now I will tie it a hundred times more.
London, Printed for W. Thackeray, T. Passenger, and W. Whitwood.


