New News FROM BEDLAM: OR More Work for Towzer and his Brother Ravenscroft.

ALIAS Hocus Pocuus Whipped and Stripped: OR A Ra-ree New Fashion CUPPING-GLASS
Most humbly Represented to the (...)

Wherein the various Shapes, and present Legerdemain Postures, Principles and
Practices of the bold and most Insolent Factors for the Infallible Chair (both
in Church and State) are yet more and more unvailed and discovered.

As it was lately Represented in a plain honest Country Dialogue, ( viz. both
Serious, Comical, Satirical, Tragical and Theological) to a True Loyal
Protestant-Association of Master and Scholars, to be Acted by them at the next
Breaking up of their Grammar School, and then, and there, it is shrewdly
suspected (by a Vote of Nemine Contradicente) 'twill be Resolved, That a Second
Impression of the said Dialogue, with App^^^^^^, shall be forthwith promoted
and Published for the (...) and farther Information of the (...).

By Theophilus Rationalis, one of Heraclitus Ridens, Nut. Thompson's, and the
most profound Obser^^^'s Wise Men of Gotham, although a most Sincere, and True
Lover of King and Country.

Post Tenebras splendet, surgit post Nubila Phoebus.

London. Printed for the Author, and Published by Langley Curtis, at the Sign
of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey's Head near Fleet-Bridge. Anno Domini 1682.

A Loyal Protestant Address: OR The Epistle Dedicatory.
To the Right Honorable, the truly Noble and most Loyal Protestant Peers of
this Realm. In particular His Grace James Duke of Monmouth, Arthur E. of Essex,
and Anthony E. of Shaftesbury, etc.
AS you have been the Captains in our Channels,
To take those Pirates, and bold Water-Spaniels,
Which to their cost did here so lately come
In strong Armadoes, from the Church of Rome,
For to destroy us: And our Lands to make
A Legal Prize, unto that Stygian Lake
Of bloody Tyber: And to drain from hence
Millions of Treasure, by Saint Peter's Pence,
For which Attempt your Loyalty now Rings
In sweet tuned Anthems to the King of Kings,
For raising up such Noble Peers to stand
Now in the Breach, against that Hellish Band,
And will remain for everlasting praise
Unto your Honors, who all have won the Baies,
Although the flattering, huffing, ranting Tory Crew
Of State-Satyricks, so bespatter you,
Your Names shall live, when their's shall die and rot,
Your Coat shall shine, when their's shall have a blot;
You shall be great, when they shall be forlorn;
You shall be loved, when they the Nations scorn;
You shall be Gold, when they shall be but Dross;
You shall triumph, when they may mount a Cross.
Courage, brave Heroes, now some breezing Gales
Will make their Captains strike their main Topsails,
And may ere long surrender to the Whigs
Their Tory Roary plotting Bird-lime Twigs,
Which have stuck fast unto that Interest,
Which wise men call the Scarlet-colored Beast.
Since things are so transacted now in France,
The Tories now will tack to Monsieur Prance,
And bless Not. Thompson, that true Romish Elf,
Who now does Print, that Godfrey hanged himself
Although the first, who did the Truth declare,
That he was Murdered from the Roman Chair;
And he that trebles each Dissenters spot,
Marks not one word, of this most scandalous blot
Unto the Justice of our English Nation,
For Hanging men, only for Recreation)
And rather lean unto that Popish Fry,
And well he may, because he knows they Lie
Much like himself; and Birds all of a Feather,
Do love to flutter, and to flock together;
Yet these be Men the Tories count so Loyal,
Damn us for Dogs, upon the least denial
Of this Sham Truth (Oh Heavens!) what Men are those
Who cannot distinguish between Doves and Crows.
Between bold Traitors, and true Loyal Peers,
Between good Subjects, and those Leather Ears,
Who now do trot from House to House, to try
Who will Abhor, and who for Liberty;
The first they mark, as Loyal Sons of State,
The next they seal, often with a broken Pate,
In Loyal Duty, with the rest of those,
Who will Abhor our King and Kingdoms Foes,
And will stand by them not with Iss and Ands,
Or Forty thousand of High Tory Flands.
Like the Dulmano Tribe, which hums and haws,
Instead of Preaching, only do pick Straws,
And tears Dissenters with their Lockarom Jaws:
Or like that Monsieur with his Vahant Men,
Went up an Hill, and so came down again:
No, we will stand by them with our Lives and Lands,
So far as they lift up our Legal Hands,
For to support our English Monarchy
Against all Popish, and French Tyranny.
Unto your Honors, I these Lines present,
In patient Hopes, that our next Parliament,
Will search the bottom of those Sham Intrigues,
From French, from English, and from Irish Teagues;
I dare not boast the strength of this my Muse,
Like soaring Laureat, who does so abuse
Your Grace, your Honors, and his Country too;
He brands his Country in dispraising you.
And though his Satyrs in them have no weight,
Yet for his pains deserves a broken Pate.
Small Chicken am I, not yet Pen-feather'd for
To steer a Ship, or board a Man of War;
Yet I have ventured from my Bedlam shore
One of their tall Ships with my Plumes to gore;
And if they pass but through his Aged side
(Although I steer both against Wind and Tide)
And chance to fall into his Powder-Room,
Whigs may then write to Miss Joanna Broom,
To let her know of Towzer's sad Disaster,
And to provide for him a cooling Plaster:
If this will not do, let Joan turn him to Grass,
To nab some Thistles with the braying Ass;
Or else six spoon-fulls in our Cupping-glass
Of Aqua fortis, and strong Hellebore,
Mixed well together, take for this, I am sure,
Probatum est, 'twill either kill or cure;
And though of late he has with Rippon Spur,
Endeavored much, my Credit for to slur,
In his Remarks, because he knows I am
In Hand and Heart a true bred English Man;
Yet if your Honors patronize these Lines
(Which he will Print, are dull distracted Rimes)
I then do hope, these honest Bedlam strains,
Will be a means to wipe off all his stains,
And in due time Reward me for my pains.
So prays Your Honors most obliged, most faithful, most obedient, and most
sincerely devoted Servant Theophilus Rationalis.
(Most Noble Peers)



An EPISTLE TO THE TORIES.
Gallant and brave Sirs,
AS your Noble Champion (and Guide to the Inferior Clergy) has been pleased in
his Noverint Umversi's, viz. his weekly (I had almost said Quotidiano)
Observations, to proclaim my Name in Print, No. 104. which duly weighed and
considered, is a very great Honor and Reputation (an shall please your
Toryships) to some Persons, either to render them more famous, or else more
obnoxious to those with whom they do more or less Traffic and converse, but
more especially in this Lunatic and Scribbling Generation of ours, wherein if a
man makes but the least halt whatsoever, either in his Morals or Intellectuals,
though it be lapsus Linguae, lapsus Memoriae, aut lapsus Scribendi, he has a
most ingenious and genteely accomplished Observator at the heels of him
immediately, either to bite him by the Legs, or else to send him presently to
Bedlam, for his more severe and deserved Castigation.


Tories,
The Premises considered (and too apparent to be denied or disputed) I could do
no less than strain Courtesy with him (namque manus manum fricat) and would
beg of you Genteels, to present him with one of these Books, which are the
first Fruits of my Lunatic Labors upon this Bedlam account (to whom I presume
it is most properly due, and ought to have been my Patron, in regard he sent me
to this College, but allowing me no maintenance since my Admission, I was
resolved to find out more Noble Persons for my Epistle Dedicatory.)

And that you would be pleased also more especially to present him with my
obliged Gratitude for his particular (though by me undeserved) Respects, in
ranking me with a Person of so great Quality, viz. no less than a Duke. And as
that Person of Quality has already made his Public Acknowledgment unto him,
as to his own particular, so I could do no less (Eodem modo and forma) than pay
my Respects upon the same Account. And that from my head Quarters No. 205. in
the Lower Walk in Bedlam, whither his Eminent Excellency was pleased to send
me, from whence I hope (as well as my Noble Brother) if he do not too much
blister me with his Scarrificatious Horse-Leeches and Cupping-glasses (with the
additional Aid of your Prayers and Curses which are idem per idem, of the same
import) but I shall be restored again in a short time to my former Senses, and
so if you are well, pray tell Mr. Observator that I am pretty well, and so True
Tories fare you well.

Bedlam, April the first 1682. No. 205. in the Lower Walk. I am Yours, and the
Observator's very respective (though Lunatic) Friend to trace both him and you
in my Mad Fits according to your Sentiments of the ensuing Dialogue, Theophilus
Rationalis.


To the True Loyal Protestant Whigs, upon his purusal of his Worthy Friends,
Hocus Pocus, or the Observator's New-Fashion Cupping-Glass.
LIft up your drowzy Heads unto the dawning Light,
Heavens have forbid an Everlasting Night;
And though you have a long time been forlorn,
Yet now rejoice, to see the approaching Morn.
You bave been tossed among the Raging Waves;
The Algerines did hope to make you Slaves:
But your Chase Guns, when they were all in laughter,
Did split their Bottoms, between Wind and Water.
Courage, brave Lads, never despond no more,
Your Loyal Ship is now come safe to shore:
Your Valiant Captain now has foiled all those,
Who were the Churches, and the Kingdoms Foes.
Those ill bred Vapors, which do hover here,
With so much rage, within our Hemisphere,
Th'Informing Tribe, a shame unto our Nation,
To suffer such to blot your Reputation:
The Dog, the Fox, the Tiger, and the Bear,
Which did your Loyal Hearts so often in pieces tear,
From day to day, and what they heard over Night
In Screetch-Owl Barns, next Morn was brought to light,
And stamped for Current by the Tory Crew,
Although as false sometimes, as Heaven is true.
Such is the boldness of these Romish Varlets,
To make Black White, Vermillions to be Scarlets.
But here they are met with such a Cornish Hug,
As you will find will make them always shrug;
And doubtless, will make some pull in their Horns,
Rather than undergo such future Scorns.
Your stripling Friend here with his nimble Pen,
Has charmed Old Towzer close within his Den,
From biting any more. His crazy Head,
By Hocus Pocus new, is brought to Bed:
Although sometimes perchance he will bark again
At these, who shall come near his rattling Chain.
Yet now he may discharge his Elder Gun,
You have a Broom, who has him quite outdone.
The Play house sure a Plague-house is become,
Pestered with Plague-sores by the Pests of Rome,
Spurting out still Poison most pestilent,
Sometimes Profane, and sometimes Turbulent.
When Popish Priests were out of Pulpits Thrust,
In Pious Edward's Reign, Invectives Cursed,
They pestered Stages with, to Ridicule,
His Reformation; hence to Charm that Devilish,
Stage Plays were Damned by Statute Royal-Rule:
Oh that our Powers would Reinforce that Law,
This Cursed Cockatrice to keep in Awe,
From Hatching Fiery Serpents, who wag their Wings,
Strike Loyal Protestants with Fatal Stings.
Plays are a Nasty Nurse to Vice, the Devil's Ground,
Where He possesses All within his Round:
Where wicked Wits, with their Lewd wanton Acts,
In Satan's Ord nance soon beget base Fects;
God's Ordinance they are not, His Institution,
God never gave them, nor his Benediction.
Tories take heed, lest their Contagion catch you,
And Tyburn-Tippets do in time Dispatch you.
Though Doctor Spratt a Sword-Fish seems, and would
Conjure your Coats to Swords, while circl'd stood,
Save you, nor can Enchanted Swords, nor Falchions,
New News from Bedlam gives you solid Cautions.
N.C. The Masters Advice to a French Painter, to Draw several Scenes to present
to the Scholars at the Breaking up of their Grammar School.
DRraw Bedlam first, the Glory of our Land,
And all the Trees which do before it stand;
Then those within, who lately there were sent
By Ravens Craft, to give his Passion vent;
And also him, whom Towzer there put in,
When as he was upon the merry Pin,
And thither sent him, in his Goose cap Quills,
To take this Leat, the Observator's Pills,
Although in truth they never yet came there,
Nor never will, we rather hope than fear.
Draw next two Jesuits, all besmeared in blood,
Bringing in Pop'ry, like a mighty Flood.
Draw them good Painter in the Forlorn Hope,
As Cousin Germains to their Prince the Pope,
As laboring hard by Wiles and by Meanders,
Just like those Youths, who lately came from Flanders:
Saint Omers Breed, a special hopeful Fry,
To Sham us of our Lives and Liberty:
Draw them dear Painter in their various shape,
( Camelion like) when they commit a Rape
Upon our Bodies and our Senses: Come
Draw them Importors from the Church of Rome,
Draw them as Men, who lately came from Hell,
And in their heat courting a Je-za-bel,
And with their Sluts, embracing in their Arms,
Still flattering them with Hocus Pocus Charms:
If to the life you would a Jesuit Paint,
Draw Fiend on backside, on the fore-side Saint.
Draw Towzer next, and all his Elder Guns,
His Paper Pellets, and his weekly Puns;
His Cupping-Glasses, and his Brain-fick Notions,
His Glister-Pipes, and all his Bedlam Potions;
His Tory Study, and his Coffee Fumes,
His City Crabstocks, and his Country Prunes:
Observe him well, or he will observe your hits,
And fairly put you in his Frantic Fits,
Within those Cells, where he has sent of late
A special Friend to teach him how to prate;
Miss not one Feature in his Prince-like Face,
Which if you should, you would him much disgrace.
If you do doubt what posture will him please,
Painter, for that I Will give your Pensil ease;
Draw him a Weaver, working in a Loom,
Then draw him Warping to the Church of Rome:
This posture sure of all must please him best,
Or his Proposals are but all in Jest,
Which he of late has published to Unite,
To make us all to Rome turn Proselite.
Next draw Jack-Pudding in his Cocks comb Cap,
The Observator leaning on his Lap,
And all his Bigots round about him sit,
Telling him Lies without either fear or wit:
Th'Informing Tribe, those filthy Kennel-Rakes
To sober minds that stink like any Jakes,
Draw them as black as Paint can make them black,
Then draw them mounted on the Devil's back;
Draw them on Coals, in their own Grease to fry,
That London Phans have here such Liberty,
And not coopt up in Holes, in Caves, in Dens,
Like to those Worthies now in Bristol Pens.
( England beware lest Heaven should now make speed,
To help his People at their time of need.)
Draw Tories next them in their Frantic Fits,
Like Bedlams foaming, stark out of their wits,
In their accursed Oaths (like claps of Thunder)
As if they would rend both Church and State asunder;
A special Tribe to be Sons of the Church,
When Heaven at last will leave them in the lurch:
God bless us from their horrid Imprecations,
When they Address even to their own Damnations:
If God should take them at their proper word,
Although their Oaths he has them on Record,
But will not let his furious Passion vent,
Because they should take warning, and Repent.
Tories beware, remember what is to come,
If you ask what? It is the Day of Doom,
Where you must stand, a strict Account must render
For Oaths and Curses, and for Flouts (none slender,)
Which you did make at all things that were-Sacred,
And then must stand before your Judge all naked.
Draw Heraclitus next, that special Trout,
Who from some muddy Lake did sure leap out:
Draw him now writing a Pindarique Ode,
Then draw him swelling like an ugly Toad;
Then draw him strutting like a Crow in Gutter,
Then draw a Screech-Owl, when his Wings do flutter,
Then draw him Bandog, when he runs at Sheep,
Then draw him Bugbear, when he plays Bo-peep,
Then draw him dead-drunk, when he cannot creep,
Then draw him sober, when he is fast asleep:
Now draw him Painter in his Goose-cap dressed,
To please the Fops with a dry frothy Jest,
Although in earnest, a mere Jack-a-Lent,
A Scar Crow Bigot, against a Parliament,
More fitter for the Country Hobs, and those
Who Till our Lands, to fright away the Crows.
Then to stay here with his Pindarique Lerries,
Draw him in Kent as frighting Rooks from Cherries,
Or else upon Ben. Tooke'es Ship to sail
With him and Not. the next Fair-blowing Gale,
Into the Land of Whigland, where no doubt
If once they come, they will hardly thence get out:
The Soil, the Air, the Country is so good,
They Will never want for good and wholesome Food:
They were the Men who first found out the Land,
Why then so proper to fetch home the Sand
Of those Rich Banks, as these Vtopian Sprights,
Who found it out in long dark Winter Nights;
When Fogs arose, when scarce they saw their Hand,
Yet these brave Mousers then found out the Land,
A Land that flows with Beasts and Irish Cattle,
Fitting to serve them in their Whigland Battle;
Draw them here weighing to fetch home more Mice,
And let their Cargo be a Ship of Lice:
But when they are launcht into the Ocean deep,
Let Neptune lull them all there fast asleep,
Within his crisped Arms, and never more,
To have such Vermin on our English Shore.
Painter stop here, if this you Paint with skill,
You shall be Laureat of the Pencil Quill.
Draw next Nath. Thompson with his Cross-Key Fetters,
And all his Bullies of the Roman Letters;
Draw him, be sure, as limping with one Leg,
Then draw the other fast stuck on a Peg,
And cannot stir without some fetch him thence,
By Habeas Corpus of Saint Peter's Pence;
But draw him with such Actions at his Tail,
That none shall venture thence to give him Bail;
Paint him so wicked, as never to have hope
To fly from thence, unless it be by Rope,
Which if he escape, then draw him there to lie,
A Rogue he lived, and so there let him dye.
Draw Towzer, Not. and Clitus here together,
As if they were Birds of the self-same Feather;
Next draw Satyricks, which so much do flutter,
Because they want some Honey to their Butter,
In their Sublimes, wherein our Noble Peers,
They make so bold, to pluck them by their Ears,
Because stout Champions for their Countries good,
Though by these Fops they are not understood;
A bold Imperious flattering sort of Cattle,
Who make a Noise, just like the Childrens Rattle,
And do deserve with all their Herds and Flocks,
Fast to be tied to the Whipping stocks,
And them be lasht until they learn more Wit,
Or there remain till Parliament may Sit.
Kings and bold Tyrants are the self-same things
With these Flesh-Flies, when mounted on their Wings,
Witness of late their Protectorian Praise,
For which some fay, Our Laureat won the Baies
In those Rebellious Times; and now he rakes
Hell and the Devil, and the Stygian Lakes,
And them impleads for to inspire his Muse,
His King and Country, and his Peers to abuse;
Come Painter, leave him to our Cupping-Box,
Which may in time abate this swelling Pox,
Which he has caught among the Tory Crew;
Leave him with them, to sing Cuckold Adieu.
Here spoke my Painter thus; Sir if you please
Now to sit down, and give your self some ease,
I have a mind to draw one here below,
As a Lieutenant to your Ra-ree Show,
If not room here, in our next Wainscot Page,
And this shall be the Tinker of our Age,
That special dry Chip of a piece of Wood,
Who never writ, nor thought of what was good;
It matters not to draw him to the life,
Since he is dead, with all his Works of strife;
And though the Tories may perchance to hust,
To hear their Champion went out like a snuff,
Yet here I Will draw him with a Face of Brass,
Because his Name was Monsieur Hudibrass;
I Will draw him first here scraping to the Devil,
To cure the State of the Fanatique Evil,
And to inspire his base Hobgoblin Muse,
By Tumbling Art, the Loyal Phans to abuse;
Then I will draw him, and his doughty Rymes,
Only to please the now debauched Times,
And all his Ribbald and Romantic Stories,
Only to please the Hogan Mogan Tories;
I Will let my Pencil here now run at Rovers,
As if I were to draw here Kentish Drovers;
Then shall my Right Hand fairly dash about,
As if I did intend to draw Dishclout;
Be sure I Will draw him all in Rags and Rents,
And in those Rags burlesquing Parliaments;
I Will drew him now in Dogrel Meeter,
And there like to a Chimney-Sweeper,
With all his knick-knacks at his shoulders,
To mend the Bumpkins and Freeholders,
Where er'e he comes for to make sport,
Either in City, or in Court;
I Will draw him in his proper Geers,
In setting Dogs and Bears by The Ears;
I Will draw him and his profane Wit,
As pleasing to the Tory Cit;
I Will draw him hab-nab at a venture,
Then draw him cutting of Indenture,
With twenty Maggots and mishaps,
As he came home from Mother Red-Caps,
Upon his Body and his Noddle,
As being so drunk he could not straddle,
But down he fell into a Ditch,
And there was bit by a Salt-Bitch,
And ever since he could not write
One word of Truth; but only Bite;
I Will draw him here with all his Pranks,
And then presented with no Thanks,
Only for his Rambling Prattle,
He was presented with a Rattle.
For this poor Rogue, after his Dogrel huff,
Went out from hence just like a Candle snuff,
And after all this Swineheards Revel Rout,
Had not one Ring to hang upon his Snout,
Which made him such a true discons'late Elf,
Ready with grief almost to hang himself;
Here then I Will draw him with deep Jigger Jagger,
In Life a Locust, and in Death a Beggar.
Monsieur,
Se vous rend grace pour ce dernier effort,
Which may perhaps make Whig and Tory sport.
Painter draw next the Worthies of our Nation,
Who from their hearts desire Reformation,
And willing are to suffer Penal Laws
Against them made in any Righteous Cause:
Then Paint them hoping the next Parliament,
Will all their Fears and Jealousies prevent;
If not before, then draw them all Addressing,
And on their knees imploring Heavens great blessing
Upon them all, and that he would now please
T'incline King Charles his heart to give them ease,
Or else with strength their Loyal Hearts support,
Against new Edicts that shall come from Court;
But Painter draw them still with a desire
That Royal Charles should quench that smoking Fire,
Which is almost throughout the Nation spread,
Which makes them so (poor hearts) to hang the Head.
Painter next draw the Clergy of our Nation,
As being mounted on a Lofty Station,
And just below them place those Worthy Men,
Which even now you drew forth with your Pen,
And in their Mouths this Label place as sent
Unto those Clergy, and next Parliament.
Great Sirs,
We don't pretend to things that are sublime,
Above our sphere, as namely Laws Divine,
To be enforced by the Civil Sword,
But only by that Charming Voice, his Word,
Most plainly Preached unto our common Sense,
By Arguments of Reason drawn from thence,
Which is that Light set up within Man's Breast,
That does distinguish him from a Brute Beast,
(Which must be Ruled with Bit and Bridle too,
With Whip and Spur, if you will have him do.)
No other way as yet we have found out,
To save Men's Souls, or to resolve a Doubt,
And therefore will not with the Tories prate
At such a bold pragmatick scrabling rate,
By Laws Established both in Church and State.
The last is yours, the first it is God's Throne,
And those who grate so much upon that Bone,
Are Rebels more than those of Forty One.
Poor mortal Shrubs! we dare not so presume
To think that we can make a sweet Perfume
Unto the King of Kings, by making Laws
For to Establish his most Righteous Cause,
Which he has undertaken, and has sent
His only Son on purpose to present
His Will to us, in Acts of Parliament,
Of Scripture-Records, signed with the Blood
Of Christ himself; for all the Nations good
Under the Cope of Heaven, if they will come
Submit to him, and to his glorious Son.
All Cob-web Laws of Statesmen since that time,
Have only been but Water mixed with Wine,
In Church Affairs; for doubtless that is his own
Most proper Right, which we dare not disown,
Since he has promised that the Gates of Hell
Shall never prevail against his Charming Bell
Of Magna Charta Laws, where Reason must us guide,
And not the Pope, nor any Man beside
On this side Heaven, so as to force Assent,
Beyond the power and dint of Argument,
For Mortal Men to make Immortal Laws,
To bind our Souls, and free us from the Jaws
Of Everlasting Death; how does it look
Just like a Whale caught with a small Fish-hook;
And though our Rulers do pretend so high,
To guard the Throne of Sovereign Majesty,
By their Bylaws Imposed on his Church,
They will at last be left all in the Lurch;
And they shall see their solly in his time,
Who only makes such Laws as are Divine,
And not for them to meddle with, but stand
In their own proper sphere to give command,
Where God has placed them by his Sovereign Power,
To guard Men's Bodies, not their Souls devour,
By forcing them against their common sense,
To make Men Hypocrites, under pretense
Of guarding of God's Truth, but make them evil,
And send by wholesale Men unto the Devil;
Yet this you venture at with full intent,
In your Imposing things Indifferent;
And when you have once got the Royal Stamp,
Our Old Religion then you will strait new vamp
With Trash and Trumpery, only to abuse
God's holy Church, with Country clouted Shoes,
And then you thunder out Hell and Damnation,
To all that will not Bow (throughout the Nation)
Unto your Idols, which you so Adore,
And here set up, just like a Painted Whore,
And do present her to the Peoples sight,
As if she had the stamp of Divine Right:
For shame leave off these whiffling tricks of Art,
Whereby you make the Nation so much smart;
We dare be bold t'affirm these Impositions,
Are only Rellicks of Rome's Superstitions;
And though you press them with such Zealous Rage,
In Press and Pulpit, to this present Age,
Yet we do think (and therein may be bold)
You Will never bring this Nation to your Mould.
Though you do say, the things themselves are such
Which may be used, or not used over much;
And do affirm, although Indifferent
In their own nature; but a Parliament,
When they Impose them, and them do proclaim,
The case is altered, now they must remain
Not as before. But all of them such things
As if commanded by the King of Kings:
It Is not the things themselves that are so sacred,
But Royal Stamp, that has them so Created.
This is your great Goliath, who bids defiance,
And upon whom you have so strong Reliance;
One little stone thrown from a Striplings Sling,
Will strip your Champion of his Treble String,
And he shall tell him, and need say no more,
This very thing sets up the Scarlet Whore,
Top and Top gallant, with her Plumes so high,
As if she would mount above the Starry Sky,
And there invade even Sovereign Majesty,
As if he could not tell what to Impose,
Without the Statute of his Bulls and Blows:
It is the common Art which she does use,
To cheat their Chickens, and poor Souls abuse,
In telling them, they must not think too much
Of any thing Imposed by holy Church,
For by the same Law you Impose but one,
You may do here as they have done at Rome,
Impose one hundred, and in time may clog
All our Religion with the Romish Fog;
Like the Egyptian Darkness, which was such,
That none could find the right way to their Church;
Pray what security give you these Men,
That charge you thus with their plain downright Pen?
Impose but one, then by the self-same hand
Impose an hundred by your just command,
All must obeyed be, or else forsooth
You Will tell the King they have an aching Tooth,
Who do Dissent, to be at some strange things,
Make him the Foot, and they themselves all Kings.
This is the very Language of all such
Who count themselves the Pillars of the Church;
And so at length they will come to Infinitum,
With Popish Trinckets, only to invite'um
To come to us, that so at last they may
Save all our Souls the clean contrary way;
Whereas we know, that Heaven's right charming Bell,
Is to persuade, but never to compel,
Unless it be by such a Bow that is bent
(Non Vi and Armis, sed) with strong Argument,
As knowing th'Terrours of our dreadful Lord,
We do persuade Obedience to his Word;
But your Imposing things Indifferent
by Statute-Laws, in Acts of Parliament,
Has made the Breach so wide in Church and State,
That may at last end in a broken Pate,
For ought we know, unless it God prevent,
By sending us an Healing Parliament,
Which may leave all these things (like Heaven) so free,
That all shall Love His present Majesty
With all their Souls, their Bodies, and their States,
And one and all cry down these Maggot Pates,
Who would enslave us to the Roman Chair,
And by degrees would cut off all our Hair
Wherein our strength does lie; but hold a Blow,
We know our Trustees, these things better know,
Than for to send us once more to that Church,
Which will at last leave all our Souls i'th'lurch.
Come Painter, now close up, for we have done,
We Will leave these Bigots to the Church of Rome,
Who may perchance be cheated (just like these,
Who once were Pigeons, but now counted Crows)
Unless they will, to save their Plurnes, but turn,
( Camelion like) before that they will burn.
Honoi soit qui mal y pense.

The Prologue spoken by Mr. Tho. Tell-Truth, as Captain of the School, being
clothed in Vermillion Satin, and a white Plume of Feathers in his Hat; and
Addressing himself first to the Gentlemen and Ladies, and afterward to the
Scholars (who were also clothed in their proper Formalities) he began as
follows.
Gentlemen and Ladies,
IF you are come, expecting Grammar Treats,
Our Lads can sham; the World's so full of Cheats;
But yet they say (though thwarting Expectation)
They hope to please you by a Declaration,
Which they will send abroad for to expose
As well the Churches, as the Kingdoms Foes;
And this they will speed quite round about the Nation,
Bedlams our Scene, and our just provocation;
For you must know, that to this place was sent
Some Friends of ours, as mad and TURBULENT;
And here forsooth they must have Doctor French,
To give them Pills, their hot Brains for to quench,
Although indeed the Fops that like that Play,
Are ten times madder, as you will hear to day:
We mean those Franticks, who did first excite
The Ravens Goose-quill, that Sham to Endite;
And since our Master, to requite his strain,
Gave us this Theme, his Maggot to explain,
And to declare the Truth unto all those
Who cannot distinguish between Doves and Crows.
Our Friends retain their Wits, even as created
Rooks feed on Carrion, and are Maggot-pated.
We say our Master, who does yonder sit,
Gave us this Theme to exercise our wit:
Our Plumes proclaim their Dove-like Innocence;
Our Satin shows they are without offense.
Our bashful Poet in his Bedlam Vest,
Was clapped in also there among the rest,
Only for dashing two words with his Quills,
There he was sent this Lent to take some Pills,
Number. Ducent. quinque being his Dose cell,
There he beat out his Hocus Pocus Spell;
Thence also came his new invented Glass,
With which he hopes to cure both Fool and Ass,
The which he has exposed to public view,
Hoping likewise to purge the Tory Crew.
When Men are often exposed, they see their folly,
And some return from their mad Melancholy.
We hope you will thank him for his good Intents,
To Prince, to People, and to Parliaments.
Porters forbear, let not the Tories in,
These to the Pope, some say, are near of kin;
But hanged for once, come let them all draw near,
It Is not the Pope or Tories that we fear;
We Will represent plain Truths, let them tell Lies,
They shoot at Rovers, we shall gain the Prize;
Although perhaps they may, for ought we know,
Go and declare they have seen the Raree-show,
And swear it too, against our Master here,
To get some Cakes unto their late strong Beer;
But unto these our Master bids defrance,
And to such Rogues he has not an Alliance;
And though the Truth to tell he has thought fit,
He loves ingenious, but no Factious Wit.
And now we will tell you what we shall express,
To please your Fancies, either more or less;
For in so great a Congress some may huff,
Whigs take Tobacco, Tories they take Snuff.
Our Master gave, besides our Bedlam Theams,
To Oil our Fancies, several sorts of Scenes;
And in our Contemplations bid us hope
To Maul the French, the Tories and the Pope;
And in Obedience to his strict Commands,
We launcht our Ship from off the Goodwin Sands,
As having then some breezing prosperous Gales,
We weighed our Anchors, and hois'd up our Sails,
Intending for the Cape of Bon Sperance,
When Lo a Fleet with their full Sails from France,
Of these bold Pirates, and their Popish Fry,
From off our Topmast head we did descry,
As if intending to surprise our Isle;
Come Peace, come War, come either Cross or Pile,
With bold Resolves, by Shams, or else by Thumps,
That here at last the Pope should turn up Trumps;
We called a Council straight for to consult,
And soon our Captains came to this Result,
To let them pass into our English Channels,
And there to fight them and their VVater-Spaniels;
Where having fixed them, all along our Shore,
We made our demi, and our whole Canons roar
So briskly on them, that in truth we may
Declare to you that we have got the day,
And so shall hold it, unless some strange mishaps
Do fall upon us like great Thunderclaps,
To beat us from our Anchors, and our Cables,
Which Tories hope, but we hope will prove Fables.
These are the Men which we shall represent,
As bold and Factious heady Turbulent,
Disloyal to their Prince, and scurr'lous to their Peers,
Fills all our Heads with Jealousies and Fears,
As if the world were turned up side down,
And all good Men turned Traitors to the Crown;
If these may be believed, oh horrid shame,
That such Bandogs should stain their Christian Name,
Who never will (though so abused) let fly
One Blunderbuss against His Majesty;
Nor never will in any VVar-like Thumps,
Discharge one Gun against the Nations Trumps,
As private persons; yet they may oppose,
Not only Foreign, but Domestic Foes,
Who do so boldly in our bowels lurk,
(Far worse to England than the Jews or Turk;)
And do endeavor to blow up our States
By Treasons, Murders, or by broken Pates,
Or any thing which they can but devise,
Or Shams, or real Plots to make us prize,
Unto His Highness Seignior Don the Pope,
For which these Traitors well deserve the Rope,
Which is too good for such, who now survive,
They rather merit to be burnt alive;
For Lex Talionis is a Righteous Law.
Our Martyred Saints this very Death they saw,
And also felt, witness Old Smithfield Rounds,
In times of yo're with shrill lamenting Sounds.
Now such as these we may oppose each man
So far as legally (no more) we can,
And rather here than these shall turn up Trumps,
When Legs are cut, we will fight upon our stumps.
These are the Men in this our Declaration,
Which are th'Aggressors in our English Nation.
Our modest Poet with his Eagle wings,
Does soar aloft unto the King of Kings,
Implores his Aid, for to direct his Quill,
To stop the mouths of all that wish us ill:
Let him proceed, and may he never faulter,
And these that slur him, let them have an Halter,
To draw them up, upon the Sovereign Tree,
We hope to this with us you will agree,
Scholars, Maxim, Maxim, Maxim, Etiam, Etiam, Etiam.
Monsieurs, Oui, Oui, Oui, Oui,
Gentlemen and Ladies, Yes, Yes, Yes, Yes.
So now we will appeal in this our Frantic Reason,
Tories we dare you; Have we yet spoke Treason?
Tories, No, No, No, No.
Gentlemen aside, Cunning Dogs, whatever they think, they dare not speak
otherwise for fear of being Macknamar'd. Then you shall hear the rest, you
speak like Men,
When we have done, you will take this Test again;
Yes, Yes, Yes, Yes.
But hark our Muse, the Lads now call and say,
It Is time to stop, that they may come in play;
But yet to please, we fairly promise here
What wants in Front, to make good in the Rear.
Then turning himself to the Scholars, in particular to these who were to
perform their Parts in the Dialogue (being all clothed in their proper
Formalities) spoke as follows:

Si Puer hoc sciret quantum doctrina valeret,
Raro dormiret, sed nocte dieque studeret.
Adeste Lads, and give your Master thanks
For this days work, to show us Noble Pranks,
Which may in time redound unto our praise,
And some of us may chance to win the Baies.
If we will push hard, and think no labor lost
Wherein we learn, Dame Learning to accost.
For this, dear Sirs, our Friends has sent us here,
Not to be drunk, or learn to domineer,
With these bold Tories of our present Age,
Which is a shame to mention on our Stage,
Where modest Truth and Virtue rule the Roast:
Not cursed Oaths, which to the Jurors cost,
Will then appear, when as that dreadful Ite,
Of Go you cursed, and that blessed Venite
Shall be pronounced, upon the Day of Doom,
When Heaven and Hell shall say, Come make us Room
For all our Subjects, in their proper station,
As they did act within their State Probation.
Learn these two Letters if it be in posse
Memento mori, and teipsum nosce:
Learn, read and practice these two Letters well,
They Will teach us how to escape the Gates of Hell.
Now if you please you may lead up the Dance,
And board those Sweep-stakes which are come from France.
Remember first what is your Masters due,
If you thank him, be sure he will love you.
Scholars, Gratias, Gratias, Gratias.
The Names of the Scholastic Academians in the ensuing Catalogue.
Hocus Catholicus Romanos, Two English Jesuits sent from Rome to Sweden, and
from thence to England. Pocus Catholicus Romanos, Two English Jesuits sent from
Rome to Sweden, and from thence to England. Rodomantados Licentias Liberosos
Publicanos, An Observator. Doctorius Anthropos Orthodoxius Anglicanos, A true
Legitimate, but a high-flown Tantivy Clergyman of the Church of England.
Isabella Van, Harlot Two common Strumpets. Joanna Van, Harlot Two common
Strumpets. Jocosus Pragmaticosus Furiosus. Three swinging Inforformers, the
first is Jester to the Observator. Mercurius Hibernos Tossoffacanos. Three
swinging Inforformers, the first is Jester to the Observator. Mecurius
Aglicanos Asdriasdos. Three swinging Inforformers, the first is Jester to the
Observator. Theophilus Catholicus Christianos. Two Brethren, but in some things
modest Dissenters from the Church of England as by Law Established. Thomatius
Catholicus Christianos, alias Thomatius Tell-Truth, Two Brethren, but in some
things modest Dissenters from the Church of England as by Law Established.
Whigs and Tories, Tantivies and Strangers, Captains and Soldiers, Constables
and Watchmen, Drawers and Coffee-men.
Dialogus Primus Serious and Comical.
In Nomine Domini incipit omne Malum. Jocosus Pragmaticosus Furiosos, SUrely
our Vesper-man was invited by the Hackney-Dons this night to Supper, which made
him, when mounted in his Catholic Vestments, spur his little black Devil under
him, into a high Presbyterian Trot (as if he were to run a Race with the
Butcher of Croyden) but I presume it was to save part of his Coleworts and
Bacon, which is the usual Treats among those Journey-men Sir John's, for their
Summer nights Repasts.


Whig. Whereas you say it was a high Presbyterian Trot, I rather believe it,
was a Tantivy Gallop, and was intended for Sam's Coffee-house (where I have
seen you many a sweet time, and as great with the Observator as Cup and Can)
and should he post much after the same rate, I dare lay Twenty Guineys he would
quickly break his Neck and then you may chop off his Head, and make a little
Devil of him, and not so abuse your Pater-Noster-man beforehand, as I perceive
you have already done by your last Discourse. But since you are Merry Andrew, I
cannot much blame you, in regard it is your place (I wish you have not at last
a slap with a Fox Tail for your pains) to put your Inventions upon the wrack to
please the high Tories and Tantivy-Boyes (now in vogue) but more especially
your Reverend Patron, and most profound Master the Observator.


J. P. Come Whig in quarto (for I perceive by your joining with us to night,
you are not of them in Folio) notwithstanding your Joaking Repartee, we will
not fall out, but at in and in, as often (and as much) as you please, though
sometimes we must expect to be at cross purposes with you, viz. Out Nettle, in
Dock, and cum multis aliis, which I have not now time to repeat


Doctorius Anthropos Anglicanos, Come, since our Vespers are already done,
Or as the Western Volk do zay zo zoon)
And that Don Phoebus, Sovereign of the Light
Does now draw near unto his shortest Night,
Which we do call Saint Barnaby the bright:
And that I have as yet three hours good,
Before I need go home unto my Wood,
To maul Dissenters with my Ink-horn Pot,
To morrow morn. Come, come, the weather's hot,
I Will have a care I don't take too much pains
Against those Rebels, lest I crack my Brains
With too long Parchments in Tantivy strains:
There is enough already will them fright,
Out of their senses; Towzer does so bite
Their Maggot-Pates with his ingenious Pen;
He shuts them up (like Daniel) in the Den
If that they will not bow unto the Pope,
In time they may taste of his treple Rope;
There Is he and Not. and Ridens altogether,
Will smoke their Tails, as Birds all of a Feather:
These are our Champions, we may now sit still,
And give them each a Laureat to their Quill.
I Will steer my Course unto Comb's Coffee-house,
For some diversion, perhaps catch a Louse,
Which being pounded in a Glass of Sack,
My Doctor tells me is Old strengthen-Back,
For my distemper, my old Jaundies grief,
Stars be propitious, send me some relief.

J. P. Now Doctor if you please to go before us,
We will come after and make up the Chorus.

D. A Well moved Jack Pudding with thy custard noddle,
If thou will help, we will ride the Whigs a stroddle.

J. P. With all my heart, my honest Doctor Tant:
There you shall see how bravely I will chant,
My Gallick Tongue, and my rare flashy Wit,
Shall make the Whigs, and all the Tories split
Themselves with laughings, hums, huzza's, and after
They Will break their Fasts with merriment and laughter;
And all the Scholars, as they run to School,
Will still be chanting of their Bedlam Fool.

D. A. Huzza brave Pudding, here is a Friend indeed,
To help a Tory at his time of need.

Mr. Combs. You're welcome Doctor to our Coffee house,
But have a care you do not catch a Louse;
The Ragged Tories have been here to day,
They suck up Mum, as whigs do suck up Whey.

D. A. I thank you Combs, now for your sucking Whigs,
Though you mistook, you meant sure sucking Piggs.

Mr. Combs. I did indeed Sir, but there I did miss,
Sed lapsus linguae, non error mentis.

D. A. But have a care you do not slip too much,
Remember Towzer, and Alhallows Church.

Mr. C. I thank you Sir for this your precious Item,
Though for the Truth (some say) that he did bite 'em:
But as for that, we will not here dispute,
Leave that to Harry, him for to confute;
He Is Canon-proof, he cares not for his Guns,
Nor all his paultry, frothy Paper Puns,
Which he puts forth in his Old Canting way,
To please the Tories which have gone astray.

D. A. But what is become of all your Tory Cattle?


Mr. C. They Are all marched off unto the Whigland Battle;
The Trumpets sounded, and the Drums they beat,
And I was glad to hear of their Retreat.
Here was Ben. Took, and with him Heraclitus,
Who with Pindariques every week does fright us.
These are the Captains for that New found Land.
They were the Men who first found out the Sand
Of those Rich Mines beyond the Indian shore,
And now they are launching to fetch home some more:
These are brave Steers-men, bold Vtopian sprights,
Who found it out in long dark winter nights;
And though they say the Prince of that Rich Land,
Is loath to part with any of his Sand;
Yet to prevail with some old Jaundy Mice
Within his Court, they take a Ship of Lice
Now for a Cargo, in hopes when on the Shore,
Those Jaundy Mice will change them all for Ore.

J. P. And if they often return, I make no doubt,
But in short time to see a total Rout
Of all those Whigs which do infest our Lands,
These Golden Mines will raise such Trained Bands,
If not to fight, yet to out-swear the Devil.
Then Tony shall be cured of his Evil. Tories Huzza.

D. A. If not before, I fear he never will
Vtopian Ships do rather fright than kill.

J. P. What e're you think, pray don't our Plots disclose,
Sometimes we fight with Pens, sometimes with Blows.
We have assayed to make a Whigland Plot,
If ill success attends, pray blame us not,
Though we do stretch Inventions on the wrack,
Sometimes so high, our very Ropes do crack,
But we must still say Mum, our skill's no less,
Though we do meet with so much bad success,

Whigs, Hum, Hum, Hum.


Whig. And may you always have the same success,
Let God you blast, and let Don Pope you bless.

D. A. Come, come Jack P. let us call a new Cause: Prithee Combs who is that
man sits there at the next Table, he looks as if he were a man of metal, and I
have a mind to hear what he can say for himself; these Whigs here at this Table
do so buz in my Ears with Hums and Haws at every period of our discourse, that
it would make an Horse break his Halter to hear their gaping Mouths. But Will,
where have you been? since you are come, Bring us Tobacco, and one Quart of Mum.


Will. I will Doctor immediately.
Mercurius Hibernos Tossoffacanus,
And me another, if you please good Will,
To drink the Doctor's Health I Will try my skill.
Mercurius Anglicus Asdriasdust,
Bring me another for to quench my Thirst,
I am as dry as ever was the Dust.

D. A. Jack, What are all these Fellows that call at this rate here round
about us?


J. P. Mr. Doctor, take my word for it, they are all very honest Fellows, true
Trouts, and all as good Sons of the Church as ever -- They are come in hot.

I sent them about some particular Affairs concerning the Settlement of the
Nation (in these distracted times) and now they must (as well as your self)
after Exercise, give Nature a Phillip with two or three quarts of Mum, to
spirit them on for any Attempt that I shall Impose upon them.


D. A. In paucis verbis Jack I understand thee, and I am glad they are now come
here with all my heart, and so Gentlemen you are most kindly welcome.

Then here goes honest Pudding's Health,
Come drink it on your Head,
For he has so much Wit and Wealth,
He Will bring the Pope to Bed.
Tories, Huzza, Huzza.
But Mr. Combs. what is that Gentleman's Name which I spoke to you before of,
who sits at the next Table?


Mr. C. He is a very honest Gentleman, I will assure you; he is my very good
Customer; he speaks not much, but when he does, he speaks to the purpose, and
all people that hear him do very much acquiesce in his Determinations.


D. A. Pray what is his Name?


Mr. C. His Name is Mr. Tho. Tell. Truth.


D. A. Is he Whig or Tory according to the present Alamode distinction of the
Fanatic Times?


Mr. C. I presume he is neither, because I have often heard him commend the
Character of a Good Man neither Whig nor Tory, and he does always lay down
this Position between the two Extremes;

In medio consistit Virtus. But yet some call him a Whig for all that; but if
he be one, I believe it is one of the last Edition, viz. a Common Prayer Whig,
as you and others of my Tory Customers are pleased to call him.


J. P. Pax take him for a Whig, if he be a Common Prayer Whig, Doctor, he is
not for our company, and we shall do no good upon him; it will be but lost
labor to attempt any thing upon his Dogmaticals; for those kind of Whigs are
such a sort of Cattle, that you cannot drive them one step beyond the
Sentiments of their own carnal and (now in our lapsed State) corrupted Reason;
and yet they do cry Reason up at that rate, as if they were Roasting Eggs with
it every day in the week.


D. A. Have a little patience good Boy, and let us have a little discourse with
him, fall Back, fall Edge.


Mr. C. Have a care Doctor; though you are very pleasant, and always playing
on the poor Whigs (which are now at a very low Ebb) yet perhaps Mr. Tho.
Tell-Truth may give you as good as you bring; for I will assure you, he has
been too hard for many that have entered the Lists with him.


D. A. I long to be at him; for Combs, I must tell you (bona fide, and in verbo
Sacerdotis) to me it is Meat, Drink, and Cloth.

Will, Will, Make haste good Lad, come hither, come, Bring us some Pipes, and
to'ther Quart of Mum.


Will. What Is a Clock?


W. It is not yet Seven.

Best of all, for then I shall have the more time to recreate my self among
your Masters Whiglanders before I go home to take my sweet and natural Repose;
but indeed I thought it had been much later, but it seems St. Christophers
Church, was done sooner to night than ordinary.

Thomatius Catholicus Christianos alias Tho. Tell-Truth.


Mr. Combs, What is that Clergyman there that has asked you twice concerning
me?


Mr. C. He is a High Tantivy-man of the Church of England, a Boon Companion,
but excellent company, if a man do not tease him too much, and he would very
willingly have some discourse with you the plain truth is, he does love dearly
to Joak and Jest (and at this time he has got the Observator's Jester with him
to bear up a chorus) with the honest Whigs that come to my house.


T. J. With all my heart Mr. Combs, I shall be very willing to drink a glass of
Mum with him, if he be not quarrelsom, nor yet his Jester, if a man should
chance now and then to give him a Cornish Hug, or to pinch them close.


Mr. C. I will hope the contrary; but if it should chance to fall out
otherwise, we have Mr. Constable at the next Door ( viz. Mr. Kid) who will
quickly come and keep the King's Peace.


T. T. Your Servant Mr. Doctor, I perceive by your Canonical Vestments, that
you are a person of Quality, though by what Names or Titles soever Dignified or
Distinguished, I cannot tell.


D. A. Sir, I am so; and to give you some further satisfaction as to my Titles
and Dignities; my Name is Doctorius Anthropos Orthodoxius Anglicanos, and that
is an high Title, for I am sure it sounds very sublime, viz. a True, Orthodox,
Legitimate Son of the Church of England; and then as to my Dignities and
Spiritual Promotions, I am Rector of All Souls; I am Prebend of Baschurch; I am
Vicar of Nonsuch; I am Chaplain in Ordinary to Bishop Woodby; and I am Dean of
Christ-Church, as soon as ever I can get some Noble Patron to present me with
the same at the next vacancy.


T. T. All these are very gay things, if you of the Clergy would not so much
abuse them.


D. A. I will assure you Sir, we scorn to abuse,
We hug them close for our own proper use.

T. T. It Is very true, for others do complain,
Some Preach for nothing, but you Preach for gain.

D. A. Well Mr. Tell-Truth, this is beside our business at present, but I will
lay this down before you as a Position, and pray answer it as fast as you can,
to the content and satisfaction of this present Congregation here Assembled;
viz. That if it were not for Honest Not. Thompson (that Loyal protestant)
Heraclitus Ridens, and the most Worthy and Learned Observator, who are our
Champions, our Guides, our Glass-Lanthorns, our Beacons, our Landmarks, our
Touch and Go Tinder-Boxes, or Setting-Dogs, our Towzers, our Tumblers, cum
multis aliis, etc. the True, Loyal, and most Obedient Sons of the Church of
England, would be run down by the Whigs most abominably.


T. T. To cure us of our Jealousies and Fears,
By Setting us together by the Ears.
You High-flown Churchmen, with your spatter-Brains,
Would split us all, if you did hold the Reins.

D. A. And should be glad with all our Souls to see
Such cursed Rogues hang on the Gallow-Tree.

Tories, Huzza, Huzza.


T. T. This is right (Mr. Tantivy) to the Tune of Flying Fame, alias secundnm
Doctor Dulman, alias Doctor Blunderbuz. who Preached a Sermon to a Learned
Auditory, not long after His Majesty's Restoration, and having therein, as he
thought, given the poor Fanatics a mortal wound, he concludes his most
elaboborate and dull piece with these two Verses, in hobling Meeter.

And all that will not say Amen, Amen.
Let them be hanged, I say, again, again.

J. P. And, had I been there, I would have made the People given him such Hums,
as would have made the very Bells in the Steeple strike their Clappers to have
given him thanks for his Orthodox Sermon; for I hear that Doctor was a true Son
of the Church of England, and we want more of such grand Pillars to support us,
Tories, Huzza, Huzza.


D. A. We have consulted our Prospective-Glass,
To make a Whig not only Fool, but Ass;
And are resolved never for to center,
Until we have not only burst the Venture,
But broke the Back of Naked Truth, who stands
In bold Defiance to our Church Commands,
And let her bounce, and prate, and use her skill,
We'ave got her now at our dispose and will.

Tory, Huzza, Huzza.


T. T. If this your Resolutions therein be,
Truth will prevail, in time she will make us free;
For all your huffing and your bouncing words,
Your Tory Muskets, and your Rusty Swords,
Which came from Hell (unto your own great Fame)
There you shall center, or (say) Truth is lame;
She never yet did fail her Sons with Shield,
And Buckler too, to make them win the Field.

Whigs, Hum, Hum, Hum.


D. A. Courage bold Towzer, now stand up, or never,
You see these Rogues intends us all to sever,
By their high Lofty strains, but yet we hope
If you don't flag us, they shall have a Rope,
To draw them up, upon the Triple Tree,
There let them sing; Then hey Boys up go we.

Tories, Huzza, Huzza.


T. T. Before that day we do no question make,
But yours, the Pope's, and Towzer's heart will ache,
You know of late what did become of Not.
Towzer beware, the Whigs do smell a Rat:
If him and Ridens there should after run,
Who then must guard his Ship and your split Gun.

Whigs, Hum, Hum, Hum.


J. P. A Pox of all these Whigland Sons of Whores,
Who still do lurk along our English Shores;
Come hang'um, dam 'um, rot 'um, let 'um run,
They Will never leave us, till their War is done.
They are so bold, and still will give us Thumps,
Cut off their Legs, they will fight upon the stumps.

T. T. Leave us now then, and you shall see hereafter
We Will give you Tories, fair and gentle Quarter.
We will not touch one Hair upon your Head,
But by sweet words we will bring you all to Bed,
And heap up Coals of Love upon your Crowns,
Not Fire nor Fagots in Old Smithfield Rounds,
It Is not for naked Truth to act such things
As will displease her Lord, the King of Kings.

Whigs, No, No, No.


J. P. Come Doctor leave 'um, to melt in their grease,
That we have here so fairly kept the Peace.
For had we made the least Resistance, strait
Their next, effort had been a broken Pate.
Our Men were wise not to proceed so far.

M. T. For we had heard of Captain Macknamar.


M. A. I love for to inform, but hate to fight with those
Who do my Master scorn, and love so much dry blows.

Whigs, Hum, Hum, Hum.


J. P. Allons Monsieur car il est desja bion Tard,


D. A. With all my heart good Jack, before that we are marred.

Come Will, take money here, though these confounded Whigs have nettled us, yet
I will pay thee very honestly; I have had three Quarts of Mum, four Dishes of
Coffee, five Pipes of Tobacco, which is in all two shillings and three pence;
here is an old Rumper half Crown, (which I know you all love so well) and take
three pence for thy self.


Strangers, Hiss, Hiss, Hiss.


T. T. You are mistaken Sir, you do abuse
Your King, your Country, with such shamming News.
We love our Triple State too well, to choose
A Protectorian Magna Farta State;
We are for Laws, and not as you do prate.

D. A. Come Jack, let us go, and meet at Kids to morrow,
One Quart at Greens, will wash away all sorrow,
Which here we have received Demain perhaps,
The Whigs may pray for these their Thunderclaps.

J. P. Hang sorrow, cast away care,
Though Whigs they do not mind us,
Their Lockram Jaws we will rent and tear,
When we have got them behind us.
Tories, Huzza, Huzza.
Good night, bold Whigs, I bid you all good night,
I cannot stay, for I must go to sh --

Whigs, Hiss, Hiss, Hiss.


T. T. Come let them go for high Tantivy Elves,
Give them but Rope, in time they will hang themselves:
And though they hope to morrow they shall sing,
I fear they harp upon a rotten string,
And they will meet as good as they shall bring.

Whigs, We do resolve to meet them there to morrow;


T. T. That I cannot, Whigs, this is to my great sorrow:
But if they chance to light upon my Brother,
He Will do their Job, you need not have another.

Exeunt Omnes. Dialogus Secundus, Serious, Comical, and Satirical.
A. D. Bonjour. MY darling Drudge, I Will take thy word again,


J. P. To serve you Doctor, I Will cross over the Main.
And though last night we had so bad success,
I think Tom Truth, the Devil did him bless,
With Magic Art, to help him at his need,
Which made him run so fast, and with such speed;
And now my blood does rise within my veins,
To knock him down, or else beat out his brains.

D. A. I do accord the Whigs they were too hard,
But yet am glad we were not Macknamar'd.
Pray hold a blow, beware a broken'Pate,
If with your Tongue you can give them Checkmate,
I like it well; but still make there a stand,
Be well advised; let this be my Command.

J. P. Doctor, to me you seem to be discreet;
It Is good for fools sometimes wise men do meet;
I Will take your counsel, and resolve against Truth,
A fixed Hand, but not a Tongue-ty'd Mouth.

D. A. Hold there Jack Pudding, you will do well enuf,
And by degrees you will them all out-huff.

J. P. I do not question but my bouncing Fits
Will fright the Whigs all stark out of their wits:
I have Conundrums this day in my Head,
By which I hope to bring them all to bed.

Mr. Gibbs, Hum, quoth Sir Harry, whom have we here to day?
Tories, Tantivies, and all so fine and gay,
As if they meant now for to Act a Play.

Harry. There is Doctorious, to make up their number,
We hope the Whigs will part them all in sunder,
When they come in, there sits a Face of Brass,
Here sits another looks so like an Ass;
A Toper sure enough, there sits another.

Mr. Gibbs. But Harry look, here comes Tom Tell-truths Brother,
He Will pay them off, as sure as Eggs be Eggs,
And fix their Tongues within their Ivory Peggs.

Harry. Courage my Masters, lead them up a Dance,
And let it be that new one late from France.
From all that are now against the Pope's pulling down,
And a Tory Address from the right Country Clown,
Who at our late Parliaments do so much frown.
Libera nos, etc.
Whigs. Hum, Hum, Hum.

J. P. What ails these Whigland Coxcombs for to crow,
No Storms appear, unless a Ra-ree Show
They do foresee, which makes 'em so to Hum,
Come Doctor (Vobis) in a Glass of Mum;
They Will fill our Heads with Jealousies and Fears,
With these their Scar-Crows, and their blind Bug-bears,
And when they can, will be about our Ears.

D. A. Nay, as for that, we value them not one Rush,
When e're they come, we will give them push for push.

J. P. Well moved my Lad, I see that you can bounce,
Those very words are worth Guiney an Ounce;
And for your self, in being now so bold,
I Will swear to boot, you're worth your weight in Gold.
Tories. Huzza, Huzza.

Harry. They all did Hum to see a friend sit there,
He Will vent your Tubs, and make you drink small Beer:
He Will cut your Coxcombs, though you now so fleer;
He Will cure your Maggots, if you him do jeer.

J. P. What sauce-box's this, who talks at this wild rate?
I have a mind to crack him over the Pate.

Harry. To let you know, I am my Master's Man,
Now Constable, do what you dare or can.

D. A. Good Jack forbear, pray do not break the Peace,
Take my Advice, let all dry Blows now cease.
I will (good Sir) take your Advice although,
I had some thoughts to give him one sinart blow.
But Harry, laying aside all Quarrels, prithee tell me who is that person that
sits there, which made your Masters Customers, so to hum at the very sight of
him?


Harry. With all my Heart, I will tell you that, and any thing else, in a civil
way, if you will keep your Cane within your Legs, and not heave it at my Pate.


I. P. I will, I will, I Will assure you.


Harry. Sir, It is one Mr. Theophilus, Mr. Tell-Truths own Brother.


D. A. Tell-Truths Brother? I wish we had never seen him nor his Brother
neither, but Mum for that.


I. P. But is it Theophilus Rationalis, the Author of Multum in Parvo?


Harry. I cannot inform you, as to that, for he goes with us by the name of Mr.
Theophilus Catholicus Christianus, but the Company, and all my Masters
Customers give him a great deal of respect, for his true Loyalty to his Prince,
his Clemency and Moderation in all cases and upon all points whatsoever,
relating either to Church or State.


I. P. Harry, I thank you, for giving me this Information, as far as you can,
and if you will inform me, of any thing in this, or the like nature, when I
desire it? I will be very civil to you; and here is a George on Horseback for
you, toward your Christmas Box.


Harry. I most humbly thank you, most worthy and noble Sir, it is the greatest
Gift I have had presented me this many a day, you have obliged me; Sir, I
shall --


I. P. And likewise I do make it my request, That if Mr. Observator, and my
self, do chance to meet here sometimes, you will satisfy us in any thing that
we shall propose to you, by way of Interrogation.


Harry. Yes, yes, as far as my slender capacity does extend, you need not make
the least scruple of my ready compliance with you both, upon any such like
account.


I. P. I will assure you, we shall be both very grateful unto you, and likewise
shall endeavor to bring you some good Gentlemen Customers, that shall join
issue with us upon the same account.


Harry. Your most humble Servant, good Sir, I do very well understand you.
Verbum sapienti satis est.

Harry aside These cursed Rogues that come here on the snap,
And by their Bribes good men they would entrap.
I shall grow rich, although I smell a rot,
I Will sham the Shammer, and their Whigland-PLOT.

2.
T. C. From Tantivy Abhorrers who make it a Trade,
To represent all true Protestants in Masquerade,
Though not one of them all, but a true Tory blade,
And some kin to the Pope, that blind stumbling Jade.
Libera Nos, etc.

I. P. Harry, Pray inform me, what it is that the Whigs are reading, at the
next Table, which makes them so merry about the mouth, etc.


Harry. Sir, I will go and put my Head in among the rest of the Fraternity (or
as you do call them, Brotherhood) and bring you word presently.


D. A. A special Rogue, I Will warrant him Jack, he is fitting for your business,
if you can but manage him completely, for Isee he has already Iearn'd some of
our Canting Phrases, and I do not question but in a short time he will proceed
to perfection.


I. P. Let me alone to manage him with a Golden Rippon Spur, I Will prick him and
bear him with that effectually.


Harry. Sir, I have been among the Whiglanders, and I put in my Woodlock Bill
among 'um (an shall please you Sir) and I find upon their Paper Records, it is
a New Loyal French Protestant Letany, both for Church and State, lately
Translated, Composed, and put into English Meeter, and Theophilus Christianus
is there, now Clark of the Council.


I. P. By whom Harry preethy was it Translated?


Harry. By Mr. Tho. Tell-Truth (as one of the black Jacks turned up with white,
did inform me) Theophilus his own Brother.


D. A. A special Trout upon my Life, we shall make him a true Son of the Church
in a very short time; here you Rogue, here is a Crown piece to buy you a pair
of Gloves.


Harry. Vostre Serviteur tres humble Monsieur le Dogiteur,
Je vous en serviray de bren bon ceur.

I. P. I taught this Rogue a little French (coming here sometimes) and you see
he can speak it, ex tempore, and also in Ryme.


Harry. Oui Monsieur vous m'aver l'apprins, and un bon Maistre toujours faict
un bon Serviteur.


I. P. Allez vous en il y a un autre cinq Shellings pour vous mon bon gar^on.


3.
T. C. From all that wish well to the true Popish Plot,
And from all those grand Tories who say, They will not
Believe it at all, but would have it forgot,
Although twenty new Ropes has of late been their lot.

Whigs. Hum, hum, hum.
Libera Nos, etc.

I. P. Harry: They are at it again, may not we go and sit by them at the same
Table?


Harry. Yes, yes, without offense, for they are so bold and confident in their
way, they fear no colors, and some Tories have sometimes said in my hearing,
That though they speak not one word of Sense, but all Treason from the bottom
to the top, yet they are so Divelish confident, notwithstanding that they hope
ere long, to see them all hanged, upon my Masters Amsterdam Coffee-House
Sign-post for so doing.


D. A. I will assure you (Harry) those Tories whoever they were, spoke very
much to the point in hand, and I hope to hear of a second part to the same Tune.


I P. But Mum, good Doctor Mum, Harry, come, come,
And bring our Doctor one whole quart of Mum.

Harry, Its good sometimes to stop your mouths with
Least that the Whigs should here you over run.

D. A. Before they should, I Would rather split my Venture, Mum


Harry. But have a care you do not make Indenture
As you go home, the Whigs will say, You Are drunk,
And will conclude you have been with a Punk.

D. A. It may be so, and what is this pray more
Then what they do? to drink, to reel and Whore.
Only we are public, in the broad day light,
They do it private in Cabals at Night.

Harry. Gentlemen, yonder comes Rodomontados Licencius, Liberosus Publicanos
and Heraclitus Ridens, and Ben. Took, and Not. Thomson, and the Devil and all,
I think; what a noise do they keep as they come along, surely we shall have a
brave Trade to day? and I do not question but I shall get some money of them,
either by hook or by crook.


I. P. Oh mon bon Maistre, ha, ha, ha.

Monsieur Observator, vous ester les tres bren venu Quand on Parle de Diable il
se monstre son cul.

For we were just now speaking of you, and you chopped in upou us, almost in the
same critical minute.


R. L. You are a Rogue and ever so will be.
But yet your Face of Brass, I Am glad to see.

I. P. Je vous rend grace, I am your sure Tool;
Call me what you please, but don't call me Fool.

R. L. Its granted, Rogue enough, let't be a Match,
Instead of Fool, I Will call thee honest Patch.

I. P. By patching and piecing, I Will pay off the Whigs,
By canting and ranting I Will hum all their Gigs.
By Swearing and Gursing, I Will teach them to pray,
And send them to Heaven, the contrary way.
But my honest Master (in good scber sadness) how came you and your company
here to day, for to the best of my remembrance, I never saw you here before, in
my life; but I am apt to think some body has conjured you and the rest of you
here together, to help us at a dead lift, for the Whigs are grown so abominable
saucy and impudent, that they speak Treason as faft as I can swallow Cherries
at 2 d. per pound, and that you shall hear presently, if you will hearken to
their Letany, which Mr. Gill Justice, at the upper end of that Table (as Clerk
of the Council,) is now reading to their Honors.


R. L. A Pox of their Honors, I Will do what I can to stop all their Mouths, or
else I Will put them all in Bedlam (one after another) in my next Observations,
but in the first place, I must tell thee honest Patch, I think thou art a
Witch, for I do protest there was such an Hurricane in the Street, that did
blow us here all together, as we were marching along to our general Randevouz
at Sams Coffe-House, do what we could for our lives.


I. P. It is very well, I will hope our Stars are propitious, and that you were
not sent here for nothing.


R. L. I do hope so too, come let us draw near the Treasonable Table, but
whatever you do hear, say nothing to them but Mum but what Treason you hear
them speak, be sure you cry them up to the Skies, and Hum as well as they do,
and I Will warrant it, we will make a Protestant Whigland-Plot of it, before we
have done.


I. P. Oh my brave Master, you speak (shall I say?) like a Captain; no, no, by
no means, but you speak like an Emperor, or like Don John of Austria, as if he
were here in his own proper person? and I will tell you something in your Ear:
We have secured Kids Boy Harry (a profound deep Rogue I Will swear) with some of
our charming Powder, to tell us any thing that we shall demand of him, so that
I do suppose we may peremptorily conclude the day is our own; and now I will
sing you a Ketch.


R. L. Prithee do Patch, for I love thy Ketches dearly well.


I. P. Oh Master, you forgot honest Patch, but now if you please, leave out
honest, and put in Master, for a little of that thing called Honesty, will go
but a very little way with us both; But Mr. Patch, Mr. Tory, Mr. Tantivy, Mr.
Cockscomb, Mr. Towzer, Mr. Tumbler, cum multis alijs, are such Genteel Titles
of Honor, given us by the Whigs. that they will go along with us to our
Graves, and those I like mighty well, because their Tongues are no slanders.

You have quite put me out of my Ketch, and I will sing you that some other
time, in the mean time, let us go and catch them at their Side-board
Treasonable Table.


R. L. But I would speak one word with Harry Premirement, and will give him one
Dose more of our quantum meruit and charming powder, that so if it work well
with him, it may do our Jobb effectually.


I. P. Vous avez ra^son Monsieur Harry venez ca.


Harry. Je vien que vous plaict ils Messienrs.


R. L. Harry. Let me round you in the Ear: This Gentleman (Mr. Patch) has
informed me of mighty great things of you, and here is a Guiney for your
farther encouragement.


Harry. Worthy Sir, You have so much obliged me, That I will resolve to run
through Fire and Water, to serve either you or your good friend, or that
glorious Cause, which you are now managing, with so much gallantry, secresy and
dexterity, and I am sure you are not a Rafter, but one of the main Pillars,
both of Church and State, for all those noble ends and purposes, before
mentioned.


R. L. Mr. Patch, upon my Life he is a brave Fellow, I think we have got Multum
in Parvo over to our side; could any man have spoke more to the purpose, in so
small a compass of ground.


I. P. I did manage him before you came, and I told him, you should be civil to
him also.

I beat the Bush, come you shall catch the Hare,
If Harry prove right, you will make 'um all to stare
Like roasting Piggs, when Eyes are coming out,
Come lets draw nigh; our Plot I do not doubt
But will succeed, according to our mind,
Which if it do, have at you ever kind.
And all you Whigs, that round about there sit,
Hating good Doctrine, as you hate good Wit.

4.
T. C. From Toping Tantivies who wear Ribbons red,
As a Badg of distinction, to show a green Head,
And call themselves Tories; The Forlorn they have led,
To bring Madam Scarlet in time here to Bed.
Libera Nos, etc.

Whigs, Hum, hum, hum.


R. L. These are Merry Whigs I Will Swear, how many of these Stanza's that run so
upon all four, have they dispatched already? Harry, I believe you can tell me.


Harry, Yes Sir, that I can, and a great many things more, which will make
their Hearts ache, when I come to make a Discovery, of what I have at present,
within this Brain Pan of mine; but Sir, the last they read to the Brotherhood,
was Number 4. and they will go through with it before they have done, and there
(if you have but your remembrances about you) you will hear Treason enough of
all conscience to hang them up every Mothers Child of 'um.


I. P. Thou art a brave Boy, Harry, thank you for that, what if they should not
go through slitch with their Letany, but omit some part of the most material
and Treasonable part of it, will you tell us the rest after they are gone?


Harry. Yes, yes, that I will, for Mr. Tell-Truth gave it me, and I have it all
by Heart, and can say it as perfectly as my Pater Noster, and if they should
chance to miss, I shall rub up their Memories, and fork their Tobies, or else
it shall cost me a fall, and if there be not plain downright Treason in that
Letany, I am as much mistaken as ever I was in my life.


R. L. Well Mr. Patch, if this don't do, none of our measures will be taken
right, at any time, I am sure.

Harry aside. Mr. Gibs, Hear how they vapor, I laugh in my fleeve.
But let them laugh that wins, I Will make them grieve
Before we have done with these old Shamming Tories,
I Will tell them whiskers still for real Stories.
But Mr Patch, let us hearken to some more of their
Let any, and pray observe your hits.
For since your name is changed to Monsieur Patch.
I do expect that you observe and catch.

I. P. I will my good Master, and you shall see to boot,
That at long run, I Will bring the Devil out,
Hark, hark.

5.
T. C. From Heraclitus Ridens, that Brazen-Face Tool,
Who writes to get Bread, and makes himself Fool,
Between Jest and Earnest, but his courage may cool,
When the Commons and Ketch shall give him a stool.

Whigs, hum, hum, hum.
Libera Nos, etc.

I. P. Master, shall not Heractitus answer these Rogues now, for this too
nearly concerns him, and I perceive he is most desperately netled at them, for
putting this slur upon him, now he is here in his own proper person.


R. L. You know our consultation together was, That whatever we heard them say,
We were to answer nothing but Mum, and therefore neither of us must Retort,
whatever we do hear, as to our own particulars, but afterward we may all
witness against them what we please.

Not. Ridens, Ben. I. P. and so we will, as sure as Eggs be Eggs.


6.
T. C. From that Observator who would us now rob,
Of all our five Senses, to do the Pope's Jobb,
Who its feared at the last will prove but a dull Hobb.
When the Pope and his Party shall give him the bobb.
Libera Nos, etc.

R. L. mum, mum, mum.


Whiggs, hum, hum, hum,


7.
T. C. From Brazen-Fac't Not. that Billingsgate slave,
Who writes for the Pope, that right Scarlet Knave,
Who bids Not. still write Loyal, us all to out-brave,
On purpose in time, here us all to enslave.

N. T. mum, mum, mum.
Libera Nos, etc.

Whigs, hum, hum, hum.


Harry. There Is a double one against Not pray do not skip, Mr. Christianus, if
you do, I will tell the truth.


8.
T. C. From Protestant Not, that true Romish Elf,
Who tacks toward Tiber on purpose for Pelf,
But let him beware of the old Roman shelf,
And that after he is drowned he don't hang himself.

N. T. Mum, Mum.
Libera Nos, etc.

Whigs, Hum, Hum, Hum.


9.
T. C. From I. P. That Goose-cap and Fop of a Man.
And all of that Tribe, from Bershcba to Dan,
Who runs up and down like a Bell-VVeather Ram,
To blind the Popes PLOT, by a Protestant Sham.

I. P. Mum, Mum, Mum.
Libera Nos, etc.

10.
T. C. From Ben. Tooks new Vessel and Cargo of Lice,
And from his late Venture to Whigland for Rice,
Which new spot of Land is full of rare Mice,
And it is in Utopia all covered with Ice.
Libera Nos, etc.

B. T. Mum, Mum, Mum.


R. L. A Pax of these Whigs, this wont do our business, I do not hear one word
like unto Treason as yet, in this new Loyal Protestant Letany.

If Harry sham us, we shall be shamed for ever,


I. P. Don't question that, now is the time or never


Harry. You see they begin but moderately; but you shall hear by and by what
whisking High Treason, they have about the latter end of their Letany.


R. L. Come, come, Let them go on and prosper, Hark, hark, hark, Boys hark.


11.
T. C. From the Libelling Tribe of Towzers in grain,
Who sprang from St. Omers, a very fine strain,
To be here Nursed up, Loyal Fanns to defame,
And damn all Dissenters on purpose for gain.

Whigs, Hum, Hum, Hum.
Libera Nos, etc.

12.
T. C. From all those grand Tories. who would us now bring,
From a Protestant Prince, to a true Popish King,
Which if once here effected, the Bells they must ring,
And the Poor Fanns at Tyburn fetch many a swing.
Libera Nos, etc.

13.
From French Whores in England, and Jesuits from France.
From a Popish Successor, who would lead us a Dance,
From Tiber to Tyburn, where we must advance,
And take our last farwell in Ned Colemans chance.
Libera Nos, etc.
14.
From all such Sham-Plotters, who now run about,
From Tavern to Tavern, and make such a rout,
To trepan honest Men, and root them all out,
Their Villainies sure will at length be found out.
Libera Nos, etc.
15.
From such Devils incarnate, who would us now sham,
By a new Counter Plot, the true old one to Damn,
Where there is thousands engaged, a fine pleasant flam,
A whole College of Joyners, although hardly one man.
Libera Nos, etc.
16.
From the Bell and the Dragon, who still do so rage,
With such Fury and Madness, in almost every Page,
Of R. L. H. and T. th'grand Hobbs of this Age,
Sent Post from Beelzebub to act on his Stage.
Whigs, Hum, Hum, Hum,
Libera Nos, etc.

17.
From those Bullies in Newgate, who now do so rant,
And gave thanks in Print, for a New College Plant,
Who spoke Words like Treason, as some Tories grant,
When they were hooping and hollowing at an Irish Courant.
Libera Nos, etc.
18.
From such Irish Cattle, who cannot fare well,
And be Treated by Friends, but must presently tell,
Such words to requite them, as will ring out their Knell,
Only Treason and Murder as a Pasport to Hell.
Libera Nos, etc.
D. A. In troth Mr. Observator, this Letany tends nothing to Edification, this
Rogue Harry I am afraid has shamm'd us, for I have caught him napping (I
think, as Moss caught his Mare) for you may remember he told us of a Loyal
Protestant Letany, both for Church and State, and we hear nothing as yet of the
Church, which is Hysteron proteron (secundum Gracum) or as we say in English,
The Cart before the Horse, unless the Church Letany be yet behind.


Har. Why Gentlemen, let me tell you, it is very usual with these Whiglanders
so to do, for if they should proceed according to your expectation, you would
then think they were regular Sons of the Church of England, but as to that, I
leave it to your more grave and prudent Considerations, whether it be true or
false, but the Church Letany is just now coming, within two or three Stanza's,
and the great Hogan Mogan Treason comes after that.


D. A. Well Harry, thou art a brave fellow, if thy words prove true, come, we
will have yet patience to hear the remainder.


Harry. Why Gentlemen, If the worst come to the worst (that is to say) if they
should break off abruptly, when they have done with the Church (before they
come to the Treason) I have it all by Heart, and also the Key to it, to unlock
every Syllable, as Mr. Tel-Truth has Explained it to me, and you shall as
surely have it from me, as this Cap is now upon my Head (which I do wear at
present for a Cold which I caught setting up too late with them, at their
private Cabals) but I had rather you should hear the Treason Viva Voce, which I
presume would be much more to your full content and satisfaction, for the
making out of the Protestant PLOT, which you have already posted all over the
Nation, and should you now fail thereof, I should be heartily sorry for you
(and your Reputations sake) I will assure you.


D. A. Upon my honest word, he speaks like a Conjurer, I will give him one
Guinny more, for his future encouragement, take it here.


Harry. I most humbly thank you Sir.


19.
From a Learned grand Council of five hundred Men,
With brave Nobles and Peers of a true Loyal Stem,
To be fetched up to School and sent home again,
On the eighth morning after, when the Clock had siruck ten.
Libera Nos, etc.
20.
D. A. I can have no patience, but sit upon Thorns, till the Church Letany
comes on, and then the High Treason after that, and then we will sing,

The Delights of the Bottle, and the Charms of good Wine, etc.


Harry. Good Sir, It is now within a Stanza or two, and then after that, Oh
then we will sing, God bless our King,

And hey then up go we.
When Fanns and all the Kingdoms Foes,
Shall truckle to our Swearing Blows.
Upon the Tripple-Tree.
Tory Stranger aside.
Hark hither, Sirrah, here is another Guinny to buy you half a dozen of
Cravats, but I would not have you buy them of that Exchange man, that comes
here sometimes.


Harry. I most humbly thank you Noble Sir, I understand you, and shall observe
your Directions to an hairs breadth.


21.
T. C. From a Dons solemn Oath, if he Swears he will bring,
All things to rights, when he coms to be King,
Although his hopes are but small, as to any such thing,
In regard the old POPE, he will here then let in.
Libera Nos, etc.

R. L. But, Harry, can you tell me with your Key, what they do mean by the
Great Dons Oath?


Harry. I had thought Mr. Observator you would not have asked me such an easy
question, which is so obvious to every Man's understanding, at the very first
pronunciation: do not you know that Seigneor Don Alonzo de Tolledo is the most
Catholic Spanish Prince on the South side of the Water, upon whom the Pope
has conferred this small Northern spot of Heretic Ground (as being formerly
part of St. Peter's Patrimony) so soon as he can get Possession thereof by any
means whatsoever?


D. A. I think Mr. Observator, the Lad has given you a fair account of your
particular question, but whereas you did peradventure expect another
Explication, I would not have you to be too censorious against the Whigs, but
take their expressions in the plain Litteral and Gramatical construction.


R. L. Doctor, I thank you, and I must ingeniously confess, I have been too
much Guilty of those absurdities, which I am sure has gained me more Enemies
than ever I shall get Friends as long as I live; but I perceive you set upon
Thorns, I do think you may now listen, for they are come to the Church Letany
of Libera Nos, etc.


D. A. I am glad of that with all my Heart.


22.
T. C. From a dull Preaching Hocus, who dotes on a Form,
And a scandalous Vicar, who thinks it no scorn
To tope all the Week, and the next Sunday Morn,
To rail at Dissenters to keep himself warm.

Whigs, Hum, Hum, Hum.
Libera Nos, etc.

D. A. Mum, Mum, Mum.


23.
T. C. From all the Tantiveys in Pulpit and Press,
Who still do so Rant (have at you by guess)
Against all Dissenters, them for to distress,
For which Love and Kindness, some in time may them bless.
Libera Nos, etc.

24.
From all those Grandees, who would lead us a Dance,
Both in Church and in State, like the Monsieur of France,
(Though ere long such bold Traitors, their Necks may perchance,
The Sovereign Tree learn how to advance.)
Libera Nos, etc.
25.
From Dogmatical Preachers, who are grown so sublime,
As to make Monarks absolute, and a point so Divine,
So that nothing must down with them but the right Line.
Which some of them Love as well as Women and Wine.
Libera Nos, etc.
26.
From all those young Clergy, who grate on that Bone
(Instructed by Towzer) called Forty and One,
Who just like the suckow Sings all in one Tone,
And sucks up those Eggs, which are none of her own.
Libera Nos, etc.
27.
From such lubberly Drones, who would make us believe,
We must pin all our Faith on the Church of Romes sleeve,
The which most rare PLOT, if once they atchieve,
Our Lives with new Ropes they will surely reprieve.
Libera Nos, etc.
28.
From the Arian Doctors, who damned the Nicene Creed,
Who made the true Christian so often to bleed,
Which Sanguis Martyrum was right Catholic Seed,
And with Idem per Idem some still would us seed.
Libera Nos, etc.
29.
From all that pretend to an absolute Fate,
Before we were Born, both of Love and of Hate,
(The Sermons they Preach, it is nothing but prate,
For if fixed so firm, what need their Debate?)
Libera Nos, etc.
30.
From such Destiny-Mongers, who have been so bold,
In Faith and in Virtue, to make Men so cold,
When the last Trump shall sound, both for Young and for Old.
For this their presumption they may be cajoled.
Libera Nos, etc.
31.
T. C. From a conjuring Clergy, of the right Roman stamp,
Whom our Bodies and Souls would here willingly cramp,
And all our Religion would likewise new vamp,
And afterward lead us by a dull glimmering Lamp.
Libera Nos, etc.

D. A. Harry, I think they will make Paul's work of their Church Lettany, for I
am quite weary and so is Mr. Observator, and so we are all.


Harry, Peace a little, and you will catch some Fish presently, the Treason
comes within two Stanzas more, and so Hey then up go we.


32.
T. C. From all that pretend to such a Light from within,
As to give out to the World they are without Sin,
And slily catch many with this pretty Gin,
Though they oftentimes are on a merry Pin.

Tories, Huzza.
Libera Nos, etc.

33.
Now to all that wish well to our thrice NobleState,
By King, Lords and Commons against which some do so prate,
Let the first have thy Love, let the last have thy hate,
And let our King by his Power them all dissipate;
And when they Rebel, let this be their Fate,
That Ketch near High- Holborn, may give them check mate.
We beseech thee to hear us, etc.
Whigs, Hum, Hum, Hum,
Amen, Amen, Amen.

Whigs. Mr. Theophilus Christianus, We return you many thanks for this
kindness, wherewith we are all very well pleased, but how the Tories, the
Tantivies, and the Papists will approve of it, we cannot forestand.


T. C. Come Harry, take money of us all, for it is near Exchange time.


Harry, Pray Gentlemen and my Masters don't tell me of paying, but go on with
your Letany, for the best is yet behind, and which will tend most to
Edification, not only to your selves, but also to these Gentlemen (my noble
Benefactors) whom I did invite to this Table to hear the whole, and you have
omitted the most material part in the said Letany.


T. C. What art thou distracted Harry, or else art thou drunk this morning
before Exchange time?


Harry, Neither the one nor the other, but I will assure you I am in very good
earnest, but pray Sir let me whisper you one word in the Ear, I must say and I
will tell you the reason of it by and by.


Whigs, Come to pay, to pay, Allous tous ensemble.
Exeunt Whigs.

Harry. This was a most divelish thing that they did break off so abruptly, bur
however you remember, Genlemen, your promise, and I will assure you i will be as
big as my word, for I scorn to put a slur upon you, who have been so over-kind
to me.


D. A. Harry, I was possessed with a kind of panick fear that they would serve
us so, for it had been much better to have heard that High Treason viva voce,
than from you at the second hand.


R. L. But come Harry, let us hear (brave Boy) the remainder, and we must make
the best of a bad Market, and if you can Swear to what you tell us, That it was
their Act and Deed, and all did consent to it (when it was formerly in Reading)
with their loud Acclamations, as they have done to day; we shall do their
business for them notwithstanding.


Harry. Yes, I shall endeavor to do that, and bring you in likewise two
substantial Witnesses more, for the corroborating my single Testimony.


I. P. Here you Rogue, take this sweet Angel to put in your Pocket to remember
your good Friend.


Mr. Gibs. Harry, Your Master knocks above, don't you hear how he Thunders? he
has knocked thrice already.


Harry. Gentlemen, My Master is taken extremely ill, even almost at the point
of Death, and he has sent me with all the speed imaginable for his Doctor, who
lives at the other end of the Town; but Gentlemen, I will (the very first
opportunity) come to Sams Coffee-House (I hope within a night or two) and give
you a full Relation of every particular, and many more things, which will be
worth all your Observations.


Mr. Gibs. Harry, Your Master calls again, to see if you are gone.


Harry: I go, I go: Gentlemen, Adieu jusques au revoir.


D. A. Mr. Gibs: Take money here; I am afraid this Rogue Harry will sham us all
at the last.


I. P. Mum, Mum, Mum for that Doctor Allous.

Exeunt Tories Omnes.
Enter Harry, statim. And are they gone? Oh may they never more
Return again, upon my Masters Shore,
Where Loyalty and Truth does steer our Tribes:
Not cursed Oaths, or any Roman Bribes.
To bring us over to that cursed Evil,
Of running headlong to (old Nick) the Devil.
When first they came, I straightway smelt a rot,
And did as soon resolve a Counter-Plot.
Against these bold Imposters, from their Hellish Sire,
Who does them all with Shams and Lies inspire:
(Against all those who would pluck down his Throne)
And Sham us still with number Forty one.
It Is true, their Money I have lately got,
Which was to Swear a real Whigland PLOT
As they did hope; But stay, I never meant
To wrong my Conscience, or a Parliament:
As they have done, and will do still the same,
Because they hope to have an after-Game.
When once they prove by that true Romish Elf,
That Justice Godfrey truly killed himself.
Now for those Guinees which they did advance,
They Will serve us (Gibs) to drink a Health to Prance;
To Doctor Oats, to Wilkinson and those,
Who are the Roman Tory-Rory Foes.
Mr. Gibs. Brisk bonny Lads, for these your pretty Pranks,
I hope the Whigs will give you hearty thanks,
'Twas Nobly done, and fallere non est fraus,
To a Deceiver when he comes with cross,
On this fide and with Pile on the other,
On purpose to ensnare his honest Brother:
And cheat him of his Liberty and Life,
And put the Nation into such a strife.
To clear the stains of these accursed Elves.
Which in due time they may be hanged themselves.
Give them but Hemp enough, they have begun
To twist a Cord, the which their rising Sun
Shall nere untwist, cheer up (my Heart) I know
This Sham of yours will make the Whigs to crow.
And all the Tories to hang down their Heads,
And make the Papists run unto their Beads:
And offer Incense to the Virgin Mary,
And beg of her for to chastise bold Harry;
Who has so rudely countermin'd all those
Who were her Children and her Sons great Foes.

Dialogus Tertius, serious and tragical.
In II. Parts.
Pars I.
Hocus Catholicus Romanus.
When sturdy Storms are gone and past,
Shall pleasant Calms appear,
And though we have been tossed, at last
We see the Heavens are clear,
The Winds blow fair, the Sky's serene above,
And, Lo, that Spot, which we so dearly love,
Cheer up, dear Heart, the Stars are bright and clear,
Lift up your head, for yonder is Dover Peer.

Pocus Catholicus Romanus.
Te Deum Laudamus. But a Pax of his Holiness, notwithstanding, for his Servus
Servorum Shams, in singling out among the rest of our Conjuring Tribe, to leave
our stately Cells, where we did fair so deliciously every day in the Week
(except good Friday) and to be exposed now to so much hazard (all winds and
weathers) and had we been caught napping, we should as sure have been gelded,
as the old Pope's dog was, when he run at Sheep: And besides, you may remember.

Oh, the little House that stands under the Hill, Where was Wine and Tobacco,
with Women at will, Which we did forsake like Bees from their Hives, But they
must needs go, when the old Devil Drives.


Hocus. Upon my Word, Pocus, You speak very affectionately, and warmly, as to
our late expedition; but you must remember, It was upon the Account Current,
viz. For the good of the Catholic Church: and this sweet Cordial must qualify
the Asperity of a Thousand bitter Potions, and since our Stars have been so
propitious as to bring us safe into this Harbor. Let us now offer up large
Tapers of Thanksgiving unto the Blessed Virgin, for commanding her Son to send
his Angels to deliver us out of those tempestuous Storms, wherewith our Vessel
was even now environed.


Pocus. You speak something of Reason, I must confess, therefore light the
Tapers, and let us have 2 or 3 Ave Mary's, and 2 or 3 Pater Noster's: and then
lets read-over our Commission again, according to our Primary Instructions from
our Holy Father and his College of Physicians.


Hocus. I wish we have not lost our late Commission in that cold Country where
we were like to be frozen to death, and not an honest Whore to be had in the
whole Country to make use of in the time of our Extremity.


Pocus. Here Is the Commission, pray harken to your Instructions.
And if therein, we have but good Success,
Oh Heavens, how St. Peter will both us bless.

To Hocus Catholicus Romanos and his Brother Pocus, at Jesus Golledg, these
with Care and speed, d. d.
Servus Servorum, etc.
Right trusty Friends, and Subjects of our Hope,
(not to the Prince of Darkness but the POPE)
We do command you in St. Peter's Name,
Whose true Successors, we our selves proclaim,
By right Divine (and not by false pretense,
As Whigs give-out, only for Peter Pence)
Next under Christ, for to support and keep,
His tender Lambs, and little flock of sheep,
Which is his Church, whom we do represent,
( ^^t vi and Armis, in full Parliament)
When as we sit upon our Chair of State.
Where neither Rival nor yet bold Checkmate,
We will admit, for to draw near or come
Within our bounds, until the day of Doom,
Upon which day, we must surrender all,
Both Bag and Baggage and our Capitol.
Now we command you: straitway hence to go
And ship your selves unto our Sweedish Foe.
When Martin Luther did our Church affright,
To make our Lambs to him turn Proselite,
By Arguments drawn from his furious Pen:
Just like a Frantic shut up in his Den,
Where you come there be sure you make no Bones,
Of any thing (but only of your Stones)
Pray have a Care whereby you may advance
Our Church, our Empire and Intreague with France.
And while you're there, their idle Consubstance
Do what you can to turn the Tide to Trans;
This having done, we do command you more,
From thence you Sail unto great Britain's shore,
When once ariv'd within Our Port of Dover,
Read once again your new Commission over,
Observe it well, therein are weighty Points,
Enough to fix and settle all our Joints,
Which have been straind, 'ere since that cursed time
Bold Harry's Cod-piece did our Church decline.
From thence straightway advance into that Town
Which bids defiance to our Triple Crown:
Dam her, and sink her, by what means you can,
Murders, Massacres, Fires, and that Man
Who is her head, and bids us bold Defiance,
And upon whom we can have no Reliance:
Be sure you strike him to his very Life,
This will put all things out of Doubt and Strife.
The Towns our own, if he were once but dead,
VVee'd bring ourselves there straitway into Bed,
If this you do, Return unto your home,
You shall be Pillars in our Church of ROME.
Or, if you will, you shall have Coleman's Fate,
Saints after Death, now Pillars in our State,
This we do Promise. In our own great Name,
If not performed, never take our Words again.
Witness our self, and all Saint Peter's Fry
(Upon the day of his Nativity.)
Now standing by us, near our Royal Throne,
We like their Heads, But love to reign alone.
And signed be our chiefest Scribe of State,
Our Ink-horn-Lord, who is our constant Mate.
Signed, Seignior, Don John Alonzo Furioso, de Lucifero, principal Secretary of
State to his infallible Highness, and true Successor of S. Peter, and supreme
head of Christ's holy Catholic Church, over all Kings, Princes and Potentates
whatsoever, until the general Resurrection.

Pocus. Come, let us not miss one hair's breadth of our large Instructions, but
however, I had rather be a Pillar in the Church of Rome, durante vita, than to
be a Canonizd Saint in the Church of Rome, post mortem, for taking a running
Jump from Tiber to Tiburn for the good of the Good Old Cause.


Hocus. I believe you without swearing; for to tell you the Truth, by J -- I am
of the same Judgment to a Cows thumb: and though, here and there, one hot
spirited Zealot, for the Catholic Cause, may be so far transported as to
venture his Neck: yet you know how our-Superiours, at home, do put them in
their Ignoramus Calender, for a Company of Goose-caps, Cocks-combs and
Jack-puddings upon that account.


Pocus. They do so, and you may remember before we came away how many they had
lately of Saint Coleman's Disciples put in there upon the Accomt aforesaid: And
how did they almost split themselves with laughing when they read their
Confessions. That THEY all dyed Innocent: and, That it was like in a short-time
to pass for current, That Sir Edmund bury Godfrey was Felo de se, when they
themselves in a Consultation in our own College, had laid a Platform, although
in some things as to the whole of their Design it proves unsuecessful.


Hocus. Had not some of our St. Omers Beagles (and deep-mouthed Hounds) run
upon a false scent, and, in stead of pursuing the wild Bores, had not fallen
upon and worried the innocent sheep, we had done our Business, especially
before this time; but, hinc illae Lachrimae, and we must be contented to make
the best of a bad Market. But yet tempora mutantur, etc. and we may yet make an
after-game of it, if we can but play our Cards closely.


Pocus. Come Olbion days, The Cocks will bravely crow,
And like bold Ridens, Gape, A Raree show:
In those brave times, the Birds will sweetly sing,
And we may hope to have a glorious Spring:
The Seed is sown: The Corn begins to mount;
Come we will attempt. To be Lords Paramount.

Jocus. I Will do my best to serve the Church and Pope,
But I Will beware of Coleman's twisted Rope.

Pocus. To serve Don Seignior, I Will do what I can,
But I Will beware of Harris's Trepan;
Come lets be Wise, and sometimes be Merry,
Not always Plotting, sometimes let us drink Sherry,
For to revive Us, when we are in Durnps,
Least that the WHIGS should turn up still for Trumps
And not Our Church, which they proclaim is Evil;
But if we can, we will Post 'um to the Devil.

Hocus. Sometimes lets use that Modest Recreation,
Like Our Superiors in their long Vacation;
When Dead FLESH is forbid, they take in Store,
Of Living LAMBS, which they do Love like ORE,
You may remember under Our great Hill,
In Fasting Times; They had such Lambs at Will,
And told those still, which sometimes brought them Chink
That at such things St. Peter he would Wink;
And when Confession of those Sins were made,
They might begin a new Score, on that Trade;
This they do tell Us is no Mortal Sin,
Therefore sometimes, lets Play at in and in.

Pocus. With all my Heart, true Trout, I Will follow Thee,
But lets bewar still of the Gallow-Tree.

Hocus. Never question that, we will not proceed so far,
Though we are now, St. Peter's Men of War;
Yet being now beyond his Reach, we may,
Do sometimes like him, who once ran astray:
And rather than be Martyrs for Our Church.
We Will leave both POPE and Peter in the lurch.

Pocus. Come now after we have taken a Nap or two, lets take Post for London,
with all Our Letters Credential to those Gentlemen at the Wild-house, which
have been there so long upon the Account Courant.

And I have one Letter in particular to Heraclitus Ridens: to Draw the PO ES
Picture in small, for one of Our Superiors (you know who I mean) That Senior
Sophister in Our College, who does intend to present it to his Holiness, for
his next New-Years-Gift, in hopes of a Fools Cap, now there are so many
Vacancies.


Hocus. I know he can do it to the Life, for before I went to Rome, he was
esteemed the best Limner in England, upon that account, and his name, as I
remember was Mr. -- but Mum for that.


Pocus. Come Brother Hocus, surge, surge, Diluculo surgere Saluberrimum est.
Our Horses are just ready, and we shall reach London in good time. Come Drawer,
and Chamberlain bring us a Bill.


Drawer. Here is a Bill Sirs, in the whole 21 s. 6 d. Besides the Oat-stealers
Bill, for the Hire of Your Horses, he will give you an Account of it.


Hocus. There is a Guiny for You, and 12 d. in Silver over, and so Fare you
well.


Drawer. Gentlemen, you are Heartily Welcome.


Pocus. Here Oatstealer, here is Money for Your Horses, and 12 d. more, for
your Care and Pains.


O -- I thank you Heartily Gentlemen and wish you well to London, but Pray have
a care how you pass over Gads-hill, and if you pass that and Shouters-hill, you
need not fear Robbing till you come at Tyburr, and there Ketch may Rob you of
your huffing Periwigs for calling me Oatstealler, for I never was called so
before in my Life.


Pocus. Prithee Honest Fellow be not Angry, for I had that Appellation from the
Drawer.


O -- I thank you for that Sir. And I am resolved to bumbast him as soon as you
are gone, but however i will give you a Couple of Verses which comes into my
Remembrance seeing your new Periwigs:

For Perewigs, Glass Coaches, loose Gowns and a Whore, This Age is most
Famous, to those gone before.


Hocus. This is an Arch Rogue, i will Warrant him, but Brother Pocus, I wish that
this Word Tiburn, and this Word Whore, be not Ominous Expressions to one or
both of Us.


Pocus. Amen, says the Clerk,
But he that does Mind such mad Tittle Tattle,
Deserves in my Mind to have a fine Rattle;
For such things as these are nothing but Fables,
Only fitting at Supper, for old VVomens Tables.

Hocus. I have now a prospect of London, from this Bowling-Green, where I have
Played many a Game at Rubbers, with several Friends, whom we are now going to
Lodge withal at the Wild-house.


Pocus. But it will be very late before we shall reach London and have Supped,
and then how shall we pass through the Watches at London Bridge, Ludgate, and
Temple Bar.


Hocus. We shall do well enough for that, leave it to my single discretion,
though in other more Important affairs, we will lay Our Heads together for
consultation.


Pecus. We are just come to the Bridge. Pray Remember your single Management.


Watchman. Stand, who comes there, Stand, I say, or else i will run my Halbert in
the Bowels of You.


Pocus. Why what is the matter a Man must be Commanded to stand so all of a
sudden, when he is going home to his Lodging?


Watch. Come before the Constable, it is very late, and the Times are very
Dangerous, and my Master will hardly let you pass, unless you give a very good
account where you have been, there are so many Priests and Jesuits come into
England, and come skulking into our City in the Night time, that my Lord Mayor
has given the Constables of this Gate a particular Charge to be very careful,
that none pass without particular Examination and Satisfaction to Mr. Constable.


Hocus. Watchmen, hark hither, one word in Your Ear, here is 12 d. for you to
Drink; Is your Master (who is on his VVatch to Night) a Whig or a Tory.


Watch. Pray Sir do not say any thing that I told you, but he is a very honest
Man, and a reputed VVhig.


Beadle. Watchmen, Why do you keep those persons so long in a Chat? Why don't
you bring them before the Constable?


Constable. Gentlemen, whence came you, and where have you been out so late
these troublesome Times, wherein we cannot rest in our Beds without some
Alarm, or other every Night, by the Cursed Papists, and that (which is worst
of all) since their late horrid and damnable Plot, of blowing up our most
gracious King, and his Loyal Parliaments, was so Fully (by Dr. Otes, Coleman's
Letters, and other corroberating Circumstances) and so Wonderfully discovered.


Hocus. Mr. Constable, You speak like a Loyal Subject and good Citizen, I wish
all the Constables, Captains, and Citizens of London, had the same Sentiments,
for I do persuade my Self if those Cursed Jesuits who flock daily from Rome,
and other parts from beyond Seas, be not closely and narrowly Traced and
Observed, they will make an After-Game of their former Plets, and bring us all
here in a short time to Utter Ruin and Confusion; but Mr. Constable to give You
an Answer to your Question (though I must confess it is something too late for
Men to pass such a Worthy and Diligent Constables-VVatch as you have clearly
Demonstrated) we have been to take Our leaves of some Friends here in the
Borough (which are all of your Stamp) and are for the Country to Morrow
Morning; We were loath to part, being pleasantly Merry, and we did (I must
confess) Drink many Healths to the Kings most Excellent Majesty (whom God long
Preserve) and to the prosperity of the English Nation, and to an happy Union
between his Majesty, and his next Parliament.


Constable. Gentlemen such as you may pass my Watch at any Time, being in the same
good order you are in, Watchmen open the Gates for them, and take your
Lanthorn one of You, and light them over the Bridge, or Home to their Lodgings,
if they please, and so Gentlemen Your humble Servant a good night to you.


Ho. Mr. Constable. we give you our hearty Thanks for this Civility. Pray Heavens
prosper you, and the Loyal City of London, with all the true Protestant
Citizens.


Po. Here Watchman there is 6 d. for your Pains, for we are just at Our
Lodging, good Night. I perceive Hocus your Wits don't run a Wooll-gathering, I
must leave Ludgate and Temple Bar to you likewise.


Ho. No, you shall do that, it is good to Exercise your ex tempore Faculties
sometimes.


Fo. Well I will try then for once, and see what I can do, if a Man should be
put to his Shifts.


Century. Stand, who comes there, Stand; If you do notstand the third Time (for
I have bid You stand twice already) you must expect a Brace of Bullets in your
Bowels.


Ho. We do stand, call your Corporal. What is this the Royal Exchange? Pocus
look to your Hits, for we shall have a hard Task of it I am afraid, who
expected a Guard of Soldiers at this time of Night?


Corporal. Whence came you? Musketeers Gentlemen advance, and make all ready.


Po. Are you the Captain of the Guard for this Night, and in this place?


Corp No Sir, but his Deputy to examine you, (and better than) you at this time
of the Night, and that you shall know before we part good Mr. Huffington.


Po. I say, I will go before your Captain, for we have some Business of very
great Consequence to Impart unto him.


Cor. Musketeers open to the right and left, and conduct these 2 huffing
Gallants to our Main-Guard where our Captain is now drinking his Bottles of
Wine with his Housekeepers, who came out the last Night to attend him in there
own proper Persons, and when they come out, he is as Noble as a Prince,
although the Whigs do so bespatter him.


Hocus. That word Brother Pocus (Whigs) was worth 10 s. to you, if you have
your Wits about you to make use of it.


Po. I understand him, let me alone with the Captain.


Captain. Gentlemen Soldiers stand to your Arms, who comes there? Stand.


Officers. They are Files of Musketeers come in from the Corporal, with 2
Gentlemen in the midst of them.


Capt. Gentlemen whence came you, and why so late out these troublesome Times,
as if you were going up and down the Streets to set Our City on Fire, as the
Papists did Anno 1666.


Pocus. Most Noble Captain, I will tell you in short; we have been out late (we
must Confess) and we have been also briskly Merry, but it was upon so good and
commendable an account, that I do persuade my Self, had you been there, you
would have joined Issue with Us, withal your Heart.


Captain. Upon what Account was that I Pray? and do not you put any Sham-Tricks
upon me, for if you should, I will assure you, I Will lay you fast enough, and
have you before the Civil Magistrate to Morrow Morning.


Pocus. Sir, Upon his Majesty's return from Newmarket, accompanied with his
Royal Highness, this Night, we went with several of Our Friends, unto the
TAVERN, to Drink both their HEALTHS, with Prosperity to all the Honest TORIES,
and TANTIVYS, to honest NOT. HERACLITUS, and the OBSERVATOR, who does so MALL
the WHIGS and DISSENTERS in their Weekly and quotidian Exercises, and this we
did with such loud Acclamations and HUZZA'S, that we daunted all the WHIGS in
the said TAVERN, and made them run sneaking away, like so many Dogs that had
burnt their Tails, and after that, only TORIES came into the House, and were
extremely well pleased with Our Pleasant Mirth and Jollity.


Captain. And so should I have been also, had I been so happy as to have been
in the Company. Come Soldiers, open to the Right and Left, and let the
Gentlemen pass Home quietly, and had I known where they had been out so late in
my Grand-Rounds, I would have marched to have given them one Broadside for
their Loyalty to their Prince, and their Respects to the Right Line, as it is
by Law Established.


Hocus. Good Night most Noble Captain, and to the rest of your Gentlemen
Soldiers.


Capt. We may bid you good Morrow for the Day begins to break, but being so
pleasantly Merry, you did not know how the time passed away.


Po. Well Brother did not I come off indifferent well?


Hocus. But had you been out, or made the least halt, I was ready with a pure
Fancy in my Head, to help a Lame Dog over the Style.


Po. Very well, now for the Wild-house, without any more let or molestation,
for it is now broad day light.


Hocus. But let us call at the Wonder as we go along, and there perhaps we may
light upon some Wonderful Wine, or some Wonderful Women, or some Wonderful
Strange Fortune, for I had a notable Dream the last Night, as being at that
very House, and therefore I would very fain call there, and refresh Our Selves
for some Time.


Pocus. With all my Heart, good Brother Hocus.


Bar-Boy. You are VVelcome Gentlemen, show a Room there, the SUN is Empty, show
the Gentlemen up Stairs.


Drawer. What Wine will you please to Drink?


Hocus. A Bottle of your best Canary, and make a Toast, and make have and get
us a Barrel of Oysters immediately.


Drawer. It shall be done with all Celerity and Expedition imaginable,


Pocus. Well said Honest Drawer, thou speak like a Man.


Drawer. Carry up some Oyster-Knives, Vinegar and Pepper, and a Cut-Rowl into
the Sun presently, for they are in great have; they look like persons of
Quality by their Habit, and their light colored Periwigs.

Here Gentlemen is a Bottle of Canary will make a Cat speak, it has such a
Flavor and Gust with it, after it is down Gutter lane.


Hocus. Upon my Life Brother it is most excellent Canary, and the Oysters are
most incomparable likewise. But Drawer, What Ladies are those singing so
sweetly in the next Room by themselves?


Drawer. Sir, You must excuse me for that, for they have charged me upon their
Blessing not to discover them.


Pocus. Oh Heavens! what Ravishing Voices they have got? Drawer, here is 5 s.
for Thee to drink their Health.


Drawer. Truly Gentlemen, You have so much obliged me, that although I am
almost under an Oath of Secresy, yet I must needs tell you for your Civilities
sake.


Hocus. Well said, and if by Your Declaring the Truth, it turn any thing to
our advantage, I will assure you, Drawer, we will be very grateful to you upon
that account.


Drawer. Sirs, They are two persons of great quality, and Virgins who come here
sometimes to refresh themselves, as having some Relations near this place, who
will come to them e're they go; they are very great Fortunes, for an Uncle of
theirs that is Dead, did leave them Ten Thousand pounds a piece, and they have
so many Servanrs, that do accost them, that they are forced to come to my
Masters House, remote from their Lodgings, to divert themselves, and that none
should know where to find them.


Pocus. May we not know their particular Names?


Drawer. They are very shy of that, especially in regard their Uncle came by a
violent Death; though some say, he dyed-upon a good account: and besides, there
are some Gentlemen, that have Courted them, knowing of their Names, have sent
them Acrostick Verses upon their Names, which they have Burnt, as soon as
Received, because they were such Balderdash stuff, and almost perfect
Nonsense; although I have heard them say, If any of their Servants could send
them a Copy of complete Acrostick Verses, they would accept of them for
Husbands upon that very account, because by that they would show something of
Ingenuity, and Ingenious Persons they Love dearly, because they are so
themselves.


Pocus But pray good Drawer, let us know their Names. If you have any respect
for us, for we are a couple of Batchellors of a good Family, and competent
Estates, and we do not question, but if you will bring us Acquainted with them,
we may stand as fair, as to matter of Husbands for them as other Men.


Drawers. I do not question it in the least, for your Presence and Deportment,
bespeaks you Persons of no mean Quality, as far as I can apprehend. Their Names
are Mris. Isabella, and Mris. foanna Coleman.


Hocus. What are they as to their persuasions, in matters of a Religious
concern?


Drawer. They are both Roman Catholics.


Pocus. Were they any Relation to Coleman the Traitor?


Drawer. Yes Sir, He was their Uncle, and they will tell you, that he was a
Martyr and not a Traitor.


Hocus. And so would I tell them, if I were once Acquainted with them, for we
are Roman Cathelicks as well as themselves, but the Truth is not to be spoken
at all times.


Drawer. But Mum for that, I understand you very well; but that was the
Gentleman, who left them this great Fortune, and they come here constantly
three times a Week from the Pall Mall, where they have most stately Lodgings,
that would Dazzle a Man's Eyes almost to behold.


Pocus. You must needs prevail so far with them, as that we may Kiss their
Hands before we go.


Drawer. I shall use my Endeavors, Gentlemen, to serve you, and will bring you
Word by and by of their Pleasure therein.


Hocus. Here is 5 s. more for your Encouragement.


Pocus. My Brother Hocus, we must write some Acrostick Verses upon their Names,
for I perceive by the Drawer, that will touch them to the quick.


Hocus. I do protest, they are most curious Girls;
I Will strain my Noddle for such Orient Pearls.

Pocus. And I likewise resolve to try my Skill,
Ten Thousand Pounds will force out Wit at Will.

Hocus. My Blood rebels, I have no Mind to stir,
Unless they beat me like a wandering Cur,
Out of their Presence, when he comes for Meat,
Although poor Dog, he looks for no such Treat.

Pocus. I find my self so Stabbed with CUPIDS Bow,
I have no Mind, neither to stir nor go.

Hocus. I find My Self, likewise so much in LOVE,
I hope these ANGELS dropped down from above,
For to Salute us, at Our coming Home,
And to requite us. for that Service done,
For PETER'S Sake, and for the Church of ROME.

Pocus. But however, let Us this Night go for the Wildhouse, and come again to
Morrow.


Hocus. Hang Sorrow, cast away Care,
We have left the POPE behind Us;
And We shall get now Ladies fair,
Where he shall never find Us.

Drawer. Ladies, I peceive your charming Voices will procure you most gallant
Fortunes, at the long run, provided that I use my endeavors, which I am
resolved to do, in regard of your civillity to me, upon all occasions, and
emergencies whatsoever.


Isabella O brave Boy, thou shall be our true Drudge, and Journy-Man Drawer
still, let us Marry when you will, let them be persons of Quality, or by what
Names or Titles soever Dignified, it shall be something to you, young Rogue
enough.


Drawer. There are some hussing brave Gentlemen in the next Room, and they are
fallen desperately in Love with you, as you were singing, and being upon the
quest with me concerning you: I told them several whiskers as to your Fortunes,
and that your Uncle Coleman had left you 10000 l. a piece, and that you were
both Roman Catholics, (for as they went up stairs, I perceived them crossing
themselves) and that you loved Acrostick Verses on your Names, etc. and now
they are all in a Flame to kiss your white Hands.


Joanna. I do protest Drawer thou art a brave Fellow, come let me spit in thy
Mouth, let them come and welcome, if we can cully them in for Husbands, we
shall be Ladies indeed (if they should chance to prove persons of Quality) and
by that time they have had us about three Months a piece, we shall have marked
them with a Witness, and let them put their Horns in their Pockets, if they
will be some of the contented ones.


Drawer. I understand you, and let me alone to manage them.


Gentlemen, I have had the happiness to be admitted to speak to those Ladies in
particular, one by one, and I have given such a Character of you, that I have
over-perswaded them to admit you into their Companies.


Hocus. Thou art an honest fellow indeed, we shall be good Customers to your
Masters House, and likewise to your self, if our Affairs do succeed according
to our desired expectations; here accept of this small piece of broad Gold for
my sake.


Drawer. Sir, I am resolved to be your most faithful Servant; to the utmost of
my slender Ability; but Sir, you must not be admitted till the next time they
come here, which will be to morrow in the Afternoon, about five of the Clock,
and then they will come prepared for your Reception.


Pocus. If it cannot be otherwise, we must be contented: come Brother Hocus let
us make have now to the Wild-House to dispatch those Affairs wherein we have
been entrusted by the Successor of St. Peter, and we will go through the Park,
and peradventure we may see that person whom we have a Commission to lay fast
asleep, and never to rise again until the general Resurrection.


Hocus. I do protest here he comes up the Pell-Mell, you have now a fair
opportunity to do his business, if in case you have your Implements about you.
How sternly Brother Pocus, does he look?
I Will never trap him with Saint Peter's Hook.
My Joints do tremble, and my Heart does ache,
My Soul within me does most sadly quake;
Heavens doubtless will protect this Sovereign Lord,
Our Pence are good, the Fact's to be abhorred.

Pocus. Come let us burn our Papers and Commission,

Never let the Wild-house see Saint Peter's Mission.

Hocus. I le burn my Letters and Commission too,
Wonder is all that we have now to do.
VVonder of Wonders! Oh blessed Stars that we,
Instead of Killing should both Married be:
And that to persons both of High Degree.
Whose Fortunes answer our accursed intents.
To kill the King and blow up Parliaments:
For which Attempt, (to bind us fast to the Crime)
Don Senior gave us some of his Birdlime,
Which will not stick upon our Fingers now,
In Wondrous times, and so Heavens speed our Plough.

Drawer. Ladies of Pleasure, your Gallants are come already, I will go and
introduce them into your Chamber of Presence, but be sure Isabella and Joanna
Vanharlof, you go by the same Names as I did represent you unto them, they are
most huffing fine to day.


Isabella Prithee let us alone (Rogue enough) to manage the Intreague as well
as thy self.


Drawer. Gentlemen, I have prevailed with the Ladies for your admission, and I
am to be Sir Oliver Flemming, alias The Master of the Ceremonies, to introduce
you.


Hocus. Ladies your Servant, and we both do swear,

It was your Voices that did bring us here.

Isabella. If that our Voices did your Honors Charm,
We do admit in KISSING there is no harm
Now of our Hands, but pray presume no higher,
Least that blind Cupid sets your Hearts on Fire.
For us true Virgins who are Lambs of hope,
And do belong to Senior Don the Pope;
And never will Marry, unless he consent,
To time, to persons this is our Intent.

Pocus. If that your Resolutions (Ladies) be,
We well may fing, Come Hey then up go we:
For we are Agents from your Aged Sire,
Who will give leave to quench that smoking Fire
Which you have kindled, in our naked Breast,
We speak in earnest, not one word in jest.

Isabella My Lords, you seem to be extremely civil,
We are not able to resist that Devil,
Which some call Love, our Hearts do burn likewise,
We are your Captives, you shall be our Prize.

Hocus. Ladies, we thank you for your kind intent,
Heavens bless your Honors, and now crown the event.

Isabella. But withal we must acquaint your Lordships, that we have made a
Resolution within our selves, that no person or persons whatsoevet shall enjoy
either of us, unless they first present us with some Acrostick Love-Verses on
our Names, that shall be to our content and satisfaction, for we have had
several of our humble Servants that have fumbled at it, but they were such
hobling stuff when presented, that we did burn them at the very first perusal.


Hocus. We shall endeavor to fulfill your Mind,
Since you have hinted to us you will be kind.

Pocus. May we crave your Names Ladies, that so we may be satisfied to what
persons of Quality we stand obliged.


Joanna. The Drawer I presume has informed you, as to that particular a heady.


Hocus. It is very certain Madam he did, but for our better satisfaction, we
were willing to enquire at the Fountain Head.


Isabella. That Drawer, I will assure you, is and honest Fellow, and you may
trust him with untold Gold, for we have had sufficient experience of his
Fidelity and willingness to serve us both.

But Mr. Hocus, I must tell you one thing more, and that is, I have been
troubled of late, with a most pestilent Courtier, who swears by all the flesh
on his Body, he will have me, whether I will or no, and though I am a Daughter
of the Church of Rome (as I have already informed you) and will have no other
but one of the same Tribe, yet he being a grand Tory, I had no other way to put
him off, but by Equivocation, in telling him I was a grand Whig, and would
Marry with no other; whereupon he replied, he would take up the Cudgels with
any Whig in England, that was my Servant.


Hocus. And then, what issue did you come to, I beseech you Madam to inform me?


Isabella. We came to this issue, that I would bring a Whig, a Servant of mine,
that should enter the Ring with him, and I pitched upon you for that end and
purpose, so that you must now ( Camelion like) turn your Coat into a Sword,
upon that account, if you have (as you do pretend) any real kindness or respect
for me.


Hocus. Madam, To gain you I will surely turn
My Coat and Cassock too, or else i will burn
My Books at last, before he shall prevail,
I Will give him School-Play with my Jesuits flail,

Pocus. Madam, You know that we can turn our Coats,
From Popish Treasons to good Doctor Oate.
Who has preserved the Royal Crown and State,
For which our Church deserves a broken Pate.
Heaven's does Protect him from Saint Peter's Charms.
And LONDON saves him with their Loyal Arms.

Hocus. Pray Madam, what is this huffing new pragmatick-Courtier's Name? It is
a new fashion, which I have not yet heard of, to have Ladies without their own
consent.


Isabella. His Name is Jocosus Pragmaticosus Furiosus (a tearing Gallant) and
as I am informed, a person of a very considerable Estate and Fortune.


Hocus. A very huffing Name, I do protest, but let me alone with him, I Will huff
him with a Vengeance.

And if I find him bold and turbulent,
And shall abuse our stately Government;
That Tripple League, which has so firmly stood,
From Age to Age, although a sweeping flood
Has sometimes rose, and covered all our Land
For many years, yet now from Royal Hand
We have it Signed, That no such floods shall more,
Come near our Banks, to overflow our Shore.
So if I find him in so great an Huff,
Madam, for you, I Will change my Goat to Buff:
I little Sprat, will turn a Sword-Fish straight.
I Will comb his Cocks-Comb, teach him how to prate.

Isabella. Well Sir, I thank you, he will be here to morrow morning, that is
the time prefixed, and therefore I pray come prepared, but withal remember our
Acrostick Verses into the bargain; I gave him the same charge, (as to Our
Names) to try his proficiency in that difficult subject, wherein many of our
Gallants have been so miserably plunged.


Hocus. Verbum Sapienti, etc. We will take our leaves of you, Ladies, for the
present, and not fail to meet you here again at the time limited.


Joanna. Drawer, call to our Coachman to be ready, and let our Lackqueys, also,
come and attend our motion, for it begins to grow somewhat late.


Drawer. They are all at my Masters Door, expecting your coming down, and so
Ladies and Gentlemen, your most humble and faithful Servant.

Remember, Wonder, and remember Will,
To serve you all, I Will try my utmost skill.

Pars Secunda.
Enter Jocosus Pragmaticosus Furiosus. I. P. Madam, Your most humble Servant, I
honor the ground, that bore the Grass, that fed the Ox, which had the Hide
that made you Shoe-Soles.


Isabella. Bray (Mr. Jocus) do not run so fast,
I have an Hocus will fit you at last:
Look, here he comes, look well unto your hits,
He Will singe your Goose-Cap in his frantic fits.

I. P. Oh this is your Champion Whig, you told me the other day, I should
engage withal; come, I Will enter the Lists with him if he be come prepared.


Isabella. I do not question that in the least.


I. P. Come, Madam, I Will sing you a new Catch this morning, and observe your
Whig, well to see if he be able to answer me ex Tempore, without scratching a
long time his Paper Scull. I begin, viz.

Your Langleys and your Viles,
Your Janaways to boot,
Shall march in Ranks and Files,
To kiss fair Tiburns Foot.

Isabella. At him, my Hocus, without Hums or Haws,
Come off but bravely, you shall gain the Cause.

I. P. Ah but Madam, who shall be Umpire (or Judge) in the Case? for it is not
proper to be Judge your self in your own Cause.


Isabella. No, there is no reason for that, and therefore let us pitch upon an
indifferent person between us both.


I. P. What think you of Will the Drawer, a very honest Intelligent person, as
I think will do us both Justice to an hairs breadth.


Isabella. With all my Heart (Mr. Jocus) let him be the Man.


Enter Jeronimy (my Friend Mr. Hocus) did you hear this new Catch this morning,
which I believe may perchance catch you by the Nose (like strong Mustard) and
will make you scratch where it does not Itch. Hocus. I well remember both the
one and ^'other,
And at your Service I have such another.
It is to the same Tune, though directly in opposition. viz.

Your Towzer and your Tumblers,
Which now make such a rout,
Your Jack-a-dandy Fumblers,
May first kiss her old Snout.

Isabella. Well bowl'd (brave Hocus) this will do the feat,
And put your Jocus all into a Sweat.

I. P. I fear him not, although my blood does rise,
Least that Tom Tell Truth's here, in a Disguise.

Isabella. I cannot tell, perhaps it may be he,
He speaks so plainly of the Tripple-Tree.
For you and others of the self same sort,
Which may in time make Aged Tyburn sport.

Hocus. Madam, This Man is Jesto to that Hob,
Who lurketh here, to do the old Popes Job.
And will you now look on this precious Tool,
Who is no more than Towzers Jesting Fool.
I hope you wiser than to lead your Life
With such a Man, who always makes strife.

I. P. Are you Tom-Tell-Truth here in a Disguise?


Hocus. Are you the Man that tells so many Lies?


I. P. Tom-Fool, to answer one thing by another,


Hocus. The safest way to sham a Tory Brother.


I. P. I am no Whig, but true Son of the Church,


Hocus. The Church of Rome, and kin to Madam Birch.


I. P. And what are you, if I may be so bold,
The Church of Whigland, that old Bawd and Scold?
Or, which is worse, your Principles do come,
From the Republic and Free State of Rome.
In days of yore, who did so much Cajole,
Their Neighbor Princes from their Capitol.

Hocus. We scorn your words. we like our Triple State,
And for that sham, have at your Noddle Pate.
I Will Comb your Cox-Comb, and your Pudding Brain,
To bring such slurs upon our Christian Name.

Isabella. Pray stop, Sir Hocus, let no Swords appear,
Within Our Sight, to put us Both in fear
Of Shedding Blood, which may us straightway bring
Within the Verge, of our great Charles the King,
I Will end the quarrel, put all out of Strife,
The best ACROSTICK, I will be his Wife:
Come Mr. Hocus have you brought them with you?

Hocus. Madam, I have, and hope that I shall find,
That unto me, you will be ever kind.

Isabella. Are they Indeed your own? Did not some other,
Either Tom Truth, or else Tom Tell-truths Brother,
Help you to them, whereby you might prevail,
To take us Virgins, by the Rump and Tail?

Hocus. Upon my Honor, Madam, they are Mine,
I will assure you, every Word and Line.

Isabella. Pray Read them then, but with a comely Grace,
And let Sir Jocus hear them Face to Face.

Hocus. To that Fair Lady, whom I so much Love,
These Lines I send her, from my Stars above,
Blind CUPID, he did aid my Trembling Quill,
And pusht me forward with his Art and Skill;
And what the product was, you here shall see,
To try Jack Pudding, and his Poetry.

Isabella. Well done, Sir Hocus, this to me is Sweet,
Lift up your Voice and do not fall asleep.

Hocus. My suite to You is bent, cause from your hand,
It must have Sentence, or to fall or stand;
Shall I then freedom take, for to impart,
To you the secrets of my Lovesick Heart,
Rarest of Beauties know, when first I took,
Into my serious Thoughts, Your comely Look;
Straightway ful-fast the Winged Wantons Dart,
I found was stuck within my Wounded Heart,
Since that (my Dearest Love) I could not find;
Abroad no Joy, at home no quiet Mind,
But still when as Thy Lovely Eyes I spide,
Entered new Darts into my bleeding side,
Lo now thou see, to what my Mind is bent,
Let me but one thing crave, I Will be content,
Ah! speak (my Dear) my cruel pain and grief,
Cannot be salv'd, unless thou send relief,
Oh give Thine Heart, and for that gift of Thine,
Least thou should want an Heart, I Will give Thee Mine:
Eject me not, but (Madam) Grant my Suite;
My Heart is true, and therefore stand not Mute,
Advance (my Dear) let me now hear Thee say,
No more Jack Puddings shall my heart e're sway,
So should I rest whilst Heaven me Breath to lend,
Thy Faithful Servant and most Cordial Friend.
Hocus Catholicus, etc.

Isabella. Sister, I Swear these Lines are rarely good,
I cannot deny him, for my very Blood
Does rise within me, for to go to Church,
I Will never forsake, nor leave him in the Lurch.

Joanna. Come, come, Sir. Pocus be quick and nimble, have you brought Yours
with you, I am in very great have?

Yes,


Pocus. Madam, I have, and hope to be your Slave,
And so will be, till I am laid in Grave.

Joanna. Advance your MUSE, and make no long delay,
For I do long to have my Wedding Day;
If they do please me to the very Life,
You then shall say my Dear (my Dearest) Wife.

Pocus. Most virtuous Madam, and Celestial Joan,
In all the World, like unto Thee there is none;
So soon as thy most lovely Eyes I spied,
Then Cupid struck his Darts within my side;
Reason did prompt me, like a Friend most kind,
In that sweet Face, there was a sober Mind,
Sure lodged within, the Soul of such fair Looks;
I Will Plot no more, but rather burn my Books;
Open Thy Heart; be never Coy no more,
AVertuous Bride, Tran scends a Common-VVhore;
Never distrust my sure and careful Hand;
Never will I profusely spend Thy Land,
Always I Will Love Thee, Run at Thy Command.
Coleman that Saint, his very Name I Loved;
Oh speak (my Dear) my Heart is truly moved;
Let not my Suite, I pray return in Vain,
Ever I Will serve Thee, not in the least for Gain;
My Thoughts were never, on false Riches bent,
All I Request is only Thy Consent;
Never refuse me, but my Death prevent.

I. P. These are two Jesuits, I know their looks,
You see they both have got St. Peter's Hooks;
No Whigs could make such Lines as these to Trap,
And make fair Ladies, fall into their Lap:
If you resolve still for a Whig to have,
I Will show you one, who shall be your great Slave.

Isabella. It is very well Mr. Jocus, but have you brought Yours along with
You, we hope to see most Incomparable Lines from You; for You now are to be
Lieutenant to bring up the Rear, and as we do usually say, The deeper the
sweeter, or

The higher the Plum-tree, the sweeter the Plum,
The richer the Cobbler, the blacker his Thumb.

I. P. Madam, I do protest, I will deal Ingeniously with You, I have been
hobling upon, but could not Hammer any thing to the purpose out of Your Name,
but I have brought you in Lieu thereof a parcel of Verses, which I am very
certain will please You a great deal better than these flattering and daubing
Lines even now Read unto You; and if you please to let me Whisper a word in
Your Ear, I will tell you a very great Secret.


Isabella. Your Suite is granted, and pray as to the Secret.


I. P. Madam, Since I saw You, I am turned a very great Whig, and it was not, I
will assure You, to Gain You, or the Richest Person in the World, but only my
Judgment and Conscience was prevailed upon, by the Substantial Arguments of
sober Reason.


Isabella. I can hardly believe it, but only (viva voce) Your own person does
inform me thereof: But pray, what sort of Whig are you, as to your present
Sentiments?


I. P. I am a John a Baptist Whig, and I think that is one of the highest form
in the Christian Church, (if I am not very much mistaken) and I am confident,
Madam, I shall now please You to the Life,

And therefore of that Jesuit think no more,
Better turn Bawd, or else a Common Whore,
Then lead Your Life with such an idle Fop,
Give me but leave, his Ears I Will streightway Lop;
Or, if in Sweden, I would make no Bones,
To be the Man should cut out both his Stones.

Isabella. Well but are these Verses you have brought Whigish ones, and are
they of your own making?


I. P. I will not tell you a Lie in an Age (though I have told thousands when I
was a Tory) they are not my own but they are of about twenty years standing (to
the best of my remembrance) and perusing them since I last parted from You,
they wrought so much upon me, even to a Conversion.


Isabella. Oh let us hear them by all means, but pray tell me where you had
them?


I. P. I was lately at a Torys (or rather at a Tantivys) Study in high Holborn,
who has by him all sorts of Popish Prelatical Jesuitical, and a few Fanatical
Books, and among those last named, which were put in a Byhole (as if intended
for the last use of wast Paper) I found these Verses, which as soon as I had
perused, I fairly put them up into my Pocket, asking no questions for
Conscience sake; but however I do intend to tell him of it next time we meet at
Sams Coffee-House, which is hard by this Tavern, where we are now so pleasantly
merry.


Isabella. For Customs, Books, I see none are so kind,
To give his due to Caesar, or's Friend to mind,
But keep them as a Prize, and nere repent,
Though against our three States in full Parliament.
But however I long to hear your Verses, let them be what they will, for I am
fixed as to my own Pers^^sion, as to matters Spiritual, but as to things
Temporal, I must submit my Self to our triple and thrice Noble State.


Hocus. I understand you, but Mum for that, although you spoke a little too
loud, and I overheard you.


I. P. Here Madam, Pray Read to your Self, and let none hear you.


Isabella. I cannot allow of that, they must be Read that all must hear, for
you may remember William our Drawer here, was to be Umpire between you, and Mr.
Hocus.


I. P. I beg your Pardon, but I did not think of that, being so much in Love
with your proper Person.


Isabella. Or rather (Mr. Jocus) you should have replied good Wits have short
Memories: But pray to the Point in Hand.


I. P. I am now just at the Point, and the Title of my Verses is as follows,
viz.


The Asses Complaint against Balaam, or, The Cry of the Country against
Ignorant and Scandalous Ministers.
To the Reverend Bishops,
YE Mitred Members of the House of Peers,
The Kings Church-VVardens, and Gods Overseers,
Fathers in Christ; We your poor Children Cry,
Oh give us Bread of Life, or else we Dye:
For we are Burdn'd with our old Sir John's,
When we ask Bread, they allways give us Stones,
And only Cant, a Homily or two,
Which Daws and Magpies may be taught to do,
Drunkards Canonical, unhallowed Bears;
The name of God more often in Oaths then Prayers,
Into what Darkness will Our Church be hurled,
If such as these be called, the Light o'th World;
These that have naught to prove themselves devout
Save only this: That Cromwell turned them out,
Mistake us not, we do not mean those Loyal,
And Learned Souls, who in the fiery Trial,
Suffered for King and Conscience sake, let such
Have double Honor, we shall never think much;
But this our tender Conscience dis-approves,
That Ravens should return as well as Doves,
And Croak in Pulpits, once again to bring
A second Judgment, on Our Church and King:
Though England does not fear another Loss,
'Cause God has Burned his Rods at Charing cross;
Yet CLERGY Sins may call him to the Door,
Even him, who whipped, and scourged them out before;
Oh therefore ye that Read the Sacred Laws,
Eject their Persons, and disown their Cause:
God and the King, have both Condemned this Crew,
Then let them not, be Patronized by you;
It Is not their Cassocks, nor their Surplices
We Quarrel at, there is no harm in these;
We own their Habit, but yet every Fool
Cannot be called a Monk, that wears a Cowl;
Were Grace and Learning wanting (by your leaves)
We would not pin our Faith on your Lawn sleeves:
It Is Aarons Breast Plate, and those sacred Words
Become a Churchman; Oh it is that my Lords,
Which pious Baxter makes his Livery;
Would all our Curates were but such as he:
Pardon my Lords, we do not make this stir,
To vindicate the Factious Presbyter;
We hate his ways, and equally disown
The Zealous Rebel, as the idle Droan:
And beg as often to be delivered from
The Kirk of Scotland, as the Sea of Rome.
We pray for Bishops too, that they may stand,
To heal the mad Distractions in our Land.
Then give us Priests Loyal and painful too,
To give to Caesar and to us our Due:
God save King Charles our Christian Faiths Defendor,
And bring Religion to its ancient Splendour.
Amen.

Hocus. Pax of this Tory, what is he now turned Whig,
On purpose to draw in my pretty Pig?
A Stab i will give him, which shall cure his Itch,
Save him from burning like to an old Witch.

Isabella. If that he be, it is of the better sort,
Called Common Prayer Whigs, who do resort
Unto their Parish Church; I like him well,
I think those Verses are a charming spell,
He is a Baptist Whig, that shining Light,
Who was Praecursor to that Star so bright.
Who brought the Wise Men from the East to see.
The only Son of Sovereign Majesty.

Hocus. Madam, the whole that you have now to do
Is to hear Will, what he will say to you.

Isabella. Pray Will remember both the Whig and Pie,
Let not your Lips now give your Heart the Lie.
Speak you the Naked Truth and shame the Devil,
Give me the least, but not the greatest Evil.
Of these two Gallants who have tried their skill
To purchase Favor and our kind good will.

Drawer. As near as I can, I will the Truth Judge,
And soon I will help you unto a true Drudge.
Gentlemen and Ladies, pray hearken to what I was entrusted withal. I have been
serious and extremely civil
Unto my Masters, who have got the Evil,
Which they call Love, though some do call it vile,
You may take both, or else take Cross or Pile.
I do declare, that Hocus he has got
The weather-gage, of your Jack Pudding Plot.
Then take your Bride, and let Jack-Pudding run
For help again, to Towzers Elder Gun:
And Pocus likewise, be you like Sylvester,
Straightway to Bed, with this her only Sister,
All things are ready fixed for each Bride,
For you this Night to sleep here by their side.

Hocus. Will, I do thank you for your Justice done
To me, your Servant and true rising Sun.
Here take my promise, which I made before,
And for your Bill, pray put it on the Score;
I Will have to Bed unto my own Dear Wife,
Who is the joy and comfort of my Life.

Drawer. And are they gone? these Jesuits they have got,
Instead of Riches, a true Pouder-Plot;
They both will find, before the Night be spent,
Enough to make them straightway keep a Lent.
They both are Whores, and if Jack-Pudding sorrow,
To cheer him up, I Will tell the truth to morrow.
And may they all be whipped and stripped thus,
Who come to kill with Romes old Blunderbuz.
A wonder strange! by these two Whores in Bed,
Our Royal Charles does now hold up his Head.
When as they came with full intent to Kill,
Their lust and heat did qualify their will;
And when they went to rouse the Royal Deer,
Their very Hearts and Joints did quake for fear.
And may he live to overtop that state,
Which to our Church has such invet'rate hate:
And may his Tripple-Crown from hence advance,
To bear a part with Monsieur King in France.
In order to that dreadful day of Doom,
Wherein shall flame, the bloody Church of Rome.

DIALOGVS QVARTVS: Serious and Theological.
Tho. Tell-Truth. THIS Theam's so large, we must refer you here,
To Treat you all with our next Christmas Cheer.
That Token sent us from the Powers above,
To feed our Souls with Everlasting Love.
Though in the mean our utmost we will try,
To make you now a short Apology. Viz.

AS to our last and this most serious part,
Which is a secret and mysterious Art:
A Subject Sacred, and of vast Extent,
Which will concern both King and Parliament.
At their next meeting for to think upon,
If they will Protect, our Church and Royal Throne
From foreseen dangers, which do hover here,
Like Blazing Comets in Our Hemisphere.
And do portend, its feared a Fatal Doom,
To some great Dons, as well as unto Rome:
We have forborne, until that we shall see,
How Church and State to this first will agree:
If it shall please: We fairly promise here,
To Act that part before you next New-Year.
We say, before you, in this very School,
Or else say Tell-Truth is a very Fool:
And speaks that here which he cannot perform,
And so deserves a Rattle or an Horn
For to be grafted on his Brainsick Head,
By Towzers Hand, in his new Bedlam Bed.
But never fear't, our Pen is in our hand,
And do resolve to make bold Towzer stand;
And give account from what place he does come,
Whether from Flanders, or direct from Rome;
From whence such Vermin here do weekly spring,
Like fiery Serpents with their Mortal sting.
If he will speak Truth and will now take our Test,
And will forbear the Language of the Beast.
In future Libels we will let him pass,
If not we will Score him for a very Ass.
Or else with Goose Quills we will knock him down,
And send him packing to some Country Clown.
To fix him whistling in some hollow Tree,
Like Screetching Bubo in the Night, to see
How Whigs will Chant this (like the Birds in Spring).
Towzer is foiled, and so God save the King:
And Tories then may sing (oh hone) and say,
The Loyal Whigs of him have got the day.
That times a coming, long it will not be,
Towzer remember Eighty two and three.
We cannot forbear, the Heavens they have combined,
To Loyal Subjects they will be ever kind:
Join then with them, and don't propose an Union,
Twixt our true Church, and the Popes Communion;
Who now must suffer for that trash and jeer,
(Which on the Rock he does so often rear)
Called Hay and Stubble, which our Heavenly Sire,
Will surely burn, when Rome is all on Fire:
Remember how Jack-Pudding turned his Coat;
And in a trice did sing another Note:
When as he stole some Verses from your Study,
Which you did deem, to be so thick and Muddy.
Because they did bewail what here was done,
As well in England as the Church of Rome.
By those Dulmano's, and that special Fry,
In drinking Healths do take such liberty:
Strike while it is hot, for we are Sons of Thunder,
Not of that Church, which keeps Men's Souls-shil under.
We are true Sons of the true Christian Church.
And yours is false, and must be left j'thlurch.
If you will believe Gods pure and Sacred Word,
And sell your Coat, for a true Gospel Sword.
Like Doctor Small-Fish, who had the rare hap;
To turn from Red-Nose to Red-Feather-Cap.
If you will join Issue, we may soon prevent
Much pro and con, between next Parliament
And our Supreme, who will rejoice to see,
Drunkards discarded, sober Fanns to be
Firmly united to our Church and Head,
Whom we do hope will burn the Popes straw-Bed.
This we expect, all in his own good time,
Who Is Truth it self, and is the most sublime.
To him be Honor, Glory, Power, Praise,
To whom belongs the Everlasting Bays;
When Saints and Angels all shall sweetly sing;
Eternal Anthems to their LORD and KING. Amen, etc.
The Epilogue spoken by Mr. Tho. Telltruth the first Proloquutor.
WHat now?
Will nothing do in these distracted Times;
To cure hot Brains, but HOCUS POCUS Lines?
Will Not GALEN do, nor yet no Cinque foil Grass,
Nor Physic Herbs; But this our Cupping Glafs?
Will not the Lions Rampant one jot move,
Within their Cells; But by such Charms of Love?
Let Us throw away our Books, Mind them no more,
Which have so shamed us, in the days of Yore,
But let us Mind our late new Bedlam Lad,
Who cures all, though they be never so Mad.
If this be true, Our Youth has done their Job,
In this his Bedlam HOCUS POCUS Bob;
Sure Heaven has sent him from the Stars above
To know by Planets, what they most do Love;
For as we say, And it is a Truth most sure,
A desperate Case must have a desperate Cure:
In this attempt, We like his Project well,
Who knows his Art, but by his Charming Spell,
He may in time, with his Industrious Pen
Charm the Old Dragon, close within his Den,
Let now his Guardian Angel him Protect,
Should he dare Write in such a Dialect,
Then would begin that Jubilee of Years,
To free us from Our Jealousies and Fears,
As is foretold in Sacred Writ to come,
For the Destruction of the Whore of Rome,
So far as she with Antichrist does hold
Let her not Boast, this Truth it is foretold,
If she is that Beast, that sits on seven Hills
We may affirm, They need not make their Wills;
There is a Caveat, late put in from France
Which may perchance make the old Whore to Dance
A sad Curranto, with her TORY Crew,
Heavens grant to Scotland, That the News prove true,
'Twill break their Measures, And their Meal-Tub Plots,
And make Our TORIES dye here of the Rots,
Or broken Winds, by Galloping up Hills
And taking of the Observators Pills:
The Bullies now will melt in their own Grease
Because they cannot destroy Our Kingdoms Peace,
Not and his Varlets, these special Roman Elves,
Will now like Bedlams even hang themselves.
The Clergy-Guide, Our Friend has here Outdone,
By slight of Hand, He has reverst his Gun,
And by his Glass, has got the Weather-Gage,
Of topping Towzer and his Jack Pudding Page.
Cavete, Popelings, of Monsieur Caveats Jumps,
He Will cut your Legs off, make you go on Stumps;
Who knows, but he must now lead up the Dance,
And we must follow after into France.
That petit COMET, with its long brushing Tail,
May prove at length, a raree new French flail,
And should it light, upon Your whorey Head,
The Whigs would say, You're sweetly brought to Bed.
The Grand Superiors, though they seldom meet,
Yet when they do, their Faces are not sweet:
Time will produce their Dire effects upon
The Scarlet Beast, and Whore of Babylon.
This Gallant Monsieur, whom of late you Scorn,
Now in his Rage, may pluck you by the Horn;
When as you hear, He Abby-Lands Escheats,
Into his Chec quer, then he will Work rare Feats,
And we may Trust him, and likewise declare,
In words at length, He wants the Roman Chair
As a dependant to his late Conquests,
There Is many a true Word often spoke in Jests;
Be gar, Madam, Look well unto your Hits,
Its now high time to Exercise your Wits,
The French, the Dutch the English are a coming
To Kiss your Toes, and find out all your Cunning,
Wherewith you have bewitched them ever since
The Dragon gave you power to be Prince
Over all Potentates in the Christian Church,
And now Dear Heart, he will leave you in the Lurch,
And so we leave you to his last Farewell,
Which many say, Will be in Flames of Hell,
Unless Repentance intervene between,
Those Fiery Flames which are so sharp and keen:
Farewell likewise to all that do Infest,
Our Royal State, and Churches with the Pest,
The Plagues of Egypt were in nurnber Ten,
(You that Write Shorthand, take them with your (Pen;)
The self same number is in this Our Isle,
Presented here to us, in Rank and File,
By Our good Master, in his sober Mind,
Because to us, he will be ever kind,
And in his Judgment, thought it very fit
To give us Scenes to Exercise Our Wit,
And if you have a Mind to tell their Number,
Come Scenes draw forth, and part Your selves asunder.
1. Here Is first two Jesuits all be smeard in Blood,
Bringing in Popery, like a mighty Flood;
2. There Is Towzer next, with all his Elder Guns,
His Paper Pellets, and his Penny Buns:
3. Next is Jack Pudding with his Cox-combe Cap.
The Observator leaning on his Lap,
4. The Informing Tribe, there round about him sit,
Telling him Shams, without all fear or wit.
5. Here Is Ridens next, that paultry VVhigland Elf,
Who may in time, for Madness hang himself,
Although some say, The Triple Tret much longs
To have a Taste of his Pindarique Songs.
6. There is Ben. Tokey with his Ship of Lice,
Enterd for VVhigland to fetch home more Mice.
7. Here comes the Tories in their Frantic fits,
Like Bedlams foaming, stark out of their Wits.
8. This is bold Not. who brings his Cross-Key Fetters,
With all his Bullies of the Roman Letters,
Who still does Sham, with For ged Lies and Stories,
Tapsters to please, and Hogan Mogan Tories.
9. These are Satyricks, which so much do flutter,
And soar a loft, for Honey to their Butter.
And as Lieutenants to bring up the Rear,
10. Here Is Hudibrass, that froathy state Bugbear,
Who for his Drolling Dogrel prittle prattle,
He was at last presented with a Rattle,
And on his Tomb, this Epitaph may be
Fairly Inscribed for his Friends to see,
VIZ.
Here lies bold Hudibrass, that dogrel swagger,
In Life a Tinker, and in Death a Beggar,
The same may serve for Ridens and his Oade,
Leave out but Tinker, and put in a Toad:
And Poet Laureat, with his Satyrick Gang,
May likewise have their Tombs of the same twang;
But since old Laureat is the Prince of all,
We Will Write his Tomb, in Letters Capital.
VIZ.
Here Lies old Laure at with his Rampant Rhimes,
Who daubed so high, to please the present Times;
But since he is Dead, Noll's Ghost does haunt his Tomb,
And so will do, until the day of Doom;
The Reason's this, because this Huff did Paint
Him, Dead, a Devil, but in Life a Saint.
In fine,
To make the Tories Grin, the Whigs to laugh,
We will conclude with Towzers Epitaph,
VIZ.
Hic jacet old Towzer with his Elder Guns,
Who split them, all by ramming Paper Puns
So hard into their Mouths, with strong Intents
To guard the Pope, but blow up Parliaments;
But now he is Dead, his name will dye and rot,
Unless remembered like the Powder Plot.
Our Priend has here so mauld him Hip and Thigh,
That some do think, he will never make Reply,
And if you like his Honest Goose-quill Blows,
As well in Verse as keen Steeleto Prose,
I ray thank him fort, and here we will now close,
Gratias, Gratias, Gratias,
And all clapped Hands with loud acclamations.
BUt stay Our Lads, to you we will rehearse
Before we part, an old right Roman Verse,
Which may well serve, for to Conclude Our Play;
Look here, it is Ovid, which we read to Day,
In Nova fert animus, mutatas dicere formas, etc.
And now like him, in Our Poetic Feude,
If you will hear, to him we will Allude, viz,
A Tiber Goose is turned into a Kite,
A Ravens-croft is Romes grand Proselyte,
That's Turbulent, within his Magot Pate
Is turned Vulpone, in Our Church and State:
Brave Godfrey's Not. is turned into a Jayle;
Pindarique Ridens, a true Roman Flaile;
Ben. Tooke's Ship is turned into a Lighter;
Jack Pudding he, is turned an old Sheep Biter,
The Tory Mountain's turned into a Mouse,
Towzer's great Flea, is turned into a Louse,
And though he skipt before, yet now must crawl,
And scratch his Noddle, at his own downfall,
For sending Ratio. to his Bedlam Cell,
Where he has foiled him, by that very spell,
Wherein he thought to cure his Frantic Brains,
Now Martins Ludgate, pay him for his Fains,
Or else pay Ratio, with your Hearty Thanks,
For these his Hocus, and new BEDLAM Pranks,
Wherein he has (the Whigs will say no doubt)
In his new BEDLAM, found bold Towzer out,
We often see a spark much like a Louse
In Magnitude does sometimes Burn a House.
Towzer was he, who kindled first the spark,
And now his House is Rent and Torn, and Dark,
He was the Man, who first began to Prate,
And for his Pains deserves a broken Pate,
These Lines will Live, when his shall Dye and Rot
And be to him an everlasting Blot,
We wish him well, and always we will pray,
He may repent before his Judgment day,
For all his Follies, where he does expose
True Loyal Subjects, to be Caesar's Foes,
If this ben't Madness, we have lost Our Reason;
Some Men Write Nonsense, and will have it Treason:
These are the Bedlams, or we have no skill,
And Ignoramus of Our Makers Will,
But yet we hope to see true Tories run,
In a short time from Towzers Elder Gun;
Who has Bewitched them ever since his Tone
Of Curse ye Meroz, and his Forty One.
Scholars, Gratias, Gratias, Gratias, With loud acclamation. Saying,

Vivat Rex, Vivat Rex, Vivat Rex,
Currat Lex, currat Lex, etc.
Laborat Grex, Laborat Grex, etc.
Let Towzer Vex, Let Towzer Vex.
Crescit sub Pondere Virtus
ET
Soli Deo Gloria. Amen.
BUT stay a while the Tories first must come,
And take the Test, and then we shall have done;
Tories draw nigh, and take the Test once more,
Have we spoke Truth (or Treason) as before?
Tories. Truth, Truth, Truth.


Tantivys. Treason, Treason, Treason.
What ails these Tories and Tantivy Eives,
Now at the last to contradict themselves?
By which you plainly see with your own Eyes,
Some Tories can speak Truth, though most tell Lies.
The last are Towzers VVhelps, the first are those
Who now have fairly bit them by the Nose,
Common Prayer Whigs the first, the last are such
Who neither stay at home, nor go to Church,
But every Sunday having got the Spleen,
They take the Air to Visit Doctor Green;
But since you are so high, Tantivys Pray
Tell us the Treason you have heard to Day.

Tantivys. In saying, That his Name shall Dye and Rot
Unless remembered like the Powder Plot;
If this be not, both flat and downright Treason,
You may Conclude, That we have lost Our reason.

Tell-truth, If you will withdraw we will put it to the Test,
Of these great Peers, their Judgments are the best.

Tantivys. With all Our Hearts, provided that we may
But be assured, we shall have fair Play;
Don't question that, these Peers they art not those,
Who are the Kingdoms, and the Churches Foes,
We all do know, that these are truly Loyal,
Experieuce teaches, We have had the Trial.

Exeunt omnes and statirh Enter again. Tantivys, The Lords conclude that you
have lost your Senses,
By drinking hard, and sitting late with Wenches,
And by Your Words which you affirm are Treason,
They do Conclude, that you have lost Your reason;
And out as much as that true Roman Elf,
Who is to prove that Godfrey Hanged Himself:
For which attempt, to Newgate he was sent
Among his BULLIES, there to keep his Lent;
And may you all, be sent to him in Season,
To cure the Itch of this your Purblind Treason.

Now Gentlemen and Ladies, you are all most heartily welcome.

Gratias, Gratias, Gratias.

And all clap Hands with loud Acclamations.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
To the Tantivies, By T. T.
AS our two Jesuits, from the Stars above,
Were struck with Paleness, and dead drunk with Love.
From Cupid's Engine, called his Charming Dart,
With which he makes hot Loves often smart,
By means whereof, Our Royal Charles his Life
Was sasely guarded from ROME's enraged Knife,
Which does appear like Lambs to vulgar sight,
But inwardly are Ravening Wolves of Night.
So now likewise: If Towzer he shall rage
And bark at us, in every weekly Page,
To quench the Flames of our new Bedlam Play,
Which if he can, then We must run away:
And 'twould seem strange, That Joan's old Elder Gun
Should make Tom Tell-troth, at the last, to Run;
We fear him not, Come let him do his worst,
The more he barks, the more he will be cursed
By God himself, who never shoots at Rovers,
And will at length slay all right Roman Drovers,
We have a Distick always holding true,
Though not yet heeded by your cursed Crew,
The Palm Tree grows the more pressed down,
And Crosses prove the Churches Crown.
Repent in time, thank Tell-Truth for this hint,
And do no more on him so look a-squint.
Which if you should, he will pay you home, be sure,
Now you have put his jealous Pen in Ure,
By your old Hocus tricks, wherein you huff,
And light them up, Just like a Candle Snuff,
And so will end, or we have lost our Aim,
And do deserve, an everlasting Blame
Be put upon us, by such Fops as you,
Who are the Tory and Tantivy Crew,
But We Are the honest and true loyal Blew.
Vale.
T. T.

FINIS.

