NEW PROPOSITIONS PROPOUNDED At the Kings Royal Court at Holmby, Betwixt the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, and Mr. Marshall and Mr. Caryll. CONCERNING The
Presbyteriall Government, the Book of Common Prayer, and the Directory. ALSO,
His Majesty's several Reasons, concerning Episcopacy, and Mr. Marshalls Reply
for the clearing his Majesty's Objections. Together with diverse remarkable
passages of the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland, propounded to His
Majesty for his Royal assent to the Propositions, and signing the Covenant.
WITH Another Message from His Majesty at Holmby, to both Houses of Parliament.

Published by order of Parliament.

London, Printed for F. F. Feb. 26. 1647.

NEW PROPOSITIONS, PROPOUNDED At the Kings Royal Court at Holmby, betwixt the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, and Mr. Marshall, and Mr. Caryll.
THe Parliament of Scotland have sat very close, about the disposal of His
Majesty's Royal Person, and his future Reign and Government of himself and
his Royal Posterity, which indeed is a thing of high concernment and very much
desired, by his Majesty's Subjects within the Kingdom of England: their hearts
relenting, until the time of expitation, of the great business now in
dispense, between the Sovereign and the Subject; their eyes being fully fixed
upon this State-Object, longing to see that happy day of the joyful return of
their Gracious Sovereign, to his Tribunal Throne at London.

For, the accomplishing of these their long-wished desires, His Majesty's
loyal Subjects, (the Parliaments of both Kingdoms) do likewise endeavor to
bring to a speedy period, and instant of time; if so be, his gracious Majesty
would be pleased, to hearken to the faithful advice of His two great Councels,
by signing the Propositions, and taking the Covenant, that so the distractions
of the Church of England, may be fully composed, and the purity of Religion
firmly established, within His Majesty's Realms and Dominions.

And to this end, the Estates of Scotland, do freely and unanimously concur
with the Parliament of England, for the humble advising of his Majesty to
condescend to these their Propositions, viz.

1. That his Majesty would be pleased (no longer to continue in this adverse
way) but to unite himself with them, and to give his Royal assent for the
signing of the Propositions; that so, all differences may be composed within
his Majesty's Realms of England and Scotland.

2. That his Majesty would be graciously pleased to unite his Royal heart
with his Subjects of both Kingdoms, by taking that blessed Covenant, first
drawn up, by the divine will and pleasure of the great Jehovah, in the highest
Throne, and here confirmed upon Earth, (by his omnipotent power) for the
finishing of his great Work; that so the purity and light of his Gospel,
might spring and grow up, both in the hearts of Prince and People, and shine in
all luster, throughout the Realms of England and Scotland.

3. That his Majesty would be pleased to embrace these their humble and loyal
Desires, by signing the Propositions and taking the Covenant, His Subjects of
Scotland do declare, that his gracious Majesty and his Royal Posterity, should
not suffer in the least, etc.

And for the further effecting of this gallant work, no means and ways is
unsought by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms for the retarding of it, but
does daily use their utmost endeavors for the attaining of the same, which God
grant may be speedily b^ought to a period.

For, how would his Majesty's Loyal Subjects rejoice, to hear that tryumphant
sound, and melodious Echo, of his Majesty's concurrence with his great
Counsels, by setting his Royal hand to sign the Propositions, and bending
his gracious heart to receive this faithful Covenant.

A Message from his Majesty to both Houses of Parliament.
Carolus Rex.

SIne I have never dissembled, nor hid my Conscience: And that I am not yet
satisfied with the alteration in Religion, to which ye desire my consent.

I will not loose time in giving reasons (which are too obvious to every body)
why it is fit for me to be attended by some of my Chaplains, whose opinions,
as Clergymen, I esteem and reverence. Not only for the exercise of my
Conscience, but also for the clearing of my judgment, concerning the present
differences in Religion; as I have at full declared to Mr. Marshall, and his
Fellow-Minister: having showed them that is the best and likeliest means of
giving me satisfaction (which without it I cannot have) in these things,
whereby the distractions of the Church may be the better se^led.

Wherefore I desire, that at least two of these reverend Divines, whose names I
have here set down, may have free liberty to wait upon me, for the
discharging of their nuties to me, according to their Fuection.

From Holmby this present Month of February, 1646. For the Speaker of the
House of Peers, pro tempore, to be communicated to the two Houses of
Parliament at Westminster assembled. Charles Rex.
The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Salisbury. The Bishop of Peterborough. Dr.
Shelden, Cler of my Closet. Dr. May, Deane of York. Dr. Sanderson. Dr. Bayley.
D. Heywood. Dr. Beale. Dr. Fuller. Dr. Hammond. Dr. Tailor.



The Kings Majesty is verb desirous to come near London, but yet expresses
himself very gallantly at Holmby, and is very familiar with the Commissioners
of both Kingdoms, and has had several Conferences with the English Divines,
about Religion and the Government of the Church of England, having propounded
several Reasons unto them, why he will not give his Royal assent for the
confirming of the Presbyteriall way, and settling of the Directory: Desiring
likewise to have a Conference with twelve Learned Divines of the Episcopal
Government, that so he may be cleared of some points, which as yet seems very
strange unto him.

But as Mr. Marshall and M. Caroll does use their utmost endeavors for the
convincing of his Majesty, and to clear some scruples about the Directory,
which his Majesty objects against: But within few days we hope to hear of
the happy tidings of his Majesty's Royal assent, to the desire and humble
supplication of his great Council the Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

FINIS.

