ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the General Court or Assembly of His Majesty's
Province of New Hampshire in New England.

Begun and Held at Portsmouth, on Monday the Seventh Day of August, 1699.

Anno Regni Gulielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Undecimo.

royal blazon or coat of arms W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET SON DROIT

BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the Earl of BELLOMONT. 1699.

Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi III. Undecimo
Acts and Laws, Passed by the General Court or Assembly of His Majesty's
Province of New Hampshire in New England.
Piracy.
An Act for Restraining and Punishing Privateers and Pirates.
WHEREAS nothing can more contribute to His Sacred Majesty's Honor then that
such Articles as are concluded and agreed on in all Treaties of Peace should by
all His Majesty's Subjects according to their Duty be most inviolably preserved
and kept in and over all His Majesty's Dominions and Territories. And whereas
not only against such Treaties of Peace made by His Majesty with His Allies,
but also contrary to His Majesty's Royal Proclamation several of His Subjects
have and do go, into Foreign Princes Services, and Sail under their
Commissions contrary to their Duty and good Allegiance, and by fair means
cannot be restrained from so doing.

Felony, to serve in hostile manner under any foreign Prince without License.
Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by
Authority of the same, That from and after Publication hereof, it shall be
Felony for any person which now does, or within four years last past, has, or
hereafter shall inhabit or belong to this Province, to Serve in an Hostile
manner under any Foreign Prince, State or Potentate, or any Employed under any
of them, against any other Foreign Prince, State or Potentate in Amity with
His Majesty of Great Britain, without special License for so doing under the
Hand and Seal of the Governor or Commander in Chief of this Province for the
time being. And that all and every such Offender or Offenders, contrary to the
true intent and meaning of this Act, being thereof duly Convicted in His
Majesty's Superior Court of Judicature within this Province, to which Court,
Authority is hereby given to hear and determine the same as other Cases of
Felony: shall suffer pains of Death without benefit of Clergy.

Saving for such as shall desert before the 29. of September 1700.
Provided nevertheless, That this Act nor any thing therein contained shall
extend to any person or persons which now are or have been in the Service or
Employ of any Foreign Prince, State or Potentate whatsoever, that shall return
to this Province, and leave and desert such Service and Employment before the
Twenty Ninth Day of September, Anno One Thousand Seven Hundred, rendering
themselves to the Governor or Commander in Chief for the time being, and
giving him such Security as he shall appoint for their future good behavior.
And also that they shall not depart the Province, without the Governors Ticket
License.

And for the better and more speedy Excution of Justice upon such who having
committed Treasons, Piracies, Felonies, and other Offenses upon the Sea, shall
be apprehended in, or brought Prisoners to this Province.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Treasons, Felonies,
Piracies, Robberies, Murders, or Confederacies committed, or that hereafter
shall be committed upon the Sea, Treasons, Feloni's, Piracies etc. committed on
the Sea to be inquired heard and judged, as if committed on the Land, by
Commission directed to the Judge of the Admiralty etc.
or in any Haven, Creek or Bay where the Admiral has Jurisdiction, shall be
punished with Death; and shall be Inquired, Tried, Heard, Determined and Judged
within this Province in such like form, as if such Offense had been committed,
in and upon the Land; and to that end and purpose, Commissions shall be had
under the Seal of this Province, directed to the Judge of the Admiralty of this
Province for the time being, and to three or more such substantial persons, as
by His Majesty's Governor or Commander in Chief of this Province for the time
being, with the advice and consent of the Council shall be named and appointed,
which said Commissioners, or such a Quorum of them as by such Commission shall
be thereunto Authorized, shall have full power to do all things, in and about
the Inquiry, hearing determining, adjudging and punishing of any of the Crimes
and Offenses aforesaid, as any Commissioners to be appointed by Commission
under the Great Seal of England, by virtue of a Statute made in the Twenty
Eighth Year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth are Empowered to do and
execute within the Kingdom of England. And that the said Offenders which are or
shall be apprehended in, or brought Prisoners to this Province, shall be liable
to such Order, Process, Judgments and Execution, by virtue of such Commission
to be grounded upon this Act as might be awarded or given against them if they
were proceeded against within the Realm of England, by virtue of any Commission
grounded upon the said Statute. And all Trials heretofore had against such
Criminal and Criminals before any Judge or Judges by virtue of such Commission
or Authority at any time heretofore granted, All Trials heretofore had by
virtue of such Commission ratified.
and all Proceedings thereupon are hereby ratified and confirmed and adjudged
lawful. And all such Judges with all and every the Inferior Officers that have
acted thereby, are hereby Indempnified to all intents and purposes whatsoever.
And in case they or any of them shall at any time hereafter be sued, vexed,
molested or troubled for any such their Proceedings as aforesaid, he or they so
sued, vexed, molested or troubled, shall plead the General Issue, and give this
Act in Evidence: Any Law Statute, Custom or Usage to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Persons knowingly entertaining, harboring, concealing or corresponding with
any Privateers or Pirates to be accounted Accessaries and confederates.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
person and persons that shall any way knowingly entertain, harbor, conceal,
trade or hold any correspondence by Letter or otherwise, with any person or
persons, that shall be deemed and adjudged to be Privateers, Pirates, or other
Offenders within the Construction of this Act, and that shall not readily
endeavor to the best of his or their power to apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended such Offender or Offenders shall be liable to be prosecuted as
Accessaries and Confederates, and to suffer the like pains and penalties as in
and by this Act is provided for the Principals.

And for the better and more effectual Execution of this Act.
Commission Officers Empowered and required to seize and apprehend all
Privateers, Pirates etc.
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Commission Officers
in their several Precincts within this Province are hereby required and
Empowered, upon his or their knowledge, or credible notice given that any
Privateers, Pirates, or other persons suspected to be upon any unlawful design,
are in any place within their respective Precincts, to raise and levy such a
number of well Armed men as he and they shall think needful for the seizing,
apprehending and carrying to Goal all and every such person and persons; and in
case of any resistance or refusal to yield Obedience to His Majesty's
Authority, it shall be lawful to kill or destroy such person or persons; And
all and every person and persons that shall oppose or resist by striking or
firing upon any of the Commanded parties, shall be deemed, taken and adjudged
as Felons, and shall suffer the pains of Death. And every such Officer that
shall omit or neglect his duty herein, shall forfeit Fifty Pounds, Penalty for
Officers neglect of duty.
current Money of this Province for every such Offense, to be recovered in any
of His Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province, by Bill, Plaint or
Information, wherein no essoign, wager of Law or protection shall be allowed;
one Moiety thereof to be to our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and
Successors, for and toward the Support of the Government of this Province and
the contingent Charges thereof; and the other Moiety to the Informer. And all
and every person and persons that upon orders given him or them shall refuse to
repair immediately with his or their Arms well fixed and Ammunition, to such
place or places as shall be appointed by the said Officer, Penalty for non
appearrance in Arms.
and not readily obey his Command in the premises, shall be Imprisoned without
Bail or Mainprize, until the next General Sessions of the Peace within the same
County, and by the Justices of the same Court fined, not exceeding Ten Pounds,
or be corporally punished, not exceeding Ten Stripes, at the discretion of the
Justices.

For the better Encouragement to make diligent Enquiry after, and Seizure of
Pirates Goods.
Recompense for discovering and seizing of Pirates Goods.
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforsaid, That whatsoever person or
persons shall make discovery and seizure of any Goods or Treasure, that shall
be brought into this Province by any Pirate or Pirates, or inform of or
disclose the same, so as that such Goods or Treasure be seized and secured to
be answerable in the Law, every such person or persons shall have and receive
as a recompense for such Service, one fifth part of the Goods and Treasure so
seized and secured, or of the value thereof within ten days next after
Condemnation of said Goods or Treasure, to be paid by order of the Justices of
the Court where the Trial shall be had, and all the remainder of such Goods and
Treasure to be secured by order of the Justices of such Court for the use and
benefit of the true and right Owners thereof if any such appear, by themselves,
Factors, Agents or Attorneys, How such Goods shall be secured.
within the time of eighteen months next after such Condemnation, and shall
make out their right thereunto, all just and reasonable Charges being first
deducted and paid thereout. And if no Claimer or Claimers appear and make out
their Right thereto within the said time of eighteen months then all the
remainder of such Goods and Treasure the Charges as aforesaid, being first
deducted and paid thereout to be delivered into His Majesty's Treasury within
this Province, there to be lodged until His Majesty's Pleasure shall be
signified, how the same shall be disposed of.

Jurors.
An Act to return able and sufficient Jurors to Serve in the several Courts of
Justice, and to Regulate the Election of Represensentatives to Serve in the
General Assembly within this Province.
BE it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the Clerks
of the several Courts of Justice within this Province fifteen days at least
before the day limited by Law for holding such Courts from time to time, Writ
of Venire for Jurors to be issued 15 days before the Court
shall make out a Writ of Venire Facias, directed unto the Sheriff of the
Province, Commanding him in His Majesty's Name to Impannel and return so many
good and lawful men for Grand and Petit Jurors, out of the several Towns within
this Province in as near a proportion as may be according to the number of
Inhabitants, each person so returned to have an Estate of Freehold worth Forty
Shillings Per Annum at the least, Qualification of Jurors.
or Fifty Pounds Sterling in personal Estate; And the Sheriff shall cause each
person named in his Panel to be duly Summoned and Warned to attend the Service
of the Court where the same is returnable. The Grand Jurors for the Quarter
Sessions of the Peace, to Serve one whole year from the time of their being
Sworn, and every person Impannelled and Summoned as aforesaid, to Serve as a
Juror at any of the said Courts who shall make default by not appearing or not
attending the Service required of him, Penalty on Jurors making default.
shall loose and forfeit the Sum of Forty Shillings, unless such persons make a
reasonable Excuse for the same to be approved and allowed by the Justices of
the said Court, the said Forfeiture to be unto the use of our Sovereign Lord
the King, for and toward the Support of the Governnient, and for answering the
incident charges thereof, and to be Imposed and set by the Justices of the
Court where the Venire is returnable. And when it shall happen by reason of
Challenge, Tales de circumstantibus.
default in appearance or otherwise there shall not remain a sufficient number
to make up a Petit Jury, the Sheriff by Command of the Justices of the Court
shall return so many persons de talibus Circumstantibus, The Coroner to return
Jurors and serve Writs, in case
as shall be requisite to make up a full Jury. And in case where the Sheriff
shall be a party, or related to either of the parties, the Jury shall be
Impannelled and returned by the Coroner, who is also hereby Empowered to Serve
Writs in cases where the Sheriff is concerned.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person
Inhabiting within this Province, Qualification of Representatives, and Electors.
other than Freeholders of the value or income of Forty Shillings Per Annum or
upwards in Land, or worth Fifty Pounds Sterling at the least in personal
Estate, shall have any Vote in the Election of Representatives; or be capable
of being Elected to Serve in the General Assembly, and the trial of such
Qualification as aforesaid, shall be by the last Lists of Rates and Assessments
which the Select men of each respective Town, are hereby required to bring with
them for that end, upon all days and times appointed for such Election.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be a suitable
person Chosen in each Town after the same manner used for Choice of other
Officers to be Town Clerk to Serve in the said Office until another be Chosen
and Sworn in his stead; Town Clerk to be chosen and sworn.
and every such Town Clerk shall have an Oath Administered unto him, by a
Justice of the Peace well and truly to Execute the said Office and Trust.

A Tax.
An Act for a Tax or Assessment, of Five Hundred Pounds.
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of His
Majesty's Province of New Hampshire, Convened in General Assembly, do
cheerfully and unanimously give and grant unto His Most Excellent Majesty the
Sum of Five Hundred Pounds in Money, humbly beseeching Your Majesty, that the
same may be applied and appropriated unto the sole and proper use of His
Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Your Majesty's Governor in Chief of this
Province. In Testimony of our great regard and respect unto His Lordship, under
whose happy Conduct we assure our selves to enjoy great quiet and felicity; And
pray that it may be Enacted.

And be it Enacted accordingly by the Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the said
Sum of Five Hundred Pounds to and for the use aforesaid be Raised by a Tax or
Assessment to be made and laid in manner as is hereafter expressed, upon all
persons and Estates both real and personal lying, being and belonging to the
several Towns and the Districts thereof within this Province, according to each
Towns proportion toward the same, as follows: That is to say,

l s d Portsmouth, One Hundred and Twelve Pounds, Fifteen Shillings. 112 15 00
Hampton, One Hundred Forty and Eight Pounds, Eighteen Shillings, and Nine
Pence. 148 18 09 Dover, One Hundred Pounds, Eleven Shillings and Three pence.
100 11 03 Exeter, Ninety One Pounds, Ten Shillings. 91 10 00 New Castle, Forty
Six Pounds, Five Shillings. 46 05 00

And that the Treasurer send out his Warrant to the Constables of the
respective Towns, Requiring them to Assemble the Inhabitants to make choice of
two Assessors where they are not already Chosen for the year, to join with the
Select-men in making the Rate and Assessment according to this Act to whom the
Treasurer shall also give Warrants pursuant thereto. And the Rates and
Assessments so made to be committed to the Constables of the respective Towns
by the last of September next ensuing, with Warrants from a Justice of the
Peace. And the Select men and Assessors to Collect the same, and pay unto the
Treasurer for the time being, in Money by the Twentyeth Day of December next
following.

Courts of Justice.
An Act for Establishing Courts of Public Justice within this Province.
WHEREAS the orderly Regulation and Establishing of Courts of Justice, as well
in respect of time as place for the bolding of the same, does very much tend to
the Honor and Dignity of the Crown, and to the ease and benefit of the
Subject.

Justices of the Peace Empowered to hear and determine causes of 40 s. value or
under, where title of of Land is not concerned.
Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That every Justice of the Peace in the same Town where he resides, be,
and hereby is fully Authorized and Empowered to hear, try and determine all
Pleas and Actions of Debt and Trespass, where Title of Land is not concerned,
arising or happening within this Province, to the value of Forty Shillings or
under, and to give ^udgment therein and to award Execution thereupon, and
either party agrieved at the Judgment or Sentence given by any such Justice in
Civil Causes, may appeal therefrom unto the next Inferior Court of Common
Pleas, the party appealing giving Security before such Justice unto the
Appellee in a reasonable Sum to prosecute his Appeal with effect, Appeal.
and to answer and pay such Cost and Damages as shall be awarded against him in
case the first Sentence be affirmed.

And for the better Conservation of the Peace, and punishment of Offenders.
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be Held and
Kept by the Justices of the Peace within this Province or so many of them,
Court of Sessions of the Peace.
as shall be limited by the Commission of the Peace to make a Quorum. Four
Quarterly Courts or General Sessions of the Peace yearly at the Town of
Portsmouth on the First Tuesdayes on the Months of March, June, September and
December from time to time; which said Court shall have Cognizance of all
matters and things proper to the Jurisdiction of said Court relating to the
Conservation of the Peace, and punishment of Offenders; according to the Laws
and Statutes in force within this Province. And the Sessions of the said Court
shall hold and continue by the space of two days and no longer.

Inferior Court of Common Pleas.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be Held
and Kept at Portsmouth aforesaid, an Inferior Court of Common Pleas by four
Justices to be appointed and Commissionated thereto by the Governor, or in his
absence the Commander in Chief for the time being; any three of whom to make a
Quorum; the said Court to be held and begin at the time and days following:
That is to say, on Thursday next after the rising of the Court of the Quarter
Sessions of the Peace from time to time; which said Inferior Court of Common
Pleas shall have Cognizance of, hear, try and determine all Actions, Matters
and Causes tryable at the Common Law, not exceeding the Sum or value of Twenty
Pounds, and where Title of Land is not concerned, and give Judgment therein and
award Execution accordingly.

Provided nevertheless, That either party agrieved at any Judgment or Sentence
given in the said Court may appeal therefrom unto the next Superior Court of
Judicature; Appeal.
such Appellant giving sufficient Security in double the S^m or value recovered
unto the Appellee, before one or more of the Justices of the Inferior Court,
to prosecute his Appeal with effect, and to answer and pay such Costs and
Damages as shall be awarded against him in case the first Sentence shall be
affirmed.

Superior Court of Judicature
And further be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be held and
kept at Portsmouth aforesaid, and not elsewhere within this Province a
Superior Court of Judicature by one chief Justice, and three other Justices,
to be appointed and Commissionated thereto by the Governor, or in his absence
the Commander in Chief for the time being; any three of whom to make a Quorum,
on the Second Tuesday in August, and on the Second Tuesday in February yearly
from time to time, which said Courts shall have Cognizance of all Pleas, and
Causes, as well Civil (not under the value of Twenty Pounds except where Title
of Land is concerned) as Criminal as fully and amply to all intents and
purposes whatsoever, as the Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequer
within His Majesty's Kingdom of England, have or ought to have, and are hereby
Empowered to give Judgment, and award Execution therein, and it shall be in the
liberty of any Party, Plaintiff or Defendant agrieved at any Judgment or
Sentence given in the said Superior Court to appeal therefrom unto the
Governor and Council. Appeal to the Governor and Council.
Provided the value appealed for exceed the Sum of One Hundred Pounds Sterling,
and that sufficient Security be given, in manner as in and by this Act is
before directed to prosecute the same, and to pay such costs and damages as may
be awarded in case the first Sentence shall be affirmed.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That in all Civil Causes to be
commenced at the said Superior Court of Judicature, Appeal to His Majesty in
Council.
where the matter in controversy exceeds the true value and Sum of Three
Hundred Pounds Sterling, it shall and may be in the liberty of the party
agrieved to review the said Cause by a new Process out of the said Court once
and no more; and if either party shall not rest satisfied with the Judgment or
Sentence of the said Superior Court, either upon the first Trial, or upon the
Review, such party may appeal therefrom unto His Majesty in Council Provided
the matter in difference exceed the true value and Sum of Three Hundred Pounds
Sterling, and that such Appeals be made, within fourteen days after Sentence
given; And that Security be likewise given by the Appellant, to answer such
Charges as shall be awarded, in case the first Sentence shall be confirmed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Writs to issue forth of
the Clerks Office.
That all Writs and Processes for bringing any Actions or Suits to Trial in any
of the Courts aforesaid shall be Summons, Capias or Attachment, and shall Issue
out of the Clerks Office of the same Court under the Seal thereof, and Signed
by the Clerk, and shall be directed to the Sheriff, Undersheriff or Deputy,
For Trials before a Justice to be granted by such Justice.
and Executed fifteen days before the day of the Courts Sitting, and to be
returned to the Court from whence the same Issued. Writs or Processes for Trial
before a Justice of the Peace, to be granted by such Justice, directed unto a
Constable or Constables, and to be Executed seven days before the day appointed
for such Trial, and to be returned to the Justice.

Reasons of Appeal to be filed in the Clerks Office.
And be it further Enacted, That every person appealing from any Judgment or
Sentence given in any of the Courts aforesaid, shall file a Declaration in the
Clerks Office of the Court appealed from, therein briefly assigning the Errors
in such Judgment fifteen days at least before the day of the Sitting of the
Court appealed unto. And if the Appeal be made from a Sentence or Judgment
given by a Justice of the Peace, such Declaration shall be filed with the
Justice by the like time.

Power of Chancery in several cases.
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That as well the Justices of
the Inferior Court of Common Pleas, as the Justices of the Superior Court of
Judicature respectively; where the forfeiture or penalty of any Obligation with
a Condition underwritten, or a penalty annexed to any Articles, Agreement,
Covenants, Contracts, Charter party or other Specialty or Forfeiture of any
Estate granted upon condition, executed by Deed of Mortgage or Bargain and Sale
with defeazance, shall be found by Verdict of Jury, or by default or confession
of the Obligor, Mortgager or Vender, are hereby Empowered and Authorized to
moderate the Rigor of the Law. And on consideration of such Cases according to
equity and good Conscience to Chancer such Forfeiture, and to enter up
Judgment, for the just Debt and Damages, and to award Execution accordingly,
only in real Actions upon Mortgage, and Bargain and Sale, with defeazance, the
Judgment to be conditional, that the Mortgager or Vender, and his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators do pay unto the Plaintiff such Sum as the Court
does determine, Justices of the Courts to be Sworn before the Governor or
Commander in Chief, or such as he shall appoint
to be justly due thereupon within two months time after Judgment entered up,
for discharging of such Mortgage or Sale, and that the Plaintiff recover
possession of the Estate Sued for, and Execution to be awarded for the same;
and the Justices of the said several Courts as well Superior as Inferior
respectively, shall take the Oath following, to be Administre^ to each of them
by the Governor, or in his absence by the Commander in Chief for the time
being, or such as shall be by him thereto appointed. That is to say, Oath.
YOU Swear, That well and truly you shall Serve our Sovereign Lord the KING and
His People in the Office of a Justice of the (...) Court of (...) And that you
will do equal Law and Execution of Right to all people, poor and rich, after
the Law's in force within this Province, and Usage within the same, and in such
cases, as the Law does specially provide to be relieved in equity, there to
proceed according to equity and good Conscience, without having regard to any
person whatsoever. So help you God.



Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Duties of Excise etc.
An Act for continuing several Rates and Duties of Custom, Excise, Impost and
Powder Money on Tonnage of Shipping.
WHEREAS in and by one Act of General Assembly of this Province made and past
in the Fourth Year of the Reign of KING William and Queen Mary, Entitled, An
Act for defraying the Public Charge of the Province, there was given and
granted unto Their said Majesty's several Duties of Impost, Excise and Tonnage
of Shipping in the said Act particularly enumerated and set down; Which said
Duties have been and are continued by Acts since made, until the fifth day of
November next ensuing, at which time they will expire, unless revived by an Act
of this Assembly.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Earl of Bellomont Governor,
Council and Representatives Convened in General Assembly; And it is hereby
Enacted and Ordained up the Authority of the same, That from and after the
fifth day of November next ensuing, the several Rates and Duties set upon all
Wines, Liquors and Merchandises that shall be Imported into this Province, and
all Duties of Tonnage and Excise in and by the said former Act of Impost and
Excise, Custom and Tonnage Money, be, and are hereby continued to be paid as in
and by the said Act is directed for and during the space and time of one year:
That is to say, until the fifth day of November, which will be in the Year of
our Lord, One Thousand and Seven Hundred. And the Money arising thereby to be
applied toward the Support of this His Majesty's Government.

FINIS.

