The Divine Goodness a Pattern to All.

A SERMON PREACHED At the Assizes held at Chester, Sept. 16. 1689.

By HENRY NEWCOME, M. A. Rector of Tatten-hall, in the County Palatine of
Chester.

IMPRIMATUR,

October. 22. 1689.

Z. Isham. R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris.

LONDON; Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1689.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, NICOLAS, Lord Bishop of CHESTER.
My LORD;
BEing commanded by my Lords the Judges, the High Sheriff, and the most
Honorable of the Auditory, to which this Sermon was preached, to publish it; I
was induced in deference to their better Judgments to hope, that what such
approved of from the Pulpit, might do some good from the Press. The Design was
sincere, according to my mean Capacity, to recommend to those that heard me
their Duties, suitable to the occasion, and to discourage that Immorality,
which has in this last Age been the Disgrace of our Gentry, and the Bane of
this Nation. I presume to prefix your Lordship's Name to it, not only because I
am assured you will readily lend me the Authority thereof, for promoting so
good a Design, but also that I may lay hold on this first opportunity, to make
a public Acknowledgment of your extraordinary Favor and Bounty in preferring
me to that Station, which I now enjoy in the Church. That this plain Discourse
may be some way serviceable for the promoting of Justice, Charity and Sobriety,
for which end it was first preached, and is now published; That your Lordship
may long live among us, to second that great Example recommended in it, by your
own, and that God will at length reward in Heaven your Kindness and Bounty to
me here, is the hearty Prayer of,

Your Lordship's most obliged and obedient Servant, HENRY NEWCOME.

1 PET. iii. 13. And who is he that will harm you, if ye he followers of that
which is good?


It Is every Man's Enquiry, Psalm. 4.6.
Who will show us any Good? But that will be in vain till they have found where
to be safe from Harm. Nature, which teaches us to love our selves, obliges us
to endeavor our own Preservation, as necessary to our Happiness. For Safety is
the first part of Felicity, and that is best consulted by Religion. The Altar
of God is a sure place of Refuge; 2 Cor. 6.7.
and the Armor of Righteousness the best Defense. For, Who is he that will
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good?

Which words contain two Parts; a Duty, and a Privilege annexed to the
Performance of it. The Duty is, to be followers of that which is good. The
Privilege, or Advantage of such, Who is he that will harm you? i. e. None will,
none can harm such an one.

I shall first explain the Duty; and then consider the Privilege annexed as a
Motive to it.

I. First for the Duty. To follow, has relation either to an End or a Pattern,
and still denotes either to pursue a Design, or transcribe an Example. Here the
Greek word (...), which signifies Imitators, evidently confines it to the
latter Notion. The only difficulty to the explained is, what is to be
understood by that which is good, which is here proposed as the Pattern or
Example, which we are to follow, or imitate. Now (...), The Good, not only in
the Writings of Plato, Trismegistus, and other Heathen Philosophers, but also
in Sacred Writ too, is used to signify God Himself: As when our Savior says,
There is none good but one, Mat. 19.17.
that is God; he seems to appropriate to God this Title of The Good. And if we
consider the Verse before my Text, we find that it is the Lord, whose Eyes are
over the Righteous, and whose Face is against them that do Evil, whom the
Apostle recommends under the Notion of the Good, to our Imitation. Be ye
followers of the Good, is the Duty in the Text, which is the same with what St.
Paul recommends to the Ephesians, to be followers of God as dear Children. Cap.
5.1.
Only by styling God the Good here, St. Peter seems to restrain that general
Precept of imitating God to that Divine Perfection, which is the most proper
Object of our Imitation, his Goodness. Plutarch derides the Ambition of some
Princes, that affecting the Power of the Deity, would be painted with Thunder,
(...). Mor. p. 780.
or a Trident; showing their Folly (says he) in desiring to be like God in
what they could not attain, whilst they despised what is most Divine in the
Deity, and what he is most willing they should share with him in, his Justice,
Meekness, Lenity and Bounty; that is, in the Apostle's Language, his Goodness.
Adam aspiring to be like God in Knowledge, and Lucifer in Majesty, that was cast
out of Paradise, and this out of Heaven: But for Angels or Men to covet to be
like God in Goodness, never will be a Transgression; Nay, it is our Duty, it is
the chief End of our pure Religion, and will be our Perfection to imitate God
in this, which is his Glory, Exodus 33 18, 19.
the very best and most imitable of his Perfections.

To be Followers of this, whether in a public or private Capacity; whether in
the Offices of Magistracy, or common Neighborhood, would constitute a good
Christian.

First; Magistrates cannot have a better Example, than his Goodness, who
governs the World, to transcribe in the Exercise of their Authority. And that
both in respect of his watchful Providence, and his untainted Justice.

1. For the first. It was a gross and low Conceit, which Epicurus framed to
himself of the Divine Nature, when he apprehended the Care of his Creatures too
cumbersom an Employment for him, or that it was inconsistent with his Happiness
to provide for theirs. Since the best Natures are most communicative, and
equally happy in dispensing, as enjoying, their own Goodness. And to suppose
God otherwise, were to deny him to be the best of Beings, that is, to be God.
What therefore was the Commendation of the Roman General, that he took care not
only to provide Pay for his Captains, but even Litter too for the meanest Beast
that served his Camp, is much more true of the Lord of Hosts, whose Care and
Bounty is exerted toward the meanest as well as the noblest of his Creatures.

And when the Scripture styles Magistrates Gods, Psalm. 82.6.
it intends they should imitate God's Providence, as well as share in his
Authority; and be as ready to undergo the Toil, as enjoy the Honor of
governing Antigonus styled the Royal State a great Slavery; and nothing can
reconcile a good Magistrate to the Drugery of his Office, but the Conscience of
the great Good he does thereby to others. Every Crown and Ensign of Authority
has its Thorns, which he bears (as the Savior of the World did his) for the
good of Mankind, which in a lower Capacity he designs and endeavors to promote
thereby. But as in his Care, so also,

2. In the distribution of Justice, a good Magistrate makes the Divine Goodness
his Example. It was for this, says Plutarch, Moa^l. p. 781.
that the Heathens represented Justice to be always with Jupiter; not as
Anaxarchus glossed, to flatter Alexander after the Murder of his Friend Clitus,
as if whatever a King did, were to be accounted just, but because Jove himself
cannot rule the World longer than Justice is his Assessor.

1. Consider then, that God sits not in Heaven an unconcerned Spectator, but a
compassionate Helper of the Oppressed; He has his Ears always open to their
Cries, and hears nothing so soon as the Groans of Injured Innocence: When such
cry, Exodus 22. v 3. with zer. 27.
he says, he will surely hear them, and for this reason, because he is
gracious.

This Goodness are the Earthly Gods to transcribe, as remembering that they were
ordained (to use the words of judicious Bishop Sanderson) not so much for their
own sakes, Sermon. 1st ad Magis. p. 86.. 10
that they might have over whom to bear rule and to domineer at pleasure; as
for the Peoples sakes, that the People might have to whom to resort, and upon
whom to depend for Help and Succor, and Relief in their Necessities: And that
it is not a Power to hurt, but a Power to help, that makes them like the Deity.
From whom they may learn not only Compassion toward the Innocent, but also

2. Patience toward the Guilty. It was not the least witty of Momus's Censure,
when he found fault, that the Salvage Bull had his Eyes under, rather than
above his Horns. Sure I am, all Power ought to be governed by Reason; and that
is so, which takes its measures from God. Genesis 18.21.
He went down to see whether the Sin of Sodom were as heinous, as the Cry of it
was loud: Not that he needed Information, but that Magistrates by his Example
might be induced with Diligence and Patience to hear, examine, and enquire into
the Truth of things, whether judicial or criminal, before they pass Sentence.
And,

3. Lastly, that they swerve not from their Rule, they must not be influenced
by the fear or favor of Men, to part with Justice, Conscience, or true Honor.
They must not let Gold turn the Scales in Judgment, nor preponderate the Reason
and Merits of the Cause: But so impartially and with that noble Resolution
perfrom their Duty, as to discourage all Attempts to pervert them. They must
not fear Vice, when most bold or best befriended, but dare to punish the
greatest as well as the meanest Crimial that is brought before them: For this
is to be like God, who has often declared, that he is no Respecter of Persons,
but will judge all Men according to their Works. Greatness cannot awe him, nor
can Misery melt him: The rich Man's Purse, the poor Man's Tears cannot bribe
him. Omnipotence cannot be frighted, nor Allsufficiency corrupted. God loves
none so as to injure any other for their sakes; nor does he hate any so, as to
sacrifice his Justice to Revenge. Psalm. 97.2.
Clouds and Darkness are round about him; ie. there may sometimes be obscurity
in the Divine Dispensations, through which Men may not so clearly discern the
Equity of his Proceedings; yet Righteousness and Judgment are always the
Habitation of his Throne. Prove. 25.5.
As the King's Throne on Earth, so God's in Heaven, is established in
Righteousness.

And in this Mirror of the Divine Goodness Magistrates may discern their
Duties; good ones may see themselves in it, what they are, and others what they
should be. But lest the Mirror should have contracted any flaw by my rougher
handling of it, I shall conclude with the words of King Jehoshaphat to his
Judges, wherein you have the Parallel more exactly drawn. Take heed what ye do;
for ye judge not for Man, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7.
but for the Lord, who is with you in Judgment. Wherefore now let the Fear of
the Lord he upon you, take heed and do it: for there is no Iniquity with the
Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts. I proceed,

Secondly, To recommend this Example of the Divine Goodness to others in a more
private Capacity, as an excellent Rule of their Duties, especially in these
four branches of it, viz. Justice, Bounty, Mercy, and Purity.

1. Justice. God in all his Dispensations and Actings is so just, that no Man
was ever wronged by him. He appeals in this respect to all the World by the
Prophet; Ezekiel. 18.25
Are not my ways equal? For they must needs be so, since there is not in him
any of that Ignorance, or those blind Affections (such as Fear, Rage,
Covetousness, or the like) which commonly lead Men into unjust Designs. Be ye
then righteous, as God is Righteous. 1 John 3.7.
Let not Greatness please it self in bearing down the Rights of Inferiors,
there is no Example of any such thing in God. Let not rich Men attempt to
corrupt Justice by Bribery, or undermine it by hired Perjuries: Let no Advocate
be found (to use the words of a late Reverend Writer) of so degenerous a Mind,
or so mercinary a Tongue, as to plead any Cause to obtain the Ends of Avarice
or Ambition; as if, with the Italian Lawyer, he thought himself only the
Advocate of his Client, and not of Justice. Let no Witnesses, to gratify a
Friend, to curry Favor with a Superior, or to be revenged of an Enemy,
enlarge their Evidence beyond the measures of Truth. Let not Jurors, through
heedlesness or prejudice, give away any righteous Cause by an unrighteous
Verdict. In a word, let every one now to be concerned in the Administration of
Justice, remember what the Apostle affirms, That God is righteous, and he only
who does Righteousness is born of him. 1 John 2.29.
Nothing, says Plato, is more like God than a just Man, and such an one only
is entitled to the Privileges of his Children. Unjust Men rather follow the
Wickedness of the infernal Fiends, who do what Mischief and Wrong they can to
the whole Creation, than the Goodness of God, who does Right to all Men, even
to the Devil, and bad Men themselves. But as the Justice, so

2. The Bounty of God, is another branch of his Goodness to be transcribed by
us. When God declares himself abundant in Goodness, Exodus 34.6.(...)
he expresses it by an Hebrew word, which most frequently denotes Bounty: And
as He himself is infinite; so his Bounty is (I had almost said) somewhat more,
extending, besides himself, to every one of his Creatures. For what was the
Creation, but a wonderful Emanation of the Divine Goodness? What is his
Providence, but his daily Beneficience in maintaining and providing for all the
Creatures he has made? And not to mention his Care of inferior Beings, how
innumerable are the Benefits that Man derives daily from his Goodness? Man,
whom he has advanced above the rest of his visible Creatures, as in the
dignity of his Nature, so also in the multitude of his Favors. For does not
Time continually travel in the production of new Blessings on us, every Season
entertaining us with its peculiar Conveniences? Is not every Creature given us
to serve our Necessities for Food and Raiment, nay and to minister to our
moderate and sober Pleasures too? But not to stay on smaller Largesses, has
not the same Bounty given us his eternal Son to be born, to obey, to suffer and
to die, in purchasing Heaven for us? Has he not sent his holy Spirit to assist
us, and given us his holy Gospel, and, by a late Miracle of Mercy to this
Nation, confirmed us in the possession of it, to direct us in the way thither?
Is he not ready to give us all things we need, all things that are fit for us,
and that for asking? Yea, and does he not frequently by his Bounty preventour
Petitions, as well as exceed our deservings? God's Bounty is a Fountain always
running over, and yet never exhausted.

And need I now to say, Who is a follower of this Goodness? Not sure the
Envious Man, who is so far from giving to others, that he grudges them the
Gifts of Heaven. Not the Covetous Man, who is so far from being bountious to
others, that he is not so to himself, but for fear of dying a Beggar, lives
like one. Not those selfish narrow Souls, that can influence no wider than the
Bodies they inform; confining their Love and Care to their own Carcases; and
like the fat Monk, who, at the dissolution of the Abb^es, had got a Pension for
his own Life; not at all concerned for the Necessities of others, so they can
save their own Stakes. But least of all, those morose Malicious Men, who love
Mischief, delight in harrasing and ruining their Neighbors; and like the
Hedg-hog (as one compares him) wrapping themselves in their own soft Down, turn
their sharp Prickles to all the World besides. No, he only transcribes the
Divine Bounty who is ready to distribute, 1 Timothy 6.18.
willing to communicate; Who, like the Sun, liberally scatters about him that
Light wherewith he abounds, and withholds his warm Influences from none of his
Inferiors, that wants them. Who (as Epist. ad Diog^. Edit. 1593. p. 387. (...).
Justin Martyr pursues the Character) takes part of his Neighbors Burden,
gladly communicates to them any good thing, wherein they are deficient, and by
bestowing on them that want, the abundance God has given him, becomes a God to
them that receive it. He (as (...).
Antonius in Jul. Caesar's answers Silenus) who needs the least himself, and
gives the most to others, best resembles the Infinite Good, who needs nothing,
and gives all things.

Let this then be considered by you, whom God has enriched with plentiful
Estates, and so qualified, that you may be great Blessings to your Country and
to your Inferiors. Look up to Heaven and remember, that you are not Great as
God is, unless you be Good too; unless you lay out your selves in Works of
Beneficence for the Service of the Public, and the relief of the distressed;
unless as you have more than others, ye do more Good with it; nay, unless ye
can not only give to them that need your Bounty, but forgive them also that
need your Mercy. Which leads us to the next branch of the Divine Goodness,
which we are to imitate.

3. His long-suffering and Mercy toward them that provoke him. That God is
patient and merciful, not easily provoked, nor inexorable when he is provoked,
is as evident as that we survive the Sins we have committed, and live still in
hopes of pardon after all our Provocations. Our own Experience assures us, that
he is not wont to send down Fire from Heaven upon the kindling of every Lust
below. That he does not command the Earth to swallow up every bold Offender, as
soon as he has made himself unworthy to tread on it: That he is not always
moved at the first Affront, but is still as slow to Wrath, as we are forward to
provoke, and no less backward to punish, than we are to reform. For do not all
of us breath by the benefit of his Forbearance? Had not the very best of us
been dead, in the Grave, in Hell long since, had not he made known his Power,
Romans 9.22.
by enduring with much long-suffering us Vessels of Wrath, so fitted for
Destruction.

But to forbear with Sinners is not all the Goodness that God shows toward
them; for he is always ready to forgive them, and his Mercy is no less
conspicuous than his Patience. How importunately does he invite all Prodigals
to return? and how ready is he to entertain and embrace them when they do? How
loath is he that any of us should die in our Sins? and how forward to give us
Life, if we forsake them? And in the mean time, even whilst we persist in our
Rebellion, how constant is he in his Care of us, and Bounty to us.

And need I now to say, who are the followers of this Goodness? Not sure the
froward and passionate, the cruel and revengeful Man, who never forbears with
any that provoke him longer than till he have an opportunity of Revenge, and is
never at rest till that be found out: Not those tumultuous Spirits that never
can be quiet, till they have signalized their Resentments by the ruin of their
Adversaries, and through the unruliness of their Passions, are miserable
themselves, till they have made their Enemies so. No; such impetuous Souls
derive their Heat from Hell, not from the calm Influences of Heaven, Rev. 12.12.
and imitate the great Wrath of that wicked one, whose Malice designs the
destruction of Mankind; not the Goodness of God, Isa. 30.18.
who always waits to be gracious, even toward the most provoking Offenders. If
you will transcribe this Copy, you must be slow to Wrath, Jam. 1.11.
and merciful as your Heavenly Father is; and that is not only to the good, but
also to the unthankful and evil: Luke 6.36.
You must be so just toward others, as not to need Pardon from them; and so
merciful, as never to deny Pardon to any that need it from you. You must
resolve to practice no other sort of Revenge on your Enemies, than by your
kindness to heap Coals of Fire on their Heads; Romans 12.20, 21.
and according to the method of Divine Goodness in leading Sinners to
Repentance, Romans 2.4.
take this only course to make them repent the Injuries they have done you, by
overcoming Evil with Good.

And now you have a fair opportunity to show this Christian, this Divine
Temper. Whatever Injuries may have formerly been done to any of you, now that
you have it in your Power to be revenged, let the World see you have forgiven
them: That the Christian has so much the advantage of the Man, and of the
Gentleman too, (according to the common standard of Gentility) that you can
exult as much in such an occasion of expressing your Meekness, as any others
may have done formerly in signalizing their more passionate Resentments: That
you prefer the glorious Triumphs of Christian Patience, and the Peace of your
Country and the whole Nation, that may be secured thereby, above the little
Satisfaction of some angry Retaliations: And had rather make others ashamed of
their Heats, by setting before them the instance of your calm and sedate
Temper, than seem to justify what they have done, by doing any thing like an
imitation of it.

It only remains that I recommend the Divine Goodness to your Imitation,

4. In respect of his Purity. That God is a Being infinitely pure and holy, and
that all Immorality is as contrary to his Nature as his Laws, can be doubted by
none that believe him to be a most perfect Being. Some few are so debauched in
their Principles, as not to acknowledge Virtue a Perfection, and Vice an
Imperfection. God's Moral Laws then, whereby he obliges us to Purity, are not
the bare result of his Will, but of his Nature; and all Immorality and
Debauchery is odious to him, not barely because he cannot abide to be
disobeyed, but because it is contrary to that eternal Reason, which is founded
on the Purity of his Nature. Heathen Poets indeed represented the
Transformations of their Deities, and the abominable Extravagancies then
committed by them. Yet so far were their wisest Men from imagining any such
things consistent with the Divine Nature, that Plutarch tell us, De 'E^ apud
Delphos, p. 393. E.
they accounted it an unholy thing to report them, or even to hear them.

If then you will follow God's Goodness, you must, according to the Apostle's
Exhortation, purify your selves, as God is pure. 1 John 3.3.


And I hope it will not be judged impertinent for me (now that I am called to
speak to this Honorable Auditory) to become the Advocate of contemned
Morality, and to recommend Purity and Sobriety to you Great Ones; whose Example
would as effectually teach it your Inferiors, as it is too evident it has
already done the contrary. Who sees not that the Profaneness and Debauchery,
that every Clown is now so expert in, had its Original from the Honorable and
Worshipful? Retainers have imitated their Patrons, Servants their Masters, and
Tenants their Landlords, transcribing into their own Practice the Profaneness,
Drunkenness and Whoredoms, which they observed to be not practiced only, but
even applauded among them. And so far has this prevailed, that it has been
accounted (I need not to say) almost a Scandal for a Gentleman to be sober; So
that he that durst not Swear, or Drink, or Whore; that had not some, or all of
these Gentile Qualities, was accounted a mean ill-bred Fellow, and of no other
use than to be redicul'd by the rest of the Company. It has been condemned as
ill Manners to pretend to, and practice better Morality than the rest; and
some, resolved to be virtuous, have thought it their safest Course to avoid
such public Appearances of the Gentrey, because they judged it hard to be
virtuous among them.

Thus it has been: Is it now otherwise? There has been a great and happy
Revolution in the Times; Is there any such Change in our Manners? The Gentry
have to their Honor showed an extraordinary Zeal for their Religion, hazarding
their Estates and Lives for its Preservation: And may it not now be reasonably
expected, that they should practice, which is the only way of enjoying what
they have purchased? There is nothing doubtless more base and below a Gentleman
in the whole Catalogue of Vices, than Hypocrisy and Dissimulation: And there
cannot be a more base Hypocrisy, than for those to pretend Zeal for any
Religion, who have, who will have no Religion at all; than for them to contend
with so much heat for our Faith and our Laws, who are resolved their Lives
shall be a continued Villation of and Affront to both. Show then the sincerity
of your Profession by your practice. Let the World see, that you love your holy
Religion, by living it; and that you are truly Zealous for the best of
Churches, by leading Lives, such as may be for her Honor. Let Swearing be left
out of your common Conversation, where, to say the least, it is Impertinent,
and altogether Insignificant, unless it be of the Speaker's Profaneness: and
reserve it for Courts of Judicature, where, with Truth, Jer. 4.2.
Judgment and Righteousness, it may be useful. Let Drunkenness be banished from
your Society, and the vile fashion of provoking it, by urging Healths, now at
length Sacrified to the Honor of Sobriety. Let unchaste Embraces be Strangers
to your beds, and Whoredom and Adultery, as much hated by you, as it is sure to
be severely judged by God. Heb. 13.4.
That as the Gentry are wont to leave Fashions, as soon as the Commonality take
them up, you would now leave these and such like Vices, which they have learnt
from you, and by your eminent Sobriety help to retrieve them too.

How else should you expect, that the pure and holy God should continue his
Protection, or appear any longer as your Deliverer? How else should it be
thought, that what you have done, has been out of Zeal for Religion, and not
rather Interest under that Disguise; if, after your Point is gained, Religion
be cashiered, and when your Interests are served, your Vices are retained? But
I hope better Things of you, tho I thus speak; that your Piety, Justice,
Bounty, Mercy and Sobriety will give us a sure Prospect of good Times: That
thereby you will make God your sure Friend, and then the worst of Men that are,
or shall be against you, shall not be able to harm such Followers of that which
is Good. Which brings me at length to the second Part of my Text.

II. The Privilege of such as follow the Divine Goodness. None will, none can
harm such an one.

1. This Interrogation supposes an Improbability at the least that any should
desire their Harm. There is such an attractive Beauty in this Image of the
Divine Goodness, as will effectually recommend the Owners of it to the esteem
and love of all Mankind. For a good Man (the Apostle says) one would even dare
to die. Romans 5.7.
A Man of this Character is so useful a part of this World, and obliges so
many, that he must needs have the fewest Enemies, and the most, and the best
Friends. Friends that would run the greatest Hazards, perhaps venture their own
Lives for the preservation of his: Who so savage and brutish as to be Enemies
of those that are public Blessings to Mankind? They are snarling Curs indeed,
that bark at those great Luminaries, which by their Sovereign Influences
cherish all inferior Beings. However, if such have any Enemies, the warm
Influences of their Kindnesses are likely to melt them into a more soft and
gentle Temper; or at least the irresistible energy of God's Providence will,
who has promised, (...) 1^ 7.
that when a Man's ways please him (as he cannot but be pleased with such a
lively Image of himself) he makes even his Enemies to be at Peace with him.

But it is possible there may be some so monstrously bad, and advanced so far
toward the Nature of the Devil, as to hate them most that are most like to God,
and for that reason most unlike themselves; and to breath Destruction against
all, whose Perfections upbraid and expose their Vices. However, these followers
of God's Goodness may defy their impotent Malice. For,

2. Let such do their worst they cannot harm them. The Interrogative here, as
frequently in the Scriptures, more vehemently denies. (...); who shall ( i. e.
none shall) be able to harm you? Which will appear from the Consideration of
these three Particulars.

1. That no external Evils that the Malice of Men can bring on them, can
rufflle the inward Peace and Serenity of their Consciences. Naturalists take
notice of the Sagacity of the Hedghog, whom Nature has taught to retreat
within herself, and take Sanctuary under her own Prickles against the Violence
of stronger Beasts. In Allusion to which the Royal Stoic Antoninus counsels
his virtuous Man, for Security against external Evils, (...), lib. 7. (...),.
28.
to contract himself within himself, to retreat into his own Breast, and take
Sanctuary against external Violences under the Protection of his own Innocence.
A merry Heart, says Solomon, or rather (...) Prove. 15.15.
a good Heart, is a continual Feast. A Feast that cannot, like Caligula's, be
disturbed by a flash of Lightning, or clap of Thunder; a Feast, whose Viands
cannot be snatched from thy Mouth, nor thou defeated of the Entertainment by
the most potent Malice. Let Oppression rob thee of thy Estate; Let Calumny
blacken thy Reputation: Let hard and cruel Usage impair thy Health; yet none of
them can rob thee of thy Innocence, or that inward Peace that results from the
Conscience of it. When Storms roar abroad, there will be a Calm within, and the
soft Whispers of a good Conscience, those Eccoes of Heaven's approbation, will
charm thee not only into Peace, but but Exultation and Rejoicing, even when the
World breaths out nothing but Threatening and Destuction. The followers of God's
Goodness are hereby assured, that God is with them, and that makes them not to
fear what Men are, or what they act against them. And the less,

2. Because what is done against them, God will help them to become better for
it. De Provid. c. 4.
Seneca compares his wise, virtuous Man, to Phidias, that famous Statuary, who
could show his Skill not only in Ivory, Brass or Marble, but (when those were
wanting) in baser Materials, by carving on any Matter the best Work it was
capable of. For as a good Man can exercise his Virtues in the midst of
abundance, so (when stripped of that) in Poverty. He can be virtuous at home,
and (if driven thence) in Banishment: Like the Fire, which turns all sorts of
Fuel into its own Nature, and increases its Heat and Brightness by those
Heaps, that seem to threaten the smoothering of both. Or like the Rod of
Mercury (as Epictetus compares him) he turns every thing he touches into Gold.
L. 3. c. 10.
Whatever his Condition is, he makes it best for him by doing his Duty, and
exercising suitable Virtues in it. And this not barely by his own Strength, but
by the gracious Assistances of God, who has promised to make all things to
work together for his good. Romans 8.28.
And who can harm him, who is sure to be better for all the Harm his Enemies do
him? whose inward Peace cannot be discomposed, whose Virtues will be improved
by all the Attempts of their Malice against him? Especially considering,

3. Lastly, That his eternal Felicity will be increased by all his temporal
Sufferings. Epict. Ench. c. 79. etc Simpl. in loc. p. 296.
He may defy his Enemies Malice, as Socrates did Anytus and Melitus; Ye may
kill me, but yet cannot hurt me. Their Malice may thrust him out of this World;
but as it cannot keep him out of Heaven, so it will occasion the increase of
his Glories there. For as there are degrees of Happiness in Heaven, ( one Star
there differs from another in Glory) so they that suffer for well-doing, 1 Co.
15.41.
shall share in the highest of them. 2 Cor. 4.17.
Their light Afflictions will work for them a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory. Far exceeding not only the Merit of their Sufferings, but also
the Glories of all those that have suffered less than they. Lazarus, who lived
a good Man in the most mean and necessitous State here, Luke 16.23. Vid. Ham.
on Mat. 8.11.
we find in the most honorable place, next the Master of the Feast, in
Abraham's Bosom at the Supper of the Lamb. He that does and suffers most for
God, is sure to receive most from him; so that the Malice of his Enemies
designing his Misery will inhaunce his Happiness, and add to his future
Recompense whatever they take away from his present Enjoyments. Anaxagoras (as
Plutarch relates) being unjustly deprived of his Estate, and thereby
constrained to travel into Foreign Parts, met with such Advantages for the
improvement of his Intellectuals, that upon his return home, passing by the
Lands which had formerly been his, he said, I had never been happy, if I had
not lost you. Such pleasant Reflections will good Men in their Mansions of
Glory make on their Worldly Losses and Sufferings. I had never arrived at this
height of Happiness, had I wantted Enemies to endeavor my Misery. I had never
attained to such an exceeding weight of Glory, had I been pressed by a less
weight of Afflictions. I had never enjoyed so much of the Love and Goodness of
God, had I tasted the less of the Malice and Cruelty of Men. Thanks therefore
to those Enemies that designing my Harm, advanced my Felicity, and by their
malicious Charity, helped me to obtain a brighter Crown, in enduring the
Sufferings which they inflicted: Or rather Hallalujah's to my good God, who
has turned their Malice to my advantage; and by those that pursued me with a
purpose to destroy me, has driven me further into Heaven for Sanctuary.

This is the Privilege of those that imitate the Goodness of God, either none
shall be willing, or none shall be able to harm them, because they cannot rob
them of their inward Peace, and their external Injuries will make them better
here, and more happy hereafter.

I shall only add, that as they are safe from Men's Malice, so they are also
from God's Wrath.

A time will come, however the World seems to forget it, when all the Pageantry
of this Life will be gone by, 1 Cor. 7.23.
and the more dreadful Solemnities of the last Judgment succeed them; when the
Realities of the present Scene will be transacted, and the great Assizes of the
World approach, whereof we have before us a fainter Emblem. A time will come,
when the shrill Eccho's of the last Trump shall pierce not the Air only; but
the Earth too, and awaken all Mankind out of their deep Sleep of Death to their
final Trial; when the Shouts of Angels rending the Skies, shall usher, and
Flames of a burning World shall light the Judge of it to his Tribunal. A time
will come, when before that tremendous Judge, and the August Assembly of Angels
and Men, every one shall be impleaded, have all his secret Crimes displaid, and
from that Righteous Judge receive a Sentence according to his Works.

And whose followers then will you desire to be found? Who then will fare
better, than they that have the Image of God's Goodness imprinted on them? Who
then can expect a favorable Judge and a merciful Sentence, but they that,
having done Good in their public or private Capacities, have neither the Cries
of the Injured, nor the Clamors of their own Conscience to appale them? It Is
not Greatness then, but only Goodness that will avail you. It Is not numerous
Titles; high Honors, great Authority, no nor great Estates that can then stand
you in stead, unless you have thereby promoted Justice, protected Innocence,
and set a good Example of Sobriety and Charity. Then every one must stand
naked, whatever their external Ornaments here have been, except those only that
are clothed in Robes of Righteousness. Isa. 61.10.
Then none will be found to have an Interest in Christ's Merits, but they only
that have transcribed God's Goodness. And they then being safe from Harm,
secure of Blessedness, shall be advanced to that glorious Immortality, where
they shall be for ever satisfied with God's Likeness. Psalm. 17.15.
To which God of his infinite Mercies, bring us all, through the Merits of our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

