Here on this Figure Cast a Glance,
But so as if it were by Chance,
Your eyes not fixed, they must not stay,
Since this like Shadows to the Day
It only represent's; for Still,
Her Beuty's found beyond the Skill
Of the best Paynter, to Embrace,
Those lovely Lines within her face,
View her Soul's Picture, Judgment, wit,
Then read those Lines which She has writ,
By Phancy's Pencill drawn alone
Which Piece but She, Can justly own.



NATURES PICTURE Drawn by FANCIES PENCIL To the Life.

Being several Feigned Stories, Comical, Tragical, Tragi-comical, Poetical,
Romancical, Philosophical, Historical, and Moral: Some in Verse, some in Prose;
some Mixed, and some by Dialogues.

Written by the Thrice Noble, Illustrious, and most Excellent Princess, THE
DUCHESS of NEWCASTLE.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, in the Year 1671.

THE DUKE of NEW CASTLE UPON ALL THE WORKS OF HIS DUCHESS.
YOU, Various Readers, various Judgments give;
And think, Books are condemned, or ought to live,
According to your Censures, bad or good,
Before you read them, or they are understood:
Laying Aspersions with a jeering brand.
But read these first; and, if you understand
What Is to be liked, you will like what here is writ;
Else you will forfeit your Judgment and Wit.
For your own sakes, dislike not these Books then,
Have mercy on your selves, you censuring Men:
For when you're dead, with all your envious looks,
These Writings will outlive all other Books.
O, but a Woman writes them! She does strive
TO entrench too much on Man's Prerogative.
Then that is the Crime, that her Fame pulls yours down.
If you be Scholars, she is too of the Gown;
Therefore be civil to her: think it fit
She should not be condemned cause she is a Wit.
If you be Soldiers, Ladies you will defend,
And your sheathed Arguments, when drawn, will end
The small Male-Gossipings. But, Gallants, pray
Be not ye Factious, though your Mistress say,
The Books are naught; but do you talk with those,
Of Ribbans, Point de Gen's, and curious Clothes,
Their better reading; and let Books alone:
But these I will compare to every one
That here does follow. Nay, old Homer writ
Not clearer Fancies, nor with clearer Wit:
And that Philosophy she does dispense,
Is beyond Aristotle's hard Nonsense.
Her Observations of Diseases new,
Hippocrates the Grecian never knew.
As Eloquent she is as Cicero,
And sweeter Flowers of Rhet'rick here do grow.
Her lofty high Descriptions do shame still
The swelled Lines of the Imitator Virgil.
As good Odes too as Horace: nay, I can
Compate her Dialogues to rare Lucian.
Lucan, the Battle of thy Civil-War
Is lost; this Lady does exceed thee far.
More Fame, by Morals, she, than Plutarch, gains.
As useful Fables she, as AEsop, feigns.
And as good Language as e're Terence writ.
Thy Comedies, poor Plautus, have less wit.
Her rare Epistles all Epistles sully,
Even the too-familiar of vain Tully.
And as wise Sentences she still does say,
As Marcus Aurelius, or Seneca.
Verses as smooth and sweet as Ovid writ:
And may compare with sweet Tibullus Wit.
What takes the Soul more than a gentle vain,
That charms the charming Orpheus with its strain?
If all these Wits were praised for several ways,
What deserves this that has them all? what praise?
THE PREFACE.
THE Design of these my Feigned Stories, is, To present Virtue to your view,
the Muses leading her, and the Graces attending on her: To defend Innocence,
help the Distressed, lament the Unfortunate, and show that Vice is seldom
crowned with good success.

I have described in this Work many sorts of Passions, Humors, Behaviors,
Actions, Accidents, Governments, Laws, Customs, Peace, Wars, Climates, Arts
and Sciences; but have not Painted them all alike, some being done with
Oily-colours of Poetry, others with Watercolors of Prose: some upon dark
Grounds of Tragedy, and others upon light Grounds of Comedy. Nor are those
Descriptions so lively expressed by my Pen, as Sir Anthony Vandike's Pictures by
his Pencil, being rather formed by Fancy, than copied from the true Originals
of immediate Action; for I have not read much of History to inform my self of
what was done in former times, where I might unhappily have found, to my grief,
that some of my Sex have outdone all the glory I can aim at, or hope to attain
to.

That my ambition of extraordinary Fame, is restless, and not ordinary, I
cannot deny: and since all Heroic Actions, Public Employments, as well Civil
as Military, and Eloquent Pleadings, are denied my Sex in this Age, I may be
excused for writing so much; for that is the Reason I have run, more busily
than industriously, upon every Subject I can think of.

Though some of these Stories be Romancical, I would not be thought to delight
in Romances, having never read a whole one in my life; and if I did believe
that these Tales should neither benefit the Life, nor please the Mind, more
than what I have read in them, did either instruct or satisfy me; or that they
could create Amorous thoughts in idle brains, as Romances do, I would never
suffer them to be printed, and would make Blots instead of Letters. But
Partiality persuades me otherwise; and I hope, that this Work will rather
quench Passion, than inflame it; will beget chaste Thoughts, nourish the love of
Virtue, kindle Human Pity, warm Charity, increase Civility, strengthen fainting
Patience, encourage noble Industry, crown Merit, and instruct Life: will damn
Vices, kill Follies, prevent Errors, forewarn Youth, and arm the Mind against
Misfortunes; and in a word, will admonish, direct, and persuade to that which
is best in all kinds, wherein I have my wishes and reward.

I have not dressed these Discourses with constraint fashions, which are hard
words, set-phrases, and bombast Sentences: but though it be done carelessly, yet
not loosly; and when I use any foreign words, do not, I beseech you, attribute
it to affectation, or to the vanity of being thought skilful in those Languages
from whence they are taken: for I have never learned any, besides my
Mother Tongue, which is (at this time) extremely enriched with the wise and
lawful Plunder of others; and is like Mithridate and Cordial-waters, which are
much the better for being compounded of the choicest Ingredients.

For Method, I do neither understand perfectly what it is; nor, if I should,
have I the patience to be tied to its exact Rules, which in my opinion fetters
Nature more often than it helps it by its pretended Order. And therefore do not
expect in this Book any artificial Contrivances, and be contented to find my
Expressions clear, natural, and very intelligible, without the least Art in the
World.

If I cannot be so happy to deserve your Commendations, let me deserve your
Censure; which cannot be (in relation to you) till you have read the whole
Work; and chiefly, the Stories of the Anchoret, and of the Experienced
Traveller; and then (I hope) the Prejudices you may have against an unlearned
Woman, will be taken off.

AS I was writing, by a little fire,
These Feigned Histories; I did desire
To see my Native Country, Native Friends,
That loved me well, and had no other ends
Than harmless mirth to pass away dull time,
With telling Tales either in Prose or Rhyme.
But though Desire did then like a Wind blow
The Sails of Wishes on Love's Ship to go;
Yet Banishment to my dear Lord, was then
A dangerous Rock, made of hard-hearted men.
And hearing of such dangers in my way,
I was content in Antwerp for to stay;
And in the Circle of my Brain to raise
The Figures of my Friends crowned with Praise:
These Figures placed in company together,
All setting by a Fire in cold weather;
The Fire was of Fancy, which I made
Within the Glandule of a Chimney laid:
My Lord and I amongst our Friedns was set
In the midst of them that were thither met.
But afterward perceiving I could make
As many Figures as my Thoughts could take.
Then I invited all the Learned men,
And best of Poets that the Age had then:
The poorest Guess, though they no birth inherit,
To entertain according to their merit.
Thus was my Mind as busy as a Be,
To entertain this Noble Company.
Then my Imaginations a large Room built,
Furnished most curiously, and richly gilt:
I hired all the Arts for to provide
Choice of Provisions, and Pastime beside.
The Wit I had unto the Muses sent,
With Love's Request, which humbly did present
My Mind's Desire; which was, without delay,
To come and help to pass the time away.
Wit traveled far, and searched them all about,
At last in Nature's Court Wit found them out.
Then first to Nature, Wit did bow down low;
To Wit, Dame Nature did her Favors show;
And, with a pleasing-smile, she bid him say,
Whether be came to fetch her Maids away.
Wit answered, Yes. Then Nature bid them take
The Helicon Water, and with it make
The Company all Poets. Which they did,
Although they were but Pictures in my Head;
Their real persons at great distance were:
But on my Thoughts that did their Figures bear,
The mavelous Waters could not work well,
Which is the cause no better Tales I tell;
But hope those Friends my Fancy do present,
Will take it well, and for a good intent:
For I did trouble much my poor weak Brain,
This worthy Company to entertain.
MARGARET NEWCASTLE.

SEVERAL Feigned Stories IN VERSE. The First BOOK.
READERS, my Works do not seem (in my Mind)
So bad as you make them, if Faults you find:
For if you find much Fault, you would not spare
Your ridgid Censures, but their Faults declare.
For I perceive the World is evil bent,
Judging the worst of that which was well meant.
When they a word to Wantonness can wrest,
They Will be well-pleased, and often at it jest:
When every foolish Tongue with words can play,
And turn good sense, with words, an evil way.
But at my Writings let them do their worst,
And for their pains with Ignorance be cursed.
IN VVinter cold, a Company was met,
Both Men and Women by the Fire were set;
At last they did agree (to pass the time)
That every one should tell a Tale in Ryme.
The Women said, We no true Measures know;
Nor do our Rhymes in even Numbers go.
Why, said the Men, All Women's Tongues are free
To speak both out of time, and follishly.
And, drawing Lots, the Chance fell on a Man,
Who having spit and blown his Nose, began:
Of the Mournful Widow.
I Traveling, it was my chance to spy
A little House, which to a Tomb stood nigh.
My Curiosity made me inquire
Who dwelt therein: to further my desire,
I knocked at the door; at last came one
Which told me, 'Twas a Lady lived alone.
I prayed that I the Lady might but see:
She told me, she did shun all Company.
By her discourse, the Lady had been Wife,
But being a Widow, lived a lonesome life.
I told her, I did travel all about,
Only to find a Constant Woman out.
She answered, If the world had any where
A Constant Woman, surely she dwelt there.
I waited there, in hope my Fortune might
At length direct me to this Lady's sight:
And lying underneath a Tomb at night,
At Curfue-time, this Lady with a Light
Came forth out of the House all clothed in white,
And to the Tomb her walk she bended right;
With a Majestick-grace she walked along,
She seemed to be both beautiful and young;
And when she came, she kneeled down to pray,
And thus unto her self did softly say.
Give leave, you Gods, this Loss for to lament;
Give my Soul leave to seek which way his went:
O let my Spirits with his run a Race,
Not to out-go, but to get next in place:
Amongst the Sons of Men raise up his Fame,
Let not foul Envy Canker-fret the same:
And whilst, Great Gods, I in the world do live,
Grant I may Honor to my Husband give:
O grant that all fond Love away may fly,
But let my Heart amongst his Ashes lie.
Here do I sacrifice each vainer dress,
And idle words, which my Youth did express.
Here, Dear, I cancel all Self-love, and make
A Bond, thy loving Memory to take,
And in my Soul always adore the same;
My Thoughts shall build up Altars to thy Name:
Thy Image in my heart shall fixed be:
My Tears from thence shall Copies take of thee,
And on my Cheeks those Tears as Pictures placed,
Or, like thy Carved Statue, never shall waste.
Thy Praise my words (though air) shall print so deep,
By Repetition shall for ever keep.
With that, Tears from her Eyes in showers did flow:
Then I rose up, to her my self did show.
She seemed not to be moved at my sight,
Because her Grief was far above her Fright.
Said I, Weep, weep no more, thou Beauteous Saint,
Nor over these dull ashes make complaint;
They feel not thy warm Tears, which liquid flow;
Nor thy deep Sighs, which from thy Heart do go:
They hear thee not, nor thank thee for thy love;
Nor yet his Soul, that is with the God's above.
Take comfort, Saint, since Life will not return;
And bury not thy Joys within this Urn.
She Answered.
I have no Joys, in him they did reside;
They fled away when as his Body died:
Not that my Love unto his Shape was tied,
But to his Virtues, which did in him 'bide.
He had a Generosity beyond all Merit,
A Noble Fortitude possessed his Spirit;
Foreseeing-Prudence, which his Life did guide;
And Temperate Thoughts did in his Soul abide:
His Speech was sweet and gentle to the Eat;
Delight sat close, as listening for to hear
His Counsel wise, and all his Actions good:
His Truth and Honesty as Judges stood
For to direct and give his Actions Law:
His Piety to Gods was full of awe.
Wherefore return, your Counsels are in vain;
For I must grieve whilst I'n the world remain:
For I have sacrificed all my Delight
Upon my Noble Husband's Grave, and slight
All Vanities, which Women young do prize,
Though they entangle them, as Webs do Flies.
Lady, said I, you being Young and Fair,
By Pleasures to the world invited are:
Bury not all your Youth and Beauty here,
Which like the Sun may to all Eyes appear.
O Sir, said she, the Sun that gave me light,
Death has eclipsed, and taken from my sight.
In Melancholy Shades my Soul does lie,
And grieves my Body which will not yet die.
My Spirits long to wander in the air,
Hoping to find its loving Partner there.
Though Fates my Life have power to prolong,
Yet they have none my constant Mind to wrong.
But when I did perceive no Rhetoric could
Persuade her to take comfort, grieve she would;
Then taking my leave for to go away,
With adoration thus to her did say:
Farewell thou Angel of a Heavenly Breed,
For sure thou come not from a Mortal Seed,
Thou art so constant unto Virtue fair,
Which very few of either Sexes are.
And after a short time I heard she died;
Her Tomb was built close by her Husband's side.
After the Man, a Woman did begin
To tell her Tale; and thus she entered in.
A Description of Diverted Grief.
A Man had once a Young and Handsome Wife,
Whose Virtue was unspotted all her life.
Her words were smooth, which from her Tongue did slide;
All her Discourse was wittily applied.
Her Actions modest, her Behavior so,
As when she moved, the Graces seemed to go.
Whatever Ill she chanced to see or hear,
Yet still her Thoughts as pure as Angels were.
Her Husband's Love seemed such, as no Delight
Nor Joy could take him out of his Wife's sight.
It chanced this virtuous Wife fell sick to death,
And to her Husband spoke with dying-breath:
Farewell my dearest Husband, dye I must,
Yet do not you forget me in the Dust;
Because my Soul would grieve if it should see
Another in my room, your LOVE to be:
My Ghost would mourn, lament; that never dies,
Though Bodies do; pure Loves eternalize.
You Gods, said he, that order Death and Life,
O strike me dead, unless you spare my Wife.
If your Decree be fixed, nor alter can,
But she must dye, (O miserable Man!)
Here do I vow (Great Gods all witness be),
That I will have no other Wife but thee:
No Friendship will I make, converse with none;
But live an Anchoret my self alone.
Thy Spirits sweet, my Thoughts shall entertain;
And in my Mind thy Memory remain.
Farewell, said she, for now my Soul's at peace,
And all the Blessings of the Gods increase
Upon thy Soul; but I pray do not give
Away that Love I had whilst I did live.
Turning her Head, as if to sleep she lay,
In a soft Sigh her Spirits flew away.
When she was dead, great Mourning he did make,
Would neither eat, nor drink, nor rest could take;
Kissing her cold pale Lips, her Cheeks, each Eye;
Cursing his Fate he lives, and cannot dye:
Tears fell so fast, as if his Sorrows meant,
To lay her in a watery Monument.
But when her Corpse upon the Hearse was laid,
No Tongue can tell what mournful Cries he made.
Thus did he pass his time, a week or two,
In sad commplaints, and melancholy woe;
At last he was persuaded for to take
Some air abroad, even for his own healths sake.
But first, unto the Grave he went to pray,
Kissing that Earth wherein her Body lay.
After a Month or two, his Grief to ease,
Some Recreations sought himself to please;
And calling for his Horses, and his Hounds,
He went to hunt upon the Champian grounds:
His Thoughts by these Pastimes diverted are,
Passed by the Grave, and never dropped a Tear.
At last he chanced a Company to meet
Of Virgins young, and fresh as Flowers sweet;
Their Clothing fine, their Humors pleasant, gay,
And with each other they did sport and play,
Giving his Eyes a liberty to view;
With interchanging Looks, in Love he grew.
One Maid amongst the rest, most fair and young,
Who had a ready wit, and pleasant tongue,
He Courtship made, to her he did address,
Cast off his Mourning, Love for to express.
Rich Clothes he made, and wondrous fine they were;
He barb'd, and curled, and powdered sweet his Hair:
Rich Gifts unto his Mistress did present,
And every day to visit her he went.
They like each other well, they both agree,
That in all haste they straight must married be.
To Church they went, for joy the Bells did ring:
When married were, he home the Bride did bring.
But when he married was some half a year,
He Curtain-Lectures from his Wife did hear:
For whatsoever he did, she did with spite
And scorn dislike, and all his kindness slight:
Cross every word, she would, that he did say;
Seemed very sick, complaining every day,
Unless she went abroad; then she would be
In humor good, in other Company.
Then he would sigh, and call into his Mind.
His dear dead Wife that was so wondrous kind.
He jealous grew, and was so discontent,
(And of his later Marriage did repent)
With Melancholy Thoughts fell sick and died;
His Wife soon after was another's Bride.
When she had done, the Men aloud did cry;
Said she had quit her Tale most spitefully.
Another Man, to answer what she told,
Began to tell, and did his Tale unfold.
The Feminine Description.
A Man a walking, did a Lady spy;
To her he went: and when he came hard by,
Fair Lady, said he, why walk you alone?
Because (said she) my Thoughts are then my own:
For in a Company my Thoughts do throng,
And follow every foolish babbling Tongue.
Your Thoughts, said he, 'twere boldnessfor to ask.
To tell, said she, it were too great a task:
But yet to satisfy your Mind, said she,
I Will tell you how our Thoughts run commonly:
Sometimes they mount up to the Heavens high,
Then straight fall down, and on the Earth will lie;
Then circling run to compass all they may,
And then sometimes they all in heaps do stay.
At other times they run from place to place,
As if they had each other in a Chase.
Sometimes they run as Fancy does them guide,
And then they swim as in a flowing-Tide:
But if the Mind be discontent, they flow
Against the Tide, their Motion's dull and slow.
Said he,
I travel now to satisfy my Mind,
Whether I can a Constant Woman find.
O Sir, said she, it is Labor without end,
We cannot Constant be to any Friend:
We seem to love to death, but it is not so,
Because our Passions still move to and fro:
They are not fixed, but do run all about;
Every new Object thrusts the former out.
Yet we are fond, and for a time so kind,
As nothing in the world should change our Mind:
But if Misfortune come, we weary grow;
Then former Fondness we away straight throw:
Although the Object alter not, yet may
Time alter our fond Minds another way.
We love, and like, and hate, and cry,
Without a Cause, or Reason why.
Wherefore go back, for you shall never find
Any Woman to have a Constant Mind:
The best that is, shall hold but for a time,
Wavering like wind, which Women hold no Crime.
A Woman said, This Tale I will requite,
To vindicate our Sex which you did slight.
A Man in love was with a Lady fair,
And for her sake would curl, perfume his Hair.
Professions thousands unto her did make,
And swore for her a Pilgrimage would take.
I swear, said he, Truth shall for me be bound,
Constant to be, whilst Life in me is found.
With all his Rivals he would Quarrels make;
In Duels fought he often for her sake.
It chanced this Lady sick was, like to dye
Of the Small Pox, Beauty's great Enemy.
When she was well, her Beauty decayed quite,
He did forsake her, and her Friendship slight;
Excuses made, her did not often see,
Then asked leave a Traveller to be.
And thus, poor Lady, when her Beauty's gone,
Without her Lover she may sit alone.
Then was the third Man's turn, his Tale to tell,
Which to his Company he fitted well.
A Description of Constancy.
THere was a Noble Man that had a Wife
Young, Fair, and Virtuous; yet of so short life,
That after she had married been a year,
A Daughter's born, which Daughter cost her deer;
No sooner born, the Mother laid in bed,
Before her Lord could come, his Wife was dead;
Where, at the sight, he did not tear his Hair,
Nor beat his Breast, nor sigh, nor shed a Tear;
Nor buried her in state, as many do,
And with that Funeral-Charge a new Wife woe:
But silently he laid her in a Tomb,
Where, by her side, he meant to have a Room:
For by no other side he meant to lie,
In Life and Death to keep her company.
The whilst he of his Daughter care did take,
And fond he was even for his dear VVife's sake:
But Grief upon his Spirits had got hold,
Consumed him more than Age, that makes Men old.
His Flesh did waste, his Manly Strength grew weak;
His Face grew pale, and faintly did he speak:
As most that in a deep Consumption are,
Where Hectick-Fevers do with Life make war:
And though he joy'd he had not long to live,
Yet for to leave his Daughter young, did grieve;
For he no Kindred had to take a care
Of his young Child, and Strangers he did fear
They would neglect their Charge, not see her bred
According to her Birth, when he was dead;
Or rob her of her Wealth, or else would sell
Her to a Husband might not use her well:
Or else (by Servants bribed) might her betray
With some mean Man, and so to run away.
These cares of his, his Mind did much torment,
And her Ill Fortune to his Thoughts present.
At last he did conclude, If any be
True, Just, and full of Generosity,
They Are such as are like to the Gods on high,
As Powerful Princes, and Dread Majesty.
The Sovereign was dead, but left to reign
His Widowed-Queen, whose Prudence did maintain
The Government, though Foreign Wars she had,
Which was a Charge, and oft-times made her sad.
This Nobleman sent to the Queen to crave,
That she upon his Child would pity have,
To take her to the Court, there to be bred,
That none might wrong her after he was dead.
The Queen most willingly his Suit did sign,
And so in Peace his Soul he did resign.
This Lady soon did to the Court repair,
Where she was bred with tender Love and Care;
And Youth, that is bred in Courts, may wisest be,
Because they more do hear, and more do see
Than other Children that are bred obscure,
Because the Senses are best Tutors sure.
But Nature in this Maid had done her part,
And in her frame had showed her curious Art;
Composed her every way, Body and Mind,
Of best Extracts that were to form Mankind:
All which she gave to Time for to distill,
And of the subtil'st Spirits the Soul to fill;
As Reason, Wit, and Judgment; and to take
The solid'st part the Body for to make.
For though that Nature all her works shapes out,
Yet Time does give strength, length, and breadth about.
And as her Person grew in stature tall,
And that her Beauty did increase withal;
So did affection in her Heart grow high,
Which there was planted in her Infancy.
There was a Subject, Prince within the Land,
Although but young, the Army did command:
He being chose for Birth, Wealth, Valor, Wit,
And Prudence, for to lead and martial it;
The whilst his Father did the Queen assist
To manage State Affairs, as knowing best
The Kingdom's Constitutions, Natures bad
Of Common People, who are sometimes mad,
And wildly in Distempers, Ruins bring;
For most Rebellions from the Commons spring.
But he so just and loyally did serve
His Queen and Country, as he did preserve
Himself within her Favor, and her Love,
As great Respect, and honored Praise did prove;
And in the Wars his Son such Fame did get,
That in Fame's Chariot he triumphant set.
For he was Valiant, and of Nature free,
Courteous, and full of Generosity:
His Wit was quick, yet so as to delight,
Not for to cross, or in Disputes to fight:
For gallant Swordmen that do fight in war,
Do never use with Tongues to brawl and jarr.
He was exact in Body and in Mind,
For no Defects in either could you find.
The Queen, that had a Niece both young and fair,
Did strive to match her to this Prince, and Heir
Of all his Father's Wealth, who had such store,
As all the Nobles else did seem but poor:
And the young Princess liked so well the choice,
That thoughts of marrying him did her rejoice:
And through her Eyes such Messages Love sent,
On smiling-rays and posting-glances went.
The other Lady did hear the Report,
For every one did talk of it in Court:
Besides, she saw his Person still attend
Upon the Princess, and did Presents send:
And every day to visit her did go,
As being commanded by his Father so.
At which she sad and melancholy grew;
Yet her Disease not thoroughly she knew.
Like as a Plant, that from the Earth does spring,
Sprouts high, before a full-blown Flower it bring.
So did her Love in Bud obscurely lie,
Not any one as yet did it descry:
Nor did the Prince the least affection find,
She being reserved in action, and in mind.
Sober she was, and of a bashful look,
Of but few words; yet she good notice took,
And much observed, for Love has a quick Eye,
And often by her Countenance does spy
The hidden Thoughts, that the Tongue dare not tell:
For in the Mind obscurity does dwell.
But yet she did espy something lay cross
To his Desires, but guessed not what it was;
But grieved that any thing should him displease:
For those that love, do wish their Loved much ease:
Nay, so much ease, they Torments would endure,
If these, for those they love, might good procure.
But she grew restless, and her Thoughts did run
About him, as about the World, the Sun:
For he was her sole World, and wished her Love
Had influence, as Planets from above,
To order his affections, and to bring
From several Causes, one Effect to spring;
And the Effect, that he might love her so,
As love her best, or at least he might know
How well she loved him; for she wished no more
Than love for love, as Saints which do adore
The Gods in Heaven, whose love is wholly pure,
And nothing can of drossy flesh endure.
At last she and her Thoughts in Council sat,
What was best to be done, or this, or that:
They all agree, that she her Love should own,
Since innocent and pure, and make it known
By her Epistles, and her Pen to write
What her pure Heart did dictate and indite:
No forfeit of her Modesty, because
She had no Ends, but only Virtuous Laws.
Then took she Pen and Paper, and her Wit
Did tell her Love the truth; and thus she writ:
Sir, You may wonder much that I do send
This Letter, which by Love does recommend
It self and suit unto your judging-ear,
And that it was not stopped by bashful fear:
But let me tell you, This pure Love of mine
Is built on Virtue, not on base Design.
It has no dross, nor proudly does aspire;
A Flame inkindled by immac'late Fire,
Which I to the Altar of your Merits bring,
From whence the Flame to Heaven high may spring.
Your glorious Fame within my Heart, though young,
Did plant a Slip of Honor, from whence sprung
Pure Love, and Chaste Desires; for I do crave,
Only within your Heart a place to have.
I do not plead, hoping to be your Wife,
Nor 'twixt you and your Mistress to breed strife;
Or wish I that her Love you should forsake,
Or unto me a Courtly Friendship make:
But only, when I Am dead, you would inshrine
Within your Memory, this Love of mine;
Which Love to all the World I may proclaim
Without a blush, or check, or spotted-fame:
It Is not your Person I do so admire,
Nor yet your Wealth or Titles I desire:
But your Heroic Soul, and Generous Mind,
Your Affability and Nature kind;
Your honest Heart, where Justice still does reign;
Your prudent Thoughts, and a well-tempered Brain;
Your helping Hand, and your industrious Life,
Not to make broils, but to decide all strife;
And to advance all those are in distress,
To help the weak, and those are powerless;
For which my Heart and Life to Love is bound,
And every thought of you with Honor crowned.
These are not feigning Lines that here I write,
But Truths as clear and pure as Heaven's Light.
Nor is it Impudence to let you know,
Love of your Virtues in my Soul does grow.
Her Love thus innocent she did enroll,
Which was the pure Platonic of her Soul:
Though in black Characters the Envious may
Call the sense clear, as is the Morning's day;
And every word appear unto the sight,
To make her smoother Paper yet more white.
Thus she infolded Honor, and more Truth,
Than ever yet was known in Female-youth.
Blush-colour'd Silk her Letter then did bind,
For to express how modest was her Mind:
And Virgins Wax did close it with her Seal:
Yet did that Letter all her Love reveal.
Then to her Nurse's Husband she did trust
These loving Lines, knowing him faithful, just
To all her Family; he obeyed her will,
And would have done, no doubt, though it had been ill:
For his Obedience never asked the cause;
Nor was he Casuist in Divine Laws,
But faithful and most trusty: so was sent
With this most Sacred Letter; then he went.
In the mean time that she her Letter sent,
The Prince to her a Letter did present
By a Servant, in whom he put much trust,
As finding him both dextrous, prudent, just
In all Employments; he this Letter brought,
Which'mongst this Lady's Thoughts much wonder wrought;
Even so much, as she could not believe,
But thought he did mistake, and did conceive
She was the Princess. Whereupon, said she,
I doubt this Letter was not writ to me.
But he confirmed, to her that it was writ.
She to her Closet went, and opened it:
With trembling hands the VVaxen Seal she broke,
And what he writ, with a faint Voice thus spoke:
Fairest of all your Sex, for so you are
Unto all others; as a Blazing-Starr,
Which shows it self, and to the World appears
As a great VVonder once in many years;
And never comes, but does portend on Earth
Either the fall of Princes, or their Birth.
O let your influence only at me aim,
Not for to work my Overthrow, or Fame;
But Love, to make me happy all my life;
Then yield your self to be my Virtuous Wife.
But if you (this Request) to me deny,
The Gods, I hope, will grant me soon to dye.
She, when she this had read, was in a maze,
And senslesly did on the Letter gaze;
By which her Spirits discomposed were,
In quarrelling-disputes, 'twixt Hope and Fear.
At last Hope got the better, then did they
Triumph with joy, and in her Heart did play.
For when the Spirits mutually agree,
Both in the Eyes and Heart they dancing be.
Then to the Gentleman that came, she went,
And told him civilly that she had sent
Unto the Prince, and that she could not fit
So well an Answer to return as yet.
The Prince as Melancholy sat alone,
But all the while his Mistress thought upon:
Staid for the Messenger's return; for he,
Till answer came, refused all Company.
At last one of his Pages to him ran,
To tell him, Without was an ancient Man
That would not be denied, for speak he must
Unto the Prince, or else must break his trust
He was in charge with; and rather than so,
Would venture life, before he back would go,
And not his Message to the Prince to tell.
Whereat the Prince, liking his Courage well,
Sent for him, who came with Humility,
The Letter gave upon his bended knee.
The Prince the Letter read, and pleased so,
As by his smiling-countenance did show;
Which made all Cloudy Thoughts disperse, and clears
His Mind, as in dark days when Sun appears.
Sure, said the Prince, the Gods our Loves decree,
And in our Unions they do all agree:
They join our Hearts in one, our Souls so mix,
As if eternally in Heaven would fix.
Then soon he (all delays for to prevent)
Another Letter writ; which to her sent
In answer of her own; this Letter gave
Unto her Foster-Nurse, who was as grave
As old bald Father Time, of Courage stout,
A Rustic plainness, and not easily out
Of countenance; trusty to be employed,
And in her Lady's service would have died.
The Prince commended her Fidelity,
And pleased he was at her blunt Quality:
But with the Letter quickly did return,
(For she, though old, yet every step did run)
And then the Letter which the Prince had sent,
She to her Lady did in mirth present;
Who then the Letter broke with joyful speed,
And to her Foster-Nurse she did it read:
Sweetest, You have expressed your Love to me
With so much plainness and sincerity;
And yet your style severely have you writ,
And ruled your Lines with a Commanding-wit:
Heroic Flourishes your Pen does draw,
Or executes as in a Martial-Law.
Then solemnly does march in Mourning-trail,
And melancholy words all hopes do vail.
As Golden dust on written lines strewn were,
Your written lines seem sprinkled with a Tear;
As by the Heat of Passion spread about,
For fear that Cruelty should blot it out.
But let me tell you, That my love is such,
As never Lover loved half so much,
And with so fervent Zeal, and purest Flame,
Nay, something above Love, that wants a Name
For to express it; like to Gods on high:
For, who can comprehend a Deity?
And though I honor all your Sex, yet my
Having another Mistress, I deny,
Besides your self; and though I do obey
To visit the fair Princess, nothing say
Concerning Love, nor yet Professions make,
As common Lovers, promise for her sake
Wonders; and yet my Life to her will give
To do her service: but whilst I do live,
My Heart and Soul is yours; and when I dye,
Still will my Soul keep yours in company:
Though by Honor my active life is bound
Unto your Sex, you only will be found
Within my Heart, and only Love to be,
From whence my Brain does Copies take of thee:
On which my Soul does view with much delight,
Because the Soul sees not with vulgar sight:
For Souls do see, not as the Senses do,
But as transparent Glass, the Minds quite through:
Or rather as the Gods see all that is past,
Present, or what is to come, or the World vast;
Or what can be, all unto them is known;
And so are Souls to one another shown:
And if our Souls do equally agree,
Our Thoughts and Passions to each known will be.
But after this Letter, they both did get
An opportunity, by which they met:
No Complemental-wooing they did use;
True Love all flattering words it does refuse.
But they agreed, and both did think it fit,
Their love to hide, not to discover it.
At last the Queen and Father did agree,
The Prince and Princess straight should married be;
Never made a question, for they doubted not
But Youth and Beauty had each other shot
With Amorous Loves. But when the Prince made known,
How that his heart was now none of his own;
His Father seemed, with trouble, discontent:
But the enraged Queen, with malice bent,
Did strive all ways she could for to disgrace
The sweet young Lady, often disprais'd her Face,
Her Person, Dress, Behavior, and her Wit;
And for to match with such a Prince, not fit.
The Prince's love so firm, no words could break;
Impatiently did hear, but little speak.
But the Princess heard the Prince to be
A Lover to another; then did she
Tear, rail, and rave, as if she frantic were;
And of her Rival, words she would not spare.
One day a Company of Nobles met,
And in a Room they were together set;
The Prince and his Fair Mistress she did spy,
And often at them cast a spightful Eye.
At last her Malice set a-work her Tongue,
And at the Prince she evil words out flung,
Which he received with a submissive face,
Turning those scorns as favors of her grace.
But when she had with Scorns his Patience tried,
She (for to vent her Spleen) in Passion cried.
Some of the Company there jesting by
The other Lady, asked if she would cry:
She answer made, she had not the like cause;
Nor had she broke the Modest Civil Laws:
But if her Passion had misled her Tongue,
She would have wept to water, or else flung
Her self to dust, for want of moisture dye,
Unless her life could issue through her eye.
But when the Prince perceived such storms to rise,
And showring tears to fall from beauteous eyes,
He did absent himself, and shunned to be
A trouble to the Princess Company.
But when the Queen had tried all means she could
To alter his affections, nothing would;
She then their Marriage strove for to prevent,
And to the Army she the Prince soon sent;
Then order gave, Not to return again,
But with the Army there for to remain.
He to his Mistress went, his leave to take,
Persuading her a Journey she would make
Unto the Army, and there to agree,
When they should meet, and straightway married be.
At last she did resolve to leave the Court,
And privately with great speed to transport
Her Person to the Prince where he was gone,
For never till then she found her self alone.
When the Army began for to retire
To Winter Quarters, he did there desire
His Mistress Company, and then did write
To those he had entrusted, how they might
Convey her safely: but by some mistake,
The Queen had means this his Letter to take;
Which when she read, all in a rage she grew,
And then his Letter into the fire she threw.
Which when sh' had told her Niece, they both did strive,
And both in Council sat, for to contrive
To hinder her wish'd-meeting; wherefore they
Did think it best, the Lady to convey
Unto some private place, and then give out
That she was dead, which soon was spread about,
And every one in censuring spent some breath,
And most did judge she died a violent death.
But the Queen's anger only would destroy
Their Loves, because her Niece then should enjoy
The Prince, on whom her heart in love was set,
And used all means she could, his love to get.
But though at first they thought the Prince might mourn;
Yet when his grief had been by time out-worn,
He then might take the Princess for his Wife,
Concealing the young Lady all her life.
And though they did not murder her, yet they
Did strive to grieve and cross her every way:
Wherefore they did agree that some should tell
Her, that the Prince in Battle fell.
The report of her death spread far and near;
And at last came unto the Prince his ear:
The news struck him so hard, as it did make
His strength grow weak, and all his limbs to shake.
But when his strength returned, his mind sad grew,
And from all company himself withdrew:
No Orders he would give, but left the care
Of all the Army to an Officer:
And from the Army, without the Queen's consent,
He did return, and to his Father went,
And told him, he all worldly things did wave,
Had buried them all in his Mistress Grave,
And the remainder of his days would spend
In holy Devotion, his Prayers would send
Unto the Gods; and my dear Saint, said he,
Will be a Mediator there for me:
His Father did dissuade him all he could,
But all in vain, a Hermit be he would.
Instead of Palaces, he chose a Cell,
Left Courts and Camps, did solitary dwell:
Instead of Clothes that rich and costly were,
He wore a Garment made of Camel's hair.
Instead of Arms, a Hermit's Habit took;
And for a Sword, he used a Prayer Book:
Instead of treading Measures in a dance,
And wanton Eyes that often would side-ways glance;
His knees upon hard stone did bowing bend,
And his sad Eyes unto the Earth descend:
Instead of flattering words to tempt Maids fair,
No words did speak but what were used in Prayer.
All wild and wandering thoughts were now composed,
And the dead object of his Mistress closed,
Like Multitudes that gather in a Ring,
To view some curious or some wondrous thing:
Or like a devout Congregation met,
Will strive about the Altar near to set:
So did his Thoughts near her Idea get,
Which, as a Goddess, in his Soul did set:
Then he an Altar built of Marble white,
And Waxen Tapers round about did light:
Her Picture on this Altar placed was high,
There to be seen with an up-lifted Eye.
She was his Saint, and he there every day
Did offer Tears and Sighs, to her did pray,
And her implore, she would the Gods request
To take his Soul, his Body lay to rest.
In the mean time his Mistress's made believe
That he was killed, for which she much did grieve:
For when she at the first the news did hear,
Her Face turned pale, like Death it did appear:
Then gently sinking, she fell to the ground;
Grief seized her heart, and put her in a swound:
At last, life got the better, and then wept,
And wished to Heaven, that she in death had slept.
But Melancholy her whole Soul possessed,
And of all pleasing Thoughts it self divest:
All objects shuns, that pleasing were, and fair;
And all such sounds as were of a leight air:
The splendrous Light and glorious Sun shut out,
And all her Chamber hung with black about:
No other light but blinking Lamps would have:
Some Earth and Turf therein, like to a Grave,
The which she often viewed, or sat close by,
Imagining the Prince therein did lie;
And on that Grave, her Tears, like showers of rain,
Keep fresh the Turf, on the green Grass remain
As pearled dew before the Sun does rise;
Or as refreshing showers from Cloudy Skies:
And often this supposed Grave does dress
With such significant Flowers as did express
His Virtues, and his Dispositions sweet,
More than those Flowers when in Posies meet:
His various Virtues, known to all so well
More fragrant than those Flowers were for smell.
But first, she set a Lawrel-Garland green,
To show that he a Victor once had been;
And in the midst a copious Branch did place,
For to express he dyed in the chase
Of his fierce Enemies; his Courage was so true,
That, after a long fight, away they flew.
Thus Melancholy past her time away,
Besides sad solemn Music 'twice a day:
For every Sense with Melancholy filled,
And always dropping-tears from thence distilled,
With which her Melancholy Soul did feed,
And Melancholy Thoughts her Mind did breed:
Then on the ground her Head aside-ways hung,
Would lie along whilst these sad Songs were sung.
A SONG.
TITAN, I banish all thy joys of Light,
Turning thy glorious Rays, to darker Night;
Clothing my Chamber with sad Black, each part,
Thus suitable unto my mournful heart:
Only a dimn Wax Taper there shall wait
On me, to show my sad unhappy Fate.
With mournful Thoughts my Head shall furnished be,
And all my Breath sad Sighs, for love of thee:
My Groans to sadder Notes be set with skill,
And sung in Tears, and Melancholy still.
Languishing-Musick to fill up each Voice
With Palsied trembling Strings, is all my choice.
A SONG.
SInce he is gone, Oh then Salt Tears,
Drown both mine Eyes, and stop mine Ears
With Grief; my Grief it is so much,
It locks my Smell up, Taste, and Touch.
In me remains but little breath,
Which quickly take away, Oh Death.
A SONG.
WHY should I live? But who does know
The way to him, or where to go?
Death's ignorant, the Dead they have
No sense of Grief, when in the Grave.
Forgetful and Unthankful Death,
Have thou no love, when gone's our Breath?
No Gratitude, but there do lie,
In dark Oblivion for to dye?
No sense of Love, or Honor, there:
Then Death I prithee me forbear:
Thousands of years in sorrow I
Would live in Grief, and never dye.
A SONG.
MY Bed of Sorrow's made, since no relief;
And all my Pillows shall be stuffed with Grief,
My Winding-sheets are those whereon I lie,
My Curtains drawn with sad Melancholy.
Watching shall be my Food, Weeping my Drink,
Sighing my Breath, and Groaning what I think:
Trembling and shaking, all my Exercise;
Disquiet and disordered Thoughts now rise.
Wringing of hands, with folded arms lamenting,
Is all the joy is left me of contenting:
For he is gone that was my joy, my life;
I Am left his Widow, who never was his Wife.
But all the while, the Queen was angry bent
Against the Prince, because away he went,
And left the Army without a General;
For which she Rebel, Traitor, him did call:
But she another General did make,
Which of the Army all the Charge did take:
Yet his Success in Wars proved but bad,
For afterward the Queen great Losses had.
And all the Soldiers they were discontent:
Whereat the Queen another General sent;
But he no better Fortune there could meet,
The Enemy did force him to retreat;
Then did the Enemy so powerful grow,
The Forces of the Queen they overthrow
In every Fight and Skirmish which they had;
For which the Queen and Kingdom did grow sad.
At last the Queen the Prince did flatter, and
Entreated him again for to Command:
But he denied the Queen, would not obey;
Said, Earthly Power to Gods they must give way.
At last she sent him word she would not spare
His life, and therefore bid him to prepare
Himself for death, for dye he should
For Disobedience, and Revenge she would
Have on him: Then his Father to him went
For to persuade him, and there did present
Showers of Tears, which sadly pouring fell
Upon his only Son, his grief to tell.
He round about his Neck one arm did wind,
The other arm embraced his Body kind:
His Cheeks his Son did join to his,
And often he his Lips did kiss:
O pity me, my Son, and thy Life spare,
Thou art my only Child, and only Heir.
The art my sole Joy, in thee I pleasure take,
And wish to live but only for thy sake.
The Prince, his Father answered; and said he,
I am not worth those Tears you shed for me.
But why do you thus weep, and thus lament,
For my death now? When to the Wars I went,
You did encourage me to fight in field
For Victory, or else my Life to yield:
I willingly obeyed, and joy'd to find
My Father's Sympathy unto my Mind.
Besides, it showed a greater love to me,
Than Parents self-lov'd fondness used to be;
For to prefer my Honor, and my Fame,
Before the perpetu'ty of your Name:
And as you prized my Honor and Renown,
So I a Heavenly, not an Earthly Crown:
And give me leave the better choice to make,
To quit all troubles, and sweet Peace to take:
I never more willing, nor more fit can dye,
For Heaven, and the Gods pure company:
For had I died in Wars, my Soul had been
Stained with Blood, and spotted over with Sin.
But now, my Mistress is a Saint, in Heaven
Has intercession made, my sins forgiven.
And since she is gone, all Joys with her are fled,
And I shall never happy be, till dead:
She was my Soul's delight, in her I viewed
The pure and Celestial Beatitude.
But were I sure the Soul that never dies,
Should never meet, nor Bodies never rise
By Resurrection; yet sure those are blessed
That pass this life, and in the Grave do rest.
Then said the Duke (his Father) to his Son,
What ever comes, Son, Heaven's will be done;
But since you are resolved, and needs will dye,
I in the Grave will keep you company.
The young Prince said, I cannot you dissuade,
Since none are happy but those Death has made.
The Day of Execution drawing nigh
Of the young Prince, his Father too would dye.
Then the young Prince asked leave, and leave he had,
That he like to a Soldier might be clad:
When he was brought to dye, and on that day
Death he did meet in Soldierly array:
Instead of Mourning-Garments, he had on
A Suit of Buff, embroidered thick upon;
And a Rich Scarf that was of Watchet-dye,
Set thick with Pearls; instead of strings to tie
It close together, were rich Diamonds, so
As like a Ring or Garter it did show,
Of but one entire Diamond; this did bind
The Scarf so firm as an united Mind:
A Scarlet Coat embroidered thick with Gold;
And Hangers like to it, his Sword did hold;
And in his Hat a Plume of Feathers were,
In falling-folds, which hung below his Hair.
He being thus accouter'd, Death to meet
In Gallantry, yet gently, friendly, sweet:
He would embrace it, and so gladly yield,
Yet would he dye as Soldiers in the Field:
For gallant valiant men do court Death so,
As amorous courtly men a wooing go.
His Father all in Mourning-Garments clad,
Not grieved to dye, but for his Son was sad:
Millions of People thronged about to see
This gallant Mourning Prince's Tragedy.
But in the time these Preparations were,
The Queen sent to the young Lady to prepare
Her self to dye: when she the news did hear,
Joy in her Countenance did then appear:
Then she her self did dress like to a Bride,
And in a Rich and Gilded Coach did ride:
Thus triumphing as on her Wedding Day,
To meet her Bridegroom Death; but in the way
The people all did weep that she should dye,
And Youth and Beauty in Death's arms should lie.
But she did smile, her Countenance was glad,
And in her Eyes such lively Spirits had,
As the quick-darting Rays the Sun out-shin'd,
And all she looked on, for a time were blind.
But when the Queen and Nobles all were set,
And the Condemned on the Scaffold met:
Where when the Lovers they each other spied,
Their Eye-strings seemed as if together tied:
So firmly they were fixed, and did so gaze,
And with each other struck in such a maze,
As if with wonder they were turned to stone,
And that their feet unto the ground were grown;
They could not stir; but at the last moved he
In a slow pace, amazed, went to see
That Heavenly Object; for, thought he, it may
An Angel be, my Soul to take away.
Her Limbs did shake, like shivering Agues cold,
For Fear upon her Spirits had got hold,
When she did see him move; for she had thought
He was a Statue, and by Carvers wrought,
And by the Queen's Command was thither brought.
When he came near, he kneeled down to pray,
And thus unto her sofrly he did say:
My Sense my Spirits surprise, thy Spirit my Mind;
And great disturbance in my Thoughts I find:
My Reason's misty, Understanding blind;
Tell me whether thou art of Mortal Kind.
Said she, That Question I would ask of you,
For I do doubt my Senses are not true
Intelligencers; are you the Prince I see?
Or are you a Spirit that thus speaks to me?
With that, the Queen did come, their doubts to clear;
It was my Plot, said she, to bring you here:
And why I crossed your Loves, I will forbear
To tell you now, but afterward declare.
Then did she cause a Priest to join their hands,
Which he devoutly tied in Wedlock-bands.
Then did the Queen unto her Nobles say,
That she a Debt to Gratitude must pay:
And to the Prince's Father straight she went;
Here, Sir, said she, I do my self present
To be your Wife; for by your Counsel I
Have Ruled and Reigned in great Felicity.
He, kneeling, kissed her Hand; and both agree,
That in few days the Wedding kept should be.
Such joys of acclamation loud, of wonder,
Echoed the air, louder than is Jove's Thunder.
Her Princely Niece so Noble was, that then
For joy she modestly threw up her Fan;
Since to a Highborn Prince she well knew she
In glorions Nuptials soon should joined be.
The Marriage-Song.
WEre all the Joys that ever yet were known;
Were all those Joys met, and put into one,
They Would be, than these two Lovers Joys, far less;
Our Lovers height of Joys, none can express:
They Have made another Cupid, I am told,
And buried the blind Boy that was so old.
Hymen is proud, since Laurel crowns his Brow,
He never made his Triumphs until now.
The Marriage-Song for the Old Duke and the Old Queen's Marriage.
NOW the Old Cupid he is fled
Unto the Queen; she to her Bed
Brought the Old Duke; so ends all harms
In Love's Embraces, in their Arms.
This Elder Wedlock, more than ripe,
Was of the Younger but a Type:
What wants of Cupid, Hymen's Cup,
Ceres and Bacchus make it up.
A Marriage-Song of the Queen's Niece.
SEE the Old Queen's Beloved Niece,
For Beauty, Favor, such a Piece
As Love could feign, not hope to see;
Just such a Miracle was she.
She does congratulate, and's eased
To see these Noble Lovers pleased
Above repining: The Fates since
Are just, and gave her a brave Prince.
A SONG.
HYMEN triumph in joy,
Since overcom'd Love's Boy:
Each Age, each Sex and Place,
The Wedlock-Laws embrace,
The looser sort can bind,
Monarch of what is Mankind.
All things do fall so pat
In this Triumvirat,
Which now in Wedlock mix;
Now Three, though once were Six.
A Lady said, Such Constant Love was dead,
And all Fidelity to Heaven fled.
Another Lady said, She fain would know,
When Married, if they did continue so.
O, said a Man, such Love (as this was) sure
Does never in a Married Pair endure:
But Lovers crossed, use not to end so well:
Which, for to show, a Tale I mean to tell.
The Description of the Violence of Love.
THere was a Lady, Virtuous, Young, and Fair,
Unto her Father only Child and Heir:
In her Behavior modest, sweet, and civil;
So innocent, knew only Good from Evil:
Yet in her Garb had a Majestic Grace,
And affable and pleasant was her Face.
Another Gentleman (whose House did stand
Hard by her Father's, and was rich in Land)
He had a Son whom Beauty did adorn,
As some might think, of Venus he was born:
His Spirit Noble, Generous, and Great;
By Nature Valiant, Dispositions sweet:
His Wit ingenious, and his Breeding such,
That his Sci'nces did not Pedantry t'uch.
This Noble Gentleman in love did fall
With this fair Lady, who was pleased withal:
He Courted her, his Service did address;
His Love by Words and Letters did express.
Though she seemed Coy, his Love she did not slight,
But Civil Answers did in Letters write.
At last so well acquainted they did grow,
That but one Heart each other's Thoughts did know.
Mean time their Parents did their Love's descry,
And sought all ways to break that Unity:
Forbad each other's company frequent;
Did all they could Love's Meetings to prevent.
But Love regards not Parents, nor their Threats;
For Love, the more it is barred, more Strength begets.
Thus being crossed, by stealth they both did meet,
And Privacy did make their Love more sweet;
Although their Fears did often affright their Mind,
Lest that their Parents should their Walks out-find.
Then in the Kingdom did Rebellion spring,
Most of the Commons fought against their King:
And all the Gentry that then Loyal were,
Did to the Standard of the King repair.
Amongst the rest, this Noble Youth was one;
Love bade him stay, but Honor spurred him on:
When he declared his Mind, her Heart it rent;
Rivers of Tears out of her Eyes grief sent;
And every Tear, like Bullets, pierced his Breast,
Scattered his Thoughts, and did his Mind molest.
Silent long time they stood, at last spoke he,
Why does my Love with Tears so torture me?
Why do you blame my Eyes, said she, to weep,
Since they perceive you Faith nor Promise keep?
For, did you love but half so true as I,
Rather than part, you would choose to stay and dye:
But you Excuses make, and take delight,
Like cruel Thieves, to rob and spoil by Night.
Now you have stole my Heart, away you run,
And leave a silly Virgin quite undone.
If I stay from the Wars, what will Men say?
They Will say, I make excuse to be away:
By this Reproach, a Coward I am thought;
And my Disgrace will make you seem in fault,
To set your Love upon a Man so base;
Bring Infamy to us, and to our Race.
To sacrifice my Life for your content,
I would not spare; but (Dear) in this consent,
It Is for your sake Honor I strive to win,
That I some Merit to your Worth may bring.
She.
If you will go, let me not stay behind,
But take such Fortune with you as I find:
I Will be your Page, attend you in the Field;
When you are weary, I will hold your Shield.
He.
Dear Love, that must not be; for Women are
Of tender Bodies, and Minds full of Fear:
Besides, my Mind so full of Care will be,
For fear a Bullet should once light on thee,
That I shall never fight, but strengthless grow,
Through feeble Limbs be subject to my Foe.
When thou art safe, my Spirits high shall raise,
Striving to get a Victory of Praise.
With sad Laments these Lovers did depart;
Absence, as Arrows sharp, does wound each Heart:
She spends her time, to Heaven-high does pray,
That Gods would bless, and safe conduct his way.
The whilst he fights, and Fortune's Favor had,
Fame brings this Honor to his Mistress sad:
All Cavaliers that in the Army were,
There was not one could with this Youth compare:
By Love his Spirits all were set on fire,
Love gave him Courage, made his Foes retire.
But, O ambitious Lovers, how they run
Without all guidance, like Apollo's Son Phaeton,
,
Run out of Moderation's Line; so he
Did through the thickest of the Army flee
Singly alone, amongst the Squadrons deep
Fighting, sent many one with Death to sleep.
But Numbers, with united strength, at last,
This Noble Gallant Man from Horse did cast:
His Body all so thick of wounds was set,
Safety, it seems, in fight he did forget,
But not his Love, who in his Mind still lies;
He wished her there, to close his dying-Eyes.
Soul, said he, if thou wandrest in the Air,
Thy Service to my Mistress by thy care:
Attend her close, with her Soul Friendship make,
Then she perchance no other Love may take.
But if thou sink down to the Shades below,
And (being a Lover) to Elyzium go;
Perchance my Mistress Soul you there may meet,
So walk and talk in Love's Discourses sweet:
But if thou art like to a Light put out,
Thy Motion's ceased, then all is forgot no doubt.
With that a sigh, which from his Heart did rise,
Did mount his Soul up to the Airy Skies.
The whilst his Mistress being sad with care;
Her Knees were worn, imploring Gods with Prayer.
A Drowsy Sleep did all her Senses close,
But in her Dreams Fancy her Lover shows
With all his Wounds; which made her loud to cry,
Help, help, you Gods, said she, that dwell on high.
These fearful Dreams her Senses all did wake;
In a cold sweat, with fear, each Limb did shake.
Then came a Messenger as pale as Death,
With panting sides, swollen eyes, and shortened breath;
And by his looks, his sadder Tale did tell;
Which when she saw, straight in a swoun she fell:
At last her stifled Spirits had recourse
Unto their usual place, but of less force:
Then lifting up her Eyes, her Tongue gave way,
And thus unto the Gods did mourning say:
Why do we pray, and offer to high Heaven,
Since what we ask, is seldom to us given?
If their Decrees are fixed, what need we pray?
Nothing can alter Fates, nor cross their way.
If they leave all to Chance, who can apply?
For every Chance is then a Deity.
But if a Power they keep to work at will,
It shows them cruel to torment us still.
When we are made, in Pain we always live;
Sick Bodies, Grieved Minds, to us they give:
With Motions which run cross, composed we are,
Which makes our Reason and our Sense to jar.
When they are weary to torment us, must
We then return, and so dissolve to Dust?
But if I have my Fate in my own Power,
I will not breathe, nor live another hour:
Then with the Gods I shall not be at strife,
If my Decree can take away my Life.
Then on her feeble Legs she straight did stand,
And took a Pistol charged in either hand:
Here, Dear, (said she) I give my heart to thee,
And by my Death, divulged our Loves shall be;
Then Constant Lovers, Mourners be; when dead,
They Will strew our Graves, which is our Marriage Bed:
Upon our Hearse a weeping-Poplar set,
Whose moistning-drops our Death's-dri'd Cheeks may wet.
Two Cypress Garlands at our Head shall stand,
That were made up by some fair Virgin's hand:
And on our cold pale Corpse such Flowers strew,
As hang their Heads for grief, and downward grow.
Then shall they lay us deep in quiet Grave,
Wherein our Bones long Rest and Peace may have.
Let no Friends Marble-Tombs erect upon
Our Graves, but set young Mirtle-trees thereon:
Those may in time a shady Grove become,
Fit for sad Lovers Walks, whose Thoughts are dumb:
For Melancholy Love seeks place obscure,
No Noise nor Company it can endure:
And when to ground they cast a dull sad Eye,
Perhaps they will think on us who therein lie:
Thus, though we are dead, our Memory remains;
And, like a Ghost, may walk in moving-Brains;
And in each Head Love's Altars for us build,
To sacrifice some Sighs, or Tears distilled.
Then to her Heart the Pistol set, she shot
A Bullet in, and so her Grief forgot.
Fame with her Trumpet blew in every Ear;
The sound of this great Act spread every where:
Lovers from all parts came, by the report;
Unto her Urn, as Pilgrims did resort:
There offered Praises of her Constancy,
And vowed the like unto Love's Deity.
A Woman said, That Tale expressed Love well,
And showed, that Constancy in Death did dwell.
Friendship, they say, a thing is so sublime,
That with the Gods there is nothing more Divine.
With wonder Lovers, having but one will,
Their two Bodies one Soul does govern still:
And though they be always dis-joined much,
Yet all their Senses equally do t'uch:
For, what does strike the Eye, or other part,
Begets in all like Pleasure, or like smart.
So though in Substance, Form divided be,
Yet Soul and Senses, joined in one, agree.
A Man that to the Lady placed was nigh,
Said, He would tell another Tragedy.
Humanity, Despair, and Jealousy, expressed in three Persons.
WAlking along, close by a River's side,
The Waters smooth ran with a flowing-tide:
The Sun thereon did dart such shining-light,
As made it than a Diamond-Chain more bright.
The purling-streams invited me to swim,
Pulled my Clothes off, then entered every Limb.
But envious Cold, alas, did me oppress,
And darting-arrows sharp me backwards press.
The River to embrace me, made great haste,
Her moist soft arms incircled round my waste.
Streams coming fast, strove there to force me stay,
But that my arms did make my body way.
My hands did strike the soft smooth Waters face,
As flattering them to give my body place.
But when I found them apt higher to rise,
Striving to stop my breath, and blind my eyes;
Then did I spread my arms, and Circles make,
And the united-streams asunder brake:
My Legs did kick away those Waters clear,
To keep them back, lest they should crowd too near:
And as I broke those Streams, they run away,
Yet fresh supplied their place, to make me stay:
Long did I struggle, and my strength did try,
At last got hold upon a Bank near by;
On whose side was a Hill where Trees were placed,
Which on the Waters did a shadow cast:
Thither I went; and when I came close by,
I saw a Woman there a weeping lie;
Which seeing, I began to slack my pace:
Straight did my Eyes view there a lovely Face
Under a Tree; close by the Root she sat,
Which with her Tears as falling-show'rs she wet:
At last she spoke, and humbly thus did pray,
You Gods, said she, my Life soon take away:
No slander on my Innocence throw,
Let my pure Soul into Elyzium go:
If I drown here within this watery Lake,
O let my Tears a murmuring River make:
Give it both Voice and Words, my Grief to tell;
My Innocence, and why therein I fell.
Then straight she rose, the River leapt she in,
Which when I saw, I after her did swim:
My Hands, as Oars, did well my Body row,
Though panting-breath made waters rough to grow;
Yet was my Breast a Keel for to divide,
And by that help my Body swift did glide:
My Eyes the Needle to direct the way,
Which from the North of Grief did not estray;
She, as the Lodestone, drew me to her aid,
Though Storms within did make my Mind afraid.
Her Garments loose did on the Waters flow,
Which were puffed up like Sails when winds do blow.
I caught thereat, to draw her to the brink;
But when I went to pull, she down did sink:
Yet did not I my hold thereof let go,
But drew her to the Shore with much ado;
I panting with short breath, as out of wind,
My Spirits spent, my Eyes were dimly blind;
My strength so weak, forced me to lie down straight, did fill,
Because, alas, my Life was over-fraight.
When life got strength, my mind with thoughts
Then to the Lady used all art and skill;
Bowing her forwardsth' waters to let out,
Which from her Nose and Mouth gusht like a spout:
At last her breath (before restrained) out-broke,
And thus to me she passionately spoke:
O who are you that do my Soul molest,
Not giving leave in Death to take my rest?
Is there no Peace in Nature to be found?
Must Misery and Fear attend us round?
O Gods, said she, here grant me my desire;
Here end my life, and let my breath expire.
I Answered.
Thus you with Nature set your self at odds;
And by this wish you do displease the Gods:
By violence you cut off their Decree,
No violence in Nature ought to be.
But what makes you thus strive for to destroy
That Life which God did give you to enjoy?
She Answered, O Sir
If you did know the torments I do feel;
My Soul is rackt upon Ill Fortune's Wheel:
My Innocence by aspersion whipped,
And my pure Chastity of Fame is stripped:
My Love's neglected and forsaken quite,
Banished from that my Soul took most delight.
My Heart was placed upon a Valiant Man,
Who in the Wars much Honor bravely wan.
His actions all by wisdom placed were,
And his discourse delighted every Ear:
His Bounty, like the Sun, gave life and light
To those whom Misery had eclipsed quite.
This Man my Person seemed for to admire;
My Love before the World he did desire:
Told me, the Gods might sooner Heaven leave,
Than he forsake my love, or truth deceive.
But O vile Jealousy, a Lover's Devil!
Tormenting Thoughts with Suspicions evil;
Frighting the Mind with false Imaginations,
Burying all Joys in deepest Contemplations:
Long lay it smuther'd, but at last out-broke
With Hate; in Rage and Spleen base words it spoke.
Slander and Infamy in Circles round,
My innocent Youth with sharpest Tongues do wound:
But his Inconstancy did wound me more
Than Slander, Spite, or Malice did before:
For he another married, and left me
Clouded in dark Disgrace, black Infamy.
With that she fetched a Sigh; Heaven bless, said she,
This cruel unkind Man, who e're he be.
I faint, Death digs my Grave, O lay me in
This watery Monument; then may the Spring
In murmures soft, with blubbering words relate,
And dropping weep at my Ill Fortune's Fate.
Then on a Groan her Soul with wings did fly
Up to the Heavens, and the Gods on high:
Which when I saw, my Eyes with grief did flow,
Although her Soul I thought to Heaven did go.
And musing long, at last I chanced to see
A Gentleman which handsome seemed to be.
He coming near, asked me who there did lie?
I said, 'Twas one for Love and Grief did die.
Hearing my words, he started back, Brows bent,
With trembling legs he to the Body went;
Which when he viewed, his blood fell from his face,
His Eyes were fixed, and standing in one place.
At last kneeled down, and thus did say,
No hope is left, Life's fled away.
Thou wandering Soul, where e're thou art,
Hear my Confession from my heart:
I loved thee better far than life,
Thought to be happy in a Wife:
But O Suspicion, that false Thief,
Seized on my Thoughts, ruling as Chief.
Suspicion, Malice, Spite, commanded still,
To carry false Reports thy Ears to fill.
My jealousy did strive thee to torment,
And glad to hear when thou wast discontent:
I strove always my love for to disguise;
'Twas. said I married was, when all were lies.
But Jealousy begets all actions base,
And in the Court of Honor has no place.
Forgive me, Soul, where ever thou do rest,
For, of all Women, I did love thee best.
Here I do offer up my life to thee,
Both dead, we in one Grave may buried be.
Swifter than Lightning, straight his Sword he drew,
Upon the Point himself he desperate threw;
And to his panting Breast made such dispatch,
That I no help could bring, on hold could catch:
Turning his pale and ghastly eyes to me,
Mix both our ashes in one Urn, said he.
With that he fell close by his Mistress side,
Embraced, and kissed, and groaned, and there he died:
Which when I saw, I dressed, my Clothes put on,
To celebrate their Funeral-Rites alone:
First, I did lay a heap of Cypress dry,
With striking Flints I made a fire thereby,
Laid both their Bodies thereupon to burn,
Which in short time did into ashes turn:
And being mixed, I took them thence away,
And dug a Grave those ashes in to lay:
Then did I gather Cockle-shells, though small,
With art I strove to build a Tomb withal;
Placing some on, others in even Lays,
Others joined close, till I a Tomb did raise.
And afterward I planted Myrtle green,
Where Turtle-Doves are daily building seen:
And there young Nightingals come every Spring;
To celebrate their Fames, do sit and sing.
A Merry Lass, amongst the rest,
Began her Tale, and thus expressed:
A Master was in love with his fair Maid,
But of his scolding Wife was sore afraid:
For she in every place would watch and pry,
And peep through every Keyhole to espy;
And if she found them out, aloud would call,
And cry she was undone, her Maid had all
Her Husband's love, for she had none sh' was sure;
Wherefore this life she never would endure:
But he did woo his Maid still by his eye;
She, apprehensive, understood thereby;
And often would find some work to come in place,
Because her Master should behold her Face;
Excuses make, that business she had great,
(Her business was, her Master for to meet).
With pretty smiles she trips it by,
And on him casts a kind-coy eye:
To all the House besides, would seem demure,
Often singing Psalms, as if she were right pure;
Repeating Scripture, sigh, turn up her eyes,
As if her Soul straight flew unto the Skies,
And that her Body were as chaste cold Ice,
And she were only fit for Paradise:
Though her words were precise, her thoughts were not;
She, with her Master, Scripture quite forgot:
She then a Goddess was, prayed unto;
Her Master did, as Priests, with Offering woo:
Her Mistress, like to Juno, fret and frowned,
When that her Husband and her Maid she found;
And in the Clouds of Night would seek about,
Sometimes she mist them, sometimes found them out:
But when she did, Lord, what a noise was there!
How Jove and she did thunder in the air!
She with an Ishmael big away was sent;
Like unto Hagar, out of doors she went;
Where he, like Abraham good, a Bottle tied,
And gave her Means for the Child to provide:
Whereat her Mistress angry was, and cried;
And wished her Maid (like Ishma'l) might have died.
Another man, amongst the rest,
Said, they their Tales bad well expressed.
BUT they that study much, and seldom speak,
For want of use of words, are far to seek:
Their Tongue is like a rusty Key grown rough,
Which hardly turns, so do their words come forth:
Or like an Instrument that lies unstrung,
Till it be tuned, cannot be played upon:
For Custom makes the Tongue both smooth and quick,
And moving often, no words thereon will stick;
Like to a flowing-Tide, makes its own way,
Runs smooth or clear, without a stop or stay:
That makes a Lawyer plead well at the bar,
Because he talks there four parts of the year:
That makes Divines in Pulpits well to preach,
Because so often they the People teach:
But those that use to contemplate alone,
May have fine thoughts, good words to express, they none:
Good language they express in black and white,
Although they speak it not, yet well they write:
Much thoughts keep back the words from running out;
The tongue's ti'd up, the sluice is stopped no doubt:
For Fancy's quick, and flies such several ways,
For to be dressed in words it seldom stays.
Fancy is like an Eele, so slippery glides,
Before the tongue takes hold, away it slides.
Thus he that seldom speaks, is like to those
That traveling, their Mother-tongues do lose.
Now, says a Lady that was sitting by,
Pray let your rusty Tongue with silence lie,
And listen to the Tale that I shall tell;
Mark the Misfortunes that to them befell.
A Description of Love and Courage.
A Gentleman was riding all about,
As in a Progress, he chanced to spy out:
(Growing upon a rising-Hill) a Wood,
In midst whereof a little House there stood:
It was but small, yet was it wondrous fine,
As if 'twere builded for the Muses Nine:
The Platform was so well contrived, that there
Was never a piece of ground lay waste or spare.
This House was built of pure rich Marble-stone,
And Marble-Pillars wholly stood upon;
So smooth 'twas polished, as like Glass it showed,
Which gave reflection to the Wood there grow'd.
Those Trees upon the Walls, seemed painted green,
Yet every Leaf thereon was shaking seen:
The Roofs therein were arched with artful skill,
Which over-head hung like a hanging-Hill;
And there a man himself might entertain
With his own words, rebounding back again.
The doors to every room were very wide,
And men, like Statues, carved on either side;
And in such lively postures made they were,
They seemed like Guards or Porters waiting there.
The winding-Stairs rising without account
Of any steps, up to the top did mount:
It on the Head a Cap of Lead did wear,
Like to a Cardinal's Cap, 'twas made apiece;
But flat it was; close to the Crown did lie,
From Cold and Heat it kept it warm and dry:
And in the midst, a Tower placed on high,
Like to Ulysses Monster, with one eye:
But standing there, did view through windows out,
On every side, fine Prospects all about.
When that his eyes were satisfied with sight,
And that his mind was filled with such delight,
He did descend back by another way,
Chance was his only Guide, which did convey
Him to a Gallery both large and long,
Where Pictures, by Apelles drawn, there hung,
And at the end, a Door half open, half shut,
Where, in a Chamber, did a Lady sit.
To him so beautiful she did appear,
She seemed an Angel, not a Mortal here:
Clothed all in white she was, and from her Head
Her Hair hung down, and on her Shoulders spread;
And in a Chair she sat, a Table by,
Leaning thereon, her Head did side-ways lie
Upon her Hand, the Palm a Pillow made,
On which, being soft, her Rosy Cheeks she laid;
And from her Eyes the Tears in showers did fall
Upon her Breast, sparkling like Diamonds all:
At last she fetched a sigh, Heart break, said she;
Gods take my Life, or give me Liberty:
When those words were expressed, she was constrained;
He courage took on what she there complained,
And boldly entering in, she seemed afraid;
He kneeling down, asked pardon, and thus said:
Celestial Creature, do not think me rude,
Or want of Breeding made me thus intrude;
But Fortune me unto this House did bring,
Whereby a Curiosity did spring
From my desires this House to view throughout,
Seeing such shady Groves to grow about:
And when I came near to the Gate, not one
Was there to ask or make opposition:
The House seemed empty, not a Creature stirring,
But every Room I entered, still admiring
The Architect and Structure of each part;
Those that designed, were skilful in that Art.
VVandring about, at last, Chance favoring me,
Has brought me to this place, where I do see
ABeauty far beyond all Art, or any
That Nature heretofore has made, though many
Of all the Sex creates she sweet and fair,
Yet never any of your Sex so rare:
This made me stand and gaze, amazed to see
What wondrous glorious things in Nature be.
But when I heard your words for to express
Some grief of heart, and wished for a redress,
My Soul flew to your service, here I vow
To Heaven high, my life to give to you;
Not only give my life, but for your sake
Suffer all Pains Nature or Hell can make:
Nor are my Proffers for a base Self-end,
I Am to your Sex a Servant and a Friend:
Pure is my Zeal, and my Flame being clear,
Choose me your Champion, and adopt me here.
If I cannot your Enemy destroy,
I Will do my best, no rest I will enjoy;
Because my Fortune, Life, and Industry,
I Will sacrifaice unto thy Liberty.
When that the Lady heard him speak so free,
And with such passion, and so honestly:
I do accept your Favor, Sir, said she,
For no Condition can be worse to me
Than this I now do live in; nor can I
My Honor hazard in worse Company:
Wherefore, to your protection I resign;
Heaven, O Heaven, prosper this Design.
But how will you dispose of me? pray tell.
I will, said he, convey you to a Cell
Which is hard by; and there will Counsel take
What way is best to make a clear escape:
With that, his Riding-Coat which he did wear,
He pulled straight off, which she put on; her Hair
She tied up short, and covered close her Face,
And in this posture stole out of that place.
An old ill-natured Bawd that did wait on her,
Being then asleep, did never think upon her.
But when sleep fled, awaked, she up did rise,
Sitting upon her Bed, rubbing her eyes
That were sealed up with Matter and with Rheum;
When that was done, she went into the Room
Wherein the Lady used, alone to be:
Straight missing her, cried out most piteously,
Calling the Servants to search all about;
But they unto a Wake were all gone out.
The Peasant's Ball is that we call a Wake,
When Men and Maids do dance, and love do make;
And she that danceth best, is crowned as Queen,
With Garlands made of Flowers, and Laurel green:
Those Men that dance the best, have Ribbans ti'd
By every Maid that hopes to be a Bride.
Youth loves these kind of Sports, and to a Fair,
'Twill venture life, rather than not be there.
Which made the Servants all, although not many,
To be abroad, and leave the house for any
To enter in, which caused this escape,
And to the Owner brought so much mishap.
A Lord came galloping as from his Palace,
With pleasing thoughts, thinking alone to solace
Himself with his fair Mistress, who admired
Her Beauty more than Heaven, and desired
Her Favor more than Jove's; her angry words
Did wound him more than could the sharpest swords.
Her Frowns would torture him as on a Rack,
Muffling his Spirits in melancholy black:
But if she chanced to smile, his joys did rise
Much higher than the Sun that lights the Skies.
But riding on, the Castle coming nigh,
The Woman running 'bout he did descry:
His heart misgave him, with doubts he alighted,
Asking the reason she was so affrighted:
She shak'd so much, no answer could she make;
He, being impatient, unto her thus spoke:
Devil, said he, what is my Mistress dead,
Or sick, or stole away? or is she fled?
She kneeling down, cried out, O she is gone,
And I left to your Mercy all-alone.
With that he tore his hair, his breast did beat,
And all his body in a cold damp sweat;
Which made his Nerves to slack, his Pulse beat slow,
His strength to fail, so weak he could not go,
But fell upon the ground, seeming as dead,
Until his Man did bear him to a bed:
For he did only with him one Man bring,
Who proved himself trusty in every thing:
But when his diffused Spirits he did compose,
Into a deep sad Melancholy he grows;
Could neither eat, nor drink, nor take his rest,
His thoughts and passions being so oppressed.
At last this Lady and her Noble Guide,
Got to a place secure, yet forced to hide
Her self a time, till such Friends could make
That would protect Virtue for Virtue's sake;
Because her loving Foe was great in Power,
Which might a Friendless Innocent devour.
This Noble Gentleman desired to know
From what Misfortunes her restraint did grow.
Willing she was to tell the Gentleman
The story of her Life, and thus began:
After my birth, my Mother soon did dye,
Unto my Father leaving a Son and I:
My Father nor my Brother lived not long,
Then was I left alone; and being young,
My Aunt did take the charge to see me bred,
To manage my Estate; my Brother dead,
I was the only Child and Heir; but she
Was married to a Lord of High Degree,
Who had a Son, and that Son had a Wife,
They disagreed, led an unhappy Life.
When I was grown to sixteen years of age,
My Aunt did dye, her Husband did engage
To take the charge, and see me well bestowed,
And by his tender care great love he showed.
But such was my Misfortune, O sad Fate!
He died, and left me to his Son's VVife's hate;
Because this younger Lord grew much in Love,
Which when his Wife by circumstance did prove,
She sought all means she could to murder me;
Yet she would have it done with privacy:
The whilst her amorous Lord fresh Courtships made,
With his best Rhetoric, for to persuade
My honest Youth to yield to his desire,
My Beauty having set his heart on fire:
At last, considering with my self, that I
Having a plentiful Estate whereby
I might live honorable, safe, and free,
Not subject to be betrayed to slavery;
Then to the Lady and the Lord I went,
As a respect I told them my intent.
The Lady my Design she well approved;
He nothing said, but seemed with passion moved.
But afterward, when I my leave did take,
He did rejoice, as if 'twere for my sake;
And so it was, but not unto my good,
For he with Treachery my ways withstood;
For as I traveled, he beset me round,
And forced me from my Servants, which he found
To be not many; when he had great store
For to assault, but my defense was poor.
Yet were they all disguised, no Face was shown,
(Such unjust acts desire to be unknown).
When I was in their power, Help, help, said I,
You Gods above, and hear a VVretch's Cry:
But no assistance from Heaven did I find,
All seemed as Cruel as the mad Mankind.
Then he unto the Castle me conveyed;
The Lord, himself discovering, thus said:
Cruellest of thy Sex, since no remorse
Can soften thy hard heart, I Will use my force;
Unless your heart does burn with equal fire,
Or condescend to what I shall desire.
I for my own defense, against this abuse,
Soft flattering words was forced for to use;
Gently entreating his Patience, that I
A time might have my heavy heart to try;
That by persuasions it might entertain
Not only Love, but return Love again.
He seemed well-pleased, his temper calm did grow,
Which by his smiling-countenance he did show:
He said, If in your Favor I may live,
A greater blessing Heaven cannot give.
Then to a Woman old he gave the charge
For to attend, but not for to enlarge
My Liberty; with rules my Life did bind;
Nothing was free, but Thoughts within my Mind.
Thus did I live some half a year, and more,
And all this while the Gods on high implore;
For still he wooed, and still I did deny;
At last h'impatient grew, and swore that I
Deluded him, and that no longer would
He be denied, but yield to him I should.
With much entreaty I pacified his Mind
With words and countenance that seemed kind;
But Prayers to Heaven more earnestly I sent
With tears and sighs, that they would still prevent,
By their great power, his Evil Design,
Or take away this loathed life of mine:
Although at first they seemed to be all deaf,
Yet now at last they sent me some relief.
The whilst the Champion Knight, with his fair Prize,
Was struck with Love by her quick-darting Eyes;
Yet moved they so as Modesty did guide,
Not turning wantonly, or leer'd aside:
Nor did they stern or proudly pierce,
But gentle, soft, with sweet commerce:
And when those Eyes were filled with watery streams,
Seemed like a Brook gilded with the Sunbeams;
At last perswading-Love prevailed so far,
As to present his Suit unto her care:
Fair Maid, I love thee, and my Love so pure,
That no corrupted thoughts it can endure:
My Love is honest, my Request is just;
For one Man's fault, do not all Men mistrust.
I am a Bachelor, and you a Maid,
For which we lawfully may love, he said:
Wherefore, dear Saint, cast not my Suit aside;
Choose me your Husband, and be you my Bride.
I am a Gentleman, and have been bred
As to my Quality; my Father dead,
Me his Possessions left, which are not small,
Nor yet so great to make me vain withal.
My Life is yet with an unspotted Fame;
Nor so obscure, not to be known by Name;
Amongst the best and most within this Land,
Favors received, yet none like your Command.
She stood a time, as in a musing-thought,
At last she spoke, Sir, said she, you have brought
My Honor out of danger, and civilly
Have entertained me with your company;
For which I owe my life, much more my love;
Should I refuse, I should ungrateful prove.
It Is not for Wealth that I would marry to,
Nor outward Honors that my Love can woo:
But it is Virtue, and a Heroic Mind,
A Disposition sweet, noble, and kind;
And such a one I judge you for to be,
Wherefore I Will not refuse, if you choose me.
When they were thus agreed, they did repair
Unto his House, and went to marry there:
The whilst the Lord, the Kingdom all about,
He privately had sent to search her out.
At last news came, with whom, and where she dwelt;
With that much grief within his heart he felt,
That any Man should have her in his power;
He, like a Devil, could his Soul devour.
But when he heard the Messenger to say,
There Is preparation against her Wedding Day;
He grew outrageous, cursed Heaven and Earth,
The Marriage of his Parents, and his Birth:
At last he did resolve, what e're befell,
That he would have her, though he sank to Hell.
When he had got a Company together,
Such as he fed, that would go any whither;
No act they would refuse, that he desired,
Obeyed most desperately what he required.
Unto his House they went in a disguise,
Intending then the Lady to surprise:
But being upon her Wedding Day, were there
A Company of Guests that merry were;
This Lord desired to part them, if he might,
'Cause lie together they should not that Night.
So in they went: the Servants all did think
Them Maskerades, and made them all to drink:
But when they went into an inward Room
Where all were dancing, Bride and the Bridegroom;
The Bride acquainted with that Maskard-sight,
She ran away as in an extreme fright:
The Bridegroom soon imagined what they were,
And, though unarmed, his Courage knew no fear.
Their Swords they drew, aimed only at his life;
That done, they thought to get away his Wife:
His Hat and Cloak, Arms of Defense did make;
The Tongs, for to assault, he up did take:
The Women scriecht, Murder, Murder, cried out;
The Men flung all the Chairs and Stools about,
With which they did resist, and did oppose,
For some short time, the Fury of his Foes.
It chanced a Sword out of a hand did fall;
The Bridegroom straight took't up and fought withal;
So well did manage it, and with such skill,
He many of his Enemies did kill:
Yet he was wounded sore, and out of breath;
But heat of Courage kept out dull cold Death.
At last his Friends got Arms to take his part,
Who did the oppression of his Foes divert.
The Vizzard of the Lord fell off at length;
Which when the Bridegroom saw, with vigorous strength,
He ran upon him with such force, that he
Struck many down, to make his passage free.
The trembling Bride was almost dead with fear,
Yet for her Husband had a listening ear.
At last the noise of Murder did arrive:
O is he dead, said she, and I alive!
With that she run with all her power and might,
Into the Room, her Husband then in fight
With her great Enemy; and where they stood,
The Ground was like a foaming Sea of Blood;
Wounded they were, yet was each other's heart
So hot with Passion, that they felt no smart.
The Bride did pass and re-pass by their Swords,
As quick as flashing Lightning, and her words
Cried out, Desist, desist, and let me dye,
It is decreed by the great Gods on high,
Which nothing can prevent; then let my fall
Be an Atonement to make Friends withal.
But Death and Courage being long at strife
About her Husband's Honor and his Life,
They both did fall, and on the ground did lie;
But honored Courage received Fame thereby.
When Death had turned out his Life, it went
Into his Fame, and built a Monument.
The Bride, when that she saw her Husband faint,
She weeping mourned, and made a sad complaint:
O Gods, said she, grant me but this Request,
That I may dye here on my Husband's breast.
With that she fell, and on his Lips did lie,
Sucked out each other's breath, and so did dye.
When that the Lover saw her Soul was fled,
And that her body was cold, pale, and dead;
Then he impatient grew his Life to hold,
With desperate Fury then both fierce and bold,
He gave himself a mortal wound, and so
Fell to the ground, and sick did grow.
Then did he speak to all the Company,
I do entreat you all for Charity,
To lay me by my Mistress in a Grave,
That my free Soul may rest and quiet have:
With that a Voice heard in the air to say,
My Noble Friends, you ought to disobey
His dying-words; for if you do not so,
From our dead ashes jealousy will grow:
But howsoever, their Friends did so agree,
That they did put them in a Grave all three:
And ever since fierce Jealousy does rage
Throughout the World, and shall from age to age.
A Bachelor that spightful was, and old,
Unto the Company his Tale he told.
WOmen care not, nor seek for Noble Praise;
All their delight runs to Romantic ways;
To be in love, and be beloved again;
And to be fought-for by the youngest men,
Not for their Virtue, but their Beauty fair,
Intangling men within their amorous snare,
And turning up their Eyes, not for to pray,
Unless it be to see their Love that day:
With whining Voice, and foolish words implore
The Gods; for what? unless to hold the door.
And what is their desire, if I should guess,
I straight should judge it tends to wantonness:
Perchance they will say, It is for Conversation;
But those Conversations bring Temptation.
What Youth's in love with Age, where wisdom dwells,
That all the follies of wild Youth still tells?
But Youth will shun grave Age's Company,
And from them fly as from an Enemy.
Say they, Their wit is all decayed and gone;
And, that their wit is out of fashion grown:
Say, they are peevish, froward, and displeased,
And full of pain, and weak, and often diseased.
But that is fond excuse to plead for Youth:
For Age is Valiant, Prudent, full of truth:
And Sickness often on the Young takes hold,
Making them feeble, weak, before they are old.
If Women love, let it be for the sake
Of Noble Virtue, and the wiser take;
Else Virtue is depressed, forsaken quite,
For she allows no Revellers of Night.
This Sex does strive by all the art they can,
To draw away each other's Courtly-Man.
And all the allurements that they can devise,
They put in execution for the prise.
Their Eyes are quick, and sparkling like the Sun,
Yet always after Mankind do they run:
Their words are smooth, their faces in smiles dressed;
Their heart is by their countenance expressed:
But in their older age they spightful grow,
And then they scorns upon their youngers throw;
Industrious are, a false Report to make:
Lord! Lord! what poor Employments Women take
To carry Tales on Tongues. from Ear to Ear,
Which faster run than Dromedaries far:
In heat, with speed and haste they run about
From House to House, to find their Comrades out:
And when they meet, so earnest they are bent,
As if the Fate's Decrees they could prevent:
The best is Rubbish; they their Minds do load
With several Dresses, and what is the Mode:
But if they spightful are, they straight defame
Those that most Virtue have, or honored Name;
Or else about their Carriage they find fault,
And say their Dancing-Masters were stark naught.
But for their several Dressings, thus will say,
How strangely such a one was dressed to day!
And if a Lady dress, or chance to wear
A Gown to please her self, or curl her Hair,
If not according as the Fashion runs,
Lord, how it sets a-work their Eyes and Tongues!
Straight she is fantastical, they all do cry,
Yet they will imitate her presently;
And for what they did laugh at her in scorn,
With it think good themselves for to adorn.
Thus each of them does into other pry,
Not for to mend, but to find fault thereby.
With that the Women rose, and angry were,
And said, they would not stay such Tales to hear.
But all the Men upon their Knees did fall,
Begging his Pardon, and their stay withal.
And Women's Natures being easy, free,
Did soon consent to keep them company.
The Tale to tell,
Unto a Woman's turn befell:
And when their rusling twatling Silks did cease,
Their creaking Chairs, and Whisperings held their peace;
The Lady did a Tragic Tale unfold,
Forcing their Eyes to weep, whilst she it told.
The Description of the Fondness of Parents, and the Credulity of Youth.
A Gentleman had lived long, and was old,
A Wife he had, which Fifty years had told:
Their Love was such, as Time could not decay;
Devout they were, and to the Gods did pray:
Yet Children they had none to bless their Life;
She happy in a Husband, h'in a Wife.
But Nature, in the World her Power to show,
From an old Stock caused a young Branch to grow:
At length this aged Dame a Daughter bore,
Got by her Husband when Threescore, and more.
They are so joy'd, they Nature's Bounty praise,
And thank the Gods that did the Issue raise.
They were so fond, that none this Child must t'uch,
Only themselves; their pains they thought not much.
She gave it suck, and dressed it on her Lap,
The whilst he warmed the Clouts, then cooled the Pap.
They, when it slept, did by the Child abide,
Both sitting near the Cradle on each side.
But when it cried, he danced it on his Arm,
The whilst she sung, its Passion for to charm.
Thus did they strive to please it all they could,
And for its good yield up their Lives they would.
With pains and care they Nursed their Daughter well,
And with her Years her Beauty did excel.
But when she came to Sixteen years of age,
Her Youth and Life by Love she did engage
Unto a Gentleman that lived hard-by
Close to her Father's House, who seemed to dye
If he enjoyed her not; yet did he dread
His Father's Curse to light upon his Head;
His Father to his Passion being cruel,
Although he was his only Son and Jewel;
Charging, upon his blessing, not to marry
This fairest Maid; nor Servants for to carry
Letters or Tokens, Messages by stealth;
Despising her, because of no great Wealth:
Yet she was Nobly born, not very poor,
But had not Wealth to equal his great store.
But he did woo his Love in secret guise,
Courting her privately for fear of Spies.
He strove to win her unto his embraces;
Muffle the Faults he would, and the Disgraces.
Said he,
Why may not we our Senses all delight?
Our Senses and our Souls Heaven unite
That we call Honor, only Man creates,
For it was never destined by the Fates.
It is a word Nature never taught us, nay
It is a Precept she forbids to obey.
Then follow Nature, for that follows God,
And not the Arts of Men, they are vain and odd.
Let every Sense lie steep, not drowned, in pleasure:
Let us keep up their height in balanced measure.
First, let our Eyes all Beauteous Objects view;
Our Ears all Sounds, which Notes and Times keep true.
Then Scent all Odours to refresh the Brain;
With Tastes delicious Palates entertain.
Touch things most pleasing, that all Parts may feel
Expansion of the Soul, from Head to Heel:
Thus we shall use what Nature to us gave;
For by restraint, in Life we dig our Grave:
And in the Grave our Senses useless lie;
Just so is Life, if Pleasures we deny.
Thus Heaven, that gave us Sense, may take it ill,
If we refuse what is offered to us still:
Then let our Sense and Souls take all delight,
Not to surfeit, but feed each Appetite.
Come Pleasure, Circle me within thy Arms,
Inchant my Soul with thy delightful Charms.
Said she, It is not always in our Power
To feed, Delight, nor Pleasure to devour.
Man no free Power has of any thing;
Only himself can to destruction bring:
Can kill his Body, and his Soul can damn,
Although he cannot alienate the same;
Nor can he make them always to remain,
Nor turn them to what they were first again.
Thus can we cross and vex our selves with pain,
But being sick, cannot be well again:
We can Disturb great Nature's work at will;
But to Restore and Make, is past our skill.
But he did plead so hard, such Vows did make,
Such large Professions, and such Oaths did take,
That he would constant be, and that his Bride
He would her make, when that his Father died:
She, young and innocent, knew no deceits,
Nor thought that Words and Vows were used as baits.
So yielded she to all he did desire,
Thinking his Vows as much as Laws require.
But they so often did meet, till it befell,
She sick did grow, her Body big did swell;
Which she took care to hide, and would not be,
As she was wont, in other Company:
But to her Parents she would often cry,
And said she swelled so, with a Tympany.
They did believe her, and did make great moan,
Their only Child was now so sickly grown.
His Father old, the Marriage to prevent,
Now, in all haste, his Son to travel sent;
Gave him no time nor warning to be gone;
Nor, till he saw him shipped, left him alone.
But he, to ease his Mistress of her fear,
For to return, he only now took care.
But she no sooner heard that he was gone,
But in her Chamber locked her self alone;
Complained against her Destiny and Fate,
And all her Love to him was turned to Hate.
You Gods, said she, my Fault's no wilful sin;
For I did think his Vows had Marriage been:
But by his stealth, so privately to leave me,
I find my Crime, and that he did deceive me:
For which, said she, you Gods torment him more
Than ever any Man on Earth before.
With that she rose, about her Neck she flung
A Silken String, and in that String she hung.
Her Parents to her Chamber did repair,
Calling her forth to take the fresh sweet air;
Supposing it might do her Health some good;
And at her Chamber door long time they stood:
But when they called, and knocked, no answer made,
She being sick, they' began to be afraid:
Their Limbs did shake with age, Nerves being slack't,
Those Nervous Strings with fear were now contract:
At last, though much a-do they had to speak,
They Servants called to open, or to break
The Lock: No sooner done, but with great fear
They entered in; and after they were there,
The horrid sight no sooner struck their Eyes,
But it congealed their Hearts, and straight both dies.
The Fame of their sad Fates all round was spread,
The Lover heard his Mistress then was dead;
His Clothes, his Hair he tore, his Breast did beat,
His Spirits issued out in a cold Sweat.
Said he, O cursed Death come kill me quick,
And in my Heart thy Spear or Arrow stick;
Because my Love in thy cold Arms does lie,
I now desire, nay, am resolved to dye.
But O! Love is a powerless God; in vain
He strives with his Flame to melt Death's Icy Chain:
For though with Love my Heart so hot does burn,
Yet cannot melt, I fear Death's Icy Urn.
Then he all in a rage to the Earth fell,
And there invoking up the Devils of Hell,
Says he, Ye Powerful Terrors me assist,
For to command or force Death when I list,
That by your help and power my Love may rise
From the dark Vault or Grave wherein she lies;
Or else by Death's cold hand alone,
Convert me into Marble-stone.
Then running, as distracted, in and out,
By Fancies, Visions strange saw all about:
And crying loud, My Mistress, she is there;
He seemed to catch, but grasped naught else but air:
See, see her Ghost, how it does slide away,
Her Soul is pure, and shines as glorious Day.
But my foul Soul, which is as black as Night,
Does shadows cast upon the Soul that is bright;
Which makes her walk as in a gloomy shade,
Like Shadows which the Silver Moon has made.
Hark how my Love sings sweetly in the Sky,
Her Soul is mounted up to Heavens high,
And there it shall be made a Deity,
And I a Devil in Hell tormented lie.
His spirit being spent, fell to the ground;
And lying there a while, as in a swound,
At last he rose, and with a sober pace
He bent his steps, as to her burying-place;
And with his Cloak he muffled him about,
His Hatpull'd over his Brows, his Eyes looked out
To guide his way; but far he had not gone,
That straight he saw the Funerals coming on:
Three Hearses all were born, as on a breast,
Black covered two, with white the third was dressed:
A Silver Crown upon that Hearse did stand,
And Myrtle-boughs young Virgins bore in hand:
The graver sort did Cypress-branches bear,
The mournful Parents death for to declare.
With solemn Music to the Grave them brought;
With Tears in-urn'd their Ashes in a Vault:
But he, before the People did return,
Did make great haste to get close to the Urn;
His Hat pulls off, then bows, lets loose his Cloak;
With dropping Eyes, and countenance sad, thus spoke:
You charitable Friends, whoever you be,
To see the Dead thus buried solemnly;
The like to me your Favor I do crave,
Stay all, and see me buried in this Grave.
Giving himself a private wound, there fell
Into the Grave; and dying, there did tell
Of his sad Love; but now, said he,
Our Souls nor Bodies never shall parted be.
With that he sighs, and breathing out his last,
About his Mistress Corpse his Arms he cast.
The Urn sealed up, his Friends a Tomb did build;
Famous it was, such Love therein it held.
Most Parents do rejoice, and Offerings bring
Of thankful Hearts, or Prayers for their Offspring.
These thought their Age was blessed; but they were blind
With Ignorance, and great affections kind,
More than with Age; but who knows Destiny?
Or thinks that Joy can prove a Misery?
Some Parents love their Wealth more than their Breeds,
Hoording up more than Love or Nature needs:
And rather than poor Virtue they will take,
By crossing Love, Childless themselves will make.
A sober Man, who had a thinking-Brain,
Of Vice and Vanity did thus complain:
IT IS strange to see the Follies of Mankind,
How they for useless things do vex their Mind:
For what superfluous is, serves them for naught;
And more than necessary is a fault:
Yet Man is not content with a just measure,
Unless he surfeits with Delight and Pleasure;
As if true Pleasure only lived in Pain,
For in Excess Pain only does remain:
Riches bring Care to keep, Trouble to spend;
Beggars and Borrowers have never a Friend:
And Hospitality is often diseased,
And seldom any of their Guests are pleased:
In Feasts, much Company disturbs the rest,
And with much noise it does the Life molest.
Much Wine and Women makes the Body sick;
And Doting-Lovers they grow Lunatic.
Playing at Cards and Dice, Men Bankrupts grow,
And with the Dice away their Time they throw,
Their Manly Strength, their Reason, and their Wit,
Which might in Wars be spent, or Letters writ.
All Generosity seems buried here;
Gamesters seem Covetous, as does appear:
But when they spend, most prodigally wast,
As if their Treasures were the Indies vast,
Or else their Purse an endless Mine of Gold;
But they will soon find it does a bottom hold.
Titles of Honor, Offices of State,
Bring Trouble, Envy, and Malicious Hate.
Ceremony restrains our Freedom, and
State-Offices Commands, Men tottering stand.
And Vanities Inchanters of the Mind,
That muffle Reason, and the Judgment blind;
Do lead the life in strange fantastic ways,
To seek that Pleasure which does live in Praise.
Praise is no real thing, an empty Name,
Only a Sound which we do call a Fame;
Yet for this Sound Men always are at strife,
Do spend their Fortunes, and do hazard Life:
They give their Thoughts no rest, but hunt about,
And never leave until the Life goes out.
That Man that seeks in Life for more than Health,
For Rest and Peace within his Commonwealth,
(Which is his Family) sure is not wise,
And know not where true Happiness still lies.
Nor does he guess that Temperance does give
The truest Pleasure, makes it longest live.
You Gods, said he, give me a Temperate Mind,
An Humble Cottage, a Chaste Wife and Kind,
To keep me Company, to bear a part
Of all the Joys or Sorrows of my Heart;
And let our Labors, Recreations be,
To pass our Time, and not a Misery.
Banish all Cares, you Gods, let them not lie
As heavy burdens; and when we must dye,
Let Us leave the World, as in a quiet Sleep;
Draw gently out our Souls, our Ashes keep
Safely in Urns; not separate our Dust,
Or mix us so, if transmigrate we must,
That in one Body we may still remain;
When that is dissolved, make us up new again.
A Lady said, She his Discourse would fit;
A Story tell that should his Humor hit.
THere was a Man and Woman married were,
They lived just so as should a Married Pair;
Though their Bodies divided were in twain,
Their Souls agreed, as one they did remain:
They did so mutually agree in all,
This Man and Wife we only One may call.
They were not rich, nor were they very poor;
Not pinched with want, nor troubled with great store.
They did not labor for the Bread they eat,
Nor had they various or delicious Meat;
Nor many Servants had to vex their Mind,
Only one Maid that faithful was, and kind;
Whose Work was just so much as to employ
Her so, as Idleness might not her annoy.
Thus decently and cleanly did they live,
And something had for Charity to give.
Her Pastime was to spin in Winter cold,
The whilst he read, and to her Stories told:
And in the pleasant Spring, fresh air to take,
To Neighbouring-Villages short Journeys make.
In Summer-Evenings they the Fields did round,
Or sit on Flow'ry-banks upon the ground:
And so, in Autumn they their walks did keep,
To see Men gather Grapes, or sheer their Sheep.
Nor did they miss Jove's Temple, once a day,
Both kneeling down unto the Gods to pray
For gracious Mercy, their poor Souls to save,
A healthful Life, an easy Death to have.
Thus did they live full forty years, and more;
At last Death comes, and knocks at the door,
And with his Dart he struck the Man full sick,
For which the Wife was almost Lunatic:
But she with care did watch, great pains did take;
Broths, Julips, Jellies, she with skill did make.
She most industrious was his pains to ease,
Studying always his Humor for to please:
For often the sick are peevish, froward, cross,
And with their pains do tumble, groan, and toss,
On their sad Couches; quietly he lay,
And softly to himself to Heaven did pray.
Yet was he melancholy at the heart,
For nothing else, but from his Wife to part.
But when she did perceive his Life decay,
Close by his side, upon a Bed she lay,
Embraced and kissed him often, until his Breath
And Soul did part, drawn forth by powerful Death:
Art gone, said she? then I will follow straight;
For why, my Soul upon thy Soul shall wait.
Then turned her self upon the other side,
In breathing-sighs and show'ring-tears she died.
A Single-Life best.
A Man said, He lived a most happy Life,
Because he was not tied unto a Wife:
Said he, Marriage at best obstructs the Mind.
With too much Love, or Wives that are unkind.
Besides, a Man is still tied by the heel,
Unto the Cradle, Bed, Table, and Wheel;
And cannot stir, but, like a Bird in string,
May hop a space, but cannot use his wing.
But those who are free, and not to Wedlock bound,
They have the liberty the World to round;
And in their Thoughts much Heavenly Peace does dwell,
When Marriage makes their Thoughts like pains of Hell.
And when they die, no Care does grieve their Mind,
For any thing that they shall leave behind.
A Lady said, If Women had but Wit,
Men neither Wives nor Mistresses should get:
No cause should have to murmr and complain,
If Women their kind Freedom would restrain.
But Marriage is to Women far more worse
Than it is to Men, and proves the greater Curse:
And I, said she, for proof, a Tale will tell,
What to a Virtuous Married Wife befell.
THere once a Lord and Lady married were,
And for Sev'n years did live a Happy Pair:
He seem;d to love his Wife, as well he might,
For she was Modest, Virtuous, Fair, and Bright;
A Disposition suitable and kind;
No more Obedience Man in Wife could find:
She did esteem him so, and prized him such,
Of Merit, she thought no Man had so much;
And loved him more than Life loved perfect Health,
Or Princes for to rule a Commonwealth.
But such the Natures of most Husbands be,
That they love Change, and seek Variety;
Or else like Fools or Children, easily caught
With pleasing looks, or flattering tongues are brought
From Virtues side, in wicked ways to run,
And seldom back with Virtue do return.
But Misery may drive them back again,
Or else with Vices they do still remain.
It chanced this Lord a Lady fair did meet,
Her Countenance was pleasing, Speech was sweet;
And from her Eyes such wanton Glances went,
As from her Heart Love-Messages had sent;
Whereby this Lord was caught in Cupid's Snare,
How to address, he only now takes care.
But he straight had access, and Courtships makes,
The Lady in his Courtships pleasure takes;
And Pride she takes, that she could so allure
A Husband from a Wife, that was so pure
As Heaven's Light, and had the Praise and Fame
Of being the most Fair and Virtuous Dame.
At last this Lady by her wanton Charms,
Enchanted had this Lord, till in his arms
He might embrace her in an amorous way,
His Thoughts were restless, working Night and Day
To compass his Designs; nor did he care
To lose his Wife's affection, but did fear
His Mistress to desplease; and as her Slave,
Obeyed her will in all that she would have.
But she was subtle, and of Nature bad;
A crafty Wit, in making Quarrels, had:
For which she seemed to be Coy and Nice,
And sets her Beauty at so great a price,
That she would never yield unless that he
From his Chaste Wife would soon divorced be:
Straight he, to please her, from his Wife did part,
For which his Wife was grieved at the Heart,
And sought her self obscurely for to hide,
And in a solitary House did 'bide,
As if she had a grievous Criminal been,
Or Causer was of his adulterous Sin;
And for a Penance, she did strictly live;
But she was Chaste, and no offense did give:
Yet she in sorrow lived, no rest could find,
Sad melancholy thoughts moved in her Mind:
Most of her time in Prayers she did spend,
Which as sweet Incense did to Heavens ascend;
Did often for her Husband Mercy crave,
That they would pardon all his Faults, and save
Him from Destruction, and that they would give
Him Happy Days as long as he should live.
But after he his Mistress had enjoyed,
And that his Amorous Appetite was cloyed;
Then on his Virtuous Wife his Thoughts did run,
The later Lady he did strive to shun:
For often they did quarrel and fall out;
He gladly would be rid of her, no doubt.
At last he was resolved his Wife to see,
And to be Friends, if that she would agree.
But when he saw his Wife, his Heart did ache,
As being guilty, all his Limbs did shake:
The terror of his Conscience did present
To him her wrongs, but yet to her he went.
She being set near to a Fountain low,
Her Tears did make the Stream to overflow.
Thither he came, and on the Earth did kneel,
But in his Soul such passions did he feel
Of Shame, Fear, Sorrow, as he could not speak:
At last his Passion through his Lips did break,
Begging her Pardon, and great Vows did make
Of Reformation, and that for her sake
He would all Pain or Punishment endure,
And that no Husband should to Wife be truer.
Which when she heard, she sighing, did reply,
You come too late, my Destiny is over-fraught,
My Bark of Life with Grief is over-fraught,
And ready is to sink with its own weight:
For showers of Tears, and stormy Sighs do blow
Me to the Ports of Death, and Shades below.
He being affrighted at the word she spoke,
In haste he rose, her in his arms did take:
Wherewith she pleased, and smiling, turned her Eye
Upon his Face, so in his arms did dye.
And being dead, he laid her on the ground;
He in the Fountain, and her Tears, was drowned.
Impatiently in a high discontent
There died, so had a watery Monument.
Another Lady said, Such Men I hate
That wrong their Wives, and then repent too late.
But all Adulterers I wish might have
A Violent Death, and an Untimely Grave.
The next Man's turn to speak was one that in
The Wars was bred; and thus be did begin:
A Description of Natural Affection.
THere were two Potent Princes, whose great Fames
For Actions in the Wars got mighty Names.
It chanced these Potent Princes both did greet,
And were resolved in open Wars to meet,
Their Courages to try, their Strengths and Power,
Their prudent Conducts, or their fatal Hour.
In short, these Armies meet, a Battle fight,
Where one Side beaten was by Fortune's spite.
The Battle won, that Army routed, ran,
And for to save his Life, strove every Man,
And their Artillery they left behind,
Each for himself a shelter hoped to find.
When from pursuit the Victors did come back,
The Solidiers for to plunder were not slack:
And every Tent they searched, and sought about
To see if they some Treasure could find out.
To th'Prince's Tent did some Commanders go,
Where they did find an Object of much woe.
That Prince being dead, upon the ground was laid,
And by him sat a fair and sweet young Maid:
Her Beauty was so splendrous, and so bright,
Through Clouds of Grief, it shone like Heavens light.
Which the Commanders saw, then straight did go
To let their General of this Beauty know.
Who when he came, amazed was in mind,
Such Beauty for to see, and Grief to find.
For this fair Princess by her Father set,
Her Eyes being fixed, her Tears his Cheeks did wet;
She leaning over his Head, her Eyes down bend,
From whence her Tears upon his Face descend.
Upon his Mouth such deep-fetch'd sighs did breathe,
As if therein her Soul she would bequeathe;
For which this General did her admire,
Her Tears quenched not, but kindle did Love's Fire.
With that he did command the Solidiers there,
The Dead to take, the Body up to bear.
But then she spoke: For pity have remorse,
Remove not from me my dead Father's Corpse:
For had not Fortune (which he never trust
With any business, but what needs he must)
Conspired with Death to work his overthrow,
His wisdom crossing her, she grew his Foe.
But all her Spite could never do him harm,
For he with Prudence still himself did arm:
But when that Death assisted her Design,
She struck him dead when Battles were to join;
His Solidiers forced to fight, when that their Mind
Was pressed with grief, which fast the Spirits did bind;
It was his Death that made him lose the Day,
And made you Victors that now wear the Bay.
But look, said she, his Hands now strengthless lie,
In fight which made his Enemies to fly:
His Eyes, now shut by Death, in Life gave light
Unto his Soldiers, in the Wars to fight.
His Tongue, that silenced is by Death's cold Hand,
In Life moved wisely, and could well command:
It Knowledge gave to those that little knew,
And did instruct what was the best to do.
His Heart lies still, no Motion does remain:
Ceased are the Thoughts in his well-tempered Brain;
Where in his Heart all Virtues did abide,
And in his Brain strong Reason did reside:
But all is vanquished now, and Life does seem
No better than a Shadow, or a Dream.
It Is strange in Nature to observe and see
The unproportion'd Links in Destiny.
For Man's the wisest Creature Nature makes,
And best Extracts to form his Figure takes;
And yet so short a Life to him she gives,
He Is almost dead before he knows he lives:
Yet she from Man receives the greatest praise,
He does admire all her curious ways:
With wonder he her several Works does see,
And studies all her Laws, and each Decree;
Does travel several ways within his Mind,
His Thoughts are restless, her Effects to find.
But in his Travels Death cuts him off short,
And leads him into dark Oblivion's Court.
Thus Nature is unjust, Heaven unkind,
Which strikes the Best, the Worst do favor find.
My Father's Merits might have challenged still
A longer Life, had it been Heavens will.
But he is dead, and I am left behind,
Which is a torture to my troubled Mind.
If Soldiers pity have, grant my desire,
Here strike me dead, and let my Breath expire.
Said the Victorious Prince:
Heaven forbid! all horrid Acts we shun;
For in the Field the purest Honor's won:
We stake our Lives for Lives, and justly play
A Game of Honor on a Fighting-Day.
Perchance some Cheats may be among the Rout,
But if they are found, the Noblest throw them out.
But since you cannot alter Destiny,
Nor none that live, but have some Misery;
Raise up your Spirits, unto Heaven submit,
And do not here in Grief and Sorrow sit.
Your Father was a Soldier of great Fame,
His Valiant Deeds did get an Honored Name:
And for his sake judge us, which Soldiers be,
To have Human'ty, and Civility.
Your Father he shall safely be conveyed,
That he may be by his Ancestors laid.
But you must stay, yet not as Prisoner;
You shall Command and Rule our Peace and War.
She answered not in words, her Tears did plead,
That she with her dead Father might be freed:
But her clear Advocates could not obtain
Their humble Suit, but there she must remain
With the Victorious Prince; but he denied,
As Victor, in a Triumph for to ride:
For though the Battle I have won, he said,
Yet I am Prisoner to this Beauteous Maid.
She is the Conqueress, therefore it is fit
I walk as Prisoner, she Triumphant sit.
Then all with great Respects to her did bow;
So does the Prince, and plead, protest, and vow,
To be her Servant, and to yield his Life
To Death's sad strokes, unless she'ld be his Wife.
But she still weeps, his Suit no favor gains;
Of Fates and Destiny she still complains.
Why, said the Prince, should you my Suit deny,
Since I was not your Father's Enemy?
Soldiers are Friends, though they each blood do spill,
It Is not for Spite, nor any Malice ill;
But Honor to maintain, and Power to get,
And that they may in Fame's House higher set:
For those of greatest Power, to Gods draw near;
For naught but Power makes Men like Gods appear.
But had I killed your Father in the Field,
Unto my Suit in Justice you might yield.
But I was not the Cause your Father died,
For Victory does still with him abide:
And though that Death stid strike him to the heart,
Yet his great Name and Fame will never part.
Men will suppose the Loss is loss of Life,
And had he lived, there would be greater strife
Between our Armies; but if you will be mine,
Our Kingdoms in a Friendly Peace shall join.
Then she began to listen, and give ear;
She of her Country in distress took care:
And in short time they were both Man and Wife;
Long did they live, and had a happy Life.
The next, a Virgin's turn her Tale to tell;
Her Youth and Modesty did fit it well.
The Surprisal of DEATH.
A Company of Virgins young did meet,
Their Pastime was, to gather Flowers sweet:
They white Straw-Hats upon their Heads did wear,
And falling-Feathers, which waved with the air,
Fanning their Faces, like a Zephyrus Wind,
Shadowing the Sun, that strove their Eyes to blind;
And in their Hands they each a Basket held,
Which Baskets they with Fruits or Flowers filled:
But one amongst the rest such Beauty had,
That Venus for to change might well be glad.
Her Shape exact, her Skin was smooth and fair;
Her Teeth white, even set, a long curled Hair:
Her Nature modest, her Behavior so,
As when she moved, the Graces seemed to go.
Her Wit was quick, and pleasing to the Ear,
That all who heard her speak, straight Lovers were.
But yet her Words such Chaste Love did create,
That all Impurity they did abate.
And every heart or head where wild Thoughts live,
She did convert, and wise Instructions give:
For her Discourse such heavenly Seeds did sow,
That where she strewn, there Virtues up did grow.
These Virgins all were in a Garden set,
And each did strive the finest Flowers to get.
But this fair Lady on a Bank did lie
Of most choice Flowers, which did court her Eye;
And every one did bend their heads full low,
Bowing their Stalks, which from the Roots did grow;
And when her hands did touch their tender Leaves,
Each seemed to kiss, and to her Fingers cleaves.
But she, as if in Nature 'twere a Crime,
Was loath to crop their Stalks in their full prime;
But with her Face close to those Flowers lay,
That through her Nostrils those Sweets might find way;
Not for to rob them, for her head was full
Of Flowery Phansies, which her wit did pull,
And Posies made, the World for to present
With a more lasting and a sweeter Sent.
But as she lay upon this pleasant Bank,
For which those Flowers did great Nature thank;
Death envious grew she such delight did take,
And with his Dart a deadly wound did make:
A sudden Cold did seize her every Limb,
With which her Pulse beat slow, and Eyes grew dim.
Some that sat by, observed her pale to be,
But thought it some false Light; yet went to see:
And when they came, she turned her Eyes aside,
Spread forth her arms, then stretched, and sighed, and died.
The frighted Virgins ran with panting-breath,
To tell the sadder story of her death:
The whilst the Flowers to her rescue bend,
And all their Med'cinable Virtues send:
But all in vain, their Power's too weak; each Head
Then drooped, seeing they could not help the Dead.
Their fresher Colors did no longer stay,
But faded straight, and withered all away.
For Tears, they dropped their Leaves, and thought it meet
To strew her with them, as a Winding Sheet.
The Airy Choristers hovered above,
And sung her last sad Funeral-Song of Love.
The Earth grew proud, now having so much honor,
That Odoriferous Corpse lying upon her.
When that pure Virgin's Stuff dissolved in Dew,
Was the first cause new Births of Flowers grew,
And added Sweets to those it did renew.
The Grosser Parts the Curious soon did take,
Of it transparent Purslain they did make:
Her Purer Dust they keep for to refine
Best Poets Verse, and gild every Line;
And all Poetic Flames she did inspire:
So her Name lives in that Eternal Fire.
A Mock-Tale of his Grace the Duke of Newcastle.
CUPID Love-birding went, his Arrow laid,
Aiming to hit a young fresh Countrey-Maid:
Being pur-blind, his Arrow it did glance,
And hit an Old-old Woman there by chance.
She presently with Love sighs shorter breath,
Groaned so, as all the Neighbors thought her Death.
Little she had of feeling, nor no ground
To guess where Cupid used to make the wound.
A long forgetfulness there was, no doubt,
Of what was Love, and all those thoughts worn out.
At last, Love rubbed her Memory up, and then
She thought some Threescore years ago, and ten,
Was wounded so; but then was in her Prime;
The Surgeon cured her, was Father Time;
But he is not skilful for Love's wounds; all those,
Though they seem cured, yet they will never close,
But break out still again; not Winter's cold
Will freeze them up, nor Age, though never so old.
She, with Laborious Hands, and Idle Breech,
Used to weed Gardens, and for her grown rich;
Some Twenty Pounds she would got, which she did hide
For her great, great, great Grandchild, when a Bride.
O powerful Love! to see thy fatal Curse,
Now to forget her Noble Race and Purse;
Enquires out the best Tailors in the Town,
To make her Wastcoats, Petticoats, and Gown:
New Shoes of Shoo-maker she did bespeak,
And bids him put three-penny-worth of Creak
Into the Soles, that Dew when them it fills,
Like Hero's Buskins, chirrup through the Bills.
Hunts Pedlars out, and buys fresh Ribbans blew,
To show that she is turned a Lover true.
And now those Hands, not white as Venus Doves,
Not to preserve, but hide with Dog-skin Gloves.
Takes keener Nettles up, that by her stood,
To rub her Skin and Cheeks, but found no Blood.
No dangling Tresses there could any find;
Sister to Time, no Locks before, behind.
Yet smooth she was not, as the Billiard-ball;
But bald as it all over, you might call.
When met her Love, he thought she smiled to grace
Her self, when 'twas but wrinkles in her Face.
And all Love's arts she tried, and often she met him,
This lusty young and labouring-man, to get him.
His Poverty with her Purse joined their hands,
And so did enter in the Marriage-bands.
But to describe their sumptuous Marriage Feast,
Their richer Clothes, and every honored Guest;
Their melting Love-Songs, softer Musick's t'uch,
Are not to be expressed, not half so much
As you may now imagine; all my Skill,
And fainter Muse, too weak; nay, Virgil's Quill,
With that description, it would blunter grow;
And Homer's too, with all his Furies; so
They blushed for shame, when saw this lovely Bride
Put them all down; thus triumphs she in Pride.
Now after Supper, when they were both fed,
Your Thoughts must go along with them to bed:
There being laid, he mounted now Love's Throne;
She sighed with Love, then fetched a deeper groan:
And so expired there in height of Pleasure,
And left him to enjoy her long-got Treasure.
Nay, so beloved she was, that now lies low,
That all the Women wished for to dye so.
Then came a Lady young, that had not been
In that Society; and coming in,
They told her, she a Tale must pay,
Or, as a Bankrupt, she must go away.
Truly, said she, I am not rich in Wit,
Nor do I know what Tales your Humors fit.
Yet in my young and budding Muse,
Will draw the Seasons of the Year,
Like 'Prentice-Painters, which do use
The same to make their skill appear.
But Nature is the Hand to guide
The Pencil of the Brain, and place
The Shadows so, that they may hide
All the Defects, or giv't a grace.
Fancy Draws Pictures in the Brain,
Not subject to the outward Sense;
They are Imaginations vain,
Yet are they the Life's Quintessence.
For when Life's gone, yet they will live,
And to the Life a Fame will give.
The Tale of the Four Seasons of the Year.
THE Spring is dressed in buds and blossoms sweet,
And Grass-green Socks she draws upon her feet.
Of freshest air a Garment she cuts out,
With painted Tulips fringed round about,
And lines it all within with Violets blew,
And yellow Primrose of the palest hew:
Then wears an Apron made of Lillies white,
And laced about it is with Rays of Light.
Cuffs of Narcissus her fair hands do tie,
Pinned close with Stings of Bees which buzzing fly
To gather Honey-dew which thereto cleaves,
And leave their Stings when they do prick the leaves.
Ribbons of Pinks and Gilliflowers makes;
Roses both white and red, for Knots she takes.
When she is thus dressed, the Birds in Love do fall,
And chirping, then, do to each other call
To sing, and hop, and merry make,
And joy'd they are all for the Spring's sake.
But of all Birds, the Nightingal delights
To sing the Spring to bed in warmer Nights;
Because the Spring at Night draws in her Head
Into the Earth, for that she makes her bed;
And in the Morning, when asleep she lies,
The Nightingal does sing to make her rise;
And calls the Sun to open her fair Eyes,
Who gallops fast, that he might her surprise.
But when the Spring is past her Virgin's prime,
And married is to old bald-Father Time;
The Nightingal, for grief, does cease to sing,
And silent is till comes another Spring.
The Summer's clothed in glorious Sunshine bright,
And with a trailing-Veil of long-day-light:
Some Dust, as Powder, on her Hair does place,
And with the Morning's Dew does wash her Face.
A Zephyrus-Wind she for a Fan does spread,
To cool her Cheeks, which are hot-burning-red;
And with that Heat so thirsty she does grow,
As she drinks all the fresh sweet Springs that flow.
Then in a Thundring-Chariot she does ride,
For to astonish Mortals with her Pride:
Before her Chariot flashing-Lightning flies,
A fluid Fire that spreads about the Skies.
As Princes great, that in dry ways do travel,
Have Water thrown to allay the Dust and Gravel.
This Fire allays, cleanses all Vapors gross,
Lest, rising, they should stop the Thunder's force:
And when she from her Chariot does alight,
Then is she waited on by Sunbeams bright:
Or else the Rays that from the Moon do spread,
As Waxen Tapers, light her to her bed,
And with refreshing-sleeps a while does rest;
There sweet air breathing from her panting breast.
Yet Summer's proud, ambitious, high, and hot,
And full of action, idle she is not:
Chol'rick she is, and often does Quarrels make;
But yet sometimes she does her Pleasure take:
At high-noon with the Butter-flyes does play,
In the Evening with the Bats does dance the Hay:
Or at the setting of the Sun does fly
With Swallows swift, to keep them Company.
But if she is crossed, she straight malicious grows,
And in a fury Plagues on Men she throws,
Or other Sickness, and makes Beasts to dye,
And cause the Marrow in the bones to fry.
But Creatures that with long time are grown old,
Or such as are of Constitution cold,
She nourishes, and Life she does restore,
In Flies, Bats, Swallows, many Creatures more:
For some do say, these Birds in Winter dye,
And in Summer revive again to fly.
Of all the Four Seasons of the Year,
This Season does most full and fat appear.
Her blood is hot, and flowing as full Tide,
She Is only fit to be Apollo's Bride:
But she, as all young Ladies, in their prime,
Does fade and wither with old Father Time;
And all their beauty, which they much admire,
Does vanish soon, and quickly does expire.
Just so the Summer dries, withers away;
No powerful Art can make sweet Beauty stay.
The Autumn, though she is in her fading years,
And sober, yet she pleasantly appears:
Her Garments are not decked with Flowers gay,
Nor are they green, like to the Month of May,
But of the color are of dapple Deer,
Or Hares, that to a sandy ground appear:
Yet she is rich, with Plenty does abound,
All the increase of Earth is with her found:
Most Creatures, Nourishment to them does give,
And by her bounty, Men, Beasts, Birds, do live;
Besides, the grieved Heart with Joy does fill,
When from the plump Grapes Wine she does distill;
And gathers Fruits, which lasting are, and sound,
Her brows about with Sheaves of Corn are crowned,
In those are Seeds, whereof Man makes some Bread,
With which the Poor and Rich are nourished.
Yet it is not Bounty can hinder Nature's course,
For constantly she change in one source:
For though the Matter may be still the same,
Yet she does change the Figure and the Frame:
And though in Principles she constant be,
And keeps to certain Rules, which well agree
To a wise Government; yet does not stay,
But as one comes, another glides away:
So does the Autumn leave our Hemisphere
To Winter cold, at which Trees shake for fear,
And in that Passion all their Leaves do shed,
And all their Sap back to the Root is fled:
Like to the Blood, which from the Face does run,
To keep the Heart, lest Death should seize thereon.
Then comes the Winter, with a lowering brow,
No pleasant Recreations does allow:
Her skin is wrinkled, and her blood is cold;
Her Flesh is numb, her Hands can nothing hold:
Her Face is swarthy, and her Eyes are red;
Her Lips are blew, with Palsy shakes her Head;
She often coughs, and's very rheumatick,
Her Nose does drop, and often does she spit;
Her Humour's Melancholy, as Cold and Dry,
Yet often she in show'ring Rain does cry,
And blustering Storms, as in a Passion sent,
Which on the Earth, and on the Water vent;
As Rheums congeal to Phlegm, the Waters so,
By thickning Cold, congeal to Ice, Hail, Snow,
Which she spits forth; upon the Earth they lie
In lumps and heaps, which makes the Plants to dye:
She Is poor and barren, little has to give,
For in this Season all things hardly live:
But often those who are at the worst estate,
By change of Times do grow more fortunate:
So when the Winter's past, then comes the Spring,
And Plenty does restore to every thing.
A Poet in the Company Said to his Lady:
YOur Fingers are Minerva's Loom, with which
Your Sense in Letters weave,
No knots or snarls you leave;
Work Fancy's Thread in Golden Numbers rich.
Your Breasts are Helicon, which Poets fits:
For though they do not drink,
If thereon they do think,
Their Brains are filled with high and sparkling Wits.
Your Tongue's Parnassus Hill, on high it stands;
Her Muses sit and sing,
Or dance in Fayrie's Ring,
Crowned with your Rosy Lips, and sweet Garlands.
Your Eyes Diana's Arrows; and no doubt
Your arched Brow her Bow,
Like Ebony black does show,
From whence sweet gentle Modesty shoots out.
Your Hairs are fatal Threads, Lovers hang by;
Your Brain is Vulcan's Net,
Fine Fancies for to get,
Which, like to winged Birds, aspiring fly.
The next, a Man of Scholarship professed,
He in his turn this Tale told to the rest.
An Expression of the Doubts and Curiosity of Man's Mind.
THere was a Man which much desired to know,
When he was dead, whither his Soul should go;
Whether to Heaven high, or down to Hell,
Or the Elyzium Fields, where Lovers dwell;
Or whether in the air to fly about;
Or whether it, like to a Light, goes out.
At last the Thoughts, the Servants to the Mind,
Which dwell in Contemplation, to find
The truth; they said, No pains that they would spare
To travel every where, and thus prepare:
Each Thought did clothe it self with Language fit,
For to enquire, and to dispute for it:
And Reason they did take to be their Guide,
Then straight unto a College they did ride;
Where Scholars dwell, and learned Books are read,
The living Works of the most Wise, who are dead.
There they enquired, the truth for to know,
And every one was ready for to show;
Though every several Work, and several Head,
And several Tongue, a several path still lead;
Where the Thoughts were scattering several ways,
Some tedious long, others like short Essays.
But Reason, which they took to be their Guide,
With rest and silence quietly did 'bide,
Till their return, who ragged and all torn,
Came back as naked as when they were born:
For in their travels hard disputes had past,
Yet all were forced for to return at last.
But when Reason saw their poor condition,
Naked of Sense, their Words, and Expedition,
And Expectation too, and seeming sad,
(But some were frantic, and despairing, mad.)
She told them, They might wander all about,
But she did fear the Truth would never find out.
Which when they heard, with rage they angry grew,
And straight from Reason they themselves withdrew.
Then all agreed they to the Court would go,
In hopes the Courtiers then the truth might know:
The Courtiers laughed, and said they could not tell;
They thought the Soul in Sensual Pleasures dwell,
And that it had no other Heaven or Hell;
The Soul they slight, but wish the Body well.
This answer made the Thoughts not long to stay
Among the Courtiers, but soon went their way.
Then to the Army straight they did repair,
Hoping the Truth of Souls they should find there;
And of the Chief Commander they enquire,
Who willing was to answer their desire.
They said for certain, that all Souls did dye,
But those that lived in Fame or Infamy.
Those that Infamous were, without all doubt
Were damned, and from reproach should never get out:
But such whose Fame their Noble Deeds did raise,
Their Souls were blessed with an Eternal Praise;
And those that died, and never mentioned were,
They thought their Souls breathed out to naught but Air.
With that the Thoughts were very much perplexed,
Then did resolve the Chemists should be next
Which they would ask: so unto them they go
To be resolved, If they of Souls did know.
They said unto the Thoughts, When Bodies dye,
Souls are the Elixir, and pure Chemistry:
For Gold, said they, can never wasted be,
Nor can it alter from its purity.
Eternal it is, and shall for ever last,
And as pure Gold, so Souls do never wast.
Souls are the Essence, and pure Spirits of Gold,
Which never change, but shall for ever hold:
And as Fire does the pure from dross divide,
So Souls in Death are cleans'd and purified
From grosser parts of Body; and no doubt
The Soul, as Spirits, Death exhaleth out:
It is the Essence of great Nature's store;
All Matter has this Essence, less or more.
After the Thoughts had mused long, In fine,
Said they, we think the Soul is more Divine,
Than from a Metal'd Earth for to proceed;
Well known it is, all Metals Earth does breed:
And though of purest Earth the true Gold be,
Being refined by Heat to that degree
Of pureness, by which it long does last,
Yet may long time and labor make it wast,
To show it is not Eternal; and perchance
Some slight Experience may that work advance,
Which Man has not yet found; but Time, said they,
May Chemists teach; and so they went away.
But traveling about, they weary grew;
To rest a while, they for a time withdrew
The search of Truth, into a Cottage went,
Where lived an aged Cottage, well content,
A Man and Wife, which pious were, and old;
To them the Thoughts their tedious Journeys told,
And what they went to seek, the Truth to find
Concerning Souls, to tell unto the Mind:
For we desire, said they, the truth to know,
From whence the Soul proceeds, or where 'twill go,
When parted from the Body. The Old Man said,
Of such Employment he should be afraid,
Lest Nature or the Gods should angry be
For his Presumption and Curiosity.
If it be Nature's work, there is no doubt
But it does transmigrate all things about:
And who can follow Nature's steps and pace,
And all the subtle ways that she does trace?
Her various Forms, which curious Motion makes;
Or what Ingredients for those Forms she takes?
Who knows, said he, the Cause of any thing,
Or what the Matter is whence all does spring?
Or who at first did Matter make to move
So wisely, and in order, none can prove;
Nor the Decrease, nor Destinies can find,
Which are the Laws that every thing do bind.
But who can tell that Nature is not Wife
To mighty Jove? and he begets the life
Of every Creature which she breeds, and brings
Forth several Forms; each Figure from her springs.
Thus Souls and Bodies joined in one Gin,
Though Bodies mortal be, the Soul's divine,
As being first begot by Jove, and so
The purest part of Life's the Soul, we know;
For the animated part from Jove proceeds,
The grosser part from Nature self she breeds.
And what is more Animated than Mankind,
Unless his Soul, which is of higher Kind?
Thus every Creature to Jove and Nature are,
As Sons and Daughters, and their Offspring fair.
And as their Parents of them do take care;
So they, as Children, ought not for to fear
How they dispose of them, but to submit
Obediently to all that they think fit;
Not to dispute on idle Questions still,
But show obedience to their Maker's will.
Man asks blessing of his Father Jove,
And Jove does seem Mankind the best to love.
And Nature she her blessing does bestow;
When she gives Health, makes Plenty for to flow.
The blessings which Jove gives unto Mankind,
Are peaceful Thoughts, and a still quiet Mind:
And Jove is pleased, when that we serve his Wife
(Our Mother Nature) with a Virtuous Life:
For Moral Virtues are the Ground whereon
All Jove's Commands and Laws are built upon.
Thoughts trouble not your selves, said he, which way
The Soul shall go to Jove, and Nature pay:
For Temperance, wherein the Life is blessed,
That Temperance does please the Life the best.
Intemperance does torture Life with pain;
And what is superfluous, to us is vain.
Therefore return, and temper well the Mind,
For you the truth of Souls shall never find.
At last came Reason, which had been their Guide,
And brought them Faith; in her they did confide.
Taking their leave, away with Faith they ride,
And Faith e're since does with the Mind reside.
A Lady which all Vanities had left,
Since she of Youth and Beauty was bereft:
She said, That Pride in Youth was a great sin;
Of which a Tale did tell, thus entering in:
A Description of the Fall of foolish and self-conceited Pride.
THere was a Lady rich, that sat in state,
And round about her did her Servants wait:
Where every Tongue did walk still in their turn,
But in the ways of Flattery they run.
You are, said one, the finest dressed to day;
A Heavenly Creature, did another say:
Your Skin is purer far, than Lillies white,
And yet is clear and glassy as the Light:
And from your Eyes such splendrous rays do spread,
That they seem like a Glory round your Head:
Your Wit is such, it is supernatural;
And all that hear you speak, straight Lovers fall:
The sound but of your Voice, charms every Ear,
And when you speak, your breath perfumes the air.
Thus by these flatteries most proud she grew,
And scornful looks on every Object threw:
All Men she scorned that did to her address;
And laughed at all did love to her profess.
Her Senses for to please, she was so nice,
That nothing served but what was of great price.
Thus did she live in Lux'ry, Pride, and Ease,
And all her Thoughts were still her self to please.
She never prayed unto the Gods on high,
For she did think her self a Deity;
That all Mankind was made her to admire,
And ought her Favors most for to desire:
That every knee that bowed not to her low,
Or whose demeanors did not reverence show.
She thought them Beasts that did not Merit know,
Or that her Frowns should work their overthrow.
Her Smiles and Frowns she thought such power had,
As Destiny, to work both good and bad.
At last the Gods, that always have an eye
Upon the Earth, who all things do descry
Amongst poor Mortals, they this Lady spied,
Whose heart was swelled, and thoughts were big with pride,
Begot by Pluto's Wealth, and Nature's Paint,
Bred in the Soul, which makes it sick and faint.
But Pride is nursed still by the Senses five,
What from each Sense it sucks, it keeps alive.
But if no Nourishment it gets from those,
As Touch, Taste, Sound, sweet pleasant scent orshows.
It faints and pines a way as starved, so dies,
And in a Grave of Melancholy lies.
But, as I said, when Gods poor Mortals viewed,
They for their sins, with Punishment pursued.
Then with this Lady they did first begin,
Many ill accidents at her they fling:
First, they did set her House and Goods on fire,
Where her rich Furniture did soon expire:
Then Envy sought all ways to pull her down,
And taxed her Land as due unto the Crown;
And in that Suit great Sums of Money vast
Lawyers engrossed, which made those Sums to wast.
And when those Lawyers got all that she had,
They cast her Suit, as if her Cause was bad:
By which her Lands she lost; then only left
Her rich with Beauty, but of Lands bereft:
In which she pleasure took, although but poor
Of Fortune's Goods, of Nature's Giftssh' had store.
But when the Gods did see her still content,
At last they to her Body Sickness sent.
She patient was, her Beauty still did last:
But when that they their Judgment on that cast,
Making a Grave to bury Beauty in,
Which Beauty once did tempt the Saints to sin:
Because her Face so full of Pock-holes were,
That none could judge that Beauty once dwelt there.
Then did she sit and weep, turned day to Night,
Ashamed she was to show her Face the light.
Time, an Ingraver, cuts the Seal of Truth;
And, as a Painter, draws both age and youth:
His Colors, mixed with Oil of Health, lays on;
The plump smooth Youth he pencils thereupon:
Shadows of Age he places with much skill,
Making the hollow places darkest still.
But Time is slow, and leisure he does take,
No price will hasten him his Works to make;
But accidental Chance, who often does jarr
With aged Time, and then some Works does mar.
But when her wealth was gone, and state was down,
Then did her Friends and Servants on her frown;
So far now from professing Slavery,
As they did use her most uncivilly;
Would rail against her, spightful words throw out;
Or had she been but guilty, would (no doubt)
Betray her life: such natures have Mankind,
That those in Misery no Friends can find:
For Fortune's Favors only Friendships make.
But few are Friends only for Virtue's sake;
In Fortune's Frowns Man will not only be
A Neuter, but a deadly Enemy:
Nay, even a Devil to torment the Mind,
If he no mischief' against the body find.
But after she had mourned Three hundred days,
Consid'ring Nature's, Fortune's various ways;
She did repent, weeping for what was past,
Imploring Gods to pity her at last.
Good Gods! forgive my Vanity and Pride,
Let not my Soul with sinful spots be died;
Let your great Mercies scour those spots off clean,
That by your Justice no spots may be seen.
Consider, Lord, the Works that Nature makes,
The Matter, Motion, and the Form she takes;
The Grounds and Principles on which she builds;
The Life and Death in all things she distills,
Is various still; in what she does compose,
Nothing but wild Inconstancy she shows.
Nor is it only the substantial part
That is composed thus by her Curious Art:
But what we call Immortal, as the Soul,
Does various passions appetites control.
And as all bodies that are young, want strength,
And wait for Time to give them breadth and length;
So does the Soul want Understanding too,
And knows not what is best to think or do:
Wherefore, great Jove, I never shall despair
Of thy sweet Mercy, nor yet Devils fear.
To punish Ignorance, Youth rash ways runs,
Which Age by long-experienc'd knowledge shuns:
But Age often time's as faulty, as Youths be
Corrupted with bad Principles: we see
That length of Time and Custom makes them show
As if in Man they naturally grew.
But to conclude, the time she had to live,
She heartily unto the Gods did give:
Though young, into a Nunnery she went,
Her Vows unto the Gods she did present:
Her Days not being long, she soon there died,
And now her Soul with Angels does reside:
For with her Penance, Tears, and Contrite Spirit,
She washed away her sins, and Heaven did merit.
The next Tale when you read, it will discover
The fortunate or the unfortunate Lover.
A Mock-Tale of the Lord Duke of Newcastle, which his Grace was pleased to say,
out of his great Civility, That it would serve for Shadows to set off the rest;
He loving Truth so well, that he was never good at telling Tales.
A Young and Lusty Cheshire-Lad did move
In Venus Sphere, and was so filled with Love
When first he saw a lovely Lass at Chester,
Whose badg of Christianity was Hester.
So beautiful and fair she did appear,
Fresh as the welcome Spring to the New Year;
And Odoriferous as Flower's birth;
As fair as newborn Lillies from the Earth.
This set the young Man's heart in Love's Flame Fire,
Struck dumb in Love, turned all now to admire.
At last Love found a Tongue, which did not fail
To burst out violently, and thus to rail;
Cursing now partial Nature, that did give
More beauty to her than elsewhere does live.
Bankrupt in Beauty, since her store is gone,
Mankind condemned to foul ones now, or none.
Was Nature lavish? or else made the Thest
Upon her self, since she has nothing left
Of what is handsome? so I now do find,
He enjoys thee, enjoys all Womankind:
For Beauty, Favor, and what is height of Pleasure,
Since thou art Nature's Storehouse, and her Treasure.
O love me then, since all my hopes are crossed;
If I enjoy you not, I Am wholly lost.
For what I can call Happiness; nay worse,
My Life then to me's but a fatal Curse:
But if you yield, I Will bless Dame Nature's Gift,
And Bounty to you, since 'twas all her drist
To make her Masterpiece in you, and vex
The envious Females, angring all your Sex:
And if her bounty to you, you give me,
I shall be Deifi'd in love by thee.
Here on my knees I beg thy Love thus low;
Until I have it, my Knees here shall grow:
Therefore be kind. She answered with sweet Eyes,
Which spoke, not speaking, for to bid him rise:
And then discoursed with modest blushes, so
As that did tell him all her heart did know.
Trembling and shaking with Love's Palsi'd Tung,
With broken Sighs, and half Words it was strung;
Love's Comma's, Full-Points, and Parenthesis,
And this Love's Rhetoric, Oratory is.
With Love's pale-difficulty then afraid,
She softly said, O I Am a tender Maid,
And never heard such language! you will deceive me;
And now I wish, I could wish you would leave me.
Why do you inchant a silly Maid? alas,
I never saw such beauty in my Glass,
And yet I Have heard of flattering Glasses too;
But nothing flatters like you Men that woo:
Your Tongue's Love's Conjuration, without doubt;
Circles me here in Love, cannot get out,
By your Love's Magic whispering. Then did yield,
And said, You Have conquered, and have won the field.
Such Joy between them, such new Passions raised,
Which made the God of Love himself amazed;
Since by no Tongue or Pen can be expressed;
Cupid and Hymen never hoped such a Feast.
But see the Fate of business, which does move
So cross, For Business has no sense of Love.
O thou dull Business! Yet some Statesmen pry
Into Love's Secrets with a glancing Eye.
But here our Lover was arraigned to stand
Condemned to Business, that in Ireland
Necessity does urge him: That word Part,
So cruel was, it struck each other's heart,
Which inwardly did bleed with sorrow's grief,
Since nothing now but hopes were their relief.
Sadly he goes aboard, Love fills his Sails,
And Cupid with his wings fanns gentle Gales
To waft him over; he thus thought to please
His wounded Lover over those Rocky Seas;
Love would not leave him: nor was he content,
Unless this dangerous passage with him went.
In the mean time, his Mistress did commit
Her self to sorrow, and with her to sit
As her close Prisoner, this was all her end,
And grieved more than Widows do pretend.
Safely is landed now our Lover over,
And Cupid with him, on the Irish shore.
Love is so various, which some Lovers see;
Now Love an Irish Cupid's turned to be:
And takes all memory thus from our Lover,
Of his first Mistress, and does now discover
Love's new Plantation in the Irish Pale,
In Love's rich Island there, which does not fail
To take our Lover, and inflame him more
Under an Irish Mantle, than what is store
Of Gowns of Cloth of Gold. Curls, painted Art,
Cheats Love, when simple Nature wounds Love's Heart.
This change of Love is blown so up and down,
By Fame's loud Trumpet, through all Chester Town:
The Women gossip'd it, and could not hold
Till to his former Mistress they it told.
This was the first time that she smiled to see
Impossible Reports of him to be:
They might as well say, Phoebus gives no light,
Or Stars to fall, or make a Day of Night,
As he inconstant was: yet Love does doubt,
Not doubting, yet enquires all about,
And sets her Love-spies to enquire anew:
But those reports each minute stronger grew:
So she resolved her self to know the truth,
And was disguised in Clothes now like a Youth,
And went in Cavalier: The gentle Wind
Did favor her, and landed to her mind.
The Port was Dublin, and could not forbear
To make enquiries for her Love, and there
She found him at an Inn. He then began
To take such liking to his Countryman,
All his Discourse enquiring for his Ends,
To know the welfare of his English Friends:
Which she so fully satisfied, as he
Was now enamored of her company;
And was so fond, in her took such delight,
As supped, and lay together too that night.
Never suspecting her, his Mistress, then
Blindly went on, and took her for a Man;
So full of Love and Friendship, could not hold,
But to her all his Irish Love he told,
Desiring her to go along and see
This Miracle of Beauty, which was she;
And so she did. Her Love turned now disdain,
To see his Falsehood, and no love remain:
So base, unworthy, and unconstant too,
As now began to think what she should do.
She quenched her Passion, which is wise and better
Than Love's Complaints: so writ to him a Letter
Of her whole Voyage, and Love's constant History,
All her Designs, disguises in Love's Mystery;
And left this Letter in the Window: so
Three or four days it was before he did know,
Or found it out. In the mean time she is gone,
And shipped for England, leaving him alone.
When found her Letter was, such Passions grew
Stronger upon him than e're Lover knew;
Resolved the foaming Billows to embrace,
Those liquid steps of hers he meant to trace,
And lay himself in pickled tears of Love,
Now at her feet, to see what that would move:
But all in vain, he thought too long had tarri'd,
When landed, found the same day she was married:
Fell in such ecstasies, cursing his Fate,
The Ship and Winds, that made him come so late.
With Love's new hopes, his Sails he filled, and then
Invoked God Neptune to go back again:
And all the passage as he went along,
Challenged the Mermaids in a loving Song;
With Love's assurances so overjoyed,
As now his loving heart was not annoyed,
But filled with Pleasure, and with all Delight,
Thinking to embrace his Irish Love that night.
No sooner landed so -- he thought to woo
His Mistress, but he found her married too.
Cursing the Stars of his Nativity,
Thus short of Wedlock at both ends to be;
Made him grow desperate; and, as they say,
Then in despair he made himself away
Upon a Wench, and some swear without doubt,
That there he knocked the Brains of's Cupid out;
So murdered Love, and there he did enroul
Each one a Fool, with a Platonic Soul:
And so despised and scorned the old God Hymen,
That with so easy words so long did tie men,
To make them Galley-slaves in Marriage, so
Ti'd in his Chains, condemned for life to row
In Wedlock's Galley -- Give me freedom then,
Thy Godhead I invoke, whilst foolish Men
To Love and Hymen's Prisons there do sit,
Justly committed for their want of Wit:
For he is a Fool that is ti'd when might be free:
And thus he raved and talked Nonsense you see,
As he that writ this Story, you may mend it;
So for his sake, and yours, and mine, I Will end it.
A Lady said, His Tale of Love did tell;
She with a Tale of Death would fit it well:
For Death, said she, unties the Lover's knot,
When deadly Arrows from his Bow are shot.
A Lady on her Deathbed panting lay,
She called her Friends, and thus to them did say:
Farewell my dearest Friends, for I must go
Unto a place which you nor I yet know:
May be my Sp'rit will wander in the shade
Of glimmering light, which is by Moonshine made:
Or in my Tomb in peace may lie asleep,
So long as Ashes in my Urn do keep.
Or else my Soul, like Birds, may have its wings,
Or like to Herc'les Flies that want their stings.
But howsoever, Friends, grieve not, nor cry,
For fear my Soul should be disturbed thereby:
Clothe not your selves with Melancholy black;
Call not your Grief unto remembrance back:
But let your Joys a Resurrection have,
Called forth by comfort from the sorrowful Grave.
Let not Delight intombed lie
In the sad Heart, or weeping Eye:
Let not pale Grief my Soul affright,
Shrouded in Melanch'ly's dark Night:
But Death, said she, I fear him not;
So turned her head, and Death her shot.
Then on a Cypress Hearse was laid forth dead;
As scorning Death, aside was turned her head:
By cruel Death her arms were careless flung;
Her hands over the sides as strengthless hung:
Her eyes were closed, as if she lay asleep;
Though she was pale, her face did sweetness keep.
Her Elogie was thus:
Tears rain a-pace, and so a River make,
To drown all Grief within a watery Lake.
Make Seas of Tears, for Wind of Sighs to blow
Salt Billows up, the Eyes to overflow:
Let Ships of Patience traffic on the Main,
To bring in Comfort to sad Hearts again.
The next turn, a Man;
And he thus began:
THE Silkworm and the Spider Houses make,
All their Materials from their Bowels take;
They cut no Timber down, nor carve they Stone;
Nor buy they Ground to build their Houses on:
Yet they are Curious, built with Art and Care,
Like Lovers, who build Castles in the Air,
Which every puff of Wind is apt to break,
As Imaginations, when Reason's weak.
They said, His Tale was short,
He Answer made, I Will piece it out.
And thus he said:
THE Silkworm digs her Grave as she does spin,
And makes her Winding Sheet to lap her in:
And from her Bowels takes a heap of Silk,
Which on her Body as a Tomb is built:
Out of her ashes do her young ones rise;
Having bequeathed her Life to them, she dies.
They only take that Life to spin a Death;
For as they wind up Silk, they wind out Breath.
Thus, rather than do naught, or idle be,
They Will work, and spin out Life's small Thread we see.
When all their work is done, ready to dye,
Their Wings are grown, for Life away to fly.
The Silkworm is first a small Seed; then turns into a Worm; at last grows
to have Wings like a Fly, but lives not to make use of them. As soon as she is
big enough, she spins a Ball of Silk all about her self; wherein, being grown
to be a Fly, she makes a hole to come out, to leave Seed for the generation of
her young ones: After which she immediately dies.

The Women said, the Men made quick dispatch
In telling Tales, like Dogs that Bones do snatch.
But howsoever, a Woman did begin
To tell a Tale, and thus she entered in.
A Description of the Passion of Love misplaced.
A Lady on the Ground a mourning lay,
Complaining to the Gods, and thus did say:
You Gods, said she, why do you me torment?
Why give you Life, without the Mind's content?
Why do you Passions in a Mind create,
Then leave it all to Destiny and Fate?
With knot and snarls they spin the Thread of Life,
Then weave it cross, and make a Web of strife.
Come Death, though Fates are cross, yet you are a Friend,
And in the Grave do peace and quiet send.
It chanced a Gentleman that way came by,
And seeing there a weeping Beauty lie;
Alas, dear Lady, why do you so weep,
Unless your Tears you mean the Gods shall keep?
Jove will present those Tears to Juno fair,
For Pendants, and for Neck-laces to wear:
And so present that Breath to Juno fair,
That she may always move in perfumed air.
Forbear, forbear, make not the World so poor;
Send not such Riches, for the Gods have store.
I Am one, said she, to whom Fortune's a Foe,
Crossing my Love, working my overthrow:
A Man which to Narcissus might compare:
For Youth and Beauty, and the Graces fair,
Do him adorn; on him my love is placed:
But his neglect does make my life to wast.
My Soul does mourn, my Thoughts no rest can take;
He, by his scorn, does me unhappy make.
With that she cried, O Death, said she, come quick,
And in my heart thy Leaden Arrow stick.
Take comfort, Lady, grieve and weep no more,
For Nature handsome Men has more in store:
Besides, dear Lady, Beauty will decay,
And with that Beauty love will flee away.
If you take time, this heat of Love will wast,
Because it is only on a Beauty placed.
But if your Love did from his Virtue spring,
You might have loved, though not so fond have been.
The love of Virtue is, for to admire
The Soul, and not the Body to desire:
That Is a gross Love, which only dull Beasts use;
But Noble Man to love the Soul will choose:
Because the Soul is like a Deity,
Therein pure Love will live eternally.
O Sir, but Nature has the Soul so fixed
Unto the Body, and such Passions mixed,
That nothing can divide or dis-unite,
Unless that Death will separate them quite:
For when the Senses in Delights agree,
They bind the Soul, make it a Slave to be.
He Answered,
If that the Soul in Man should give consent
In every thing the Senses to content,
No Peace, but War amongst Mankind would be,
And Desolation would have Victory:
No Man could tell or challenge what is his own;
He would be Master that is strongest grown.
Lady, love Virtue, and let Beauty dye,
And in the Grave of Ruins let it lie.
With that she rose, and with great joy, said she,
Farewell, fond Love, and foolish Vanity.
The Men condemned the Tale, because (said they)
None but a Fool would preach so, Wise men pray.
But Ladies hear me, did another say.
TO love but one, is a great fault,
For Nature otherwise is taught:
She caused Varieties for us to taste,
And other Appetites in us she placed;
And caused dislike in us to rise,
To surfeit when we gormandise;
For of one Dish we glut our Palate,
Although it be but of a Salat.
When Solomon the Wise did try
Of all things underneath the Sky;
Although he found it Vanity,
Yet by it Nature made us free:
For by the change her Works do live
By several Forms that she does give:
So that Inconstancy is Nature's play;
And we, her various Works, must her obey.
A Woman said, that Men were foolish Lovers,
And whining Passions Love often discovers:
They Are full of Thoughts, said she, yet never pleased,
Always complaining, and yet never eased:
They Will sigh, they mourn, they groan, they make great moan,
They Will sit cross-legg'd, with folded arms alone.
Sometimes their Dress is careless, with despair,
With hopes raised up, it is costly, rich, and rare,
Setting their Looks and Faces in a frame;
Their Garb's affected by their Mistress Name,
Flattering their Loves, forswearing; then each boasts
What Valiant Deedsh' has done in Foreign Coasts;
Through what great dangers his adventures run;
Such acts as Hercules had never done:
That every one that hears, does fear his Name;
And every Tongue that speaks, sounds forth his fame.
And thus their Tongues extravagantly move,
Caused by vainglorious, foolish, amorous Love,
Which only those of his own Sex approve.
But when their Rallery was past,
The Tale upon a Man was cast:
Then crying peace to all that talking were,
They were bid hold their Tongues, and lend an Ear.
The Man, more than the rest, was somewhat old;
They said to him, Your Tale you have not told:
Alas, said he, my Memory is bad,
And I have none so good as you have had.
He, musing a short time, thus did begin;
I hope, said he, my Tale may credit win.
A Description of Civil-Warrs.
A Kingdom which long time had lived in Peace,
Her People rich with Plenty, fat with Ease;
With Pride were haughty grown; Pride Envy bred;
From Envy Factions grew: then Mischief spread;
And Libels every where were strewn about,
Which after into Civil-Warr broke out.
Some for the Commons fought, some for the King,
And great Disorder was in every thing:
Battles were won and lost on either side;
Where Fortune ebbed and flowed, like to a Tide.
At last the Commons won; and then astride
Fierce Tyranny on Noble Necks did ride:
All Monuments pulled down, that stood long time;
And Ornaments were then thought a great Crime.
No Law was pleaded but the Martial Law;
The Sword did rule, and keep them all in aw.
No Prayers offered to the Gods on high;
All Ceremony in the Dust did lie:
Nothing was done in Order, Truth, and Right:
Naught governed then, but Malice, Spleen, and Spite.
But mark how justly Gods do punish Men,
To make them humble, and to bow to them.
Though they had Plenty, and thereof did eat,
They relished not that good and savoury Meat;
Because their Conscience did them so torment,
For all their Plenty they were discontent:
They took no rest, Cares so oppressed their Mind,
No Joy nor Comfort in the World could find.
When drowsy sleep upon their Eyes did set,
Then fearful Visions in their Dreams they met:
In Life no pleasure take, yet fear to dye;
No Mercy can they hope from Gods on high.
O serve the Gods, and then the Mind will be
Always in peace and sweet tranquillity.
A Woman said, A Tale I mean to tell,
That in those Wars unto a Cross befell.
AN ancient Cross lived in our Father's time,
With as much Fame as did the Worthies nine:
No harm it did, or injury to none,
But dwelt in peace, and quietly alone:
On Times or Government did not complain,
But stood Stone-still, not stirred in no King's Reign.
Both Winter's Snow, and Summer's scorching Sun,
It did endure, and Urin'd was upon.
Yet peaceful Nature, nor yet humble Mind,
Shall not avoid rude Ignorance that is blind:
That superstitiously beats down all things
Which smell but of Antiquity, or springs
From Noble Deeds; nor love, nor take delight
In Laws or Justice, hating Truth and Right:
But Innovations love, for that seems fine;
And what is new, adore they as Divine:
That makes them so neglect the Gods above,
For Time does waste both their respect and love.
And so this Cross, poor Cross, all in a rage
They pulled down quite, the fault was only Age.
Had it been gilded gloriously and brave,
They Vanity for an excuse might have:
But it was poor, its Mortar all off worn,
Which Time had eaten, as when Dogs have torn
The Flesh from Bones of Hares, or harmless Sheep;
Or like to Skeletons, that Scholars keep.
If they had pious been, it might have stood,
To mollify the Minds of Men to good.
But they were wicked, hating every thing
That by example might to goodness bring.
Then down they pulled it, leaving not one stone
Upon another, for it to be known
To after-ages; for the Ground lies bare,
And none can know that once the Cross stood there.
Then said a Man, I can this Tale well fit,
For I a Tale can tell that is like to it.
IN old times, when Devotion false did reign,
A Church was built, although to use profane,
Was Consecrated as Diana's right,
Who was their Goddess of the Moonshine bright.
But afterward, when Truth with Zeal did flame,
It Christened was, and bore Jove's mighty Name,
And dedicated to the Sun above,
Then married was, became his Spouse and Love.
Long did she live in Duty, Peace, and Zeal,
Became an Honor to the Commonweal;
Was curiously adorned within, without,
The Quoire all hung with Hangings rich about;
With Marble Tombs and Statues carved and cut,
Wherein the Bodies of good Saints were put.
There polished Pillars long the Isles did stand,
And Arched Roofs built by a skilful hand;
With Painted Windows placed on either side:
At every end were Gates, large, open, wide:
And all the inside was most bravely gilt,
As all the outside with Freestone were built:
There Choristers did sing each several Note,
And Organs loud did answer every throat:
And Priests there taught Men how to pray and live,
Rewards and Punishments which Jove did give.
But mark, this Temple was destroyed by sin,
Since they did leave to worship Jove therein,
Because this Church profaned by sinful Men,
Was made a Stable, and for Thieves a Den.
No surer mark of Wrath when Gods do frown,
Then to give leave to pull their Temples down.
A Lady said, these Wars her Soul did shake,
And the remembrance made her heart to ache.
My Brother then was murdered in cold-blood,
Incircled round with Enemies he stood;
Where he, like to a fixed Starr shined bright;
They like to black and pitchy Clouds of Night:
He like the Sun, his Courage like that Heat;
Their Envy, like bad Vapors, strove to beat.
His Light of Honor out; but powerful Fame
Did throw their spite back on their heads with shame.
And though they struck his Body, not his Mind,
(For that in Death through all their Malice shined.)
He valiant was, his Spirits knew no fear,
They never chilled when they in Battle were;
And strove to give more blows than safety sought:
His Limbs most vigor had, when most he fought.
He spoke not loud, nor sung, his fear to hide;
With silence marched, and quietly did ride,
Viewing the Armies with a watchful Eye;
And careful was, advantages to spy.
If that his Soldiers chanced to run away,
He ran not after them to make them stay,
As some Commanders, which will call and run
After the Soldiers, when the Flight's begun:
But when once gone, seldom return again,
But with their Soldiers they will safe remain.
But he amongst his Foes, like Earth, was fixed;
Or, like to Fire, himself was intermixed;
And their great solid Bodies did divide,
Pulling their Fabric down on either side;
Until his Mercy did for Favor pray
Unto his Courage, so to run away.
He made them know he was a Soldier good,
Trained up in Wars, which Art he understood:
Besides, his Genius was prompt thereunto;
Wit, Skill, Invention, knew what best to do:
Which made the Foe more fierce his Life to take,
For fear that he their ruin soon would make.
For they, so soon as he was in their power,
Like greedy Vulturs, did his Life devour.
He stood their Rage, his Courage knew no fear;
Nor on grim Death with terror did he stare;
But did embrace her with a Generous Mind,
With Noble Thoughts, and Kisses that were kind.
Vollies of Shot did all his Body tear;
Where his blood's spilt, the Earth no Grass will abear.
As if, for to revenge his Death, the Earth
Was cursed with barrenness even from her birth.
And though his Body in the Grave does lie,
His Fame does live, and will eternally.
His Soul's Immortal, and so is his Fame;
His Soul in Heaven does live, and here his Name.
The next time had a Man his turn to speak;
Who said, That Civil-Warrs made Rich men break.
Populous Kingdoms, that do flourish well
In Peace and Plenty, then to ruin fell.
WHen I, with grief, unto remembrance bring
The blessed time men lived with a goodKing;
To think at first how happy such do reign,
And in what Peace such Kingdoms do remain;
Where Magistrates do sit in Justice Throne,
Few Crimes committed, Punishments scarce known;
The Nobles lived in state and high degree,
All happy, even to the Peasantry:
Where easy Laws, no Tax to make them poor,
All live Plenty, full is every Store:
They Customs have to recreate the Mind,
Not barbarous, but civil, gentle, kind:
And those where Chance and Fortune bad do fall,
Have Means straight given to be kept withal:
Their Lands are fertile, and their Barns are full,
Orchards thick planted, from whence Fruit to pull:
Of Cattle store feeding in Meadows green,
Where Crystal Brooks run every Field between;
With Cowslips growing, which makes Butter yellow;
And fatted Beasts, two inches thick with Tallow:
And many Parks for fallow Deer to run,
Shadowed with Woods, to keep them from the Sun:
And in such Kingdoms, Beasts, Fowls, Fish, are store;
Those that industrious are, can never be poor.
But O sad Fate and Fortune, if it chance
The Sword of Civil-Warr for to advance;
As when Rebellions, like a watery Flood,
O'reflows a Monarchy; in Royal Blood
Builds Aristocracy with cruel hands,
On unjust grounds of Tyranny it stands.
Then into wicked States such Kingdoms go,
Where Virtue's beaten out, no truth they know:
And all Religion flies away for fear,
And Atheism is preached every where.
Their Magistrates by Bribes do govern all,
No Suit is heard but what Injustice call:
For Covetousness and Malice pleads at bar
Against poor Honesty, with whom they jarr:
Calamity does find no Pity; for
All Pity's buried in a Civil-Warr.
A Lady's turn was next,
Which told this Tale perplexed:
SHE said, I over Sea to Lapland went,
My Husband being then in banishment:
His Estate gone, and being very poor,
I thought some means Compassion might restore:
But when I asked, no pity could I find;
Hard were their Hearts, and cruel every Mind.
Fie, says a Man, you do all Orders break,
So long on Melancholy Themes you speak.
The Prologue to the Beggars Marriage.
I Have served two 'Prentiships, and now am made
Free of the Beggars Company to trade:
My Stock, in secret to your Ear I speak,
Is such, as I am sure I shall not break.
Let Boreas burst his Cheeks, and the Sea rore,
The Beggars Bark can never be tumbled over.
What fitter Subject for my Muse can be,
Than make Descriptions of our Company?
The Beggar's Theme too well my Fortunes fit,
My begg'rly Fancy too, and so my Wit.
The Duke of Newcastle's Description of the Beggars Marriage.
WHile'om, there was a Ragged Beggar old,
Who in his time full fourscore Winters told;
His Head all frozen, Beard long, white as Snow,
With a staff's prop, for else he could not go:
With bleared Eyes, all parched, dry, and cold;
With shaking-Palsie, little could he hold:
His Clothes so tattered, for they were so worn,
Older than he, in many pieces torn:
The subtill'st Brain, and prying'st Eye, those seen,
Both could not guess what stuff they would ever been.
On's Cloak more several Patches there did stick,
Than labored Algebra's Arithmetic
Could once tell how to number; and was fuller,
Than was the Rainbow, of each various Color,
But not so fresh; so faded when they were seen,
That none could guess which red, which blew, which green.
His Turf-house leaned to an old stump of Oak;
A hole at top there for to void the Smoke
Of stolen scattered Boughs; could not be fed
But by his daily begging daily bread.
There on his little Bench I Will leave him, then
Within a while I Will speak of him again.
A withered Beggar-woman, little sundred
From him, who all the Town said, was a hundred:
Toothless she was, nay more, worn all her Gums,
And all her Fingers too were worn to Thumbs:
Wrinkles, deep Graves to bury all delight;
Eyes now sunk holes, little she had of sight,
Little could speak, as little sense could tell;
Seldom she heard, sometimes the great Towns-bell:
A long forgetfulness her Legs had seized;
For many years her Crutches them had eased:
Clothes, thousand rags torn with the wind and weather,
Her Huswifry long since had sewed together.
No Livelihood, but Charity grown cold
As she was, this more than her years made old.
In a hot Summer's day, they out did creep,
Enlivened just like Flies, for else they sleep;
Creeping, at last each one to other get,
Lousing each other, kindly thus they met:
Apollo's Masterpiece shining, did aim
To light dead ashes sparks, not make a flame
To stir up Nature in them, now so cold,
And whether Cupid dwelt in them who are old:
Now Heat and Kindness made him try to kiss her;
Her Palsi'd Head so shak'd, he still did miss her:
He thought it Modesty; she' against her will,
Striving to please him, could not hold it still:
She mumbl'd, but he could not understand her:
He cried, Sweet Hero, I Will be thy Leander:
She said, Before we met, cold as a stone is,
I was; but now am Venus, thou Adonis.
Such heights of Passion's-love uttered these two,
As youngest Lovers, when they 'gin to woo:
For Cupid, reign over Mankind still will have;
He governs from the Cradle to the Grave.
Their Virtue's such, they would not sin, nor tarry,
So heated, vowed a Contract, then to marry.
This Marriage now divulged was every where
To neighbor Beggars, Beggars far and near;
The Day appointed, and the Marriage set,
The Lame, the Blind, the Deaf, they all were met:
Such throngs of Beggars, Women, Children, seen,
Mustered all on the Town's fair Grassy-Green:
The Bridegroom's led between two Lame men, so,
Because our Bridegroom fast he could not go.
The Bride was led by Blind-men; him behind,
Because you know that Love is always blind.
The Hedg-Priest then was called for, did him bring,
Married them both with an old Curtain-Ring:
No Father there was found, or could be ever;
She was so old, that there was none to give her.
With acclamations now of louder joy,
Prayed Hymen Priapus to send a boy,
To show a Miracle; in Vows most deep
The Parish swore their Children all to keep.
Then Tom-a-Bedlam wound his Horn, at best;
Their Trumpet now, to bring away the Feast;
Picked Marrow-bones they had found in the Street,
Carrots kicked out of Kennels with their feet;
Crusts gathered up, for Biscuit, 'twas so dried,
Alms-tubs Olio Podridoes had beside:
Many such Dishes had, but it would cumber
Any to name them; more than I can number.
Then came the Banquet (that must never fail)
Which the Town gave, that is White-bread, and strong Ale.
Each was so tipsie, that they could not go,
And yet would dance, and cried for Music Ho;
Gridirons and Tongs, with Keys, they played on too,
And blind-men sung to them, as use to do:
Some whistled then, and hollow sticks did sound,
And thus melodiously they played a Round:
LameMen, lame Women, mingled, said, Advance;
And so, all limping, jovially did dance:
The Deaf-men too, for they could not forbear
When they saw this, although they did not hear,
Which was their happiness. Now to his House
The Bridegroom brought the Bride, each drunk as Mouse.
No room for any but them two, they saw,
So laid them both in bed of good fresh Straw.
Then took their leave, put out their Rushen-light;
But they themselves did revel all the Night.
The Bridegroom ruffles now, kissed, and said, Friend;
But when he kissed, thought 'twas at the other End,
And cried her mercy, said he could not look,
It was so dark, and thought he had mistook.
No, said the Bride most sweetly, you are right,
As if our Taper here was shining bright.
Now Love's Hesperides would touch the same,
That Place, O Place! which Place no tongue should name.
She, gentle Dame, with roving hand, indeed,
Instead of Crutches, found a broken Reed.
They both, now filled with Ale, Brains in it did steep;
So, arm in arm, our Lovers fell asleep.
So for the Will, though nothing else indeed,
To Love the Beggars built a Pyramid.
A Tale of his Grace the Duke of Newcastle, called, The Philosopher's Complaint.
I Through a Cranny there did spy,
A grave Philosopher all sad,
With a dim Taper burning by,
His Study was in Mourning clad.
He sighed, and did lament his state,
Cursing Dame Nature, for 'twas she,
That did allot him such a Fate,
To make him of Mankind to be.
All other Animals, their Mold
Of thousand Passions makes them free,
Since they are not subject unto Gold,
Which does corrupt Mankind we see.
The busy Merchant plows the Main,
The Pleading-Lawyer for his Fee;
Pious Divines for Lawful Gain,
Mechanics all still Coz'ners be.
With Plow-shares, Farmers wound the Earth,
Look to their Cattle, Swine, and Sheep,
To multiply their Seed, Corn's birth,
And all for Money, which they keep.
The Sunburned Dame prevents the Day,
(As her laborious Bees for Honey)
Does milk her Kine, and spins away
Her fatal Thread of Life for Money.
Mankind does on God Pluto call,
To serve him still, is all their pleasure:
Love here does little, Money all;
For of this World it is the measure.
Beasts do despise this Orient Mettle;
Each freely grazing fills his Maw:
After Love's procreating, settle
To softer sleep, wise Nature's Law.
They Are not Litigious, but are mute;
False Propositions never make:
Nor of unknown things do dispute;
Follies, for wise things do not take.
Or Flowery Rhet'rick to deceive;
Nor Logic to enforce the wrong:
Or tedious History to weave,
Troubling the Hearers all along.
Nor study the enameled Sky,
Thinking they are governed by each Starr;
But scorn Man's false Astrology,
And think themselves just as they are.
Their Pride not being so supreme,
Celestial Bodies moving thus,
Poor Mortals each awaking dream,
To think those Lights were made for us.
Nor are they troubled where they run;
What the Sun's Matter it might be;
Whether the Earth moves, or the Sun,
And yet they know as well as we.
Nor do they with grave troubled looks,
By studious Learning for to stay,
Or multiplicity of Books,
To put them out of Truth's right way.
For Policies, Beasts never weave,
Or subt'ler Traps do ever lay,
With false dissembling, which deceive,
Their Kind to ruin, or betray.
No hot ambitions in them are;
Trumpets are silent, Drums do cease:
No troublers in their Kind in War,
For to destroy, but all for Peace.
The Stranger valued Jemms that dress
Our beauteous Ladies like the day,
A Parrot's Feathers are no less;
And gossips too as well as they.
Man's ever troubled 'bout his Fame,
For Glory and Ambition hot:
When Beasts are constantly the same;
In them those Follies enter not:
Nor hope of Worlds to come, that is higher,
With several Sects divisions make;
Or fear an everlasting Fire,
But quiet sleep, and so awake.
Man still with thoughts himself torments,
Various desires, what shall be;
And in his life has small contents:
Beasts pleased with what they have, not we.
Repining Man, for what is past,
Hating the present what they see,
Frighted with what is to come at last:
Beasts pleased with what is, and must be.
Ease Man does hate, and Business store;
A burden to himself he is:
Weary of time, yet wishes more:
Beasts all these Vanities they miss.
Self-loving Man so proud a Dirt,
Vain 'bove all things, when understood;
Studies always himself to hurt:
When Beasts are wise to their own good.
Man makes himself a troubled way,
Runs into several dangers still,
When in those thoughts Beasts never stray,
But do avoid them with their will.
Man's troubled Head and Brain still swelling
Beyond the Power of Senses five,
Not capable of those things telling:
Beasts beyond Senses do not strive.
Nature's just measure, Senses are,
And no Impossibles desire:
Beasts seek not after things that is far,
Or Toys or Baubles still admire.
Beasts Slander not, or Falsehoods raise,
But full of Truth, as Nature taught;
And wisely shun dissembling ways,
Follow Dame Nature as they ought.
Nor to false Gods do sacrifice,
Or promise Vows to break them; no:
No Doctrine to delude with Lies,
Or worship Gods they do not know.
Nor envy any that do rise,
Or joyful seem at those that fall;
Or crooked ways against others tries;
But love their Kind, themselves, and all.
Hard labor suffer when they must;
When over-awed, they wisely bend;
Only in Patience then they trust,
As Misery's and Affliction's Friend.
They seek not after Beauty's blaze,
To tempt their appetite when dull;
But drink the Stream that Tempests raise,
And grumble not when they are full.
They take no Physic to destroy
That Health which Nature to them gave:
Nor ruled by Tyrants Laws, annoy,
Yet happy seem with what they have.
With cares Men break their sweet repose,
Like Wheels that wear with turning round:
Beasts quiet thoughts their Eyelids close,
And in soft sleep all cares they drowned.
No Rattles, Fairings, Ribbons, Strings,
Fiddles, Pipes, Minstrelses, them move,
Or Bugle Bracelets, or fine Rings,
And without Cupid makes Love.
O happy Beasts! that spend the day
In pleasure with their nearest Kin,
And all is lawful in their way,
And live and dye without a sin.
Their Conscience never troubled is;
We made so, yet forbid it too:
For Nature here is not amiss,
We strive against what we are made to do.
Beasts need not Language, they despise
Unuseful things, all Men's delight:
Those Marks which Language from does rise,
If pleased with them, discourse they might.
And out of words they argue not,
But reason out of things they do:
When we vain Gossipings have got,
They quiet silent Lives have too.
Complained of Scholars, that they sought
With envious watching, and with spite,
To leave the good to find a fault
In any Author that does write.
O vain Philosophy! their Laws
With hard words still for matter brings,
Which nothing is, nor knows the cause
Of any thing; unuseful things.
Why are our Learned then so proud,
Thinking to bring us to their bow?
And Ignorance, Wisdom allowed,
And know not that they do not know?
Motion's cessation is the end
Of Animals, both Beasts and Men;
The longest Lives to that do tend,
And to Death's Palace, his dark Den.
Or that Beasts breath does downwards go,
And that Men's Souls do upward rise;
No Post from that World comes you know:
It puzzled Solomon the Wise.
Thus he complained, and was annoyed,
Our grave Philosopher for's birth,
That he was made to be destroyed,
Or turned to sad or colder Earth.
I piti'd him, and his sad case,
Wishing our Vicar him to teach;
For to infuse a Saving-grace,
By his Tongue's Rhet'rick for to preach.
SEVERAL Feigned Stories IN PROSE The Second BOOK.
The strict Associate.
THERE was a Gentleman came to a Lady with a Message from his Lord, which was
to tell her, His Lord would come to visit her.

Sir, said she, Is your Lord a Poet?

No, Lady, said he.

Then he has no Divine Soul, said she.

Is he a Philosopher?

No, Madam, said he.

Then, said she, he has no Rational Soul.

Is he an Historian?

Neither, said he.

Then, said she, he has no Learned Soul.

Is he an ancient Man?

No, Lady, said he.

Then he has no Experienced Soul, said she.

Is he an Orator?

No, Lady, said he.

Then he has no Eloquent Soul, said she.

And if he has neither Poetical Wit, Philosophical Wisdom, Studious Learning,
Experienced Knowledge, nor Eloquent Language, he cannot be conversable; and if
he be not conversable, his Visit can neither be profitable nor pleasant, but
troublesome and tedious; therefore I do entreat your Lord that he will spare
his pains, and mine, in giving me a Visit.

But, said the Man, though my Lord is neither a Poet, a Philosopher, an
Historian, an Orator, nor Aged; yet he is a Young Beautiful Man, which is more
acceptable to a fair Lady.

Sir, said she, Youth and Beauty appears worse in Men, than Age and Deformity
in Women; wherefore, if it were in my power, I would make a Law, That all young
men should be kept to their Studies so long as their Effeminate Beauty does
last; and old Women should be put into Cloisters when their Youth and Beauty is
past: but I must confess, That the custom of the World is otherwise; for old
Women and young Men appear most to publik view in the World; when young Women
and aged Men often retire from it.

The Judgment.
THERE were two Gentlemen that had traveled both into England and France; and
meeting another Gentleman, he asked one of them, Which he liked best, England
or France? Who said, He liked both well where they were alike worthy; and
disliked them both in things that were not worthy of praise.

Then he said to the second Gentleman, And which like you best?

Which do you mean, answered he? the Countries or Kingdoms?

Why, what difference is there betwixt saying a Country and a Kingdom, was
replied to him?

Great difference, said he: for, to say a Country, is but such a circumference
of Earth; and to say a Kingdom, is to say such a Country manured, inhabited,
or rather populated with Men that dwell in Cities, Towns, and Villages, that
are governed by Laws either Natural or Artificial.

Well, which Kingdom do you like best, then?

Truly, said he, I cannot give a good judgment unless I had traveled through
every part in both Kingdoms, and had taken strict surveys of their Forts,
Havens, Woods, Plains, Hills, Dales, Meadows, Pastures, Arrable; also of their
Architectures, as Cities, Towns, Villages, Palaces, Churches, Theaters; of
their Laws, Customs, and Ceremonies; of their Commodities, Trafficks, and
Transportations; of their Climates and Situations; and of the several Humors
of the several People in each Kingdom: which will not only require a solid
Judgment, and a clear Understanding, but a long Life to judge of it all.

But, said the other, judge of as much as you have seen.

To judge of Parts (answered he), is not to judge of the Whole: but to judge of as
much as I have seen, I will compare them, or similize the Parts of those two
Kingdoms, to two Ladies, whose Faces I have only seen, their Bodies and
Constitutions being unknown; the one that a larger and fairer Forehead than the
other, and a more Sanguine Complexion; the other has better Eyes, Eyebrows,
and Mouth. So France is a broader and plainer Country, and the Climate is more
clear, and somewhat hotter than England; and England has better Seaports,
Heavens, and Navigable Rivers, than France has; also, the one has a more
haughty Look than the other; and the other a more pleasing and modest
Countenance. So France appears more Majestical, and England more Amiable.

The Vulgar Fights.
A Young Gentleman, of a good Natural Wit, had a desire to travel: but first,
he would visit every Province in his own Country, before he went into Foreign
Kingdoms; preferring the knowledge of his own Native Soil, before those wherein
he was neither born, nor meant to dwell. So he went to the Chief Metropolitan
City, where he did intend to stay some time, that he might inform himself best
of the several Trades, Trafficks, Imposts, Laws, Customs, Offices, and the
like. When he was come to it, he sent his Man to seek him out some Lodgings in
some private House, because Inns are both troublesome, and more chargeable. His
Man had not gone far, but he saw a Bill over a Trades-man's Door, to let
Passengers know there were Lodgings to be Let. The Mistress sitting at the
Door, he asked her if he might see the Lodgings that were to be Let?

She answered, No; she would first see them that were to take them: Who is it
that would take them, said she?

My Master, said he.

Has he a Wife, said she?

Why ask you that, said he?

Because (said she) I will not Let my Lodgings to any Man that brings a Wife:
for, Women to Women are troublesome Guests; whenas Men are very acceptable: and
I thank the Gods (said she) I am not so poor as I care for the Profit, but for
Company and Conversation: for, to have no other Company but my Husband, is very
dull and melancholy.

The man said, My Master has no Wife.

Is he a young man, said she?

Yes, said he.

Is he a handsome man, said she?

Yes, said he.

Then, said she, my Lodging is at his service.

At what Rate are they, said the Man?

She said, Your Master and I shall not fall out about the Price.

So he returned to his Master, and told him, He had found not only Lodgings,
but (as he thought) a fair Bedfellow for him; for the Mistress would make no
Bargain but with himself.

So thither he went, where he found all things accommodated for his use; and
his Landlady, who was a handsome Woman, and her Husband a plain Man, bid him
very welcome; then taking their leave, left him to himself: after which, the
good man seldom troubled him; but the Wife was so officious, as he seldom mist
of her Company; and so wondrous kind as might be, making him Whitewine-Caudles
for his Breakfast, and giving him very oftern Collations: besides, if he
stayed out, she would send her Husband to bed, and wait for his coming home:
for which Kindness he would return her Courtly Civilities.

He went often abroad to view the City, and to see the course of the People,
and the several passages that happen in such places: and one day, as he went
through a large Street, a Coachman and Carman man fell out for out for the
right side of the way; the Carman said he was loaded, and therefore would not
give way; the Coachman said, It was not fit for a Coach to give way to a Cart,
and therefore he should give way: so after words, followed blows; and their
Whips were their Mettle-blades, wherewith they fought and lashed one another
soundly. The Gentleman, seeing them lashing one another so cruelly, spoke to
his Man to part the Fray. In troth, Master, said the Man, if I shall go about
to part all foolish Frays, or but one in a City, I may chance to go home with a
broken Pate, and get no Reputation for the loss of my blood.

Thence they went to the Market place, and there were two Women which had
fallen out about their Merchandise, and their fight was much fiercer than the
Coachman and Carters, and their words more offensive, and their Nails more
wounding than Whips, insomuch as they had scratched each other so, that the
blood trickled down their faces: whereupon the Gentleman, being of a pitiful
nature, commanded his man to part them: The man said, I will adventure on the
Feminine Sex, for I believe I can pacify them, at least make my party good: so
he went and spoke to them to forbear each other; but their ears were stopped with
the sound of their scolding; and when he went to part them, it did so enrage
their fury, as they left fighting with each other, and fell upon him; who, to
help himself, was forced to fight with them both: at last it grew to be a very
hot Battle; first off went his Hat, then down fell his Cloak; he thrust them
from him, they pressed upon him; he cuft them, they laid on blows on him; they
tore his Band, he tore their Kerchers; they pulled his Hair, he pulled their
Petticoats; they scratched his Face, he beat their Fingers; he kicked them,
they spurned him: at last, with struggling, they all three fell into the Kennel;
and so close they fought, as those three Bodies seemed but one Body, that moved
as a Whale on a shallow shore, which wants water to swim; even so they lay
waving and rolling in the Kennel: in this time a number of people were gathered
about them to see them fight, (for it is the nature of common people to look on
Combats, but part none; to make frays, but not friends) who enraged them the
more, and enflamed their angers with their shooting-noises: but the Gentleman,
that was concerned for his Man, desired the people to part them; who cried out,
Let them fight, Let them fight; and they that had so much good nature as to
offer to pull them asunder, were hindered by the rest. At last the Constable
came, and did cause them all three to be put into the Stocks; the Man was
placed betwixt the two Women, which made him almost deaf of both his Ears; for
though their Legs were fast, their Tongues were loose; with which they rung him
such a Scolding-Peal, as made his Head dizzy; whereas he, without speaking one
word, sat in a most lamentable posture, with his Clothes all rent and torn,
his Face all scratched and bloody, and that Hair they left on his Head, all
ruffled, and standing an end, as if he were affrighted: But at last his Master,
by bribing the Constable, got his Man out of the Stocks, and gave the Constable
so much more to keep the Women shackled a longer time; who, when they saw the
Man let loose, and they still fast, were stark mad. The Man was so dogged, that
he would not speak to his Master, because it was by his command he came into
that Womanish Quarrel. His Master, to pacify him, and to reward him for his
obedience, gave him new Clothes, and all things suitable, and Money, to be
Friends again. But though the Money did qualify his Passion, yet he was
wonderful angry for the disgrace (as he thought it) to be beaten by Women, and
prayed his Master to give him leave to depart from him, that he might retire to
some meaner man's Service, where he might hide his Dishonor. His Master told
him, He thought he never had much Honor to lose; neither would any trouble
their thoughts, and burden their memory, with such foolish Quarrels: But
howsoever (said his Master) if you be a Man of Honor, as you imagine your
self, you should glory in this Combat; for Honorable and Gallant Men will not
refuse to grasp with Women, and take it as an honor to receive blows from
them; a rent Band is their Victory, and a scratcht Face their Trophy, and their
scolding Speech is their Chariot, wherein they ride in triumph. Heaven (said
the Man) deliver me from that Honor; for I had rather grasp a Fury of Hell,
than an angry Woman!

So home they went; and when they came to their Lodging, they found the Man and
his Wife together by the ears; the Man cursing, the Wife scolding, and the
Wares in their Shop flung about; for they had hurled all they could lay hold
on, at each other's head: Both Master and Man stood at the door, not daring to
enter the House, for fear they should partake of the Quarrel. At last said the
Man to his Master, Sir, now you may have those Honorable Victories, Trophies,
and Triumphs, you spoke of, if you will endeavor to part them. His Master
answered, That one man was enough for one woman, and two would be too much. The
Man said, I found two women too much for one man, and I dare lay a wager our
Landlady will be too hard for our Landlord. He had no sooner spoke, but the
Wife had broke her Husband's Head with a Measure that lay by; which as soon as
she had done, she run into the Kitchen, and shut the Door to secure her self,
making it her Castle of Defense; where her Husband followed with
threatning-language, then bounced and beat against the Door to break it open;
but she had not only barred and locked it, but set all the Pots, Pans, and
Spits against it, as a Barricado to make it strong. At last the Gentleman went
to his Landlord, and persuaded him to be friends with his Wife. At first he
would not hear him; but at last, when he found he could not get in, and that
his fury was wasted with the many assaults against the door, he was contented
to have a Parley: Then there was a Truce agreed upon for two hours; in which
time the Gentleman managed the Quarrel so well, as he made them Friends; the
Wife being contented to be Friends with her Husband for the Gentleman's sake,
and the Husband for Quiet's sake. The Man was also contented to stay with his
Master, when he saw he was not the only man that was beaten by women, but
triumphed that the Landlord was beaten by one, when he had two against him.

The TOBACCONIST.
THERE were two Maids talking of Husbands, which is for the most part the Theme
of their Discourse, and the subject of their Thoughts.

The one said, I would not marry a man that takes Tobacco, for any thing.

Then said the other, It is likely you will have a Fool for your Husband; for
Tobacco is able to make a Fool a Wise man: And though it does not always work
wise Effects, by reason some Fools are beyond all improvement; yet it never
fails, where any improvement is to be made.

Why, said the first, what wise Effects does it work?

The second said, it composes the mind, it busies the thoughts, represents
several Objects to the mind's view, settles and stays the Senses, clears the
Understanding, strengthens the Judgment, spies out Errors, evaporates Follies,
heats Ambition, comforts Sorrow, abates Passions, excites to Noble Actions,
digests Conceptions, enlarges Knowledge, elevates Imaginations, creates Fancies,
quickens Wit, and makes Reason Pleader, and Truth Judge, in all Disputes or
Controversies betwixt Right and Wrong.

The first said, It makes the Breath stink.

You mistake, said the second, it will make a stinking Breath sweet.

It is a Beastly Smell, said the first.

Said the second, Civet is a Beastly Smell, and that you will thrust your Nose
to, although it be an Excrement; and, for any thing we know, so is Ambergreece;
when Tobacco is a sweet and pleasant, wholesome and medicinable Herb.

The School-Quarrels, or Scholars-Battels.
A MAN traveling, and being very weary, seeing a large House, a-lighted, and
went to the Gates, which he found open for any to pass without opposition:
Entering in, he came into a large paved Court; and walking about it, he heard a
noise as of a great Wind, which made him look up toward the Clouds; and seeing
the Air not much agitated, he wondered at it: At last he looked in at a Door
that was open, but there was such a Mist, that he could see no further than the
entrance; yet going in, he perceived a long Gallery, wherein were Books placed
in long rows, and Men in old tattered Gowns reading them, and turning their
leaves; which showed him his error to think he heard a Wind, for it was the
shuffling of the Leaves of the numerous Books that were turned over by those
many men. But desiring to instruct himself of their several Studies, he went
softly to observe them.

The first man he took notice of, was one that (as he read) did beat his hands
upon the Desk whereon his Book lay; and looking over his shoulder, he perceived
he was studying the Laws, and acted, against he pleaded at the Bar.

Then he went to the next, who was counting on his Fingers, and looking in his
Book; by which he saw he was studying Arithmetic.

A third was with a Celestial Globe, and a pair of Compasses, very busy
studying of Astronomy, measuring of the Planets, and their distance.

The fourth was with a Terrestrial Globe before his Book; and one while he
would read, then view the Globe, and then read again, studying Geography.

On the other side he saw one very serious in his study, and he was reading
Moral Philosophy.

Another he saw reading, who would often lay his hand upon his Breast, and cast
up the black of his Eyes, and he was studying Theology.

Then there were others who as they read, would often scratch their Heads, and
they were Natural Philosophers.

But one amongst the rest looked very merrily, and he was studying the old
Poets.

Likewise there were very many more, as, Historians, Grammarians, Logicians,
Geometricians, Physicians, and the like.

At last a little Bell rung, whereupon they all left off their studying, and
began to walk about, discoursing to each other of their several Studies. So the
Grammarians and the Logicians began to dispute, one for the Words, or rather
for the Letters; the other for the Sense, Subject, and matter of Discourse; the
one troubling himself with Derivations, the other about Quantities and
Qualities.

Then fell into dispute two Divines, about the Controversies of Theology: but
they grew so hot with zeal, that their discourse flamed up high, and their
fiery words flew above all Respects or Civility, calling one another Heretic,
and Beelzebub, and the Whore of Babylon, and the like terms, that the rest of
the Scholars had much ado to appease them.

But amongst the rest, there were two Historians, the one a Grecian, the other
a Roman; who talking of Caesar and Alexander, the Roman Historian said, There
was no comparison between those two Worthies: for, said he, Alexander was only
a Darling of Fortune, whose Favor gave him a free passage without opposition,
and had no occasion to show his Courage, Skill, Conduct, or Industry; and, said
he, Fools, Cowards, and Slothful persons, have had good Fortune sometimes. At
this Discourse the Grecian grew very angry, saying, That Alexander was born
from a Warrier, and bred a Soldier, and was a Valiant, Wise Commander; and that
Caesar was only a Man of Fortune, Traitorous, Desperate; and whatsoever he got,
was all by Chance. In this Dispute, one defending Alexander, the other Caesar,
they fell from words to blows; and, like two School boys, to Cuffs they went;
and such notable thumping-blows they gave each other, that either had a
bloody-nose; whereupon the rest of the Scholars began to side in Factions, some
taking one part, some another, that at last they were all together by the ears;
and so fierce in fight they were, that the Drums and the Trumpets of their
several Clamours, arrived to the Master of the Colledg's hearing; at which
noise he went running up to inform himself of the Cause: But when he came, his
Questions could not be heard, nor his Commands obeyed; for all the Scholars
were divided so equally, as if it had been a pitched-Battel: for all the
Scepticks were against the Mathematicians, the Natural Philosophers against the
Divines, the severe Moralists against the Poets; and in the like opposition
were all the rest: But at last they grew out of all order, and there became
such a confusion, that they cared not whom they did strike, so they did fight,
although 'twere their own Parties: Whereupon the Master of the College hollowed
so loud, and bestirred himself so prudently, that he appeased them; and after
their Fury was quenched, at least abated, they began to consider, and finding
their Quarrels needless, they were ashamed; and feeling their received blows
painful, they did repent. But howsoever, it was a strange sight to behold them,
some having black and blew Eyes, others swelled Foreheads, like Camels backs,
others scratched Faces; some blowing blood out of their Nostrils, others
spitting blood out of their Mouths, and some their Teeth also; and all the Hair
both of their Heads and Beards, was in a ruffled and affrighted posture, and
the poor Library was, like a Ship after a storm at Sea, in great disorder; for
there was strewed about pieces of Papers rent from Books, and old Patches of
Cloth and Stuff torn from Gowns, Slippers kicked from their feet, Caps flown
from their Heads, handfuls of Hairs pulled from their Crowns, and Pens and Ink
sans nombre.

The man that came by chance, was crept into a hole, and was in such an agony
and fear to see this distraction, that he had not power to come forth: but at
last, when they were all gone out of the Library to Supper, or Prayers, he took
courage, and came out of the corner, stealing forth the same way he came in:
and being clearly got from the College, full glad he was, and then began to
call into his Mind their Quarrels; which when he had considered, Well (said he
to himself), if there be no more Tranquillity and Order amongst Scholars, I
will keep the company of my merry, harmless, and ignorant Neighbors; and so
returned home.

The Observer.
A Gentleman desirous to travel to see the Varieties of several Countries and
Governments, at last he arrived in a Kingdom, where he went to the chief City,
and there wandering about, came to the King's Palace; and though there was a
Guard, yet there was a Porter sitting at the outward Gate of the Palace, to
whom he went and said to him, I am a Stranger that travel to see several
Kingdoms and Courts, and have heard great praises and fame of your King for his
peaceable and wise Government; wherefore I desire you would please to assist
me, if you can, to see the King. So putting two or three Pieces of Gold into
his hand, that the Porter might as well feel his Bounty, as hear his Desire, to
help to make his passage free; the Porter making Legs without Thanks (for
Bribes have only Civil Congies), he told him there was a Gentleman at Court
that was his very good Friend, and that he used to come and go through the
Gates late at night, and early in the morning (which he need not have told, but
he thought he should have as much knowledge for his Money as he could give);
but, said he, I will try if I can find this Gentleman, my good Friend, and he
will show you the King for my sake.

No sooner had he spoke, but the Gentleman came by; who, at the Porter's
entreaty, conducts this Stranger to the sight of the King and Queen (for
Courtiers will oblige one another for Interest sake, although they have neither
Kindness, nor Civility, where they cannot have Ends or Designs): He guided this
Gentleman through a great Courtyard, wherein were many walking and talking,
like Merchants in an Exchange, or as a Court of Judicature; and so up a pair of
Stairs into a large Room, where was a Guard of Soldiers with Halberts, which
were more for show than safety; for the Halberts lay by, and great Jacks of
Beer and Wine were in their hands, and some at their mouths, drinking to one
another: by their strong large stature, and swelled bulk, they seemed as if
they did use to eat to the proportion of their drinking.

From thence he was guided into a Long-Gallery, at the end of which was the
Presence, where were many young Gallants, and fair Ladies, the young Men
courting their fair Mistresses, in repeating of Love-Verses and Sonnets, some
dancing, others singing, some congie-ing, some complementing, and thus
diverting themselves in pleasant pastimes. Thence he was guided into the
Privy-Chamber, where the King and Queen were set, with many of their Nobles
about them, discoursing of Plays Masks, Balls, Huntings, Progresses, and the
like, After he had been there a little while, the King and Queen rose to go to
Supper, and the Gentleman invited the Stranger to sup at the Waiters Table;
which offer he civilly received. When he was there, he found good store of
Company full of discourse; and amongst much talk, they complained of their long
Peace, saying, That Peace was good for nothing but to breed Laziness; and that
the Youth of the Kingdom were degenerated, and become effeminate: concluding,
That there ought to be a War, were it for no other reason, but to exercise
their Youth in Arms, which would breed Courage, and inflame their Spirits to
Action. But after Supper, the Stranger was guided into the Presence again,
where there was a great Company of Lords and Ladies waiting for the King and
Queen's coming forth, which gave the Stranger some time for observation.

It was his chance to stand by a Lord that had many of his Friends, or rather
flatterers, about him, speaking to him of another Lord at the other side of the
Room, who stood also with his Friends or Flatterers; he said to his Company, Do
you think that Lord worthy of those Favors the King throws on him, having
neither Merit nor Worth to deserve them; when Men of Noble Qualities, and great
Deserts, are neither regarded nor rewarded? Gentlemen, said he, this must not
be; for we are born Free Subjects to the King, not Slaves to his Favorite, who
makes our Estates the Exchequer to supply his Vanities by the way of large
Taxes, which is not to be suffered: for, though the King commands by his
Advice, yet he receives the Sums.

The Stranger (that had but a little time to stay) removed from that side to
the other, where the other Lord was talking to his Faction, and said, Do you
see that Formal Lord, who loves and affects Popularity, and would be the
absolute Man in the Kingdom, to Rule and Govern all? Let me tell you Gentlemen,
said he, He is a dangerous Man, whom the King should be ware of: but alas, said
he, the King is so facil, that whosoever comes with a clear Brow, and a smooth
Tongue, he believes all he says is truth. Besides, he is so cockered up with a
long Peace, that he cannot believe any body dares be Traitors. And thus he
lives in secure Credulity, and is so timorous, that he dares not displease any
one: for, those that are against him, he preferrs; and those that are faithful
to him, he cares not for, and rejects them.

From that Company, the Stranger removed to the Women's Side; where was a Lady,
wity others by her; who said to one of them, Prithee look on yonder Lady, how
she is Painted and Curled, to allure the Youth of the Court; but in faith, said
she, it will not do; for if one comes near, she is as withered and dry as a
Leaf in Autumn. So he (desiring to hear all Parts) removed to the other Lady,
where she said to some others, Do you see, said she, the Wit of the Court
(meaning the other Lady that was opposite)? In Faith (said she) if I were her, I
would rather conceal my Wit, than discover my Prattling: She is so full of talk,
that she will suffer none to speak but her self. Every Lady of each Company,
flung spightful words upon each other's back: But the Music beginning to play,
they all flocked together, and did all embrace, kiss, profess, and protest such
affections, and vowed such friendships, That neither their Lives nor Fortunes
should be wanting in one another's Service: Which the Stranger hearing, went
out of the Court as fast as he could, for fear of the Court's Infection. And
when he came to the Gate, the Porter (to whom he first spoke) asked him, Why he
went away so soon? for, said he, the Company seldom parts until one or two of
the Clock in the morning, nay, said he, some not all the night long, if their
Mistresses favor them, or at least take some pity of them.

The Stranger said, He had seen so much, that it did fright him: What, said the
Porter, some Devils in the Play, or in the Masque? Yes, said the Gentleman,
they could change into as many shapes as they would. That is only in their
Clothes, answered the Porter. No, said the Stranger, it was in their Tongues
and Faces: And so God give you Goodnight.

The Discreet Virgin.
THERE was a Grave Matron who came to visit a Young Virgin; whom she asked, Why
she did not marry, since she was of marriageable years?

Truly, said she, I am best pleased with a Single Life.

What (answered the Matron), will you lead Apes in Hell?

The young Lady said, It was better to lead Apes in Hell, than live like Devils
on Earth: for, said she, I have heard, That a Married Couple seldom or never
agree; the Husband roars in his Drink, and the Wife scolds in her Choler; the
Servants quarrel, the Children cry, and all is in more disorder than it is
thought Hell is, and a more confused Noise.

The Matron said, Such are only the Meaner sort of people; but the Noble and
Rich Men and their Wives live otherwise: for the Better sort (the Noble and
Rich) when they are drunk, are carried straight to Bed, and laid to sleep; and
their Wives dance until their Husbands are sober.

The Lady said, If they dance until their Husbands be sober, they will dance
until they be weary.

So they do, replied the Matron.

Why, said the Lady, the Husbands are, for the most part, always drunk.

And the other answered, And the Ladies are, for the most part, continually
dancing.

But, by your favor, said the Matron, Men are not so often, nor so constantly
drunk, as you report them.

The young Lady answered, You shall be Judge if I slander them: They drink drunk
at Dinner; and before they are thoroughly sober, they go to Supper, and they
drink so, as they go drunk to bed; and in the Morning they will have their
Refreshing-draughts: But, said she, I perceive you think none are drunk but
those that drink in Tavern; but they, let me tell you, are sober men to Home
Drunkards; and Taverns are quiet orderly Houses, to Great, Noble, and Rich
Men's Houses: for Palaces are oft-times but Hospitable Taverns, Inns, and
Bawdy-houses, only their Guests pay nothing for their Fare: but when they are
Gaminghouses, then they pay the Box sometimes to their grief.

Fie, Lady, fie, said the Matron, Why do you abuse Noble Persons?

I do not abuse them, answered she, they abuse themselves.

We will leave off this Discourse, said the Matron, and talk of Husbands.

We have talked (said the young Lady) of Husbands already: besides, the Theme
is so bad, that the Discourse of them cannot be good.

I am come (said the Matron) to offer you a Husband.

She replied, She was offered Husbands enough, but there were none worth the
taking: for, said she, Men in this Age are far worse than Women, and more
ridiculous in their Behaviors, Discourses, Dressings, Vanities, and Idleness:
As for their Humors, said she, they are either apish, constrained, or rude: If
they be apish, they put themselves into a hundred several postures in an hour;
and so full of apish actions, as scratching their Heads, combing their
Perwicks, or gogling their Hats, with jogging their Heads, one while backwards
to the Noddle of their Heads, and then forwards, to their Brows; or fumbling
with their Buttons, Band-strings, or Boothose; or pulling their Cloaks one
while upon one shoulder, and then on another, and then back again; or else pull
their Cloak with one hand, and hold it fast with the other (this pulling-motion
being a Mode-motion): But those that are very much in the Mode, lay it about
their Waste, all in a crumple, like a Scarf; or else (like Malcontents)
muffle themselves therein. As for their Behavior, those that are fantastical,
their Bodies are in a perpetual motion, winding, or turning, or wreathing about
or dancing affectedly, singing fa, fa, la; or whistling, like a Carter; or lie
careless upon the ground, kicking back with their Heels; or with the end of
their Feet lie kicking the ground. But when they affect a careless Behavior,
as thinking it dignifies them (as all those that have been meanly born or bred,
and have had some advancement either by Riches, Offices, Royal Favors, or by
Fortune) then they will sit lolling upon their Breech, or lean on their Elbows,
gaping or stretching themselves, or else laying the Ankle of one Leg upon the
Knee of the other, heaving their Feet up toward the Nostrils of their Company,
especially when Ladies are by.

Methinks (said the Matron) that is an ill behavior, to thrust their Feet
toward a fair Lady's Nose.

They do so, answered she: Also, they have a Restless Mode, to stand up one
minute, the next sit down; dividing the time of visiting, in neither going, nor
staying, but between both: for they neither quietly stay, nor civilly take
their leave: and in Winter, where there is Fire, as soon as they come into a
Room, they straight go the fire, and there turn their backs to warm their
Breeches, with their hands turned back upon them: but if it be in Summer, then
they lean their Breech upon the Chimney-side, or against a Wall, standing
cross-legg'd; or else they stand bowing over a Chair's back, or set their
Stomachs against the edg of a Table, and lay the upper part of the Body upon
it; and sometimes they rest their Elbows thereon, and hold up their Chins with
the palm of their Hands, or Wrist; and in all these actions their Tongues run
with Nonsense. But the rudest Behavior is, to pull out the Ladies Fanns or
Muffs out of their hands, to fling their Cloaks or Coats on their Beds,
Couches, or Tables; or to lie rudely upon their Beds or Couches; or to come
unawares and kiss their Necks, or embrace their Waste; and twenty such like
tricks, which no Woman of Honor can like, but will be very angry: yet they
know not how to be revenged, unless they engage their nearest Friends, Fathers,
Brothers, Uncles, or Husbands, in a Quarrel; for they cannot fight with Men
themselves, their strength being too weak, although their will is good.

The Discourses of the most part of them, are, Swearing, Bragging, Ranting,
Rallery, Railing, or Lascivious: and in their Dressings and Fashions they are
more fantastical, various, and unconstant, than Women: for, they change their
Blocks for their Hats (although they cannot their Block-heads) forty times
oftener than Women change the shapes of their Bags or Hoods for their Heads, and
Men's Bands, Cuffs, and Boot-hose-tops, are changed into more several shapes,
than Women's Gorgets, Handkerchiefs, or any Linen they wear: and for their
Doublets, Breeches, Cloaks, Coats, and Cassocks, they change their Fashions
oftener than the Winds change their corners: whereas Women will keep to the
fashion of their Gowns, Petticoats, and Wastcoats, two or three years before
they alter their shapes. Neither do Men change for convenience, grace, or
behavior; but out of a fantastical vanity. And are not Men more Perfumed,
Curled, and Powdered, than Women? And have they not greater Quantities of
Ribbons of several Colors ti'd and set upon their Hats, Clothes, Gloves,
Boots, Shoes, and Belts, than Women on their Heads and Gowns? Have not Men
richer and more gaye Clothes than Women have? And where Women make Clothes
once, Men make Clothes three times; yet Men exclaim against the Vanities of
Women, when they are a hundred times vainer, and are more unnecessarily
expensive than Women are: Women may be allowed by the severest Judgments, to be
a little vain, as being Women; when it ought to be condemned in Men as an
Effeminacy, which is a great Vice.

The last is their Idleness: for, Do not Men spend their time far more idly
(not to say wickedly) than Women? Do not Men run visiting from House to House,
for no other purpose but to twattle, spending their time in idle and fruitless
discourse? Do not Men meet every day in Taverns and Ordinaries, to sit and
gossip over a Cup of Wine? When Women are condemned for gossiping once in a
quarter of a year, at a Labor, or a Christning, or at the Up-sitting of a
Childbed Woman. And do not Men run and hunt about for News, and then meet to
gossip on it with their Censuring-Verdicts? Besides, they are so greedy of
twattle, that rather than want idle matter to prate of, they will invent News,
and then falsely report it; and such are accounted Wits that can make the most
probable Lies, which they call Gulling.

Have not Men also more foolish Quarrels than Women have? Are not Men more apt
to take exceptions at each other, than Women are? Will not Men dissemble, lie,
and flatter with each other, more than Women do? Will not Men rail and
back-bite each other, more than Women will? Are not Men more spightful,
envious, and malicious at each other, than Women? Will not Men imitate each
other's fantastical Garb, Dress, and the like, more than Women? Will not Men
ride from place to place, to no purpose, more than Women? And do not Men take
more delight in idle pastimes, and foolish sports, than Women? And in all this
time of their Visiting, Club, Gossipping, News-travelling, News-venting,
News-making, Vain-spending, Mode-fashioning, Foolish-quarrelling, and
Unprofitable-journeying, what advantage do they bring to the Commonwealth, or
honor to their Posterity, or profit to themselves? None at all; but they are
like Flies bred out of a Dunghill, buzzing idly about, and then dye: when
Women are like industrious Ants, and prudent Bees, always employed to the
benefit of their Families. Therefore unless I can have a Husband that is so
wise that he can entertain himself with his own thoughts, to dwell quietly in
his own House, governing prudently his own Family; also, to behave himself
civilly, to speak rationally, to accoutre himself manfully, to defend himself,
and maintain his Honor valiantly; to do nobly, to judge charitably, to live
honestly, to temper his Appetites, rule his Passions, and be very industrious;
I will never marry: for it is not only a Good Husband, but a Wise Man, that
makes a Woman happy in Marriage.

Of Three TRAVELERS.
THERE were three Travelers that enquired of each other about their Travels;
and after they had recounted their tedious Journeys, dangerous Passages, and
their many Inconveniences; they discoursed of the Climates of each Country
they had been in, their Scituations, Commodities, Trade, and Traffic; the
Customs, Fashions, and Humors of the People, the Laws and Government of their
Princes, the Peace and Wars of Neighbour-Nations; at last they became to
question one another, Who had seen the greatest Wonders in their Travels?

Said one, I have seen the greatest VVonder: for I have seen a Mean Man become
an Emperor.

Pish, said the Second, that is nothing; for I have seen a Mean Fellow, without
Merit, a Powerful Emperor's Bosome-Friend, and Chief Ruler: for, though the
Power of Fortune can enthrone Slaves, and unthrone Kings; yet Fortune has no
Power over the Souls of Kings: for, although Fortune has Power over the Body,
she has none over the Mind.

Why, said the third, that is no more VVonder for Nature to put a Subject's
Soul (filled with mean Thoughts) into an Emperor's Body, than for Fortune to
set an Emperor's Crown on a Slave's Head. But I can tell you, said he, a
VVonder indeed, which is, That where I traveled, there was an Emperor, the
wisest Man in the world.

That is no wonder, answered the other; for all great Monarchs and Emperors
ought to be the wisest, because they rule all others.

But though they ought to be so, said the other yet they are not always so:
for, were not many of the Roman Emperors called, The Foolish Emperors? And when
there are so few wise Men in the world, that there is scarce a wise Man to be
found in an Age, it is a VVonder when Wisdom lights in the right Line, I mean
in a Royal Line.

No, answered the Third, it is no Wonder; for the Gods take a particular care
to endue a Royal Head with Understanding, and a Royal Heart with Justice: for,
Hereditary Royalty is Sacred, since the Gods anoint those Lines to that
Dignity.

But those that have not a Right by Inheritance, the Gods take no care of; nay,
many times the Gods punish with Plagues, and other Miseries, those People that
make a King of their own choosing, and justly; since Kings are God's
Vicegerents, or Deputies on Earth: for, as the Gods are chief in Heaven, and
rule the Works of Nature as they will; so Kings are chief on Earth, and rule
the rest of Mankind as they please.

But, said the other; If they rule not well, they are to give an account.

Yes, answered the other; but not unto those Men they rule, but to the Gods
that placed them. in their Thrones.

The Loving-Cuckold.
THERE was a Gentleman that had married a Wife, Beautiful, Modest, Chaste, and
of a mild and sweet Disposition; and after he had been married some time, he
began to neglect her, and make Courtship to other Women: which she perceiving,
grew very melancholy; and sitting one day very pensive alone, in comes one of
her Husband's Acquaintance to see him, whom this Lady told, Her Husband was
abroad.

He said, I have been to visit him many times, and still he is gone abroad.

She said, My Husband finds better Company abroad than he has at home, or at
least thinks so, which makes him go so often forth.

So he, discoursing with the Lady, told her, He thought she was of a very
melancholy Disposition.

She said, She was not naturally so, but what her Misfortunes caused.

He said, Can Fortune be cruel to a Beautiful Lady?

It Is a sign, said she, I am not Beautiful, that she would match me to an
unkind Husband.

He said, To my thinking it is as impossible for your Husband to be unkind, as
for Fortune to be cruel.

She said, You shall be Judge whether he be not so: for first, said she, I have
been an Obedient Wife, observed his Humors, and obeyed his will in every
thing. Next, I have been a Thrifty, Cleanly, Patient, and Chaste Wife. Thirdly,
I brought him a great Portion. And lastly, My Neighbors say, I am handsome;
and yet my Husband does neglect me, and despise me, making Courtships to other
Women, and sometimes (to vex me the more) before my Face.

He said, Your Husband is not worthy of you: therefore, if I may advise you, I
would cast aside the affection I had placed upon him, and bestow it upon a
Person that will worship you with an Idolatrous Zeal; and if you please to
bestow it on me, I will offer my Heart on the Altar of your Favors, and
sacrifice my Services thereupon; and my Love shall be as the Vestal Fire, that
never goes out, but perpetually burns with a Religious Flame.

Thus speaking and pleading, he made courtship to her; which she at first did
not receive: But he having opportunity, by reason her Husband was much from
home, and using importunity, at last corrupted her; and she, making a
Friendship with this Gentleman, began to neglect her Husband as much as he had
done her: which he perceiving, began to pull in the Bridle of his loose
carriage; and finding that his Acquaintant was her Courtly Admirer, he began to
woo her anew to gain her from him; but it would not be: for she became from a
Meek, Modest, Obedient, and Thrifty Wife, to be a Ranting, Flanting, Bold, and
Imperious one.

But her Husband grew so fond of her, that he sought all the ways he could to
please her; and was the most observant Creature to her, that might be; striving
to please her in all things or ways he could devise; insomuch, as observing she
was never pleased but when she had Gallants to court her, he would invite
Gentlemen to his house, and make Entertainments for them; and those she seemed
most to favor, he would make his dear Friends; and would often be absent, to
give them opportunities to be with his Wife alone; hoping to get a favorable
Look, or a Kiss, for his good services, which she would craftily give him to
encourage him.

But the other Gentleman that made the first addresses to her, being a
Married-man, his Wife hearing her Husband was so great a Lover of that Lady,
and that that Lady's Husband was reformed from his incontinent life, and was
become a doting fond Wittal, loving and admiring her for being courted and made
love to; esteeming that most, which others seemed to like best; she began to
imitate her: which her Husband perceiving, gave her warning not to do so; which
she would not take, but entertained those that would address themselves to her:
Whereupon her Husband threatened her; but she was at last so delighted with
variety, that she regarded not his Threats: whereupon he used her cruelly; but
nothing would reclaim her; only she would make more secret meetings, wherewith
she was the better pleased; for secret meetings, as I have heard, give an edg
to Adultery; and it is the nature of Mankind to be most delighted with that
which is most unlawful. But her Husband, finding no reformation could be made,
he parted with her, because he thought it a greater dishonor to be a Wittal
than a Cuckold, although he was very much troubled to be either: for, though he
was willing to make a Cuckold, yet he was not willing to be one himself. Thus
you may see the different natures of Men.

The Converts in Marriage.
THERE were four young Gentlewomen, whose Fathers were near Neighbors;
whereupon there grew an Acquaintance, and so a Society between them.

The first was Reserved and Coy.

The second was Bold and Ranting.

The third was Merry and Gay.

The fourth was Peevish and Spightful.

She that was Reserved and Coy, was Generous and Ambitious.

She that was Bold and Ranting, was Covetous and Wanton.

She that was Merry and Gay, was Vain and Fantastical.

She that was Peevish and Spightful, was Cross and Unconstant.

It chanced that the four Fathers (by reason they had good Estates) were
offered four Husbands for their four Daughters, all at one time.

The Husband that was to marry the first Lady, was Covetous, Miserable, and
Timorous; as all Miserable, Covetous Persons, for the most part, are: but being
very Rich, the Father to this Lady forced her to marry him.

He that was to marry the second Lady, was Temperate, Prudent, and Chaste.

He that was to marry the third Lady, was Melancholy, Solitary, and Studious.

And he that was to marry the fourth Lady, was Choleric and Impatient.

After they had been married some time, the Covetous and Timorous man became
Hospitable, Bountiful, Valiant, and Aspiring; doing High and Noble Deeds.

And she that was Bold and Wanton, became Chaste, Sober, and Obedient.

He that was Melancholy, became Sociable, Conversable, and Pleasant; and she,
Thrifty and Staid.

But he that was Choleric and Impatient, who married her that was Peevish and
Spightful, they live like Dogs and Cats, spit, scrawl, scratch, and bite;
insomuch as they were forced to part: for, being both faulty, they could not
live happily, because they could never agree: for Errors and Faults multiply,
being joined together.

AGE's FOLLY.
THERE was a Man and his Wife that had been married many years together; and
had agreed and lived happily, loving each other wondrous well: but at last,
after they were stricken in years, the Husband was caught with a crafty young
Wench, (like a Woodcock in a Noose or Net) wherein he was entangled in Love's
Fetters; and though he fluttred and fluttred to get loose, yet she kept him
fast; not that she loved Age, but Wealth: for Amorous Age is prodigal, and
though more self-conceited than those that are young, or in their prime of
years, yet are easily catched; which is strange: for, most commonly, those that
are selfconceited, are proud, disdainful, despising, thinking few or none
worthy of their love. But Amorous Age, although they are self-conceited, take a
pride, and brag, that they can have a Love as well as those that are Young;
which makes each smile and every amorous glance from youthful eyes, to be
snares, or rather baits, which Age does nibble at.

But his Wife observing her Husband to prank and prune, to jet and set himself
in several postures, to be extravagant in his actions, fantastical in his
dress, loose in his discourse; wondered to see him on a sudden transformed from
a Sober, Grave, Staid, Wise Man, to a Jack an-apes: At last concluded with her
self, That for certain he was mad; with which opinion she became wondrous
melancholy. But, by chance, finding him making amorous addresses to a young
Woman, she then perceived the Cause was Love, and nothing but Love; I mean
Amorous Love, that powerful Amorous Love, which blindfolds long and wise
Experience, with a foul, false appetite; making not only Young, but Old Men
Fools.

His Wife, like a discreet Woman, moderated her Passion for a while, hoping it
was but a sudden flash, or faint blast, that would soon dye. But when she
perceived his Amorous Humorou not to quench, but rather to burn, though
smutheredly, and no persuasions could reform him, but rather make him worse, as
Cordials in hot Fevers; she parted from him, after that they had been, and as
she thought, happily married many years; and so resigned that part of the
Command and Government of his Family that was left her; for the Maid had
encroach'd by her Master's favor, and had engrossed the chiefest Power of Rule
in the Houshold-affairs, as well as in the Affection of the Heart.

Thus his Wife left him, and his Dotage; but Death in a short time did come and
revenge her Quarrel; and that Tinder-fire Cupid had made, Death put out.

By this we see, there is no Certainty of Constancy, nor no Cure in Time, nor
no Settlement in life.

The Three WOOERS.
THERE were three Knights went a wooing:

A Covetous Knight.

An Amorous Knight: and

A Judicious Knight.

The Covetous Knight sought a Rich Wife, not caring for her Birth, Breeding, or
Beauty.

The Amorous sought for a Beautiful Wife, not caring for her Wealth or Birth.

The Judicious sought for a Wife Virtuous, well bred, and honorably born, not
caring for the Wealth or Beauty.

And having all three good Estates, every Man that had Daughters, invited and
feasted them.

So they went to visit all Noble, Hospitable Housekeepers, such as Gentlemen
are, and Honorable Persons, that live in the Country.

The Amorous Knight made love to all those Ladies and Gentlewomen that were
Handsome; but as soon as he was to treat with their Parents or Friends about
Marriage, or to appoint a Weddingday, he would find some excuse or other to
break off.

The Covetous Knight would be so far from Wooing, that he would not speak to
any of the young Ladies, nor look on them oftenl, for fear they should claim
Marriage; but he still would treat with their Parents or Friends, to know what
Portions they had, or what Estates were likely to befall them by the death of
their Friends.

The Judicious Knight would neither woo the Ladies, nor treat with their
Parents or Friends, but discoursed with them civilly, observing strictly what
Capacities, Wits, and Behaviors, the Women had; also employing Agents secretly
to enquire of their Servants, Neighbors, and Acquaintance, of what Natures,
Dispositions, and Humors, they were; not trusting to their sober outsides, and
formalities they use to Strangers.

After they had visited all Noble Entertainers, they went to the City.

For, said the Covetous Knight, I will not choose a Wife in these Families; for
these Daughters, Sisters, and Neeces, are too prodigally bred to make Thrifty
Wives. So they went to visit the City.

But the Amorous Knight said, He would not choose a Wife out of the City;
because (said he) I shall never love my Wife but on Holy Days, or Sundays; for
they then appear indifferent Handsome, when they have their best Clothes; but on
VVorking days they smell of the Shop, and appear like their Father's faded,
moldy, withered VVares. Besides, said he, they discoursing to none but their
Journey-men and 'Prentice-boys, cannot tell how to entertain a Gentleman, or a
Lover, with Romancical Speeches, or pieces of Plays, or Copies of Verses, or
the like.

The Covetous Knight said, You condemn that I shall commend, and dislike that
which I shall like, and love that which I shall hate: for I hate whining-Love;
and I shall be unwilling to marry a Woman (although she should bring me a great
Portion) that would be reading Romances, and the like; and be entertaining with
repeating Verses, and singing Love-Sonnets, when she should be looking to my
Servants, ordering my Family, and giving directions: Or such a one that would
be half the day dressed so fine, she cannot stir about her House, or will not,
for fear of dirtying or crumpling her Clothes; besides the infinite Expense
their Bravery will put me to. But when they dress fine but on Sundays and
Holy Days, (I mean, only at such Good-times as Christmas, Easter, Whitsuntide,
or so) a Silk-Gown will last some Seven years. He is a good Husband that will
or can love his Wife sometimes, as on Holy Days; although I shall love my Wife
best those days she is most in her Huswifry (which is, in her Sluttery), and
not on Holydays, when she is in her Bravery. But he that loves his Wife every
day, and at all times, is Luxurious, and ought to be banished a Commonwealth:
for, Fond Husbands make Proud, Vain, Idle, and Expensive Wives, who spoil
Servants, kill Industry and all good Huswifry, which is the ruin to Noble and
Ancient Families.

But after they had traversed the City, they went to the Court.

And when the Covetous Man saw the Bravery of the Court, he would by any means
be gone from thence. The other two asked him the reason: He said, He was afraid
that they would cheat him, or bring some false Witness to accuse him of
Treason, to get his Estate; or at least to bring him into some Court of
Justice, to get a Fine: for, said he, I verily believe they have no Money,
having no Lands but what they get by such shifting, sharking, flattery,
bribery, betraying, and accusing: for, said he, poor Courtiers are like starved
Prisoners, devour all they can get, and sometimes they devour one another. But
the Amorous Knight was ravished with the glistering Shows; and was more
enamoured with the gay Clothes, than with the fair Ladies; and did long to
embrace their Silver-Lace; which made him use all his Rhetoric to the Covetous
Knight, to stay.

As for the Judicious Knight, he was neither moved with fear, as the Covetous;
nor struck with admiration, as the Amorous Knight; said little, but observed
much; and was willing to go or stay, as the others could agree.

But when the Covetous Knight heard them to talk of nothing but Fashions,
Gowns, Gorgets, Fanns, Feathers, and Love-Servants, he fell into a Cold-sweat,
for fear he should be forced by the King and Queen to marry one of those Maids
of Honor. And when he heard them talk of Love, Justice, and justifying
loving-Friendships, he was forced to go out of the room, or otherwise he should
have swooned with an Apoplexy, or Lethargy, or the like sudden Disease: for he
did imagine himself married to one of them, and all his Estate spent, and he
only left with a pair of Horns; and, like a Horned-Beast, in the wild Forest of
Poverty.

But these sorts of Discourse did enslave the Amorous Knight, binding him in
Love's Fetters, insomuch as he became a Servant to them all: but then finding
it was impossible to please them all, he only applied, and at last yielded
himself to one; to whom, after a short time, he was married.

The Covetous Knight, being afraid of being forced to marry a Courtier, took a
Wife out of the City.

The Judicious Knight, seeing his Wooing-Travellers married, thought it would
show an unconstant Humor not to marry, since he traveled about with them to
get a Wife; or else it would seem as if he thought no Woman Virtuous, or at
least Discreet. So he went to a Noble Gentleman, who had a fair, well-bred,
virtuous Lady to his Daughter, although but a small Portion; and having the
Father's consent, and the Lady's affection, at least her good will, married.

When these three Knights were married, each carried his Wife to his
Dwelling House.

Where the Covetous Knight did spare from his Back and Belly, rise early, and
go to bed late; yet his Wife and Servants did agree, at least did wink at each
other, to cozen him: let him do what he could to spare, they outwitted him with
craft, to get.

The Amorous Knight, when he had lived at home a little while to himself, and
his Wive's gay Clothes were faded, and she appeared in her natural Complexion,
and became like her Neighbors, he courted others, and despised his Wife; then
she strives to spruce up, and to get others to court her, which Courtships did
cause Expenses, in Dancing, Meetings, Revelling, and Feasting.

The Judicious Knight and his Lady, lived happily, loved dearly, governed
orderly, thrived moderately, and became very rich, when the other two were
Bankrupts; the one being cozened by his Wife and Servants (he not allowing them
sufficiently); the other being impoverished with Mistresses and Vanities.

Ambition preferred before Love.
THERE was a Noble Gallant Man, made love to a Virtuous Fair Lady; and after he
had expressed his affection, and desired a return, and so agree to marry; she
told him, If she would marry, and had her liberty to choose a Husband through
all the World, it should be him: for, said she, the same of your Worth, and
praise of your Merits, has planted a Root of Affection in my Infantyears,
which has grown up with time: but, said she, there was another Root also
planted therein by Encouragement, which is Ambition; which Ambition, says she,
has out-grown that; so that the Tree of Love is like an Oak to a Cedar; for
though it may be more lasting, yet it will never be so high. On this high Tree
of Ambition, said she, my Life is industrious to climb to Fame's high Tower,
for the top reaches to it; which, if I marry, I shall never do.

Why, said her Lover, Marriage can be no hindrance.

O, yes, said the Lady; Husbands will never suffer their Wives to climb, but
keep them fast locked in their Arms, or tie them to Houshold-Employments; or,
through a foolish-obstinacy, bar up their Liberty: but did they not only give
them Liberty, but assist them all they could; yet the unavoidable Troubles of
Marriage would be like great storms, which would shake them off, or throw them
down, before they had climbed half the way: Wherefore, said she, I will never
marry, unless you can assure me that Marriage shall not hinder my climbing, nor
cause me to fall.

Her Lover said, I will give you all the assurance I can: but, said he, You
cannot be ignorant, but know, That Fortune, Fates, and Destiny, have power in
the ways to Fame, as much as in the ways to Death; and Fates, said he, do spin
the Thread of Fame as unevenly, as they do Threads of Life.

Yes, said she; but there is a Destiny belongs to Industry; and Prudence is a
good Decree in Nature: Wherefore, said she, I will be so prudent, as not to
marry; and so industrious, that all the actions of my life, and studious
contemplations, shall be busily employed to my Ambitious Designs: for I will
omit nothing toward the life of my Memory.

The Matrimonial Agreement.
A Handsome young Man fell in love with a fair young Lady; insomuch that if he
had her not, he was resolved to dye; for live without her, he could not. So
wooing her long, at last, although she had no great nor good opinion of a
married life, being afraid to enter into so strict bonds, observing the
discords therein that trouble a married life, being raised by a disagreement of
Humors, and jealousy of Rivals. But considering withal, that Marriage gave a
respect to Women, although Beauty were gone; and seeing the Man personable, and
knowing him to have a good Fortune, which would help to counterpoise the
Inconveniences and Troubles that go along with Marriage, she was resolved to
consent to his request.

The Gentleman coming as he used to do, and persuading her to choose him for her
Husband, she told him she would; but, that she found her self of that Humor,
that she could not endure a Rival in Wedlock; and the fear of having one, would
cause Jealousy, which would make her very unhappy; and the more, because she
must be bound to live with her Enemy (for so she should account of her Husband,
when he had broken his Faith and Promise to her).

He smiling, told her, She need not fear; and that Death was not more certain
to Man, than he would be constant to her; sealing it with many Oaths and solemn
Protestations; nay, said he, When I am false, I wish you may be so, which is
the worst of Ills.

She told him, Words would not serve her turn; but, that he should be bound in
a Bond, That not only whenever she could give a proof, but when she had cause
of suspicion, she might depart from him; with such an allowance out of his
Estate, as she thought fit to maintain her.

He told her, He was so confident, and knew himself so well, that he would
unmaster himself of all his Estate, and make her only Mistress.

She answered, A part should serve her turn. So the Agreement was made and
sealed; they married, and lived together as if they had but one soul: for,
whatsoever the one did, or said, the other disliked not; nor had they reason:
for their study was only to please each other.

After two years, the Wife had a great Fit of Sickness, which made her pale and
wan, and not so full of lively spirits as she was wont to be; but yet as kind
and loving to her Husband, as she was before: and her Husband, at her first
sickness, wept, watched, and tormented himself beyond all measure; but the
continuance made him so dull and heavy, that he could take no delight in
himself, nor in any thing else.

His occasions calling him abroad, he found himself so refreshed, that his
spirits revived again; but returning home, and finding not that mirth in the
sick, as was in the healthy Wife, it grew wearisome to him; insomuch that he
always would have occasions to be abroad, and thought Home his only Prison. His
Wife, mourning for his absence, complained to him at his return, and said, she
was not only unhappy for her Sickness, but miserable, in that his occasions
were more urgent to call him from her, when she had most need of his company to
comfort her in the loss of her Health, than in all the time they had been
married: And therefore, pray Husband, said she, what is this unfortunate
business that employs you so much, and makes me see you so seldom? He told her,
The Worldly Affairs of Men, Women did not understand; and therefore it were a
folly to recite them: besides, said he, I am so weary in following them, that I
hate to repeat them. She, like a good Wife, submitted to her Husband's Affairs,
and was content to sit without him.

The Husband returning home one day fromjolly Company, whose Discourse had been
merry and wanton, he met with his Wife's Maid at the door, and asked her how
her Mistress did; she said, Not very well: Thou look well, said he, and
chucks her under the chin. She, proud of her Master's kindness, smerks and
smiles upon him; insomuch, that the next time he met her, he kissed her. Now
she begins to despise her Mistress, and only admires her self, and is always the
first Person or Servant that opens the door to her Master; and, through the
dilgence of the Maid, the Master's great Affairs abroad were ended; and his
only employment and busy care is now so much at home, that whenever he was
abroad, he was in such have, that he could scarce salute any body by the way;
and when his Friends spoke to him, his Head was so full of thoughts, that he
would answer quite from the question; insomuch that he was thought one of the
best and carefullest Husbands in the World.

In the mean time his Wife grew well, and his Maid grew pert and bold toward
her Mistress; and the Mistress, wondering at it, began to observe more strictly,
what made her so: for she perceived the VVench came oftener than accustomed
where her Husband and she were; and found also, that her Husband had always
some excuse to turn his head and eyes to that place where she was; and that
whenever the Wench came where they were, he would alter his Discourse,
talking extravagantly.

VVhereupon, not liking it, she examined her Husband, Whether his Affections
were as strong to her as ever they were: He answered, He was the perfectest
good Husband in the World, and so he should be until he dyed.

It chanced he was employed by the State into another Country; where, at the
parting, his Wife and he lamented most sadly, and many tears were shed. But
when he was abroad (being in much Company who took their liberty, and had many
Mistresses), he then considered with himself, he was a most miserable Man that
must be bound only to one; but withal, did consider what Promises he made his
Wife, and what Advantages she had on him in his Estate; which kept him in good
order for a time.

But at last he was persuaded by his Companions to fling off all Care, and take
his pleasure whilst he might: for, said they, What do our Wives know what we
do? Besides, said they, Wives are only to keep our House, to bring us Children,
not to give us Laws. Thus preaching to him, he at last followed their Doctrine,
and improved it so well, that he became the greatest Libertine of them all;
like a Horse that having broken his Reins, (when he finds himself loose) skips
over Hedges, Ditches, Pales, or whatsoever is in his way; and runs wildly
about, until he has wearied himself.

But his Wife having some Intelligence (as most commonly they want none), or
may be out of pure love, comes to see him: He receives her with the greatest
joy, and makes the most of her in the World, carrying her to see all the
Country and Towns thereabouts, and all the Varieties, Curiosities, and Sights,
that were to be seen. But when she had been there a Month, or such a time, he
tells her how dangerous it is to leave his House to Servants who are negligent,
and his Estate to be entrusted he knows not to whom; so that there is no way
but to return both for his and her good, especially if they had Children;
although, said he, I had rather part with my life, than be absent from you; but
Necessity has no Law. So she, good Woman, goes home to care and spare, whilst
he spends; for in the mean time he follows his Humors: and Custom making
Confidence, and Confidence Carelessness, begins to be less shie, and more free;
insomuch as when he returned home, his Maid, whom he did but eye, and friendly
kiss, now he courts in every Room; and were it not for his having his Estate
made over, even before his Wive's face; but that made him fawn and flatter, and
somewhat for quietness sake.

But his Wife, one day being in his Closet, by chance opened a Cabinet, wherein
she found a Letter from a Mistress of his; whereat she was much amazed: and
being startled at it, at last calling her self to her self again, showed it to
her Husband; he fain would have excused it, but that the plainness of truth
would not give him leave: whereupon he craved pardon, promising amendment, and
swearing he never would do so again.

No, said she, I never will trust a broken Wheel: Do you know what is in my
Power, said she?

Yes, said he, a great part of my Estate.

O how I adore Dame Nature, said she, that gave me those two Eyes, Prudence to
foresee, and Providence to provide: but I have not only your Estate, but your
Honor and Fame in my Power; so that, if I please, all that see you, shall hiss
at you, and contemn whatsoever you do.

For, if you had the Beauty of Paris, they would say, You were but a Fair
Cuckold.

If you had the Courage of Hector, they would say, You were but a Desperate
Cuckold.

Had you the Wisdom of Ulysses, or Solomon, they would laugh, and say, There
goes he that is not yet so Wise as to keep his Wife Honest.

If you had the Tongue of Tully, and made as Eloquent Orations, they would say,
There is the Prating Cuckold.

If you were as fine a Poet as Virgil, or as sweet as Ovid, yet they would
laugh, and scorn, and say, He makes Verses, whilst his Wife makes him a Cuckold.

Now Jealousy and Rage are her two Bawds to corrupt her Chastity; the one
persuading her to be revenged, to show her Husband she could take delight, and
have Lovers, as well as he. This makes her Curl, Paint, Prune, Dress, make
Feasts, Plays, Balls, Masks, and have Merry-meetings abroad: whereupon she
began to find as much pleasure as her Husband, in Variety; and now begins to
flatter him, and to dissemble with him, that she may play the Whore more
privately, finding a delight in obscurity, thinking that most sweet which is
stolen: so they play, like Children, at Bo-peep in Adultery, and face it out
with fair looks, and smooth it over with sweet words, and live with false
hearts, and dye with large consciences. But these, repenting when they dyed,
made a fair end.

Of Two Ladies different Humors.
THERE were two young Ladies bred together; the one proved a Stoic, living a
retired life; the other proved a Gossip, her Head being full of vain Designs,
her Tongue full of idle Discourses, her Body busily-restless, running from
place to place, spending her life in fruitless Visits, and expensive
Entertainments; gleaning up all the News of the Town; and when she had gathered
up a Bundle, or Sheaf, of this unprofitable Grain, her Custom was to come and
thresh it out with the Flail of her Tongue, at the Door of the other Lady's
Ears; which she, although with great inconvenience, suffered, by reason of
their long acquaintance, which many times breeds a kind of friendship, although
between different Humors, Natures, and Dispositions: for Custom of
Acquaintance begets some small affections even in the most obdurate hearts.

But this Stoical Lady did comply so much with her Friend's humor, as to give
her the hearing, although she would often advise and persuade her to that
course of life she lived; which course of life the other Lady would often
dislike, and speak against, saying, That Solitariness was a Grave that buried
the Life; and, that a Contemplatory Mind was a Tomb, wherein lay nothing but
insipid Thoughts.

The other Lady said, That Solitariness was a Paradise of true Happiness; and,
that Contemplation was a Heaven of Fruition: for in Imagination (said she) we
enjoy all things with ease, and as we will; whereas iu Action we find great
disturbance and opposition; are crossed in every thing, and enjoy nothing. At
last the Lady Gossip married, whereat the Stoick-Lady rejoiced, imagining her
Friend would become grave and staid, and that her thoughts would be more
composed and settled to a retired life, being married, than when she was a Maid,
by reason married Wives have more employment than Maids, in ordering their
Families, directing and over-seeing their Servants, nursing their Children, and
the like.

But after she had been married some time, she came with her Eyes full of
Tears, and her Mouth full of Complaints, one while for the Debaucheries of her
Husband, and other times for the Carelessness and Cozenage of her Servants.

Other times she would come in a choleric humor, with railing-speeches,
telling her Friend what quarrels she has had with such a Lady, and such a
Neighbor, and what abuses she had received: Which the Stoic Lady would
endeavor to pacify, and persuade her to patience, as much as she could. But
at last the Stoick-Lady married to a Gallant Heroic Man.

But soon after, a Civil-Warr broke out; where these two Ladies Husbands being
for the Emperor, after great Dangers, and many Wounds got in their Royal
Master's Service, with the loss of their Estates, and banishment of their
Persons, they were forced to wander into other Nations, to live with Strangers
upon cold Charity; and these two Ladies were forced also to take up their
Crosses, and travel with their Husbands; wherein the Stoic Lady did bear her
part patiently.

The other Lady was impatient with her Misfortunes, which made her quarrel with
every thing, even with her self; and yet sometimes would take delight with
the least hopes of a repair, and would lend a credulous ear to every hopeful
report, although never so improbable.

But the Stoick-Lady, as she bare her Misfortunes patiently, so she lived
quietly, making her Necessities a School of Wisdom, where Truth taught, and
Judgment corrected; wherein she learned neither to be credulous, nor obstinate;
not to believe every report, nor to reject all reports; but settled her self, if
good came, so; if not, she knew how to suffer without repining at that which
could not be avoided nor amended.

But one day the Lady- Gossip came to the Stoick-Lady with a pleased humor,
and merry countenance, and told her, That her Husband had been with the
Emperor, and that the Emperor used him very kindly, and had spoke to him very
affectionately.

The other Lady said, That Princes would do so to them that had deserved no
favor.

Nay, said the Lady- Gossip, he told my Husband, That when he has his Power,
he would reward his Service.

O, said the other Lady, Princes forget to Reward when they have Power,
although they never forget to promise Rewards when they have none.

Nay, said the Lady- Gossip, the Emperor's Favorite said, The Emperor had a
great esteem of my Husband; and that he takes an occasion in all his discourse
to commend my Husband, and to express his Love and Kindness to him.

The Stoic Lady said, That was but a petty Favourite's Policy, to keep off
Envy from himself, and to feed half-starved Sufferers: for it is not to your
Husband only, who is a Gallant Man, and deserves much; but to every one he says
the like; even to Grooms, Trumpeters, Cooks, and Scullions, making no
difference in Promises nor Commendations. The like they do in Letters; for one
kind of style serves for all Qualities and Degrees, which is as one Deed of
Gift to several Friends, which in effect proves nothing; and though they think
it is not perceived, yet it is as public as a Proclamation, which begins, May
it be known to all People.

But, said she, although this kind of Policy may deceive unpractised Men, and
please young Men, and foolish Women, with vain hopes, causing them to build
Castles in the Air: yet they that are wise and experienced, are not muffled nor
blinded therewith, nor build any design thereon, by reason that Politic
Foundation is rotten and weak; and that such poor, smooth, smiling, dissembling
Policies, will sooner pull down Monarchy, than defend it, much less set up one
that has been cast down by Rebellion.

No, said she, Wise Men know, That the best Policy is True and Plain dealing.

And, said she, let me fore-warn you, Not to feed upon Court-Promises, Smiles,
Commendations, and Letters; for they will breed in you Vain Crudities, and fill
you with Hydropsical Spleen, and Spightful Vapors, and hot Malicious Humors,
which are apt to make Honest Men turn Knaves.

The Lady- Gossip said, If I thought my Husband's great Losses and faithful
Services should not be rewarded, I should hate the Favorite for playing the
Politician with my Husband; and, for revenge, I would work up a Faction of
Women against him; and in faith, said she, they would not fail to pull him down.

Indeed, said the Stoick-Lady, our Sex is prevalent and prompt in any
Revengeful-Design; and those in Authority might safer displease Ten Men, than
One Woman: for, though they can do no good (said she) in State Affairs, yet we
can do hurt.

Yes, said the Lady- Gossip, and so secretly, that Men shall not perceive it.

But, said the Stoick-Lady, it is against the nature and temper of our Sex to
do so.

No, said the Lady- Gossip, we were born to do it; and so went out in choler.

The Drunken Poets.
THERE were a Company of Men met at a Well called Helicon; which place of
Society is the cause, many times, of good Fellowship; and drinking they take
for their Pastime. But here, at first, they drank soberly, and discoursed
orderly; but at last they began to drink Healths, and so many, that they grew
so drunk that they could not stand; and so drowsy, that they all fell asleep.
But, in their sleep, this Drink did work such effects, that when they waked,
they became all Mad in Poetry; some Merry, some Melancholy, others Envious;
some Amorous, some Divinely, Poetically Mad.

Those that were Mad-merry, were Lyrick Poets, who did nothing but sing Sonnets.

The Melancholy were Tragedians.

The Envious were Satyrists, who describe the World a Hell, and the Men therein
Devils.

The Amorous run all into Blank-Verses, putting them into such Numbers as to
raise the Voice to a passionate whining, folding their Arms, fixing their Eyes.

But a Grave Moral Philosopher walking that way, seeing a Company together, out
of a Curiosity went to them. The first that he saw, was blind Homer, acting of
Paris; who hearing one come toward him, imagined straight it was a Woman,
because his desire would have it so; and would have him act the part of Helen.
The Philosopher told him, He was not fit to make a Courtezan. Why, said Homer,
Pythagoras was one in his Transmigrations. Whereat the Philosopher was very
angry, and left him, and went to see who the rest were.

The next he met, was Virgil, acting of AEneas; who as soon as saw the
Philosopher, would needs take him up for his Father Anchises. The Philosopher
desired to be excused: for though (said he) I am old enough to be thy Father,
yet I love not the few remainder of my days so well, as to have them be a cause
to burden my Son; nor am I so uncharitable as he was to his Daughter-in-law,
to expose her to danger, and so to be lost, whilst he rid lazily upon his Son's
Shoulders.

The third Person he saw, was Ovid, transforming Gods, Men, and Beasts. As soon
as he saw the Philosopher, he would needs have him Europa, and himself Jupiter;
and lay tumbling upon the Grass, feigning himself like a Bull, and would have
him get upon him, as Europa did, and bid him lay hold upon his Horns. The
Philosopher said, He thought them all Horn'd-mad, and so left him.

The fourth he met, was Lucan, describing the Battle between Caesar and Pompey:
and when he saw the Philosopher, he would have him stand for Pompey, whilst he
represented Caesar, and so would have had them fight. But the Philosopher told
him, He was a Man of Peace, and not for War; my study, said he, is, To conquer
unsatiable Ambition, and not to fight and kill for Power and Authority by
Usurpation.

The fifth he met, was Martial; who was writing Epigrams, and would needs write
one of the Philosopher. But he prayed him to forbear: for, said he, my ways are
so dull and sober, that they will not produce such Fancies as must go to the
making of Jestings-Epigrams.

The sixth he met, was Horace; who was describing, in his Discourse, a
Countrey-Life; and would needs have the Philosopher a Countrey-Lass; he would
have had him sit down upon a Bank by him, that he might make love to him, by
repeating of Amorous Poems. But after much struggling, the Philosopher got from
him; and growing weary of their Company, left them to their vain Fantasms, and
Fantastical Humors.

LOVE's CURE.
THERE was a Man, Amorous by nature, and of a Courtly Behavior, who made love
to a young Lady, and she returned him Affection for his kind Professions: but
after a while he forsook her, and made love to another; of whom he had also the
good fortune to be beloved, as oft-times Amorous Men have, by reason they
address their Suits to Credulous Women, who are self-conceited and opinionated,
easily believe, and soon persuade themselves, That Men's Praises and Promises,
Vows and Protestations, are real; and, that their Affections are unalterably
fixed, when they address themselves as Suitors and Servants. But this Gallant
left her, as he did the other, and made love to a third: for it is the nature
of Amorous Persons to love variety, and seek for change, being soon weary of
one and the same Object.

Whereupon these two forsaken-Ladies became very melancholy; and though they
were Enemies whilst he made love to either, yet now became dear Friends, since
he made love to neither: and every day they would visit one another, to condole
and bewail their Misfortunate Loves.

But the second forsaken-Lady having been some time in the Country, and
returning thence, went to visit her Friend, with a Face clothed in a sad
Countenance, and veiled with dull Eyes; and seeing her Friend (who had wont to
have as mourning a Face as she) to have now a merry Countenance, a lively
Behavior, and a healthful Complexion; began to be jealous, thinking her
unconstant Lover had renewed his Love-suit to her: for Friendships made by
Loss, dissolve, when either get what they before did lose; and think they had a
right to, or at least a share in it.

But, to be resolved, she asked her the reason she seemed so well disposed to
be pleasant; for when she parted from her last, she seemed to be like one newly
raised from the dead; or like a Statue made of Stone, that had no Life nor
Motion.

Truly, said she, my Mind is in such peace, that my Thoughts take a harmless
freedom to sport and play, and it gives also my Body leave to nourish Life.

The second Lady said, Would my Mind could find the same tranquillity.

The first said, Truly if your Mind be troubled still, and finds no rest, I
pity you, by what I have felt my self; for when my Mind was troubled, there was
a Civil-Warr amongst my Passions, such Factions, Side-takings, and
Disputations, with Anger, Spite, Spleen, and Malice, against Love, Hope, and
Jealousy, that it caused many Tears to be shed, and Groans to be sent forth.

But how came you to be cured, said she?

I tell you (answered she); After a long Civil-Warr amongst my Passions, my
Body became almost wasted to skin and bone, for want of rest and nourishment;
for my Passions had devoured Sleep, and banished Appetite, whereby my Mind
began to be infected with a Feverish Distemper; which Reason perceiving, came
to the rescue, bringing an Army of Arguments, of which Understanding and Truth
were chief Commanders; and after many Skirmishes, those Passions being often
foiled, and put to a rout, they grew weak, and so dispersed several ways. But
after these Wars, a dark Melancholy covered my Mind like a Cloud, which
eclipsed all the Light of Comfort, and made it murmur against the Gods Decree,
and complain against Nature's Works, and curse Fortune's Instability: at which,
poor Virtue, whom Education had put to be my Governess, was very angry, and
said, The Gods had been too merciful, Nature too bountiful, and Fortune too
favorable, unless I were more thankful. Yet she commanded Patience and Charity
(who were two of her Handmaids) to stand by me. But as my Mind was musing, in
came my grave and sober Companions, the Sciences; and seeing me in that
posture, began to counsel me, persuading me to follow their Studies: for, said
they, nothing can compose and settle the Mind more than we do.

My Mind, bowing to them, gave them thanks for their advice: But as soon as
they were gone, in came my Domestic Acquaintance, the Arts, who offered me all
their Industry and Ingenuity, to do me service. But I told them, I was past the
cure of any. Art: Whereupon they very sorrowfully departed.

No sooner were they gone, but in came my Playfellows, the Muses; who seeing me
sit so dejected, began to sport with me; one pulled me out to Dance; another
would have me Sing; another repeated Love-Verses; another described Battles and
Wars; another, like a Mimmick, imitated several Humors: and so every one
endeavored to please me in their turns. But the Tragedian Muse said, That she
liked my Humor very well; and, that I was the only fit Company for her. But my
Moral Governess chid them away, and said, She would order me better, than to
suffer such wanton Wenches, and idle Huswives, to keep me Company; for they
were able to spoil and corrupt a whole Nation with their wildness, and
impoverish a Kingdom with their laziness: whereupon some went laughing away,
but others went weeping. So after I had been some time chastised by Virtue, the
Sciences returned in a Chariot which the Arts had made, being finely carved,
neatly cut, and lively painted, joined with curious Screws, and subtle Engines,
and the Wheels Mathematically Compassed: Which Chariot was drawn by Six new,
sound, strong, and wellbreath'd Opinions, Harnessed with Speculations, Shod
with Disputations, wherewith they often stumble upon the ridg of Ignorance, or
plunge into holes of Nonsense. He that drove the Chariot, was Ambition; the
Postillion, was Curiosity; the Sciences sat in it, and Doubts and Hopes run by,
as Lacquies; which Lacquies did bear me upon their Shoulders, and placed me in
the midst of the Chariot, the Sciences being round about me. Where I was no
sooner set, but Rhetoric presented me with a Posie of sweet Eloquence, and the
Mathematics crowned me with Truth. But they all, in their turns, encouraged me
with Promises, That they would carry me to Fame's Palace, and there I should
remain.

No sooner had Ambition given a Lash, to make the Opinions run, but the Muses
came in another Chariot made by Contemplation, cut out of Imagination, lined
with several-colour'd Fancies, embroidered with Rhymes, rolling upon the Wheels
of Numbers, drawn by Distinguishings, whose Trappings were Similizing, Plumed
with Delight, Shod with Pleasure, which makes them run smooth, swift, and
easy: He that did drive the Chariot, was Judgment; and the Postillion, Wit.

But when the Muses, who were therein, saw I was in the Chariot of the
Sciences, they began to quarrel, and draw out their Satirical Swords.

The Sciences, being more Grave and Temperate, received their Assaults very
civilly, as coming from fair Ladies. But after some dispute, they did agree to
take turns to carry me to Fame's Palace. After I had traveled some time with
the Sciences, I was received into the Chariot of the Muses, where I was
received with great joy, and crowned with a Wreath of Flame. And thus I am
traveling with very wise and pleasant Company, though as yet I have no sight
of the Palace; but howsoever, my Mind is so pleased with the Journey, so
delighted with the Society, and so proud of the Favors and Gifts it receives
from them every day, that it despises the Follies, and hates the Falsehood of
Mankind, and scorns the Proffers of Fortune, not regarding the Vanities of the
World.

Would you could bring me into that Society, said the second Lady.

The first answered, I will do my endeavor.

So, after a short time, She pleaded so earnestly in her Friend's behalf, that
she was received into their Company, in their Chariots; where each Lady took
their turns to ride in each Chariot, whereby the Muses and Sciences were both
pleased, having always one of them with each. And when at any time they rested
from traveling, the Sciences and Muses made Pastimes for those two Ladies,
like those of the Olympick-Games; the Sciences found out new places to play in,
and took the Height, the Longitude and Latitude of them.

Also, by the help of the Arts, they fortified and made them strong, and built
thereon; and the Muses invented Masks, made Plays, and the like: for the
Sciences, Arts, and Muses, were so proud, and did so glory that they had gotten
two of the Feminine Sex, that they strove with all their Industry to delight
them, and to entertain them after the best manner.

The Propagating SOULS.
THERE was a handsome young Lord, and a young beautiful Lady, who did love one
another so passionately and entirely, that their Affections could never be
dissolved: but their Parents not agreeing to it, would by no means be persuaded
to let them Marry, nor so much as to let them converse like Strangers, Setting
Spies to watch them.

But when they found they would meet, in despite of their Spies, they enclosed
them up from coming at each other: Whereat they grew so discontent and
melancholy, that they both dyed, and just at one and the same time, to the
great grief of their Parents, who now wished they had not been so cruel.

But when their Bodies were dead, these Lovers Souls, leaving their Fleshly
Mansions, went toward the River of Styx, to pass over to the Elyzium-Fields;
where, in the way, they met each other: At which meeting they were extremely
joyed, but knew not how to express it, for they had no Lips to kiss, nor Arms
to embrace, being Bodiless, and only Spirits. But the Passion of Love being
always ingenious, found out a way, that their Souls (which are Spirits) did
mingle and intermix, as liquid Essences, whereby both their Souls became as one.

But after these gentle, smooth, soft Loveexpressions, they began to remember
each other of their Crosses and Oppositions whilst they lived in their Bodies:
but, at last, considering of the place they were moving to, the Masculine Soul
was unwilling to go to it; for, since he had his Beloved Soul, he cared not to
live in the Elyzium: Then, speaking in the Soul's Language, he persuaded his
Love not to go thither: for, said he, I desire no other Company but yours; nor
would I be troubled or disturbed with other Lovers Souls. Besides, I have
heard, said he, that those that are there, do nothing but walk and talk of
their past-life, which we may desire to forget. Then let us, said he, only
enjoy our selves by intermixing thus.

She answered, She did approve of his desire; and, that her Mind did join and
consent. But where (said she) shall be our Habitation? He answered, He would
build a Mansion in the Air, of Poets Fancies, and Philosophers Imaginations,
and make Gardens of Oratory:

Wherein should Flowers of Rhetoric grow,
By which Rivers of Divine Faith should flow.
That place (said she) a Paradise would be;
But I no strong Foundation there can see;
For it will shake with every puff of Wind;
No certainty nor surance will you find.
My Soul, said be, then we will higher fly,
And there another Mansion we will try.
And after they had argued some time, at last they did agree to dwell in one of
the Planets; but before such time as they could arrive to the lowest Planet,
these two Noble Souls, by Conjunction, produced several Flames, which were
called Meteors: these, being not able to travel so high, lived in the Lower
Region; and by intermixing together, as their Parents did, produced more of
their Kind.

But after those productions of these Souls, they went to the Planets, where
they found some of their Climates too cold, others too moist, others too cold
and moist; others hot, and others hot and moist; others hot and dry, others
cold and dry; with which they did not agree, being not equally tempered.

But yet in every Planet, these Souls being fruitful, they left many of their
Issues, called Meteors, which are shining-lights, like Stars; but being
produced from the Mortal temper of the Souls, are subject to Mortality: for,
Amorous Thoughts are the Bodily-dregs of Mortality, which made these Meteors
subject to dye, as other Generations, being the Mortal Effects of their
Immortality; otherwise they would be Stars: for, whatsoever is Mortal, may
beget their Like, or Kind, which other things that are Immortal, never do.

But when these two Souls had traveled above the Planets, they became one
fixed Starr, as being Eternal, and not subject to dye.

And when they were thus, they did produce no more Issues; for what Mortality
the Body left,

Those Souls to Earth and Planets did resign,
Which in a Generation of Meteors shine.
Fancy's Monarchy in the Land of Poetry.
IN the Land of Poetry, Reason was King; a Gallant Prince he was, and of a
Heroic Spirit, a Majestical Presence, and of a Sober and Grave Countenance: He
was tall of Stature, and strong of Limbs. His Queen was the Lady Wit; a Lady of
a quick Spirit, of a pleasant Conversation, amiable Countenance, free
Behavior, and of a sweet Disposition: she was neatly shaped, fair
Complexion'd, and finely, but variously attired.

This King and Queen loved one another with an extraordinary Affection, and
lived very happily and peaceably, for he governed wisely. His Kingdom was
large, and fully populated; well manured, and of great Traffic. He made
profitable Laws, set strict Rules, and kept good Orders both in the Church and
State.

As for the Church, Faith and Zeal were the two Archbishops, who were sworn to
consecrate none but Moral Virtues, to preach Good Life, and leave all Sects,
Opinions, Superstitions, Idolatry, and the like. Neither were they suffered to
make Lectures of Learning, because it is always about Controversies, puzling
Belief with nice Distinctions, vain Fantasms, and empty Words, without Sense.

The Cathedral Church, was the Conscience. The two Universities, were Study and
Practice, wherein all the Masculine Youth of the Kingdom were bred.

As for the State, there were Superintendent Officers and Magistrates made of
all degrees. The Sen ces were the five Ports to this Kingdom; the Head and the
Heart were the two Magazines.

There were two Governors made to every Port to Command and Rule, Judgment and
Understanding always sit at the Ports called the Ears, to examine all that
enter there, having a strict Command from the King to let in no Sound but
Harmony, no Reports but Truth, no Discourses but Rational or Witty; and that
they should shut the Gates against Flattery, Falsehood, Discord, harsh loud
Strains, Scraping, Creaking, Squealing Noises.

Love and Skill were the two Commanders to the Port, Eyes, who were commanded
to let none in, but Uniformity, Cimmetry, Beauty, Graceful Motions, pleasing
Aspects, light and well-mixt Colors; and to shut the Gates against Deformity
or Monstrosity, rude or cruel Actions, glaring Lights, illmix'd Colors, false
Shadows, and Darkness, and to set up the light of Dreams when they are shut.
Also to let no Tears pass through the Eyes, but those that have a Passport
from the Governor of the Heart.

At the Port of the Nostrils sat Like and Dislike, who were commanded to let
in none but sweet Smells, such as refresh the Brain; as, the scent of sweet
Flowers, savoury Herbs, Earth new-plough'd, new-bak'd Bread; also, sweet Gums,
sweet Essences, and the like; but to shut the Gates of the Nostrils against
snuffs of Candles, stinking Breaths, corrupted Flesh, stale Fish, old Apples,
strong Cheese, spilt Drink, foul Gutters, especially the Pump or Sink in a
Ship: also, no Smells of Suet or Grease; and from many more stinking Scents,
which would be too tedious to mention. But in case of necessity they were to be
allowed, or at least commanded, to let in some sorts of Stinks, as Assafoetida,
and burnt Feathers, to cure the Fits of the Mother.

Then the two Commanders of the Mouth were, Truth and Pleasure; one was to
govern the Words, the other the Taste. Pleasure was commanded to let nothing
into the Mouth that was either too sharp, too bitter, too salt, or too
deliciously sweet. Truth was commanded to suffer no Lies, Cursing, Slandering,
Railings, Flattering; nor Amorous, Lascivious, Factious Discourses. Likewise,
never to let pass an Oath, but to confirm a Truth; no Threatening, but to
terrify or reclaim the Wicked, or Crossnatur'd; no Pleading, but for Right; no
Commands, but for Good; no Praises, but for Worth. Also, to let no Sighs nor
Groans pass, nor no Professions, except they have a Passport from the Heart.
Nor no Promises, but when they have a Passport from the King, which is Reason.

The two Commanders of Touch, were Pain and Pleasure; who were commanded to
keep out all sharp Colds, burning Heats, Bruises, Pinches, Smartings, Cuttings,
Prickings, Nippings, Pressing, Razing; and to let in none but nourishing
Warmth, soft Rubbing, gentle Scratching, refreshing Colds, and the like. And
upon pain of Death, or at least high Displeasure, these Rules were to be kept.
Yet, sometimes, Bribery corrupted the Commanders.

The Privy-Council-Chamber was the Breast; the Privy-Councellors were, Secrecy,
Constancy, Fidelity, Unity, Truth, Justice, Fortitude, Prudence, and
Temperance. These Privy-Councellors helped the King to manage the Affairs of
the Kingdom.

The Secretaries of State were Intelligence and Dispatch.

The Treasurer, was Memory.

The Lord Keeper, was Remembrance.

The Mayors of every City, were Authority.

The Constables were Care.

The Judges were, Commutative and Distributive Justice. Honesty was the
Commander of all the Forces, of the Actions and Thoughts.

The Heroic Actions, are the chief Commanders, as Captains, and Colonels, and
the like.

The Common-Soldiers are the ordinary and necessary Actions, which are employed
in Offensive and Defensive Wars.

The Merchants are the Imaginations, which traffic and trade all over the
World.

The Inventions, are the Handicrafts-men and Laborers.

The Appetites are the Citizens, that are so covetous as to engross all
Commodities, and the Wealth of the Kingdom; and are the most Luxurious People
in the Land.

But, as I said, the King was a Wise Prince; and to divert his Subjects from
too serious Studies, dull Contemplations, and laborious Dictatings, he had
Masks, Plays, Pastorals, and the like; being attended by his Nobles, the
Sciences; and the Gentry of the Kingdom, which were the several Languages.

The Queen, by the Muses and Graces.

The Marriage of Life and Death.
DEATH went a wooing to Life; but her grim and terrible Aspect did so affright
Life, that she ran away, and would by no means hearken unto her Suit.

Then Death sent Age and Weakness, as two Ambassadors, to present her
Affection: but Life would not give them audience.

Whereupon Death sent Pain; who had such a persuasive power, that made Life
yield to Death's embracements. And after they were agreed, the Wedding Day was
set, and Guests invited.

Life invited the Five Senses, and all the Passions and Affections, with
Beauty, Pleasure, Youth, Wit, Prosperity; and also, Virtue, and the Graces.

But Health, Strength, Cordials, and Charms, refused to come; which troubled
Life much.

None that Death invited, refused to come; they were, Old Father Time,
Weakness, Sickness, all sorts of Pains, and all sorts of Diseases, and
killing-Instruments; as also, Sighs, Tears, and Groans; Numbness, and Paleness.

But when Life and Death met, Death took Life by the Hand; then Peace married
them, and Rest made their Bed of Oblivion, wherein Life lay in the cold Arms of
Death. Yet Death got numerous Issues; and ever since, whatsoever is produced
from Life, dies. Whereas, before this Marriage, there was no such thing as
dying; for Death and Life were single, like Batchelors and Maids. But Life
proved not so good a Wife, as Death a Husband; for Death is sober, staid,
grave, discreet, patient, dwelling silently and solitary; whereas Life is wild,
various, unconstant, and runs about, shunning her Husband Death's company.

But he, as a loving and fond Husband, follows her; and when he embraces her,
she grows big, and soon produces young Lives. But all the Offspring of Death
and Life, are divided; half dwelling with Life, and half with Death.

At this Wedding, old Father Time, which looked the youngest, although he was
the oldest in the Company, and danced the nimblest and best, making several
changes in his Dances; he trod so gently, and moved so smoothly, that none
could perceive how he did turn, and wind, and lead about. And being wiser than
all the rest, with long Experience, he behaved himself so handsomely,
insinuated so subtly, courted so civilly, that he got all the Ladies
Affections; and being dextrous, got Favors from every one of them, and some
extraordinary ones; for he devirginated Youth, Beauty, Pleasure, Prosperity,
and all the Five Senses; but could not corrupt, Wit, Virtue, nor the Graces.

But Nature, hearing of the abuse of her Maids, was very angry, and forced him
to marry them all. But they, although they were inamoured of him before they
were married, yet now they do, as most other Wives, not care for him; nay, they
hate him, rail and exclaim against him; that what with his peevish, froward,
and cross Wives, and with the jealousy he has of Sickness, Pains, and
Mischances, that ofen ravish them, he is become full of wrinkles, and his Hair
is turned all gray.

But Virtue and Wit, which are his sworn Friends, and sweet Companions,
recreate him with their pleasant, free, honest, and honorable Societies.

Of the Indispositions of the Mind.
THE Mind was very sick, and sent for Physicians; and the first that came, were
Divines; who disputed so long, and contradicted one another so much, that they
could conclude of nothing. One advising the Mind to take a Scruple of Calvin's
Institutions; others, a Dram of Luther's Doctrine; some, two Drams of the
Romish Treacle, or Opinions; some, of the Anabaptists Water; others, to take
some of the Brownists Spirits. But there were some quite from these Opinions,
and would advise the Mind to lay some of Mahomet's Pigeons at the feet, cutting
them with the Turkish Scimitar, then bind it up with his Alcaron; others would
have the Mind bind the Head with the Talmud of the Jews.

But the Mind grew sicker and sicker; insomuch that it was almost at the last
gasp: whereupon the Mind desired them to depart; for, said he, your
Controversies will kill me sooner than your Doctrine will cure me! The Mind
being very sick, sent for other Sects of Physicians, who were Moral
Philosophers; who being come, set round a Table, and there began to discourse
and dispute of the Diseases of the Mind.

One said, Grief is a Lethargy.

No, said another, Stupidity is a Lethargy; for Grief rather weeps, than
sleeps.

O, but said another, there are dry Griefs, that sweat no Tears.

Pray, Gentlemen, dispatch, said the Mind, for I am in great pain.

One says, Hate is an Apoplexy; for it is dead to it self, though it lives to
the Beloved.

No, said he, but Hate is a Dead-Palsie,

No, said the other, Ignorance is a Dead-Palsie, but Hate is an Apoplexy,
caused by the stopping of the Spirits, either Animal or Vital; the Vital
Spirits being Compassion; the Animal Spirits, Generosity.

You are most strangely mistaken, said another; for all the Spirits are
composed of Fortitude; the Vital Spirits are active, the Animal are passive.

But they disputed so long upon this point, that they had almost fallen out;
and the Mind prayed them not to quarrel; for wrangling noise did disturb him
much.

Then one said, That Spite and Envy were Cancers; the one caused by sharp
Humors, the other by salt,

Another said, That Spite was not a Cancer, but a Fistula, that broke out in
many several places; and that Envy was the Scurvy, that speckled the whole Body
of the Mind, like Flea-bites.

The Mind prayed them to go no further in that dispute.

Then one of them said, That Anger was a Hot Burning Fever.

Nay, by your favor, said another, Anger is an Epilepsie, that soams at the
Mouth, and beats its Breast, struggling and striving, and will be often in
Cold-Sweats, and as pale as Death.

Then another said, That an Ague in the Mind was Doubt and Hope; the Cold Fit
being Doubt; and the Hot Fit, Hope.

A second answered, That Agues were Fear, which caused Shaking-Fits.

A third said, That Jealousy was an Ague, that had Cold and Hot Fits.

Nay, said a fourth, Jealousy is an Hectic Fever, that is, an extraordinary
Heat got into the Arteries, which inflames the Spirit of Action, drinks up the
Blood of Tranquillity, and at last wastes and consumes the Body of Love.

A fifth said, Jealousy is the Gout; which is a burning, beating pain, never
letting the Mind be at rest.

Said a sixth, Jealousy is a Head-ake, caused from an ill affected Friend.

But there grew such a Dispute upon this, as whether it was the Head, Heart, or
Arteries; that the Mind was forced to threaten them, they should have no Fees
if they did dispute so much.

As for the Wind-cholick in the Mind, some said, It was an overflow of
Imaginations and Conceptions: others, That it was strange Opinions: others
said, It was wild Fancies: others, That it was the over-dilating of the
Thoughts: and many more several Judgments were given; whereupon they were ready
to fight.

To which the Mind replied, That it is impossible you should prescribe
effectual Medicines, if you cannot agree about the Disease.

Then another said, Slander was the Spotted-Fever.

Another said, A Spotted-Fever was Malice.

Says another, A Spotted-Fever and the Plague have near relation: but the
Plague, said he, is Discontent, that is caused by Envy, Slander, Malice, and
the like. This Plague of Discontent breaks out into Factions, Sores, and great
Spots of Rebellion, which causes Death and Destruction.

But one of the former Doctors was about contradicting him; but the Mind forbid
him.

Then one said, Melancholy was the Stone, caused by a cold congealment of the
Spirit.

Another said, Cruelty was the Stone, caused by hot Revenge, or covetous
Contractings, which bakes all the tender and softer Humors into a hard
confirmed Body, the Stone.

Then one said, That Rage and Fury were Convulsions.

No, said another, Inconstancies are Convulsions.

Then one said, Pity was a Consumption, pining and wasting by degrees.

Nay, by your favor, said a second, Forgetfulness is a Consumption, which
fades as Light and Colors, or moulders as Dust.

Then another said, Desire was a Dropsy, which was always dry.

Nay, said a second, Desire is that Disease which is called a
Dog-like-Appetite; which causes the Appetite of the Mind to be always hungry,
and the Stomach of the Mind seeming always empty, which makes the Thoughts hunt
after Food. But a Dropsy (said he) is a Reluctance, which always swells out
with Aversions.

O, said a third, a Dropsy in the Mind is Voluptuousness.

Nay, said a fourth, a Dropsy is Pride, that swells out with Vainglory.

But they disputed so much, whether a Dropsy, or a Dog-like-Appetite, or a
Reluctance, or Voluptuousness, or Pride, that they fell together by the Ears.

And the Mind was well content to let them fight. But for fear the Mind should
be disturbed, his Friends parted them, and prayed the Doctors that they would
prescribe the Mind something to take. Then they began their Prescriptions.

For the Lethargy of Grief, said one, you must take some Crumbs of Comfort
mixed with the Juice of Patience, the Spirits of Grace, and Sprigs of Time, and
lay it to the Heart of the Mind, and it will prove a perfect Cure.

Another said, A Lethargy is Stupidity; and therefore you must take hot and
reviving Drinks, as the Vapor of Wine, or the like Drinks, variety of Objects,
pleasant Conversation; mix these together: then put this Liquor into a Syringe
of Music, and squirt it into the Ears of the Mind, and this will bring a
perfect Cure.

The Doctor, who said an Apoplexy was Hate, said, The Mind must take a few
Obligations, and mix them with a mollifying-Oyl of Goodnature, and Spirits of
Gratitude, and bind them upon the grieved part, and that would cure it.

No (said the Doctor that said Apoplexies were Love), you must take the Drug of
Misfortunes, and the Sirrup of Misery; and when you have mixed them together,
you must set them a stewing on the Fire of Trial, then drink it off warm; and
although it will make the Mind sick with Unkindness for the present, yet it
will purge all the doting Humors out of the Mind.

But he that said, Hate was a Dead-Palsie, prescribed the same Medicine as he
that said it was an Apoplexy; for he said, an Apoplexy is a kind of a
Dead-Palsie.

He that said, Ignorance was a Dead-Palsie, said, The Mind must take some good
Books, whose Authors were Learned Persons, and squeeze them hard through a
Strainer of Study, and mix some practiced Experience thereto, and make a Salve
of Industry, then spread it upon a strong Canvase of Time, and lay it upon the
Malady, and it will be a perfect Cure.

And he that said, Spite and Envy were Cancers, bid the Mind take the Honey of
Self-conceit once in two or three hours, and it would abate that sharp or salt
Humor.

The other, that said that Spite and Envy were Fistula's, bid the Mind get
some of the Powder of Inferiors, or the Tears of the Distressed, and mix them
well together, and lay it to the Sore, and it will be a perfect Cure.

He that said, that Envy was the Scurvy, bid him bathe in Solitariness, and
drink of the Water of Meditation, wherein run Thoughts of Death, like
Mineral-Veins, and it will cure him.

And the Doctor that said, Anger was a Fever, bid the Mind drink cold Julips of
Patience.

He that said, Anger was an Epilepsie, bid the Mind take the Powder of
Discretion.

And the Doctor that said, An Ague was Doubts and Hopes; bid him take the
Powder of Watchfulness, and mix it with a Draught of Courage, and drink it in
his Cold Fit; and take the Powder of Industry in the Liquor of Judgment, in his
hot Fit, and it will cure him.

He that said, An Ague in the Mind was Fear, gave the same Prescription of the
former Medicine for the Cold Fit.

But he that said, Jealousy was an Ague, bid the Mind take some of the Spirits
of Confidence.

And he that said, Jealousy was a Consumption; bid the Mind take
Nourishing-Broths of Variety, and bathe in the River of Oblivion, which would
cool the Fever of Suspicion.

But he who said, That Jealousy was the Gout in the Mind; bid the Mind lay a
Plaster of Absence, spread on the Canvase of Time, and it would cure him.

As for the Wind-Cholick, he that said it was the overflow of the Imaginations
and Conceptions, bid the Mind take some several Noises, both Instrumental and
Vocal, and mix them with much Company, and lay them to the Ears of the Mind,
and it will cure. Probatum est.

And those that said, That Wind-cholick was strange Opinions, or wild Fancies;
bid the Mind take some Pills of Employment to purge out those crude, flatulent,
and undigested Humors.

But he that said, It was caused by a dilatation of the Thoughts, bid him take
the Eyes of Dice, and the Spots of Cards, and the Chequers of Chessboards, and
the Points of Table-men, and put them together; and when they are thoroughly
mixed, and dissolved into an Oil, anoint the Fingers-ends, the Palms of the
Hands, the Wrist, the Elbows, and the Eyes of the Mind; this, says he, will
contract the Thoughts to the compass of a Single-penny, which will cure that
Disease.

As for the Disease called the Spotted-Fever, which is Slander; they bid the
Mind take a good quantity of Repentance, and distill it, from whence will drop
Tears; and take a Draught of that distilled Water every morning fasting.

But he that said, That Malice was the Spotted. Fever, bid the Mind distill
Merits, from whence will drop Praises; and bid the Mind take a draught of that
Water every Evening.

He that said, Discontent was the Plague, being a part of all the Diseases; bid
the Mind take Humility, Magnanimity, Obedience, Loyalty, Fidelity, and Temper;
and put all these together, and make a Pultis, and lay it upon the Swelling, it
will keep it from breaking, assuage the Pain, and cure the Patient. But if they
come out in Spots of Rebellion, there is no Remedy to avoid Death.

As for Melancholy, he that said it was the Stone in the Mind, caused by a cold
congealment in the Spirits, which stupifies the Senses of the Mind into Stone;
bid him take Beauty, Wit, fine Landskips, Prospects, Music, fresh Air; put
this into the Liquor of Mirth, and drink of it every day; it would prove a
perfect Cure.

But he that said, The Stone in the Mind was Cruelty, caused by the sharpness
of Envy, the bitterness of Hate, and greedy Covetousness; bid drink a Draught
of Prodigality once a week, and it would cure him.

And he that said, Cruelty was the Stone, that baked the tender and soft
Humors, into a hard confirmed Body of Stone; bid him take an Ounce of
Compassion, two Ounces of Charity, two Ounces of Generosity, as much Clemency,
and bray them all together; then divide them into two parts, and lay one half
to the Heart, and another to the Reins of the Mind; and those Medicines will
soon dissolve the Stone.

As for Convulsions of the Mind, he that said it was Fury, bid the Mind take an
Ounce of Discretion, half an Ounce of Judgment, a Scruple of Gravity; mix them
all together, as in an Electuary, and take it fasting, and it will cure him.

And he who said, That Inconstancy was the Convulsion in the Mind, bid him take
an Ounce of Temperance, and an Ounce of Judgment; one Ounce of Understanding,
two of Resolution; mix these into an Electuary, and take a good quantity of it
every morning, and this will cure him.

As for a Consumption, he that said, Pity was a Consumption; bid the Mind take
a Heart, and bake it dry; and when it was dried to Powder, mix it in his
ordinary Drink, and it will cure him.

But he that said, Forgetfulness was a Consumption; bid him only take a Draught
of Remembrance every day.

As for Dropsies, he that said Desires were Dropsies, bid the Mind take a Bunch
of Reason, that grows in a well-tempered Brain; and as much Humility, that
grows in a good Heart; boil them in the Water of Content; and drink a Draught
three times a day; this (said he) will dry up the superfluous matter.

But he who said, That Desire was that Disease which was called the
Dog-like-Appetite; bid the Mind make a Bisk of Vanity, an Oil of Curiosity, and
a Hodg-podg of Variety; and eat so long, till he did vomit it up again; and if
he could surfeit thereof, it would prove a Cure, otherwise there was no remedy,
unless the Mind could get some Fruition, which is seldom to be had; yet
sometimes it is found, said he.

But he that said, A Dropsy was a Reluctance, that swelled out with an
Aversion; bid the Mind only use Abstinence, and it would cure him.

And he that said, It was Voluptuousness, said, That the same Medicine was to
be prescribed.

He that said, It was Pride that swelled out with Vainglory; bid the Mind take
a great quantity of Humility; but if you take it from the hand of Misfortunes,
said he, it will make you sick.

But the Mind, perceiving that they agreed not in any one Medicine or Disease,
desired that they would depart from him: for, said he, Gentlemen, it is
impossible you should prescribe an effectual Medicine, or Remedy, since you
cannot agree about the Disease. So he paid them their Fees, and they departed;
and the Mind became his own Physician, Apothecary, and Chyrurgeon.

First, He let himself Blood, opening the wilful Vein, taking out the obstinate
Blood.

Then he did take Pills made of Society and Mirth, and those purged all strange
and vain Conceits.

Also, the Mind eat every morning a Mess of Broth, wherein was Herbs of Grace,
Fruit of Justice, Spice of Prudence, Bread of Fortitude; these were boiled with
the Flesh of Judgment, in the Water of Temperance. This Breakfast was a
Sovereign Remedy against the malignant Passions; for it did temper Heat,
qualify Sharpness, allay Vapors, and mollify obdurate Passions, and foolish
Affections.

Likewise, he did take, to his Service, the strongest, soundest, and quickest
Senses, which were Five; these waited on him: and each in their turn gave him
intelligence of every thing, and brought him all the News in the Country,
which was a Recreation and a Pastime for him. And in thus doing, he became the
healthfullest and jolliest man in the Parish.

The Thoughts feasted.
THERE were two men, great Companions; one of them told the other, That he had
made a particular search, and a strict enquiry for him, three days together,
and could not hear of him; insomuch that he had thought some unfortunate
Accident or violent Death had befallen him.

He answered, His Senses had been to visit the Soul, which was the cause of his
Body's retirement.

The other said, I have heard that the Soul did use to visit the Senses, but
never heard that the Senses did use to visit the Soul.

He answered, That the Sensitive Spirits did as often, in some men, visit the
Rational, as the Rational did the Sensitive.

Well, said he, and how does the Soul live?

He said, As a great Prince should do: for the Mansion of the Soul is nobly
situated upon a high Hill of Ambition, which ascends by steps of Desires,
whereon stands a very curious Castle of Imaginations, and all about are
solitary Walks of Contemplations, and dark Groves of Melancholy, wherein run
Rivers of Tears. The Castle is Walled with Vainglory, and built upon Pillars
of Hope. Within the Walls are fine Gardens of Eloquence, set full with Flowers
of Rhetoric, and Orchards of Invention, wherein grow fruitful Arts. In this
Orchard are many Birds of Fancies, which fly from Tree to Tree, from Branch to
Branch, from Bough to Bough, singing fine Notes of Poetry in a sweet strain of
Verse, and chirping Rhymes, and building their Nests in Arbours of Love,
wherein they hatch Conceits.

Likewise, said he, the Soul has another House, which is a most stately
Palace; it stands in the midst of a large Plain of good Nature, wherein run
Rivers of Generosity. This Palace is walled about with Fortitude, and stands
upon Pillars of Justice. There are long, straight, level Walks of Temperance,
where is fresh Air of Health. This Palace is built very convenient: for on the
outside are Stables of Discretion, wherein are tied up wild Opinions,
Phantasms, and all skittish Humors, and a large Riding-Room of Judgment, where
all Opinions are managed. Also, there are Granges of thrifty Contrivance,
wherein are Cattle of Prudence, that give the Milk of Profit. Besides, there
are Kitchins of Appetite, Dining-rooms of Luxury, Galleries of Memory, Cellars
of Forgetfulness, Chambers of Rest, and Closets of Peace.

But, said he, after my Senses had viewed every place, they took their leave of
the Soul, who told them, That they should stay and feast with her. So the Soul
invited all his Subjects, the Thoughts. The first of all, were the Generous
Thoughts, who are the Nobles; then the Gentry, who are the Obliging and
Graceful Thoughts; the Heroic Thoughts were Commanders of War; the Factious
Thoughts were the Commons; the Mercenary were Tradesmen; the Plodding-Thoughts
were the Yeomantry; the Ordinary Thoughts were Laborers and Servants. Then
there were the Politic Thoughts, which were Statists; the Proud Thoughts,
Magistrates; and the Pious Thoughts, Priests; the Censuring Thoughts, were the
Judges; the Wrangling and Pleading Thoughts, Lawyers; and the Terrifying
Thoughts, Sergeants; the Arguing Thoughts were Logicians; the Doubting
Thoughts, Scepticks; the Hoping Thoughts Physicians; the Inquisitive Thoughts,
Natural Philosophers; the Humble Thoughts, Moral Philosophers; the Fantastical
Thoughts, Poets; the Modest Thoughts, Virgins; the Jealous Thoughts, Wives; the
Incontinent Thoughts, Courtesans; the Amorous Thoughts, Lovers; the Vain
Thoughts, Courtiers; and the Bragging or Lying Thoughts, Travelers.

And when all these Thoughts were met, the Soul feasted them with Delight, and
the Senses with Pleasure, presenting them with Reason and Truth.

The Traveling Spirits.
THERE was a Man went to a Witch, whom he entreated to aid his Desires: for,
said he, I have a curiosity to travel; but I would go into such Countries,
which, without your power to assist me, I cannot do.

The Witch asked him, What those Countries were?

He said, He would go to the Moon.

Why, said she, the Natural Philosophers are the only men for that Journey: for
they travel all the Planets over; and indeed, study Nature so much, and are so
diligent and devout in her Services, that they despise our great Master the
Devil, and would hinder us in our ways very much, but that they travel most by
Speculation.

Then, said he, I would go to Heaven.

Truly, said she, I cannot carry you thither; for

I am as unpractised in those ways, and have as little acquaintance there, as
the Natural Philosophers have; for they believe that there is no such Kingdom.

But if you desire to travel to that Kingdom, you must go to the Divines, who
are the only Guides; yet you must have a care in the choice: for, some will
carry you a great way about, and through very troublesome and painful places;
others, a shorter, but a very strait, narrow way; others, through ways that are
pleasant, and easy; and you will find, not only in Natural Philosophers, but
also in Divines, such Combats and Dissentions amongst them, that it is both a
great hindrance and a trouble to the Passengers; which shows they are not very
perfect themselves in their ways: for many Travelers go, some a quarter, and
some half, and some three parts of the way, and then are forced to turn back
again, and take another Guide; and so from Guide to Guide, until they have run
them all over, or are out of breath; and yet be as far to seek of their way, as
when they first set out.

Why, then (said the Man) carry me to Hell.

Truly, said the Witch, I am but a Servant extraordinary, and have no power to
go to my Master's Kingdom, until I dye; although the Way be broad and plain,
and the Guides sure: yet, being the Devil's Factor to do him service on the
Earth, I can call forth any from thence, although it were the King himself.

Well then, said he, carry me (I beseech you) to the Center of the Earth.

That I can do (said she), and so obscurely, that the Natural Philosophers
shall never spy us. So she prayed him to come into her House; for, said she,
it is a great Journey, therefore you must take some repast before you go.
Besides, said she, your Body will be too cumbersome; wherefore we will leave
that behind, that you may go the lighter, being all Spirit. So she went out,
and came and brought a Dish of Opium, and prayed him to eat well thereof: So he
eat very heartily, and when he had done, his Senses grew very heavy, insomuch
as his Body fell down, as in a swound, remaining without Sense; in the mean
while his Spirit stole out, and left the Body asleep.

So the Witch and he took their Journey; and as they went, he found the Climate
very intemperate, sometimes very hot, and sometimes very cold: great Varieties
they found in the way; in some places, monstrous great and high Mountains of
the Bones of Men and Beasts, which lay mixed with one another. Then he saw a
very large Sea of Blood, which had issued from slain Bodies; but those Seas
seemed very rough: whereupon he asked, What was the reason? She answered,
Because their Deaths were violent. And there were other Seas of Blood, which
seemed so smooth, that there was not a wave to be seen. Whereat he asked, How
comes this to be so smooth and calm? She said, It was the Blood of those that
dyed in peace. Then he asked her, Where was the Blood of other Creatures, as
Beasts, Birds, Fish, and the like. She said, Amongst the Blood of Men: for,
said she, the Earth knows no difference.

And as they went along, they came through a most pleasant place, which (she
said) was the Storehouse of Nature, where were the shapes and sub. stances of
all kind of Fruits, Flowers, Trees, or any other Vegetables, but all were of a
dusky color. There he gathered some Fruit to eat, but it had no taste; and he
gathered some Flowers, and they had no smell: Of which he asked the reason? She
said, That the Earth gave only the Form and Substance; but the Sun was the only
cause of the Taste, Smell, and Colors.

Going farther, they saw great Mines, Quarries, and Pits; but she, being
versed, and knowing the way well, did avoid them, so that they were no
hindrance in their journey, as otherwise it would have been.

But going down further, it began to grow very dark, being far from the face of
the Earth; insomuch that they could hardly see the plainest way: whereupon he
told the Witch, That the Hill was so hideously steep, and the place began to
grow so dark, that it was very dangerous. No, said she, there is no danger,
since our Bodies are not here: for our Spirits are so light, that they bear up
themselves. So they went a great length, until the place grew so strait, that
it began to be a pain even to their Spirits: and so he told the Witch, His
Spirit was in pain. She said, He must endure it: for, the Center of the Earth
was but a Point in a Circle. So when he came to the Center of the Earth, he saw
a Light like Moonshine; of which, when he came near, he saw that the first
Circle about the Center, was Glowworms Tails, which gave that Light; and in
the Center was an old Man, who did neither stand nor sit, for there was nothing
to stand or sit on; but he hung (as it were) in the Air; nor ever stirred out
of his place; and had been there ever since the World was made; for he, having
never had a Woman to tempt him to sin, never dyed. And although he could never
remove out of his place; yet he had the power to call all things on the Earth
unto him, by degrees; and to dispose of them as he would.

But, being near the old Man, the Witch excused her coming, and prayed him not
to be offended with them: for, there was a Man desired Knowledge, and would not
spare any pains or industry to obtain it: For which he praised the Man, and
said, He was welcome; and any thing he could inform him of, he would.

The old Man asked him about the Chemists that lived upon the face of the Earth.

The Man answered, They made much noise in talk, and took great pains, and
bestowed great costs, to find the Philosophers Stone, which is to make the
Elixir, but could never come to any perfection.

Alas, said the old Man, they are too unconstant to bring any thing to
perfection; for they never keep to one certain ground or track, but are always
trying of new Experiments; so that they are always beginning, but never go on
toward an end. Besides, said he, they live not long enough to find the
Philosophers Stone: for, said he, it is not one nor two Ages will do it, but
there must be many Ages to bring it to perfection. But, I said he, living long,
and observing the course of Nature strictly, am arrived to the height of that
Art; and all the Gold that is dug out of the Mines, was converted by me:
for, in the beginning of the World, there was very little Gold to be found; and
neither my Brother Adam, nor his Posterity after him, for many Ages, knew any
such thing: but since I have attained to the perfection of that Art, I have
made so many Mines, that it has caused all the outward parts of the World to
go together by the ears for it: but I will not hereafter make so much as to
have it despised.

As for my Stills, said he, they are the Pores of the Earth; and the Waters I
distill, are the sweet Dews: the Oily part is the Ambergreece; and the Chemists
know not how, or from whence, or from what it comes: for some say, from Trees;
others, that it is the Spawn of some kind of Fish; so some think it one thing,
some another.

The saltness of the Sea comes also from Chemistry; and the Vapor that arises
from the Earth, is the Smoke that steems from my Stills. But, said he, the
World is not to continue long as it is; for I will, by my Art, turn it all into
Glass; that as my Brother Adam transplanted Men from Earth, by his sin, some to
Heaven, some to Hell; so I will transplant the World from Earth to Glass, which
is the last act of Chemistry.

Then the Man observing a great concourse of Waters, that went with a violent
force close by the Center; he asked the old Man, How came that Water there? He
answered, It was the Gutter and Sink of the Earth: for, whatsoever Water the
Sun drank from the Sea, and spued upon the Earth, run through the Veins, into
the Sea again, by the Center, all little Pipe-Veins meeting there, or else
(said he) the World would be drowned again: for, at Noah's Flood, those
Pipe-Veins were commanded by Jove to be stopped, and after such a time to be
opened again.

I wonder, said the Man, that all the weighty Materials in the World do not
fall upon your Head, and so kill you. Why so they would, said he, if they lay
all together on a heap: but, as every thing has a several motion; so, every
thing has a proper place: for, Gold and Iron never dwell together in the
Earth; neither are all kinds of Stones found in one Quarry; nor do all the
Mines or Quarries join together; but some are in one place, and some in
another; which poises the weight of the Earth equally, and keeps it from
falling.

The Man said, You have but a melancholy life, being none here but your self.

O, said the old Man, the Riches of the Earth, and all the Varieties thereof,
come into my Compass: This place is the Heart or Soul of Plenty: Here have I
sweet Dormice, fat Moles, nourishing Worms, industrious Ants, and many other
things, for Food. Here are no Storms to trouble me, nor Tempests to disorder
me; but Warmth to cherish me, and Peace and Quiet to comfort and joy me: the
drilling-Waters are my Music, the Glowworms my Lights, and my Art of
Chemistry, my Passtime.

When he had done speaking, they took their leaves, craving pardon for their
abrupt Visit, and giving him thanks for his gentle entertainment. But the old
Man very kindly prayed them to have a care of themselves as they returned: for,
said he, you must go through Cold, Crude, Aguish, and Hot, Burning, Pestilent
places; for there are great Damps in the Earth, as also a great Heat and Fire
in the Earth; although it gives not Light like the Sun; for the Heat of the
Earth, said he, is like the Fire in a Coal; and that of the Sun, like that of a
Flame, which is a thinner part of Substance set on fire, and is a weaker or
fainter Heat; but the Sun, said he, gives more Heat by his quick Motion, than
the Heat gives Motion. And though, said he, the Fire be the subtillest of all
Elements, yet it is made slower, or more active, by the substance it works
upon: for, Fire is not so active upon solid Bodies, as it is upon leighter and
thinner Bodies.

So the Witch and the young Man's Spirit, gave him thanks, and departed. But
going back, they found not the ways so pleasant as when they went: for, some
ways were deep and dirty, others heavy and clayie, some boggy and sandy, some
dry and dusty, and great Waters, high Mountains, Stony and Craggy Hills, some
of them very Chalky and Limy.

But at last, arriving where they set out, he found his Body there; and putting
it on as a Garment, gave thanks to the Witch, and then went home to rest his
weary Spirits.

The Tale of the Lady in the Elyzium.
THERE was a Lord that made love to a Lady upon very honorable terms, for the
End was Marriage. This Lady received his Love with great Affection; and it
chanced that upon the hearing of a report, That he was married to another, she
fell into a swound for above an hour, insomuch that they all thought her to be
dead: but at last, returning to her self again, one told her, That he thought
her Soul had utterly forsaken her Mansion, the Body. No, said she, 'twas only
the sudden and violent Passion, which had hurried my Soul to Charon's Boat, in
a distracted Whirlwind of Sighs; where, in the Crowd, I was Ferried over to the
Elyzium-Fields.

They asked her, What manner of place it was?

She answered, Just such a place as the Poets have described; Pleasant green
Fields, but as dark as a shady Grove, or the dawning of the Day; or like a
sweet Summer's Evening, when the Nightingal begins to sing, which is at the
shutting up of the day. But when I was there, said she, I met with such Company
as I expected not? Who were those, said they? Julius Caesar and the Vestal
Nunn, Nero and his Mother, Agrippa and Catiline, and his Daughter Cornelia; and
such as Anthony and Cleopatra, Dido and AEneas, sans number. But finding not my
chaste Lover there, said she, I went to Charon, and told him, The Fates had
neither spun out my Thread, nor cut it in sunder; but they, being careless in
the spinning, it was not so hard twisted as it should have been; insomuch, that
the report of my Lover's Marriage had given it such a pull, that (if the Fates
had not had great care in slacking it) it had broke from the Spindle. So I told
Charon, He must carry me back again; where, with much entreaty, he set my Soul
where he had taken it up; and from thence it returned into my Body, to be alive
again.

The SPECULATORS.
A MAN having occasion to travel, being in the heat of Summer, for more ease
took his journey when Night was running from Day, for fear the glorious Sun
should overtake her. And looking earnestly, to observe how her darker Clouds
retired or were illuminated; at last, in the dawning, before the Sun appeared
in glory, he thought he saw something appear in the Air, more than usual; which
Fancy of his caused him to a-light from his Horse; and fastening his Bridle to a
Bush, himself went and lay upon his back on the ground, that he might fix his
Eyes on the strange Sight the more steadfastly. But his desires were crossed
with the dullness and dimness of his Eyes, which (by over-earnestness) could
view nothing at all.

But a grave old man coming there, asked him, Why he lay in that posture? He
answered, It was to look up to see more perfectly that which in the Air he had
but a glimpse of: but, said he, striving to see more, I saw less; for I have
not only lost the Vision, but almost my Sight

That may well be, said the old man; for the Body is like the Mind, whereinto
if you take more Learning than the Understanding can discuss, it overwhelms it,
and knocks Reason on the head; as, if you take more Meat into the Stomach than
it can digest, it surfeits; if the Ear receives too swift or harsh a Sound, it
makes it deaf, smuthering the distinct Notes. Likewise, if you draw more
Species than can pass through the Eye, in order to the Optic Nerve, it is like
a Crowd of People at a narrow Pass, every one striving to get in first, wedging
themselves so close, sticking so fast, one binding in the other, that they can
neither pass backward nor forward, but stop up the place. Just so come the Eyes
to be dimmed or obstructed. Besides, said the old man, Nature is not only
curious in her workings, but secret in her Works: for, none of her Works know
themselves perfectly; not Man, who seems to have the best Understanding;
because Nature governs her Creatures by Ignorance; and if any had perfect
knowledge, they would be as great as She.

The other Man says, Does she know her self?

The Answer was, That it is a Question not to be resolved: but surely, if her
Creatures knew her, she would be slighted; for what they know, they despise:
but Ignorance begets Fear; Fear, Superstition; Superstition, Admiration; and
Admiration, Adoration. By that we perceive, that Nature takes delight that her
Creatures should search her ways, and observe her several motions; and those
are esteemed her perfectest and best Works that do so. And because your Desires
fly high, I will give you such Glasses as shall satisfy your Mind concerning
the Celestial Globe. Here be three Glasses; the first shows you the Lower
Region; the next, the Second Region; and the third Glass shows you the Upper
Region; that is, as high as can be observed. So taking leave of the Gentleman,
he left him to his observation.

Soon after, the Gentleman takes the first Glass, and laying his Eye to it, he
saw a Vapor arise from the Earth, straight upward, in small Lines or Streams,
streaming through every Pore of the Earth, which Pores were like a Sieve full
of small holes: This was a fine sight, to see how small, straight, and thick,
those Streams were: for it seemed as an ascending-Rain; and those Streams, at a
certain height, gathered together, and became spongy Clouds; which clouds were
of the fashion of Honey-combs, where, in every hole, lie drops of Water, which
are squeezed by the agitation of the Air; or, by the heat of the Sun, made to
bubble out; or, those holes being over-full, they fall down with their own
weight; or, as one may say, they overflow.

Then turning his Glass to the two Poles, first to the North, then to the
South; he saw they were like two Crystal Squirts, which some call Syringes;
those suck and draw in a certain quantity of Water from those
Honey-comb-Clouds; and when they are full, they spout that Water with such a
force back, that it goes a great length; and the smalness of the passage,
wire-draws it, as it were; and by the agitation it becomes so powerful, that it
drives all before it, if they be not very firmly fixed; it enters all Porous
Bodies; and those that are sensible, it puts to pain, as if they were sharp;
for the smalness, thinness, and quickness, makes it cut and divide; and the
force makes it break and cast down all that does oppose it. These are called
the South and North Winds.

Then directing his Perspective to the midst, between the East and the West,
which is called the Torrid Zone; he perceived it was like a Cymbal of Fire,
which had three holes; the one in the midst, by which it drinks in Water; the
other two holes of each side, which are called the East and West: for, the
Water that is drawn in, being in this hollow Ball, the Heat rarifies it so
thin, that it breathes forth at the lesser Holes: for, as the Water is rarefied
into Air by the Heat; so the Air is rarefied into Wind; and those two small
holes let out the thinner part, and keep the grosser in, until it be more
rarefied into Wind. Those Winds that are made thus, are much gentler and softer
than those that proceed from the Squirts, because this is only a voluntary
Motion, which breathes out, and spreads gently; the other is forced, and goes
out with Violence.

Now the hole that is in the midst of this Cymbal, which serves as the Mouth,
drinking perpetually, being very dry, by reason of the heat within, cannot
digest it all at once, but by degrees. Now if that part of the Water be
rarefied soonest, which is of that side we call the East, that blows out first;
if it be rarefied of that side first, that we call the West, that blows
soonest: but if it blows from several places or parts, then that predominates
that is most powerful.

After he had perceived how the Winds were made, he laid by that Glass, and
took up the second, and looked into the Middle-Region; then he saw curling,
folding, and rolling Waves of Air, every Wave as thin as the thinnest Cypress;
and through those Waves he saw many Cities, which had great Champanes of Air,
full of Flowers, Fruits, and sweet Herbs; which Champanes of Air the Winds
plough or dig; and the Sun plants, sows, and sets Incorporeal Vegetables with
his Instrumental Beams; for they draw the Vapors or Scents of all Herbs,
Flowers, Fruits, and the like, from the Earth, and plants them there: So there
grows nothing but the sweet and delicious Scents, and not the gross Corporeal
part.

As for the People in that Region, they are of upright shapes, and very
slender; but their sub. stance is of the same of Fish, and they swim in the
Air, as Fishes in the Sea, which do not admit of a firm footing; so that they
swim or ride upon Waves of Clouds every where.

As for their Houses, they are made of the Azure Sky; and are so clear, that
the Inhabitants are seen in them, when the Sun shines; being only obscured when
the Sun is from them. These Houses are covered with Flakes of Snow, and all
their Streets are pitched with Hailstones.

But when the Chariot of the Sun runs through their Streets in the Winter time,
their furious Horses being more heady in Winter, run then the swifter; for in
Summer they are lazy and faint with Heat: but with the trampling they loosen
the stones, and then they fall to earth, and there melt to Water. Neither are
their Tiles or Slats safe; for the Wheels of the Chariot do so shake their
Houses, that the flakes of Snow fall many times from their Houses upon the
Earth. But they, being of a nature as industrious as little ants, do straight
pitch their Streets a new, and repair their Houses, having enough Materials:
for there are there great Rocks of Hail stones, and huge Mountains of Snow.

But when the Chariot runs in Summertime, the Streets being dried and hard,
or, as I may say, Crystalined, it makes a rattling Noise, which we call Thunder;
and the Horses being very hot, great flashes of Fire proceeds out of their
Nostrils, which we call Lightning; and many times their Breath is so exceeding
hot, and being moist withal, that it softens their Streets; and, melting their
Hailstones, cause great overflows, which fall down in pouringshowers of Rain,
as we often see when it Thunders. Now Snow and Hail are as naturally engendered
there by Cold, as Minerals in the Earth by Heat, both being wrought by
contraction; only the one is more dissolvable than the other, because the
Matter contracted, is different in solidity; but they meet at one End at last,
though by different ways.

When he had observed the Middle Region, he takes the third Glass to view the
highest Region. There he saw Six moving-Cities, which we call Planets; every
City had a Governing-Prince; their Compass was very large, their From round,
and moving in a Circular Motion. The midst of those Cities, was a Center City,
as I may say, a Metropolitan City, which we call the Sun, the King thereof; and
all his People are of the nature of Salamanders, for they live always in Fire,
as Fishes in Water; for it is not so hot as is imagined; because that which
feeds the Flame, is not a gross, combustible, and solid Matter, to burn like
Coals; but a thin, voluble, and oily substance, which makes only a Flame clear
and bright, having no Dross mixed in it; and whatsoever is wasted by the Flame,
is supplied by the Six Cities, which is the Tribute they pay to the Seventh,
the Monarchical City, whom all the rest are some ways or other subject unto.

But indeed, these Cities are forced, by necessity, to send Oily Matter, or the
like, or else they should be in perpetual Darkness, wanting Light; so that this
Oily Matter comes into the Metropolitan-City, and the Flame goes out like the
Water into the Sea; for the Water of the Sea goes out salt, and returns fresh,
being clarified by the Earth: so this Oil, when it runs to the Center-City, is
refined, and made more thin and pure, and is sent back in Streams and Beams of
Light.

But though the King and People be of the nature of Salamanders, yet their
shapes are like those we describe Angles to be, and fly about through Beams of
Light, though our grosser Sense cannot see them without the help of some
Miraculous Glasses, as these were.

Some of them perceiving this Man saw them, went to the King, and complained
thereof; which when he heard, he was very angry, and rose in great Rage,
casting a Blaze of Light, which dazzled his Eyes, blinded his Sight, and in this
Heat melted his Glasses.

The Body, Time, and Mind, disputed for Preheminency.
THE Dispute was begun by Time, who said, If it were not for me, the Body would
neither have Growth nor Strength, nor the Mind Knowledge or Understanding.

The Mind answered, That though the Body had a fixed time to arrive to a
perfect growth, and mature strength, yet the Mind had not: for I, said the
Mind, can never know and understand so much, but I might know and understand
more; nor has Time such a Tyrannical Power over the Mind, to bring it to ruin,
as it has over the Body.

Why, said the Body, Time has not an absolute power over me neither: for
Chance and evil Accidents prevent Time's Ruins; and Sickness and evil Diers
obstruct and hinder Time's Buildings. Neither is it only Time that nourishes
the Body, but Food; for without Food the Body would waste to nothing: for, the
Stomach is as the Pot, and the Heart as the Fire, to boil the Food, to make it
fit for Nourishment, making a Broth for Blood, a Jelly for Sinews a Gravy for
Flesh, and Oil for Fat; from which a Vapor steems forth to make Spirits; and
the several parts of the Body, are the several Vessels, wherein, and by which,
the Body is nourished, and Life maintained. Neither does Time give the Mind
Knowledge and Understanding, but the Senses, which are the Porters that carry
them in, and furnish the Mind therewith; for the Eyes bring in several Lights,
Colors, Figures, and Forms; and the Ear several Sounds, both Instrumental and
Vocal; the Nose, several Scents; the Tongue, several Tastes; and every part of
the Body, several Touches; without which, the Mind would be as an empty, poor,
thatched House with bare Walls, did not the Senses furnish it. Besides, said
the Body, the Mind could have no pleasure nor delight, were it not by my Senses.

But the Mind answered, That Delight belonged only to the Soul, and Pleasure
only to the Body. It Is true, says the Mind, they often make a Friendship, as
the Soul and the Body do; yet they consist by, and of themselves. And for Time,
said the Mind, he is only like a Page or Lacquey, which brings Messages, runs
of Errands, and presents Necessaries for the Mind's use: but, said the Mind,
had Time no Employment, or the Senses no Goods to bring in, and neither would
or could do the Mind any service; yet the Mind would not be like a thatched
House, empty and unfurnished; for Delight would be there as Queen, were it not
for Discontent, which is begot in the Body, but born in the Mind; and if he
lives, becomes a Tyrant, unthroning Delight, which is the natural Queen
thereof, as Pleasure is in the Body; and if it were not for this Tyrannical
Usurper, Delight would have more perfect Fruition than Pleasure has, by reason
Perfection lives more in the Mind, than in the Senses. And let me tell you,
said the Mind, Nature builds some Minds like a curious and stately Palace, and
furnishes them so richly, that it needs neither Time nor the Senses, laying
Reason as the Foundation, and Judgment for the Building; wherein are firm and
straight Pillars of Fortitude, Justice, Prudence, and Temperance; is paved with
Understanding, which is solid and hard; walled with Faith; which is roofed with
Love, and bows like an Arch, to embrace all toward a round Compass; is Leaded
with Discretion, which sticks close, keeping out watery Errors, and windy
Vanities; it has passages of Memory and Remembrance, to let Objects in; and
Doors of Forgetfulness, to shut them out; likewise, it has Windows of Hopes,
that let in the Light of Joy; and Shutts of Doubts, to keep it out: also, it
has large Stairs of Desire, which arise by steps or windings up, by degrees,
to the Towers of Ambition.

Besides, in Architecture of the Mind, there are wide Rooms of Conception,
furnished richly with Invention, and long Galleries of Contemplation, which are
carved and wrought with Imaginations, and hung with the Pictures of Fancy.

Likewise, there are large Gardens of Varieties, wherein flow Rivers of Poetry,
with full Streams of Numbers, making a purling Noise with Rhymes, on each side
are Banks of Oratory, whereon grow Flowers of Rhetoric, and high Trees of
Persuasion, upon which a Credulous Fool, helped by the Senses, will climb; and,
from the top, falls on the Ground of Repentance, from whence old Father Time
takes him up, and puts him into the Arms of Expense, who carries him in to the
Chyrurgeon of Expense, and is healed with the Plaster of Warning, or else dies
of the Apoplexical Disease, called Stupidity. But Wisdom will only look up to
the top, viewing the growth, and observing what kind they are of, but never
adventures to climb: she will sit sometimes under the Branches, for Pleasure;
but never hang on the Boughs of Insinuation.

While they were disputing, in comes grim Death, whose terrible Aspect did so
affright the Mind, that the very fear put out its Light, and quenched out its
Flame; and the Body, being struck by Death, became senseless, and dissolved into
Dust. But old Father Time run away from Death as nimbly as a light-heel'd Boy,
or like those that slide upon the Ice; but never turned to see whether Death
followed or no: Death called him; but he made himself, as it were, deaf with
Age, and would not hear.

A Tripartite Government of Nature, Education, and Experience.
NATURE, Education, and Experience, did agree to make a Juncto to govern the
Monarchy of Man's Life, every one ruling by turns, or rather in parts, being a
Tripartite Government, The Soul, the Senses, and the Brain; where Nature
creates Reason as the chief Magistrate, to govern the Soul. Education creates
Virtue to govern the Appetites; for Virtue is bred, not born in Man. And
Experience creates Wit to govern the Brain: for Wit (though native) without
Experience, is defective.

As for the Soul, which Natural Reason governs, it has large Territories of
Capacity and Understanding, and many Nobles living therein; as, Heroic
Passions, and Generous Affections; Subtle Enquiries, Strong Arguments, and
Plain Proofs.

The Senses (which Virtuous Education governs, are five great Cities; and the
various Appetites, are the several Citizens dwelling therein; which Citizens
are apt to rebel, and turn Traitors, if Virtue, the Governess, be not severe
and strict in executing Justice with Courage, cutting off the Heads of
Curiosity, Nicety, Variety, Luxury, and Excess; and though Temperance must
weigh, measure, and set Limits; yet Prudence must distribute to Necessity and
Convenience, the several Gifts of Nature, Fortune, and Art.

The third is the Brain, wherein Experienced Wit governs, which is the
pleasantest part, and has the larrgest Compass; wherein are built many Towers
of Conceptions, and Castles of Imaginations; Grounds ploughed with Numbers, and
sowed with Fancies; Gardens planted with Study, set with Practice; from whence
Flowers of Rhetoric grow, and Rivers of Elegancy flow through it.

This part of the Kingdom has the greatest Traffic and Commerce of any of the
three parts, and flourishes most, being populated with the Graces and Muses;
Wit, being popular, has great power on the Passions and Affections, and in the
Senses makes Civil Entertainments of Pleasure and Delight, feeding the
Appetites with delicious Banquets.

NATURE's HOUSE.
THE whole Globe is Nature's House; and the several Planets are Nature's
several Rooms; the Earth is her Bed Chamber; the Floor is Gold and Silver; and
the Walls Marble and Porphyrie; the Portals and Doors are Lapis-Lazarus;
instead of Tapistry Hangings, it is hung with all sorts of Plants; her Bed is
of several precious Stone; the Bed-posts are of Rocks of Diamonds; the
Bed'shead, of Rubies, Saphires, Topasses, and Emeralds: Instead of a
Feather-bed, there is a Bed of sweet Flowers; and the Sheets are fresh Air; her
Table is of Agats, and the like: yet the Roof of the Chamber is Earth; but so
curiously Vaulted, and so finely wrought, that no Dust falls down: it is built
much like unto a Martin's Nest: the Windows are the Pores of the Earth.

Saturn is her Gallery (a long, but a dark Room), and stands at the highest
Story of her House.

Sol is her Dining Room, which is a round Room built with Heat, and lined with
Light.

Venus is her Dressing Room.

Cynthia is her Supping-Room, which is divided into four Quarters, wherein
stand four Tables; one being round, at which she sits, being furnished with all
Plenty; the other are Side-board Tables.

Mercury is her Room of Entertainment.
The Rational Creatures are her Nobles.
The Sensitive Creatures are her Gentry.
The Insensible Creatures are her Commons.
Life is her Gentleman Usher.
Time is her Steward.
And Death is her Treasurer.
A DISPUTE.
THE Soul caused Reason and Love to dispute with the Senses and Appetites.

Reason brought Religion: for, whatsoever Reason could not make good, Faith did.

Love brought Will: for whatsoever Love said, Will confirmed.

The Senses brought Pleasure and Pain, which were as two Witnesses: Pleasure
was false Witness; but Pain would not, nor could not be bribed.

Appetite brought Opinion, which in somethings would be obstinate, in others
very facil.

But they had not disputed long, but they were so entangled in their Arguments,
and so invective in their Words (as most Disputers are), that they began to
quarrel (as most Disputers do).

Whereupon the Soul dismissed them, although with much difficulty: for, Disputers
are Captains or Colonels of ragged Regiments of Arguments; and when a Multitude
are gathered together in a Rout, they seldom disperse until some Mischief is
done; and then they are well pleased, and fully satisfied.

The Preaching-Lady.
Dearly Beloved Brethren,
IHAVE called you together to Instruct, Exhort, and Admonish you: My Text I
take out of Nature; the third Chapter in Nature, at the beginning of the fourth
Verse; mark it, dearly Beloved, the third Chapter, beginning at the fourth
Verse: (The Text) In the Land of Poetry there stands a steep high Mount, named
Parnassus; at the top issues out a Flame, which ascends unto Fame's Mansion.

This Text, dearly Beloved, I will divide into seven parts:

First, In the Land of Poetry. Secondly, There stands a Mount. Thirdly, A steep
Mount. Fourthly, A high Mount. Fifthly, The Name is Parnassus. Sixthly, There
issues from the top a Flame. Seventhly, and lastly, The Flame ascends to Fame's
Mansion.
First, In the Land of Poetry.

Which Land, dearly Beloved, is both large, sweet, pleasant, and fertile; and
has been possessed by our Forefathers, ever since the time of our Father Adam
in Poetry, which was Homer; from whom all Poets are descended (as the Ancients
say). This our very great Grandfather, named Homer, did excel all other Men;
for he did not only give some Names to Creatures on Earth, but he gave Names to
all the Gods in Jove's Mansion, and to all the Devils in the Infernal Parts.
Nay, he did more; for he made Heavens and Hells, Gods and Devils; and described
them, that his Posterity might know them in after-Ages. In this Land of Poetry
he lived, which Land flowed with Wit and Fancy; and is so large, that it does
not only reach to all parts and places of or in the World (spreading it self,
like Air, about, and into every nook and corner in this World), but beyond it,
as into many other Worlds. In this most spacious Land runs a clear Stream,
called Helicon; it is a most pleasant Spring, and refreshes not only the Life
of the Senses, but the Sense of Life. In this Spring did our very
Great-Grandfather bathe himself in; also, with this Spring he watered numbers
of several Roots growing in this Land, that the sweet Flowers of Rhetoric
might sprout forth in due season, and that the Trees of Invention might bear
their fruitful Arts, for the nourishment of Common-weals.

Secondly, In the midst of this Land there is a Mount: A Mount, dearly Beloved,
is a swelled, contracted, and elevated Matter or Form: but you must not
conceive this Mount to be of Earth, but of Thoughts; it is a swelled,
contracted, and elevated Form in the Mind.

Thirdly, It is a steep Mount: That is, dearly Beloved, it is not slope, or
shelving; but so straight, as to be perpendicular: insomuch, that those that
have not sure and sinewy Feet, can never wald up this Mount: indeed, it
requires Mercury's Feet, which have Wings, that when they are in danger to
slip, their Wings might bear them up.

Fourthly, It is a high Mount: That is, dearly Beloved, there is a great space,
or long line, from the Bottom to the Top; unto which top, all that have light
and empty Heads can never attain; for the height will soon make them dizzy, and
cause them to fall into the Gulf of Oblivion.

Fifthly, The Name of this Mount is Parnassus: A Name, dearly Beloved, is a
Word; not a Thing, but the Mark of Things, to distinguish several Things, or
conceptions of Things, to know and understand them.

Sixthly, From the top of this Mount Parnassus, issues out a Flame: A Flame,
dearly Beloved, is the fluid part of Fire. But, Beloved, you must know, there
are two sorts of Fire; the one, a bright shining Fire, which is visible to the
vulgar sense; the other is so pure and subtle a Fire, that it is not subject to
the outward Sense, but is only perceived by the Understanding; indeed it is a
Spiritual Fire, which causes a spritely and pure Flame: The other a Corporeal
Fire, which causes a gross and smoking Flame.

Seventhly and lastly, This insensible Flame ascends to Fame's Mansion: And
though, dearly Beloved, Fame's Mansion is but an old Library, wherein lies
ancient Records of Actions, Accidents, Chronologies, Moulds, Medals, Coins, and
the like; yet Fame her self is a Goddess, and the Sister to Fortune; and she is
not only a Goddess, but a powerful Goddess; and not only a powerful Goddess,
but a terrible Goddess; for she can both damn and glorify; and her Sentence of
Damnation is, most commonly, of more force than her Sentence of Glorification;
for those that she damns, she damns without Redemption; but she sets, many
times, a period to those she Glorifies.

Thus, beloved Brethren, I have interpreted to you the Text. Now I am to exhort
you, That none should venture up this Mount, but those that can fly with
Fancy's Wings, or walk with a measured pace, on Velvet Feet, or Comic Socks,
or Tragic Buskins; not to venture, if you find any infirmity or weakness in
the Head, or Brain, or other parts: for, the Flame which issues out of the
Mount called Parnassus, is not only a Flame, but a wondrous hot, sindging,
scorching, burning Flame; insomuch, that (many times) it is insufferable, and
oft-times burns the Brains into Cinders, and consumes the Rational
Understanding; at least, it sindges the Health, and endangers the Life of the
Body.

But to conclude, beloved Brethren in Poetry: Let me admonish you to be devout
to the Name of great Fame, who is able to save or damn you: Wherefore be
industrious in your Actions; let no opportunity slip you, neither in Schools,
Courts, Cities, Camps, or several Climates, to gain the Favor of great Fame;
offer up your several Conceptions upon her white Altars (I mean white Paper),
sprinkling Golden Letters thereon; and let the Sense be as sweet Incense to her
Deity, that the Perfumes of your Renown may be smelt in after-Ages, and your
Noble Actions recorded in her ancient Mansion.

And so the Love of Fame be with you,
And the Blessing of Fortune light upon you.
A Moral Tale of the Ant and the Be.
IN the midst of a pleasant Wood, stood a large Oak in its prime, and strength
of years, which by long time was brought to a huge bigness. A Company of Ants
meeting together, chose the Root, or bottom thereof, to build a City; but
wheresoever any of them build, they build after one fashion, which is like a
Hill, or half-Globe, the outside being Unequal, the inside Concave; a Figure, it
seems, they think most lasting, and least subject to ruin; having no Corners,
Points, or Joints, to break off; and every one of the little Creatures
industrious for the Common-good, in which they never loyter, but labor and
take pains; and not only laboriously, but prudently; for those that bring the
Materials to build, lay those Materials in such a manner, that they do not
hinder one another by any retardments: Among Men, one brings the Brick, another
the Mortar, and a third builds with them; and if any come to a mischance, the
Work is not only hindered, and time lost, but the Builder is forced to be idle
for want of Materials; and if the Builder comes to any mischance, the Materials
are useless for want of a Worker. But they, being wiser than Man, know Time is
precious; and therefore judiciously order it, forecasting while they work, and
taking up the whole time with Contrivance, leaving none for Practice; neither
do they prefer Curiosity before Convenience. Likewise, they are careful of
Repairs, lest Ruin should grow upon them; insomuch, that if the least Grain of
Dust be misplaced, they stop, or close it up again. They are also as prudent
for their Provisions, having a Magazine of Meat in their City, as Men have of
Arms: but this Magazine is like a Farmer's Cupboard, which is never without
Bread and Cheese; wholesome, although not delicious Fare; so is theirs. Neither
do they shut their Door, for all is open and free: they need not beg for
Victuals, since every one labors and takes pains for what they eat: neither
are they factious and mutinous, through Envy; by reason there is no superiority
amongst them, for their Commonwealth is composed of Laborers. They have no
impertinent Commanding Magistrates, nor Unjust Judges, nor Wrangling Lawyers:
for, as their Commonwealth is as one Body; or rather, all those little Bodies
are as one great Head; or rather, as one wise Brain; so are they united by a
general Agreement, as one Mind; and their Industries are united as to the
general Good; which makes the Profit thereof return equally to each particular:
for as their Industry, so Power and Riches are levelled amongst them, which
makes them free from those Inconveniences and Troubles, and oft-times Ruins,
that are incident to those Commonwealths that make Distinctions and Degrees,
which beget Pride, Ambition, Envy, Covetousness, Treachery, and Treason;
causing Civil-Warrs, Tyrannical Laws, Unjust Judgments, False Accusations,
Cruel Executions, Faint Friendships, Dissembling Affections, Luxury, Bribery,
Beggary, Slavery, heavy Taxes, and unconscionable Extortions. But these
Citizen-Ants, have little Heads, and great Wisdom; which shows, it is not the
quantity of Brains that makes any particular Creature wise; for then an Ox
would be wiser than a Man: Nor is it the bigness of the Heart that makes a
Creature goodnatur'd; for these little Creatures, although they have little
Hearts, yet they have great Generosity, Compassion, and Charity to each other:
and as their assistance is always ready and free to bear a part of a Burden;
so their care and affection is not less to bury their Dead. I know not whether
they have the passion of Sorrow, or rather (I may say) the moisture of Tears,
to weep at their Funerals; but they do lay the Dead into the Earth, and cover
them with Earth, with great Solemnity. But they have, as all other Creatures
that Nature has made, Enemies: for, though they are Friends among themselves,
yet they cannot make Friendships with all Nature's Works, by reason some
Creatures live upon other Creatures; and they have many Foreign Enemies, as
Swallows, and other Birds, which come with their sharp and digging Bills, and
pull down their City, devour their Eggs, and make a Massacre of their Citizens;
which Cruelty makes them fearful, and careful in concealing themselves,
crepping always out at little holes, lest they should be discovered.

It happened, upon a hot Summer's day, a company of Bees flying to that Tree,
to swarm on a Bough thereof; that they, thinking it might be some of their
Enemy-Birds, were in an extraordinary fright: Whereupon they withdrew all into
the City, shutting up the Gates thereof; only sending out a few Spies at
Postern-doors, and setting Cen-tinels to view their approaches. At last they
ob-served, these Birds (which Men call Bees) gathered in a round Figure, or
Globe, like the World; which shows, the round Figure is not only the most
profitable (having the least waste, and largest compass), but the securest
Figure, being the most united, not only by drawing in all loose and wandering
parts, but it combines them all together with a round Line. But when these Bees
were swarmed (which swarming is a general Meeting, to make up one Council),
there was such a humming-noise, as did more affright the Ants than it had
before: for Bees do not, as Men in Public Councels, speak by turns; but they
speak all at once, after the Leading-Bee has spoke; I suppose, either all
consenting, or not consenting to the chief Bee's Proposition. Neither can I
perceive that they speak studied Speeches, as Men do, taking more care and
pains therein, than for theCommon Good. Neither do they, as Men do, which is,
to speak as Passion persuades them, not as Reason advises, or Truth discovers,
or Honesty commands them; but as Self-love or Self-will draws them, driving
their own particular Interest, following their own Appetites, preferring their
own Luxuriousness and Pleasure, before the public Felicity or Safety;
venturing the public Ruin, for a Title of Honor, or Bribe, or Office, or
Envy, or Hate, or Revenge, or Love, or the like; nay, for a vain and affected
Speech. But Bees are wiser; for they know, that if the Commonwealth be
ruinated, no particular Person can be free. Also, Bees do like those that send
Colonies out of over-populous Kingdoms, to make new Plantations: for, if there
should be more Mouths than Meat, and more Men than Business, they would devour
one another in Civil-Warrs, and pull down the Fabric of the Commonwealth, by
breaking the Laws and Civil Customs thereof.

But this Colony of Bees swarming together, agreed where to settle, and so to
meet all at the appointed place: Whereupon the Council broke up, and every one
took their flight several ways, to gather Honey and Wax, wisely providing for
Food, and Storehouses to lay their Provisions in, building them a City in some
hollow Tree, or cleaved part of the Earth, or the like places; and their
several Apartments are built so close together, and in such a curious
Mathematical Figure, that there is not the least waste or loss; and they are so
industriously wise, that they carry their Provisions of Victuals, and their
Materials to build withal, at one time, as one Burden; for they have a
natural Bag, like a Budget, which they fill with Honey; and they carry their
Wax on their Thighs.

But when the Ants had heard their wise Propositions, their general Agreements,
their firm Conclusions, their quick Executions, their methodical Orders, their
prudent Managements or Comportments, and their laborious Industry; they did
admire, commend, and approve of their Commonwealth; and the more, because it
was somewhat like to theirs. But the truth is, the Ant and the Be resemble one
another more in their wise Industry, than in their Government of the
Commonwealth; for the Bees are a Monarchical Government, as any may observe;
and the Ants are a Republic.

But by this we may perceive, it is not such and such kinds of Government, but
such and such ways of Governing, that make a Commonwealth flourish with Plenty,
Convenience, Peace, and Tranquillity: for, the Monarchical Government of the
Bees, is as wise and happy as the Republic of the Ants.

The Second Tale of the Ant and the Be.
AN Ant and a Be meeting together upon a Gilliflower, condemned each other for
doing wrong to the Flower: for, said the Ant to the Be, you luxuriously and
covetously come and suck out the sweet and nourishing Juice.

You are deceived, said the Be; for I only gather off the sweet Dew that lies
thereon; I neither draw out the Juice nor Scent, nor fade the Color, nor
wither the Leaves, nor shorten the Life; for it may live as long as Nature
pleases, for all me: but you eat out the Seeds, which are their young
Offsprings; and the Earwigs eat off the Leaves, and the Worms devour the Roots;
when I bear nothing away, but what is free for all, which is that which falls
from the Heavens.

By this we may perceive, That it is the nature of most Creatures that are
guilty, and do the greatest Wrongs, to be the first Accusers.

The Third Tale of the Ant and the Be.
IT chanced, that an Ant and a Be, wandering about, met in a Honey-pot; the
Honey being very clammy, stuck so close to the Ant, and weighed so heavy, that
she could not get out, but (like a Horse in a Quagmire) the more pains she took
to get out, the deeper she sunk in: Whereupon she entreated the Be to help her.

The Be denied her, saying, She should become guilty of Theft, in assisting a
Thief.

Why, said the Ant, I do not entreat you to assist my Stealth, but my Life:
but, for all your pretended Honesty, and Nicety of Conscience, you endeavor to
steal Honey, as much as I.

No, said the Be, this Honey was stolen by Man out of our Commonwealth; and it
is lawful not only to challenge our own, but to take it wheresover we find it.
Besides, Man (most commonly) does cruelly murder us, by smuthering us with
Smoke, then destroys our City, and carries away the Spoils. But Men are not
only the most wicked of Creatures, in making the greatest Spoils and
Disturbances in Nature; but they are the subtillest of all Creatures, to
compass their Designs; and the most inventive for several destructive and
enslaving Arts. But Nature, knowing the Ingenuity of Man to Evil, and the
proneness of his Nature to Cruelty, gave us Stings (for Weapons) to oppose and
defend our selves against them; which they finding, by experience, invented the
way of smuthering us with Smoke.

The Ant said, I hope that the Cruelty you condemn, and have found by
experience in Man, will cause you to be so charitable, as to help me out of my
Misery.

There is no reason for that, answered the Be: for if Man does unjustly strive
to destroy me, it does not follow, I must unjustly strive to help you.

But whilst the Be was thus talking, the Honey had clammed the Bee's Wings
close to her sides, so that she could not loosen them to fly; and in struggling
to get liberty for flight, plunged her whole Body in the Honey.

O, said the Be, I shall be swallowed up, and choked immediately.

What, said the Ant, with your own Honey?

O, said the Be, the Quantity devours me: for, Water refreshes Life, and
drowns Life; Meat feeds the Body, and destroys the Body by Surfeits: besides, a
Creature may choke with that which might nourish it. O unhappy Creature that I
am, said the Be, that my Labor and Industry should prove my ruin! but the
Honey rising above her Head, stopped her speech, and killed her.

The Ant, after a short languishing, dyed also.

Thus we see, the same Mercy and Assistance we refused to others, is refused to
us in the like Distress. And, many times, in the midst of Abundance, are our
Lives taken away.

When we are too greedily earnest in keeping or taking what we can justly call
our own, we seldom enjoy it, either by losing it, or our selves. Which shows,
there is no secure Safety, nor perfect Felicity, nor constant Continuance in
the Works of Nature.

A Tale of the Woodcock and the Cow.
A COW seeing a Woodcock sitting close to a a green Turf, and observing him not
to stir, asked him why he sat so lazily there, having so strong a Wing as he
had to fly.

O, said the Woodcock, it is a laborious action to fly; but sitting here, I
take my ease and rest.

The Cow said, If I had Wings to fly, I would never lie upon the cold Earth,
but I would mount up near to the warm Sun, whose Heat clarifies the Air to a
Crystalline Sky; whereas the Earth is only a gross Body, sending forth thick
and stinking Fogs, which many times give us the Rot, and other Diseases, by the
unwholesome Vapors that arise from it, and cold Dews that lie upon the Ground;
when the Air is sweet and refreshing, warm and comfortable.

It Is true, said the Woodcock, the Sun is a glorious and powerful Planet; his
Heat is our Comfort, and his Light is our Joy; and the Air is a thin and fine
Element. But alas, said he, though we be Birds that can fly therein, yet we
cannot rest therein; and every Creature requires rest sometimes: neither can we
live only by the Sun; for the Sun cannot fill us, though he warms us; his Light
fills not our Crops, although it does our Eyes; nor is the Seed sown in the
Air: and though the Winds furrow and plow the Clouds, yet the Air is too soft
an Element to bear Corn, or any other Vegetable; nor does there grow sweet
Berries on the Sunbeams, as on the Bushes: besides, great Winds beat down our
sailing-wings; and when the Air is thick, and full of Water, it wets and
cleaves our Feathers so close, they will not spread; which causes difficulty
of flight; which tires us, and puts our Limbs to pain, when you sit lazily here
all day long, chewing the Cud, having your Meat brought by Man, to increase
your Milk; and in the Summer you are put to rich Pasture, or lie in green
Meadows, growing thick with Cowslips and Dazies; or else, for change, you walk
up to the Mountains tops, to brouse on wild Thyme, or sweet Marjoram; and yet
you rail against our good Mother Earth, from whose Bowels we receive Life, and
Food to maintain that Life she gives us: She is our kind Nurse, from whence we
suck (out of her springing breasts) fresh water; and are fed by her Hand of
Bounty, shaded under her spreading-Boughs, and sheltred from Storms in her
thick Groves.

Besides, said the Woodcock, you are safe from Dangers; whenas we have many
Airy-Enemies, as the Tyrant-Eagle, and Murtherous Hawk: But, said the Cow, we
that only live upon the Earth, are dull and melancholy Creatures, in comparison
of those that fly in the Air: for, all Birds are ingenuous, and seem to have
more Wit than Beasts: besides, they are of chearfuller Dispositions, and have
clearer Voices, by reason their Spirits are more refined, whereof the Serene
Air, and the hot Sun, is the cause, by agitating the Spirits to that degree,
that they seem to have more Life than we Beasts have, or any other Creature;
for those Bodies that are most active, and those Minds that are more cheerful,
have most, although not longest Life, having more of the innated Matter (which
is Self-motion) in them, than duller Creatures have. And since Nature has
given you a greater proportion of Life (that is, more lively Spirits), slight
not her Benefits, but make use of them; for to that purpose she gives them.

Wherefore get up, and sit not idly here;
Mount up on high, above the Clouds appear.
The Woodcock said, When we are up on high,
We rather swim like Fishes, and not fly:
The Air is like the Ocean, liquid, plain;
The Clouds are Water, and the Roof is Rain:
Where, like a Ship, our Bodies swift do glide;
Our Wings, as Sails, are spread on either side:
Our Head's the Card, our Eyes the Needles be,
For to direct us in our Airy Sea.
Our Tail's the Rudder, moves from side to side:
And by that motion we our Bodies guide.
Our Feet's the Anchors; when to ground them set,
We mend our Sails, that is prune our Feathers wet:
And every Bush, like several Ports they be:
But a large Haven is a broad-spread Tree.
O, said the Cow, this Voyage to the Sky
I fain would see, whilst on the Ground I lie.
To satisfy you, said the Woodcock, I
Will mount; so rose, and shak'd his Wings to fly.
But the Woodcock had not flown above a Cast high, but a Faulcon (who had
soared above for a Prey) seeing the Woodcock underneath him, came down with
such force, that he knocked him on the head with his Pounces.

Which when the Cow saw, she lowed out with sorrow, and made a most lamentable
Voice, bewailing the Woodcock's misfortune; and out of a sad, melancholy, and
discontented grief for the Woodcock his death, and for the unfortunate counsel
she gave him, she mourned and lamented, putting on a black Hide; which Hide she
wore to her dying-day, and all her Posterity after her; and not only her
Posterity, but many of her Acquaintance.

The MORAL.
Some are so busily-good, that they will persuade and counsel not only all
those they have relation to, or all they know and have acquaintance with, but
all they meet, although they be mere strangers to them. But although some do it
out of a mere busy nature, and intermedling humor and disposition; yet
questionless some do it out of a desire and natural inclination they have for a
general fruition of Happiness, putting themselves in the last place.

But these sort of men have more Goodnature than Judgment; for their Counsel
oft-times brings Ruin, at least Sorrow, both to those that take it, and those
that give it, through a blind ignorance of both Parties. But those that are
prudently wise, never give Counsel but when it is asked; and then, not without
great Caution; choosing the safest ways, and the likeliest means, joining their
own Reputation with the Party's Good; fearing to lose the one, or hurt the
other by a rash Advice.

Of a Butcher and a Fly.
IN Shamble-Row, a Butcher walking in his Shop, where Meat was lying upon his
Shop-board, and (being in the heat of Summer) a number of Flies were busily
working thereupon; which the Butcher seeing, was very angry, and said, That
Flies were good for nothing but to corrupt Dead Flesh. At which words, the
Flies murmured against the Butcher, making a humming-noise, to express their
Passion.

But one of the ancientest and gravest Flies amongst them (which Fly living
long, and observing much, had studied Natural and Moral Philosophy), having
observed the Humors and Actions of all Creatures, especially of Man, and more
especially of Butchers, by reason they most commonly frequent the Shambles; she
answered the Butcher thus:

Why (said the Fly) do you rail and exclaim against us, when we do nothing
against Nature, but do good service to the Country? for, we create living
Creatures out of that you destroy; whereby we keep Nature from ruin: and those
only that destroy Life, are Nature's Enemies; but those that maintain or create
Life, are Nature's Friends. Thus we are Friends, and you are Enemies to Nature:
for you are cruel, striving to destroy Nature, not only by taking the Life of
barren Creatures, that are past producing; but of young Creatures, that would
increase, had they been suffered to live, in not killing them before their
natural time to dye. Besides (said the Fly to the Butcher) you are a Cheat and
a Robber, as well as a Murderer; for you cozen and rob Time of the Goods he is
entrusted to keep until such time as Nature requires them, to whom he
carefully, easily, peaceably, delivers them to the right Owner. Also, you do
not only rob him of those Goods he has in charge; but you maliciously or
covetously spoil his Work: for, those Creatures that he has but newly made and
shaped, and some before they are quite finished; nay, some which he has but
molded in a lump together, you destroy; which not only spoils old Father
Time's Labors, but defaces his Architecture, disgracing his Skill. Likewise,
you do not only endeavor to destroy Nature, and rob and disgrace Time; but you
take away Divine Worship from the Gods, who receive their Worship from Life,
which you destroy; for which, they may justly punish you to Death.

After the Fly had made an end of this Discourse, Now (says the Butcher to the
Fly) you think you have spoke wisely, honestly, and piously; but your Speeches
show you to be a formal, prating Coxcomb: For first, Nature creates more
Creatures from Death, than from Life; from the Grave, than from the Womb: for
those Creatures she creates from the Womb, she creates (for the most part) by
single ones, or couples, as Mankind, and most sorts of Beasts; but those that
she creates from Death and the Grave, as from dead Carcasses, and Corruption,
she produces by numbers, as Maggots, Worms, and the like: and, most commonly,
your impertinent Worships are created in that manner. And if the Gods are only
served by Life, we serve the Gods best; for we, by killing of single Creatures,
are the cause of creating millions of living Creatures. Neither have you reason
to brag; for it is not you that are the only cause that those Creatures are
produced from those Carcasses, but Corruption, which is the Mother of Life, and
which (by your Bloth) you hasten, whereby you take Time's Work out of his
hands, and so you do usurp on Time's Prerogative, for which I will whisk you
out of my Shop as a Company of busy, prating, idle, foolish Creatures you are.
Whereat they, being frighted, flew away.

Of a Man and a Spider.
A MAN, whose Thoughts were not busily employed upon potent Affairs, but lazily
sitting in his Chair, leaning his Head on his Hand, with his Face toward the
Window, viewing a crafty Spider, and marking what pains she took in spinning a
Web to entangle the innocent Flies; saw, that her Work was no sooner done, but
a Fly was caught therein. He seeing this poor Fly dragged along, and ready to
be murdered by the cruel Spider (who had watched her coming thither), thus
spoke:

Mischievous Spider (says he) who art only industrious to an Evil Design,
spinning out thy own Bowels only to entrap a Creature that never did nor meant
thee harm: Had thou spun out of a charitable intention to clothe the Naked,
thou had been worthy of my Commendation; but now thy Malice falls justly
under my Wrath: and taking the Tongs, intended to kill her. But the Spider,
perceiving his intention, thus spoke:

Sir, You that pretend to Justice, be just to me, and hear me first speak: for,
What is more unjust, than to censure, strike, or kill, before you know whether
your Doom be deservedly given; and you must be clear from the same Faults,
before you can justly punish another for the like Crimes; as also, be free from
Partiality, lest you become cruel to one, through your tender pity to the
other. But to answer for my self: I do not only spin thus to catch the Flies,
but it is my House in which I dwell; which no sooner have I built it up, but
the Flies strive to break it down: for, if you would but observe, that when I
have spun my Web, they straight fly into it; which I no sooner see, but I run
upon my Threads to assault them, and so catch them, if I can: for, since I
cannot keep my House from being assaulted, I strive to make it a Snare to
entangle my Foes therein; and by that means I make it a Mischief to fall on
their own Heads: and, What Creature has Nature made, but (if they had power)
would defend themselves. But say, I spun this Web only to catch Flies to feed
upon, it were no Crime in Nature: for, What Creature is there that will spare
the Life of another, if it be to maintain his own? since Self-preservation is
the chief of Nature's Works; and of all her Works, Man seeks it most: and not
only so, but he delights in Spoil, which is against Nature: for, Does not Man
take delight, and account it as one of his Recreations, to kill those Creatures
that he refuses to eat? Nay, Man will destroy his own Kind: for, What Wars and
Slaughter do they make, out of a covetous Ambition for Power and Authority?
But, if you be so just as you pretend, then first cast out all Intemperate
Desires. Make Peace among your selves, then may you be fit Judges to decide the
Quarrels of other Creatures, and to punish Offenders, when you are innocent;
otherwise you will but show your self an Usurper, wresting that Power that
belongs not to you; and a Tyrant, to execute with the Sword of Cruelty,
destroying Truth and Right.

The Man, when he had heard the Spider's Discourse, turned his Back, and went
his ways.

A Dialogue betwixt a great Lady, and her Maid of Honor.
THERE was a great rich Lady talking to one of her Maids of Honor of several
things, at last she began to speak of the false Reports Envy and Malice had
raised in the World.

Her Maid told her, If she would not be angry, she would tell her what they
said of her.

Do so, said she; for I do not censure my self according as the World's
reports, which most commonly are false; but I judge my self according to my
Life, which is my Thoughts and Actions: Wherefore, they cannot move my Anger at
any thing they say; and so you may relate without offense.

Maid. They say, You are Proud.


Lady. I am so, in scorning what is base.


Maid. They say, You prize your Title of Honor at too high a rate.


Lady. That Is false, said she; I only prize such Titles, as being the Mark of
Merit: for, only Merit dignifies a Man, and not those Titles of Honor, which
gain a Luster from the Worth of those they are placed upon.


Maid. They say, You are vain, in making Shows of State, and Stately Shows.


Lady. Why, answered she, the Gods delight in Ceremonies, which are devout
Shows; and this World which they have made, is like a Pageant, or
Masquing-Scenes; and when Great Kings neglect their Ceremonies, their State
goes down;

And with their State they lose their Kingly Crown.


Maid. They say, You are so Proud, that you will not sit, because all others by
you should stand.


Lady. They are deceived, said she; for I would rather stand whilst others sit;
for as they sit, they bow lower toward the Earth;

By which, my Slaves and Vassals they do show.


Maid. They say, You will not eat your Meat, but by your self alone; which
proves you Proud, or Covetous


Lady. It proves me neither: for, Why should I disgust my Palate, in hearing a
confused Noise? For, when good Meat and Wine fumes to their Brains, their
Tongues become unruly. Neither is it out of Covetousness: for, I do not only
keep one wellfurnished Table, but many; and do allow Entertainment to all Civil
Guests.


Maid. They say, You are Proud, because you will receive no Visits but at set
and certain times.


Lady. Why should I spend my time in idle talk, since Life is short? or to
disturb my solitary hours, which is the best and happiest time of Life, wherein
Man only does enjoy himself?


Maid. They say, You are not Sociable, in not carrying abroad your Neighbors,
or your Friends, as other Ladies of great Titles do; which send about to other
Ladies to accompany them abroad, to fill their Train, and make a Show.


Lady. I hate to be attended upon Courtesy, or make a Show of
Borrowed-Favours, or fill my Train with bare Acquaintance, or humble
Companions; to have my Estate none of my own, only to make a seeming-Shew; and
when they are gone, my Estate is gone, and I left alone, naked and bare, having
none that I can command about me. No, when I appear abroad, I will only be
attended and waited upon by such as live upon my Bounty, or are raised by my
Favors. I will have no patched Train, made up of Strangers; it shall be all my
own, although it be the shorter; otherwise, what Shows soever it makes, it is
but mean and poor, expressing more Vainglory, than it does State. Besides, it
cheats and cozens Noble Honor: for, should a King be attended and served in
State with other Subjects than his own, upon another King's Charge or
Courtesy; he would not seem, to those that are wise, to have great Power. But
he is Great, whose Kingdom is fully populated, and all do bow with an obedient
Knee, and are ready to serve his Will. So, like Potent Kings, in my Degree,
will I be served and waited on by my own Family, with Duty and Obedience; and
not by Strangers, who are like Foreigners, and are apt to mutiny, and make a
War, or think they do me Honor. No, I will have none but such as think I
honor them; and if I have Merit, I do so (although they be of equal rank), if
by my Worth or Fortune I do grace or assist them any way: for, it is an Honor
to receive a Bounty or a Favor from Persons of Merit.


Maid. They say, You do dislike, when any Man falutes you, although of Quality.


Lady. How! salutes me?


Maid. Why, to kiss you.


Lady. Why ought not every honest Woman so to do? For, Kisses are Cupid's
Gentlemen-Ushers, and Venus Waiting-Maids, which often betray the Men to wild
Desires, and kindles in their Hearts unlawful Fire: Wherefore, I would have
that Custom banished quite, especially by Husbands that do prize their Honor.
But Envy does misemploy the Tongue, and leads Mankind to base Actions, making
their Life like leaking-Vessels, where precious Time does idly drop away.


Maid. I have heard, That all the World was pictured in Fool's Cap.


Lady. It Is strange it should be so: for Nature that did make it, and Gods that
rule it, are wise: but Men are bad, which makes me not care what they say: for,
I divide Mankind into Four parts, whereof three are naught: One part I hate, as
being Wicked. The second I scorn, as being Base. And, the third I pity, as
being Ignorantly foolish.


Maid. What is the fourth part, Madam?


Lady. The fourth part I may divide into four parts more: One part I admire, as
being Wise. The second part I honor, as being Noble. The third part I love,
as being Good. The fourth part I rely on, as being Valiant.


Maid. There would be little Security, if only the fourth part of the fourth
part were Valiant; for the other parts might overpower them.


Lady. O no, Cowards know not their own strength, because they dare not try it;
and one Valiant Man, if Fortune sits but idle, will beat at least twenty
Cowards. But Fortune, for the most part, is a Friend to Cowards and to Fools,
more than to the Valiant and the Wise; yet oft-times the Valiant and the Wise
do make a passage through, though Fortune do obstruct.


Maid. But, Madam, if there were so few Valiant, there would not be so much
War amongst Mankind, as is.


Lady. O yes; for Cowards fight for fear, and Valiant Men do set them on; and
were it not for those that are Valiant and Wise, there would neither be
Justice nor Propriety.


Maid. Indeed, Justice is pictured with a Sword in one hand, and a pair of
Balances in the other.


Lady. That shows, that Wisdom does justly weigh Truth, and Valor does
maintain the Right.


Maid. I have heard a Proverb, Madam, That be that is wise, is honest.


Lady. And those that are not Valiant, can never be constantly Honest; for,
said the, Fear would put them out of Honest ways. And so she left off
discoursing.


A Dialogue betwixt a Contemplating Lady, and a Poet.
POET. PRAY, Madam, think me not rude to intrude upon your Contemplation.


Lady. A Poet's Wit is a Companion
Fit for a vain Imagination.

Poet. That is not vainly done, which gives a Delight to the Mind, without
endangering the Soul, or distempering the Body: for, Vanity lives only in that
which is useless or unprofitable.


Lady. Indeed, to delight the Mind is more necessary than to feed the Body:
for, a discontented Mind is worse than Death; but the most part of the World
think nothing useful to the Life, but what is Substantial.


Poet. If they do so, they must account Thoughts vain: for, Thoughts are only
an Incorporeal Motion, or at least believed to be so.


Lady. But without the Incorporeal Motion, the World would be a dead Carcass
only: for, were it not for Contemplation, there would be no Invention; if no
Invention, no Convenience; if no Convenience, no Ease; if no Ease, no Pleasure;
if no Pleasure, no Happiness; and to be unhappy, is worse than Death: but
Contemplation is the Mother of Invention.


Poet. But Language is the Midwife, and Practice the Nurse. Besides, if there
were no Practice or Conversation, all Invention and Industry would be Abortive:
And Language utterly unknown,
The Trumpet loud of Fame unblown:
No Ladder set unto ber Throne,
The Hill untrod she sits upon.


Wherefore, we ought not to bury our selves in Contemplation, nor to banish our
selves from Conversation: for, Conversation gives the Mind breath, and makes
the Imagination the stronger, the Conception larger, the Invention apter, and
Fancy livelier; otherwise we shall smuther the Thoughts for want of vent, and
put out their Light for want of Oil, and then the Life would sit in Darkness.


Lady. Certainly the greatest Delight that Life gives, is Contemplation; and
the Life of Contemplation, is silent Solitariness.


Poet. It Is true: but the Mind, as the Body, may feed so long of Pleasures,
that they may prove tormenting-Pain: so that the Mind must be exercised with
Discourse, cleansed with Writing, otherwise the Streams of Fancy, which arise
in several Springs from the Imaginations, may overflow the Mind, causing it to
be flatuous and hydropcal; or the several and singular Opinions, which are most
commonly tough and hard, may obstruct the Mind, causing it to be pursie and
short-breathed; and the cold and hot Passions, for want of Purgingwords, may
either stupifie or inflame the Mind; and too much Solitariness will bedridden the
Mind, making it faint and weak. Besides, if the Mind do not travel to several
Objects, and traffic with the Senses and Discourse, it would have no
acquaintance with the World, no knowledge of Men, nor Famous Monuments. And give
me leave, Lady, to tell you, Extremes in Nature are an Enemy to Life, and to
Life's delight: Wherefore, let me advise you to intermingle with your harmless
Contemplations, rational Discourses, knowing Societies, and worthy Actions; and
employ your Senses on profitable Labors, and not suffer them to live idly and
useless to the Mind.


Lady. Let me tell you, Sir, the Mind needs them not; for the Mind is so well
attended, so richly furnished, has such witty Companions, such wise
Acquaintance, such numbers of Strangers, such faithful Friends, such
industrious Servants, such various Pleasures, such sweet Delights, such
spacious Walks, such safe Habitations, and such a peaceable Life, that it
neither needs to converse or have commerce either with the Senses, Mankind, or
the World; for it is a World within it self.


The Mind a vaster World it self does prove;
Where several Passions, like the Planets, move:
Poetic Fancies, like fixed Stars, shine bright
Upon the Brain, mhich makes a Day of Night.
The flux of things produces from the Earth;
As some decays, to others gives new birth.
Nature and Time are equal in their ends,
As some decay, to others new Life sends.
The Circulation of Time's World, we see,
May prove Eternal, the Mind Immortal be.
All the Material World has Compass round,
But in the Mind no Compass can be found:
It Is infinite, like Nature can create
Thoughts, several Creatures, Destiny and Fate:
And Life and Death do in the Mind still lie;
Death to forget, and Life is Memory.
Poet. But, Lady, in Justice the Body, as well as the Mind, must share in the
Pleasures of Life: for it were unjust that only the Body should endure
Restraint and Pain, and take no Delight: wherefore you ought not to imprison it
to dark and solitary places, to chain it up with Contemplation, and to starve
it with Abstinency; but let it take a moderate pleasure.


Lady. Well, I will try to be more sociable, and not starve the Life of my Body
with over-feeding my Mind.


But hard 'twill be to me for to abstain,
And leave the Banquet of a thinking-Brain;
Where all delicious Pleasures and Delight
Are there set forth to feed each Appetite.
The Dialogue of the Wise Lady, the Learned Lady, and the Witty Lady.
Learned Lady. SOME are of opinion, That the World is a living Creature, and
the Sun is the Soul of it. A Wise and Learned Philosopher held, That the World
was made of Atoms, the Chaos being nothing but an infinite confused quantity of
them.


Wit. I think the Chaos was a great Lump of Wit, which run it self into several
Figures, creating several Forms. Thus the Chaos being Wit, and the Wit being
Motion, has invented this World, and many more, for all we know: for Wit is
never idle, but is still producing something either of Delight or Profit.


Wis. The best is, Not to dispute of what Matter it is, or how it was made, or
when it was made; but to enjoy the Pleasures thereof, to make use of the
Profits it has, and to avoid (as much as we can) the Inconveniences and
Troubles therein: for Disputes carry more out of the ways of Truth, and leads
further into the ways of Ignorance, than all the Reason Nature has given can
add to our Knowledge; and there is no Reason so strong, but may be contradicted
by another.


Wit. If our Reason be so false a Guide, and not only the Creation, but the
Tract of the World, is so hard to be found out; How shall we find a direct way
to Jove's Mansion?


Wis. I will tell you: The way to walk, is by the Line of a good Life, and to
take hold of Faith, and to climb up to Heaven by the Ladder of Prayers.


Lear. Nature is a Chemist, and Water is the Mercury, Fire is the Sulphur, Air
is the Volatile Salt, Earth is the fixed Salt, the fixed Stars are the
Crystalline part, Life is the Spirits or Essences, Death is the Caput Mortuum.


Wit. Wit, which is the Scholar of Nature, is as good a Chemist: for, Wit does
extract something out of every thing.


Wis. And Wisdom knows how to apply the Extraction to the best use.


Learn. As the agitation of the Air makes us draw our breath; so the agitation
of the World makes it continue.


Wit. The agitation of the Brain makes a sharp ready Wit.


Wis. The agitation of Virtue makes a peaceable Commonwealth.


Learn. Some Moral Philosophers hold, That no Creature has Reason, but Man.


Wis. Men only talk of Reason, but live like Beasts, following their Appetites
without Rules.


Wit. Men may as soon set Rules to Eternity, as to themselves: for, their
Desires are so infinite, and so intricate, that we may as soon measure
Eternity, as them: for, Desires are like Time, still run forward; and what is
past, is as it had never been.


Wis. But Man may set Rules to Himself, not to his Desires; and as wise Laws
govern the Life, so that Reason (Which Men say they have) should govern their
insatiable Desires.


Learn. It Is said, History instructs the Life, it registers Time, it enthrones
Virtue, it proclaims Noble Natures, it crowns Heroic Actions, it divulges
Baseness, and hangs up Wickedness: It is a Torch, that gives light to dark
Ignorance: It is a Monument to the Dead, and a Fame to Persons of Merit.


Wit. In Poetry is included Music and Rhetoric, which is Number and Measure,
Judgment and Fancy, Imitation and Invention: It is the finest Art in Nature;
for it animates the Spirits to Devotion, it fires the Spirits to Action, it
begets Love, it abates Hate, it tempers Anger, it asswages Grief, it eases
Pain, it increases Joy, allays Fear, and sweetens the whole Life of Man, by
playing so well upon the Brain, that it strikes the strings of the Heart with
Delight, which makes the Spirits to dance, and keeps the Mind in tune, whereby
the Thoughts move equally in a round Circle, where Love sits in the Center as
Mistress and Judge.


Learn. Some Philosophers hold, That all the Changes in the World are only
caused by Dilatation and Contraction.


Wit. I am sure, too much Dilatation of the Spirits, causes a weakness, by
dis-uniting their Forces, and contracting of Humors, causes Diseases. Yet a
dilatating Wit is best, spreading it self, smoothly flowing, and easily; which
if it be contracted, it makes it constraint, hard, and unpleasant, and becomes
difficult to the Understanding.


Wis. Let us contract our Vanities, and moderate our Appetites with sober
Temperance, and dilate our Virtues and good Graces, by Noble Actions, and Pious
Endeavors.


Learn. The Mind, some say, is nothing but Local Motion in the Brain, which we
call Spirits in Animals, that is, Vapor; indeed, Vapor of Vapors; that is,
the thin and sharp Vapors; it is an Extract of Vapor from Vapors, like
Essences or Smoke, that arises from the porous and liquid parts of the Body,
especially the Blood. This Essence has an innated Motion, arising from the
acuteness thereof; yet its strength is often allayed by the dullness and
coldness of grosser Vapors, or obstructed or hindered by the thickness of dull
Matter; and oft-times it evaporates out of the Body, by too much rarification,
caused by too quick a Motion.


Wit. The Mind is, like a God, an Incorporeal thing; and so infinite, that it
is as impossible to measure the Mind, as Eternity. Indeed, Vapor is a great
Instrument to the Wit: for, gross Vapor stops up the Wit, cold Vapor congeals
it, hot Vapor inflames it, thin and sharp Vapor quickens it. Thus all sorts
of Vapors make Variety of Wit; and the several Figures, and Works, and Forms,
that the Vaporous Smoke arises in, causes several Fancies, by giving several
Motions to the Brain.


Wis. Well, Sisters, to conclude your Dispute, The best Ingredient of the
Mind, is Honesty; and the best motion of the Brain, is Reason; otherwise the
Brain would be mad, and the Mind wicked: wherefore moderate the one, and temper
the other.


Learn. Learning increases Knowledge, begets Understanding, employs Time, and
enriches the Mind.


Wit. Wit invents profitable Arts, it creates Sciences, it delights the Mind,
it recreates the Life, and entertains Time.


Wis. Wisdom guides the Life safe, gives honest Laws to the Will, sets noble
Rules to the Actions; it governs Misfortunes easily, it prevents Misfortunes
prudently, it employs Time thristily, it makes Peace, it gets Victory, it
tempers those Passions that would disturb the Soul; it moderates those
Appetites that would cause Pain to the Body; it endures Sickness patiently, and
suffers Death valiantly.


Learn. There are many several kinds of Arts, as Arts of Pleasure, enticing
Arts, vainglorious Arts, vain Arts, superfluous Arts, superstitious Arts,
ambitious Arts, covetous Arts, profitable Arts, destructive Arts.

Arts of Pleasure are, Gardens, Groves, Bowers, Arbours, Grots, Fountains,
Prospects, Landskips, Gilding, Painting, Sculpture: likewise, Music of all
sorts, Confectionary, Cookery, and Perfumes.

Enticing Arts are, Artificial Singing, Artificial Speaking, Artificial
Dressing, Dancing, Powdring, Curling, Perfuming, Rich Clothing, Luxurious
Entertainments.

Vain Arts are, Feathers, Fancies, Ribbons, black-Patches, and Side-Glasses.

Amorous Arts are, flattering Complements, false Professions, affected Garbs,
affected Speeches, affected Countenances, affected Actions; Sonnets, Poems,
Frolicks, Questions and Commands, Proposes and Riddles, Presents, Private
Meetings, and Conference.

Expensive Arts are, Feasting, Masquing, Balling, Carding, Dicing, Racing,
Betting, and the like.

Ill-natured Arts are, Bull-baiting, Cock-fighting, Dog fighting,
Cudgel-playing.

Exercising Arts are, Bowling, Shooting, Hunting, Wrestling, Pitching the Bar,
and Tennis-Court Play.

Vainglorious Arts are, Oratory, Pleading, Disputing, Proposing, Objecting,
Magnisicent Entertainments, great Revenues, Sumptuous Palaces, and Costly
Furnitures.

Covetous Arts are, Bribery, Monopolies, Taxes, Excises, and Compositions.

Ambitious Arts are, Time-serving, Observing, Insinuating.

Malicious Arts are, Impeachings, Back-bitings, and Libels.

Superstitious Arts are, Interpretations, false Visions, Impostures,
Imprecations, Ceremonies, Postures, Garbs, Countenances, and Paces; and
particular Customs, Habits, and Diets.

Idolatrous Arts are, Groves, Altars, Images, and Sacrifices.

Dangerous Arts (though necessary for the safety of Honor) are, Fencing,
Riding, Tilting, Vaulting, Wrestling, and Swimming.

Murdering Arts are, Swords, Knives, Hatchets, Saws, Sythes, Pick-axes, Pikes,
Darts, Grenades, Guns, Bullets, Shot, Powder.

Arts of Safety are, Trenches, Moats, Bridges, Walls, Arms, and Chyrurgery.

Profitable Arts, are, Geometry, Cosmography, Arithmetic, Navigation,
Fortification, Architecture, Fireworks, Waterworks, Wind-works, Cultivating,
Manuring, Distilling, Extracting, Pounding, Mixing, Sifting, Grinding, as
Malting, Brewing, Baking, Cooking, Granging, Carding, Spinning, Weaving,
Coloring, Tanning, Writing, Printing.


Wit. Why, Learned Sister, all these Arts, and innumerbale more, are produced
from the Forge of the Brain, being all invented by Wit; and the Inventer is to
be more valued than the Art; the Cause, more than the Effect: for as without a
Cause, there would be no Effect; so, without an Inventive Brain, there could be
no Ingenuous Art.


Wis. Dear Witty Sister, do not engross more than what is justly your own; for
there are more Arts produced from Accidents and Experiments, than from
Ingenious Wit.


Learn. Some Learned Men hold, That the Motion of the Sun makes the Heat:
others, that Heat makes Motion.


Wit. Then it is like the Brain; for a hot Brain makes a quick Wit; and a quick
Wit makes the Brain hot.


Wis. We ought not to spend our time in studying of the Motions and Heat of the
Sun, but of the Motions and Passions of the Heart.


Learn. Some are of opinion, That Light has no Body: others, That it has a
Body; and that the Light of the Sun enlightens the Air, as one Candle does
another.


Wit. Light is like Imagination, an Incorporeal thing, or an Accidental
Proceeding from a Substance; and as one Candle does light another, so one Fancy
produces another.


Wis. Pray discourse of Virtues, which is the Light of the Soul; and
Generosity, an Effect thereof, which distributes to Necessity, producing
comfortable Relicfs therewith.


Learn. And some say, Colors are no Colors in the dark, being produced by
Light on such and such Bodies.


Wit. We may as well say, Wit is no Wit, or Thoughts no Thoughts in the
Brain, being produced by such and such Objects; nor Passion is no Passion in
the Heart, being raised by such and such Causes.


Wis. I pray dispute not how Colors are produced, whether from the Light, or
from their own Natures, or Natural Substances; but consider, that Good Works
are produced from a Soul that is pure and bright.


Learn. The Learned say, That Sounds are Numbers, and Optics are Lines of
Light.


Wit. Wit sets the Number, and Motion draws the Lines.


Wis. There is no Music so harmonious, as Honest Professions, nor no Light so
pure as Truth.


Learn. And they say, Discord in Music well applied, makes the Harmony the
delightfuller.


Wit. So Satyr in Wit makes it more quick and pleasant.


Wis. So Truths, mixed with Falsehood, make Flattery more plausible and
acceptable.


Learn. Time, which is the Dissolver of all Corporeal Things, yet it is the
Mother, Midwife, and Nurse to Knowledge; whereby we find all Modern
Romancy-VVriters, although they seem to laugh and make a scorn of Amadis de
Gall, yet make him the Original-Table, or Ground, from whence they draw their
Draughts, and take out covertly their Copies from thence. Indeed, Amadis de
Gall is the Homer of Romancy-writers.


Wit. Although Wit is not a Dissolver, yet it is a Creator. Wit does descry and
divulge more Knowledge than Time: for that which Time could never find out, Wit
will discover.

Wit is like a Goddess in Nature: for, though it cannot dissolve, yet it can
produce, not only something out of something, but something out of nothing (I
mean, from the Imaginations, which are nothing); and Wit needs no other Table
or Ground to draw its Draughts, or take Copy from, but its own Brain, which
creates and invents, similizes and distinguishes.


Wis. But Time and Wit would soon produce a Chaos of Disorder, if it were not
for Wisdom, which is composed of Judgment, Justice, Prudence, Fortitude, and
Temperance: for, Judgment distinguishes Times and Wits; Justice governs Times
and Wits; Prudence orders Times and Wits; Fortitude marshals Times and Wits;
and Temperance measures Times and Wits.


Learn. Scholars say, That one Man can see higher and further, when he is set
upon another Man's Shoulders, than when he stands or sits on the Ground by
himself: so, when one is raised by another Man's Opinion, he can descry more in
hidden Mysteries.


Wit. But if a Man see a Lark tower in the Sky, which another Man does not,
having weaker Eyes; yet he is no wiser than the other, that only saw the Lark
picking Corn on the Ground. But he that sees her not in the Sky, knows she is
in the Sky, as well as the other, because he saw from whence she took her
flight.

But if the other, that is raised, can see a Bird in the Sky that was never
seen before, it were something to add to his Knowledge. Besides, a sharp, quick
Eye will see further on his own Legs, than on the Shoulder of another: for most
grow dizzy, if set on high, which casts a Mist on the Eyes of the Understanding.


Wis. Leave the Shoulders of your Neighbors, and let your Eye of Faith reach
to Heaven. As some Meats nourish the Body, and some destroy the Body: so some
Thoughts nourish the Soul, and some destroy it. The Senses are the
working-Labourers, to bring Life's Materials in. As Nature is the best Tutor to
instruct the Mind, so the Mind is the best Tutor to instruct the Senses. And my
Mind instructs my Senses to leave you.

There are learned Arts and Sciences; a Poetical and Satirical Wit; a Comical
and Tragical Wit; an Historical and Romancical Wit; an Ingenious and Inventive
Wit; a Scholastical Wit; a Philosophical Wit. There is Moral, Human, and Divine
Wisdom.


The CONTRACT.
A NOBLE Gentleman that had been married many years, but his Wife (being
barren) did bear him no Children; at last she dyed, and his Friends did advise
him to marry again, because his Brother's Children were dead, and his Wife was
likely to have no more. So he took to Wife a virtuous young Lady; and after
one year she conceived with Child, and great Joy there was of all sides: but in
her Childbed she dyed, leaving only one Daughter to her sorrowful Husband, who
in a short time (oppressed with Melancholy) dyed, and left his Daughter (who
was not a year old) to the care and breeding of his Brother, and withal left
her a great Estate, for he was very rich. After the Ceremonies of the Funeral,
his Brother carried the Child home, which was nursed up very carefully by his
Wife; and being all that was likely to succeed in their Family, the Uncle grew
extreme fond and tender of his Niece, insomuch that she was all the comfort and
delight of his life.

A great Duke, which commanded that Province, would often come and eat a
Breakfast with this Gentleman, as he rid a Hunting; and so often they met after
this manner, that there grew a great Friendship betwixt them: for this
Gentleman was well bred, knowing the World by his Travels in his younger days;
and though he had served in the wars, and fought many Battles, yet was he not
ignorant of Courtly Entertainments. Besides, he was of a very good
conversation, for he had a voluble Tongue, and a ready Understanding; and in
his retired life, was a great Student, whereby he became an excellent Scholar;
so that the Duke took great delight in his company. Besides, the Duke had a
desire to match the Niece of this Gentleman, his Friend, to his younger Son,
having only two Sons; and knowing this Child had a great Estate left by her
Father; and was likely to have her Unkle's Estate joined thereto, he was
earnest upon it: but her Uncle was unwilling to marry her to a younger Brother,
although he was of a great Family: but, with much persuasion, he agreed, and
gave his consent, when she was old enough to marry; for she was then not seven
years old. But the Duke fell very sick; and when the Physicians told him, he
could not live, he sent for the Gentleman and his Niece, to take his last
Farewell; and when they came, the Duke desired his Friend, that he would agree
to join his Niece and his Son in Marriage.

He answered, That he was very willing, if she were of years to consent.

Said the Duke, I desire we may do our parts; which is, to join them as fast as
we can: for Youth is wild, various, and unconstant; and when I am dead, I know
not how my Son may dispose of himself when he is left to his own choice: for he
privately found his Son very unwilling, being a Man grown, to marry a Child.

The Gentleman seeing him so desirous to marry, agreed to what he desired.

The Duke called his Son privately to him, and told him, His intentions were to
see him bestowed in Marriage, before he dyed.

His Son desired him, Not to marry him against his mind, to a Child.

His Father told him, She had a great Estate, and it was like to be greater, by
reason all the Revenue was laid up to increase it: and besides, she was likely
to be Heir to her Uncle, who loved her as his own Child; and her Riches may
draw so many Suitors when she is a Woman, said he, that you may be refused.

He told his Father, Her Riches could not make him happy, if he could not
affect her.

Whereupon the Duke grew so angry, that he said, His Disobedience would disturb
his Death, leaving the World with an unsatisfied Mind.

Whereupon he seemed to consent, to please his Father. Then were they as firmly
contracted, as the Priest could make them, and two or three Witnesses to avow
it.

But after his Father was dead, he (being discontented) went to the Wars, and
in short time was called from thence, by reason his Elder Brother dyed, and so
the Dukedom and all the Estate came to him, being then the only Heir. But he
never came near the young Lady, nor so much as sent to her; for he was at that
time extremely in love with a great Lady, who was young and Handsome, being
Wife to a Grandee which was very rich, but was very old; whose Age made her
more facil to young Lovers, especially to this young Duke, who was favored by
Nature, Fortune, and Breeding: for he was very handsome, and of a ready Wit;
Active, Valiant, full of Generosity; Affable, wellfashion'd; and had he not
been fullied with some Debaucheries, he had been the compleatest Man in that
Age.

The old Gentleman perceiving his neglect toward his Niece, and hearing of his
Affection to that Lady, strove by all the Care and Industry he could, to give
her such Breeding as might win his Love: Not that he was negligent before she
was contracted to him; for from the time of four years old, she was taught all
that her Age was capable of; as, to Sing, and to Dance: for, he would have that
Artificial Motion become as Natural; and so to grow in Perfections, as she grew
in years. When she was Seven years of age, he chose her such Books to read, as
might make her Wise, not Amorous; for he never suffered her to read in
Romances, nor such leight Books: but Moral Philosophy was the first of her
Studies, to lay a Ground and Foundation of Virtue, and to teach her to moderate
her Passions, and to rule her Affections. The next study was History, to learn
her Experience by the second hand; reading the Good Fortunes and Misfortunes of
former times; the Errors that were committed, the Advantages that were lost,
the Humors and Dispositions of Men, the Laws and Customs of Nations; their
rise, and their fallings; of their Wars and Agreements, and the like.

The next study to that, was the best of Poets, to delight in their Fancies,
and in their Wit; and this she did not only read, but repeat what she had read
every Evening before she went to Bed. Besides, he taught her to understand what
she read, by explaining that which was hard and obscure. Thus she was always
busily employed; for she had little time allowed her for Childish Recreations.

Thus did he make her Breeding his only Business and Employment: for he lived
obscurely and privately, keeping but a little Family, and having little or no
Acquaintance, but lived a kind of a Monastical Life. But when the Niece was
about Thirteen years of age, he heard the Duke was married to the Lady with
which he was enamoured: for being by the death of her Husband left a rich
Widow, she claimed from him a Promise that he made her whilst her Husband was
living, That when he dyed (being an old man, and not likely to live long) to
marry her: which he was loath to do; for Men that love the Pleasures of the
world, care not to be encumbred and obstructed with a Wife; and so did not at
all reflect neither upon his Contract with the young Lady; for after his Father
dyed, he resolved not to take her to Wife; for she being so young, he thought
the Contract of no validity. But the VVidow seeming more coy than in her
Husband's time, seeking thereby to draw him to marry her; and, being overcome
by several ways of subtilty, he married her. VVhereupon the Uncle was mightily
troubled, and very melancholy; which his Niece perceived, and desired of him to
know the cause; which he told her.

Is this the only reason, said she?

Yes, said he: and does it not trouble you?

No, said she, unless I had been forsaken for some sinful Crime I had committed
against Heaven, or had infringed the Laws of Honor, or had broken the Rules of
Modesty, or some Misdemeanour against him, or some defect in Nature, then I
should have lamented, but not for the loss of the Man, but for the cause of the
loss; for then all the World might have justly defamed me with a dishonorable
Reproach: but now I can look the World in the face with as confident a Brow as
Innocence can arm. Besides, it is likely I might have been unhappy in a Man
that could not affect me. Wherefore, good Uncle, be not melancholy, but think
that Fortune has befriended me, or that Destiny had decreed it so to be: if
so, we are to thank the one, and it was impossible to avoid the other: and if
the Fates spin a long Thread of your Life, I shall never murmur for that loss,
but give thanks to the Gods for this Blessing.

O, but Child, said he, the Duke was the greatest and richest Match, since his
Brother dyed, in the Kingdom: and I would not have thy Virtue, Beauty, Youth,
Wealth, and Breeding, stoop to a low Fortune, when thou may be a Match fit
for the Emperor of the whole World, in a few years, if you grow up, and go on
as you have begun.

O Uncle, said she, let not your Natural Affection make you a Partial Judge, to
give the Sentence of more Desert in me, than I can own: if I have Virtue, it is
a Reward sufficient in it self: if I have Beauty, it is but one of Nature's
fading Favors; and those that loved me for it, may hate me when it is gone:
and if I be rich, as you say I am like to be: Who are happier than those that
are Mistresses of their own Fortunes? Having bred me well, I shall be happy in
what Condition soever I am in, being Content; for that is the End and Felicity
of the Mind.

But if thou had been in Love with him (said her Uncle), Where had been your
content then? For no Education can keep out that Passion.

I hope (said she) the Gods will be more merciful, than to suffer in me such
Passions as I cannot rule. What manner of Man he, said she? For I was too young
to remember him.

His Person (said he) is handsome enough.

That is his outside, said she; but, What is his inside? What is his Nature and
Disposition?

Debauched, said he, and loves his Luxuries.

Heavens have blessed me from him, said she.

Well, said her Uncle, since I am crossed in thy Marriage, I will strive to
make thee a Mirror of the Time: wherefore I will carry thee to the Metropolitan
City for thy better Education; for here thou art bred obscurely, and can
learn little, because thou hear and see little. You shall not appear to
the World this two or three years, but go always veiled, for the sight of thy
Face will divulge thee; neither will we have acquaintance or commerce with any;
but observe, hear, and see so much as we can, without being known.

Sir, said she, I shall be ruled by your Direction; for I know my small Bark
will swim the better and safer for your steerage: wherefore I shall not fear to
launch it into the deepest or most dangerous places of the World, which I
suppose are the great and populous Cities. So, making but small Preparations,
only what was for mere necessity, they took their Journey speedily, carrying no
other Servants but those that knew and used to obey their Master's will. And
when they came to the City, they took private Lodging; where, after they had
rested some few days, he carried her every day (once or twice a day) abroad,
after her Exercise of Dancing and Music was done. For, being careful she
should not only keep what she had learned, but learn what she knew not; after
her Lessons at home, he carried her to Lectures, according as he heard where
any were read, either of Natural Philosophy, (for this she had studied least:
but taking much delight therein, she had various Speculations thereof) or of
Physic and Chemistry, of Music, and of diverse others, on such days as they
were read. Also, he carried her to places of Judicature, to hear great Causes
decided; and to hear the several Pleadings, or rather Wranglings, of several
Lawyers; but never to Court, Masks, Plays, nor Balls: and she always went to
the public places aforementioned, masqu'd, muffl'd, or scarf'd: and her Uncle
would make means to get a private Corner to sit in, where they might hear well;
and when he came home, he would instruct her of all that was read, and tell her
where they differed from the old Authors; and then would give his Opinion, and
take hers, of their several Doctrines. And thus they continued for two years.

In the mean time, her Beauty increased with her Breeding, but was not made
known to any, as yet; till being come to the age of sixteen years, her Uncle
did resolve to present her to the World: for he knew, Youth was admired in it
self; but when Beauty and Virtue was joined to it, it was the greater Miracle.
So he began to examine her, for he was jealous she might be caught with vain
Gallants; although he had observed her Humor to be serious, and not apt to be
caught with every Toy; yet he knew Youth to be so uncertain, that there was no
trusting it to itself.

So he asked her, How she was taken with the Riches and Gallantry of the City;
for she could not choose but see Lords and Ladies riding in their brave gilt
Coaches, and themselves dressed in rich Apparel, and the young Gallants riding
on praunsing Horses upon embroidered Foot-Clothes, as she passed along the
Streets.

She answered, they pleased her Eyes for a time; and that Dressings were like
Bridal-Houses, garnished and hung by some Ingenious Wit; and their Beauties
like fine Flowers drawn by the Pencil of Nature; but being not gathered by
Acquaintance, said she, I know not whether they are vertuonsly sweet, or no; as
I pass by, I please my Eye, yet no other ways than as upon senseless Objects:
they entice me not to stay; and a short view satisfies the Appetite of the
Senses, unless the Rational and Understanding part should be absent; but to me
they seem but moving-Statues.

Well, said he, I hear there is a Masque to be at Court; and I am resolved you
shall go, if we can get in, to see it: for though I am old, and not fit to go,
since my Dancing-days are done; yet I must get into some Corner, to see how you
behave your self.

Pray, said she, What is a Masque?

He said, It is painted Scenes, to represent the Poets Heavens and Hells, their
Gods and Devils, the Clouds, Sun, Moon, and Stars: besides, they represent
Cities, Castles, Seas, Fishes, Rocks, Mountains, Beasts, Birds, and what
pleases the Poet, Painter, and Surveyor. Then there are Actors, and Speeches
spoke, and Music; and then Lords or Ladies come down in a Scene, as from the
Clouds; and after that, they begin to dance, and every one takes out one or
other, according as they fancy. If a Man takes out a Woman, if she cannot, or
will not dance, then she makes a Curt'sie to the King, or Queen, or chief
Grandee, if there be any one; if not, to the upper end of the Room; then turns
to the Man, and makes another to him: then he leaves, or leads her to them she
will take out; and she does the like to him, and then goes to her place again.
And the Men do the same, if they will not dance; and if they do dance, they do
just so when the Dance is ended; and all the chief of the Youths of the City
(or all those that have youthful Minds, and love Sights and fine Clothes) come
to see it, or to show themselves. Then the Room is made as light with Candles,
as if the Sun shined; and their glittering Bravery makes as glorious a Show as
his gilded Beams.

Sir, said she, if there be such an Assembly of Nobles, Beauty, and Bravery, I
shall appear so dull, that I shall be only fit to sit in the Corner with you.
Besides, I shall be so out of Countenance, that I shall not know how to behave
my self; for private Breeding looks mean and ridiculous, I suppose, in public
Assemblies of that nature, where none but the Glories of the Kingdom meet.

Ashamed, said he, for what? You have stolen no Body's Goods, nor Good Names;
nor have you committed Adultery; for on my Conscience you guess not what
Adultery is: Nor have you murdered any; nor have you betrayed any Trust, or
concealed a Treason; and then why should you be ashamed?

Sir, said she, although I have committed none of those horrid Sins; yet I may
commit Errors through my Ignorance, and so I may be taken notice of only for my
Follies.

Come, come, said he, all the Errors you may commit (although I hope you will
commit none) will be laid upon your Youth; but arm your self with Confidence,
for go you shall, and I will have you have some fine Clothes, and send for
Dressers to put you in the best fashion.

Sir, said she, I have observed how Ladies are dressed when I pass the Streets;
and, if you please to give me leave, I will dress my self according to my
judgment; and if you intend I shall go no more than once, let me not be
extraordinary brave, lest liking me at first, and seeing me again they should
condemn their former judgment, and I lose what was gained; so I shall be like
those that make a good Assault, and a bad Retreat. But, Sir, said she, if you
are pleased I shall show my self to the most glorious, let me be ordered so,
that I may gain more and more upon their good Opinions.

Well, said her Uncle, order your self as you please, for I am unskilled in
that matter: besides, thou need no Adornments; for Nature has adorned thee
with a splendid Beauty, Another thing, is (said he), we must remove our
Lodgings, for these are too mean to be known in; wherefore, my Steward shall go
take a large House, and furnish it nobly; and I will make you a fine Coach, and
take more Servants, and Women to wait upon you; for, since you have a good
Estate, you shall live and take pleasure. But I will have no Men-visitors but
what are brought by my self: wherefore, entertain on Masculine Acquaintance,
nor give them the least encouragement.

Sir, said she, my Duty shall observe all your Commands.

When her Uncle was gone, Lord (said she), What does my Uncle mean, to set me
out to show? sure he means to traffic for a Husband; but Heaven forbid those
intentions, for I have no mind to marry. My Uncle is wise, and kind, and
studies for my good; wherefore I submit, and could now chide my self for these
Questioning thoughts. Now (said she) I am to consider how I shall be dressed;
my Uncle says, I am handsome; I will now try whether others think so as well
as he; for I fear my Uncle is partial on my side: wherefore I will dress me all
in Black, and have no Colors about me; for if I be gay, I may be taken notice
of for my Clothes, and so be deceived, thinking it was for my Person; and I
would gladly know the truth, whether I am handsome, or no; for I have no skill
in Faces: so that I must judge of my self by the approbation of others Eyes, and
not by my own. But if I be (said she) thought handsome, What then? Why then
(answered she her self) I shall be cried up to be a Beauty. And what then? Then
I shall have all Eyes stare upon me. And what am I the better, unless their
Eyes could infuse into my Brain Wit and Understanding? Their Eyes cannot enrich
me with Knowledge, nor give me the Light of Truth; for I cannot see with their
Eyes, nor hear with their Ears, no more than the Meat which they do eat, can
nourish me; or rest when they do sleep. Besides, I neither desire to make, nor
catch Lovers; for I have an Enmity against Mankind, and hold them as my
Enemies; which if it be a Sin, Heaven forgive, that I should for one Man's
Neglect and Perjury, condemn all that Sex.

But I find I have a little Emulation, which breeds a desire to appear more
beautiful than the Duke's Wife, who is reported to be very handsome: for I
would not have the World say, He had an Advantage by the Change: Thus I do not
envy her, nor covet what she enjoys; for I wish her all Happiness: yet I would
not have her Happiness raised by my Misfortunes, for Charity begins at home;
and those that are Unjust or Cruel to themselves, will never be Merciful and
Just to others. But, O my Contemplations! whither do you run? I fear, not in an
Even Path: for, though Emulation is not Envy, yet the Bias leans to that side.

But, said she, to this Masque I must go; my Uncle has pressed me to the Wars
of Vanity, where Cupid is General, and leads up the Train: but I doubt I shall
hang down my Head through shamefacedness, like a young Soldier when he hears
the Bullets fly about his Ears: but, O Confidence, thou Goddess of good
Behavior, assist me! Well, said she, I will practice against the day, and be
in a ready posture. So, after two or three days, the Masque was; and she being
ready to go, her Uncle comes to her, and sees her dressed all in Black.

He said, Why have you put your self all in Black?

Sir, said she, I mourn like a young Widow, for I have lost my Husband.

By my troth, said he, and it becomes thee: for, you appear like the Sun when
he breaks through a dark Cloud. I would have you go veiled, says he; for I
would have you appear to sight only when you come into the Masquing-Room; and
after the Masque is done, all the Company will rise, as it were, together, and
join into a Crowd; then throw your Hood over your Face, and pass through them
as soon as you can, and as obscure; for I will not have you known, until we are
in a more Courtly Equipage. So away they went, only he and she, without any
Attendants; and when they came to enter through the Door of the Masquing-Room,
there was such a Crowd, and such a Noise, the Officers beating the People back,
the Women squeaking, and the Men cursing; the Officers threatening, and the
Enterers praying, that so great a Confusion made her afraid.

Lord, Uncle, said she, What a horrid Noise is here? Pray let us go back, and
let us not put our selves unto this unnecessary trouble.

O Child, said he, Camps and Courts are never silent; besides, where great
Persons are, there should be a Thundering-Noise, to strike their Inferiors with
a kind of Terror and Amazement: for Poets say, Fear and Wonder makes Gods.

Certainly, said she, there must be a great felicity in the sight of this
Masque, or else they would never take so much pains, and endure so great
affronts, to obtain it. But pray Uncle, said she, stay while they are all
passed in.

Why then, said he, we must stay until the Masque is done; for there will be
striving to get in, until such time as those within are coming out.

But when they came near the Door, her Uncle spoke to the Officer; Pray Sir,
said he, let this young Lady in to see the Masque.

There is no room, said he; there are more young Ladies already, than the
Viceroy and all his Courtiers can tell what to do with.

This is a dogged Fellow, said her Uncle: whereupon he told her, She must put
up her Scarf, and speak her self; for every one domineers in their Office,
though it does not last two hours; and are proud of their Authority, though it
be but to crack a Lowse: wherefore you must speak.

Pray Sir, said she to the Doorkeeper, if it be no injury to your Authority,
you will be so civil as to let us pass by.

By my troth, said he, thou have such a pleasing-Face, none can deny thee: but
now I look upon you better, you shall not go in.

Why Sir, said she?

Why, said he, you will make the Painter and the Poet lose their design; for
one expects to enter in at the Ears of the Assembly, the other at their Eyes;
and your Beauty will blind the one, and stop the other. Besides, said he, all
the Ladies will curse me.

Heaven forbid, said she, I should be the cause of Curses; and to prevent that,
I will return back again.

Nay, Lady, said he, I have not the power to let you go back; wherefore pray
pass.

Sir, said she, I must have this Gentleman along with me.

Even who you please, said he, I can deny you nothing: Angels must be obeyed.

When they came into the Masquing-Room, the House was full: Now (said her
Uncle) I leave you to shift for your self; and he went and crowded himself into
a Corner at the lower end.

When the Company was called to sit down, that the Masque might be represented,
every one was placed by their Friends, or else they placed themselves. But she,
being unaccustomed to those Meetings, knew not how to dispose of her self; and
observing there was much justling and thrusting one another to get places, she
considered she had not strength to scamble amongst them, and therefore she
stood still. When they were all set, it was as if a Curtain was drawn from
before her, and she appeared like a glorious Light; whereat ali were struck
with such a maze, that they forgot a great while the civility in offering her a
place. At last, all the Men (which at such times sit opposite to the Women, to
view them the better) rose up, striving every one to serve her. But the
Viceroy bid them all sit down again, and called for a Chair for her. But few
looked on the Masque, for looking on her; especially the Viceroy and Duke,
whose Eyes were rivetted to her Face.

When the Masquers were come down to dance, (who were all Women, the chief of
them being the Daughter of the Viceroy, who was a Widower, and she was his
only Child) they took out such Men as their Fancy pleased, and then they sat
down; after which, one of the chief of the Men chose out a Lady, and so began
to dance in single Couples; the Duke being the chief that did dance, chose out
this Beauty, not knowing who she was, nor she him: but when she danced, it was
so becoming! for, she had naturally a Majestical Presence, although her
Behavior was easy and free; and a severe Countenance, yet modest and
pleasing; and great skill in the Art, keeping her Measures just to the Notes of
Music; moving smoothly, evenly, easily; that it made her astonish all the
Company.

The Viceroy sent to enquire who she was, and what she was, and from whence
she came, and where she lived; but the Enquirer could learn nothing. But as
soon as the Masque was done, she was sought about for, and enquired after; but
she was gone, not to be heard of; whereupon many did think she was a Vision, or
some Angel, which appeared, and then vanished away: for, she had done as her
Uncle had commanded her, which was, To convey her self as soon away as she
could, covering her self close: So home they went, and her Uncle was very much
pleased to see the Sparks of her Beauty had set their Tinder-Hearts on fire.
But as she went home, she enquired of her Uncle of the Company: Pray Sir, said
she, was the Duke or Duchess there?

I cannot tell, said he; for my Eyes were wholly taken up in observing your
Behavior, that I never considered or took notice who was there.

Who was he that first took me out to dance, said she?

I cannot tell that neither, said he; for I only took the length of your
measures; and what through a fear you should be out, and dance wrong, and with
joy to see you dance well, I never considered whether the Man you danced with,
moved or no, nor what he was: but now I am so confident of you, that the next
Assembly I will look about, and inform you as much as I can: so home they went
But her Beauty had left such stings behind it, especially in the Breast of the
Viceroy and the Duke, that they could not rest. Neither was she free; for she
had received a Wound, but knew not of it; her Sleeps were unsound, for they
indeed were Slumbers rather than Sleeps; her Dreams were many and various: but
her Lovers, that could neither slumber nor sleep, began to search, and to make
an enquiry; but none could bring tidings where she dwelt, nor who she was. The
Viceroy cast about to attain the sight of her once again. So he made a great
Ball, and provided a great Banquet, to draw an Assembly of all young Ladies to
his Court; which her Uncle understanding, told his Niece she must prepare to
show her self once again; for I will (said he) the next day after this Ball,
remove to our new House.

Sir, said she, I must have another new Gown.

As many as thou will, said he, and as rich; I will also buy you Jewels.

No Sir, said she, pray spare that cost; for they are only to be worn at such
times of Assemblies, which I shall not visit often, for fear I tire the Courtly
Spectators, which delight in new Faces, as they do in new Scenes.

So her Uncle left her to order her self; who dressed her self this time all in
white Satin, embroidered all over with Silver.

When her Uncle saw her so dressed; Now by my troth, thou look like a Heaven
stuck with Stars; but thy Beauty takes off the gloss of thy Bravery: Now, said
he, you shall not go veiled; for thy Beauty shall make thy way: besides, we
will not go too soon, nor while they are in disorder; but when they are all
placed, you will be the more remarkable.

The Cavaliers (especially the Duke, and the Viceroy) began to be melancholy,
for fear she should not come: their Eyes were always placed at the Doors, like
Sentinels, to watch her entrance; and when she came to the Court, all the
Crowds of People, as in a fright, started back, as if they were surprised with
some Divine Object; making a Lane, in which she passed through; and the Keepers
of the Doors were struck mute, there was no resistance, all was open and free
to enter. But when she came in, into the presence of the Lords and Ladies, all
the Men rose up, and bowed themselves to her, as if they had given her Divine
Worship; only the Duke, who trembled so much (occasioned by the passion of
Love) that he could not stir; but the Viceroy went to her.

Lady, said he, will you give me leave to place you?

Your Highness, said she, will do me too much Honor.

So he called for a Chair, and placed her next himself; and when she was set;
she produced the same Effects as a Burning-glass; for the Beams of all Eyes
were drawn together as to one Point, placed in her Face; and by reflection she
sent a burning heat, and fired every Heart. But he could not keep her; for as
soon as they began to dance, she was taken out, not by the Duke, for he had not
recovered as yet Love's shaking-sit. The young Gallants chose her but too often
to dance; for every one took it for a Disgrace not to have the Honor to dance
with her; insomuch that few of the other Ladies danced at all, as being
Creatures not worthy to be regarded whilst she was there.

The Viceroy, fearing they should tire her (for she durst not deny them, by
reason it would be thought an affront, and rude, or want of Breeding) called
sooner for the Banquet than otherwise he would have done. Besides, he perceived
the rest of the Ladies began to be angry, expressing it by their Frowns: and
knowing nothing will so soon pacify that Bitter Humor in Ladies, as
Sweetmeats, he had them brought in. But when the Banquet came in, he presented
her the first with some of those Sweetmeats, still filling her Ears with
Complements, or rather chosen Words, for no Complement could pass on her
Beauty, it was so beyond all expressions.

At last he asked her where her Lodging was, and whether she would give him
leave to wait upon her?

She answered him, It would be a great grace and favor to receive a Visit from
him; but, said she, I am not at my own disposing: wherefore I can neither give,
nor reccive, without leave.

Pray, said he, may I know who is this happy Person you so humbly obey?

She said, It is my Uncle, with whom I live.

Where does he live, said he?

Truly, said she, I cannot tell the name of the Street.

Is he not here, Lady, said he?

Yes, said she, and pointed to him. And though he was loath, yet he was forced
to leave her so long, as to speak with her Uncle: but the whilst he was from
her, all the young Gallants, which were gathered round about her, presented her
with Sweetmeats, as Offerings to a Goddess; and she, making them Curt'sies,
returned them thanks for that she was not able to receive, as being too great a
Burden; for she was offered more Sweetmeats than one of the Viceroy's Guard
could carry.

But all the while the Duke stood as a Statue, his Eyes were fixed only upon
her; nor had he power to speak; and she perceiving where he was (for her Eyes
had secretly hunted him out), did as often look upon him, as her Modesty would
give her leave; and desired much to know who he was, but was ashamed to ask.

At last the Duke, being a little encouraged by her Eye, came to her.

Lady, said he, I am afraid to speak, lest I should seem rude by my harsh
Discourse: for there is not in the Alphabet, words gentle nor smooth enough for
your soft Ears, but what your Tongue does polish; yet I hope you will do as the
rest of the Gods and Goddesses, descend to Mortals, since they cannot reach to
you.

Sir, said she, but that I know it is the Courtly-Custom for Men to express
their Civilities to our Sex in the highest Words, otherwise I should take it as
an affront, and scorn to be called by those Names I understand not, and to be
likened to that which cannot be comprehended.

The Duke said, You cannot be comprehended; nor do your Lovers know what
Destiny you have decreed them.

The Viceroy came back with her Uncle, who desired to have his Niece home, the
Banquet being ended.

But when the Duke saw her Uncle, he then apprehending who she was, was so
struck, that what with guilt of Conscience, and with repenting-forrow, he was
ready to fall down dead.

Her Uncle, seeing him talking to her, spoke thus to the Duke:

Sir, said he, you may spare your Words, for you cannot justify your unworthy
Deeds.

Whereat she turned as pale as Death, her Spirits being gathered to guard the
Heart, being in distress, as overwhelmed with Passion. But the Bussle of the
Crowd helped to obscure her Change, as well as it did smuther her Unkle's
Words, which pierced none but the Duke's Ears, and hers.

The Viceroy taking her by the Hand, led her to the Coach, and all the
Gallants attended; whereat the Ladies, that were left behind in the Room, were
so angry, that they shoot forth Words like Bullets, with the Fire of Anger,
wounding every Man with Reproach; and at the Viceroy they sent out whole
Volleys, which battered his Reputation. But as for the young Lady, they did
appoint a place of purpose to dissect her, reading Satirical Lectures upon
every part, with the hard terms of Dispraises. So all being dispersed, the
Viceroy longed for that seasonable hour to visit her.

But the Duke wished there were neither Time nor Life: I cannot hope (said he)
for Mercy, my Fault is too great; nor can I live or dye in quiet, without it;
and the Miseries and Torments of despairing-Lovers, will be my Punishment.

The old Gentleman was so pleased to see his Niece admired, that as he went
home, he did nothing but sing after a humming way; and was so frolic, as if he
were returned to twenty years of age: and after he came home, he began to
examine his Niece:

How do you like the Duke, said he? For that was he that was speaking to you
when I came.

She answered, That she saw nothing to be disliked in his Person.

And how (said he) do you like the Viceroy?

As well (said she) as I can like a Thing that Time has worn out of fashion.

So, said he, I perceive you despise Age: but let me tell you, That what Beauty
and Favor Time takes from the Body, he gives double proportions of Knowledge
and Understanding to the Mind. You use to preach to me, The outside is not to
be regarded; and I hope you will not preach that Doctrine to others that you
will not follow your self.

Sir, said she, I shall be ruled by your Doctrine, and not by my own.

Then, said he, I take my Text out of Virtue, which is divided into four parts,
Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, and Justice. Prudence is to foresee the worst,
and provide the best we can for our selves, by shunning the dangerous ways, and
choosing the best. And my Application is, That you must shun the dangerous ways
of Beauty, and choose Riches and Honor, as the best for your self.

Fortitude is to arm our selves against Misfortunes, and to strengthen our
Forts with Patience, and to fight with Industry. My Application of this part
is, You must Barricado your Ears, and not suffer, by listening, the enticing
persuasions of Rhetoric to enter: for if it once get into the Brain, it will
easily make a passage to the Heart, or blow up the Tower of Reason, with the
Fire of Foolish Love.

Temperance is to moderate the Appetites, and qualify the unruly Passions. My
third Application is, you must marry a discreet and sober Man, a wise and
understanding Man, a rich and honorable Man, a grave and aged Man; and not be
led by your Appetites, to marry a vain fantastical Man, a proud conceited Man,
a wild debauched Man, a foolish Prodigal, a poor Shark, or a young unconstant
Man.

Fourthly and lastly, Is Justice, which is to be divided according to Right and
Truth, to reward and punish according to desert, to deal with others as we
would be dealt unto. And my last Application is, That you should take such
counsel, and follow such advice from your Friends, as you would honestly give
to a faithful Friend, as the best for him, without any ends to your self; and
so Goodnight, for you cannot choose but be very sleepy.

When he was gone, Lord! said she, this Doctrine, although it was full of
Morality, yet in this Melancholy Humor I am in, it sounds like a
Funeral-Sermon to me: I am sure it is a Preamble to some Design he has; pray
God it be not to marry me to the Viceroy: of all the Men I ever saw, I could
not affect him; I should more willingly wed Death than him; he is an Antipathy
to my Nature. Good Jupiter, said she, deliver me from him. So she went to Bed,
not to sleep, for she could take little rest; for her Thoughts worked as fast
as a Feverish Pulse.

But the Viceroy came the next day, and treated with her Uncle, desiring her
for his Wife.

Her Uncle told him, It would be a great Fortune for his Niece, but he could
not force her Affection: but, said he, you shall have all the assistance that
the Power and Authority of an Uncle, and the Persuasions as a Friend, can give,
to get her consent to marry you.

Pray, said the Viceroy, let me see her, and discourse with her.

He desired to excuse him, if he suffered him not to visit her: for, said he,
young Women that are disposed by their Friends, must wed without wooing. But he
was very loath to go without a sight of her: yet pacifying himself with the
hopes of having her to his Wife, he presented his Service to her, and took his
leave.

Then her Uncle sat in counsel with his Thoughts, how he should work her
Affection, and draw her consent to marry this Vice Roy; for he found she had no
stomach toward him. At last he thought it best to let her alone for a Week, or
such a time, that the smooth Faces of the young Gallants that she saw at the
Masque and Ball, might be worn out of her Mind. In the mean time she grew
melancholy, her Countenance was sad, her Spirits seemed dejected, her Color
faded; for she could eat no Meat, nor take any rest; neither could she study
nor practice her Exercises, Dancing and Music was laid by;and she could do
nothing, but walked from one end of the Room to the other; where her Eyes fixed
upon the Ground, she would sigh and weep, and knew not for what; but at last
spoke thus to her self: Surely an Evil Fate hangs over me; for I am so dull, as
if I were a piece of Earth, without sense; yet I am not sick, I do not find my
Body destempered: then surely it is in my Mind; and what should disturb that?
My Uncle loves me, and is as fond of me as ever he was: I live in Plenty; I
have as much Pleasure and Delight as my Mind can desire. O but the Viceroy
affrights it! there is the Cause: and yet methinks that cannot be, because I do
verily believe my Uncle will not force me to marry against my Affections:
besides, the remembrance of him seldom comes into my Mind; for my Mind is so
full of Thoughts of the Duke, that there is no other room left for any other:
my Fancy orders, places, and dresses him a thousand several ways. And thus have
I thousand several Figures of him in my Head; Heaven grant I be not in love; I
dare not ask any one that has been in love, what Humors that Passion has.
But why should I be in love with him? I have seen as handsome Men as he, that I
would not take the pains to look on twice: and yet when I call him better to
mind, he is the handsomest I ever saw. But what is a handsome Body, unless he
has a noble Soul? He is perjured and inconstant; alas, it was the fault of his
Father to force him to swear against his Affections Whilst she was reasoning
thus to her self, in came her Uncle, who told her, He had provided her a good
Husband.

Sir, said she, Are you weary of me? or, Am I become a Burden, you so desire
to part with me, in giving me to a Husband?

Nay, said he, I will never part; for I will end the few remainder of my days
with thee.

She said, You give your Power, Authority, and Commands, with my Obedience,
away: for, if my Husband and your Commands are contrary, I can obey but one,
which must be my Husband.

Good reason, said he; and for thy sake I will be commanded too: but, in the
mean time, I hope you will be ruled by me; and here is a great Match propounded
to me for you, the like I could not have hoped for, which is the Viceroy; he
is rich.

Yet, said she, he may be a Fool.

O he is Wise and Discreet, said he.

I have heard, said she, he is ill-natured and froward.

Her Uncle answered, He is in great Power and Authority.

He may be (said she) never the Honester for that.

He is (said he) in great Favor with the King.

Sir, said she, Princes and Monarchs do not always favor the most deserving;
nor do they always advance Men for Merit; but most commonly otherwise, the
unworthiest are advanced highest: besides, Bribery, Partiality, and Flattery,
rule Princes and States.

Her Uncle said, Let me advise you not to use Rhetoric against your self, and
overthrow a good Fortune, in refusing such a Husband as shall advance your
place above that false Duke's Duchess; and his Estate, with yours joined to it,
will be greater than his; with which you shall be served nobly, attended with
numbers of Servants, live plentifully, adorned richly, have all the Delights
and Pleasures your Soul can desire; and he, being in years, will dote on you:
besides, he having had experience of vain Debaucheries, is become staid and
sage.

Sir, said she, His Age will be the means to bar me of all these Braveries,
Pleasures, and Delights, you propound; for he, being old, and I young, will
become so jealous, that I shall be in restraint, like a Prisoner; nay, he will
be jealous of the Light, and of my own Thoughts, and will enclose me in
Darkness, and disturb the Peace of my Mind, with his Discontents: for
Jealousy, I have heard, is never at quiet with it self, nor to those that live
near it.

Come, come, said he, you talk you know not what: I perceive you would marry
some young, fan'tastical, prodigal Fellow, who will give you only Diseases, and
spend your Estate, and his own too, amongst his Whores, Bawds, and Sycophants:
whilst you sit mourning at home, he will be revelling abroad; and then disturb
your rest, coming home at unseasonable times: and if you must suffer, you had
better suffer by those that love, than those that care not for you: for,
Jealousy is only an overflow of Love. Wherefore be ruled, and let not all my
Pains, Care, and Cost, and the Comfort of my Labor, be lost through your
disobedience.

Sir, said she, I am bound in Gratitude and Duty to obey your Will, were it to
sacrifice my Life, or the Tranquillity of my Mind, on the Altar of your
Commands.

In the mean time, the Duke was so discontented and melancholy, that he
excluded himself from all Company, suffering neither his Duchess, nor any
Friend, to visit him, nor come near him; only one old Servant to wait upon him:
all former Delights, Pleasures, and Recreations, were hateful to him, even in
the remembrance, as if his Soul and Body had taken a Surfeit thereof. At last,
he resolved she should know what Torment he suffered for her sake; and since he
could not see, nor speak to her, he would send her a Letter. He called for Pen,
Ink, and Paper, and wrote after this manner:

Madam,
THE Wrath of the Gods is not only pacified, and they do not only pardon the
greatest sins that can be committed against them, taking to mercy the Contrite
Heart; but give Blessings for Repentant tears; and I hope you will not be more
severe than they: Let not your Justice be too rigid, lest you become cruel. I
confess, the sins committed against you, were great, and deserve great
punishment: but if all your Mercies did fly from me, yet if you did but know
the Torments I suffer, you could not choose but pity me; and my Sorrows are of
that weight, that they will press away my Life, unless your Favors take off
the heavy Burden. But bomsoever, pray let your Charity give me a Line or two
of your own writing, though they strangle me with Death; then will my Soul lie
quiet in the Grave, because I dyed by your hand; and when I am dead, let not
the worst of my Actions live in your Memory, but cast them into Oblivion, where
I wish they may for ever remain. The Gods protect you.


Sealing this Letter, he gave it to his Man to carry with all the secrefie he
could; bidding him to enquire which of her Women was most in her favor, and to
pray her to deliver it to her Mistress when she was all alone, and to tell the
Maid, He would be in the Street to wait her Command.

The Man found such access as he could wish; and the Letter was delivered to
the Lady; which when she had read, and found from whom it came, her Passions
were so mixed, that she knew not whether to joy or grieve; she joy'd to live in
his Thoughts, yet grieved to live without him; having no hopes to make him
lawfully hers, nor so much as to see or speak to him, her Uncle was so averse
against him; and the greatest grief was, to think she must be forced to become
another, when she had rather be his, though once forsaken by him, than to be
beloved by another with Constancy. Then musing with her self for some time,
considering whether it was fit to answer his Letter or no; If my Uncle should
come to know (said she) I write to him without his leave (which leave I am sure
he will never give), I shall utterly lose his Affection; and I had rather lose
my Life, than lose his Love: but if I do not write, I shall seem as if I were
of a malicious nature, which will beget an evil construction of my Disposition
in that Mind, in whose good Opinion I desire to live. If I believe, as Charity
and Love persuades me, that he speaks truth, I shall endanger his Life; and I
would be loath to murder him with nice scruples, when I am neither forbid by
Honor nor Modesty, Religion nor Laws, to save him. Well, I will adventure, and
ask my Uncle pardon when I have done. My Uncle is not of a Tyger's nature, he
is gentle, and a Pardon may be gotten: but Life, when once it is gone, will
return no more. Then taking Pen, Ink, and Paper, writ to him after this manner:

SIR,
I Am obedient, as being once tied to you, until you did cut me off, and throw
me away as a worthless piece, only fit to be trodden under the feet of
Disgrace; and certainly had perished with shame, and been left destitute, had
not my Uncle owned me. And though you are pleased to cast some thoughts back
upon me, yet it is difficult for me to believe, that you that did once scorn
me, should humbly come to sue to me: and I fear you do this for sport, angling
with the Bait of Deceit, to catch my innocent youth. But I am not the first of
my Sex, nor I fear shall not be the last, that has been, and will be deceived
by Men, who glory in their treacherous Victories; and if you beset me with
Stratagems, kill me outright, and lead me not a Prisoner, to set out your
Triumph. If you have Wars with your Conscience, or Fancy, or both,
interrupting the peace of your Mind, as your Letter expresses; I should
willingly return to your side, and be your Advocate: but the Fates have
destined it otherwise. And yet what unhappy Fortune soever befalls me, I wish
yours may be good. Heavens keep you.


Here, said she, give the Man that brought me the Letter, this.

The Man returning to his Lord so soon, made him believe he had not delivered
her his Letter.

Well, said the Duke, you have not delivered my Letter?

Yes, but I have, said he, and brought you an Answer.

Why, said the Duke, it is impossible, you staid so short a time!

Then, said he, I have wrought a Miracle, or you did lengthen my Journey in
your Conceits with the foul ways of Dissiculties.

I hope, said the Duke, thou art so blessed, as to make as prosperous a
Journey, as a quick Dispatch. Leave me a while, said he, till I call you. But
when he went to open the Letter, Time brings not more weakness, said he, than
Fear does to me; for my Hands shake as if I had the Palsy; and my Eyes are so
dim, that Spectacles will hardly enlarge my sight. But when he had read the
Letter, Joy gave him a new Life. Here, said he, she plainly tells me, She would
be mine: She says, She would return to my side, if the Fates had not destined
against it; by which she means, her Uncle is against me. Well if I can but once
get access, I shall be happy for ever. So after he had blessed himself in
reading the Letter many times over, I will (said he) strengthen my self to be
able to go abroad, for as yet I am but weak; and calling to hisMan, he bid him
get him something to eat. Did your Grace, said the Man, talk of Eating?

Yes, answered the Duke, for I am hungry.

By my troth, said the Man, I had thought your Hands, Mouth, Appetite, and
Stomach, had made a Bargain; the one, That it never would desire Meat nor
Drink: The other, That it would digest none: The third, That it would receive
none: and the fourth, That it would offer none: for on my Conscience you have
not eat the quantity of the Pestle of a Lark this week; and you are become so
weak, that if a Boy should wrestle with you, he would have the better.

You are deceived, said the Duke; I am so strong, and my Spirits so active,
that I would beat two or three such old Fellows as thou art; and to prove it, I
will beat thee with one hand.

No pray, said he, I will believe your Grace, and leave your active Grace for a
time to fetch you some Food.

When his Man came in with the Meat, he found the Duke a dancing.

I helieve, said he, you carry your Body very leight, having no heavy Burdens
of Meat in your Stomach.

I am so Airy, said the Duke, as I will caper over thy Head.

By my troth, said he, then I shall let fall your Meat out of my hands, for
fear of your heels.

Whist the Duke was at his Meat, he talked to his Man: Why have thou lived an
old Bachelor, and never married?

O Sir, said he, Wives are too chargeable.

Why, said the Duke, are you so poor?

No, Sir, answered he, Women are so vain; and do not only spend their Husbands
Estates, but make his Estate a Bawd to procure Love servants; so as his Wealth
serves only to buy him a pair of Horns.

Prithee let me persuade thee to marry, and I will direct thee to whom thou
shall go a wooing.

Troth Sir, I would venture, if there had been any Example to encourage me.

Why, what do you think of my Marriage? Do not I live happily?

Yes, said he, when your Duchess and you are asunder; but when you meet, it is
like Jupiter and Juno; you make such a thundering noise, as it frights your
Mortal Servants, thinking you will dissolve our World (your Family); consuming
your Hospitality by the Fire of your Wrath; rouling up the Clouds of smoaky
Vapor from Boil'd-Beef, as a Sheet of Parchment. When you were a Bachelor, we
lived in the Golden Age; but now it is the Iron Age, and Doomsday draws near.

I hope, says the Duke, thou art a Prophet; but when Doomsday is past, you
shall live in Paradise.

In my Conscience, Sir, said he, Fortune has mismatch'd you; for surely Nature
did never intend to join you as Man and Wife, you are of such different humors.

Well, said the Duke, for all your railing against Women, you shall go a
wooing, if not for your self, yet for me.

Sir, said he, I shall refuse no Office that your Grace shall employ me in.

Go your ways, said the Duke, to that Lady's Maid you gave the Letter to, and
present her with a Hundred pounds, and tell her, If she can help me to the
speech of her Lady, you will bring her a Hundred pounds more; and if you find
her nice, and that she says, She dares not; offer her Five hundred pounds, or
more; and so much, until you have out-bribed her cautious Fears.

Sir, said the Man, If you send her many of these presents, I will woo for my
self, as well as for your Grace: Wherefore, by your Grace's leave, I will
spruce up my self before I go, and trim my Beard, and wash my Face; and who
knows but I may speed? For I perceive it is a fortunate year for old Men to win
young Maids Affections; for they say, The Viceroy is to be married to the
sweetest young beautifullest Lady in the World; and he is very old, and (in my
Opinion) not so handsome as I am.

With that, the Duke turned pale.

Nay, said the Man, Your Grace has no cause to be troubled, for it is a Lady
you have refused: wherefore he has but your leavings.

With that the Duke up with his hand, and gave him a box on the Ear; Thou
lie, said he, he must not marry her.

Nay, said the Man, that is as your Grace can order the business: But your
Grace is a just performer of your Word; for you have tried your strength, and
have beaten me with one hand.

The Duke walked about the Room; and after he had pacified himself, at last
spoke to his Man: Well (said he), if you be prosperous, and can win the Maid to
direct me the way to speak to her Lady, I will cure the Blow with Crowns.

Sir, said he, I will turn you my other Cheek, to box that, if you please.

Go away, said the Duke, and return as soon as you can.

Sir, said he, I will return as soon as my business is done, or else I shall
lose both Pains and Gains: Good Fortune be my Guide, said he, and then I am
sure of the World's Favor: for they that are prosperous, shall never want
Friends. Although he were a Coward, a Knave, or a Fool; the World shall call,
nay, think him, Valiant, Honest, and Wife.

Sir, said he to the Duke, Pray flatter Fortune, and offer some Prayers and
Praises to her Deity in my behalf, though it be but for your own sake; for he
that has not a feeling interest in the business, can never pray with a strong
devotion for a good success; but their Prayers will be so sickly and weak, that
they can never travel up far, but fall back, as it were, in a swoun, without
sense.

In the mean time the Viceroy and the Uncle had drawn up Articles, and had
concluded of the Match, without the young Lady's consent: but the Uncle told
her afterward, She must prepare her self to be the Viceroy's Bride: and, said
he, if you consent not, never come near me more, for I will disclaim all the
interest of an Uncle, and become your Enemy.

His words were like so many Daggers, that were struck to her heart; for her
grief was too great for tears. But her Maid, who had ventured her Lady's Anger
for Gold, had conveyed the Duke into such a place, as to go into her Chamber
when he pleased. He seeing her stand, as it were, without life or sense, but as
a Statue carved in a Stone, went to her; which Object brought her out of a
muse, but struck her with such a maze, as she fixed her Eyes upon him as on some
Wonder; and standing both silent for a time, at last she spoke:

Sir, said she, this is not civilly done, to come without my leave, or my
Unkle's knowledge; nor honorably done, to come (like a Thief in the night) to
surprise me.

Madam (said he), Love, that is in danger to lose what he most adores, will
never consider Persons, Time, Place, nor Difficulty, but runs to strengthen and
secure his side, fights and assaults all that does oppose him: and I hear you
are to be married to the Viceroy; but if you do marry him, I will strive to
make you a Widow the first hour, cutting your Vows asunder; and your Husband,
instead of his Bride, shall embrace Death; and his Grave shall become his
Wedding-bed, or I will lie there my self, shrouded in my Winding Sheet, from
the hated-sight of seeing or knowing you to be another. But if Knowledge lives
in the Grave, think not your self secure when I am dead; for if Ghosts (as some
imagine) can rise from the Earth, mine shall visit you, and fright you from
delights; and never leave you, until you become a Subject in Death's Kingdom.
But if you are cruel, and take delight to have your Bridal-Health drunk in
Blood, marry him, where perchance we may be both deaddrunk with that warm red
Liquor.

Sir, answered she, It is an unheard of malice to me, or an impudent and
vainglorious pride in you, neither to own me your self, nor let another; but
would have me wander, that the World may take notice, and say, This is your
forsaken Maid; and I live to be scorned, and become friendless: for my Uncle
will never own me; which will prove as a Proclamation to proclaim me a Traitor
to Gratitude and Natural Affection, by committing the Treason of Disobedience.

The Duke said, You cannot want an Owner whilst I live; for I had, nor have,
more power to resign the Interest I have in you, than Kings to resign their
Crowns that come by Succession; for the Right lies in the Crown, not in the
Man:and though I have played the Tyrant, and deserved to be uncrowned; yet none
ought to take it off my Head, but Death: nor have I power to throw it from my
self; Death only must make way for a Successor.

Then said she, I must dye, that your Duchess may have Right, and a free
Possession.

Nay, said he, You, must claim your own just Interest, and place your self
where you should be.

What is that, said she? Go to Law for you?

Yes, said he.

If I be cast, said she, it will be a double shame.

You cannot plead, and be condemned, said he, if Justice hears your Cause: and
though most of the Actions of my Life have been irregular, yet they were not so
much corrupted or misruled by Nature, as for want of good Education, and
through the Ignorance of my Youth: But Time has made me see my Errors. And
though your Beauty is very excellent, and is able to enamour the dullest Sense;
yet it is not that alone disturbs the peace of my Mind, but the being conscious
of my Fault; which unless you pardon and restore me to your Favor, I shall
never be at rest.

I wish there were no greater obstacle (said she) than my Pardon, to your Rest:
for I should absolve you soon; and sleep should not be more gentle, and soft on
your Eyes, than Peace to your Mind, if I could give it; but my Unkle's dislike
may prove as fearful Dreams to disturb it: though indeed, if his Anger were
like Dreams, it would vanish away; but I doubt it is of too thick a Body for a
Vision.

The Duke said, We will both kneel to your Uncle, and plead at the Bar of
either Ear: I will confess my Fault at one Ear, whilst you ask Pardon for me at
the other: And though his Heart were Steel, your Words will dissolve it into
compassion, whilst my Tears mix the Ingredients.

My Uncle, said she, has agreed with the Viceroy; and his Word has sealed
the Bond, which he will never break.

The Duke said, I will make the Viceroy to break the Bargain himself, and then
your Uncle is set free: besides, you are mine, and not your Unkle's; unless you
will prove my Enemy to deny me; and I will plead for my Right.

Heaven direct you for the best, said she; it is late, Goodnight.

You will give me leave, said he, to kiss your Hand?

I cannot deny my Hand, said she, to him that has my Heart.

The next day the Duke went to the Viceroy, and desired to have a private
hearing, about a business that concerned him: And when he had him alone, he
shut the door, and drew his Sword; which when the Viceroy saw, he began to
call for help.

Call not, nor make a noise; if you do, Hell take me, said the Duke, I Will run
you through.

What mean you, said the Viceroy, to give me such a dreadful Visit?

I come, said the Duke, to ask you a Question, to forbid you an Act, and to
have you grant me my Demand.

The Viceroy said, The Question must be resolvable, the Act just, the Demand
possible.

They are so, said the Duke: My Question is, Whether you resolve to be married
to the Lady Delicia.

Yes, answered he.

The Act forbidden is, You must not marry her.

Why, said the Viceroy?

Because (said he) she is my Wife; and I have been married to her almost nine
years.

Why, said he, you cannot have two Wives?

No, said he, I will have but one, and that shall be she.

And what is your Demand?

My Demand is, That you will never marry her.

How, says the Viceroy? Put the case you should die, you will then give me
leave to marry her?

No, said the Duke; I love her too well, to leave a possibility of her marrying
you.

I will sooner die, than set my hand to this, said the Viceroy.

If you do not, you shall die a violent death, by Heaven, answered he; and more
than that, you shall set your hand never to complain against me to the King:
Will you do it? or will you not? for I am desperate said the Duke.

The Viceroy said, You strike the King in striking me.

No disputing, says he; set your hand presently, or I will kill you.

Do you say, You are desperate? Yes, answered he.

Then I must do a desperate Act, to set my hand to a Bond I mean to break.

Use your own discretion, to that.

Come, said he, I will set my hand before I read it; for whatsoever it is, it
must be done. After he set his hand, he read.

Here I do vow to Heaven, Never to woo the Lady Delicia, nor to take her to
Wife: Whereunto I set my hand.

To this Paper too, said the Duke.

Here I do vow to Heaven, Never to take Revenge, nor to complain of the Duke to
the King my Master: Whereunto I set my hand.

The Duke said, I take my leave; rest you in peace, Sir.

And the Devil torment you, said the Viceroy! O Fortune! I could curse thee,
with thy Companions, the Fates; not only in cutting off my Happiness, in the
enjoying of so rare a Beauty; but in stopping the passages to a sweet Revenge.
And though I were sure there were both Gods and Devils, yet I would break my
Vow; for the one are pacified by Prayers and Praises, and the other terrified
with Threats. But O! the Disgrace from our Fellow Creatures (Mankind), sets
closer to the Life, than the Skin to the Flesh: for, if the Skin be flayed off,
a new one will grow again, making the Body appear younger than before: But if a
Man be flayed once of his Reputation, he shall never regain it; and his Life
will be always bare and raw, and Malice and Envy will torment it, with the
Stings of ill Tongues; which to avoid, I must close with this Duke in a
seeming-friendship, and not defy him as an open Enemy, lest he should divulge
my base Acts done by my Cowardly Fear: but they are Fools that would not
venture their Reputations, to save their Life, rather than to dye an Honorable
Death, as they call it; which is, to dye to gain a good Opinion; and what shall
it avail them? A few Praises; it will be said, He was a Valiant Man: And what
does the Valiant get? Is he ever the better? No, he is tumbled into the Grave,
and his Body rots, and turns to dust; all the clear distinguishing Senses, the
bright flaming Appetites, are quenched out: but if they were not, there is no
Fuel in the Grave to feed their Fire; for Death is cold, and the Grave barren:
besides, there is no remembrance in the Grave, all is forgotten; they cannot
rejoice at their past gallant Actions, or remember their glorious Triumphs; but
the only happiness is, that as there is no Pleasure in the Grave, so there is
no Pain: but, to give up Life before Nature requires it, is to pay a Subsidy
before we are taxed; or to yield up our Liberties before we are Prisoners: and
who are wise that shall do so? No, let Fools run headlong to Death, I will
live as long as I can; and not only live, but live easily, freely, and as
pleasantly as I can. Wherefore, to avoid this Man's Mischiefs (which lies to
entrap my Life), I will agree with him; and I had rather lose the Pleasures of
one Woman, than all other Pleasures, with my Life: but from a secret Mischief
he shall not escape, if I can prevail: for I perceive this Duke, since he can
have but one Wife, intends to set up a Seraglio of young Wenches; and, by my
troth, he begins with a fair one; and whilst he courts his Mistress, I mean to
woo his Wife; for he has not sworn me from that: So that my Revenge shall be,
To make him a Cuckold.

So the Viceroy went to the Duchess; and after he had made his
Complemental-Addresses, they began to talk more seriously.

Madam, said he, How do you like the rare Beauty, which your Husband does
admire so much, that he is jealous of all that look on her, and would
extinguish the sight of all Men's Eyes, but his own; and challenges all that
make Love to her; and threatens Ruin and Murder to those that pretend to marry
her?

She answered, If he be so enamoured, I shall not wonder now that my Beauty is
thought dead, my Embraces cold, my Discourse dull, my Company troublesome to
him, since his Delight is abroad. But, said she, I am well served; I was weary
of my old Husband, and wished him dead, that I might marry a young one: I
abhorred his old Age, that was wise and experienced; despised his gray Hairs,
that should have been reverenced with respect. O what happiness I rejected,
that I might have enjoyed! For he admired my Beauty, praised my Wit, gave me my
Will, observed my Humor, sought me Pleasures, took care of my Health, desired
my Love, proud of my Favors; my Mirth was his Music, my Smiles were his
Heaven, my Frowns were his Hell: whenas this Man thinks me a Chain that
enslaves him; a Shipwreck, wherein all his Happiness is drowned; a Famine to
his Hopes, a Plague to his Desires, a Hell to his Designs, and a Devil to damn
his Fruitions.

Nay certainly, said he, that Woman is the happiest that marries an ancient
Man; for he adores her Virtue, more than her Beauty; and his Love continues,
though her Beauty be gone; he sets a price of Worth upon the Honor and
Reputation of his Wife; uses her civilly, and gives her Respect, as Gallant Men
ought to do to a tender Sex; which makes others to do the like: when a Young
Man thinks it a Gallantry, and a Manly Action, to use his Wife rudely, and
worse than his Lacquey; to command imperiously, to neglect despisingly, making
her the Drudg in his Family, flinging words of disgrace upon her; making her,
with scorn, the mirth and pastime, in his idle and foolish discourse amongst
his vain and base Companions; when an ancient Man makes his Wife the Queen of
his Family, his Mistress in his Courtship, his Goddess in his Discourse; giving
her Praise, applauding her Actions, magnifying her Nature; her Safety is the
God of his Courage; her Honor the World to his Ambition; her Pleasure his only
Industry; her Maintenance the Mark for his Prudence; her Delights are the
Compass by which he sails; her Love his Voyage; her Advice his Oracle: And
doing this, he does Honor to himself, by setting a considerable value upon
what is his own: when Youth regards not the temper of her Dispotion, slights
her Noble Nature, grows weary of her Person, condemns her Counsels, and is
afraid his Neighbor should think his Wife wiser than himself; which is the
Mark of a Fool, and a Disease most Men have (being married young). But a Man in
years is solid in his Counsels, sober in his Actions, graceful in his
Behavior, wise in his Discourse, temperate in his Life, and appears (as Nature
has made him) Masculine. Whereas a young Man is rash in his Counsels,
desperate in his Actions, wild in his Behavior, vain in his Discourses,
debauched in his Life; and appears not like his Sex, but Effeminate.

A fair Forehead, and a smooth Skin; a rosy Cheek, and a ruby Lip; wanton
Eyes, and a flattering Tongue, are unmanly; appearing like Women or Boys, let
them be never so Valiant; and as if they would sooner suffer the Whip, than
handle the Sword.

In an ancient Man, every Wrinkle is a Trench made by Time, wherein lies
Experience to secure the Life from Errors; and their Eyes are like active
Soldiers, who bow and sink down by the overheavy Burdens of their Spoils,
which are several Objects that the Sight carries into the Brain, and delivers
to the Understanding, as Trophies, to hang up in the Magazine of the Memory.
His white Hairs are the Flage of Peace, that Time hangs out on the Walls of
Wisdom, that Advice and Counsel may come to and fro safely. Nay, the very
Infirmities of Age, seem manly; his seeble Legs look as if they had been
over-tired with long Marches, in seeking out his Foes; and his Palsey-Hands, or
Head, the one seems as if they had been often used in beating of their Enemies;
and the other in watching, as if they knew not what Rest meant.

Sir, said the Duchess, you commend Aged Husbands, and dispraise young ones,
with such Rhetoric, torick, as I wish the one, and hate the other; and in
pursuit of my Hate, I will cross my Husband's Amors as much as I can.

In the mean time, the Duke was gone to the old Gentleman, the young Lady's
Uncle; who when he saw him enter, he started, as if he had seen an Evil he
desired to shun.

Sir, said he, What unlucky occasion brought you into my House?

First, Repentance (answered the Duke), and then Love; and lastly, my Respect,
which I owe as a Duty. My Repentance begs a Forgiveness: My Love offers you my
Advice and good Counsel: My Respect forewarns you of Dangers and Troubles, that
may come by the Marriage of your Niece to the Viceroy.

Why, what danger (said he) can come in marrying my Niece to a Wise,
Honorable, Rich, and Powerful Man, and a Man that loves and admires her, that
honors and respects me?

But, said the Duke, put the case he be a Covetous, Jealous, Froward,
Ill-natured, and Base Cowardly Man, Shall she be happy with him?

But he is not so, said he.

But, answered the Duke, if I can prove him so, Will you marry her to him?

Pray, said he, spare your Proofs of him, since you cannot prove your self an
Honest Man.

Sir, said the Duke, Love makes me endure a Reproach patiently, when it
concerns the Beloved: but though it endures a Reproach, it cannot endure a
Rival.

Why, said the old Gentleman, I hope you do not challenge an Interest in my
Niece.

Yes, said the Duke, but I do; and will maintain that Interest with the power
of my Life, and never will quit it, till Death; and if my Ghost could fight for
her, it should.

Heaven bless my Niece, said the old Gentleman! What is your Design against
her? Is it not enough to fling a Disgrace of Neglect on her, but you must ruin
all her good Fortunes? Is your Malice so inveterate against my Family, that you
strive to pull it up by the Roots, to cast it into the Ditch of Oblivion, or to
fling it on the Dunghill of Scorn?

The Duke said, My Design is, To make her happy, if I can; and will oppose all
those that hinder her Felicity, disturbing the content and peace of her Mind:
for, she cannot love this Man; besides, he disclaims her, and vows never to
marry her.

Sir, said the Gentleman, I desire you to depart from my House, for you are a
Plague to me, and bring an evil Infection.

Sir, said the Duke, I will not go out of your House, nor depart from you,
until you have granted my Request.

Why, said the Gentleman, you will not threaten me.

No, said the Duke, I do petition you.

The Gentleman said, If you have any Quarrel to me, I shall answer it with my
Sword in my hand: for, though I have lost some strength with my years, yet I
have not lost my Courage; and when my Limbs can fight no longer, the heat of my
Spirits shall consume you: besides, an Honorable Death I far prefer before a
baffled Life.

Sir, said he, I come not to move your Anger, but your Pity; the Sorrows I am
in (for the Injuries I have done you) being extreme great; and if you will be
pleased to take me into your Favor, and assist me, by giving my Wife (your
Niece) leave to claim the Laws of Marriage and Right to me, all my Life shall
be studious to return Gratitude, Duty, and Service, to you.

Yes, answered he, to divulge her Disgrace, declaring your neglect in an open
Court, and to make my self a Knave to break my Promise.

Sir, said the Duke, your Disgrace by me, is not so much as you apprehend: but
it will be a great Disgrace, when it is known the Viceroy refuses her, as I
can show you his hand to it; and if he deserts your Niece, you are absolved of
your Promise made to him; and to let you know this is a Truth, here is his Hand.

The whilst the old Gentleman was reading the Papers, the Viceroy comes in.

O Sir, said he, you are timely come! Is this your Hand, says he?

Yes, answered the Viceroy.

And do you think it is honorably done, said the Gentleman?

Why, said the Viceroy, Would you have me marry another Man's Wife?

Well, said the old Gentleman, when your Vice-Roy-ship is out (as it is
almost), I will give you my Answer; till then, fare you well.

But the Duke went to the young Lady, and told her the progress he had had with
her Uncle, and his Anger to the Viceroy.

After the old Gentleman's Passion was abated toward the Duke, by his humble
submission, and the Passion enflamed toward the Viceroy, he hearkened to the
Law Suit, being most persuaded by his Neece's Affection, which he perceived was
unalterably placed upon the Duke. And at last, advising all three together,
they thought it sit (since the Parties must plead their own Cause) to conceal
their Agreements, and to cover it by the Duke's seeming dissent, lest he should
be convicted as a Breaker of the known Laws, and so be liable to punishment,
either by the hazard of his Life, or the price of a great Fine.

Being thus agreed of all sides, the Lawsuit was declared; which was a
business of discourse to all the Kingdom; and the place of Judicature, a
meeting for all curious, inquisitive, and idle People.

When the day of hearing was come, there was a Bar set out, where the Duke and
the two Ladies stood; and after all the Judges were set, the young Lady thus
spoke:

Grave Fathers, and most Equal Judges,

I Come here to plead for Right, undeck'd with Eloquence; but Truth needs no
Rhetoric; so that my Cause will justify it self: But if my Cause were foul,
it were not pencil'd words could make it seem so fair, as to delude your
understanding Eyes.

Besides, your Justice is so wise, as to fortisie her Forts with Fortitude, to
fill her Magazine with Temperance, to victual it with Patience, to set
Sentinels of Prudence, that Falsehood might not surprise it, nor Bribery corrupt
it, nor Fear starve it, nor Pity undermine it, nor Partiality blow it up; so
that all all right Causes, here, are safe, and secured from their Enemies,
Injury and Wrong. Wherefore, most Reverend Fathers, if you will but hear my
Cause, you cannot but grant my Suit.

Whereupon the Judges bid her declare her Cause.

I was married to this Prince, it is true; I was but young in years when I did
knit that Wedlock-knot; and though a Child, yet since my Vows were holy, which
I made by Virtue and Religion, I am bound to seal that Sacred Bond with
Constancy, now I am come to years of knowing good from evil.

I am not only bound, most Pious Judges, to keep my Vow, in being chastely his
as long as he shall live but to require him by the Law, as a Right of
laberitance belonging to me, and only me, so long as I shall live, without a
Sharer or Co-partner: so that this Lady, who lays a Claim, and challenges him
as being hers, can have no right to him, and therefore no Law can plead for
her: for, should you cast aside your Canon Law (most Pious Judges), and judge it
by the Common Law, my Suit must needs be granted, if Justice deals rightly, and
gives to Truth her own: for, should an Heir, young, before he comes to years,
run on the Lenders score; though the Lender had no Law to plead against Nonage;
yet if his nature be so just to seal the Bonds he made in Nonage, when he
comes to full years, he makes his former Act good, and fixes the Law to a just
Grant, giving no room for Cozenage to play a part, nor Falsehood to appear. The
like is my Cause, most Grave Fathers; for my Friends chose me a Husband, made a
Bond of Matrimony, sealed it with the Ceremony of the Church; only they wanted
my years of Consent, which I give now freely and heartily.

The Judges asked, What says the Duke? Then the Duke thus spoke:

I Confess, I was contracted to this Lady by all the Sacred and most binding
Ceremonies of the Church, but not with a free consent of Mind: for, being
forced by the Duty to my Father, who did not only command, but threatened me
with his Curse, he being then upon his Deathbed, and I being afraid of a
dying-Father's Curses, yielded to those Actions which my Affections and
free will renounced: and after my Father was dead, placing my Affections upon
another Lady, married her, thinking my self not liable to the former Contract,
by reason the Lady was but Six years of age, whose Nonage I thought was a
warrantable Cancel from the Engagement.

Most Upright Judges,

MY Nonage is not a sufficient Reason to set him free, he being then of full
Age; nor can his fear of offending his Parents, or his loving-Duty toward
them, be a Casting-Plea against me: his Duty will not discharge his Perjury;
nor his Fear could be no warrant to do a Wrong: And if a Fool by Promise binds
his Life to Inconveniences, the Laws that Wise Men have made, must force him to
keep it. And if a Knave, by private and self ends, does make a Promise, Just
Laws must make him keep it.

If a Coward makes a Promise through distracted Fear, Laws (that carry more
Terrors, than the broken Promise, Profit) will make him keep it.

A Wise, Just, Generous Spirit, will make no Promise but what he can, and
durst, and will perform.

But say, a Promise should pass through an ignorant Zeal, and seeming Good; yet
a right Honorable and Noble Mind will stick so fast to its Engagements, that
nothing shall hew them asunder: for, a Promise must neither be broken upon
Suspicion, nor false Construction, nor upon enticing Persuasions, nor
threatening Ruins; but it must be maintained with Life, and kept by Death,
unless the Promise carry more malignity in the keeping, than the breaking of it.

I say not this to condemn the Duke, though I cannot applaud his second Action
concerning Marriage: I know he is too Noble to cancel that Bond his Conscience
sealed before high Heaven, where Angels stood as Witnesses: Nor can he make
another Contract, until he is free from me: so that his Vows to his Lady were
rather Complemental, and Love's Feignings, than really true, or so Authentical
as to last. He built Affections on a wrong Foundation, or rather Castles in the
Air, as Lovers use to do, which vanish soon away: for, where Right is not,
Truth cannot be. Wherefore, she can claim no lawful Marriage, unless he were a
Freeman, not bound before; and he cannot be free, unless he has my Consent,
which I will never give.

Then the other Lady spoke.

Noble Judges,

THIS Crafty, Flattering, Dissembling Child, lays a Claim to my Husband, who no
way deserves him, she being of a low Birth, and of too mean a Breeding to be
his Wife: Neither has she any right to him in the Law, she being too young to
make a free Choice, and to give a free Consent. Besides, he does disavow the
Act, by confessing the disagreeing thereto in his Mind; and if she was to give
a Lawful Consent, and his Consent was seeming, not real, as being forced, it
could not be a firm Contract. Wherefore, I beseech you, cast her Suit from the
Bar, since it is of no validity.

Just Judges, answered she:

WHAT though he secretly disliked of that Act be made? Yet Human Justice
sentences not the Thoughts, but Acts: Wherefore those Words that plead his
Thoughts, ought to be waved as useless, and from the Bar of Justice cast aside.

And now, most Upright Judges, I must entreat your Favor and your Leave to
answer this Lady, whose Passions have flung Disgraces on me; which I, without
the breach of Incivility, may throw them off with scorn, if you allow me so to
do.

The Judges said, We shall not countenance any Disgrace, unless we knew it were
a punishment for Crimes: Wherefore speak freely.

Well then, to answer this Lady, who says, That I am meanly born: It Is true, I
came not from Nobility, but I can draw a Line of Pedigree Five hundred years in
length, from the Root of Merit, from whence Gentility does spring. This Honor
cannot be degraded by the Displeasure of Princes; it holds not in Fee-simple
from the Crown, for Time is the Patron of Gentility, and the older it grows,
the more beautiful it appears; and having such a Father and Mother, as Merit
and Time, Gentry is a fit and equal Match for any, were they the Rulers of the
whole World.

And whereas she says, Most Patient Judges, I am a false Dissembling Child.

I answer, As to my Childhood, it is true, I am young, and unexperienced; a
Child in Understanding, as in years: but to be young, I hope, is no Crime; but
if it be, 'twas made by Nature, not by me. And for Dissembling, I have not had
time enough to practice much Decev my Youth will witness for me. It is an Art,
not an Inbred Nature, and must be studied with Pains, and watched with
Observation, before any can be Masters thereof. And I hope this Assembly is so
just, as not to impute my Innocent Simplicity to a Subtle, Crafty, or a
Deceiving Glass, to show the Mind's false Face, making that fair, which in it
self is foul.

And whereas she says, I have been meanly bred, it is true, Honored Judges, I
have been humbly bred, taught to obey Superiors, and to reverence old Age; to
receive Reproofs with thanks, to listen to wise Instructions, to learn honest
Principles, to Huswife Time, making use of every minute; to be thrifty of my
Words, to be careful of my Actions, to be modest in my Behavior, to be chaste
in my Thoughts, to be pious in my Devotions, to be charitable to the
Distressed, to be courteous to Inferiors, and to be civil to Strangers: for the
truth is, I was not bred with splendid Vanities, nor learnt the Pomp and Pride
of Courts; I am ignorant of their Factions, Envies, and Back-bitings; I know
not the sound of their stattering Tongues; I am unacquainted with their smiling
Faces; I have not Wit to perceive their false Hearts; my Judgment is too young,
and too weak, to fathom their deep and dangerous Designs.

Neither have I lived so long in populous Cities, as to share of their
Luxuriousness: I never have frequented their private nor public Meetings; nor
turned the Day into Night by Disorders: I can play at none of their Games; nor
can I tread their Measures. But I was bred a private Countrey-Life, where the
Crowing of the Cocks served as Waights of the Town; and the Bleating of the
Sheep, and Lowing of the Cows, are the Minstrels we dance after; and the
Singing of the Birds are the Harmonious Notes by which we set our Innocent
Thoughts, playing upon the Heart Strings of Content, where Nature there
presents us a Masque with various Scenes of the several Seasons of the Year.

But, neither low Birth, nor mean Breeding, nor bad Qualities; nay, were I as
Wicked as I am Young, yet it will not take away the Truth of my Cause, nor the
Justness of my Plea: Wherefore I desire you to give my Suit a patient Trial,
and not to cast me from the Bar, as she desires; for I hope you will not cast
out my Suit by unjust Partiality; nor mistake the right Measure, and so cut the
Truth of my Cause too short: but I beseech you to give it length by your
serious Considerations, and make it fit by your just Favor: for, though Truth
it self goes naked, yet her Servants must be clothed with Right, and dressed
by Propriety, or they will dye with the Cold of Usurpation, and then be flung
into the Ditch of Sorrow, there to be eaten up with the Ravens of Scorn, having
no Burial of Respect, nor Tomb of Tranquillity, nor Pyramids of Felicity, which
your Justice may raise as high as Heaven, when your Injustice may cast them as
low as Hell. Thus you become, to Truth, Gods or Devils.

Madam, said the Judges to the young Lady, The Justice of your Cause judges it
self: for, the severest Judge, or strictest Rules in Law, can admit of no Debate.

And truly, Madam, it is happy for us that sit upon the Bench, that your Cause
is so clear and good; otherwise your Beauty and your Wit might have proved
Bribes to our Vote: But yet there will be a Fine on the Duke, for the breach of
the Laws.

With that the Duke spoke:

Most Careful, Learned, and Just Judges, and Fathers of the Commonwealth:

I Confess my Fault, and yield my self a Prisoner to Justice, which may either
use Punishment or Mercy: But, had I known the Laws of Custom, Religion, or
Honor, then (as well as I do now) I had not run so fast, nor plunged my self
so deep in the foul ways of Error: But wild Youth, surrounded with Ease, and
fed with Plenty; born up with Freedom, and led by Self will, sought Pleasure
more than Virtue; and Experience has learned me stricter Rules, and nobler
Principles; insomuch as the reflection of my former Actions, clouds all my
future Happiness, wounds my Conscience, and torments my Life. But I shall
submit to what your wise Judgments shall think fit.

My Lord, answered the Judges, Your Grace being a great Peer of the Realm, we
are not to condemn you to any Fine, it must be the King: only we judge the Lady
to be your lawful Wife, and forbid you the Company of the other.

The Duke said, I shall willingly submit.

With that the young Lady spoke: Heaven (said she) send you just Rewards for
your upright Actions: But I desire this Assembly to excuse the Faults of the
Duke in this, since he was forced, by Tyrant Love, to run in uncouth ways; and
do not wound him with sharp Censures: For, Where is he, or she, though never so
cold,
But sometimes Love does take, and fast in Fetters hold?


The Viceroy being by, said to the other Lady, Madam, Since the Law has given
away your Husband, I will supply his Place, if you think me so worthy, with
whom perchance you may be more happy than you were with him.

I accept of your Love, said she, and make no question but Fortune has
favored me in the Change.

With that the Court rose, and much Rejoicings there were of all sides.

The Ambitious TRAITOR.
THERE was a Nobleman in Fairy-Land, which was in great favor with King
Oberon; but the Favor of the King made him so proud and haughty, that he
sought to usurp the Crown to himself. His Design was, To kill the King, and
then to marry Queen Mabb; and to bring his Evil Designs to pass, he feasted the
Nobility, devised sports for the Commonalty, presented the old Ladies with
Gifts, flattered the young ones, in praising their Beauties; made Balls, Plays,
Masks, to entertain them; bribed the Courtiers, corrupted the Soldiers with
Promises of Donatives; fired the Youth with Thoughts of Chivalry, and
expectations of Honors; and was industrious to present the Petitions of
Suitors, and to follow the Causes of the Distressed, and to plead for his
Clients; and all to get a popular esteem and love. But there is none so wise
and crafty, that can keep out Envy from searching into their ways with the Eyes
of Spite. His Popular Applause begot in him private Enemies, which advertised
the King to look to himself, and to cut off his growing-Power; not out of
Loyalty to the King, but out of hate to the Favorite: and Kings being jealous,
are apt to suspect the worst; which made him observe with a stricter Eye,
setting Spies and Watches on all his Actions, until he caught him in the Trap
of his Rebellion: for, speaking some dangerous and seditious words, he was cast
into Prison until further trial. A day being appointed for his hearing, a
Council was called of all the Peers of the Land, which were his Judges; and the
Witnesses being brought, he was cast, and condemned to dye. Great Preparations
were made against the Day of Execution, Scaffolds were set up, Windows were
pulled down, that People might behold him: Guards were set at each corner of
the Streets, and the multitude did so throng, that when this Nobleman passed
along, every Eye strove to out-stare each other; and every Neck stretched to
out reach his fore-standers head; and every Ear listened to hear if he did
speak; and every Tongue moved with Enquiries; every Mind was filled with
expectation of the Event; and every one as busy as a Judge, to condemn him, or
a Hang man to execute him; and those that professed most Friendship to him in his
Prosperity, were his greatest Enemies, upbraiding him with the Name of Traitor,
though truly, yet not seemly, from former professed Friends: But he (with a slow
pace, and a sad countenance, habited in Black) went on, until he came to the
Scaffold: Then turning his Face to the People, he thus spoke: I do not wonder
to see so great a Multitude gathered together, to view the Death of a single
Person; although Death is common to every one, and that there is as many
several ways to dye, as Eyes to look on: yet Beasts do not gather in Troops to
see the Execution of their Kind. But I wonder Men should change their Opinion
with the change of Fortune, as if they did applaud her Inconstancy, hating what
she seemed to hate, and loving what she seemed to love; calling them Fools
which she casts down, and those Wise which she raises up, although it be
without Desert: for, had I been prosperous in my evil Intention, I should have
had as many Acclamations, as now I have Accusations; had been called Wise,
Valiant, Generous, Just, and all the Names that Praise could honor me with:
and not only they would have called me so, but have thought me to have been so.
But, O odd Man! how art thou made! To have so much Ambition as to desire the
Power of Gods, and yet to be more foolish than Beasts, and as illnatur'd as
Devils of Hell! For, Beasts follow the Laws of Nature, but Men follow their own
Laws, which make them more miserable than Nature intended them to be. Beasts do
not destroy themselves; nor make they Laws to entangle themselves in the Nets
of long strong Suits; but follow that which pleases them most. Unless Men vex
them, they weary not themselves in unprofitable Labors, nor vex their Brain
with vain Phantasms; they have no superstitious Fear, nor vain Curiosity, to
seek after that which (being found) they are never the better: nor strange
Opinions, to carry them from the Truth; nor Rhetoric, to persuade them out of
the right way. And when Beasts prey upon one anothe, it is out of mere Hunger;
not to make Spoil, Man, who is so disorderly, as that he strives to destroy
Nature her self, and (if he could) pull Jupiter out of Heaven: But when we come
near to be destroyed by Death, then we have a seeming-Repentance, and flatter
the Gods to have pity on us. And though my Nature is so bad (as being of
Mankind) that I may dissemble so nicely, as not to perceive it in my self; yet
I hope the Gods will have as much mercy on me, as I think I am truly sorrowful
for my Fault: and then kneeling, thus said:

O Jupiter! how should weak and frail Men agree amongst themselves, when there
have been Quarrels in thy Heavenly Mansions, envying thy glory, and being
ambitious of thy Power, conspiring against thee? And since Ambition has been
in Heaven, pardon it on Earth: for it was not against thee, my Maker, but
against my Fellow Creature.

O Jupiter! check thy Vicegerent Nature for making me of such an aspiring
quality, coveting to be the chiefest on Earth: for she might have made me
Humble and Lowly, and not of so proud and haughty a Disposition; for it was in
her power to have made me in what temper she had pleased. I do not expostulate
this out of a Murmuring-discontent, but to draw down thy pity for my unhappy
Nature, which (in a manner) enforced me thereunto. But I submit, as thou have
commanded me, and am content to obey thy will and either to undergo Pulto's
Punishments, or to be annihilated: But if thy Judgment may be diverted, send me
to the blessed Elyzium.



Then turning to the Block, he was executed.

No sooner was his Head off, but all his Acquaintants, Friends, and Kindred,
forgot him, as the living usually do any the dye. And although most rejoice at
the fall of those that are most Eminent (as if the chiefest Ingredient of Man
were Malice and Spite, which produces Cruelty); yet when the Multitude saw
all was done, and that their greedy Appetite was satisfied with Blood, then a
lazy and sleepy Pity seized on them; and with yawning wishes, would have had
him alive again.

But King Oberon and Queen Mabb, after the Execution, having given Order for
his Quarters to be set up on the Gates of the City, rid to their Palaces in
State, hoping they should have no more such Traitorous Subjects disturb their
Peace.

Assaulted and Pursued Chastity. PREAMBLE.
IN this following Tale or Discourse, my endeavor was, To show young Women the
danger of Traveling without their Parents, Husbands, or particular Friends, to
guard them: for, though Virtue is a good Guard, yet it does not always protect
their Persons, without other Assistance: for, though Virtue guards, yet Youth
and Beauty betrays; and the Treachery of the one, is more than the Safety of
the other; for Young, Beautiful, and Virtuous Women, if they wander alone, find
but very often rude entertainment from the Masculine Sex, witness Jacob's
Daughter Dinah, which Shechem forced: and others, whose Forcement is mentioned
in holy Scripture, and in Histories of less Authority ( sans nombre:) which
shows, that Heaven does not always protect the Persons of Virtuous Souls from
rude Violences; neither does it always leave Virtue destitute, but sometimes
sends a Human Help; yet so, as never but where Necessity was the Cause of their
Dangers, and not Ignorance, Indiscretion, or Curiosity: for, Heaven never
helps, but those that could not avoid the Danger; nay, if they do avoid the
Danger, they seldom avoid a Scandal: for, the World in many Cause judges
according to what may be, and not according to what is: they judge not according
to Truth, but Show; nor by the Heart, but by the Countenance; which is the
cause that many a Chaste Woman has a spotted Reputation. But to conclude, I
say, Those are in particular favored by Heaven, that are protected from
Violence and Scandal, in a Wandring-life, or a Travelling-condition.

IN the Kingdom of Riches, after a long and sleepy Peace, overgrown with
Plenty and Ease, Luxury broke out into Factious Sores; and Feverish Ambition,
into a Plaguey Rebellion, killing numbers with the Sword of Unjust War; which
made many fly from that Pestilent Destruction, into other Countries; and those
that stayed, sent their Daughters and Wives from the Fury of the Inhuman
Multitude; choosing to venture their Lives with the hazzards of Travels, rather
than their Honors and Chastities, by staying at home amongst rough and rude
Soldiers. But in ten years Wars, the Ignorant-Vulgar, being often (in the
Schools of Experience) whipped with Misery, had learnt the Lesson of Obedience;
and Peace, that laid all that time in a Swound, was revived to life; and Love,
the Vital Spirits thereof, being restored to their orderly Motions; and Zeal,
the Fire of the Public Heart, flaming anew, did concoct the undigested
Multitudes to a pure good Government; and all those that Fear or Care had
banished, were invited and called home, by their natural Affections to their
Country. A Lady, amongst the rest, enricht by Nature, with Virtue, Wit, and
Beauty; in her returning-voyage, felt the spite of Fortune, being cast by a
storm, from the place she steered to, upon the Kingdom of Sensuality, a Place
and People strange unto her: No sooner was she landed, but Treachery beset her;
and those she entrusted, left her: Her years, being but few, had not gathered
Experience enough to give her the best direction. Thus, knowing not how to
dispose of her self, wanting means for support, and calling her young and
tender Thoughts to counsel; at last they did agree, She should seek a service:
And going to the chief City, which was not far from the Haven-Town, with a
Skipper, whom she had entreated to go along with her; he left her in a poor and
mean house, to Chance, Time, and Fortune; where her Hostess, seeing her
handsome, was tempted (by her Poverty and Covetousness) to consider her own
Profit, more than her Guest's Safety, selling her to a Bawd which used to
traffic to the Land of Youth, for the Riches of Beauty. This old Bawd, having
commerce with most Nations, could speak many Languages, and this Lady's amongst
the rest; and what with her Languages, and her flattering Words, she enticed
this young Lady to live with her; and this old Bawd (her supposed virtuous
Mistress) used her kindly, fed her daintily, clothed her finely; insomuch as
she began to think she was become the Darling of Fortune; but yet she keeps her
closely from the view of any, until her best Customers came to the Town, who
were at that time in the Country.

In the mean time her Mistress began to read her Lectures of Nature, telling
her, She should use her Beauty while she had it, and not to waste her Youth
idly, but to make the best profit of both, to purchase Pleasure and Delight:
besides, said she, Nature has made nothing in vain, but to some useful End;
and nothing merely for its self, but for a common Benefit, and general Good; as
you see by the Earth, Water, Air, and Fire; Sun, Moon, Stars, Light, Heat,
Cold, and the like. So is Beauty (with Strength and Appetites) either to
delight her Creatures that are in being, or to procure more by Procreation; for
Nature only lives by Survivers; and that cannot be, without Communication and
Society. Wherefore, it is a sin against Nature, to be reserved and coy; and
take heed, said she, of offending Nature; for she is a great and powerful
Goddess, transforming all things out of one shape into another; and those that
serve her faithfully, and according as she commands, she puts them in an easy
and delightful Form; but those that displease her, she makes them to be a
trouble and torment to themselves: wherefore serve Nature, for she is the only
and true Goddess, and not those that men call upon, as Jupiter, Juno, and a
hundred more, that living-men vainly offer unto, being only Men and Women which
were Deified for Invention, and Heroic Actions: for unto these dead, though
not forgotten Gods and Goddesses (as they are called through a Superstitious
Fear, and an Idolatrous Love to Ceremony, and an Ignorant Zeal to Antiquity),
Men fruitlesly pray: But Nature is the only true Goddess, and no other;
wherefore follow her Directions, and you shall never do amiss: for, we that are
old, said she, are Nature's Priests, and being long acquainted with her Laws
and Customs, do teach Youth the best ways to serve her in.

The young Lady, being of a quick apprehension, began to suspect some Design
and Treachery against her: and though her Doubts begot great Fears, yet her
confidence of the Gods protection of Virtue, gave her Courage; and, dissembling
her discovery as well as she could for the present, gave her thanks for her
Counsel: But when she was gone, considering in what a dangerous condition she
stood, and that the Gods would not hear her if she lazily called for help, and
watched for Miracles, neglecting Natural Means: whereupon she thought the best
way was, secretly to convey her self out of that place, and trust her self
again to Chance, by reason there could not be more danger, than where she was.
But those thoughts being quickly cut off, because she could find no possibility
of an escape, being strictly kept by the care of the old Bawd, for fear she
should give away that by enticement, which she meant to sell at a high rate:
Wherefore she was forced to content her self, and to satisfy her Fears, with
hopes of finding some means to be delivered from those dangers; praying to the
Gods for their assistance, to guard her from cruel Invaders of Chastity. But
after two or three days, a Subject Prince of that Country, which was a grand
Monopolizer of young Virgins, came to the Town (which was the Metropolitan City
of that Country); where as soon as he came, he sent for his chief Officer, the
old Bawd, to know of her how his Customers increased; who told him, she had a
rich Prize, which she had seized on, and kept only for his use; telling him,
She was the rarest Piece of Nature's Works, only (faith she) she wants mature
confidence; but Time, and heat of Affection, would ripen her to the height of
Boldness. So home she went to prepare for his coming, adorning her House with
costly Furniture, setting up a rich Bed, as an Altar to Venus; burning pleasant
and sweet Perfumes, as Incense to her Deity, before the Sacrifice of Chastity,
Youth, and Beauty; and instead of Garlands, dressed her with costly and rich
Jewels: But the fair Aspect of her Beauty, her lovely Features, exact
Proportion, graceful Behavior, with a sweet and modest Countenance, was more
adorned thus, by Nature's dress, than those of Art. But these Preparations
turned Miseriae; for so she was called from Doubts, to a perfect belief of what
she feared before; and not knowing how to avoid the Shipwreck, she grew into a
great Passion, and great Controversies she had with her self, whether she
should lose her Honor, and live; or save her Honor, and dye: Dishonor she
hated, and Death she feared; the one she blushed at, the other she trembled at.
But at last, with much struggling, she got out of that Conflict, resolving to
dye; for in Death (said she) there is no Pain; nor in a dishonorable Life, any
Content: But though Death (says she) is common to all, yet when it comes not in
the ordinary ways of Nature, there must be used violence by Artificial
Instruments; and in my Condition, there must be used Expedition. And,
considering what ways to take, she bethought of a Maidservant that used to
make clean the Rooms, and such kind of works; to whom she had often talked, as
she was about her Employments, and had gotten much of her Affections: Her she
called, and told her, that a Wife Wizard had advised her, That ever on her
Birthday, she should shoot off a Pistol; and in so doing, she should be happy,
so long as she used the same Custom; but if she neglected, she should be
unfortunate; for by the shooting thereof (said she), I shall kill a whole Year
of Evil from doing me hurt: but she told her withal, That it must be that day;
and it must be a small one, for fear of making a great noise; and done
privately, for fear her Mistress should know of it, or any Body else; for it
will be of no effect if above one know of it besides my self.

The simple Wench, easily believing what she said, was industrious to supply
her wants, and in a short time brought her desires; which when she had got, her
dejected Spirits rose with an overflowing joy; and setting down with a quiet
Mind, since before she could not stand nor set still: for her troubled and
rough Thoughts, drove her from one end of the Room to the other, like a Ship at
Sea that is not anchored nor ballasted, or with storm tossed from Point to Point;
so was she: but now with a constant Wind of Resolution, she sailed evenly,
although she knew not to what Coast she should be driven.

But after some expectation, in came the old Bawd and the Prince; who was so
struck with her Beauty, as he stood some time to behold her: At last coming
near her, earnestly viewing her, and asking her some leight Questions, to which
she answered briefly and wittily; which took him so much, as he had scarce
patience to bargain with the old Bawd for her. But when they were agreed, the
wicked Bawd left them to themselves; where he, turning to the young Lady, told
her, That of all the Women that ever he met with, his Senses were never so much
delighted; for they had wedded his Soul to Admirations.

She answered, That if his Senses, or his Person, did betray her to his Lust,
she wished them all annihilated, or at least buried in Dust: but I hope (said
she) by your Noble and Civil Usage, you will give me cause to pray for you, and
not to wish you Evil: for, Why should you rob me of that, which Nature freely
gave? And it is an Injustice to take the Goods from the right Owners, without
their consents; and an Injustice is an Act that all Noble Minds hate; and all
Noble Minds usually dwell in Honorable Persons, such as you seem to be; and
none but base or cruel Tyrants, will lay unreasonable Commands, or require
wicked things, from the Powerless, or Virtuous.

Wherefore, most Noble Sir, said she, Show your self a Master of Passion, a
King of Clemency, a God of Pity and Compassion; and prove not your self a Beast
to Appetite, a Tyrant to Innocents; a Devil to Chastity, Virtue, and Piety; and
with that, Tears did flow from her Eyes, as humble Petitioners, to beg her
release from his Barbarous Intention.

But he by those Tears (like Drink to those that are poisoned) grows more dry,
and his Passions more violent: He told her, No Rhetoric could alter his
Affections. Which when she heard, and he ready to seize on her, she drew forth
the Pistol which she had concealed, bending her Brows, with a resolute Spirit
told him, She would stand upon her Guard: for why, said she, it is no sin to
defend my self against an Obstinate and Cruel Enemy; and know, said she, I am
no ways to be found by wicked Persons, but in Death: for whilst I live, I will
live in Honor; or when I kill or be killed, I will kill or dye for security.

He for a time stood in a maze to see her in that posture, and to hear her high
defiance: but considering with himself, that her words might be more than her
intentions, and that it was a shame to be out-dared by a Woman; with a
smiling-countenance said, You threaten more Evil than you dare perform;
besides, Honor will be buried with you in the Grave, when by your Life you may
build Palaces of Pleasure and Felicity.

With that he went toward her, to take away the Pistol from her: Stay, stay,
said she; I will first build me a Temple of Fame upon your Grave, where all
young Virgins shall come and offer at my Shrine; and, in the midst of these
words, shot him. With that, he fell to the ground; and the old Bawd, hearing a
Pistol, came running in: where, seeing the Prince lie all smeared in blood, and
the young Lady (as a Marble Statue) standing by, as if she had been fixed to
that place, looking steadfastly upon her own Act; she, running about the Room,
called out, Murder, Murder, Help, Help; not knowing what to do, fear had so
possessed her. At last she drew her Knife, thinking to stab her; but the Prince
forbid her, saying, He hoped he should live to give her her due desert; which
if the Gods grant, said he, I shall ask no more. So desiring to be laid upon
the Bed until the Surgeons came to dress his Wounds, stenching the blood as
well as they could, the mean time. But after the Surgeons had searched his
Wounds, he asked them, Whether they were mortal? They told him, They were
dangerous, and might prove so; but their hopes were not quite cut off with
despair of his recovery. But after his Wounds were dressed, he gave order for the
young Lady to be locked up close, that none might know there was such a Creature
in the House; nor to disclose how or by what means he came hurt. Then being put
in his Litter, he was carried into his own House, which was a stately Palace in
the City. The noise of his being wounded, was spread abroad, and every one
enquiring how he came so, making several Tales and Reports, as they fancied,
but none knew the truth thereof. After some days, his Wounds began to mend, but
his Mind grew more distempered with the love of the fair Lady; yet loath he was
to force that from her, she so valiantly had guarded and kept: and to enjoy her
lawfully, he could not, because he was a married Man, and had been so five
years: for as the years of Twenty, by his Parents Persuasion (being a younger
Brother at that time, although afterward he was lest the first of his Family,
by the death of his Eldest Brother), he married a Widow, being Noble and Rich,
but well stricken in years, never bearing Child. And thus being wedded more to
Interest than Love, was the cause of his seeking those Societies which best
pleased him.

But after long Conflicts and Doubts, Fears, Hopes, and Jealousies, he resolved
to remove her from that House, and to try to win her by Gifts and Persuasions:
And sending for a reverent Lady, his Aunt (whom he knew loved him), he told her
the passage of all that had happened, and also his affection, praying her to take
her privately from that place, and to conceal her secretly, until he was well
recovered; entreating her also, to use her with all the Civility and Respect
that could be.

Going from him, she did all that he had desired her; removing her to a House
of hers a Mile from the City, and there kept her.

The young Lady, in the mean time, expecting nothing less than Death, was
resolved to suffer as valiantly as she had acted. So, casting off all care, she
was only troubled she lived so idly. But the old Lady coming to see her, she
prayed her to give her something to employ her time on: for, said she, my Brain
has not a sufficient stock to work upon it self.

Whereupon the old Lady asked her, If she would have some Books to read in?

She answered, Yes, if they were good ones; or else, said she, they are like
impertinent persons, that displease more by their vain talk, than they delight
with their Company.

Will you have Romances, said the old Lady?

She answered, No; for they extol Virtue so much, as begets an Envy in those
that have it not, and know they cannot attain unto that perfection; and they
beat Infirmities so cruelly, as it begets pity, and by that a kind of love.
Besides, their Impossibilities makes them ridiculous to Reason; and in Youth
they beget Wanton Desires, and Amorous Affections.

What say you to Natural Philosophy, said she?

She answered, They were mere Opinions; and if there be any Truths, said she,
they are so buried under Falsehood, as they cannot be found out.

Will you have Moral Philosophy?

No, said she; for they divide the Passions so nicely, and command with such
severity, as it is against Nature to follow them, and impossible to perform
them.

What think you of Logic?

She answered, It is nothing but Sophistry, making Factious Disputes, but
concludes nothing.

Will you have History?

No, said she; for they are seldom writ in the time of Action, but a long time
after, when Truth is forgotten; but if they be writ at present, Partiality,
Ambition, or Fear, bears too much sway?

Will you have Divine Books?

No, said she; they raise up such Controversies that cannot be allayed again,
tormenting the Mind about that, they cannot know whilst they live; and frights
their Consciences so, that it makes men afraid to dye. But, said the young
Lady, Pray give me Play-Books, or Mathematical ones; the first, said she,
discovers and expresses the Humors and Manners of Men, by which I shall know
my self and others the better, and in shorter time than Experience can teach
me. And in the latter, said she, I shall learn to demonstrate Truth, by Reason;
and to measure out my Life by the Rule of good Actions; to set Marks and
Figures on those Persons to whom I ought to be grateful; to number my days by
Pious Devotions, that I may be found weighty when I am put in the Scales of
God's Justice. Besides, said she, I may learn all Arts useful and pleasant for
the Life of Man, as Music, Architecture, Navigation, Fortification,
Waterworks, Fireworks; all Engines, Instruments, Wheels, and many such like,
which are useful: besides, I shall learn to measure the Earth, to reach the
Heavens, to number the Stars, to know the Motions of the Planets, to divide
Time, and to compass the whole World. The Mathematics is a Candle of Truth,
whereby I may peep into the Works of Nature, to imitate her in little: It
comprises all that Truth can challenge: All other Books disturb the Life of
Man; this only settles it, and composes it in sweet Delight.

The old Lady said, By your Beauty and Discourse, you seem to be of greater
Birth, and better Breeding, than usually ordinary young Maids have; and, if it
may not be offensive to you, pray give me leave to ask you, From whence you
came? and, What you are? and, How you came here?

She (sighing) said, I was, by an unfortunate War, sent out of my Country,
with my Mother, for safety, being very young, and the only Child my Parents
had: My Father (who was one of the Greatest and Noblest Subjects in the
Kingdom, and being employed in the Chief Command in that War) sent my Mother
(not knowing what the Issue would be) to the Kingdom of Security. where he had
been formerly sent Ambassador. So my Mother and I went to remain there, until
the troubles were over. But, my Father being killed in the Wars, my Mother
dyed for grief, and left me destitute of Friends, in a strange Country, only
with some few Servants. I hearing a Peace was concluded in the Kingdom, was
resolved to return to my own Native Soil, to seek after the Estate which my
Father left me as his only Heir. When I embarked, I only took two Servants, a
Maid and a Man; but, by an unfortunate Storm, I was cast upon a Shore belonging
to this Kingdom; where, after I was landed, my two Servants most treacherously
robbed me of all my Jewels, and those Moneys I had, and then most barbarously
left me alone; where afterward my Host sold me to an old Bawd, and she to one
of her Customers, who sought to force me; whereas I, to defend my self, shot
him; but whether he be dead, or alive, I know not: afterward I was brought
hither, but by whose directions, you (I suppose) can give a better account to
your self, than I; yet I cannot say, but that since I came hither, I have been
civilly used, and courteously entertained by your self, who seem to be a Person
of Worth, which makes my fears less; for I hope you will secure me from
Injuries, though not from Death. And since you are pleased to enquire what I
am, and from whence I came, I shall entreat the same return, to instruct me in
the knowledge of your self, and why I was brought hither, and by whose Order?

The old Lady said, She was Sister to the Prince's Mother, and a tender lover
of her Nephew; and to comply with his desires, she was brought there to be kept
until he should dispose of her. Then she told her what he was, but never
mentioned the affection he had for her, but rather spoke as if her Life were in
danger. So, taking her leave, she left her, telling her, She would send her
such Books as she desired.

Thus passing some Weeks, in the mean time the Prince recovered, resolving to
visit this young Lady, having heard by his Aunt the relation of what she was;
whose Birth made him doubt she would not be so easily corrupted as he hoped
before: and she knowing his Birth, had more hopes of honorable usage: Yet
sitting in a studious posture, with a sad Countenance, and heavy fixed Eyes,
accompanied with melancholy Thoughts, contemplating of her Misfortunes past,
with a serious consideration of the condition she stood in, advising with her
Judgment for the future; in comes the Prince, whom she no sooner saw, but she
trembled for fear, remembering her past danger, and foreseeing the trouble she
was like to run through: But he, with an humble Behavior, and civil Respect,
craved pardon for his former Faults, promising her, That if she would be
pleased to allow him her Conversation, he would never force that from her,
which she was not willing to grant: for there was nothing in this World he held
dearer than her Company; and, sitting down by her, began to question her of
Love; as, Whether she had engaged her Affection to any person of her own
Country, or any where else?

She told him, No.

By which Answer (he being jealous before, imagining she might be so valiant as
to wound him more for the sake of her Lover, than out of a love to Honor or
Reputation) received great content and joy; esteeming it the next happiness,
that since she loved not him, she loved no other.

I wonder at your Courage, said he; for usually your Sex are so tender and
fearful, and so far from using Instruments of Death, as Swords, Guns, or the
like, that they dare not look at them, but turn their Head aside.

She answered, That Necessity was a great Commandress.

And thus discoursing some time, at last he took his leave until the next day.
But when he was gone, how glad she was.

O what a torment will this be, said she, to be affrighted every day with this
ravenous Lion! But (said she) I must get a spell against his Fury, and not only
against him, but against all such like; and (by her industry) she got a subtle
Poison, which (being put in a very small Bladder) she fastened to her Arm, that
when any occasion served, she might have it ready to put in her mouth, which in
great extremity she might use, and crushing it but betwixt her teeth, she was
sure it would expel Life suddenly.

The next Morning the Prince sent her a Present of all kinds of rich Persian
Silks and Tissues, fine Linen and Laces, and all manner of Toys, wherewith
young Ladies use to make themselves fine and gay. But she returned them with
great thanks, bidding the Bringer tell the Prince, That she did never receive a
Present, but what she was able to return with advantage, unless it were from
those to whom she had a near relation, as Parents and Kindred, or the like. But
he, when he saw them returned, thought it was because they were not rich
enough; and sent her another Present of Jewels of great value: which when she
had viewed, she said, They were very rich and costly: but returning them back,
she said, I dare not trust my Youth with the Riches and Vanities of the World,
lest they may prove Bribes to corrupt my free and honest Mind: wherefore tell
the Prince, I am not to be caught with glorious Baits; and so returned them
back.

The Prince, when he saw he could fasten no Gifts on her, was much troubled;
yet hoped, that Time might work her to his desires: so went to visit her; and
when he saw her, he told her, He was very unfortunate, that not only Himself,
but even his Presents, were hateful; for he could guess at no other reason why
she should refuse them, since they were neither unlawful, nor dishonorable to
receive.

She answered, That the Principles that she was taught, were, That Gifts were
both dangerous to give, and to take, from Designing or Covetous Persons.

He said, He was unhappy; for by that he saw she would neither receive Love,
nor give Love.

Thus he daily visited her, and hourly courted her, striving to insinuate
himself into her favor, by his Person and Services; used Powdering, Perfuming,
and rich Clothing; though he was so personable and well-favoured, and had such
store of Eloquence, as might have persuaded both Ears and Eyes to have been
Advocates to a young Heart, and an unexperienced Brain. His Service was, in
observing her Humor; his Courtship, in praising her Disposition, admiring her
Beauty, applauding her Wit, and approving her Judgment; insomuch that at the
last she did not dislike his Company, and grew to that pass, as to be
melancholy when he was gone, blush when he was named, start at his approaching;
sigh, weep, and grow pale and distempered, yet perceived not, nor knew her
Disease. Besides, she would look often in the Glass, curl heir Hair finely,
wash her Face cleanly, set her Clothes handsomely, mask her self from the Sun;
not confidering why she did so: But he (as all Lovers have watchful Eyes)
observed, she regarded her self more than she used to do; which made him more
earnest, for fear her Passion should cool; protesting his Love, vowing his
Fidelity and Secrecy, and swearing his Constancy to death.

She said, That he might make all that good, but not the Lawfulness: Can you
(said she) make it no sin to God, no dishonor to my Family, no infamy to my
Sex, no breach to Virtue, no wrong to Honesty, no Immodesty to my self?

He answered, It was lawful by Nature.

Sir, said she, It is as impossible to corrupt me, as to corrupt Heaven. But,
were you free, I should willingly embrace your Love in lawful Marriage.

He told her, They were both young; and his Wife old, almost ripe enough for
Death, and a little time more would cut her down: Wherefore, said he, let us
enjoy our selves in the mean time; and when she is dead, we will marry.

No, said she, I will not buy a Husband at that deer rate; nor am I so evil, as
to wish the death of the living for any advantage, unless they were Enemies to
Virtue, Innocence, or Religion.

But he was so importunate, as she seemed displeased; which he perceiving, left
off persisting, lest he might nip off the young and tender Buds of her
Affection.

But it chanced, not long after, there was a Meeting of many Nobles at a Feast,
where Healths to their Mistresses were drank round; and the Prince (who thought
it a sin to Love, to neglect that Institution) offered, with great Ceremony and
Devotion, for his Mistress's Health, sprinkling the Altar of the Brain with
Fume, and burning the Incense of Reason therein. After the Feast was ended, he
went to see his Mistress, whose Beauty (like Oil) set his Spirits in a flame;
which made his Affection grow to an intemperate Heat. Whereat she became so
afraid, as she puts the Poison into her Mouth (the Antidote of all Evil, as she
thought), and then told him her intention. But he, having more Passion then
Doubt, would not believe her. Which she perceiving, broke the Bladder asunder
betwixt her Teeth, and immediately fell down as dead. Whereat he was so amazed,
as he had not power to stir for a time. But at last, calling for help, the old
Lady came to them, he telling her what she had done, as well as his Fear would
give him leave. The Lady having skill in Physic (as most Ladies have, reading
in Herbals, and such kind of Books) gave her something to make her vomit up the
Poison, wherewith she weakly revived to life again. But she was so very sick,
as almost cut off all hopes of keeping that Life. Whereat he lamented, tearing
his Hair, beating his Breast, cursing himself, praying and imploring his
Pardon, and her Forgiveness; promising and protesting, Never to do the like
again. She returning no answer, but Groans and Sighs. But he, being a diligent
Servant, and much afflicted, watched by her, until she mended by the Lady's
Care and Skill. When she was indifferently well recovered, she began to lament
her ill condition, and the danger she was in, employing her Thoughts how she
might escape the Snares of Spightful Fortune, and gain her Friendship; where,
soon after, finding opportunity to take Time by the fore-lock, the Prince being
sent for to Court, and the old Lady being not well, whereby she had more
liberty; and searching about the Room, found a Suit of Clothes of the old
Lady's Page; which Suit she carried into her Chamber, and privately hid it;
then taking Pen and Ink, writ two Letters, the one to the Prince, the other to
the old Lady: So, sealing the Letters up, and subscribing them, left them upon
the Table. Then she straight stripped her self of her own Clothes, which she
flung in a dark place, with her hair that she had cut off, and putting the
Page's Clothes on, in this disguise she went toward the chief City, to which
came up an Arm of the Sea, making a large Haven for many Ships to lie at Anchor
in: But as soon as she came to the Seaside, there was a Ship just going off;
which she seeing, got into it; her Fears being so great, as not to consider nor
examine, whither they were bound; and they were so employed, hoisting their
Sails, and fitting their Tacklings, that they took no notice when she came in.
But being gone three or four Leagues from the Shore, and all quiet, and free
from labor; the Master, walking upon the Deck, seeing a handsome Youth stand
there in Page's Clothes, asked him, Who he was? and, How he came there?

She said, I do suppose you are bound for the Kingdom of Riches, where I desire
to go; but coming late, seeing every one busily employed, I had no time to
bargain for my Passage; but I shall content you with what in reason you can
require.

The Master said, We are not bound to that Kingdom, but are sent for new
Discoveries toward the South; neither have we Provision for any more than
those that are appointed to go.

Which when she heard, the Tears flowed from her Eyes, becoming her so well,
that they moved the Master to pity and affection.

Then asking him, What he was?

She answered him, That she was a Gentleman's Son, who (by the reason of
Civil-Warrs) was carried out of his own Country very young, by his Mother; and
so related the very truth of his being cast into that Kingdom; only she
feigned, that she was a Boy that had served a Lady as her Page; but (desiring
to return into his own Country) had mistaken, and put himself into a wrong
Vessel; but (said she) I perceive the Fates are not willing I should see my
Native Country, and Friends, and (being young) Travel may better my knowledge;
and I shall not neglect any service I am able to do, or you are pleased to
employ me in, if you will accept of it.

At last, her graceful and humble Demeanor, her modest Countenance, and her
well-favoured Face, preferred her to this Master's Service, who was a grave and
a discreet Man, and told her (as supposing her a Boy), That, since he was
there, he would not cast him out; and although it will be hard for me to keep
you, yet you shall parrake of what I have allowed for my self.

She giving him many thanks, said, She would strive to deserve it.

But after some Weeks, the Master fell very sick; in which sickness she was so
industrious to recover his health, by her diligent attendance and care, that it
begot such affection in the old Man, that he adopted him his Son, having no
Children of his own, nor none like to have, he being in years. They sailed five
or six Months, without any tempestuous Winds, yet not without danger of Rocks
and Shelves of Sand, which they avoided by their skill, and many times
refreshed themselves in those Harbors they met with in their way; which made
them hope a pleasant and prosperous Voyage.

But Fortune playing her usual tricks, to set Men on high hopes, and then to
cast them down to ruin; irritated the Gods against them, for their Curiosity,
in searching too far into their Works; which caused them to raise a great
Storm, making the Clouds and Seas to meet, Showers to beat them, Winds to toss
them, Thunder to affright them, Lightning to amaze them; insomuch as they had
neither strength to help, nor sight to guide, nor memory to direct, nor courage
to support themselves; the Anchor was lost, the Rudder was broke, the Masts
were split, the Sails all torn, the Ship did leak, their hopes were gone:
Nothing was left but black Despair,
And grim Death on their Face to stare:
For every gust of Wind blew Death into their Face,
And every Billow dug their burial place.


In this time of Confusion, the Traveller (for so now she calls her self)
followed close her old new Father, who had as many careful Thoughts, and as
great a regard for her safety, as she of her self; and giving order to the
Pilate, that had lost his steerage, to cast over the Cock-Boat; which no sooner
done, but a gust of Wind drove them on a Rock that split the Ship; and as soon
as he perceived it, he took his beloved and supposed Boy, and put him (with
himself and the Pilate) into the Boat, cutting the Cable, emploring the favor
of the Gods, committing themselves to the Fates, and setting up a little Sail
for the Wind to carry them which way it pleased. No sooner put off, but the
Ship (and all therein) sunk: But the Gods, favoring the young Lady for her
Virtue, tied up the strong Winds again into their several corners; after which,
sailing six days, at last they were thrust through a Point into a large River,
which for the greatness might be called a large Sea: for, though it was fresh
water, yet it was of that longitude and latitude, that they could not perceive
Land for four days together: but at the last, they espied Land; and coming
nigh, they perceived a Multitude of People, which when they came to the shore,
were affrighted, having never seen any Bark (or the like) swim upon the water,
for they had themselves the propriety to swim naturally like Fishes: Nor had
they in the Boat ever seen such Complexion'd Men; for they were not Black, like
Negroes; nor Tauny, nor Olive, nor Ash-colored, as many are; but of a deep
Purple, their Hair as white as Milk, and like Wool; their Lips thin, their Ears
long, their Noses flat, yet sharp; their Teeth and Nails as black as Jet, and
as shining; their Stature tall, and their Proportion big; their Bodies were all
naked, only they had somewhat from their Waste, down to their Twist, which was
brought through their Legs, up to the Waste again, and tied with a knot; 'twas
a thin kind of Stuff, which was made of the Barks of Trees, yet looked as fine
as Silk, and as soft: the Men carried long Darts in their hands, Spear-fashion,
so hard and smooth, as it seemed like Metal, but made of Whale-bones. But when
they landed, the People came so thick about them, as almost smuthered them; and
the Grave and Chief of them (which seemed like their Priests) sent them
straight to the chief Governors of those parts, according to their Custom (as
it seemed to them afterward); All that was strange or rare, was usually
presented to their Chiefs: but they staid not so long as to see the Ceremony of
the Sacrifice they were then offering, only they perceived it was a Sacrifice
of Fish to some Sea-God; then they were set on a Creature half Fish, half
Flesh; for it was in shape like a Calf, but had a Tail like a Fish, a Horn like
a Unicorn; that lives in the River, but yet would lie upon the Sands in great
Herds or Sholes, as Seils do; so as they might take them for their use at any
time, without the trouble of keeping them up, for they were tame and gentle of
themselves.

Thus they rid along the Sands two or three Leagues, to the Governor's House;
for all along those Sands only, upon a Bank, were Houses all in a row, built
with Fishes Bones, which Bones were laid with great Art, and in fine Works, and
as close as Stone or Brick; the tops of these Houses were Scales of Fishes laid
like Tile or Slat, which glistered so in the Sun, that they looked some ways
like Silver, other ways like Rain-bows in all manner of Colors.

When the Governor had viewed them, he sent them (with other Messengers, but
on the same Beasts) to the next Governor: And thus they rid upon the Sands for
some days, their Food being Fish broiled upon the hot Sands; for there was no
other Food but Fish and Waterfowl, whereof they had great store, but yet of
strange Kinds to Strangers; for there was no Pasture, nor any thing like green.

At last they came to a place which seemed like a Forest, for there were a
number of Bodies of Trees (if one may call them so, having no Branches) which
were so big, as to hold a Family of Twenty, or more, of the Governor's House,
as big as four other; and the Bark of those Trees, or indeed the Wood of the
Tree quite through, was of all manner of Flowers, both for Color, Shape, and
Scent; painted, and set by Nature in the Wood: so that the Wood being cut one
way, the Flowers were all perfect in shape; but cut another way, and they
seemed like Flowers shedded from the Stalks: and this Wood was so sweet, that
all the Forest smelt thereof.

After the Governor of this place had viewed them, he set them on other
Beasts, and sent them by other Messengers; so leaving there their Fleshy-Fishy
Beasts, they run back again to the place they were taken from. But those they
rid after, were like a Stag in the Body; which was as big as a Horse, black as
a Coal, a Tail like a Dog, Horns like a Ram, tipped with green, like Buds of
Trees, and as swift as a Roe. And thus they rid until they came to another
Forest, where all the Trees were very high and broad, whose Leaves were
shadowed with several Greens, lighter and darker, as if they were painted; and
many Birds there were of strange Colors and Shapes; some Birds had Wings like
Flies, Beaks, Bodies, and Legs, like other Birds; some the Bodies like
Squirrels, but had Feathered Wings: there was one (a very fine kind of Bird in
shape) both for Beak, Head, Body, and Legs, like a Parrot; but instead of
Feathers, it was covered with Hair, like Beasts, which Hairs were of the color
of Parrots Feathers, and the like Batts Wings, streaked like a Rainbow; the
Eyes looked yellow, and sent forth a kind of a Light like to small Rays of the
Sun: In the midst of the Forehead it had a small Horn, which grew winding, and
sharp at the end, like a Needle. This Bird did mount like a Hawk, in Circle;
and after would fly down at other birds, as they do; but instead of Talons,
that Horn struck them dead; for it would thrust its Horn into their bodies, and
so bear their bodies upon their Horn, and fly some certain lengths, as in
triumphs, and then would light, and eat them.

There were some Birds no bigger than the smallest Flies, yet all feathered;
besides, there were many sorts of Beasts, some had Beaks like Birds, and
Feathers instead of Hair, but no Wings, and their Bodies like a Sheep. There
was one kind of Beast in the shape of a Camel, and the Neck as white as a Swan,
and all the Head and Face white; only a lock of Hair on the top of his Crown,
of all manner of Colors; the Hair of his Body was of a perfect Gold-yellow,
his Tail like his Fore-top, but it would often turn up like a Pea-cock's Tail,
and spread abroad; and the Hairs being of all several Colors, made a most
glorious show: the Legs and Feet of the color of the Body, but the Hoofs as
black as Jet.

At last they were carried to another Governor, who lived in a Town, whose
House was built with Spices, the Roof and Beams as big as any House need to
have, made of Cinnamon; and the Walls were plaistered with the flakes of Mace,
which flakes were a foot square; the Planks were cut thick, like Bricks, or
square Marble pieces, out of Nutmegs; the long Planks out of Ginger (for their
Nutmegs and Races of Ginger, were as great as Men could carry): the Houses were
covered on the top, some with Pomegranat-rines, others with Oranges and
Citrons; but the Pomegranats last the longer, and the other smelt the sweeter,
and looked the pleasanter to the Eye. They never have Rain there, nor in any
part of the Kingdom; for the Air is always serene and clear: nor no higher
Winds than what fanns the Heat: their exercise was Hunting; the Women hunted
the Females, and the Men the Males.

As they went to the Governor, all the People run about to see them, wondering
at them, and viewing them round. But the Governor seemed to admire the Youth
much; yet durst not keep him, being against the Custom; but sent them straight
toward their chief City, where their King was. After some days riding, they
came out of the Forest into great Plains and Champains, which were covered with
a Seagreen and Willow-colour'd Grass; and some Meadows were covered with
perfect shadows of all manner of sorts of Greens. As they drew near the City,
they saw great Quarries of Crystal, as we have of Stone; and when they came up
to the City, all about without the Walls were Orchards and Root-Gardens, where
there grew Roots as sweet as if they were Preserved, and some all Juicy: most
of their Fruits grew in Shells like Nuts, most declicious to the taste; but
their Shells were like a Net or Caul, that all the Fruit was seen through; and
some kind of Fruits were as big as one's Head; but some were no bigger than
ours; others, very small. There never fell Rain, but Dews to refresh them,
which fell upon the Earth every Night, like flakes of Snow, and being upon the
Earth, they melted, and did look and taste like double-refined Sugar.

At last they entered the City, which was walled about with Crystal; and so were
the Houses, which were built both high and large, and before them were Arched
Walks with great Pillars of Crystal; through the midst of the Street ran a
Stream of Golden Sands; and cross the Stream were little Silver Bridges to pass
and re pass over to each side of the Street; on each side of this Stream grew
rows of Trees, which were about the height of Cypress Trees; but instead of
green Leaves, upon every Stalk grew a particular Flower, which smelt so sweet,
that when Zephyrus blew (for they never had high Winds), they gave so strong a
scent, that it did almost suffocate the Spirits of those that were not used to
them.

The King's Palace stood in the midst of the City, higher than all the other
Houses; the outward Wall was Crystal, cut all in Triangles, which presented
Millions of Forms from one Object; and all the ridg of the Wall was all pointed
Crystals, which Points cut and divided the beams of the Sun so small, that the
Wall did not only look sparkling, but like a flaming Hoop, or Ring of Fire, by
reason the Wall went round. To this Wall were four open Passages, Arched like
Gates; from those passages went VValks, and on each side of these VValks were
Trees: the Barks thereof were shadowed with Hair-colour, and as smooth as
Glass; and the Leaves of a perfect Grass-green, which is very rare in that
Country, because Nature has every where intermixed several Colors made by
Light on several grounds or bodies of things; and Birds do so delight on those
Trees, that they are always full of Birds, every Tree having a several Quyer by
it self, which sing such perfect Notes, and keep so just a time, that they do
make a most ravishing Melody: besides, the variety of their Tunes are such,
that one would think Nature did set them new every day. These VValks lead to
another Court, which was walled about with Agats, carved with all sorts of
Imagery; and upon 'the ridg of the Wall such were chose out as most resemble
the Eyes; for in some Agats their Colors are naturally mixed, and lie in
Circles, as Eyes; these seem as if so many Sentinels lay looking and watching
round about. From this Wall went a Walk, where on each side were Beasts cut
artificially, to the life, out of several-colour'd Stones, according as those
Beasts which they were to resemble. This Walk leads to another Court which was
not walled, but rather railed with white and red Cornelians, cut
Spearfashion. From the Rails went only a plain Walk paved with Gold, which
went straight to the Palace. this Palace stood on a little Mount, whereto went
up a pair of Stairs; the Stairs went round about the House, ascending by
degrees on steps of Amber, leading up to a large and wide Door; the
Frontispiece thereof was Turky-stones curiously carved; the Palace-Walls were
all pure Porcelline, and very thick and strong, yet very clear: It was all
roofed or covered with Jett, and also paved with the same; so that the black
Jett was set forth by the white Porcelline; and the white Porcelline seemed
whiter, by the blackness of the Jet. The Windows were only arched holes to let
in Air. In the midst of the Palace was a large Room, like a little enclosed
Meadow; in the midst of which ran a Spring of clear Water, where the King
bathed himself. Also, there were brave Gardens of all sorts of Flowers; in the
midst of which, was a Rock of Amethists; and artificial Nymphs, cut out to the
life, of Mother-Pearl; and little Brooks, winding and streaming about, of
Golden Sands: The wonder was, that although there were many Mines in that
Kingdom, yet the Soil was very fertile.

At last they were brought to the King's Presence, who was laid upon a Carpet
made of Thistle-down, with great attendance about him: He, and all those of the
Royal Blood, were of a different color from the rest of the people; they were
of a perfect Orange-colour, their Hair coal-black, their Teeth and Nails as
white as Milk; of a very great height, yet well shaped.

But when the King saw them, he wondered at them: first, at the old Man's Beard,
for they have none: The next, at their Habit, which were Seamens Clothes; but
above all, at the Youth, who looked handsome in despite of his poor and dirty
Garments. The King did command to have their Clothes pulled off; but no sooner
did they come to execute that Command, but Travelia was so affrighted, that he
fell down in a swound: those that touched him, started back when they saw him
dead. But the old Man, bending him forward, brought him to life again.
Whereupon they straight thought that their touching him, killed him; and that
the old Man had power to restore Life, which made them afraid to touch them any
more; for that Disease of swouning was not known to them. Then their Priests
and Wizzards were called for, to know from whence they came, and what should be
done with them. The Priests were only known from the rest of the people, by a
Tuft of Hair growing just upon the Crown of the Head, and all the Head else had
no Hair; whereas other Priests are only bald upon the Crown. The King and they
fell presently into great dispute.

The King pleaded hard to keep the Youth; but at last the Priests had the
better (as most commonly they have in all Religions), and so carried them away,
and kept them a Twelvemonth; but never dared to touch them, for fear they
should dye, because Travelia swouned; but they beckned and pointed to them.
They gave them ease, not employing them to any labor; and fed them daintily of
what they could eat; for some Meats they could not eat, as Man's Flesh: for,
they had a Custom in that Country, to keep great store of Slaves, both Males
and Females, to breed on, as we do breed Flocks of Sheep, and other Cattle; the
Children were eaten, as we do Lambs or Veal, for young and tender Meat; the
elder for Beef and Mutton, as stronger Meat. They kill five Males for one
Female, for fear of destroying the Breed; although they be so fruitful, that
they never bear less than two at a birth, and many times three; and they seldom
leave Childbearing, until they are Threescore years old; for they usually live
there until they are Eight score, and sometimes Two hundred years: but the
ordinary Age is a Hundred, unless Plagues come; not out of Sluttery, or evil or
corrupt Air, but with too much nourishment, by reason of their delicious Diet,
which breeds such a superfluity of Humors, that it corrupts their blood. As
for their Houses, they are kept very cleanly, by reason they never eat in them;
for their custom was, to eat all together in common Halls, as the Lacedaemonians
did, only they had better Cheer, and more Liberty. Likewise, their Women were
common to every one's use, unless it were those Women of the Royal Blood, which
is a sort by themselves, as was described before, and therefore never mixed with
the rest; but if they did, and were known, it was death: These of the Royal
Blood, had all their Skins wrought, like the Britans. As for their Government,
it was Tyrannical; for all the common People were slaves to the Royal Race.

But to return to the old Man, observing how careful and choice they were kept,
he told his Son what he thought was their intention, which was, to sacrifice
them; and (said he) there is no way to escape, unless we had their Language,
and could make them believe we came from the Gods; and that the Gods would
punish them if they put us to death; and you are young (said he), and apt to
learn; but I am old, and my Memory decayed; wherefore, now or never, study
for your Life.

Well, said he, since my Life lies in my Learning, I will learn for my Life:
Which he did so well, that he got (in that Tvvelve-month) their Language so
perfect, as he understood, and could speak most of it: In which time he
understood all that I have delivered in this Relation; and besides, understood
that they had many Gods and Goddesses.

The Sun was their chief God, and the Earth the chief Goddess; their next God
was the Sea, and their Goddess the Moon; and they prayed to the Stars (as some
do to Saints) to speak in their behalf, and to present their Prayers to the Sun
and Moon, which they thought to be as Man and Wife, and the Stars their
Children. To their Gods they offered none but the Males; and those offerings
were offered by Men: And the Men prayed only to the Gods; and to their
Goddesses none but the Women; nor none but Female-offering were offered unto
them.

At last, by their Discourse and Preparation, they perceived they were to be
sacrificed to the Sun, as being both Males (as they thought); and with great
Ceremony, as being Strangers, and such Rarities; yet they did not touch
Travelia, as supposing (if they should)' he would dye before he was brought to
the place of Sacrifices: In all this time, he never disclosed that he could
speak their Language, nor understand them. But in this time the old Man had got
some Salt-peeter and Brimstone, and burnt Wood into Charcoal, so made Gunpowder
(for they had the liberty to go where they would about their Temples): and
after he had made the Gunpowder, he made two things like Pistols, although not
so curious and neat, yet well enough to serve his turn; and directed his Son
what he should do and say. Against that day he made himself a Garment of a
Grass, which was like to Green Silk; which he had woven so finely, as it looked
like Satin: He had also upon the Calves of his Legs like Buskins of
several-colour'd Flowers, and a Garland of Flowers on his Head; the Soles of
his Sandals were of that Green, but the stripes a-top was of Flowers like his
Buskins; in each hand he held the two Pistols; his Hair (which was grown in
that time, for he never discovered it, keeping it tied up) untied, and let
down, spread upon his back: But when the Priest (which came to fetch him forth)
saw him thus dressed, never seeing Hair before (for they had none but Wool, and
very short, as Negroes have), was amazed at the sight; and not daring to touch
him, went by him, guarding him (as the chief Sacrifice) to the place; where the
King and all his Tribe, and all his People, waited for their coming: the King
being placed at the head of the Altas, with a Dart in his right hand, the Spear
of the Dart being an entire Diamond, cut with a sharp Point, to signify the
piercing beams of the Sun; which Spear he usually struck into the Heart of the
Sacrificed; which Heart the Priest used tb cut out, and give the King to eat
raw; the whilst the Priest sung Songs in the praise of the Sun, as the Father
of all things.

Thus, after some expectation, the Priests came with their Sacrifices; which
when the King and People saw, they were all amazed, as well they might; for the
Youth appeared most beautiful. But at last they all shouted, and cried out,
Their Gods had beautified and adorned their Sacrifices, as being well pleased
therewith; making great shouts and noises of Joy. But when he came to the
Altar, he called to them in their own Language; at which they grew mute with
wonder: and, being silent, he thus spoke: OKING, and you Spectators! Why do you
offend the Gods, in destroying their Messengers which come to bring you life,
and to make you happy? Head I brought you Plagues, then you might have
sacrifieed me to your God of Lights, as coming from Death and Darkness, his
Enemies: but for this your false Devotion, the great Sun (says he) will
destroy you with one of his small Thunderbolts, killing first your Priests,
and then the rest.



With that, shot off his Pistol into the breast of the Chief Priest, wherewith
he straight fell down dead.

The noise of the Pistol, and the flash of the Fire, which they never saw
before, and the effect of it upon the Priest, struck them with such a horror,
and did so terrify them, as they all kneeled down, imploring Mercy and
Forgiveness, with trembling Limbs, and weeping Eyes.

Whereupon he told them, There was no way to avoid Punishment, but first, To
fast two days from any kind of Nourishment: Next, Not to open their Lips to
speak: And then, To obey whatsoever he shall teach them, as being sent from the
Gods; bidding them go home, until their time of Fasting were out, and then to
return to the Temple again; commanding none to remain there, but to leave it to
the old Man, and himself.

The Temple was most rich and curiously built, having (in that Country) great
Art and Skill in Architecuture.

After which, the King and all the People, rising up, bowed their Heads down
low, as in humble obedience to the Commands he had received; praying to him, as
a God, to divert the Punishments intended to them; and in sorrow lamenting
their Fault, went home, each to his House, sealing up their Lips (for such a
time) from receiving Meat, or sending forth Words: In the mean time, the old
Man and he had leisure to bethink themselves what to do, having at that time
the Temple, as a Palace, to live in; none to disturb them, nor to hinder their
Thoughts from working out their advantage; and, sitting in Counsel a long time,
disputing with each other what was best to do, at last resolved, That the old
Man should go to the King, as sent from the Gods, to bid him send a Command to
all his People, to eat such Herbs for Sallads, and drink their Water without
mixture, just before they came: for else (said the old Man) their Hunger will
make them impatient, or so dull, as it may stop their Ears by the faintness of
their Spirits, caused by their empty Stomachs; and too much (said he) makes
them furious, sending up Malignant Vapors to their Brains, which may cause our
Ruins.

But after he had been with the King, he returned back to the Temple again, and
the King obeyed his Desire, as a Command from the Gods; and brought the People
all to the Temple: where, after they were all gathered together, Travelia
advanced himself so much higher than rest, as they might hear him round about.

Then thus spoke: PIOUS Friends, for so I may call you, being willing to please
the Gods; though your Ignorance has led you wrong ways: But the Gods seeing
your Zeal, though through a false Devotion, pitying your Ignorance, have by
their Wisdom found means to appease the Wrath of their Justice; for every
Attribute of the Gods must have a satisfaction: for, Right is their Kingdom,
and Truth is their Scepter, wherewith they govern all their Works: but the Gods
have strowed Lots amongst Mankind, of movable things, which Chance gathers up;
and Chance, being blind, mistakes both in the gathering and distributing. Now
the Gods made this Chance by their Providence, when they made Man: for, Man
has no more knowledge of the transitory things of the World, than what Fortune
gives them, who is an unjust Distributer: for, all External Gifts come from her
hand; and, for want of sight, she gives oft-times the Beggar's Lot to the King,
the Servants to the Master, the Master's to the Servant: and for the Internal
Gifts which the Gods have bestowed on Men, they are different, as the External
are transitory; for some are nearer to perfection, some farther off; yet none
have perfect knowledge: for, the Gods mix Man's nature with such an aspiring
Ambition, that if they had a perfect knowledge of the glory of the Gods, and a
perfect knowledge of the first Cause, and of the Effects produced therefrom,
they would have warred with the Gods, and have strove to usurp their Authority:
So busy and vainglorious has the Gods made the Minds of Men! Wherefore, the
Gods govern the World by Ignorance; and though the goodness of the Gods is
great, yet it is bound in with their Justice, which is attended with Terrors,
to punish the Crimes of Men, and even to punish the innocent Errors that
proceed from that Ignorance which they have muzled Man withal. But as their
Power made the World, their Wisdom rules the World, their Justice punishes the
World; so their Mercy keeps the World from destruction; and their Love not only
saves Man, but preferrs Man to a glorious Happiness. And some of this Love the
Gods have sent to you, although by your Ignorance you had almost cast it from
you. And since the Gods have sent you Knowledge by us, take hold of it, and do
not wilfully fall in your superstitious Errors; although it is a difficult
pains, even for the Gods themselves, to persuade Man, who is of a cross,
suspicious, inquisitive, and murmuring nature, accusing the Gods of Partiality;
saying, They prefer or cast out whom they please, not as Man deserves. Thus
they judge of the Gods by their own Passions; but the Gods, by Variation, are
pleased to continue the World; and by Contradiction to govern it; by Sympathy
delight it: for, Delight lives not altogether in the power of Chance, being
created in the Essence and Soul of Man: for, though Chance can present those
things (with Antipathies or Sympathies) to the Senses, which present them to
the Soul; yet it has not the power to rule it: for, the Soul is a kind of God
in it self, to direct and guide those things that are inferior to it; to
perceive and descry into those things that are far above it; to create by
Invention, and to delight in Contemplations: and though it has not an absolute
power over it self, yet it is a harmonious and absolute thing in it self: and
though it is not a God from all Eternity, yet it is a kind of Deity to all
Eternity, for it shall never dye: and though the Body has a relation to it,
yet no otherwise than the Mansion of Jove has unto Jove: The Body is only the
residing-place, and the Sensitive Spirits are as the Soul's Angels or
Messengers, and Intelligencers: So the Souls of Men are to the Gods, as the
Sensitive Spirits to the Soul: And will you dislodg the Sensitive Spirits of
the Gods, by destroying and unbuilding each other's Body by violent Deaths,
before it be the Gods Pleasure to dissolve that Body, and so remove the Soul to
a new Mansion? And though it is not every Creature that has that Soul, but
only Man (for Beasts have none, nor every Man, for most Men are Beasts; only
the Sensitive Spirits, and the Shape may be, but not the Soul); yet none know
when the Soul is out or in, but the Gods; and not only other Bodies may not
know it, but the same Body is ignorant thereof.

The Soul is as invisible to the Sensitive Spirits, as the Gods to men: for,
though the Soul knows, and has intelligence by the Sensitive Spirits, yet the
Sensitive have none from the Soul: for, as Gods know Men, but Men know not
Gods; so the Soul knows the Senses, but the Senses know not the Soul:
Wherefore, you must seek all the ways to preserve one another, as Temples of
the Gods, not to destroy and pull them down; for whosoever does so, commits
Sacriledg against the Gods: Wherefore, none must dye, but those that kill, or
would kill others; Death must be repaid with Death, says Jove; and only Death
is in the power of Man to call when they please; but Life is in the power of
the Gods; and those that displease the Gods, shall have a miserable Life, not
only in the bodily part, which is sensible of pain, and may be tormented out of
one shape into another, and be perpetually dying, or killing, with all manner
of Torments, and yet never dye; in the shape of a Man, feels stabs in the
Sides; in the shape of a Bull, knocks on his Head; in the shape of a Heart,
Arrows in the Haunch; in the shape of a Fish, Hooks tearing the Jaws; besides
all manner of Diseases and Infirmities; it may be, Burning, Hanging, Drowning,
Smuthering, Pressing, Freezing, Rotting, and thousands of these kinds; nay,
more than can be reckoned. Thus several Bodies, though but one Mind, may be
troubled in every Shape.

But those that please the Gods, live easy in every Shape, and dye quietly and
peaceably; or when the Gods do change their Shapes, or Mansions, it is for the
better, either for Ease or Newness.

Thus have the Gods sent us to instruct you, and to stay so long amongst you,
as you can learn and know their Commands, and then to return unto them.



With that, the King and People bowed their Faces to the ground, adoring him as
a God, and would have built Altars, and offered Sacrifices unto him: But he
forbad them; telling them, They must build Altars in their Hearts of Repenting,
Humbling, and Amending-Thoughts, and offer Sacrifices of Prayer and
Thanksgiving, to the great and incomprehensible Jove, and not Altars built with
hands unto Men; nor to offer Inhuman Sacrifices to Gods, of their own making.

Thus Preaching every day for some time, forbidding Vain and Barbarous Customs,
and Inhuman Ceremonies; teaching and persuading them to believe, The Gods were
not to be known nor comprehended; and, that all that they have discovered of
themselves to their Creatures, was only by their Works, in which they should
praise them. By which Doctrine they were brought to be a Civilized People, and
approved of their Teacher so well, that they would do nothing concerning
Religion, or any other Affairs of Government, without him: and being dismissed
for that time, departed, leaving them to themselves in the Temple; where, at
certain and set-times, the King and People repaired to hear him Preach; who
taught them according to his Belief: and whenever they moved out of the
Temple, all the People flocked about them with Acclamations of Joy; and
whenever the King sent for them (as he often did for their Counsels), all the
Princes attended, and People waited upon them. And thus they lived with great
Splendour, Love, and Admiration, amongst them; their Persons were thought
Divine, their Words were Laws, and their Actions Examples, which the People
followed.

Thus for a while we leave them, and return to the old Lady, and the Prince.

The old Lady sending into Affectionata's Chamber (as then called, for so she
named her self there) to entreat her Company, for therein she took great
delight, she being witty in her Conversation, and pleasing in her Humor. But
the Messenger missed of the Mark; for looking about, and calling aloud, he
could neither hear nor see her. So returning, told the old Lady, She was not to
be found. Whereat she grew into a great Passion, not only for her loss (which
she thought great, since her love to her, and esteem of her, was not small);
but that she apprehended the Prince would think that she had neglected that
Charge he had entrusted her with.

Whilst she was in this Passion, the Prince came in, who had been in the young
Lady's Chamber, but missing her, thought she had been there; but seeing her
not, and the old Lady weeping, straight asked her for his Mistress; but she
through Tears and Sobs could not answer. Whereupon some about her answered, She
was gone none could tell where. At whose Words the Prince's Countenance and
Complexion expressed his grief, the one being sad, the other pale; standing in a
fixed Posture, his Body seeming like a Statue without Soul, which was gone to
seek after her. But at last, as if it had returned in despair, grew frantic
with grief, tearing himself, cursing his Misfortunes; at length, goes into her
Chamber again, looking in every corner, even where she could not be, as much as
where she might be: for, Lovers leave no place nor means unsought, or untried.
At last he espied a Letter upon the Table, directed to the Lady, which he
opened, considering not the Incivility of breaking up the Seal without the
Lady's leave (for Jealous Lovers break all such Ceremonies): and thus read:

Madam,
PRAY think me not ungrateful, after all your Noble Favors, that I go away
without your leave or knowledge: for, could I have staid with security, nothing
but your Commands could have forced me from you; or could my Life have served
you, I would have offered it as a Sacrifice to Obligation. But, Madam, it is
too dangerous for a Lamb to live near a Lion: for, your Nephew is of so hungry
an Appetite, that I dare not stay, which makes me seek safety in some other
place. But when my Thoughts forget your Honorable Memory, let them cease to
think. The Gods protect your Virtue, and send you Health. Fare you well.

Affectionata.

When he had read this Letter, and went to lay it on the Table again, he
perceived another Letter directed to him, which he opened and read.

SIR,
YOU cannot condemn me for going away, since my stay might prove my Ruin, you
having not power over your Passions. But had my Life been only in danger, I
should have ventured it: not that I am so fond of Death, as to give my Life
willingly away; but I am so true a Votress to Chastity, that I will never
forsake her Order, but will carry her Habit to my Grave: Nor will I give Virtue
an occasion to weep over my Follies, nor Truth to revile me with Falsehood; but
Honor, as a Garland, shall crown my Hearse, whilst Innocence enshrines my
Corpse, that Fame may build me a Monument in Noble Minds. Had you been Master of
your Passion, or bad the temperance of your Affections been equal to your other
Virtues, I should have joyed to live near you, as Saints do to the Gods; and
though my hard Fortune have driven me into many Dangers (and more I am like to
run through, by the unknown ways you have forced me into) yet the blessing of
Jupiter fall upon you, whatsoever Chance befalls me. Farewell.

Affectionata.

When he had read his Letter, he sits down musing with himself a long time;
then rose, and without speaking any words, departed to his House in the City.

The old Lady, his Princess, seeing him so sad, asked him what was the Cause?

He answered, He was sick, and went to bed.

The next day, calling his Steward, he settled his Estate, and ordered every
thing according to his Mind, and bid him provide so much Moneys: which done, he
sent for his Wife, telling her, She must not take it ill, if he left her for a
short time, for he was resolved to travel: for, said he, I have a quarrel to
one that is stolen out of the Kingdom, and I cannot (...) at quiet until I have
found the Party out, to be evenged for the Injury done me; which he bid her to
conceal.

She, with Tears, entreated his stay; but no Persuasions could prevail to alter
his intention, or rather resolution: for, Love is obstinate; and if it finds
not a like return, but a neglect, grows spightful, rather wishing evil to what
they love, than another should enjoy what they would have; and hate themselves,
out of a displeasure, in not having what they desire: So did he, and was
impatient until he was shipped and gone; who steered his course toward the
Kingdom of Riches, as believing she was sailed toward her own Country; and
resolved he was to find her out, or to end his days in the search; his Life
being a burden to him without her company.

Thus Love, sailing in the Ship of Imagination, on the Ocean of the Mind,
tossed on the troubled Waves of discontented Thoughts, whilst his Body sailed
in the Ship on the Sea, cutting the salt Waves, they were set on by Pirates,
and taken Prisoners; so that he was doubly captivated, his Soul before, and now
his Body. At first they used him but roughly, according to their barbarous
natures; but, by degrees, his noble Disposition, and affable Behavior, got
indifferent entertainment.

It chanced some time after, in the sharing of those Prizes they got with him,
and some others they had got before, they fell out, and from rude words they
fell to ruder blows: The Prince apprehending the danger that might befall to
himself, strove to pacify them; giving them such Reasons in elegant words,
that it charmed their Ears, and softened their Hearts, and ended the strife
amongst them; and begot from them such love and respect, that they made him
their Albitrator, and Divider of the Spoils; which he performed with that
Justice and Discretion to each one, that they made him their Governor, and
chief Ruler over them; which Power he used with that Clemency and Wisdom, that
he was (...) father as their God, than their Captain, giving him all
Ceremonious Obedience.

And thus reigning in his Watery Kingdom with his three-forked Trident, we leave
him for a time, and visit the old Man and adopted Son, who now began to grow
weary of their Divine Honors, and (like wise Men, that seek a retired and
secured life from the Pomp of dangerous Glories) bethought themselves how they
might get away, and to return into their own Countries again: for, an humble
and mean Cottage is better beloved by the Owner, than the bravest and
stateliest Palace, if it be another's.

Thus, putting their Designs in execution, they invited the King and People to
a solemn Meeting in the Temple; where Travelia, standing in his usual place,
thus spoke: THE Gods ( said he) will have us to return from whence we came; and
to you (Great King) their Command is, To love your People, and to distribute
Justice amongst them; guarding the Innocent, punishing the Offender; and not to
use any cruel Ceremony to destroy your own Kind; but to instruct them in the
Right, and to lead them into the ways of Truth, as being their High Priest
amongst them: Also, To make as Wars against your Neighboring Kingdoms, but as
a defense and guard to your own: for, in Peace lives Happiness, when Wars
bring Ruin and Destruction; and in doing this, Tranquillity shall be as a Bed
of Ease for Life to sleep on; and Length of Days as a Chariot for Life to ride
in to Heaven, where your Souls shall dwell in the height of Bliss: And, in this
World, Fame shall Crown your Deeds, and your Posterity shall glory in your Name.

And to you, beloved People, the Gods command Piety in your Devotion, Obedience
to your King, Love to your Neighbor, Mercy to your Enemies, Constancy to your
Friends, Liberty to your Slaves, Care and Industry for your Children, Duty to
your Parents: and in doing this, Plenty shall flow in amongst you, Mirth shall
dance about you, Pleasures shall invite you, Delight shall entertain you, Peace
shall keep you safe, till the Gods call you to partake of the Glories of
Heaven; and my Prayers shall always be, That Jove may preserve you all.



Then going off from the place where he stood, they went to the King to take
their leaves: whereat the King and People wept, and wished the Gods had given
them leave to dwell amongst them. But since they could not have their desire
therein, they traveled to the Riverside in attendance on them, offering them
great Riches to carry with them: But they desired, nor took they any more with
them, than they thought would defray their charges in a time of necessity:
Neither did they build a new Ship to sail in, but went in the same Boat they
came, which had been kept, as a Relick, safe: for the old Man considered with
himself, that a bigger Vessel would be more dangerous, without Seamen, than
the small Boat, which they could manage themselves. And so with great sorrow of
either side, the one to lose their Angels (as they thought them to be), the
others for the dangers they were to run through.

And thus they parted from the Kingdom of Fancy, putting forth their Boat from
the shore; the old Man (who was very skilful at Sea) observing what Angle they
came in, returned the same way: where, after six days, they were upon the Main
Sea, the Winds being fair, and the Waters smooth, the Boat went as swift as an
Arrow out of a Parthian's Bow; and as even, as if it meant to hit a Mark; but
if by a fresh Gale the Waves did chance to rise, the Boat would as nimbly skip
each ridg, as a young Kid over a green Hillock; being as leight as Mercury's
winged Heels: So Joy filled their Hearts with Hopes, as Winds filled their
Sails.

But various Fortune, causing several changes in the World, did raise such
Storms of Fears, as drowned all their Joys: for a Ship fraughted with Pirates,
like a great Whale, seized on them. Pirates let nothing escape which they can
get to make advantage of; so ravenous is their covetous Appetite: But finding
not such a Prize as they did expect, but such as might rather prove a burden,
consulted to put the old Man into the Boat again, and to keep only the young
Youth, whom (being very handsome) they might sell for a Slave, and get a Sum of
Money. But when the old Man was to depart, Travelia clasped about him so close,
that his Tears, and the Tears of the old Man, mixed and joined, and flowed as
Waters through a Channel, swelled with several Brooks. But when he was forced
to leave his hold, down on his kness he fell, begging he might go, or keep his
Father there: Pity, said he, my Father's Age: Cast him not out alone to sail on
the wide and dangerous Sea; for though my Help is weak, yet I am a Stay and
Staff for his decayed Life to lean upon; and I hope the Gods have destined me
to that end; but if no pity can move your Hearts for Him, O let it do it for
Me: Cut me not from the Root, though old and dry;
For then, poor Branch, I wither shall, and dye.


Nay, said he, I will dye when I can no longer help him; for Death is in my
power, though Life is not.

But the Prince, who was their Commander, hearing a noise, came on the Deck;
who no sooner saw him, but was struck with Compassion, raised by a resemblance
of his Mistress appearing in the Face of the Youth; and going to him, bid him
dry his Eyes, and cease his Sorrow, for they both should live together so long
as he could keep them.

Heaven bless you, said he, and may you never part from that you most do love.

But when Travelia's Tears were stopped, and sight got a passage through her
Eyes again, and looking up to view that Man from whom his Obligations came, no
sooner saw his Face, but Terror struck his Heart, and trembling seized her
Limbs, as if she had seen some hideous and prodigious thing.

The Prince observing her in that Agony, asking him (as supposing her a Boy),
What made him shake and tremble so?

In quivering Words she answered, As Fear before had shrunk his Sinews short,
so now Joy had extended them too far.

The Prince then stroaking his Head, promised they should both be well used;
and so returned into his Cabin.

Thus traveling on the Sea, as on a great Champain; the Ship, like a Horse,
went several paces, according as the Waves did rise and fall.

But at last this Ship became like a Horse diseased with Spavins, which broke
out, and sprung a leak, which they stopped as well as they could for the time;
but doubting it could not long hold out, grew very sad, some weeping, some
praying, some murmuring, some raving, according as their Fear and Hopes were.
But the Prince, who was valiant by nature, expected Death with as much
patience, as they with fear did apprehend it; neither was he struck with
terror, but yielded to the Fates, and was willing to dye. But, in the midst of
their Afflictions, at last they espied an Island; at which sight they all
shouted for joy.

Thus, in the life of Man, many several accidents pass about; and it chances,
many times, that out of the midst of Grief and Sorrow, rises up Objects of
Comfort; so was it here: and setting up all their Sails, made haste to it; but
before they could come close to it, although they were not far from it, the
Leak broke out again, and likewise their Fears; for the Ship grew sick of a
lingering Disease, that it could swim no farther, but perished by little and
little; which perceiving, they hoist out their Boat, where the Prince gave
order, That those which were most afraid, should go first; he himself was the
last that went therein, though the Boat did go and unload, and returned many
times; insomuch, that not only the Passengers were saved, but all their Goods,
which no sooner were out, but the Ship sunk, and dyed of that Incurable Dropsy.

But in these Dangers the Prince forgot not Travelia; for why, the Prince was
more fond of him, than Travelia was of himself; for her fears of being known,
gave her no rest. But being all safely arrived in the Island, they began to
consider what to do; the Prince counseled them to choose out some of the
Company to build up Hutts to lay their Goods in; and also to cut down some
Trees, there being great store of Wood, choosing that which was most proper and
fit to build a new Ship; whilst the rest of the Company went to seek Food, and
to discover the place.

This being agreed upon, they divided themselves; and those that traveled up
into the Island, found it very small, as being not above thirty miles long, and
twenty broad, and unpeopled; but great store of Fish and Fowl; few Beasts; but
those that were, were of a gentle Kind; fine Meadows full of Grass and sweet
Flowers; refreshing and shady Woods, wherein ran clear Springs, and bubling
Brooks. Thus, though it were little, it was very pleasant; the greatest
Inconvenience they found there, was want of Houses; for they found the ground
somewhat damp with Dews, which (being an Island) it was subject to: but the Air
was ferene and clear, the Climate a little more than temperately hot. But the
time that the Ship was a building, the Prince had a little House, or thing like
an Arbor, built in the midst of the Island, to lodge in; and the rest made
Hutts for themselves; and several Recreations they found to pass away the time.

Being in so solitary a place, the Prince (who was melancholy for the loss of
his Mistress) grew full of Thoughts; and having her Picture in his Mind drawn
to the life, comparing it to Travelia's Face, which he often looked upon, began
to reason with himself why that might not be she, considering her private
escape, and the little acquaintance she had in that Country; and seeming of a
better breeding than a Ship-Master's Son could have, it did almost confirm his
hopes. But discoursing one day with the old Man of several accidents, telling
their Misfortunes and good hap of both sides, and being both of one Country;
the old Man, thinking no harm, discovered by his talking, that Travelia was
none of his Son, begotten from his Loins, but adopted through Compassion and
Affection; and then telling the Story how he came into his Ship unknown, or
without his leave; by the circumstances of Time, Place, and Manner, found that
it was she; whereat, being transported with joy, he could scarce conceal his
Passion, but dissembled his knowledge as well as he could for the present, yet
after that time sought an occasion to get her alone; where he did usually go a
Birding, and did command Travelia to carry his Bags of Shot after him (who
loved the Service, though she feared the Lord); and when they were gone some
distance from the rest of the Company, and being in a shady Wood, the Prince
feigned himself weary; and setting down to rest, commanded him to do the like;
and at last discovered to him how he came to know her.

She finding her self discovered, turned as pale as Death; and in that passion
of Fear, prayed him to kill her, or otherwise she should find a way to do it
her self.

But the Prince told her, He would satisfy himself first, unless she would
consent to live with him as his Wife, in that Island, wherein (said he) we may
live free and secure, without any Disturbance.

She musing with her self what to do, believing he was not grown the Chaster,
with living amongst rude and barbarous People, thought it best to dissemble,
and give a seeming-consent.

Whereat the Prince's Thoughts being more elevated, than if he had been Master
of the whole World, they returned to the rest of the Company; the one with an
over-joyed Mind, the other sad, and full of perplexed Thoughts. But when she
came to a place where she might be alone, sitting down in a melancholy posture,
without uttering Words, or shedding Tears; for Grief and Amazement had
congealed the one, and stopped the other: yet at last her smuthered sorrow broke
out into Complaint.

You Gods ( said she)! Who will offer Sacrifice to your Deities, since you give
Innocence no protection, nor let Chastity live undefiled? Cruel Fates! to spin
my Thread of Life, to make me up a Web of Misery! Accursed Fortune, that brake
not that Thread with an untimely Death! And you unjust Powers, to torment poor
Virtue, making it a sin to free it self: for, bad I leave to dye, I would not
live in shame: for to dwell bear, committing Acts dishonorable, although I am
forced, yet shall I seem a Party guilty; and though no outward Accusers, yet my
Conscience will condemn me. But, O you Gods of Light! Since you regard me not,
nor will not hear me; You Powers of Darkness, hearken unto me, and wrap me up
in your dark Mantles of perpetual Night, that no Eye may see me; and cast me
into black Oblivion, where no remembrance is.

The old Man her Father (who was come from the Waterside, where he had been
for the directing and ordering the building of a new Ship) came to her in the
midst of her Complaints, and asked her, What she lacked? or, If she were sick?

I would I were, said she; then might I hope Death would reprieve me: But I am
worse; for I am miserable, having Torment (like to those of Hell) within my
Mind: My Thoughts are Vultures, eating on my Carrion-Infamy; or like the
restless Stone, that cannot get up to the Hill of Peace, but rolleth back with
fear and sad remembrance. Then she told him what she was, which he did never
know before; and what had passed since the first of her Misfortunes, to that
present; and how he had ignorantly discovered her.

Which, when he heard, he cursed his Tongue for telling how, and where he found
her.

Father, said she, What is past, cannot be recalled; wherefore, I must strive
to help my self in what is to come: and since I have been dutiful, and you so
loving and kind, as to save me from the Jaws of Death; help me now to protect
my Honor; convey me hence; let me not live here to please his Appetite, but
cast me to some unknown place, where (like an Anchoret) I may live from all the
World, and never more to see the face of Man; for, in that Name, all Horror
strikes my Senses, and makes my Soul like to some furious thing; so much
affrighted it has been.

Her Father said, Heaven give you quiet, and me aid to help your Designs. But
you must (said he) dissemble, to compass them: wherefore rise, and put on a
smooth and pleasant face, and let your Discourse be so compliant, that you may
have a free liberty; for if a Doubt should cross his Thoughts, you may chance
to be restrained and kept by force, which will break that assistance I may give
you.

Whilst they were thus discoursing, the Prince came to them (who had not
patience to be long from her; for her Absence was his Hell, and her Presence
his Heaven), flattering the old Man: My Father, said he, (for so I may call you
now) let me entreat you I may be your Son, and she your Daughter; since she,
you thought a Boy, is proved a Girl: and since Fortune has brought us so
happily to meet, let us not despise her Favors, but make the best use of them,
to our advantage.

Then telling the old Man, how that Island might be made a Paradise, and in
what felicity they might live there, if their peevish Humors did not
overthrow. their Pleasures. The old Man seemed to approve of all the Prince
said; whereupon the Prince took him to be his dear Friend, and secret
Councellor: for the old Man did not omit to give him Counsel concerning the
settling and advancing of his new and small Monarchy; because he thought, in
doing so, he might the better work out his own Design, by taking away those
suspicions that otherwise he thought might be had of him.

Then the Prince bid the old Man to have a care, and to order his Maritime
Affairs, in over-seeing his Ships and Boats built (for, said he, our chief
Maintenance will be from the Sea); the whilst I will persuade these Men I have
here, to make this place the Staple and Port of their Prizes, and Dwelling.

Then taking Travelia along with him (the old Man and he parted for that time),
and going to the rest of the Company, he persuaded so well with his Rhetoric,
that they resolved to stay, and build them Houses there to live, and also
Warehouses to lay their Prizes in, and from thence to traffic with them into
safe and free places. Whereupon every one put himself in order thereunto; some
cut down Wood, others dug up Stones; some carried Burdens, and some
builded. Thus, like Bees, some gathered the Honey and Wax, whilst others made
and wrought the Combs.

The mean time the old Man made himself busy, at the Coast side, about Ships
and Boats, as being the chief Master employed in that Work. But oft-times he
would go out a fishing in a Fisher-boat all alone, bringing several Draughts of
Fish; and when he thought he should be least mistrusted, conveyed Victuals
therein, and then gave Travelia notice to steal to the Waterside; who,
watching her opportunity when the Prince was busy in surveying, and in drawing
the Platforms of the City he would have built, stole away; and as soon as she
came, her old Father went as if he meant to go a fishing, carrying his Nets
(and the like) with him to the Boat, his supposed Son busy in helping him; and
so both being put out to Sea, and not gone very far, were taken by the
Sympathetical Merchants, who trafficking into the Kingdom of Amity, sold them
there to other Merchants; who carrying them to the chief City, the Queen of
that Country (who was an Absolute Princess in the Rule and Government thereof)
seeing Travelia, who was brought to her as a Rarity, took such a liking to him,
that she received him into her Family, as also to attend near her Person;
wherein he behaved himself so well, that he became her Favorite, and the old
Man was treated very well for his Son's sake.

In the mean time, the Prince was in a sad condition for the loss of his
Mistress, who searched about all the Island for her; but could hear nothing of
her, until he sent to the Seaside for the old Man, to enquire for her; and had
answer back, That the old Man and the Youth went out a fishing, but were not as
yet returned. Which he no sooner heard, but guesled a-right that they were fled
away. Whereupon he grew so enraged, that he lost all Patience; swearing,
tearing, stamping, as if he had been distracted.

But when his Fury was abated, his Melancholy increased, walking solitary,
accompanied only with his sad Thoughts, casting about which way to leave that
hated place (for all places seemed so to him where his Mistress was not): yet
he knew not very well what to do, because he had persuaded the rest of the
Company to abide there, and make it their home; and in order thereunto he knew
they had taken great pains: besides, he thought they might despise him, as
seeming unconstant; yet stay he could not: wherefore calling them together he
spoke in this manner: My Friends, said he, We have here a pleasant Island,
altogether unhabited, but what is possessed by our selves; and certainly, we
might become a famous People, had we Women to get Posterity, and make a
Commonwealth: but as we are all men, we can only build us Houses to live and
dye in, but not have Children to survive us. Wherefore my Counsel is, That some
of us that are most employed, may take the new Ship, and go a Pyracing for
Women, making some adventure on the next Kingdom, which may be done by a sudden
surprisal; which Prizes, if we get any, will bring us more comfort, pleasure,
and profit, than any other Goods: for, what contentment can Riches bring us, if
we have not Posterity to leave it to?



They all applauded so well of his Advice, that they were impatient of stay,
striving who should go along with him; and so pleased they were with the
imagination of the Female Sex, that those whose Lot was to stay (who seldom or
never prayed before) prayed for the others good success. But the Prince's
intention was, only to find that Female he lost; caring not to seek for those
he never saw. But setting out with great expedition, and hopes of a good
return, sailed with a fair Wind three or four days, at last saw Land, part of
the Kingdom of Amity. No sooner landed, but they were beset with Multitudes of
Countrey-people, who flocked together, being affrighted with the arrival of
strangers; and being more in numbers than they were, overpowered them, and
took them Prisoners. They were examined, for what they came? They answered, For
fresh Water. But they believed them not: for, said they, it is not likely you
would come in a Troop so armed, for fresh Water. So they bound them, and sent
them to the King, to examine them farther: And being carried to the chief City,
where the King was, who was advertised of all; sent for them into his Presence
to view them: And being brought unto them, the Prince, who was of a comely and
graceful Presence, and a handsome man, bowing his Head down low, in a
submissive style thus spoke: Great King, We poor Watry-Pilgrims, traveling
through the vast Ocean to search the Curiosities of Nature, that we may offer
our Prayers of Admiration, on her Altar of New Discoveries; have met with cruel
Fortune, who always strives to persecute, and has forced us to your Coast for
the relief of fresh Water: for we came not here to rob, nor to surprise; but to
relieve our feeble Strength, that was almost lost with thirst; not that we were
afraid to dye, but loath to live in Pain: nor would we willingly yield up our
Lives, unless great Honor lay at stake: but if the Fates decree our death,
what way soever it comes, with patience we will submit.

But if, great King, your Generosity dares trust our Faiths, so far as to
employ us in your Service, we may prove such by our Courage, that our Acts may
beg a Pardon for those necessitated Faults we have committed; and if we dye in
Wars, we dye like Gallant Men; but to dye shackled Prisoners, we dye like
Slaves, which all Noble Natures abhor.



The King, when he had heard him speak, thus answered the Prince (as their
accustomed manner was) in Verse: Your Faith I Will trust, and Courages will try:
Then let us see how bravely you dare dye.


The Prince Poetically answered again, as he perceived it an usual Custom to
speak: Our Lives, said he, we will quit, before we yield:
We Will win your Battles, or dye in the field.


For the King, at that time, was newly entered into a War with the Queen of
Amity; the chief cause was, for denying him Marriage, he being a Bachelor, and
she a Maid, and their Kingdoms joining both together; but he nearer to her by
his Affection, being much in Love with her: But she was averse and deaf to his
Suit; and besides, her People was loath, for fear of being made a subordinate
Kingdom. Wherefore, he sought to get her by force. And the King, liking the
Prince's Demeanor, demanded who he was, and from whence he came. The Prince
told him truly, who he was, from whence he came; how he was taken by the
Pirates; and how long he had lived with them (concealing the cause of his
journey): But by his Discourse and Behavior, he insinuated himself so far into
the King's Favor, and got such Affections in his Court, that he became very
powerful, insomuch as he was chosen the Chief Commander to lead out the Army;
believing him (as he was) nobly born, and observing him to be honorably bred;
and they (being a People given to ease, and delighting in Effeminate Pleasures)
shunned the Wars, sending out only the most Vulgar People, who were rather
Slaves than Subjects: All meeting together, produced the choosing of the Prince,
who ordered and directed their setting out, so well, and prudently, as gave
them great hopes of a good Success.

In the mean while, the Queen was not ignorant of their Intentions, nor slack
in her Preparations, sending forth an Army to meet them: But the Queen her self
had a War in her Mind, as great as that in the Field; where Love, as the
General, lead her Thoughts; but fear and doubt of Times, made great disorder,
and especially at that time; for Travelia, on whom she doted, was then sick; in
which Sickness, she took more care to recover him, than to guard her self and
Kingdom. But the Army she sent out, was led by one of her Chief Noble Men, who
marched on until he had a view of the other Army; and, being both met, they set
their Armies in Battel-array.

When they were ready to fight, the Prince thus spoke in the most general
Language: Noble Friends,

YOU being all Strangers to me, makes me ignorant both of your Natures and
Customs; and I, being a Stranger to you, may cause a mistrust both of my
Fidelity and Conduct. As for my Experience, I am not altogether ignorant of the
Discipline of War, having been a Commander in my own Country. Neither need
you doubt of my Zeal and Loyalty to your King's Service, by reason I owe my
Life to him; for it was in his power to have taken it away: Neither can I have
more Honor bestowed on me from any Nation, than from this, were I never so
ambitious, or basely covetous, to bribe out my Fidelity: Wherefore, if I lose
(as I am persuaded I shall win the Day), yet it will not be out of my Neglect,
Falsehood, or want of Skill; but either it must be through Fortune's
Displeasure, or by your Distracted Fears; which I cannot believe will possess
any Spirit here, being so full of Alacrity, Cheerfulness, and Readiness to meet
the Enemy; and may the Thoughts of Honor maintain that Heat and Fire, not only
until it has consumed this Army you see, but all that shall ever oppose you.



After he had thus spoke to them, they began the Onset: Long was the Dispute;
but at last, by the Prince's Courage, which animated the rest by his Example,
and by his wise Conduct and diligent Care in rectifying the disordered Ranks,
and supplying their broken Files by fresh Men, he got the day, and put the
Enemy to a rout, killing many, and taking store of Prisoners.

The Prince, when he saw that Fortune was his Friend at that time, though at
other times she had frowned; yet now he thought to make his advantage whilst
she was in a good Humor: wherefore he called to the Soldiers to follow their
pursuit; but they were so busy in the dividing of the Spoils, as they were
deaf to all Commands or Entreaties, giving their Enemies leave to rally their
scattered Forces, and so to march away; and by that means they got so far
before them, as they had time to get up their Spirits, and strengthen their
Towns by Fortification; to Man their Forts, and to entrench themselves;
whereas, if they had followed their Victory, they might have taken a great part
of the Country: for, all Towns, Forts, and the like, seldom stand out, but
yield to a Victorious Army; yet it must be whilst the terror and fright of
their Losses, has wholly possessed their Minds, leaving no place for Hope. But
when the Prince thought they had lost their opportunity, through the
Covetousness of the Soldiers, he sent a Messenger to the King, of the Victory,
and with the Reasons why he could not follow the same; but, if his Majesty
would give permission, he would march on, and try out his Fortune. In the mean
time, the Queen hearing of the loss of her Army, was much perplexed; Then
musing with her self what way she were best to take, she straight went to
Travelia, who was indifferently well recovered; to him she related the sad
News; then asked his Counsel what she were best to do.

He told her, His Opinion was for her to call a Council of the Gravest and
Noblest of her Subjects, and those whose Age had brought Experience: for, if
Worldly Wisdom dwells any where, it is in Aged Brains, which have been ploughed
by various Accidents, and sowed with the Seed of Observation, which Time has
ripened to a perfection; these are most likely, said he, to produce a plentiful
and good Crop of Advice; but young Brains, said he, want both Manuring and
Maturity, which makes their Counsels green and unwholesome. Whereupon they
called a Council; where, after they had disputed long, at last they all agree
in one consent, That the best was, For her to go her self in Person, to animate
her Soldiers, and to give a new Life to their dejected Spirits.

Whereat she was much troubled, by reason Travelia was not so well as to travel
with her; and to leave him, seemed worse to her than Death.

But after her Council was broken up, she returned to him, and told him what
her Council had decreed. And this (said she angerly to him) was by your Advice:
For, had I not called a Council, but had sent a General of my own choice, it
would not have been put to a Vote for me to have gone in Person. But had you
had that love for me, as I have for you, I should have had better Advice; and
with that wept. Heaven knows, said she, the greatest Blow Fortune can give me,
is to go and leave you behind me.

He seeing her weep, thus spoke: BEAUTY of your Sex, and Nature's rarest Piece;
Why should you cast your Love so low upon a Slave so poor as I, when Kings
hazard their Kingdoms for your sake? And if your People knew, or did suspect
your Love to me, they would rebel, and turn unto your Enemy; and besides,
Conquerors are feared and followed; whereas Losing is a way to be despised, and
trod into the Earth with scorn. Alas! I am a Creature mean and poor, not worthy
such a Queen as you; and 'twere not wise to hazard all for me. Wherefore, go
on great Queen; and may you shine as glorious in your Victories, as the
brightest Stars in Heaven: May Pallas be your Guide, and Mars the God of War
fight your Battles out: May Cupid give you ease, and Venus give delight. May
Hymen give such Nuptials as best befits your Dignity. May Fortune always smile,
and Peace dwell in your Kingdom.

And in each Heart such Loyal Love may grow:
No Disobedience may this Kingdom know:
Age Crown your Life, and Honor close your Days:
Fame's Trumpet loud may blow about your Praise.


She, weeping, said:

No Sound will pierce my Ear, or please my Mind,
Like to those Words you utter, when they are kind.
But at last by his Persuasions, more than by her Councellor's Advice, she
consented to go, upon that condion he would take upon him the Government of her
Kingdom, until such time as she returned again; and, said she, if I dye, be you
Heir to my Crown, and Ruler of my People. And may the Gods keep you from all
Opposers.

The People knowing her Commands and Pleasure by her Proclamation, fell a
murmuring, not only in that she left a Stranger, but a poor Slave, who was
taken Prisoner and sold, and a Person who was of no higher Birth than a
Ship-Master's Son, to govern the Kingdom, and rule the People. Whereupon they
began to design his death, which was thought best to be put in execution when
she was gone.

But he behaved himself with such an affable demeanor, accompanied with such
smooth, civil, and pleasing words, expressing also the sweetness of his Nature
by his Actions of Clemency; distributing Justice with such even Weights;
ordering every thing with that Prudence; governing with that Wisdom, that it
begot such Love in every Heart, that their Mouths ran over with Praises,
ringing out the Sound with the Clappers of their Tongues, into every Ear; and
by their Obedience showed their Duty and Zeal to all his Commands, or rather to
his Persuasions, so gently did he govern.

Thus whilst he ruled in Peace at home, the Armies met abroad; and being set
ready to fight, the Trumpets sounded to Charge, and every one prepared to
encounter his Enemy, striving for the honor of Reputation, which is got by the
ruin of one Side: So equally has Nature distributed her Gifts, that every one
would have a just Proportion, did not Fortune disorder and misplace her Works
by its several Accidents.

But the terror of the former Blow was not quite extinguished in the Queen's
Army, nor the insulting Spirits of the other Army laid, but rather a new
Courage added to their old Victory, which did help them now to win that day,
and with such victorious Fortune, that they took the Queen a Prisoner, and did
destroy the whole Army.

The Prince thinking the Kingdom won, in having the Queen's Person, made him
divide his Army into two parts; the one half he sent to take possession of the
Towns, Castles, and Forts; the other part he led himself to conduct the Queen,
being much pleased that he had such a Gift to present to the King; which
Present he knew his Royal Master would prize above all the World, which made
him choose to go with it: for had the Spoils been less, he had sent them with
some Messengers; but being so Rich, he durst trust none to guard it but himself.

The King hearing of their coming, made all the Preparations of State that
could be, sending the Prince a Triumphant Chariot, and his own Robes to wear;
which Chariot coming as they were ready to enter the City, the Prince sets the
Queen thereon, and walks on foot by the Chariot-side, as being Mistress to the
King his Master.

And the King, being attended by all his Nobles of the Kingdom, met the Queen,
and with great respect led her to his Palace; where, when she came, the King
kissed her Hand, and smiling, said,

The Gods had brought her thither: for certainly, said he, the Gods by their
Fates have decreed and destined you to be my Queen; in which Gift the Gods have
made me like themselves, to enjoy all Felicity.

She with a Face clothed in a sad Countenance, answered, Fortune was his
Goddess; and if he were like her, he might prove unconstant; and then, said
she, you may change from Love to Dislike; if so, I may chance to have liberty,
either by Death, or to be sent into my own Kingdom again.

If you will accept of me, said he, you shall not only have your own Kingdom,
but mine, wherein you shall be adored and worshipped as the only She in the
World.

She answered, I had rather have what I adore, than to be adored my self.

Then was she conducted to a strong and safe, but a pleasant place, to be kept
in, where the King visited her often, treated her civilly, courted her
earnestly, loving her with an extraordinary Passion.

The Prince, in the mean time, was in high favor with the King, who asked and
took his Counsel in every thing: And sending for him one day, when he came,
hung about his Neck, as was his Custom so to do; saying to him,

O my Friend! (for that was his usual Name he gave him) my Cruel Prisoner (said
he) you brought me, despises my Affection, slights my Addresses, condemns my
Suit, scorns my Proffers, hates my Person: What shall I do to gain her Love?

Alas! said the Prince, I have had so ill success in Love, that what I doted on
most, did hate me worst; which is the cause I have left my Country, Friends,
and Estate, and lost the peace of Mind, the joy of Mirth, the sweets of
Pleasures, the comfort of Life, hating my self because she does not like nor
love me: Jealous I am of Light, Darkness, Heat, Cold, because they come so near
as to touch her. I wish her dead, because none should enjoy her but my self:
yet I cannot live without her, and loath I am to dye and leave her here behind.
Thus hang I on a tortured Life, and bear my Hell about me.

Whilst they were thus lamenting their hard Fortunes in Love, a Messenger
brought News that their Forces were beaten that were sent into Amity.

How can that be, said the Prince? Most of the Nobles being here, and none but
Peasants left behind, who have no skill in Wars, and only fight like Beasts?

But the Alarms came so thick one after another, to tell that they had not only
beat their Forces, but were entered into their Kingdom.

With that the King in haste dispatched the Prince with a fresh Supply added to
those Forces he brought the Queen with, so marched out to meet the Enemy. For
Travelia hearing the Queen was taken Prisoner, was highly enraged; which Choler
begot a Masculine and Courageous Spirit in her: for though she could not have
those Affections in her for the Queen, as a Man; yet she admired her Heroic
Virtues, and loved her as a kind and gracious Princess to her; which
Obligations made her impatient of Revenge: Then calling all the chief of the
Kingdom together, thus spoke unto them: Honorable, and most Noble,

You have heard the sad News of the Queen's being taken Prisoner, which cannot
choose but strike your Hearts through your Ears, and make them burn in flames of
high Revenge; and may those Flames be never quenched, until you fetch her back,
and set her in her Throne again. She went to keep you safe; and nothing can be
more ungrateful, than to let her live amongst her Enemies. Nor can you here be
free, whilst she is made a Slave; your Wives and Children will be bought and
sold, and you be forced to do their Servile Work: What Goods you now possess,
your Enemies will enjoy. Then let your Hands and Strength redeem your
Countrey's Loss; or sacrifice your Lives in the Service.



After she had spoke, they proclaimed her with one Voice General; raising new
Forces, making Vows they would never forsake their Queen; but dye, or be
Conquerors.

Then sitting themselves in order thereunto, Travelia (as their General and
chief Governor) caused a solemn Fast and Procession, sacrificing to the Gods
for good Success.

After that, she took a view of her Arms and Ammunition, selecting out the
ablest and youngest Men to fight, making the better sort Commanders, that Envy
might not breed Disobedience: The Aged she chose for her Counselors, her old
Father being made one; the most Mechanics, as Smiths, Farriers, Pioneers,
Cannoneers, Sumpter-men, Wagoners, Cooks, Women, and the like, went with the
Bag and Baggage. Neither did she omit to take good Chyrurgeons, Doctors,
Apothecaries, and Druggists, to help the Sick and Wounded. At the Army's going
out, she caused a Proclamation to be read, That all the Women and Children, and
infirm persons, which were left behind, not being fit to go, should pray
incessantly to the Gods for Victory and safe return: for, said she, Women and
Children, and the Infirm, are the best Advocates, even to the Gods themselves,
being the most shiftless Creatures they have made, wherefore the most aptest to
move Compassion.

Thus settling the Kingdom in a devout and orderly posture, they marched on,
re-taking their Towns, Forts, and Castles, lost; beating the Enemy out of every
place; insomuch as they did not only clear their own Kingdom of their Enemies,
but entered into theirs: And being gone some days journey, their Scouts brought
them word there was an Army coming to meet them; and, after a short time, the
Armies were in view of each other: Whereupon she drew up her Forces; the right
and left Wings she gave to be commanded by two of the Valiantest and
Experienced Commanders; the Rear unto another; the Van she led her self; the
Reserve she gave her old Father in charge to bring in, as he saw occasion;
praying him he would not stand with it so far off, but that he might come soon
enough to their aid; nor yet to stand so near, as to be annoyed with their
present Fight: Father, said she, I give you this part to command, because I
dare trust your Faith, as well as your Judgment, Courage, and Skill.

Then she commanded every Captain of a Company should place himself in the
midst of their second Ranks; for if the chief Commander (said she) in a
Company, be killed, the Spirits of the common Soldiers soon dye, and their
Nerves grow slack with fear; and all their strength will fail, unless it be to
run away.

The Lieutenants, she ordered them to place themselves in their last Ranks, to
keep the Soldiers from flying: for, said she, shame will cause Obedience, to
submit to Authority: wherefore, his Eyes will be as a Fort, and his Breast as a
Bulwark, to keep them in. Then she gave order, that every Squadorn should be
but five Ranks deep, and fifty on a breast; which number, said she, is enough
to knit into a proportionable Body; more makes it unweildy, and is like a man
overgrown with Fat, whose bulk makes him unactive either to assault, or to
defend himself: and Rands of Ten deep, said she, are not only unuseful and
troublesome, but so many men are lost as to employment; for the hindermost
Ranks come seldom or never to the Charge. In every Troop of Horse she placed
some Foot, both Pikes and Muskets, to gall and hurt their Enemy's Horse when
they came to encounter: for, if once the Horse fails, the Man is down. After
that, she commanded her Army to marchin such a slow pace, as not to break or
loosen their Ranks, but commanded them to join so close, as if there were no
Vacuum in their Troops, and so to move as one entire Body or Piece. Lastly, She
commanded all the Cuirasiers should stand in the forefront, to bear the shock,
or break the Ranks. And thus she set the Battalia in order, form, and figure,
as the ground and places would permit to their best advantage.

The Prince ordered his Battalia as he was used to do, making it thick, as
believing it to be the stronger; which is questionless the best way, if it were
only to stand still for a defense, but not to assault: for in Action, the half
of those thick Bodies serve only as Ciphers without a Figure; but never help to
multiply the Numeration of Blows. But the Armies, being both ready to join, the
young General thus spoke to his Soldiers: Noble Friends, Brave Soldiers, and
Wise Counselors,

WHO knows but this our meeting may produce good and great Effects, and bring
Peace to your Country, which is molested with Wars, and Ruin to your Enemies,
that have almost ruined you; Comfort to your sad Friends we have left behind,
Liberty to your imprisoned Friends? We fight for Fame hereafter, for Honor and
Profit now presently: but if we let our Enemies become our Masters, they will
give us restless Fears, unreasonable Taxes, unconscionable Oaths, whereby we
shall lose the Peace of our Mind, the Conversation of our Friends, the Traffic
with our Neighbors, the Plenty of our Land, the Form of our Customs, the Order
of our Ceremonies, the Liberty of the Subjects, the Royalty of your Government,
and the Company and Rule of our Gracious, Virtuous, and Beautiful Queen. And
shall they have Courage to spoil, and we none to right our Wrongs? Shall they
live by our hard Labor? And shall we live by their hard Laws? All Noble
Spirits hate Bondage, and will rather dye than endure Slavery. Wherefore, my
Friends, be you constant to your just Resolutions, circumspect in your ways,
patient in your Labors, Heroic in your Actions: for, What Man can remember
such Injuries, and let their Courages be cold? Wherefore, for your own sakes,
your Countrey's sake, your Royal Queen's sake, go on with valiant Hearts, and
active Strengths; and may Apollo be your Friend, shooting his Darts, dazzling
your Enemies Eyes. May Mars, the God of War, direct you in your fight. May
Fortune give you aid, and Pallas give you victory.



After she had thus spoke, the Trumpets sounded to Charge, and the young
General sent some flying Horse to give the onset, and then seem to run away;
which the other Army seeing, thought it was out of fear, and followed them as
in pursuit, which disordered and broke all their Ranks: but the Queen's Army
marched in good order to meet them; at which the Enemy, viewing their
unexpected posture, was so daunted, as they neither had Spirits to fight, nor
power to run away; and so a great number being killed and taken Prisoners, the
Queen's Army became absolute Masters of the Field.

The Prince with much difficulty retreated back about a days march, with some
few, but with the prime of his Horse; where he heard of a fresh Army coming to
assist them: for the King, fearing they were not strong enough, being forced
suddenly away, caused new men to be raised to follow them. The news of this
Army rejoiced the Prince much, being at that time very melancholy for the great
loss he received, and for the disgrace, as he thought, by reason he despised
the Enemies to the King; and to be overcome by those he scorned, did wrack his
Soul. But taking up fresh hopes with his new-come Army, returned back to the
Queen's Army again; who, when they heard of a new Supply, were much amazed and
dejected, by reason they were weary and tired with three Fights, and disordered
with gathering up, and carrying away their Spoils. But the young General,
perceiving them to hang down their Heads, thus spoke: Noble Friends,

I Perceive such a sadness in your Faces, as if fear had taken possession of
your hearts; which if it has, except Courage beats it out, it will betray your
Lives unto your Enemies; and to be taken by a timorous thought, before your
Strength has grapled with your Foes, were base; and if Right and Truth be on
your side, as sure it is; and Reason rules your Judgment, as I hope it does;
you have no cause to doubt: but if you fear the Conduct of my Youth, as wanting
Experience to judge or direct the best, then here are Aged men who with Ulysses
and Nestor may compare; their Counsel is your aid. Let no vain suspicion
therefore quench your hopes, but Courage set your Spirits on fire, and with
their heat consume your Enemies to Ashes.



With that they all aloud did say, Go on, we will dye or conquer.

In the mean while the Prince was encouraging his new-come Army, who was struck
with the news of the last Battle, hearing nothing of it until they met the
Prince; the sudden Report (like Thunder) shook their Spirits; which to appease,
the Prince thus spoke: Noble Friends,

You that have Humility to obey, Love to unite, Charity to redress, have Hopes
to obtain: for, Hope is the Ground on which Courage is built. Let not the Enemy
of Mistrust, vanquish your Faith; but perform your Loyalty through your
Industry: for obedient Thoughts are not sufficient, without obedient Actions.
Wherefore take Courage to fight. Let not your Enemies kill your Spirits. Weep
not, nor condole at our Losses; but let us regain our Honors either by
Victory, or Death. And they that are sloathful or cowardly in this Army, may
they neither enjoy the Laurel, Olive, or Cypress; but go to the Grave
unregarded, or forgotten; or live in shame, despised. But those that are
industrious and valiant, may they sit high in Honor's Throne; and Fame blow
their Praises so loud, and far, that no time can stop the Sound.



Then the two Armies being set in Battel-array, the Prince (to save the
effusion of blood) finding his Army not full of alacrity, sent the young Geral
a Challenge; who, although he knew himself unfit for a single Duel, accepted
it, being afraid of the dishonor of denying it: but the two Armies would not
consent to look on whilst they fought; for, in the Encounter, both Armies
joined in cruel fight.

But she having no skill in the art and use of the Sword, nor strength either
to assault or resist, was wounded; and her Wound bled so fast, that she fainted
and fell down to the ground. But the Prince, who was of a Noble nature,
perceiving by her shape that she was but a Stripling, run to unty her
Headpiece; and viewing her Face, straight knew her; and was so astonished
thereat, that he had not power to stir for the present; but stopping the Wound
as well as he could, brought life again; yet so faint she was, that she could
not speak; neither had he power to go away, but sat by until he was found in
that posture.

In the mean time, the Army being left to chance, having not their General to
direct them, Fortune played a part of Civility and Courtship, giving victory to
the Ladies; so the Queen's Army had the day; and some of the common Soldiers,
seeking for Spoil, found them, he sitting by, holding her in his Arms; from
whence they took her, and put her in a Litter, and he also in the same, as a
Prisoner, to carry them to the body of the Army; and as she went, having
recovered her Spirits again, thus complaining, she said:

I have heard of Pleasure, never could it obtain;
For what we Pleasure call, still lives in Pain:
Then Life is Pain, and Pain is only Life,
Which is a Motion, Motion all is strife;
As forward, backward, up or down, or so
Side-ways, or in a Circle round does go.
Then who would live, or would not wish to dye,
Since in the Grave there is no Misery?
O let me dye, strive not my Life to save;
Death happy is, and Peace lies in the Grave.
The Prince told her, She preached to her self a false Doctrine: for, said he,

Life is a blessing which the Gods do give;
And nothing shows them Gods, but that they live:
They Are the Original of Life, the Spring;
Life the beginning is of every thing:
And Motion is from all Eternity;
Eternal Motions make the Gods to be.
To wish no Life, we wish no Gods, and then
No Resurrection to the Souls of Men:
In Resurrection we as Gods become;
To be -- none would refuse a Martyrdom:
The very Being pleases Nature well,
Were she to live always in pains of Hell.
Nature, nothing is more horrid to her
Than Annibilation, that quite undoes her.
Thus Gods and Nature, you do wish to spoil,
Because a little pain endures a while.
Devils had rather Devils be, than naught at all;
But you like Angels that did never fall.
Thus they discoursed as they went; but he strove to conceal himself from her
knowledge, until such time as he thought he might make his peace with her, for
fear she should run away again out of hate and dislike to him.

But the Army, when they missed their young General, grew so sad, that they
took no pleasure in their Victory: for they were all as one dumb man, no noise
was heard, all Eyes were full of Tears. But when they saw the Litter, as
supposing she was dead, they raised a Cry that rent the Air, and made the
thicker Clouds to move. Which when she heard, and saw them running to her, she
shook her hand to show them she did live.

Then sent they shouts of Joy to Heaven high;
And every Countenance sad, looked merrily.
But when they came so near as to view her Face, and saw her pale and weak,
they grew into such a rage, that they would have killed the Prince, hearing he
wounded her: but she entreated for his life, and begged him for her Prisoner:
No sooner asked, but granted; and she gave the charge of him to her Father.

Being brought into her Tent, the Army watched by turns whilst she was under
the Surgeons hands for cure: Nor would they take any of the Spoils, but what
she did divide unto them; nor any Direction but what she gave: Nor would they
stir until her Health permitted her to travel: but, being indifferently well,
she gave order to march on.

But the King had raised another Army in the time of her sickness, and sent it
out to meet them. She, although weak, went about to order and encourage her
Soldiers, who loved her better than their life; which Affections made them
fight so well, that they overcame their Enemies; and before the King could
raise another Army, they got unto the City. Where, as soon as she came near,
she gave order to her Soldiers to entrench about it, and to cast at every
corner of the City a Mount of Earth, on which she placed her Cannon to batter
down the Walls: then she did build Forts about, to place her Men to shoot and
cast Grenades in; and by their several assaults they battered the City, and
killed many of their Men by sundry and sudden assaults: at last she resolved to
storm it. But the King, perceiving his weakness, and that he could not hold out
long, sent to the young General, desiring a Treaty, and withal a Cessation of
Arms.

In the mean time, the Queen, being weary of her Imprisonment, longing for the
coming of her Beloved, in a melancholy Humor thus spoke: O what a Hell is it
to love, and not be loved again! Nay, not only to love, but to love a Slave,
and he regards me not: Do I say, Slave? No, he is none, that has no Slavish
Passion: Then he is free,

And I am only bound to Slavery,
First to my Passions, then to his Tyranny.
What shall I do, you Gods above?
You punish me, and yet you make me love.
Do you delight still in a tortured Mind?
Make you no sympathy in Human Kind?
Must all your Works consist in contradiction?
Or do we all enjoy nothing but Fiction?
The Mind is nothing but mere Apprehension;
It Is not a Thing, unless it has Dimension.
But O you Powerful Gods! by your Decree,
You can of Nothing, Something make to be:
Then make me Something, grant me my Delight;
Give me my Lover, or destroy me quite.


Thus leaving her in a Melancholy Posture and Humor, we return to the Armies.

The Cessation being near expired, the young General called a Council, and thus
spoke to them: Right Noble and Valiant Heroes,

THE King has sent to treat of Peace; but in my opinion there can be no
honorable Agreement (next to the setting the Queen at liberty) but the
resigning of his Crown, and so his Kingdom, to her.

First, For raising Hostility, and disturbing the sweet Peace and happy
Condition of a Kingdom that never molested them.

Then, for the dishonor, in taking the Queen Prisoner, the ruin and spoil of
your Country, the death of your Friends, and the loss of your gallant Men,
killed in this Dissension, making many Widows and Fatherless Children.

Besides, Who can rely upon the Faith of an unjust Prince, who made War upon
his Neighbors without a just offense, but only through an ambitious attempt
upon your Queen and Kingdom? Have we not Victory? And yet shall we return with
Loss? Shall we despise the Gift of the Gods, in making no use of what they give
us? And shall the Trumpet of loud Fame report the Queen was taken Prisoner, and
resigned upon a low Agreement? No, let Fame divulge unto the World, her Release
came with the Ruin of his Kingdom.



After the General had spoken, one of the Council, who was like Nestor for
Years and Experience, thus spoke: OUR General has spoke a Speech so full of
Courage and Honor, as shows him to be of so true an Heroic Spirit, that he
has left no room for Policy to play a part. But States cannot subsist with
Valiant Hands alone, unless they have a Politic Head, which is the Guide to
great Designs; it burns more Cities than Grenades do; it undermines strong
Towns, pulls down great Works, wins Forts, sets Battles, takes Prisoners, makes
Slaves, and conquers Kings and Kingdoms; and what we call Policy in a Public
State, is called Discretion in a private Family; and it is not, as the Vulgar
think it, a Cheat, or mere Deceit, but a wise Prudence, to prevent the worst of
ills, and to keep Peace, or get Tranquillity. It Is true, Valor is a daring
Spirit, but Policy is the trusty Friend, and covers with skill all those Faults
it cannot mend; it guides the Bark in which Man's Life swims, and keeps them
from the shipwreck of the World, pulls down the ambitious Sails when blown too
full with Pride, lest it should overturn the Ship of Safety, to be drowned in
Seas of Miseries: But Policy will rather choose the Oars of Patience, and take
the Tides of Time, than venture where the Doubts are more than Hopes, or
Hazzards more than Gains. Then let us try to make a prudent Peace, not trusting
to Fortune's Favor, unless she were more constant:

For in the Wars such unknown Chance may fall,
Instead of Victory, we may be ruined all.
I speak not this to cross my General; for I shall be as ready to obey all his
Commands, be they never so dangerous, as I have freely delivered my Opinion.



After he had spoke, the General rose up, and said, These Counsels are too
solid to be contradicted by rash Youth.

Whereupon they all agreed to treat with the King, giving his Ambassadors
Audience.

The King's Ambassadors coming into their Assembly, thus spoke: You great
Victorious Amitenians,

MY Master should not need to seek for Peace, before it sought for him, had not
the God of Love proved his Enemy, persuading Mars to be his Foe: for those that
are crossed in Love, have seldom Victory; for Mars does take the part of Venus,
Cupid's Mother. Thus our great King and Master is by Love undone. But since
it is the Gods that work his Fate, he humbly does submit: Wherefore he sends
these Proffers unto you:

First, He will build your broken Forts again, and raise those Walls his
Soldiers have pulled down.

Secondly, He will repay your Charges and Expenses in this War, although his
own is great, and his Loss is more.

Thirdly, He will restore his Prisoners, if you will do the like to those you
have taken: but for the Queen, she is no Prisoner:

For our Master is her Captive, and her Thrall,
Both to command Him, and his Kingdoms all.


After the Amitenians had consulted, they told the King's Ambassadors, That
Words were not Acts; wherefore, they could conclude of nothing until the Queen
was in her Army to make her atonement for her self; and if she were no
Prisoner, they desired to wait on her out of the City; if not, they must use
force. Whereupon the Ambassadors went back to their King to declare their
Answer.

But to return to the Captive Prince, who was more fettered in his Mind, than
in his Body; for the old Father treated him civilly, and used him kindly: but,
perceiving him to be very melancholy, thought it might proceed from the
Overthrow he received; which he strove to moderate, telling him, Nothing was
more subject to Chance, than War; and that the Valiantest and Wisest Men,
might fall by Fortune's hand: for, said he, She on Wheels, not on firm Ground
does stand.

She seeks not Worth and Merit to advance;
Her Scepter, which she governs by, is Chance.
Then said the Prince, O Fortune, most unkind!
I would she were as Powerless as Blind.
As he was speaking, in comes the young General; whom when he saw, Love's
Passion shook his Manly Strength, and made his Visage pale. But she, being of
an affable and sweet disposition, wished all content of Mind to every person,
although she had little her self.

Noble Sir, said she, It was not for want of respect, I have not visited you;
but my Engagements have so busily employed me, that till the Cessation of Arms,
I have not had so much time as to examine your welfare. But I know my Father
has not omitted any Service he could help you in; neither do believe, you
(being a Commander) can be so ignorant, but to know, that Camps can afford but
a rude Entertainment, having therein no necessary accommodations; and since my
Wishes cannot make it better, you will be pleased to accept of it as it is.

Worthy Sir ( answered the Prince), I am only a Prisoner to your Favors, but
am free by your Noble Entertainments.

So, after some discourse, telling him of the Agreement which was like to be,
left him, or rather carried him with her; for his Soul went after her, although
his Person stayed behind.

But, to follow the Ambassadors, who were got to the King, and told him, the
Demands of the Amitenian Army was, To have their Queen, before they would treat
any farther. The King being very much troubled thereat; for to keep her he
durst not, knowing his own weakness, and their strength; and to let her go, he
could not; for his Passion of Love would not give him leave: neither would he
call a Council, knowing they would be for the departure of the Queen, for their
own securities: then did he wish for his Friend and Servant, the Prince: but at
last, being resolved, went to the Queen his Mistress, and taking the Crown from
off his Head, laid it at her Feet: Madam, said he, Here I deliver you my Crown,
and with it my Kingdom; and yield my self your Prisoner, dispose of it and me
as you please: for it never shall be said, I make Conditions with her I do
adore; for since my Soul is yours, there is nothing I can own that is not so.
And since you must and will go from this place, let me go with you, to set your
Triumphs out; and lead me as your Slave.

Sir, answered she, I have not been so ill treated, nor am I so ungrateful to
go away, and leave no thanks behind me: Wherefore I will stay until there is
such a Peace made, as you may receive as much Profit, and as little Losses
thereby, as I. Wherefore, in order thereunto, I desire, that the General of my
Forces, and some of my Council, may come hither, and so confer both with my
self and you.



The King gave order, that the Gates of the City might be set open: but the
Queen sent a Messenger to the Army, that none of the Forces should enter into
it, but keep themselves where they were, without; only the General and the
Council, and some of the chiefest Commanders, to come unto her. But when they
were ready to wait upon the Queen, the old Man fell very sick, and sent to his
Son (the young General) to come unto him to take his leave of him before he
dyed; who went with a sorrowful heart, and sad countenance; and when he came
close to his Bed, the old Man spoke:

Son, said he, My Lease of Life is expired; and Death, the Landlord of my Body,
knocks at my old and ruinated Cottage, sending out my Soul to seek another
Habitation; which Soul intends to travel through the Airy Skies, unto the
Mansion of the Gods, where it shall pray for your success and happy days on
Earth.

O Father, said Travelia, Must you go, and leave me here behind?

Why will the Gods so cruelly oppress
An innocent Youth, to leave it in distress?
You were my good Angel, to guard me from those Evils that Fortune sets about
me; you were my Guide, which did direct my simple Youth to just and honest
ways: What will become of me when you are gone? Or who will rescue me from
those that seek my ruin?

The old Man said, The Gods, the Gods, my Son, they will reward your Virtue.
Farewell, farewell; then turned his head, and dyed.

After he had lamented and mourned over his lifeless Corpse, he sent to the
Queen to give him leave to interr his Father's ashes. The King hearing thereof,
sent to the General, inviting him to bring his Father's Body into the City, and
there to be interred in his chief Temple; which Honor he accepted. Whereupon
all the Army brought the Hearse unto the Gates, and then returned unto their
Trenches. But the Chief Commanders did bear it unto the Grave; the young
General came into the Temple, being clad all in Mourning, only his Face seen
(which appeared like the Sun when it breaks through a dark and spungy Cloud,
whose Beams did shine on those watery drops that fell upon her Cheeks, as Banks
where Roses and Lillies grow) and standing on a mounted Pillar, he said: I come
not here to flatter or be-lye the dead, but to speak the truth as far as my
knowledge is informed: He was aged in years, not old; for those are only old,
whose Memories and Understanding are grown defective by the length of time. He
was Wise by Experience, not led with Self-opinion. He was learned in the Art of
Navigation, and not ignorant of Land-Service, or Command; although few that
dwell on Seas, and profess that Art, know more of Land, than the Ports where
they take harbor to shelter themselves from furious storms, or to take fresh
Victuals in, or to be deboist with Wine and Women. But he was most temperate,
not only in moderating his Passions, but also his Appetites, with Reason,
Honor, and Religion. In his Behavior he was affable and free, not formal nor
constrained, by vain and self-conceit. His Disposition gentle, sweet, and kind.
He was in his Nature compassionate to all that were in distress. He was
Industrious to all good Effects, and had a nimble and ingenious Wit, and (...)
a superfluity of Courage, as did not only banish fear in himself, but begot
spirit in others. He was bred in the Schools of Honor, where he had learnt
Virtuous Principles, and Heroic Actions. He had all the Ingredients that goes
to the making of an Honest and Gallant Man. And he was not only Morally Honest,
but most Pious and Devout. He offered not Sacrifice to the Gods for Worldly
Prosperity, but out of Pure Love and Adoration to the Gods. He was a Pattern
for all others to take Example by. His Soul was as the Breath of the Gods; and
his Animal Part as the best of Nature's Extraction. But Nature makes nothing to
last in one Form long; for what she creates, she dissolves again.



With that her Tears fell so fast from her Eyes, as stopped her mouth for a time:
but at last, she sighing, said: Although my Tears are useless to him, since it
is not in their power to alter the Decrees of Fate, nor can persuade the Gods
to give perpetual Life here in this World; yet Natural Affections are forced
through my Eyes.



Then bowing down her Head over the Corpse, which was placed underneath, said:
These, as satisfaction, may assuage my grief, to think my newborn Fears, the
issues of my Love, shall be buried and lie intombed with his cold Ashes; which
is the only way to mingle Souls, when Death has parted Bodies. But if Fate had
had the power to twist the Thread of of my Life with his, then Death had struck
me too, and so eased my grief. But since it is not so, his Memory shall lie
entombed in my Heart until I dye.



After he had spoke this Funeral-speech, he descended from the Pillar; and
helping to lay the Corpse upon the Funeral-Pile, did with a flaming-Torch set
the Fuel on fire; and gathering up the Ashes, put them in the Urn, and placed
it in a Tomb. Having thus executed those Ceremonies belonging to the dead, he
changed his Mourning-Robes, and clothed himself fit for the Court or Camp
again. Then he and the Council, and the chief Commanders, went unto the Palace
of the King; where, after some discourse, he was brought to the Queen, who
joyed more to see her Travelia, than for the Victories they had won: and after
she had condoled with him for the loss of his Father, she congratulated with
him for the good success he had in the Wars; and withal told him, She must set
at liberty his Prisoner the Prince, for she had given him back unto the King.
Whereupon he presently gave order for the Prince to repair to the Court; and
after she had heard the relations of all their several Actions and Accidents,
and pleased her self with the variety of other Discourses; she told them, She
would sit in Council to consider what was to be done as concerning the Peace;
and so dismissed them for that time: only she stayed Travelia, loving his company
so well, she could not so easily part with him. But the King perceiving her
Affections, as being never pleased but when Travelia was with her, he grew so
jealous, that had not Honor forbid him, having past his word unto her, they
should all there be safe, he should not have let him live to have been his
Rival.

In the mean time, the Messenger had caused the Prince to repair to the Court;
who was much troubled how to behave himself: for, said he in his thoughts, if I
should make my self known unto my Mistress, she will straight convey away her
self either by death, or stealth; and if I go disguised, although I may make
the reason known unto the King, yet the Court will talk, and think it is for
some ill design against the State, so bring an aspersion upon my Loyalty.

Thus musing a long time with himself, at last he thought it best for to take
counsel of the King; and being come to him, the King with great joy embraced
him, saying, O my Friend! thy Company is a Kingdom to me. He humbly kissing his
hand, said, He thought Fortune was so much his Enemy, as that she had shut him
out of his Royal Favor. But Sir, said he, it was none of my fault I did not
win; for the Gods, Jupiter, Mars, and the rest, are such Lovers of the fair
Mortal-Females, that they will never be against them; for wheresoever they are,
Victory is there also.

The King, thinking he meant it of the Queen, told him how unkindly she used
him, and how he perceived she loved the young General even to a dotage; and
withal, asking his counsels what he should do, he smiling, yet sighing, said:

O Sir, said he, there is no cause to fear; for that Person you do suspect, is
a Woman, which I believe the Queen knows not. Then he told him all the story of
his Love, and all the several accidents thereupon, and asked his advice what he
should do?

The King was overjoyed at his relations, discovering she was a Woman; and his
joy gave so many several Advices, that the number confused the Counsel, and
confounded the Choice.

But while they were thus talking, a Messenger came to the Prince, which
brought him Letters from his own Country, by Merchants that were lately come
in, that his Wife was dead (for although they knew not where he was, yet they
sent Letters into several Countries, in hope some might light into his hands):
which when he heard, his Doubts were turned into Hopes. With that, the King and
he embraced with joy, making no question now but Cupid was turned their Friend,
and that he would shoot two Golden Arrows into their Mistresses Hearts from the
Forts of their Affections.

The time being come when the King and Queen, and the Counselors of both,
should meet about the Peace, they being all set ready to treat, the King
entreated the Queen she would give him leave, that the Prince might be one of
his Council; which (said he) without your own consent, he shall not be, since
he has been your Prisoner.

She told the King, He was not bound to her, since she had given him a Release;
and your Counselors are to be chosen by your self, and not by me.

After her answer, he sent for him; who came, being not disguised, but as he
was himself; and Travelia looking upon his face as he was coming in, and seeing
the Man she most did fear, she fell into a swound: at which accident the Queen
being extremely afflicted, thinking it was done by some design wrought from the
jealousy of the King, broke up the Juncto for that time, taking all the care
she could for his recovery. But Travelia being recovered out of her swound, was
still sick in Mind, though not in Body; and kept her Bed as if she had been
very ill.

Whereupon the Queen's suspicion was more increased, and feared some Poison had
been given him; and with that conceit could not endure to see the King.

The King being much troubled that the Queen was more severe to him than she
was used to be, and perceiving that it was Travelia that was the cause,
complained unto the Prince, and (with seeminganger) said merrily, Dispose of
your Mistress some way; for I am jealous, said he, although she be a Woman.

Sir, said the Prince, I have as much reason to be jealous of the Queen, as you
have of my Mistress, setting her Masculine Habit aside.

At last they did agree to discover her to the Queen. Whereupon the Prince went
to the Queen, and desired her (by a Messenger) to grant him half an hours
Conference.

She desired to be excused.

He sent her word, It was something concerning his own Affairs. Whereupon she
gave him admittance.

When the Prince came to her, he said:

Madam, I should not press thus rudely on your thoughts, but that I think I am
part of the cause that makes them melancholy.

Sir, said she, You take upon you to know much; for it is hard to know the Mind
or Thoughts of our selves, much less of others.

Madam, said he, I will be so presumptuous to guess at them, if you will give
me leave.

Take it, said she.

Then, Madam, said he, I must tell you, You are in love; and the Person you
love, although most excellent, yet cannot return such love as you desire; for
you have placed your Affection upon a Woman, who has concealed her Sex, in
taking the Habit of a Man; and has more confirmed your mistake, by the actions
of a Soldier. I know not, said the Prince, how kind you have found her; but I
have found her cruel. Then told her the story from the first time he saw her,
until that present.

When the Queen had heard his relation, her Color came and went, moved by her
mixed Passions, Anger and Love; angry that she was deceived, yet still did
love, and wished she had been a Man.

Then the Prince began to move unto her the Suit of the King. But she was so
impatient and troubled in her Mind, being crossed in her Love, that she would
hear nothing concerning Love more at that time. Which he perceiving, took his
leave for the present. But as soon as he was gone,

Tears from her Eyes flowed out, as if they meant
To make her there a Watery Monument.
And her oppressed Heart such sighs sent forth,
Like Gusts of Wind that blow from South or North.
After this furious Storm, a Calm did rise,
Her Spirits, like a still smooth Water, lies.
Then laying down her gentle Head to rest,
Thus to the God of Love her Prayers addressed.
Thou powerful God of Love, that shoots from high,
One Leadden Arrow in my Breast let fly,
To quench that scorching Heat thou made to burn,
Unless a Woman to a Man can turn.
With that the God of Love did pity take,
Quenched out the first, and did a new Fire make;
Yet was it weak, as being made but new;
But being kindled, it much hotter grew.
At last the Flame got hold upon the King,
Which did much Joy unto each Kingdom bring.
After a sweet and refreshing sleep, she rose, and went to Travelia's Chamber,
and told her how she was discovered. Then chiding her gently for not making her
self known unto her, said, that she had caused her many unquiet rests.

But Travelia begged her pardon; telling her, it was the cause of her
misfortunes that concealed her, and not out of any evil design she had to
deceive her. Then desired her assistance and help to secure her.

Whilst they were thus talking, the King and the Prince came to see the sick
Person; to whom the Queen with a smiling-countenance said, She was courting her
hard-hearted Lover.

The King answered, That he hoped she would take pity on him, by what she had
felt her self.

The Queen told him, She was likelier to love him now, than if she had never
been a Lover before: for, said she, there is something pleasing in Lovers
Thoughts, be their Fortunes never so adverse; and I believe, said she, the
Prince will say as much.

Madam, said he, It is a pleasing-pain, as being mixed with Hopes and Fears;
but if our Hopes do cease, all Pleasure is gone, and nothing does remain but
Pains of Hell.

Then, said the Queen, your Mistress should be in a sad condition, if she loved
you as you seem to love her, you being a Married-Man.

No, said the Prince, I am now a Widower; but I doubt (said he) that does not
advantage me in my Mistress's affection.

But when Travelia heard he was a Widower, her Heart did beat, like a Feverish
Pulse, being moved with several Passions, fearing it was not so, hoping it was
so, joying if it were so, grieving that she ought not to wish it so.

But the Queen asked the Prince, How that he came to know of it.

Whereupon he told her.

She said, I have promised your Mistress to protect her against your outrageous
Assaults: but since your Suit is just, and your Treaty civil, I will yield her
to you, upon that condition you carry her not out of my Kingdom: for, since I
cannot marry her, and so make her my Husband, I will keep her, if I can, and so
make her my Friend.

With that, Travelia rises up in her Bed, and bowed her self with a pleased
countenance, giving the Queen thanks.

The Prince said, You have given me as much as the Gods could give, which is,
Felicity.

Madam, said the King, You have given me nothing.

The Queen, with Blushes, answered, That if her Council would agree, she would
give him her self.

The King, for joy, kneeled down, and kissed her Hand: Now, said he, I am like
to the Gods, they can but have their wish.

Thus passing that day in pleasing-discourses, the next day they caused their
Councils to meet, where they concluded the Marriage of the King and Queen; and
that the Queen should live with their King in the Kingdom of Amors; and that
her first Son should be Heir to the Crown, and her second should be Heir to the
Kingdom of Amity: but in case there were no Sons, or but one, then Daughters
should inherit.

In the mean time, the Prince, and his Princess that was to be, should be
Viceroy; or rather, that she should rule, who was so beloved of the People, as
if she had not only been a Native born, but as if she had been born from the
Royal Stock. But they thought it fit she should make her self known unto the
Army by word of mouth, that she was a Woman, otherwise they might think she was
made away by a violent Death; and that the report of being a Woman, was only a
trick to deceive them; and from thence arise such a Mutiny as might bring a
ruin to both Kingdoms.

When all was agreed, they prepared for the Marriages.

In the mean time, Travelia goes to the Army, attended by the Prince; where
the King and Queen came soon after, that the Soldiers might see they were
there, as Witnesses of what she told them. And, being all in a Circle round
about her, she being upon a place raised for that purpose, thus spoke: Noble
Friends, and Valiant Soldiers,

I Am come here, at this present, to declare I am a Woman, although I am
habited like a Man; and perchance you may think it immodesty: but they that
will judge charitably, will enquire the Reason, before they give their Censure:
for Upright Judges never give Sentence before they examine. Wherefore I believe
you will not condemn me because Necessity did enforce me to conceal my Sex, to
protect my Honor: for, as the love of Soul and Body is inseparable, so should
the love of Chastity, and the Feminine Sex; and who can love, and not share in
danger? And since no danger ought to be avoided, nor Life considered, in
respect of their Honors; and to guard that safe from Enemies, no Habit is to
be denied: for it is not the outward Garment that can corrupt the honest Mind;
for Modesty may clothe the Soul of a naked Body; and a Sword becomes a Woman
when it is used against the Enemies of her Honor: for though her strength be
weak, yet she ought to show her good will; and to dye in the defense of Honor,
is to live with Noble Fame: and therefore neither Camp, nor Court, nor City,
nor Country, nor Danger, nor Habit, nor any worldly Felicity, must separate
the love of Chastity, and our Sex: for, as Love is the sweetest, so it is the
strongest of all Passions; and true Love proceeds from Virtue, not from Vice:
wherefore it is to be followed by Life, and to be maintained till Death: And if
I have served my Queen honestly, condemn not my Modesty.



Then she bowed her Head down low, first to the King and Queen, then to the
Army.

Whereupon the Army gave a shout, and cried out, Heaven bless you, of what Sex
soever you be.

After she had spoke this Speech, she went into her Tent, and dressed her self in
her Woman's Robes, and came out again; and standing in the same place, thus
spoke: Noble Friends,

THUS with my Masculine Clothes I have laid by my Masculine Spirit; yet not so,
but I shall take it up again, if it be to serve the Queen and Kingdom, to whom
I owe my Life for many Obligations.

First, To my Queen, who bought me as a Slave, yet used me as a Friend; and
loved me with that Affection, as if Nature had linked us in one Line; for
which, Heaven reward her with Glory and Renown. Besides, her Love did bestow
upon me great Honor, made me Protector of her Kingdom in her absence; and you
her Subjects (out of Loyalty) obeyed all my Commands, although I am young and
unexperienced. And it is not only what your Loyalty enforces; but I have found
your Affections of Love to be such, as it showed they came freely from your
Souts, expressing it self in grieving for my Sickness, taking care for my
Health, joying in my Company, mourning for my Absence, glorying in my Fame; in
so much, as you would lessen your own, to give it me. What shall I do to show
my Gratitude? Alas! my Life is too poor a Sacrifice: Had I the Mansion of the
Gods, I would resign it for your Felicity. But these are only Words, not Acts,
to show you my thanks. Yet here I do offer all that the Gods or Nature gave me,
Life, Health, or Beauty; Peace, Pleasure, or Plenty; and these shall stand upon
the Altar of a Thankful Heart, ready to be sacrificed to your Service.



Whereupon all the Army cried out, An Angel, an Angel, the Gods had sent unto
them!

Then was there a Declaration read in the Army, of the Agreement of Peace: and
when it was read, That the Prince should be Viceroy in the Kingdom of Amity,
all the Soldiers (as if they had but one Voice) cried out, Travelia shall be
Vice-Regent; which was granted to pacify them.

Whereupon there were great Acclamations of Joy.

But the Prince told his Mistress, She should also govern him.

She answered, That he should govern her, and she would govern the Kingdom.

Then went the King and Queen, the Prince and Travelia, the Nobles and the
chief Commanders, to celebrate their Nuptials; and on the Weddingday, though
the Queen was adorned with a Crown of Diamonds, hung about with rich Jewels;
yet her Beauty did dim their Luster. But Travelia was only dressed in a white
Silk Garment, which hung loosly about her; and yet

Her Face did seem like to a Glory bright,
Where Gods and Goddesses did take delight:
And in her Eyes, new Worlds you there might see,
Love-flying Cupids there as Angels be:
And on her Lips Venus enthroned is,
Inviting duller Lovers there to kiss:
Winged Mercury upon her Tongue did sit,
Strewing out Flowers of Rhetoric and Wit:
Pallas did circle-in each Temple round,
Which she with Wisdom, as a Laurel, crowned:
And in her Cheeks sweet Flowers for Love's Posies,
There Fates spun Tbreads of Lillies and of Roses:
And every loving Smile, as if each were
A Palace for the Graces to dwell there:
And chaste Diana on her Snow-white Breast
There leaned her Head, with most pure thoughts to rest:
When viewed her Neck great Jove turned all to wonder,
In Love's soft Showers melting without Thunder.
The lesser Gods on her white Hands did lie,
Thinking each Vein to be their Azure Sky.
Her charming circling Arms, made Mars to cease
All his fierce Battles, for a Love's soft Peace;
And on our World's Globe sat triumphing high,
Heaved there by Atlas up unto the Sky:
And sweet-breathed Zephyrus did blow her Name
Into the glorious Trumpet of good Fame.
After they were married, to set out their Triumphs, they had Masks, Plays,
Balls, Pageants, Shows, Processions, and the like.

And when they had kept the Festivals some days in the City, the Prince and
Princess desired they might go and revel for some days with the Army that was
without the City. The Queen being well pleased therewith, thither they went;
where they had Tiltings, Running at the Ring, Fencing, Wrestling, Vaulting,
Jumping, Running Races of Horse and Foot, Baiting of Beasts, and many the like
Warlike Pastimes; and such Hospitality, that every Common Soldier was feasted:
And after they were well satisfied with Sports and good Cheer, the Prince and
Princess returned to the Court again: where, after they had remained some time,
the King and Queen sent them with the Army into the Kingdom of Amity; and the
Soldiers returned home not only with all the Spoils they got in the War, but
the King did present all the Chief Commanders with Presents; and the two
Kingdoms lived in Peace and Tranquillity during the life of the King and Queen;
and, for ought I can hear, do so to this day.

The Tale of a Traveller.
A Gentleman and his Wife being married some years, and having none but
Daughters; at last was born unto them a Son, of whom they were very fond, and
did strive to give him the best Breeding they could.

In the first place, he was to learn the Horn-book, from that his Primmer, and
so the Bible, by his Mother's Chambermaid. But after he came to ten years old,
or thereabouts, he was sent to a Free School, where the noise of each Scholar's
reading aloud, did drown the sense of what they read, burying the Knowledge and
Understanding in the consusion of many Words, and several Languages, yet were
whipped (for not learning) by their Tutors, whose ill teaching broke and weakened
their Memories with over-heavy burdens; and striving to thrust in more
Learning than could be digested, or kept in the Brain, dulled their Senses, and
oppressed their Understanding; for, being afraid of whipping, they got their
Lessions by rote, without understanding the sense. But this Youth, being
ingenious by nature, learnt more by his own Capacity, than by his Tutor's dull
Rules.

After some time, he was sent to the University; where continuing from the
years of Fourteen, to the years of Eighteen, did at last consider with himself,
that he was buried to the World and its Delights, conversing more with the
Dead, than with the Living, in reading old Authors; for that little company he
had, was only at Prayers and Meat; the time of the one being taken up in
Devotion, the other in Eating, or rather Fasting; for their Prayers were so
long, and their Commons so short, that it seemed rather an Humiliation and
Fasting, than an Eating and a Thanksgiving. But their Conversation was yet a
greater Penance then their spare Diet; for their Disputations (which are fed by
Contradictions) did more wrack the Brain, than the other did gripe the Belly;
the one with filling the Head with vain Opinions, and false Imaginations, for
want of the light of Truth; as the other with Wind and Crude Humors, for want
of sufficient nourishment.

Upon which Considerations, he left the University, and fitted himself to
travel into Foreign Countries, to see their Varieties and Curiosities, and to
learn the Customs and Laws thereof, going into all places and Companies of note
and recourse: But when he had traveled some few years, he began to sum up his
Journeys, that he might know what advantageous Experiences he had gained by his
Observations. Whereupon he recounted the several Forms and Fashions in
Architecture, both in Churches and Palaces, Cities, Towns, and Villages; their
Longitudes and Latitudes, their Height and Thickness; their Forms, as Round,
Square, Triangular, and the like; their Materials, as Stones, and what sorts of
them, Wood, Brick, Tiles, Slat, or the like: what Pillars and Pillasters of all
fashions, Cuts, and Carvings; the Doors and Frontispieces, which are for grace
and ornament, as Bellviews; or for Convenience, to avoid the sharp Winds,
shunning the Northern or Southern Points: And so for Windows; placing them
obliquely from the Sun, to avoid the extremity of Heat. Then likewise
Granishing; as Gilding, Fretting, and their Paintings, where the proportion of
their Figures were made according to the distance of the Eyes. Then what Piles
had been so built upon the least compass of Ground, that none was lost, but
every foot employed, making no vacant corners, or useless places. Then their
Situation and Accommodations for Water, and Fuel, and Healthsome Air. What
Cities had Navigable Rivers, or convenience of Ports and Havens for Traffic
and Commerce. What Fortifications or Forts for its defense.

After he had recounted this to himself, and what those Sights had advantaged
him; If I were able, said he, I would pick out all the Curiosities of these
several Buildings, by imitation, and create me a Palace. But, upon
reflecting-thoughts, he said, Building was very chargeable; for the very
building of a mean House, will wasten an indifferent good Estate: so that I may
build a House after mine own Humor, but I shall be so poor, as not be able to
live in it when it is finished. No, said he, I will live in those House my
Ancestors left me, who built by degrees, according as they were able, every
Generation adding something; and leave Great, Curious, and Rare Buildings, to
great Princes and Monarchs, who build with their Subjects Puises; or to the
Clergy, who build with Charity, raising great Colleges and Churches out of
weak Consciences; or to unjust Magistrates, who create Palaces from Brides.
Then what good has these Observations done me, said he, unless I meanto to be
a Surveyor? and then I would not study any other thing, because then I would
make it my Living, and so learn the curiosity of it for my Trade. But, since I
cannot build for my Humor, Fancy, nor Fame; I will not trouble my self for the
pleasure of others.

He recounted also to himself the several Courts of Judicature he had seen, and
how Causes were determind; where he observed, That Riches and Power decides all
Causes; and those that have neither, lose their Suits.

Afterward he considered what places of Societies he had frequented, and what
he had gained by conversations at Ordinaries, where all Strangers and
Travelers meet; and that their Discourses were most commonly of News, many
times false, being of what Designs one Prince has against another; and of
their Peace and Agreements, their Wars, their Victories, and Overthrows; the
Disadvantages and Advantages of their Polities, Governments, and Tyrannies;
their Favorites, their Luxuries, and Vanities; but seldom in praise of their
Wisdom or Justice. And what Advantages, said he, do I gain by this? Their
Losses hurt not me; I gain nothing by their Victory: their Luxury draws nothing
out of my Purse; nor does their Clemency nor their Bounty extend so far as my
Miseries or Necessities: GOD send me Health, said he, and Fortune give me good
Luck, and let Foreign Kingdoms do what they will; for I cannot settle them
when they are in disorder; Mutinous Factions will not hear me; nor will Tyrant
Princes take my Counsel: why should I then fill my Head with their Actions, or
busy my Thoughts with their Quarrels or Agreements? Besides, the Reports are
most commonly, or at least half of them, Lies.

Then he took notice of his Recreations and Pastimes, as Playing at Cards and
Dice, Mistresses, and the like: By this, said he, I do not only lose and waste
time, idly sitting still, and only exercising my self in shuffling and
throwing; but I lose my Money: for, if I win once, I lose twice; and the Box
eats up all the Gains: which does so torment my Mind, that it is never at rest:
for, when I have won, I long to be at play again, to win more, with the hopes
that I shall grow rich with it, and so fill my Head with such vain
imaginations, build such Castles in the Air, do such Wonders with my imaginary
Wealth, as Caesar and Alexander never did the like: and if I lose, I am never
quiet until I am at play again, out of hopes to get what I have lost; and am as
sullen all the while, as a Hare that is got in restraint; my Countenance so
dejected and sad, as if I had newly buried my Father; and my Humor so cross,
that I contradict all Discourse, let it be never so Rational; and am so
choleric, that I am ready to beat all I meet. Thus I disturb my Sleep, torment
my Thoughts, vex my Mind, impair my Health in sitting up late, and all to no
purpose.

If not at Play, then I go to a Bawdy House, and there for a short Pleasure I
get a lasting Disease: for the Pox is seldom got out of the Bones; and when it
is cured at the best, it leaves Pains and Aches to their dying-day.

Well, said he, by these courses I find I am absolutely a loser; and therefore
I leave them to Whores, Bawds, Cheats, and Pick-pockets.

And as for those Exercises and Qualities (said he) which we call Virtuous, I
could never get them by traveling about to see Sights and Rarities, as they
are accounted: so that Vaulting, Riding, Fencing, which should maintain Honor,
and defend my Life, is lost in the search of Novelties, which whirls a Man
about as Dust in a Whirlwind; and his Thoughts are so scattered about; that his
Reason and Consideration can settle in no judicious place.

Well, said he, I will turn Courtier, and see what Preferment I can get at
Court. Whereupon he made himself fine Clothes, taking many Pages, Lacqueys, and
Grooms, giving Fantastical Liveries: and thus being accoutred for a great
Prince his Court, he addressed himself there to ushering the Ladies, kissing
their hands, admiring their Beauties, cringing and congying, creeping and
crouching to the Favorites; waiting and attending in the Privy-Chamber for the
Presence of the King and Queen; and if he could at any time get a word from the
King or Queen (although it were but to call such a one, or to speak to have a
backdoor ready opened to go into the Garden, or to take Coach privately), he
thought himself raised from a Molehill to a Mountain. But after he found his
Money was spent, and no Preferment was like to come, he considered with himself
what Advantages he had got, or rather lost.

Here, said he, I waste my time in hopes of Preferment, which comes by Favor,
not by Merit; and, many times, those that deserve least, have the greatest
Honors cast upon them. Here I spend my Estate to grace the Court, and my self
to flatter Authority, to maintain Knavery; siding in Factions, to rail against
honest Men, to belly my Conscience; and to what purpose is this? for when I am a
Bankrupt, I shall be despised and scorned, or be their Anvil to knock Jests
upon.

No, said he, I will spend my Estate where I shall have something for my Money,
and be flattered by them that shall live upon my Bounty or Vainglory.

Besides, said he, this is an idle and cowardly life; I will go to the Wars,
and there get me Honor and Reputation. So he fitted himself with Arms, Horses,
Tents, Wagons, and the like; and after he had been received by the General very
kindly, and with great Civility, he marched with the rest of the Cavalry; and
having past two Summers in Marching, Besiedging, Fighting, Wintering,
Quartering, and Purloining, he began to consider the course of life he lived in.

Here, said he, I adventure my Life, running through great Dangers, endure
great Miseries by Colds and Heats, and extreme Hunger and Thirst, breaking my
natural Rest, lying upon the cold and hard Ground, killing those that never did
me harm, and offering my self to be killed by those that never did me good; and
this I do to get an honorable Fame; whenas, ten thousand to one, I am cast
into the Grave of Oblivion, amongst the common Soldiers: for alas, Fame has
not many Puny-Clarks to record every several Action done by every particular
person in a great and numerous Army.

Besides, all the Honor of a Victory redounds to the General, and the Losses
reflect upon the Common-Soldier and Under-Commanders; besides, Fortune gives
the Triumph, and not Merit.

And what have I gained by all my Travels and Experience? Nay, what have I not
lost? Have I not spent a great Sum of Money, endangered my Life both by Sea and
Land, wasted my Youth, wearied my Limbs, exhausted my Spirits with tedious
Journeys, my Senses almost choked with Dust, or drowned with Wet, lying in
Lousy Inns, eating stinking Meat; and suffered all the Inconveniences that go
along with Travelers; and when they return to their own Country, they are no
wiser than when they went out; but oft-times become more complete and absolute
Fools, bringing vain Fashions, fantastical Garbs, lying Reports, Infectious
Diseases, rotten Bodies, Atheistical Opinions, feared Consciences, and spotted
Souls.

Well, said he, I will now return to my Native Soil, leaving the flattering and
dissembling Courts, the deboist Cities, the Cruel Wars, and never take up Arms
more, but when my King and Country calls me to it; nor will I travel more, but
when my King and Country sends me forth. But I will lead a Countrey-life,
study Husbandry, follow my Plows, sell my Cattle and Corn, my Butter and
Cheese, at Markets and Fayres, kiss the Country Wenches, and carry my
Neighbor's Wife to a Tavern when Market is done; live thriftily, and grow rich.

Then taking his leave of the General, he returned to his own Country, where
after he had visited his Friends, who were joyed to see him, and did welcome
him home; he put himself into one of his Farm-houses, stocking his Grounds,
taking Menservants and Maidservants to follow his Business; and he himself
(clothed in a Frieze Jerkin, and a pair of Frieze Breeches, a Frieze pair of
Mittins, and a Frieze Mountier-Cap, to keep out sharp-cold in Winter-mornings,
when the Breath freezes between the Teeth) would over-see and direct; and was
industrious to call up his Servants before daylight, and the last a-bed when
their Work was done; for in the Summertime he would be up with the Lark, to
mow down his Hay, to reap down his Harvest, and to see his Carts loaded, riding
from Cart to Cart; and at Noon would sit down on his Sheafs of Corn or
Hay-cocks, eating Bread and Cheese, and young Onions, with his Regiment of
Workmen, tossing the black-Leather Bottle, drinking the Healths of the
Countrey-Lasses and Good-wives that dwelt thereabout; and after his Harvest was
brought into his Barns, and his Sheep-shearing-time done, make merry (as the
custom of the Country was) with good Cheer, although Countrey-fare; with
Goose-Pyes, Pudding-Pyes, Furmity, Custards, Apples, and March-Beer; dancing to
the Horn-Pipe with the lusty Lasses, and merry Good-wives, who were dressed in
all their Bravery, in their Stammel Petticoats, and their gray
Cloath-Wastcoats, or white wrought Wastcoats, with black Woolstead, and green
Aprons; and the Men with Cloth Breeches, and Leather Doublets with Pewter
Buttons.

These and the like Recreations the Countreypeople has mixed with their hard
Labors: When their Stomachs were full, and their Legs weary with dancing, or
rather with running and leaping (for their Dances have no nice and difficult
Measures to tread), they disperse every one to their several Houses, which are
thatched, and only Holes cut for Windows; unless it be the rich Farmers, and
they most commonly have a chief Room, which is glazed; yet the poorer sort are
seldom without Bacon, Cheese, and Butter, to entertain a Friend at any time.

Then giving thanks to the Gentleman for their good Cheer, and he shaking them
every one by the hand, they took their leaves; and the next day every one
followed their own Labors, as they used to do; nor did the Gentleman omit any
pains, care, and industry in his Affairs, but plied the Markets, selling his
Corn, Straw, Hay, Cattle, Cheese, Butter, Honey, etc.

And after he had followed this way of Husbandry two or three years, casting up
his Accounts, he found that he was rather behind than beforehand in his
Estate, and that his Husbandry did not amount so high as the Rents he had from
his Tenants, when he did let them.

Alas, said he, Have I taken all this pains, rising early, following my
business hard all day, making my self a Slave to the Muck of the Earth, to
become poorer than I was! It Is hard, when those that take my Lands, pay me
great Rents, and not only live themselves and their Families thereon, but grow
rich into the bargain; and I cannot make so much as my Rent, when I take as
much pains, and am as industrious as they are. Then being in a choleric Humor
(as they are most commonly that thrive not), and vexing at the Servants round
his House for their carelessness and idleness, in a melancholy humor he would
walk out into his Fields; and going once by a Neighbor's Cottage, where only
lived an old Man, and his old Wife; he saw her standing at the door, fanning
some Corn in a little Basket:

By your leave, Good-wife, said he; You are fanning your Gleanings?

God bless you, my good Master, said she, and all that belongs to you: Truly,
said she, I am sifting a little Corn from the Husks, to boil for my good Man's
Supper and mine, who will come home weary and hungry from his day's labor: We
are old, Master, said she, and Labor goes hard with us now; but in our
younger days it was like a Recreation, when our Bodies were young and strong,
and our Spirits lively: but now, our Bodies being weak, and our Spirits faint,
it is a toil and an affliction to us: but we must work whilst we live, for we
have nothing but our Labors to feed us, and clothe us, God help us, said she.

Well, said he, I will be charitable, and see if that will make me thrive; and
told her, he would allow her a Weekly-stipend.

Why, the blessing of God (said she) rain down plentifully on your Life, and
Eternal Joys in Heaven, after you are dead.

But I wonder, said he, you could not get so much by your Labor in your
younger days, to serve to maintain you when you were old.

O Master, said she, some have too little to thrive on, and some have too much;
but those that have nothing but from hand to mouth, can never lay up, because
they eat up what they get; and there can be no store without some savings: They
that have more than they can manage themselves, are destroyed by those that
help them; for many mouths eat them up, and many hands work them out: besides,
they are ever cozened and cheated in every Office; their Reapers steal sheaves
of Corn; for whilst the Masters watch one end of the Field, there are sheaves
flung over the Hedge at the other end; and their Sons, Daughters, Servants,
Friends, or Partners, that help to share, convey it away; and if they miss it
in the Field, they will have it when it goes home in the Cart; for whilst the
Master goes home with one Cart, the other that goes before, or comes behind,
is purloined: when he is in the Barn, they rob him in the Field; when he is in
the Field, they rob him in the Barn: besides, their Threshers carry home Corn
in their Bottles and Bags, or hide it in some out-corner until they go home.
They are cozened in their Garners: for though they do keep the Keys themselves,
yet when it is fanned, sifted, and turned, they must watch as a Cat does a
Mouse, or else they will lose it; and if they grind their Corn, the Miller
steals his share, and when they go to sow the seed in the ploughed up ground,
if the Master does not follow the Plough and Harrow, and watch the hand that
flings in the Corn, they will throw handfuls in heaps, to gather it up when he
is gone home; and for their Kine and Sheep, their Maids will sell their Milk in
the Fields; and when their Masters and Mistresses are gone to Bed, although
they saw them go before, they will rise in the middle of the night when they
are asleep, and skim their Bowls of the first Cream. In their Meadows and
Pastures, the Neighbors will put their Cattle to feed on their Grass in the
night, and take them out before the day. Besides, the Servants they send to
Markets, will drink out the gains, and then complain to their Masters, that
Provisions came so thick, and Buyers so few, that they were forced to sell at
under-rates; and, that Plenty destroyed the Market; so that Robbin and Dick,
Jone and Gill, make merry with what their Master loses: and so the like in all
other Commodities. The Shepherd steals the Twin-Lambs; the Swineherd the tenth
Pig; the Net-herd will mix strange Steers in amongst his Master's to grass,
knowing his Master cannot have so much time as to count his own every day: and
when the Barns, and the Ploughs, and the Carts want mending, and repairing, his
Baylie cuts down two Trees, or more, when less than one will serve the turn;
and the Carpenter makes more and greater Chips than he needs to do; or carries
pieces of Wood home amongst his Tools: likewise, his Carters steal his Oats,
and makes his Horses fast, and flings down more Trusses of Hay from the Lost,
than they need to use: the Butchers steal the Tallow out of the Oxe's, the
Sheep's, and Swine's Belly, whilst they rip them up, unless they be watched:
Wherefore he that Husbands much, had need have Argus Eyes, to watch in every
corner, and to spy into every action; and Briareus hands, to help at every
turn; and more than one pair of Legs, to walk into every place, or else he
shall never thrive.

But he that has no more Ground than he can ride about every day, nor more
Servants than what his two Eyes can observe, nor more Laborers than what he
can diligently follow, nor more Cattle than what he can easily count, nor more
Mouths than Business; this Man shall thrive so, as to be able to pay his
Landlord's Rent, to maintaintain his Family, and have Money in his Purse to lay
out upon a good Bargain, when many a good Worshipful Gentleman is fain to
borrow, and find more wants in his Abundance, than the other in his hired Farm;
and those are the happiest Masters (said she) that have not many nor high
desires, and can be content with a little, and whose Wants are not above their
Means.

The Gentleman said, I have traveled far, and have seen and heard much; yet I
have learnt more experience from you, than I have done in all my tedious and
expensive Travels: wherefore (said he) I find we go far about to seek for that
which is at home; and for your Learned Discourse (said he) here is a Crown to
make your Husband welcome when he comes home.

Heaven send you a good Wife, said she; and may you live together as old as
Methuselah, and as loving as Isaac and Rebecca.

So home he went, and by the way he considered what the old Woman had told him.
I find, said he, her words true; for I have taken more Business upon me than I
can manage: wherefore I will sell off my Stock, and let my Lands again, only
keep so much as shall serve me for Provision for my private Expense; and I will
get me a Wife, who shall not be so handsome as to be proud of her Beauty,
seeking ways to show it to the World; and whilst she strives to show her self,
out of a desire to have all Eyes gaze at her, and to incaptivate all Hearts,
she may chance to be caught in Love's Net her self with some flattering Youth,
or ignorant Coxcomb, who are only crafty to lay Lime-twigs to catch simple
Women.

Neither will I have one with a great Portion, for she will so presume upon
what she brought, and be so extravagant in her Expenses and Vanities, (which
are like Hydra's heads, where if one be struck off, two will rise in the room)
and will not be contented to spend her own, but my Estate also.

Nor will I have one that is poor, for then her beggarly Kindred will lie upon
my Estate like so many Caterpillars, and never leave until they have destroyed
the Fruit, Tree, and all.

But I will have one that is Right Worshipful, born Honorably, bred Chaste, and
of a good Reputation, has a competent Portion, is young, and indifferently
handsome; and one that is cleanly, thrifty, and patient, with a sober behavior,
and a modest Countenance, has so much wit as to understand my Discourse, and so
much Discourse as to answer pertinently to my Questions, is without
self-conceit, and of so much ingenuity as to learn the rules of my will; then I
will live to my self, seeking all moderate Delights for my Senses, and not be
as a Property to serve others, cramming a Company of idle People, as they do
Capons, with the fat of my Estate, and I their Host to provide their Meat and
Drink, and their Servant to place their Dishes before them, and their Drudg to
make my House clean after they are gone; and have nothing for my labor but
their Satirical Reports, saying I am vainglorious and prodigal: and when my
kind heart and courteous civility has made me Bankrupt, they will laugh at my
Person, condemn my Actions, scorn my Poverty, shun my Miseries, and will blot
me out of their remembrance: for Ingratitude, or any other Vice or Wickedness,
seldom has, and hates returning-thoughts. Neither will I spend my time in
deciding my Neighbors foolish Quarrels; for Time is precious, being short,
though it measures the full life of Man; and I shall have in recompense, only
the honorable Name of Justice of Peace in Quorum, which is nothing but a
sound, and no real and substantial thing; neither would I have the trouble for
all the Poultry in the Country: wherefore, I will have nothing to do in Court,
City, or Country; but obey the Laws, though not to execute them as a
subordinate Magistrate; I will submit to Authority, but not sit in Authority.

At last, with these Contemplations and Discourses to himself, he arrived to
his own House: so after Supper, with musing thoughts, he went to Bed.

The next day he sent to an intimate Friend to come to dine with him; and after
dinner he told him his intent of discharging himself of the trouble and loss of
Husbandry: withal, he told him a design he had to marry, and desired him to
seek him out a good Wife; relating what manner of Woman he would have her to be.

His Friend said, I will do my best to search out such a one as may sympathize
with your Humor. But I do wonder, said he, you should think of Marriage now;
for you should have wedded a Wife when you were in the prime and strength of
your Age, about the years of four or five and twenty, and not stay until you
are eight or nine and forty, when weakness and sickness is ready to seize on
you.

He answered and said, That young Men, wanting the Experience of time, chose by
Fancy, and not with judgment: besides, they knew not how to prize Chastity, nor
honor the Virtues of their Wives, having no experience of the Falsehood and
Inconstancy which dwells in that Sex, or rather that was created with Women, as
being the Essence of their Natural Dispositions; so that Chastity is to be
accounted as supernatural; and if my Wife had been inclined to Honesty, yet the
Vanities and Debaucheries of my Fantastical Youth, might have misled her Youth,
and have corrupted her pure Mind, and innocent Life, by my ill Example.

Besides, If I had married whilst I was young, it is likely I should have been
weary of my Wife before she had been old; and my Children might have been weary
of me before I had been old: but now I am old enough to govern a young Wife by
my sober Example, and my solid Instructions, and gentle Persuasions; and to
prize her Chastity so, as to trust her without a jealous Spy, and to honor
her Virtue, to love her Person, to maintain her Honor, to provide for her and
her Family, to choose her Delights, and to direct her Life: Thus I may be happy
in my Age, by not marrying when I was young.

Well, said his Friend, I will travel all the Country over to choose you a fit
Wife.

Pray, said he, let me give you some certain Rules along with you.

First, I would not have her a mere Countrey-Gentlewoman; for she seldom seeing
any other Men but her Father's Steward, Butler, or Carters, with their Frieze
Jerkins, and Leather Breeches; if she should come to see a flanting young
Gallant bedaub'd with Gold and Silver Lace (or say it were Copper) she will be
so ravished in admiration, that she will yield upon the meanest condition he
can make; nay, a Gentleman Usher, with a pair of Silk Stockins, will beset her
hard. Wherefore, let me have one that dwells in the Country, that has seen
the City, that has seen the Court, Plays, and Masks; but not so well
acquainted with them, as to know their enticing-Vanities, or tempting-Vices.

Then, I would have her such a one, whose Parents have bred her rather to a
Superfluity, than in pinching-Necessity; for Necessity teaches Youth to
dissemble and shark; and when they come to command Plenty, they have no stay of
their Prodigality and Luxury; but just like those that are almost starved for
want of Meat and Drink, throw so much into the Stomach, that many times it
causes a sudden death, or else a dangerous sickness. But those whose breedings
have known no want, have no mean nor base desires; for plenty opens the door to
generosity, and raises the mind to high and noble speculations, which produces
honorable actions, despises unnecessary vanities, loves magnanimity, and
hates crouching flattery, or base dissembling actions, which Plenty seldom
knows, having no use thereof.

Another thing, you must observe her humor, and have a care she be not of a
peevish disposition, for they are pleased at no time, but fall out with every
thing, even with themselves; and not only make their own unhappiness, but of
all those that live near them; they will cross all discourse, be it never so
rational; oppose all actions, be they never so just; delight in no place to
live in, be it never so convenient; but all their Life is made up with crosses,
and their mind is ensnared with unnecessary troubles.

Truly, said his Friend, your Rules by which I am to measure a Wife, are so
strait, as all my industry will never fit you.

So his Friend left him to court his Contemplations, whilst he went to search
for a Fruition. After a short time, he sent him word in a Letter, thus:

SIR,
I Have found a young Lady, who has the Reputation of being Virtuous; born from
an Ancient Stock, and Honored Race; carefully bred, and well qualified; her
Portion is small, her Friends are not poor; she has enough Beauty to delight a
temperate Mind; she seems to be of a cheerful Disposition, and makes me believe
she can love an Ancient Man, if (says she) his Merit equals his years: but
(said she) I will be wooed before I am wed. Wherefore, if you will marry, you
must visit the Lady; and as you do both like, you may agree: Howsoever, I durst
not strike up the Bargain before you see her, for fear you should dislike my
Market, being the first Commodity of this kind, and of this nature, I ever
cheapned. So good Fortune direct you.


After he had received this Letter, he put himself into a Wooing-Equipage; and
so complete he was in Apparel and Attendants, that the same Eyes that had seen
him when he followed his Husbandry, and should view him now, would forswear
they had ever seen him before. Such alterations fine Clothes and many Followers
make.

The young Lady, who expects his company, makes her self fine to entertain him;
the whilst her Friends trim up the House, direct their Servants how to wait,
and provide good Cheer to bid him welcome.

At last a Servant comes running in, to give notice the Noble Gentleman was
come; which as soon as the young Lady heard, the report gave her the
Palpitation of the Heart, which caused a trembling over the whole Body, and
fear and bashfulness made her Color to rise and fall: but hemming up those
Spirits that Fear had depressed, settling her Countenance to the best advantage
for her Face, she stood with as much resolution as her weak Confidence would
give her leave, to receive his Addresses; whom he no sooner saw, but loved;
liking her by report, before he came. After he had saluted her, he thus spoke:
Lady, I come not to woo you as a wanton Lover; for neither my Years, nor your
Modesty, will allow it: neither do I come a Suitor to your Beauty, but your
Virtue; and I wish I were such a one as might merit your Affection: but since I
cannot promise you to be such as I wish to be; you will do a meritorious
Action, to take me out of Charity, since I love you devoutly.

Sir, answered she, I wish I were worth a valuable Affection, such as I prize
yours to be: I am not yet acquainted with your Merit by Experience, but by
Report: and though the Ears are the Doors that let in the truest Affections,
yet I will not bar my Eyes, but they shall stand as open, as free, though not
the only passage to my Heart. And I wish Reason may rule the Objects of my
Affections, that are gathered together: for it is not safe to love a Man for
one good Quality; but as many several Causes produce but one Effect; so, many
several good Qualities, produce one entire Affection.



When they had discoursed themselves (after this manner) out of breath, the
Gentleman was directed to his Chamber, where he laid by his Riding-Cloak,
shifted his Boots, brushed his Hat, combed his Hair, and set himself in order,
waited on by an old Servant, who was busy about him, and one that had been
with him in all his Travels, and was his Favorite.

What think you, Jack, (said he) of a young Mistress to your old Master?

In troth, answered he, I think my Master thinks well of a young Mistress.

The Master says, The young Lady has a modest Countenance, which is a sign
she will make a good Wife.

So is a Bush, said the Man, hung out of a Tavern, a Sign of good Wine, but it
often deceives the Customers. But in troth, said he, I am like one that is dry,
with seeing another drink thirstily; for I have a mind to a Wife, now I
perceive your Worship resolves to marry.

Why, Jack, (said he) you may woo the Chambermaid.

He answered: But, Sir, the question is, Whether the Chambermaid is as
discreet as her Mistress, to marry a Man in years; for I am as old as your
Worship: besides, if she be not young, I shall not like her; for I would
imitate your Worship in every thing: but the best of it is, if she be old, she
will not like me; for an old Woman desires to marry a young Man; and when their
Teeth are fallen out of their Head with Age, yet they will snicker upon a
Beardless Boy.

Thus, whilst the Master was trimming himself up, his Man and he discoursed.

In the mean while, the young Lady was gone into her Chamber; and called her
Maid to bring her the Glass, and to view if the Curls of her Hair were in order.

O Lord, said she, Joan, how red my Face is! I seem as if I were drunk, my
Cheeks burn like fire; you told me the other day, I was in the Green Sickness;
you cannot think so now.

She answered, By my troth, Mistress, the Gentleman's Discourse has painted
your Cheeks; pray Mistress, says she, does he talk finely?

He talks rationally, answered her Mistress?

Is he a handsome Man, said she?

The Mistress said, He has a Manly Garb, and a Wise Countenance, and then he
cannot be ill-favored.

I pray Mistress, said she, how does he seem to like you?

Truly, Joan, said she, I cannot tell; he did not frown; he seemed well
pleased: yet I believe I behaved my self simply, for I was extremely out of
countenance; and shame-fac'dness restrains the Words, and disorders the
Behavior, and many times makes one fall into such ridiculous Errors, that it
is hard to get out of them.

O Mistress, said she, Youth can commit no Errors to be condemned, for all
their follies are cast on their few years, and their simplicity are Graces in
the eyes of their Lovers.

In the time while they were discoursing, her Servant had found out the way to
her Chamber; whom when she saw him, she flung away her Glass.

He told her, she did ill to lay aside that which did present her the best
Object, her self.

She answered, His Civility might prove Bribes to Self-conceit, and persuade
her Eyes to be Impartial Judges: but, said she, if I can make my Mind fair, I
care not how my Face appears.

But, after a short time, growing more acquainted, they left their Complemental
Wooing, and discoursed more seriously concerning the course of life they did
intend to settle in.

He said, I have heard by the Writing of Wise Solomon, That the only happiness
in this life, is, to eat, and drink, and sleep in peace; and that all things
else are wearisomness and vexation of spirit: and truly, said he, that little
Experience I have, though I have traveled a great way, and into many places,
proves if so to me: but, finding a good Wife must be added to complete the
happiness, I resolved to marry: but the danger is, if the Wife proves not
according to the Man's desire, then his life is closed up in Misery; yet I
cannot believe my Fate so ill, since I saw you.

She said, I can only say this for my self, I shall be a very honest Woman: but
for all other good qualities, which are the Ingredients to make up a good Wife,
I cannot promise; but what Errors my ignorant simplicity may be apt to commit,
it may be rectified by your wise Admonitions.

Then he told her, The quicker they did dispatch their Marriage, the sooner
they should be happy; but, said he, I find your Friends desire a public
Wedding, great store of Company, Music, and good Cheer.

I must confess, Company and Music fits the Years of Youth; but they are not
seemly Companions for the Gravity of Age: and to see a Man in years dance, is
as if his Head and his Heels were mis-match'd, the one is too light for the
other; and it is seldom known, that a wise Brain is propt with Dancing-Legs;
and if I put my self where such Pastimes are exercised, I must run the hazard
of being rude, in denying those that offer to take me out; or render my self
ridiculous, which I would not willingly do, especially before you.

Besides, it is more Comely, Noble, and Majestical, for Youth to follow the
strict and severe Rules of Age, than for Age to follow the leight Measures,
Fantastical Garbs, and vain Rules of Youth.

Sir, said she, As I choose Age for the best to lead my life withal, so I shall
choose Aged Counselors to direct all my Actions; and though I am young, I do
not approve of the ways of Youth; neither do I find any solid Mirth, or lasting
Contentment, in their Recreations or Pastimes.

He said, You speak according to my own Soul, and I hope Nature did create us
for one another, and Destiny will link our Affections so fast, that neither
change of Time nor Fortune can alter them; and that our Loves will live in the
Grave, when our Bodies be dead.

So in two or three days all Contracts were confirmed, and the Match was
concluded with the approbation of all Friends of either side; married they
were, and in a short time after he carried her to his House, there made her
Mistress of his Estate; and whilst he governed his outward Affairs, she
governed the Family at home, where they lived plentifully, pleasantly, and
peaceably; not extravagantly, vain-gloriously, and luxuriously; they lived neat
and cleanly, they loved passionately, thrived moderately; and happily they
lived, and piously dyed.

The She-Anchoret.
THERE was a Widower who had but one Child, and she a Daughter; which Daughter
he bred with Pious Devotions, Moral Instructions, and Wise Advertisements; but
he falling sick to death, called his Daugher unto him, and thus spoke to her:

Farewell my dearest Child, for dye I must;
My Soul must fly, my Body turn to dust:
My only care is, that I leave thee young,
To wander in the World, Mankind among;
Few of them charitable are, or kind;
Nor bear they in their Breast a Noble Mind,
To help the Fatherless, or pity Youth,
Protect the Innocent, maintain the Truth:
But all their time's spent with laborious toil,
For to pervert, to ruin, and to spoil.
Flatter thy Beauty, and thy Youth betray,
To give thy Heart, and Virgin-flower away.
They will profess love, vow to be thy Friend,
Marriage will promise; yet they will pretend
Their Friends will angry be, or else they will say,
Their Land's engaged, they first their Debts must pay;
Or else that they during some time of life,
Have made a Vow, Not yet to take a Wife:
And twenty such Excuses they will find
For to deceive the simple Female-Kind.
And if you marry, Troubles you will find,
Pains, Griefs, and Cares, to vex a quiet Mind.
But here I charge you (lying in Death's Arms)
That you do stop your Ears against their Charms:
Live chaste and holy, serve the Gods above,
They will protect thee for thy zealous Love.
Daughter.
I will obey whatever you command:
Although you dye, your will shall fixed stand.
Father.
Next, I do charge thee, Not to grieve nor mourn,
Since no redress will from the Grave return.
Daughter.
O do not so, said she;
But give Grief leave to flow out of my Eyes;
For if it be suppressed, the Body dies:
Whilst now you live, great wrong y'uld think you have,
If I should sit and laugh upon your Grave;
Or with neglect should I your Grave pass by,
And never take notice where your Ashes lie.
Father.
You cannot hinder Destiny's Decree.
Daughter.
O no! but Nature, Nature still will be:
Nature created Love within the Mind;
The Object dead, the Passion still is kind.
Had I as many Lives as Nature make,
I Would lay them on Death's Altar for your sake.
That single one I have, O Heavens me hear!
Exchange it for my Father's Life so dear:
But when her Father found that Death drew on,
He bid her lay her Hand his Eyes upon.
Father.
Close up my Eyes, said he, and then receive
Upon thy Lips my last Breath, let me breathe.
When he was dead, sh' amazed, long time sat still;
At last bethought her of her Father's Will:
Then up she rose, his Body did entomb;
And how she spent her Life, rehearse I Will soon.
The Description of her Life in Prose.
AFTER she had interred her Father's Corpse, although she had rich, honorable,
and importunate Suitors; yet she resolved to live like a kind of an Anchoret's
Life, living encloistered by her self alone, vowing Chastity, and a
Single-life; but gave leave for any to speak to her through a Grate. When she
went first into her solitary Habitation, she thus spoke: Virtues are several
Paths which lead to Heaven;
And they which tread these Paths, have Graces given:
Repentant tears allay the Dust of Pride;
And pious Sighs does blow vain Thoughts aside:
Sorrow and Grief, which in the Heart does lie,
Does cloud the Mind, as Thunder does the Sky:
But when in Thundring-groans it breaks out,
The Mind grows clear, the Sun of Joy peeps out.
This pious Life I now resolve to lead,
Will in my Soul both Joy and Comfort breed.


She had not been long enclosed, but she grew as famous as Diogenes in his Tub;
all sorts of people resorted to her, to hear her speak; and not only to hear
her speak, but to get knowledge, and to learn wisdom: for she argued rationally,
instructed judiciously, admonished prudently, and persuaded piously; applying
and directing her Discourse according to the several Studies, Professions,
Grandeurs, Ages, and Humors of her Auditory.

The first that came to her, were Natural Philosophers; who asked her Opinion
of Man's Soul: of which she discoursed in this manner:

She said, Man has three different Natures or Faculties; A Sensitive Body,
Animal Spirits, and a Soul: This Soul is a kind of Deity in it self, to direct
and guide those things that are far above it, and to create by Invention; and
though it has not an absolute Power over it self, yet it is an harmonious and
absolute thing in it self: and though the Sensitive Body has a relation to it,
yet no other ways than Jove's Mansion has unto Jove; for the Body is only the
residing-place, and the Animal Spirits are as the Angels of the Soul, which are
Messengers and Intelligencers: All Animal Creatures have not this Soul, but
only Man; for Beasts have none; nor every Man: for most Men are Beasts, and
have only a Sensitive Body, and Animal Spirits, as Beasts have: but none know
when this Soul is out or in the Body, but the Gods: and not only other Bodies
and Spirits cannot know; but the Body where it resides, and the
attending-spirits, are ignorant thereof: for this Soul is as invisible to the
Body and the Animal Spirits, as the Gods to Men; for, though this kind of Soul
knows, and has intelligence by the Senses, and by the Animal Spirits; yet the
Senses nor Animal Spirits have none from the Soul: for, as Gods know Men, but
Men know not Gods; so this Soul knows the Senses and Animal Spirits, but the
Senses nor Animal Spirits know not this Soul.

Then they asked her, Whether Souls were Immortal?

She answered, That only the Life was Immortal, from whence all Souls are
derived.

Then they asked her, What Deities she thought there were?

She answered, She thought but one, which was the Father of all Creatures, and
Nature the Mother; he being the Life, and Nature the only Matter; which Life
and Matter produces Motion; and Figure, various Successions, Creations, and
Dissolutions.

Then they asked her, What she thought Time was?

She said, Time was only the Variation and Alteration of Nature; for Time is
only in respect to Creations, Alterations, and Dissolutions.

Then they asked her, What Eternal was?

She answered, An endless Succession.

Then they asked her, What Infinite was?

She said, A Numberless Succession: but, said she, Eternal is in respect to
Infinite, as Infinite to Eternal.

Then they asked her, Whether she thought there were fixed Decrees, or all were
governed by Chance?

She answered, That doubtless there were fixed Decrees, as Light, Darkness,
Growth, Decay; as Youth, Age, Pain, Pleasure, Life, Death, and so in every
thing else, for ought my Reason can perceive. For, said she, as Nature creates
by Dissolution, and dissolves by Creation; so the Diattical Life (says she)
decrees Rules, and rules by Decrees.

Then they asked her, What was Chance and Fortune?

Chances (said she) are visible Effects from hidden Causes; and Fortune, a
conjunction of many sufficient Causes to produce such an Effect; since that
Effect could not be produced, did there want any one of those Causes, by reason
all of them together were but sufficient to produce; but that one Effect, many
times, produces many Effects upon several Subjects; and that one Effect, like
the Sun, streams out into several rays, darting upon several Subjects: and
again, as the Sun scorches and burns some things, and warms and comforts
others; so this Effect advances some, and casts down others; cures some, and
kills others; and when the Causes vary, and the Effects alter, it is called
Change of Fortune.

Then they asked her, Whether she thought Faith could naturally produce any
Effect?

She answered, That in her opinion it might: for, said she, why may not Faith,
which is an undoubted Belief, joined to such a subject, produce or beget an
Effect, as well as a Seed sown or set in the Earth, produces a Flower, a Tree,
or the like; or as one Creature begets another; especially if the Faith, and
Subject whereon it is placed, have a sympathy; but by reason (said she) Faith
is not so customary a way of producing, as other ways are, it causes many
Doubts, which Doubts are like cold Northern Winds, or sharp biting Frosts,
which nip and kill the Buds of Faith, which seldom or never lets the Effects
come to perfection.

Then they asked, What the Sun was?

She answered, A Body of Fire.

Then they askedher, What Light was?

She answered, Light was enflamed Air.

They said, That if Light was enflamed Air, it would burn all things, and so
consume the World.

She answered, That in thin Bodies Fire had but little power to burn; for the
thinness of the Matter weakens the power of the Strength, which causes Flame
(said she) to be of no great Heat: for, the hot Flames do rather sindg than
burn; and the thinner the substance is that is set on fire, the purer the Flame
is; and the purer the Flame is, the less Heat it gives; as the Flame of
Aqua-vitae, that may be eaten with Sops.

Then they asked her, What Air was?

She answered, That Air was the Smoke produced from Heat and Moisture: For Air,
said she, is a thin Oil, which is set on fire by the fiery Sun; or is like a
fiery Substance, and fiery Motions, whose Flame is light.

Then they asked her what Darkness was?

She answered, Darkness was the absence of Light.

And then they asked, why it was dark immediately, when the passage of Light
was stopped, and that if it were inflamed Air, it would burn and give Light, as
long as that inflamed Air lasted.

She answered, that when the fiery Rays that issued from the Sun were cut off,
the flame went out; for said she, it is not the Air, that feeds the Flame, but
the fire that is in the Flame, and when that Fire is spent or taken away, the
Flame dies; this is the reason, said she, that as soon as the Rays of the Fire
is cut off, or shut out, or taken away, it is dark; and when they are eclipsed,
the Light is dull and dim: but, as I said before, Light is only Air, set on
flame by the fiery Sun; and the Blewest Sky, is the thinnest Flame, being the
purest Air; and just as if we should carry a Candle away, we carry the light
also, which is the Flame; so does the Sun: and as we bring a Candle, or the
like, into a Room, we bring in the light; so does the Sun: Where the Fire is,
there is the greatest light; and when a Screen is set before it, the light is
eclipsed: and when kindled Fire (as a Candle, or the like) is carried quite
from the place, it leaves as great a darkness as if it were put out: just so
does the Sun, (which is the World's Candle) when it goes down, draws away
the light, which is the Flame; and as it rises, it brings in the Fire, which
causes the Flame; and when it is high-Noon, then is the brightest light, as
casting no shadows, if naught Eclipses it; and when Clouds get before it, it is
Eclipsed, as with a Screen; and when it is quite removed to another part of the
World, it does as if it went into another Room or Chamber, leaving no light
behind it: for twilight is caused from the Rays of the Sun: for, though the
Body of the Sun is gone from off such a part of the Earth, yet the Rays (which
are the spreading-part of Fire) are not quite drawn away as soon as the Sun;
for as those Rays usher the Sunrising, so they follow the Sunsetting: and
though these Rays of Fire (which are the Beams of the Sun) inflame the Air; yet
not so bright as the Body of the Sun does: and where the Sun is gone so far as
the Beams cannot reach, that part of it becomes dark. It is not the gross
Clouds (as some think) make twilight; for we see a cloudy day makes the
twilight seem shorter, though it be not; and it is by reason they eclipse the
enflamed Air; for Clouds are rather Vapor than Air: and though Vapor and Air
have some relation, the like has Vapor and Water; and Vapor, when it is
gathered into the Clouds, does rather eclipse than prolong light.

They said, That if the Light was Flame, the Vapoury Clouds might quench it out.

She answered, That although Vapor could eclipse the Light, it could not put
out the light of the Sun: it is true, said she, it may and does often allay the
fiery heat in the Rays; for some days will be cooler than other days, although
the Sun be higher; and some will be cooler than others, although in the same
degree of the Sun, by reason of low Marish Grounds, or near great Rivers, from
whence Vapors arise. But though the Vapor may abate the heat in the Rays, as
the enflamed Air, and eclipse the light either of Mists or Fogs, or when they
are gathered into Clouds, yet they can neither put out the light, nor quench
out the heat of the Sun, which is the Fountain of both, no more than a drop of
Water can quench a House on fire. The Sun is a World of bright shining Fire,
from which other Worlds receive both light and heat. It Is true, if there could
be such a quantity of Water as could equal the Sun's power, it might quench the
Sun, unless the Sun be an eternal Fire. But as for Vapor, were there a greater
quantity than what arises from the Earth, it could not change the natural
property of the Sun: besides, Vapor is of a middle nature, as betwixt Water
and Air; for by the rarifaction it is not so gross nor so wet as Water; nor
rarefied so much as to be as thin and dry as Air.

Then they asked her, What she thought of those that were of the opinion, That
under the Line it was uninhabitable, through an extreme heat.

She said, She thought they were like those that were blind of one eye, which
saw perfectly on the one side, but not on the other: for their Reason
discovered there was a great Heat, but it did not discover the refreshing-Winds
and moistning-Dews which are constantly in that place; which Winds and Dews
quench the fiery heat, which makes it temperate; for, Heat and Cold make an
equal temper, when they are equal in degrees: and because there is twelve hours
night, and twelve day; there is as much Cold as Heat; for the Dews and the
Winds joined with the Night, makes it temperate; but if it were not for the
equal hours, and those Dews and Winds, it would be, as they thought it was,
insufferably hot; but they wanted information concerning the Dews and the Wind,
and did not thoroughly consider when they missed the Night.

Then they asked her the reason of the light of Clow-worms Tails?

She answered, That it was probable the purest, thinnest, and oilest extracted
parts of the Body, were in the Tail, which the radical Fire enflamed, which
Flame was Light; and (said she) the Worm having no solid Bones, tough Sinews,
firm Flesh, gross Blood, or thick Skin in that part, to obstruct or eclipse the
light, it visibly shines in the Night when the Sun is gone, whose greatest
light drowns all other lesser lights: and the reason it shines some times, and
not others, may be some outward cause that eclipses it from our sight, as a
little Cloud will do the Sun; whereas a much smaller Vapor, or the like cause,
will serve to obscure the light of the Glowworms Tail: and certainly, said
she, if we could see through the Bodies of Animals, and likewise throught their
Skull, as easily as the Glowworms Tail, we should see (said she) a much
brighter flame in the Heart and the Brain; which flame is the light of
Knowledge; and the several Objects that the Senses bring in, are there visibly
perceived; these Lights Sickness eclipses, and Death puts out.

Then they asked her, What the Moon was?

She answered, A Body of Water; and the several Changes (said she) is the
ebbing and flowing thereof, which makes it fuller sometimes in one part of the
Circle, than in the other; and when it is High-tide, we say it is Full Moon;
and when it is Low-tide, it is in the Wane; and as it increases, or decreases,
we say it is in the First, Second, or Third Quarter.

Then they asked her, What made it give light?

She said, The Sun's Reflection thereon: for you may observe (said she), that as
the Water shines with the Reflections or Beams of the Sun, so does the Moon, as
we say, with a Watrish light; and (said she) it is more or less light, as that
side next to the Sun is swelled fuller, or ebbed lower.

Then they asked her of the rest of the Planets?

She said, She believed that Venus Starr was a Body of Water, as the Moon was;
but for the other Planets (said she) I take them to be Earthly Bodies; but not
such as our Globe is, but much finer, and of as great a difference (said she)
as between Porceline and Clay; which makes them shine so bright, the substance
being so pure, that it is as it were transparent.

Then they asked, What the fixed Stars were?

She answered, Suns.

Then they asked her, What was the reason that the Breath was hot and cold all
at one time, as it were? for when a Man breathed upon his hand, it would feel
hot; and when he blows upon it, it would feel cold.

She said, There was a reason for that: for, (said she) a Dilatation causes
heat, and a Contraction causes cold; and (said she) if one breathes on the
hand, they open the Mouth and Lips wide, by which the Breath dilatates like a
steam, or a vapor, which is hot; and when one blows upon the hand, then the
Mouth and Lips are drawn into a narrow compass, and that contracts the Breath
into a cold wind. These several Motions make one and the same thing, from one
and same manner or passages, to work two several effects; and surely those
Winds that are coldest, from whence soever they issue out, their passage is
narrow; and those Winds that feel warm, as many times Winds will do, their
passage is wider, and are rather a breathing Vapor, than a perfect Wind. There
is nothing shows that VVind is made cold by Contraction, so much as to blow
upon the hand; which shows, that VVind is contracted Air.

Then they asked her, What was the reason wind could blow out flame, and in a
flame it could kindle, and put out fire?

She said, That wind did strive to dissipate all things it did encounter; and
where it has not so much power to dissipate, it only dilatates; and when fire
is set to any combustible Matter, as wood, or the like; the wind having not a
forcible power to dissipate it into dust or ashes, it beats the heat of the
fire into it; and fire having a nature to catch hold, and to dilatate, and so
to feed it self upon all things, or at least upon most, when the Matter is too
hard for the siery-points to enter, or at least to enter suddenly; the wind,
like a Hammer, strikes them in, and so lends the fire force; and helping the
fire to extend, by its dissipating-power, dilatates the Heat into the smoke or
vapor of the Matter, and so into a flame: but when it puts out fire or flame,
it is when it has so much force, as to dissipate the Matter the fire works on;
and if the wind destroys or disperses the Matter, it must needs put out the
fire, having nothing to work on; for fire dies when it has no Fuel to work or
feed on. This is the reason a Man with his Breath can blow out the flame of a
Candle, and with his Breath blow the flame in again, if the snuff of the Candle
be full, and thoroughly fired, or else he cannot; but if it be full, and
thoroughly fired, he may blow so hard as to dissipate the flame, yet not so hard
as to dissipate the fiery snuff, or wieck of the Candle; so that the flame, by
the dissipating, goes out, being dilatated to a dissipation; and when the
flame is out, and the fire remaining, with a gentle wind he may dilatate the
fire into a flame again, and so many times, as long as the body of fire
remains; but if they should blow so hard or strongly, as to dissipate the body
of fire, they put out both fire and flame.

Then they asked her, What Snow, Hail, Ice, and Frost, was?

She answered, That Snow was curded Water, like curded Milk: for, says she,
cold does curdle water as sower Vinegar does Milk; and as curded parts will lie
in clods, so Water in flakes of Snow.

Hail (said she) is broken water, or rather crumbbled water: for as a hand
which nips a piece of Bread, crumbles it by rubbing it between their fingers;
so does some sort of cold Motions break and crumble water into a number of
small parts; and as many crumbs' of Bread will stick together, through the
moist clamminess, lying in little lumps; so does the broken parts of water,
which is Hailstones: and though the Body is divided into abundance of little
parts; yet every part is more compact, as being closer contracted, with being
crushed and nipt together.

As for Frost, said she, that is candyed or crusted Vapor, which is rarefied
water: for as some sorts of hot Motions candy Sugar, so some sorts of cold
Motions candy's Vapor. Likewise, said she, as Milk changes not the nature from
being Milk, with curding; nor Bread, with crumbling; nor Sugar, with candying;
so Water changes not the nature with contractions or dividings into Snow, Hail,
Ice, and Frost.

As for Ice, it is made by such a kind of cold Motion, as hot Motions make
Glass: for, as fire in a hot Furnace calcines some sorts of Earth, and the
purest to Glass: so does the strongest of such sorts of cold Motions congeal
Water into Ice. And as some hot Motions strive to convert Earth into Water (as
we may see, by making Earth into Glass); so some sorts of cold Motions do turn
Water into Earth, as by condensing into Ice, Hail, Snow, and Frost: and as Snow
and Ice is nothing but condensed Water; so Glass is nothing but calcined or
rarefied Earth: for, that fine Earth which makes Glass, is so rarefied by the
hot fire in a Furnace, which blows and spreads it as thin, and clarified it as
clear as Water; only it makes it not liquid and fluid; yet whilst it is in the
fire, it is in a degree of being fluid, for it is soft and clammy. Thus Fire
makes Earth so near like Water, as it is transparent, shining, and smooth, and
brings it into the midway; but it wants the liquid, wet, and fluid Motions,
which some will call Parts, to make it perfect Water. And I suppose, that
Crystals, Diamonds, and the like, are only the purest part of Earth, turned (by
the heat in the Earth, or in the Sun) to a Glassy substance, but stronger, as
being wrought by a natural Heat, and not by an artificial Heat, or Fire; but as
Glass is a rarefied Earth, so Air is a rarefied Water, and Smoke a rarefied
Oil, and Oil is a fluid Sulphur, and Flame is a fluid Fire, and Quicksilver is
a fluid Metal.

Then they asked her, Whether there were Natural Elements, not subject to be
Metamorphosed?

She answered, Yes.

They asked, How she would prove it?

She said, She would prove there was a natural Fire, by the Sun, which never
changes his heat, or ^^ffens his light, nor alters his natural Properties of
attracting, contracting, and the like; and to prove a metamorphosed Fire, is
Lightning, Meteors, Fevours, and the like; and to prove a natural Water, is the
Sea; and to prove a metamorphosed Water, is Vapor; and to prove a natural Air,
is the Serene; and to prove a metamorphosed Air, is Wind: and (said she) the
difference of natural Elements, and those that are called metamorphosed, is,
that the natural Elements cannot lose their properties, as those that are
metamorphosed do, by changing from one thing to another: For say the natural
Elements be mixed, yet they quit not their natural properties; as for example,
mix Wine, or Aqua-vitae, or the like, and Water; and though they are mixed, yet
they lose not their natural properties, as the Water to cool, and Wine to
heat; for put a drop of wine to a pint of water, or to an ocean, and it will be
so much more hotter, as the quantity of a drop can heat; and so for a drop of
water to so much wine, and it is so much colder, as the quantity of a drop can
cool; for though they mix, yet they lose not their properties, neither does
their mixture take from their pure nature.

Then they asked her, If a natural or metamorphosed Element, might not corrupt
a pure Element?

She said, No, being not subject to change, more than a gross and malignant
Vapor can corrupt the Sun: but (said she) natural Elements can and do
oftentimes purify corruption, if they be not obstructed; for though they
cannot be changed, they may be obstructed; as we see dark Clouds will obstruct
the natural light of the Sun, and many times the natural heat; yet they can
neither quench out the one, nor put out the other: the like is the continuance
of the natural Elements. But perchance you will say, that you talk of an
Element, and I speak of a Planet: I say that for example: But though the Sun is
a Planet, yet it is an Elementary Fire; and though Earth may be called a
Planet, yet it is an Elementary Earth; and for all we can know, the Moon may be
an Elementary Water: but howsoever, there may be a natural Fire, which is an
unalterable Fire, which you may call the Elementary Fire, as the Sun, and so
the rest of the Elements, for any thing that Reason can prove against it.

Then they asked her, If Nature did work always exactly?

She answered, No: for, Nature does seldom work so exactly, as to bring often
to perfection, not the Bodies of all Animals, especially Mankind, either in the
Body or Mind; much less to make them both exactly answerable, or answerably
exact.

As for their Bodies, for the most part they are neither in proportion nor
lineaments answerable to each other: for, some have well-shap'd Hands, Legs,
and Feet, and ill-shap'd Bodies: others well-shap'd Bodies, and ill-featured
Faces, and ill-shap'd Legs and Feet: also, some have one Feature in the Face
excellent, and all the rest ill-favored.

The like is the Mind: for, some have good Capacities and Understandings to
some things; and to others, are as dull, as senseless Blocks: some are witty
upon some Subjects, and are mere fools to others; so some will be good-natured
to some things, and bad or cruel to others, without cause. Likewise, Nature
seldom makes a Body and Mind answerable; for some have an ill-favored Body but
a noble Soul, and rational Understanding: others, most beautiful Bodies, but
base Souls, and depraved Understandings: which shows, as if Nature took so much
pains and care in making the one, as she became weary before she began the
other: and sometimes she seems lazy in the beginning of her Work, and sometimes
as if she were idle in the midst of her Work, and sometimes as if she were
quite tired at the finishing of her Work; as when she makes ill-favored and
weak Bodies, imperfect Senses, and ill or foolish Minds, then she is lazy at
the beginning; and when she makes some parts exact, and some defective, then
she is idle, working by halfs; and when she makes all exact, but some little
defect, then she is tired out before she has quite made an end: But (said she)
the most probable reason that I can give, why Nature (for the most part) works
so imperfectly, is, She has so much work to do, as we may say, that she has
not leisure to be exact; for the insinite Matter takes up the infinite Time, so
as she cannot stay about the curiosity of her Works; and so we may say, that
what was, or is wrought extraordinary, is rather done by Chance, than intended
by Nature; for it were a kind of Miracle, if any thing should be so exact, as
somewhat might not be mended, either in Property, Quality, Quantity, Formality,
Symmetry, or the like.

Then they asked her, If a Man could have an Idea of Jove?

She said, She thought not: for (said she) if it were an Image printed or fixed
to the Essence or Soul of Man, all Mankind would have one and the same Idea,
which we find they have not: for, some have thought him a Corporeal Substance;
others, an Incorporeal Thing: which shows his Idea was not created with Man;
neither can we have an Idea from the Works of Jove, because we neither know the
Matter he works on, nor the Motions he works with, nor to what End he works for.

Besides, the various Figures are not to be drawn, nor his subtle ways to be
traced, nor to be guessed at: we may have various thoughts (said she)
concerning the various works of Jove, but never draw his Idea therefrom, or
thereby.

Then they asked her, What was an Idea?

She said, A Shadow: for, as all Shadows were Eclipsed-lights, so all Idea's
were Eclipsed-thoughts; for Thoughts are the light of Knowledge, and Knowledge is
the Sun of the Animal World, which receives Aliment from outward Objects.

Then they asked her, Why Iron does not move to Iron, being more like; than
Iron to a Lodestone, being less like?

Because (said she) there is a sympathy in Contrarieties, and not always like
unto like: for we see, those that are cold, seek heat; and what is hot, seeks
cold: so what is cold, is nourished by heat; and what is hot, is refreshed by
cold. The same sympathy has Iron to the Lodestone, and the Lodestone to Iron.

Then they asked her, Why in Nature there are certain Principles of different
kinds?

Because (said she) there is but one principal Matter, from whence all
Principles are derived; and the variety is only made by Motion, not Matter; but
the Principle keeps in the Matter, which is not subject to change from such
Principles.

Then they asked her Opinion of the World?

She said, The World is like a Clock that is woun'd up to such a time as Ten,
Twenty, or a Hundred thousand years; and the Planets, as its Wheels, go their
natural course, turning round.

His Grace the Duke of Newcastle's Opinion, Whether a Cat sees in the Night,
or no?
SOME say, Cats do not see in the night, but only do hunt Mice by the smell, as
Dogs do Deer: but I dare say, if Dogs were stark blind, they would hardly kill
any Deer, or any thing else; and how is it possible that a Cat (by the smell)
should lay her foot so exactly upon a Mouse in the dark, and at the very first
time, did she not see in the dark? We will wave unnecessary disputes, and fall
to the truth, without the vexation of our Readers.

First, We are to take into consideration what things (besides fire) shine, or
give light in the darkest night: Rotten VVood shines in the night, and the more
if it be a little greenish and moldy: so does Fish-bones that are a little
greenish. But that which shines the most of all in the night, is a Glowworm,
and especially the tail of it, which is a kind of a Sea-water-green.

Now let us take into consideration the Eyes of all Cats, which being of what
color sover (for my Curiosity in this point made me observe it with care), I
find are thus:

That which we call the black of the Eye, which indeed is a round hole in most
Animals, covered with a double Glass, which they call the Crystalline Humor,
is unequal, to draw all the Lines to a point, and the Glass double: for a single
one would make every thing in appearance to us, to go upon their Heads; and a
double Glass sets them all on their Feet again, because the Lines cut cross in
the hole of the Eye; and because the Line that comes from the Head, cuts at the
bottom of the hole; and the Lines that come from the Feet, cut at the top of
the hole; so that all the species in a dark Chamber, coming in at a little
hole, upon a white sheet of Paper, go on their Heads: but put another Glass
over your former Glass, and then all the species are set right upon their Legs
again, because the Lines are cut again cross in the hole, which sets them up
right, though the species are weakened by their double journey. And this is the
reason that the Crystalline Humor is double in all other Animals, but Cats;
which have white about the black of the Eye.

Now you must understand, that the Eyes of all Cats are just as I have told you
of other Animals, saving the round black, which in a Cat is a slit downward,
which she can contract and dilatate at her pleasure; and that slit being
extended to its uttermost, is a mighty Circle. Then you must conceive again,
that the white that is about our Eyes, is a Seawater-green about all Cats Eyes:
so that in the day a Cat does stretch and extend the narrow slits of her Eyes,
which are dilatated to a mighty Circle, hiding her Seawater green that is
about them, almost all over. But in the night she contracts her Eyes to a very
narrow long slit, which very much enlarges the Sea-water-green all about them;
which Sea-water-green gives the light. And thus she lights her Torches, or
Flamboes, in the night, and carries them along with her to see by, as one does
a Candle in the hand; and puts out her Candles in the day, as having no use of
them.

That this is probable, remember the several greens that I told you of before,
that do shine and give light in the night; and besides, I have heard by a great
many several credible Witnesses, that have seen the Eyes of Cats shine just
like Candles in the dark night; which is so often and commonly seen, that it
suffers no dispute.

But if you will put a Cat in some dark place, and she is not pleased to light
her Torches, because she would not have you find her, do not rashly condemn the
Opinion for that; for I do assure you, very many confirm it as no strange
thing, or miraculous, and that never dreamed of Philosophy.

If you do not like these Reasons, give better, or else pardon the meanness of
the Subject, since the times give me leave to study the nature of all things,
even from the Mouse to the Elephant.

The second sort that were to visit her, were PHYSICIANS.
And after a short time, they asked her what made a good Physician?

She answered, Practice and Observation.

Then they asked her, What made the difference between Pain and Sickness?

She said, Pain was caused by cross perturbed Motions; and Sickness by
distempered Matter, and the overflow of Humors.

Then they asked her, Whether the Mind could be in pain, or be sick?

She answered, No; but (said she) the Mind is like the fire, it can put the
Body to pain, but can feel none it self: likewise, the Motion is like fire; for
the more Matter it has to work on, the quicker it moves; and when the Mind is
(as it were) empty, it grows dull, and the Head is filled with nothing but
smoaky Vapors.

Then they asked her, What difference there is between the Soul and the Mind?

She answered, As much difference as there is betwixt Flame, and the grosser
part of Fire: for, said she, the Soul is only the pure part of the Mind.

Then they asked her the difference (if any was) betwixt the Soul, the Mind,
and the Thoughts?

She answered, As the Mind was the Fire, the Soul the Flame; so the Thoughts
were as the Smoke that issues from the several Subjects that the Mind works on:
and as Smoke, so the several Thoughts many times vanish away, and are no more
remembered; and sometimes they gather together as Clouds do; and as one Cloud
lies above another, so the Thoughts many times lie in rows one above another,
as from the first, to the second and third Region.

Then they asked her, What was the best Medicine to prolong Life?

She answered, Temperance and good Diet.

Then they asked her, What Diet?

As for Diet, said she, to Healthful Bodies, Meats must be well and wisely
matched: but to Diseased Bodies, such Diets must be prescribed as are proper to
cure each several Disease. As for the mixing and matching Meats, said she, they
must be after this description following: All Flesh-meats are apt to breed Salt
Rheums; and being roast, breeds Choleric Humors; which Salt Rheums, and
Choleric Humors, causes (many times) Hectic Fevers, enflaming the Arterial
Blood, and Vital Spirits, and drinking out the Radical Moisture; and Salt
Rheums penetrating into the Vital parts, cause excoriations and ulcerations.

As for white Meats, as Milk-meats, and the like, they are apt to breed sharp
Humors: also, the gross parts cause many times obstructions of the Noble
parts; and the sharpness is apt to corrode, especially the Uretaries, Guts and
Stomach; producing Bloody-waters from the one, and Cholicks in the other. Also
sharp Humors cause Cankers, Fistula's, and the like, eating through several
parts of the Body, making several holes, passages, or wounds, to pass through;
and Obstructions cause ill digestion, ill digestion causes corruptions,
corruptions cause several Diseases, as Fevers, Smallpox, Imposthumes, Boils,
Scabs, and Leprosies, if the Corruption is salt or sour.

As for Fish, and also all sorts of Pults, they breed Slime; and Slime in hot
Bodies causes the Stone, and Gout in cold Bodies; and all sorts of white
Swellings, as the King's Evil, Wens, and the like; also the Brains, Feet, or any
Sinewy part of any Meat, does the like, as also Sweetmeats.

As for all sorts of Fruits, Roots, Herbs, they breed thin, crude Humors,
which causes Wind; Wind causes Cholicks, Cramps, and Convulsions, by griping
and twisting the Guts, Nerves, and Veins; as also, all swimming and dizzy
Diseases in the Head; likewise, Head-akes, caused by a Vapor arising from the
crude and raw Humors; also, in hot Bodies it causes the Sciatica, the heat
over-rarifying the sharp Humors, caused by Fruit, makes it so subtle and
searching, that it does not only extend to the outmost parts of the Body, as
betwixt the skin and flesh; but gets into the small Thread-Veins.

As for all Sweetmeats, and Comfits, they are in some Bodies very obstructive,
and in all Bodies they breed both sharp and hot Rheums; and I have heard, said
she, that Sugar makes the most sharp and acid Vitriol.

As for the matching of several Meats:

Fish-meats do well agree with Roots, Herbs, and Fruits, if they be stewed,
roasted, boiled, baked, or the like; otherwise the rawness hinders the
concoction of the Meat: but if they be dressed as aforesaid, they temper the
saltness, and quench out the heat which the over-nourishing strength does
produce.

Also, Fish may be mixed with Flesh-meat, although all Physicians are against
it: for certainly, the natural freshness and coldness of Fish, does temper and
allay the natural heat and saltness that is in Flesh-meat, mixing it into a
good Chyle, and tempering it into a Juicy-Gravy, which increases the radical
moisture, and nourishes the radical heat: also, it supplies the Arteries,
fills the Veins, plumps the Flesh, smooths the skin: whenas strong drinks mixed
with strong meats, over-heats the Body, enflames the Spirits, evaporates the
radical moisture, burns the radical heat, scorches the Arteries, drinks up the
Blood, sears the Veins, shrinks up the Nerves, dries the Flesh, and shrivels
the Skin.

White Meats and Pults agree best, as being of one and the same degree (as it
were) of heat: for all strong Meats curdle all sorts of Milk, which causes
obstructions and corruptions, and turns it sour, being of a nature so to do;
which makes such sharpness in the blood and body, as causes Tertians, Quartans,
Quotidians, and the like Diseases.

Pults, and all sorts of Milk-meat, being of a spungy substance, digest (as it
were) together; when Meats that are solid, mixed with Meats that are more
porous and spungy, do hinder each other.

Small drink is best with white Meat; but when Pults is eaten without Milk, it
may agree better with stronger Liquor.

Roots and Milk-meats agree, as being both easily dissolved from the first
forms, into Chyle.

Nor do Fruits and Pults disagree; for the sharpness of the Fruits, does divide
the clamming of the Pults; and the sliminess of the Pults does temper the
sharpness of the Fruits: but Fruits and Milkmeats are enemies, which when they
meet, they do exasperate one another.

So that Fruits and Pults, and Milk and Roots, do best together; Roots having
no sharpness in them: but there is of all sorts of Flesh, Fish, Milk, Roots,
and Herbs; some being hotter than others, and grosser; as, the most watrish
Fruits are the hottest, as having most Spirits in their acute Juices.

Likewise, all Roots or Herbs that bite, as it were, the tongue, or are bitter
to the taste, are hot, although Druggists, Herbalists, and Physicians, are many
times of the other opinion: but certainly all that is sharp, salt, or bitter,
proceeds from a hot nature, and most commonly produces hot effects, having a
fiery figure and motion: but because they find many things that are sharp or
bitter, to qualify Fevers, or the like hot Diseases, they think it is the
natural temper of the Drugs, Herbs, Roots, Fruits, or the like; but a hot Cause
may produce a cold Effect: as for example, Obstructions cause heat in the Body;
but sharp things do divide and dissolve those gross and tough Humors, and open
Obstructions.

Likewise, those that are salt and bitter, do purify and cleanse the
corruption in the Body; and when the cause of the Disease is taken or removed
away, the Body becomes equally tempered; for as the Disease does waste, the
Body does cool. Thus it is the sharpness, saltness, and bitterness, that cures
the Disease, and not a cold nature in the Simples; for when the Disease, as I
said, is gone, the Body is well-tempered and cooled.

Then they asked her, which was the best way to make the best temperament for
Health.

She said, that way that was best toward Mediocrity, as neither to eat too
gross meats, nor too watrish; nor to drink too strong drink, nor such as was
very small; that is, neither too hot, nor too cold, either virtually, or
actually.

As for gross Meats, they fill the Body with too much Melancholy Humors, and
the Head with Malignant Vapors.

Very fine and tender Meat, makes the Stomach weak, by reason the substance is
not sufficiently solid: for, as very gross meat over-powers the Stomach, by the
laborious working thereon; so very fine and tender meat makes it lazy and weak
for want of exercise.

Very small Drinks, being very watrish, quench the natural heat; and those that
are very strong, burn it out: but, said she, Meats and Drinks must be wisely
matched; and not only Meats and Drinks, but the Nourishment, and the Nourished:
for, although (in general) hot Constitutions should use cooling drinks and
meats for their diets; and cold, hot diets; and moist, dry diets; and dry,
moist diets: yet, if the Body be any ways diseased or distempered, they must
order such a Body according to the Cause, and not to the Effects of their
Disease: As for example, To all Hydropical Bodies, must not be applied drying
Medicines nor Diets: for if the Dropsy proceeds from a dry cause, dry Diets or
Medicines are as bad as poison; for though the Effect be watrish in such
Diseases, yet the Cause was dry: So for heat or cold. And this example may
serve for all other Diseases: wherefore Physicians must search out, and know
the original cause, before they can cure the Disease: for, those that prescribe
according to the Effect, may cure by chance, but kill with ignorance.

Then they asked her, If the Spirits were always affected with the Distemper of
the Body, or the Body with the Distemper of the Spirits?

She answered, Not always: for sometimes the Spirits will be ill-affected, and
the Body in health: other times the Body sick, and the Spirits lively and
well-tempered: But (said she) this is to be observed, that the Body may be
cold, and the Spirits enflamed; and the Body heated, and the Spirits quenchched
or stupefied; for the Spirits are the thinnest and subtillest substances of the
Creature: now this thinnest and subtillest substance in the Creature, may be
enflamed, when the solid'st is be-numb'd with cold: for a cold melancholy Body
may have enflamed and distracted Spirits.

Likewise, a cold diseased Body may have Hectic Spirits: and thus both the
Animal and Vital Spirits may be hot, and the more solid Parts or Humors of the
Body cold. Also, the heat of the Spirits may be quenched, and the Body
burning-hot; as the Stomach, Liver, or other parts, may be parched with heat,
when both the Animal and Vital Spirits have not a sufficient heat to give them
lively motions. And it is to be observed, said she, that the Animal and Vital
Spirits, as they are the thinnest and subtilest part of a Creature, so they are
nourished by the thinnest substances or parts of Food, which dilate to the
Spirits: for, though the Spirits can and do work upon the solid'st parts of the
Body, or Nourishment; yet they only receive benefit by the thinnest. As also,
the great annoyance: for it is the Vapor of Meats and Drinks that feeds the
Spirits, and not the Substance: for, Vapor will choke, smuther, burn, or
quench them out: But the Vapors from Liquors work more suddenly upon the
Spirits (either to good effect, or bad), than Vapors from a solid Substance,
by reason all Liquors have a dilatating nature, which spreads it self amongst
the Spirits with more facility. Also, the Vapor of Liquid Bodies is more facil
than the Vapor of Solid Bodies: and, said she, some burn their Stomachs with
Drugs, and some quench their Spirits with Julips; others burn their Spirits
with Cordials, and flat or dead the Stomach with Meats virtually cold: For it
is to be observed, that there is a general Error amongst Mankind, about Rules
concerning Health; some practicing with a belief, that Drinks virtually
cooling, temper hot Meats; and virtually cooling Meats, hot Drinks. In which
they are deceived: for, though they may mix so, and temper; yet, for the most
part, it is only as Water and Meal makes Dough; or as Earth and Water makes
Mud; or as Sugar and Water makes Syrrup; but does not temper that virtual heat
or cold that works upon the substantial or the spiritual parts; for that which
works upon the Spirits, has a more sudden operation than that which works upon
the solid parts of the Body; and that from the solider parts has a flower
operation: so that the Stomach may be parched, and the heat of the Spirits
quenched, and the Spirits burnt, and the Stomach weak by a heavy or dull
coldness. But those Bodies that are in health, have not such defects as to fear
such a sudden operation; for as defects are easily inveterated, so Health is
not suddenly annoyed: wherefore they may temper their Meat and Drink by cooling
and heating, yet not to a high degree; for all Extremes are naught.

Then they asked her, What was the reason that all Creatures look fuller and
fatter in Summer than in Winter?

She answered, The reason was, Because then the Blood extends to the extreme
parts, which swells out the flesh, and puffs out the skin; and in the Winter
the blood falls back, as the sap of Plants does to the Roots, which causes the
flesh and skin to look withered and dry, as Branches and Leaves do, seared,
faded, withered, and dry.

The like reason is, when Men have Pimples, Scabs, Swellings, Pocks, and the
like, which is the fruit of corrupted blood.

Then they asked her opinion of Mineral Waters; What Virtues and Vices they
have, being drunk?

She answered, That all Mineral-waters were of a kind of a Brine, but not so
much a salt Brine, as a sharp Brine (if I may call that which is sharp, Brine,
said she); but whether it has the effects upon the body, as Brine has upon
dead flesh, as to preserve or keep it from putrefaction, I cannot say; but
certainly it drinks up the natural moisture in healthful bodies, more often
than it purifies the corrupted Humors in diseased bodies. The Effects of Sharp
and Salt, are oft-times alike, as a sharp Pickle will preserve from
putrefaction, as well as Brine. But howsoever the Mineral-waters have much salt
in them, the Effects are hot and dry, and have a corroding quality; their
corroding quality is caused by the sharpness; and their heat, by their
corroding; and their dryness, by their insipid nature: and though they are
actually cold, they are virtually hot; their virtues are only on cold and moist
bodies, or diseases; as those that have obstructions caused by raw cold phlegm;
or swellings caused by cold clammy Humors; or Ulcers caused by cold corrupted
Humors; or Rheums, or Dropsies, caused by too many cold moist Humors; or the
like Diseases, caused by cold Humors; and in my opinion, said she, they would
be excellently good for all outward Ulcers, or old Sores or Wounds, being
washed and bathed therewith, by reason they have a cleansing, drying faculty,
not only inwardly taken, but outwardly applied. Also, they may temper the
inflammations that most commonly attend all Ulcers, Sores, or Wounds, not only
by cleansing and drying up the putrefactions, but being actually cold,
especially outwardly applied: for, though they are virtually hot, being
inwardly taken, and digested into the blood; or as I may say, the Mineral
rubbed or wrought into the body; yet they are actually cold, that is, cold to
touch. But to return to the interior Maladies: All those Diseases that are
produced from hot, dry, and sharp causes, are as bad as poisons.

They are so: for such obstructions that proceed from hard-baked, dry Humors,
or Dropsies caused by hot dry Livers, Spleens, or other parts; or Consumptions
that proceed from salt sharp Rheums, or hot dry Lungs, Livers, Spleens, or the
like parts: or all Swellings caused by hot, dry, or sharp Humors; or interior
Ulcers, caused by hot, dry, or sharp Humors; or Apoplexies, caused by hard
crusted phlegm, or dry black melancholy, or burnt dry thick blood, which stops
the natural passages of the spirits; or Epilepsies, or Convulsions, caused by
sharp Humors, which shrivel and knit up the Nerves or Veins, or Joints of the
Body; or hot Winds, which work and foam, and (as I may say) yeest the natural
Humors in the body, distempering the body therewith. Likewise, it is an Enemy
to all melancholy bodies, being full of sharp Humors, like Aquafortis, which
are bred in the body; or as a sharp green Humor, which is a poisonous
Verdigrease bred in the body; which Humor is the cause most commonly of the
Disease called Epilepsis, or Fallingsickness; and oft-times is the cause of
Convulsions: but this Humor is a certain cause of the Stomack-Cholick, that is
to say, a Wind in the Stomach and Sides. Also, they are Enemies to the Gout, by
reason that the Gout proceeds from a hot-baked, dry, salt, or sharp Humor. It
is a bitter or sulphurous Humor, or a limy chalky Humor, that causes the
Gout; and indeed, it is a calcined Humor, which makes it incurable.

For the Stone, they may work good Effects, although my Reason cannot perceive,
but that the Minerals may contract and confirm humors into stone, as well as
dissolve stone: for, thought their acuteness is penetrating, and so may
dissolve; yet their dryness is Contracting, Uniting, Combining; and they are
not only dry, by the insipidness of their nature, but by their sharpness; for
all sharpness is drying, more or less: and though sharpness is actually
dissolving by corroding; yet it is virtually drying, by heating: for corroding
is the cause of heat. For whatsoever is rubbed, or grated hard or swiftly,
grows hot; even Stones, or any Metal, which is the hardest Matter we know; but
looser Matter, as Wood, will be set on fire. Wherefore if Wood, Stone, and
Metal, will become actually hot, by rubbing or grating actually thereon; well
may soft flesh, especially the inward parts, that are most tender. And as it is
the nature of sharpness to corrode, and the nature of corroding or rubbing, to
heat: so it is the nature of heat to drink up moisture, and make all things
dry. And as sharp things may cleanse Ulcers, by eating the filth therein; or
may be good to take off superfluous flesh, called proud-flesh, in Sores; or may
dissolve some hard Humors, moderately taken or applied: so they may make
Ulcers, Sores, and Wounds, and contract and confirm humors, if immoderately or
unnecessarily, or wrongfully applied.

But, as I said, the Mineral-waters may as well cause the Stone in the Kidneys
or Bladder, as dissolve it; and may also ulcerate as soon as cleanse: but the
Mineral-waters do rather make a passage, and send forth Gravel, by the quantity
that is drunk, and passes through the Uretories, which like a stream does wash
and carry all loose Matter before it, and not so much by the virtue of
dissolving.

But to conclude, concerning Mineral-waters (said she); I cannot perceive but
they may breed more Diseases than they cure; and those Bodies they are most
proper for, must be purged and empty before they take them, lest the weight and
quantity of the Waters, should carry obstructions to the parts open and free,
by carrying too suddenly or forcibly, or pressing or thrusting too hard.

Then they asked her about the nature of Purging-Drugs?

She said, All Purging-Drugs were full of Spirits, which was the cause they
were so active and quick in operation: for, said she, whatsoever has most
Spirits, is most active; which shows, says she, that Birds have more Spirits
(which is innated Matter) than any other sort of Animal-kind; for they are
always hopping and flying about; also chirping, whistling, and singing; which
shows them not only to be more active, as having more vital or sensitive
Spirits; but also more rational, as being fuller of Animal Spirits.

But to return to Drugs (said she); they seem to have more of the Sensitive
spirits (vulgarly called Vital Spirits), which work upon the grossest
Substance, than the Rational Spirits (which are vulgarly called Animal spirits)
do; with which spirits Cordials seem to be full, as working upon the finer
parts; for Cordials do cheer, and do revive the Soul or Mind, making the
thoughts more cheerful and pleasing; which alacrity does help to abate and
qualify the disorders in the body.

Then they asked her, What was the best study for such as would practice
Physic?

She said, Natural Philosophy: for, said she, those can never be good
Physicians, that are not good Natural Philosophers; and if they would study
Natural Philosophy more than they do, there would be more frequent Cures: for
if they do not study Nature that makes the Body, they shall never know Remedies
to cure the body; for those that do not understand the Works of Nature, cannot
mend a fault, or prevent a danger to come: but they must study Nature's
Creations, Dissolutions, Sympathies, Antipathies, in Matter, Motion, and
Figure: but, said she, it is a difficult study, and requires a subtle,
moving-brain to find out the several motions, although they be the plainest,
vulgar, and grossest, much more the subtle and intricate ones.

And had Aristotle, said she, studied the motions in Nature, or Natural
motions, as he did the parts of Nature, or Natural parts, he would have been a
far more learned Man than he was; but his study was easy: for it is no great
matter to conceive what the Senses present; but it is difficult to present to
the Senses what the Brain conceives, making the Senses the Servants or Scouts,
to seek and search, by industry and experiments, and to find the truth of a
Rational Opinion: but (said she) the studies of many Physicians in these later
times, are mixed, as partly of one Science, and partly of another; which makes
them learned in neither.

As, if a Physician should study Theology, he will neither be a subtle Divine,
or an Eloquent Preacher, nor a knowing Physician; one Study confounding the
other: for, though Natural Philosophy proves a God, yet it proves no particular
Religion.

Then they asked, What was that which was called the Sensitive and Rational
Spirits?

She said, They were the highest Extracts of Nature, which are the Quintessence
and Essence of Nature, and the innated parts of Nature, which in the knowledge
and life, are Nature; which are the Soul and Actions of Nature.

Then they asked her, Whether those Spirits had several Figures or small
Bodies? and, Whether they were from all Eternity?

She answered, That their Degrees and innated Motions; and their Figurings,
Acuteness, and Subtilties, were from all Eternity.

As for the rational innated parts, said she, they change and re-change into
any figures or forms, having no particular figure or form inherent, but the
form of that degree of Matter it is of: but as it can put its self into parts,
so it can unite its self; and as it can divide and unite its self, so it can
dilate and contract its self, and all by a self-motion, as moving innatedly,
like Quicksilver, from an united body, into numbers of parts; and from parts,
to an united body again. The Sensitive innated part moves, said she, after
another manner, as Aquafortis, or the like, on Metal; for it moves, not
figuring it self, but as it figures other parts of Matter that has no
innateness inherent therein, but (only as a dull lump) lies to be moved by the
moving-part, which is the innated part, as Metal does by Fire or Water, by Cold
or Heat.

Thus this different way of moving, was from Eternity, as their degree was from
Eternity; for the Rational innated Matter, is a degree above the Sensitive
innated Matter: and though they move not always after one manner, yet they move
always after one nature.

Many, said they, could not conceive what those Spirits were; some imagining
them little Creatures.

No, said she, they are not Creatures, but Creators, which creating-brains may
easily understand; and those that cannot conceive, have a scarcity thereof.
But, said she, because the Philosophy is new, therefore they do obstruct it
with idle Questions, ignorant Objections: but (said she) the Philosophy is
good, in despite of their ignorance. I desire very much to know (said she) how
the Learned describe that which they name Vital and Animal Spirits? Whether
they think them little Creatures, or no?

To which they made no answer.

Then they asked her, What caused sleep in Animal Figures?

She said, The tiredness or weariness of the Sensitive innated Matter, called
the Sensitive Spirits; which weariness causes them to retire from the outward
parts of Animal Figures: for, though the Sensitive spirits do not desist from
moving in any part, as to the consistence or dissolution of the Figure; yet all
the Sensitive spirits do not work one and the same way, or after the same
manner; nor the same part of Innated Matter, or Sensitive Spirits, work not
always one and the same way, or after the same manner, nor in the same parts:
but, as some of that Innated Matter, or Spirits, work in several parts of a
Figure, on the dull part of Matter, to the consistence or dissolution of the
Figure; so others, and sometimes one and the same degree, work to the use,
convenience, or necessity of the Figure; and those that work to the use of the
Figure in the several senses, although they do not desist from moving, as being
against Nature, being a perpetual Motion; yet they often desist from laboring
(as I may say): for it is a greater labor to take patterns (as they do) from
outward Objects, than to work by roat, or as they please (which they do), in
sleep: But it is not always their labor, as being over-pow'rd with work; but
sometimes their want of work; as many will sleep through idleness, having no
outward objects presented to them, to print or paint: other times it is their
appetite to freedom and liberty from those outward labors or employments: for,
though they may, and are oft-times as active when they work, as in sleep; yet
it is easier, being voluntary: for the spirits work more easy, at least more
freely, when they are not taskt, than when they are like Apprentices or
Journey-men; and will be many times more active when they take or have liberty
to play, or to follow their own Appetites, than when they work (as I said) by
constraint, and for necessity; but many times the Sensitive spirits retire,
when they work, not to sleep, as being persuaded or dissuaded then from either,
by the Rational innated Matter, which is called the Rational Spirits in the
Figure; or by the Rational Spirits in another Figure, to desist from the
outward labor, as one would persuade another to rest; and to retire, and shut
up the Shop-windows and Doors of the Sensitive Houses: for the Eyes, Ears,
Nostrils, Mouth, or the pores of the Skin, are but the Working-houses or Rooms
of the Sensitive spirits.

To prove it: Does not our Mind (which is the Rational part) persuade the Body
(which is the Sensitive part, and that wherein works the Sensitive Matter or
Spirits) to lie, to rest, or to withdraw from outward Employments, because it
would not be disturbed with the labor of the Sensitive spirits? For the
Rational, which is the Mind (said she), are not only the servants, to view and
take notice of all the works and workings of the Sensitive; but are oftentimes,
in many things, the Directors, Advisers, and sometimes Rulers and Opposers; as
when the Mind forces the Body to danger or trouble. But this Rational part, or
the Rational spirits, are (for the most part) busily employed in figuring
themselves by the Sensitive prints, which is the knowledge they take of the
works and workings; being the more busy and exact, when the Sensitive spirits
work outward works.

I will not say, they move always after the Sensitive prints, which is to view
them; for sometimes they move after their own inventions: for many times the
Mind views not what the Body does; and many times they move partly after their
own invention, and partly after the Sensitive prints. But when the Sensitive
spirits do retire, or when the Rational spirits persuade them to retire, then
the Rational spirits move after their own appetites or inventions, which are
Conceptions, Imaginations, Opinions, Fancies, or the like: But (said she) it is
to be taken notice, that as the Rational spirits, for the most part, move after
the Sensitive prints, which is, to put their own Matter into such Figures as
the Sensitive spirits print upon the dull and unmoving parts of Matter: so many
times the Sensitive spirits do print or engrave those Conceptions,
Imaginations, Fancies, or the like, upon the dull part of Matter, as Patterns
of the Rational Figures: for, as I said, the Rational spirits do cast, work, or
move their own part of Matter, into Figures; and the Sensitive spirits do
figure and print upon other parts of Matter, as that which is called the dull
and unmoving part: but when the Rational Matter persuades, or causes the
Sensitive Matter to work and print from their figurings; or that the Sensitive
spirits do it of their own free choice, they work (for the most part)
irregularly; I will not say, always; for when the Rational spirits move to
invention, the Sensitive spirits work those inventions regularly, if not at
first, yet with a little practice; but when the Rational spirits move to any
passion, especially violent passions, the Sensitive spirits are apt to work
irregularly, and to discompose the Animal Figure with Irregularities; for
oft-times, not only the irregular motions of the Rational spirits, but the
violence of their motions, although regular, does disorder the Sensitive
spirits, causing them to work irregularly; but violence is not always irregular
or perturbed: also, the regularity of the Sensitive spirits, will cause a
disorder amongst the Rational spirits; as we shall see the Mind will distemper
the Body, as the Body will disorder the Mind; but where the Rational innated
Matter, or Spirits, move so irregularly, as to make unusual imaginations, or
imaginary fears, and other conceptions and passions, which are irregular; as
much as violence causes the Sensitive spirits also to work both irregularly
and violently; whereby they print strange figures in the Animal Senses, as we
may prove by those that are affrighted, or have imaginary fears, who see
strange and unusual objects, which Men call Devils, Hobgoblins, Spirits, and
the like; and without question, they do see such things as are strange and
unusual to them; for such strange and unusual Figures, are printed by the
irregularity of the Sensitive spirits, upon the Optic Nerve. And so for
Hearing, Scent, Touch, and the like: for, when Men have such imaginary fears,
they will say, they saw strange things, and that they heard strange noises, and
smelt strange Scents, and that they were pinched and beaten black and blew, and
that they were carried out of their way, and cast into Ditches, or the like;
and it is not to be doubted, but that they did see such Sights, hear such
Sounds, smell such Scents, and feel such Pains; for many times the
black-and-blew marks will be seen in the flesh, and the flesh will be sore; and
how should it be otherwise, when the Sensitive innated Matter, or Spirits, by
moving in such motions, work in each Sense those Objects, Sounds, Scents,
Touches, and the like? And I see no reason, but the whole Body may be carried
violently from place to place by the strength of the Sensitive spirits: for
certainly, the innated Matter, in every Animal Figure, does not commonly use
its full strength: for, the Body will be more actually strong at some times,
than at other times; and upon some occasion, more than when they have no
occasion to use strength: for, though the several degrees of innated Matter
cannot work beyond the strength of their degree, yet they can work in their
strength, and not always work to their full power; and as we may observe, the
power of strength is seldom used in Animal Figures; but certainly it is amongst
the Sensitive and Rational spirits, in every Animal Creature, as it is with the
Governors or Citizens of every Kingdom; they know not their own power and
strength, until they be put to it: for, every particular Part, knows not the
strength of the Whole, until they join together as one Part. This is the
reason, Man, or any other Creature, is ignorant, not only each of other, but of
themselves: for, How is it possible, Man should know himself, since Nature
cannot know her self, being divided into several Parts and Degrees? But to
return to the strength of the unitedspirits of Mankind; which united-spirits,
working irregularly, carry the Body forcibly into unnecessary or dangerous
places: for, the violence and irregularity, does disorder the Rational spirits
(if they were not disordered before) so much, that they cannot direct
prudently, nor order methodically, not advise subtly; but are all, as I may
say, in a hurlyburly: for the Rational spirits, making imaginary fears, do as
those that begin an Uproar: so the Rational spirits are not only afraid of the
Tumult amongst the Sensitive spirits, but are discomposed and hurried about
themselves; and their Society, which is their own Matter, is dispersed abroad;
that is, dis-united and disordered in their regular motions: so as the Rational
innated Matter, or spirits, although they were the first Cause of the
extravagant Commotions amongst the Sensitive spirits, yet they are discomposed
therewith, by reflection, their own disorders returning in double lines of
strength from the Sensitive Body.

Then they asked her, Why the Animal Figure did not always dream in sleep,
since the Sensitive and Rational spirits, or innated Matter, did never desist
from moving.

She said, That although the innated Matter did never desist from moving, yet
they did not always figure or print, for they dissolve as well as create.

Besides, said she, they may work to the preservation or consistence of the
Figure, and of every particular sense, and yet not always make use of the
senses. Besides, said she, the Rational Matter does not always figure it self
by the Sensitive Print; and for proof, many times those that are in a serious
Discourse, studious Contemplations, or violent Passions, will take no notice of
the Sensitive motions: for, in a violent passion, many will receive a deadly
wound, and never take notice of the touch; and, many times, those in serious
discourse receive a pinch on their Arm, or Finger, or any other part, and yet
they at that time never take knowledge thereof; and yet when their violent
passion or discourse is ended, then their Rational knowledge takes notice that
their Finger, Arm, or other parts, ache; or their Wounds smart; which shows the
sense of Touch was sometimes in their Finger, or in that part wounded, before
the Rational knowledge took notice of it. So in a deep Contemplation, when they
view Objects, hear Sounds, smell Scents, taste and touch, the Rational knowledge
takes no notice of it, because the Rational spirits move not to the Sensitive
Works; so that only the Eye sees, or the Ear hears, or the Nose smells, or the
Tongue tastes, or any particular part feels, but the Rational takes no notice
thereof: so that these are but particular knowledges in every particular sense,
or part of the Figure, and not a general knowledge: for the Sensitive knowledge,
which are the Sensitive spirits, are bound to parts; but the Rational knowledge,
which are the Rational spirits, is free to all, as being free to it self, the
other bound to the dull part of Matter.

But to return to Dreams; How shall we remember figurative Dreams, since Memory
is not made by the Rational motions? for, though the Sensitive innated Matter
might print such figures; yet the Rational innated Matter has not figured
those prints; and then we say, we did not dream.

Then they asked, Why some Animal Creatures were almost dissolved for want of
sleep?

She said, Want of sleep was caused by distemper; which distemper was a
disorder and irregularity amongst the innated Matter, sometimes from the
Sensitive spirits, sometimes from the Rational spirits, and sometimes from
both. The irregularity of the Sensitive spirits, was, when the Body was pained,
or sick, or overpowered: the irregularity amongst the Rational was, when the
Mind was troubled: these disorders hinder the Sensitive spirits from shutting
up Shop orderly; and when they sleep by halves, or unsoundly, those
irregularities cause their windows and doors (which are the senses) to open and
shut unnecessarily and untimely, as I may say; and, many times, lack of sleep
is caused, when the spirits are so tired, that they cannot use a sufficient
force to shut up shop, at least, not to lock or bar the Windows and Doors
close. Sometimes the Sensitive spirits are so earnest and (as I may say) greedy
in working, that they labor both night and day, either for curiosity, or
increase, or pleasure: but, most commonly, the Rational spirits join or go
halves with the Sensitive spirits, when they work for curiosity or pleasure,
because they make a delight thereby.

Then they asked her, What was the reason that some sorts of Cordials or Drugs
caused sleep?

She said, That that part of innated Matter that was taken in Cordials, or such
Drugs, did either help the innated Matter in the Animal Body or Figure (by
adding strength to them), to shut up their Shops and Windows; or else helped to
rectify their disorders and irregularities.

But (said she) as some Drugs or Cordials do sympathize to the irregular part
of innated Matter in the Figure; so other Drugs and Cordials do work
antipathetically to their regularity, and sympathetically to their
irregularities; and then the working to sleep is more hindered then helped.

Then they asked her, Whether one kind of Motion could give a perfect form at
one instant?

She said, No, unless the Creature formed be without the varieties of parts;
for every different part requires a different motion to the creating of each
part, and a distance of time to form each part in; for some parts require more
work and labor than others.

Then they asked her, If all Creatures were created by degrees?

She said, All Creatures that were composed of various parts, are: for, as
there are degrees of innated Matter, which innated Matter is the Creator of all
Figures; so there are degrees of, and in Creation: for our senses (said she)
show us, that there is a season, a time, and a working in time, by degrees: and
if we allow there be degrees of increasing, as strengthening and enlarging, why
should we think there are none in creating every particular Figure, and
different parts in one and the same Creature? For as we see, seed must be first
sown, and then remain in the Earth for some time, before those seeds sprout up
and increase; so there is time and degrees in forming of the formed: for if
there be degrees that we call Time, why not in the working of each part of each
Figure in time? For in reason we cannot think, that the root, the blade, the
stalk, the ears, the seed in the ears of Corn, are produced from one motion,
made by the Seed sown, and the Earth, and so each different part to be created
at one instant, into one created from or figure.

And as in Vegetables, so questionless in Animals, there are degrees in their
creations: for it is against reason and sense, to think an Animal is formed at
one instant, although the figure at first created, was no bigger than a hair,
if the figure has variety of parts, which require not only various motions,
but degrees of motions, and distance of time to move in.

And thus as Vegetable require degrees and distance of time to create one
figure; so in Animals there is not only space in time, and degrees of motions,
and several mixtures of temperaments, to enlarge and strengthen that figure;
but degrees in creating every particular part in one and the same figure, which
is not formed at once: for common sense (said she) shows us, that there is
nothing done but by degrees; and whosoever thinks otherwise, their thoughts
move irregularly, and against sense and reason: for Nature works by degrees,
and in order, and orders her Works by degrees.

Then they asked her, Whether a Creature might not be created by the effects of
motion, without partaking of the substance of the Parents.

She said, No: for, said she, the Earth, and the seed sown (which are the
Parents that produce an Offspring), cannot produce any thing of its own
nature, unless some part of the Producers goes to the creating of the
Produced: for it is not only such a motion made between the Producers, that
creates the Produced; but part of their innated Matter (which are the Sensitive
and Rational spirits), which goes to the forming and creating of the Produced:
for that innated Matter or Spirits that goes from the Producers, meeting and
intermixing together, creates or lays the foundation of the Produced, on which
other innated Matter or Spirits (brought by the way of nourishment) do build:
so that the foundation of every Creature, is of the Creator. But, said she, one
and the same Matter does not move always after one and the same manner; for it
is not merely such a motion, but such kind of motions, that create; and the
variousness of the motions, or Creators, although of one and the same Matter,
causes a difference in the Created, in semblances, constitutions, humors,
dispositions, qualities, faculties, and the like: for, though the Producers be
the same, and not only the Produced of the same Kind, but of the same Natures,
as coming from such Producers; yet the Produced are not always alike, but some
vary more than others, not only the Produced, but those produced from their
Producers.

But, said she, to show that the Produced partake of the Producers, of each
party, more or less, not only in effects, but in substance, is, that such a
Creature or Creatures could not be created, but by the same Creators; otherwise
the same motions, made by such a kind of Matter, would produce the same
Creature: which cannot be; for the same kind or degree of innated Matter which
creates, has the same kind of motions in general; but every particular part is
of it self: for that which is of one part, is not of another part, although it
be of one and the same Kind, and has one and the same Property. But the
Rational spirits (said she) go to the creation of the Mind or Soul, the
Sensitive to the Body. But, said she, Opinion creates one way, and Nature
another way; which Opinions, except there be sense and reason in them, are the
false Conceptions in Nature. But the learned Students study so much the Parts,
that they never consider the Parties that work therein.

The Authoress of these Opinions of the Rational and Sensitive spirits, says,
she brings Sense and Reason to dispute for their truth, which no other Opinions
do; and they that will not believe Sense and Reason, will believe nothing; but
express, by their incredulity, that they have but a small quantity of that
innated Matter in their Brains.

Whatsoever treats of innated Matter, as the Sensitive and Rational spirits, is
to be compared to my Philosophical Opinions.

Then they asked her, Whether she thought there could be Repetitions in Nature?

She said, Yes: for, said she, if anything in Nature cannot be so dissolved, as
to be annihilated, it may be repeated. for if the same Matter and same Motions
are in being, the same Figures may be repeated; and if there can be in
Creations, said she, a repetition, it is probable there are repetitions of one
and the same Creature; only the time, and changes of time, makes a difference
and obscurity; in which obscurity the Creature is ignorant of it self, and its
former Being; whereby one and the same Creature may come to envy his own
Renown, which was kept alive by Records from Age to Age; as if Homer should be
created again, and envy his own Works, or at least strive to out-work them; or
that Alexander and Caesar should be created again, and should envy their own
Actions, Victories, and Powers, or (at least) grieve and repine they cannot do
the like: for if they were created again, they might miss of the same
Occasions, Opportunities or Powers, Birth or Fortunes: for though the Body and
Soul may be the same, as also the Appetites and the Desires; yet the outward
concurrence may not be the same that was in the former Being; for though the
Concurrents (as well as the Creature) may be repeated, yet perchance not
repeated in one and the same Age or Time: but if they should fall out to be
repeated in one Age, the same Actions would fall out to be as Caesar's or
Alexander's were, to conquer the World again, as they did before; and there
would be the same War betwixt the Grecians and Trojans, if the same Occasions
were; but Homer would not write the same Poems, if they were on record: for,
though it be an honor to conquer what was conquered (although after the same
manner); yet it is no honor to Wit to write what was writ before upon the same
Subject, nor indeed upon any other Subject: for, both the Wit and the Subject
must be new; at least the Wit, to gain as great and lasting Renown.

Then they asked her, What Fire was?

She said, That Fire was not only the quickest motion, but it is a perpetual
quick motion, that has no intermission, by which it has a strange power over
every thing; so that it has a stronger power by the continuance, than by the
quickness.

The Third sort that visited her, were Moral Philosophers.
The Moral Philosophers asked her, If it were possible to alter or abate the
Passions?

No, said she; you may pacify or imprison them, and enforce them to conceal
themselves in the heart, not only from outward appearance, but from the very
understanding in the head; but never alter or change their natures, to weaken
their natural strength, or abate their natural vigor: for Passions (said she)
are like the Sun; they may be eclipsed, or clouded, but never can be altered:
and as the Sun (says she) draws forth Vapor from the Earth; so do the
Imaginations draw forth Passions from the Heart; and as a Bucket draws up Water
from the bottom of a Well, so do outward Objects draw up Passions from the
Heart.

Then they asked, What was the difference betwixt the Passions and the
Appetites?

She said, The Appetites were the Passions of the Body; and the Passions, the
Appetites of the Mind; and the Mind is as apt to surfeit of the one, as the
Body of the other.

Likewise, says she, the Mind is as seldom pleased, as the Body is seldom at
ease; being both restless, and never satisfied: for the height of sensitive
Pleasure, is the beginning of Pain; and the height of Passion, is the beginning
of Desire; and Desire has no Period, no Pleasure, no Center.

Then they asked her, What sort of Love was the perfectest?

She said, That Love that descended: for Love that descends, is more solid than
that which ascends; and draws more toward perfection, as being most
contracted: for that which ascends, is airy, and disperses soon, like smoke:
but that which descends, is like falling showers of Rain, that join into a
River or Sea of Love, running with force to perfection. This is the reason
Parents love their Children better than Children can love their Parents. This
is the reason Nature loves her Creatures better than the Creatures can love
Nature. This is the reason, The Gods love Mankind better, and more perfectly,
than Mankind loves the Gods. Thus the perfectest Love is from the Gods to Men;
for the greater the descent is, the more force there is.

The like (said she) is Hate: for, that Hate which descends, is more inveterate
and malignant than that which ascends; for we are easily persuaded to pardon
the Injuries or Wrongs we receive from our Superiors; but seldom are pacified,
without a high revenge, for the Wrongs we have received from Inferiors; I mean,
not only the Inferiors of Birth, or Fortunes, but Merit. This is the reason
Noah could not forgive his Son Cham for the disgrace which he received; for no
Hate is like to that of Dishonor. This is the reason that Heaven hates Hell
more than Hell can hate Heaven.

Then they asked her, Why the Passions forced the Body to weep, to sigh, to
groan, to laugh, to sing, to complain, to rail, to curse, to commend, to
extol, to implore, to profess, to protest, to look pale, to look red, to
shake, to tremble, to strike, to embrace?

She said, That the causes, in the mind, did work their Effects upon the
Bodies, as the Causes, in Jove, did work their Effects upon Nature. Or, in a
lower Comparison, said she, the Mind is as the Sun, and the Body like the
Earth; the Sun having several Faculties, as the Mind several Passions; it gives
life and light, strength and growth; it comforts and warms, it weakens,
corrupts, withers, and decays; it burns and destroys, it dilatates and
contracts; it does digest and expel; it sucks, it draws, and confirms: so does
the Mind; it gives the Light of Knowledge, and the Life of Understanding; it
comfort and warmeth by Invention; it strengthens by Judicious Advice; it
increases by Temperance; it weakens, withers and decays by unsatiable
Intemperance; it drys and parches it by grief; inflames it by anger; burns it
by rage; confirms it by melancholy; destroys it by desperate fury, as
self-murder.

Likewise, as the Sun does not only contract and dilatate it self, but
contracts and dilatates the several Creatures on and in the Earth; the same
does the Mind the several parts of the Body; it dilatates the Body into several
actions, postures, and behaviors; to strike, to kick, to stretch out the Body,
to spread out the Arms, to fling out the Legs; to stare, to call, or cry out;
to hoop, to hollow; and it will contract the Body into a silent musing, close
the lips, shut up the eyes, fold in the arms, bow or bend in the legs, and (as
it were) wind up the Body by fear, grief, anger, melancholy, joy, wonder,
admiration, and the like: and as the Sun does suck and draw from the Earth, and
dissolve and expel the Creatures therein; so do the Passions, the Humors of
the Body: for, as some Sunbeams suck moisture from the several Springs that
rise in the Earth; so diverse Passions suck out moisture from the several Veins
that run in the Body; or as such Beams which pierce the Earth, make the face
thereof wither and pale; so will some sorts of Passions: and as some other
sorts of Sunny-beams (for all work not the like effect) draw Sulphurous
Vapors from the Bowels of the Earth, toward the Middle-Region, which flash
out in Lightning; so do the Passions draw from the Heart a flushing-colour to
the Face, which flushes in hot blushes. And as the Sunbeams draw Salt Vapors
from the Sea, which fall in pouring showers; so do the Passions draw Salt
Vapors from the Bowels, which fall in trickling tears: for the Passions are
the beams of the Mind, and have as great an influence and power over the Body,
as the Sunbeams have upon the Earth; and as the Sun's bright Rays cause the
Elements to appear clear and light; so does the Mind's tranquillity cause the
countenance to look cheerful and fair.

Then they asked her of the Four Cardinal Virtues?

She said, That Prudence and Temperance were two Virtues, which belonged more
to the Wise, than the Heroic Men: for Prudence bars Generosity and
Magnanimity; and does not only forewarn dangers, but restrains from dangerous
actions: when Heroic Honor is got in Danger, more than Safety; and Courage is
made known thereby: likewise, Temperance forbids Magnificence; but Fortitude
and Justice belongs most to Heroic Men.

Then they asked her, If she thought Beasts had a Rational Soul?

She answered, That if there could be no Sense without some Reason, nor Reason
without the Sense, Beasts were as Rational as Men; unless, said she, Reason be
a particular Gift, either from Nature, or the God of Nature, to Man, and not to
other Creatures: if so, said she, Nature, or the God of Nature, would prove
partial or finite. As for Nature in her self, she seems unconfined; and for the
God of Nature, he can have no Biass, he ruling every thing by the straight Line
of Justice; and what Justice, nay what Injustice would it not be, for Mankind
to be supreme over all other Animal-Kind; or some Animal-Kind over any other
Kind?

Then they asked her, Why no Creature was so shiftless at his birth, as Man?

She answered, There were other Creatures as shiftless as Man; as for example,
Birds are as shiftless before their Wings are fledged.

For, as Infants want strength in Arms to feed themselves, and Legs to go; so
Birds want strength of Bills to feed themselves, and Feathers in Wings to fly.

Then they asked her, Whether she thought there were a Heaven and a Hell?

She answered, That in Nature there was a Hell and a Heaven, a God and a Devil,
good Angels and bad, Salvation and Damnation; for, said she, Pain and Trouble
is a Hell, the one to torment the Body, the other the Mind.

Likewise, said she, Health and Pleasure is a Heaven, which gives the body
rest, and the mind Tranquillity; also, said she, the natural God is Truth; the
natural Devil, Falsehood; the one seeks to save, the other to deceive; the good
Angels are Peace and Plenty; the evil are Wars, and Famine; Light is the
Beatifical Vision, Darkness the natural Dungeon, Death is the Damnation, Life
the Salvation; and Moral Virtue is the natural Religion, and Moral Philosophers
are Nature's Priests, which preach, and seem to practice a good life.

Then they asked, What Government for a Commonwealth was best?

She answered, Monarchical. for, as one Sun is sufficient to give Light and
Heat to all the several Creatures in the World; so one Governor is sufficient
to give Laws and Rules to the several Members of a Commonwealth. Besides, said
she, no good Government can be without Union; and Union is in Singularity, not
in Plurality; for Union is drawn to a Point, when Numbers make Division,
Extraction, Substraction; which oftentimes brings Distraction; and
Distraction, Confusions.

Then they asked her, Whether she was of that Opinion, That those that had good
Understandings, had weak Imaginations?

She said, She was not of that Opinion; for, said she, from the pureness and
cleerness of the Understanding, proceeds the subtilty and the variety of their
Imaginations; and the Understanding is the foundation of Imagination: for, as
Faith is built upon Reason, so is Imagination upon Understanding.

Then they asked her, If the Faculties of the Mind or Soul had their uses, or
proceeded from the temper of the Brain and Heart?

She answered, That the uses and faculties of the Mind, proceeded from the
Motions of the Vital and Animal Spirits, which I call (said she) the Sensitive
and Rational Spirits, which is the Life and Soul; and from the regular motions,
and full quantity thereof, proceeds a perfect Memory, a clear Understanding,
and a sound Judgment: from the quick motions proceed a ready Wit; and from the
various and regular motions, proceed probable Imaginations or Opinions: from
the scarcity, proceeds dullness and stupidity, or insensibility; from the
irregularity, proceeds Extravagancies or Madness; and where the Scarcity and
Irregularity meets, it produces a stupid, dull Madness.

The Fourth sort that visited her, were Scholars, that studied Theology; and
they asked her, Whether she was of opinion that Man has Free will?
She answered, That she was not so proud, nor so presumptuous, as to think that
Man had Freewill: for, said she, if Jove had given Men Free Will, he had given
the use of one of his Attributes to Man, as free Power; which, said she, Jove
cannot do; for that were to lessen himself, To let any Creature have free power
to do what he will: for, Free Will is an Absolute Power, although of the
narrowest limits; and to have an Absolute Power, is to be a God; and to think
Man had it only, and no other Creature, were to think Jove partial; but, said
she, Man's Ambition has bred this, and the like Opinions.

But, said they, Jove might permit Man, or suffer Man to do some things.

She said, That was as ill, or a worse Opinion: for, to think Jove permits Man
to cross his will, and let him do that which he would not have him do, were to
make Jove less than a God, as if his Decrees were to be altered by Man's Humor
and Will; or, said she, to think that Jove requires of Man such things as his
Nature suffers him not to do; and so, as it were, to force him to disobey him:
or to think Jove suffers Man to do evil, when he could prevent it; or to think
Jove permits Man to provoke his Justice, or to damn Man, when it is in Jove's
power to save him, were to think Jove unjust and cruel; or to think Jove made
Man, yet knew he would be damned; and might have saved him, in not making him;
were make a malignity in the nature of Jove: for to make, and take delight to
punish, is to be malicious; which cannot be, said she; for Jove is a God in
Goodness, as well as a God in Power; and a God in Justice, as well as a God of
Wisdom: for Justice and Knowledge is the Basis of Wisdom; but, said she, the
Opinions Men have of Jove, are according to their own natures, and not
according to the nature of Jove, which makes such various Religions, and such
rigorous Judgment in every Religion, as to condemn all but their own Opinion;
which Opinions are so many and different, as scarce any two agree; and every
Opinion judges all damned but their own: and most Opinions are, That the
smallest Fault is able to damn; but the most Virtuous Life, and innocent
Thoughts, not sufficient to save them.

Then they asked her, If she did believe Predestination?

She said, She believed that Jove did order all things by his Wisdom; and that
his Wisdom knew how to dispose to the best; as also, that Jove's Will was the
only fixed Decree; and that his Power establishes all that his Will decrees.

Then they asked her, What she thought Jove required from Man?

She answered, She thought Jove required nothing from man, but what he required
from Nature; as Love, Praises, Admiration, Adoration, and Worship; to love his
Goodness, praise his Justice, admire his Wisdom, adore his Power, and to
worship all his Attributes; and Jove (said she) requires not only this in man,
but of all the Creatures in Nature; for, said she, it were a sinful opinion to
think none but man did love, praise, admire, adore, and worship Jove.

Then they asked her, If there were no Evil?

She said, there was; but, said she, all Evil lives in Nature, as all Good in
Jove; for in Nature, said she, is Discord, in Jove Concord; by Nature
Confusion, by Jove Method: and though, said she, Jove's Goodness and Power will
not suffer Nature to run into a Confusion; yet Nature, faith she, struggles and
strives, like an untoward Jade that would break loose to run wildly about; and
her skittish tricks, said she, are the sins against Jove; but (said she) all
things in Nature are guilty, as much as Man, in one kind or other.

Then they asked her, What were the sins in Nature against Jove?

She said, Many: but the greatest sins the Creatures in Nature commit against
Jove, are, Not to believe he is above Nature; or to think it is the Nature of
Nature, and not the Knowledge and Power of Jove, that governs so wisely, that
orders so prudently, that produces so orderly, that composes so harmoniously;
and all with a free Will, a pure Goodness, and Infinite Bounty: likewise, as
not to believe that Jove has an infinite Generosity to forgive and pardon all
the Evils and Defects in Nature: Also, to dislike or murmur at the Government
of Jove. And the Submission in Nature, is, to repent, to be humble, to agree,
to be content, and to think all that cannot be avoided, is for the best: And as
Nature is apt (said she) to commit sins against Jove, so Nature is apt to
disorder, cross, and vex it self, by Excess, Mischief, and Cruelty; as, to
strive to destroy to no use, to obstruct to no purpose, to hinder the
Creations, to displace Creations, to oppose Right, to defend Falsehood, to
conceal Truth, to obstruct Knowledge, to delude Ignorance, to wrong Innocence,
to hurt the Helpless, to destroy the Hurtless: likewise, to overcharge the
Appetite, to exasperate the Passions, to deceive the Affections to abuse Time,
to be unnecessarily busy, or lazy, or idle. And thus all the Creatures of
every Kind, that are made in Nature, do, in one manner or other: but the
Goodness and Power of Jove (said she) does still hinder Nature from running
into Confusions, and rectifies the Disorders therein: for War lives in Nature,
said she, and Peace in Jove.

Then they asked her, What natural Evils there were?

She said, Nature was an infinite Lump of Evil; but the natural Evils to
Animals (said she) are, Pain, Sickness, Sorrow, Fear, Famine, Wars, Darkness,
and Infamy.

Then they asked her, If there were no natural Good?

She said, None in Nature: for all that is good, said she, is caused by Jove's
wise ordering and composing harmoniously: for, said she, Health is an
harmonious Composition; Pleasure and Delight is an Harmonious Composition;
Rest, an harmonious Composition; Peace, an harmonious Unity: As for Life, said
she, it is an Evil, were it not ordered wisely by Jove; and would be a
perpetual torment, did not Jove by his Wisdom order Nature so, as to ease it
with that we call Death; which is only as a change of Notes in Music, or
Harmonious Measures: and the several Measures Life danceth, are several
Transmigrations, which Jove orders as it moves; and the Notes are the several
Creatures that are made, which Jove's Wisdom sets; and Health is the Cords that
Jove's Wisdom tunes; and the several Pleasures are the several Lessons that
Jove's Wisdom causes Nature to play; and Peace is the Harmony that Jove's
Wisdom makes. So that all that is thought Good in Nature, is but Good as it is
ordered by Jove; Jove measures the Matter, marks out the Figures, and appoints
the Motions what Work to do. Likewise, Jove's Goodness and Wisdom qualifies and
tempers, by several mixtures and temperaments, the vicious malignant Evil of
Nature, or Natural Evil. Thus, said she, there would be a perpetual War in
Nature, if Jove's Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, did not order Nature.

Then they asked her, If there were not Punishments and Rewards ordained by
Jove?

She answered, Yes: for, said she, Jove has ordained, Virtue shall be a Reward
to it self, and Vice a Punishment.

The Fifth sort that visited her, were the Fathers of the Church; who desired
her to speak: which she did as follows:
You Holy Fathers (said she), you will pardon me for what I shall speak, since
it is your desire I should speak.

The Preachers for Heaven, said she, ought not to preach Factions, nor to show
their Learning, nor to express their Wit; but to teach their Flock to pray
rightly: for hard it is to know, whether we pray, or prate; since none can tell
the purity of their own heart, or number the Follies thereof, or cleanse out
the muddy Passions that by Nature are bred therein, or root out the Vices the
World has sown thereon: for, if we do not leave out the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, in our humble Petitions, and earnest Desires, we offer to Heaven, it
may be said, we rather talk than pray: for, it is not bended knees, or a sad
countenance, can make our Prayers authentical or effectual; nor words, nor
groans, nor sighs, nor tears, that can pierce Heaven; but a zealous Flame,
raised from a holy Fire, kindled by a spark of Grace in a devout heart, which
fills the soul with admiration and astonishment at Jove's incomprehensible
Deity: for, nothing can enter Heaven, but Purity and Truth; all the gross and
drossie parts fall back with greater force upon our Lives, and, instead of
Blessings, prove Curses to us; and the Ignorant, not conceiving the difference,
may be lost for want of instruction therein, being most commonly taught the
varieties of Opinions, the Sayings and Sentences of the Fathers of the Church;
or exclaimed against natural Imperfections, or threatened for slight Vanities;
and many, by giving warning against Vices, raises those that have been dead and
buried with former Ages, unaccustomed, and utterly unknown to the present
Auditory. But one good Prayer that is directly sent to Heaven, buries a
multitude of Errors and Imperfections, and blots out many a Sin. I speak not
this to tax any one here; for I believe you are all Holy Men, and Reverend and
Grave Fathers of the Church, who are blessed Messengers and Eloquent Orators
for Heaven, the true Guides to Souls, and the Example of a good Life.

Then they asked, How they ought to pray?

Whereupon, in a Zealous Passion, thus she said:

O Gods! O Gods! Mankind is much too blame;
He commits faults when be but names his Name:
This Name, says she, that Deity has none;
His Works sussicient are to make him known.
His wondrous Glory is so great, how dare
Man similize, but to himself compare?
Or, how durst Men their Tongues or Lips to move
In argument, his mighty Power to prove?
As if Men's Words his Power could circle in,
Or trace his ways, from whence he did begin
His mighty Works to make, or to what end;
As proudly placing Man to be his Friend:
Yet poor, proud, ign'rant Man, knows not the cause
Of any Creature made, much less his Laws:
Man's knowledge so obscure, not so much light
As to perceive the glimmering of his Might.
Strive not this Deity to comprehend;
He no beginning had, nor can have end:
Nor can Mankind his Will or Pleasure know,
It strives to draw Him to expression low.
Let Words desist, let us strive our Souls to raise:
Let our Astonishments be Glory's praise:
Let trembling thoughts of fear, as prayers, be sent;
And not leight words, which are by Men invent:
Let Tongues be silent, Adoration pray:
And Love and Justice lead us the right way.
The Sixth sort that visited her, were Judges; who asked her about Justice.
I will divide Justice, said she, into three parts, Human, Moral, and Natural.

These three into six: Punishing, Deciding, Distributing; Censuring,
Trafficking, and Suffering.

In Punishing Justice, there is Divine Piety, and Human Pity; and if a Judge
leave out those two, it is no more Justice, but Cruelty: for, Temporal Judges
ought to have as great a care of the Soul of the accused, as of executing
Justice on the Body. For if a Judge threaten terribly a timorous nature, or
cruelly torture a tender Body; the fear of Pain may make them be lie, forswear,
or falsely accuse themselves; which endangers the Soul, not only by their Oaths,
Lies, and false Accusations, but by self-murder: for those that falsely accuse
themselves, commit wilful-murther.

As for the punishing of the Body, they ought not to be condemned before they
can positively prove them Criminals: for Probabilities, although they appear
plain, yet are oftentimes deceitful.

The second is, Dividual Justice, or Common Justice, in deciding of Causes, and
what is Right and Truth: as, put the case two Men claim equal right to one
piece of ground, which piece of ground but one can have right to: The Judge, not
knowing how to distinguish the truth from the falsehood, divides the ground,
giving one half to the one, and the other half to the other; which is unjust:
for he that has right to all, has as much injustice done unto him in that
part that is given from him, as if he had lost all the whole: nay, one grain of
dust wrongfully taken, or given away, makes the injustice the same; for it is
not the weight of the Cause makes Justice more or less, but the truth of the
Cause.

But Judges will say, It is not to be helped, by reason Truth lies many times
so obscure, that neither Industry, Ingenuity, Subtilty, long Experience, nor
solid Judgment, can find it out. So they think, that by dividing they do cut
off some Branches of Injustice, although the Root will lie obscurely, do what
they can. But I say, Injustice has no Branches, but is all Root.

The last Act of Justice, is, in distributing Reward according to Worth or
Merit; wherein there may be as much Injustice to deal beyond or above Worth or
Merit, as to fall short of Worth and Merit: and though the Actions are the
visible Objects of Merit; yet Merit is oftentimes buried for want of
opportunity; and many times good Fortune is mistaken, and taken for Merit. Now
it is as great Injustice to give Rewards to Fortune, as unfortunate for Merit
not to be made known by some act: for, though Merit dwells in the actions, yet
it was born in the Soul, and bred in the Thoughts.

The fourth is, Censuring-Justice, which lives merely in Opinion: for, Who
knows the heart of another, since no Man can give a true or a right account of
his own? And though Misdemeanors ought to be punished in a Commonwealth, lest
they should cause the ruin thereof; yet, to judge the heart, and condemn it for
faults, by the Actions, Words, or Countenance, were very unjust: for many evil
Actions are done through a good Intention; for the Design might be honest,
though the Effect prove evil; nay, the Design or Intention may not only be
morally honest, but divinely pious, yet the Effect prove wicked.

Likewise, many evil actions are produced by Chance or Misfortune; and it were
an injustice to accuse the heart of dishonesty for Fortune's malice, and
Chance's carelessness.

Again, there are many evil actions produced from some infirmity of Nature, or
from the ignorance of Practice, or want of Experience; not from a dishonest
nature; and though Infirmities ought to be corrected by Admonitions, and
Ignorance rectified by Instruction; yet it were an injustice to condemn Honesty
for Infirmities, Faults, or ignorant Errors.

Also for Words; although there is an old saying, The Mouth speaks what the
Heart thinks; yet Antiquity cannot verify it for a truth: but, most
commonly, the Tongue runs by rote and custom, without the consent of the Heart,
or knowledge of the Thoughts: for, the Tongue does ofttimes like the Legs, which
most commonly walk without the guidance of the sight, or the directions of the
knowledge; for few measure each stride, or count or look at every several step
they take, nor think they how they go, nor (many times) where they go; and the
Mind, many times, is so deep in Contemplations, that the Thoughts are so fixed
upon some particular Object, or so busily employed on some Invention, or so
delightfully taken with some Fantasm, that although the Legs walk themselves
weary, yet the Mind and Thoughts do not consider or think whether the Body has
Legs or no.

How many, through extreme fear, run into that they should shun, not
considering whither they go? And if the Legs move so often without the Mind's
knowledge, or Heart's consent, well may the Tongue, which is the agilest Member
of the Body.

And to judge by the Countenance, were more unjust: for, a Man may have a
Knavish Face, and an Honest Heart; a spightful Eye, yet a Generous Nature; a
Frowning Brow, yet a Quiet Spirit; a Dull Cloudy Countenance, but a Bright
Clear Mind.

The fifth is, a Chaffering or Trafficking Justice: for, though it is justice
for a Man to buy and to fell in a Commonwealth, where all is not in common; yet
there may be great injustice in buying and selling.

As for example: A Man has a Horse which he esteems, and has a love or (as it
were) an affection to; which Horse he is forced to sell, either for want, or
otherwise; for which he asks a Price according to his Affection, not according
as he is really worth: now this Man does not cozen nor cheat, because he prizes
him as he thinks he is worth; yet he is unjust through his partiality, not
judging the Horse uprightly, nor weighing the Scales of Justice evenly, between
his Affection, and the Horse's worth.

The sixth, Suffering.

As for Buying, it comes into Self-Justice: for example; A Man through
persuasion buys a House, which House is no way convenient for him; or stands
unhealthy, being in an ill Air; or unpleasantly, as in a dirty place; or in
some place where many Travelers pass, which puts the Dweller to great charges
through Entertainments. Now this Man is unjust to himself through his facil
nature, or courteous or kind disposition, in buying such a House as will impair
his Health or Estate, or necessitate him through incommodiousness.

Or for a Man to keep a Servant that is no way ingenious or useful in his
Offices; the Master may be said to be a Bountiful or Charitable Man to his
Servant, but unjust to himself, to be ill served when he may be better served.

Likewise, for to be bound or engaged for a Man unto whom he is no ways
obliged, or hopes to be so, is an injustice to himself, but to hazard, if he
does never suffer imprisonment for the Engagment, not being able to make a
satisfaction for which he gives up his Liberty; this Injustice is caused by a
foolish pity.

Also, although it is Justice for a Man to adventure, offer, or lay down his
Life for one that he knows by good proofs would do the like for him; yet for a
Man to offer or give up his Life for a Man condemned, or otherwise, from whom
he never received such Favors as to deserve or merit his Life, or had proof of
his Friendship; although this Person was never so worthy, I say, it were a
Heroic Act, and a huge Generosity, but a great injustice to himself, unless he
had self ends, in thinking he should get a Fame thereby: for, though there is a
Human Justice, as well as a Grateful Justice, For Mankind to help and assist
each other; yet surely it is Justice for a Man to love himself best, next to
his Creator, Producer, Preserver, and Protector; as his God, his Parents, his
Country, and his Friend; and he ought to offer up his Goods, Life, Liberty,
and Fame, to Him from whom he received them; for it is an Injustice not to
return (if need require) as much as he received.

Thus it is Justice to prefer a Man's own Fortunes, Life, and Fame, before all
others but those beforementioned; and an Injustice if he do otherwise.

Thus, Noble Hearers, said she, you may observe and take notice, That although
all dishonesty is Injustice, yet all Injustice is not Dishonest, because the
Intent is not evil.

Likewise, although Justice is Honest, yet Honesty is not always Just; by
reason, many times, the Knowledge is not perfect, or the Understanding clear, or
the Truth visible, or the Will free, or the Power strong enough to do Justice,
or justly.

The Seventh sort that visited her, were Barresters and Orators; to whom she
thus spoke.
The Root of Oratory is Logic, the Branches are Rhetoric, and the Fruit is
Magic, which charms the Senses, and inchants the Soul: wherefore it ought to
be banished from the Bar of Justice, lest it should incircle Justice-Seat,
excluding Right and Truth that comes to plead.

For Oratory chiefly is employed
For to prefer the Wrong, and Falsehood hide.
They asked her, Whether an Orator or a Poet had most power over the Passions?

She answered, An Orator had power to betray the Passions, but could not make
an absolute Conquest of them.

As for Poetry, says she, it has a double power; for all Poetry has Oratory,
but all Oratory has not Poetry.

Wherefore, said she, Poetry has an absolute power over the Passions; for
Poetry is like a powerful Monarch, can raise, rally, and imbattel them at his
command; and, like a skilful Musician, can set, tune, and play upon them as he
pleases.

Poetry is Nature's Landscape, and Life's Prospect; it is a Spring, where
Noblest Souls do bathe themselves: Their Thoughts, like wanton Boys, dabble
therein.



But those that are to make Orations, said she, either at the Bar, in Pulpits,
upon Theaters, or in the Field, must first consider the ground and matter
whereon and whereof they would speak, and to what End they would drive their
speech; for when they have laid the ground, and have well considered the
subject of their Discourse, Words will follow easily and freely, without
meditating thereupon; but those that consider only Words, and in what Phrases
they shall speak, shall never speak well; but be out at every turn, because the
foundation is not laid whereupon their Discourse should be built: for the
Materials (which are Words) will serve them in small stead, or to little
purpose, when they want the Ground, or mistake the Ground whereon they should
work. But a Learned Orator's Head, said she, is like a Garden, wherein are set
diverse sorts of Flowers, fetched from several Soils both far and near; as some
from Demosthenes, Thucydides, Tully, Seneca, Tacitus, and the like; and many
Slips from more Modern Orators, and Seeds from so many several Authors, which
they strain about in their Orations, as is sans nombre. Or, said she, a Learned
Orator is like a Crab tree-stock, whereon are grafted several sorts of sweet
Fruits, but bears nothing of its own Fruit; and if it does (said she), they
will be but sour Crabs: So their Speech would sound harsh to the Ear, as such
sour Fruit would be sharp to the Taste. Whereas a Natural Orator, said she,
bears, nor brings forth any other Fruit but his own, which is sweet and
pleasent, without pains-taking or ingrafting: but all things grow as Nature
sets them, without the help of Art.

But I have observed, said she, that in Matches of Orations, the last has ever
the Victory (or for the most part) although not so Wise or Eloquent as the
first; which shows, that the digesting part of the Brain (which is Judgment and
Nutriment, and is Truth, which nourishes the Rational Understanding) is not
like the Stomach, the digestingplace for Food, that is to nourish the sensitive
Body; for when the Stomach is full, the Taste dis-relishes all Meat presented
thereunto, be it never so delicious; it heaves against it, as being
overcharged; neither does variety tempt it.

Whereas the Head, although it be stuffed, or over-gorged, as I may say, still
covets more; and the Ears suck and draw in with an eager appetite, so it be
variety; otherwise it grows dull, flat, and drowsy: for, the Brain will feed
on gross Matter, or unwholesome Trash, with more pleasure, and a greater gust,
than on that which is fine or wholesome, if once received before.

Also, said she, I perceive all those that make Orations in the Field to their
Soldiers, repeat their Victories from the first descent, of the foundation of
their Cities, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, and the Renown of their Ancestors;
but never their Losses, their Treacheries, or their Follies; they strive to
bury them in oblivion: for, though it be a good Policy, yet it is not a clear
Honesty, to present a half-faced Glass for a whole. But this is not so great a
fault, but it may be excused, when it is to a good End, as to defend what is
rightly their own, or to gain back what unjustly they lost, or to revenge an
unpardonable Wrong, or to punish a wicked Crime, or to take the part of the
Helpless Innocent; otherwise it is a Dishonesty not excusable, when it is used
for Treason, Rapine, or the like.

But you Orators (said she) are like those that are skilful in playing on a
Flute, or Cornet; where the Ears of the Auditors are the holes; and your
Tongues, or Words, as the Fingers, do make the stops; your Breath gives the
sound, and your Wit and your Learning, are the Airs and Musical Ditties that
move their Passions, or rather their Passion: for indeed, there is but one
Passion in Nature, or at least in an Animal Figure; which Passion changes into
several Forms, according to the several subjects or objects it is placed upon;
for upon some subjects, it is Love, upon others it is Hate, upon others it is
Fear, upon others Anger; and so the like of all the rest of those they call
several Passions, which is but one natural Faculty, Property, Quality, or what
you will name it, which is the Heart. That these severally alter and
(Camelion-like) change, and sometimes seem all one color, and sometimes of
diverse colors; or as a Triangular-Glass, which makes a Million of various
colors from one light; so does the Triangular-Heart (from the light of Life)
seem to have many Passions: But (said she) lest Orators should be the cause of
unlawful Passions, there ought to be a Law, That the public Assemblies that
are drawn about an Oracle, either such as are to declare the Command of the
Gods, or for any other Instruction; Informations or Exhortations, either in the
Church, or on Theaters, should not be mixed of several Sexes; but either the
Assembly should be all Men, or all Women; otherwise a Consecrated Place may be
polluted with wanton Eyes, and enticing Countenances; self-whisperings, and
secret agreements to dangerous Meetings; evil Intentions, and wicked Actions;
by which a Church would become a Bawdy House, and the Priests the Pimps or
Procurers to draw them together. And all Orations concerning the Commonwealth,
or for any important matter, would be lost; for the Ears of the Assembly would
be stopped by their Eyes; at least, the hearing of the Auditors would be
imperfect, and their Understanding confounded, and their Memory dazzled with the
splendour of light glances and fair Faces of each Sex.

The Eighth sort of Visiters were Statesmen, who asked her, What Government
was best?
She answered, Monarchy: For (said she) a good King is the Center of a
Commonwealth, as God is the Center of Nature, who orders and disposes all to
the best, and unites and composes all differences, which otherwise would run
into a confusion: and Unity, said she, is sooner found, and easier made by one,
than by more, or many: Neither, said she, can one Man make so many Faults, as
more or many may. Besides, said she, there is less Justice, and more Injustice
in a Multitude, than in one.

Then they asked her, Whether it were lawful for a King to lay down his Scepter
and Crown?

She answered, That Princes that voluntarily lay down their Royal Dignity, do
either express some infirmity in Power, or weakness of Understanding, or
imperfect Health of Body, or Effeminacy of Spirits, or doting Affection, or
Vainglory: for Religion requires it not; nay, said she, it seems rather an
Impiety for Jove's Anointed, being his chief Deputy on Earth, to leave, or be
weary in governing the people, by which, and in which he serves Jove. And it
was accounted (said she) a Blessing as well as an Honor, in the Ancient Writ,
to go out and in before the People, most being inspired by Jove to that Dignity
of Prophesying; and for the Great, Gallant, Heroic Heroes, as Alexander and
Caesar, they left not their Crowns, nor parted with their Power, until Death
uncrowned and divested them. Neither (said she) were there any that voluntarily
laid down or yielded up a Crown, but have had more Condemners and Dispraisers,
than Commenders or Admirers. Thus, said she, neither the Laws of Honor or
Religion allow it; nor can I perceive Morality approves it.

Then they asked her, If a foolish King might not bring a Commonwealth to ruin
sooner, than a Council of Many?

She said, No: for, said she, the plurality breeds Faction; which Faction
causes more evil than one foolish Head can make or bring about.

Then they asked, If a Tyrant-King were not worse than a Factious Assembly?

She said, No: for, said she, a Tyrant-King may make good Laws, and keep Peace,
and maintain Supreme Power and Authority; but a Factious Assembly (said she)
will break all Laws, do no Justice, keep no Peace, obstruct Authority, and
overthrow Supreme Power; and, said she, that Kingdom is happiest that lives
under a Tyrant-Prince; for when the People are afraid of their Prince, there is
Peace; but where the Prince is afraid of the People, there is War; and there
is no Misery like a Civil-Warr: Nor is there a greater sign that a King is
afraid of his People, than when he advances those that are, or seem to be his
Enemies. Thus Subjects in general live happiest under a Tyrant, but not
particular Courtiers, or busy prating Fools, or Factious Knaves: and a facil
King causes more Trouble, Distraction, and Ruin, by his soft easy nature,
than a Cruel Tyrant with Executions, severe Laws, or heavy Taxes: for the
greatest Tyrant that ever was, will not destroy all his Subjects, or take away
all Substance, for his own sake; for if he did, he would destroy his Power, and
ruin his Monarchy.

Then they asked her, What Men made the best Privy Counselors?

She said, Those that had most Experience, such as had seen the several changes
of Fortune, and observed the several Humors of Men. Likewise, those that are
rich; for those will be cautious in their Counsel, and careful for the
Commonwealth for their own sakes; not daring to adventure their Estates in a
Factious Party, or a rash Advice. But, said she, Princes should not have more
Counselors than Business, for fear they should make Troubles to have
Employments.

Likewise, A State should not have too many Magistrates: for, many Magistrates
in a Commonwealth, are like many Masters in Family: Nor too great a number of
Officers, lest the many Officers should over-charge the State, spending more in
ordering and commanding, than they would lose by some Disorders and
Disobedience.

Then they asked her, What was apt to make Rebellion?

She answered, Poor Nobility and Rich Citizens or Burgers, being both Factious,
and apt to raise Rebellion through Covetousness and Ambition: for, the poor
Nobility would have Wealth to maintain their Honor; and rich Burgers and
Yeomantry would have Honor to dignifie their Wealth.

Then they asked her, Why those Kings that had Favorites, were most commonly
unfortunate?

She said, One cause was, That the Subjects (in general) take it for a weakness
in a Prince to beruled or persuaded by one particular Man.

Secondly, They hate that particular Person, as an Usurper, engrossing wholly
the King's Favor; which makes them think their Prince unjust, to give to one
Man that which ought to be distributed according to Merit and Worth.

Thirdly, The Favourite's Crimes are thought the King's Cruelty or Facility.

Fourthly, The Favourite's Vanity is thought to be their Taxes; all which,
makes them apt to murmur and rebel: but they never fail to rebel, when the King
interposes himself as a Buckler betwixt the People and his Favorite; by which
he endangers himself, but helps not the Favorite.

But a King who would reign long and peaceably, if he will have a Favorite,
must have a Favorite to be a Buckler between him and the rest of his Subjects:
for he must not take his Favourite's Faults upon him, but lay his Faults on the
Favorite; for when a People judge their King to have Faults, they will withdraw
their reverences; for Princes must be thought as Gods that cannot err. But
Favorites, said she, are very dangerous and insinuating Parasites: for, those
Princes must needs be ignorant, that are much flattered; for every flattering
Tongue is as a Muffler, to blind the Eyes of the Understanding; and
Self-conceit is the Mouth, that sucks the Milk of Vainglory, which putrifies
the Reasori, and breeds a corrupted Judgment; which causes Crudities and
Ulcers in the Stomach of the Commonwealth, and makes the Heart of the Kingdom
sick; which distempers the whole Body, and brings the Plague of Rebellion,
every Member being infected therewith; which is a certain and sudden death to
Monarchical Government.

Then they asked her, How Great Monarchs should use Petty Princes?

Great Monarchs or Princes should always keep lesser Princes in awe, lest in
time they should go cheek-by-jowl, and may chance to thrust them out of their
Power, either by Land, or Sea. Indeed, they should be kept like Spaniels, to
crouch; and not like Mastiffs, to bite; otherwise they may chance to leap at
their Throat, and tear out the Life of their Supremacy. Also, said she, Lesser
Princes ought not to be suffered to encroach upon the Ceremonies of great
Monarchs: for, if Ceremonies Deifie, those Ceremonies ought to be kept sacred.
Nor upon their Orders or Dignifyings, as to make Nobility, or to give their
Orders, or such as are like to them, as the George, the S. Esprit, or Golden
Fleece, which Elective Princes are apt to do, if they be not kept in awe by the
Hereditary Kings; and those Hereditary Kings that give way to them to do it,
ought to lose their Magnisicency.

Then they asked her, How Kings and Monarchs should use their Officers of
State, and Commanders of War?

She said, Kindly, whilst they were in Employments: for, their Employments
either in the Civil Magistracy, or Martial Discipline, give them Power; and a
small Power (said she) oft-times ruin a greater, especially when Malice and
Opportunity are joined together: for though Ambition, said she, persuades; yet
it is Opportunity and Malice which betrays and sets open the Gates to
Rebellion; for many Powerful Princes, and Potent Monarchs, have been unthrnned,
and Kingdoms ruined, by mean Subjects, and small Beginnings. Wherefore, said
she, Princes and States should have a care of lessening the Power of their
Officers, and to remove them from a better Office, or higher Degree, to a worse
Office, or lower Degree; but if they will remove them, or must (as being most
convenient), then let them put them out of all Power and Authority, or advance
them, either in Authority of Office or Honor, by which they will qualify
their Spleens, or prevent their Malice, or destroy their Abilities from doing
any harm.

Then they asked her, If it were seemly or fit, that Kings should suffer any
Subjects to be familiar in their Discourse or Actions, either to themselves
privately, or in the presence of a public Assembly?

She said, No: for, said she, a familiarity makes a parity, for it advances a
Subject to a greater respect; and draws down a King to a less esteem; but said
she, Kings should be like Gods, obeyed with fear, and loved for Mercy.

Then they asked her, What Kings should do to such Subjects or Servants?

She said, They shnuld be checked with frowns, and banished from their
presence; for, that King that does not keep strict orders, and rules severely,
shall neither be obeyed nor loved, as being either fearful, that dares not
check Offenders, and cut off Criminals; or facil, to suffer boldness in his
sight; or hated, as being thought partial: and if you will observe (said she),
you shall find the more stern a Master, the better he shall be served: for,
although his Servants complain, yet they dare not disobey: so a King, the more
Tyrannical he is, the better he shall be obeyed; when a gentle Master, and a
facil King, shall lose his Power and Authority.

Then they asked her, Whether it were wise for a King to discover the secrets
of his Heart to a chief Favorite Councellor?

She said, The King that made known the secrets of his Heart, or would but make
known his ordinary Intentions, until they were to be put in execution, although
but to the most trusty of his Council, was fitter to be ruled, than to rule:
but, said she, it is an ordinary Policy in Favourite-Councellors, to persuade
their Prince to keep nothing of moment from their knowledge, or any Advice that
others give; for if they do, they cannot counsel as they should, because they
know but part of the King's Affairs; which credulous Princes believe, and so
betray themselves. But wise Princes, said she, hear others, but counsel
themselves; and foolish Princes, said she, will hear nothing from any, but
those they will entrust; but if they do, they straight tell their Favorites
(as Children do their Nurses) all that they hear or know.

The Ninth sort were Tradesmen, or Citizens; and they asked her, How they
should grow rich?
She said, Not to have their Pride above their Calling: for, they that think
themselves too good, or too worthy, or too highly born for their Trade, will
never thrive thereby; for they neglect it through scorn, and so grow poor with
Pride.

Likewise, said she, not to take too many Apprentices; for, out of a
covetousness of a little present Money they get when they are bound, they are
forced for seven years to maintain a company of idle Boys, that can gain them
nothing, by reason they must learn before they can work; and by that time they
come to be Shop-men, or Workmen, and skilful in their Trade, their Time is out;
so that the Masters lose the time in teaching them, spends Money in maintaining
them, and receives no profit by them.

Likewise, Not to have more Journey-men than Trafficque: for Journey-men have
great Wages; and when they have more Servants than Employments, they spend more
than they can get, giving more Wages out, than they have Profit coming in.

Likewise, Not to set too great prizes on their Ware; for those that sell deer,
will have but few Customers.

Likewise, Not to neglect their Shops; for when there is no body to sell their
Ware, it must needs lie unbought.

Also, Not to neglect their Customers; for there are few will stay and pray for
what they must deerly pay.

Likewise, Not to break their Promises, or day of Payments; for that will make
all afraid to trust them.

Likewise, Not to trust much, especially such as have not visible Estates; for
they that sell out their Wares for Bonds, may chance to break by their
Customers: for, though Bonds may imprison their Persons, yet not always get
their Money; for, as the old Saying is, Where there is nothing to be had, the
King must lose his Right.

Likewise, to shun all Lawsuits: for, whilst they follow their Suit, they are
forced to neglect their Trade, leaving all to their Servants, who are as idle
and as careless in their Shops, as the Master is busy in Law. And whilst the
Lawyers pick their Purse of their Gains, their Servants cozen and rob their
Shops of their Wares, or lose their Customers by their Carelessness, or lazily
neglect their Work. also not to be Drunkards, for Drink drowns all Industry;
and though it swells the Body, it shrinks the Purse; and as it disorders the
Brains, so it causes disorders in a Family, by abusing their Wives, Children,
and Servants; disturbing their Neighbors with their quarrels and unhandsome
demeanours: besides, by their drunken humors, sometimes they spoil and destroy
their Goods; so that what with their spending more, or at least as much as they
get, and spoiling what they have, and neglecting what they should have, a
Drunkard is never rich, but on the contrary very poor.

Lastly, To marry Wives that are approved for good Huswifry, rather than for
Riches: for an idle Gossip will spend more than she brings; and will be
maintained finer than her Husband's Quality, and above his Trade or Calling.

Then they asked her, What it was to be a good Citizen? She said, Not to look
after their particular Profit more than the public Good; and never to neglect
their duty in discharging their Commissions or Offices of Authority.

Likewise, Not to prefer their own private Interest before the Public, by
engrossing Trading, or heightning the Prizes.

Also, Not to be factious, murmuring at Authority, or repining through envy.

Likewise, To defend their Country with Courage, Wealth, and Love, against any
Assault made against it.

Likewise, to observe the Laws punctually, to perform the Customs and
Ceremonies strictly, to submit to Magistrates willingly, to dwell by their
Neighbors peaceably, to govern their Family orderly, to breed their Children
civilly, and to live honestly.

The Tenth sort that visited her, were Housekeepers, and Masters of Families.
They asked her, What was the greatest ruin to an Estate?

She answered, Great Estates were ruinated with gluttonous Hospitality,
unnecessary Servants, negligences of Stewards, unprofitable Horses, drunken
Cellars, careless Masters, and Vainglory.

As for the first, said she, a Man is only praised so long as the Meat is
tastable in their Mouths; but when their Bellies are full, and their Stomachs
sick, by being overcharged, they will curse not only the Meat they eat, and
the Cook that dressed it; but the Master that gave it, when it is digested, is
forgotten.

As for unnecessary Servants, said she, when there are more Servants than Work,
they grow lazy and proud, thinking themselves Masters by their little
Employment, forgetting at whose cost they live; besides the Factions Idleness
brings, by harkening after Tales, and reporting them worse than they were
meant; so they rather serve to eat, than to work; to command, than to obey.

Then they asked her, Whether it were not against Hospitality to quarrel with a
Stranger in his House?

She said, Yes.

Then they asked her, If it were not lawful to defend his Honor against a
Stranger in his own House?

She said, They might defend their Life in their own House; but not assault the
Life of their Guest or Stranger.

Likewise, said she, they may defend their Honor by reasoning, clearing, and
telling the truth' and by declaring the right; but not to revenge their Quarrel
in their own House; but when they are departed from their House, they might do
their pleasure.

Then they asked her, If a Housekeeper might not in honor deny Strangers
Entertainment?

She said, Yes, when it was inconvenient to the Owner, and not very serviceable
to the Guests.

Then they asked her, If an impertinent troublesome Guest might not be put out
of one's House, if he would not go civilly of himself?

She said, Yes; for, said she, every Man's Dwelling House is, or ought to be
his Earthly Paradise; and if there be a Serpent, he ought to be banished out;
or evil Angel, to be thrown out.

Then they asked her, If it were against the Laws of Hospitality, if they
should entertain their Guests only with a sufficiency, without a superfluity?

She said, Honor did not bind or require any Man to ruin himself: wherefore,
said she, every Man may, nay ought to entertain according to his Estate?

Then they asked her, If they ought not to make a difference of Persons in
their Entertainment?

She said, Yes, if their Estates would allow it, or else not; for every Man,
said she, must entertain according to the Ability of his Fortunes, not
according to the Quality of his Guests.

Then they asked her, What was the reason the Man looks finer in the Master's
old Clothes, than the Master did when he left them off.

She answered, The reason was, Because the Master seemed too Noble for his old
Clothes; but when the Man had them on, the Clothes seemed too Noble for him.

The Eleventh sort that visited her, were Married-Men and their Wives.
The Men asked her, What was the best course to keep their Wives honest?

She said, Tender regard, civil respects, wise instructions, honorable
examples, and virtuous employments.

For, said she, Idleness breeds vain thoughts, wild passions, and extravagant
appetites; and vain thoughts and wild passions have a sympathy to each other;
and as thoughts lie in the Brain, so passions dwell in the Heart, and various
thoughts raise up several passions: But Reason, said she, should govern as King
in the Brain; and Temperance, as Queen in the Heart; and when this King and
Queen are contracted into a Matrimonial Bond, the Life lives orderly, the Mind
peaceably, and the Body healthfully. Wherefore, said she, Women ought to be
wisely employed; for Business to the Mind, is as necessary as Exercise to the
Body; and Instructions to the Mind are as necessary as Food to the Body; and
let me warn you, said she, of Idleness; for it is the great Bawd of the World.

Then the Men asked her, If Husbands might not in honor correct their Wives?

Yes, said she, with timely Admonitions, seasonable Reproofs, and loving
Persuasions; but not with cruel Blows: for a Husband is a Wife's Guardian and
Protector from all harms; wherefore he ought not to hurt her, but to cherish
and defend her: But, said she, a Husband may restrain a Wife, although not beat
her; for if she be an unsufferable Scold, or a Vixen, he may bind her Hands
with kind Embraces, and stop her Mouth with Kisses.

If she be indiscreet, he may restrain her from going abroad, lest she should
disgrace him with her Follies.

If she be a Slut, he must keep Servants that are cleanly, if he be able; if
not, he must do his work himself, or visit his Wife but seldom: but if he
cannot do his work himself, through public Employments, and yet he must be at
home; he must strive to make her better by Persuasions and Directions: for they
that will not mend with good Counsel, will grow worse and worse, and more
perverse with blows.

If she be wanton, she must be kept to a spare dry Diet; she must be purged
much, and eat little; she must study much, and sleep little; and she must have
Moral Lectures preached to her very often: likewise, she must be maintained
thriftily, not vainly; she must not be suffered to be superfluous or costly,
but only to be allowed Necessaries or Conveniences, which will keep her from
wandering or gadding abroad, having no Vanities to show her Neighbors: as for a
Man to lock up his Wife, it is no secure Remedy; for Women will find a thousand
inventions to get liberty.

Wherefore, if the Cure cannot be wrought upon the Body and Mind, they may
despair: for restraint of liberty will do them small good.

But the only way in this condition, is for a Man to part from his Wife; for
then the World may only pity him as being a Cuckold, but cannot scorn him as
being a Wittal.

Then they asked her, If a Husband might not be lawfully Complemental to other
Women in their Wives company?

She answered, It was unworthy for any Man rudely to neglect a Civility to any
Woman; and he was no ways worthy the name of a Gentleman, that used not respect
to the meanest of that Sex: but, said she, a Husband ought to have respect to
his Wife, and to do no action, nor speak no words that may justly offend or
disgrace her, or to put her out of countenance: for, though Men ought to be
civil to that Sex, yet a Husband ought not to make Courthsips to any, neither
in jest or earnest; for foolish toying, though harmless meaning and honest
intentions, may cause great discontent bet wixt a Married Pair, and breed such
Quarrels as cannot be reconciled.

Then they asked her, How they should breed their Children, especially Sons?

She said, Children should be bred according to their condition of Birth or
Fortune: yet, said she, there is a general Breeding, as well as a particular
Breeding; that is, to be bred on honest Grounds, and honorable Principles: to
do as they would be done by, that is Justice; to suffer an Evil patiently, when
they cannot avoid, that is Fortitude; to be industrious to prevent Evils that
may come, is Prudence; to abstain from tempting-Evils, that is Temperance; and
to instruct them of the benefit that will accrue thereby, showing them that it
is the greatest wisdom for a Man's self, to be honest; and to have Honorable
Principles, is to do good when they have power to do hurt; to prefer their
Neighbor's good before their own pleasure; to maintain Right, to defend the
Truth, to assist the Helpless, to incite them to Noble Endeavors, and Civil
Demeanours.

For particular Breeding: If they be nobly born, they should be respectfully
bred; their Tutors should instruct them submissively and humbly, and not
commandingly; they should rather be persuaded by Reason, than forced to learn
by Terrifying; otherwise a Noble Person may have a Slavish Spirit: Their
Learning must be, To know Men and Manners; to be instructed of times past; to
be advertised of the times present.

Likewise, they must be bred to handle the Pen more than the Pencil, the Sword
more than the Pen, the Horse's Bridle more than the Fiddle-string, the
Cannot-Bullet more than the Racket-Ball, the Valuting-Horse more than Dancing;
to encounter Strengths, more than running Lengths; to Wrestle, more than
shuffle Cards; and throwing the Bar, more than throwing the Dice: The actions
of Cards are too soft and effeminate for Masculine Spirits. Also, they must
rather be taught to speak well, than sing well.

Likewise, they must rather study Fortification than Logic; to defend Towns,
rather than dispute Arguments; to decide Quarrels, rather than to make Quarrels.

Likewise, they must study how to return Obligations gratefully, to reward
Merit nobly, to supply Necessity generously.

Likewise, they should be bred more with the Muses, than the Sciences: for the
Poetic Flame does fire the Spirits with a Noble Ambition.

Likewise, they must be bred to know the Laws, Customs, and Privileges of
their Native Country, lest their Ignorance should commit faults in breaking
the Laws, or commit errors in omitting the Customs, or do themselves wrong in
not claiming their Privileges.

Also, they should have some insight of the Laws of other Nations, that they
may know how to behave themselves, if they should be sent Ambassadors; or to
advise, if they should be called to Councils.

Also, they should be instructed in the Maps of their own Nation, as also of
Foreign Nations; that they may know how to order their Commands, to take their
Advantages, and to avoid Dangers, in case they should be employed as Commanders
and Officers of War for their King and Country. In short, They must be
instructed by Truth, advised by Honor, and encouraged by Fame.

As for the breeding them in common Schools, I do utterly disapprove, although
some say it gives them Confidence, and quickens their Courage; but my opinion
is, It rather makes them rudely bold, than manly confident.

It learns them rather to quarrel, than to fight: for a company of Boys make a
wrangling-noise, and scolding-quarrels; but seldom fight or cuff with alacrity.

It makes them factious and unconstant; for having not experience to understand
truly, and judge rightly, they one while take this Boy's part, another while
another Boys part; and there is a faction between the little Boys and the great
Boys, and amongst the lesser Boys too.

A Free School is apt to make Liars, Sharks, and Thieves; for Boys will not
only be apt to lie to save their Breech, denying the truth of a fault; but to
get a Point, or rather for fear to lose a Point or a Farthing at play.

They learn to shark, being necessitous, either by the thriftiness of their
Parents, or Tutor, or both; or being cozened by other Boys, whose Parents have
not much to give them; and they, rather than want, will do any base thing to
get: and Boys, being active and stirring, young and strong, causes sharp
Appetites, and quick Stomachs, which quick Stomachs and short Commons do not
agree; and their Hunger out-running their Meat, makes their Wit outrun their
Honesty; for they will be strangely subtle, and most ingenious to cozen or get
from those Boys that have more than the rest: it learns them to flatter and
dissemble, to get it by fair means; or to quarrel and lie, to get it by force;
or to watch or design, to get it by theft; and when they cannot compass their
Designs, they will make other Boys sharers, to help them to steal, or at least
to cheat.

It makes them envious at the praises of those that are most apt to learn; also
malicious, by being whipped; and makes them ill-natured, to wish, or be glad when
any other Boys are whipped, because they shall not be laughed at, or twitted, for
being whipped.

It makes them base Informers, and many times false Accusers; for rather than
they will suffer the disgrace (as they take it) to be whipped alone, they will
betray, be-lye, or accuse any, that they may make them have the same punishment.

Besides, in common Schools much beastly wickedness is learnt: but it were a
wonder if Vices should not be caught in a common School, being so many Boys in
a company, of several natures and dispositions, qualities, births, and
fortunes; and vicious qualities, being malignant, like the Plague; for one sick
body is able to infect a whole Town, when the best Cordial-Counsels and Advices
cannot save life.

A company of Boys are like a company of Colts before they are backed, which
kick, and fling, and run about; and are so impatient at the Bridle, Spurr, and
Rod, that they strive with all their strength, and use all their skittish
tricks to fling their Rider off, striking all that come near them; so do Boys
their Tutors: and unless a Tutor be a discreet Man, and a Wise Governor, his
Scholars grow resty, and become unuseful, stubborn, malicious, and ill-natured.

But by reason it is proved, that common Schools breed confidence, or rather
boldness, it is good for the breeding of such Youth whose Parents intend them
for Lawyers and Divines, Ambassadors, and the like, who are to present
themselves, and to speak in a full Assembly, where bashfulness may perchance
disturb and obstruct their Oratory. And it is the best Breeding to get
Experience, and to be acquainted with the nature of Mankind: for in Youth the
nature lies open and plain to the view; and the rest of the Senses are not
arrived to the Art of concealing them under counterfeit Veils, or disguising
them in various Dresses, which Time learns Men to do.

Likewise, these common Schools may be good for Physician,s and Surgeons,
and Soldiers: for Surgeons, because it makes them bold and adventurous: for
Soldiers, because it makes them hardy, venturous, and resolute: for Physicians,
because it gives them experience of several Appetites, Diets, and
Constitutions: for Prints strike deeper in Youth than Age; and Men in Age
remember best the observations of their Youth; and Youth observe more than Age
does; and like a Jack-anapes, imitate what they observe.

As for the particular Breeding of the Commonsort, they are to be bred
according to the Profession their Parents intend them to practice: as, Clerks
must be bred to the use of the Pen, and to learn several Hand-writings.

All Merchants, either trading, trafficking, or adventuring, must learn
Arithmetic, and to keep Accounts.

Apothecaries must learn the difference and properties of Simples.

Doctors, to apply them.

Lawyers must learn the Laws, Customs, and Privileges of the Kingdom; also,
the Records, Fees, and Offices of several Courts; likewise, all sorts of
Warrants, Grants, Leases, and Wills.

Heralds must be good Antiquaries, and learned in the Fashious, Ceremonies, and
Orders of Dignities.

Surveyors, Architectors, and Musicians, must be learned in the Mathematics
and Geometry.

Picture-drawers, in History and Geography; as also in the Mathematics, by
reason of Symmetry.

As for Handicrafts-Trades, Practice makes them Masters; and Tradesmen of all
sorts, the lesser speculative Learning they have, the better Workmen they most
commonly be, busying their heads with nothing but their Trade.

As for Secretaries of State, they must be bred to several Languages, and to
understand the Laws, Customs, Humors, and Potencies of Foreign Nations, for
which they should be bred with several Ambassadors, whose Employments are
Travelling-Schools, and Experienced-Tutors.

As for Statesmen, they must be bred to a general Learning, but no particular
study; they must learn the Humors of Men, as well as the laws of the Kingdom;
they must learn the Discipline of War, as well as the Rules of Peace; they
must learn the Weakness and Strength, the Infirmities and Advantages of the
Kingdom, as well as the Traffic and Commerce. They must learn Morality as well
as Rhetoric; they must learn to do well, as well as to speak well: for he will
be but a corrupt Statesman, who has more Eloquence than Justice, more Policy
than Honesty.

But in Youth, says she, the Understanding is like their Age and Bodies,
little and young; their Eyes must first be fed with Action, their Ears with
Relation; without which Objects and Subjects, the Understanding would become
lean or starved: for several Objects and Discourses, put to the sight and
hearing, pass through the Eyes and Ears, into the Head, to feed the Brain,
which maintains the life of the Understanding; as several sorts of Meats put by
the Hands into the Mouth, pass through the Throat into the Stomach, to feed the
Body, to maintain the life thereof; and the natural Capacities digest those
several Objects and Subjects into Knowledge and Understanding, as the natural
heat into Flesh and Blood.

And the Brain is like the Body, sometimes more strong, and sometimes more
weak; which makes the Understanding sometimes more sick, and sometimes more
healthy: and sometimes also the Brain will be stuffed with Fancy, as the Body
with Humors. But some Brains are like an unhealthy Body, that will never
thrive; and others, like Stomachs that are nourished but with some particular
sort of Meat, when Variety will corrupt, but never digest.

And others are like Stomachs, that the more Varieties are received, the better
Concoction, where particulars would cause a Surfeit.

Likewise, said she, young Brains are like tender Slips, not grown to bear
Fruit; but length of time brings them to maturity.

And some Brains are like barren Grounds, that will not bring Seed or Fruit
forth, unless it be well manured with the Wit which is raked from other Writers
or Speakers.

Others are like unplowed ground; for the Senses, which are as the Husbandman,
either neglect through laziness, or are so poor that they have not a sufficient
stock of Objects or Subjects, or Matter or Form, to work with, or sow in the
Brain.

Others are like foolish Husbandmen, that either sow or reap too soon or too
late; that know not how to set and graft, to prune or to cherish; which makes
the Brain unprofitable.

Others, like ill Husbands, run wandering about unconstantly, and never regard
their Affairs, but let the Brain run to Weeds, which with good Husbandry might
bear fruitful Corpse.

And some are so rich and fertile, that if they be not plowed nor set, yet they
will be fat Meadows, and rich Pasture, wherein grow wild Cowslips, Prim-roses,
Violets, Dazies, and sweet Thyme, Marjoram, Succory, and the like.

Then they asked her, How they should govern their Servants?

She answered, With Employment: for, said she, idle Servants, like idle
Subjects, grow factious, and so rebellious, for want of good Employments to
busy their heads with.

Then they asked her, How Masters ought to use Servants?

She answered, As good Princes do their Subjects, with a Fatherly care for
their well-being, welldoing, and subsisting: they must have a Protector's
regard, for their safety; be just Judges, for their Rights and Privileges, for
their Condemnations and Punishments; honest Friends, to advise them; wise
Tutors, to instruct them; prudent Governors, to order them; powerful Generals,
to command them; bountiful Gods, to reward their painful Labors, their dutiful
Obediences, their honest Services, their faithful Trust, and their constant
Fidelity.

Then the Wives asked her, If it might not be as lawful for Wives to receive
and entertain Love's Courtships, as for Husbands to make Love-Courtships?

She said, No: for, said she, unconstant Women are the ruin of a Commonwealth.

For first, It decays Breed: for, though many be barren by Nature, yet there
are more become barren through Wildness.

Secondly, It corrupts Breed, mingling the Issues of several Men.

Thirdly, It decays Industry: for, a Man that doubts the Children be none of
his, will never take pains to provide for them, or at least not to enrich them.

Fourthly, It makes dangerous and deadly quarrels: for the Cuckold and the
Cuckold-maker can never agree.

Then they asked her, What they should do in case their Husbands did kiss their
Maids, or their Neighbor's Maids, Daughters, or Wives?

She said, To take as little notice of it as they could; to give them as much
liberty as they would have; to praise their Mistresses more than they deserved;
and to cause them to be as jealous of them as they could be.

First (said she), To take no notice, makes them to live quiet, and makes their
Husbands to be more shye, lest they should perceive it; otherwise, said she,
there will not only be quarrels, but she will receive often affronts and
disgraces by himself and Whores.

Secondly (said she), To give them liberty, will glut their Appetites, surfeit
the Humor, and quench their Affections.

Thirdly (said she), A superlative Praise will abate the Truth, and out-reach
the Admiration.

Lastly (said she), To make them jealous by discoursing, That no Woman is to be
trusted or relied upon, for their constancies in Love, when they have forsaken
their own Honor, their Modest Nature, their Honest Birth, their Lawful Rites,
their Civil Customs, and their Pious Zeal to Heaven: for Jealousy, says, she,
turns Love into Hate.

Then they asked her, What they should do if their Husbands Whores did enslave
them by being as Mistresses to command, and they as Drudges and Slaves to obey,
making them as Bawds or Witnesses to their Lascivious Acts?

She said, There was nothing for that, but parting: for, said she, a Noble Mind
cannot play the Bawd, nor live with impudent Vices.

But, said they, if the Wife have Children, how shall they part then?

It Is better, said she, to part with the Goods of the Body, than the Goods of
the Soul; wherefore it were better to part from Children or Life, than with
Honor and Virtue: for, though Virtue, said she, may wink at an Infirmity, and
Honor may excuse a Fault, yet not be made as a Party, or brought to the
public view, or be made a Slave thereto.

Then they asked her, What was the best way to keep their Husband's Love, and
cause them to be constant?

She said, The best way to keep their Husband's love, was, to be honestly
modest, cleanly, patient, prudent, and discreet: but, said she, a man may love
dearly and tenderly his Wife, and yet desire to kiss his Maid: wherefore, to
keep him constant, said she, a Wife must act the Arts of a Courtizan to him,
which is very lawful, since it is to an honest End: for the Arts honest and
lawful, but the Design and End is wicked: but, said she, to learn those Arts,
you must be instructed by such as have practiced or seen them; for I have not,
nor cannot guess or devise Arts.

The Twelfth sort were Nurses with their Nurse-Children.
And they asked her, How Children should be ordered?

She said, Young Children should be handled gently, watched carefully, used
kindly, and attended prudently.

The gentle handling, said she, is most requisite: for Children have rather
Grissles than Bones, more Jelly than Flesh; whereby the least oppression, or
wrenching, or turning, may deform them, causing some Members to be deformed,
that otherwise would be in perfection; and by reason Nurses handle not Children
tenderly, there is so many lame and crooked as they are.

Likewise, Nurses should give their Limbs liberty, not swaddle nor tie them too
hard, or to suffer their Coats to be too little, or their Shoes or Stockings
too short, nor to pin too many Pins about them, lest they should prick them.

Likewise, not to toss nor tumble them, nor to dance nor rock them too
violently; for a weak motion may displace an unknit Grissle-Joint; and what
Pains soever they feel, or Hurts they get, they cannot complain or tell their
Grievance by their Speech, having not learnt a Language; and though their Tears
supply their Speech, yet Nurses most commonly take their Tears to be shed out
of a froward passion, rather than a mournful complaining, or a craving redress;
which makes them only to sing, or prate, or whistle, or rattle to them, to
please them; but not to search about them, or observe them, to find out their
Malady, to ease them; but rather, by the dancing and rocking them, they put
them to more pain.

Secondly, To watch them carefully: for many Children are killed, or cripled,
or blinded, or scarified (which is worse) by the negligence of the Nurses. And
some are over-laid by the Nurses in their sleep; some choked by giving them
Meat too hard, or too big to pass through their little tender throats. Some
fall into the fire and burn themselves, or put out their Eyes, or disfigure
their Face; some fall from Tables, Stools, Beds, Stairs, or the like, whereby
they become oft-times Cripples all their lifetime; and many the like accidents
befall through the carelessness of the Nurses: wherefore, Children should rather
lie and play upon the ground, laying some soft Blanket under them, then be set
upon Tables, Stools, or Beds: besides, it is both healthful and strengthening,
for Children to lie stretching and rolling themselves; for their weak strength
cannot disorder their tender Limbs, but rather gives them liberty to grow;
whereas to be carried much in arms, or to set much in Chairs, or to lie much in
Cradles, cramps up their Limbs, and does (as it were) rivet their Joints,
causing them to grow, as we say, double-jointed.

Thirdly, To be fed sparingly, or rather discreetly: for there is nothing that
destroys Children, or causes more Diseases, than too full Diet; or Nurses are
of an opinion, That a Child cannot live and be in health, unless they be always
eating; through which opinion the Nurses feed them so long, as they puke it up
again; and the Nurse is so desirous they should eat, that they will return the
Meat they spue up, into their Mouths again, forcing them to eat against their
Appetite or Stomach; which must needs be very unwholesome: First, In
over-charging their Stomachs. Next, In not giving their Stomach time to digest.
Lastly, In giving a Child Milk and Flesh-meat, which no ways agree; for it
curdles the one, and corrupts the other. Thus an overcharged Stomach causes
Surfeits, which Surfeits breed a superflous moisture, which causes the
Rickets; or else it breeds tough matter, which matter breeds obstructions,
which obstructions causes swellings. Likewise, an ill digestion breeds
Crudities, which Crudities cause the Cholick and Convulsions. Also, Milk and
Meat together, the corruption of the one does cause Burning-Fevers, or Scabs on
their Heads and Faces; and the sharpness of the other causes Agues or sharp
Rheums, making sore Eyes, or the like Rheumatick Diseases. And Children being
weak of nature, and sickly in breeding of teeth, which makes them more weak;
yet they feed them so much, that if a Man at his full strength should eat as
often, and as great a quantity for his growth, as Children for theirs, he would
become as weak as a Child, and there would be as great a Mortality of Men, as
there is most commonly of Children; for more dies in Infancy than in Age; and
the reason is, that they are killed with over-feeding, although Nurses and
Parents impute it to the Teeth; for a Child, as I said, cannot tell its
grievances, which makes them mistake, by reason they can only guess at the
cause. Wherefore, said she, Children must be both orderly and temperately fed,
have a Breakfast, Dinner, and Supper, until such time as they are so strong as
to run about, and then they may eat four times a day: for by reason a Child is
active, and always stirring, and likewise growing, they may eat the oftener, if
they exercise much; but whilst they are weak, having not strength to run about,
they must be fed with leighter Meat, and a less quantity: for, though some are
of opinion, That a Child's Stomach is extraordinary hot, which heat they think
causes a quick digestion; yet I am of opinion, That the heat is according to
their years, which is like a newkindled fire, which is rather a smuthering
heat, than a hot dissolving heat; and as heat is weak in a Child, as being not
thoroughly kindled; so it becomes weak by Age, as being burnt out: wherefore,
Infancy and Old Age should feed most temperately, lest the quantity of the Fuel
should quench out the strength of the Heat; but howsoever, Nurses feed Children
as if they had Ostritch's Stomachs, which is able to digest Iron.

Lastly, Children should be kindly used, and prudently bred: wherefore they
must be humoured in all things that are not hurtful; otherwise to be crossed,
makes them of a froward and crossing nature; for the ill custom of being
crossed, makes them take the habit or custom of crossing, and to strike, or
beat, or whip them, is worse; for stripes create a Spaniel's disposition; and
timorous spirits are hard and cruel natures.

Likewise, Not to scold, rail, or to give Children ill language, for that only
teaches them the rudest part of language, and to be foul-mouthed, as we say.

Likewise, Children must not be deceived with Lies, lest they learn to deceive
with lying: also, they must not be frighted with telling them of Hobgoblins, or
the like; for what is printed in Infancy, does not easily wear out with Age;
and certainly the terrors of Youth are a great cause of cowardly Age: for
surely, frighting-tales to Children work the same effect on the Mind, as
unwholesome Food on the Body; for as the Body becomes weak, so the Mind fearful.

Likewise, Children should be taught the purest and perfectest parts of their
Language, and the most significant Words and eloquent Speech; and the Tongue
get the habit of a good pronunciation, as well as the Understanding the right
and clear sense thereof; otherwise they will be like those that have learned
Music of an ill Master, that though they can play a Tune perfectly, and keep
just time, and set a true Note, yet they play not sweetly, but rough and
rudely, making a jarring-scraping, or squeaking-noise.

Wherefore, Children must hear Truth, and not Lies; be instructed with Reason,
not beaten with Rods; advised with Kindness, not threatened with Words;
presented with Gifts, not crossed in Toys; used with Respect, not slighted with
Neglect.

Likewise, They must be taught to speak perfectly, sensibly, and seasonably,
not impertinently; civilly, not rudely; truly, not falsely.

To conclude, Those that attend Children, should behave themselves well before
them, lest they should give an ill example.

Wherefore the better sort, that have Estates to maintain it, should have their
Children attended by none but such as are well fashioned, well spoken, and well
qualified.

The Thirteenth sort were Widowers and Widows.
The Widowers asked her, If it were not allowable for a Widower (in the Laws of
Honor) to Marry?

She said, Yes, in six cases.

The first was, If he had a good Estate, and had no Children to be Heir to it;
or that there were none left of his Family to keep alive the lovely memory of
his Ancestors.

The second was, If he had many young Children, and his Employments or Affairs
required him often from home.

Thirdly, If he had many Servants, and much Houshold-Employments.

Fourthly, If he were a Melancholy Man, and lived solitarily alone.

Fifthly, If he were infirm or sickly.

And lastly, If he were consciously honest, or honestly amorous.

Yet, said she, he must be wise, in choosing such a Woman as his Affairs
require, or his Humor desires: for a Man that marries for Children, must choose
a Woman well born, well bred, of a good Reputation, and who comes from a
fruitful Stock; likewise, she must be beautiful and well shaped, lest she gives
his Breed an ill dye, or an ill-favored mark.

Secondly, If a Man marry a Wife to take care to bring up his Children, he must
choose a discreet, sober, and well-natured Woman, and one that is honorably
born, and well bred; for those that are honorably born and bred, have good
Natures, noble Qualities, and sweet Dispositions; also, it breeds Children to
respect, it humbles them to obedience, it subjects them to corrections, and
begets in them a love.

Thirdly, If a Man marries a Wife to follow his Servants, and govern his
Houshold-affairs; she must be such a one as has been bred thriftily, and to
good Huswifry, and one that has had some experience in the World: otherwise he
may chance to have a busy Wife, but not a prudent Wife; she may take pains,
but he get but small gains.

Fourthly, If a Man marries because he would not live solitarily, he must use
his endeavor to get a cheerful Wife, and of a pleasant Humor, or rather a
pleasing Humor; she must be conversible, and of a ready Wit, and a good
Understanding: also of a healthful Constitution: otherwise he will have a
Disease instead of a Wife; a Trouble instead of a Companion; a Grave instead of
a Bed.

If a Man marries a Wife to attend and nurse him, she must be a neat, cleanly,
ingenious, and handsome-handed Woman; also skilful in Surgery and Physic,
and the applying of Medicines: likewise, she must be careful, watchful, and
industrious; also patient, silent, chaste, and good-natured; otherwise his Wife,
instead of a Nurse, may prove his Plague, his Hell, his Tormenter; his Plague,
with her Sluttery; his Hell, with her Dishonesty; his Tormenter, with her
froward nature, and scolding tongue.

And lastly, If a Man marry out of a Conscientious Honesty, as being Honestly
Amorous; he must endeavor to get a Chaste, Healthful, Beautiful, Cleanly Woman.

Likewise, she must be of a free Disposition, a merry Humor, and a kind
Nature; also, she must rather be modestly kind, than boldly wanton.

For if she be dishonest, his Jealousy will disturb his Love. If sickly, his
Kindness will disturb her Health. If ill-favored, it will tempt his Constancy.
If sluttish, he will loathe her Bed. If peevish or coy, it will cross his
Desires; and if bold, it will surfeit his Appetite.

But, said she, Equal Matches and Happy Marriages, are not common; by reason
Fortune, Covetousness, or Lust, makes more Marriages, than prudent Judgment of
Love; and oft-times Men and Women are deceived in each other; by reason the
nature of Man is so obscure, as it can hardly be found out: besides, Woers do
strive to conceal their Faults, and veil their defects; or pretend to be
virtuous, because they would be gracious in the opinion of their Mistresses, or
the Mistress in the opinion of the Suitor; whenas Marriage will discover them
to be but Counterfeits, gilded with deceit; which Golden outside is rubbed off
with acquaintance; and then their base drossie Nature appears, and Repentance
is dearly bought.

Then they asked her, If it were not lawful for a Man to keep a Mistress, in
case he was unwilling to marry?

She said, The Laws of Nature and Custom would allow it; but not the Laws of
Morality or Divinity: Wherefore if they could not live a chaste single life, she
said they ought to marry.

Besides, said she, although those Men that have Mistresses instead of a Wife,
have liberty to change their Mistresses, which they cannot do their Wives; yet
it is a far worse condition of life to keep a Mistress, than marry a Wife: for
the best natured Mistress is harder and more difficult to please, than the
worst humored Wife: for a Mistress is a Tyrant, prouder than a mean foolish
Favorite; more commanding than a strict General; more Tyrannical than any
Tyrant; more false than a Traitor: Proud, because sued to; Commanding, because
served with obedience; Cruel, because jealous; False, because unconstant.
Wherefore, she must be flattered, obeyed, observed, and watched. Likewise, they
will be more prodigal than a Gamester; for what they get by Vice, they spend in
vanity; and yet more covetous than an Usurer; for if she lend her Lover her
Person, she will have the Interest of his Estate.

This ruins his Family, and impoverishes his Estate: Also, she is more froward
than a Child, if she has not what she desires; or as melancholy as a Stoic,
when she has so much she knows not what to desire; more furious than a
desperate Madman, when she is crossed. Wherefore, she must be humored and
pleased, to keep her quiet.

Likewise, when is merry, she is more mischievous than a Jack-an-apes, more
skittish than a Colt, skips more than a Frog, chatters more than a Pie: when
she is angry, she is more furious than a Bull, and more fierce than a Mastiff.

When she has Designs, she is craftier than a Fox, more subtle than a Serpent;
when Covetous, more ravenous than a Wolf; when Jealous, more cruel than a
Tiger; when Kind, they are worse than Beasts; for Whores are seldom harmlesly
merry, or virtuously melancholy, or honorably angry, or innocently wise, or
prudently thrifty, or lovingly jealous, or modestly kind. The Gifts of Nature,
Youth, Wit, and Beauty, they set as snares to entangle Virtue, or to entrap
Vice; Youth fits, Beauty draws, and Wit catches hold.

To conclude, A Whore and good Fortune leaves a Man at once; and a Whore many
times makes the Fortune ill; when a chaste Wife is constant to a Man all her
life, and many times makes an ill Fortune good.

Then the Women asked her, If it were not allowed in Honor's Laws, for Widows
to marry?

She said, By no means: for Widows do both Cuckold their dead Husbands, and
their living Husbands.

The Fourteenth sort were Virgins.
They asked her, How they ought to behave themselves?

She said, Soberly, Modestly, Silently, Civilly, Temperately, and Dutifully.

Soberly: Behaving themselves with reservedness; not to dance, skip, jump, or
toy wildly about, or to wander or gad abroad without their Parents or
Governesses.

Modestly: Not to keep lewd or ill-famed Company, or to entertain all sorts of
Visiters, or to suffer Men to embrace, kiss, or whisper to them.

Silently: Not to talk much, or loud; or to laugh or sing much before Company,
unless they have excellent Voices; nor then, except they are civilly entreated;
and if they can sing, and are entreated thereto, not to be foolishly nice, nor
confidently forward; also, to leave the Hearers with a relish or appetite, and
not to sing so long as to tire them, or surfeit their ears.

Civilly: To give every one their due respect.

Temperately: Not to drink too much Wine, or eat too high or luxurious Meats.

Dutifully: To obey their Parents, Governesses, Tutors, or Mistresses, with all
humility, care, diligence, willingness, and love.

Then they asked her, If they might not lawfully entertain Suitors?

She said, Yes; but so, as to have some Friend by, as Witness, that they may
not give them cause to brag of their received-favours, or to challenge
Promises, or to receive disgrace by their Inconstancies; but to hear their Suit
with attention, to return them an Answer with discretion; to entertain
modestly, or deny them civilly.

Then they asked her, What Age was best to marry in?

She said, At the years of Twenty: for at that Age (said she) Time does both
usher and follow you: and at those years a WOman is like the Sun at high-noon,
being then in full strength, glory, and splendour, as being past the dawning-day
of Infancy, and has enlightened the dark Clouds of Ignorance, and is filled
with the sweet Morning-dew of good Education: and at this height you give a
full light of Beauty, without shadows; a clear day of Wit, without Misty
Errors, or Foggy Follies; a comfortable Warmth, by an assured settled Love; a
nourishing Life, by a fruitful Womb: for Marriage, in Childish Years, is like
unseasonable Weather, wherein nothing is brought forth kindly: it dries the sap
of Youth, shrinks up the Body of growth; it nips the Buds of Beauty, blasts the
Blossoms of Modesty, withers the Leaves of Pleasure, spoils the Fruits of
Birth, and kills the Root of Love. If Women marry before they come to full
growth, their Children are most commonly weak and infirm; for when a young and
tender Slip bears Fruit, the Fruit is most commonly little, or insipid, or very
watrish; and those forward Trees last not so long, nor are so strong nor large,
nor flourish so much, as those that bear more late.

Likewise, when Women marry before they are experienced in Knowledge, or have
solid Judgment, they most commonly repent, having been deceived, and despising
the Acts of their Youth, or condemning their Childish Affections, or rather
Fondness: for Youth is rather fond, than truly loving, by reason they have not
judgment to distinguish Merit and Worth from Vanities and Trifles; for they
will be caught with sweet Banquets, persuaded with kind Words, enticed with
gay Clothes, and won with pedling Toys; nay, many young Maids will marry for no
other reason, but to wear a Wedding-Ring; for they never enquire after the
Birth, Fortunes, Breeding, or Disposition of their Suitors, but observe whether
they be brave or no; a Silver and Gold-laced Suit they prize more than Lands
and Livings; gay Ribbans, and flanting Feathers, they esteem more than Titles
or Birth; to dance, and make a Courtly Congey, they account exact Breeding;
their flattering Courtship they believe is good nature, and gentle disposition:
they think them very wise if they talk much, and very valiant if they swear or
rant highly; very noble if they brag; very handsome if they be fine; and very
fine, if they be gay.

Three or four Lacqueys they take to be most honorable Attendance, and more
than forty other Servants; and the Master of a Race-horse sooner wins a
Mistress, and with more facility, than the Wager for which he runs.

But let me warn you (said she) of Bawds, for they are more crafty, and have
more Devices and Policies to deceive young Virgins, Wives, or Widows, than
Machiavel, or the wisest Statesmen, to cozen the People. Of which Bawds there
are four sorts: A Procuring Bawd, a Protecting Bawd, a Conniving Bawd, and a
Flattering Bawd.

A Procuring Bawd, is to make Love-Matches, and contrive Love-Meetings.

A Protecting Bawd, is to help Lovers in distress, as to entertain, or hide, or
conceal Lovers.

A Conniving Bawd, is to wink, or to take no notice of Lovers Designs, hindering
not their Meetings, nor obstructing their Desires, but leave them both to Time
and Opportunity.

A Flattering Bawd, is to palliate Lovers Faults, excuse Lovers Follies, to
maintain Lovers Arguments, and to plead Lovers Freedoms.

But many one, said she, are Bawds to corrupt their own Virtue; and are as
ingenious and industrious to cozen themselves, as those that get a Fee or Bribe
to cozen another.

Wherefore, said she, Women should guard their Chastity with Temperance and
Prudence, with Courage and Constancy, with Innocence and Modesty, with Honor
and Piety.

Then they asked her, Whether it was a disgrace and dishonor to live to be an
old Maid?

She said, No: for Virginity, said she, may be compared to Angels for Purity
and Innocence; and to be like Angels, is no dishonor to any Age, Sex, or
Quality: but if a Woman cannot be free from Scandals, or safe from Injuries,
she ought to marry: for a Husband is a Tower, and a Champion, to keep and
defend a Woman's Chastity and Reputation.

Then they asked her, Why old Maids were most commonly scorned and despised?

She answered, It was out of a corrupt nature in Mankind, which strives to
scandalize Virtue; and a spightful Reproach from the Masculine Sex, that would
corrupt all the Female Kind.

Besides, said she, the generality of Mankind think it a disgrace to be
ignorant in any thing in Nature, although it be in Vice; for they had rather be
Criminals than ignorant. But Virtue, said she, desires to know no more than for
Virtue's use.

The Fifteenth sort were Lovers.
And they asked her, What made Love so painful?

She said, That a Lover was as if he were tied to a post, his Mind being firmly
fixed upon one Object: but when the Mind is stretched, said she, with
admiration, then is a Lover nailed with Thoughts, as it were, upon a Cross; for
admiration is extension, and yet is fixed; and when the Mind, said she, is
extendedly fixed, the Spirits grow faint, the Senses dull, the Complexion pale,
the Body sick, the Flesh withers, and the Strength decays: whereas if the
Thoughts, said she, were loose, the Mind would be at liberty, and free from
Love's tormenting-pains.

Then they asked her, Why Lovers were apt to weep?

She said, That when the Mind was crucified, it was a hundred to one but it
would bleed: for, said she, Tears are the Blood of the Mind, although they flow
in the Body; for the Head and the Heart, said she, are the Cisterns that are
filled with this Blood; and the Eyes are the Veins or Artery-Pipes, through
which it runs; and when the Mind is wounded, it bleeds; which Blood is
droppingtears, that fall upon the Cheeks, and sometimes gush out in a full
stream.

Then they asked her, Why they were apt to sigh?

She said, Sighs were the Minds Pulse; and when the Mind was sick, the Pulse
beats strong, fast, and unevenly; which made Lovers sigh softly, smutheringly,
and sometimes deeply and strongly.

Then they asked her, What made Lovers groan?

She said, Groans were the Mind's Voice; and when it felt pains, it complained,
as finding no ease.

Then they asked her, What made Lovers extravagant?

She said, That Extravagantness was a distemper in the Mind; which distemper
was caused by the Pain it felt.

Then they asked her, If there were no Cure?

She said, Yes; Time was a good Physician; and Change, the only Remedy: unless
(said she) the Object of Love be unalterable, and then it is dangerous. But
(said she) the Mind would be well and free from such pains, if it were not for
the Appetites, which are never pleased, but are restless, run after Excess, and
hunt after Variety; for they are always in pain, either in desiring and not
enjoying, or else with surfeiting of what they have fed upon: for the period of
the Appetites, is Excess; and Excess is Surfeit; and Surfeit is Sickness; and
Desire is Traveling, and Traveling is Restless, and Restlesness is Wearisome,
and Wearisomness is Painful; insomuch as before we get to our desired End, we
are tired or dead.

Seldom do Lovers weep, sigh, groan, or tremble,
But to make love, or rather to dissemble:
For some can forge those Passions by the dozen,
And act them all, poor Women for to cozen.
The sixteenth sort of Visiters, were Poets.
Who asked her, Why Poets were most commonly Poor?

She said, Poets are employed with Contemplations, that they have no time for
Fruition; for Poets, said she, had rather have Fancies in their Heads, than
Money in their Purse; and take more pleasure in expressing the one, than in
spending the other; which makes their Imaginations their chiefest Possessions;
being careless of Fortune's Goods, despising her Service, regarding neither her
Frowns nor her Favors; being entertained by Nature, whom they most
industriously serve, and diligently attend.

Then they asked her, Who were most in Nature's favor, Poets or Philosophers?

She answered, There was no doubt to be made, but that she esteemed and loved
Poets the best: for (said she) Natural Philosophers tire Nature with Enquiries,
trouble her with searching and seeking about, anger her with their Erroneous
Opinions, tedious Disputations, and senseless Arguments, and make her outrageous
with their cruel Extractions, Substractions, and Dissections.

As for Moral Philosophers, said she, they restrain, enclose, and tie Nature,
as one that is mad, tormenting her beyond all reason: but sometimes, said she,
with struggling and striving, she breaks out; but cannot get so far, but they
straight get hold of her again; which makes them always at variance.

But Poets, says she, never cross nor anger her, nor torment her; they please
her all they can, and humor her every way; they sooth her Passions, feed her
Appetites, delight her Senses, praise her Wit, admire her Beauty, adorn her
Person, and advance her Fame.

Then they asked her, What the Muses were?

She said, That the Muses were Nature's Dressers, and Poet's Mistresses; to
whom they made Love, and several Courtships.

Then they asked her, What Poets were?

She said, Poets were Nature's Painters, which drew her to the life; yet some
do flatter her, said she, and some do her wrong; but those that flatter her,
she favors most (as all great Ladies do).

Then they asked her, What was the ground of Poetry?

She said, Distinguishing and Similizing, which is, said she, Judgment and
Fancy: as for Numbers, Rhyme, and Rhetoric, they are but the several
Accoutrements, but no part of the Body of Poetry.

Then they asked her, What was the Effect of Poetry?

She said, To move Passions, to describe Humors, to express Actions, to
correct Errors, to condemn Follies, to persecute Vice, to crown Virtue, to
adorn the Graces, to entertain Time, to animate Youth, to refresh Age, to
encourage Noble Endeavors, to quicken the Spirits, to please the Senses, to
delight the Mind, to recreate the Thoughts, to increase Knowledge, to instruct
the Understanding, to preserve the Memory, to refine Language, to praise
Heaven, to inflame Zeal, to register Life, to in-urn Death, to pencil Nature,
and raise Fame.

Then the Poets asked her, If Wit might not be gotten by Industry?

She said, Yes: for, though it is Nature's Work to make a Brain strong, and
well-tempered, or put it in tune; yet it is Learned Practice and Skill, that
must play therewith; like a Lute, although it should be well strung, and justly
tuned, yet if there were no hands, or other things, to set it in motion, it
would become useless; and unless it were tried, it would not be known whether
it could sound or no; and one that was not practiced and learnt in the Art of
that Instrument, might jangle, but hardly play a composed Tune, or make any
Harmony therewith. So a Brain becomes dull for want of use, stupid for want of
subject, and barren for want of learning; unless Nature does play on the
Instruments she makes, without the help of Art: which she can do, and does
sometimes; but so seldom, that it is a wonder.

But although she does not always make use of Art, she never but does make use
of Time; for Time is her chief Instrument, with which she works, and produces
all things.

I perceive, said she, that few profit by reading over or repeating of their
own Wit; for it is like the Breath of Water-Divers, who have two Bags, one
filled with Air, the other to put in Breath that issues out; and that Breath
that goes out, can never be drawn back for use; for the life of the Body must
be fed with fresh Air, or else it is smuthered out: so the life of Wit must be
fed with new Subjects; or else it becomes idle, or (panting) dies.

The Seventh sort that visited her, were Aged Persons.
They asked her, What made Age so dull?

She said, That most commonly Aged Bodies had Melancholy Minds; their Thoughts,
as their Bodies, were always traveling toward death; unless (said she) it be
the Irrational sort, who live only to their Appetites, and dye like Beasts: for
although old Father Time preches Death to them every minute, they sensually (or
being accustomed to his Doctrine) regard him not, but follow their Senses as
long as they can, until they become as insensible, as before irrational.

Then they asked her, What made Mankind afraid to dye?

She said, Pain, and Oblivion: but, said she, all Creatures are afraid of the
one; but none but Mankind are afraid of the other.

Then they asked her, What Age endured the most violent Pangs of Death?

She said, Middle-age, and perfect growth, as being strongest Bodies: for
perfect growth, with middle-age, is like a well built House, thoroughly
seasoned, and strongly settled; which makes Death take the greater pains to pull
it down. But Infacy and Age, said she, are like to Houses newly wrought, or
rotten with long time, which the least puff of Wind lays level with the ground.

Then they asked her, What course of life was best for Age to live?

She said, Piously, temperately, soberly, easily, peaceably, pleasantly, and
sagely: to be Pious in serving the Gods duly; and to be Compassionate and
Charitable: for the Aged many times seem as if they were tired in the Service
of the Gods, making their Age a lazy excuse for their omissions. And Age having
the Experience of the changes of Fortune, the accidents of Chance, the Miseries
and Cruelties in Nature, and the Havocks and Spoils Death makes, grow
hard-hearted: for, as Time hardens a tender Plant with the growth; so Custom
hardens a tender Heart with frequency. As also, having observed the false
Natures, the malicious Dispositions, the subtle Designs, the Selfends, the
cruel Actions in the generality of Mankind, they are apt to censure, mistrust,
and condemn all; which makes their Charity cold, and Assistance slow.

They should be Bountiful; for Age seeing the many Miseries that Poverty
brings, and the Power that Riches has, become oft-times so covetous, and so
sparing, that they become miserable, making their Stores their Prisons, their
Gold their Shackles, lashing themselves with the Rods of Scarcity and
Inconveniency; and though their Blood streams not through a porous skin, yet
are their Veins shrunk up, and dry within; they feed on Thoughts, as Lovers do;
and their Gold is their Mistress, admiring it as the fairest of Nature's Works,
worship it as a Deity, believe all happiness lives therein, and good is
produced thereby. But those that have a generous Soul by Nature, and have been
accustomed to relieve by Practice, increase in Humanity, Compassion, Charity,
and Liberality, as in years: also, their Love and Piety is fuller of
Fervencies; and though the Lamp of their Life is blinking, yet the Flames of
their Zeal are more clear; for as their Oil of Life wastes, their Oil of
Devotions increases continually, pouring in Glory, Praises, and Thanksgiving.

Likewise, said she, Age should live soberly and temperately: As for
Temperance, said she, Age is a Distemper in it self; and therefore they should
have a greater care in ordering themselves; but some are so far from patching
the Ruins of Time, or propping, or upholding a sagging, sinking Life, that they
make the rents greater, and pull down the Building sooner than Nature intended,
disturbing their bodily rest, and peaceable mind, by their unseasonable Hours,
and unnecessary Cares; as also, by their unwholesome Diets, and disordered
Appetites, which weakens Nature, and disturbs Health, more than otherwise they
would be. But those that are prudently wise, survey themselves, and
industriously maintain Life in as good Repairations as they can, placing
shelters before it, or laying covers upon it, to defend and keep it from
boisterous Storms, and nipping Colds.

Likewise, they repair it with nourishing Food, comfortable Cordials, and quiet
Rest; which makes them appear like a famous Monument, or an ancient Palace,
whose stately Structure cannot be buried in the Ruins.

They should also live soberly, gravely, and reservedly: for an aged Body, with
a vain Mind, fantastical Humors, extravagant Actions, apish Behaviors, and
idle Discourses, suit not well together; they appear both uncomely, undecently,
and unnaturally. for, Can there be any thing vainer, than for Age to rant and
swagger, brag and boast, or to be vainglorious? or, Can there be any thing
more fantastical, than for Age to be inconstant and various, pining and
spightful, gossipping and thwarting, amorous and wanton? And can there be more
phantasticalness, than for Age to be fooling and toying, sporting and playing,
dancing and singing, flanting and revelling, posting and traveling, searching
and seeking, sharking and fawning, crouching and creeping? Or, Can there be
more apishness, than to see Age full of imitation, as to affect a dancing,
jetting, strutting, straggling gait; a pruning, jointing, wreathing, rolling
posture; a simpring, fleering, jeering, mopping, mewing Countenance; or
leering, fleering, winking, gloting Eyes?

And what can be idler, than to hear Age talk lasciviously, buffoonly,
impertinently, falsely, amorously, vain-gloriously, maliciously, factiously, and
wickedly? But sober Age has a settled Mind, quiet Thoughts, well governed
Passions, temperate Appetites, noble Resolutions, honest Designs, prudent
Actions, rational Discourses, and Majestical Behaviors.

For an easy life, said she, Age should shun all troublesome Offices, painful
Employments, tedious Travelings, long Speeches, impertinent Talkers, hard
Couches, uneasy Garments, sharp Colds, burning Heats; also Surfeits, or
unpleasant or loathsome Meats or Drinks; for it were better to dye, than live
in pain; and the infirmities of Age is pain enough, without any addition to
increase them.

Likewise, Age should strive to live a peaceable life, as neither to hear
Quarrels, or make Quarrels, or be a Party in Quarrels, or quarrelsome business;
should abate all turbulent Passions, restless Cares, endless Desires, vexing
Thoughts.

It should also avoid all Clamours or mournful Noises; cruel, dreadful, or
pitiful Objects: they should forgive Injuries freely, suffer Injuries
patiently, submit to Power willingly, or at least readily: for Life is a
torment when Peace is banished; and to have an unquiet Life, a troubled Mind,
joined with a weak Body, would be as bad as Hell's torments.

The last is, To have a pleasant Life: for Age being apt to be melancholy, it
ought to please it self, to divert its saddest Thoughts, and raise its drooping
Spirits. Besides, Age has most reason to please it self, having by nature the
shortest while to live; and they are most unwise, that make not the best use,
or take not the most profit of Time.

But some may say, That Age cannot take pleasure, by reason that Pleasure lives
in the Senses; and the Senses, which are the Strings, Organs, or Pipes of
Pleasure, are broke, or out of tune; and the Mind, they will say, is subject to
ruinous Time, as much as the Body and Senses: for Knowledge, which is the
Foundation thereof; and Understanding, the Building thereon; and Memory, the
Doors thereto; and Remembrance, the Windows therein, is apt to decay; which
forces the Inhabitant, which is Delight, to forsake its Mansion: But I speak
not to those that are so old, or so infirm, as to be past thinking, as it were;
for those are but breathing-Carcasses, not living-Men: but I speak to such,
whose Knowledge is more, and Understanding clearet, by Time's Experience: for,
though the Body has a fixed time to arrive to a perfect growth and perfection,
yet the Mind has not; for the Mind can never know nor understand so much, that
it might not know and understand more; neither has Time such a Tyrannical
Power over the Mind, as over the Body.

Wherefore, said she, the Mind may have delight when the Body is past
Pleasures; and the Thoughts, which are the Children of the Mind, may have more
various Pastimes and Recreations to delight them, than the Senses can have
Varieties of Substance to work Pleasures out of; for they can create Delight in
themselves, which the Senses cannot; for they become dull, and grow as dead,
when they have nothing to work on.

When the Thoughts are like Spiders, or Silkworms, that can spin out of their
own Bowels, which is the Mind; for the Mind is the Bowels or Womb of Thoughts:
and though some think the Mind would be like an empty House, if it were not
furnished by the Senses, and outward Objects; yet some Minds are so largely,
curiously, and sumptuously built by Nature, and with such excellent, rich, and
strong Materials, that they need not the Senses.

The several Objects that the Senses bring in, do but incumber it, and lumber
it, hiding the curious Architecture, and shadowing the light thereof; but
howsoever, to please or delight the Mind by the Senses, Age must hear sweet
charming Music, view delightful Objects, smell comfortable Scents, taste
savoury Meats, drink delicious Drinks, be lapt in soft Silks, or warm Furr.

Likewise, they must converse with and pleasant Company, and so recreate
themselves in what they most delight: for Wise and Noble Age cannot delight in
any thing but what is Honorable, Allowable, and Commendable; and whosoever
lives temperately, prudently, soberly, easily, peaceably, and pleasantly, lives
sagely; but, said she, Wise Age Majestic seems, like Gods above;
Their Countenance is Mercy joined with Love:
Their Silver Hairs are like to glorious Rays;
Their Eyes, like Monarch's Scepter, Power sways.
Their Life is Justice Seat, where Judgment's set;
Their Tongue is the sharp Sword, which Truth does whet.
Their grave Behavior the Balance, which poise
The Scales of Thoughts and Actions, without noise:
Merit's the Grains, which makes them even weight;
Honesty the steady hand that holds them straight.


The Eighteenth sort were Soldiers.
And they asked, What sort of Men were fit to be Generals?

She said, Those that could command themselves, were wise enough to command
others.

Then they asked her, What sort of Men were best for other Commanders and
Military Officers?

She said, Those that had learnt to obey; for from their Obedience they could
well Command.

Then they asked her, Of what age Men should be chosen for Soldiers?

She said, That Men of Twenty were desperate, and Men of Thirty were
courageous, and from Thirty they were valiant: for Courage (said she) is not so
furious as Desperateness; nor Valor so rash as Courage: and Beasts (said she)
are furious and courageous; but none but Men are Valiant: but (said she) of
necessity there must be Men of all ages, that are able to bear arms; or else
there will not be Men enough to make up a Number: for, though (said she) Fury
is soon spent by violent Force, and Courage is weaker by rash Follies; yet if
none should be chosen but those that are rightly Valiant, there would not be a
Troop where there should be an Army: for true Valor (said she) is such an
equal temper and mixture of Capacities, Qualities, and Virtues compounded, as
Justice, Prudence, Temperance, Patience, Judgment, Understanding, Resolution,
Audacity, Circumspection, and the like, to make Valor, that there are few
Valiant Men to be found; whenas of Men of Courage, whole Armies are full: for,
Courage is only a Passion, without any mixture of Fear; or rather, it is an
Appetite to Adventures.

Then they asked her, What Assaulting-arms were best?

She said, The Sword: for, said she, Cannons, Muskets, Carbines, Pistols, or
the like, are fitter to fight with Walls, than Men: Besides, said she, there is
no assaulting-arms that stands at a distance, but seem cowardly, as Bows,
Slings, Pistols, Guns, and the like; which make Men seem as if they were afraid
to meet and encounter Body to Body, when a Sword, or the like Weapon, seems (as
it is) Heroic and Manly.

Then they asked her, Whether an Army were better to entrench, or lie in
Garrison Towns?

She said, To entrench: for, said she, the Soldiers will be careful to defend
their Walls of Mudd, which are Trenches; but when they lie in Garrisons, they
become negligent, as thinking the Walls of Stone Should defend them.

Then they asked her, How they should begin the Onset of a Battle?

She said, Closely, Coldly, and Temperately, lest their force should waste in
their fury, and disorders should grow by the violence thereof.

Then they asked her, How they should behave themselves in a Victory? She said,
Humbly and Mercifully.

Then they asked her, How they should behave themselves when they lost?

She said, Patiently and Cheerfully; to show their Spirits were not dejected
with their ill fortune.

The last sort that visited her, were Historians.
They asked her, Whether it were worth the taking pains, to write an History?

She said, There was no pains worth the taking, but for the cause of Truth, for
Right sake, and for the advancement of Good.

As for an History, said she, it cannot be exactly true, because there are so
many several Intentions interwoven with several Accidents; and several Actions
divided into so many several Parties and several Places; and so many several
Reporters of several Opinions, Partialities, Understandings, Judgments, and
Memorials, which give such various relations of one and the same Action, that
an Historian (being but one Man) cannot possibly know the truth; which makes
them write so falsely, whereby Right is injured and degraded of that Honor
which is due unto its Merit; or else that Honor is given where there is not
Merits to deserve it. Neither does History add Good to an Human Life, or Peace
to a Disordered State, or Zeal to a Pious Soul: for it instructs the present
Life with the Vices, Follies, and Ambitions, Rapines, Cruelties, Craft,
Subtilties, and Factions, of former Ages; which makes the present Age more bold
to do the like, and desirous to follow their forefathers steps; which rather
inflames the Distempers, than gives Peace to a Commonwealth; indeed it
distempers a peaceable Commonwealth, and oft-times brings it to ruin,
over-heating the Youth, and hardening the Aged: neither does it add Zeal; for
reading in History the several Religions, and many Gods, that Wise Men held and
prayed to, in every Age, weakens their Faith with doubt of the right, not
knowing what to choose.

Also Historians are, for the most part, Detractors; for they oftener blurr
Men's Reputations, than glorify them; and the World is apt to believe the
worst part: for, one Pen may blurr a Reputation, but one Pen will hardly
glorify a Reputation; for Glory requires many Pens, many Witnesses, or else
the World will not believe it; when one Accusing-Pen shall serve to condem the
most Noble Persons, and Heroic Actions; so unjust the World is.

They are also contrary one to another, writing according to their Opinions,
Judgment, and Belief, not often to the Truth; for some praise those Men and
Actions that others dispraise; causing doubts to the Readers, who know not
which to believe: besides, they are so partial to Sides and Factions, that to
the adverse Party they note things to their disadvantage; or aggravate their
Errors or Imperfections, and leave out some things that are of high worth, and
worthy the remembrance; or else lessen them in their Relations. But to those
they adhere to, they do the contrary; they either obscure or excuse their
Errors, Imperfections, and Crimes; and illustrate, with false lights, their dim
Virtues; or give them such Praises they never deserved.

Wherefore, no History should be esteemed, but what was written by the Authors
themselves; as, such as write the History of their own Lives, Actions, and
Fortunes, and the several Accidents that befell in their time, and to their
knowledge: yet, (said she) I wish I might outlive the Historians of these
times, that I might write a History of the Historians, there to describe their
Birth and Breeding, their Life, their Actions, their Fortunes, their Interest;
and let the World judge, whether they writ Truth, and without Partiality.

But to draw toward an end of my Tale: All sorts of People resorting to hear
her speak, she became so famous, as that a great Monarch (whose Kingdom was
neighboring to the Country she was born, bred, and lived in) had a great
curiosity to see and hear her; for the fame of her Beauty was equal to the fame
of her Wit; and putting himself into a disguise, left his Kingdom and Wife, to
visit this Lady; whom when he saw, and had heard speak, her Wit, Beauty, and
graceful Behavior did so ravish him, that he became a deseperate Lover:
Whereupon he secretly revealed himself unto her, persuading (all he could) to
leave that enclosed life, proffering her to be divorced from his Wife, and to
marry her: But she refused his Offers, despised his Love, forbid his Suit, and
absented her Person; which caused him to return in a rage and fury, sending
Ambassadors to proclaim Wars, unless the State would deliver the Lady into his
Power. But they absolutely denied to deliver her, thinking it both a wicked and
dishonorable disgrace to their Country, although they perceived an utter ruin
was like to fall upon them, by reason the Kingdom was in a weak condition,
caused by former Wars. But it came no sooner to her hearing, but she desired
to meet the Ambassadors in a public audience, which they granted; where
multitudes of People came thronging to see her; and when they were met, she
thus spoke: I come not here to make Eloquent Orations to divulge my Wit, or to
present my Beauty to the view of many Eyes: for, though I may thank Nature for
her bounteous Gifts,

Yet I have not that Vanity or Pride,
For to allure or draw from Virtue's side.
But I come to answer these Threatning-Ambassadors; for I cannot call them
Noble, or Honorable, since they come upon a base Design, and to an unjust End:
But let me tell them, That the Gods would hate me, should I break my holy Vow.
Next, I should grieve my Father's sleeping-Ashes, should I disobey his
dyingcommand. Thirdly, I should be a dishonor to my Birth and Sex, should I
live incontinently. Lastly, I should curse my Birth, hate my Life, blast my
Fame, should I be the cause of my Countrey's Ruin; and my Country had cause to
do the same, should it beruined for me: But since it will prove a Mischief,
Sin, and Shame, to live; Honor, Prudence, Love, and Justice, bids me dye:
Wherefore I have sacrificed my Life for my Countrey's Peace and Safety; my
unspotted Chastity, holy Vows, and dutiful Obedience, and to quench the raging
Lust of a wicked Tyrant.



And growing very sick, she became so weak, that she could stand no longer; but
gently sinking to the ground, she fell: whereupon all that could get near, run
unto her to help her: but she told them it was in vain; for Poison (says she)
has been the Engine that has broken open the Gate of Life, to let Death in;
and so immediately dyed. Which the People no sooner understood, but made such
outcries, lamentations, and mournings, as if there had been an utter desolation
of the whole World. Then after some time of Preparations, they buried her with
great solemnity, and intombed her costly; the State setting up her Statue of
Brass, for her Courage and Love to her Country: the Church Deified her a
Saint, for her Virtue and Piety; and the Clergy raised Altars, where all the
Kingdom twice a year did offer unto her solemn Sacrifices: and the Poets built
several Pyramides of Praise of her Beauty, Wit, Virtue, and sweet Graces; which
Pyramides reached to Fame's highest Tower: and the Historians writ her Life and
Death in Golden Letters, and recorded them in Fame's Brazen Tower, that all the
World might know and follow the Example of her Heroic Spirit, Generous Soul,
Chaste Body, Pious Life, and Voluntary Death.

HEAVEN's Library, which is FAME's Palace, purged from Errors and Vices.
JOVE, and some of the other Gods, being set in Council, Pallas being one, rose
up, and bowing to Jove, thus spoke:

Great Jove, said she, I ought in duty and love to inform you, not only of the
Vices and Errors, which are numerous in the World, and in time may bring it to
confusion; but of those Errors and Vices which are crept into your great
Library ( Fame's Palace), and if order be not taken to destroy them, they will
devour all your best and noblest Records.

Jove answers, That Vices were as Serpents, and Errors as Worms, bred in the
Bowels of Nature, of which she could never be cured, for the Gods had no
Medicine strong enough to purge them out; and by reason they were from all
Eternity, they could not be destroyed: for, if any thing could be destroyed
that is from all Eternity, then we our selves might be destroyed: but, said
Jove, we can cast them out of our own Mansions, though we cannot cast them out
of Nature's Bowels; also, we can hinder them from coming in: wherefore Fame is
to be reproved for suffering the Library to be so foul, and full of filthy
Vermin.

Whereupon Mercury was sent to call Fame to appear before Jove and his Council;
so when Fame came, Jove told her, That Gods and Goddesses ought to be just and
upright, and to have their Palaces pure, and full of Truth; which (said he) you
nor your Palace has not been; for you are Partial, and your Court full of
Faction, and my Library (your Palace) foul, and full of Wormy Errors; which if
it had been kept pure and clean, they would never have entered; or if they had
entered, you might have caused them to have been swept out by Old Father TIME.

Fame answered, That it was not her fault; for Mars, Venus, and Fortune, had
sent them in; and it is not for me to oppose so great a God as Mars, or so
great a Goddess as Venus; or to sit as Judge, to determine what was best to be
flung out, or what to be placed therein; for none is fit to judge those Causes,
but you (great Jove) and your Council.

Jove approving what Fame said, told his Council, That after they had taken
some repast, they would sit in Council again, and their only Business should
be, to purge and cleanse their Library. So after they had feasted with Ambrosia
and Nectar, they returned to Council; where they did first decree:

That all those Records that were to be cast forth, should be heapt up
together, and then they would decree how to dispose of them. After that, they
did decree, That all those Records that were of Usurpers and Invaders, should
be cast forth.

Next, All Fabulous and Profitless Records.

Thirdly, All Wanton and Amorous Records.

Fourthly, All Records of Useless Laws, and Inhuman Sacrifices.

Fifthly, All Records of tedious Speeches, or vain or factious Oratory.

Sixthly, All obstructive Controversy, as being destructive to Truth, should
be cast out: Also, tedious Disputes and Sophistry.

But Mars, Cupid, and Mercury, opposed it as much as they could, saying,

That if all these Records should be cast forth, the famous Library would be
very empty.

Jove said, It was an Infamous Library (...) they were kept therein; and that
no Records ought to be in Fame's Library, but of such Acts as suppressed Vice,
and advanced Virtue, and were prositable for the Life of Man; and those of
necessary Inventions; but chiefly, those that glorified the Gods, and sung
their Praises, declaring their Power, Wisdom, Justice, and Love; whose Authors
ought to have their memory recorded to everlasting time. As for the Works of
the Poets by Nature, said Jove, the Fates have decreed them several places in
the Library; wherefore it is not in our power to remove them: but those that
are like false Coin, that have only got, by unjust means, the stamp of the true
Figure, and not the worth of the Metal; such as are dross, or basely mixed, not
pure and perfect pieces, we shall find out by their trial.

After they had decreed the Generalities, they fate in Council on the
Particularities; as, which were unworthy to be kept, or worthy to be cast out.

First, they began with Moral and Natural Philsophers, Physicians, and
Chemists; where Jove said, All but some few ought to be cast forth; for, to
what purpose should we stuff the Library with the Repetitions and false
Commentaries, of which all Modern Records are (for the most part) full, being
only altered in language.

As for the Philosophers, the first shall be Plato, and his Works shall be all
kept, but his Commonwealth; and that shall be put out, by reason it was so
strict it could never be put in use, nor come into practice: The rest that were
named, were Pythagoras, Epicurus, Socrates, and Aristotle. As for Physicians,
only Hippocrates, and Galen; and Paracelsus for his Medicines; and Reymund
Lully for the Philosoper's-stone: for although their Records be lost in the
Rubbish of the Library, yet old Father Time shall be employed to find them out,
and other Records that are buried in the dust, which are worthy of perspicuous
places. Also Aristotle's Logic and Rhetoric was kept; and for Gramar, Lilly.

The next they came to consider, were Mathematical Records; whereof none was to
be kept but Archimedes and Euclid. As for the Records of Invention, all that
are either necessary, profitable, or pleasant, shall be enrolled: but all such
Invention as is hurtful, distrustful, obstructful, vain and useless, shall be
cast forth.

Then said one of the Gods, Archimedes must be cast out, for he invented many
Engines of War.

It Is true, said Jove; but by reason it was in the defense of the City he lived
in, and was a Native thereof, he shall be spared.

The next were Astronomers; whereof four were kept; Copernicus, Tichobrache,
Ptolomy, and Gallileo. The next sort were Orators and Lawmakers: As for
Lawmakers, there were Moses, Licurgus, and Solon kept: for Orators, only
Thucydides and Demosthenes: as for Tully, he was a vain Boasting Fellow, and
Seneca a mere Pedant, and a dissembling, pretending Philosopher; and therefore
they shall out. For Politics, only Achitophel and Machiavel.

Then they came to Heroic Records. Jove said, That all the Records that were
of the Actions of those they call the Heroes, ought most of them to be cast
out, being violaters of Peace, and destroyers of Righteous Laws, and Divine
Ceremony; Prophaners of our Temples, breaking down our Altars and Images,
robbing us of our Treasures, to maintain their ill-gotten Power therein; or to
get that Power they have no right to; having no Justice but Strength to make
their Titles good: Besides, they are the greatest Troublers of Mankind,
Robbers, and Thieves, disposing the Right of Ancient Possessions, and defacing
the Truth of ancient times.

With that Mars rose up, and bowing to Jove, said, May it please your great
Godhead, There are Priests of yours that have made it good by Divine Laws, and
many Lawyers that justify it by the Laws of every Kingdom, and by the Laws of
Nations; and will you cast down that which your Priests and Lawyers preach and
plead up?

With that Pallas rose up, and spoke:

Great Jove, said she, Wisdom knows, that Force makes the Gown stoop; and
Mercury knows, that Orators Tongues are as often bribed for Fear, as Reward;
and those two Professions plead always for the stronger side, and falsifies
your Text for Interest, and turns Right to Wrong, and makes the Text and Laws a
Nose of Wax, which will take any Print; or else, How should various disputes
arise in that we hold Sacred, as divinity; and every Cause disputed pro and
con, in all Courts, by opposite Counsels? Wherefore (All-seeing Jove) your
Power will rectify it, and it will be Justice to throw them out. Wherefore,
let all the Records of all those of the Heroic Acts and Heroes both of Greeks
and Romans, that were Invaders or Usurpers, with their Heroes (as Alexander,
Hannibal, Scipio, Caesar), and all the rest; and all other Records and Heroes,
of what Nation soever, which is of that in jurious, turbulent, ambitious, and
vainglorious Nature, whereof there be Thousands, which ought to be cast into
Hell's Dungeon, the place of Infamy, there let their Actions be recorded; and
not usurp Heaven's great and glorious Library, as they did Earth's.

Then (said Mars) you must cast all the Heroic Actions and Worthies, in
Homer's Works, into that Dungeon.

That must not be, said Jove: for Homer was Heaven's Chronologer; and the
Records of the Gods of Heaven must not be cast into Hell. Besides, there was a
just pretense for that War; for the Grecians had received a palpable Injury,
and the Trojans did but defend themselves; and though the Injury done, and the
Wrong received, were but by Two single Men; and the Quarrel but for a leight
inconstant Woman; yet it was a Riot: and the more faulty, and less pardonable,
because it was a Riot of our Deputies on Earth. for Kings are the Gods Deputies
and Vicegerents, and therefore Sacred, and ought not to be injured; but when
they are, their Injuries are to be severely punished; and Heaven forbid we
should be so unjust, as to cast out all Heroic Actions, and Warring Heroes;
no, we cast out only those that make war unjustly, vain-gloriously, or
covetously.

Then Mars asked, If Tamberlain should be cast out?

Jove said, Yes; for he had no right to the Turks Empire.

Then he asked, If Scanderbeg should be thrown out?

Jove said, No: for it is lawful for any to get their own, and to maintain
their Right by what force soever: and that Scanderbeg had reason to fight for,
and to maintain by force his own Inheritance.

Then he asked, If the Records of the Jews Heroes, and their Heroic Actions in
the Land of Canaan, should be cast out?

Jove said, No: for that Land was given them by the Gods.

Then they came to Romances; where Jove said, All Romances should be cast out,
but Don Quixot, by reason he has wittily abused all other Romances; wherefore
he shall be kept, and also have his Books writ in Golden Letters.

Then Cupid spoke in their behalf, and entreated Jove, that they might not be
cast out: for, said Cupid, Romances work as great effects upon the hearts of
Mortals, as my Arrows (tipped with Gold) do: besides, they are my Mother Venus
Looking-glasses.

Jove said, They did corrupt Mortals thoughts, and made them neglect their
Divine Worship, causing them to spend their time vainly, idly, and sinfully.

Then Cupid desired Jove to spare Amadis de Gaul.

But Jove said, That should be the first that should be cast out, by reason it
was the original of all the rest.

Likewise, said Jove, all Fables shall be cast out, but Esop's Fables, which
profit Mankind by his Morals. Also, Lucian and Rabelais shall be kept, both for
their huge Wit and Judgment, rectifying Scholars Understandings; and though
some that are spiteful at their Wit, call them Scoffers, yet they are not so,
but Teachers of Truth in a pleasant style; and those that say they are
Profane, judge presumptuously and maliciously of them. At this Sentence Mercury
joyed.

At last they came to judge of Poets; where Homer, Pindar, and Anacreus, were
preferred as the three first.

Then one of the Gods, named Virgil as the fourth.

Jove said, It was a question whether Virgil was a true Poet by Nature, or no,
by reason he was rather an Imitator of Homer, than of Nature; and his praise
was more for his Language, than either for Fancy or Natural Description:
Wherefore, said Jove, he might be questioned for a true-born Poet; and since it
may be doubted he is of a Bastard-kind, I will prefer Horace before him, who
certainly is a true-begotten Poetical Son of Nature.

Another of the Gods said, I should judge Ovid to be placed before either of
them both, for the sweetness of his Verse, and fineness of his Fancy; the
curious intermixing, and the subtle interweaving of his several Discourses,
Theams, Arguments, or his Transitions.

Jove said, For his part he was no Friend to Ovid for divulging his several
Amors; and if it were in my power (said Jove) to alter the Decrees of Fate, I
would cast him forth; but by reason he is a right Poet by Nature, I cannot; but
yet I can place him in Heaven's Library as I will; and therefore he shall not
be before either Horace or Virgil, but he shall stand in the sixth place; and
in the seventh place shall stand Martial.

Cupid said, Your Godhead has forgot Tibullus and his Son.

No, said Jove; they ought to be put out, because their Verses were wanton.

Cupid said, Your Godhead cannot put them out, because they are Poets by
Nature.

Then let them (said Jove) be placed in some out-corner of the Library. At
which Sentence Cupid srown'd, knowing his Mother Venus would grieve to have
them dis-respected. After them were placed the Comedians, Terence and Plautus;
and the Tragedian, Seneca. And having given their Judgments of all the Ancient
Poets, which were more than could be numbered in this place; they tried the
Moderns, whereof they could not find one true Poet by Nature, amongst Five
hundred: for though there is an infinite company of them, yet hardly one true
one amongst them all; for most of the Moderns have been like a company of
Ravens, that live upon dead Carcasses, so they upon old Authors; and some have
been like Maggots, that have been bred in their dead Flesh, which is the living
Works of dead Authors; and some like Hornets, and some like Bees: but very few
rightly begotten from Nature; indeed so few, as I am loath to set them down: so
most of the Moderns were cast out. Then after they had divided the Records,
what to be put out, and what to be kept in, there rose a great dispute amongst
the Gods, How those that were cast out should be disposed of? At last Jove
decided the case: Those that were wicked, mischievous, and base, should be put
into Hell; and those that were idle, vain, useless, and foolish, should be
drowned in the River of Styx; but they were forced to make new Boats to waft
some to Hell, and to drown others in the River; for there was such an infinite
company, that Charon had not leisure, neither could one Boat serve their turn.
But then there rose another dispute about those that go to Hell; for, said some
of the Gods, the Records must not be in Paper, nor Parchment, nor in Metal, nor
Stone, by reason there is a continual and eternal Fire in Hell, which will burn
the one, and melt and moulder away the other. Whereupon Jove ordered, That
those that were to go into Hell, should be recorded in Salamander-stone, on
which the Fire has no force; for the more it is burnt, the more it is
purified. After they had decreed this, all the Records of Tyrants, Usurpers,
Invaders, Murderers, Thieves, Ravishers, Extortioners, Detractors, Licentious
Mutiniers, Factious, Profane, and Rebellious Records, with Evil Inventions,
were cast into Hell, a Room being provided as a Library, and one of the Furies
with a fiery Trumpet to sound out their reproach: And all those Records that
were Vain, Useless, Idle, Amorous, and Wanton; with all those that were full of
Sophistry, Tedious, Obscure, Pedantical; and those that were only Repetitions
and false Commentaries; also, those of useless Inventions, and that were mere
Rhymers, were cast into the River of Styx, and so drowned in Oblivion.

FINIS.

