AN ANSWER Of the Right Honorable the EARL OF NEW CASTLE HIS Excellency, etc.
To the six groundless aspersions cast upon him by the Lord Fairefax, in his
late Warrant (here inserted) bearing Date Feb. 2. 1642.

By the EARL Himself.

The Protestation of the afflicted Ministers, Printed 1605.
Page 4. Though the King command anything contrary to the Word, yet we ought
not to resist, but peaceably to forbear obedience, and sue for grace, and when
that cannot be obtained, meekely submit our selves to punishment.

And Page 18. It is utterly unlawful for any Christian Churches by Armed Power
against the will of the Civil Magistrate to set up in Public the true
Worship of God, or suppress any Superstition or Idolatry.

Printed at York, and reprinted at Oxford by H.H. 1642.

IT is my Will and Pleasure, That this Answer, together with the Lord Fairefax
his Warrant, be published in all Churches and Chapels within this City and
County of York.

W. NEW CASTLE.

AN ANSWER OF THE RIGHT Honorable the EARL of New Castle, his Excellency, etc.
IT is no new thing (though it was never so frequent as now) for Incendiaries
to accuse Innocents as disturbers of the Public tranquillity of the Country.
So ugly is the Face of Rebellion when it comes unmasked, without some cloak or
Vizard over it, that even seditious persons cannot fancy it in themselves. The
charge which the Lord Fairefax gives against me, in this Declaration, is like
that of a Roman against his fellow Citizen, That he did not receive his whole
weapon in to his body. He was angry that his neighbor should defend himself,
and my Lord, that I should protest His Majesty's good Subjects from his
violence. And though a general accusation might justly be slighted as a
slander, to which by the Laws of this land no man is bound to answer, to which
it is impossible for any man to make a direct answer (since it is not invested
with the due circumstances of time and place and persons) neither is the Lord
Fairefax able to bring one particular instance to make good his general
calumniations, yet since it proceeds from a person of his eminency, I have
thought fit as well for the vindication of mine own honor, as for
confirmation of the minds of His Majesty's well affected subjects in their
loyalty to repel his slanders in the press, as I doubt not by Gods assistance
to do his forces in the field. Yet give me leave to wonder who they are that
have such an influence upon his Lordships understanding, as to draw him in six
lines to Publish to the world six groundless aspersions, against a person that
has not deserved ill of him without the least provocation.

The first is, That contrary to the Laws of the Land I have raised agreat Army.
I might answer, That the Laws are indeed an excellent standard and measure of
Justice so long as they are common to all parties, but when they become like
spiders webs to entangle some, and let through others, when some men must
observe Law, and others will be free from all Law, it is the greatest
partiality and the falsest measure in the world. And as our Savior said to the
Pharisees, If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your Children cast
them out? They shall be your Judges. So say I, If I be a Delinquent against the
Laws, for raising defensive Arms by virtue of His Majesty's Commission (with
whom alone the power of the Militia is entrusted both by God and Man) what is
the Lord Fairefax and his parteners for raising offensive rebellious Arms
against their fellow Subjects, without, nay, against His Majesty's authority.
But he has appealed to the Laws, to the Laws let him go? Let him show but
any one particle of known Law, Statute or Common, which I have violated, and I
shall lay down Arms as cheerfully as I took them up. But if this be
impossible (as without doubt it is) then cease at length to tell us of Laws in
the clouds, or of Laws written in the Sybills books, which no men ever read
or heard of but your selves. All true English men will disdain to exchange
their inheritance, the ancient Laws of this Land (under which they and their
progenitors have already enjoyed such happy and Halcionian days, and hope
still for better from His Majesty's greater experience, and late Acts of Grace)
either for a Company of far-fetched deare-bought principles, drawn without Art
or Judgment, by factious unskilful persons, out of the Law of nature or of
Nations, as a Lesbian rule to serve their ambitious ends: Or for Arbitrary
Government, which knows no bounds, or limits but the will of headstrong
discontented persons. With what face can these men name the Laws of the Land?
when one of them has lately told the world in print, that they are but the
inventions of men: Yea moral precepts, fitter for Heathens then Christians. In
a word, I raise Arms by the Law, and for the Law, to protect the Laws and
Religion established; you to subvert them both, I raise Arms under His
Majesty, for His Majesty; you without him, against him, by virtue of your own
warrants: If it be not so, show us but one text, one Statute, nay, but one
poor case or president for your Justification. And that you may see I am in
earnest, I desire God to vouchsafe his blessing and assistance to that party
which stands truly and cordially for the defense of the known Laws of this
Realm, and to deny it to all others.

The second charge is, That mine Army consists of Papists and other Malignants.
That I have in mine Army some of the Romish Communion I do not deny; yet but
an handful in comparison of the whole Body of it, I believe not above one of
fifty, and I wish their Consciences as well satisfied as mine own of the
Truth of our Profession. These I admitted for their Loyalty and Abilities, not
for their Religion, as was most lawful for me to do; a course warranted by
the examples both of God and Man, and chalked out to me by themselves: yea, it
was a note higher in them, in a War pretended against Papists, to make use of
Papists in places of great trust and command; nay, do they not still admit all
sorts of Sectaries, Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, etc? I have demonstrated
the equity of this course to the World, which they know not how to answer; the
fidelity of the one shall rise up in judgment against the Rebellion of the
other, and condemn it; Certainly in this particular service they show
themselves better friends to the Protestant Religion, then the others But they
are not satisfied to rob me of them, unless they may sweep away all the rest
under the stale and empty name of Malignant; I do not much blame them, their
intended work would be more easily achieved. But let us inquire who in their
Dialect are these Malignants; Are they who do not willingly part with their
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Lively hoods, lest them by their fathers upon
Arbitrary Votes? So a Theife may Term a True man a Malignant, because he does
refuse to deliver his Purse upon demand; So the Wolves in their Treaty of
Accommodation with the Sheep, desired the Dogs to be delivered up to them as
Malignants. Those have hitherto been esteemed Malignant humors in the Body
Natural, which being stubborn, Rebellious, Venomous, are with difficulty
reduced to their light temper, either by strength of Nature, or skill in
Physic, not, those which are not easily infected or distempered. This is new
Learning, and requires a new Dictionary to warrant it. Before they conclude
them Malignant, they should do well to prove them to be Peccant against any
authentic rule: The Apostle says, Where there is no Law there is no
transgression; To accuse boldly is not sufficient to convince. If a common
Adversary did not keep them in a kind of Herodian Unity for a time, your
Brownists would soon condemn your ordinary disciplinarians for Malignants, and
your Anabaptists again your Brownists, etc.

Thirdly, you charge me to have Invaded this County of York. An insolent and
presumptuous Challenge Can the Kings forces be said to make an Invasion in His
own Dominions? The second blow may be said to make the fray, but it is the
first that makes the Invasion. Say in good earnest, did not your Forces first
make Inrodes into the Bishopric of Durham under my charge, where they had no
pretense of employment? Did they not Rob and Plunder sundry of His Majesty's
Liege People at Dornton) in such cruel manner, that the prime Officer of the
Town died of grief within three or four Days? Did they not-give an assault
upon Piers bridge to their loss? And when I come to chastise these Intruders,
can it be called an Invasion? Neither did I then set foot into this County, but
upon the earnest Solicitation and Entreaty of the Prime Nobility and Gentry of
Yorkshire, to secure them from your violence and oppression. If Protection be
Invasion, then this is Invasion. I could nourish little hopes that these
restless Spirits, who could not be bounded within their own calling, would be
contained within the limits of a County: Or that they would spare me any
longer, then until they had fully subdued their Neighbors and fellow Subjects
at home. Neither could I have been ever able to have given an Account to His
Sacred Majesty for such an unpardonable omission, if being Armed by His goodness
with sufficient power to repress such tumultuous disorders, I should see
before mine eyes His Loving and Loyal Subjects trampled upon by His and their
Enemies, in His Cause, and for His sake; and whilst they seek to me for
succor, I should be wanting in my Duty to my dread Sovereign, and my
necessary assistance to them. All this while the Lincolneshire Forces are quite
forgotten, they were Brethren; no Invaders.

The fourth charge arises yet higher, For killing and destroying some numbers
of the Religious Protestant Subjects. Where did ever my Forces kill one man who
did not take up Arms against us, or was not ready to have killed us first if
he could? The weight of guiltless blood is more heavy then a Mountain, The
stain thereof not to be washed out with all the water in the Ocean, but only
by the tears of Repentance, and the blood of Christ. This weight and guilt of
blood shall lie heavy upon the heads of those men and of their seed after them,
who have been the authors and famentors of these horrid distractions, when
Peace shall be upon the head of our Sovereign, and his seed, and his throne for
ever. They that take the Sword (without a lawful calling) shall perish by the
sword, And He that sheddeth Man's blood (without a Commission from the King of
Heaven, who only has original Power over the lives of his creatures, and no
multitude of men in the world collective or representative whatsoever) by Man
shall his blood be shed. The supreme Magistrate is Gods Vicegerent, And Bears
not the sword in vain; but those who presume to use the sword and can derive
no Power from him, it were meet for them to make their Accounts betimes with
God, least they die in the state of Murderers both of themselves and others,
both of soul and body. It is an easy thing for an Orator to cast a mist
before the eyes of Vulgar People, and make them a plausible Discourse of the
Cause of God, the true Religion, of suppressing Superstition and Idolatry, and
setting upon the Right Worship of the Lord. They had hard hearts if they could
not afford themselves a good word. But admitting, not granting, all this to be
true (which is most false) will this plea yet serve before the Judge of Heaven
and Earth? Nothing less. These very Men and their Predecessors, have taught
the contrary, have protested the contrary, have Printed the contrary, Ante mota
certamina, before these unhappy differences began, whilst men's eyes were not
fascinated with faction and prejudice. Then themselves condemned this very
Doctrine which now they practice as Antichristian and Anabaptisttcall, and
their present practice which they now defend, as seditious and sinful; this
would be truly laid to heart; And withal, that if the Lord Fairfax and his
friends had been men of their words, or performed that agreement to which
Honor and Justice did oblige them, all the blood which has been spilled, or
shall be shed hereafter in this Cause, had been saved; And upon their score it
will be cast in the end, both by God and Man. It would be known who they are
whom emphatically (if not exclusively) he calls Protestants. Are they the
Successors in Doctrine of those first Reformers in Germany, whom from a
Protestation made, they named Protestants? No, what these old Protestants
allowed and practiced as lawful and necessary, these new Protestants condemn
as superstitious and Antichristian. This is beyond the power of Omnipotency to
make both parts of a contradiction to be true, Protestants whilst they
continue the same to be no Protestants, and no Protestants to be Protestants.
If they do cordially love the thing as they do hug the name, why do we not
all shake Hands and become Friends?

And so from murdering their bodies he proceeds to sterving their souls, that
is, by Banishing and imprisoning the Zealous Ministers. This is my fifth
charge, I envy no man's zeal, but wish them Discretion proportionable to their
Devotion. To satisfy their charge home, first, de jure, what may be done. It
has ever been accounted lawful to bind a phreneticke man's hands. Shall it be
lawful for these seditious Orators to bring railing acculations into the
Pulpits daily against the Lords anointed, such as Michaell the Archangel durst
not bring against the Devil, and yet be free from question: May they
prostitute the Ordinance of God to the rebellious designs of ambitious men,
yet be free from question? Could these Ambassadors of Peace keep themselves
to that Theme, which was bequeathed to them by the Prince of Peace, they might
long enjoy their Benesices and Liberties; yea, with some connivence to a truly
tender Conscience. But when a Man may frequent their Sermons a whole year, and
hear nothing but incentives to War, shedding the Blood of the ungodly, and
adjoining with others to make a great Sacrifice to the Lord, may not a man
justly say to them, as Queen Elizabeth sometimes to an Ambassador, Hei mihi I
vocem Pacis expectavi, Cur Belli clamorem audio? Are not these the same Men who
teach in their own case, That he deserves more rigorous punishment who shall
infect the Souls of Men with poisoned Doctrine, then he that shall destroy
their bodies with poison? Are not these the Men, who upon the same grounds have
silenced or Imprisoned, or, to use their own Phrase, banished from their
Churches so many of our Reverend, Learned, and Worthy Divines throughout the
whole Kingdom, to subintroduce Heterodox, and contentious persons in their
Rooms? And may no Man say to their Minions, not worthy to sit at the Feet of
the other, Domine, cur ita facis? Sir, why do you so? Or shall we once again
bring in an exemption of Church men privately at the backedoore, which we have
Publicly thrust out at the foredoore? Thus you see it might be done, even upon
your own grounds in point of right.

Now for the matter of fact, it is as much mistaken as the right, I have
recollected my self, I have inquired of ray Secretary, yet can I not find one
Minister by me either banished or imprisoned. If any Minister either before my
coming or since, being apprehensive of his own demerits, or out of a guilty
Conscience, without other compulsion, did forsake his Church, and leave it as
the Ostridge does her eggs in the sand, without care or provision, you cannot
call this Banishment. Or if at ny of your Ministers have assumed a plurality
of professions and added the Sword to the Word, if my Officers should me with
him in such a garb, might they not inquire, an haec tunica Filii tui sit, and
take him in his second capacity? Or lastly, if the Justices of this County, who
live upon the place, and do best know seditious persons, and the just fears
and dangers of the County, have thought fit to restrain any man from doing
hurt, was I bound to give a protection or a supersedeas? when you instance in
particular persons, you shall receive particular satisfaction.

And so from the Body and Soul he descends to the Estate, the last step of
his accusation, in these words, And has besides done infinite spoil and wast
upon the good Subjects, plundering and taking away their Goods and Cattle, in
so much as in many places there are neither Men nor Cattle left to Till the
Ground. Lord how these men are touched to the quick, when any man but
themselves dare offer to plunder! As if they desired not only the free Trade,
but even the Monopoly of Plundering to themselves. I know no such places in
this County as he mentions; if there be any such, without doubt they must
neeeds know the desolation which themselves have made. But do they think with
such clamours and outcries to deaf the ears of men, and drown the ejulations
of poor people, whom they have harrowed? They have spared no Age, neither the
venerable Old Man, nor the innocent Child; No orders of Men, The long Robe as
well as the short has felt their fury. No Sex, not Women, no not women in
Childbed, whom common humanity should protect: No condition, neither Fathers
nor Friends. They have spared no places, The Churches of Christians which the
Heathens durst not violate, are by them profaned. Their Ornaments have been
made either the supply of their necessities, or the subject of their
scurrilities; their Chalices, or Communion Cups (let them call them what they
will so they would hold their singers from them) have become the objects of
their Sacrilege; the Badges and Monuments of ancient Gentry in Windows and
Pedegrees have been by them defaced; Old evidences, the Records of private
Families, the Pledges of Possessions, the boundaries of Men's Properties, have
been by them Burned, torn in pieces, and the Seals trampled under their
feet. Seelings and Wanscott have been broken in pieces, Walls demolished, a
thing which a brave Roman spirit would scorn (to tyrannize over Walls and
Houses.) And all this by a company of Men crept now at last out of the bottom
of Pandora's Box. The poor Indians found out by experience that Gold was the
Spaniards God, and the Country finds to their loss what is the Reformation
which these men seek. At this very time, I am informed they are executing the
illegal Order for the Twentieth part of every Man's Estate in Craven. This
would be a sufficient answer for them, but not a sufficient plea for me.

Therefore in the second place I add, that my case is clear different from
theirs: there may be Treason against the King, there can be none against them.
There may be Forfeitures of Estates to the King, none to them. The King may
raise Arms and leavy a just War, whatsoever they do in that kind is void by
the Law of Nations; whatsoever they shall acquire in such a Course is not by
Right, but a mere Nullity. No tract of time can wear away the unlawfulness
of the first acquisition, but after an hundred years possession, they are
still malae fidei possessores, possess it with a bad Conscience, and are bound
to make restitution.

Lastly, for matter of fact, when I came first into this County I made a
public Declaration against plundering in Print, which I have since endeavored
to observe. Yet that some men of their party have suffered in their estates I
do readily grant, that is, either such as have absented themselves, or have
refused to pay those proportions of money, which were imposed upon them by the
County. But whatsoever has been done in that kind has been done by the Gentry
or the Committees by them named, with as much moderation as the present
exigence of affairs would permit, wherein I have rather acted the part of
their Minister, to execute what they resolved, then lookod upon that great
trust which His Majesty has imposed upon me. So I have done with the charge.

The Lord Fairefax requires all Parties to appear, and I Command them all upon
their Allegiance to stay at home. They may perhaps come thither without danger,
but the difficulty will be to get safe back again, sedrevocare gradum, hic
Lahor hoc Opus est, and afterward to avoid certain punishment for these
tumultuous and Rebellious meetings. It were a more conscionable and discreet
part of them, to repair all as one unanimous body to their Sovereign's
Standard, and drive out these Incendiaries from among them, who have been the
true authors of all the pressing grievances and miseries of this County.

Withal, his Lordship talks of driving me and mine Army out of the County; he
knows this cannot be done without a meeting. If it be not a flourish, but a
true spark of undissembled Gallantry, he may do well to express himself
more particularly for time and place. This is more conformable to the Examples
of our Heroicke Ancestors, who used not to spend their time in scratching one
another out of holes, but in pitched Fields determined their doubts. This would
quickly set a Period to the sufferings of the People, unless he desire rather
to prolong those miserable distractions, which were begun with breach of
Promise. It were pity if his desires lead him this way, but he should be
satisfied: And let the God of Battles determine the right of our English Laws
and Liberties.

FERDINANDO Lord FAIREFAX, General of all the Northern Forces raised and to
be raised for the Service of KING and PARLIAMENT.
To all and singular the Majors, Bayliffes, Aldermen, and other Magistrates,
and to the Ministers of the Churches within the West Riding of the County of
York, and to every of them.
For as much as the Earl of Newcastle, contrary to the Laws of the Land, has
raised a great Army of Papists, and other Malignants, and with them Invaded
this County of York, Killing and Destroying some numbers of the Religious
Protestant Subjects, Banishing and Imprisoning the Zealous Ministers, and has
besides done infinite spoil and wast upon the good Subjects, Plundering, and
taking away their Goods and Cattle; insomuch as in many places there are
neither Men nor Cattle left to till the ground. These are therefore to desire
and Command you respectively to cause to be Published and Proclaimed in all the
Churches and Markets of this County, that all Men of able Bodies and well
affected to the Protestant Religion, are required with the best Weapons and
furniture for the War that they have; to assemble, come in, and assist me and
the Army under my command, in expelling and driving away out of this County the
said Army of Papists, and common Enemies of the peace, each Manbringing with
him necessary Victual for four Days, only the said Forces thus to be
raised, to draw down to the several places of Rendezvous hereafter named,
that is, The West Riding Men to Sherbourne and Abberford; The North Riding Men
to Tollerton and Own; And the East Riding Men to Stamford-Bridge, all of them
to be there on Monday Night next, And so to March forward as they shall be
ordered by Command that shall meet them at the places aforesaid. And for so
doing, this shall be your Warrans.

Given under my Hand and Seal the second Day of February, Anno Domini, 1642.
Fer. Fairfax.
To John Tailor, one of the High Constables of Skiracke, to procure this to be
Published within your division.



FINIS.

