A COPY OF GENERAL LESLEY'S LETTER To Sir JOHN SVCKLING; With Sir John
Sucklings Answer to his Letter.

Printed in the year 1641.

GENERAL LESLEY'S LETTER TO SIR JOHN SVCKLING.
SIR;
I Am heartily sorry for the report I hear of you For in those parts where we
here reside, it is constantly r^lated, that you are fled from your Country,
whether it be out of discontent, or any other intended design, is not as yet
certain. Trust me, I ever retained this opinion of you, that your heels were
as swift for any action as your head. And if you showed your Country a pair
of fair heels, you seconded but your action at Newbourne: where we thank
you, we received from you more then you intended to give, by leaving with us
an Inventory of your clothes: and furnishing us with such a Wardrobe, as if you
purposed to do a work of charity, in covering your naked Enemy.

Now it may be some will conceive you to be a man of action: and that you
intend strange stratagems of Stat^: nay, that you will imbarke your perfumed
person in some military service, to recover your lost fame: and make the world
ring with the brute of your actions. But this is the least of my fear or
thoughts. I know you love your self too well, to put your tender flesh upon so
desperate an hazard. We that can write no strong lines; nor are able to
discover our thoughts in any other language, then Buffe-Rhetoricke: nor were
ever acquainted with your Potato's, Eringo's, Caviare, or any such Kix-shawes,
are fitter to be employed upon such exployts, then your Civet Carpet honor,
whose valor is best displaid in the arms of your Mistress: or hazarding your
patience and necessitous fortunes at hazard. Go to Sir; let not your country
fear you. My life for hers, you will do her no harm. You may, I confess,
present some massacres upon the Stage with your pen: but if ever you commit
such outrage with your pike, you deceive the world. For my part I must tell
you, I would never desire a more indulgent, nor favorable enemy: For I am
steadfastly of this opinion, that the sweetness and affability of your
condition infinitely hates shedding of blood. Your addressements, I know well,
are for more amorous employments: Such as may satisfy the sense, and close
better with the safety of your person. Nay, fear is such a fever, as I am
persuaded you are never without it, which will be a means to secure you from
those hazardous overtures that we poor Soldiers are subject to. You are
nimble, I am lame, you may fly, I must stand to it. Thank God for your speed;
as I shall for my spirit.

We are now upon our retrait; and to signify to the world our joy in this
happy union, we intend upon our return to regreet our country with some
pleasant Pastoral, or delightful Commedy; and if you please in this short
vacation from your more serious affairs, to become our Poet, though we cannot
accommodate our Actors with such Properties, as you sometimes bestowed on the
Globe, yet shall we suite them with such Habilliments, as may sort with our
Countrey-garbe. Your answer is expected by him, who honors your parts and
person.

Lesley.

Sr. JOHN SVCKLINGS Answer to General LESLEY'S Letter.
SIR,
YOu expect my answer, and I here return it, and in such a Dialect as may
suite with a Soldier, especially such an one as is no Scholar. You are
pleased to jeere me with my flight from my country: and I must tell you, it
were well for my country, if you would fly into your own. And for my action
at Newbourne; it was more noble for me to fly, then it was loyal in you to
pursue. I left my clothes, it is true: they were mine own: but you in
possessing them, decked your selves with others feathers, by seazing on that
which was not your own. And in it, you say* I did a work of charity; and so I
account it, for if they knew how to put them on, I am sure they might cover
many that were naked. You write unto me, that some will conceive me to be a man
of action; and so I am; my thoughts are ever active, nay, shall I speak really
to you; they are passive, till you perform what you profess, and leave our
country; where report goes, you intend to sojourn and take your repast* till
your ragged Regiment has brought them in with their Harvest. Your opinion of
me, of tenderness and effeminacy shall little move me: when actions of
reputation shall invite me, I have a spirit in me to evince that opinion: and
make the world know, that I dare do what may fairly close with loyal
resolution. For my Potato's, Eringo's, Caviare, and such Kix-shawes, you say
you were never acquainted with them, and I e^sily believe it: These are too
delicate viands for a Buffe-palat: yet I am confident, should you retire but a
season from your military discipline, you would quickly incline to such
delicacy, and from the Camp become a Carpet Knight, and bestow this weakened
Remainder of your time on ease and effeminacy. For my Mistress; If I win her,
I deserve to wear her; she shall need no pension from you to supply her. For
my Feverish fear, you were never yet so nearly imbosom'd in me, as to know any
such passion yet surprise me; if flight from an Enemy deserve such a style;
what may he deserve, who flies from his Country to prey upon an others state?
For my Massacres on the Stage; of a Tragedy, I made a Comedy: and so might you
do by dis-banding and leaving our Country upon your retreat, you intend to
regreet your country with a Pastoral; or some pleasant Comedy: And you would
have the assistance of my Poetry: but your Excellence cannot digest strong
Lines, some Calidonian Bard then will better suite you, and leave me a daily
Petitioner for your speedy departure.

JOHN SVCKLING.


