The Naked Truth of the Distillers CASE, Humbly offered to the Consideration of
the Honorable House of Commons, By a VVell-wisher to the Distillers and the
Nation.
I. IF this BILL is Passed for the Prohibiting the Distilling of Spirits or
Brandy from Malt, they will suffer some Damage by the Houses and Works some
have Built, to the greatly enriching of themselves, as they connot but own.

II. They must also confess (that notwithstanding whatever Pretenses they make)
their great Working of Malt has occasioned the Dearness of both that and
Wheat; the Farmers having turned their Lands, to improve Barley, which was
before employed for Wheat.

III. They also know well, that if this BILL pass, That Tillage will not
suffer; for then more Beer will be Brewed, to the Increase of Excise and the
Expense of Malt, and the help of those Poor who are now forced to drink Water
and eat Grains.

IV. That rather then to have this BILL pass, they will be contented to have 20
l. per Ton Duty on Brandy distilled from Malt; for then they will gain much
more Money than the Brewers; although it be retailed at the Price it has been
and now is, as appears by the Calculate here-under: If good Malt cost 30 s. per
Quarter, 17 Quarters will make L 25-10-00 a Ten, or 252 Gallons of Spirits,
which will cost -- Admit it paid Duty -- L. 20-00-00 And Charge of Working, as
Fire, etc. is -- L.02-10-00 So a Ton will cost -- L. 48-00-00

This sold by the Distillers at 4 s. 4 d. per Gall. amounts to 54 l. 12 s. so
their Grain is about 6 l. 12 s. per Ton of a quick Return and Ready Money
Commodity.

The Midling Tradesman may sell it to the Retailer for 5 ^ per Gall. and get 8
or 9 l. per Ton.

The Retailer may sell it as they do now, for 2 d. per quarter of a Pint, which
is 71 l. per Ton, and get 8 l. per Ton, and if for 2 1/2 d. per quartern, their
profit will be 20 l. per Ton; but the former Profit is enough for a quick
Return, and what the Brewers would be glad to have.

V. They Distill form Malt at present, not less then 150 Ton per Week; which
would produce almost 150000 l. per Annum to the King, and might raise a good
Fund to be appropriated as this Honorable House shall think fit; this would do
good, and hurt no one.

VI. That an effectual way to Prohibit the Exportation of Malt Spirits, is to
lay a Duty thereon for a time, and take off the Bounty Money.


