THE COVENANT OF GRACE Effectually Remembered. Being the Substance of a SERMON
OR TWO.

Preached by a MINISTER of the GOSPEL.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. and R. R. for Richard Janeway in Queens-head Alley,
in Paternoster Row. 1682.

The Covenant of GRACE, etc.
Psalm. 105.8. He has remembered his Covenant for ever, the word which he
commanded to a thousand Generations.

1 Chronicles. 16.15. Be ye mindful always of his Covenant, the word which he
commanded to a thousand Generations.


THERE being such an apparent Dissonance between these two places relating to
the same Matter, makes me to observe it, and to set these two places one with
the other, for my Text, at this time; trusting, that after a little time we
shall find a sweet Harmony in them; and that in this place, as well as in other
like places of Scripture, where the same things are repeated with some variety,
it is not in any Contradiction, but usually for greater Illustration and
Advantage. You will find the Holy Ghost in this place of the Chronicles begins
with the first fifteen Verses of this 105. Psalm, and goes on with a part of
the 96. Psalm, etc. And in those, fifteen Verses they are almost the same to a
word, only in this one place, wherein the variety is so remarkable.

The Design of the Psalm is to set forth Gods Praise, an holy Excitation of the
Soul to this great and excellent Duty: And taking up several Heads which are
proper matter for this Work. And Gods mavelous works he bids them to
remember, ver. 12. in the Chronicles, and ver. 5. of the Psalm. And then seems
to enforce this Duty upon Gods peculiar people, the seed of Abraham, so called
in the Psalm; and the seed of Israel in the Chapter.

These upon the account of their Covenant Interest in God, have special
Obligation to this Duty; and this very Relation is special matter or ground of
it. Let such be sure to be mindful of Gods praise, as the duty of their
Relation; and let them do it, because they are such, and are favored and
dignified with such a Relation. In the Psalm he declares in the continued
matter of his Praise, That God does remember his Covenant for ever. In the
Chapter, as a part of the Expression of praise for this Goodness and
Faithfulness of God, he exhorts the Faithful, That they should always be
mindful of Gods Covenant.

Now to show that there is no Contradiction in these Scriptures, and such
like; it may be observed, That though these Psalms, for part of them, are very
like, and perhaps the same; yet it does not follow, that they were delivered at
the same time. As some of our Saviors words in the Gospel that are diversely
reported by the Evangelists, many think the same things might be spoken more
than once by our Savior: and so one Evangelist may relate the same words as
spoken at one time, and upon one occasion; and another mentions them as spoken
at another time, and upon another occasion; and so there may be some variety in
the words related by them; and yet both truly the words of our Savior, and
true too. So Psalm 14. and 53. are upon the matter the very same; yet it is
conceived they were twice delivered by the Psalmist, and it may be on different
Occasions. So in the Chapter here, ver. 7. it is said in that day David first
delivered this Psalm; which does imply, it might be delivered after, with some
variation.

So when he first delivered this Psalm, the words came as an exhortation to
duty on our part, to be always mindful of his Covenant. In the place in the
Psalms, the words come in by way of declaration of what God himself is pleased
to do for us in this behalf, He has remembered his Covenant for ever.

Now without doubt when the same holy Psalmist came upon another occasion to
fall into the same matter, he did not make the Variation in this thing, but
upon gracious and ingenuous considerations, and these expressions should refer
to the same design and purpose, with respect to the matter of God praise. As if
when he should have said, Be ye always mindful of his Covenant, whilst your
heart is enlarged in his praise; he here says, to promote this holy affection
and trust of Gods goodness to you, for which you should always praise him, That
God himself does always remember his Covenant.

It is his grace to remember his Covenant for ever.

It is Man's duty to be always mindful of it. And they do mutuo se ponere, they
suppose and advantage one the other, the one as the requisite means and
condition of the other, the other as a privilege and reward for that again.

Obs. That it is to one and the same gracious effect and purpose, that both God
and man are always mindful of Gods Covenant.

It is Man's Duty and Interest always to be mindful of it; and it is his great
advantage and comfort, that God will remember it for ever.

God has always remembered, that is our glory and privilege.

Man should always mind it, that is his Work and Duty.

I shall show.

1. What this Covenant is, that is thus minded on both hands. 2. How God does
always remember it. 3. How we should always be mindful of it. 4. How these do
mutually refer unto, and imply one the other, or comply jointly to promote the
same design, and to procure the same effect.
1. What is this Covenant, that is thus remembered an both sides? Why, it seems
to be his word of promise set out in particular in his Oath to Abraham, Isaac
and Israel, that he would give them that good Land; which Covenant took effect
after great length of time, and through many difficulties and unlikelihoods,
and yet he remembered it to the seed of those unto whom he made the promise. A
glorious instance of Gods truth and faithfulness! What he promises, he will do.
And this Covenant in the particular instance here, does relate and specify the
temporal blessing of that People in the promised Land; but this was but a part
of the Covenant he entered into with Abraham, and but a pledge and shadow of that
better Land that he had provided for them and their seed: to wit, the benefit
of the Covenant of Grace, the Covenant of Life and Salvation through Jesus
Christ. This God will remember for ever, and this we should always be mindful
of.

Now this Covenant of Grace is that which God freely entered into with Adam,
renewed it to Abraham, in the promise, Genesis 3.15.
That as the seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head; Genesis 12.3.
so in the seed of Abraham all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed. He
revived it to Moses and his People, and under Types and Shadows prefigured
Christ, and the benefits for the Soul, which were to be expected from him. To
David he swears, That the fruits of his Body should rule; and the Saints by
faith embraced the promise: and when the fullness of time was come, the blessed
Christ came, the Covenant, Isa. 42.6. and the Mediator of it: The word which he
has Commanded to a Thousand Generations, i. e. The word of promise which he
has commanded; that is, has appointed to be thrown out for his Servants to
rely upon; that which is firm and settled, is said to be commanded, as Psalm. 42
8. God commands his loving kindness; and Psalm. 133.3. he commands the blessing.
And it is a certain number for an uncertain, a Thousand Generations; that is,
for ever.

God engages with fallen man upon royal and blessed terms to be reconciled and
engaged to him. He will forgive, and give grace and glory. Man is to believe,
repent and obey.

Poor sinners could claim and expect nothing, but God makes himself a debtor to
his truth, and promise, and oath: This Covenant is everlasting, ordered in all
things, and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5. 2. Tim. 1.1. The blessed Apostle styles himself
an Apostle, a messenger of God to Souls; and the matter of his message, The
promise of life which is in Christ Jesus. 1 John 5.11, 12. This is the record,
(the whole business of the Gospel Written and Preached) that God has given us
eternal life, and this life is in his Son, etc. Life is promised, and is to be
Preached to sinners; if they come in and close with Christ, He will pardon
sinners, give them grace, change their hearts, give them peace, keep them to
persevere, bring them through Death to Glory. Man is to believe, repent and
obey, and to walk worthy of it: According to that of Ezekiel 16.8. I swear unto
thee, and entered into Covenant with thee, said the Lord God, and thou becamest
mine.

2. God always remember his Covenant. It is sacred to him. Many forget their
promises, and keep them not, but God is known by his truth and faithfulness. He
has exalted his word above all his name, Psalm. 138.2.

1. He remembers his Covenant to perform it; faithful is he that has called
you, (and that upon his promiser of acceptance) and he also will do it. What
promise he makes, you may write upon it. He is not as man, that he should lie;
he will not alter the thing that is gone out of his lips. None of his words
shall fall to the ground: He is a God keeping Covenant for ever, Mic. 7.20. He
will perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which God has sworn
from the days of old. It was Mercy in the Original; it is Truth in the
pursuance of it. What he has promised in his infinite Mercy, he will perform
in his inviolable Truth. To all intents and purposes he will perform the
Covenant, for he ever remembers it.

2. More particularly. He is mindful of his Covenant, to perform many glorious
things for believers, that are the result of the Covenant, which the Soul was
undone without, and could never be looked for, but for the promise.

The Covenant obtains it.

1. For infinite forbearance and long-suffering. Haenc longanimitatem, Deum
sapientissimo consilio erga homines adbibere, quia (ut rite August. notavit)
nisi expectaret impium, non inveniret quem glorificaret pium. Rivet. in Exodus
34.6.
He has promised to suffer long, to wait to be gracious; he is slow to anger,
Exodus 34.6. One Orient Jewel in that royal Character and Name of his, is, that
he is long-suffering, 1. To bear with us till we repent; how is it that we are
not destroyed for sin, before the time of repentance comes, but from this
infinite patience of God? 2. To bear with us after we repent and sin again.
That delivers us yet again, though we have broken our vows with him. 3. To bear
with them that never repent, To. 9.22. That sinners that repent not, nor never
will, are not immediately ruined and destroyed from the presence of the Lord,
is sure from the Covenant; and that the wickedest are not destroyed, as soon as
they are, is sure from the Covenant, and from Christ, whom God does ever
remember.

2. For pardon upon repentance. He has promised to forgive iniquities,
trangression and sin, Exodus 34.7. All words put in to signify Sin, to make the
assurance of pardon full and strong, Mic. 7.18, 19. Psalm. 103.8, 11, 12. Here
is a poor sinner convinced of the evil of sin, and of his own particular
wickedness; his Eyes are opened as Adams were, and he sees his wickedness. What
can a poor wretch do in this case? Whither can he go? he may, as Job, say, I
have sinned, Job 7.20.
what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? To know what it is to be
Guilty before God, detected of villainy, and seized and bound over by conscience
to answer all to the God that made me, is a sad and tremendous state of Soul!
The Angels sinned and find no place for repentance. No more could we, if it
were not for the Covenant; by this Covenant there is place and room for
repentance: he delights in mercy, and therefore penitents are pardoned. It
would little avail at man's bar, if convicted of the crime alleged, to say, It
is true, my Lord, I have done this thing, but I am sorry for it; I grieve that
I did it, etc. Alas! the answer would be, Friend, I pity you that you took no
better care; but our work is to see that you have Justice done you, and that
the matter of Fact be evidently proved; and if it be, we do Justice to Execute
the Law upon you. And God might do so too with every convicted sinner: but the
Covenant is otherwise; he has promised to forgive such as repent, abundantly
to pardon: Isa. 55.7.
to multiply forgiveness to those that come with their multitudes of
iniquities. The poor Rebel comes in upon the Proclamation of Grace, falls down
at the Sovereigns feet, acknowledges the iniquity of his sin; and he then
remembers his Covenant, and is ready to forgive; nay, he takes as great
pleasure in forgiving a great offender, as such a one can take to receive a
pardon. His bowels are moved toward the brokenhearted penitent, and remembers
his Royal word toward them, when ever they come, to relieve and comfort them,
and to speak peace unto them. What penitent was ever yet turned back?

He looks upon men: Job 33.27, 28.
and if any say, I have sinned, I have perverted that which is right, and it
profited me not: poor miserable wretch that I am, I have sinned sadly and
wretchedly, I have done unjustly and dishonestly to the laws of my Creation and
Nature; basely and unworthily, and find also it never did me good to do on this
manner; I have gotten nothing but Guilt, horror and sorrow by my perverse way.
But I repent, I fly to the Mercy of the Covenant in the case: why he looks
for such; and if such a one come thus to him, he will remember his Covenant,
and will deliver his Soul from going into the pit, Number. 14.17, 18.
and his life shall see the light. His power shall be great, to forgive the
greatest sinners. He has the absolute Supreme Power, to forgive all manner of
transgressions; he is not limited, and he can find in his heart to forgive the
greatest sinners: and when they come, he remembers his Mercy effectually for
them, 1 Timothy 1.15. the chiefest sinners may here find Mercy: O, says the
Psalmist (and so any Soul that has felt Guilt will say the same) Blessed is
the man whose sin is forgiven, Psalm. 32.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
etc. Let his condition be what it will, sick, poor, despised, no matter what
it be; if forgiven, he is blessed. The truth is, I was sullen, and loath to
yield, and kept silence, I would not be in any fault; or if I was, I would not
take to it. I would not honor him for a time by my submission; but I was in
sad case that while; all consumed within me; and then at last I said, I will
confess my transgression: I will yield and humble my self, and not hide any
thing in the case; but throw my self upon his Royal grace, in the way of
submission and repentance. And no sooner did I say thus, and conclude thus, and
act thus, but I found acceptance, thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. And so
will he always do with poor sinners that repent. He has not proclaimed Mercy,
as expecting that none will lay claim to it, or trust to it, and so boggle at
it, or go about to diminish and lessen it to those that come in upon it; O no;
he delights to show Mercy, and remembers his Covenant fully and effectually in
this case.

3. For grace to repent. It is his Covenant to accept us when we repent, and
also to help us to repent. They are blessed whose sins are forgiven, Psalm.
32.2. and in whose spirits there is no Guile: that is, that honestly and
without hypocrisy do repent; that do not sin with thoughts to repent of it; nor
do not repent with thoughts to sin again; this is guile. Now the poor Soul may
be convinced of the evil and danger of sin, and may rejoice in Mercy offered to
the penitent; but says it, Woe and alas, How shall I repent? how shall I be able
to repent truly, if I do repent? my heart is hard and deceitful: O how shall I
come acceptably unto God, that I may find Mercy! Is this thy case? why God will
remember his Covenant to the Soul that he has made willing, to make it able.
His Covenant is to take away the hard, and to give a soft heart; to write the
Law in the heart, Jer. 31.33. he has promised to give the Spirit to them that
ask him, Luke 11.13. When we are converted at first, or after, God has
remembered his Covenant for us, and has blessed us, in turning us from our
iniquity, Act 3.26. And by exalting Christ to be a Prince and Savior, to give
repentance and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5.26. He will not forgive, if we turn
not heartily to him; but he expects not that we should turn in our own
strength; what he requires, he also promises. Turn you at my reproof: I will
pour out my Spirit upon you: whenever any sinner has repented, God has
remembered his Covenant for him to help him therein; and none ever cried for
help in this case, but God has in faithfulness afforded grace unto him.

4. For perseverance. The poor sinner is turned, and has found the difference
in the change; but is apt to forget himself, and is subject to fall sadly; but
God remembers the Covenant, and he orders it that the Soul shall not fall
finally. It is by the Covenant that our standing is secured, Jer. 34.40. he
will not forsake us, nor suffer us to depart from him. He will put his fear
into our hearts, that we shall not depart from him. We are kept by the mighty
power of God, through faith, to the day of Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Joh. 10.28,
29. Grace being a Creature, might no doubt be lost; but our Salvation is lodged
where it cannot be lost. It is in the Covenant, and in Christ's hands; He will
not suffer our faith to fail, he will take order to bring us back by repentance
when we go a stray. It is in this faithfulness and truth of God, that our
standing is secured, and therein it cannot fail. The Lord will not cast off his
People, since it has pleased him to make them his People, 1 Samuel 12.22. when
he sees a poor believer step out of his way, he remembers his Covenant, and
sends some conviction, or some affliction, to make him bethink himself, that he
may turn back again; what a sad havoc would be made amongst them in a little
time, if God did not remain faithful to his Covenant, and remember it for us?
from this it is, a poor Soul may have confidence (and it is not impudence) to
say, I have gone astray like a lost Sheep, but Lord seek thy Servant; Psalm.
119. ult.
bring back and restore thy poor Servant. They quarrel thee and would give over
The bargain made to serve thee, but thy love
Holds them unto it, and does cover
Their follies with the wing of thy mild dove,
Not suffering those
Who would, to be thy foes.
Herb.
God has remembered his Covenant for us, or we had long since forsaken Christ,
and given over to follow after him.

5. For support and comfort under Temptation. It is possible for one that
fears the Lord, and obeys the Voice of the Prophet, to be in the dark, and
to see no light; yet even then let him trust in the Lord, Isa. 50.10.
and stay himself upon his God. He never forgets to be gracious, he can never
shut up his loving kindness in displeasure, but he will refresh and give light
again; and he discernably at the time remembers his Covenant for them, in that
whilst he hides his Face, he draws their heart after him: often sorrowful sinners
are afraid to sin, and are willing to do any thing, which it may be they would
not be so ready to, if they had the peace and joy which they want. He is
faithful to them in all their desertions; and further than it is best for them,
their troubles shall neither increase nor continue. Light is sown for all the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. It is sown, and it will come
up; Psalm. 97.11.
It is sown in the Covenant and in the Promise, and it is sown in their
humiliation of Soul, and it is sown in the holiness of their hearts, and
harmlesness of their lives, and in the best time it will come up: they shall
return with joy, and bring their sheaves with them. Christ the blessed Mediator
of the Covenant, was tempted, and he knows how to pity and succor them that
are tempted, Heb. 2.18. The soul in this case may say, as Mic. 7.8, 9. When I
fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.
He will bring me forth unto the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.
Read Isa. 40.27. to the end.

6. For a sanctified sufficiency of outward things. Godliness has the promise
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. And, seek
the Kingdom of Heaven first, and these things shall be added, Psalm. 111.5.
Mat. 6.33. your father knows that ye need these things; and he does remember
his Covenant, and he does give them. He has given meat to them that fear him,
he is ever mindful of his Covenant. Are any truly good, extremely poor? Why, 1.
You take no notice how many good men prosper in the World, and more than
others; this is not noted; but if but one be poor, this must be noted to be
sure. 2. Good men, less will serve them, than other men. 3. They make
conscience to avoid idleness, and to take pains in their places: and God does
usually bless the diligent; they stand fairer for these things than any. 4. It
may be more might be had, if the promise and providence of God were more eyed
and relied upon than it is. 5. However God makes it out to the truly good,
whatever their condition is: And they have all, since they want not what they
have not; and this content is from the Covenant-Grace. Godliness with
contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. He supplies his Children with fresh
necessaries, and excuses them the care and trouble, and reckoning for
abundance. But he is faithful in his Covenant for the worldly concerns of all
that are his.

7. For necessary, seasonable and sanctified afflictions. As a father
chasteneth his Son, Deuteronomy. 8.5.
so the Lord thy God has chastened thee. It is so far from being in the
Covenant that you should not be afflicted, (fain poor wretches would have it
so) that it is expressly a part of this blessed Covenant that we must be
afflicted, Heb. 12.5, 6. And God remembers for us his blessed Covenant about
our afflictions, in the greatest goodness, truth and faithfulness. 1. To see
that all his be afflicted when they need, 1 Pet. 1.6. 2. That they be afflicted
in measure, Isa. 27.7, 8. 3. To be supported under them, 1 Cor. 10.13. 4. To be
delivered out of them, Psalm. 34.19. 5. To have good by them. To. 8.28. Psalm.
25.10. He will not have them in the furnace to be consumed, but only to be
tried; tho he cause grief, yet he will have compassion according to the
multitude of his mercies, Lam. 3.31, 32. and as a Father pities his Children,
so the Lord pities them that fear him, for he knows their frame, and remembers
they are but dust, Psalm. 103.13, 14, etc. He remembers for them his Covenant,
when they are in distress, Psalm. 106.45. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are
right, and that in faithfulness thou have afflicted me, Psalm. 119.75. O my
blessed God! true and faithful is thy Covenant, the word that thou have
commanded to a Thousand Generations; thou have remembered thy Covenant for me,
to my Soul, to my outward supplies, and in my needed good afflictions, which I
could not have been without, no not one of them. This a good Soul will say
after all.

8. For safety at death, and for eternal life. It is his express Covenant to
give eternal life. Again and again, Christ has said, I give unto them eternal
life, Joh. 10.28, and 17.2. Thou will guide me with thy counsel, and afterward
bring me to glory, Psalm. 73.24. Death is terrible to Nature; but when I come to
dye, God will remember his Covenant with me, and will help me to dye. The good
man cried out not in vain when dying, Lord be thou now present with thy poor
Servant that is contesting with whole eternity; thou art now leaving all thou
know, thine age is departed, thou must now go into an unknown state, to
leave the world, and men, and to go amongst Spirits: but God will remember thee
then, he will send to help thee, he will send comfort to thee, he will deliver
thee from the evil of death, and from the fear of death, Heb. 2.14, 15. 2 Timothy
1.12. He will keep the Soul for eternal life, which thou have committed to him,
2 Timothy 1.12. and 4.7, 8. The ship in the dry harbor cannot be lanched; but when
the tide comes in, it goes out with ease. If heavenly comforts flow in upon
thee, thou shall go hence with ease and triumph: he will remember his Covenant
for his dying Servants, and make their last act, easy, safe and blessed.

9. For posterity. The blessed Covenant is with us, and with our Children: for
he keeps mercy for thousands, Exodus 34.7. that is, for thousands of
Generations. As he visits the Sins of the Fathers upon the third and fourth
Generation; so he keeps mercy for Thousands of Generations of them that love
him. As there is keeping of judgment for Posterity in some cases, so there is
much more a keeping of Mercy for Posterity; and because he delights in Mercy,
(as Mic. 7.18.) therefore it is on this side a thousand to three or four. He
remembereth his Covenant for Childrens Children, to such as keep his Covenant
and remem bers his Commandments to do them. Psalm. 103.17.18.
The Children of thy Servants shall stand fast in thy sight, and their seed
shall be established before thee, (Psalm. 102. ult.) For grace it self, the
promise goes from the Posterity of the Godly, Isa. 44.3. I will pour out my
Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon their offspring. He is a Fountain of
rich and infinite Mercy; and he has laid up, after he has laid out. He has
as surely and fully showed Mercy to thee, as if thou had been the first
come-over, and as if thy Father had spent him none before thee; and he has
Mercy as ready for thy Child, as if he had laid out none upon thee: such it is
to live upon infinite and inexhaustible goodness, that is always full and
overflowing, and can never be drawn dry! He thus remembers his Covenant for
ever, the word which he has commanded to a Thousand Generations. And for the
sad Objection that some make in this case, That so many of the Children of good
parents do so woefully miscarry; it does not cloud this truth. For.

1. We take no notice of the many Children of good Parents that do well;
wherein Gods Covenant does most graciously obtain, to the comfort and joy of
such Parents, and to the Observation of others. But if one Child of a good man
misprove, this is greatly noted, as indeed well it may be; nay sometimes but
one or two of several miscarry, and several others do well, and God is not
glorified as he should be for this great Mercy.

2. There are some Children of bad Parents are converted and do well; and how
can we tell, but that this is from the Covenant that some remote Parents were
in, and God remembers them when they are forgotten in the World, and takes
their Children's Children after many Generations, in faithfulness unto them;
and who can tell but these bad Children's Children may likewise come in?

3. It may be, if the Covenant was better understood, and better kept, and
better taken hold of for Children than it is, it might more effectually operate
for them in the case they are in; who knows but that Mercy might sooner be
obtained for them, and they might yet turn to their Fathers God, and the
disobedient might yet come in again to the wisdom of the just?

4. And who knows yet what may be done for these Children of the Covenant? God
may remember Mercy for them, and bring them back again.

5. And does not God remember his Covenant for such Children, in that tho they
have not the desired grace of the Covenant, yet God give them the discipline of
the Covenant, Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33. God does correct them duly for their
Trangressions, and they are usually crossed, as some others in their
Circumstances are not. It is not ordinary for bad Children of good Parents to
prosper in the World: they may account to be crossed; which I take to be Gods
remembering the Covenant of their Fathers for them, to withhold them thereby
from some degrees of wickedness, and to keep them still in the way of cure and
recovery by their afflictions.

So that he does remember his Covenant for ever with respect to our Children.

10. For the Church of God. He still will have a Church, the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. The Enemies shall not be able to root it out. God
has not cast off his People, when they are in greatest distresses, he has
remebered for them his holy Covenant. When his People were in Egypt in great
distress and bondage, Psalm. 106.4^
he says, I have heard the groanings of the Children of Israel, Exodus 6.5.
whom the Egyptians keep in Bondage; and I have remembered my Covenant. And we
know how effectual it was, for their thorough and speedy deliverance: when
there is none shut up nor none left, he will then own his Relation to his own
People. He swear to Abraham to give him that Land, whereas yet he had no Child,
when so long there was so few; when oppressed so long in Egypt, yet it is done
at last. If the promise seem to run under ground, yet it shall break out again
in a mighty stream, Isa. 43.1. to the 8.

His Covenant for his whole People as his Church, (as the body of Christ, the
fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23) shall obtain it in two
things especially.

1. That whatever advantages Enemies get, shall in the end make against them.
It is but to ripen them for their ruin; they do but in one misery fill up the
measure of their iniquity, and the full account will be brought upon them: and
they shall not do what they will neither. 2ly, Whatever the Church suffers,
shall in the end tend to its advantage: the very sufferings for the truth shall
advance it. Philip. 1 12. all tends to the furtherance of the gospel; the blood
of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church.

3ly. How should we be always mindful of this Covenant?

1. To close with it. In an utter disclaim and abhorrence of all worth of thy
own, to lay hold of the grace of the Covenant. ^ieb. 6.18.
To fly for refuge to the hope that is set before thee; let the righteousness
of Christ reign in thy Soul continually. Phil. 3.8, 9.
Count all but loss and dung, that you may win Christ, and be found in him. If
he be extreme to mark what is amiss, who can stand? but (by the Covenant) there
is forgiveness with him; we are undone but for the Promise that has no
foundation but mere Mercy and Goodness. Psalm. 103.3* 4. Isa. 56.4, 6.
The Eunuchs and the strangers, that take hold of the Covenant, shall find
favor. This explicit owning of the Covenant is our duty and interest, as in
all the benefits of it, ( Isa. 44.5.) The Soul consents to the match, to belive
and to recive Christ. They delivered and gave up themselves to the Lord, and
unto us (2 Cor 8.5.) We Ministers, as the friends of the Bridegroom, sue for
consent in this case we pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled unto
God, 2 Cor. 5.20. And men should be mindful always to do their duty on this
account.

2. To keep it. Gods Mercy is Everlasting to them that keep his Covenant, and
remember his Commandments to do them, Psalm. 103.17, 18. They are mindful of the
Covenant, that feel themselves under the force of its obligation, that observe
the terms and the condition of it, that they may keep up their title to all the
benefits of it, Exodus 19.5. If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my
Covenant, then ye shall be a People unto me above all People, for all the Earth
is mine. If ye will have me remember my Covenant for you, you must be mindful
to live by the rules of it: to take heed that you forget not the the Covenant
of God. Isa. 44.17. but that with purpose of heart you cleave unto the Lord,
Acts 11.23.

3. To trust to it. God would be believed and relied on. He would have men to
set their hope on him, Psalm. 78.7. He takes pleasure in them that fear him,
and in those that hope in his Mercy, Psalm. 33.18. The Church relies for pardon
upon the Covenant which is compounded of Mercy and Truth, Mic. 7. ult. He takes
pleasure to be trusted: Be always mindful of his Covenant, so as to trust in
the Lord at all times, Psalm. 62.8. for every thing, Soul and Body, Self and
Others, Private and Public.

4. To plead it. Remember thy word to thy Servant, wherein thou have caused me
to put my trust, Psalm. 119.49. says holy David. And Nehemiah when he prayed for
the Church in great distress, he pleads with God in prayer from this, That he
is God that keeps Covenant and Mercy for them that fear him, and observe his
Commandments, Neh. 1.5. and 9.32. the best Plea we can have at the Throne of
Grace, and that which an infinitely good God, that remembers his Covenant for
ever, delights to be argued with.

5. To renew it. Frequently and Solemnly, Jer. 30.21, 22. and 50.5. and this
upon solemn occasions, and ordinances for that purpose; wherein we have
opportunity to take fresh hold of it, and to renew our engagements in it.

6. To improve it. Against temptataitions: 1. To sin. When tempted to sin,
remember the Covenant; is this according to the Covenant? am I not bound to do
otherwise? Is not my own hand against me? As I hope for the privilege, must I
not do the duty of the Covenant (2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Cor. 6. uli). I am devoted, and
vowed, and espoused to the Lord, and I cannot be free to sin. 2. To
despondency. Why whatever my condition is, this well-ordered Covenant is all my
Salvation, and my desire, 2 Samuel 23.5.

7. To be seriously humble, and always mild in their own eyes. I have nothing
by Merit, but all by Grace and free promise, and therefore I have cause to be
humble. And I must carry it low, that I may keep first the Comforts and
Sweetness of his Covenant. The just (whose heart is not lifted up in him) lives
by faith; Heb. 2.4.
the heart lifted up, soon loses the sight of Christ.

8. To rejoice in it, and to be always thankful for it. This is all my safety,
and all my joy; all my Salvation and all my Desire, 2 Samuel 23.5. This Covenant
does bring me in pardon, and grace, and adoption, and is in me through Christ
the hope of glory. 1. I have nothing without it. 2. Nothing but what I have by
it. 3. And I can want nothing with it. This is that which my heart holds by,
and which my heart lives upon. Therefore my heart shall rejoice, and my flesh
shall rest in hope, Psalm. 16.8, 9, 10.

4ly, How do these mutually imply one the other, or meet in the same effect,
and to the same purpose for believers?

1. That God remembers his Covenant always, is our privilege and
standing-comfort. We have nothing to subsist by, if he could forget his free
and blessed promise.

2. It is our duty to be mindful of his Covenant. It is the proper and great
work of a Christian, which will branch it self out into all the parts of
Religion. The holy man was in the right, that said his great work was, ne anima
sit ingrat a Deo, his study and care in all things was, that his Soul might not
be unthankful unto God. In order to this, let the Soul be taken up with study
and admiration of Gods Covenant, which will affect and influence him to all
manner of holy Conversation and godliness.

3. God's remembering his Covenant, is the cause of our being mindful of it. His
faithfulness to it may incite us to the like grateful mindfulness of it; and it
also is the cause of it; God remembers it; and therefore we do not forget it:
he remembers it to give us the Spirit, by which we are enabled to be mindful of
him.

4. Our mindfulness of it is the means and condition of deriving the virtue of
it to our Souls; and the bringing in a comfortable sense of Gods mindfulness of
us. As Gods love is the cause of our love to him, and our love to him is the
Evidence of his love to us: so God's mindfulness of his Covenant, is the root
and cause of our ability to be mindful of it, and our being mindful always as
we should be of it, is a means of our Evidencing our interest therein, and of
deriving comfort and sweetness, and benefit therefrom. This is to continue in
his love, Joh. 15.9 2 Chr. 15.2. If we forget him, we can have no confidence
that he will remember us.

5. These do both conspire to the holy rejoicing in God. to live a life of
thanksgiving, which is the great work of a Christians life. 1 These. 5.18.
In all things to give thanks, to rejoice in the remembrance of his holiness:
to have the heart lift up in the ways of God, as Jehoshaphats was; 2 Chr. 17.6.
to fear the Lord and his goodness, Hos. 3.5. The heart set upon the Covenant,
has a disposition to be thankful, and to be cheerfully holy, and may afford,
and be able to be so: and to know that God is also mindful of his Covenant,
does provoke and stir him up to be thankful and holy. So that the Soul may be
indifferently helped in the Lords solemn praise, when either it is actually
mindful of this Covenant, or does consider how he remembers it for ever.

For USE briefly.

1. This speaks to ungodly men amongst us, that neglect the Covenant of God.
They are baptized, externally interested in it, but are altogether unmindful of
it. There is nothing required of them, or which they hate and envy others for
practicing (wherein they differ from them), but it is that which they are
themselves engaged unto. They that name the name of Christ should depart from
all iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. They will be called Christians, but if they knew
what it truly imports, they would hate the Name as as well as they do the
Christian life signified thereby. Acts 11.26.
They that were first called Christans at Antioch, if they had been such
Christians as many of us are, the name had signified very little, no great
matter what Drunkards, and Whores, and Whoremasters, and unjust and oppressors
are called; indeed any thing better than Christians. It is indeed one of the
Triumphs of the Devil, to have men fight in his army that are listed under
Christ, and do carry Christ's name, to do his work with. The best that can be
said of many of them, they are a sort of baptized Heathens; only, for their
lives far short of many Heathens, of whom we may say (as the Apostle did of
some in his time) we have often told you of them, Phil 3.18, 19.
and now tell you weeping, (for it would make one to weep to think of them, or
to Name them) they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind
earthly things. They are in Covenant, but mind neither the duty nor privileges
of it. Toward whom God will remember his Covenant to avenge the quarrel of it
upon their Souls to all Eternity, Lev. 26.27.
if they repent not.

2. It speaks to young persons, that are born within the Covenant, devoted and
dedicated to God by Baptism; that they would be mindful of the Covenant, that
God may remember it for them. Be willing to understand what you are engaged to,
and what is engaged to you, if you perform the just and honorable condition:
and be not perverse and froward as some have been. This Covenant is that you
must be happy by, both here and hereafter. Know therefore the Lord God of your
Father, 1 Chr. 29.9.
and serve him with a perfect heart and a willing mind: Labor to know God, be
willing to understand the terms of our whole nature; by what we are kept from
present Hell, and upon what terms Grace and Happiness is yet to be had; labor
to understand what a one God is, and what is in his Covenant: and how Christ
came to be necessary in this Case, and that God is in Christ ready to receive
you to Favor and Mercy. And be sure to close with him honestly, and sincerely,
and willingly: do not serve by cumpulsion, merely to please your Parents and
Superiors, or whilst they live, and because you have expectance from them: but
do it with a willing mind, as that which is due, and that which is your
interest and only advantage to be engaged in. O do not hanker after liberty to
sin; let not Religion be your restraint, be never quiet till you have begged of
God a willing mind for all he requires; for do not think that an outside
compliance with the way of your Education will serve you; you cannot for shame
throw off the way you have been bred in (for it is a disgrace for Children of
good Parents to be loose, even in the eyes of those that have no Religion
themselves) and therefore you will keep it up of the cheapest and slightest
sort of the kind that ever you can. But your heart is malignant at the same
time, and when you can get any thing of worldly advantage for it, you will part
with your profession too; but let such persons know, that God searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts. He knows how
deep your Religion lies, he knows what you secretly think to do: but take this
for the conclusion, He is faithful in his Covenant, but he will not be imposed
upon by such as are Treacherous. If thou seek him he will be found of thee, if
thou be faithful and mindful of the Covenant, as thy duty and interest to do
thy part, he will be true to thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee
off for ever, and then thou art undone for evermore.

I would on this occasion offer at two or three things both with respect to
Children and Parents in reference to this Covenant of God, which is all our
Salvation, and all our desire.

1. It were advisable that it be clearly understood how the Covenant of God
came in upon the fall, and what is the Tenor of it on both sides; Gods and
man's, and the purport of the Baptismal Covenant, in the words of the shortest
Catechism by Mr. Baxter, p. 9.

The Holy Covenant.

I do believe in God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, according to the
particular Articles of the Christian Faith: And heartily repenting of my sinful
life, I do presently, absolutely and resolvedly give up my self to him, my
Creator and reconciled God and Father in Christ my Savior and my Sanctifier:
Renouncing the Devil, the World and the sinful desires of the Flesh: That
taking up my Cross, and the denying my self, I may follow Christ the Captain
of my Salvation to the Death, and live with him in endless Glory.

2. That Parents understood the nature of Baptism, that it is a solemnizing of
the Covenant: and that they would as seriously prepare to bring a Child to
Baptism, as they do to go themselves to the Lords Supper: and so seriously and
solemnly take hold of the Covenant for themselves, and renew it in their own
person, and to take hold of it for their Child.

3. To hold the Covenant for the Child, whilst it is not capable to take hold
for it self: to plead it solemnly and frequently for it, and to instruct the
Child in it diligently according to its capacity; that so it may not be a
Christian by example, but by Principle, and may set out with a stock and title
of its own.

4. That Children take heed to this, Solemnly and explicitly to take up the
Christian Title and Covenant in their own persons; that so God may remember it
always for them, and they may be always mindful of it. This is an estate left
you whilst your Father lives; and the sooner you have it in your own hands, the
better for you and your Father too.

But 3ly, I shall improve this in a word or two, to those that are truly
serious.

1. Let it be improved to our support and comfort in all troubles of Life. Let
us believe that God always remembers his Covenant.

This may comfort us against Temptations, Dissertions, Great Afflictions, Great
Backslidings, and sad fits of Deadness, The Covenant he will not go from: and
this may be strong comfort to us at all times, against all sad appearances of
things, and against all discouragements from inward guilt, God is gracious and
ready to forgive, and therefore have I hope still. If we be weak in faith, and
can scarce think how he should show such glorious things to such poor wretches
as we are, and so at present may not believe as we should do; 2 Timothy 2.13.
yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. He will remember his Covenant
for thee, and treat thee according to the terms of it, as a gracious,
long-suffering, and ever merciful God. Keeping Mercy for Thousands, etc.

2. Let us make it our work and business to be always mindful of his Covenant,
Psalm. 25.14. The heart of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show
them his Covenant; he will show him that fears him, to understand it; and show
them to fulfill and perform according to it. O strive to live upon it always:
That as it is your comfort that God remembers it for ever; so let it be your
duty always to be mindful of it.

And since his heart is so enlarged that he always remembers his Covenant for
us, 2 Cor. 6.11, 12, 13.
let us (in allusion to that of the Apostle) for a recompense, be enlarged also
toward him. Let the Covenant be still in our thoughts, reign in our hearts,
and be the principle and rule of our whole lives.

And having said a little of Baptism, let me accommodate this matter to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. At such a time, let us be actually mindful of
the Covenant, which we come there to Seal and Solemnize. Apply the Covenant to
all the blessed ends and intents of it: let us hope to have it Sealed to us at
such a time. To allude to that of Genesis 9.15, 16. I set my bow in the Clouds;
and when I behold it (says God) I will remember my Covenant, That I will not
destroy the World with Water any more. He has appointed this Bread and Wine,
to be also a sign in a greater matter; and he has said of other great
promises, That they shall be unto him as the Waters of Noah, Isa. 54.9, 10. All
his promises shall be as fully kept and fulfilled, as that has been. Take this
Bread and Wine, and recieve it as he has appointed, and say, This is a sign of
the Covenant: plead, that God would look upon it and remember his Covenant for
thee. Take hold of it for thy Soul, and labor to renew your own part of it, to
be faithful in the Covenant for ever, that you may feel your self sweetly
helped to be mindful of the Covenant, to be duly and sutably affected with it,
and may find the sweet effects to your Soul of God remembering his Covenant for
you in particular, and dealing with you according to the Royal purport of it,
for the increase of your Grace and Peace, and hope of Eternal Life.

FINIS.

