THE Popes Supremacy DESTROYED BY THE FRENCH KING. As it was by King HENRY
VIII. of ENGLAND. Communicated in a LETTER from PARIS, 25 MARCH 1682.
SIR,
BEing obliged upon all occasions to give you a testimony of my respects and
service, I could not omit giving you a particular Relation of that
extraordinary Piece of News, which at present is the general Discourse of the
City; which take as follows:

The Seventeenth of this Month the Clergy assembled according to their Usual
Custom; where they heard the Report of the Commissioners named to examine the
Six Propositions of Sorbon, presented to the King 1663. The Bishop of Tournay,
Chief of the Commission, began the Report, which took up the Session of that
day. The next day in the Evening the other Commissioners, which were the Bishop
of Maux, the Bishop of St. Malo, the Bishop of Lavat, the Bishop Count De
Chalons, and the Bishop d' Alet, expressed themselves upon the same Subject.

The Nineteenth, in the Morning it was seriously discussed and deliberated by
the Provinces, upon the Subject of the Commission; and in the Evening the
Assembly met again, and approved by a General Consent and Declaration, the
Propositions following.

I. That neither the Pope, nor the Church it self, has any power directly nor
indirectly, over the Temporalities of Kings: That they cannot be Deposed, and
that their Subjects cannot be Absolved from their Oath of Allegiance and
Fidelity, for any reason whatsoever. II. That a General Council is above the
Pope, according to the Established Doctrine in the Fourth and Fifth Sessions of
the Council of Constance, which the Assembly declares to have had all the Power
and Approbation of the Church. That they do not approve the Erroneous Sense of
those which say, That it has only place in Times of Schisms. III. That the Use
of the Power of the Pope ought to be limited by the Canons; and that he can do
nothing to the prejudice of the Ancient Customs and Liberties of the Gallick
Church. IV. That the Pope has Principal Authority in Matters pertaining to
Faith: But that his Decisions or Judgments are not certain without the Consent
of the Church.
After this the Bishop of Tournay read to them the Contents of a Letter which
he had been desired to prepare to be sent with this Declaration to all the
Bishops of France, in the Name of the Assembly. He read also a Memoire in
Conformity thereunto; whereupon the Clergy desired of the King a Declaration,
whereby his Majesty should strictly Order all Professors in Divinity and Canon
Law, to teach the Doctrine contained in these Four Articles, which is the
Ancient Doctrine of the Kingdom, and shall prohibit all Communities Secular and
Regular, to teach the contrary.

The Archbishop of Paris proposed to the Assembly to nominate the Commissioners
to examine the Matter of the Jurisdiction, which of long time rests undecided,
and which should settle the Secular Power of the Magistracy, by Conformity to
the Power of the Church, and of the Ordinations thereof: Which having been
approved, he named Six Commissioners of the First Order, and as many of the
Second Order, to Examine this Matter.

The Twentieth the Archbishop of Paris, the Bishop of Rhemes, and the
Commissioners who had the Charge of the Examination of the Six Propositions of
Sorbon, went to St. Germains. The Arch Bishop of Paris being President of the
Assembly, was the Speaker; who with much force of Argument and Eloquence,
presented an Account to the King of what was done at the Assembly upon the
Subject of that Commission. He gave to the King the Act containing the Four
Propositions, signed by all the Assembly, the Letter which ought to be sent
with the Act to all the Archbishops, and Bishops of the Kingdom, and the
Memoire; according to which he humbly implored his Majesty to cause an Edict to
be made: which the King agreed to, according to the earnest desire of the
Clergy, and the 23th of this Month it was Ratified and Passed in Parliament.

The King Ordered by this Edict, That the Declarations of the Clergy of France
shall be Registered in all the Courts of Parliament, Balliages, Universities,
and Faculties of Theology and Canon Law of his Kingdom, Lands, and Dominions
under his Obedience.

The King prohibits all his Subjects and Strangers Secular and Regular, within
his Kingdom, to teach any thing contrary to the Doctrine contained in this
Declaration.

He Ordains, That those which shall be chosen to teach Divinity in all the
Colleges of each University, shall subscribe the same Declaration, and shall
agree to teach the Doctrine therein contained.

That in all the Colleges where there shall be several Professors Secular or
Regular, one of them shall be bound every year to teach the Doctrine contained
in the said Declaration; and where there shall be but one Professor, he shall
be obliged to teach one the three years successively.

That all the Classes of the Faculties of Divinity, shall every year present to
the Prelate the Names of the Professors, who shall be obliged to Report them in
Writing when it shall be required by the Prelates, or the Procurators, or
Attorney General.

That no Bachelor, Secular or Regular, may be received as Licentiate or Doctor
in Divinity or Canon Law, till he has maintained this Doctrine in one of his
Thesis.

That the Prelates shall employ their Authority to cause this Doctrine to be
taught within the Extent of their several Diocesses.

That the Dean and Classes of the Faculties of Divinity, shall Assist in
Execution of this Edict, upon pain of Answering it Personally and in their own
Names.

Here Sir, you have the plain and true Sense and Judgments of our Clergy in
that so Controverted Point of Supremacy: And by the way, be pleased to take
Notice, how long our King (for 'twas Presented in 63.) has been endeavoring to
free himself from that uneasy Yoke imposed on him by St. Peter's proud mistaken
Successor; and no question our Warlike Master will quickly cast it off, unless
the Man with the Triple Crown can prove his Doctrine of Infallibility to be
grounded on better Reason than his (now no) Doctrine of Supremacy; which I Will
promise you is very much questioned here, even by the Vulgar, whose Sentiments
of the lewd Old Gentleman of late (since the Publishing of this Edict) differ
but little from Tenets your English Protestants hold of him: And I believe if
they had him in their Clutches, they would hardly show his Holiness any more
Mercy than yours have shown to his Effigies. Adieu Dear Sir,

I am yours T. N.

London, Printed for J. Wilkins. 1682.


