A New-Years-Gift for the Tories, ALIAS RAPPERREES, ALIAS Petitioners of London.
Representing, in a few Particulars, a Comparison of the Administration of some
Public Affairs (especially in the City) in the Mayoralty of Sir Thomas
Pilkington, the present Lord Mayor, with the Administration in the Mayoralty of
Sir John Moore, Sir William Pritchard, etc in the latter end of the Reign of K.
Charles II, and in the Late K. James's Reign.
I. SIR John Moore, Mayor in 1682. By Color of his assumed Authority and
Illegal Proceedings, dissolved the Common-Hall-Court, assembled for the
Election of Sheriffs; when Mr. Pilkington and Mr. Shute, then Sheriffs,
according to the Right and Duty of their Office, were taking the Poll for
Sheriffs; and did afterward (by the Direction of Sir Leoline Jenkins then
Secretary for the Whig Plot) with Force and Arms, and in a Hostile Manner,
constitute North and Rich Sheriffs; though not duly returned by the Common Hall,
according to the Usage of the City. Sir Peter Rich, Alderman of Aldersgate
Ward, did, after the Example of Sir John Moore, upon the 22th of December 1690.
dissolve the Ward-Mote-Court of his Ward, when assembled to elect
Common-Council-Men; though the Inhabitants insisted, according to their Right, to
proceed to the Election. I. Sir Thomas Pilkington, the present Lord Mayor, has
indeed been maliciously charged, for Dissolving the Court of Common Council:
But it has been made out beyond Contradiction, that his Adversaries and
Accusers were so clamarous and rude in the Court, that no Business could be
proceeded upon; and for that reason, as also because it was late in the
Evening, upon Motion of several Members, his Lordship dissolved the Court. II.
Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois, being, according to the City Charter, duly
elected Sheriffs in 1682. and being kept out by Sir John Moore and some of the
Aldermen; they, by the Advice of Counsel, brought Writs out of the Court of
King's Bench, directed to the Coroner of London (Mr. John Brom) against Sir
William Pritchard, the succeeding Lord Mayor, in order to bring the Matter to a
Legal Trial: Whereupon the Coroner, in a very respectful Manner, waited upon
Sir William, desiring him to appear to the Actions; but the same being refused,
the Coroner having forborne the Execution of two Writs, and a third being
brought to him, he made Warrants thereupon, and Sir William Pritchard was
Arrested and Detained some Hours in the Coroner's Custody: Hereupon Sir William
brought his Actions against Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois, for arresting my Lord
Mayor; and the Matter being represented to come little short of Treason, a Tory
Jury gave Pritchard 10000 l. Damages, though not one Pennyworth of Damage proved
or done; and most undoubtedly Mr. Dubois would have had the same Fate, had not
he dyed before the Trial against him could be brought on. II. Sir Peter Rich,
in this year (1690.) pretending to have Cause of Action against Sir Thomas
Pilkington, Lord Mayor, commences his State against him; his Lordship, without
laying Pritchard's Trap for him, by refusing to appear till arrested, gave Sir
Peter a Voluntary Appearance to his Action, and Liberty to make his best of it.
III. Four Tory Juries gave the Duke of York 400000 l. in four several Actions,
against Sir Thomas Pilkington, Dr. Otes, Mr. Covert of Chichester, and Mr.
Culliford, for saying the Duke was a Papist, or Words to that effect: whereas,
(if I remember right) the Pensienary Long Parliament gave him but 100000 l.
Damages for being Assaulted and Beaten by the Dutch; And such another Jury gave
B^lsworth 800 l. Damages, in an Action against my Lord Mayor that now is, for
bidding the stinking Fellow (when he was insolently disturbing the
Ward-Mote-Court) go home and pay his Debts. III. Sir P. Rich brought his Action
(1690) against one Mr. (...) Bellamy, for saying Sir Peter (one of the Usurping
Sheriffs in 1683.) murdered my Lord Russel: Bellamy not pleading a
justification of the Words, according to the best advice; and it being proved
that he spoke them, an honest Jury gave Sir Peter full as much as he deserved,
26s, 8d. Damages IV. Alderman Cornish was murdered for asserting the City
Rights, and defending its Charters: And for no other Crime Sir Thomas
Pilkington, Sir Patience Ward, Mr. Bethel, Mr. Papillon, and many other eminent
and well-deserving Citizens, were drove into Exile or thrust into Gaols. IV.
Sir John Moore, with a multitude more of the Tory Crew, were guilty of the most
High and Notorious Violations of the Rights of the City, and are come off with
Impunity.

V. Mr. Samuel


