Usurpation Defeated, AND David Restored: Being an Exact Parallel between DAVID
And our most Gracious Sovereign King Charles II. In their dangerous
Dissettlement, and wonderful Restoration. Laid open in a SERMON on II SAM.
XIX. 14. PREACHED On the Public Solemn Day of Thanksgiving, MAY 24. 1660 in
the Collegiate Church of Manchester in the County Palatine of LANCASTER.

By HENRY NEWCOME Master in Arts, and Minister of the Gospel there.

Prove. 24 21. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Shelmerdine Bookseller in Manchester, 1660.

To the HONORABLE Sir GEORGE BOOTH, BARONET, one of the Members of the
Honorable House of COMMONS; The RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir RALPH ASHTON of
Middleton, Knight and Baronet, And the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL RICHARD HOLLAND Esquire
Renowned Sirs,
THis Sermon, preached some Months since, and at the importunity of many
Friends, now published; which has gotten of all this time of its suspension,
and intended utter suppression, no higher an esteem with its unworthy Author,
had need when forced out, to seek for Patronage: Neither are there any to whom
I could more willingly and confidently engage my self for such a favor then
your selves; whom I have cause to prefer in my thoughts, not only for your
undeserved Respects upon occasion to my self, (which I would hereby with all
thankfulness acknowledge) but also for the Renowned Undertakings, Hazards and
Sufferings you have undergone for the Public. It is grateful to me, that I
should by the Providence of God, Date this Epistle to such a Sermon in this
Month, which but a year since was the season of so many hazards, and
dreadfully threatening Dangers, to your selves principally, and to many others
with this poor Town of MANCHESTER, which so willingly offered themselves with
you in that Cause of GOD you so signally engaged in: Shall it ever be forgotten
by us, what the Lord has wrought? May not that holy Providence and Power of
his be for ever adored, that has in such a short time turned for us our
Mourning into Rejoicing? That those proud Waves should be so soon and
remarkably broken upon us, and be now like waters that are passed away. I hope
the profit of these Dangers and Deliverances shall remain with us, as a
sufficient and lasting ground of engagement upon our hearts to fear, serve,
trust and delight in that God who has thus wrought for us.

And if this poor service may any way tend to the recording and perpetuating of
our sense of this wonderful Mercy, and of our faithful and loyal engaging
for, and rejoicing in the glorious Return of his Gracious Majesty to these
Nations (wherein the People of these Two Counties engaging with you as their
faithful and active Leaders have cause to conceive they have a double share) I
have the utmost I could aim at in this so despicable an undertaking. And humbly
craving pardon for this boldness, I commit you to the blessing of that God that
performs all things for us: And am

Your unfaignedly affectionate And unworthyest Servant In the GOSPEL, Henry
Newcome.
Manchester, Aug. 29. 1660.
TO THE Reverend, his Worthy Friend, Mr. HENRY NEWCOME, Minister of CHRIST at
MANCHESTER.
REVEREND SIR,
ONce more by especial Providence I have had a view of another Sermon of yours.
In the former you opened a Door of Hope for Sinners meeting with their God, and
in this you have opened another Door for Subjects meeting with their Sovereign.
The distance betwixt God and Sinners was great; Heaven and Hell are opposite,
and between them there is a great gulf fixed. And how powerfully did you make
appear that the Gulf might be shot, that Heaven and Earth might meet; that God
and Sinners might be reconciled: Ezr. 10 2.
Yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. The distance likewise
between our Sovereign and his Subjects was very great: True Sovereignty is from
Heaven, Romans 13.1.
The Powers that be are ordained of God: But Rebellion and Treason are from
Hell, they are 1 Samuel 15.23.
as the Sin of Witchcraft, which is ordered and ordained by the Devil; and
betwixt these there was a great Gulf or Sea, for one Land could not bear them
both: And yet how ably have you made it appear, That Seas might be crossed,
That the Powers from above, and Treasons from the deep might peaceably meet,
That his Majesty and Subjects might be reconciled. It was not impossible with
God to bow the hearts of all the men of England, even as the heart of one men,
so that they should send this word unto the King, Return thou and all thy
Servants. Me thinks I look upon these two Sermons as two Twins, which though
they came not out together in one day, yet they were conceived in one Womb, and
they made haste one after the other: And now being come to light they resemble
each other both in matter and form: As the two Tables were both of Stone, and
were both hewed by Moses at Gods appointment, and in the one of them is written
our Duty to God, and in the other our Duty to our Neighbor; so are these two
Sermons for their matter as precious Stones, and for their form, hewed out by
your self, by Gods own ordering; and in the one of them is written our especial
Duty to God, pointed out in the first Commandment of the first Table; and in
the other is our Duty to Man, 1 Pet. 2.13.
our Head, our King, our Supreme, pointed out in the first Commandment of the
second Table, Ephesians. 6.2.
which is the first Commandment with Promise. Were it not pity that any man
should put asunder those things which God has joined together? You have taught
us comfortably to hope in God, and shall we be deprived of that second Lesson,
To honor the King? What if this Table has been by some as broken and laid
aside? the Lord has put it into your heart to hew it again, and by his
assistance you have fairly written the words of the Covenant: My humble advice
is, that such a Talent may not be hid and buried in the Earth; but as you have
Preached it, so you would please to Print it, and make it yet more legible to
all the World. You may think it is now out of Date, his Majesty who was invited
to Return is now Returned: And what then?

1. It was one of the most seasonable Sermons that ever I read; it was a Word
fitly spoken: And I should look upon that Book as an Ornament in my Study,
which I might call Prove. 25.11.
Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. But

2. It is of constant and continual use. As the words in the Text were only in
season when David lived, and when that Negotiation was transacted; yet to this
day (as now we see) is that Scripture 2 Timothy 3.16.
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness. So will this Sermon be till the Worlds end. From this one
Doctrine of Loyalty, all Subjects may be for ever rightly informed in Judgment
and instructed in Life: Or if any hereafter should be disloyal (which God
forbid) it would be for Reproof of the Weak, and for Correction of the Wicked.

Our Nations have been a long time under great reproach, let this Sermon
witness to the World, That the Lord has rolled our reproach away, in that he
has wrought us into the temper of his Darling Judah, Bowing all our hearts,
even as the heart of one man, to become truly Loyal. God dealt thus with
Judah, but he has dealt more graciously with us; for it was but the heart of
all the men of Judah; or if Judah and Israel had both been joined, they had
been the hearts of only One Nation, and no more: But with us God has done more
wonderfully, in that he has bowed the hearts of Two Nations, Three Nations,
all at once, as if Three Nations had but one heart. And at his Majesty's
Return, such Rejoycings were on all hands as never England saw before. The King
in his Proclamation is pleased to acknowledge, That both his Royal heart, and
the hearts of his People, were as full of mutual love, and confidence, and joy,
as became such a Restitution of King and People. Now Sir, let this be writ in
Marble: Job 19.23,24.
Oh that they were Printed in a Book, that they were graven with an Iron Pen,
and laid in the Rock for ever.

Records may last long, yet time may injure them, but these words with Job I
would have last for ever: That King and Subjects, kept at distance by Usurped
Powers for about Twelve years, yet then met together with such love, and
confidence, and joy, yea with such testimonies of love, and confidence, and
joy, in Bonefires, Bells, Trumpets, Thunderings of Shot and singing of Praises,
as if Heaven and Earth had met.

Before this we were the reproach of Nations indeed, but now tell me France,
Italy, Spain, Germany, or any other Country; if ever was the like day in any
of your Nations. Surely this was the Lords doing, and it was, and is, and for
ever will be mavelous in our eyes. The Lord bless these Papers, and all your
labor to the good of his Church: So prays

Your unworthy Brother In the work of the Ministry, Isaac Ambrose.
Gacslang, Aug. 21. 1660.
Usurpation Defeated, AND DAVID RESTORED. II SAM. 19. 14. And he bowed the
heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man, so that they sent
this word unto the King, Return thou and all thy Servants.


THis verse. is a part of the very remarkable History of David's return to his
Kingdom, after the Rebellion and Usurpation of his ambitious Son Absalom. It is
easy to see the scope of the story in reviewing the Context. After the death
of Absalom, the people of Israel speak of fetching the King back, as it is
verse. the 9. and 10. of this chap. David sends to the house of Judah a Message
and Declaration, to be delivered by Zadok and Abiathar to the Elders of Judah,
v. 11, 12. another to Amasa, the General of Absaloms Army, v. 13. the effect of
which Message and Declaration you have in the words of the Text, which is
twofold.

1. The universal and cordial inclination of the people toward the King, in
these words, And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart
of one man. 2. The Loyal Message and invitation they sent to him, of returning
to his Kingdom and Royal City, in these words, So they sent this word to the
King, Return thou, and all thy Servants.
We shall briefly explain the words, whereby you will still more clearly
discern their Emphasis, and their suteableness to the present occasion.

And he, he bowed. This relative is conjectured to refer to diverse antecedents.

1. He; Some will have it to be David, he, that is David by his gracious
Message and Declaration of his tenderness to his people, and readiness to
forgive, to pardon Amasa, and to prefer him upon his submission, did hugely
sway with the Elders of Judah, and with all the people, that forthwith they
sent unto him. 2. He, some will have it to be Zadok or Abiathar, to whom the
Message was sent: they were of the Priests of the Lord, had interest in the
Elders and People too, and appearing satisfied in the Kings message, they bowed
the people to this unanimous and dutiful compliance. God has often made use of
his servants in the Ministry, in furthering such works as these are by them. 3.
Some will have him to be Amasa. Indeed he is the immediate antecedent, the
message to him is in the next verse before. The King offering him so fairly,
and he having the power of the Sword, commanding the people in Arms, and now
returning to his loyalty and obedience, he had influence upon all the people
hereby, toward their inviting in the King again. God often has made great
changes in Nations by the change of the Generals heart. Thus Abner brought back
Israel to David before, 2 Samuel
and Amasa might do it now. Whether David is the he, or the Priest, or the
General, whether King or Zadok or Amasa, is not material, any of them might be
instrumental. And all have been so in our case to the like purpose. But we must
say, 4. This he may be God, and it must be so, if we understand a principal
efficient by it. God bowed the heart of the men of Judah, none could do it but
he, who has the heart of all men in his hand. And though David's message might
do much, and Zadoks faithful speech much, and the Elders compliance with the
King, might have influence upon the people, and Amasa with the Sword in his
hand might do more in this business; yet God did work by them all, and was the
chief Doer. Whether he be primarily meant in the Text or no, yet he is
necessarily and chiefly to be employed and understood in the business. It is the
great work of the Lord, whoever are instruments in it, by what means soever it
is brought to pass, that the heart of the people is thus bowed, etc.
He bowed.] This word implies two things.

1. That there had been a contrary temper in the heart of the people: It was
averse enough unto David. It did stand desperately opposite and stiff and
hardened toward him, yet now it is bowed. 2. That there is now a compliance
wrought, which yet was not of it self, but brought upon it by means. It was
bowed. It did not yield it self of it self, but was taken hold of as it were,
and brought down to a compliance by strong hand, It was of refractary and
exceeding opposite made as compliant as could be expected or desired.
The heart.] It is not said the hearts of all the men of Judah, in the plural
number, but heart in the singular, to denote, That often there is a general
spirit prevails upon the people of a Land, they are one body, and sometimes
possessed with one soul: there is the temper of a Man and the temper of the
Nation to be seen; and sometimes it is for good, and sometimes for evil, and
this to be distinguished, when the Chief of a Nation are bent such a way, and
the people love to have it so. The heart of the people, the temper and spirit
of the Nation are set the right way now to restore David.

Of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man.] They were universally
inclined, unanimous in the Vote, all concurred to a man, or they were as easily
prevailed with, as if but one man had been to be dealt with. Sometimes we say,
For one or two we can deal with, but a multitude it is hard to know how to turn
it; but God can sway a multitude as well as one single man. They were bowed as
the heart of one man, a most cordial unanimous concurrence is hereby expressed.
For the message they sent, it may be presumed it was sent by Honorable
Commissioners and Delegates from the Elders of Judah, and the General. They
resolve to have the King fetched back, and they send to him, to desire him
speedily to return, and all his servants. The King was glad to flee from
Jerusalem to save his life, and some Shimei's fearfully abused him in the way;
but now they send for him back again with much honor and affection to him as
their rightful Lord and Sovereign.

The thing that presents it self from this subject to our meditation, as
exceeding suitable to our present occasion, is, the greatness and wonderfulness
of this change in this hearty and unanimous vote and message for the bringing
the King back to his Throne and Royal City, after he had been so inhumanely,
disloyally, and treacherously driven out as he had been.

We may consider several things in this case of Absalom and David, which may
run parallel to our present business. Take it in two parts.

1. Consider, the dissettlement and almost despair that David's affairs were in.
2. The manner and nature of his resettlement. In both which you may observe
things wonderful, and with greatest thankfulness to be acknowledged, and the
like in our present occasion.
1. The dissettlement and almost despair that David's affairs were in. You
cannot prize the deliverance, unless you take a full view of the danger you are
escaped from. Consider David's sad condition of affairs, 1. In the design that
was laid against him. 2. In the pretexts to usher it in. 3. In the manner of
its mannagement.


1. The design that was laid against the King. It was Absalom aspired, he aimed
to be King in his Fathers stead. The design was to exclude the rightful
Governor from his Royalty, and to place this ambitious Prince in his stead:
and for this end he raises war, draws many into a confederacy, they plotted to
destroy the King, to secure the Usurper in the Throne: This was the design; a
most wicked and unnatural attempt. Any thing sometimes is adventured upon.
Regnandi causa: occidar modo imperet, Let me die, said proud Agrippina, so be
it her son Nero might reign: Men will adventure reputation, religion, life, nay
soul and all, to get into rule and dominion. This was the design in the story,
and no less has been more then designed in our days. Absalom might in time
have had a good title to the Crown, but it was rebellion in the Heir of the
Crown to be more then a Servant, whilst his Father lived: Much more then most
abhorred Treason in Subjects, some of them of the vilest and meanest, to
supplant the King, as they did, to Usurp the Throne. They aimed to kill the
King, ours effected it, a most wretched and unparalled act, always by the
soberest in the Nation accounted Murder, and now declared and owned to be such
in all men's mouths. It was not of Son against the Father; but of wicked men
against Father and Son too. The design against the late King was like that of
Ahab against Naboth, 1 King. 21.19.
To kill and also to take possession; and to his present Majesty it was like
that of the unrighteous Husbandman, that said, Mat. 21.38.
This is the Heir, come let us kill him, and the Inheritance shall be ours.
This was the design.

2. The pretext it was ushered in with. Absaloms Treason was brought in with
very specious pretenses.

1. Of public good, and redress of Grievances. Absalom knew the peoples
grievances, and made them full as many as they felt them to be. Chap. 15.2,3.
Thy matters are good, but none is deputed of the King to hear them. None
appointed to do justice, and therefore, verse. 4. O that I were made a Judge!
And then I would see matters better ordered. The people were prepossessed with
Absaloms great good will to the Subject. Oh! he is tender of our Liberties, and
therefore questionless, if he rise, say the deceived people, our best friend
is up, and it stands us all in hand to stand by him, that stands so for the
good of the Public. While all this pretext of public good is but in
English, The liberty of the Subject. There is a Liberty which is our
Birthright, and might have been maintained without violation to the Laws of
God and Man, but this was the bait that many were ensnared by. Oh the noise
that has been for the Public, the administration of Justice, the security of
the good people of these Nations! this has been cried up to be the Good Old
Cause. And the Government settled by the Fundamental Laws of this Land, and
sworn unto by us, must be changed for the public good; when it is clear as
the Noon Sun, that private designs and interests are sought and carried on
under these pretexts. We talk of public ease and liberty of the people, and
of our Keepers of the Liberties; whereas the peoples Taxes and burdens
increase all along under this way of Government, and must necessarily do so, to
keep it up: And these Keepers apparently increase themselves, and to keep their
unjust acquirements, an unrighteous Settlement must be kept up over the whole
Nations. The naked truth now appears, to set up an Absalom in the Throne is the
design, under the pretense of Justice he will do to the people. So we are
necessitated to keep up the Government of a Free State, as they call it, to
preserve the Estates of a few men unjustly gotten, which cannot endure the test
of a righteous settlement to the true public good of the Nation. This is the
first pretext.

The Second Pretext is of piety and devotion, whereby this desperate ambitious
design is introduced, chap. 15.7,8. He desires leave of his Father, that he may
go to perform his Vow in Hebron, a religious service, and piece of Gods
Worship, then in use, wherein by sacrifice they engaged themselves to God, etc.
And he further relates the ground of it to be, the deep sense that he had of
the Lords deliverance of him in his former troubles, that then he promised to
serve the Lord: So that it is not only the pretext of a mere Vow, for that
time, or of so much Religion only, as might be expressed in what accompanied a
Vow, but he would make this Vow, not only a part of his intended religiousness
toward God, but an Introduction into a more strict course then heretofore: He
would thus begin, and henceforward be very strict and serious in the Lords
service. And now how much might this take with the people? not only to get them
into his Conspiracy, but to tie them to him, when they were in. They might a
little startle, when they heard him declare to Usurp the Kingdom: but then
this would sway much with the people: He is known to be a great Favourer of the
public Liberty, and a man that we see owns the service of God, and sets out
Religiously, and therefore we may the better venture with him: He does not
declare against the Temple; not threaten to cast off the true God, and to
introduce Idolatry, but in his very entrance into his work, pretends more then
ordinary piety and devotion. It is easy in our parallel to find out an
Absalom, that had a design to aspire, that never showed much Religion, till it
would advance a wicked design: On the sudden he is religious, the only popular
man, all for devotion and the Lords service: Oh! say the poor people, this
cannot be murder, and rebellion, and usurpation, and perjury, that such men as
these are engaged in. They are not profane, notorious sensual men, but men of
the greatest profession, of the strictest life, etc. In nomine Domini incipit
omne malum. A Proverbial speech first taken up from the Popes Murtherous Bulls
and Edicts that used to come out thus in Christ's name. It has been one of the
designs of the Devil since the Church was Christian, to bring in his greatest
persecutions under the disguise of some great profession; the matter else would
want Accomplices to carry it on. A vile man in esteem with a good design would
have a few followers, and a seeming good man has a great advantage in his hand
of betraying many to a bad business, if he dare lead in it. Men are too apt to
follow men, and can hardly keep out of Error, if a tolerable person undertake
their conduct. It is hard for the vulgar to distinguish between good men and
bad actions, as if it must cease to be evil when such men dare engage in it:
Whereas men should judge men by their actions, and not actions by men. Oh! what
pretenses of Religion and godliness has there been in the late mischiefs, that
have been perpetrated? calling upon God; appealing unto God to decide the
controversy, nay perpetrating villainy upon impulses pretended from the Spirit
of God, security of Religion, liberty for tender Consciences, etc. This has
been cried up, as their Good Old Cause, that had the blood of Kings and
Prophets at the bottom of it, like that Mic. 2.10,11. They build up Sion with
blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity -- yet will they lean upon the Lord, and
say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us? Nay, their unheard
of villainies are made the fulfilling of their Vows: no return for their
deliverances and victories so proper, as to raze our Foundations, murder our
King, pull down the Ministry, etc. as no doubt it was in design, yet all along
to advance Religion too. None so cruel among the Turks as a Renegado Christian;
and so none more like to ruin Religion then the Apostate Professor, and much
the more if in truth an Apostate and yet a Professor still. Absalom we know not
what a King he might have proved, he was never tried, ours have had time enough
to have showed some of their great good, they seemed to be big with; but we
never could see a reality in them to this end to this day. But thus we agree in
this second particular, in the introduction of the design, with high pretenses
of Religion and the Liberty of the people.

3. The manner of the management, and advance of this design, several things
are considerable in that.

1. Many drawn into the business that meant well, the liker to be more
resolute in the undertaking. Absalom he knew what he intended by his Vow, there
were 200 followed him from Jerusalem in the simplicity of their hearts, 2 Samuel
15.11. meant nothing less then treason or murder to their King and his Father,
but when in the business cheated and drawn hoodwinkt into this design, helped
it forward. And so all over Israel he had his Agents, who were privy to his
design, and they at the sign given drew in the people in like manner. Many a
time desperate businesses are carried on under other pretenses, upon the secret
design of a few. A sad unnatural civil War is kindled, is carried on a great
way, too far, if it had been the will of God; parties engaged declare
themselves defensive, they protest, and vow, and Covenant they had no design
against his Majesty's Royal person, or just honor and greatness. The business
goes on, the victory falls to their side. Now the Absaloms appear, and they
show what their design was: The people went in their simplicity, meaning no
other then what was declared to them, which has sufficiently appeared in that
the business could not be effected till force was put upon the Houses of
Parliament, the Lords clearly dismissed, near 300 Commoners pulled out, and
kept out of the House of Commons; many hundreds in the Nation would never say a
Confederacy with them, and have suffered according to their first declared
Principles and innocent intentions, upon occasion all along under these
Usurpations. But yet many were drawn in no doubt, in their simplicity, to go on
further with them. If this had been known at first to have been the design, it
might in all liklihood have been never advanced one step: but they take their
advantage, the common people, and some good people of midling capacities,
others seduced and infected in their Principles, are gotten on further into the
business, decoyed and cheated into the design, to follow that cursed Absalom to
the Throne. They pretend it is the Parliaments cause still, and the people
generally make no great difference between a Parliament consisting of Lords and
Commons treating with the King, and upon the matter agreed with him, and a bit
of a Parliament, the Lords removed, and the best and greatest number of the
Commons forcibly secluded, and to destroy the King too. Alas! many went in
wickedness, and many in simplicity, meaning no hurt, not foreseeing the guile,
nor understanding the treachery.

2. There was a great multitude engaged in Absaloms business against David.
The text says v. 12. The conspiracy was strong. It was strong, 1 In that the
whole body of the people were gotten into it. 2 David the rightful King was
forced to fly from the Royal City, and to go over Jordan to save his life, and
therefore the waters rose very high against him. We need not apply this. It is
evident the whole Nation were either consenting, or forced to acquiesce in the
Usurpation. David gone over Jordan to escape for his life.


3. There was cruel policy and craft to the height used in the business.
Absaloms party was much strengthened by Achitophel the Gilonite joining in the
business, chap. 15. v. 12. Two great things there were in Achitophels counsel.

First, in that he was a man of such vast abilities for Counse: 2 Samuel 16.23.
The Counsel of Achitophel, which he counseled in those days, was as if a man
had enquired at the Oracle of God, so was all the Counsel of Achitophel both
with David and with Absalom: His counsel had such authority in the Council, it
was so profound, and this counsel was gotten to Absaloms side.

Secondly, in that he had been David's Counselor, and so understood the affairs
of the Nation, the Arcana Imperii; knew David's way of counsel, and so could
better undermine and prevent his restoration, and always give Absalom the way
into the strength of the Nation by this his experience. This was a great blow
to David, and advantage to Absalom. Certainly the design here that was so
strong, was laid in deepest policy: We had a man that had Absaloms pride and
ambition, and Achitophels headpiece. Men laid their devices as low as Hell,
(but that their counsels were defeated by him, who takes the crafty in their
own craftiness, and whose counsels must stand) their policy was very
formidable, and a great while successful. That there were those that joined
what they could contribute to this work, that had been of his Majesty's own
Servants, etc. I need not here assert. There was wisdom, treachery and utmost
ingratitude concentred to keep our David down.

4. And lastly (to mention no more of this kind) Absoloms design was secured
in a desperate piece of wickedness; and this was no small strength to his party
and disadvantage to David. The politic piece of wickedness was from this
Achitophels counsel, and that is, 2 Samuel 16.20,21,22. Absalom must go in to his
Fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel on the top of the house. And what
would this do? why, says he, Then all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred
of thy Father, then shall the hands of all that are with thee be strong. How
would this strengthen the hands of all Israel with him? why, these two ways:

1. It would assure the people that Absalom must stick to them, as well as they
adventured with him; for they might sometimes doubt of the business, there may
be mysteries between the Father, and the Son, and David recover a little
strength; why, Absalom offended him once before, and he got his favor again.
The King may be tender to his Son upon his submission. It may prove but
banishment, or keeping from Court a while, as it did before, the fault may then
fall heavily upon many of us as Instigators, and Abetters of this rash young
man in his Enterprise, and he may happen let us fall to the Kings mercy, in
hope, of his Fathers pardon for any thing that yet is done. Therefore says
Achitophel, Do some odious thing that the people may be sure of thee. Nay, may
the people now say, We may venture with him; for he dares never leave us, when
he has so unnaturally defiled his Fathers bed.

2. It will make the people firm to Absalom by making them see, they can now no
longer dally in the business. The cause is declared by this open villainy of
Absalom, we are gotten in, we have advanced him, have brought him to Jerusalem,
and he has now under our countenance and assistance perpetrated this villainy.
There is no hope of ever being pardoned either for him, or us, that are so far
engaged with him, when such a thing as this is done; who can hope the King
should forgive us, when we have provoked him on this manner! The policy was
devilish to link Absalom and his Forces by such a villainy: Themistocles would
make a golden bridge for his Enemies to retreat upon at any time, counting it
no wisdom to force an enemy to fight whether he would or no. When there is no
hope of mercy, men will sell their lives as dear as they can. This was the
design in Absoloms case, to make Absalom and his party desperate, that hopes of
Indemnity might never spoil their resolution. He puts it past hopes of pardon,
that that might never make them indifferent in the undertaking, nor mar their
valor. A device if one would rake hell for one, you cannot find one more
devilish, and yet serving to this desperate design. How must David ever get
over this, when his enemies are so united and engaged to stand against him?
Ours was of the same brood, and from the same father (no doubt) the Devil that
Achitophel fetched this. To keep David out, we murder the Kings Royal Father,
and in a horrid manner. If some few Assassinates had done it, they might have
made them to have born the blame; but it is done in the sight of all Israel,
and the Sun, in the Kings Royal City, before his own Gates, in the crowd of his
people, on purpose to make as many partakers of the thing as might be, that
they might have the more Abetters to cleave to them now for very protection.
Most of the great Officers are made Judges, that these might, to prevent the
like Judgment, and sentence on themselves, stick together to the last man. Any
thing but the Murder of his own Father, a King may upon principles of honor,
and prudence pardon. But here many engaged to be desperate now against the Heir
of the Crown, those that were not Judges and Actors they have another device to
get many of them engaged too; And that is by taking possession as well as
Killing, and so by disposing of the Kings Lands for small value, they raise
money at present, but they do more to their design, they strengthen their party
unspeakably thereby. There is now an interest in the Nation that must be
respected under this very notion, which shows how there wanted not villainy to
make their party strong and secure. Matters had in all likelihood never held so
long as they have done, if men had not been choked with Purchases. Many men
ivolved in so much guilt, as that they have justly despaired of pardon, and
many so deep in estates none of their own, as loath to think of restitution.
And thus the hand of the people is made strong with them.

Absalom carried on his business but a while, and though it was notably laid,
yet being unsettled, more easily brought down. Aegrius ejicitur quam non
admittitur hostis. But ours got settled, an Usurpation of almost a dozen years
standing, the channel quite turned, Estates gotten and improved, and so men
more loath to part with them. And therefore in this the danger and hazard of
dissettlement has exceeded.

But sure David's case (both David's) is very hazzardous and sad, when such a
desperate design laid, so ushered in, so cruelly managed, raised upon the
abused well-meaning of many, the crafty and treacherous counsels of others, the
strength of the multitudes, and the security of despair for ever receding from
it, and yet this was that, and our David's case.

Now secondly, Consider the manner and nature of his Re-settlement.

David's Re-settlement, and our David's Re-settlement: In both which you will
find things alike parallelly wonderful.

1. Consider the manner how God has brought it to pass. 2. Consider the thing
thus far effected.
1. Consider the manner how the Divine Providence has brought David to his
Kingdom again, when his affairs were so desperate.

1. Several, notwithstanding this general defection, remained faithful to
David. Several fled out of Jerusalem with him, 2 Samuel 15.17,18. Many people
when he fled went after him; his servants, the Cherethites, the Pelethites, the
Gittites, etc. passed on before him. Joab and Abishai his Kins-men and famous
Generals, they found the part of the Kingdom beyond the River, though
inconsiderable to the body of the people, but two Tribes for ten, yet they were
faithful to him; the Priests of the Lord abode with the Ark, yet David's true
friends, Hushai the Archite goes back, and by his counsel with Absalom furthers
and secures David's affairs truly and effectually. David was forced out of his
City, and yet not out of the hearts and affections of all his Subjects. Several
were true, loyal and constant to him, and this helped up his interest again.
And so with us the Lord kept many hearts upright to sound and upright
principles of Covenanted loyalty to his Majesty. Several run the same fate of
Exilement with him. The part of his Kingdom beyond the River true to him, gave
him admittance, were oppressed, and almost ruined for him. He had Hushaies that
had a respect to his interest as there might be occasion. There were thousands
in Israel that were faithful in Covenant, that never bowed their knee to Baal:
that would never say, A Confederacy with them, that said a Confederacy, that
were true in their hearts to David, and ready to show themselves when ever God
would begin to give a reviving to his Majesty's just cause. Several whom the
Lord kept upright in the Nations, that grieved to see the dishonor done to
Religion, and wrong to Superiors and inferiors, and were ready Instruments in
Gods hands to rescue the almost ruined rights of their King and Nations.

2. Fervent prayers were put up to God by David and his party, as Psalm. 3. and
other Psalms 42. and 43. were penned upon this occasion. But especially David
most earnestly puts in a Caveat at the Throne of Grace against Achitophel, 2 Samuel 15.31. The Lord turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness; which was
so punctually answered, and that in so great a concernment, that we cannot but
take notice of prayer as having a chief hand in David's Restoration. Prayer
has in like manner been made without ceasing unto God for our David, and
especially in the zealous passion of many a Religious and Loyal heart; that God
would in very terms turn the Counsel of Achitophel into foolishness. Job 35.9.
By reason of oppression they have made the people to cry, they have cried out
by reason of the Arm of the Mighty. When good men have seen how the wicked have
prospered, and how they have abused their successes; made God the Patron and
Abettor of their villainies, and sought themselves all along to the ruin of
true Religion; they have cried to God with their voice, they have ordered their
cause before God, filled their mouths with Arguments, pleaded Gods Covenant,
their own integrity in the main, the reproach of Religion, the insolency and
rage of the enemy, and have waited Ps 94.14,15.
when God should return judgment unto righteousness, that the upright in heart
might follow after it. This has prevailed much in our David's case. When God
saw 2 Kings 1.26.
there was none shut up, and none left in Israel, and yet his people cried to
him, his own Arm has brought salvation to his people. He has looked down,
from heaven did the Lord behold the earth, Ps. 79.10,11.
to hear the groans of the prisoners, and to deliver those that were appointed
to dye. It appears that he has seen, he has seen all this while the
affliction of his servant, and his people; these prayers have moved him to come
down to deliver. As in a like case, Exodus 2.23. They cried by reason of their
bondage, and their cry came up to God, and God has remembered us, and had
respect unto us. If men will adventure to abuse any of Gods children, they had
best do it out of the Fathers sight (which is impossible) or to take heed they
make them not cry; for if they cry God, will know the matter, and it will be
hard with them that do them wrong. God will not always endure his peoples
cries against any that oppress them. This was a second help, and notable means
that kept David's Affairs alive, the Spirit of Prayer, that lay continually at
the Throne of Grace, moving the King of Heaven for assistance, to restore the
banished King to his Right again: And this was more than if the greatest
Potentates had joined by their Forces to set him in the Throne.

3. God did defeat their Counsels; he divided and defeated their Counsels:
Achitophel gave counsel to do quickly what they did, 2 Samuel 17. Hushai gives
advice to the contrary. Absalom takes the wrong counsel, ver. 14. For the Lord
had appointed to defeat the good counsel of Achitophel, to the intent that he
might bring evil upon Absalom. This is the plain of the business, God spoils
their Counsels, thereby to defeat and destroy their design. Whether the Lord
has had any Hushai's in the Counsels that intended our David's good, I know
not; but God has made some Counsels to serve well David's turn; and the very
like disappointment of the design of the late formidable Army, in the very same
kind, that they forthwith fell not upon the Renowned General who opposed them;
that they would gather all Israel together for this purpose; or what it was,
but God divided them in their party before, to work their ruin, Counsels
divided, and Forces divided. Many a thing, no doubt, that party can now say,
may have been on foot, which if taken, had prevented their overthrow; but God
has done all this, to the intent that he might bring evil on our Absoloms, and
their traiterous Design.

4. God removes one dangerous Instrument after another, out of David's way.
Achitophel hangs himself, Absoloms Army is defeated in a bloody Battle, 2 Samuel
18.8. The Battle was scattered all over the Country, and the Wood devoured
more people that day, then the sword devoured. Absalom himself is found and
slain, hanging in an Oak; the great Heads and Ringleaders of the Faction being
removed thus by the hand of God, way is notably prepared for David's Return. God
has wrought as wonderfully in the like manner to remove the prime Usurpers, to
make way for the Kings return; Achitophel's gone, and Absolom's gone; and
though God has mightily saved from the effusion of blood, yet he has by a
wonderful hand dispersed and broken a potent and terrible Army, even without
hands, in the late Northern defeat; God knows what wood they fell into, but
there were they broken, Psalm. 76.4.
there are the stout-hearted fallen, they have slept their sleep, and none of
the men of might have found their hand.

5. God stirs up the people generally to think and take counsel to bring the
King back. They fall to consultation about it, 2 Samuel 19.9,10 Two things they
mention to move one another to return to their Loyalty, and to endeavor the
restoring David to his Right. 1. They remember the relation he had stood in
unto them, the good works he had done, what a Deliverer he had been as an
Instrument in Gods hand unto them, 2. They take notice, that Absalom that was
the Competitor, whom they had anointed, was dead in the Battle; and therefore
there remained nothing more reasonable for them, then that they should speak of
bringing the King back. The people were strangely turned of late in their
hearts toward our David; they begin now to call the King to mind again, that
had bin forgotten all this while, some years, and scarce so much as named. And
there was two things that very much swayed with some men, to think that God
pointed at the King's restoration; 1. The miraculous preservation of the King,
that he was so delivered and escaped, when his life was sought as he was. 2.
That that desperate Usurper and Competitor was so strangely removed out of the
way. It was not long since a great piece of Discourse, That if we must have
Monarchy, there must be a continued competition between the two Lines of the
Stuarts and the Cromwells; this latter having settled himself as firmly, as the
wickedest Wit and Policy of man could contrive; and yet God dashed all this by
Creatures of his own, by contrary Factions, he and his settlement is removed as
easily, as it seemed to be established firmly: They that pulled that Line down,
little intending to ^ake way for the lawful Sovereign. Absosom that would have
a Pillar to be remembered by, in the Kings Dale, 2 Samuel 18.18.
exchanges it or an ignominious heap of stones in the Wood* Our Usurper is not
left to be only ignomious and odious to him whom he had wronged, but his own
faction do this to our hand, his Pillar pulled up, Psalm. 9.6.
his Memorial in a years time is perished with him. And hence the people might
well consult to stir for their Liberties, and to see by these many weary
tossings and changes, they were out of the way, and under the Lords curse for
their Rebellions, and Treacheries, and Disloyalties, and therefore might well
see that their hope of settlement must needs be in bringing the King back God
preserved him sure, and not for nothing. God has so removed Absalom, that it
directs the whole People to look after David, and the Elders of all the Tribes
seasonably to declare for a free Convention, their undoubted Right, which the
Adversaries all along interpreted to be as much as to resolve to bring the King
back. And so upon the meeting of the Representatives in Parliament, they had
resolved after a day of solemn Humiliation, on Tuesday, May 1. to consider
expressly of this matter.

6. While the people are considering to bring the King back, 2 Samuel 19.11,12.
David sends to Zadock and Abiathar and the Elders of Judah, and to Amasa the
General, his Message and Declaration, whereby he incites and encourages them to
fetch him back. How like is this to his Majesty's Letters and Declaration to
the Parliament, to the General, and to the City, expressing himself so
affectionately to them, as bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh, as he
does; offering not only Pardon, but Preferment to such as should seasonably
return to their Loyalty and Obedience. This helped David's Affairs very much.

7. The effect of David's Message and Declaration, was, That the Priests, the
Elders, the General, they all are affected with it, and return an unanimous and
cordial Answer to David, and invite him to return with all his Servants: This
is just our present posture, the heart of all the people is bowed as the heart
of one man. Commissioners are now sent to his Majesty, of the Elders of Land,
both Lords and Commons, from the General, of the Ministers, all accepting most
affectionately his Majesty's Grace and Favor, and particularly inviting him,
nay with speed to return unto his People.

This is the present posture of our Affairs: I shall follow the parallel no
further, since we are yet brought but thus far, though we humbly hope and
expect the joyful Return of the King to his Kingdom and Royal City; but that
God has brought things thus far, we are appointed by Authority to keep this
solemn Day of Thanksgiving.

Thus we have considered the manner how God has brought David's re-settlement
to pass:

2 dly. Let us consider the greatness of the thing which the Lord has thus
effected, which may truly further us in the great duty of the day. It is a
wonderful work.

1. If we consider what a change it wrought, how far things were gone another
way, and how God has reduced them quite back again; David under this
invitation from all his people, to return back with all his servants, when a
little before looked upon as the common Enemy, and all with him persecuted as
Traitors; a little before the people ready to say, We have no Portion in the
son of Jesse; Let David look to his own House. Charles Stuart was the best
Title our Sovereign could have; the Son of the late Tyrant, the cursed
Interest, etc. And now it is our Sovereign Lord the King, with all his Titles;
and every one strives who shall have the greatest share in him: Men are now
striving who shall be first to bring the King back. Compare two places or
Scripture in this story, and you will say there is a great and wonderful change
wrought 2 Samuel 16.6,7,8. and 19 19,20. the very Shimei, the same man speaks
both those speeches. It was even now, Go up thou bloody man, God has now
reckoned with thee; I know not what blood is laid at David's door. As it is
easy to find matter in the best man's life for an uncharitable censurer to
ascribe his troubles unto; if a man be greatly afflicted, he must be greatly in
fault in the worlds eyes: But now his very Shimei desires pardon; and therefore
he is the first of all the House of Benjamin that comes to meet the King: Would
one ever have a thought that this very man should a few weeks since have bin
throwing stones at David, and casting dust in the air, and cursing him. What a
work is this, the people that slighted this Moses, now receive him loyally and
cordially? The Shimei's that cursed him, now are ready to go first out to meet
him. The very same Barbarians that count Paul a Murderer when the Viper's on
his hand, have much ado to withold sacrifice from him as a God, when they see
the Viper shaken off into the Fire, and he unhurt. What has the Lord wrought?
When now we have command and authority to pray for the King, which a few Months
since should have been accounted Treason. Prove. 11.8
The Righteous are delivered out of trouble, and the wicked are come in their
stead. This is a wonderful change, a mighty work that is wrought.

2. That this is brought to pass so suddenly and unexpectedly. God has done
for us Isa. 64.3.
things we looked not for; It is the Lord that has thus subdued David's People
under him; That they which drove him out, or durst not appear to call him in,
should now all unanimously appear; and that even as it were one soul should
possess all the people, and they should join to call the King back. Psalm.
18.47. and 114 3.
It is the Lord that subdues my People under me, said David: As it was said of
the change of Religion in Hezekiah's time: 2 Chronicles. 29.30.
God had prepared the heart of the People, for the thing was done suddenly. The
House may soon be reared, when all the Materials are prepared and made ready,
and framed to setting up; The Lord laid this business in his own counsel, he
fitted the heart of the people to concur in the Fundamental Constitutions of
the Nation, as the only means of our preservation, opened almost all men's eyes
to see the hypocrisy, selfishness, tyranny and falsity of those that had thus
long abused us. And so the work upon this opportunity is done suddenly.

3. That God has therein so much vindicated Religion, and his own glory. One
great thing that troubled David in his flight from Absalom, was, That his
Enemies daily said, There was no help for him in his God, Psalm. 3.2. A Psalm
penned upon this very occasion; and this troubled him more then any thing; it
was like Psalm. 42.10
a Sword in his Bones, while the Enemy still said, Where is now thy God? Oh how
often was God's people run through with this reproach? How were they mocked with
their prayers? How was God's Providence blasphemed? How did the Enemies brag
that they had gotten God to their side, 2 Kings 18 25
and that they were not come up without God against us? But the Lord made the
Enemies know, that David was not forgotten, he works now the other way, for
ever to silence the Enemy about Successes. When was ever such a work wrought in all they have blasphemously bragged for them, as God has now wrought against
them? Those wretched Giants, that would pretend they build by his allowance,
because they had his permission; he has now at once come down and confounded
their Language, and spoiled their Babel in a moment; It may be now said, Psa.
58.11
Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous. Verily he is a God that judges
in the Earth: We can show the Phanatique now, where our God is.

4 ly. The work is wonderful, in that such way is made for a perfect
settlement. Trees shaken by the Wind, take Root the faster. David is not only
brought back to the Throne, but no doubt it is settled faster than ever, by the
late convulsion upon it. We may conceive, the people seeing the praemunire the
ambitious Usurpers had led them into, the loss they had sustained by it, the
danger they were in, if they might now have the King's favor, would be more
firm to him then ever they were, and more wary of hearkening to Usurppers while
they lived. The King also might see somewhat that Absalom might catch, to make
a grievance of, for the people, that they should thereupon ^oin in commotion
against him; and so might remove that prejudice, and see to the Administration
of Justice, to prevent the like discontent for the time to come. They have
liberty, several of them, to show their good affection in bringing him back,
and so to have pardon, upon which they might be firmly engaged to him, and so
the state more happy in King and People for ever after; as it appears, one
Sheba after made a slight Rebellion, but few followed him, and as easily it was
quelled. No such cure of a Nations discontents, as when people find that
patience is better then any remedies of their own that can be applied. I shall
not here speak of things that have passed in this Nation these last twenty
years, (for I am but of yesterday) sad breaches have been between Prince and
People, King and Parliament. God has sadly afflicted both, and I hope pardoned
both: Why should we now go about to lay the fault at either door, when God
seems to be in a way of forgiveness of it? And sure the Lord has put such an
opportunity into our hands of a perfect settlement, as we have not had before;
Dulce est bellum inexpertis: Sure God has taught us for being forward in
drawing the Sword again in have. O a desperate remedy it is! and especially
when this is well considered, that there was an Enemy that was lately in Power,
would have made no difference between any sober men of each party in the
Nation; God having joined us in the deliverance, cannot we keep together after
it? Why should not the old enmity be laid aside? God has undertaken and
answered the honest desires of all: What the Allegiance and Conscience of Duty
obliges some unto, that the same Principles, and the Covenant in like manner
oblige others unto: You are for the King's just Rights, we are for the same;
Why then should we not be all one? Especially when his Majesty does use such
pathetical terms in his own Declarations, even now read unto us, to command,
invite, and conjure us to lay aside all animosities, etc. as he does; we are
agreed at present, or may be if we will; And have we not had enough of the old
quarrel? If either obedience to God or the King sway with us, we must lay down
our sinful and uncomfortable distances, and be united, as God has united us in
this great mercy which he has granted to us all, to make us friends. We may
allude to that of Jehoash to Amaziah. 2 Kings 14.9
We had best thistles fight with Cedars, and one with another, till God find
another wild beast to eat up the Thistle. Has God found out our Joseph for us,
and shall we now fall out by the way about the guilt of his loosing? There is
great hopes of a perfect settlement, when God has thus suffered us to tire our
selves in our confusions and divisions these many years -- And these
Considerations makes this a great occasion of our rejoicing before God.

Obj. But some may object upon this; We fear what may be the issue of this
change, we may happen run into another extreme; we always feared Religion
might be more hazarded in the Change, then it was before, etc. and therefore we
are much afraid in this day of our rejoicing.

Answ. I answer to this very briefly:

1. I hope that those that truly fear God, do as dearly fear the things of God
and Religion upon their hearts, as ever they did; and as in the Day of their
trouble, when God smote them into the place of Dragons, they were able to say
in some measure of sincerity and humble confidence, Psalm. 44.17
All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have dealt
falsely in thy Covenant. So in this day when God turned again their Captivity,
they are as ready to say, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget her cunning; If I do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the roof
of my mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. I do hope we are not
so far transported with our occasions of rejoicing, as to forget Religion as
our chiefest concernment.

But secondly, It were worth our considering, how much this pretense of
securing Religion has miscarried of late times; We have secured Religion, and
see what it has effected.

1. A Liberty for the bad, as well as the good: It is a question not absolutely
determined, whether is the better, to have the bad absolutely suppressed,
though the good thereby be afflicted too; or, to have the good have their
utmost liberty, and the bad and unfound have as much liberty as they; God can
order things be sides both extremes: Yet I believe the sufferings of good men
never hurt the Church so, as the Liberty of bad men has done.

2. Where has our increase been under our late prosperity? Prove. 29.1
The Churches had rest, and they multiplied, and were edified; And sure if our
rest had been in God's Way, we might have seen it more blessed unto us. There
has been little increase, few converted under means.

3. We have secured Religion, but seem many Apostates from it, as ever any one
Age brough forth, even in this little while. The damnable monstrous Doctrines
that have been vended; those evils are gotten into the Church in this time of
Liberty, that it is well if any thing but some persecution or fiery trial may
expel.

4. The love of many is waxed cold; zeal and heat in godliness is lost from
them that retain the sound Doctrine; Religion is gotten a politic thing with a
great many, a Sceleton, an outside, the power of it lost in a great measure,
under this glorious talk of Religion.

And fifthly, We have gotten such a reproach upon it in these late years, by
that which we have done under the highest profession of it, that has been the
greatest dishonor to Christ, since his Church has been upon earth, I verily
believe. And if Religious men should be under contempt, for what has been done
by false Professors of it, it cannot be worse then may well be looked for, and
it is well known who may be thanked for it, Mat 18.7
Woe to them by whom these offenses come.

Our securing Religion hitherto me thinks has looked like rest that a man sick
is forced to, he is quiet with it, or seems to rest quietly, but when he
awakes, he professes he is not refreshed at all by it. And so what ever you can
fear, it is not worse then the best in effect that has bin: our rest has not
been kindly, has not come in ways that God has blessed; and so not done us
that good which might have been expected.

And thirdly, It will be a great while in likelihood before things on another
hand to such an height, as to make our condition comparably hazardous to what
it lately was. Is their danger of destroying the Ministry, pulling up the
Universities, shutting up the Church doors, etc. All which, and much more you
are just escaped from?

Fourthly, As far as Religion can be secured in Gods way, we are to look to it,
and to make it our care. But when we must use extraordinary extravagant courses
to settle it, I believe we shall have no thanks for it, as the Apostle with
detestation expresses it. As we be slanderously reported, Rom 7.8.
Let us do evil that good may come of it, whose damnation is just. -- Further
then we can secure Religion in Gods way, it cease to be our duty or care. We
distrust Gods All Sufficiency, when we will offer to do his work by the Devils
means. It was an excellent Monition that Luther gave to Melancthon, when he was
over sollicitous, about what should become of the Church when things looked
darkly toward it; says he in a Letter to his neighbor Ministers, Monendus
est per nos Philippus, ut desinat esse Rector mundi: Philip is to be admonished
by you that he cease usurping to be the Ruler of the world. So I could wish we
would take more care of duty, and leave the issue and success of all things
unto God. Let the Government of the Church lie on his shoulders on which God
has laid it, who will take care of it when thou and I are in our graves,
especially commands thee to lay thy hands off this care, further then thy plain
duty appears unto thee in it.

Fifthly, What if sufferings should come? Why 1. We suffered before. 2.
Sufferings must not come unless (need be) and nothing shall come but what is
prescribed, but what is in the Phisicians Bill to do the Patient good with. 3:
We shall have peace of conscience in our sufferings, that we have not by
unrighteous means sought to prevent them.

But sixthly, Why should we count it necessary that the Church must fare the
worse for this change? Is it any thing less than a limiting the holy One of
Israel, when he has brought us out of Egypt by a mighty hand as he has done,
to be questioning already, whether he Ps. 78.19,20.
can provide a Table for us in the Wilderness. To receive such a wonderful
mercy from God so unexpectedly, and so undeservedly, and at the very next turn
to be distrusting and counting of the very worst, is not so reasonable; why may
we not hope, that the same Almighty power and free mercy will not perfect the
work, that has begun it? God has purchased better credit at our hands by his
late works then this comes to.

And what should all the hopes which God gives in his instrument, the David in
the occasion stand for nothing with us! may not the Lord vindicate Religious
Loyalty in his Majesty's eyes? The heart of the King is in the hand of the
Lord, and he can turn it as the Rivers of water. He can do by it as the
Husbandman by the water, makes it overflow what fields he pleases to his
advantage, can drain or drown what place he will with it, so can God turn the
heart of the King. Why should it be doubted but that it may be evidenced, that
many have detested the horrid villainies that have been perpetrated in the late
confusions, have mourned and suffered under them? And why should it but be
hoped that a Prince of such sufferings, deliverances, prayers, and experiences,
but that God has a large interest in his heart? Acts 19.32
And when the Righteous are in Authority, the people may rejoice. And therefore
I do conceive that notwithstanding the Objections that men of discontented,
peevish (and many of them guilty) spirits, can suggest of fears; we are not
excusable from serious and solid rejoicing in our God upon this occasion.

I shall from all infer two or three things in way of use, and so conclude.

1. Let us learn hence the mighty power of God. What cannot the Lord do? What
desperate state of affairs cannot he put life into? How far was David's affairs
gone, and yet now he is invited back to his Throne. He can alter things as he
pleases. He can make the people that durst scarce name him, unanimously send
for him. He can bow the hearts of Kings and people to accord and sit down to
gether. Truly God has done that in this little while we could not have
expected. He has turned our Captivity like the streams in the South, and we
are still like Psalm. 126 1
men that dream. We were inured to the Pots and Brick-kilns, to the service
wherewith our Masters made us to serve with rigor, and we counted still of it,
but God has changed the state with us, and that on a sudden, who would have
said that we that durst scarce keep a day of Fasting to own our affliction,
should have kept one day after another in way of thankfulness for our
Deliverances. It is the Lords doing, and a mighty God is he.

2. Learn hence the profit and safety of honest and direct dealing; this fears
no after-claps, or after-reckonings. The righteous now are bold as a Lion. Romans
13.4.
Will thou not be afraid of the power, do that which is good, and thou shall
have praise of the same. If there be no unrighteousness in thy hand, thou
need not fear an inquisition into former things. Prove. 10.9.
He that walkketh uprightly, walks surely. A good cause it seems can never be
buried. God will bring forth the integrity of his servants, and make a
difference even in this world, between them that have unfainedly cleaved close
to him, and them that have turned aside to crooked paths.

3. Keep your hearts still up to God, notwithstanding what God has done for
you. It is not God has saved you thus far, and the Kings that can save you out
of the rest. If God put us over to any man's salvation, we shall fall back into
as bad or worse then we were before. Wait therefore on God, and let your
expectation be from him, and study to keep so in with him, that he may please
to perfect what he has begun.

And to this end, Labor especially to rejoice like Christians.

1. Let not your National mercies make you forget your personal interest and
business. Look to the soul as earnestly now as at any time, do not think that
God gets you leave to play, in respect of secret seriousness by his great
mercies vouchsafed to you. Beware you lose not your hearts from God and
Religion, in respect of inward secret duties by these providence. For first,
you will miss of the best part of your comfort if you neglect God, in, and
besides these mercies. These things are not able to satisfy your souls, unless
an inward interest be secured and made under them. Secondly, You are subject to
particular crosses under this general joy. If your joy take you off your duty,
a cross may soon come which may take you off your joy. Thirdly, You must dye,
and this will be little toward that, and no part of your time can be spared
from preparing for that change. Nay you may dye in the midst of these joyful
days, Psalm. 102.22,23. When the people are gathered together, and the
Kingdoms to serve the Lord, he weakened my strength; in the way he shortened
my days, and therefore it is good to mind the soul, what ever your joy in the
Nation be.

2. Dishonor not God, in the day, or upon occasion of your rejoicing: you
pretend to honor God, do not under such a pretense do sacrifice to Satan: And
I must needs here speak of a profane and wicked practice, beginning to break
out, and upon this mercy too. (The worst time that can be for sin to meet so
eminent a mercy in, lest it should turn it back again) and that is, that men
fall a drinking of healths, as if you could not testify your affection to your
King, unless you do apparent dishonor unto God; for men to make this an Engine
to intemperance, and excess in drunkenning, it is very unworthy and unbecoming.
It is that which an Heathen King forbad, Esth. 1.8. His Majesty we hear,
measures the affections of his Subjects by the Prayers they put for him, and
not by the healths they drink unto him; and I hope such as these that are a
dishonor to God, and the King too, will in time be made to know it; Has the
Lord given us such a deliverance as this, and shall we again break his holy
Commandments? Was this all the burden that lay upon us, that we had not
liberty to drink, and revel, or to blaspheme? Or is this the way to have this
mercy continued or completed? O lay aside this wretched Excess, out of
obedience to God, and the King too; For be you well assured, these courses will
soon breed new Judgments amongst us; he that has caused it toward Evening to
be light, can make our Sun to set at noon. Labor to be Christians still, and
to carry like Christians under this wonderful mercy, for the Christian has
not had the least hand in the procuring of it.

FINIS.

