THE ANSWER OF HIS EXCELLENCY The EARL of NEW CASTLE, To a late Declaration of
the Lord FAIREFAX: Dated the 8. of June, 1643.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1643.

By special Command.

The Answer of his Excellency the Earl of New Castle to a Declaration of the
Lord Fairefax, etc.
WHen I received notice lately, of a Declaration Dated the eight of this
Month, made by the Lord Fairefax, intitling himself untruely, and contrary to
his own Conscience, Lord General for all the Northern Forces for King and
Parliament; I could not choose but wonder, either at the strength of his
imagination, to fancy such a Government to himself in His Majesty's Dominions,
without His Royal Assent (especially knowing himself to be Proclaimed a
Rebel, for such Traiterous courses:) or rather at his deep subtilty, under the
pleasant bait of His Majesty's pretended Authority, to hide the cursed hook of
Perjury and Rebellion, and by the sight of this counterfeit Flagge, to seduce
His Majesty's good Subjects, contrary to their Oaths of Allegiance and late
Protestation, from their bounden Obedience, to detestable Faction and Treason:
or howsoever presumptuously to profane His Royal name, to the raising and
fomenting an unnatural War, in the bowels of His own Kingdom, directly
against His Sacred Person, Crown, and Dignity. Without a Commission under His
Majesty's broad Seal, he may be (as he is indeed,) an Usurper and latruder
into power, for which he, and all his Adherents; are obnoxious to His Majesty
and the Law, in the high crime of Rebellion; but cannot justly nor with any
Color of reason, style himself General to the King and Parliament. The very
counterfeiting of this power, without the true owner, leave, and against his
express Command, does evidently show, That he knows he can have no Military
Power without His Majesty, much less against His Majesty. As it is the hearty
desire and prayer of all true Englishmen, that they may speedily see a blessed
conjunction of King and Parliament; so we cannot but take notice, That they who
join them together in their Titles and Pretenses, are they, and only they,
that divide them and sever them in their actions, and retard our hopes of an
happy Union; partly by thrusting us into real mischiefs, for fear of
fictitious and imaginary dangers, and partly by opposing a sound and satisfying
Accommodation. But perhaps it will be said, Though he make bold with the King,
yet he derives a good Authority from the Parliament. When the two Houses are
legally Assembled in a place free from Tumults, whither all the Members may
repair with safety, and Vote freely without prejudice, fear, or faction; then
they are venerable Assemblies: but at the best, neither have nor ever had,
without His Majesty's concurrence, a power to raise Arms, or create Generals,
or order the Militia of the Kingdom. England did never see such an Example,
such a President, never heard of such a Challenge of Military Supremacy, made
by the two Houses without the King, either in cases ordinary or extraordinary,
before the beginning of these pernicious distractions. All the Orders of this
Kingdom, assembled in Parliament, upon mature deliberation, in a case
extraordinary (sitting the Parliament,) have disclaimed this power, and plainly
acknowledged, That it is an essential and inseparable Flower of the Crown,
That it belongs solely to His Majesty, To defend force of Armor, at all times
when it shall please him, and to punish them that shall do contrary: and that
the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Commonalty are bound to aid him as their
Sovereign Lord at all seasons when need shall be.

Where the very Title is so apparently untrue and supposititious, what truth
can be expected in the body of the writing? The first subject of his
Declaration, are the Prisoners taken at Seacroft. Surely he had great reason to
have expressed himself more forward, for the Redemption of those poor seduced
Persons, then hitherto he has done, who without any Authority on his part, or
Obligation on their part, did hazard both their bodies and Souls, merely to do
him service. He pleads for them that

They had quarter promised them, that contrary to the Rules of Christianity,
Charity, the Laws of this Land, and the Law of Arms they have been detained in
durance. It is true they had Quarter given them, not out of any favor to their
Rebellious courses, but out of Pity to their Persons, and their misled seduced
simplicity, in hope that when their eyes were opened they would return to
their former Loyalty: but I never heard that they had any Quarter promised, or
that there was any Treaty held, or any Covenants proposed or condiscended unto,
but a free and absolute submission of themselves. So the sole and single ground
of this invective Declamation, has no more truth in it then the Title. We are
now told of Christian Charity, But where was the consideration of this
Christian Charity, when the accord made at Rothwell, with his own consent, was
perfidiously broken? the observation whereof had saved the effusion of so much
Christian Blood, and prevented so many Murders, Robberies, Imprisonments of
his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, only for keeping their Faith and Allegiance
unstained, and their Oaths inviolated. These men desire to be objects of
Christian Charity, not Subjects, they would have this grace look toward them,
but not from them: or otherwise they would be ashamed to ruin so many
thousands of their Neighbors and Fellow Subjects, and yet talk of Christian
Charity, as if it were a Topicall Argument, not a Theological virtue. His next
stalking horse is the Law of the Land. I would gladly know where that Law is
written, which allows any Liberty or Privilege to a Subject, who is taken in
actual Rebellion against his Lawful Sovereign. If he and his Adherents have
no favor, but what the Laws of this Land do afford them, they must expect
releife in another world, upon their repentance. Neither will the Law of Arms
help him. It is a confessed truth, that there is no Law of Arms, but only
between such as have a power of Arms lawfully invested in them. The Law of
Nations does except a Subject from pleading the Law of Arms against his Prince,
or against any Authority derived from his Prince. But he says further,

They have been detained in such durance and under such Tyranny, as there is
about an 100 of them dead, and about 200 of them made so sick and weak, as
they are not likely to recover, and to the rest of them all necessary
refreshments are denied, with intention to reduce them also to the like
wretched state; and so in time to destroy them all. This and the like
expressions contained in this Paper, being so publicly cast upon the Officers
of this Army under my command, must of necessity reflect upon my self: which
has increased my desire to understand the certainty of these particulars,
which being known, may be a good caution to his Lordship, hereafter to take
heed how he builds his groundless confidence, (which he calls assurance) upon
such weak and partial informations. The wounded Soldiers were dressed and
cured by our Surgeons, at our charges: The sick Prisoners were visited by the
Queens Physicians, and medicines given them at our charges; these were no
signs of any intention to destroy them: They have wanted neither Sermons, nor
other Divine Offices: The Wifes and Sisters of such as have been sick, have had
free Liberty from time to time to attend them: The public collections of such
as favor them, and the private Benevolence of particular Friends, either in
the City or Country, have been duly converted to their best advantage: And
except the inconveniences which accompany a long and throng imprisonment, they
have wanted nothing which moderate men could desire. But an 100 are dead, and
200 more are sick. Let it be admitted, can the most careful Governers keep
sickness out of their Camps? If it were but out of a provident circumspection,
for the safety of the City and ourselves, we had reason to use all our best
endeavors, to keep contagious diseases from among them. This aspersion is
rather cast upon Almighty God, then any way concerns us, unless he could show
in particular, wherein the Officers have failed in doing their duties. To
prevent all occasion of infection, they have been d^vided as much as possibly
could be; Diverse of the Officers and some others are lodged in the City, some
in Davy Hall, some in Merchants Hall, places of good receipt, some in private
Houses, and sundry of them are admitted to walk up and down the City, with a
Keeper. The common Prisoners in the Castle have the Liberty of the Castle,
where they walk all Day long at their pleasure, and at Night lie in the great
Hall, free both from Wind and Rain. Now to censure Men's intentions, upon
probable Surmises, is rashness, to do it against such apparent light, is
far from those Rules of Christian Charity which he pretends. If the Death of
these Prisoners must be imputed to any man, to whom rather then to the Lord
Fairfax himself? who drew them into their Rebellious courses, who has
neglected them in their distress, and now when he has means to redeem them,
seems to urge the sickness of some of them, rather as an Argument of
Discourtesy toward us, then of Relief unto them; as if he measured his
favors not according to their passed service, but his present use. The ground
of this heavy Accusation follows.

Which does more evidently appear, in that I have often offered exchange of
Prisoners taken at Wakefield and other Places, for Redemption of those taken at
Sea-Croft and elsewhere* First, the evidence is not sufficient to prove his
Assertion: He that shall bind the hands of a Phrenetique man, or restrein
Persons who are wilfully bent to hurt themselves or others, is not presently
guilty of an intention to destroy them, since it argues much more probably a
desire to save them. Secondly, an Exchange of Man for Man by the Poll, is not
always an equal Exchange, according to a true Geometrical proportion, if the
one have a more considerable Estate then the other: yet such Exchanges as
these, we have either been necessitated to make with his Lordship, or to have
none at all. Thirdly, a great part of this mortallity was past, before
Wakefield was so accidentally and unfortunately lost; so as his Lordships offer
came late, and unseasonably, even by his own Confession. But leaving all these
advantages, the very truth is this, The Lord Fairefax did once condescend to a
Treaty, before the surprise of Wakefield, about the Redemption of the Sea-Croft
Prisoners: but whether it was serious, or only feined and fraudulent, to cast
a Mist before our eyes, until he got his ends on Wakefield, Let all the World
Judge by the true Relation of it. The Persons appointed to treat for us, were
M. Stanhop and M. Nevill; and for them M. Lambert and one M Robinson, The place
named for the Treaty, was Kippax, The time Whitsun-even. But the very Evening
before the meeting (no sooner) he sent on purpose to forbid it, taking some
slight exception to the place, and desiring that Temple Newsom might be named
for it; and more to the Persons, alleging that M. Lambert and M. Robinson were
Soldiers, but M. Stanhop and M. Nevill were none, and by consequence knew not
how to estimate Soldiers according to their true worth, desiring that two
Soldiers might be named in their rooms. Which exception is so grossly and
palpably frivolous in every man's judgment that knows both parties, that it
argues strongly, that the Treaty was nou^i^hed not heartily or bona fide, but
craftily for private advantage: for the very night following they set forward
toward Wakefield, and surprised it on Whitsunday, early in the morning. But
both before and since the said Treaty, it has been my desire to have the
Prisoners exchanged or redeemed. To which purpose (I must be his Remembrancer)
sundry Propositions have been made unto him, both before this Mortallity fell
among them, and since: as to deliver three hundred of them for three Men, Sir
John Goodricke, Sir Thomas Danby, and Major Hiliard; but it was refused. After
this Sir Thomas Glemham offered the Lord Fairfax to release man for man, to
bring the sick Prisoners in Carts or on Horseback, and to deliver them two
miles from Tadcaster, in the midde way between York and Leeds, attended only
with one Troop of Horse, if the Lord Fairfax would do the like, The Troops
not to come within a quarter of a Mile each of other, but Officers to be
appointed on either side to receive the Prisoners, and the Lord Fairefax and
Sir Thomas Glemham to engage their words respectively each to other, that no
interruption should be given to either party, going or returning: but this
offer also was rejected as the former, unless they might be delivered at
Kippax, the place formerly refused by himself. And lastly, after General
Goring was taken Prisoner, there was a Proposition made to deliver the whole
700 upon very favorable terms, so as the delivery of General Goring, might be
treated of and concluded at the same time: but that was slighted also. By all
which it is as clear as the Sun, that the Prisoners have had as fair
Accommodation from us, as we could possibly afford, or their condition could
expect* and that they may thank the Lord Fairfax, and none but the Lord
Fairfax and his Counselors, for their long durance; that the subdolous Arts,
the nice exceptions, the frivolous pretenses, and the menacing lines of him or
his Counselors, have been and still are the sole and proper cause, under Gods
just judgment of their deaths, who either have been or shall be swept away in
this Mortallity which is fallen among them: yet he is not afraid to impute it
to the Lord Goring and others. So it follows in his Declaration.

Which is refused and opposed by the Lord Goringe and other Persons in that
Army. I speak upon good assurance, the Lord Goring never interposed in this
matter until his Sons sickness, and then he was a Furtherer and Promoter of
these Prisoners Liberty, until the Lord Fairefax by his threatening and
unseasonable expressions in a Letter yet extant, (that such as took and
detained those Prisoners, did run an hazard of their Life's and fortunes,) had
awakened him to a just consideration of His Majesty's Honor and advantage. And
since his Sons inprisonment, he has been an earnest Mover for a fair Treaty.
If he seek to include his Son therein, if he judge it unequal that all the
Prisoners be restored to their Liberty, and he only who took them Prisoners
remain in strict Custody, who can blame him? the Lord Fairfax confesses in
one of his Letters, that when an offer was made to him for the exchange of
these Prisoners, he did on purpose delay it for four or five days, to try if
in the mean time he could procure the releasing of some of his Superior
Officers. The case is the very same, and his Officers had no such near
relation to him, as such a Son to such a Father. But if the Lord Gorings
Desires be pertinaciously opposed, he is confident in the goodness of Almighty
God and the success of his Royal Master, that Deliverance shall arise shortly
to his Son by another means. So from the Seacroft Prisoners he proceeds to
Captain Fairfax.

And for as much also as Captain Fairfax and other Commanders of Rotheram and
those parts, having by Treaty their Liberty promised before they yielded up the
place, are not withstanding made Prisoners, contrary to right and the Law of
Arms. I have showed before that neither he, nor any of his pretended Captains
in this War, can challenge any interest in the Law of Arms, yet nevertheless
whatsoever was promised to any of them, either by my self, or by any Person by
me trusted, shall be really and effectually performed, so soon as it shall be
made to appear that it was promised. There was a Treaty indeed, and almost a
conclusion, but broken off by themselves, and afterward the Town delivered up
by the Commissioners or Deputies named and trusted by the Town to negotiate for
them, (who were all desirous to return to their Loyalty and Obedience,)
notwithstanding the reluctation of Captain Fairfax and the other Captains. Am
I bound to make good all those Covenants which themselves deserted? Praesta
mihi omnia eadem, and idem sum. This being the case, they might all have been
detained, without breach of promise. Yet Captain Fairfax was permitted to to go
to the Lord Fairfax, upon his own word to return, and has been used with as
much Freedom and Courtesy as he can desire; the others were stayed not for
the business of Rotheram, but for the contribution toward the charge of the
War which themselves had helped to raise, as was expressly concluded in the
Treaty of Rotheram, if it had succeeded: and that with so much Courtesy and
Respect, that the Principal of them M. Westby is fairly slipped away. And to
let the World see how unwilling I am to come near the brinke of
promise-breaking, or within the suspicion of it, I have given order for Captain
Fairfax his liberty. He proceeds

Captain Reynolds, Captain Fulthorpe, M. Dalton, and M. Lilburne being all Men
of quality are all thrown into Dungeons, and there kept in most miserable and
inhumane durance. Thus he busieth himself to hunt after pretenses, what are
these four to him? two of them being Bishopric Men, the other two serving
under another command: unless he be the General Superintendent of the North,
as he would be the General of the Northern Forces. But let us examine it. All
thrown into Dungeons and there kept in most Miserable and Inhumane Durance;
Very high expressions: and all this to be published to the World, by the Lord
Fairfax in a Declaration under his hand, and scarce one word of it to be true
sub modo, as it is related? He that was the Penner of this passage needs not
paint a Cypress Tree, to move his Spectators to pity. Surely the Lord Fairfax
will never more give credit to those Informers, who suggested this unto him.
Captein Fulthorpe and M. Lilburne have the best chamber in the Castle to
themselves. Captein Reynolds and M. Dalton are in the Summer Hall, with another
Gentleman one M. Constable, a prisoner for debt: And they three have that long
Room to themselves, where sometimes above thrice three Debtors have been kept.
The two former have the Freedom of the Castle, The two latter are indeed
restreined and upon just grounds: Dalton for preaching openly Sedition and
Rebellion to the prisoners, and Reynolds for seconding him in it.

His last charge is about Doctor Bastwick and Captain Ludlow. And also that
Doctor Bastwick and Captain Ludlow are made close prisoners, and all
conveniences for their health denied to them, insomnch as all the Gentlemen
aforesaid are like to perish, through those unusual tortures and durances,
which they suffer in their Imprisonment at York. Tortures and unusual
tortures? who inflicteth them? when? upon whom? Falsehood always loves to go
masked in generalities. Neither are those two Prisoners any thing to him at
all, except his Christian Charity which is so cold to his Neighbors, do glow
toward strangers. When Doctor Bastwick and Captain Ludlow were first committed
to the Castle of York, they had all the Liberty which that place could afford
and much better Accommodation then they deserved; I believe as good as the best
Doctors in the Kingdom, who are now in the custody of the other party do find.
And in this state they might have continued if a Malignant heart, an envious
eye, and an inveterate rancour against Sovereignty, had not incited them to
broach pestilent principles to make their Chamber a School of error, a
poisoned Fountain to infect the minds of His Majesty's Subjects, with
Schismatic and Seditious opinions. And yet for all this, they were not so
restrained, but that they had two h^u^es allowed each day, to walk abroad
within the precinct's of the Castle, for their health and recreation; until
their Letters were intercepted forty Miles from York, brimme-full of
prodigious Treason against the Person of His Sacred Majesty, and by them
acknowledged to Sir Thomas Glemhan to be their own hands, and maintained, That
they would Seal the same with their Bloods. Then as it was high time they were
confined to their lodging, an easy punishment for such an exorbitant crime.
Who will suffer a scabb'd sheep to mingle with his Flock? We use to shut up the
doors of persons infected with the Plague, without any breach of the Liberty
of the Subject. If a Papist do but attempt to seduce any of His Majesty's
Subjects, it is death by our Law. And it is true, That being in this condition,
of late they both fell sick, not of a Consumption out of Grief, or for want of
necessary sustenance, but of an hot Fever, whereof Ludlow is dead, and
Bastwicke is upon his recovery, God give him grace to amend his manners. But
that corollary which follows, That all conveniences for their health are denied
them, was forged in the same shop with the rest of the Declaration. For they
have had both their Medicines and Apothecaries to attend them, what and whom
they desired; and their Divine to give them Ghostly Counsel and comfort, and
all other expediences which they did request. If that truth which they cry for
in Religion, be of the same stamp with their moral truths, God deliver all
good Christians from it.

In the close of his Paper he intimates the like hard measure to our Prisoners
taken at Wakefield, who as he says have hitherto been used with all humanity
and civility. I hope that to crowd them together into filthy and worse then
Augean Stables, is no part of this civility. I hope that to choke them with the
fumes of their own ordure, and to bury them alive in subterraneous Cellars, is
no part of this humanity: where they cannot behold the light of Heaven but
through a little grate of two spans breadth: and this only because they
remember their Duties, Oaths, Obligations to His Majesty, better then
themselves. But I delight not in recriminations.

By this we may conjecture in part, what is the true scope of this Declaration,
to cast an aspersion upon His Majesty's Officers, to lead the Friends of the
sick Prisoners into a fools Paradise in expectation of some miraculous
deliverance, to remove from himself the blame and envy of their long durance,
as if he desired an exchange but we stopped it, and lastly, to excuse the hard
and unhumane usage of our Prisoners in his Army. But to unmaske him: I do
hereby declare to all the world, that I ever have been, and still am ready to
entertein a fair Treaty about the Prisoners. And now at last his Lordship may
do well to keep an audit with his own Conscience and understanding, to take
notice of that deluge of mischiefs and miseries which he has brought upon
this County, and made his native Country a field or stage of blood, as if the
Liberty of the Subject did consist in a Liberty, or rather licentiousness for
them to do what they list, and to compel all others that are not of their
Faction to suffer what they list. He may do well to consider, That these men
whom he imprisons are free men born, and fellow Subjects with himself, and
with them from whom he pretends to derive his Authority; That God and their
King will expect a severe account of it; That the empty name and spurious title
of General of the Northern Forces for King and Parliament, contrary to the
light of reason, contrary to the plain Law of the Land, much more irregular and
exorbitant then the most pernicious Presidents of the worst times which ever
England groaned under, will be no satisfactory plea for so many life's, and so
many Souls as have perished, and are like to perish in this unnatural
Rebellion; That when his guilt is elevated to the highest, the Catastraphe
(without timely prevention) will be the utter ruin of him and his Adherents.
And his seduced Followers may do well also to open their eyes, and consider at
how dear a rate hitherto they have purchased nothing but Repentance, with the
ruin of so many Estates, the effusion of so much blood, the peril of so many
Souls, taken away in actual Rebellion, without knowing either what they
desire, or what they fear, without one Text of Scripture or one particle of Law
to warrant their actions, being merely led by the persuasions of the Lord
Fairfax and their seditious Preachers, so much as in them is, to overthrow what
they desire to build up, the Protestant Religion, the Law of the Land, the
Liberty of the Subject; That a timely submission is their only remedy; That if
they still continue their desperate courses, His Majesty and His Servants are
guiltless, and they may blame themselves for all those Mischiefs which fall
upon their own Heads.

FINIS.

