THE Newcastle Associators; OR, THE TRIMMERS LOYALTY.
Being a true Relation how several Sanctified Brethren were Apprehended, and
found Signing the Association, (several others having made their Escapes) at
the Assizes at Newcastle, August 2. 1684.

To the Tune of Ignoramus; or, Lay by your Pleading.
I.
LAY by your Reason,
Truth's out of Season;
Since Treason's Loyalty, and Loyalty is Treason.
Toney the Jealous,
Sidney the Zealous,
Contrived the Nation's fall, yet both were Loyal Fellows
With Patience, Narrations,
And ASSOCIATIONS.
Lord what ado there was for Teckley's Reformations?
They Plotted, and Lotted, and Sotted, and Voted;
And never will have done, 'till their Heads are all Promoted
II.
With Insurrections,
Lawless Objections,
They studied to promote the Commonwealth Projections.
Monarchy Haters,
ASSOCIATORS,
Did Swear into a League with Rascals, whigs and Traitors,
Then Venture, Indenture,
In Bonds they do Enter:
Whilst at the Royal Pair their Malice still did center:
They Plotted, and Lotted, and Sotted, and Voted,
And never will have done till all the Tribe's promoted.
III.
But the Brave Chief Justice,
In whom our Trust is,
Will do the Rebels Right, who in Law the first is.
In this High Station,
Purging the Nation
Of ^ll that did promote this damned Association.
Bakers and Quakers,
And Monarchy-haters,
And all that join in League with Associators,
They Plotted, and Lotted, and Sotted, and Voted,
And never will have done till all the Train's Promoted.
IV.
He late surprises,
In quaint Disguises,
No less then seventeen at Newcastle Sizes:
Villains he scented,
That had Indented,
And with the Cooper had a new Tap invented.
Jack Shallow, Sim. Swallow,
Will. Weeks. and Tom. Tallow,
Nine were for Trayters found, the next in course will follow
They Plotted, and Lotted, and Sotted, and Voted,
And never will have done till all their Tribe's Promoted.
V.
These on their Trial
Would all be Loyal,
Although the Royal Race they studied to Destroy all.
Their False hearts founded,
The rest Confounded;
Guilt flying in their Face, for the Fact absconded.
Both Richard the Bitcher,
And Williams the Letcher,
Whilst Thumb, and Dick, and Tom are left behind to stretch for it.
They Plotted, and Lotted, and Sotted, and Voted,
And in good time we hope will likewise be Promoted.
VI.
Toney that Scented,
And first Invented
This Holy Covenant, was the first Absented.
Of all forsaken,
To save his Bacon,
He into Whigland crawls, but was overtaken.
The Starter's a Martyr,
Death gives no Quarter,
Whilst Walcot and the rest were by the Head cut shorter.
They Plotted, and Lotted, and Sotted, and Voted,
And never will have done till their Heads are all Promoted.
VII.
Russel did Try for it,
Sidney did Die for it,
While Rumbold, Gray and Tom, with the rest did fly for it.
For all their Teaching,
Ferguson's Preaching,
His Head's upon a Pole, and his Quarters Bleaching:
The Starter's a Martyr,
The Squire gives no Quarter,
For now the Bully Knight is by the Head cut Shorter.
They Plotted, and Lotted, and Sotted, and Voted.
And never will have done till their Quarters are Promoted.
VIII.
Now be Confounded
Whig, Trimmer, Roundhead,
And all the Factious Lump of Treason so Compounded.
By every Action,
We see your Faction
Tends only to Involve the Nation in Distraction.
Your Lopping, and Fopping,
And Blunderbuss Popping,
And all your flying for it will not save your Necks from Chopping.
You Plotted, and Lotted, and Sotted, and Voted,
And in good time we hope you all shall be Promoted.
Printed and Sold by Nath. Thompson at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden
near Charing Cross.


