A NEW YEARS GIFT: BEING A POEM Dedicated to the lasting Memory of That Worthy
and Learned Dr. TITUS OATS, the First Discoverer of the Popish Plott, to
destroy the Sacred Person of his Majesty, and to Extirpate the Protestant
Religion.
GREAT! -- I am in a plunge what more to say,
Our Great Creator shall we call Thee? Nay:
That Title is too great, we all must own
Due only unto GOD (to HIM Alone;)
The highest Titles by which men express
Their Deityes or Demigods are less
Than Thy Deserts: should we Contract Thy Fame
Within such narrow Limits, Thou might blame
Mankind, and justly Brand us with a Blot
Of shame so foul as could not be forgot;
Had All Angelike Souls, Enlarged, that might
Retain Conceptions of Thy Worth Aright,
Then neither Prose nor Verse would needful be
To tell All Future Ages, Thou art He
Whom God has sent into the World to Rear
A New Meridian in our Northern Sphere:
To tell All Ages which shall after come
Thou art the Harbinger of sudden Doom
(More Fatal than Great Hannibal) to Rome:
He only threatened (as did many more)
And only made their large swollen Heart Strings sore
By driving them into a Punique Fright,
But Thou have broke Their haughty Heart Strings quite;
We cannot express This Wondrous Act of Thine,
But by such Characters as are Divine!
Shall we compare Thee then to Alexander,
To Hannibal, or any great Commander?
For shame: These, are All-Man-Sir's, Hectoring Boys,
Who having purchased Ginger-bread and Toys,
(For Towns and Castles are such things,) suppose
They only merit Titles who have Those,
Although They swim to Empires in a Flood
Of Fathers, Mothers, Widows, Childrens blood,
Spending their precious time in Emulous wrangle
(In dust and crowd and sweat) to catch a Spangle.
Great Caesar shall we Style Thee? that were less
Than if we owned (which yet we must profess)
We know not what to call Thee, but Our Heart,
Our Life, Our Breathing Soul, Our Vital Part:
Our almost All we have, and Dear to HIM
Who did Entrust Thee (for Our Cherubim)
To Guard Our British Isle (that little World)
Which else had Topsie-turvy quite been hurled,
And to a dismal Chaos had been brought,
More dreadful than the most tremendous Thought.
Great Guardian of this Honorable Trust,
Blessed to All Ages (though by Rome Accursed.)
We read in ancient Story of Saint George,
Who stuck his Lance into a Dragons gorge:
We knew His Namesake also at the Charge
To tug home Our Great Charles his laden Barge.
Both These wrought Wonders! but Thou have Outdone
Those Heroes, and far greater Fame have won;
The former slew a Beast with Spear and Sword,
But Thou Unarmed wast, yet, by Thy Word
(Spoke Powerfully) Thou gav'st a Mortal Wound
To Rome (the Old Great Dragon) and the Sound
Of Thy Name only, brought Death, and did Slay
All Serpents, Tigers, Panthers, Wolfes of prey,
Who in That mighty Forest lurking lay.
By which means, Thou have brought the World to Rest,
Which by This Vermin has been sore Oppressed;
Of All brave Champions, it shall be confessed,
To Thy Eternal Praise Thou art the Best.
The Latter placed Our Monarchs Crown on's head,
But in All after Worlds, it shall be said
That, Thou, did Raise Him Up, even from the Dead!
And His Three Kingdom's also did Thou Save
By This Strange Resurrection from the Grave!
Blessed Wonder of Our Age! we cannot give over
But must Contemplate on Thee more and more:
Were England, India, we should Thee Adore!
Thou art The Skillful Pilot of Our Age,
Who, when Rome's Water-floods began to Rage,
And all its rolling Billows (Ghastly Waves
More dismal than the most untimely Graves).
Began to Overwhelm Our Floating Boat,
When we were Sleeping, and had scarce a Thought
Of Danger nigh, Then, did Thy Watchful Soul
Find more than English Courage to Control
That Tempest which had like to Overwhelm,
If (under GOD) Thou had not sat at Helm.
Great OATS, when we were breathing out our last,
Thy wakefull Thoughts on Englands Clock were cast:
Thou heard'st It strike Our Midnight, whilst the Popes
False Dial pointed Noon, by Its secret gropes
Was almost at the Solstice of His hopes;
Which (to Thy constant Praise) did end in Tyburn Ropes;
A New Years Gift we seek for, but find None
To Give, which we can truly call Our Own.
Thou have long since each Corner of Our Heart,
(Except that which for GOD is set apart,
And for our King:) None can say This -- is mine
Or That -- though we Possess, the Right is Thine:
Yet since all Tenants to their Landlords bring
A Token of their Duty (though the thing
Is inconsiderable) Thou will not scorn
Though we can bring Thee but this Pepper-Corn;
Accept It (Dear Sir) since That round dark Ball
Shows that we fain would give Thee More than All
We have; AND, if All Earth were Ours to give,
It is Thy Due, ( Blessed Instrument by Whom we Live;)
Away with Alablaster Statues, Those
Are Puppet-like, fit but for Bartholms Shows:
We cannot carve Thy Worth in Monument
Of Stone or Silver, (though our good intent
In that dumb Signature we may present;)
These are such Hieroglyphics, as the Rust
Of Cank'ring Time Consumes and turns to dust;
But Thine shall never Fade, ( Thou Wise and Just.)
Since then no curious Art of mortal Man
A Shadow of Thy Self so lively can
Describe, but that Thy strange Illustrious Ray
Will suffer some Unjust Eclipse that way,
OUR GREAT OMNIPOTENCE, for Thy Blessed Sake
A Miracle to work did undertake,
That All succeeding Ages may Rehearse
His Glory, in Thy Praise, beyond all Verse.
FINIS.
Anno Dom. 1680.

