THE PHILOSOPHICAL AND Physical Opinions,

Written by her Excellency, the Lady MARCHIONESS of NEWCASTLE.

LONDON

Printed for J. Martin and J. Allestrye at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard
1655.

Collegium sive Aula S.S.t Trinitatis in Academia Cantabrigiensi, 1700


TO THE LADY MARQVESSE OF NEWCASTLE, On her Book entitled her Philosophical,
and Physical Opinions.
WEre the old Grave Philophers alive,
How they would envy you, and all would strive
Who first should burn their Books; since they so long
Thus have abused the world, and taught us wrong,
With hard words that mean nothing; which nonsense.
When we have Conn'd by heart, then we commence
Masters and Doctors, with grave looks; and then
Proud, because think, thus we are learned men,
And know not that we do know nothing right,
Like blind men now, led only by your sight.
And for diseases, let the Doctors look
Those worthy learned men but in your Book,
They Will find such news in their art, and so true
As old Hippocrates he never knew,
Nor yet vast Gallen; so you need not seek
Farther then English, to know less in Greek;
If you read this and study it, you may
Out of dark ignorance see brighter Day.
W. NEWCASTLE.

AN EPISTLE To justify the LADY NEW CASTLE, AND Truth against falsehood, laying
those false, and malicious aspersions of her, that she was not Author of her
BOOKS.
I Would willingly begin with the common, and Dunstable rode of Epistles,
Gentle Readers, but finding you much otherwise, I will fall to our discourse in
hand. First it is but your envious Supposition that this Lady must have converst
with many Scholars of all kinds in learning, when it is well known the
contrary, that she never convert with any professed Shooler in learning, for to
learn, neither did she need it, since she had the conversation of her
Honorable, and most learned Brother from her cradle; and since she was married,
with my worthy and learned Brother; and for my self I have lived in the great
world a great while, and have thought of what has been brought to me by the
senses, more then was put into me by learned discourse; for I do not love to be
led by the nose, by Authority and old Authors, ipse dixit will not serve my
turn, were Aristotle made a more Philosophical Bible then he is, and all
scholars to have a lively faith in him, does not move me to be of their
Philosophical church at all. And I assure you her conversation with her
Brother, and Brother-in-law, were enough without a miracle or an impossibility
to get the language of the arts, and learned professions, which are their
terms, without taking any degrees in Schools. It is not so difficult a thing
though they make mountains of mole-hills, and say they, thatthis Lady uses
many terms of the Schools; but truly she did never Impe her high-flying
Phancies, with any old broken Feathers out of any university; and if you read
well, which is to understand, and look on her Poems, you will (...) they are
all new born Phansies, never touched of heretofore. But for the rarity of the
terms, or nests of Divines, Philosophers, Physicians, Geometricians, Astrono
mers, and the rest of the Gown-Tribe, as one terms them, how is it possible
she should know them; And first for Divinity, when she speaks of
Predestination, Free Will, (...), and consubstantiation; truly these terms are
not so hard to be got by heart as to be understood, since I believe it puzzels
the learned to make sense of them. But I beseech you give this Lady so much
capacity, as to get them by heart, since every Tub-preacher discourses of them,
and every sanctified wife gossips them in wafers, and hipocris at every
Christening. Next are the terms of the Philosophers, Certainly it is no
Conjuration to conceive Atoms, invisible, and indivisible bodies, elements,
earth, air, water and fire, whereof your elementary fire under the moon is much
doubted of, and then you have but three elements. Motion is a difficult thing
indeed, to understand the varietes of it, but certainly not of a body moved,
that is no such transcendent thing. Dilation a spreading, Contraction a
gathering together Rarificationthinning, and Condensation thickning; I confess
in the Latin it seems very learned, but in the English very vulgar, there-fore
I beseech you give this Lady leave to have the wit, and the judgment to
understand these Great no mysteries. And put the case now that this Lady should
name materia prima, -and understand the English of it to be first matter, and
ask her friend again what they mean by it, and he tells her they say they mean
matter without form, and she should answer, there is no matter without some
form, so materia prima are two Latin words that mean nothing. An incorporeal
substance is too learned to be understood, so that is waved. Now for the terms
of Physicians, when she speaks of Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy and Blood, and of
Ventricles in the heart and brain, of veins, arteries and nerves, and
discourses of fevers, apoplexies, convulsions, Dropsies, and diverse other
diseases with their particular causes, symptoms and cures; how should this Lady
understand these terms say some? truly a good Farmers wife in the country, by
seeing one of her sheep opened, may well understand the terms of most of
these, and a Constables wife of a hundred in Essex that uses Physic and
Surgery may well talk of the diseases, without any great learned mystery, they
are so plain and so common, as none needsto construe Greek in Hippocrates or
Galen for them. But would you know how we know the great Mystery of these
Physical terms, I am almost ashamed to tell you; not that we have been ever
sickly, but by Melancholy often supposed our selves to bave such diseases as we
had not, and learned Physicians were too wise to put us out of that humor, and
so these terms cost us much more then they are Worth, and I hope there is no
body so malicious, as to envy our bargain, neither truly do I repent my
bargain, since Physicians are the most rational men I have converst with all,
and my worthy and very good friends, and truly this Lady never converst with
any Physician of any disease, but what she thought she had her self, neither
has she converst with many of that profession. Now for the great learning of
knowing the terms of Geometricians, when this Lady touches upon Triangles,
Squares, Circles, Diameters, Circumferences, Centers, lines straight and
crooked etc. I will not dissect these great mysteries, because they are so very
common, as the meanest understands all these terms, even to Joyners and
Carpenters, therefore surely this Lady is capable of them.

Then of Astronomers, say they, when she speak's of the Horizon, Meridian,
Equator, Zodiac, Eclyptick, Tropicks, Poles of the world etc. When these
terms are understood that's their meaning, they are no such subtilties, since
every boy may be taught them, with an apple for the Globe, and the parings for
the spears, it is so ridiculous then to think that this Lady cannot understand
these terms, as it is rather to be laughed at, then to trouble ones self to
answer. And that invincible Problem, the quadrature of the circle, as they call
it, which makes me doubt that they think themselves wiser, for naming the
quadrature, then squaring the circle, who lives that has not heard of it, and
who lives that can do it, and who is dead that has done it, and put the case
it were done, what then? why then it is squared, and that is all, and that all is
nothing, much ado about nothing. But we will leave these impertinent,
malicious, and most false exceptions to the Lady, and her Books, and will now
begin with her book of Poems, examining first her Philosophy there. That's an
old opinion of Atoms, say some, witness Democrates and many others; It Is very
true they have talked of atoms, but did they ever dispose of them as they are
there, or tell you what several sorts there are of them, and what figure they
bear, and being joined, what forms they produce of all kinds, in all things,
if you have read any such things before, i will be bold to burn the Book. Why
then all these are new opinions, and grounded upon Reason, I say some, but they
are Paradoxes, what then? I hope a Paradox may be as true as an old opinion,
and an old opinion as false as a Paradox, for neither the one nor the other
makes a truth, either the new or the old, for what is most reason and
reasonable; for in natural Philosophy, one opinion may be as true as another,
since no body knows the first cause in nature of any thing. Then this Ladies
Philosophy is excellent, and will be thought so hereafter, and the truth is
that it was wholly, and only wrought out of her own brain, as there are many
witnesses, by the several sheets that she sent daily to be writ fair for the
press. As for her Poems, where are the exceptions to these? marry they miss
sometimes in the numbers and in the rimes. It is well known by the copies, that
those faults lie most upon the Corrector, and the Printer; but put the case
there might be some slips in that kind, is all the book damned for it, no
mercy Gentlemen? when for the numbers, every Schoole-boy can make them on his
fingers, and for Rimes Fenner would have put down Ben. Johnson, and yet neither
the boy or Fenner so good Poets. No, it is neither of those either makes, or
condemns a Poet, it is new born and creating Phansies that Glorifies a Poet,
and in her Book of Poems, I am sure there is excellent, and new Phancies, as
have not been writ by any, and that it was only writ by her is the greatest
truth in the world. Now for her Book called the Worlds Olio, say some, how is
it possible that she showld have such experience, to write of such things so; I
answer, that I living long in the great world, and having the various fortunes
of what they call good and bad, (...) the reading of men might bring me to as
much experience as the reading of Books, and this I have now and then discourst
unto this Lady, who has wisely and elegantly dressed it in her own way, and
sumptuously clothed it, at the charge of her own Phancies and expressions; I
say some of them she has heard from me, but not the fortieth part of her book,
all the rest are absolutely her own in all kinds, this is an ingenious truth,
therefore believe it. As for the Book of her Philosophical opinions, there is
not any one thing in the whole Book, that is not absolutely spun out by her own
studious fancy, and if you will lay by a little passion against writers, you
will like it, and the best, of any thing she has writ, therefore read it once
or twice, not with malice to find a little fault, but with judgment to like
what is good. Truly I cannot believe so unworthily of any Scholar, honoring
them so much as we both do, that they should envy this Lady, or should have so
much malice or emulation, to cast such false aspersions on her, that she did
not write those Books that go forth in her name, they will hardly find out who
else writ them, and I protest none ever writ them but her self; You should
rather encourage her, then by false suppositions to let her see the world is so
ill natured, as to believe falsehoods before truths. But here is the crime, a
Lady writes them, and to entrench so much upon the male prerogative, is not to
be forgiven; but I know Gown-men will be more civil to her, because she is of
the Gown too, and therefore I am confident you will defend her and truth, and
thus be undeceived. I had not troubled you with this, but that a learned
Doctor, our very noble friend, writ is word of the infidelity of some people in
this kind; whatsoever I have write is absolutely truth, which I here as a man
of Honor set my hand to.

W. NEWCASTLE.

TO THE READER.
IN my Book called the Worlds Olio, there are such gross mistakes in
misplacing of Chapters, and so many literal faults, as my book is much
disadvantaged thereby.

As for Chapters, there are many misplaced, for some Chapters that belong to
that part of diseases, are misplaced among those of natural Philosophy, as one
that belongs to sleep, and three Chapters that are of the temper of Air;
likewise another Chapter of the strength of the soul and body is placed between
the first and last part of the Commonwealth, which nothing belongs to it: for
though there is a soul and body belonging to every Commonwealth, yet not such
a soul and body as I have discourst of there.

For the soul of a Commonwealth is Actual Justice, and industry.

The soul of a man is Contemplation, Reason, and imagination.

And the body of a Commonwealth, is the Citizens therein, and Magistrates
thereof.

And the body of a man is the senses therein, and the members thereof.

Likewise the strength of a Commonwealth is the Laws.

And the strength of a man's body is the nerves.

Likewise a short copy of verses which is at the latter end of the book, is
what I intended for this book, as being my beloved of all my works, prefering
it as my masterpiece, although I do believe it will not please my Readers,
because as I have said in some of my Epistles, few take delight in the study of
Natural Philosophy, yet those that delight not, or slight the study, or
dispraise the work, make it not the less rational, for reason will be reason
in the despite of the most malicious detractors or sophsterian censurers, but
for the faults and mistakes in my other works, and perchance the like mischance
may come to these, and although I know a passion cannot recall an injury past:
yet I cannnot but grieve at the misfortune, as for a friend that should be hurt
or lamed by some unhappy accident, but if there be any other faults of
indiscretions in it, I the Author am to be pardoned by reason somewhat of it was
writ in the dawning of my knowledge, and experience, and not having a clear
light I might chance to stamble in dark ignorance on molehills of errors; not
that I accuse my book of faults; but arm my self with truth against crabbed
censurers. Likewise I do not lay all the faults in my book to the Printers or
Correctors charge, for that would be so great an injustce, as I could never
forgive my self for the crime, for the Chapters that are misplaced are through
my fault, by reason I sent some part of it after the book was in the press,
and it seems that the Printer or corrector not understanding where to place
them, put them in a wrong place.

But the literate faults I lay to their charge, whereof I cannot choose but
complain, for in some places it is so falsely printed, as one word alters the
sense of many lines; whereby my book is much prejudiced, and not only by
putting in false words, as a costements, for accoutraments, ungrateful for
ungraceful, muster for mufler, and the like; but the significancy of words, to
express a singular for a plural; yet I must confess that this book is much
truer Printed then my book of Poems, for where this book has one fault, that
has ten; for which I can forgive the Printer, and Corrector ten times easier
then I did for the other, but setting aside the faults of my book, and
complaining thereof, I must take the liberty in my own behalf to complain of
this ill natured, and unbeleeving age, in not allowing me to be the right
Author thereof; and though it were an endless work to answer every idle and
impertinent question, or malicious objection; for I am assured that rational,
wise, learned, and just persons will never make a doubt, knowing that nature
has power to temper a brain as she pleases both to receive, retain, discuss,
and create, yet for truths sake I am willing to satisfy my worthy readers (if
I can) although I had thought I had answered it in my former writings.

But to answer those objections that are made against me, as first, how should
I come by so much experience, as I have expressed in my several books to have?
I answer, I have had by relation, the long and much experience of my Lord, who
has lived to see and be in many changes of fortunes, and to converse with many
men of sundry nations, ages, qualities, tempers, capacities, abilities, wits,
humors, fashions and customs.

And as many others, especially wives go from church to church, from ball to
ball, from collation to collation, gossiping from house to house, so when my
Lord admits me to his company, I listen with attention to his edifying
discourse, and I govern my self by his Doctrine; I dance a measure with the
muses, feast with the Sciences, or sit and discourse with the arts.

The second is, that since I am no Scholar, I cannot know the names and terms
of art, and the diverse and several opinions of several Authors, I answer, that
I must have been a natural fool if I had not known and learnt them, for they
are customarily taught all children from their nurses breast being ordinarily
discoursed of in every family that is of quality, and the family from whence I
sprung are neither natural idiots, nor ignorant fools, but the contrary, for
they were rational, learned, understanding and witty.

And when I said I never converst an hour with professed Philosophers, for
indeed in this age, I have not heard of many which do profess it, or an
intimate acquaintance or familiar conversation with professed scholars, nor so
much discourse as to learn from them, for three or four visits do not make an
intimacy, nor familiarity, nor can much be learnd therefrom, for visiting and
entertaining discourse, for the most part are either cautionary, frivolous,
vain, idle, or at least but common and ordinary matter, and most commonly all
visiting discourses, are after one and the same manner, although the company be
several; but I did not think my readers would have been so rigid as to think I
excluded my husband, brothers, and the rest of my family, neither are they
professed Philosophers nor Scholars, although they are learned therein, or to
believe I was so ridiculously foolish, or so foolishly vain, or so basely false
as that I strive to make the world to believe, I had all my experience and
knowledge before I was born, and that my native Language came by instinct, and
that I was never taught my A, B, C; or the marks and names of several things;
but I hope my book has more spiteful enemies then faults; for I have said in
an Epistle before the second part of my Olio, that if I had never seen nor
heard so much as I have done, should never have been able to have writ a book.

Thirdly, that I had taken feathers out of the Universities to enlarge the
wings, of my fancy; I answer, no more then David took the wool from his sheeps
backs to cloth his Poetical Phancies of devotion, or as I may say his devout
Poetry which is dressed with simulising.

But it has been known in several ages, that even poor Peasents that hear
nothing but the blating of sheep: the lowing of herds, the crowing of cocks,
and the like, and their ordinary discourses of nothing but of their market, or
the like, have been high flying Poets, politic states men, wise Governors,
prudent Soldiers, subtle Philosophers, excellent Physicians, and what not,
even to be eloquent Orators, and Divine preachers, as the holy writ will make
manifest to us, and I believe many more are mentioned in other Histories of
less authority; thus we may observe that nature is Prevalent in all qualities
and conditions; And since nature is so generous to distribute to those that
fortune has cast out, and education has neglected, why should my readers
mistrust nature should be sparing to me, who have been honorably born,
carefully bred, and nobly married to a wise man, from whom, as I have said in
some of my Epistles, in my book called the Worlds Olio, and do here say again,
and again, if it will satisfy the Readers that I am my Lords Scholar, and as I
have learnt, so I do daily learn knowledge and understanding, wit, and the
purity of my language; and let me intre at my Readers to be so just to me, as
not to condemn me for an idiot by their objections and doubts, as not believing
I am capable of learning, but let me tell my Readers that what I have learned
since I was married, it is from my Lord, and what I had learned before it was
from wy own family, as from my own brothers, for my father died when I was
young, and not from strangers; for though I have seen much company, yet I have
converst with few, and I take conversation to be in talking, which I have not
practiced very much, unless it be to particular friends, for naturally I am so
wedded to contemplations, that many times when I have been in company, I had
not known one word they have said, by reason my busy thoughts have stopped the
sense of my hearing; and though I prefer the delight of contemplation, before
the pleasure of the senses, yet when the nearest and dearest of my friends
speak, as my husband, brothers, sisters, or their children, my affection is
such that I give such an atention to them, as if I had no other thoughts but of
what they say, or any other sense but hearing; but as I have said of the names
and terms of art, and the several opinions of the Ancients, and the
distinguishment of the sciences, and the like, I learned them from my nearest
and dearest friends as from my own brothers, my Lords brother, and my Lord (but
having the words and terms of art makes me not a Philosopher) nor a Poet; and
if every one in justice ought to have a due, then nature must have a share, and
truly I will never be so ungrateful as not to acknowledge her favors, or to
belie her in saying she has not been bountiful to me, for she has given me
such materials, as I hope to build me a monumental fame therewith; but to
satisfy my Readers, I will tell them as well as I can how I came to know, and
understand passages, all though I never practiced, or were a spectator therein,
or thereof; as put the case my husband, or brothers should tell me of an Army
of horse and foot, and that two Armies encountered, and fought a battle, and
express the forms and figures, rancks and fiels, the flanck, the wings the
vans, the rears, and the like, by which relation to my conceit I see it in my
brain as perfectly, as if the battle was pitched, and fought there, and my fancy
will build discourse therefrom. Likewise if they should tell me all the parts
of an Animal body, and how they are formed and composed, I conceive it as
perfectly to my understanding as if I had seen it dissected although I never
did and therefore may be deceived in my understanding, for truly I have
gathered more by piece-meals, then from a full relation, or a methodical
education for knowledge; but my fancy will build thereupon, and make discourse
therefrom, and so of every thing they discourse of, (I say they) that is my
husband and brothers; For the singularity of my affections are such, that
though I have an ill memory, and could not if it were for my life relate word
for word of any discourse, if it be any thing long that I shall hear from
strangers, for I am the worst repeater of a story from strangers, or out of a
book in the World, when from my near friends (especially my Lord) whose
discourses are lively discriptions, I cannot forget any thing they say, such
deep impressions their words print in my brain, when I cannot remember one
discourse perfectly from others, were they holy sermons to save my soul. but as
I have said from a bare relation, I can conceive to my thinking every
particular part, and passage, as if I were a witness thereof, or an actor
therein; but many things, although I should never have heard of any such thing,
yet my natural reason will guide and discover to me, the right and the truth.

For put the case I see a watch, or any other invention, and none should tell
me how it was made, yet my natural reason would conceive how it was made, so in
natural things my natural reason will conceive them without being any ways
instructed; and so working a brain I have that many times on small objects or
subjects will raise up many several phancies, and opinions therein, from which
my discourse betwixt reason and those opinions will be produced; but the truth
is, I have more materials to build with, then ground to build on, whereby they
become useless, but I believe time will moulder them to dust, or accidents, as
sickness may destroy them, as dropsies may drown them, fevers may burn them,
consumptions may waste them, or griefs may wither them, or other employments
like usurpers may throw it out of my head, but as yet my head is fully
populated with diverse opinions, and so many phancies are therein, as sometimes
they lie like a swarm of bees in a round heap, and sometimes they fly abroad
to gather honey from the sweet flowery rhetoric of my Lords discourse, and wax
from his wise judgment which they work into a comb making chapters therein.
But those that make these and the like idle objections against me either have
not read all my Epistles, and the rest of my books or understands them not, but
that is not my fault, but their unjust natures, to censure and condemn before
they examine or understand; Nay they do in somethings faulsely, ac cuse, and
maliciously break out of some of my Epistles some parts to throw against me,
which is most base and cruel to dismember my book tormenting it with spiteful
objections, misforming the truth with falsehood: but those that have noble and
generous souls will believe me, and those that have base and mechannick souls,
I care not what they say, and truly I would not have troubled my self in
striving to satisfy this present age which is very censorious; but fear the
future age wherein I hope to live, may be deceived, and I by false
constructions wronged; for I have observed that the ignorant, and malicious, do
strive to disturb, and obstruct all probable opinions, witty ingenuities,
honest industry, virtuous endeavors, harmless phancies, innocent pleasures,
and honorable fames although they become infamous thereby.

Readers I had forgotten to mention the objection, that there is no distinction
between a scholar, and a Philosopher, if they mean as being vulgarly called
both scholars

I answer a scholar is to be learnd in other men's opinions, inventions and
actions, and a philosopher is to teach other men his opinions of nature, and to
demostrate the works of nature, so that a scholar is to learn a Philosopher to
teach, and if they say there is no distinction between a professed scholar, and a
professed philosopher, I am not of their opinion; for a professed scholar in
theology, is not a professed Philosopher; for Divines leave nature on the left
hand, and walk on the right to things supernatural and if they mean professed
scholars, as being bred at universities ( I answer) that I take not all those
that are bred at an University, and those that are learned to be professed
scholars, or those that are great Philosophers to be professed, unless they make
it their profession, as a professed Divine that has taken Orders, or a professed
Physician that has commenced Doctor, or professed Pleaders, or Lawyers that are
made Barresters, or Philosophers, that teach Scholars; but certainly there are
many that are very learned that are not professed, as being of that profession by
which they live.

Likewise an objection for my saying I have not read many Books; but I answer,
for not reading of many Authors, had I understood several Languages, as I do
not,, I have not had so much time; had I endeavored to have been learned
threin, for learning requires close studies, long time, and labor.

Besides, our sex takes so much delight in dressing and adorning themselves, as
we for the most part make our gowns our books, our laces our lines, our
imbroderies our letters, and our dressings are the time of our study; and
instead of turning over solid leaves, we turn our hair into curles, and our sex
is as ambitious to show themselves to the eyes of the world, when finely dressed,
as Scholars do to express their learning to the ears of the world, when fully
fraught with Authors.

But as I have said my head was so full of my own naturai phancies, as it had
not room for strangers to board therein, and certainly natural reason is a
better tutor then education; for though education does help natural reason to a
more sudden maturity, yet natural reason was the first educator; for natural
reason did first compose Commonwealths, invented arts, and sciences, and if
natural reason have composed, invented and discoverd, I know no reason, but
natural reason may find out what natural reason has composed, invented, and
discovered, without the help of education; but some may say that education is
like money n put to use, which begets increase; I say it is true, but natural
reason is the principal, which without increase could not be, but in truth
natural reason, is both the principal and the increase, for natural reason
produces beneficial effects, and finds out the right and the truth, the wrong
and the falsehood of things, or causes; but to conclude, what education has not
instructed me, natural Reason has infor med me of many things.

TO THE TWO UNIVERSITIES.
Most Famously learned,
I Here present the sum of my works, not that I think wise Schoolmen, and
industrious, laborious students should value my book for any worth, but to
receive it without a scorn, for the good encouragement of our sex, lest in time
we should grow irrational as idiots, by the (...) of our spirits, through the
careless neglects, and despisements of the masculine sex to the effeminate,
thinking it impossible we should have either learning or understanding, wit or
judgment, as if we had not rational souls as well as men, and we out of a
custom of dejectedness think so too, which makes us quit all all industry
toward profitable knowledge being employed only in looe, and petty
employments, which takes away not only our abilities toward arts, but higher
capacities in speculations, so as we are become like worms that only live in
the dull earth of ignorance, winding our selves sometimes out, by the help of
some refreshing rain of good educations which seldom is given us; for we are
kept like birds in cages to hop up and down in our houses, not sufferd to fly
abroad to see the several changes of fortune, and the various humors, ordained
and created by nature; thus wanting the experiences of nature, we must needs
want the understanding and knowledge and so consequently prudence, a nd
invention of men: thus by an opinion, which I hope is but an erroneous one in
men, we are shut out of all power, and Authority by reason we are never
employed either in civil nor marshall affairs, our counsels are despised, and
laughed at, the best of our actions are trodden down with scorn, by the
over-weaning conceit men have of themselves and through a dispisement of us.

But I considering with my self, that if a right judgment, and a true
understanding, and a respectful civility live any where, it must be in learned
Universities, where nature is best known, where truth is oftenest found, where
civility is most practiced, and if I find not a resentment here, I am very
confident I shall find it no where, neither shall I think I deserve it, if you
approve not of me, but if I desserve not Praise, I am sure to receive so much
Courtship from this sage society, as to bury me in silence; thus I may have a
quiet grave, since not worthy a famous memory; but to lie intombed under the
dust of an University will be honor enough for me, and more then if I were
worshipped by the vulgar as a Deity. Wherefore if your wisdoms cannot give me
the Bays, let your charity strew me with Cypres; and who knows but after my
honorable burial, I may have a glorious resurrection in following ages, since
time brings strange and unusual things to pass, I mean unusual to men, though
not in nature: and I hope this action of mine, is not unnatural, though unusual
for a woman to present a Book to the University, nor impudence, for the action
is honest, although it seem vainglorious, but if it be, I am to be pardoned,
since there is little difference between man and beast, but what ambition and
glory makes.

AN EPILOGE TO MY PHILOSOPHICAL OPINIONS.
SOme say that my Book of Philosophy, it seems as if I had converst with
Descartes or Master Hobbes, or both, or have frequented their studies, by
reading their works, but I cannot say but I have seen them both, but upon my
conscience I never spoke to monsieur De Carts in my lise, nor ever understood
what he said, for he spoke no English, and I understand no other language, and
those times I saw him, which was twice at dinner with my Lord at Paris, he did
appear to me a man of the fewest words I ever heard. And for Master Hobbes, it
is true I have had the like good fortune to see him, and that very often with
my Lord at dinner, for I conversing seldom with any strangers, had no other
time to see those two famous Philosophers; yet I never heard Master Hobbes to
my best remembrance treat, or discourse of Philosophy, nor I never spoke to
Master Hobbes twenty words in my life, I cannot say I did not ask him a
question, for when I was in London I meet him, and told him as truly I was very
glad to see him, and asked him if he would please to do me that honor to stay
at dinner, but he with great civility refused me, as having some business,
which I suppose required his absence.

And for their works, my own foolish fancies do so employ my time, as they will
not give me leave to read their books, for upon my conscience I never read more
of Mounsieur Descartes then half his book of passion, and for Master Hobbes, I
never read more then a little book called De Cive, and that but once, nor never
had any body to read to me, as for their opinions, I cannot say I have not
heard of many of them. As the like of others, but upon my conscience not
thoroughly discoursed of, for I have heard the opinions of most Philosophers in
general, yet no otherw aies then if I should see a man, but neither know his
estate, quality, capacity, or natural disposition, thus upon my conscience is a
truth, not only in these two Philosophers, but all Philosophers, and not only
Philosophers, but all their learned men, so that I am no otherwise learned in
writers works, or other opinions then those that only learned the terms of
arts, and sciences, but know no more. The like they may say of Physicians, as
of Philosophers, when they read my opinions of diseases; it is true I have
converst with Physicians more then any other learned profession, yet not so
much as to increase my understanding, although more then was advantageous for
my health, indeed I have been the worst Physician to my self; besides wise
learned men think it a discredit to discourse learnedly to ignorant women, and
many learned men speak most commonly to women, as women do to children
nonsense, as thinking they understand not any thing, or else like those that
are of another Language speak such gibbrish, to those they would have
understood that they understand not themselves yet think those they speak to do
conceive them, as if ignorance was bound to understand nonsense, that is not to
be understood; but I desire my Readers, or censurers; for some will censure
that have not read, or at least not understood me, that I did never take nor
steal any opinion, or argument from any other as my own, nor never will, and if
I hit or light upon the same, it is mere chance. It Is true, I have mentioned
many opinions, but not as my own opinions or arguments, but rather, (...)
civilly I have been opposite to those opinions I have heard of, and I make no
question but if my Readers will take the pains to compare my writings to
others, and thoroughly examine them, they will I make no question, find great
difference; for though other Philosophy have treated of matter, form, and
motion, being the fundamental ground, of all all natural Philosophical
discourse, yet I believe not my way, nor I never read any book of diseases, or
medicines but Gerrards Herball, which no question is a very rare book, and
cetainly discribes the tempers of herbs, fruits, and drugs very learnedly, but
I do verily (...) the learning lies more in the tempers then in the
applications; for I believe where one is rightly applied, forty are falsely
applied, and how shall it be otherways, unless he had studied the motions and
tempers of diseases; for one and the same diseases may be of several tempers,
and motions, wherefore one and the same simple will not cure one and the same
kind, or rather sort of disease; Wherefore I beseech my readers to be so
charitable, and just, as not to bury my works in the monuments of other
writers, but if they will bury them, let it be in their own dust, or oblivion,
for I had rather be forgotten, then scrape acquaintance, or insinuate my self
into others company, or brag of received favors, or take undeserved gifts, or
belie noble Benefactors, or to steal, although I were sure the theft would
never be discovered, and would make me live eternally.

But I have no acquaintance with old Authors, nor no familiarity with the
moderns, I have received no instructions by learning, and I never owned that
which was not justly my own, nor never stole that which was justly another,
neither have I retained, but plain truth to defend, and conscience towitnesse
for me.

Besides, I have heard that learning spoils the natural wit, and the fancies,
of others, drive the fancies out of our own brains, as enemies to the nature,
or at least troublesome guests that fill up all the rooms of the house.

This opinion, or rather a known truth, was a sufficient cause for me, neither
to read many Books, or hear arguments, or to dispute opinions, had I ever been
edicted to one, or accustomed to the other, by reason I found a natural
inclination, or motion in my own brain to fancies, and truly I am as all the
world is, partial, although perchance, or at least I hope not so much as many
are, yet enough to desire that my own fancies, and opinions might live in the
world, rather then the fancies and opinions of other men's in my brain.

AN EPISTLE TO MY HONORABLE READERS.
MOst Noble Reader, let not partiality, or obstinacy weigh judgments scales,
but truth; wherefore if you weigh my Philosophical, and Physical opinions with
the ancient Philosophers, lay by the weakness, and incapacity of our sex; my
unexperienced age, my unpractised time, my ignorant studies, my faint
knowledge, and dim understanding to help to pair my discourse, with theirs, in
which scale there are learned studies, long experience, practiced time, high
arguments, and School-disputations; Besides, they draw and make the large river
of their discourse from many several springs; mine only flows in little
Rivolets, from the natural spring in my own brain.

AN EPISTLE TO THE Reader, for my Book of Philosophy.
PErchance many that read this book, will hardly understand it, not but it may
be as rational, and as probable, as any that have writ before, but unless they
be contemplary persons, which are not many in our nation, especially in the
Protestant opinion, which live not Monastical lives, are not so curious, nor so
inquisitive, after nature, as to study that Science; Besides, they think it
unprofitable, bringing no advantage; but they are much mistaken, for that it is
a great insight to the knowledge of all Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals,
their constitutions, their sympathies, and antipathies, their extractions, and
applications which they apply, for health, and prolonging of life; Besides, the
study in this Science, brings them acquainted with the course of the stars and
planets, and the several tempers of the Climats, and the nature of the several
Soyls, which is profitable in husbandry; then it is advantageous for the art of
Navigation, and Plantations, and many other things; but above all, this study
is a great delight, and pleases the curiosity of men's minds, it carries their
thoughts above vulgar and common Objects, it elevates their spirits to an
aspiring pitch; It gives room for the untired appetites of man, to walk or run
in, for so spacious it is, that it is beyond the compass of time; besides, it
gives pleasure in varieties, for infinite ways are sirawed with infinite
varieties, neither does it bind up man to those strickt rules as other
Sciances do, it gives them an honest liberty, and proves temperance is the
greatest pleasure in nature. It Is true, moral Philosophy is an excellent study,
but the doctrine is too strict for the practice, for it teaches more then can
be followed, and Theology is a glorious study, but the way is difficult and
dangerous, for though there are many paths, yet there is but one that leads to
heaven, and those that step awrie fall into the Gulf of damnation, and the
deep study in this many times blindes the eyes, both of faith and reason, and
instead of uniting mankind with love, to live in peace, it makes discords with
controversies, raises up faction to uphold each-side, whose endless quarrels
are followed with such hatred, and fought with such malice and envy, and the
zeal spits so much blood, as if not only several parties would be rased out,
but the bulk of mankind; And to study Law, is to study dissension, to study
Logic is to study deceit, to make falsehood appear like truth; to study
Rhetoric is to study words more then sense, and many the like studies are more
painful then useful, more time lost then profit got, more tedious then
pleasant, more sophistry then truth. Indeed the Mathematics brings both profit
and pleasure to the life of man, it gives just measure and equal weight, it
makes all odd reckonings even, it sets all musical notes, it brings concord out
of discord, it gives diminution and extention; But as I said before, few or
none but Monastical men, which live contemplary lives, despising the vanities
of the world, next to the service of God, seek to be acquainted with nature,
and to observe the course of her works, yet in an humble and respectful manner,
as to admire her curiosity, and to glorify and adore the God of nature, for
the wonders they find by her works, and workings: for this reason, if I had
been so learned, I would have put my book into Latin, which is a general
language through all Europe, and not have writ it in my native Language, which
goes no further then the kingdom of England, wherein I fear my book will find
but little applause; because few therein study natural Philosophy, and what
they understand not, they cannot judge of, yet I believe all that read will
take upon them to give a censure, and what their weak brains is not capable to
reach at, their active tongues are capable to pull down, so that I fear me my
book will be lost in oblivion, or condemned by ignorance, unless some generous
disposition which has a genius in natural Philosophy, and learned and eloquent
in the Latin tongue will translate my work; yet I had rather my book should
die in Oblivion, then to be divulged to disadvantage, and instead of clothing
it in a new garment, they will dismember the body of sense, as to put out the
natural eyes, and put in glass eyes in the place, or to cut off the legs, and
then set the body upon wooden stumps, but unless the Translator has a genius
suitable to the Author of the Original, the Original will be disfigured with
mistakes; yet it is easier to translate prose then verse, for rimes, number,
and sense, are hard to match in several Languages, it is double labor, and
requires double capacity; for although Ovid and Dubartus were so happy as to
meet a Sylvester and a Sands, yet very few or no other had the like good
fortune in our Language: for this reason I would have turned my Atoms out of
verse into prose, and joined it to this book, but I finding my brain would be
like a river that is turned from its natural course, which will neither run so
smooth, swift, easy, nor free, when it is forced from its natural motion and
course, both which made me desist etc.

AN EPISTLE TO MY READERS.
I Must advertise my Readers that though I have writ difserent ways of one and
the same subject, yet not to obstruct, cross, or contradict; but I have used
the freedom, or taken the liberty to draw several works upon one ground, or
like as to build several rooms upon one foundation, likewise my desire was, to
express the several works that several motions make in printed figures, that
the sense of my opinions might be explained to the eye, as well as to the ear,
or conceivements of my Readers; but by reason the Painters and Cutters in this
Country cannot speak, nor understand English, nor I any other Language; which
reason persuaded me to let my Book be Printed without them, for though I might
have had such an Interpreter that could express gross material subjects, yet
none that were so learned in both Languages, as to express, and instruct them
to express by their art the figures of the fine, curious, subtle, and obscure
motions in nature, and to have them all done would have rather puzzled my
Readers, and confounded the sense of my opinions, then any ways have
advantaged the one, or informed the other.

Wherefore I must entreat my Readers to take a little more pains, and care in
the reading, and considering part.

AN EPISTLE TO MY READERS.
I Desire my Readers to give me the same privilege to discourse in natural
Philosophy, as Scholars have in schools, which I have heard speak freely, and
boldly, without being condemned for Atheism; for they speak as natural
Philosophers, not as Divines: and since it is natural Philosophy, and not
Theology, I treat on, pray account me not an Atheist, but believe as I do in
God Almighty.

A CONDEMNING TREATISE OF ATOMS.
I Cannot think that the substance of infinite matter is only a body of dust,
such as small atoms, and that there is no solidity, but what they make, nor no
degrees, but what they compose, nor no change and variety, but as they move, as
only by fleeing about as dust and ashes, that are blown about with wind,
which me thinks should make such uncertainties, such disproportioned figures,
and confused creations, as there would be an infinite and eternal disorder. But
surely such wandering and confused figures could never produce such infinite
effects; such rare compositions, such various figures, such several kinds,
such constant continuance of each kind, such exact rules, such undissolvable
Laws, such fixed decrees, such order, such method, such life, such sense, such
faculties, such reason, such knowledge, such power, which makes me condemn the
general opinions of atoms, though not my particular opinions of the figures,
that the long atoms make air, the round water, the flat square earth; also that
all the other figures are partly severed from those; also the measure, and the
weight of atoms, of slime, flame, of burning, of quenching of fire, and of the
several motions, compositions, and composers in their creating and dissolving
of figures; also their wars and peace, their sympathies and antipathies, and
many the like; but this opinion of mine is, if the infinite, and eternal matter
are atoms, but I have considered that if the only matter were atoms, and that
every atome is of the same degree, and the same quantity, as well as of the
same matter; then every atom must be of a living substance, that is innate
matter, for else they could not move, but would be an infinite dull and
immoving body, for figures cannot make motion, unless motion be in the matter,
and it cannot be a motion that sets them at work without substance, for motion
cannot be without substance or produced therefrom, and if motion proceeds from
substance, that substance is moving innately, but if motion is nothing, then
every several nothings, which are called several motions, are gods to infinite
matter, and our stronger nothing, which is every stronger motion, is god to
every weaker nothing, which is every weaker motion; for if motion depend upon
nothing, every particular motion is absolute; but the old opinions of atoms
seems not so clear to my reason, as my own, and absolutely new opinions, which I
hear call my Philosophical opinions, which opinions seem to me to be most
probable, and these opinions are like Chymistrie, that from a gross substance,
extract the substance and essence, and spirits of life, or knowledge which I
call the innated matter.

THE OPINION, or RELIGION OF THE OLD PHILOSOPHERS.
NAtural Philosophers in their opinions make three gods, the causer, the
worker, and the matter, as God, nature, and the Chaos, all three being eternal,
as the causer God was, is, and shall be, the worker, nature was, is, and shall
be, the matter, chaos was, is, and shall be, was ever, is present, and shall be
eternally, and whatsoever was in its self from all eternity, and shall be to
all eternity, is a God, but if they make them all but one thing, then they may
say there is but one God; but if they make them three distinct things, then
they make three Gods, for though they make them all one in unity, yet not in
property, but God is like a Center, from whom all infinites flow, as from him,
and through him, and to him, his infinite knowledge knows all past, present,
and what is to come, and is a fixed instant.

THE TEXT TO MY Natural Sermon.
I As the preacher of nature, do take my text out of natural observance, and
contemplation, I begin from the first chapter, which is the only, and infinite
matter, and conclude in the last which is eternity.

But I desire my noble Readers to hear me with so much patience, or be so just
to me as to observe, that though my text is common, for who has not heard of
the first matter? and my application old, for what is older then eternity?

Yet that my arguments, and proofs are new; for what ancient Philosophers have
preached after my way? wherefore most industrious and ingenious students, cast
me not out of your Schools, nor condemn my opinions, out of a dispisement of my
sex; for though nature has made the active strength of the effeminat sex
weaker then the masculine, yet perchance she may elevate some fancies, and
create some opinions, as sublime, and probable in effeminate brains as in
masculine.

Wherefore it were unjust to condemn the probable particulars for the errors
of the generality; and if you speak or think me too vainglorious in pleading in
my own cause, it may be thought you are irregular, and if I should not plead
for my self in a just cause, it may be thought I were not a right begotten
daughter of nature, but a monster produced by her escapes, or defects; for
every true child of nature will require its just inheritance.

The first cause is matter.

The second is Motion.

The third is figure

which produces all natural effects.

Nature is matter, form, and motion, all these being as it were but one thing;
matter is the body of nature, form is the shape of nature and motion.

The spirits of nature, which is the life of nature, and the several motions
are the several actions of nature.

The several figures are the several postures of nature, and the several parts,
the several members of nature.

OF MATTER AND MOTION.
CHAP. I.
THERE is no first matter, nor first Motion; for matter and motion are
infinite, and being infinite, must consequently be Eternal; and though but one
matter, yet there is no such thing, as the whole matter, that is, as one should
say, All. And though there is but one kind of matter, yet there are infinite
degrees of matter, as thinner and thicker, softer and harder, weightier, and
lighter; and as there is but one matter, so there is but one motion, yet there
are infinite degrees of motion, as swifter and slower; and infinite changes of
motion; And although there is but one matter, yet there are infinite of parts
in that matter, and so infinits of Figures: if infinite figures, infinite
sizes; if infinite sizes, infinite degrees of bigness, and infinite degrees of
smalnesse, infinite thickness, infinite thinnesle, infinite lightness,
infinite weightinesse; if infinite degrees of motion, infinite degrees of
strengths; if infinite degrees of strengths, infinite degrees of power, and
infinite degrees of knowledge, and infinite degrees of sense.

Chap. 2. Of the Form and the Mind. I mean of Form, dull Matter.

AS I said, there is but one Matter, thinner and thicker which is the Form, and
the Mind, that is, Matter moving, or Matter moved; likewise there is but one
motion, though flower or swifter moving several ways; but the slower or weaker
motions are no less motion, then the stronger or swifter. So Matter that is is
thinnest or thickest, softest or hardest, yet is but one matter; for if it were
divided by digrees, until it came to an Atome, that Atome would still be the
same matter, as well as the greatest bulk. But we cannot say smallest, or
biggest,, thinnest, softest or hardest it Infinite.

Chap. 3. Eternal matter.
THat matter which was solid, and weighty from all Eternity, may be so
eternally; and what was spungie, and light from all Eternity, may be so
eternally; and what had innate motion from Eternity, may be so eternally; and
what was dull without innate motion from Eternity, may be so eternally: for if
the degrees could change, then there might be all thin, and no thick, or all
thick, and no (...) all hard, no soft, and fluid, or all fluid, and no
solidity. For (...) contracting and dilating may bring and join parts together,
or separate parts asunder, yet those parts shall not be any other ways, then
by Nature they were.

Chap. 4. Of Infinite matter.
INfinite matter cannot have exact Form, or Figure, because it has no Limits:
but being divided by motion into several parts, those Parts may have perfect
Figures, so long as those Figures last; yet these parts cannot be taken from
the Infinite Body. And though parts may be divided in the Body Infinite, and
joined several ways, yet Infinite can neither be added, nor diminished; yet
division is as infinite as the matter divided.

Chap. 5. No proportion in Nature.
IN Nature there is no such thing, as Number or Quantity; for Number, and
Quantity have only reference to division: neither is there any such thing as
time in Eternity; for Time has no reference but to the Present, if there be
any such thing as Present.

Chap. 6. Of one Kind of Matter.
ALthough there may be infinite degrees of matter, yet the Nature, and kind of
matter is finite: for Infinite of several kinds of matter would make a
Confusion.

Chap. 7. Of Infinite knowledge.
THere can be no absolute Knowledge, if infinite degrees of Knowledge; nor no
absolute power, if there be infinite degrees of strength: nor present, if
infinite degrees of motion.

Chap. 8. No Judge in Nature.
NO Entreaty, nor Petition can persuade Nature, nor any Bribes can corrupt, or
alter the course of nature. Justly there can be no complaints made against
Nature, nor to Nature. Nature can give no redress. There are no Appeals can be
made, nor Causes determined, because Nature is infinite, and eternal: for
Infinite cannot be confined, or prescribed, settled, ruled, or disposed, because
the Effects are sa infinite as the Causes: and what is infinite, has no
absolute power: for what is absolute, is finite.

Finite cannot tell how Infinite does flow,
Nor how infinite matter moves to and fro.
For infinite of Knowledge cannot guess
Of infinite of matter, more, or less:
Nor infinite of Causes cannot find
The infinite Effects of every Kind.
Chap. 9. Of Perfection.
IN infinite can no perfection be,
For why? Perfection is in Unity.
In infinite no union can combine,
For that has neither Number, point nor Line; Some think there was a (...)
(...) confused Heap.

Though infinite can have no Figure,
Yet not lie all confused in heaps together
Chap. 10. Of Inequalities.
IF infinites have infinite degrees,
And none alike to make Equalities.
As if a Hair be cut with curious Arts,
Innumerable but unequal parts,
And that not any part alike shall be,
How shall we join, to make them well agree?
If every one is like it self alone,
Three cannot be, unless three equal One.
If one, and one make two; and two, and two make four yet there must be two
equal ones to make two, and two equal two's to to make four. And as two and one
make three, yet there must be two equal ones joined to a single one, to make
three, or three equal single ones to join in three.

The like is in weight, and Measure, Motion and Strength.

Chap. 11. Of Unities.
IN infinite if infinite degrees,
Then those Degrees may meet in Unities.
And if one man should have the (...) of four,
Then four to equal him will be no more.
As if one Line should be in four parts cut,
Shall equal the same Line together put;
So two and one, though odd is theer;
Yet three and three shall equal be.
Like those that equal spaces backwards go,
To those that is forward, equals them we know.
Like Buckets in a Well if empty be,
As one descends, the other ascends, we see;
So Motions, though their cross, may well agree,
As often in Music make a Harmony.
Chap. 12. There is no Vacuity.
IN Nature if Degrees may equal be,
All may be full, and no Vacuity.
As Boxes small, and smaller may contain,
So bigger, and bigger must there be again.
Infinite may run contracting, and dilating,
Still, still, by degrees without a separating.
Chap. 13. Of Thin, and Thick Matter.
THus may thin Matter into Solid run,
And by its motion;, make thick Matter turn
In several ways, and fashions, as it will,
Although dull Matter of it self lie still:
It Is not, that Solid Matter moves in Thin,
For that is dull, but thin which moves therein.
Like Marrow in the Bones, or Blood in Veins;
Or thinner matter which the blood contains.
Like Heat in Fire, the effect is straight to burn,
So Matter thin makes solid matter run.
Chap. 14. Of Vacuum.
IF Infinite inequality does run, The Readers may take either Opinion.

Then must there be in Infinite Vacuum.
For what is unequal, cannot joined be
So close, but there will be Vacuity.
Chap. 15. The Unity of Nature.
NAture tends to Unity, being but of a kind of Matter, but the degrees of this
Matter being thinner, and thicker, softer, and harder, weightier, and lighter,
makes it, as it were, of different kind, when it is but different degrees: Like
several extractions, as it were out of one and the same thing; and when it
comes to such an Extract, it turns to Spirits, that is, to have an Innate
motion.

Chap. 16. Of Division.
THe several degrees of Matter cause Division by different motion, making
several Figures, erecting, and dissolving them, according as their matter
moves. This makes motion and Figure always to be in War, but not the matter;
for it is the several effects that disagree, but not the Causes: for the
Eternal matter is always in peace, as being not subject to change; Several
Motitions, and several Figures
but motion and Figure, being subject to Change, strive for Superiority: which
can never be, because subject to Change.

Chap. 17. The Order of Nature.
THe Reason, that there is not a Confusion in Nature, but an orderly Course
therein, is, the Eternal matter is always one, and the same: for though there
are Infinite degrees, yet the Nature of that Matter never alters. But all
variety is made according to the several Degrees, and the several degrees do
palliate and in some sense make an Equality in infinite; so as it is not the
several degrees of matter, that strive against each other, but several motions
drive them against one another.

Chap. 18. Of War, and no absolute Power.
THe Reason that all things make War upon one another, is, the several Not the
Matter, but the Degrees.
Degrees of matter, the contradiction of motion, and the Degrees, and the
advantage of the shapes of ( Not the (...) of Figures, but the manner of
shapes: which makes some shapes to have the advantage over others much bigger,
as a Mouse will kill an Elephant.
) Figures always striving.

Chap. 19. Of Power.
THere is no absolute Power, because Power is infinite, and the infiniteness
hinders the absoluteness: for if there were an absolute power, there would be
no dispute: but because there is no absolute power, there would be no dispute;
but because there is no absolute power, therefore there be Disputes, and will
be eternally: for the several degrees of matter, motion, and Figure strive for
the Superiority, making Faction by ( Which is in Likeness.
) Sympathy, and Fraction, by ( Unlikenesse.
) Antipathy.

Chap. 20. Similizing the spirits, or Innate Matter.
THe Spirits, or Essences in Nature are like Quicksilver: for say it be fluid,
it will part into little Sphaerical Bodies, running about, though it be nere so
small a Quantity: and though they are Sphaerical, yet those Figures they make
by several, and subtle motion, may differ variously, and Infinitely.

This innate matter is a kind of god or gods to the dull part of matter,
having power to form it, as it please, and why may not every degree of Innate
matter be as several gods, and so a strong motion be a god to the weaker, and
so have an infinite, and Eternal Government? As we will compare motions to
Officers, or Magistrates. The Constable rules the Parish, the Mayor, the
Constable, the King the Mayor, and some Higher power the King: thus infinite
powers rule Eternity. Or again thus, the Constable rules the Hundred, the Major
rules the City, the King the kingdom, and Caesar the world.

Thus may dull matter over others rule,
According as it is* shaped by motions Tool. One Shape has power over another;
one Mind knows more then another.

So Innate matter Governs by degree,
According as the stronger motions be.
Chap. 21. Of Operation.
ALL things in the world have an Operative power; which Operation is made by
Sympathetical motions and Antipathetical motions, in several Figures. for the
assisting Operation is caused by one, the destructive Operation by another;
like Poison and cordials, the one kills, the other cures: but Operations are
infinite, as motions.

Chap. 22. Natural, or Sensivtie War.
ALL Natural War is caused either by a Sympathetical motion, or an
Antepathetical motion. For Natural War, and Peace proceed from
Self-preservation, which belongs only to the Figure; for nothing is annihilated
in Nature, but the particular prints, or several shapes that motion makes of
matter; which motion in every Figure strives to maintain what they have
created: for when some Figures destroyothers, it is for the maintenance or
security ofthemselves: and when the destruction is for, Food it is
Sympathetical motion, which makes a particular Appetite, or nourishment from
some Creatures to others; but an Antipathetical motion that makes the
Destruction.

Chap. 23. Of Annihilation.
THere can be no Annihilation in Nature: nor particular motions, and Figures,
because the matter remains that was the Cause of those Motions and Figures. As
for particular figures, although every part is separated that made such a
figure, yet it is not Annihilated; because those parts remain that made it. So
as it is not impossible but the same particular Figures may be erected by the
same motions, that joined those parts, and in the matter may repeat the same
motion eternally so by succession: and the same matter in a figure may be
erected and dispersed eternally. Thus the dispersing of the matter into
particular Either by Growth, or Sense, or Reason.
figures by an Alteration of motion, we call Death; and the joining of parts to
create a Figure, we call life. Death is a Separation, life is a Contraction.

Chap. 24. LIFE.
LIfe is the Extract, or spirit of common matter: (*) this extract For when
Matter comes to such a degree, it quickens.
is Agile, being always in motion; for the Thinness of this matter causes the
subtilty of the Quality, or property, which quality, or preporty is to work
upon all dull Matter.

This Essence, or life, which are Spirits of sense, move of themselves: for the
dull part of Matter moves not, but as it is moved thereby.

Their common motions are four.
Atractive. Retentive. Digestive. Expulsive.
Attractive is that which we call Growth, or youth. Retentive, That it begins
to move, and Motion is Life.
is that we call strength. Digestive is that we call Health, that is an equal
distribution of parts to parts, and agreeing of those spirits. Expulsive is
that which we call Death, or decay.

The Attractive spirits gather, and draw the materials together.

The Digestive spirits do cut and carve out every thing.

The Retentive do fit, and lay them in their proper places.

The Expulsive do pull down, and scatter them about.

Those spirits most commonly move according to the matter they work on. For in
spung and porous light matter, their motion is quick; in solid, and weighty,
their motion is slower. For the solid parts are not only dull, and immovable
of themselves, but they hinder and I mean when I say Obstruct, that it either
turns their motion another way or makes them move slower.
obstruct those Spirits of sense, and though they cut and pierce through all,
yet it is with more labor, and slower motion; for their motions change
according to the quantity and quality of that matter they meet with; for that
which is porous and spungy, the Figures that they form that matter in, are
sooner made, and sudenlier destroyed, then that which is more combustible. This
is the reason, Minerals last longer then Vegetables, and Animals, because that
matter is both tougher and harder to work on, then Vegetables and Animals are.

These Sensitive spirits we may similize to several workmen, being always
busily employed, removing, lifting, carrying, driving, drawing, digging, and
the like. And although these spirits are of substance thinner then dull matter,
yet they are stronger by reason of their subtility, and motion, which motion
gives them power: for they are of an acute quality, being the Vitriol, as it
were, of Nature, cut and divide all that opposes their way.

Now these spirts, though they be infinite, yet we cannot think them so gross
an infinite, as combustible matter, yet those thinner infinites may cut, and
carve the thicker infinites all into several figures: like as Aquafortis will
eat into the hardest iron, and divide it into small parts.

As I have said before, the spirits of life works according as the matter is,
for every thing is shaped according to the solidity of the matter; like as a
man which builds a house of such wood, which is tough, and strong, because he
knows otherwise it will break, by reason of the great weight they are to bear,
but to make laths, he takes his wood and cuts it thin, that the nails may the
easier pass through, so joining and fitting several sorts to proper uses to
build his house. Or like a Cook, when he is to raise a pie, must take stiff
Dough; for otherwise it will not only fall before it be finished, but it
cannot be raised, and to make the lids to cover his pie, he must use a softer
Paste, otherwise it will not roll thin; thus a stiff paste is not fit for a
lid, nor a thinner paste for to raise a Pie; it may make a Cake, or so. So the
spirits of life must make figures, as the matter is fit: and proper thereto, for
the figure of man or the like; the spirits of life take the solid and hard
matter for the I do not say that bones are the solid'st matter in Nature.
Bones: the Glutinous matter for the Sinews, Nerves, Muscles, and the like; and
the Oily matter, for Flesh, Fat, Marrow. So the fluid for Blood, and such like
matter. and the spirits themselves do give this dull matter, motion, not only
in the building of the figure, but to make the figure move when it is built.

Now the spirits of life, or lively spirits do not only move dull and immoving
matter, but makes that matter to move and work upon others; for some kind of
figures shall make As the figure of man.
another to resemble it self, though not just be as it self is made, but as the
shadow like the substance; for it works as a hand that is guided by another,
and not of its own strength: that is the reason, Arts have not so much
perfection as nature. The Copy is not so lively as the Original; for the
spirits of life move, and work of their own strength, and the dull matter by the
strength of the spirits.

Chap. 25. Of CHANGE.
THe Change of motion in several Figures makes all change and difference in the
World, and their several properties and effects thereto. And that which we call
Death, or corruption, is not All Motion (...) Life.
an absence of life, but an expulsive motion which does annihilate those
figures, that erecting motion has made. So death is an annihilation of the
Print, not of the Mould of figures; for the Moulds of those figures of
Mankind, Beast, or Plant, of all kinds whatsoever, shall never be annihilated
so long as motion and matter last, which may always be; for the mould of all
figures is in the power of motion, and the substance of matter.

Chap. 26. Of Youth, or Growth.
THus Spirits of sense work according to the substance of the matter: for if
the matter be porous and light, they form those figures quicker, and dissolve
them suddenly: But if their matter be solid and hard, they work slower, which
makes some figures longer ere they come to perfection, and not so easily
undone. And if their strength be too weak for the matter they work upon, as
wanting help, then the figure is imperfect, and misshapen, as we say. This is
the reason Animals and Vegetables, which are young, have not so great strength
as when they are full grown; because there are fewer spirits, and the materials
are loose and unsettled, not knocked close: But by degrees more spirits gather
together, which help to forward their work, bring in materials by food, settling
them by nourishment, carrying out by Evacuations that matter that is unuseful,
and that Rubbish and Chips, as I may say, which would hinder their motion. If
they bring in unuseful matter, their figure increases not, as we say, thrives
not. And if they carry out the principal materials, the figure decays, and
falls down. But those parts of matter which are not spirits, do not carry that
part of matter which is spirit, but these spirits carry the dull matter. Thus
the spirits, the innated matter, move in dull matter, and dull matter moves by
the spirits; and if the matter be fine, and not gross, which they build withal,
and their motion be regular, then the figure is beautiful and well proportioned.

Chap. 27. Of Increasing.
THe reason that the corruption of one figure is the cause of making of another
of the same kind, is, not only, that it is of such a tempered matter that can
only make such a kind of figure; but that the spirits make figures according
to their strength: So that the spirits that are in the Seed, when they have I
mean the Figure of dull matter.
undone the figure they are in, by a general expulsion, which we call
corruption, they begin to create again another figure of the same kind, if no
greater power hinder it. For the matter that is proper, to make such like
figures, is fitted, or tempered to their strengths. So as the Temper of the
matter, and the strength of the spirits, are the Erectors of those figures
eternally. And the reason, that from one Seed, less, or more Numbers are
increased and raised, is, that though few begin the work, more will come to
their help; and as their numbers are increased, their figures are more, or
less, weaker, or stronger.

Chap. 28. Of Decay.
WHen Spirit of Life have created a Figure, and brought it As a plentiful Crop
or a great Brood.
to perfection; if they did not pull it down again, they would be idle, having
no work to do; and Idleness is against the nature of life, being a perpetual
motion. For as soon as a figure is perfected, the spirits generally move to an
expulsive motion. This is the reason, that Age has not that strength as
fullgrowth: But like an old house falling down by degrees, shed their Hairs,
or Leaves, instead of Tiles, the Windows broke down, and stopped with Rubbish.

So Eyes in Animals grow hollow and dim. And when the Foundation of a house is
loose, every little wind shakes it. So when the Nerves being slack, and the
Muscles untied, and the Joints unhinged, the whole Body is weak, and tottering,
which we call Palsies: which Palsies, as the wind, shakes.

The Blood, as the Spring dries up, Rhumes, as Rain falls down, and Vapors,
as Dust, fly up.

Chap. 29. Of Dead, and Death.
DEad is, where there is a General Alteration of such Motion, as is proper to
such Figures. But Death is an Annihilation of that Print, or Figure, by an
Expulsive Motion: And as that Figure dissolves, the Spirits disperse about,
carrying their several burdens to the making of other Figures. Like as a house
that is ruined by Time, or spoiled by accident; the several Materials are
employed to other uses; sometimes to the building of an house again. But a
house is longer a building then a pulling down, by reason of the cutting,
carving, laying, carrying, placing, and fitting every part to make them join
together; so all the works of Nature are sooner dissolved then created.

Chap. 30. Of Local Shapes.
SOme Shapes have power over others, but it is not always in the size, or bulk
of the Figure, but in the manner of their Forms that give advantage, or
disadvantage. A little Mouse will run through the Snowt of a great Elephant: A
little Fly will sting a great Figure to death; A Worm will wind through a
thick Body; The Lions force lies in his Claws; The Horses in his Hoof; The Dogs
in his Teeth; The Bulls in his Horns; and Man's in his Arms, and Hands; Birds
in their Bills, and Talons: And the manner of their Shapes gives them several
properties, or faculties. As the Shape of a Bird causes them to (...), a Worm
to creep, the Shape of a Beast to run, the Shape of Fish to swim; yet some fly
swifter, and higher then others, as their Wings are made: So some run nimbler
then others, according as their Limbs are made; and some swim glider then
others, according as their Fins are made. But Man surpasses the shape of all
other Creatures; because he has a part, as it were, of every shape. But the
same motion, and the same matter without the shape, could not give such
External Properties; since all Internal Properties are wrought out of dull
matter. So as it is their shapes, joined with such motions proper thereunto,
that gives strength, and Agileness. But the Internal Qualities may be alike in
every figure; because Rational Spirits work not upon dull matter, but figures
themselves.

Chap. 31. The Visible Motion in Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals.
THe external motions of Animals are, running, turning, winding, tumbling,
leaping, jumping, shoving, throwing, darting, climbing, creeping, drawing,
heaving, lifting, carrying, holding, or staying, piercing, digging, flying,
swimming, diving. The Internal motion, is, contriving, directing, examining,
comparing, or judging, contemplating, or reasoning, approving or disapproving,
resolving. From whence arise all the Passions, and several Dispositions. These,
and the like, are the visible Internal motions in Animals.

The Internal motions of Vegetables, and Minerals, are in operation; As,
contracting, dilating; which is Attractive, Retentive, Digestive, Expulsive.
The Vegetables External motion, is, increasing, decreasing, that is, enlarging,
or lasting; although there may be matter not moving, yet there is no matter,
which is not moved.

Chap. 32. Of the Working of several Motions of Nature.
MOtions do work according as they find
Matter, that is fit, and proper for each kind.
Sensitive Spirits work not all one way,
But as the matter is, they cut, carve, lay.
Joining together Matter, solid Light,
And build and form some figures straight upright;
Or make them bending, and so jutting out:
And some are large, and strong, and big about.
And some are thick, and hard, and close unite;
Others are flat, and low, and loose, and light.
But when they meet with matter, fine, and thin,
Then they do weave, as Spiders when they spin:
All that is woven is soft, smooth, thin things,
As flowery Vegetables, and Animal skins.
Observe the Grain of every thing, you will see,
Like inter-woven Threads lie evenly.
And like to Diaper, and Damask wrought,
In several works, that for our Table's bought.
Or like to Carpets which the Persian made,
Or Satin smooth, which is the Florence Trade.
Some matter they ingrave, like Ring, and Seal,
Which is the stamp of Natures Commonweal.
It Is Natures Arms, where she does print
On all her Works, as Coin that is in the Mint.
Some several sorts they join together glu'd.
As matter solid, with some that is fluid.
Like to the Earthly ball, where some are mixed
Of several sorts, although not fixed.
For though the Figure of the Earth may last
Longer then others; yet at last may waste.
And so the Sun, and Moon, and Planets all,
Like other Figures, at the last may fall.
The Matter's still the same, but motion may
Alter it into Figures every way:
Yet keep the property, to make such kind
Of Figures fit, which Motion out can find.
Thus may the Fgures change, if Motion hurls
That Matter of her ways, for other Worlds.
Of the Mind.
THere is a degree of stronger Spirits then the sensitive Spirits: These
degrees are visible to us.
as it were the Essence of Spirits; as the Spirit of Spirits, This is the
Mind, or Soul of Animals. For as the sensitive Spirits are a weak knowledge, so
this is a stronger knowledge. As to similize them, I may say, there is as much
difference betwixt them, as Aqua Fortis, to ordinary Vitriol. These Rational
Spirits, as I may call them, work not upon dull matter, as the Sensitive
Spirits do; but only move in measure, and number, which make Figures; which
Figures are Thoughts, as Memory, Understanding, Imaginations, or Fancy, and
Remembrance and Will.

Thus these Spirits moving in measure, casting, and placing themselves into
Figures make a Consort, and Harmony by Numbers.

Where the greater Quantity, or Number, are together of Dancing is a measured
Motion.
those rational spirits, the more variety of Figure is made by their several
motions, they dance several dances according to their Company.

Chap. 34. Of their several Dances, or Figures.
WHat Object soever is presented unto them by the senses, they strait dance
themselves into that figure; this is Memory. And when they dance the same
figure without the help of the outward object, this is Remembrance, when they
dance the figures of their own invention, (as I may say) then that is
imagination or Fancy. Understanding is, when they dance perfectly (as I may
say) not to miss the least part of those figures that are brought through the
senses. Will is to choose a dance, that is to move as they please, and not as
they are persuaded by the sensitive spirits. But when their motion and measures
be not regular, or their quantity or numbers sufficient to make the figures
perfect, then is the mind weak and infirm, (as I may say) they dance out of
time and measure. But where the greatest number of these, or quantity of these
Essences are met, and joined in the most regular motion, there is the clearest
understanding, the deepest Judgment, the perfectest knowledge, the finest
Fancies, the more Imagination, the stronger memory, the obstinatest will.

But sometimes their motions may be regular; but society is so small, so as they
cannot change into so many several figures: then we say he has a weak mind,
or a poor soul. But be their quantity or numbers few or great, yet if they move
confusedly, and out of order, we say the mind is distracted. And the reason
the mind, or soul is improveable, or decayable, is, that the quantity or
numbers are increaseable, or decreaseable, and their motions regular, and
irregular,

A Fever in the Body is the same motion among the sensitive spirits, as
madness is in the mind amongst the rational Spirits. So likewise pain in the
Body is like those motions, that make grief in the mind. So pleasure in the
body is the like motions, as make delight, and joy in the mind, all Convulsive
motions in the Body, are like the motions that cause Fear in the mind. All
Expulsive motions amongst the rational spirits, are a dispersing their society;
As Expulsity in the Body, is the dispersing of dull matter by the sensitive
spirits.

All Drugs have an Opposite motion to the matter they work on, working by an
expulsive motion; and if they move strongly, having great quantity of spirits
together in a little dull matter, they do not only cast out superfluous
matter, but pull down the very materials of a figure. But all Cordials have a
Sympathetical motion to the matter they meet, giving strength by their help to
those spirits they find tired: (as one may say) that it is to be overpowered
by opposite motions in dull Matter.

Chap. 35. The Sympathy, and Antipathy of Spirits.
PLeasure, and delight, discontent, and sorrow, which is Love, and hate, is
like light, and darkness; the one is a quick, equal, and free motion; the
other is a slow, irregular, and obstructed motion. When there is the like
motion of Rational Spirits in opposite figures, then there is a like
understanding, and disposition. Just as when there is the like Motion in the
sensitive spirits; then there is the like constitution of body. So when there
is the like quantity laid in the same Symmetry, then the figures agree in the
same proportions, and Lineaments of Figures.

The reason, that the rational spirits in one Figure, are delighted with the
outward form of another Figure, is, that the motions of those sensitive
Spirits, which move in that figure, agree with the motion of the rational
spirits in the other. This is love of beauty; And when the sensitive motions
alter in the figure of the body, and the beauty decays, then the motion of
rational spirits alter, and the love of godliness ceases. If the motion of the
rational spirits are cross to the motion of the sensitive spirits, in opposite
figures, then it is dislike. So if the motion be just cross and contrary, of
the rational spirits in opposite figures, it is hate; but if they agree, it is
love.

But these Sympathies, which are made only by a likeness of motions without an
intermixture, last not long; because those spirits are at a distance, changing
their motion without the knowledge, or consent of either side. But the way that
the rational spirits intermix, is, through the Organs of the body, especially
the eyes, and Ears, which are the common doors, which let the spirits out, and
in. For the vocal, and verbal motion from the mouth, carry the spirits through
the ears down to Heart, where love and hate is lodged. And the spirits from
the eyes issue out in Beams, and Rays; as from the Sun, which heat, or scorch
Scorching is, when the Motioh is too quick.
the heart, which either raise a fruitful crop of love, making the ground
fertile, or dries it so much, as makes it insipid, that nothing of good will
grow there, unless stinking weeds of Hate: But if the ground be fertile,
although every Crop is not so rich, as some, yet it never grows barren, unless
they take out the strength with too much kindness; As the old proverb, they
kill with too much kindness; which murder is seldom committed. But the
rational spirits That is, when there come so many spirits, as they disagree.
pressing upon one another.
are apt to take Surfeit, as well as sensitive spirits, which makes love, and
Good Will, so often to be ill rewarded, neglected, and disdained.

Chap. 36. The Sympathy of Sensitive, and Rational spirits in one Figure.
THere is a strong Sympathy, and agreement, or Affection (as I may say) betwixt
the rational spirits, and the sensitive spirits joined in one figure: like
Fellow Laborers that assist one another, to help to finish their work. For
when they disagree, as the rational spirits will move one way sometimes, and
the sensitive spirits another; that is, when reason strives to abate the
appetite of the Senses; yet it is by a loving direction, rather to admonish
them by a gentle contrary motion for them to imitate, and follow in the like
motions; yet it is, as they always agree at last; Like the Father and the Son.
For though the father rules by command, and the Son obeies through obedience,
yet the father out of love to his son, as willing to please him, submits to his
delight, although it is against his liking; Those degrees that are nearest,
have the greatest Sympathy
So the rational spirits oftimes agree with the motions of the sensitive
spirits, although they would move another way.

Chap. 37. The Sympathy of the Rational and Sensitive Spirits, to the Fgure
they make, and inhabit.
ALL the External motion in a Figure, is, by the sensitive spirits; and all the
internal, by the rational spirits: and and when the rational and sensitive
spirits, disagree in opposite figures, by contrary motion, they often war upon
one another; which to defend, the sensitive Spirits and rational spirits, use
all their force, and power in either Figure; to defend, or to assault, to
succor, or to destroy, through an aversion made by contrary motions in each
other.

Now the rational spirits do not only choose the materials for their defense,
or assault, but do direct the sensitive spirits in the management thereof; and
according to the strength of the spirits of either side, the victory is gained,
or lost. If the Body be weak, there is like sensitive spirit, if the direction
be not advantageous, there is less rational spirit. But many times the
Alacrity of the rational and sensitive spirits, made by moving in a regular
motion, overcoms the greater numbers, being in a disordered motion. Thus what
is lost by Scarcity, is regained by Conformity and Unity.

Chap. 38. Pleasure, and Pain.
ALL Evacuations have an expulsive motion; If the Expulsive motion is regular,
it is Pleasure, if irregular, it is pain. Indeed, all Irregular and cross
motion, is Pain; all regular motion is pleasure, and delight, being Harmony of
Motion, or a discord of Motion.

Chap. 39. Of the Mind.
IMagine the rational Essence, or spirits, like little spherical Bobdies of
Quicksilver several ways Like Chessmen, Table-men, Nine-pins, or the like.
placing themselves in several figures, sometimes moving in measure, and in
order: and sometimes out of order this Quicksilver to be the mind, and their
several postures made by motion, the passions and affections; or all that is
moving in a mind, to express those several motions, is only to be done by
guess, not by knowledge, as some few will I guess at Love is, when they move
in equal number, and even measure. Hate is an opposite motion: Fear is, when
those small bodies tumble on a heap together without order. Anger is, when they
move without measure, and in no uniform Figure. Inconstancy is, when they move
swiftly several ways. Constancy is a circular motion, doubt, and suspicion,
and jealousy, are when those small bodies move with the odd numbers. Hope is
when those small bodies move like wilde-Geese, one after another. Admiration
is, when those Spherical bodies gather close together, knitting so, as to make
such a circular figure; and one is to stand for a Center or point in the midst.
Humility is a creeping motion. Joy is a hopping, skipping motion. Ambition is a
lofty motion, as to move upwards, or I say higher for expressions sake.
higher then other motions. Coveting, or Ambition is like a flying motion,
moving in several Figures like that which they covet for; if they covet for
Fame, they put themselves into such Figures, as Letters do, that express
words, which words are such praises as they would have, or such Figure as they
would have Statues cut, or Pictures drawn: But all their motion which they
make, is according to those Figures with which they sympathize and agree:
besides, their motion and figures are like the sound of Music; though the
notes differ, the cords agree to make a harmony: so several Symmetries make a
perfect Figure, several figures make a just number, and several quantities or
proportions make a just weight, and several Lines make an even measure: thus
equal may be made out of Divisions eternally, and infinitely. And because the
figures and motions of the infinite Spirits which they move and make are
infinite, I cannot give a final description: besides, their motion is so
subtle, curious, and intricate, as they are past finding out.

Some Natural motions work so curious fine,
None can perceive, unless an Eye divine.
Chap. 40. Of Thinking, or the Mind, and Thoughts.
ONE may think, and yet not of any particular thing; that is, one may have
sense, and not thoughts: For thoughts are when the mind takes a particular
notice of some outward Object, or inward Idea; But Thinking is only a sense
without any particular notice. As for example; Those that are in a great fear,
and are amazed, the mind is in confused sense, without any particular
thoughts: but when the mind is out of that amaze, it fixes it self on
Particulars, and then have thoughts of past danger; but the mind can have no
particular thought of the Amaze; for the mind cannot call to mind that which
was not.

Likewise when we are asleep, the Mind is not out of the Body, nor the motion
that makes the sense of the mind ceast, which is Thinking; but the motion that
makes the thoughts therein work upon particulars. Thus the mind may be without
thoughts, but thoughts cannot be without the mind: yet thoughts go out of the
mind very often, that is, such a motion to such a thing is ceast; and when that
motion is made again, it returns. Thus thinking is the mind, and thoughts the
effect thereof: Thinking is an equal motion without a figure, or, as when we
feel Heat, and see no fire.

Chap. 41. Of the Motions of the Spirits.
IF it be, as probably it is, that all sensitive spirits live in dull matter; so
rational spirits live in sensitive spirits, according to the shape of those
Figures that the sencitive spirits form them.

The rational spirits by moving several ways, may make several kinds of
knowledge, and according to the motions of the sensitive spirits in their
several figures they make, though the spirits may be the same, yet their
several motions may be unknown to each other. Like as a point, that writes upon
a Table Book, which when the Letter that was (...) thereon, is rubbed out, the
Table is as plain, as if there were never any letter thereon; but though the
letters are out, yet the Tablebook, and in Pen remain. So although this Motion
is gone, the spirit, and matter remain; But if those spirits make other kinds
of motions, like other kinds of Letters, or Language, those Motions understand
not the first, nor the first understands not them, being as several Languages.
Even so it may be in a sound; for that kind of knowledge the Figure had in the
sound, which is an alteration of the motion of the rational spirits, caused by
an alteration of the motion of the sensitive spirits in dull matter: And by
these disorderly motions, other motions are rubbed out of the Table Book, which
is the matter that was moved. But if the same kind of letters be writ in the
same place again; that is, when the spirits move in the same motion, then the
same knowledge is in that figure, as it was before; the other kind of
knowledge, which was made by other kind of motion, is rubbed out, which several
knowledge is no more known to each other, then several Languages by unlearned
men. And as Language is still Language, though not understood, so knowledge is
still knowledge, although not general; but if they be that we call dead, then
those letters that were rubbed out, were never writ again; which is, the same
knowledge never returns into the same figures.

Thus the spirits of knowledge, or the knowledge of spirits, which is their
several motions, may be ignorant and unacquainted with each other: that is,
that some motion may not know how other motions move, not only in several
spirits, but in one and the same spirit; no more then in every Effect can know
their cause: and motion is but the effect of the Spirits, which spirits are a
thin subtle matter: for there would be no motion if there were no matter; for
no thing can move: but there may be matter without Self-motion; but not
self-motion without matter.

Matter prime knows not what effects shall be,
Or how their several motions will agree.
Because Nothing can be made or known absolute out of Infinite and Eternal.
it is infinite, and so does move
Eternally, in which no thing can prove.
For infinite does not in compass lie,
Nor has Eternal lines to measure by.
Knowledge is there none, to comprehend
That which has no beginning, nor no end.
Perfect knowledge comprises all can be,
But nothing can comprise Eternity.
Destiny and Fates, or what the like we call,
In infinites they no power have at all.
Nature has Generosity enough to give
All figures ease, whilst in that Form they live;
But motion which innated matter is,
By running cross, each several pains it gives.
Chap. 42. Of the Creation of the Animal Figure.
THe reason, Though it may mave oMotions, yet not the Animal Motion.
that the sensitive spirits, when they begin to create an animal figure, the
figure that is created feels it not, until the model befinished, that is, it
cannot have an animal motion, until it has an animal figure; for it is the
shape which gives it local motion? and after the Fabric is built, they begin
to furnish it with The Figure might be without an Animal Motion, but an Animal
motion cannot be until there is an Animal Figure.
strength, and enlarge it with growth, and the rational spirit which inhabits
it chooses his room, which is the Head; And although some rational spirits
were from the first creating it, yet had not such motions, as when created:
besides, at first they have not so much company, as to make so much change, as
to take parts, like instruments of Music, which cannot make such division upon
few strings as upon more. The next, the figure being weak, their motions cannot
be strong; besides, before the figure is enlarged by growth, they want room to
move in. This is the reason, that newborn Animals seem to have no knowledge,
especially Man; because the spirits do neither move so strong, nor have such
variety of change, for want of company to make a consort. Yet some animals have
more knowledge then others, by reason of their strength, as all beasts know
their dams, and run to their Dugs, and know how to suck as soon as they are
born; and birds and children, and the like weak Creatures, such do not.

But the spirits of sense give them strength, and the spirits of reason do
direct them to their food, Which food is when such Materials are not proper for
such a Figure.
and the spirits of sense gave them Taste, and (...), and the spirits of reason
choose their meat: for all Animal Creatures are not of one diet, for that which
will nourish one, will destroy another.

Chap. 43. The gathering of Spirits.
IF the rational spirits should enter into a figure newly created, altogether,
and not by degrees, a Child (for example) would have as much understanding,
and knowledge in the womb, or when it is newborn, as when it is enlarged and
fully grown. But we find by experience there are several sorts and degrees of
knowledge and understanding, by the recourse of spirits: which is the reason,
some figures have greater proportion of understanding and knowledge, and sooner
then others; yet it is increased by degrees, according as rational spirits
increase. Like as children, they must get strength before they can go. So
Learning and experience increase rational spirits, as Food the sensitive: But
experience and Learning is not always tied to the ear; for every Organ and
Pore of the body is as several doors to let them in and out: For the rational
spirits living with the sensitive spirits, come in, and go out with them, but
not in equal proportion, but sometimes more, sometimes fewer: this makes
understanding more perfect in Health then in sickness, and in our middle age,
more then in the latter age: For in age and sickness there is more carried
out, then brought in. This is the reason, Children have not such understanding,
but their reason increases with their years. But the resional spirits may be
similized The greater the number is, the more variety of Motion is made, which
makes Figures in the brain.
to a company of Good-fellows, which have pointed a meeting; and the company
coming from several places, makes their time the longer ere their numbers are
completed, though many a brain is disappointed; but in some figures the rooms
are not commodious to move in, made in their Creation, for want of help: those
are Changelings, Innocents, or Natural Fools.

The rational spirits seem most to delight in spungie soft and liquid matter;
as in the Blood, Brain, Nerves, and in Vegetables; as not only being nearest
to their own nature, but having more room to move in. This makes the rational
spirits to choose the Head in Animals, for their chief room to dance their
Figures in: in Animal Shapes
for the Head is the biggest place that has the spungy Materials; thus as soon
as a figure is created, those rational Spirits choose a Room.

Chap. 44. The moving of Innate matter.
THough Motion makes knowledge, yet the spirits give motion: for those Spirits,
or Essences, are the Guiders, Governors, Directers; the Motions are but their
Instruments, the Spirits are the Cause, motion but an Effect therefrom: For
that thin matter which is spirits, can alter the motion, but motion cannot
alter the matter, or nature of those Essences, or spirits; so as the same
spirits may be in a body, but not one and the same knowledge, because not the
same motion, that made that knowledge. As for example; how many several Touches
belong to the body? for every part of the body has a several touch, which is a
several knowledge belonging to every several part; for every several part does
not know, and feel every several touch. For when the head aches, the heel feels
it not, but only the Rational spirits which are free from the encumbrance of
dull matter, they are agile, and quick to take notice of every particular
touch, in, or on every part of the figure. The like motions of a pain in the
Body. The like motions of the Rational spirits, we call grief in the mind; and
to prove it is the like motion of the Rational Spirits to the sensitive, which
makes the knowledge of it, is, when the rational Spirits are busily moved with
some Fantasmes, if any thing touches the body, it is not known to the rational
spirits, because the rational spirits move not in such motion, as to make a
thought in the head, of the touch in the heel, which makes the thoughts to be
as senseless of that touch, as any other part of the body, that has not such
pains made by such motions. And shall we say, there is no sense in the heel,
because no knowledge of it in the head? we may as well say, that when an Object
stands just before an eye that is blind, either by a contrary motion of the
thoughts inward, by some deep Contemplation, or otherwise: we may as well say
there is no outward object, because the rational spirits take no notice of that
Object; it is not, that the stronger motion stops the less, or the swifter, the
slower; for then the motions of the Planets would stop one another course.

Some will say, what sense has man, or any other Animal when they are dead? it
may be answered, that the Fignre, which is a body, may have sense, but not the
Animal; for that we call Animal, is such a tempered matter, joined in such a
figure, moving with such kind of motions; but when those motions do generally
alter, that are proper to an Animal, although the matter, and Figure remain,
yet it is no longer an Animal, because those motions that help it to make an
Animal are ceased So as the Animal can have no more knowledge of what kind of
sense the Figure has (because it is no more an Animal) then an Animal, what
sense dust has. And that there is the reason, that when any part is dead in an
Animal, if that those motions that belonged to the Animal, are ceased in that
part, which alter it from being a part of the Animal, and knows no more what
sense it has, then if a living man should carry a dead man upon his shoulders,
what sense the dead man feels, whether any, or no.

Chap. 45. Of Matter, Motion, and Knowledge, or Understanding.
Whatsoever has an innate motion, has knowledge; and what matter soever has
this innate motion, is knowing,: but according to the several motions, are
several knowledges made; for knowledge lives in motion, as motion lives in
matter: for though the kind of matter never alters, yet the manner of motions
alters in that matter: and as motions alter, so knowledge differs, which makes
the several motions in several figures to give several knowledge. And where
there is a likeness of motion, there is a likeness of knowledge: As the
Appetite of Sensitive spirits, and the desire of rational spirits are alike
motions in several degrees of matter. And the touch in the heel, or any part of
the body else, is the like motion, as the thought thereof in the head; the one
is the motion of the sensitive spirits, the other in the rational spirits, as
touch from the sensitive spirits, for thought is only a strong touch, and
touch a weak thought. So sense is a weak knowledge, and knowledge a strong
sense, made by the degrees of the spirits: for Animal spirits are stronger (as
I said before) being of an higher extract (as I may say) in the Chemistry of
Nature, which makes the different degrees in knowledge, by the difference in
strengths and finenesse, or subtlety of matter.

Chap. 46. Of the Animal Figure.
WHatsoever has motion has sensitive spirits; and what is there on earth that
is not wrought, or made into figures, and then undone again by these spirits?
so that all matter is moving, or moved by the movers; if so, all things have
sense, because all things have of these spirits in them; and if Sensitive
spirits, why not rational spirits? For there is as much infinite of every
several degree of matter, as if there were but one matter: for there is no
quantity in infinite; for. infinite is a continued thing. If so, who knows, but
Vegetables and Minerals may have some of those rational spirits, which is a
mind or soul in in them, as well as man? Only they want that Figure (with
such kind of motion proper thereunto) to express knowledge that way. For had
Vegetables and Minerals the same shape, made by such motions, as the sensitive
spirits create; then there might be wooden men, and iron beasts; for though
marks do not come in the same way, yet the same marks may come in, and be made
by the same motion; for the spirits are so subtle, as they can pass and repass
through the solidest matter. Thus there may be as many several and various
motions in Vegetables and Minerals, as in Animals; and as many internal figures
made by the rational spirits; only they want the Animal, to express it the
Animal way. And if their knowledge be not the same knowledge, but different
from the knowledge of Animals, by reason of their different figures, made by
other kind of motion on other tempered matter, yet it is knowledge. For shall
we say, A man does not know, because he does not know what another man knows,
or some higher power?

Chap. 47. What an Animal is.
AN Animal is that which we call sensitive spirit; that is, a figure that has
local motion; that is, such a kind of figure with such kind of motions proper
thereunto. But when there is a general alteration of those motions in it, then
it is no more that we call Animal; because the local motion is altered; yet we
cannot knowingly say, it is not a sensitive Creature, so long as the figure
lasts: besides, when the figure is dissolved, yet every scattered part may have
sense, as long as any kind of motion is in it; and whatsoever has an innate
motion, has sense, either increasing or decreasing motion; but the sense is as
different as the motions therein, because those properties belonging to such a
figure are altered by other motions.

Chap. 48. Of the dispersing of the Rational Spirits.
SOme think, that the Rational spirits fly out of Animals, (or that Animal we
call Man) like a swarm of Bees, when they like not their hives, finding some
inconvenience, seek about for another habitation, or leave the body, like Rats,
when they find the house rotten, and ready to fall; Or scared away like Birds
from their Nest. But where should this Swarm, or Troop, or Flight, or Essences
go, unless they think this thin matter is an Essence, evaporates to nothing?

As I have said before, the difference of rational spirits, and sensitive
spirits, is, that the sensitive spirits make figures out of dull matter: The
rational spirits put themselves into figure, placing themselves with number,
and measure; this is the reason when Animals die, the External Form of that
Animal may be perfect, and the Internal motion of the spirits quite altered;
yet not absent, not dispersed until the Annihilating of the External Figure:
thus it is not the matter that alters, but the Motion and Form.

Some Figures are stronger built then others, which makes them last longer: for
some, their building is so weak, as they fall as soon as finished; like houses
that are built with stone, or Timber, although it might be a stone-house, or
timber-house, yet it may be built, not of such a sort of Stone, or such a sort
of Timber.

Chap. 49. Of the Senses.
THe Pores of the skin receive touch, as the eye light, the ear sound, the
nose scent, the tongue taste. Thus the spirits pass, and repasse by the holes,
they pierce through the dull matter, carrying their several burdens out, and
in, yet it is neither the Burden, nor the Passage that makes the different
sense, but the different motion; ( To prove that it is the several Motion, is
that we shall have the same sense in our sleep, either to move pleasure or feel
pain.
) for if the motion that coms through the Pores of the Skin, were as the
motions which come from the Eye, Ear, Nose, Mouth, then the body might receive
sound, light, scent, Taste, all other as it does touch.

Chap. 50. Of Motion that makes Light.
IF the same motion that is made in the Head did move the Heel, there would
appear a Light to the Sense of that part of the figure; unless they will make
such matter as the Brain to be infinite, and only in the head of an Animal.

Chap. 51. Optics.
THere may be such motion in the Brain, as to make Light, although the Sun
never came there to give the first motion: for two opposite motions may give a
light by Reflection, unless the Sun, and the Eye have a particular Motion from
all Eternity: As we say an Eternal Monopolor of such a kind of Motion as makes
Light.

Chap. 52. Of Motion, and Matter.
WHY may not Vegetables have Light, Sound, Taste, Touch, as well as Animals,
if the same kind of motion moves the same kind of matter in them? For who
knows, but the Sap in Vegetables may be of the same substance, and degree of
the Brain: And why may not all the senses be inherent in a figure, if the same
Motion moves the same matter within the figure, as such motion without the
figure?

Chap. 53. Of the Brain.
THe Brain in Animals is like Clouds, which are sometimes swelled full with
Vapor, and sometimes rarefied with Heat, and moved by the sensitive spirits to
several Objects, as the clouds are moved by the Wind to several places.

The Winds seem to be all Spirits, because they are so agile, and quick.

Chap. 54. Of Darkness.
TO prove that Darkness has particular motions which make it, as well as
motion makes light, is that when some have used to have a light by them while
they sleep, will, as soon as the light goes out, awake; for if Darkness had
no motion, it would not strike upon the Opick Nerve. But as an equal motion
makes light, and a perturb'd motion makes color, which is between Light and
darkness: So darkness is an Opposite Motion to those motions that make light;
for though light is an equal motion, yet it is such a kind, or sort of Motion.

Chap. 55. Of the Sun.
WHY may not the Sun be of an higher Extract then the rational spirits, and be
like Glass, which is a high Extract in Chemistry, and so become a ( Like
glass.
) shining body? If so sure it has a great knowledge; for the Sun seems to be
composed of pure spirits, without the mixture of dull matter; for the Motion is
quick, and subtle, as we may find by the effect of the light, and heat.

Chap. 56. Os the Clouds.
THe Clouds seem to be of such spungy, and porous Matter, as the Rain, and
Air, like the sensitive spirits that form, and move it, and the Sun the
Rational Spirit to give them knowledge; And as moist Vapors from the Stomach
rise, and gathering in the Brain, flow through the eyes: so do the Clouds send
forth, as from the Brain, the Vapors which do rise in showers.

Chap. 57. Of the Motion of the Planets.
THE Earth, Sun, Moon, the rest of Planets all
Are moved by that, we Vital Spirits call.
And like to Animals, some move more slow,
And other some by quicker motion go.
And as some Creatures by their shapes do fly,
Some swim, some run, some creep, some rises high
So Planets by their shapes about do wind,
All being made, like Circles, round we find.
Chap. 58. The Motion of the Sea.
THe Sea's more quick, then fresher waters are,
The reason is, more Vital spirits are there.
And as the Planets move still round about,
So Seas do ebb and flow both in and out.
As Arrows fly up, far as strength them lend,
And then for want of strength do back descend:
So do the Seas in ebbes run back again,
For want of strength, their length for to maintain
But when they ebb, and flow, at certain times,
Is like the Lungs that draw, and breath out wind.
Just so do Seas draw back and then do flow,
As constant as the Lungs do to and fro:
Always in motion never lying still,
The empty place they leave, turn back to fill.
We may as well inquire of Nature, why Animals breath in such a space of Time,
as the Seas ebb and flow in such a space of Time.

AN EPISTLE TO CONDEMNING READERS.
MAny perchance will laugh in scorn at my opinion, and ask what reason I have
to think those things I have described should be made with such a kind of
Motion, my answer is, that I guess by the forms, I mean the figures, or shapes,
what the motion may be to produce them; for I see the figure of a four legged
Creature has other motions then two legged Creatures, or then those Creatures
that have no legs; and I see some shape Creatures that can flee, by reason of
their figures, which is made proper to produce that kind of motion; for those
that are not made so, cannot do so. By this I think it probable that Internal
motions, are after the manner of External motions; for we may guess at the
cause by the effects, so by the figures of Snow, Frost, Hail, Rain, Vapor, and
the like, we may guess at other Internal, or external motions, that produced
their External figures, or alterations, and by the effects of light, darkness,
heat, cold, moisture, what manner of motions produced them; wherefore I know no
reason why any should condemn my opinions. But the custom of their breeding in
the Schools of Aristotle, and Socrates, and the rest of ancient Authors, or
else they consider not my opinions enough; for if they did, they might see as
much probability for mine, as any of their opinions; For though in natural
Philosophy there may be many touches found out by experiences, and experiments,
yet the Study is only conjecturally, and built upon probabilities, and until
probabilities be condemned by absolute and known truth, let them have a place
amongst the rest of probabilities, and be not so partial to contradict, as to
be unjust to me, take not away the right of my place because young; for though
age ought to have respect, yet not so as to do youth wrong, but I hope my new
born opinions will be nourished in Noble and learned Schools, and bred up with
industrious Students; but howsoever, I delight my self, for next to the finding
out of truths, the greatest pleasure in Study, is, to find out probabilities.
I make no question but after Ages will esteem this work of mine, but what
soever is new, is not received at the first with that good acceptance, by
reason it is utterly unknown unto them, and a newness, and an
unacquaintednesse makes the ignorance, but when time has made acquaintance,
and a right understanding, and a right understanding will make a friendship
betwixt Fame and my Book.

OF FORTUNE.
PART II.
CHAP. 59.
MAtter, Figure, and Motions, are the gods that Create fortune; For fortune is
nothing in it self but various motions gathered, or drawn to a point, which
point man only thinks it fixed upon him, but he is deceived, for it fixes upon
all other things; for if any thing comes, and rubs off the bark of a tree, or
breaks the tree, it is a miss-fortune to that tree, and if a house be built in
such a place, as to shelter a tree from great storms, or cold weather, it were
good fortune to that tree, and if a beast be hurt it is a miss-fortune to that
beast, or bird, and when a beast, or bird, is brought up for pleasure, or
delight, and not to work or be imprisoned, it is a good fortune to that beast,
or bird; but as I said before fortune is only various motions, drawn to a
point, and that point that comes from cross motions, we call bad fortune, and
those that come from Sympathetical motions we call good fortune, and there must
needs be Antipathetical Motions as well as Sympathetical Motions, since Motions
are so various.

But man, and for all that I know, all other things, are governed by outward
Objects, they rule, and we obey; for we do not rule and they Obey, but every
thing is led like dogs in a string, by a stronger power, Natural power.
but the outward power being invisible, makes us think, we set the rules, and
not the outward Causes, so that we are governed by that which is without us,
not that which is within us; for man has no power over himself.

Chap. 60. Of time and Nature.
NO question but there is a time in Nature, for time is the Variation of
Nature, and nature is a producing Motion a multiplying figure, an endless
measure, a quantilesse substance, an indefaisable matter.

Chap. 61. Of Matter, Motion, and Figure.
AS I said before in my first part of my Book, that there is no first Matter,
nor no first Motion, because Eternal, and Infinite, yet there could be no
Motion, without matter; for Matter is the cause, Motion but the effect of
Matter, for there could be no motion unless there were Matter to be moved; But
there might be Matter, and Figure, without Motion, as an infinite, and eternal
dull lump; For I see no reason, but infinite might be without running forward,
or circle-wayes, if there were not several degrees of the only Matter, wherein
Motion is an Infinite Eternal effect of such a degree. Neither is it nonsense
to say, Figure is the effect of Matter; for though there is no Matter without
Figure, yet there could be no figure without Matter, wherefore Matter is the
prime cause of Figure, yet there could be no figure without matter, wherefore
matter is the prime cause of figure, but not figure of matter, for figure does
not make matter, but matter figure, no more then the creature can make the
Creator; but a creature may make a figure. Thus although there is no first
matter, yet matter is the first cause of motion and figure, and all effects.

Although they are as infinite and Eternal, as matter it self, and when I say
Matter prime, I speak for distinction sake, which is the only Matter?

The innated Matter, is the soul of Nature.

The dull part of Matter, the Body.

And the infinite figures, are the infinite form of Nature.

And the several motions are the several actions of nature.

Chap. 62. Of Causes, and effects.
AS I have said before the effects are infinite, and eternal as the Causes,
because all effects lie in matter and motion, indeed in matter only; for
motion is but the effect of matter.

Wherefore all particular figures although dssiolvable yet is inherent in the
matter, and motion, as for example, if a man can draw the picture of a man, or
any thing else, although he never draws it, yet the Art is inherent in the man,
and the picture in the Art as long as the man lives, so as long as there is
matter, and motion, which was from all Eternity, and shall be eternally; the
effect will be so.

Chap. 63. Whether motion is a thing, or nothing, or can be Annihilated
SOme have opinion that Motion is nothing, but to my reason it is a thing; for
if matter, is a substance, a substance is a thing, and the motion, and matter
being unseparablely, united, makes it but one thing.

For as there could be no motion without such a degree, or extract of matter so
there could be no such degree or extract I say extract. because it is the
essence of matter.
of matter without motion, thus motion is a thing. But by reason particular
motions leave moving in such matters and figures, shall we say they are
deceased, dead, or become nothing; but say some, motions are accidents, and
accidents are nothing; but I say, all accidents live in substance, as all
effects in the causes, say some, when a man for example shakes his hand, and
when he leaves shaking, whether is that motion gone (say others) no where, for
that particular motion cease to be, say they.

I answer, that my reason tells me, it is neither fled away, nor ceased to be,
for it remains in the hand, and in that matter that created the hand, that is
in that, and the like innated matter, that is in the hand. But some will say,
the hand never moves so again, but I say the motion is never the less there,
they may as well say, when they have seen a Chest full of Gold, or the like,
and when their eyes are shut, or that they never see it more, that the Gold
does not lie in the Chest, although the Gold may lie there eternally, or if
they should see it again, say it is not the same Gold. So likewise particular
motions are, but showed, not lost, or Annihilated: or say one should handle a
vessel often, that every time you handle the vessel, it is not the same touch,
vessel, or hand, and if you never touch the vessel again, that the hand,
vessel, or touch is annihilated.

But particular motion, as the vessels, or hand is but used, not annihilated,
for particular motions can be no more annihilated, then particular figures that
are dissolved and how, in reason can we say in reason particular figures are
Annihilated, when every part and parcel, grain, and atome, remains in infinite
matter, but some will say, when a house: for example, is pulled down, by taking
asunder the materials, that very figure of that house is annihilated; but my
opinion is, that it is not, for that very figure of that house remains in those
materials, and shall do eternally although those materials were dissolved into
Atoms, and every Ato me in a several place, part, or figure and though infinite
figures should be made by those materials by several dissolutions and
Creations, yet those infinites would remain in those particular materials
eternally, and was there from all eternity; And if any of those figures be
rebuilt, or Created again, it is the same figure it was.

So likewise the motion of the hand which I said for example, if the same hand
moves after the same manner, it is the same motion that moved the hand before;
so it may make infinite repetitions; thus one and the same motion may move
eternally, and rest from moving, and yet have a being.

Chap. 64. Of Motions.
THere are millions of several motions which agree to the making of each
figure, and millions of several motions are knit together; for the general
motion of that are figure, as if every figure had a Commonweal of several
Motions working to the subsistence of the figure, and several sorts of motions,
like several sorts of Trades hold up each other; some as Magistrates, and
rulers; others as Train-bands, as soldiers; some make forts, and dig trenches;
some as Merchants that traffic; some as Seamen, and Shipmasters; some that
labor and and work, as some cut and carve; Others paint, and ingrave; some
mix, and temper, join, and inlay, and glue together; some form, and build; some
cast in moulds, and some makes moulds to cast; some work rough-casts; some
pollish and refine; some bear burdens, some take off burdens, some digg, some
sow, some plough, some set, some graft, some plant, some gather, some reap,
some sift, some thrash, some grind, some knead, some bake, some beat, some
spin, some weave, some sewe together, some wind and twist, some create, and
others dissolve, and millions of millions of motions, but as we see external,
so we may imagine are internal motions.

Chap. 65. Many motions go to the producing of one thing, or to one end.
FOr there are millions of several motions go to the making of one figure, or
in mixing, as I may say, of several degrees of the dull part of matter, as I
will give one for example in gross external motions, where I will describe it
by digestive motions, which is to fit parts, and to distribute parts to several
places proper to the work. For digestive motions, there are many several sorts,
or kinds of motions mixed together, as for example, a piece of meat is to be
boiled, or the like, some motions cut fuel, and others take it up, others
carry, other lay down in a Chimnie, or the like place, others put fire, others
kindle it, and make it burn, others take mettle and melt it, others cast such a
figure as a pot, others bring the pot, others set it over the fire, others take
up water, others carry that water to the pot, others put that water into the
pot, others kill a sheep, others divide it into parts, others put it a part
into the pot. Thus a piece of meat cannot be boiled without all these motions,
and many more, which would be too tedious to relate, for I could have enlarged
in three times as many more, only to boil a piece of meat, and if there be so
many several motions in our gross sense in such things as these, then what is
there in infinite Nature, yet for all these infinite varieties of motions, as I
said before, I cannot perceive but six ground-motions, or fundamental motions,
from whence all changes come, which are these attractive motions, contracting
motions, retentive motions, dilative motions digestive motions, and expulsive
motions; likewise, although there be infinite kinds, and different figures,
yet the groundwork, from whence arises all the veriety, is but from four
figures; as Circular, Triangular, Cupe, and Paralels. And as there are infinite
changes of motions, amongst the sensitive innated matter, working on the dull
parts of matter, so there are infinite changes of motions in the rational
innated matter, making infinite kinds of knowledge, and degrees of knowledge,
and understanding, and as there are infinite changes of motion, so there are
infinite effects, and every produced effect, is a producing effect, and effects
which effect produce effects, and the only matter is the cause of all effects,
for the several degrees of only matter, is the effect of only matter, and
motion is the effect of some sorts of the degrees of only matter, and
varieties are the the effects of matter and motion, and life is the effect of
innate matter; and knowledge the effect of life.

Chap. 66. Of the six principal motions.
AS I have said, there are infinite Contractions, Atractions, Retentions,
Dilations, digestions, and expulsions, and to explain my self to my readers as
well as I can, unless they should mistake me, I will here describe, although
after a gross way; yet according to my capacity. A few of the infinite variety
of motions, first there are five, or six principal motions, from whence
infinite changes are made, or produced, as from Contractions, Attractions,
Retentions; these three principal motions do in some kind simpathize to each
other; and dilations, and expulsions do also sympathize to each other, but
digestions is a mixed motion taking part of all, but I divide them into six
parts, for distinction; Now to treat of them severally, we must make an
imaginary Circumference, and Center.

Then first for Attracting motions, which is to draw toward the Center, that
is, to draw to a less compass, as to draw toward a point, yet Atractions
draw not always after one and the same manner, for some motions draw after
them, as horses do Coaches, Carts, sleds and the like, but after several This
for example.
fashions, forms, and biasses and several motions, in those motions some slow,
some quick, some cross, some even. Again, some times Attractive motions draw,
as if one should pull in a line, or draw in a net, some slope-wayes, some
straight ways; some square ways, some round ways; and millions of the like
varieties, in this sort of motion, yet all Attracting motion.

Secondly, Contracting motions which move after another manner; for though both
these sorts of motions, are to bring toward a point, yet Contraction me
thinks, strives more against Vacuum, then Attraction, gathering all into a firm
body, stopping up all porous passages, shutting out space, and gathering in
matter, as close as it can; indeed Attractions are but in the way to
Contractions, as Dilations to expulsions; but this sort of motions is,
surfling, pleating, folding, binding, knitting, twisting, griping, pressing,
tying, and many the like, and after several manners, or fashions.

Thirdly, Retention is to hold, or to stay from wandering, to fix, as I may
(...), the matter to one place, as if one should stick, or glue parts together.

Fourthly, Dilations are to enlarge, as to spend, or extend, striving for
space, or compass; it is an incroaching motion, which will extend its bounds
as far as it can, this sort of motion is melting, flowing, streaming,
spreading, smoothing, stretching, and millions of the like.

Fifthly, Expulsive, is a motion that shuns all unity, it strives against
solidity, and uniformity, it disperses every thing it has power on; this sort
of motion, is, breaking, dissolving, throwing about.

Sixthly, Digestive motions, are the creating motions, carrying about parts to
parts, and fitting, and matching, and joining parts together, mixing and
tempering the matter for proper uses.

Chap. 67. Of Exterior Motions produced from the six principle Motions.
I Will here repeat some of the varieties of gross exterior Drawing motions.
motions, such as are visible to our grosser senses, to clear my readers
imaginary motion; Some motions draw, as horses draw Coaches, Carts, Sleds,
Harrows, or the like; others, as horses, and dogs, are led in a bridle, or
string.

Some, as beasts draw their prey to the Den moving backwards.

Some draw up lines shorter, and thicker, and some draw in circular lines,
sloping lines, and square lines.

Other sorts of drawing, some straight lines; some square lines, round lines,
slope lines, some motions draw up; some draw down, some draw side-wayes; some
cross, some regular; Other motions do, as if one should drive, or shove a
solid Driving m tions.
substance before them, the varieties of these motions.

Some are, as if a man should drive a wheel-barrow, or rolling of barrels, or
driving a plough, or a rowler, and millions the like.

Others are, as if beasts and men were to carry burdens, Bearing motions.
some bearing burdens on their back; some on their head; some in in their
mouth; some in their arms; some in their hands; some under their arms; some on
their thighs; some on their stings, as Bees do, and millions the like, and
every one of those burdens, have several motions thereto, and yet all but
bearing motions.

Other sorts of motions, as throwing the bar, pitching the Throwing, striking,
darting motions.
bar, throwing a ball, striking a ball, throwing a bowl, flinging a dart,
darting a dart, throwing upward, downward, straight-out, side-wayes, and all
these several manners, is but a throwing motion.

Leaping, running, hopping, trotting, gallopping, climing, clamering, Lofty
motions.
flying, and infinite others, yet all is but a lofty motion.

Diving, dipping, mowing, reaping, or shearing, rolling, creeping, Low (...)
crawling, tumbling, traveling, running, and infinite the like examples may be
given of the varieties of one and the same kind of motion.

Chap. 68. Of double motions at one and the same time, on the same matter.
AS for example; spinning flax, or the like is drawn long, and small, twisted
hard, and round, and at one time.

Again, a bowl runs round-way, and yet straight-out at one time.

A shuttle-cock spins about in a straight line.

The wind spreads, and yet blows straight-out at one and the same time.

Flame ascends Circular, and many the like examples may be given.

Chap. 69. Of the several strengths.
ALthough there be infinite strengths of Motion, yet not to all sorts of
figures, nor to all degrees of matter; for some figures move slow, others move
swift, according to the Nature of the shape, or the interior strengths, or the
degree, or quantity of innated matter, that created them; for though every
degree of innated matter, is of one and the same strength, yet there are
different degrees; but only two degrees are subject to our weak sense, as the
innate mind, and the innated body, which we call sense and reason, which sense
and reason, may be in every thing, though after different manners, but we have
confined sense, only to animal kind, and reason only to mankind; but if the
innated matter is in the dull parts of matter, as the life of the body, then
there is no part that has not sense and reason whether creating or created,
dissolving, or dissolved, though I will not say that every creature enjoys life
alike, so every figure is not innated alike, for some is weaker innated, and
some stronger, either by quantity or degree, yet every figure is innated; for
it is innated matter that creates, and dissolves figures, yet the innated
matter works according to the several degrees, and tempers, of the dull part of
matter, and to such properties, and figures, and figures properties, and proper
figures, that is, motion does form the only matter, into figures, yet motion
cannot alter the Entity of only matter, but motion can, and does alter the
interior, and exterior figures, and though the several degrees of matter may be
placed, and replaced in figures, yet the nature of the matter cannot be altered.

Chap. 70. The creations of Figures, and difference of Motions.
THose motions that are proper to create figures, are different from those
motions that dissolve them, so that sympathetical internal motions, do not
only assist one another, but Sympathetical external Motions, and Sympathetical
figures; this is the reason that from two figures, a third, or more is created,
by the way of procreation; yet all figures are created, after one and the same
kind of way; yet not after one and the same manner of way, as Vegetables,
Minerals, and some sorts of Animals, as such as are bred from that we call
corruption, as some sorts of worms, and some sorts of flies, and the like;
Conjunction of those different motions.
Yet are they created by the procreation of the heat, and moisture, the same
way are plants that grow wild produced, but those that are sown or set,
although they are after one and the same kind of way, yet not after the same
First the earth bears Vegetables, and the plants bear seed, and the seed, and
earth bear Vegetables again.
manner; for the young vegetables, were produced from the seeds, and the earth,
which were sowed, or set together, and in grafts is when two different plants
produce seed of mixed nature, as a Mule is produced, or the like creature, from
two different Animals, which make them of mixed nature; for As there is a
Sympathetical conjunction in one, and the same kind of figure, so there is a
Sympathetical conjunction in some sorts of figures; but not in all, nor to all,
for that would make such a confusion in nature, as there would be no
distinction, of kinds; besides, it were impossible for some kind of figures,
to make a conjunction with other kinds, being such a difference betwixt them,
some from the nature of the figures, others from the shape of the figures.

And Minerals are produced by the Conjunction of such Elements, which were
begot by such motions, as make heat, and drought, and cold and dry. Thus all
figures are created from different motions, and different degrees, of infinite
only matter; for only matter joins, and divides it self by self motions, and
has done so, and will do so, or must do so eternally, being its nature, yet
the divisions, and substractions, joynings, and creations, are not alike, nor
do they continue, or dissolve, with the like measure of time, which time is
only as in a reference to several motions.

But as I have said, there can be nothing lost in nature, Although there be
infinite changes, and their changes never repeated. For say a man dies, and his
figure dissolves into dust, as small as Atoms, and is dispersed so, as never to
meet, and every Atome goes to the making of several figures, and so changes
infinitely, from figure, to figure, yet the figures of all these changes lie in
those parts, and those parts in only matter; so likewise several motions may
cease as figures dissolve, but still those motions lies in innated matter, and
each particular figure, in the generality of matter and motion, which is on the
dull part, and innated part of only matter.

Chap. 71. The Agilenesse of innated Matter:
INnated matter seems much nimbler in some works, then in other, as making
Elements, and their several changes, being more porous then Animals,
Vegetables, and Minerals, which are more contracted, and not so easily
metamorphosed, and on the thin part of dull matter, they seem much nimbler, and
agil, then when they work on the gross part of dull matter; for though the
innated matter can work, but according to the strength, yet not always
according to that strength; for their burdens are not always equal to their
strength; for we see in light thin dull matter, their motions to be more swift,
having less encumbrances, and lighter burdens, unless it be oposed, and
stopped by the innated matter, that works in the more solid, or thicker part of
dull matter, or move solid and united figures, yet many times the innated
matter, that works on the thin part of dull matter, or in more porous figures,
will make way through solid and thick bodies, and have the power on those that
work on more gross matter, for the innate matter that works on gross matter,
cannot resist so well, having greater burdens, nor act with that facility as
the others can, whose matter is lighter, or figures more pourous; for we see
many times water to pass through great rocks, and mountains, piercing and
dividing their strengths, by the frequent assaults thereon, or to; yet many
times the pass is kept or lost, according to the quantity of the innated (...)
of either side.

Chap. 72. Of external, and internal figures and Motions.
FOr the motions of heat and drought begets the Sun the motions of heat and
moisture begets the Air.

The motions of cold and dry, begets the earth, and the rest of the Planets,
and as other motions begot them, so they begot others, and as these Elemental
Planets beget in gener all figures, which we call creatures in the world; so
these figures, as they are matched, beget each particular figures of several
sorts; For external figures, are made by internal motions; for though
Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals be internal figures, as to the globe of the
World, which is the external figures to them, yet they are external figures to
those which are created in them, until such time as they are cast forth of
that mould, as I may say, which they were made in, which is the womb, and the
several wombs of several kinds, are several moulds, but indeed all moulds
differ in their points.

Perchance this subject might be better explained, but my modest thoughts will
not give my inquisitive thoughts leave to trace Natures Creations by
procreation; Although I believe nature, and her works are pure of themselves,
but it is the Abuse of her works, and not the knowledge that corrupts mankind.

Chap. 73. Of repeating one and the same work, and of varieties.
NAture may repeat one and the same creature if she pleases, that is, the same
motions, on the same matter, may create the same creature, by reason the same
motions, and the same matter, is eternally in the body infinite: thus the
Original cause of producing one and the same is eternal, by reason nothing in
nature can be annihilated, and though the infinite matter is but one and the
same, yet the infinite part of innated matter, moves infinite several ways,
and by reason of the diversity of motion, there is such variety, as seldom any
two creatures are alike, for motion delights in variety, not so much in the
different kinds, as in the particular creatures, which makes me think that
motion is bound by the nature of the matter, to make such kinds; Although it
be at liberty for particulars, and yet the several kinds may be as infinite as
the particulars; as for example, although motion is bound to Animal kind,
Vegetable kind, Mineral kind, and also to make such kind of worlds as this
is; yet motion may make infinite particular worlds, as infinite particular
Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, and those infinite worlds may differ, as those
kinds of Creaturs; for worlds may differ from other worlds, not only as man
from man, but as man from beast, beasts from birds, birds from fish, and so as
Vegetables do; for an oak is not like a tulip, or roses; for trees are not like
flowers, nor flowers like roots, nor roots like fruit, nor all flowers alike,
nor all roots alike, nor all fruits alike, nor all trees, and the rest, and so
for Minerals; gold is not like lead, nor a diamond like a pibble stone; so
there may be infinite worlds, and infinite variety of worlds, and be all of
that kind we call worlds, yet be nothing alike, but as different, as if it
were of another kind, and may be infinite several kinds of creatures, as
several sorts, that we can never imagine, nor guess at; for we can guess, nor
imagine at no other ways, but what our senses brought in, or our imaginations
raised up, and though imaginations in nature may be infinite, and move in every
particular brain after an infinite manner; yet it is but finite in every
particular figure, because every particular figuse is finite, that is every
particular figure comes by degrees from creation to a full growth, from a full
growth to a decay, from a decay to a dissolution; but not a Annihilation, for
every particular figure lies in the body infinite, as well as every particular
kind; for unless eternalmatter, and infinite matter, and eternal and infinite
motions could be Annihilated, infinite figures will eternally remain, although
not in their whole bulk, yet in their parted pieces; for though one and the
same matter may be made into other figures: yet the former figures have as much
a being as the present figures, by reason the matter that was the cause of
those figures has an eternal being, and as long as the cause lasts, the
effects cannot be Annihilated.

Chap. 74. Of creation, and dissolving of Nature.
THe divisions, and substractions, joynings, and creations, are not alike, nor
do they continue, and dissolve with the like measures of time; for some
Vegetables are old, and decrepit at a day old, others are but in their prime
after a hundred years, and so some Animals, as flies and the like, are old and
decrepit at a year old; others, as man is but at his prime at twenty years, and
will live a hundred years, if he be healthy and sound; so in the Minerals,
perchance lead, or tin, or the like, is but a fly, for continuance to gold, or
like a flower to an oak, then it is probable, that the Sun and the rest of the
Planets, Stars, and Millions more that we know not, may be at their full
strength at ten hundred thousand years, nay million of millions of years, which
is nothing to eternity, or perchance, as it is likely, other figures were at
full strength when matter and motion created them, and shall last until matter
dissolves them. Again, it is to be observed that all Spherical figures last
longest, I think it is because that figure has no ends to ravel out at.

Chap. 75. Of Gold.
SOme say that Gold is not to be altered from the figure that makes it gold,
because Chemists have tried and cannot do it, but certainly that innated motion
that joins those parts, and so made it in the figure of Minerals can dissolve
those parts, and make it into some figure else, to express an other thing; but
being a (...) solid part of dull matter then that which makes other minerals,
it is longer a creating, and dissolving, then the other figures are, that are
of a light or softer substance, and may be the motions that make gold, are of
slower nature, so as it is caused from the hardness of the matter, or the
slownesse of the spirit, caused by the curiosity of the work, wherein they must
use more different motions then in other figures; so as it may be a thousand
years uniting, or a thousand years a dispersing, a thousand, nay ten thousand;
for there is no account, nor time in nature infinite, and because we last not
so song as to perceive it, shall we say that Gold was eternal, and shall last
eternally; so we may as well Unless a greater power destroy it before the
natural time.
say an Oak, that is a hundred years, ere it comes to full maturity, and a
hundred years, ere it comes to be dissoved, that it was an Oak eternally, and
shall be so eternally, because a flower, is created, and dissolved in two or
three days, but the solidity of the matter, and the cu^riosity in the several
changes, and enterchanges of motions prolong the work, yet it is hastened, or
retarded by the quantity of spirits that work therein; for when there is more,
it is sooner formed, when less, longer ere it come to its figurative perfection.

Chap. 76. Of Sympathies, and Antipathies, which is to agree, or disagree, to
join, or to cross.
THere are infinite sorts of figures, or Creatures, that have Sympathy, and
infinite sorts of figures, that have Antipathies, both by their exterior, and
interior motions, and some exterior Sympathy with some interior, and some
interior with some exteriors, and some exterior with exteriors, and interiors
with interiors, both in one and the same figure, and with one and the same
kind, and with different kinds, and with several sorts, which works various
effects: and here I will treat a little of Vegetables, and Minerals with
Antipathy, or Sympathies, with Animals of all Animals. First, man thinks
himself to have the Supreme knowledge, but he can but think so, for he does not
absolutely know it, for thought is not an absolute knowledge but a suppositive
knowledge, for there are as many several degrees of knowledge, as of innate
matter which is infinite, and therefore not absolute, and as much variety of
knowledge, as there is of motions, and though all innated matter is knowing,
yet all innated matter is not known; this makes figures to have of each others
a suppositive, but not an absolute knowledge; thus infinite makes innated
matter in some kind, a stranger to it self, yet being knowing, although not
known, it makes an acquaintance with parts of it self, and being various by
interchanging motions, it also loses acquaintance; the acquaintance we call
learning, invention, experience, or memory, the unknown, or not acquainted we
call stupidity, ignorance, forgetfulness, illiterate, but by the acquaintance
of experience, we come to find the use of many things, and by the use we come
to learn, and from our learning we come to practice, and by our practice we
come to produce many effects, from the hidden and mystical causes, which are
the effects, from the only cause which is the only matter, thus we come to
find the use of Earth, Water, Air, and Fire, Vegetables, Minerals, and so
Animal with Animal, and we do not only get new acquaintance; which is new
experience, but we make use of our acquaintance to our own benefit, or at least
we strive to do so; for it is the nature of life, which life is innated matter,
to strive for preheminency, Life is in every thing.
and absolute power, that is, only matter would rule it self, but being
infinite it neither absolutely knows it self, nor can absolutely rule or govern
it self, and though it be an endless work, yet motion which is the moving part
of nature, cannot desist, because it is infinite, and eternal, thus moving
matter running perpetually toward absolute power, makes a perpetual war; for
infinite, and only matter is always It is but one thing, but three words.
at strife for absolute power, for matter would have power over infinite, and
infinite would have over matter, and eternity would have power over both.

Thus infinite and eternal matter joined all, as to one is always at strife in
it self, yet the war is regular, not confused; For there this is a natural
order, and discipline is in nature as much as cruel Tyranny; for there is a
natural order, and discipline oftentimes in cruel Tyranny.

Chap. 77. Of different knowledge in different figures.
CErtainly there are infinite several kinds, as well as infinite several
sorts, and particular creatures in nature, and certainly every several kind,
nay, every several sort in every kind. Knowledge works after a different
manner; in every different figure, which different manners we call particular
knowledges which works according to the figure, so infinite knowledge lies in
infinite figure, and infinite figure in infinite matter, and as there are
infinite degrees of matter, so there are infinite degrees of knowledge, and as
there are infinite degrees of knowledge, so there are infinite degrees of
motions, so there are infinite degrees of figures, and as there are infinite
degrees, so there are infinite kinds, and as there are infinite kinds, so
there are infinite sorts, and so infinite particulars in every sort, yet no
kind can be said to have most, or least, though less or more; for there is no
such thing, as most or least in nature. For as I said before, there is only
different knowledge belonging to every kind, as to Animal kind, Vegetable
kind, Mineral kind; and infinite more which we are not capable to know, but
two particular sorts in every kind; as for example, Man may have a different
knowledge from beasts, birds, fish, worms, and the like, and yet be no wiser,
or knowing then they; For different ways in knowledge makes not knowledge more
or less, no more then different paths enlarge one compass of ground; nor no
more then several words for one and the same thing, for the thing is the same,
only the words differ; so if a man has different knowledge from a fish, yet
the fish may be as knowing as man, but man has not a fishes knowledge, nor a
fish a man's knowledge.

Likewise some creatures may have more, and some less knowledge then others;
yet none can be said to have most, or least; for there is no such thing as most
or least in nature, nor does the weakness, or imperfection in particular
creatures impair the knowledge of the kind, or impair the That is to weaken
the degree.
knowledge as I may say, belonging to any particular sort, nor can any one have
such a supremacy of knowledge as to add to the knowledge of the kind, or sort
of kind, as to have such a knowledge as is above the capacity of that kind,
or sort to understand. As for example, a man to know more then the nature of
man is to know; for what knowledge man has had, or can have, is in the
capacity of the kind, though not to every particular man, for though nature
may work within her self; yet she cannot work beyond her self, and if there be
mix sorts of creatures, as partly man, and partly beast, partly man, and
partly fish, or partly beast, and partly fish, and partly fish, and partly
foul; yet although they are mixed creatures, and may have mixed knowledges, yet
they are particular sorts, and different knowledges, belonging to those sorts,
and though different sorts have different knowledges, yet the kind may be of
one and the same degree; that is, every several sort of creatures, in one and
the same kind, is as knowing and as wise, as another, and that which makes
some creatures seem less perfect then others, or more knowing then others, is
the advantage, or disadvantage of their (...), which gives one creature power
over another; but different Knowledge in different creatures takes advantages by
turns according as it turns to it. And as there is different Knowledge, and
different Kinds, and several sorts, so there is different Knowledge in
different senses, in one and the same creature; for what man has seen the
interior biting motion of Gold, and burning motions of heat? yet feels them we
may imagine by the touch, the interior nature of fire to be composed of sharp
points, yet our sight has no Knowledge thereof, so our sight has the
Knowledge of light; but the rest of our senses are utterly ignorant thereof;
our ears have the Knowledge of sound, but our eyes are ignorant of the
Knowledge thereof; thus, though our ears may be as Knowing as our eyes, and our
eyes as Knowing as our ears, yet they may be ignorant of each other, I say
Knowledge, for sense is Knowledge, as well as reason, only reason is a degree
above sense, or sense, a degree beneath reason.

Chap. 78. The advantages of some figures, some degrees of matter, and motions,
over others.
IF we do but stricktly pry into the works of nature, we shall observe, that
all internal motions, are much after the manner of external motions, I mean
those motions that we can perceive, by those effects, as are subject to our
senses, and although for the most part the strongest motions govern the
weakest, yet it is not always found that they conquer the weaker; for there
are infinite slights, or infinite advantages to be taken, or mist in infinite
nature, some by the (...) of their figures, and some in the degrees of matter,
and some in the manner of moving; for slights are just like the actions of
Juglers, Vauters, or Tumblers, Wrastlers, or the like; for shapes I will give
one or two for example, as a little Mouse which is but a weak creature, in
comparison to an Elephant, yet the small Mouse shall overcome an Elephant, by
running up through the snout, and so get into the head, and so gnaw on his
brain; And a Worm is a weak creature in comparison of a man, yet if he get into
the guts, it will gnaw out his bowels, and destroy that figure. So for degrees
of matter, what advantage has the innated matter, or the dull part of matter,
and for motions, most often the nimbler, and agile motions, get an advantage on
the stronger, if more slower, and oftener by the manner of motions; for many
times a diving motion will have the better of a swimming motion, a jumping
motion of a running motion, a creeping or crawling motion, of either, a darting
motion of a flying motion, a cross motion of a straight motion, a turning
motion of a lifting motion, so an Attractive motion of an expulsive motion, and
infinite the like, and every motion may have their advantages by turns, and
then the advantages of place, and of times, as I may call it, for distinction
sake, some Creatures will suppress other creatures in the night, when the
suppressers dare not appear to the supprssed in the light, a great Army shall
be destroyed by a little Army, by standing in a lower patch of ground, often by
fighting at such a time of the day, when the sun shines on their faces, but it
would be too long for Methusalems life, to set down examples, being infinite,
but this shall serve to express my opinions.

Chap. 79. Of the figurative figures.
MOst figures are lined, and enterlined, as I may say, for expression sake,
some figures are like a set, or nest of boxes, as for example, half a dozen
boxes one within another, so every of those figures has the same figure,
within one another, the outermost figure being the largest, the inmost figure
the least; as for example, a man builds a house, first he builds the figure of
that house with wood, as beams, and rafters and lathes; next he lays mortar,
then is the figure of that house in mortar, then he lays bricks or stones,
then there is the figure of the house in stone, and brick, then it is
plaistered within the inside, then there is the figure of the house in
plaster, if it be painted, then there is figure of the house in painting; so
likewise an Animal, as a man, first there is the figure of a man in bones, as
we may see in a Anatomy, then there is the figure of a man in flesh; thirdly
there is the figure of a man in the skin, then there are many, different
figures, belonging to one and the same figure, as every several part of an
Animal is of a different figure, and every part has different figures
belonging thereunto; as man for example, to the hand there is the palm, the
back, the fingers, the nails, yet all makes but one hand.

So the head, there is the brain, the pia matter, the dura matter, the scul, the
nose, the eyes, the forehead, the ears, the mouth, the lips, the tongue, the
chin, yet all this is but a head; likewise the head, the neck, the breast, the
arms, the hands, the back, the hips, the bowels, the thighs, the legs, the
feet; besides, the bones, the nerves, the muscles, the veins, the arteries, the
heart, the liver, the lights, the midrif, the bladder, the kidneys, the guts,
the stomach, the brain, the marrow, the blood, the flesh, the skin, yet all
these different figurative parts make but the figure of one man. So for
Vegetables, the root, the sap, the peath, the bole, the bark, the branches,
make but the figure of one tree; likewise every figure is different, this man
is not like that man, this tree is not like that tree, for some trees are
larger, or lesser, higher, or lower, more or less branched, crooked, or
straghter, so in Animals, some are of one shape, some of another, as men, some
are slender and tall; some little and low; some big and tall, others thick and
low; some high-nos'd; some flat-nos'd; some thick, some thin lipt; some high
foreheads, some low, some broad, some narrow, and numbers of like examples may
be given, not only to man, but all other Animal creatures according to their
shapes, that every particular in one and the same kind, has different
figures, yet every particular kind has but one and the same motion, which
properly and naturally belong to that Kind of figure, as a horse to gallop, to
amble, to trot, to runn, to leap, to kick, and the like; and man to lift, to
carry to walk, to run, to pitch, to dig, to shut, to chop, to pull back, to
thrust forward; likewise every particular part in one and the same Kind, has
but one and the same kind of motions, local or otherwise, and ever particular
bird, has but one, and the same kind of motion in their flights, and in their
feeding;

So beasts, every particular kind has but one and the same manner of motion,
and feeding; so likewise all mankind has after one and the same Kind of
motions belonging naturally to every particular part of his body, the only
difference is in the strength, or weakness, their restraints or facilities but
not different in manner of the movings. But to return, to the figures, I say
there are different figures belonging to one and the same kind of figure, but
the ground or fundamental figures in every particular figure, are there. (As
for example) a tree at first is the figure of wood, the second is such a sort
of wood, as a Cedar, an Oak, an Elm, an Ash, and the like; also of such a
nature of wood, some fitter to burn then to build, others that will grow but on
such, or such soils, others to last longer, or die sooner, or bud and bear in
such, and such seasons, some to bear fruit, others to bear none.

Likewise for Animals, the first figure is to be an Animal, that is, to have a
local figure, the second figure is to be flesh, Fish is a kind of flesh.
not wood. The third is to be such a kind of flesh as man's flesh, not bears
flesh, or dogs flesh, or horse flesh, or cows flesh, and more examples may be
given, then I am able to repeat, or my book to infold, but Animals and
Vegetables have more different figures, belonging to every particular, figure
or Kind then Minerals, especially metals, which are as it were composed of one
piece.

Chap. 80. Of the gloomy figures, and figures of parts, and of one piece.
Air is not a shining body of it self, but as the lines of light shine upon
it, it is smooth, and may be aglossie body, but not a shining; for though there
are infinite several sorts of brightness and shining, yet two I will describe.

As there are two sorts of shining figures; some that cast forth beams of
light, as bright shining fire, and likewise from some sorts of stones, bones,
and wood, so there are some sorts of figures that only retain a bright shining
quality in themselves, but cast forth no beams therefrom; or else so weak and
small, as not useful to our sight, but what is represented to us thereon, by
other lights; this sort is water, metal, and vulgar stones, which perchance
air may have such a shining body.

These shining bodies, as water, or metal, or the like, are not perceived in
the dark, but when light is cast thereon, we do not only perceive the light,
but their own natural shining quality by that light.

Again, some figures have only a gloss, which is a faint shining, like as a
fained light, or an eclipsed shadow, as all the pores Vegetables, and Animals
skins have; and some figures are glossy through the thinness, or
transparentnesse, not in the nature, for by reason the figure is thin, and
transparent, the light shining, though transparent does not only show the
light, but the light gives those figures a gloss.

Some figures, as I have said, are as it were all of one piece, as some sorts
of earth, water, vapor, and air, which may be metamorphosed, by contracting and
dilation.

Others of diverse pieces, and several works, as Vegetables, and Animals,
wherein are joints and knots, some parts soft, and some liquid, some firm,
some hard, every part having a several figure, which varieties and
contrarieties serve to the consistence, and preservation, but of one perfect
figure; but Animals of all other figures have the most variety of works, and
several motions.

Chap. 81. Of the dull and innated matter.
SOme may say, that if there were infinite dull and in-moving matter, some of
it may lie unmoved eternally. I answer, that cannot be, for as there is
infinite dullness and solidity; so there is infinite acutenes and facility, by
which I mean searching, and penetrating, which in some sense makes it equal, if
there be equality in infinite, but the innating matter works not upon the dull
matter, as upon a new material; for the innate matter is mixed with the dull
part of matter; For the innated matter moves in the dull part of matter, and on
the dull part of matter, as I have described in my first part, for the innated
matter takes not fresh and new (as I may say) for distinction sake, to make a
figure with; but turns the dull matter into several figures, joining each
degree as the innate matter will, or as it is proper for such a kind of
figure, for some degrees of matter will not make, I do believe some kind of
figures, but the dull part of matter, is not mixed in the innate matter,
although the innate matter is mixed in that, for the innate matter is pure in
it self, without any gross mixture, for it is the infinite pure part of matter
infinite, it is the spirits, or essence of nature.

Chap. 82. An answer to an old question, what becomes of the shape, or figure,
or outward forms of the old figure, when the nature takes a new form.
ALL Created, or not created, or created, and dissolved again, figures or
forms, lie in only matter, either in by parts, or in the whole, for the
materials of every figure is but of one matter, and the lump of all figures is
the figure of eternal matter, for the infinite particular of figures, is the
infinite form, shape, or figure of infinite and eternal matter, and the
creation, disposals, and dissolvings of figures, are the several actions of
that only matter; for infinite motions are the infinite life, of the infinite
and eternal life, which life, is as eternal matter, being part of the matter it
self, and the manner of moving is but the several actions of life; for it is
not an absence of life when the figure dissolves, but an alteration of life,
that is, the matter cease not from moving, for every part has life in it, be
the parts never so small, or dispersed amongst other parts, and if life, there
must be consequently sense, if sense, knowledge, then there can be no death, if
every part has life in it, so that which we call death, is only an alteration
of such motions, in such a figure, in only matter.

Chap. 83. Of Transmigrations.
TRansmigrations are not metamorphosed, for to metamorphose is to change the
shape and interior form, but not the intellect, which cannot be without a new
creation, nor then, but so as partly the intellect changes, with the shape and
interior form, but all bodies are in the way of transmigrations perpetually.

As for example, the nourishing food that is received into the stomach
transmigrated into Chylus, Chylus into blood, blood into flesh, flesh into fat,
and some of the chylus migrated into humors, as Choler, Phlegm, and melancholy;
some into excrement, which transmigrats through the body, into dung, dung into
earth, earth into Vegetables, Vegetables into Animals; again by the way of
food, and likewise Animals into Animals, and Vegetables into Vegetables, and so
likewise the elements.

But indeed all creatures are created by the way of transmigration.

As for example, hens, or other fouls lay eggs, and then The yolk and white is
mixed into one substance which we call an adle egg; before it be a (...) it is
bloody.
sit on them, from whence a nourishing heat is transmigrated from the hen into
the eggs, which transmigrates into a kind of a Chylus, then into blood, blood
into flesh, flesh into sinews, sinews into bones, and some into veins,
arteries, brains, and the like.

For transmigration is only the mixing sifting, searching, tempering faculty,
of innated matter, which is self-motion, It Is a lump of flesh before it be bone,
or sinew.
and motion is the only transmigrater, otherwise infinite matter would lie
idle eternally, though I cannot well conceive how infinite can be without
motion; but howsoever we perceive so much as there are proper motions, and
mixtures of matter belonging to every particular figure; and though figures
does produce figures; yet figures do not order the creation, for it is not the
figures that create, but creation that produces by figures, which creation is
motion, which motion is innated matter, which matter creates and dissolves by
the way of transmigrations, all figures dissolving to create, and creates to
dissolve, but dissolving, and creation, which is that we call life and death,
has only a reference to the figures, but not of the nature of the matter.

Chap. 84. Of metamorphosing of Animals and Vegetables.
IT is impossible for Animals and vegetables to be metamorphosed, And then it
is no metamorphosing I shall declare.
without a creation, as to transform a man into a tree, or a tree into a man,
nor a man into the form of a beast, as to turn mans-flesh into horseflesh, or
horseflesh into mans-flesh or one mans-flesh to turn into another mansflesh,
or an Oak, into a Cypres, or a Cypres into an Oak, and so the like in all
Vegetables, and Animals; thus Transforming the interior forms, or rather
changing the interior form, like garments, putting one, and another interior
form, upon one and the same intellect nature, which is impossible, by reason
the interior forms, and intellect natures, are inseparable, so that destroying
the one, destroys the other, and a change cannot be made of either, without
the dissolution of the whole, no more then a man can change the whole building,
without pulling down the house, for though they may make some alterations in
the outward shape as to add something more, or take away, and make all less,
or thicker, or thinner, or higher or lower; but cannot alter the interior form,
which is the foundations, but if they pull it down, the same materials may be
put into another form, or into the same form it was at first, but it must first
be new built again, before it can have those forms, and they must stay the time
of building; so for every Vegetable creature, and Animal creature, they cannot
be metamorphosed, by the reason metamorphosing is to change their forms without
a new creation, and they cannot change their forms without a dissolution, and
then created anew, by reason the intellect, and the interior form is as one
body, and not to be separated; for the interior forms of these creatures, and
the intellects depend upon one another, and without one the another cannot be.

The intellect, and the interior form may be divided together into parts; but
not separated apart, though the several sorts of one and the same kind, as
Animal kind may be mixed in their creations, as to be some part a beast, some
part a dog, or the like, and part a man, and some creature And then it is
called a new creature rather then a metamorphosed creature etc.
partly a bird, and partly a beast, or partly a beast and partly a fish; yet
the intellect is mixed with the interior form, and the exterior shape with the
interior form.

The like in vegetables, and if the interior forms, and intellects of each
sort, nay of each creature, cannot be changed, much less of each kind, thus
the intellect natures, and interior forms of it, can never be without a new
creation, and as for the exterior shapes of Animals may be altered but not
changed; for Animals of all other creatures have their shapes most unite to the
interior form, and (...) intellect nature of any other creature in nature.

But I desire my readers not to mistake me, for want of terms, and words of Art.

For the interior or intellect nature I mean is such properties, disposition,
constitution, Capacity, and the like; that makes it such a creature.

The interior form is such a substance, and such a sort as flesh, or fish, or
wood, or metal, and not only so, but such a sort of flesh, as mans-flesh,
horseflesh, dogs-flesh, and the like.

So the wood of oak, the wood of maple, the wood of ash; And the like, so the
gold metal, the iron metal, and the like.

For horseflesh is not mans-flesh, nor the wood of oak, the wood of ash, nor
the metal of gold, the metal of iron.

And as for the exterior form, I mean the outward shape.

Chap. 85. The Metamorphosing of the exterior forms, of some figures.
ALL figures that are of a united piece, as water and fire are, and not in
parts, as not having several parts of different natures, as Animals and
Vegetables have, may be Metamorphosed out of one form into another, and
rechange into the original form again, yet it is only their exterior form, not
their interior nature. As for example, water that is frozen, or turned to hail,
or snow, the exterior is only metamorphosed; Which circular lines I shall
express hereafter.
For the interior nature which is the circular line is unaltered, likewise when
the circular line is extenuated into air, the interior circle line is not
changed; but when the interior nature is dissolved, and the matter it was
composed of transmigrates into other figures.

Likewise metals when the interior nature is changed, it cannot be rechanged
again without a new creation; for if we can turn onemetal into another, yet it
is not as the way of metamorphosing, but transmigrating, otherwise we may say,
we can turn Animals and Vegetables into water, when we distill them, but the
magic of Chemistry shall nor return them to their interior nature, nor
exterior shape. Again, although their desires make them believe it possible to
be done, but substracting is not metamorphosing, but rather transmigrating, and
substracting is one of the chiefest faculties of transmigration.

And as for those creatures that are composed of parts of different natures (as
I have said) their exterior form cannot be metamorphosed, (...) those motions
that metamorphose one part, cannot metamorphose another.

And though every part is different, yet they generally unite to the
consistence of the whole figure, whereby the several transforming motions on
the several parts would make such a confusion, as upon necessity must dissolve
the intellect nature, and interior form of that (...) figure, thus striving to
alter would destroy.

AN EPISTLE TO THE Unbeleeving Readers IN NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.
MAny say that in natural Philosophy, nothing is to be known, not the cause of
any one thing, which I cannot persuade my selfis truth; for if we know effects,
we must needs know some causes, by reason that effects are the causes of
effects, and if we can knowbut one effect, it is an hundred to one, but we
shall know how to produce more effects thereby.

Secondly, the natural Philosophy is an endless study without any profitable
advantage; but I may answer, that there is no Art nor Science, but is produced
thereby, if they will without partiality consider from whence they are derived.

Thirdly, that it is impossible that any thing should be known in natural
Philosophy, by reason it is obscure and hid from the knowledge of mankind.

I answer, that it is impossible that nature should perfectly understand, and
absolutely know her self, because she is infinite, much less can any of her
works know her.

Yet it does not follow, that nothing can be known, because all is not known.

As for example, there are several parts of the world discovered, yet it is
most likely not all, nor may be never shall be, yet most think that the whole
world is found, because Drake, and Cavendish went in a circular line until they
came to the place where they set out at first. And I am most confident that
most of all thought all the world was known unto them before the West Indies
were discovered, and the man which discovered it in his brain before he had
traveled on the navigable sea, and offered it to King Henry the seventh, who
slighted him as a foolish fellow, not believing his intelligence, and no
question there were many that laughed at him, as a vain fool, others pitied
him, as thinking him mad, and others scorned him, as a cheating fellow, which
would have couzened the King of England of a sum of money; but the Queen of
Portugal being wiser then (...) rest employed him, and adventured a great sum
of money to set him forth on his way, which when the success was according to
the man's Genius brain, and had brought the Queen by the discovery, gold and
silver mines for her Coin, then all other nations envied the King of Spain who
was heir, and like a company of dogs which fight for a bone, went together by
the ears, to be sharers with him.

So the Bishop, who declared his opinion, of the Antipodes, was not only cried
down, and exclaimed against by the vulgar which hates all ingenuity, but
learned Scholars stood up against him, and the great and grave Magistrates
condemned him as an Atheist for that opinion, and for that reason put him from
his Bishopric, and though he had favor to spare his life, which opinion has
since been found out by Navigators, but the ignorant and unpractised brains,
think all impossible that is unknown unto them.

But put the case many went about to find that which can never be found (as
they said natural Philosophy is) yet they might find in the search that they
did not expect, which might prove very beneficial to them; or put the case ten
thousand should go ten thousand ways to seek for a cabinet of precious Jewels,
and all should miss of it but one, shall that one be scorned and laughed at
for his good fortune, or industry? this were a great injustice.

But ignorance and envy strives to take off the gloss of truth, if they cannot
wholly overthrow it; and those that write must arm themselves with negligence
against censure.

For my part I do, for I verily believe, that ignorance and present envy will
slight my book; yet I make no question, when envy is worn out by time, but
understanding will remember me in after ages, when I am changed from this life;
but I had rather live in a general remembrance, then in a particular life.

Earth Metamorphosed into water, water Metamorphosed to vapor, Air and fire,
at least into heat.
PART III.
CHAP. 86.
MOtion forms a round lump of earth, or such like matter, by extenuating swells
it out, and as the swelling increases, the circumferent enlarges, and when its
extended further then this solid form, it becomes pores, and the parts looser.
This degree of extenuation, makes it mud, when it extends further then the
degree of mud, it turns to a softer form, as that of slime; the fourth
extenuating degree shapes it into a perfect ring drawing all the loose parts
into a compass line, this becomes water, and the difference of a lump, or ball
of earth to the watery circle, for a round lump is when there is no space, or
distinct lines, and a circular ring is a distinct line with a hollow center,
that is, an empty place, in the midst of a round line, so they may be a round
ball, but not a ring, or a round circle line, and a circle line and not a ball,
and as I said, when it comes to such a degree, of extenuating, it turns water,
that is, to be wet, liquid and fluid, and according as the circles are, is the
water more or less, and according as the lines are extenuated, or contracted,
is the water thicker or thinner, colder or hotter, heavier or lighter, and
according as the lines are round, or flat-edge, pointed, or smooth, is the
water fresh, sharp, salt, or bitter, but these circles may not only dilate,
and contract several ways, but after several fashions, as to make vapor, air,
fire, snow, hail, ice, and frost, as I shall declare in my following chapters.

Chap. 87. Of wetnesse.
WE may perceive that whatsoever is hot and dry, and cold and dry, shrinks
inward as toward the center, and whatsoever is hot and moist, and cold and
moist, dilates as toward the circumference, so that all moisture is wrought by
extenuating motions, and drought, by contracting motions, and not only
extenuating motions, but such sorts of extenuating motions, and drought by
contracting motions, and notonely extenuating motions, but such sorts of
extenuating motions as in circular figures, which circular figures make water,
so soft, smooth, and flowing, smooth, because circular; for Circles make it
smooth, the figures having no end extenuating makes it softby spreading and
loosing the parts, as flowing by reason dilations drive all outward as toward
the circumference yet the degree of extenuating may outrun the degree of wet;
for wet is in such a degree of extenuating circles as I may say, the middle
degree, yet there are many sorts of wet, as oily, wet, and watery; but I have
described that in my chapter of oil, but I take oil rather to be liquid and
moist, then wet; For there is difference betwixt moist, liquid, and wet, for
though moist and liquid is in a degree of wet, yet it is not an absolute wet,
for dissolved gums are liquid, not wet, melted Sugers are liquid, not wet, oil
is more liquid then wet, and smoke may be said to be liquid, as being of an
oily nature, and air rather to be moist then wet, and dust, Ashes, flame,
light, wind, may be said to be fluid, but not liquid nor wet.

Chap. 88. Of Circles.
A Circle is a round figure without ends, having a circumference, and a center,
and the figure of a circle, may be many ways contracted, but can be but in one
way extenuated, which is by enlarging the compass, of the line; and the reason
is, because it is a round piece, without ends; for a straight line may be drawn
out at either end; but if a circle be drawn out of the compass, it may stretch
out of the one side, but it will pull in the other side after it, unless the
line be broke, and then it is no longer a circle, thus we can extend no part
out, but another part must contract to give way to that part that goes out.

Chap. 89. Of Softness.
ALL that is wett is soft, I mean that which is naturally wet; but all that is
soft is not wet, as hair, wool, feathers, and the like.

Likewise all that is soft or wet is made by extenuating motions; now some may
ask me, why extenuating motions I mean natural extenuations.
should cause figures to be soft, more then any other? I answer, first, that
all extentions causes porousnesse, or spunginesse, by spreading or loosing
parts, and all that are porous tend to hollownesse, and all that is hollow
tends to slacknesse, and all that are porous hollow, and slack tend to
softness; for we may perceive whatsoever figure is porous, is not so firm,
strong, nor hard, as those which are close compact; for that which has no
Vacuum, or Convenient distance, has not so much Liberty, as that which has
Vacuum; As the pores of the skin.
for Vacuum is space and distance betwixt parts, which gives those parts
liberty to move, and remove, and that which has most liberty is most loose,
and that which is most loose is least contracted, and that which is least
contracted, is most pliant, and that which is most pliant is soft. But I desire
my Readers would not mistake me, for as there is hard, soft, light, heavy,
thick, thin, quick, slow, belonging to the nature of the only infinite matter,
so there are belonging to such shapes, or figures made by the working of the
infinite motions making infinite figures out of infinite matter; but the
difference is, that what is in the nature cannot be altered, but what is done
by the working of motions may be undone again, for the effects may alter, but
not the cause; thus motion and figure, or figure by motion may alter, but not
the nature of the matter; For motion and figure are but the effects of the
only and infinite matter etc.

Chap. 90. Of Liquors.
ALL liquors are wrought by extenuating motions, and all that is liquid and
wet, are circles extenuated to such a degree, and after such a manner, and all
that are liquid and wet, is either water or of the nature of water, as also of
oils, vitrals, strong water, all juices from fruits, herbs, or the like, or
any thing that is liquid and wet; but though all that is liquid and wet
naturally agree in extenuating circles, yet their Oil, hot-waters, wine,
vitrals, aquafortis.
circle lines are different, which causes the different effects, for some have
different effects interiorly, others exteriorly, and some both interiorly, and
exteriorly, for some have circular lines of points, others have circular lines
pointed, others have circular lines of points pointed, others have circular
lines of points edged, some have smooth circle lines only edged; as the sharp
edge of a knife, or the like, others have circle lines edged of one side of the
line, and pointed on the other side, some their circle lines are flat, others
their circle lines are round, some their circle lines are twisted, others
plain, some checkred, others smooth, some more sharpe-edged, or pointed then
other; some smoother, and some rougher then other; And infinite more that I
know not how to describe; But these lines, nor circle points, nor edges, are
not subject to our senses, although their effects may make them subject to our
reason, for nature works beyond our sense, but reason is part of the sense of
nature; but of all wet liquors oil is most different from the effects of water,
for all other wet liquors do strive to quench fire, but oil does assist it, yet
all vitrals have an exterior burning faculty, which oil has not, and although
all strong wet liquors will flame when it is set on fire, yet they will quench
out fire, if enough be cast thereon.

Chap. 91. The extention and contraction of circles.
THe nature of extention strives to get ground, that is, space, or compass,
and to disperse, or level parts as it were, and the nature of contraction
strives to thrust out space and compass, and to thrust up parts close
together, and this is the reason that a circle may contract so many several
ways, because contraction flings out the compass, and makes use of the line,
laying the line into millions of several works.

And yet the exterior form which is the circular line, be one and the same,
that is, the circular line is not divided, but when those works are undone, and
the line extended to the full compass, it receives the original form, which is
a round circle; for as they were contracted without breaking the circle, so
they may be extended into a circle again.

Likewise the circular forms may be wrought with mixed motions, as partly by
contraction, and partly by extenuation, as when a round circle is wound about a
staff, or pole, or the like; for though the winding about the staff be a
contracting motion, or at least one way, which is when it draws inward, as
toward the center, yet by winding it lengthwayes, or upward, is a kind of an
extenuation.

Likewise, a circle or smoke when it curls in rings, before the circle break,
as we shall often times see it does contract, as folding and half curling, so it
extenuates as it spreads and wears out. Likewise take a round string, that is,
join the two ends, and put this circular string double, and then wind it
serpentine ways, and the like, and though the winding, or twisting about is
contracting, yet winding or twisting one ring before another is extenuating.

Here have I set down after what manner of ways are contracted, or continuated
circles, and thus millions of several works may by circles be wrought, and
several figures made thereof; Likewise for circular lines, some may be broad,
some narrow, some round, some flat, some edged, some twisted, but those that
are flat are most apt to be edged.

Likewise there may be circle lines with smooth lines, some pointed, some
checkred, some twisted, some braided, and the like.

But although the circle compass is perfect, yet the line is not a perfect
Circular compass, because the roughness makes it uneven. Thus as I have said
before, milions of changes may be in circles, but perchance some will say, it
is no longer a circle, when it is turned square, or triangular-wayes, or the
like.

I answer, it is a circle squared, but not a circle broke, for as long as the
circle is whole, the interior nature is not dissolved, let the exterior figure
be after what manner it will or can; for still it is a natural circle, although
it be put into a Mathematical square, or the like; so those exterior figures,
are but changed shapes, not the natural form, but a natural square is to have
four distinct lines, and a triangle three distinct lines, and a cupe six, as I
take it, or sixteen; but it is to be observed, that all those figures that
naturally are made of one piece, without distinct parts, or several tempered
matter, may change, and rechange their shapes, and yet keep their own interior
nature entire, that is the nature proper to such a figure; but those figures
that are made of many distinct parts, or several tempered matter, would make
such a confusion in their transformations, as would ruin the entire foundations.

Chap. 92. Of congealed water.
WAter is not always exteriorly wet, or fluid, as we may see always when it
is congealed to snow, ice, and hail, yet still it is water, keeping the
interior nature of being wet and fluid, only the cold contractions have, as
may say, altered the face or countenance thereof; for it is to be observed, as
there are extenuating motions, thrusting and stretching, enlarging further and
wider out in compass, breadth, length, and depth, as from the center to the
circumference, so there are contracting motions together, draw wind, twist and
pull in, as from the circumference to the center, and not only by interior
motions, but exterior motions; as for example, cold contraction upon water
circles, or any thing that is porous and spungie, draws, and gathers them into
several works, or draws them into a less compass, as strings do a purse, or
like fishers or faulkners nets.

But snow, hail, and frost, and ice is made by a level contraction, as if a
Circular line should be laid upon a flat ground, and be drawn a particular
work, as for example, according to the number of watery circles, there is such a
quantity of water, and if the quantity of water be more then the strength of
the cold contraction, it is frozen more or less, now the several figures which
cold contraction draws to make snow, hail, ice, and frost, are after this
manner, as first the interior nature of the water is a round circle like a ring.

When it contracts into hail, the exterior figure contracts into a ball, or
lump, as if one should wind up a double line, or thread into a bundle, or
bottom.

Snow is made by contraction, as if one should draw a round line into a three
square figure, as triangular way.

Ice, as if we should draw a round line into a four square figure, as after a
cupe way.

Frost is made by such contracting motions, as if a round line should be drawn
into a surfling, as a crackling figure.

When this congealed cold thaws, it is either by the interior strength of
dilating motions, or by an exterior heat that draws these contractions out into
smooth extenuating circles again.

Thus circular lines may be drawn from the round compass, to be four square,
three square, or length-wayes, as one would clap the brim of (...) hat
together; and millions of several works, and never divide the circular lines,
but I will not say by a Mathematical rule, though nature is beyond our
learning.

And that which makes ice and hail more shining then frost, and snow, is, that
the lines are evener; for all figures that are composed by the way of lines,
are apt to shine, and those figures that have fewest points, or ends are
smoothest.

Now some may say, or ask, why I should think snow is made triangular ways? My
reason is, because it seems rougher, and not so united as ice, or hail, which
shows the interior figure has more points, or unevener numbers, or unequal
lines, and a triangular figure is not so smooth, or at least seems not so, as a
circular, a parallel, or cupe; for in the angulars the points and lines are odd,
and the lines run slope-wayes, whereas the figure of a cupe, although it has
more points, yet the figure is more proportionable, by the even number of the
points and lines; for as there are four points, so there are four equal lines,
which make an equal number, when in the figure of a triangular the points and
lines are odd; for though there are a plural number, yet it is an uneven
number, as being odd. And as I have said, the lines are slope when the figure
of a cupe is just square, besides triangular points being odd, multiply and
substract by reflections, as we shall see by triangular glasses, that from one
face millions are made by subdividings. Thus what is made uneven by odd
numbers, are made even by equal numbers, and the odd points, and slope lines,
make the figure of snow rough, and the equal points, and straight lines make
the figure of ice smooth, but I treat here of exterior figures, or rather
countenances, not of the interior form, for their contractions change the
exteriors, not the interiors.

But if (...) be out, and mistake, either in terms of art, or otherwise, I
must entreat my readers to pardon it, for I am no Mathematician, only I have
gathered here and there some little parcels or crumbs from the discourse of my
friends, for I have not much kept the company of strangers, nor conversed with
dead Authors by books, but these parcels I have got, I place according to my
own fancy, if they sound probably, I have my ends, and the lines of my desires
are pointed with a satisfaction.

Chap. 93. Motion changing the figure from water to fire.
When these watery circle lines begin to enlarge, they grow smaller, and
thereby become less wet, and more thin, as vapor which is less wet then
water, and not so gross; for as I said before, when the circle comes in such a
degree of extenuating, it becomes wet, and beyond such a degree, it becomes
less wet; and so less and less, as before it came to such a degree, it
became more and more wet, as from being pores to soft, from soft to liquid,
from liquid From earth to water.
to wet, likewise from wet to moist, from moist to thin, which thin is air.

But when the extenuating lines come to such a degree of smalnesse, as to cut,
as a very small line will do, which is to such a degree, as to be sharp as an
edge, it makes it in a degree toward burning fire, so far as to become
sulphury hot, as we know by the sense of feeling, we find the air to be hot.
This sort of air which is made of watery circles, is like seething hot water,
for it is a moist heat, and not like the natural air, for this is but a
Metamorphosed air; for the interior nature of water is undissolved, only the
exterior is altered, the lines being become small and edged, by the fair
extenuations, but when those circles extenuate smaller then the quantity of
matter will afford to give a compass, it breaks, and turns to hot burning
fire; for the extenuating motions therein ceasing not, do stretch those lines
so small, as they fall into pointed parts; this alters the interior nature from
being water, to burning fire, for the interior nature of water is the circle
line, but if those lines be drawn by contracting motions into bigger lines, and
less circles, it becomes from thin hot air to vapor, or mists, and from vapor
to water, and so from water to slime, from slime to mud, from mud to earth, as
it did extenuate, so it contracts, if nothing hinders the same; for contraction
draws in the lines to such a bigness, like as a smaller thread to a bigger
thread, so from the thinnest air to the thickest air, from gross air to the
thin vapor, from thin vapor to thick vapor, fromthick vapor to water to slime,
fromslime to mud, from mud to earth; but according as the contracting and
dilating motions are quick, or slow, it is sooner or longer turning out of one
shape into another, and if any of the circular lines break by other motions or
figures before it coms to the furthest extention, the quantity becomes less
wasting that matter into figures of other natures, being dissolved from that
natural figure; thus that ball, or lump may be dissolved, like as Animals, or
the like; For no question these balls are created and dissolved as Animal
kind, and are as numerous as other creatures, and some lasting longer then
others, and some dissolving sooner; though their creations are different, one
being produced by procreation, the other by extenuation: thus these elements
are increaseable, and decreaseable, and other creature are; and when the
interior nature is altered, it dissolves as other creatures do, only the
exterior with the interior dissolves, which most of other creatures do not, for
when the interior is altered in Animals, the exterior is perfect, and dissolves
more by degrees.

Chap. 94. Of Oil.
OIL is partly of the nature of fire, and partly of the nature of water; for as
it is soft, fluid, liquid, and moist, it is of the nature of water; as it is
hot burning and flamable, it is of the nature of fire, for that which makes it
fludi and liquid, is by extenuations, and that which makes it moist and liquid
is by extenuating circles, and that which makes it burning, is, that those
circular lines are composed of pointed parts, which when fire and oil meets,
the fire breaking those lines a sunder, sets those pointed parts at liberty,
which causes it to rise in a flame, and the reason why it flames, is, that it
does not suddenly lose the circular extenuating nature; for flame is somewhat
of the nature of water, as being fluid, though not wet, and the reason why
flame is fluid, is, because it ascends in a circular motion, for though the
ascent be in a strict parrelled line, yet the matter is after a circular
figure, as a hollow spungy body, as after this manner or the like, which shuts
upward, like an arrow out of a bow, only imagining the arrow to be in
serpentine As thns
shape, and to turn and spin about as it ascends, likewise the body to extend,
or spread outward, according to the bulk or quantity, which several figures, or
several motions, may be all at one time, and in one and the same thing, and
work to one and the same effect, and to several effects at the same time, which
causes it to be fluid, liquid, and light, for light as well as oil, water, or
flame, is fluid, caused by extenuating motions, for as water will run forward
when it has liberty, or run backward in a torrent when it is stopped, so light
will enter when it has passage, or run back by reflection if it be stopped, but
all those fluidities are different by reason their extenuations are different;
For light is caused by swift extenuating parallel lines; water, oil, and the
like by extenuating circular lines, which make it moist, and liquid, as well as
fluid, but flame takes part from all, for it is light and fluid by the swift
extenuating parallel lines, it ascends in, and liquid, although not wet, by the
circular motions it ascends up in, and burning by the sharp parts it is
composed of; vitral is after the same nature of oil, only the lines are Or
rather like flame.
edged, as a knife, or the like, or sharp edged tools, which make it have an
exterior pressing quality, as burning fire has; but the exterior of oily
lines are smooth, which makes it soft, and glib, and not so sharp and
penetrating as vitrals, or the like are.

Thus flame, light, oil, fire vitrals, waters, have mixed motions, to make one
figure, and many figures, to make those figures which make them to be of mixed
qualities producing mixed effects, as indeed all effects are of a mixed nature.

Chap. 95. Of Metals.
ALL Metals are created after the manner of circle lines, as water, only the
lines in metal are contracted, as drawing inwards, and water circle lines are
extended outward, but in all metals the circle lines are flat, and edged,
having a cutting and a subdividing nature, and by reason the exterior nature
is of a circle figure, it is apt to be fluid, and to flow as water does, when
the exterior is melted by forcible motions, then it is one, as that of fire,
which draws out the contracted circles of metals, causing it to be fluid by
extention, yet the extention is not natural, as it is in water, but forced by
an over-powerful motion; for the nature of metal is not to be fluid, which is
the reason that as soon as it can get liberty, that is, when the moer strong
motions let go their As if an Any mal creature should be pulled and dragged out
of 'its natural garb.
hold, it contracts into a firm and hard body: again, it breaks not the
interior circle, for then the nature alters, for as much as metals loses in
the weight, so much is changed of that quantity, from the natural quality, and
though some metals do not, wast in quantity, which is to change in quality, so
soon as others, yet they are all dissolvable, although some say gold is not
dissolvable; but sure that opinion proceeds from impatience in mankind, not
to stay the time, or rather for want of longer time of life, having not so
lasting a life, as to observe the alteration, as the dissolution of gold, or
perhaps they have not the right ways to dissolve it; for certainly it is as
all other figures are, dissolvable, and not fixed everlastingly in one body,
Chemists make gold as a god, unalterable.

Chap. 96. Of the Lodestone.
ME thinks it is strange, that men should wonder more at the nature of the
Lodestone in attracting iron, and in the norths attracting o f the needle
touched with the Loadstone, then at the suns attracting of vapor.

But some will say, that it is the nature of fluiditie, of which nature vapor
is one, to move with facility, and not the nature I mean here the exterior
nature not the interior nature.
of solidity, of which nature iron is one, which is heavy and slow; but I say,
if the attracting motion in one body be stronger then the contracting, and
retentive motions in the other body, and those figures motions work with, be
advantageous; I see no reason but a fluid body may attract a solid body; For it
is not the substance of the body that works, or produces effects, but the
agility, subtility, or strength of motion, and advantage of the shape, so that
the working power is more in motion and figure, then merely the matter; as for
example, does not experience prove that fluid, vitral, will work through solid
metal, the reason is, because the expulsive motions in the vitral and sharp
points, are stronger then the contracting motions, in the metal and blunt
edges: but some will ask me, why the Lodestone attracts only iron? such a
question I ask, why beauty should forcibly attract the eye? they will answer by
sympathy; and I have heard, that it was the opinion of learned men, that
sympathy had the same effect, betwixt the Lodestone and iron, but I think it
not so much in sympathy, as supremacy.

Besides, it is the nature of contracting motions, of which the Lodestone is
strongly inhabited withal, to work on that which is without it, as from it, not
within it, or as it were upon it, which no other visible kind of motion does.

And certainly the Lodestone is composed of sharp figures, yet not of such
sorts as heats or burns, and those figures do issue out as beams do from the
sun: and as they draw the iron, they back return, and as the bright beams issue
from the sun, do neither weaken nor lessen it, so the visible beams that issue
out of the Lodestone, neither make it lesser or weaker; yet the beams of the
Lodestone, do as the sun beams, the farther they spread out, the less
strength they have to draw; Besides, if other motions which oppose, and are
stronger then the natural motions, may weaken the strength, as accidental
maladies mayweaken Animals, or shrewd and froward weather vegetables, or the
natural consisting motions proper to that figure, may turn to expulsive
motions, and overpower the natural attracting motions, that issued therefrom.

But as I have said, it seems the attractive power of the Loadstone, is
stronger then the irons retentive power, and sharp figures that issue
therefrom, are more advantageous then the blunt edges in the iron; and as the
sharp figures in fire unknit and loosen the contractive body of metals, making
them fluid, so the sharp points that issue in lines from the Lodestone fasten
to iron, drawing it to it; and as fire works upon several bodies after a
different manner of way, according to the nature of the body it works on,
producing diverse effects; so for all I can perceive may the Lodestone; for
certainly we do not know, nor never can come to that knowledge, as to perceive
the several effects, that are produced from the least, or as we account the
most inconsiderable creature made in nature; so that the Lodestone may work as
variously upon several bodies, as fire, and produce as various effects,
although nor to our sense, nor after the same manner of ways, that fire does,
and as fire works variously upon various bodies, so there are fires, as several
sorts, and those several ral sorts have several effects, yet one and the same
kind, but as the causes in nature are hid from us, so are most of the effects;
but to conclude my discourse, we have only found that effect of the
Lodestone, as to draw iron to it; but the attracting motion is in obscurity,
being invisible to the sense of man, so that his reason can only discourse,
and bring probabilities, to strengthen his arguments, having no perfect
knowledge in that, nor in any thing else, besides that knowledge we have of
several things, comes as it were by chance, or by experience, for certainly all
the reason man has, would never have found out that one effect of the
Lodestone, as to draw iron, had not experience or chance presented it to us,
nor the effect of the needle, and all the ages before, I mean those we have
Records of, were ignorant of that one effect, and perchance other ages may
find out some other effects produced therefrom, which these ages are ignorant
of; And as our knowledge comes slow, and in parts, and pieces, so we know but
parts and pieces of every particular thing, neither is the generality of our
senses capable of one and the same knowledge; for what one sense knows,
another sense is ignorant of, and questionless there are some things in nature
that it is impossible for our senses to be made acquainted therewith, as being
too curious for our senses, but not to some other senses; for (...) nature has
as many different senses, as other works; indeed all things are wrought by
sensitive motions, which (...) needs create a sensitive knowledge in every
thing, and where knowledge is, reason is; for knowledge is reason, and sense is
knowledge; but sense and reason work in several figures, different ways, and
not only in different figures, but in one and the same figure.

Chap. 96. Of the needle.
I Perceive the norths attraction of the Lodestone is not after the same
manner of attraction, as the Lodestone attracts iron, for the attractions of
the Lodestone draws iron to it, but the attraction of the north draws the
Lodestone toward it, by the turning it that way, as the Sun will do the the
heads of some sorts of flowers; For if the north attracted the Lodestone, as
the Lodestone iron, the Lodestone would be in a perpetual motion, traveling
to the north pole, unless it were fixed, but I do not hear that a Lodestone
does remove out of the place wherein it is, but it turns, as I may say, the
face toward it; now the question will be whether the Loadstone turns it self
toward the north, or the north turns by compulsion, or by sympathy, the
experiment will be by iron, that if a great quantity of iron should be said at
one side of the needle, whether the needle would not vary from the north
toward the iron, if it do, it shows the Lodestone turns itself toward the
north, or else it could not turn from the north, for certainly the north has a
greater operative power to turn the Lodestone to it, then the Lodestone could
have to turn it self from it, so if a quantity of iron can cause the needle to
vary, it shows that the Lodestone turns to the north by a self motion, and not
the motions of the north that make it turn to it, but if it varies not toward
the iron, then the north forces it, unless the Lodestone takes more delight
to view the norths frowning face, then to embrace hard iron, or that the
feeding appetite is stronger then the viewing delight; for it only turns it
self to the face of the north, but if it turns not it self, the north forces it
to turn, which as I have said before, is to be found by the experiments of
iron; but if it turns it self, I believe it may receive some refreshments from
those rays which stream from the north, for all things turn with self ends;
for certainly every thing has selflove, even hard stones, although they seem
insensible, so the Lodestone may work as various effects upon several
subjects, as fire, but by reason we have not so much experience of one as the
other, the strangeness creates a wonder, for the old saying is, that ignorance
is the mother of admiration, but fire which produces greater effects by
invisible motions, yet we stand not at such amaze as at the Lodestone, because
these effects are familiar unto us.

But per chance the Lodestone is nourished by iron as many creatures are by
heat, for though the creatures are nourished there with, yet the heat alters
not its virtue, nor the body in whichthe heat inheres, loses not the property
of heating, the sun is not weakened by warming the earth, though the earth is
stronger by the warm 'th of the sun; but warm 'th feeds after a spiritual
manner, not a corporal, and as somethings are nourished by warm'th, so others
by cold, as ice, snow, and many other things that are above number.

So the Lodestone may be refreshed, although not fed by the cold north, and as
fire is fed by fuel, so is the vertual part of the Lodestone by iron, or as
exercise gets health and strength to Animal bodies, so does the Lodestone on
iron, and as idleness breeds faintness, or weakness, (...) does the
Lodestone from iron.

Chap. 98. Of stone.
FIre has more power over Metals in some sense, then on stone, and in some
sense has more power over stone then I mean the heaviest metal to the hardest
stone, as gold to diamonds, or tin, or lead to a soft stone
metals.

For fire will sooner melt metal, then dissolve stone, but when the exterior
form of stone is dissolved, it is changed from the nature of being stone, and
be comes dust and ashes.

And though metal would likewise change the interior nature, if the exterior
form were dissolved, yet metal, although it be melted, keeps the interior
nature, and exterior form, but not the exterior motions; for metal is metal
still, although it be melted, only it becoms fluid, this shows that fire
does not only alter the exterior motion of stone, but dissolves, the exterior
form, and so the interior nature, which in metal it does not, unless a more
forcible fire be applied thereto then will serve to melt; which shows, that
although the interior motions of stone be contractions, as all solid bodies
are, yet the interior, nor exterior natural figure is not circular as metals
are, for stone cannot be made fluid, and as it were liquid as metal will be,
but crumbles into dust, and wastes, as wood or the like, and not evaporates away
as water, which metal does; This shows that the exterior and interior natural
form of stone is composed of parts, and not in one piece, as a circle; I do not
mean in one piece, as the exterior bulk, but in one piece, in the exterior, and
interior nature; For though you may pound, or file metal to dust, that dust as
small as Atoms, the like may be done to stone, wood, and flesh, or any thing
that is dividable, yet it will keep the nature of being metal, stone, wood,
flesh, or the like, although the parts be no bigger then an Atom; but if you do
dissolve the exterior nature, the interior nature does dissove also, thus the
exterior form may be altered, but not dissolved, without a total dissolution.

Chap. 99. Of burning.
ALL that is hot is not of a burning faculty, nor all that is burning is not
actually hot, and though Burning Motions work several ways according to the
temperament of the matter, and composure of the figures it meets with, yet the
nature of all kinds of burnings is to expulse by a piercing and subdividing
faculty, provided that the burning Motions, and burning figures are strong
enough to encounter what opposes them; but when the opposed bodies and motions
have an advantage, either by strength, or otherwise, it alters the nature and
faculty of burning, and many times there is great dispute and long combats
amongst the several motions, and different figures, for the preheminency.

Chap. 100. Of different burning.
THough all that is of a burning nature, or faculty may be called fire, yet all
that has a burning nature, or faculty is not of that sort of fire, which is a
bright, shining, hot, glowing fire, as for example, vitrals, brimstone, oil, or
spirits, or that we call cordials, or hot-waters, or any of the like nature.

Besides all burning figures, or motions, work not after one and the same
manner, though after one and the same nature, being all of a burning quality,
or faculty, for some burn interiorly, others exteriorly, but as I havesaid all
burning, is of a subdividing faculty.

Chap. 101. Fires transformation.
THe interior, and exterior figures of hot, glowing, burning, bright, shining
fire are all one, and the motions working apart according to the nature of the
figure it works on can change every thing it has power over, into its own
likeness, yet the power, and strength does alter somewhat according to the
work, and becoms grosser, and finer, accoring to the temperaments, or degrees
of that which they work on: as for example, wood that is set on fire, or a fiery
coal, is a grosser body of fire, then flaming oil, or the like, that is such a
sort of moist fluid matter set on fire, for fire takes hold, of the thinnest
parts, as well as the thickest; if they be such thin bodies which are subject
to take fire, for when fire is set to wood, it does not only take hold of the
solid'st parts, but those that are more porous, or fluid, as those that rise in
smoke, which become a flaming body, which is a fluid fire, but there is a cold,
dull, burning fire, as well as a hot, bright, burning, as all strong vitrals,
and this we call hot water, or spirits, which have an exterior nature to burn,
or dissolve other bodies, and an interior nature to flame, but it has not an
exterior nature to be hot, nor shining.

Also there is another sort of fire, which only has an interior nature to
flame, but the exterior is neither actually burning, nor hot, as sulphur, or
oil, though oil is nothing, but a liquid sulphur, and sulphur a hardened oil.

But this cold dull fire has not the power of transforming to its own
likeness, by reason there is some difference in the interiors to their
exteriors, where the quick, hot, burning, bright, shining fire, the exterior
and interior is all one, without any difference.

Chap. 102. Of such sorts of heating Motions, as cause burning, melting,
boiling, Evaporating and rarifying.
BUrning, melting, boiling, and evaporating are caused by several motions, or
several degrees or temperaments of matter.

And though burning, melting, boiling, and evaporating, are caused by expulsive
and dilating motions, yet al dilative and expulsive motions, work not after one
and the same manner, but according as the matter is; As for example, leather
does not burn as wood does, yet both are dissolved by an expulsive motion.

Besides, some figures do dissolve into flame, others moulder away into dust,
and never flame, as stone, and many more examples may be given, but most
commonly all burning motions do pierce, or shut, or wedge, in sharp tootht, or
pointed figures; into those figures they work upon, and then it dissolves it by
expulsions; for those sharp pointed figures, help motion to loosing, and
unbinde those parts that they find joined and contracted, that they may more
freely separate those parts and dissolve those figures, which as they dissolve
the thinner parts, dilate into vapor, the lighter parts fly out into fiery
points, which are those we call sparks of fire, but the grosser, and more solid
part moulders away into dust and ashes, as being too heavy and solid for the
points to spread forth, they can only as it were chew it between their sharp
teeth; for ashes are nothing but chewed wood, yet this manner of chewing does
alter the nature from being wood, or any thing that burns after an expulsive
manner, but those fiery motions that only melt, or rather those figures that
are not subject to burn, but only to melt, is done by a stretching motion, for
those motions do as it were thrust out the contracted parts, and cause them to
extenuate; but when the fiery motions cause any thing to boil, they first
stretch out the parts so far, as causes those parts to be fluid, and as it
were liquid, if those things were contracted, but if they be liquid and fluid
of themselves, they save those fiery motions that labor, and when this motion
strives to ascend with those loose parts, the liquor rises up in bubbles, or
waves, but when those fiery motions are over-poured by the weight, they fall
back again; thus the weight of the liquor, and the sharp points of the fire
strive together, one party striving to ascend, the other to descend, so that
those fiery motions, are to pull out, or to bear up, and the watery motion to
pull, or press down, but evaporating, is when the extenuating lines are
stretched so far out, as to break, or the lighter parts are carried away, and
dispersed amongst other figures; but all rarifying heats, are caused by slow
dilating motions, and not expulsions, for if such sorts of dilations as make
rarifying heat, were extended beyond the line of the matter they work on, it
alters the nature of the figure, and the motions of that nature; but rarifying
heat is an extenuating motion, spreading parts equally, and evenly, but the
farther they are spread, the more hot grows the heat, as nearer to expulsion,
and though all rarifying heat is in the way of burning, yet not in the manner.

But I must entreat my reader to take notice, that burning motions, make use of
burning figures, for all sorts of motions work according to the matter and
figure they work on, or in, or to.

Chap. 103. Of quenching of fire.
THere is such Antipathy betwixt fire, and some sorts of wets, as such wets as
are made by smooth extenuating circles, as they never can agree when they do
personally meet; and indeed such sorts of wets, have such power over hot,
burning, bright shining fire, as they never encounter, but fire is in danger to
be quenched out, if there be not a sufficient quantity to break the watery
circles, for it is not the coldness that quenches fire, but such sorts of
wetnesse, for scalding water will quench out fire, and many sorts of liquors as
wine, or the like, although they be flameable, yet if they be cast on this
bright, hot, burning fire, it will quench it out, by reason they are more of
the wet nature; then the oily, and sulphurous, or the burning or flaming
faculty.

It Is true, that there are many liquors that are subject to burn, but there are
few wets that have not power to quench, for the spherical drops do either blunt
the fiery points, or disperse the the united body, or entangle them in the
porous circles.

Thus water has the better unless the lines break in the combat, but when
fire and water treat apart, or by an Attorney, or has a body betwixt them to
Moderate their As Vessels wherein water is put, and fire underneath.
spleens they agree better, but in this treaty most commonly the water becoms
weak by rarification, and evaporates into air by too strong, or too much
extenuating, extending further then the wet compass.

Chap. 104. Of the quenching of fire, and evaporated Water.
THe reason why water quenches fire, is, that the figure being spherical, and
porous, gives distance and space of parts, where the sharp figures of fire,
flying about to bite the circular lines asunder, that they may ravel out that
figure of water, lose their strength both in their ffight and compass,
breaking their forces, by dispersing their parts, and intangling their
dispersed parts in the hollow places, in the watery figure, like arrows that are
shot into a net, seldom break the net, but entangle themselves, by reason there
is no firm substance to strick on, or in; for being soft and spungy, there is
no stop, nor hold; besides water being wet and wet in the nature is sticking,
that when those sharp points do at any time break the lines, they join again,
for being fluid each part moves to each other, and being wet they join, and
being circular they unite, into the natural figure.

Thus in a plain combat water most commonly has the better of fire, if there
be not too much odds on the fires fide for quantity, but when fire does come by
an undermining motion as when some other figures are betwixt them, then fire
gets the better, by the help of those undermining motions.

Chap. 105. Of a bright-shining hot, glowing, fire.
IT is the nature of bright-shining, hot-glowing fires, to have both an
interior, and an exterior burning, and is of such a kind of subdividing
nature, as it strives to dissolve all united parts, or bodies, and if it does
not dissolve all bodies it works on, as we shall see many things which grow
harder with fire, yet is not that the nature would not dissolve such a thing,
but the power cannot, for those bodies that grow harder with This sort of
contraction is drawing inward.
fire, opposes the power of fire, and strives by contraction to unite the
looser parts, in a more solid body, to resist with more strength.

Also some bodies grow hard by shrinking inward, for as soon Those sorts are
falling backward.
as they feel the fire, they draw back, as from an enemy, having an Antipathy
thereunto.

Thus, it is not the fire that dries or hardens, or maks more The contracting
motions too strong for the expulsive motions.
solidity, but the opposite body that will not burn, having a strength to
oppose, or a nature not to subject to this fire, or the fire has not a
sufficient power to overcome, but this sort of fire has a general power,
though some bodies will strongly resist it; but it is the nature of this sort
of fire, that most bodies they overcome, they first convert them into their Yet
there are but few bodies that are not overcome at last.
own likeness, but their natures being different, their prisoners die in the
fiery arms of their enemies.

Chap. 106. Of the dryness of hot, burning, bright, shining fire.
Dryness has such a relation to hot, burning, bright, shining fire, as
moistness to water, for though interior motions are expulsive, yet the
exterior is attractive, drawing all unto it, like a greedy appetite, and as the
teeth does mince the the food that is chewed, so does the pointed figure, of
fire, all it lays hold on, or enters into.

Chap. 107. Of moist colds, and moist heats, of dry colds, and dry heats etc.
HEat does not make drought, for there is a temper of heat, and moist; nor cold
does not make drought; for there is a temper of cold, and moist; nor heat does
not make moisture, for there is a temper of hot, and dry, nor cold does not
make moisture; for there is a temper of cold, and dry, but when the motions of
heat, and the motions of drought join, they cause hot and dry effects, and when
the motions of cold, and the motions of drought join, they cause cold and dry
effects, and when the motions of heat, and the motions of moisture joins, they
cause hot and moist effects; and when the motions of cold, and the motions of
moisture join, they cause cold and moist effects, yet there are infinite
varieties in their several effects; but those motions which make cold and heat,
I may fimilife to wandering armies, of the Goths, and Vandals, which overrun
all figures, as they all the world, I mean the matter that made it.
sometimes they work attractive, contractive, retentive, disgustive, expulsive,
according to the temper and degree of matter, and proportion and shape of the
figures they meet, or according to their own power and strength, and although
both cold and heat, are motions that work more or less upon all the figures in
this world, yet cold heat works not upon figure alike, but differ as their
figures differ, nor are cold and heat directly the same motions, although they
be of the same kind of motions, no more then several sorts of beasts kind,
yet all beasts are of Animal kind, and most commonly like several sorts of
beasts that falls out, or rather like two equal powerful Monarchies, that
oppose one another power, and fight for preheminency, where sometimes one gets
the better, and then the other, sometimes by strength, and sometimes by
advantage, but when there is a truce, or a league, they have a common commerce,
joining their motions, working sympathetically together, which produces an
equal temper.

Chap. 108. Of the motions of cold, and heat, drouth, and Moisture.
COld and heat, are not wrought by different kinds of motions, but after a
different manner of workings or movings, for a moist cold, and a moist heat,
are but one kind of motions, as being motions that extenuate, and enlarges
from the center to the circumference; for a moist heat, does thrust, or drive
outward, as toward the circumference.

A moist cold does pull, or draw from the center toward the circumference. As
for example, we shall often see a gardener that rolls a green turft walk, to
thrust the roll before him, and when he is weary with pressing forward, he will
turn his arms behind him, and pull the roll after him.

Also a dry, or congealed cold, and a dry heat, are not several kinds of
motions, but moves after several manners; for as moist cold, and heat extends,
and enlarges from the center, to the circumference, so a dry heat, or a dry, or
congealed cold, contracts from the circumference toward the center, the
congealed cold in several works; a dry cold, or a dry heat only draws into a
less space, or compass, yet the same difference in the manner of the motions,
is between a dry heat, and a dry cold, as was between a moist heat, and a most
cold; for a dry heat drives from the circumference to the center; and a dry
cold draws from the circumference to the center for although al drought is from
the circumference to the center, and all moisture from the center to the
circumference, yet the several manner of movings are infinite, also cold, and
heat are not several kinds of motions, but different motions, as every man is
of mankind, but they are different men.

And if we observe the effects of heat, and cold, we shall find them to work
after one and the same manner; for very sharp colds, and great heats, pains
equally; and sharp colds destroy with as great and strong fury, as burning
heats; neither can I perceive that burning heats have swifter motions, then
sharp colds; for water to the quantity shall freez, as soon as any light matter
shall burn; for water shall be as soon frozen, as straw burnt, take quantity for
quantity, and Animals shall be as soon frozen to death if they be touched, or
struck with very sharp colds, such as are near the poles, as be burnt under the
torrid Zone; as for plants, we oftener see them killed As several men will.
with cold, then heat, and I perceive there is no thaw so sudden, as a frost;
for when any thing is frozen, it is not suddenly thawed, which half persuades
me, that cold is the quicker motion; but howsoever we perceive they do often
dispute for the mastry, when some time the cold predominates, and sometimes the
heat. But when there is an amity, as peace among neighbors and friends.
and friendship between both, then it is temperate weather.

Chap. 109. Of dry heats, and cold, and of moist heats and colds.
ALL dry heats, and colds, are created, or produced by such manner of motions,
as pleating, folding, surfling, crumpling, knitting, linking, brading, tieing,
binding into a less compass, or space.

All moist heats, and moist colds, are created, or produced by such manner of
motions, as smoothing, planing, stricking, or stretching; but burning heats,
are like those motions that prick a sheet of paper full of holes, or dart it,
or cut it, but there are infinite of these several kinds of motions, which make
these several heats, and colds, working according to the several degrees, or
temperaments of matter, and the composers of figures, but l only set these few
notes to make my discourse, as easy to my readers understanding as I can; for
it is a difficulty to express several motions, although they be so gross as
to be visible to the optic sense.

Chap. 110. Of shining figures.
ALL figures that are composed of lines, are the aptest to shine, because lines
are the evenest measure, and I say aptest, not as they do.
the smoothest rule, for mathematical motions to work with, but according as
the lines, either exterior, or interior is smooth or rough, contracted or
extenuated, shines more or less; for some lines are interiorly even, and
smooth, and exteriorly rough and unequal, as pointed lines, or chekred, or
milions the like.

Others are exteriorly even, and interiorly rough, as lines of points, some are
interiorly rough, and exteriorly rough as lines of points pointed and some are
interiorly smooth, and exteriorly smooth, which are drawn out even, as one
piece, and not composed of parts.

Chap. 111. The motions that make natural air, and day light.
NAtural air, which is not metamorphosed air, is made by such kind of motions,
as makes cloth that is spun threads weaved, as with shuttles in a loom; so some
motions spin threads of thin dull matter, and other motions interweave those
threads, where the grossest sort makes the thicker air, as great threads make
course cloth, and the thinner matter makes the serenest air, as small threads
make the finest cloth; where some is like cobweb-lawn, so sheer, or clear, as
the smallest objects may be seen through, which is spread about the globe of
the earth, as a thin vail over a face, or body, and from the sun rising, the
motions that make light run in lines upon it, and so is like a garment laid all
over with silver-twist, or rather like silverwier, from the sun rising to high
noon, it is as it were, setting, sewing, or imbroidering on; this serene air at
midday it is quite finished, and by sun set it is quite reapt off again.

And to show that the lines of light are as it were laid upon this serene air,
and not mixed into it, is by the vapor which gathers into dark clouds, which
will obscure the light, as far as they spread, besides if the light were
intermixed the motions and matter could not so easily, nor so quickly withdraw,
or intermingle, as we see they do; for what is intermixed, is hard to separate;
but dark clouds are only as spots, which by rarification are rubbed out, if
they be wet spots, or drops, they fall out in shours of rain, but by such sorts
of motions as by ringing, or squeesing, or griping with a hand, or the like,
which breaks the sea, or waves of water, which are clouds, into several streams
of drops, sometimes with a greater force, and sometimes with a less, according
as the motions are stronger, or weaker.

The difference betwixt this serene, and natural air, and the metamorphosed
air, is as a natural face, and a mask which is put on, or put off according as
the watery circles contract, or dilate; the other in probability may be as
lasting as the sun it self, not being subject to change, but by a natural
creation or dissolution.

Chap. 112 Of light.
LIght is made by such a kind of motion as heat, being an equal extenuating
motion, but the difference is, that the motions that make heat, is a spreading
motion, but light is made by a spining motion, equally drawing out long parallel
lines, with an extraordinary swiftness, evennesse, smalnesse, and
straightness.

Chap. 113. The reflections of light.
THe reflections of light when are the innated matter draws even lines with
equal motions backwards (as I may say) for when their motions are stopped, with a
more solid matter, then that which they work on to make light, where touching,
or beating thereon, they do not break their lines, but the leading innated
matter, which makes light, returns back in equal lines, with equal motions, so
as there becomes equal lines of light, only as some lines run forward, others
run backward, but in straight parallel lines, not crossed, nor perturbed; for
when these motions are crossed, or perturbed, it does as troubled waters do, the
one rising in several colors, as the other in waves, so the colors are the
waves, or billows of light.

Chap. 114. Of light, and reflections.
NO question but there are as many various lights, as faces, and as different
kinds of lights, as there are different Animals, or vegetables, or minerals, as
some I will here set down for distinction, the sun light, the lighs of the fixed
stars, the fire light, meteor light, glowworm light, rotten wood light, the
light of fishes bones, and there are many sorts of stones which will sparkle in
the dark, as diamonds, and many I cannot recount. Then there are produced
lights, as day from the sun, flame from fire, then there are reflected lights,
as the planets, and reflected lights from reflected lights, as the light from
the planets on the earth, and infinite reflections made by several motions on
figures, for on every figure are several reflections.

Chap. 115. Of some opinions of light, darkness, and Death.
SOme say light is nothing but a motion, but there can be no motion without
some matter, for where there is no matter, there is nothing to move; but light,
as other effects are, is made by such kind of motions on such degrees, or
tempered matter, and so is heat, and cold, and darkness made by several
motions, on such matter, although some opinions are, that darkness is nothing
but an absence of light, as some think death is a cessation of motion; It Is
true, death is an alteration of such kind of motions, as we call life; so
darkness is not made by such motions as make light, for there are motions
belong to darkness, as well as those to make light; so there be many several
motions, in dissolving of figures, which dissolution we call death, as the
creating of a figure, which we call life.

Chap. 116. Of darkness.
THose motions which make darkness, seem to be as swift motions, as those that
make light, for the air is as soon made dark as light; but some do say, there
is no motion in darkness, and that darkness is a cessation of motion; It Is
true, of such kind of motions as make light; but not of all motions, no more
then the motion of the sun makes all light, or the absence of the sun makes all
darkness; for first the sun is not the only light, for we can set up lights,
when that is gone, by fire, whose flames do illuminate that part of air, that
is nearest, and could we make a fire as bigg as the sun, and feed it
perpetually, we might have a perpetual day, and the air I speak this as a
comparison, for I know the sun is much bigger then the earth.
will be as much illuminated, if there were a sufficient fire, to inlighten so
much air at one time, as the sun does; wherefore the sun is not the monopler of
such kind of motions, as make light. And can we rationally think there is no
motion in darkness, because the motions of the suns light are gone from our
Hemisphear, we may as well say a fish cannot swim, because such a horse does
not gallop, but to my fancy darkness works upon the air, as well as light; for
a dark cloud shall obscure the light, as well as the light shall pierce through
a dark cloud; thus darkness covers many times the face of the light, which
shows it is not always the withdrawing of light which makes darkness, since
darkness has as much power over the light, as the light over darkness, but
obstructed motions make darkness, and hinder those equal motions which make
light, and those motions that make mists, and fogs, are in some degree like the
motions which make darkness, and so are such motions as make colors, but the
motions of darkness seem to be intermixing motions, as I may say snarled
motions, which entangle themselves, and the different motions of darkness, and
light, are like skeines of silk, where the light is like thread which is pulled
out even and straight.

And darkness is like a skein of silk, which is so insnarled, or broken, as
not any can find a leading thread, being full of ends, knots and entercourses.

Chap. 117. The motions that make Darkness.
THe motions of darkness upon the air, are after another manner, then those of
light, for as light is laid in such small, straight, even, out-drawn lines, so
darkness is like motions of silk imbroidery, the work to be bossy, full of
intermixing stiches, and cross threads, knotted and purled after this manner.

And the reason I say silk, is, because darkness is softer then light, which
light I similise to silver, for the brightness of light many times hurts the
optics, which darkness does not.

Chap. 118. Of Shadows.
SHadows are copies, and pictures, drawn, or printed, or engraven by dark
motions, for dark lines made by the eclipsed light, are as the pencel, or the
like, the light is the paint, the solid body on which shadows are cast, is the
ground or substance to work on, motion is the artificer; for several lights are
like so many several sorts of paintings; for colors are but a perturbed light
as some say, but to show it is darkness that does pencel out, is that there
would be no such representments, if darkness were not; and too much light
drowns the figure, or is as it were plash'd, or dabbed out, or if so much paint
were spilt, or cast on the ground without order; Yet all shadows are not as if
they were painted, but printed in black and white, as against a wall, or on
water, or the like, but on a looking-glass, or on a piece of paper through a
little hole, in a dark room, it is as painted, the colors being represented as
well as the figures.

Chap. 119. Of shadows and airie figures.
SHadows are printed, or engraven, or painted by those motions, which make
darkness upon enlightened air, but the print is not seen, but upon a solid
ground, or flat, as I may say, which ground must be opposite to the figure it
represents, which is after this manner, as one figure makes more, for the
figure makes a figure, that is, the external motion of the external figure cuts
out a figure of air; for questionless wheresoever our bodies are, there is the
figure in air; for we are always encompast about with air, wherein we make
prints of our figures; for the solid bodies print their figures in that which
is more porous, and softer substance, as a seal on wax, or a print on butter,
or the like; thus the solid bodies as they remove, still make new prints
perpetually, and infinitely, but as they remove, the prints melt out like
verbal and vocal sounds, which print words, and set notes in the air, and the
reason we uannot see the letter in the air, as well as hear the sound, is, that
the air being so porous, is proper only to convey a sound to the ear, or to
spread it abroad; but not solid enough to fix the eye thereon, having not
substance to hold an object so long a time as to take notice thereof, unless
it be drawn into a shadow upon a substantial ground, on which the eye may fix;
but until the figurative be cast upon a solid ground, the figures are like
sculpture, but when they are drawn in shadows upon a ground, it is as painting,
or printing.

Chap. 120. Of a more probable opinion to me of light making several colors.
THe lines of light are whole and come so from the sun until the light of such
a figure, and according to the figure, there the lines are broken, and the
breaking of light a ccording to the several figures, makes several colors, so
it is not inherent in the thing, but in the form of the thing, which is the
figure that makes several colors breaking the several lines of light several
ways, so the Diers of several colors by their observations finds it out by
their practice, though they know not the reason of it, but the true reason is,
that all those several dies make several figures, which several figures break
the lines of light several ways, which being broken several ways produce all
those several colors.

To show you that it is several figure that breaks the lines of light that make
several colors, you may see it in a pigions neck and breast, how many various
colors it will change into, with and in the same place, the lines of light
being broken several ways by the pigions feathers, that make several figures,
as also you may perceive in Rain-bows, the sun shining upon a watery cloud, the
cloud being between you, and the sun what various colors there are, so to
spout water out of your mouth, if it be between me and the sun, it makes the
same colors, and all this is nothing else, but that the lines of light are
broken so many ways, by the several forms and figures it shines of, which
produces the multiplicity of all those various colors.

Again, more plainly to make it appear, that there can be no more truth but
this in color, take a triangular glass it is all of one color, and was never
sent to the diers, and look in it, and you shall see the most various colors
in the world, the colors are not in the glass, therefore with rational man it
suffers no dispute at all, that color is nothing else, but the lines of light
broken by several forms, and figures, that produces all the various colors
that are in the world. And for excellent disputants, that make Aristotle their
church of reason, that cannot err, and will maintain his nonsense against
reason, I leave them to their ignorance, and wish they would rather follow his
Logic, and his Rhetoric, then his natural Philosophy, for their own sakes.

Chap. 121. Of Colors.
SOme say colors are made by perturbed or obstructed light, but in my opinion,
colors are broken lines of light; for when light is obstructed as being
stopped it reflects with double light, those lines returning back like double
strings, and if it were perturbed light, like over-agitated air, or troubled
and rough waters, the light would be only thicker, and mudier, having not
liberty to move in so level, even, and straight, parallel lines; it is true,
those perturbed motions may be the cause many times of breaking the light,
which broken parts contracting into several figures, or works, causes several
colors, every particular work, being a several color, and when these several
figurative works are mixed, being part of one work, and part of another, the
colors are also mixed.

For the several works made of the pieces of light, are that which makes
several colors, and not the pieces of light without those works, for if those
pieces of light lay scattered and not contracted into several figurative
works, they could, or would not make colors, but if colors are not made by
pieces of light, they are made by contracting the straight unbroken lines of
light, which contraction turns light into colors, as contractions do water
into snow, ice, hail, frost; Now it is to be observed, that it is not only the
contracted motions on the water that make the difference, but being contracted
into such or such a figure; for whenever water is contracted into such a
manner of figure, it is snow, if into such a figure it is hail, if in such a
figure it is ice, into such a figure frost, and may do so constantly, and
eternally, and so when light is contracted into such a figure, it is red, when
into such a figure, blue, into such a figure, yellow, into such a figure green,
and when it is contracted partly into the figure of red, and partly into the
figure of blue, it makes a figure of purple, and if it be contracted partly
into the figure of red, and partly into the figure of blue, and partly into the
figure of purple, it makes a fourth figure, which is a fourth color, and so a
fifth, and so infinites, likewise one and the same figure which is one perfect
color, may vary with each patticular figure, which is each particular color,
and upon what body soever these figures are printed, they take colors, and
according as the figures differ, the colors are changed, or alter; for it is
not the body that they are printed on, or the reflections of light, cast upon
such bodies that make colors, but such figures made by contracted lines of
light, which figurative works give such colors to any thing they can print, or
place on, but the reason why I think they are rather broken pieces of light
contracted, then contracted straight lines, is, because they are so lasting,
for though some colors will fade sooner, yet some will last a long time; for
whatsoever work is wrought with parts, as I may say, several pieces of thread,
is not so apt to undo or ravel out, as that which is but of one piece, unless
the thread were circular, without ends, but lines of light are paralels, and
not circles, as for shadows of colors, in my opinion they are produced after
this manner as I said, the figure of blue or the like, which is one perfect
color, and the figure of red which is another perfect color makes a third
figure, which is a mixed color, likewise blue and yellow makes a different
figure, which is a different color from blue and red, and blue and yellow,
makes a different figure, which is a different color from blue and green, and
so we may match figures until we be weary, but whatsoever has constantly part
of one and the same figure, in the several or single compartments of other
figures, which are other colors, as blue and green, blue and red, blue and
yellow; and the like appears in shadows, by reason one particular figure, or
figurative part is the groundwork, which is, the ground color, which makes
all the colors it mixes with, partly of its own complexion, and according as
there are more or less, of that figure, the shadow is fainter or stronger, and
according as the contractions are more or less, the colors are deeper, or
paler; for those figures that are closer contracted, and rougher wrought, are
the darkest colors, as nearest to black, and those figures that are loosest,
contracted, and finer wrought, ars the the lightest, or palest colors, as
being most light, when the parts are loosest, and most at liberty, and the
brightest, as the most glorious colors that are made of the purest, and
clearest light, which is of the smallest lines of light, as I may say, the
finest threaded light, for some lights are thicker then others, by reason their
lines are grosser.

Also colors which are broken contracted lines of light, may appear darker, or
brighter according to the reflection, of other lights, or rather according to
the straight and unbroken lines of light are that cast upon them, likewise some
light does alter the colors that are made by other lights, as some colors
appear not by candlelight as by daylight, and the reason is, that several
lines of several lights, being grosser, or finer, causes the color to appear
duller or brighter, and some particular lights make some colors appear more
then others, and some particular lights obscure some particular colors more
then others, according as they are further, or nearer off the nature of each
other; for though the several figurative works make the several colors, yet it
is the lines and pieces of light, that make those figures and works.

Chap. 122. Of airy figures.
AS I said before, the solid bodies moving in the soft, and more porous bodies,
make many figures therein, some as printed, some as painted, others as
sculpture, as cut, or carved in wood, or stone, or cast in metal, or molded in
earth, some are as if a man, or the like creature should print themselves in
snow, others as if they should make themselves in snow, as for example; as if a
man should stand, and let the snow fall thick upon him until he were all
covered over, there would be his figure in snow, or if he should lie down in
snow, there would be his print; so it is in air, as we move from place to
place, new figures are made, and the former figures moulder, or melt out, but
according as the air is, so they last, or decay, for if the air be congealed
with cold, thickened with gross fogs or mist, the figures last the longer
therein, although in a misshapen posture, like ruinated buildings, or broken
statues, or like defeated armies, here an arm, or a piece of an arm, or a hand,
and there legs, here a head, there a mangled body; but when the air is thin,
and serene, the print dissolves as soon as the figure removes; and if the air
were as solid as snow, we should see the figures as perfect in the one, as in
the other; but the air being very thin, and porous, the sight of the eye runs
through without stay, or stop, taking no notice, like water in a sieve, wherein
naught can be contained, because there is no hold to keep the water in from
running out.

Chap. 123. Of External figures, and internal forms.
IN some things there is such sympathy betwixt the internal form, and the
external figure, as the alterations of the one, change the nature of the other;
as for fire, when the external figure is altered, the internal faculty is gone,
here the internal nature depends upon the exterior figure; but as for water,
the external figure may be changed, as we see when it is frozen, but the
internal nature not changed, for it is as water still, though it be not fluid,
here the internal depends not upon the external; but thus much the exterior
figures of all things depend so so much upon the exterior form, or nature, that
when the internal is changed, the exterior cannot be altered, from and to, as
to change the countenance or face, as I may say by contraction, and dilation,
as water, and metals, and many others, but an animal figure may remain, as it
was for a time, when the internal is changed, but not long, as for example,
Animals, although the internal nature, and faculty be As we say dead.
changed, which is to move after such a manner, as is proper for Animal, the
external figure is not altered: for when Animals are dead, the external, which
is the outward shape remains perfect, for a time, yet the internal motions may
be in disorder, as they are in animals that sound, or are sick or faint, or in
vegetables that are fading, or drooping; but when the internal motions move
orderly again, either of themselves, or by the help of assistant motions, and
figures, the Animal is as it was before, and the Vegetable flourishes green
again, thus there may be an alteration; but when there is an absolute change in
the internal, there can be no return, but by a new creation, for all
alterations of motions do not do it, but a total change.

Chap. 124. Earth, water, air, fire, cold, heat, light, darkness.
EArth, water, air, fire, cold, heat, light, darkness, is made as Animals,
Vegetables, and Minerals, that is, that such degrees of innated matter works
upon the dull part of matter with various motions, and several degrees, of dull
matter produces such effects joining parts together, and separating parts
asunder, but joining, and mixing each degree together, loses not the entity of
each degree, for that can never be altered, for as it was from all eternity, so
it will last to all eternity.

Chap. 125. The motions of the Sun, and Planets.
THe Sun, and the rest of the Planets, are questionless created as other
Animal creatures, and their local motions I thimk them to be Animals.
are according to the shape, as we see all Animals are, for a worm cannot run,
but only moves by gathering up the body from one place, and then stretching it
self out farther, or else by rolling, and winding his body from place to place,
nor beasts cannot flee as birds, nor birds cannot trot, amble, nor gallop, as
beasts, because they have no shape fitted thereto; for birds want four legs to
pace and gallop, and beasts want wings to flee, so the Planets move according
to their shape, turning about as a spherical circle about a center, and if the
sun runs about the world with such speed (as some old opinions are, it must
turn as a wheel about the spoake, or rundle as a bowl in the ecliptic line.

But if the sun, as some Modern opinions hold, does not move out of his place,
but is as it were fixed, and that the Planets move about it, in circular ways
according to their shape, then the motions of the sun, are only by dilation,
and attractions: from which light, and heat proceeds, and vapor is drawn or
sucked up.

Chap. 126. Of the motions and figures of the four natural Elements.
THe motions that make the natural figure of earth, are not I say natural
because there are metamorphosed elements.
so curious, nor the matter they work on so fine, as those which make fire,
air, and water; for the materials being grosser, their work is rougher, like
mortar that is made of hair, and lime, and the motions moving not so evenly, or
distinctly, but rather mixtly, causes it to be sad and dark, the solidity,
weight, and drought are caused by the contracting, attracting, and retentive
motions, which motions are the chief workers and creators of this element,
which work like ants, drawing all thereto, making it like a round heap, or like
a Lodestone, that attracts the solid matter.

The slimie or gelly part of the earth is made by such kind of motions as spin
small lines lik Silkworms, in a round hollow ball; water is made after that
manner, only those lines extenuate more into perfect circles.

Natural and pure air is made by such a kind of motion, as spiders spin webs,
small lines spread, and interwoven evenly.

Natural fire is made by such kind of motions, as the art of whetting, or
sharpening, or pointing with a grind-stone, or Lodestone or the like, and is
made like the stings of Bees, which pierce, and wound whatsoever they can enter.

Natural light is made by such kind of motions, as wierdrawing, or drawing a
small thread from a spindle.

Natural darkness is made by such kind of motions, as winding up threads upon
bottoms, in a heap.

I say natural, because they keep their original form, and is the right kind,
and true shape, as I may say of mankind; For if a creature should be partly a
beast, and partly a man, it were not of the right kind, and true shape.

Likewise Elements may be of the right kind, and yet be different as mankind,
for every particular man is not alike, neither in shape nor quality, the like
may elements differ.

Chap. 127. The reason of the ebbing and flowing of the sea thus.
I Will not dispute, according to Copernicus, that the earth goes about, and
the Sun stands still, upon which ground Galleleo says, the reason of the ebbing
and flowing of the sea, is the jogging of the earth, the old opinion is, that
the moon is the cause of it, which I can hardly believe, for mark the tide from
Scotland to Margel when the moon has the same influence, and the tide is so
many hours in coming from Scotland to Margell as if one rid post, if it were
the moon, why should it not be high water, or full tide Margell, that it is in
Scotland at the time, the power of the moon being all one, so that comes very
improbable to me, for many things fall out at the same time, and yet the one
not cause of the other, and in Philosophy there is nothing so ordinary, as to
mistake the cause of things, since indeed the things for the most part are hid
from us; some again will have the Sun the cause of the ebbing and flowing of
the sea, others rationally say, heat makes motion, and the seas being salt make
motion, because it is hot, but how comes it that the fresh waters ebb and
flow? even springs well, whatsoever the cause be of the seas motion where it
moves,; for in some places they say it does not, but where it moves it is never
high water in one place, but it is low water in another place, and the sea
moves always If one powers water on the ground it flows with a Unequal.
circularly, for as it is the nature of water to be made in figures of circular
lines, so it is the nature to flow circularly, which in my opinion is the
reason of the ebbing and flowing tides, that moves circularly, that is, part of
a circular, where the unequal flows still forward, the flowing motion extends
more and more, causing it to swell out, and the concave ends to extend longer
and closer, in so much as at last the concave ends are joined into a unequal,
for it does not extend in aperfect round circle, as I shall describe in my
following discourse, but after an oval, or rather a pear figure, but when the
flowing unequal is extended beyond the strength, it straight breaks, being most
weak, by reason it is most extended out, so that when the tides have no more
strength to flow for want of water to extend, and the unequal over-powred by
extenuation, it breaks asunder, and so falls back, whereby the unequal parts are
now become the concave, and where it was concave, is now become unequal, which
causes it to flow the other way, and ebb where it did flow, for where it lies
concave it ebbs, and where it is conex is flows, and thus it ebbs and flows
perpetually, where it has free passage, but the farther it flows, the weaker
it becoms, by reason the strength is abated, like a horse that has run fast
and far, at last is so weak and breathless as he falls down, so when the
unequal can extend no farther, it breaks in two, but as the unequal extends, the
concave ends draw closer together, whereby such time as they come to join, the
unequal is so bowingly stretched, as it becomes brittle, as I may say or weak,
which causes it to break, but it is to be observed that the tides have a
double motion, for as the unequal flows forward, the concave ends draw backward
at one and the same time, for the extenuation of unequal one way, causes the
extenuation of the concave In a pear figure.
ends the other way; but by reason the two ends draws close toward a point,
the ebbing waters seem narrow and little, but the ebbing tides are but an
effect of the flowing tides, not a cause in it self, for the interior nature of
water is to flow where it can get liberty, and freedom of passage, and where it
does not flow it is obstructed by some obscure cause, but I desire my reader
not to mistake me, as to conceive the motions of the tides, and the interior
nature of water all one, being something alike; but the motions of the tides,
and the motions of the interior nature of water are as different as the local
motions of Animals, and their interior nature, and I believe if the fresh
waters had the same liberty as the sea waters, to flow which way they would
without opposition, or obstructions of hills, dales, banks and walls, and had
the like quantity to move withal, I believe they would as naturally flow as the
sea, and ebb when their strength fails, and I believe if there were a
sufficient quantity of water in the sea, and no obstructions, as Islands,
creeks, and the like to hinder the passage, and that the earth were like a
billiard ball, it would flow perpetually round, as the Globe turns upon the
Pole, if the Pole turns not round with the Globe.

Chap. 128. Describing the tides.
THe flowing water gathers up together like superflous humors, and swells out
the unequal, as corrupted matter does the skin, and never leaves extending till
it breaks, but it begins by degrees in a demy-circle, and as it flows it grows
larger, and longer extending its compass.

And as the unequal extends, the concave ends must of necessity draw closer
together.

Which makes the ebbing waters like a tail to the unequal, which as the body,
which makes the ebbing waters to be narrow, and by the reason the bulk of the
water flows in the unequal, it causes the concave ends to be small, which makes
it shallow, and the more the concave ends extend, the smaller they are, like
thread drawn from a full distaff of flax; for so the concave ends draws, or
rather extends from the unequal body; But as I said before the more the unequal
extends, the closer the concave ends draw together, and when the unequal is
extended to the uttermost they join.

And as soon as ever they are joined and mixed together into one point, as it
were, it swells into a body.

For the former unequal being broke, the waters fall back to that part which was
the concave, but now is become the unequal, and that part which was the unequal,
is now become the concave.

Yet the unequal must be full before the concave ends extend, like as a glass
that must be filled above the brims before it can run over.

Chap. 229. Of double tides.
AN after, or double tide is caused by wind, like as a man should walk against
a very great wind, that although he presses forward, yet it drives him back,
but when he has broken the gust as it were, he passes more forcible through,
and though wind have power over the exterior motions of the waters, yet not on
the interior motions, but wind can discompose the face of the waters, as anger
does the countenance of men.

Chap. 130. Offspring Tides.
SPring tides I conceive to be caused by waters that issue forth from the veins
of the earth, which are apt to swell, and then to vent themselves forth at
certain times, as natural issues, which flowing causes the tides to be
greater, because it has more strength to extend farther, and the tides to be
higher because the unequal is thicker, and fuller, for the greater body of
water, the farther it flows; for it is for want of strength which makes an
ebb, or want of passage which makes a stop, and when the tides are lower, there
are some invisible obstructions, or the eatrh has drawn or sucked from that
part of the sea.

Chap. 131. The tide and stream flowing against each other.
THe reason the tide flows against the stream a of River, is, that the quantity
of sea water forces through the stream, and the descent of the river forces
the stream to pass through the motion, or rather by the motion of the tide,
for the natural motions of all waters being to flow, and the force of the
descent added thereto, gives it a double, if not a treble strength, so that when
the force of the tide, and the force of the stream meets, and incounters, they
make passes, as Duellers that fight hand to hand; but if one water runs quite
through another, it is most probable that the tide runs through the stream, by
reason it is armed strongly with salt, which may cause it to be streamproof,
when the river water is porous, and weak by reason it is fresh, and thin as I
may say.

Chap. 132. The difference of salt water and fresh water.
THe difference of salt water and fresh, is, that salt waters circle lines are
flat, and edged, as a knife, or the like, and in fresh water, round, which edge
makes it not less smooth, although more sharp, nor hinders the extenuating
compass, but the lines being flat, make it more solid, and so give it more
strength, then the fresh water circle that is round, which makes it more
porous, then salt water is, by the experience of an egg, and the like, which
in fresh water the egg will sink to the bottom, but very salt water will bear
it up, from sinking, and according to the strength, it will bear more or less,
but those lines may exteriorly alter, from flat to round, and round to flat,
and never alter the interior nature, as to break the compass, which is to
dissolve the circle or ring (as I may say) which circle ring is the interior
figure.

Chap. 133. Of wind.
Wind is wrought by expulsive motions, and the strength does not proceed from
the thickness, or solidity of the body, as many think it does, conceiving it
to be contracted, or pressed up air, which if it were, it could not enter into
such small porous, and narrow passages as it does; wherefore me thinks the
strength should not proceed so much from the solidity, as the agilnesse
therein; for the quick repetition does so sorcibly press on each other, as
upon necessity it must drive all loose, and porous bodies before it, but the
farther it blows, the fainter is the breadth, for as the repetitions grow
short, so weaker.

Chap. 134. Of the noise of Tempest and storms.
AS I have said, that sort of air which is made by watery circles is apt to
sound with every motion that strikes thereon, by reason of the hollow figure
being sphericall.

Likewise this is the reason running brooks make a murmuring noise; also this
is the reason, that the tides do make such a noise in the ebbs, and flows,
circles pressing, or rather strikeing each other.

Again, this is the reason the winds, when they blow upon airy, or watery
circles, by striking those spherical circles, cause it to sound, and make a
roaring noise, by the confusion it makes therein; for wind which is an
expulsive vapor does not only strike those watery circles, but those that are
extended into air, and when those motions drive circle against circle, or
circle upon circle, makes such quick rebound, which rebounds in contracting and
crossing each other, make a confused sound, which we call tempestuous and
stormy, and it is to be observed, that a tempest in the air, and a storm in the
water, and thunder, is much after one and the same kind of noise; But as
thunder is caused by the expulsion of the most extended circular lines, so
wind is the expulsion of the more grosser circles, as when lines break, which
are extended no farther then to vapor, also these expulsions, if they be not
very violent, cause rain; for the expulsed motion being no stronger then to
press upon the unbroken and extended circles, either of vapor, or air, drives
it into the watery compass, but when the weather is cloudy, it is not
altogether so hard pressed upon, as to drive it into perfect water circles, but
to the next degree, as a thick vapor.

And when the weather is unconstant, as we say, that is sometimes gross and
thick, and then it will be strait clear, and bright, is as the presser does
abate, or increase; but unforced raines (as I may call them) which is without a
violent constraint, is when those circles are drawn into a wetry compass in a
natural order, and by the natural weight, being thicker then natural air, that
is original air, and not transmigrated water, it falls down on the earth.

Likewise the pouring showers make a sound, by the force of the falling drops,
striking as they fall, sound; but by reason the water is divided, by the
falling motions into less bodies, as it were, which makes not so strong a
sound, having less compass as the tides, or air having fewer circles in a
body, as in drops, which makes it of a less bulk, and the less the body is,
the weaker, and the smaller is the sound.

But when the watery lines are drawn into a triangular figure of snow, it falls
silently without sound, by reason the watery line is drawn out of the extended
circle. Besides, that figure is the lightest figure, by reason of the
inequality, for a square has four equal parts, which makes a just number, so
an equal balance which gives it a steady weight, and a circle is equally
round, without parts, which gives a steady weight.

But a triangular figure is in three parts, which is no just number, nor equal
balance, nor steady weight, which make it of less force, for being a wavering
figure, it cannot press hard, nor strike strongly, nor fall heavy, but flies
lightly about.

Chap. 135. Of thunder and lightning.
THunder and lightning are caused from watery circles, for when they are
extended from water to vapor, from vapor to air, from temperate air, to hot
air, from hot air to fire; for if those circles extended beyond the compass,
and strength of the line, they break, which is the cause of thunder, and
lightning; for as soon as the farthest extention of the circle is broken, those
extended parts do with an extraordinary swift See my chapter of Fame
motion run, or rather shut forth into bright flaming flashes, as spinning
lines of light, but when those lines extend with a strong strength, they break
into small parts, which causes thunder to follow lightnings; for those bteaking
parts sometimes expulse disorderly, beating and striking upon those circle
lines that are unbroke, which circles being of a hollow figure, cause a sound
in the higher region, whereto they are ascended, for their extention causes
them to be light, their lightness to ascend; But all hollow figures being
concave within, and unequal without, do present to the ear, if they be strong,
as concave, and unequal glasses does objects, when presented to the eye; thus
hollow figures cause a hollow sound if they be struck, for the concave draws
those motions in which rebounds from fide to side, and the rebounds continue
(...) sound by the Echos repeated, for sound lasts longer in hollow Sound
enters into all hollow places, as well as into the Animal ear.
figures, then in any other, and though I will not say that only hollow
figures make sounds, yet I say that no sound can enter but through hollow
figures, as the ear is a hollow figure, and all hollow figures, and the ear is
not only hollow, but circular, but sounds are made in the ear, or rather
enters, as light and colors in the eyes, for discord is perturbed motion, or
rather close Antipathetical motions, and harmony are sympathetical, and regular
motions, but the more of these extenuating circles break, the more lightning
there is, and the stronger they brea, the more thunder rhere is, and the harder
they strike upon the unbroken circles the louder is the sound.

But if the circle lines break only asunder, and extend, or shut forth into
straight lines without more parts, there is only lightning without thunder,
but if those lines break into more parts, there is thunder also, and when there
falls r ain at those times of thunder, it is when the gentler motions of some
of those expulsed parts, do not strike hard upon some of those unbroken
circles, but press upon them, which causes them to draw, and gather into a
less circle, and a grosser line, until they return into the watery compass,
where growing too heavy for the hight, falls down toward the center of the
earth, as all heavy bodies, if not thick bodies under to bear them up, or
stronger motions then their weight to hold them up, thus in my opinion is
thunder and lightning caused, and when it rains, those unbroken circles return
into its nature again.

Chap. 136. Of the alterations of motions.
ONe and the same degree of innate matter may change, I call (...) natural that
are propper to the figure.
and rechange the natural posture motion in one and the same figure, but a
general alteration of those motions proper to that figure, dissolves the
natural form of any one particular figure, for a figure moving by several
motions, proper to its kind, must jointly consent either by a sympathy, or
inforcement to make a dissolution, as well as a creation, but all motions works
or alter according as the matter is, or figure they work to, or forced by
stronger motions to alter their natural course; likewise several and contrary
motions may work by turns in one and the same figure, by one and the same
degree of innated matter.

Chap. 137. Of different motions.
ALL extenuating motions make not fludity or wet, but such kind of extenuating
on such tempered, or on such Feathers, wool hair, and the like, which are
neither liquid, (...), nor wet, only soft and sympathy
degrees of dull part of matter, for some extenuating motions make light,
others make heat, and infinite the like, so all expulsive motions do not burn,
nor all (...) motions do not work alike, nor all attractive, nor all retentive,
nor expulsive; for there are infinite ways or kinds of them, which works
infinite varieties, for there are infinite several sorts of heats, coldes,
droughts, moistures (and infinite kinds of lights and darkness as well as of
colors, so infinite ways of contractions, and attractions, and infinite ways
of expulsions, and so there are such varieties in one and the same kind, as it
is impossible for me to describe, as for one man to draw the several pictures
of mankind from all eternity; but if I could draw but one picture, it will be
enough to show my art and skill, although but a plain draught, but I find the
work too hard for my wit, yet I have ventured, and mean to hang it on the wall
of censure, although I know spite will strive to pull it down.

Chap. 138. Of the local motions of water, air, and fire.
I perceive there be other figures that have local motions besides Animals, yet
it is partly their figures that are proper thereto; for though there is no
matter, but is figured, yet all figures move not but of themselves, and though
all figures aremoved, or moving, or both moved and moving, yet all local
motions move not after one and the same manner; but I hear mean by local
motion, that which naturally can move from place to place, by their interior
nature, and exterior shape, but if the word is not right to the sense, pray
pardon it, and take the sense and leave the word, and Christen it a new; but
these kinds of local figures are water, arie, and fire, which move after an
Animal manner, although they have not the shape of those we call Animals, yet
they seem Animals by their All animals are not of one shape.
self motion, as moving from place to place, unless they be stopped by stronger
motions, or other figures that are more powerful: the like of other Animals, as
for example, if one man, or more being stronger binds another man which has
not strength, nor power to oppose, or hinder them, he cannot move according to
the property of his nature and shape.

So likewise, if cold contractions be more powerful then the extenuating
circles, it binds up the the water with icie fetters, whereby it cannot move
according to the nature, nor circular shape; so if any man should go to a
place, and a high wall should stand betwixt him and that place, he cannot pass
unless there were a passage, or that he can clamber, which must be by art,
because there is no footing, and to jump over it he cannot, for it is so high
that the weight of his body will pull him down, before the strength or
agilnesse of his limbs shall raise him over, and he cannot flee over by reason
his shape is not fitted thereto, having no wings, so water being And as a man
may pick a hole through the wall, so water will pick a passage through the
earth.
stopped, and the passage hindered, by a thick bank of earth, cannot move
according to its property; for it is proper for water to move descendingly, at
least straight forth; but when it ascends, it is forced by other more powerful
motions, so likewise it is proper for air to move after a level, streaming, or
spreading manner.

For fire to ascend, after a piercing, shooting, and perpendicular I mean all
exterior motions.
manner, for these elements do as other Animals do, for man, beasts, birds,
fishes, their local motions are different according to their shapes, for it is
the property of a four legged creature to gallop, trot, pace, run, leap, but
they cannot flee, because their shape is not fitted thereto, having not wings,
nor a bird cannot gallop, trot, nor pace, having not four legs to make changes
therewith, it is true, a two legged creature may leap, jump, hop, and run.

Likewise those fishes can neither run nor flee, that have not wings nor legs;
but those that have mixed shapes, have mixed local motions, as there be fleeing
fishes, and swimming birds, and running fishes, and swimming beasts, indeed
most creatures can swim, for most shapes are fitted thereto in one kind or
another, but man's shape is such as it can imitate most various motions, though
it is the shape that makes al creatures to move different ly, yet it is not
altogether the shape that makes them move locally, but there must be such an
interior nature proper to such shapes, as Vegetables and Minerals, their
property is not to move locally, that is, to have a (...) (...) (...).

It seems their interior nature, and exterior (...) is not proper thereto, or
perchance it is only their (...) (...), (...) (...) their interior nature that
makes them unfit (...) (...) (...) for we find their interior nature to be
more active (...) (...) of the exterior shapes of Animals. But to return to
those elements I treat of, as first water, the interior nature causes it to be
liquid and wet, the exterior shape to be fluid, both agreeing by a
sympathetical conjunction give a local motion to descend, and bear all before
it, or with it, that is loose, and unfixt, so fire, the interior nature causes
(...) to be hot and dry, the exterior figure to be sharp to (...), both
agreeing by a sympathetical conjuncting, giving it a local motion to pierce and
divide it, all it can enter into, if not overpowered; so (...) the interior
nature causes it to be soft, and pliant, and the exterior figure to be thin
and searching, both agreeing by a sympathetical conjunction, gives it a local
motion to enter through all porous bodies in a level line, and to fill up all
(...) places in other figures, unless it be thrust out, and kept out by
something more powerful; It is the natural property for fire to be hot and dry,
to be sharp and burning, to move ascending.

And for water to be liquid, fluid, and wet, and to descend in a descending
line.

And air to be soft, and yielding, to be thin and searching, to move in a level
line, unless they be forced otherways, for fire may be suppressed downward, and
water forced upwards and air dispersed, and fire is not only subject to be
suppressed but quenched out for water, if there be a sufficient quantity to the
fire on which it is cast, will over power it: for the innated motions which
cause water to be wet, destroy the motions that cause fire to be sharp and
burning, and the figure (...) destroyed, that is disuniting those parts, and
those motions, that keep and maintain those parts in that figure, the property
is extinguished too, as we see many Animal figures, do to one another, and
birds, and fish, and men destroy beast, birds, and fish, according as they have
(...) (...) and advantage, for indeed the dissolution of one (...) (...) (...)
cause of the creation of another, sometime the (...) (...) one figure, make
many figures, and sometimes (...) (...) of many figures make but one figure;
and (...) (...) (...) has many several manners of moving locally and the
elements as other Animals do move sometimes slower, and sometimes faster.

Chap. 139. Explanations of only Matter.
IT is to be observed by those figures that are wrought by the way of lines,
are soft, smooth, and shining, whether they be parallel lines, cupe lines,
triangular lines, or circular lines, but the smaller, and straighter the lines
are, the smoother, and brighter is their work, but there are several sorts of
softness, and several sorts of smoothness which are made by several kinds of
motions.

Then it is to be observed, that all works of contractions, and retentions are
stronger, and more lasting, then those figures that are more light, and porous,
or extenuating.

Thirdly, it is to be observed, that the innated matter, which works upon the
light, and thin part of dull matter, is more agil, and nimbler then that which
works upon the thick and solid matter, unless the strength of the motions be
not above, or at least equal to the solidity of the matter.

Also it is to be observed, they can make solid figures of light thine matter,
by their close, and curious joynings injectures, and mixtures, and porous, and
light figures of solid matter, by their dividings, and spreadings, but though
the innated matter can contract and dilate, the thick, or thin, light, or
heavy fluid or soft, yet it cannot alter the nature, or degrees of the dull
part of matter, neither can the innated matter make it self weaker, or stronger
then by nature it is, for the entity of only matter cannot be changed, but
though the nature cannot be altered of dull part of matter, yet it may be cut,
and carved, and joined and dispersed into several figures, so the innated
matter, although the nature cannot be altered as to make each degree weaker, or
stronger, yet they may move swifter, or flower, according as the dull part of
matter is they work on or according as the curiosity of the figure requires;
and as I have said before, there be infinite degrees of the dull part of
matter; as solid, and fluid, thinner, and thicker, lighter and heavier, harder,
and softer, and infinite degrees of innated matter, as stronger, and weaker,
swifter and slower, and though I have said that the innated matter is the
thinnest part of only matter, yet I do not mean the thin incipit matter, as I
may call it for distinction sake; for there is no incipit in infinite, and
eternal matter, though there be dull in moving matter, but the innated matter
is the infinite extract of the entity of infinite matter, it is the
quintessence of nature.

Chap. 140. The differences and alterations of figures.
IN the progress of figures, figures are created in figures. The reason is,
that infinite motions which are the gods to create, dissolve, and dispose of
figures, as they please to move, share as it were the infinite matter, in their
working and dividing, and several motions, which is proper to the creation, of
such kind of figures, assisting each other in their works of creation; but not
in the figures dissolution; for those motions which are proper to create one
kind of figure, are not proper to create another, for every figure has
different motions, in the creation either more or less, which is the reason
few, or none are just alike, but either in shape, or mind will differ, but
when two figures are made with the same motions, among the sensitive innated
matter, then their figures are just alike, as we shall see twins, and if the
rational matters motion be just alike in several figures, their dispositions
and understandings are just alike, and if they differ in their motions but a
little, they resemble much either the mind, or the body; sometimes both, but
the more they differ, the less they resemble, but almost all (...) are
distinguishable, which shows such variety of motions, as there needs no more
repetition to move after one, and the same manner; for there are not only
different motions in different, and several figures, but in one and the same
figure, for the same figure does not look when it is old, as when it was young,
nor when it is sick, as when it is in health; nor when it is cold, as when it
is hot, nay the figure will alter and change, every minuit either by the
altered motion of the sensitive, or rational; but most commonly they alter
their motions together, as in a joint concent, for a troubled mind will make
the body appear heavy and sad, for joy and grief will make different
countenances in the figure, and so every passion in the mind, is most commonly
matched with a countenance agreeable thereto, and most commonly other exterinal
actions, yet although the motions may differ, the innated matter may be of one
and the same degree, for I do not say every degree of innated matter moves
always in one kind of motion; for though every degree of innated matter, is
of a particular strength, yet not of a particular motion.

Chap. 141. Of several worlds.
AS the Sun differs from the earth and the rest of the planets, and earth
differs from the seas, and seas from the airy sky, so other worlds differ from
this world, and the creatures therein, by different degrees of innate matter,
on different degrees of dull part of matter, which makes different figures by
different motions, and as this world is of a spherical figure, so other worlds
may be of other figures; as for Animals, although all Animals are not of one
shape; for a man differs from the shape of a horse, or any other four legged
creature, and every sort of beast differs from one another in their shape. So
likewise there is difference in their kinds, as well as in their several sorts,
for beasts kind differ from birds kind, so may worlds differ for all we know,
and if we should guess by the several changse, and variety in nature, it is
very probable it is so; and who knows, or indeed might not very easily believe
it so to be, that worlds may be matched by a sympathetical conjunction to
produce other worlds, as other creatures do, for we find the planets by a
sympathetical conjunction to produce other creatures, as the sun and the earth.
And it is to be observed, that as several motions create figures, so several
motions work by their created figures, and those motions that creates figure by
a sympathetical conjunction, create after their own likeness, either in the
nature or shape, or both, but those figures that create figures without
conjunction of figures, after their invention, or imitation as I may say,
cannot make such figures as conjunctially of figures man calls (...) figures,
as birds make nests, or beasts make dens, and men houses, but to reckon all
artificial figures, is past my skill, and beyond my life, who knows since we
find new and unheard stars, but that they are the birth of other worlds.

AN EPISTLE TO ALL Learned PHYSICIANS.
MOst reverend, and grave Fathers of health, I present this work unto your sage
judgments, your prudent practices, your great experiences, your studious
observations; your miraculous cures, and humbly lay it on the tables of your
studies, in hope some spare time may invite you to read therein.

I dare not commend it, lest you should disprove it; for as your wisdoms value
it, so it is good, or bad.

AN EPISTLE TO MY READERS.
I Am to be pardoned, if I have not the names and terms that the Anatomists
have or use; or if I have mistaken some parts in the body, or misplaced any:
for truly I never read of Anatomy, nor never saw any man opened, much less
dissected, which for my better understanding I would have done; but I found
that neither the courage of nature, nor the modesty of my sex would permit me.
Wherefore it would be a great change, even to a wonder I should not err in
some; but I have seen the intrals of beasts but never as they are placed in
their bodies, but as they are cut out to be dressed, and in the shambles, and
perchance I have seen passing by the shambles, a cruel Butcher cut the throat
of a beast, or rip up the body, where the guts and garbidge would burst out,
but that gave me not much more knowledge, not seeing how they lay in their
bodies: and though it is a usual custom, for Ladies and women of quality,
after the hunting a Deer, to stand by until they are ripped up, that they might
wash their hands in the blood, supposing it will make them white, yet I never
did; but as I have said before, I have seen the intrals of beasts out of their
bodies, which intrals I have heard are much like a man's, especially a hogs, so
that I know man has a brain, a heart, a stomach, liver, lights, spleen, and
the like; yet these I never viewed with a curious and searching eye, but as
they have laien in some vessels; and as for bones, nerves, muscels, veins and
the like, I know not how they are placed in the body, but as I have gathered
several times from several relations, or discourses: here a bit, and there a
crum of knowledge, which my natural reason has put together, of which meat my
wit like an unexperienced Cook has ventered to dress, if it pleases the
palats of my readers, I shall account my time not lost; if not it is not the
first dish of good meat that has been disgust.

OF THE MOTION OF THE BODY.
PART IV.
CHAP. 141.
Physicians should study the motions of the body, as natural Philosophers,
study the motions of the heavens, for several diseases have several motions,
and if they were well watched, and weighed, and observed, they might easily be
found out severally; and as they take compass of the heaven, and stand upon the
earth, so they may take the degrees of the disease, although they diffect not
the body. Thus natural Physicians may know, when the sun of health will be
eclipsed by the shadow of melancholy, which gets betwixt the body and health;
and natural physicians may come to know the thoughts, as they the stars, by
studying the humors of men, and may know what influences they may have upon the
body; and may know the several changes of their humor, as they the several
changes of the moon, that the several changes of the humor, causes the blood
to ebb and to flow, as the Tides of the Sea; thus they may make an Almanac of
the body, for to show what weather and seasons there will be, as great tempests
and storms of wind-collick; whether there will fall upon the Lungs, great
rheumes, as showers of rain, or whether there may be great and hot fevers, or
whether there will be earthquakes of shaking Agues, or cold, and dumb-palsies,
or whether there will be dearths of flesh, and so leave bones bare, by the
droughts of heated fevers, or whether the overflowing of moisture, which
causes dropsies; thus if we could find the several motions in several
diseases in a body, as surely might be done by observations, and study, and
could find out the several motions by the several operations in physic, we
might surely so apply them together, as to make animals, though not live
eternally, yet very long; and truly I think this both of philosophical
opinions, may give a great light to this study.

Physicians must first take care in their prescriptions, to prevent errors of
mistake, before he apply remedies to cure.

Cap. 142. The frame of man's body.
I Will first discourse of the orderly course of nature, which is to have a
perfect shape according to the kind, or sort of figure, it was created to;
that is, like a house to be well built; next to have it strong, and firm;
thirdly, to have it commodious; fourthly, to have it well furnished; fifthly,
to have it clean from dirt, or rubbish; sixthly, to keep it in repair;
seventhly, to prop it from falling down with old age; the pulling it down by
some evil accident, or burning it by fevers, or the like, or drowning it by
dropsies. Andthough I may similize it, to any figure, yet I only employ it, to
mankind; that is, to havea perfectand upright shape, a clear strength, sound
parts, plump and fat, clean from gross humors and obstructions, to keep it
healthful with wholesome food, to help nature with cordials, or physic, death
being the destruction.

Chap. 143. Of natural self-tyrannie.
MOtion does not only divide matter infinite, but disturb matter infinite; for
self-motion striving and struggling with self-motion, puts it self to pain; and
of all kind of motions the animal motions disturbs most, being most busy, as
making wars and divisions, not only animal figures, against animal figures,
but each figure in itself, by discontents and dislike; which discontent makes
more pain, then ease, orpleasure, or tranquillity, by reason of irregularity;
but motion is an infinite and eternal tyrant, on infinite figures; for as
motion makes figures, so motion dissolves figures, which makes infinite, and
eternal matter, eternal restless; for the extract of infinite matter, which is
an innated matter, which innate matter is motion, and makes the dull part of
matter so too, by working thereon; thus the only and infinite matter is a
tyrant to its self, or rather, I may say, infinite, is a tyrant to motion, and
motion to figure, and eternity to all. For though infinite, eternal matter,
motion, and figure, are individable, yet they are all as separated, in aspiring
for motion, although it is but an effect of matter, yet strives for absolute
power over matter and figures, and infiniteness strives for the absoluteness
and power (...), motion and figure; and eternity strives for absolute power
over all; thus the effects strive to have power over the prime causes, which is
the only matter; for if there were no matter, there could be no figure, nor
motion, nor infinite, nor everlasting, the like do the minor effects over the
minor causes, for effects are causes of effects.

Chap. 144. The two ground motions amongst the rational innate matter.
THe rational innate matter, moves as it were twofold, for they have different
motions in the figures, from the figurings, like as the sensitive matter, which
moves the dull part of matter, internally and externally, according to the
nature of each figure; as for example, the creating of a figure is one way, and
the several actions of the created is another way; the like does the rational
innate matter, it first runs into figures, and then moves figuratively: Again,
some figures they are stronger then others, will force the weaker figure to
move after their manner.

Chap. 145. The two chief parts belonging to man, is the head, and the heart,
wherein resides the rational spirits.
THe head, and the heart, are the two residing parts, for the rational innate
matter to move in, making passions in the heart, and reasons in the head; and
whenever those parts be disaffected, the understanding and passions are
disordred, and many times so, as never to be rectified; but some times this
disorder comes by the mis-working of the sensitive (...) matter, and sometimes
by the wrong steps and false Which moves in figures like dancing.
measures of the rational innated matter. But though the annimal knowledge or
reason be disordered, yet not extinguished, unless the annimal sense be
absolutely altered, which is to dye; for though they move not regular, yet they
move after an animal manner: As for example, a man although he goes not
upright, according to his natural shape, but creeps upon his hands and knees,
or that he is forced to role from place to place, having neither arms nor
legs, yet he moves in an animal manner, and partly to what his natural shape
is, for these force motion, or want of some of the outward parts alters him not
from being an animal, nor it from being a man, unless all the sensitive
motions, which naturally belong to their figure, be altered, and then he turns
from that kind of creature.

Chap. 146. Whether the passions are made in the head or heart.?
SOme are (...) (...), the passions are made in the head; others that they are
made in the heart; for my part I am of the latter opinion; that is, that all
passions are made in the heart; as Love, Hate, Fear, Anger, Grief, Jealousy,
Envy, Malice, and the like; and also the Will, and opinions, which are a kind
of passions; and that imaginations, conceptions, fancies, understanding,
judgment, memory, and remembrance, is made in the brain; and that which we call
thought, or animal knowledge is made both in the brain and heart; for if either
of these two parts be wounded, that knowledge dies, as both the sensitive
knowledge, and rational, both being that which we call thought, the one belongs
to the body, the other to the mind; for touch is a weak thought, and thought a
strong touch; and my reason is why I think that the passions are created in the
heart, and not in the head, is, first, passion and judgment seldom agree.

Secondly, when we have the passion of fear or anger, or the like; all the
motions that work to those passions, are felt in the heart; for if we do
observe, we shall find all passions arise from the heart, and all the parts
near thereto will be disturbed; when in the brain we find no violent motions
at all, perchance the sensitive part may be disturbed, as to make the
headache, as with a general distemper.

Thirdly, there are often times passions felt as it were in the heart, without
any knowledge, or thought of it in the head; as when we shall be sad, and angry,
and fearful, and know no reason why. Besides, objects many times pass by, or
as it were, steal through the senses, and likewise creep through the brains,
and raise a passion in the heart, without any notice taking thereof, or
knowledge how it came therein.

Lastly, that although there is a great sympathy betwixt the passions, and
imaginations, yet they are not after one and the same manner of motions, which
shows they are created in several figures, the one in the triangular heart,
and the other in the spherical brain, and the different shapes of the head and
heart, may be one cause, that makes the difference betwixt passions and
imaginations, as well as the different motions.

But to prove passions are made in the heart, and not in the head, is, that
when the brain is distempered and mad, as we say, yet the passions may be free
and regular; and Love, and Hate, which are the two chief passions, may be
constant to the objects they were placed on; thus the mind or soul, which is
the rational innate matter, lies as much in the heart, as the head.

Chap. 147. Of different passions in one and the same part.
AS for passion, we shall love and hate at one and the same time, but not one
and the same thing, at one and (...) same time, for that is impossible.

But different passions are made according to the subjects or objects they move
by, or to; yet the rational innated matter which creates passions, may move
partly sympathetically, and partly antipathetically, at one and the same time.
As for example, a man may be in love with a woman, for her beauty, or wit, or
behavior, and yet have an aversion to her bad qualities; but a man cannot love
the person of a woman, and hate it, at one and the same time, but to the
creating of those passions, that sympathies, as love, and hope, and joy, and
the like; The rational innate matter, does as it were spread, and delate its
self; but for those passions that antipathies, it contracts it self more
together; as in hate, fears, jealousies, doubts, envy, spite, and the like;
and when two or three passions arise at one time; as a passion of grief for my
friend that is killed, and a passionate hate to his murderer, or the like;
then the rational innated matter, divides its self, partly moving after one
manner, and partly moving after a quite contrary manner, and so may divide into
as many parts, and after as many several manners, as their place or quantity
will give way to; but when we love what was hated, or hate what was loved, then
the innate matter changes their motions, toward such a subject, or object,
without a division; but when they move disorderly, the passions are like a
tempest at Sea; passions beat against passions in a confused manner,
distempering the whole body, causing the senses to mistake, with the violence
thereof; likewise in the brain there may be opposite motions, amongst one and
the same degree of innated matter, either rational or sensitive, either by an
alteration of motion in one and the same part of matter, or by divisions moving
in parts; but when the rational innate matter moves in a regular division, and
the measures of time, and the notes of motions skilfully set, and rightly kept,
that is curiously or neatly, and carefully ordered; then there is a harmony,
which harmony is a quiet mind, gentle imaginations, a clear understanding, a
solid judgment, elevated fancies, and ready memory; but when this rational
innated matter moves disorderly, there arises extravagant fancies, false
reasons, misunderstandings, and the like.

Chap. 148. The affinity betwixt imaginations and passions.
IT is the rational innate matter that makes passions, and not the sensitive
innated matter, for the senses only present the (...), the rational the
passions; which shows the rational innated (...), is as much in the heart, as
in the head, and may be of the same degree of strength, although they work
different ways, as being different figures, yet there is such sympathy with
each other, whether by recourse, or otherwise; as passions will raise
imaginations, corrupt judgment, disorder reason, and blindfold understanding:
And imaginations will raise passions, as fear, love, hate, doubts, hopes, and
the like; which shows that the rational innate matter, in the head, and heart,
has such affinity as the sensitive innated matter has in the stomach and
head; as the pain in the head will make the stomach sick, and a sickness in the
stomach will make the headache, I will not say at all times, but most
commonly; neither will imaginations at all times raise a passion, nor a
passion, an imagination, but very often.

Chap. 149. Of the Brain.
THe brain is not the cause of knowledge and understanding, for a bird that has
but a little brain seems as understanding, if not more, then a great beast, as
an ox or the like, which has far greater quantity of brain; but perchance the
bird has more of the rational innated matter, in his little brain, then the
beast that has more brain, for the rational innated matter, moves in the
brain, not on the brain, for that is wrought and moved by the sensitive innate
matter, being made of the dull part of matter; for when the brain is defective,
it is caused by the sensitive innated matter, not the rational innated matter;
yet often times the sensitive innate matter disorders the motions of the rational
innated matter, as we shall see in distempered and sick bodies; like-wise the
disordred motions in the rational innate matter, will disorder the sensitive
motions, as we shall see by troubled minds.

Chap. 150. Of the multitude of figures amongst the rational matter in the
brain and heart.
THe reason why we may have millions of several figures in our memory at one
time, so likewise raised up to our remembrance, when we can receive but one
perfect figure through our senses at one time, is that the passages for outward
objects to enter, is so straight in all animal figures, as that but one object
can take place therein, I mean as being perfectly distinct, for the passages
being straight, many objects entering at once, make a confusion, at least a
disorder, for if more then one object be presented at one time, to any
particular sense, they are received but by piece-meals, as in the small parts;
and many times the divided parts are so mixed together, as no piece is perfectly
seen or heard, or smelt, or tasted, or touched; besides, the passages being
straight, the sensitive innate matter cannot work so regular, having not
liberty, for it is not with the sensitive innate matter as with the rational
innate matter, by reason the sensitive innate matter works upon gross
materials, as upon the dull part of matter, which makes that it cannot move so
nimbly, nor divide into parts so suddenly, especially in a straight passage, as
the rational innate matter can, which moves only in number and measure,
without any dull mixture, for the rational innate matter, can figure out the
whole world, and millions of several figures therein, sooner and swifter then
the sensitive innate matter, can print one figure upon any of the senses; and
not only those figures that the sensitive innate matter presents, or has
presented, but makes those figures that were never presented, as those we call
phantasms; and as I said the rational innate matter has more room to move in,
as in the head, and heart, then the sensitive innate matter, has in the ear,
eye, nostrils, mouth, or pores of the flesh, so there may be a greater
quantity, or proportion of that rational moving matter together, in a body, or
bulk, as I may say, then of the sensitive innate matter, in the foresaid
passages, and according as the quantity of the rational matter is, there is the
more knowledge, and clearer understanding; the quicker wit, and the livelier
memory, the fresher remembrance, and the more multiplicity of thoughts; for it
is not only the largeness, and extent of the place wherein the rational matter
moves in, that makes the more knowledge and understanding, and the like, but the
quantity of the rational matter; for a great head may have but a little wit, or
dim understanding, and a little head a quick wit, and clear understanding; if
the little head be full of this rational innate matter, and the great head be
empty thereof; but if the room (or place) be large, and filled with this sort
of innate matter, according to the bigness, that creature will be very knowing,
understanding, and ingenious; for imagine that all the heads of mankind were
put into the compass of one head, and a sufficient quantity of that rational
matter therein, that creature whatsoever it were, would have not only the
knowledge of every particular brain joined together, but that knowledge and
understanding would increase as use-money, for that bulk or bank would
multiply, being put together.

Chap. 151. Of thoughts.
MAny wonder what Thoughts are, and how such millions can be within so little a
compass as the brain.

I answer, that a little quantity of the rational innate matter, may make
millions of figures, which figures are thoughts.

As for example, from eight notes, milions of tunes are made, and from twenty
four letters millions of several Languages may be made.

Likewise one lump of clay may be molded, and formed into millions of several
figures; and like Pictures many figures The world is presented like a popitplay
in the head.
may be drawn in one piece, and every figure in a several posture; Likewise a
little picture will represent so great an Army, as would take up many acres of
land, were it in a pitched field.

Again, a Globe no bigger then a Head, will present the whole world.

Again, say some, how is it possible there should be so many several thoughts
in the head at one time, and how from one thought should there arise so many of
a sudden, and at some times so extravagant as to have no coherence therein, at
other times very methodicall, and sympathetical?

To the first I answer, how many several postures may a man put his body into
at one time, nay, I may say one part of the body? for how many several postures
may the face draw it self into at one time?

Secondly, I answer, that many several wheels will move with one motion, nay
with one kind of motion several ways, and many wheels with several motions
several ways, and all within one, and the same compass, and from one prime
spring. Again, some may wonder how it is possible figurative thoughts can
enlarge and contract the demension, and extension; I answer, how is it with
Prospective glasses, unequal, and concave glasses; likewise a screen, or a fan,
or the like, which can fold in many folds, into one fold, then can draw them
out into a plain straight piece again, and so shut up into a fold, or open in a
plain piece, as often and as quick as a thought, and millions of the like
examples, may be given, but these are enough for this time, on this subject.

Chap. 152. Of thinking, or thoughts.
THoughts are more pleasant to the mind, then the appetite to the senses, and
the mind feeds as greatly on thoughts, as a hungry stomach does upon meat;
and as some meat breeds good nourishment, and some bad nourishment, causing
either health and strength, or diseases and pain; so does thoughts, for
displeasing thoughts of grief, and all sad remembrances cause the mind to be
dull, and melancholy, or froward, and discontented; and pleasing thoughts
cause the mind to be cheerful, pleasant, and delightful. Besides, the mind is
like chewing of the cud, for what the senses bring in, and are fed with outward
objects; those swallowed objects, the thoughts of the mind chews over again;
thus the mind is always feeding; besides, the senses have no longer pleasure,
or pain then the objects remain; but the mind is as much grieved, or delighted
when the object is removed, as when they are present; As for example, a man is
as much grieved when he hears his friend is dead, or killed, as if he saw him
die, or slain; for the dead fried lives in the mind, not the mind in the
dead friend, and if a man have a fine house, or great riches, or an excellent
rare race of horses, or the like, whereupon the mind takes as great delight in
thinking of his fine house, as if it dwelt in the house, and as great delight
in thinking of his riches, or what he could do with the use of his riches; for
the mind does not so much dwell in the house, as the house in the mind, nor
the mind does not take so much delight in the use of the riches, as the use to
be in the mind, and the remembrance of the curious horses is as much in the
mind, as when those horses were in the eye; for when the sense is filled, the
mind can but think, and the mind may as well think when the objects are gone,
as when they are present, and the mind may take as much delight, in thinking
what the senses have enjoyed, as what they are to enjoy, or desire to enjoy;
for thoughts are the fruition of the mind, as objects the fruition of the
senses; for the mind takes as much delight (if not more) in thinking of an
absolute power, as when the commands of an absolute power is obeyed, for
obedience dwells no more in the mind when it is acted, then it did before it
was acted, or by the imagination that it is acted; thus the mind receives no
more by action, then it does by contemplation, only when the pleasure of the
senses are joined with delightful thoughts, may be said to be more happy,
though I believe the pleasure of senses draws the delight from the thoughts;
for the more at rest the body is, the more busy the mind is employed, and as
torments of the mind are beyond the torments of the body, or at least the
displeasure of the senses; so the delight of the mind is beyond the ease or
rest of the body, or the pleasure of the senses.

Chap. 153. Of sleep and dreams.
SLeep is caused by a tirednesse of the spirits, for when the sensitive motions
are tired, with the working on the dull parts of matter, which tirednesse is
slacking the motions, or changing their motions, as when they work lasily, then
the figure grows drousy, and the senses dull, being weary of pencelling,
copying out objects upon the optic nerve. Likewise with printing letters, and
setting notes on the drum of the (...), or in drawing (...) of several tastes,
touches, and sents on the tongue and pores of the flesh, or striking, or
playing on the nerves, and on the dia matter and pia matter, of the brain, but
many times the figure grows drowsy, and the senses dull, when the sensitive
motions are idle for want of work; that is, having no variety of objects
presented to them; that is, of such kind of works; for the innate matter never
cease to move, although the motions are not always agil, and quick, nor
after one and the same manner, but when they alter the motions, as I may say
more proper then to slacken them, they do as it were cast anchor, pulling down
their sail, going as it were under hatches, and the figure that is like a ship,
where the motions of the breath are like waves of water, that heave it up, and
then sink down, but sail not, nor steer not to any Coast; and the sensitive
innate matter which is in this action, like Mariners when they work under the
hatches drawing and winding up the slimy humors in the body, like ropes by
attractive motions, staying and settling the loose parts, by retentive motions;
Sleep nonrisheth and gives health, and strength.
placing and putting disordered parts into their proper places by disgestive
motions, and all the motions busiely employed; some mending the figure,
stopping the leaks, dearning, Nourishment.
and sewing together the torn sails, oyling Healing decays. (...).
Strengthening.
and greasing the keel, pitching and tarring the cresses; tying and twisting
the roaps, drawing the superfluous moisture to the gutter ready to be pumpt
out, sweeping all the rubbish and dirt on a heap, ready to be flung out; some
running up, and returning from the deck, which are the pores Knitting the
muscles, nervs and the like. Urin to the bladder.
of the skin; but the rational innate matter, is the master of the Animal ship,
and the sensitive innate matter, as the Saylors, those works on the dull part
of matter, the other directs Excrements into the guts. Vapors
when occasion serves, that is, when the body is in action; for though the
rational innate matter never labors on the dull part of matter, yet they
counsel and direct the animal ship, when it is built, and set afloat, that is,
when the body is come to the full growth, and orders it in blustrous storms,
and great dangers, but these the rational innated matter, when this animal ship
is cast to anchor, which is to sleep, moves only in a rocking, or rolling
motion, as it were from side to side of the cabin, which is the brain, making
no perfect figure nor gives direction, this is sleeping without dreaming; but
dreaming is when they move in figures, making such figures as these objects,
which have presented to them by the sensitive motions, which are only
pictures, or copies of the Original objects, which we call remembrance, for
remembrance is nothing but a waking dream, and a dream is nothing but a
sleeping remembrance, but if the sensitive innated matter moves in the same
manner, on the same place, as printing and drawiug such figures or objects in
the optic nerve, or setting such notes or letters on the drum of the ear, or
drawing such platforms on the dura matter, or pia matter of their brain, or the
tongue, flesh, or skin of their own accord, without the presence of the outward
objects; then we see here taste, smell, touch, as strong as if we were awake,
if their motions be as strong and industrious; but many times we have in sleep
those objects but in part, and not in whole, the reason The innate matter can
move slower then their strength, or natural agilnesse, but not above nor beyond
their natural strength and agilnesse.
is, that either the sensitive innated matter is slow, or else they are not so
perfect Artists to work without a sampler, working by misplacing, and
mistaking, or else works by halves, according to their skill, or as appetite
moves them, make a hogpog, or gallimophry of many several pieces or draughts,
into one figure or picture, which make extravagant dreams; by reason they work
not in a methodical manner, and the rational innated matter, moving in the same
manner makes a mixed resemblance, but the sensitive innate having not the
outward objects in sleep to work by, seldom works perfect, or plain, and
working imperfectly they move disorderly, and for the most part that which
makes us so often perturbed in our sleeps, is, by moving cross, and irregular,
which cross, Irregularity insnarles several motions, so as there is no
distinction, which is the reason that our dreams are so often obscure, and
dark, as we can make nothing of them; and when the rational innate matter moves
cross, and tumultuously, our dreams are most commonly fearful, and when the
sensitive innated matter works so disorderly, our dreams are painful, and when
the sensitive innated matter works perfectly, and the rational innate matter
moves justly, we have as much knowledge, and understanding of what we dream of,
and as much satisfaction from our senses, as if we were awake, and the real
abjects presented to us.

Chap. 154. Dreamings of living, and dead figures.
THose friends in acquaintance that that have been dead, a long time, and
appear in our sleep, we never question the truth of their life, though we may
question them how they lived; again, the reason is, that these figures are as
perfect, and lively to our present senses in our sleep, as when we are awake;
for oftimes the sleeping motion prints figures, on the inside of the optic
nerve, as on the inside of the pia matter, as the waking motion does on the
outside, and when we hear them as it were discourse words, right on the inside
of the drum of the ear, or pia matter, by the sensitive motion, as on the
outside when we are awake; for all the sensitive works inwards asleep, as
outward awake; for if we smell sents pleasing, or displeasing, the sensitive
spirits draw lines, and set notes on the inside of the dura matter and pia matter
of the brain; and so for taste and touch, they draw plateforms in the inside of
the skin, either of the skin of the tongue, or any other outward parts of the
body, as they do on the outside of the skin awake; Thus the senses present as
perfect prints to the rational often times in sleep, as awake, only they print
on the inside a sleep, and on the outside awake, and what rational creature
would not believe their senses; for should a man see another man die, and see
him buried, and afterward should see that man alive again, and hear him speak,
and touch him, shall feel the substance of flesh, would not he think he lived?
Thomas the Apostle questions the relations of our Saviors resurrection from
the grave, but never questioned his senses, when he saw, and touched him; so in
our dreams, when the sensitive innate matter prints such figures on the optic
nerve, as of such a person which is dead, the rational matter straight paterns
out the sensitive print; and when the sensitive print, and the rational figure
is just alike, the other motion of the rational matter cannot question the
truth of that figure, or figures being there, though they may question how they
come alive, again treating with it, as if awake, the same is if the sensitive
innated prints, any thing as dead, which is living, and the rational pattern
it, the rest of the rational motions make no question of the truth of those
sleeping motions, until waking motions otherwise inform them; for rational
motion in every particular figure, knows little of the sensitive, but what the
senses shows them, in the several motions, yet the rational generally knows
what they present unto them, which every particular sense does not, each motion
is unknown, and are strangers to each other in one and the same figure; for the
ear knows not what the eye sees, nor the eyes know not what the nose smells,
nor the nose knows not what the tongue tastes, nor the tongue knows not what the
body feels, but the rational innat matter in a figure, knows all the sensitive
motions in the same figure, as long as the figure is perfect, and moves in an
Animal way, and that the rational motion moves regular; for when the motions
are irregular, they can take no perfect copies, nor notice how the sensitive
move, that is, the reason that in perturbed passions, which are only irregular
motions, the senses become as it were useless to them, but most commonly the
disorder of one brings the disorder of the other, I will not say at all times,
and so when the sensitive spirits are regular, the rational is regular, but not
at all times, for some times the one is regular, the other is not, but the
rational which takes copies of the sensitives is oftener disordered by the
sensitives, then the sensitives by the rational, for when there is grief in the
mind, many times the body is in good health, but it is seldom known when the
body is sick, but the mind is troubled.

Chap. 155. Of Local Dreams.
THe reason that many times we dream of walking woods or houses, and the like,
is through this following reason; The rational innate matter, as I often said
before, turns most commonly into such figures, as the sensitive innate matter
prints, or has printed upon the senses, now if a tree or house, or the like,
be printed on the inside of the pia matter, or the like sensitive part, when we
are asleep, the rational innate matter straight figures them, these figures
move after a local manner, although they have not an animal, or local shape;
the reason is, that the rational innated matter being purer in it self, without
the mixture of dull matter, moves only in their own matter, and the figure
moves in the matter; whereas the sensitive innated matter working upon the dull
part of matter, moves in that dull matter, and not the dull matter in the
sensitive innated matter, that is the sensitive innate matter moves in the dull
part of matter, and the dull part of matter is moved by the sensitive innate
matter; thus the sensitive figure is moved, but not moving, but the rational
innated matters figures give their own motions; likewise if we have seen a
battle, or heard of a battle, and afterward we dream of the same, or of the
like battle; then the rational innated matter puts its self into animal
figures, and moves after a local manner, each figure placing it self after that
manner or way as was related, or printed by the senses, or after away of its
own invention, and when the figures encounter each other, as they must do to
fight a battle in the brain; and then some seem to be falling, and others
dead, and some mangled; those figures are as falling and broken, and cease to
move after the local manner; and when one party seems to move as in a
confusion, then the motions are irregular, and just as the senses present, so
does the rational innated matter act in the brain when we sleep, and sometimes
when we are awake, as in imagination.

Chap. 156. Of the senses, and the objects that pass through the senses.
THat innate matter which I call the sensitive spirits makes I call that matter
so (...) distinction.
holes, which holes serve as doors in animal figures to receive outward
objects, as the holes that are made in the eyes, ears, nostrils, mouth, and the
pores of the skin, wherein the animal receives light, sound, scent, taste, and
touch; the senses are brought and presented by the sensitive innated matter, to
the rational innated matter, who takes knowledge thereof; as for example, there
is a house or a tree, or any the like gross material figure, these being placed
beforethe passage of the eyes, those sensitive spirits, in the eye taking
notice thereof, with the help of that brings the objects therein, strait prints
or paints those objects upon the optic nerve, or upon the outside of the
brain, as the dia matter, or pia matter, upon which the rational spirits view as
on pictures, then copy them out, not by working on the dull part of matter, as
the sensitives innated matter does, but turn themselves by number and measure,
into figures like those printed or painted figures; the difference is, that the
rational matter is like sculptures, the others as pictures upon flats; these
rational figures we call knowledge, or understanding, and as long as these
rational figures last, though the object is absent, and the prints rub out, by
other objects, or by distance of place, or the like, we call memory; but when
those rational figures are dissolved, and afterward repeated be wrought
without a presentment of the senses, we call it remembrance, and the reason the
memory is not so strong, as the present sense, nor the remembrance so perfect
as the memory is; that with the present object there are two figures as the
rational sculpture, and the sensitive point, when the memory is but one, as the
sculpture, which remains as with the rational, but the sensitive print is
rubbed or worn out, and the reason why remembrance is not so perfect, as the
memory, is, because remembrance is but a copy of a copy, from the original
print, for remembrance is but a pattern taken from the Memory, and the memory
(...) a pattern taken from the objects.

Chap. 157. Of figure presented to the senses, and figures together.
THe reason why figurative senses are quicker then the figurative growth, is,
It is less labor in printing on the dull part of matter then in cutting out
sculpt figures, not for the strength of actions, as for the several laborious
actions therein, fetching their material a far way, and for many several
places, which requires time and place, when printing is but a press laid upon a
flat.

Chap. 158. Of objects, and the senses, something differing from the other
Chapter.
THat innate matter which I call the sensitive spirits for distinction sake,
makes holes or doors in animal figures, to receive outward objects; as the
ears, eyes, nostrils, mouth, pores of the skin, and the like, and these outward
objects are presented, to that part of innate matter which I call rational
spirits, but that part of innate matter I call sensitive spirits; as for
example, thus, there is a house, or a tree, or any the like gross material
figure; which is subject to the sense of animal figures, these standing at the
doors of the eyes, which as soon as the sensitive spirits perceive, or other
sensitive spirits that come in through these doors, strait print or draw the
same figure upon the optic nerve, which optic nerve is made of dull matter,
by the sensitive spirits from whence the rational spirits viewing from thence
that picture, strait run themselves by number and measure into the likeness of
that picture, which are those we call knowledge or understanding, and as long as
those figures last among the rational spirits, though the objects are absent
that we call memory, for when these prints are rubbed off by the sensitive
spirits, and others placed thereon, or vaded by distance of place, or obscured
by shutting the lids, yet the figure thereof may remain amongst the rational
spirits, which is, as I said before, memory, and the repetitions of figures;
(...) is, when one and the same figure was dissolved and created again amongst
the rational, it is remembrance; but memory is not so strong as the present
sense, nor the remembrance so perfect, as the memory and the reason is, that
what the sensitive spirits wrought on the optic nerve, is like a printed or
painted figure, and that which the rational spirits make is like a carved
statue, like painting, or sculpture, so that in memory the sculpture remains,
and in remembrance is created, although the printing, or painting is worn out,
or rubbed out, so that the present senses have two figures, one upon the optic
nerve, the other amongst the rational spirits, wherein memory remains but one,
and the reason why remembrance is not so perfect as memory is, because it is
but the copy of a copy from the original, for remembrance is but a pattern
taken from the memory, and the memory but a pattern from the object.

Chap. 159. Of the figure of the head.
THe figure of the brain gives strength to the sensitive motions, and to the
rational knowledge in animals, for the scull being made with an arched rough,
and the sides being hollow, and the whole head round, which hollow sides arched
rough and round compass, cause rebounds As we find in Churches, and caves made
hollow arched, a noise sounds loudest.
and reflections of the motions therein, which multiply, increase, and
strengthen them, as for the motions and figures of sound, the notes that are
made are struck from the drum of the ear, as balls from a hand, to the concave
part, and from thence rebound from side to side, and fall down, as a new note
is raised, or like many balls struck one after another, so rebounds follow one
another, and according as they are struck, so are the rebounds stronger or
weaker, and according as they are Lines of light may be made by the sensisitive
spirits on the side of the optic nerve as on the outside, as in sleep.
repeated, so do they last; the same for sight, for * lines piercing from the
optic nerve, darting on the concave parts reflect, and these reflections cause
double lines, which make the sensitive figures on the optic nerve appear plain
to the rational figure, but if they rebound, and reflections be disorderly
returned by disordered motions, they make a confusion, both in the sense, and
rational knowledge, as for taste, it strikes from the nerves of the tongue, upon
the brain, besides the hollow cave of the mouth, and according as the rebounds
are made, and the strokes are struck, the taste is stronger or weaker, but if
the brain be stuffed with cold, then the concaves being stuffed and so stopped
where the rebounds should return, cause the taste to be weak, insomuch as not
to be sensibly felt; and for touch, the pores of the skin and flesh are hollow;
wherein rebounds are made, striking from side to side of each pores; and we
find by experience that those parts which are not hollow, have not so strong a
sense as those that are hollow: Again, if the nerves from whence the strongest
strokes are struck be (...) slack, the sense is weak.

As for scent which is brought through the nostrils of the nose, like water
through spouts, which dilates its self through the brain circling the pia
matter, swelling, flowing and ebbing, like to the sea about the earth, which
when it flows it is strong, but when it ebbs it is weak.

But by reason scent is made by streaming motions, and not striking and
retorting motions. As the other four senses are, it retains not so long in the
memory as the others do, although it may last longer in the brain or head,
being more lasting, most commonly for the present then the rest are, for a
stink will remain in the brain a great while, and so will strong perfumes.

Chap. 160. Of Sight.
THe general opinion is, that all objects come through the optic nerve, and
print the figures received on the brain, and that there are, nor can be no
figures in the brain, but what the optics bring in, and have passed through
the eye; it is true, by experience we find, that without an eye, we cannot see
an outward object, as they are without us, yet we see those objects, as they
are without us in our sleep when our eyes be shut; thus the sense of seeing is
not lost, although the eyes were out, and the optic nerves stopped up. But
some will say, those objects in dreams have past through in part, or in whole,
therefore the question will be, where an animal can have an insight, if it were
born blind; but if it be so, as the opinion is, that no figure, or insight can
be, but what comes, or has passed through the eye, and optic nerve, must want
that sensible knowledge; for according to that opinion, the ear can do the
understanding no service as toward that sense, by reason sound can make no
figure to sight, neither will taste, nor sent; but some may say, touch may
discover somewhat of that sense to the understanding, but I think not; for in
my opinion, touch is as senssesse to insight as sound; for we cannot comprehend
more of touch then of sound, for depth and breadth are no more to insight, then
high notes, and low notes, nor soft nor hard, no more to insight then swift,
and slow, sharp, or flat, nor pleasure, nor pain, no more then harmony, and
discord; but my opinion is, that figures are as inherent to the mind, as
thoughts; And who can have an unfigurative thought, for the mind cannot have
thoughts, but upon some matter, and there is no matter but must have some
figure, for who can think of nothing; but the mind is like infinite nature,
having no dimension, or extention, no center, nor circumference, no breadth, no
depth, and as the innat matter creates figures, so the mind, which is the
matter creates thoughts, which thoughts, are the figures of the mind; for when
we hear of a deity, we say in words it is an incorporeal thing; but we cannot
conceive it so in thought, we say we do, but we cannot prove we do; It Is true,
the mind may be in a maze, and so have no fixed thought of any particular
thing; yet that amaze has a figurative ground, although not subscribed; as for
example, my eyes may see the sea, or air, yet not the compass, and so the
earth, or heavens; so likewise my eye may see a long pole, yet not the two
ends, these are but the parts of these figures, but I see not the circumference
to the uttermost extention, so the mind in amaze, or the amaze of thinking cuts
not out a whole and distinct figurative thought, but does as it were spread
upon a flat, without a circumference, and though there are not such figures in
the All innate matter is as the mind, or life of nature.
brain, as it brought through the optics, yet such figures as the mind
creates; for the mind is innate matter, and innat matter is self-motion, and
self-motion, is always moving, and working, which working is figuring; thus
the sensitives innated matter prints figures iu the brain, and the rational
innated matter creates figures in the brain after its own invention, which are
imagination and conception, wherein are made imaginary worlds, without the
materials of outward objects: and perchance these motions may create such a
figure as this world, and such several figures, as the several creatures
therein, although not so solid and lasting, because those motions want those
gross materials, of which they should create it withal; but the sensitive
innated matter in this cause, prints these figures upon the brain by patterning
the rational figures created in the brain, like as when it does the outward
objects, and when the sensitive innate matter works on the inside, as in sleep,
then it gives an insight, which are dreams according to their copied prints,
and these motions may make lines of light, triangular lines, for colors set
notes of tunes, draw plat-forms All without outward help
of taste, and sent, make prints of touch, not only the rational innated
matter, by imagination; but the sensitive innated matter gives a sensible touch
on the brain of all the outward senses, by which touch, I mean sensible
knowledge; thus the interior motions may move the brain with the variety of
every sense, without the exterior passages, or objects, The property of each
sense.
and although it may not make those very objects and subjects; yet such as are
proper for each sense, and of the same nature as I said before, draw lines of
light, gathering motions make clouds, triangular motions make colors,
insnarled motions make darkness without the outward object, and all other
motions that make several figures, or printed figures.

Likewise reflections without the help of the eye and so rebounds, and retorts;
for sound, and set notes print words, and plain tunes without the ear; so
likewise for taste, sent, and touch; but when the brain is filled withoutward
objects, the natural motion seldom works after their own invention, having not
room as it were, or else it is as it were overpowred with work, having more
objects brought in, then they can either conveniently place or sort, or
distinguish; but weak minds, which are slow moving matter, think life an
insensible thing, and the head, or brain empty of figures, when it is not
filled with outward objects, like as a barrel is not Fools have less rational
innated matter in their brains, then those that are wise.
filled with liquor, thinks it empty, because the thin air with which it is
filled, is not subject to their gross senses, so not to their weak capacities.

Thus it is not the outward objects that make the sense, but the innate matter,
which is self motion, which is the sense and knowledge, and the different
motions therein, and therefrom, make the differences thereof, and though
different sense and knowledge, may be in different, and several figures, and
such kind of sense and knowledge proper for such kind of sorts of figures; yet
the figure adds nothing to the sense, and knowledge, although the innated
matter may give a figure such a kind of sense and knowledge and when that
figure dies, that kind of sense and knowledge may alter, which was proper to
that kind of figure; yet if it were the figure that gave the sense, and
knowledge, and not the innated motions, there would be no alteration when the
figure is made, or any extraordinary passion, whereby experience we find the
sense, and knowledge do alter all, though the figure be perfect, and in health.

Chap. 161 Of Light and Colors.
LIght and color is made upon the optic nerve, as sound on the drum of the
ear, for light the sensitive innated matter draws long, straight, small, even
lines, upon the optic nerve, and when colors are made, notes are set upon
those lines, drawn upon the optic nerve as thus.

Of colors, are when those lines are set with quavor, semy quavor.

But light is only when those lines are drawn without those quavors,
semy-quavors, but as we shall see plain song books, after this manner.

And the knowledge the rational innated matter takes thereof, is when they move
in plain lines, when they move in figures and lines, they move for colors.

Chap. 162. Of Blindness.
Blindness proceeds from many causes, as when the cristalline part of the eye
is not clear; for if it be dimming, or failing, or spotted and foul, the
objects seem muddy, and misty, and as the water of the cristaline is colored,
so the objects appear; for as Diamonds, some are of a black water, others of a
yellow water, some of a green water, or blue, others of a white water; so is
the cristalline part of several eyes, and according as it is clear, or
colored, so all objects appear.

A second defect may be in the ball of the eye; for according to the compass
of the concave, or unequal thereof, the objects are presented nearer, or at a
further distance, or longer or shorter, or broader, or narrower.

A third defect may be in the eye hole; for according to the largeness, or
littleness thereof, objects are presented, either in whole, or in part,
bigger, or lesser, more, or fewer objects enter at once; for if the eyelid
hole should be too large, the species would disperse too much, disuniting parts
and figures, and if too small, the species cannot pass in (...) and file, as I
may say; for though the smaller the circle is, the closer it contracts the
species, and draws the objects into a straighter line; yet if they should pass
in a crowd, they will stop the mouth of the passage, like water in a glass
when turned suddenly downward, every drop striving to get out first hinders
each others so in the strife, as none can pass.

A fourth defect may be in the optic nerve, if it be full of slime, and the
like, it darknens the sight, stopping the passage of the light, or if it be
shrunk, or dried up, likewise if the head be full of gross vapors, it
obscures the sight, as a thick mist does the sun; for this foul foggy, and
gross vapors hinder the species from entering, and the sensitive innated matter
that should print these objects, on the optic nerve, and if they are not quite
stopped, yet it hinders the regularity, making that innated matter to work by
piece-meales, or else stays not so long, as to take a perfect survay.

The fifth and sixth defect may be, if the eyes move too quick, or too slow,
which makes the sight imperfect, or dull; for too quick motions of the eye
dazles the sight, and clips and cuts the exterior objects into so many parts,
as no one part can be perfectly known, or seen; and too slow motion blunts the
sight like a sharp point that is struck upon a stone, or the like; besides,
when it is fixed too long upon one object, other objects pass by before it
removes, or wearies it so much as one cannot take notice of it; But when the
eyes are too quick, it is by reason the nerve strings that tie and fasten the
ball of the eye to the head, are too slack, which makes the eye ball so loose
as the least motion moves it, or else these nervous strings are too small which
makes them so weak, as every little motion moves, so as they are always in
motion as it were; for if the nerves, and sinew-strings be too small for the
weight of the eye ball, it may always have a trembling motion, like a sthe
aspen, or like weights that cannot poise steady, as long as there is a
disproportion; and when the eyes are too slow the reason is when the sinews, or
nerve-strings, are so short tied, or shrunk up, so that it holds the eye ball
too hard, or too straight, giving it not liberty to stir, and turn from side to
side, or to role about.

A seventh defect may be when the eyes look asquint, as it may do two several
ways; the one is when the ball of the eye is tied too short, by the nervous
string toward the nose, by which the balls of either eye, are drawn so much
inward to each other, as to look at each other; but that they are some ways
hindered by the nose, this makes the lines or points; that shoot from either
eye, to meet acrosse, which makes all exterior objects to look double; but if
the eye string ties the balls of the eyes too short toward the temples it
draws the points from the center, and the eyes out of the natural bias which
causes a side look, as seeing two several ways at once, but neither way
perfectly, by reason that the lines that issue from the eyes, lie not level,
neither can those lines meet upon an object, in a triangular, which joins (...)
sight of each eye into a point, which makes sight so much the stronger.

Thus if the strings be too loose, or too hard, or too small, or that the
optic is shrunk up, or the eye-lid-hole covered with some scale, or filme, or
the eye-lid-hole too little or too big, or the christalline full, or the brain
full, or too many vapors continually ascending from the bowels, or stomach, or
if the eye be too quick, or too slow, it is a great defect in sight; But if the
passage be quite stopped up, of the strings or christalline part be broke,
those are irrecoverably blind.

Chap. 163. Of Hearing.
AFter the same manner is the sense received at the ear, only the difference
is, that instead of drawing, printing the outward objects, received through the
eye, printed on the optic nerve, so the sensitive innated matter, sets, or
pricks down notes, and draws lines on the drum of the ear, as musicians do upon
paper, or the like; and the sensitive innated matter in making them run, and
make stops according as the vocal sound is set, and it is louder, or lower,
according as they work weaker or stronger, but for the verbal, it is writ,
(...) printed on the drum of the ear in letters, for words, and the knowledge
the animal figure takes, is when the rational innated matter moves according to
those letters or notes, or ways of division: but in a confused sound there is
no order, time, nor stop kept, nor no perfect note, nor letter, nor line
pricked, or printed, or drawn, but, as we vulgarly say, it is all
scrible-scrable, or else ciphers set for notes; and like as it is to the
optics, so it is to the ear, for the notes and letters, as the pictures which
fade; for as the outward motions slacken, so the vocal and verbal sound
dissolves; and the memory and remembrance of sounds, vocal and verbal, is as
the sense of the objects on the optics.

Chap. 164. Of Articular sounds, or sounds without distinction.
IT is strange if we consider that one word should strike so many several ears,
and so to be heard perfectly, by every particular ear; but surely to my reason
one word or note cannot fill so many ears, as can stand to hear it: again, it
is strange that a word should directly hit into every ear that stands to hear
it, I will not say always, for sometimes a word is spoke two or three times
over, although the ear be clear before it can hit the entrance, but that is but
seldom; but in my opinion it is not a single word that runs about from ear to
ear, for then all would not hear at once, for if there were a multitude, the
last ear might not hear a week after, or at least a day after it had been
spoken.

Wherefore in my opinion it must be after this manner, the mouth, tongue, and
breath forms not only a single word, but millions in one lump, with the same
labor of pains, as for one word; as for example, take a sheet of paper, or the
like, and fold it into many folds, in a small compass, and stamp a print
thereon, and every fold shall have the like print with one stamp, and until
they are parted they stick so close as if they were but one printed body, when
every fold is divided by the stamp with the print thereon; so likewise the
mouth folds up thin air, and the tongue gives the printed stamp, which being
cast forth like a ball of wilde-fire, disperseth in a crack or sound, and then
suddenly spreads about in several streams; thus millions of words run about in
lines of air, passing in all pores and hollow bodies, as the ear or the like,
concaves as hollow wood and vaults, where finding resistance, rebounds back in
repetitions, and according to their strength, or the strength of their bearing
motions, they pierce farther and fall shorter, and according to the freeness of
the passage, they sound louder, clearer, lower, or duller, and according to
their stamp they are perfect or imperfect.

After the same manner is all distinct sounds, notes being printed as words,
but sounds without distinction, are like stamps without prints, that is plain
pieces of air, but if the ear be stopped, the sound is lost to the brain, I
will not say to natural sense, for surely the brain is not the whole ingrosser
of that and the like sensitive knowledge, neither will say the animal head
ingrosses all that sort of tempered matter, or that no passage can conveigh a
sound but the animal ear. But most probably all sounds spread as lights; as for
example, a small candle will enlighten a large compass, by reason rays of
light stream equally from the center candle to the circumference; so is sound:
for when a pistol, or any the like shots of a bullet, the pistol, or that which
makes the sound, is the center which spreads sound as fire does light, and when
such a compass of air is filled with sound, either vocal or verbal, every ear
that stands in the compass must needs receive the sound if they (...) not deaf;
likewise every eye may see daylight, that is not blind, and the rebounds of
sound are as the reflections of light, and verbals are received into the ear,
as figures into the eyes; and as cross lines of light make various colors, so
different notes make various tunes: But some may say, that if the air were full
of one and the same words, or notes, that more would enter the ears then was
sent.

I say that is impossible, unless the ear could draw the spreading, or
streaming lines from the circumference to a point, which the ear cannot.

But I believe art may do the same for sound as it can with light; for art can
draw with glasses made for that purpose, many beams to appoint, but if the eyes
did so, it would burn them out.

Also they can draw several species, through a small hole.

I believe artificial echoes, are or may be made after such a manner.

Chap. 165. Of taste, touch, and smell.
THese senses are made by such motions as sound is, and as they are set on the
drum of the ear, so these are set on the nerves of the tongue, or on the skin,
for when the skin is off our tongue, we cannot taste; likewise for As for touch
the pores of the flesh are like harpsical keys, and the nerves like the wire
strings, (...) move when those keys are touched, which cause pleasure or pain,
like discord, or harmony, according as they are struck or played upon.
touch, they are set on the nerves, and sinnews; and when these notes are set
harmoniously, it pleases the senses, otherwise it displeases them, which
displeasure is pain amongst the sensitive innated matter, and hate amongst the
rational innate matter.

As for scent, they are motions that draw like lines, like a platform upon the
pia matter of the brain; indeed the second draught of the sensitive innated
matter, is to draw all their figures upon the pia matter of the brain.

Chap. 166. Of Touch.
TOuch is the general sense of the whole body, which the other senses are not;
for though every part of the body is of a several touch, yet it is all touch;
When sight only belongs to the eyes; sound only to the ears; scent only to
the nostrils; and taste only to the tongue; besides the loss of any of these
senses, nay all of them, may be wanting, as if they were not belonging to life,
as indeed they are not, but only as conveniences to the life, but not of
necessity; whereas touch is as it were the life of the figure, for when this
sense is generally wanting in the animal figure, it is as we say dead; that is,
the natural motion belonging thereto, is generally altered, or quite changed,
as we say.

This sense is received through the pores of the flesh, and the nerves are the
instrumental strings whereon motion plays, either a harmony of pleasure, or a
discord of pain, for as their strings are struck, so is pain or pleasure felt,
but I have treated sufficiently of this sense in my chapter of numbed palsies.

Chap. 167. Of the pores of the body.
THe pores are passages which let out the smoke or vapor, unnatural heat, and
the superfluous humors in the body; also they are passages to let in
comfortable warmth, refreshing colds, nourishing air; these passages have their
inconveniences, for they are a means to conveigh out the good with the bad;
and many times takes in infections, as malignant diseases that pass through
the pores, for infection comes in as much through the pores, as any other part
of the body.

Besides, many times the radical moisture is carried out by unnatural heats,
and sometimes the vital spirits by too many transparations; but these pores
passages are drawn or shut closer together by contracting motions, or set wider
open by extenuating motions; but if these common and necessary passages to the
interior parts be (...) close shut, either by cold contractions, or hot
contractions, it smoothers and choakes the vital parts by keeping the vapor, or
smoke that should go forth, for the pores in this case are as the funnels of
chimneys, wherein the smoke ascends up, and goes out, and if they are set too
wide open by the extenuating motions, they cause the body to starve, by giving
passage to such matter as should be kept in to feed the body, or by giving too
free passage, to the natural moisture, that should quench or temper the heat in
the body, or by giving too free a passage to the gadding spirits that should
stay in the body, to be employed to the substance and strength thereof;
besides, when they are too open they are as apt to take in, by giving passage
to that which is a prejudice to the (...) of the body, as infections,
malignity, or unnatural colds, or the like.

But the pores of the body are always employed, where the other passages of the
body are employed but some times.

THE NATURAL WARS IN ANIMAL FIGVRES.
PART V.
CHAP. 167.
ALL animals after they are created, and have an animal life, the figure is
enlarged by nourishing motions, and sympathetical matter, these nourishing
motions are disgesting motions, carrying those parts which are received by the
senses, unto those parts that are created therein, building thereon, and
fitting therewith, strengthening by adding thickness, as well as enlarging by
extention, yet all that is received into the stomach, is not nourishing, the
reason is that the temperament of the matter, is not sympathetical, that is
agreeing not with the motions therein; For though it is not so antipathetical
to make an open war, which war is sickness, yet they do hinder, and obstruct,
like several factions, those natural motions which make health; but when the
natural motions and tempers of humors are quite opposite to the food that is
received, or the unnatural humors bred in the body by evil digestion, they
become mutanous by the quantity that is received, or that arises from
obstructions, whereupon there becomes a fierce and cruel fight of contrary
motions, and temperaments of matter, and whilst they are in the battle, we say
the body is sick, and if the natural motions be not strong enough, to beat that
evil, and dangerous matter out, or at least able to resist them so far, as to
guard themselves until the evil parts do spend themselves with their own fury,
or till the natural motions, and temperaments can have some assistance, as
cordials, or physic, it destroys the figure it fights with; but if the
natural motions be more powerful, either by their own strength, or by their
assistance, then the mutinous and rebellious humors, or the foreign enemy, as
surfets, and the like; but when they are beaten out, killed, or taken
prisoners, which is to be purged, corrected, or purified, which makes the
humors obedient, and peaceable.

Chap. 168. Of the four natural Humors of the Body, and those that are inbred.
AS there is natural Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, that is made by an entire
creation derived from their own proper principles.

As likewise a metamorphosed Fire, Air, Water, and Earth.

So there are humors in Animal bodies, and in other bodies; for all I can
perceive, and though the bodies cannot be metamorphosed, yet the humors may.

But in every Animal body there is natural Melancholy, Choler, Phlegm, and
blood; the natural blood is the vital vapor; the natural Phlegm is the radical
moisture; the natural Choler is the radical heat, the natural Melancholy is
the animal spirits, being the highest extract.

And if we do but observe those that be naturally melancholy, have the
soundest judgments, the clearest understanding, the subtilest observation, and
curiousest inventions, the most conceptions, the (...) fancies, and the
readiest wits; likewise the strongest passions, and most constant resolution.
but humors which are inbred as phlegm, choler, and Melancholy are made as
Metamorphosed fire, air, water, slime mud, and earth, as for example, the
chylus is the matter that is metamorphosed.

The dilating motions transform it from chylus to slime, from slime to water,
from water to blood, from blood to vapor, from vapor to comfortable and lively
heat, from comfortable and lively heat, to burning fevers and hectic fevers,
and the like.

Likewise the chylus by contracting motions, turns from chylus to slime.

If they be cold contractions, it turns from slime to phlegm, from phlegm to
heavy melancholy.

If hot contractions, it turns from chylus to temperat choler; from temperat
choler to choler adust, from choler adust, to melancholy; which from a slimy
humor to a muddy humor, from a muddy humor, to an earthy dry humor.

Some sort of hot contractions make it sharp, some salt, some bitter.

Likewise, several sorts of salts, sharpness, and bitterness, are wrought
with mixed motions, cold contractions make the humor, glassy, and stony.

Hot contractions make the humors tough, clammy glutenous and stony.

Hot dilatings make the humor oily, cold dilations watery.

Likewise, mixed motions makes mixed humors, and mixed tempers inclining to each
side, as the motions predominate.

Chap. 169 The five natural Maladies of the body.
EVery diseased figure is either pained, sick, dissy, numb, weak, or mad,
sometimes they meet all in one figure, these are distinct senses one from
another; as for pain, although every several part of the body has different
sense, yet they agree in the general, as to be all pain.

But sickness is quite different from pain, for it is another, The head ache is
different from the tooth ache, or stomach ache, and so every (...), be it never
so small, differs.
sense; for to have a pain in the stomach, is not to be sick in the stomach;
neither is any part of the body, but the stomach is liable to this sense; the
head may ache, and the heart may ache, heel, or any part of the body; but none
but the stomach can be sick; Indeed it is a different sense from pain. Thirdly,
a swimming, or diseases in the head, are different from both the other, it is a
third sort of sense, neither is any other part of the body subject to this
disease, but the head not properly, yet faintness, or weakness is a disease,
as it were tempered with the three former diseases, as to have pain, sick, and
dissy, or swimming, to be mixed or compounded into one disease, but it is so
mixed and compounded into all three, as neither is perfectly or distinctly felt;
so as it is no distinct sense As sauces may be equally mixed with several sorts
of things, as none can taste any one thing in it.
this disease is general to the whole body. The fifth is madness, this sense
is neither painful, nor sick, nor dissy, but light in the head, which is
different from dissy or swimming; but this disease infecteth with a distemper,
the five outward senses. The last is a numbnesse, and deadness of particular
parts; and sometimes of the whole body; but this disease is not only a
different sense, but an other nature, which is naturally unknown to the figure;
for the figure is not any ways sensible thereof; indeed it is of the nature of
sowning; for those that sown, the motions of the animal sense, and mind are
quite altered for a time, but then the animal motions return, that is,
rechanged to the proper motions again, so that those dead parts that cannot be
restored to the sense of touch, are as it were in a continual sown, for though
in a sown the exterior motion are proper to the sense of touch is changed, yet
the interior motions proper to the consistence, of that figure are not changed;
for if the interior consistent motions were changed, it would turn to (...), so
in dead palsies, if the interior consistent motions were changed, those parts
would corrupt as do dead carcases.

Numb palsies, ie different from dead palsies as fainting from sowning; for
fainting is in the next degree to a sown, so a numb palsy, is the next degree
to dead palsies.

Chap. 170. I will treat first of the motions that make sickness.
THe motions that cause sickness are different according as the sickness is, or
rather the sickness is according to the different motions; for some motions
are like the ebbing and flowing tides of the sea; For the humor furdles, or
folds upwards, as the flowing tide, which most commonly provokes Like the over
flowing of banks.
to cast, as overflowing the mouth of the stomach, but when the humor folds
backward, as the ebbing waters do, that provokes to the stool; for as falling
tides run from one place, they Ebbing from the mouth of the stomach as from the
river.
flows to another, so when the humor falls back from the mouth of the stomach,
it overflows the belly, but if the humor neither overflows the belly, nor the
mouth of the stomach, Like low marshy grounds.
it runs into the nerves, like as the water runs through the earth, and as the
water breaks forth by springs, so does the Humor by several (...) eumes.

Again, some sorts of sickness in the stomach, are made by such kind of
motions as water boiling in a pot, over the fire, for as ebbing and flowing
motions are running backward, and so forward, so boiling motions, are rising
upward, and falling downward, there is as much difference in these motions, as
betwixt vaughting and running; but these rising motions cause vapors to the
head, for the thin parts which rise highest, when their rising strength fails,
fall not hastily down again, but gather to a more solid body, as vapor from the
earth doht into clouds, these clouds cause the dimnesse and darkness of the
sight, obstructing the light that is brought by the optic nerves. Again, there
are other sorts of sickness in the stomach, caused by such motions, as are
like the rolling of a barrel, the humor turning about in the figure of a
barrel, which figure, or the like, is somewhat bigger in the middle, then the
two ends, this humor in the stomach is most commonly tough and thick, being
more united, and sometimes one end of this humor is as set upward, and the
other downward, and so turned as a barrel with the head upward, and sometimes
moved as a barrel the longest way on the ground, these motions cause neither
purging by vomits, nor stool, but thrust out into cold sweats; for though these
are not so strong dilating, or expulsing motions as over (...), which forces
to vomit, or to purge, yet it extenuates by thrusting weakly out into a faint
sweat, then there are other sorts of sickness, which are caused by such
motions, as if meat were turning about on a spit, for the center of the humor
removes not out of the place, although the circumference turns about; this is a
constant sickness, and the stomach has no ease, until the humor is taken out
of the stomach by some stronger motions; as you would take a spit from the
fire, or by (...) motions, to hold the humor from turning: so there are
millions of several motions, which makes several sicknesses in the stomach, for
though the stomach can be but sick, yet the sickness is not always after one
and the same manner.

Chap. 171. Of the motions which cause pains.
PAin is caused not only by irregular motions, but cross motions, or rather,
as I may say, jumbling motions; that is, motion beats upon motion, or, as I may
say, runs upon each other, thronging and justling each other; and several sorts
of pain in several parts of the body, are caused by different, cross, or
beating motions, but if they be dilating motions, they beat upon one another,
by shufling outward, like as foolish women do for place, tumbling upon each
other to get foremost; those painful motions turn to sores, and putrify,
because dilating motions make moisture, and being perturbed, make corruption,
but if they be such contracting motions which cause pains, they turn those
parts that are pained to be harder, then naturally those parts are, as the
stone dry liver, or brain, or the like; but if those pains be made of mixed
motions, as some beat inward, and some outward, and so run cross, they are hard
swelling that extends to the exterior parts, but will not break, as the King's
Evil, or Gouts that lie in the flesh, or Sciatica, and many the like; for
though the extenuating motions would burst out, yet the contracting motions
keep in, and being both equally strong, neither get the better, for the time
the pain is; and if the pain be amongst the sinews, it is caused either by
contracting motions or (...) motions, but not mixed, but as it were divided; for
if it be extenuating motions, (...) sinews are irregularly stretched too far;
if contracting or atracting motions, they irregularly draw, or pull, or gather
the sinews strings too short; if the pains be in the bones, they are only
cross motions, as if one should run one against the other, yet neither shuff
backward nor push forwards, being equally strong; if in the flesh they are
entangled motions, which make it incline toward black, as to seem purple, or
read, or black.

And if the pain be in the skin, they are pricking motions, as if a needle
should draw a thread in and out upon a cloth, or the like, but in every pained
part there is some difference in the manner of motions, although not in the
nature of the motions.

Chap. 172. Of swiming or dissiness in the head.
DIssiness and swimming in the head is made by several sorts of motions, of
such vapor as is condensed into wind, if wind be condensed, if not, it is
rarefied vapor turned into wind; and the agilness of the motions therein,
causes the force thereof, by an often repetition, giving no time for a
repulse: but howsoever wind is made, either by rarification, or condensation,
it is wind most commonly, which causes that we call a swimming and dissiness
in the head; I think it is rar fied vapor, because it is so easily dispersed.
for this condensed or rarefied vapor, (which you will) when it is expulsed,
flies violently about, carrying or driving whatsoever is bearable, loose or
moveable along, or about with it, according to the strength thereof; and if
this wind be in those veins which incompass and run through the brain, it
carries the blood therein, with such an extraordinary and swift motion about
the head, or brain, as it carries the senses, as it were, along with it, which
makes the diseased think the brain turned round in the head, when it is only
the vapor, that wheels round therein, or about; but the lasting strength
wasting by the violent swiftness, brings but a short trouble to the diseased,
and seldom or never causes a ruin, unless there be some vein broken by the
violence thereof; but if it be a windy vapor, in the (...) and larger parts of
the head, it sometimes will gather like a ball, or like that we (...) a
spinning top, which spins about in the brain, whilst it has strength, and
when the strength fails, the spinning motion is done, and the vapor disperseth,
so the dissiness cease; at other times those vapors will move like a
whirlwinde, moving ascendingly, in lesser and lesser circles, until it brings a
circle to a point in the shape of a pyramid; and when the strength abates, or
that it breaks it self against more solid matter, the vapor disperses and so
expulses, but this sort of motions is so violent, as it causes the diseased to
fall, but soon to recover, for what is supernaturally violent cannot last long.

Chap. 173. Where the brain turns round, or not in the head.
ALthough thin vapor may get betwixt the skull and the brain, and likewise
slimy (...); yet I imagine not that the brain is loose from the skull, so as to
flap, flash, or to strike against the sides of the skull, when the head is
moved, or to turn round, although it is a common phrase, to say, my brain turns
round in my head, when they are dissie; but imagine it is not in the brain that
turns round, but the vapor or the humor therein; it is true, the brain turns
round, when the whole body turns round, but so as it turns round with the head,
as one part, not in the head as a part by it self; and the reason that the
dissiness is cured by turning the contrary way, is, that the sensitive motions
therein are turned toward their moderate, natural, and accustomed manner of
moving; for the violence of turning round, forces the sensitive motions, as the
wind does the air, or water, driving all one way, as before it, or rather like
The stronger motions forces the weaker to their ways.
a scrue, or a wheel that winds up those motions, as thread upon a spindle,
and so unwinds the contrary way.

Chap. 174. Of the sound or noise in the head.
WHen there is a thin vapor got into the head, as betwixt the skull and the
brain, and runs about in Circular lines as a string about a wheel, it makes a
humming noise, as a turning wheel does, and the more by reason the head as well
as the vaporous lines is spherical, and though the brain may stick close to the
scull, yet not so close but a thin vapor may get betwixt; but if the vapor be
gathered into little hollow balls like cymbals, and runs about the head, it
causes a noise like those cymbals, as a tickling or gingling noise.

But if the vapor in the head has intermitting motions, the sound is like
musical instruments, for the stops like notes, make the divisions according to
the several motions in the head, is the sound made therein, although the ear is
stopped without.

Chap. 175. Of Weakness.
SOwning is caused by the obstruction of the spirits, or too great evacuations,
or when any thing suppresses, or lays siege to the heart, or head, they being
the magazine of the life of the body, wherein the least disorder is like fire
to gunpowder: Weakness is caused by a too much relaxing of the sinews, and
small fibers of the body, which are like laths to an house, and flesh like the
mortar laid thereon. The bones like the strong timber rafters and beams
therein, which when the mortar is worn off, the laths are apt to loosen; so
when the body is lean, the flesh is wasted, the sinews are apt to slacken.

Again, some are weak, by reason the sinews are boiled too tender, as too much
toward a jelly, which the body will be after moist extenuating diseases, as
after extraordinary sweatings, small pox, measels, or the like, or in
hydropical diseases.

Weakness is in a degree to death, as being toward a final or general
expulsion of the figure.

Chap. 176. Of numb and dead palsies.
A Dead palsy is not only made by mis-tempered matter, and disordered
motions, but by unnatural motions, as improper to the nature of that kind of
figure, working, or mis-working most commonly upon the exterior parts, drawing
up or shutting close those passages that should be open, working by contrary
motions, from the nature of the figure, which causes insensibility, but as long
as the vital parts be untouched, which are the stewards, and trustees, to the
life of the body, which are to dispose, discharge, and direct, to take in and
lay out, for the subsistence of the body (as I may say) as long as these are
untouched, the life of the body may subsist, although the other particular
parts be as we say dead, or lost to the natural use of the body. A numb palsy
is of the same nature, but not of the same degree; as for comparison, a dead
palsy is, as if a door, for common and necessary passage, should be close shut
and locked, or nailed up; and a numb palsy is as if the door or doors should
be half open, and according as it is open, or shut, the numb palsy is more or
less, but both dead; and numb palsies are occasioned by some unnatural
contractions, for if it were by some unnatural expulsions, the parts infected
would rot, and fall from the other parts, as (...), which certainly are caused
by such kind of unnatural expulsions, as dead palsies are of unnatural
contractions; thus we find by experience, that they are unnatural
contractions, that cause dead palsies, because they do not rot.

Wherefore in these diseases there must be applied opening medicines that work
dilatively, and if they be caused from a cold contraction, then hot dilating
medicines must be applied, but if they proceed from hot contractions, the cold
dilating medicines must be applied; but the difficulty and skill will be to
find whether they proceed from cold, or heat, although most commonly, all
physicians do apply in these diseases, very hot and dry medicines, which are
contracting, which medicines are quite contrary to the nature of the diseases,
which makes them cure so few, but the surest way is to apply dilating
medicines, whether hot or cold.

Chap. 177. Of that we call a sleepy numbness.
A Sleepy numbness is also caused by obstruction or stoppages; as for example,
if any over-burthensome weight lies upon the arm, or hand, or the like, it will
become numb, which is vulgarly called sleepy; the reason is, that pressing too
hard upon those parts, we stop the pores, which by touch is received; for if
the pores be close shut, touch cannot enter, no more then if the eye be shut an
outward object can enter, or stopping the ears, or nose, a sound, or scent can
enter; as we may find by experience; for if any part is bound too hard, it
strait becomes numb, likewise a violent blow; or when any part is tied too
hard, that part becomes numb, the reason is, by striking or thrusting back the
blood; for the blood is like a running company, which when they are forcibly
beaten back, on those companies that are thrusting forward, unite by
contraction into so firm a body, that no particular part can stir; which solid
and thick body stops the pores of the (...), and the running motions in the
veins; but also as we give liberty by uniting, or unbinding, or by taking off
weight, or by gently rubbing, to open the pores, and disperse the blood, it is
cured.

Likewise the sleepy numbness may proceed from a superfluity of vapor, which
flying to the pores for vent may stop the passage, by too great a concourse,
being more vapor then sudden vent; but any alteration of motion cures it, by
dispersing the vapor, more thin and evenly.

Chap. 178. Of the head feeling numb.
WHen the skins which wrap up the brain, as the pia matter, and dia matter, are
contracted by an inward cold, or an outward cold taken in at the nose, ears,
mouth, or pores of the skin, they shrivel, or are drawn in as a handkerchief,
or the like; when we carry some bulk within it, and when those skins are drawn
into a straiter compass, then the nature is, it presses upon the brain, as
being too strait, wherein the brain cannot freely move.

Besides, the veins and little small strings that run about the brain, being
contracted with cold, the blood in those veins cannot so freely run, and those
strings being shrunk, make the brain feel as if it were so hard bound, as to be
numb; but this does rather afright the life of the diseased, then destroy it;
for a little warmth by rubbing the head, or a hot cloth laid on the head, or
some warm spoon-meat cures it.

Also numbness may proceed from too much blood in the veins, or too much matter
in the nerves, for being too full causes a stopping, for want of space or room
to move naturally in; but this numbness is not so easily cured, especially when
the oppressions lie in the nerves, for opening a vein gives liberty to the
blood; but I know not how one should so easily open a nerve, neither is the
matter within so liquid, as suddenly to run out; but this numbness is rather of
the nature of a dead numbness, then a sleepy numbness.

Chap. 179. The manner of motion, or disorder in madness.
THe motions that make that extravagancy we call madness, is as a carver, or
painter, ingraver, printer, or the like, should place the figures they work,
the wrong end upwards; or as if Mathematicians should draw a platform, and
should make a square where a circle should be, or should put equal weights in
uneven scales, or set false numbers, or make false measure; or as a painter,
printer, carver, or graver, should paint, print, carve, or grave, a Coaches
head to a Lions body, or if a painter should draw feathers, on beasts, and hair
on birds, or the like; indeed a sensitive madness, is like dreams in sleep,
only the sensitive motions work in sleep as I have As on the optics, or as on
the drum of the ear, the pia matter, or the skin for touch and taste.
described before, on the inside of the sensitive doors; and when awake on the
outside; and in sleep be wrought, without a pattern; and awake by a pattern
srom the real figure, which they present; and the differences in madness are,
that they work be wrought, without the real subjects, on the outside of the
sensitive door, as if awake, although there are no objects to take pattern
from, as we may perceive by them that are distempered, that they see such
objects that are not present, or such as never was, or can be; and so the like
for sounds, tastes, touch, and smelling, that is, the sensitive motions, paints,
prints, carves, graves, or the like; as on the outside of the optic nerve,
without a real pattern; and when the sense As to see, hear, taste, touch,
smell, that which is not present, or perhaps not in nature.
works regular, they never draw on the outside without a pattern, but on the
inside, as in sleep, and the like for all the other senses: But the motions of
the rational madness are, when they move violently, and irregularly, if the
motions be only violent, then they fall into violent passions; as anger, fear,
malice, or loving, hating, grieving, dispraises, and resolute intentions; if
their motions be irregular, then they have strange conceptions, wild fancies,
mixed memories, inconstant and various opinions; if their motions be violent and
irregular, they have strong and strange imaginations, high despaires, obstinate
and dangerous resolutions; if the sensitive and rational innate matter,
sympathy in violent irregularity, then they will violently talk, laugh, sing,
weep, and sigh, without reason why, or wherefore; but mistake me not, for when
I say, too violent, strong, swift, weak, slow, it is irregular, as to the
temper or nature of the figure, but not as to its own nature; as for example, a
clock may go too swift as to the distance of the hour, and yet strike even
every nick; and the pulse may be too swift for the natural temper, and yet keep
even time: a musician may play too fast for a solemn tune, and too slow for a
light air, and yet play right to the notes; as for the irregularity, some
motions may be too swift, others too slow, for other assistant motions, as for
example an army is to march in a body, and some should go, or ride half a day,
or a days journey before the rest, and some should lag, and come slowly
behind, or that some should go one way, and some another, or as two should
carry a burden, and the hindemost should go too fast for the former, and so
tumble or throw down, or as horses in a Coach, the one runs away, and forces
the other to follow, as for disorder, it is somewhat otherwise, as tumults and
uproars, as some doing that which they ought not to do, or belong not to them,
or instead of garding a house pull it down, or like those that will make a fire
in the midst of the house on a wooden floor, and not in the Chimnie; then
there is a disorder in placing, and matching of parts, and alterations of
motions, quite different, from the nature of the figure, for some sort of
madness is made by such different motions, as death from that which we vulgarly
call life, that is, the motions, are as different, as several kinds of
figures; for in this kind of madness, they no more know in their fits, or
remember out of their fits, what they did, or said, or was done to them in
their fits, then if they had been dead; just as in a sound, they know not what
was done to restore them, yet there is not a cessation of motions; neither in
the sensitive, nor in the rational, but an alteration of motion, it is true,
there is for a time a cessation of such sorts of motion, as belong to the
natural health of the figure, but not to the life.

Chap. 180. Of madness in the body and mind.
THere are two sorts different in madness, the one is irregular motion,
amongst the rational innated matter, the other amongst the sensitive innated
matter, as misplacing, ill mixing, or mismixing, or mistempering, or
distempering, false carving, wrong printing off, and on the dull part of
matter, as in fevers, or the like diseases, where the distempered matter is
misplaced, by which improper motions, alters the natural motions, which makes
the natural temper, and causes, and unnatural temper by improper motions;
working upon every particular sense, irregularly, or rather improperly, and
mixtly, which makes extravagancies both in each particular senses, and in the
generality, this madness proceeds from the sensitive, and not from the
rational innated matter; for the rational part will be in order, and describe
distinctly what extravagant the sense presents to them; but this madness of
the body is often times mistaken, and thought to be the distemper of the mind,
because the sick persons describe those extravagancies by relation, yet oftimes
the one causes the other, but not always; for many times the mind will be
disordered when the body is sound, and healthful, and many times the body will
be distempered, when the mind is regular and free; but the madness of the
body, only continues to the height of the disease, and as the disease abates,
the extravagancies vades, and by health vanishes away, or rather is rubbed, or
worn out, by the Regular, and proper natural motions belonging to that figure,
or body, but the madness in the mind proceeds from irregular motions, amongst
the rational innated matter, as when they neither keep time, nor measure, not
only in making Figures of innated matter.
figures, but in moving those figures, they make this distemper, or rather that
disorder, is altogether in the moving matter, when the other distemper is in
disordering the moved matter, for the sensitive innate matter may work
regularly, according to the nature and strength, but not according to the
temper, or degree of the dull matter, nor according to the nature, and property
of the kind, or sort of figure; but when the sensitive, and the rational joins
in conjugal disorder the mind is ravening as we say, and the body weak.

Chap. 181. Madness is not always about the head.
Madness belongs not only to the head, as that only the eye, ear, nose, and
mouth, sees, hears, smells, and tastes extravagantly; but every other part of the
body that is sensible In mad fits.
of touch; for extravagant touch, is as much as extravavant sight, and the
like; for touch of the breast, or any other part of the body, is a sense, as
much as the eye in the head; thus the body, or senses will be mad as well as
the mind, as I have described in former chapters.

Likewise for the madness in the mind, it is not always bound in the head;
for where there are extravagant passions in the heart, the mind is as mad, as
when there are extravagant imaginations, in the head; for the rational matter,
that which we call the soul, or mind is as much, and has as much recourse to
the heart, as to the head, and so to the other parts of the body, for any thing
I can perceive.

But that matter I call the rational and sensitive spirits, If I mistake not.
which others call the animal, and vital spirits; perchance fools may think me
extravagant for giving the matter other names; but I was forced to take these
names, because they were more significant to the sense of my discourse;
besides, perchance they may think, when I speak of rational and sensitive
spirits, that they are hobgoblins, ghosts, or visions, such as nurses fright
their children with, or superstitions, or as the wiser sort does to make
credulous fools believe to keep them in awe, knowing they are apt to disorders.

Chap. 182. Music may cure mad folks.
THere is great reason why Music should cure madness; for this sort of
madness is no other but the spirits that are in the brain and heart put out of
their natural motion, and the spirits having a natural sympathy with Music,
may be composed into their right order; but it must be such Music, as the
number of the notes must go in such order as the natural motion of the brain,
though every brain has not one and the same motion, but are set like notes to
several tunes: wherefore if it were possible, to set notes to the natural
motion of the heart, or that brain that is distempered, it might be perfectly
cured, but as some notes do compose the brain by a sympathy to the natural
motion, so others do make a discord or antipathy, and discompose it, putting
the natural motions out of tune.

Thus much for the sensitive Maladies.

Chap. 183. Of the fundamental diseases, first of fevours.
THere are many several sorts or manners of fevors; but I will only treat of
the fundamental fevours, which are three, from which three all other fevors are
partly derived; the first is a malignant fevor, the second the hective fevor;
and the third the ordinary burning fevours; the first is catching, and often
deadly, the second is never catching, but always deadly; the third is neither
catching, and seldom deadly; the first proceeds from violent disordered
motions, and distempered matter, and humor. Which is corrupt humors.


The second from swift motions, which distemper and make waste of the matter,
which matter, I mean the substance of the body.

The third is too violent motions on well tempered As a sound body.
matter.

And these three sorts of fevours are often mixed, as it were a part of all mixed
into one; but a high malignant fevor, is a sudden usurpation; for the
disordered motions joined with a mistempered matter, which is corrupt humors,
surprise the body, and destroy the life therein, as we shall see in great
plagues, the body is well, sick, and dead in a moment; these or the like
diseases are caused after three manner of ways, as being taken from outward
infection, or bred by an evil habit in the body, or by taking some disagreeing
matter therein, which causes a war of sickness; for upon the Surfets, or
unholsom meats.
disorder which the disagreeing matter makes, the natural motions belonging to
the body grow factious, and like a common rout arise in an uproar, which
strives only to do mischief, stopping some passages that should be kept open,
and opening some passages that should be kept shut, hindering all regular
motions, from working after that natural manner, forcing The stronger motions
over power the the weaker
those they can over power, to turn rebels to the life of the body.

For it is against the nature of the innated matter to be idle, wherefore it
works rather irregularly then not work at all, but as long as a body lies sick,
the power is divided, one part of the innated matter working irregularly, the
other according to the natural constitution, which by the regularity, they
strive to maintain the chief forts of life which are the vital parts,
especially the heart, and disordered motions striving to take, or pull them
down, making their strongest assaults thereon; for the disordered innated
matter makes outworks of corrupted matter, stopping as many passages as their
power will give leave, so striving either to starve the vital parts, or to
oppress them with corruption, or to burn them by their unnatural heat they
make in the body, or to drown them with watrish humor which is caused by the
distemper of ill disgestions, and obstructions; the regular innated matter,
strives to break down those works, and to cast, and expel that filth out of the
body, Some days the body (...) better then others, so in an hour or half an
hour.
and according as each party gets the better, the body is better or worse, and
according as the siege continues, the body is sick, and according as the
victory is lost or won, is life or death.

Chap. 185. Of the infections of animals, Vegetables, and elements.
Such motions as corrupt animal bodies, corrupt vegetable bodies, and as
corrupt and malignant air is infectious to animals, so likewise to vegetables,
and as malignant diseases are catching and infectious, to those that comes near
them, so oftentimes vegetables are infectious to animals, as herbs and fruits,
which cause some years such dangerous sickness and killing diseases to those
that eat thereof; likewise those bodies that are infected do infect sound, and
nourishing food, when once it is eaten, causes that which is good also
malignant when once in the body.

Chap. 186. Of burning fevros.
ALL burning fevours for the most part, are produced from the vital spirits, as
when they move irregularly, they corrupt the natural humors which cause a
distemper of heat in the body moving toward expulsions, which are dilation;
and when they move with supernatural quickness after an extenuating manner,
they inflame the body in either causes, emptying the body, and quenching the
fire is to be put in execution, for the emptier the body is, the less humors
there will be. Ltkewise less motion, as having less matter, for in matter
motion lives, likewise the less cumbustible matter there is, the sooner the
unnatural fire will be quenched, unless that the fire be in the arteries, then
it is like a colepit set on fire, wherein there is no quenching it, unless you
drown the coals, so when the unnatural heat is in the arteries, you must drown
the life of the body, like the colein the pit before you can quench the fire;
but a (...) may be eased, and somewhat prolonged with cooling brothes, and
quenching julips, for though they cannot enter the arteries, yet they may keep
the outward parts cold and moist, which may cast cold damps quite through the
body, but in this case all evacuations are dangerous, for the more empty the
body is of humor, the sooner the body is consumed, for the humors serve as
oil, and though they flame, yet they keep in the light of life; in all other
fevours evacuations of all sorts are good, for if it be some melancholy pitch
humors that are set on fire in the body, or some oily choleric humors, it
is but quenching it with cooling julips, without any hurt to the body, and if
it be a brandy blood set on fire, it is but drawing it forth by broaching some
veins, and the body will be saved from the destruction.

Chap. 187. The remedies of Malignant Diseases.
IN malignant diseases expelling medicines are best, which expelling medicines
are not hot, and dry medicines, for all As hot and dry Cordials.
drugs that are naturally dry, have a contracting quality which is an utter
enemy in this disease; for they must be dilating medicines, and all dilating
medicines have a fluid faculty working after the nature of a flowing tide,
which is thrusting, or streaming outward, as to the circumference, and the
operations of drying medicines, are like the ebbing tide that draws backward or
inward, as to it self; but as I said before, that all hot and dry medicines
have a contracting quality, which contractions draw or gather up the malignity,
as in a bundle or heap together, and if it be a fiery contraction, it sets it
on a fire, which burns out the life of the body; for fire makes no
distinguishment of good or bad, but destroys all it can in compass, so as it
will not only burn up the superfluities, or corruptions, but suck or drink up
the radical moisture, or charcoales, the vital parts, and consumes the animal
life. Wherefore dilating medicines, must be applied in these diseases, but not
strong expulsives medicine, by reason the malignity is so intermixed, or spread
in the, body that striving with a strong force to cast forth the malignity they
should cast forth the nourishing and consistent matter, for the malignity, and
corrupt humors being more strong, having a greater party, can resist with more
strength the force of expulsion then the nourishing, consistant part can being
weak, so that the expulsions give strength to the malignity, or corrupt
humors, by taking away the pure, and well tempered matter; but leting blood in
these diseases (...) be excellent good, for bleeding is rather of the nature of
sweating, then of purging; besides, it will draw the malignity more from the
vital parts into the veins, for the veins having a natural quality or faculty
to draw, and to suck into them, will draw, and suck in that which does most
abound, so as it is but still letting blood as the malignity is As to draw
every day an ounce, or two as long as the violence of the discase lasts.
drawn in, for it is better to let out the blood, then endanger the vital
parts, by keeping it in, for if most of the blood should be let out there will
fresh blood increase in a short time, but if the vital parts be never so little
corrupted, or putrified or wasted, we cannot heal or make up those parts again.

Chap. 134. Diseases caused by conceit, or cured.
AS for the Producing diseases by conceit, is thus; the vital spirits which are
the motions of life, have an absolute power over the body, as working every
part thereof, and therein, so the animal spirits which are the motions of the
mind create imaginations, and conceptions, and the animal spirits and the vital
spirits being as man and wife, the animal as the husband, the vital spirits as
the wife, whereupon the animal spirits many times beget that desease it figures
which is an imagination, and the vital spirits brings that child forth, being
like the figure the animal spirits made, that is, the vital spirits often times
work such motions as makes such diseases, wherefore the animal spirits work
those motions into imaginations; and to prove it, those that conceit they shall
have the small pox, measels, pleague, or the like, most commonly they fall sick
of that disease, although they come not near the infection; and to prove the
animal spirits which is the mind, works the same motions by an imagination as
the disease is, that those which conceit a disease, do not fall sick of any
other disease but the same they imagine, and the reason why these malignant
diseases are produced oftener by imaginations then other diseases, is, that
those diseases are dangerous, or that they are apt to deform which makes a
fearful conception or imagination, to work more strongly; for did the
imiginations work as strong to other diseases as to these, they would produce
the same effects; As for those which are cured by conceit, is when I mean
there interior strength.
the motion of the animal spirits works stronger then the vital spirits, which
causes the vital spirits to altar those motions that made such diseases; but
those effects are produced but seldom, by reason that the animal spirits seldom
work so strong imaginations, for it requires a double, or treble strength to
resist or alter the force another way, which must be to cure a disease after
this manner, then to join and assist, as in the producing a disease; for when
the imagination produces a disease, the vital spirits join with the animal,
but when the disease is cured by imagination, the animal spirits takes the
animals from their work; but a great fright, or a sudden joy is a good remedy
in some diseases, by reason those passionate motions are strong, and violent,
yet they can cure only loose diseases, not such diseases as are rooted, or
fixed, for then the vital spirits are not to be altered by the animal.

Chap. 188. Of the expelling malignity to the outward parts of the body.
THe reason why malignant diseases, as the plague, or purples, or small pox,
measels, or the like; there break forth spots, swelling scabs, or whelks, is by
the power of expelling motion; But the reason why it sticks in the flesh, and
not quite out, is, because the irregular motions that maintain the health and
strength of the body, are opposed by disorderly motions, which makes corrupted
matter, that makes disordered motions; for though there can be no corrupted
matter, but what is caused from disordered motion, yet when the humors of the
body are once corrupted, the motions are more violent; again, superabundant
humors, cause disordered motions; for as there is too much humor, obstructing
the body therewith, so there is too much motion, to work regularly therein, and
being against the natural constitution to have so much humor, and motion, it
produces violent sickness, working to the destruction, and not to the
maintenance of the body; but the regular motions, which are digestive motions,
which unites, strengthens, and defends the vital parts, by atracting good
(...), by retaining the useful parts; by concocting it into a sollid substance,
by expelling of superfluieties, or malignancy out of the body, after a
methodical manner, and according as the strength of expelling motions are, so
is the malignity, cast forth, for if the repelling motions be stronger then the
expelling motion, the malignant presses so hard upon the vital parts, as it
smothers the life therein, or burns up the materials thereof: Again, the
expelling motions may be so weak, as they cannot thrust out the malignity so
far as the circumference of the body which is the skin, or if so far, yet not
to stay there so long, as to evapor it out, and then the malignity falls back
with a greater violence; for what is forced, and resists, when once it has
liberty, or gets power, it becomes more violent, by how much more it were
forced; but that malignity that does evaporate forth, does insensibly enter
into the next body it meets; entering through the nostrils, mouth, or pores of
the flesh; and thus many times, from animal to animal until there is a general
infection, which is a general disorder, for the malignity that enters in by
infection, is like a foraign enemy, which enters into a peaceable country,
which not only disorders it, but makes havoc and waste, and many times
utterly destroys it, but when a malignant disease is bred in the body, it is
like a civil war, where uproars are raised, and outrages are done, by inbred
corrupt humors; but when malignant or other diseases are caused by surfeits, it
is like a deluge of fire or water, that either drowns, or burns up the the
kingdom of the body; where sometimes it is saved by assistant As by letting
blood, or the like.
medicines, and sometimes it is so furious, as nothing can help it.

Chap. 189. Of Sweating diseases.
ALL sweating diseases are caused by such kind of extenuating motions, as melt
metal, and not by such kind of extenuating motions as evaporate water, for the
evaporations of the watery part of the body breath forth in insensible
transpirations, as breathing through the pores like a thin air; but sweat runs
through the pores like liquid oar through gutters of earth: but sweats are good
or bad for the body, according to the matter or humors that are melted out, as
for example; I will compare the humors of the body to several metals, as Iron,
Lead, Tin, Copper, Silver and Gold; Iron is melancholy dust; Lead is cold, and
dry or cold, and moist melancholy; Tin is phlegm; Copper is choler; Silver is
the radical humor; and God is the vital spirits: These humors must be
proportionably tempered to make a healthful body; there must not be too much
quantity of Lead, Tin, or Copper, for the Silver or Gold, but unless there be
some, they will not work; like as coin, it cannot be wrought, or formed without
some allay, and if the allay be too much, it abases the coin.

Likewise there must be so much heat in the body only as to compound those
humors, not to melt them out by sweats unless they superabound; and then
Physicians must only have a care to melt out that humor that superabounds; for
if the radical humor should be melted, or the vital spirits spent, it destroys
the body by wasting the life.

But in some cases sweating is very beneficial to the body, as in great colds,
which have knit up the pores or passages of the body, or in great surfeits, or
in malignant diseases, which help to expel the poisonous humor, or corrupted
humors in the body, or melt the Icy humors congealed by cold; but those sweats
that are beneficial, and wholesome for the body, the body will be much
stronger, and agiler, and the spirits quicker, and livelier,; but those sweats
that are pernicious to the body, the body will be faint and weak, after they
have sweat; but in these diseases, a physician must be very careful, when he
puts a patient in a sweat, as to give such medicines as will work upon that
humor, he would have sweat forth, but in sweating diseases, as when the body
sweats too violently, like as in great and dangerous fluxes, which are not to
be stayed by ordinary means, for although in these diseases, there must be used
contracting medicines, yet some sweats require hot contracting medicines,
others cold contracting medicines, and those medicines that are applied, must
be applied gently, and by degrees, lest by a sudden contraction they should
stop the pores of the body too much, which are the doors to let out the smoke
in the body, as well as the sweat of the body, or by too hasty contractions
those passages should be shut, that should be kept open, or those to be kept
opened that should be shut; but physicians will guess by the patient, what
humor they sweat forth; for cold sweats are from melancholy, clammy sweats from
thick phlegm; hot burning sweat from choler; cold faint sweats proceed from the
radical humor; hot faint sweats from the vital spirits.

Chap. 190. Of Surfeits.
SUrfeits are superfluities; as too much heat, or too much cold, or when there
is taken into the body too great a quantity of meat, or drink, or the like.
Likewise when the nature of the meat is disagreeing to the nature of the body;
where one scruple will be too much, as being ill, which will give a surfeit,
for surfeits do not only oppress by the superfluous quantities of matter, but
disturb by the superfluous motions, the disagreeing matter causing more motion,
then naturally belonges to a healthful body: Besides, like a company of rude
and unruly strangers disturbs and hinders the irregular motions, altering the
natural constitutions, and uniformity of the body; and many times ruins the
body, unless an assistant motion in medicinable matter is brought to help, to
expel the superfluous, or that the natural expulsive motions in the body, are
strong enough, to throw out that ill matter, either by vomit, or stool, or
other evacuation; but many times the superfluities become so strong, not only
by their own ill nature, or great quantity, but by making a faction; And so
begetting a party amongst the natural motions, which makes such a general
disorder, that though the natural digestive motion, and the natural expulsive
motion join with the like assistant motions taken in medicines, yet the body
shall be ruinated, and life cast out, by that matter, and these motions that
are their enemies therein.

Chap. 191. Of Consumptions.
ALL Consumptions are caused by an unnatural expulsion, caused by mistempered
matter, or mistempered matter caused by unnatural motions, such as work not to
the subsistence or health of the body; which after they have corrupted the Yet
it is first caused by other distempered motions, before they come to be
distempered expulsions.
matter, they turn to expulsions, throwing all out of the body; but if they be
only exterior expulsions, they only untile the house, that is, they do
unflesh the body; but if they be interior expulsions, they do not only
unflesh the body, but rot some part in the body; and if the unnatural
expulsions be amongst the vital parts, which are the foundations of the life of
the body, the whole fabric of the body falls without redemption, and the
materials go to the building of other figures.

But if they are hot expulsions, caused from a thin, sharp, salt humor, there
must be applied cold contracting medicines; and if they be cold expulsions,
there must be apylied hot contracting medicines.

All cold expulsions are, when the parts are tender, weak There are hot
expulsions, and cold expulsions, and hot contractions, and cold contractions.
and raw, and undigested; and hot expulsions are, when the parts are burnt, or
ulcerated; for all hot expulsions work upon the parts of the body, as fire on
wood when they are burning expulsions, or else like as fire does on metal,
melting them into a liquid substance; and cold expulsions work upon the parts,
as when clouds beat down into showers of rain, or slakes of snow, breaking or
extenuating those clouds into small parts, so that the dropsical humor that
arises from hot consumptions, are only liquid like melted metal; and the
dropsical humor that arises from cold consumptions, is as a watery flood: but
as I said, in all consumptions the remedies must be contractive, or at least
retentive; because the nature of all consumptions are expulsive, but yet all or
the most part of physicians, finding their patients to be lean and dry, give
all dilative medicines, as if the parts were only gathered into a less
compass; but the truth is, when so much of the natural bulk of the body is
lessened, so much of the body is wasted: I will not say but these unnatural
expulsions might proceed from unnatural contractions, like as when any thing is
made so dry as it moulders into dust, but when it comes to that degree, it
expulses; so whenever the body is in a consumption, the motions therein are
expulsive: I do not mean by siege or vomit, although they will spit much, which
is a kind of vomiting, but they waste by insensible inspirations; but all
purging medicines are an enemy to this disease, unless they be very gentle; for
though purging medicines do not expulse, after the nature of consumptive
expulsions, yet if they be strong, they may in some kind assist the
consumptive expulsions, neither is much leting blood good in these diseases;
yet a little refreshes, and tempers the body; for in these diseases physicians
must do as Chirurgions when they cure wounds, they first cleanse the sore or
wounds, taking away the putrified matter gently with a probe, and then lay a
healing plaster, so Physicians must gently purge and bleed the patient, and
then give them strengthening, and nourishing remedies: again many Physicians
have a rule, that when they perceive their patient to be exteriorly dry, that
is, outwardly dry, they think them hot; but it does not follow that all drouth
proceeds from heat; for there are cold drouths as well as hot, As witness the
frost and ice.
so that a Physician must warily observe the patients drouth, whether it
proceeds from cold or heat, or whether the drouth proceeds for want of a
sufficient quantity of matter, for the body to feed upon, or that the matter,
which properly should be porous and spungy, is contracted into an unnatural
solidity, and though the interior nature of drought is made by contraction, yet
the exterior motions may be expulsive; as for example, if any thing is dried to
that degree as to fall into dust, although the interior be contracting, that
caused it to be so dry, yet the exterior motions are expulsive, that causes it
to fall into parts; but the drouth of consumptions does proceed most commonly
from a scarcity of nourishing matter that should feed each part of the body,
for the principal and consistent parts being distempered, cannot digest so
much as will feed the hungry members thereof; but as I have said before, that
all consumptions are wrought by expulsive motions, for what is contracted, is
not consumed, nor does consume until it expulses, but those bodies that are
lean or dry by contractions, are not in consumptions, for nothing is wasted,
only the dimensions, and extentions of the body are drawn into a lesser,
compass; Thus, as I have said, Physicians, although they mistake not the
diseases, yet they may easily mistake the manner of the diseases, for one and
the same kind of diseases may move after diverse manners in several bodies, and
in one and the same body.

Chap. 192. Of dropsies.
MOst dropsies are something of the nature of consumptions, as being in the way
to consumptive expulsions, for they dilate after that manner, as the other
expulses, especially if they are dropsies, which proceed from corrupt parts,
and then they turn to consumptive expulsions, and the only difference in most
dropsies, and consumptions, is, that dropsies as long as that disease lasts,
the motions in the body are most dilating, which is in a degree to expulsion,
and when it comes to a consumption they are all expulsions, but as the motions
differ, so the diseases differ, for there are several sorts of dilations, The
like of other kind of motions.
and several sorts of expulsions, nay some are different in the manner of
working, as if they were of other kinds of motions, but some dropsies proceed
from hot dilations, others from cold dilations, and some proceed from too many
digestive motions, that is, when there are too many or too strong disgestive
motions in the body; for the natural temper of the body disgests so fast, as
makes more nourishment, then the several parts can feed with temperance, which
makes the reigns, and the rest of the sucking parts glutinous, or else those
many disgesting motions work too curious, for by reason they cannot be idle,
they work the nourishing matter too fine, or too thin, for proper uses; as if
flower should be so often bolted, that it could not work into a lump, or batch
for bread; or like as any thing should be wrought upon so much, as to become
liquid, as into oil or water.

Other dropsies proceed from the weakness of disgestion, those motions being
not strong, or sufficient to work all that is brought into the stomach;
whereupon that superfluous matter corrupts with distempered motions, and when
it comes to be corrupted, it either dilates, or expulses, if it only dilates,
it turns to water, if expulsive, it casts forth, either by vomit or stool, or
else lies to corrupt the principal parts in the body, which when they are
joined together, expulses life by their treacherous usurpation.

Other dropsies are caused by too weak contracting motions, causing that to be
tender that should be solid, or those parts loose that should be firm, as not
contracting hard enough. As first contracting into Chylus, then into blood,
then harder, for flesh, and harder for nerves and bones; the contractions
growing weaker and weaker, until they become of no strength, and then they turn
to dilations or expulsions; but pray mistake me not, for though one and the
same innate matter may grow weaker, as to abate of such or such a kind of
motion, so increases stronger and stronger, according to the quantity, as to
other motions. But as I said before, that innated matter in such diseased
bodies, turns from contracting to dilating, turning by degrees from one to
another, and then the dilations work more and more, extending more and more in
such circular motions as produce water; for when it comes to such a degree of
extention, it is become from being solid to be less hard, from being less
hard, to be soft, from soft to be liquid, from liquid fluid, and when it comes
to such a degree of a fluid extention, it turns wet, and when it is soft,
liquid, fluid, and wet it is turned to that we call water; for oil, though it
be soft, liquid, and fluid, yet it is not absolute wet, it is rather moist then
wet: for there is a difference between moist and wet, or glibby and wet, or
glibby and moist, so that oil is a glibby and moist body, rather then a soaking
wet body; but when this watery extenuation extenuates beyond the degree of
water, they turn to vapor, which causes the diseased to be puffed or blown like
a bladder, rather then swelled out, as we shall perceive that a little time
before the patients fall into a consumption, they will be so puffed out, as their
flesh will be like a fire-bal, the next degree they fall into a fiery
extenuation; For when the humor extenuates beyond vapor, which is a kind of
an air, then it becomes hot like fire, which is a hective fevour, and when the
humor has extenuated to the farthest degree, it expulses, and so pulls See in
the chap of extenuations of water.
down and throws out the life of the diseased; but in the hidropical diseases,
there must first be applied attractive medicines to draw out the watery
overflows, by issues, cupping-glasses, or the like, then there must be applied
expulsive medicines as purgings, and bleeding, and sweatings, yet they must be
gently applied, for fear of weakening the body by drawing out the humor too
suddenly, then there must be applied contracting medicines to draw into an
united substance, as to gather or draw up those parts that have been made
loose, porous, and spungie with the disease, then there must be applied
retentive medicines, to confirm and settle them, after their natural manner, or
form, then last there must be applied disgestive medicines to restore what is
wasted; but if any of the principal parts be impaired, wasted or expulsed: they
neither can be restored nor mended, but by a new creation, which uncreating
brains perhaps conceive not; but I must entreat my readers to observe, that
some sorts of motions begin a disease, that is, they lay the foundations
thereof; and other sorts of motions work upon those foundations.

Chap. 193. Of apoplexies.
SOme sorts of apoplexies are caused by an inbred superfluous water, in the
brain, which being congealed by a cold contraction, falling to the knitting
part of the head, which is the hinder part, it stupifies the senses, stopping
the natural motions as a flowing river, that is turned into ice; but those
sorts of apoplexies are curable, if assistance be taken in time, which is by
hot dilating medicines, not only to stretch out the icy contraction, but to
expel that cold watery humor by a rarification, but if the apoplexy be caused
by an inbred slime, as phlegm, which is of a thicker nature then water, and is
become crusted or peterated by hot contractions, it is seldom or never cured,
no more then brick which is once baked by the sun, or in a fire, can be made to
such clay as it was before it was burnt; But mistake me not, for I do not mean
the humor is as hard as stone, or brick in the head, but so hard, as to the
nature of the brain, that is, the phlegm is grown so dry and tough, as not to
be dissolved, so soon as the nature of the brain requires it, for though phlegm
will be contracted into stone, as in the bladder, and kidneys, yet not in the
brain, by reason the nature of the brain is so tender, and so sensible, as it
cannot endure so solid a substance therein, nor suffer so long a time as the
humor will be penetrating to stop the passages to the brain, not but those
kind of motions that produce stone, may be so strong and so swift as to turn
matter into stone immediately; but I do believe not in the animal bodies, for
they are too weak figures for so strong motions to work in; but as I said these
hot or cold contractions, for both sorts of contractions produce stone, so both
sorts of contractions make tough, clammy, crusted, hard phlegm, which is some
degree toward stone, phlegm if it stop the passages to the brain, it causes
an apoplexy; but the (...) why the watery contractions are more apt for cure,
is, because the nature of water is fluid, and is easily dissolved by dilations,
having interior nature to extenuations; but slime, and phlegm are more solid,
and so not so flexible, to be wrought upon, as suddenly to change shape, or
nature, in being dissolved or transformed.

The third cause is a fullness of blood, or a thickness of blood; for when the
veins are too full, there is not vacuity enough for the blood to run, so stops
the motion thereof, or if the blood is too thick, or clammy, it becoms less
fluid, and the more solid it is, the slower the motion is, and though the blood
may have too quick a motion by reason of heat, so it may have too slow a motion
by reason of thickness, and if the veins are filled too full of hot blood,
wherein are many spirits, it endangers the breaking some of the veins, like as
when strong liquor is put into a barrel, if it be filled too full the strength
of the spirits striving for liberty, break the barrel; the like will the blood
in the veins, and if a vein chance to break in the head, it overflows the brain
and drowns the life therein.

The last is gross vapor which may ascend from the bowels, or stomach, which
causes so great a smoke, as it suffocates, or choaks the brain, smothering out
the life of the body.

All apoplexies are somewhat of the nature of dead palsies.

Chap. 194. Of Epilepses, which is called fallingsicknesse.
THis disease is caused by a water in the brain, which water is most commonly
green, like sea water, and has an ebbing and flowing motion, like the tides
thereof, and when the water is at full tide, on the forepart of the head, it
takes the diseased after the manner of panting, and short breathing, beating
themselves, and foaming at the mouth, neither can they hear, see, smell, nor
speak; the reason is, that the flowing motion driving the watery humor so far
out, as it extends the pia matter, and dia matter of the brain, farther then the
natural extention; which extention swelling out toward the outward part of the
head, hinders all recourse, stopping those passages which should receive the
objects, through the exterior senses; and the froth or slimy humor, which is
betwixt the skin, where the brain lies; and the skull being pressed out, falls
through the throat into the mouth, and there works forth like yeast, which is
called foaming; but though the motions of the head are thus altered for a time,
so as there is neither sense nor rational knowledge, yet the body may be after
the natural course, and not any ways altered; but the body feeling life
oppressed in the head, the several parts or members in the body, strive and
struggle with what power and strength they have to release it: Like as a loyal
people that would defend or release their natural and true born King, from
being prisoner to a foraign enemy; but when this water flows to the hinder part
of the head, the pia matter, and dia matter, extending out that way, stops all
the nerves in the nodel of the head, by which stopping, it stops the exterior
motions of the whole body, by reason that place is the knitting place of those
moving strings; and when the water is flowed, as I said, to this part, the
diseased lies as in a swoon, as if they were quite dead, having no visible
motion, but as soon as the water begins to fall back, they begin to recover out
of the fits; but as often as the water in the head is at full tides, either of
the fore part of the head, or the hinder part, the diseased falls into a fit,
which is sometimes oftener then other, for it keeps no constant course, time,
nor measure; Sometimes longer and some times shorter.
and according as the pia matter and dia matter extends, the (...) are stonger or
weaker.

Likewise such green water with such motions about the heart, may produce the
same disease, for often times this green water, or green thin humor ascends or
runs from several parts of the body, into the cesterns of the head and the
heart; and this kind of water or humor, if it be in the nerves, causes
dangerous convulsions, by reason of the sharpness that shrivels up the nerves;
and when it is in the blood causes the veins to contract, through the same
reason, if in the stomach, it causes vomiting, or great fluxes, by subdividing
the humors; and the sharpness, prickling or tickling the stomach, provokes a
straining, as tickling in the nose does sneezing; so the stomach, either to
strain upwards or downwards.

Chap. 195. Of Shaking Palsies.
SHaking palsies proceed from a supernatural extenuation in the nerves, which
by the extenuating becomes more porous and hollow, and becomes like a perpetual
earthquake, having a flatuous or windy humor in the bowels thereof, and cannot
find passage out, if it proceeds from a hot extention, there must be applied
cold condensing medicines; If by a cold extention there must be applied hot
condensing remedies.

Chap. 196. Of Convulsions, and Cramps.
COnvulsions proceed from contrary contracting motions, quite from the natural
motions of the body, as winding up the sinews, nerves, or veins; but especially
those sinews, which join, and impair the muscles together, drawing not only
contrary, but contracting several ways, and after diverse manners; for some
time the nerves are as if we should tie strings in bowt-knots, others as if we
should wind (...) Lute strings on pegs; and some are twisted like whip-cord,
and many the like ways, which would be too long to recount, but these
contractions proceed either from a wind got into the nerves, or veins, which
troubles them as the winde-cholick does the guts, or a sharp humor that
shrivels them together, or as salt watery humor, mixed with wind, which
struggling and striving together turns winds, folds, or roles up the nerves,
like the waves of the Sea, or a cold icy humor, which draws and gathers in the
nerves, as frost will do, all spungie bodies, or some thick clammy humor which
stops some passages, which causes the natural motions to turn irregular, but
if the humor be only in the veins, it is cured by letting blood, if the blood
be corrupted, sharp or salt, or if the blood be cold, windy, or watery, hot
liquid medicines cure it, or cordial water, or the like; and if it be a cold
humor in the nerves, hot oils, and extraordinary hot medicines cures it, as the
spirit of Caster, oil of Amber, and the like; but if it proceed from a salt,
sharp, watery humor, or a thick clammy humor in the nerves, it is seldom or
never cured, because it is not easily got out, neither For as long as the humor
remains, the (...) are repeated.
can medicines so suddenly get into the nerves, as into the veins; for though
the cold in the nerves may be easily cured, by melting, and dissolving by the
comfortable warmth, or violent heats from the hot cordial medicines, which
spread about the body, as a great fire in a chimney, which spreads about and
heats all the room, if the fire in the chimney be answerable to the bigness, or
largeness of the room it is in, and the lesser the room is, and the bigger the
fire is, the hotter it is; wherefore it is to be considered, that those that
are at full growth, or are larger of body, if thus, the diseased ought to have
a greater proportion, or a larger quantity of those medicines, then a child,
or those that are but little of stature, for though those that are of little
stature may be more stronger then those that are of a far bigger bulk, yet in
the cause of diffusing or dilating medicines, the circumference of the body
must be considered, as well as the strength of the medicines; and if the
convulsion be in the stomach, caused by the aforesaid humor; purging medicines
or cordials may cure it, unless the stomach is gathered, shrivelled, or shrunk
up by an unnatural contracting heat, like as leather that is put into the fire,
which when so, the stomach can no more be cured then leather to be made smooth,
which is shrunk up in a purse, by fire; after the like manner as corvulsions or
cramps, but cramps most commonly are only contractions of the small veins, (...)
tie or twist them up, and many times so hard as they break; for those that have
been much troubled with the cramp, will have all the skin, where the cramp has
taken them all stretched with broken veins; I mean the small hair veins, but
rubbing the part grieved with a warm cloth, will untie and untwist them again,
by dissolving the cold, or dispersing the (...), or rarifying the blood
therein, this we (...) by experience; wherefore I should think that in
convulsion fits, that are (...) by the like, that if the diseased should be
rubbed with hot clothes, outwardly applied, as well as hot medicines inwardly
taken, it may do the patient much good. But I must remember my Readers, that in
Convulsions, the strength of the medicines inwardly taken, must be according to
the strength of the fits; for if they be strong fits, weak medicines do no
good; for more strength goes to untie a hard knot, then a loose knot, or to
untwist a hard string, then a loose string; besides, it is hard to know after
what manner the knot is tied or twisted, and many indeed are so ignorant of
medicines, as the manner of the disease, to apply such as shall hap of the
right end, as those which are cured by chance, and chance hits so seldom right,
as not one of an hundred escapes of these kind of diseases, if the disease is
any ways violent, for then the motions tie so fast, and so strong, as they
break the life of that figure asunder. There be natural contractions, and
unnatural contractions; that is, proper or improper to the health of the figure.

Chap. 197. Of Collicks.
ALL Collicks are toward the nature of Convulsions, or at at least Cramps.

Some Collicks proceed from raw undigested humors. Wind Colic.


Some from sharp melancolly humors.

Others from cold phlegmatic humors

Others from hot choleric humors. A bilious Colic.


Others from putrified humors.

Some Collicks are in the stomach; others are in the bowels, as the guts; some
in the sides, and sometimes in the veins; but those Collicks are Cramps; but
the cause of all Collicks are by extenuating motions, though the effects are
often times contracting, but if the cause be contracting, it is a Cramp, not a
Colic, for a Colic is properly wind, produced from Cramps often times taken
for Collicks.
the aforesaid humors; that is, when those humors extenuate farther then a
watery extenuation, which turns into vapor or wind, which vaporous wind, or
windy vapor, striving to get vent, being stopped by grosser vapor, or thicker
humor, runs about in cross motions, which cause pain; for the extenuating
motions thrusting outward and the resisting motions thrusting backward, run
cross, or beat on each other, which causes pain; and as long as the strife
lasts, the body has no ease, until some assistance in medicines be given, or
that it can overmaster the resistent motions; but when once it has liberty, it
flies out in expulsive motions, at all vents; but if the extenuating humors are
broke, or dissolved in the body, by the well tempered motion therein, or
expulsing of its self, it evaporates through the pores of the body in
insensible transpirations; but if the extenuating can find no way to be
expulsed, it gathers inward in small, and smaller rings, like a scrue drawing
in the guts or stomach, therein stopping the passages thereof, whereby the body
can neither receive nourishment, nor send out excrement, with which the body is
brought to an utter destruction; but these kinds of winds causing this
distember, this distemper is often times produced from sharp, hot, choleric
humors; which sharpness has a natural contracting quality which is rather of
the nature of a cramp, or a convulsion, then the nature of a colic; howsoever
expulsive medicines are good in these cases of diseases. Convulsions are
collicks in the nerves, and cramps collicks in the veins; and as the colic in
the stomach or guts proceeds sometimes from wind, and sometimes from crude
bilious sharp humors, so does this.

Chap. 198. Of the diseases in the head, and vapors to the head.
DIseases and swimming, which are diseases, belonging only to the head, differ
as the motions and mixture, and forms of matter differ; for no disease,
although of one and the same sort, is just alike; but although these diseases
belongs only to the head, yet the motions and humors of the stomach have
greater affinity to the head, and many times cause the diseases therein, by the
course and recourse thereto and therefrom; for some humors falling from the
head into the stomach, do so disaffect that part, as it returns more malignity
up again, and sometimes the stomach begins the war, sending up such an army of
ill vapors, as many times they do not only disorder the head, but totally
ruinate it; but most commonly the vapors which ascend to the head, are gathered
by contracting motions, into clouds, as vapor is which arises from the earth,
and as long as the vapor is in a cloudy body, it makes that part feel heavy,
and the senses dull by obstructions, for it stops the nose, dims the sight,
fills the ears, blunts the taste, and numbs the touch; especially if the
obstruction be caused from a cold contraction, which congeals the vapor to an
icy substance, but when it is expulsed, by a hot dilation, it falls down like
hail or flakes of snow, by which, I mean, cold glassie phlegm, which cold
phlegm does most commonly as snow does which covers the face of the earth; so
this phlegm covers, as it were stops the mouth of the stomach, and deads the
appetite thereof; but the danger is in these cold contractions, that (...) they
should last too long, they may cause numb palsies; or the like, and if
contracted, so as one may say christalined it may cause an incurable dead
palsy, but if it be dispersed by a hot expulsion, it is dissolved in thundering
coughs, or falls like pouring shoures of Rheums.
rain, running through the spouts of the noise, eyes, and mouth, and through
the pores of the skin, and sometimes falls into the cabberns or bowels of the
body, as the * Sweats.
stomach, and the intrals; but if some of the floud-gats chance to be stopped
by obstructions, these shoures may chance to overflow the body, and make an
utter destruction, otherwise it only washes and clenses these parts; but if
vapor be gathered by a hot contraction, they become sharp and salt, as being of
a burning quality, and if they be dispersed by a hot expulsion, they fall down
like a misling rain, which has a soaking and penetrating faculty, cutting and
piercing those parts they fall on by insensible degrees, which rots the vital
parts, not only by the sharpness which ulcerates, but by a continuated
unnatural weakness, which if once the parts begin to decay, which is the
foundation, the building must needs fall.

Chap. 199. Of catching cold.
ONe is apter to catch cold standing against a crevis, or door, or window, then
in a wide plain.

For narrow passages receive air, as pipes do water, though there comes in
less quantity, it passes with a greater force.

The like cause makes us catch cold after great heats, by reason the pores of
the body are extended therewith, and are like so many windows set open, which
receive air with too great a force.

Chap. 200. Of the several motions in an animal body.
When a body is in perfect health, the motions therein do not only work
regularly, and proportionably placing every part of matter rightly, and
properly mixing, and tempering the matter as it should be, or as I may say,
fittly; that is, when the quantity of matter, or humor is proportionably, and
the motion moves equally, for though every kind or sort of motion may move
evenly, and keep just time, yet not equally or harmoniously; as for example,
say there were a company of musicians, and every one played skilfuly, justly,
tunable, timely, on the same notes; yet may there be too many trebles for the
tenor, and bases, or too many tenors for the trebles and bases, and too many
bases for the tenors and trebles to make a harmony; So in the body there may be
too much of one, or more kind of motions for other kinds to make a harmony of
health, as for proof; too many contracting motions, make the body too dry, and
contract diseases; as for example, instead of binding any thing, we should
break it by pulling or drawing too hard together, or instead of joining of
parts, we should knock them so close as to rivet, or split them; or instead of
gathering such a quantity of matter, or joining such a number of parts, we
should gather twice or thrice the quantity; or numbers of the like examples
might be given; for all other kind of motions, as dilating or expulsive,
instead of throwing out the (...), or rubbish in a house, we should pull down
the house, and disperse the materials therein, digging up the foundation
thereof.

Likewise too many dilating, or expulsive motions, may disperse, or divide
parts, or unsettle, or unground parts: which disunites weakness, and dissolves
parts or bodies.

Wherefore all contracting, attracting, retentive, disgestive, dilating,
expulsive motions in a well tempered body, must move like the several Planets,
every sort in their proper spears, keeping their times, motions, tempers, and
degrees; but too many or too strong contracting motions, cause the gout, stone,
plurisie, hective fevers, numb and dead palsies, dry-liver, brain, and many the
like; and too many dilating motions, cause dropsies, winde-colicks, rhumes,
shaking palsies, sweats, or fainting sickness, and milions, the like, and too
many, or too strong expulsive motions, cause fluxes, vomiting, bleeding, and
the like, and too many, or too strong digestive motions, cause too much blood,
fat, and flesh, which is apt to choke the vital parts, or may nourish some
particular parts, so much as may make them grow, and swell out so bigg, as they
may be disproportionable, for the rest of the parts in the body.

But still I must remember my readers; that all dilating motions, are in the
way of expulsion; and all attractions in the way of contraction, and digestion,
are mixed motions taking part from either side, then I must remember my readers,
that there are infinite ways or manners of contractions, and infinite ways,
or manners of ways of attraction, and so of retentions, dilations, expulsions,
and disgestions, where every change makes a several effect.

Chap. 201. Of the several tempers of the body.
A Healthful temper of the body, is an equal temper of the body, and mixture of
(...), well set parts, and justly tuned motions, whereby life dances the true
measure of health, making several figures, and changes with the feet of times;
and a sick distempered body is, when the humors of body are superabundant, or
unequally tempered, and the motion perturbed; and irregular, keeping neither
time nor measure, but all diseases proceed from too much cold, or too much
heat, or too much drought, or too much moisture, or too much humor, or too much
motion, or mistempered humor, or unequal motion, or too swift motion, or too
slow motion; all contracting motions make the body dry, al dilating motions
make the body moist, some sorts of contracting motions make the body hot and
dry, other sorts of contracting motions make the body cold and dry; some sorts
of dilating motions make the body hot and moist; other sorts of dilating
motions make the body cold and moist; all slow or quick motions cause the
humors of the body to be heavy, thick, and clammy, all swift motions cause the
humors of the body to be thin, sharp, and salt, all crosse-justling, or beating
motions, causes pain; and according to such and such irregularities, are such,
or such sorts, or, kind, or sorts, or degrees of diseases, are produced
therefrom.

Chap. 202. The nature of purging medicines.
MOst purging drugs are of the nature of hot burning fire; for the inherent
motions therein work according to the humor, or matter it meets with, some
humor they melt, making it thin and fluid, although it be hard, tough or
clammy, and as fire does oar which is unmelted metal, makes it so fluid, as it
will run through a gutter of earth like water; so do some drugs make some sorts
of humor through the body, either upward or downward.

Again, some drugs will work upon some humors, as fire upon wood, dividing the
humor into small parts, as ashes from wood, which naturally falls downward.

And some they will dissolve by mouldring, and crumbling, as fire does stone,
which runs forth like sand, which is stone indeed bred in the body.

Some drugs rarifie the humors into wind, as fire will rarifie, and evaporate
water, which is set boiling thereon.

Other drugs will at fire that distills out the moist, and watery substance, from
that which is more gross; but it is to be observed, that all purging drugs
that work by vomit, are somewhat of the nature of that kind of fire we call
sulphur; or oil that is melted, or fluid sulphur, when these sorts of drugs are
set on fire, as I may say, by the natural or distempered heat in the body, it
flies out ascendingly, like AEtna; for it is of the nature of sulphur to ascend
I have treated of the several sorts of fire.
as flame does; and certainly al bodies have such motions naturally inherent in
them, as make and produce such effects as fire does on several sorts of
humors, by which motions the body has a natural cleansing faculty, which
makes the natural purging quality: but when the motions are so violent, they
oftentimes destroy the body with burning fevers, or violent fluxes, or the
like; for the fire in the body, is like a fire in a chimnie, for when the
chimny is clean, and the fire proportionable to lie therein, it warms and
comforts all about, and is useful for many employments for the necessaries of
life; but if the chimny be foul, or the fire too big, or too much for the
chimny, it sets all in a flame, consuming whatsoever it incompasses, if it be
not quenched out with cooling julips, as with water, or by casting on rubbish,
or gross materials to smother it out, as in great fluxes, they will not only
give restringent medicines, as having a natural restringent faculty, but thick
meats, as thicked milk, or the like; but when the body is restringent, or has
taken restringent medicines, it is produced by drying motions, as contracting,
or retentive motion, if they be hot, retentive, or contracting motions, they
they harden and confirm the humors, as the heat of the sun, or the heat of the
fire does clay, which turns it to brick or tile, or those things we call
earthen pots, and according as the humor is gross or fine, the more britle or
hard, or thick or heavy, or thin or light; It is for some humor as
Proselnye, or Chyney, others as the grosser earthen vessels; Again, some sorts
of contracting, or retentive motions draw the humor, as when bacon, neats
tongues, or the like, are dried in a chimney, or oven, or the like; other sorts
of hot contractions draw the humor, as the sun does the earth, drying up the
watery spring therein; but if the restringencies either of the body, or of the
medicines be caused by cold retentive or contracting motions, it dries the
humors, as cold frost dries the earth, or binds up the humors, as frost binds
up the waters in icy fetters, or thickens the humors, as cold thickens the
water, or vapor drawn from the earth into clouds of snow. But I am to advertise
my readers, that all expulsive motions are not fiery expulsions; for there are
infinite several ways of expulsive motions, and dilations.

Secondly these fiery motions do not always work expulsively, but
contractively, attractively, and retentively, and disgestively.

Thirdly, all expulsive, dilative, disgestive, contractive, attractive,
retentive motions are not fiery, but there is such a kind, or sort of
contractions, attractions, retentions disgestions, dilations, and expulsions,
as belong to fire or heat, or as I may better say, produces heat or fire, and
as I said there are infinite several ways of each kind of motion; as for
example, I will treat of one of them: a be gather wax, a bird gather straws,
and a man gathers sticks; the bees gather and carry the wax to the hive to make
a comb, to lay, or hold and keep the honey; the bird gathers and carries the
straw to build a nest to hatch her young ones in; the man gathers wood to mend
his house, these all gather to one end, but yet several ways; for the bees
gather the wax, and carry it on their thighs, the bird gathers the straw, and
carries it with their bill, the man gathers with his hands, but carries it
several ways, as on his head, or on his shoulders, or at his back, or in his
arms, and milions of the like examples may be given upon each kind or sort of
motion, or moved matter.

Again, I must advertise my readers, that though I say there are fiery motions
in drugs, and natural fiery motions in every animal creature, and so in many
other figures; yet I mean not a bright shining fire, although some are of
opinion, that in the heart is a thin flame, and when that is put out, or goes
out, the creature dies; but I mean not such a fire, for to my apprehension
there are three sorts of fire to our perceivance, although there may be
numberless sorts, yet all of one kind: as for example, there are those
creatures we call animals, though some are beasts, birds, fish, and men, but
not only so, for some are of one sort, and some of another; for a lennit is
not a parot, nor a parot an owl; nor a horse a cow, nor a sheep a dog, nor a
whale a herring, nor a herring a plaise, nor a plaise a lobster; nor a
black-more is not a tauny-more, nor a Europian an Ethiopian, yet all are of
animal kind; so although there may be several sorts of fire, and so of the
other elements, yet all are of the fiery kind, or likewise the fiery motions
make several figures, and several figures have several fiery motions, for every
sort of animals have a several shape, and several motions belonging to that
shape; so in fiery figures, and fiery motions; but as I said before; there are
three sorts of fire. The first is a bright-shining hot-burning fire, that is,
when the interior, and exterior temperament of matter, and the interior and
exterior figure, and the interior and exterior motions be all as one. The
second is a hot-burning fire, but not a bright shining fire, such as
Aquafortis, vitrals, and such sorts of the same nature which will burn as fire
does, but not thin as the other fire does; for though they are both of an
interior nature, yet not of an exterior, for the bright-shining fire is all
composed of sharp points, as I may say, lines of points, but this vitral fire
is as sharp edged lines, like a rasor, or knife, or the like, neither That is
when it works, and converts a thinner substance to its own nature.
is there external motions alike; for bright-shining fire mounts upwards, when
it is not suppressed, or in a straight parallel line, for flame which is the
liquid part of bright-shining fire, although it moves in several lines, as it
ascends, yet the lines they ascend in are a straight diameter line, but this
vitral fire descends as it were downward, or divides as streams of water do,
that digs it self a passage through the earth, so this vitral cuts a passage,
through what it works on, neither can this sort of fire work so variously, as
bright-shining fire can, by reason it has not so many parts, for points will
fall into more parts, and are more swift in motion, then the edged line; as for
example, dust which is numerous little parts heapt together, will be more agile
upon the least motion, although it be of a weighty nature, as of the nature of
a stone.

The small hairs which be of a light, and weightlesse nature, but being not
divided into so many parts, cannot move so nimble, as being united lines, but
if you cut the hair into small parts, it shall move with more restless motion,
then the sand, by so much the more as the substance is lighter.

The third sort of fire is that which I call a cold dull fire, such as
brimstone, or sulphur, mercury, salt, oil, or the like, this sort in the
interior nature is of the nature of bright-shining fire, both in the motions,
and temperaments of matter, but not in the exterior, for it is composed of
points, but those points But bound about with straight smooth lines without as
to the circumference.
are turned inward, as toward the Center: but as soon as it touches the
bright-shining fire, it straight turns the points outward: for those points
soon catch hold of those straight circumferent lines, and break them in sunder,
which as soon as they are broke, the points are at liberty, and taking their
freedom, they mount in a flame; but when those lines are not dissolved by fire,
but crack, as we will snap As a flint, hard sugar, brimstone, or the like.
a string asunder, then they only sparkle fire out, but not flame out; but
mercury, or quicksilver, the interior is fire, but the exterior is water, for
the exterior moves extenuating circles as water does, and so much as to make it
soft, and fluid, but not so much as to make it wet; for though it always
gathers into sphiratical figures, which shows that the exterior would run into
wet, but that the interior hinder it, by drawing the circles inward, as cold
does water into hailstones, but yet the interior wants the force to make it so
hard and firm; but as I did advertise my Readers before, that all sorts of fire
work according to the matter it meets with, yet none work so variously, as the
bright-shining fire; which makes me think that drugs are more of the nature of
bright-shining fire, then of the two other sorts, because they work in the body
according to the humor it meets with, for if it meets wit watrish humors, it
boyls it as water in a pot, which either boiles over the mouth of the stomach,
or evaporates out in sweat, like dewes, or draws downward, like as in showers
ofrain, it melts humors like metal, or turns humors like wood into ashes, or
calcines the humor, where some part is fixed, other parts are volable; As for
example, Rubarb has a double faculty, some humors it expels out, others it
binds up; for Rubarb is both purging, and restringent, as it is to be observed
in great fluxes; for what it does not cast forth it confirms to a more solid
substance, so as it does expulse and contract at one time, as I may say,
according as it finds the humor it works with; Again, some drugs move several
expulsive ways, as by vomit and stool, where the vomiting is produced with
ascending expulsions, siege with descending expulsions, but that expulses
descending are of the nature of vitral fire, all that expulses ascendingly, is
of the nature of sulphurous fire; but the generality of drugs works like
bright-shining fire, according to the nature of the matter, it meets with, as I
have sormerly described.

Chap. 103. The motion of Medicines.
AS I have said in my former chapter, that all medicinal drugs, or simples,
especially those that purge, are of the nature of fire; for the motions therein
most commonly work apart according to the humor it meets with, as fire does,
which in general is to move so and so That which is most apt to
; yet the natural motions in drugs, and likewise in fire are expulsive, and all
that is expulsive, is by antipathetical nature striving to destroy by uniting
parts, and all contractive motions are by a sympathetical nature, striving to
unite, by embracing, or drawing parts together, yet the nature of the body they
work in the contracting motions, may be antipathetical, and expulsive motions
may be sympathetical, the one in expelling the superfluous and corrupted
humors, the other in contracting them into a disease, but most diseases are
cured by contrary motions; for if they be diseases of expulsions, they must be
cured by contracting, or retentive medicines; if they be diseases of
contractions, they must be cured by expulsive medicines, or else dilating or
attracting; for though the motions of attraction be agreeable, or of the nature
of contraction, as to its self, as I may say, that is, to draw or carry, all to
a center, as it were, but the only difference is, that attraction make it self
the center, drawing all things to it; but contractions make the matter they
work on, part of the center with them, but all attractions are insinuating
motions, inviting, or drawing all toward it self, or like a man that should
draw a dish of meat, or as if one should suck the breasts or udder, but
contracting motions are rather to bind, or knit up parts together, but if the
diseases proceed from disuniting motions, then retentive medicines must be
applied, which is to firm, hold, or settle parts that are loose, unsteddy; but
if the diseases proceed out of disorder and irregularity, they must be cured by
digestive medicines, which is to put every part in order, and in its proper
place; like wise Statesmen that are neither partial or malicious, (but Readers
know) that though I say all diseases must be cured by contrary motions, yet the
motions that are in such medicines, must sympathize, and agree with the
constitution of the body. Lastly, it is to be observed, that every degree in
the disease must be followed with the same degree in the medicine, whether
swift or slow, strong or weak, or more, or less, that is, you match your
medicines to the disease; but mistake me not, I mean not after the literal
sense, but after the metaphorical sense; but al purging medicines are dilative
or expulsive, all restringent medicines, are I mean purning motions.
contractive, and retentive.

All drawing medicines are attractive. Restraining motions.


All restorative, or reviving medicines are disgestive.

And those contracting medicines that must cure the body, Attractive motion.
muct sympathize with the natural health, and constitution Restoring motion.
of the body, not with the disease, for these motions, draw, gather, or at
least knit, and bind up the sound parts from the corrupted parts, lest they
should intermix, and retentive remedies do not only stay those parts that are
apt to disunite, but give strength, and hold out the assaulting motions in
mistempered matter, and all attractive medicines that sympathize with the
natural constitutions of the body, sucks and draws forth from the corrupt
matter the pure, which is mixed, or inuolved therein; but those attractive, and
drawing medicines that are applied to outward sores, or the like, must have a
sympathy with the malady, or putrefaction, for all aversions do cast outward;
or from them, not draw to them.

As for the expulsive remedies they must be carefully applied, lest they should
cast forth the wrong humor, by which the The humor that stays behiude.
malignant grows more powerful, or else should carry out more humor, then the
strength of the body, will permit, or should be so weak, or of such a nature,
only to disturb, and unsettle, but not carry forth, from which disturbance
great inconveniences, or deadly quarrels in the body may arise; wherefore these
medicines are more dangerous then any other sort, although no medicine can be
safely applied, unless the strength and nature be answerable to the
constitution of the body, or the diseases in the body, no not those we call
restorative, or reviving remedies, which work disgestively, such as cordials,
or the like, for when there is more applied then will agree with the
constitution of the body, or with the temper, or degree of the diseases, they
turn from being assisting friends, to assaulting enemies, for when they have
more force then regular work, they put in disorder those regularities, for want
of regular employment; for it is against the nature of innate matter to desist
from moving, or working, but it is not against nature to change and alter the
motions.

The several degrees, and natures of drugs of every particular drug, and
simple; I leave my readers to the Herbal, where perchance some of it may be
discoursed of right; or effectually, howsoever it is too laborious a study or
practice for me.

Chap. 204. Agreeing, and disagreeing of humors, senses, and passions.
Some times the humors of the body, and the outward senses agree and disagree;
sometimes the humors of the body, and the passions of the mind, agree, or
disagree; sometimes the passions of the mind, and the outward senses agree, or
disagree, and sometimes the senses, and the passions disagree, or agree with
the humors of the body.

As for example, sometimes the distempered humors in the body, make
extravagancy in the senses, as we see in fevers; and sometimes the distempered
humors of the body make a disordered mind, as we see those that have choleric
humors, choleric passions; melancholy humors, melancholy passions, and the
like, or distempered humors, extravagant imaginations, and the like.

Sometimes extravagant senses make extravagant fancies, sometimes a
superabundant humor makes a strong particular appetite; as for example, those
in the green sickness, the overflowing, or increase of some raw, and
indigested humor will cause a strong particular appetite, as some in that
disease love to smell strong smells, as camfier, tanned-leather, musty bottles,
or the like, or to delight only in one taste, as oatemeal, coals, or several
particular tastes, or extravagant tastes, not natural to the constitution of the
body, as to delight to eat coals, leather, candles, cork, and milions of the
like; and the humor increases, and is nourished by the sympathy of that
extravagant diet; for what the senses take pleasure in, the mind longs for.
Again, some humors Antipathize, as to hate all loathsome tastes, smells, noices,
touches, and objects.

So passions sympathize with some humors, and disagree with others, for some
bitter humors make choleric passions, sharp humors make spiteful passions,
tough humors make a dull understanding, melancholy humors, make timerosity,
choleric humors make courage, and many the like; then the senses of the mind
agree, and disagree often, as some objects will astonish the senses, and ravish
the mind, delight the sense, and cause love in the mind; others which the
sense dislike, causes hate in the mind, pain in the sense, grieving in the
mind, pleasure in the sense, delight in the mind; but if the sense and mind
disagree, then the sense likes that the mind hates; As for example, the sense
is taking pleasure upon an object, which for the cross disposition, the mind
(...), or for some injury done, or by some neglect, or out of envy, and as
they sympathize, and antipathize in their working, and making; so in the
expulsions, time works out a passion, accidents work out passion, evacuations
work out passion; the like in the senses, so many times humors are expulsed by
passions, and as the superfluities are purged out of the body, after the same
manner, are violent passions from the mind; for as the body purges by siege,
by vomit, by urin, by spitting, by sweating, by bleeding, by incisions, and the
like; so strong passions are purged by weeping, by sighing, groaning, speaking,
and acting; but if the increasing motions of the humors in the body, and the
passions in the mind, be as many, and as strong, as the expulsive motions,
then there is a continuance of the same humor or passion, for whatsoever is
cast forth, or wasted, is bred again.

Chap. 205. Of outward objects disagreeing with the natural motions, and
humors in the body.
INward commotions of the body are often times caused by outward objects, or
subjects, as when the senses take adelight at some kind of sound, scent,
sight, taste, and touch; as for example, some will sownd at a fearful noise,
that is, at a sudden, or unacustomed, or tumultuous noise; others will sownd at
the sight of blood, or at any cruel object, or at the sight of a cat, or many
other creatures; some will sownd at sweet-smels; others if they should taste
cheese, or any meat they dissike naturally, and some will not only sownd but
die laughing with tickling, the reason is, that the exterior motion anticipates
with the natural motions belonging to the body, sometimes only to the
sensitive parts, other-some to the rational part, others to both.

The reason is, that the disordered motions of the outward senses, disorder the
interior motions, which makes the body sick, and the body passionate, and
sometimes the brain frantic, and if they make not the body sick, nor the brain
mad; yet those antipathetical, and these disordered motions, never fail to put
the sense to pain, or move passion; but when these antipathetical motions be
toostrong for the natural motions belonging to the body, or mind, it brings
death, or unrecoverable madness, for then the natural motions belonging to that
body, is as it were extinguished; thus we may see that the outward senses may
be perfect, and the inward parts within that body may be corrupt and decayed;
so likewise the outward senses may be defected, and the inward parts sound, and
so some parts of the body firm, and others infirm, and some of the outward
parts, or sense wanting, or defective, others free clear and distinguishing.

The reason is, that some of the sensitive innated matter works orderly, others
disorderly, and clear from the nature of the body; for as I have said before,
some of the exterior parts of the body, may be nummed, or dead; the reason is
that the natural motions, belonging to such a part of the body are altered, for
every part or parcel, has proper motions belonging thereunto.

But if in any part of the body, the natural motions only work irregularly,
then it only causes a pain in that part; but if the motions work cross to
the nature of the body, it causes that part to die, but if they alter but in
part, it causes only a numnesse which is in a degree of being dead, but if
the natural motions be only stopped by some outward accident, or actions, as by
a sudden fright, which causes the body to swoon by reason the spirits are
contracted by the fright into so straight a compass, and thronged so close
together, that they cannot move in order, or by the action of lying, or
pressing too hard, or too heavy upon any part that hinders the spirits therein
from moving after their natural manner, which causes a sleepiness or numnesse
in those parts, that are pressed by weight, or strength; those disorders are soon
to be rectified. Again, as by giving liberty, or helping the spirits with
cordials which gives strength to them, and sets them at liberty; but if the
sensitive parts be quite altered from their natural course, they seldom are
rectified; But sometimes the assistance of the regular motions in the body,
joining as it were with one consent, do expel that innated matter out of that
part wherein they work, contrary to the nature of the body, and supplies that
part with fresh, and new matter, that moves as it should do.

Likewise as the sensitive innated matter works in some parts of the body
irregularly, and in other parts regularly, and in one, and the same part,
sometimes regularly, and sometimes irregularly, the same is it many times with
the rational innate matter; for sometimes that will moves regularly, and
sometimes iregularly, that makes frantic men, sometimes to be in their wits,
and sometimes out of their wits: but if their madness be at certain times, as
at full of the moon, or high tides, or springs, or falls, or in the midst of
summer, or when they keep an evil, or too full a diet, then it proceeds from
those outward accidents, which give assistance to the disordered motions, which
inhabit in the body, the original defect being amongst the sensitive innate
matter, for this shows that the madness proceeds from some distemper of the
body, which most commonly is in the spleen, or that which they call in women,
the mother, from which parts arise gross, and noisome vapors, which ascends up
into the head, and disaffects the brain; and many times the brain is
disaffected with its own distempers, and whenever the brain is distempered,
the rational innate matter which moves therein, moves irregularly; but when
those times or seasons are past, or that overfulnesse of humor is purged out,
the natural motions of humor get strength, and the man is well until the
return thereof.

But if the irregularity be in the rational innate matter, it is most
dangerous, for it seldom, or never is cured, nor seldom have intermitting fits,
but as a continual fever, in the body, so is a continual madness in the mind.

But I shall speak more of this in my following chapters.

Chap. 206. Of the inward sense, and outward sense, as the interior and
exterior parts.
SOme of the exterior senses may be extinguished, as sight, hearing, scent, or
taste, or some parts of the body numb, or dead, or some disjoynted from the
rest; as legs, or arms, toes, breast, eyes, nose, or the like, and yet the
material parts sound and whole, which materal parts are the vital parts, as the
brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the lights, the spleen, the maw, the
midriff, the kidneys, the bladder, or the like; as for the heart, and the
brain, there is such a sympathising, and conjunction with the whole body, as
the least distemper indangers the body, and the least alteration of their
shapes, or figures, it destroys the life of the body, but for the rest of
those vitals, or fundamental parts, when they decay, or are any way impaired,
the life does sink down as in were by degrees, according as those parts
impaires; but if they be wounded, or corrupted by poisons, or plaguie
infections, or by an absolute, and sudden alteration, from their natural
motions or figures, then the life is suddenly extinguished, but the external
figures of the rest of the parts have not such a sympathy to the interior
motions of the whole figure; but when I say the exterior figure of the interior
parts, I mean the particular figure of every particular part, not only the
outward part, as hands and arms, legs, and head, and body and the like; but
of brain, and heart, and liver, and so all the rest; for though they be
internal figures, to the external figures, yet they be the external figures to
the internal motion that works in them.

Chap. 207. The sympathies and antipathies of sound to the mind and actions.
THe bottom hole in the ear is covered with a thin caul, or felme, which is
called the drum of the ear, where those motions that enter in at the ear beat
thereon, like unto drumsticks, and if the felm, or thin skin, be stretched
smooth, or braced straight with the nervous strings, the sound is clear and
loud, but if it be weakly braced, and the nervous strings loose, and the thin
skin slack, the sound is low and dull, by reason that skin is so soft by the
slackness, that the beating, or striking, or playing motion thereon cannot
rebound, or retort, but sinks, and is smothered therein; and if it be stretched
very hard, and thin, and then such motions enter the ear, which pierce, or cut
sharp, such as we call shrill notes, it does not only desturb the natural
motion in the brain, but many times breaks that skin, or at least puts it to
pain; likewise if those motions that enter in at the ear, move cross to the
natural motions in the brain, it causes pain in the head; likewise if one and
the same notes are often repeated, it fills the head so full of this particular
motion, as they overpower the natural motions therein; and as I may We may
hear a tune so often repeated; that it may grow hateful; although delightful at
first.
say, cause a surfeit thereof in the brain, being glutted therewith, tiring not
only the sensitive part os the brain, which causes pain or diseases, but
oppresses the rational part of innate matter in the brain, causing a hate
thereto; and if the vocal, or verbal sound are crossed, as by the way of
antipathy, it may disorder both the sensitive, and rational innated matter in
the brain, so much by striking or pressing into, and by barring and thronging
out, as the sense, and reason are so disordered, as the natural government is
absolutely overthrown, from whence proceeds madness, at least extravagant
passions raised from the heart; the like disorder both in the head, and heart,
may proceed from each of the senses; and as this or the like external objects,
or subjects may disorder by the irregular, and antipathetical motions the
health and understanding, which are the interior motions, so regularity and
sympathy of the verbal or vocal motions brought through the ear, may compose
the differences, and disorder of the natural interior motions, as health,
reason, understanding, affection, or reconcilement; as for example, a timely,
kind, discreet discourse, may compose a disquiet mind, for the motions of
wise, sober, kind, gentle, or eloquent words may turn the motion of troubled
and combustible, or extravagant thoughts into a smooth, and calm temper, or
regular order; Likewise unkind, and indiscreet, double, false, malicious,
hasty, sudden, sad, or frightful discourses, may discompose, and disorder a
quiet and well tempered mind, disordering the regular motions, by misplacing
the thoughts, making a war in the mind, giving strength to some thoughts, and
overpowring others.

The like with vocal sounds; as for music, the notes in music agree with the
motions of passions, and the motions of several thoughts, as some notes
sympathize with passions, and with the several thoughts, and move the actions
accordingly, so others discompose the mind, and inveterat and disturb it; for
slow, sought strains on the tenor, and bass, is as commending, extorting,
exciting, threatening, terrifying, judging, which moves the mind to melancholy,
from whence proceeds fear, superstition, devotion, repenting, praying, and
vowing, which causes an humble submission, dejected countenance, weeping eyes,
heaved up hands, and bended knees.

And slow soft notes, only on the tenors, are a sad relation, sorrowful
laments, mournful complaints, pleadings, petitioning, acknowledging faults,
begging pardon, imploring mercy, which moves the mind to a tender pity and
compassion, and a charitable love, from whence proceeds a listening ear, a
helping hand, a serious countenance, a sad eye, with a favoring cast therefrom.

High, hard, sharp, notes or strains, on the basse or tenor, is like
exclaiming, encouraging, or animating, extolling, promising; which moves the
mind to pride, ambition, vainglory, desire, hope, which makes the body
active, the actions adventrous, bold, the eyes darting and quick.

Low, sharp strains, and cross notes, and unequal times, move the mind to
murmur words, choler, hate, revenge, fury, despair, the cursing, their hands
tearing, the legs stamping, their bodies turning several ways, their
countenance maskerd and ghastly, and the eyes staring.

But quick sharp strains in tenor notes, and soft slow strains on treble
notes, are as persuading, flattering, insinuating, professing, inviting,
alluring, this moves the mind to love, the thoughts to be amorous; this makes
their actions affective, kissing their hands, making of legs, mending their
garments, offering their service, their words complemental, their countenance
smiling, and their eyes glancing.

And quick sharp strains, on the tenor, and treble notes, produce a cheerful
mind, it makes the thoughts lively, the countenance pleasant, their eyes
quick, their discourse wanton, and jesting, their actions laughing, singing,
playing, and dancing.

But slow low flats strike on the basses, and tenor notes moves the mind to a
dull stupidity, wherein the thoughts lie as dead, this makes the body appear
like senseless statues of stone, without motion, the head bending down, the eyes
fixed to the ground.

But Cramatick music is like Schools disputation, and discord in music, is
like quarrelling, these are the grounds of musical discourses, or discourses in
music.

Music has a sympathy to the rational motions, because the rational spirits
move in number and measure, as musical instruments do.

Thus as notes are set, the thoughts are placed, and as the notes change in
several tunes, so the thoughts move in several passions, and as notes are
composed, so are thoughts, as sembrim of thoughts, a full note is a fixed
thought.

Thus according as the notes and thoughts agree, the mind, and music makes a
harmony, if I have not matched my strains (...) notes, with words and thoughts
properly, let those that understand music, and Rhetoric mend it, for I
understand neither, having neither fed at the full table, nor drank at the full
head of learning, but lived always upon scattered crumbs, which I pick up here
and there, and like a poor lasie beggar, that had rather feed on scraps then
work, or be industrious to get wealth, so I had rather write by guess, then
take the pains to learn every nice distinction.

And if my book will not please the learned, yet it may please the vulgar,
whose capacity can only dig in the earth, being not able to reach the
celestial Orbs by speculation.

Chap. 208. The knowledge of diseases.
IT is not sufficient for Physicians to study the names of diseases, and to
know only so much, as to distinguish one kind of disease from another, as we
should distinguish man from beast, or so, as a horse from a cow, or as that
horse is a barbe, or a coarser, or a genet, or a Turk, or an Arabian, but that
this barbe, is not that barbe, or this genet is not that genet, and the like.
Likewise to know the nature so, as to know how to use it, and what fit to apply
to it; as for example, a man buys a horse, and he having only an old saddle,
that he was accustomed to ride with on a horse he formerly had, put it on his
new horses back, yet although his horse is of the same Country, or sort of
horses, as his former horse was, yet the saddle may not be fit for the new
horse, but may be either too big or too little, and by the unfitness may gall
his horse so sore, and corrupt the flesh so much, as he may be a scald back
jade, as long as he lives, if it festers not as to kill him; so in diseases
medicines may be too strong, or too weak, or they may evacuate too much or too
little, if they do not not know the just dimension, and extention of the
disease. Again, one the same sort of horses may be so dull, as hardly to move
out of his pace with the spur, although it should prick so deep, as to make his
sides to bleed, when another horse of the same sort, shall run away, over hedge,
and ditch, against trees, and stones, until he hurt himself, and flings his
rider, or at least flings, and leaps, and snorts, and stamps; and grows into a
furious heat; so diseases, some must be handled gently, others more roughly,
for in diseases you must learn the disposition of the disease, as well of what
kind, sort, or breed it is; so likewise it is not enough for a physician to
know what drugs will purge choler, what phlegm, and what melancholy, or the
like; but they should study to know the several motions, which work in them, or
else their operations will be as their imploiments are, which is chance-medly;
for otherwise a Physician neither applies his medicines knowingly, nor
skilfully, but customarily, because they are usually given in such diseases,
whereof some do mend, others do die with them; but certain if Physicians would
take pains to study the several motions of the diseases, and also of the drugs,
and medicines they give, and would do as skilful musicians, which make a
consort, where although every one plays upon a several instrument, yet they
all make their notes agree, there would follow a harmony of health in the body,
as well as a harmony of music in these consorts.

But as I said before it is not sufficient to know how to purg choler, phlegm,
melancholy, and the like, for the purging of those humors does not always work
cures; for some diseases do not always proceed so much from the loose humors
in the body, as the disordered motions in the body; for choler, phlegm,
melancholy, are not superfluous humors of the body; unless the quantity of
each be too much; for the nature of the body, for those humors are part of the
body, and the body could not subsist without them, for they are several
mixtures, which serve to the consistance of the figure, and as some humors,
make and mix such humors, so other motions carry the humor like tempered
matter, or lime to the creations or reparations of the figure, which is the
body; and if there were none of those humors, the figure would no more stand,
if once a decaying, no more then a house which runs to ruin for want of stone,
brick, wood, or mortar, or the like: besides, if there were not phlegm, choler,
would do like a coach wheel, for want of moisture, the motions would set the
body on fire, and if no choler, the phlegm would drown it, and if neither
phlegm nor choler, muddy melancholy would dam, or stop it up.

But Physicians should study diseases so, as they may be able to distinguish
them, as we do the different faces of mankind, or any other; For there are as
many several kinds of diseases, as there are animals, and as much difference
in one, and the same kind, as there are in the several shapes, and
countenances to the body and nature, and disposition of the mind; besides,
diseases are like parents, and children, as the child may resemble the parent,
or the children of the same parents may resemble one another, and yet they are
not all one; Again, diseases may be like half brothers, or sisters, as some may
have all one mother, but not one father; so some diseases may be produced,
partly from such a cause, and partly from another. Again, diseases may be
matched, and some to be like widows, and widows that marry again, so diseases
may be loose, or be quit of such a producing cause, and join with another.

As for example, a cold stomach is a disease, and a hot liver is a disease, and
both may produce such diseases; perchance the cold stomach, may be cured, but
not the hot liver, when the cold stomach is cured, the hot liver is a widow,
which afterward may chance to match with a cold melancholy spleen, or two or
three, or more diseases, may be matched together; as if a man should have two or
three wives, or a woman as many husbands; likewise several accidents may be
matched, or at least commit adultery, and get bastardly children.

As for example, a great heat may be matched or joined with a sudden cold,
which may produce a great fever or other diseases that usually follow, and
milions of the like examples may be given. But I desire my Readers, that they
may not condemn my comparisons, as extravagant, and too fantastical for so
grave a subject, but I could find no fitter to express my meaning, which is
only that I would have Physicians, as skilful, knowing and learned in
diseases, as they are in the customs, manners, humors, and persons of men, and
that they may as knowingly distiugnish the difference, alterations, degrees,
and alliances of diseases, as they do the several sexes, faces, countenance,
dispositions and qualities of men.

Besides, who knows but that the very thoughts of men may be known by the
temper of their body? for could men come but to learn the several motions of
the body, which ingenious observations may come to do, they may easily come to
learn the motions of the mind, and so come to know the thoughts, which
thoughts are the several figures therein, which figures most commonly move
sympathetically, with the motions of the body.

Chap. 209. To my just Readers.
I Desire all those that are friends to my book, if not to my book, for justice
sake, that whatsoever is new is my own, which I hope all is; for I had never
any guide to direct me, nor intelligence from any Authors, to advertise me, but
write according to my own natural cogitations, where if any do write after the
same manner in what language soever, that they will remember my work is the
original of their discourse, but they that steal out my opinions, or compare
them to old opinions, that are nothing alike, as if one should liken to men
that had neither semblance in features, countenance, proportion, nor
complexion, because they are two men, as being of madkinde, surely they might
be judged to be fools; but may all such be condemned, as false, malicious,
ridiculous or mad.

But to such noble dispositions as will give right, and speak truth, may they
never receive injury, may honor crown them, fame applaud them, and time reward
them with antiquity.

This Chapter although it belongs to another book, yet I thought it fit to join
it to this discourse.

Chap. 210. The diatical Centers.
ALthough infinite matter and motion was from all eternity; yet that infinite
moving matter is disposed by an in finite Deity, which has power to order that
moving matter, as that Deity pleases, by reason there is nothing greater then
it self, therefore there is nothing that can oppose its will.

Likewise this Deity is as the center of infinite moving matter, for though
there can be no center in infinites, by reason there is no circumference, yet
in respect the matter is infinite every way from, and to this Deity; we may say
the Deity is the center of infinite matter, and by reason, the infinite moving
matter, flows as much to this diatical, center, as from it, it does as it were
present it self, or rather is forced to be ordered, by its infinite wisdom,
which otherwise it would run into an infinite confusion, with which there would
be an infinite, horrid and eternal war in nature; and though this Deity is as
the center to infinite matter, yet this Deity in it self is as infinite matter,
for its wisdom is as infinite as matter, and its knowledge as infinite as its
wisdom, and its power as infinite as both, and the effects of these attributes
run with infinite matter, like infinite parallel lines, even and straight, not
crossing, nor obstructing, nor can they circumference or circle in each other,
the matter and the Deity being both infinite neither is the matter or Deity
finite to, or in themselves, for infinite matter has no end, or period,
neither can the infinite Deity comprehend it self, so as it is a god to it
self, as well, or as much as to matter; for this Deity is no ways finite,
neither to its self, nor matter, its knowledge being as infinite as its power,
and its wisdom as infinite its knowledge, and its power as infinite as both, and
being infinite, its wisdom cannot be above its power, nor its power beyond its
wisdom, neither can its knowledge comprehend its power, or the ways of its
wisdom being all infinite and eternal.

And though nature is infinite matter, motion and figure creating all things out
of its self, for of matter they are made, and by motion they are formed into
several and particular figures, yet this Deity orders and disposes of all
natures works.

GReat God, from thee all infinites do flow;
And by thy power from thence effects do grow;
Thou orderest all degrees of matter, just
As it is thy will and pleasure move it must,
And by thy knowledge orderd'st all the best,
For in thy knowledge does thy wisdom rest;
And wisdom cannot order things amiss,
For where disorder is, no wisdom is.
Besides, great God, thy will is just, for why?
Thy will still on thy wisdom does rely.
O pardon Lord, for what, I now hear speak
Upon a guess, my knowledge is but weak;
But thou have made such creatures as mankind,
And gav'st them something which we call a mind,
Always in motion, never quiet lies,
Until the figure, of his body dies,
His several thoughts, which several motions are
Do raise up love, hope, joys, doubts and fear;
As love does raise up hope, so fear does doubt,
which makes him seek to find the great God out:
Self love does make him seek to find, if he
Came from, or shall last to eternity;
But motion being slow, makes knowledge weak,
And then his thoughts against ignorance does beat,
As fluid waters against hard rocks do flow,
Break their soft streams, and so they backward go:
Just so do thoughts, and then they backward slide,
Unto the place, where first they did abide;
And there in gentle murmurs, do complain,
That all their care and labor is in vain;
But since none knows, the great Creator must,
Man seek no more, but in his greatness trust.
FINIS.
I Find since I have read my book over, I could have enlarged that part of my
book that treats of diseases, much to the advantage; but I must entreat my
noble Readers, to remember there are natural humors, and metamorphosed humors,
which are wrought by several motions, as those of Elements; Also that there are
natural contractions, attractions, retentions, digestions, delations,
expulsions; Likewise that there are unnatural of all these motions: that is,
such as are proper or improper to the the natural health, or consistence of the
several parts and the generality of the whole figure. Also that the motions
that make the humor, and the motions that move the humor may be quite
different, and some parts of a humor may be made by some sorts of motions, and
some by other sorts of motions, where my discourse of the motions which makes
the Elements will enlighten the Readers.

ERRATA.
IN my Epistle to my Honorable Readers, for pair read poiz. In a Condemning
Treatise of Atoms, for figures read febures. p. 10. l. 28. r. dissolution. p.
12. l. 30. r. other. p. 22. l. 35. r. dissolution. p. 23. l. 15. r. finite. p.
24. l. 21. r. brain. p. 30. l. 2. r. individable. p. 34. l. 21. r. spread. p.
35. l. 22. r. digging. p. 38. l. 21. r. prints. p. 43. l. 16. r. cold. p. 58.
l. 47. r. extenuated. p. 60. l. 15. r. crinkling. and l. 36. r. triangulars. p.
62. l. 4. r. from water. and l. 17. r. as. p. 62. l. 32. r. manner. p. 65. l.
14. r. piercing. p. 104. l. 5. r. heptick fevors. and l. 12. add my. p. 116. l.
25. r. print. p. 123. l. 6. r. foul. p. 130. l. 6. r. dissolution. and l. 27.
add and swooning. p. 143. l. 3. r. sensitive. p. 144. l. 24. r. gold. p. 148.
l. 10. r. veins. p. 149. l. 6. r. fursball. p. 157. l. 18. blot out, or quick.
and l. 42. r. as. p. 158. l. 30. r. dry. and l. 33. r. dry. p. 160. l. 11. r.
then. p. 161. l. 19. r. are not all expulsive. p. 162. l. 22. r. matter from
the.

FINIS.

