A Nevv-thing, of Nothing: OR, A Song made of Nothing, the newest in Print; He
that seriously minds it, will find Something in it.
I Will sing you a Sonnet, that nere was in Print,
It Is truly and newly come out of the Mint,
But j'le tell you before hand, you will find Nothing in it.
On Nothing I think, on Nothing I Write,
For Nothing I Covet, yet Nothing I Slight,
And I care not a Pin, if I get Nothing by it.
Fire, Air, Earth and Water, Beasts, Birds, Fish and Men,
Did start out of Nothing, a Chaos, a Den;
And all things shall turn into Nothing again.
It Is Nothing sometimes that makes many things hit,
As when a Fool amongst Wise men does silently sit,
A Fool that says Nothing, may pass for a Wit.
What one Man does love, is another Man's loathing,
This Lad loves a quick thing, and that loves a slow thing,
And both in the very Conclusion love Nothing.
Your Slashing and Clashing, and Flashing of Wit,
Does start out of Nothing, but Fancy and Fit,
It Is little or Nothing to what has been Writ.
When first we together by the Ears did fall,
Then Something got Nothing, and Nothing got All,
From Nothing it came, unto Nothing it shall.
That Party which Sealed to a Covenant in have,
Who made King and Kingdom, and Churches lie wast,
Their Projects and all came to Nothing at last.
They raised an Army of Horse and of Foot,
To tumble down Monarchy, Branch and Root,
They Thundered and Plundered, but Nothing would do it.
The Organ and Altar, and Ministers Clothing,
In Presbyter-Jack did beget such a lothing,
That he must needs set up a Petty-new-Nothing.
And when he had Robbed us in Sanctified Clothing,
And Perjured the People by Faithing and Trothing,
But at last was Caught, and all came to Nothing.
Where War and Rebellion, and Plundring grows,
The Mendicant-man is freest from blows,
For he is most Happy, has Nothing to lose.
Great Casar and Pompey, and brave Alexander,
Whom Armies did follow, as Goose follows Gander,
Have Nothing to say to an Action of Slander.
The wisest great Prince, were he never so stout,
Could he Conquer the World, and give Mankind a Rout,
Did bring Nothing in, nor shall bear Nothing out.
Old Noll that did rise up to high-thing, from low-thing,
By Brewing Rebellion, and Nicking and Frothing,
In Seven years distance, was All things and Nothing.
Dick ( Olivers Heir) that pitiful slow-thing,
Who once was Invested with Purple Clothing,
Now stands for a Cipher, and a Cipher is Nothing.
The nimble tongued Lawyer that Pleads for his Pay,
When Death does Arrest him, and carry him away,
At the General Bar, will have Nothing to say.
If King-killers are excluded from bliss,
Old Bradstaw (that feels the Reward on it by this)
Had better been Nothing, then what now he is.
Your Gallant that lives by fine Meat, Drink, and Clothing,
Who was the other day, but a pitiful low-thing,
Pays Butcher, and Baker, and Draper, with Nothing.
If any here tax me with weakness of Wit,
And say that of Nothing, I Nothing have Writ,
I shall Answer Ex Nihilo, nihil fit.
Yet let his Discretion be never so tall,
This very word Nothing, shall give it a fall,
For in Writing of Nothing, I comprehend all.
Let every man give the Poet his due,
'Cause then 'twas with him, as now it is with you,
He studied it, when he had Nothing to do.
This very word Nothing, if took the right way,
May prove advantageous, for what would you say,
If the Vintner should tell you, there is Nothing to Pay?
Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed for Tho. Verea t the sign of the Angel, withour Newgate. 1664.


