Londons Improvement AND THE Builder's Security ASSERTED, BY THE Apparent
Advantages that will Attend their Easy Charge, in Raising such a Joint Stock,
as may Assure a Re-building of those HOUSES, which shall hereafter be Destroyed
BY THE Casualties of Fire.

As it was Presented on New-Years-Day last, 1679. to the Right Honorable, Sir
ROBERT CLAYTON, Knight. the Present Lord Mayor.

Multorum manibus grande Levatur Onus. LONDON, Printed for the Author, by
Thomas Milbourn, in Jewen-Street, 1680.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Robert Clayton, Knight. Lord Mayor of the CITY of
LONDON; And to the Right Worshipful, The Aldermen, and the Worshipful, the
Common Council of the said City.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
IF this Paper shall presume with too much Confidence, to Crowd in it Self
amidst the weightyest of Your Affairs; and the Discourse therein be found too
Weak, to make good those Public Advantages promised in the Title: Be pleased,
in Favor of the Good Intention of the Designer, to Receive it as a Well-meant
New-Year's-Gift, Offered to the Common Good of the City.

The Design it brings with it, Is chiefly for the Improvement of the
City-Buildings; by proposing a Way for the Raising such a Joint Stock, as may
Assure the Re-building of their Casualties happening by Fire.

The Undertaking seems so Great and Hazardous, that a Million of Pounds
Sterling, may be expected with it, to make it Practicable, to the Satisfaction
of the several Interessed.

This pretends not to be Accompanied with such a Bank; and yet in Prospect, it
may equally Answer the Expectation of those that may be Concerned; and the
Purchase thereof may be at a much Easier Rate, than can Rationally be
Contracted for, with any Bank in the World.

It cannot better be Compared, than to that in Practice amongst the Gentlemen
of His Majesty's Lifeguard; who, at this Day, by a Mutual Agreement,
Contribute toward the Buying of Horses for their Fellow Soldiers, which either
Dye, or become Unserviceable; whereby the Rider is again speedily Mounted at
the Common Charge; to which, perhaps, his Peculiar Stock could not easily
Arrive.

It is now designed, that the Houses which shall he Burnt down, may
proportionably with as much Ease to the Proprietors, be Rebuilt amongst
themselves, as those Horses are Bought at the small Charge of the Riders.

Should Your Lordship, with the Right Worshipful the Aldermen and
Common Council, upon the Perusal, approve the Design to be for a Public Good;
I shall not doubt of Your Zeal, in Promoting it that it may be made to appear
the same in Practice, as it is Presented in the Proposals: Only, let me beg,
That if it falls short of the End that it promises, That You would be pleased
to Pardon the Presumption of Him, who out of a Tender Affection to his Country,
and the Place of his Nativity, with all humble Submission, Dedicates this
Offering to the Greater Wisdom of Your Lordship: And with all Reverence and
Respect, Subscribes himself,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant, A. N.

Londons Improvement, AND THE Builders Security, etc.
THE several Fruitless Attempts that have been made, in projecting a Design for
Assuring the Building of Houses Burnt down, may be some Discouragement to offer
more on that Subject: But This being well Approved of by many, to carry nothing
with It but the Common and Public Good, after some Years lying by, is, at
their Importunity, now exposed to a more General Censure. And that the Design
may appear to be Rationally Practicable, and Beneficial for the Public Good,
it will be necessary, First, To consider the Original of Assurances amongst
Merchants: Upon Enquiry whereof, it will be found, that the Losses and
Impoverishment, which have attended many by great Adventures in one Bottom, was
undoubtedly the Cause that first Introduced those Assurances. And by that
Means, there was a Mutual Agreement on a Praemio, or Consideration, That a Loss
might be made Good, and divided amongst Many; which otherwise might have
fallen to a Particular Person, or some few Persons, to his, or their great
Detriment, and Ruin.

This Laudable Custom of Assurances, has by Experience been found so necessary
for the Support of Traders, that it has been continued for many Ages; and is
in Practice in most Parts of the World, at this Day. The Demolishment by Fire
of the City-Buildings, may be of like Detriment, and Impoverishment to those
Proprietors.

This Fate being so Epidemical to them, that none knows how soon his Estate in
those Buildings may be buried in its own Ashes; Reason and Experience, which
has introduced and continued the Custom of Assurances amongst Merchants, will
direct the like Security to be admitted of, for Re-building and Repairing the
Casualties of Houses by Fire, to those Proprietors and Inhabitants; both being
Adventurers at a Hazard, though in a different kind and Element. And though the
late New-Brick-Buildings in the City of London, are Reasonably well Defended by
their Thick Party-Walls; yet, by sad Experience we find, each particular Man's
Interest in those Enclosures, is, by the Effects of a small Spark misplaced,
still liable to be carried away with a Flame: And when such an Accident of Fire
shall happen to lay Level the Subsistence and In-come of the Inhabitant or
Proprietor (who is not in a Capacity to Re-build those Casual^^^ those
Candle-Rents to such are little better than for ever Extinguished. Former Ages
have felt the Strokes of this Formidable Enemy: We of late Years have seen a
great part of our City laid in Ashes, by its Furious Rage. And who, though the
last Burnt down, can be so secured, as not to be the next Demolished by Fire?
This is our general Hazard and Grievance. And yet, At what a Cheap Rate might
the Builders and Proprietors give themselves Ease in a great Measure, by
counterballancing these Inconveniences? If we take an Account of the Houses in
the City of London, they will be found so Considerable in Number and Value,
that an Advance of Five Pounds per Cent. (though but of one Third Part of the
Proprietors of the late New Brick-Buildings) in Proportion to the Value of
those Houses, would raise a sufficient Joint Stock, to assure a Rebuilding of
every Casualty of Fire, which may happen amongst them. A Prospect of some
things Considerable, which will accompany the Design, (to the Benefit of the
Proprietors, and the general Good of the City) are hereunto added, and left to
the Consideration of such as may be concerned in it.

First, That which will make the Design practicable at an easy Rate and
Charge, must be, the mutual Agreement of a considerable Part of the Inhabitants
and Proprietors, to become Adventurers in raising the Joint Stock, for
discharge of the Undertaking: Many Hands Contributing, lightens the Loss, and
gives Ease in the Charge of the Re-building and Repairing. Upon a Moderate
Calculation of the City New-Brick-Buildings, and their late Years Casualties by
Fire; if but one Third Part of those Inhabitants and Proprietors should make
their Subscriptions of Five per Cent. according to the Value of their Houses,
or Charge of Rebuilding, a Joint Stock of Fifty Thousand Pounds might be raised
amongst themselves, for carrying on this Design. We will believe, there are not
less than Twelve Thousand Houses of the late New Brick-Buildings, in the City
of London: These, one with the other, may be Esteemed in their Value, or Charge
of Re-building, at Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds per House; which, at Five
Pounds per Cent. will be Twelve Pounds, Ten Shillings on each House. So that,
Four Thousand Houses (the Third Part of those Buildings, at Twelve Pounds Ten
Shillings per House) will amount to Fifty Thousand Pounds. But should
Subscriptions be made only of Two Pounds per Cent. for the whole Number of
those Twelve Thousand Houses, in proportion to their said Value, a Joint Stock
of Threescore Thousand Pounds might be raised amongst themselves, for discharge
of the Undertaking. And in probability, such a Stock, with the Improvement,
might for ever perpetuate the Re-building of all the Casualties by Fire,
happening to those Adventurers. And as it may be employed, in few Years they
may receive Dividents out of the Improvement. So that, a perpetuated Assurance
for a Re-building, etc. to be made by a Joint Stock, raised in proportion to
the Value of the Houses, will be found to be more Advantageous, and purchased
at a much easier Charge, or Praemio, to the Adventurers, than should such an
Assurance be undertaken, but for One Years time, by a private Hand.

Secondly, This Joint Stock thus to be raised for discharge of this
Undertaking, will cause a Mutual Participation of Rejoicing one with another,
in their Preservation; and will be a Comfortable Relief, and a Secured
Reparation, in case of Future Demolishments. And undoubtedly, this Security, as
it will be an easy Purchase, so it will be more Safe and Satisfactory, and
more Acceptable to them, than should any other Assurance be attempted to be set
on Foot, by a private Hand, and tending to a private Profit.

Thirdly, This Assurance will be Purchased at an Easy Rate, for the Security
and Relief of the Widow, Orphan, Aged past their Labor, and such others, not
in a Capacity of Re-building; whose whole Maintenance may depend on a Hazardous
In-come, by a small Rent of Houses.

Nor can this easy Charge of Re-building, etc. be otherwise than welcome, to
those in a better Condition than the Former. These, as they have a greater
Concern in Buildings, have a greater Value hazardous to Demolishment; and are
not more exempted from this Fate, than the others: Nor can any such Interessed
assure himself, that he shall not be the First that may have Cause to wish for
this Public Reparation.

Fourthly, That as the Adventurers do in one proportion Contribute toward
raising this Joint Stock, and each Building is equally liable to Fire; none
knowing which shall be the First, or Last, that may be Burnt down; or how often
the Casualty of Fire may be repeated to one and the same Fabric: So, whilst
any of the said intended Joint Stock shall remain unexhausted, the Re-building
and Repairing must be as often repeated out of the same. And these multiplied
Reparations, and perpetuated Advantages, upon one Consideration or Praemio,
cannot be paralleled on any other Method of Assurances, than this by a
Joint Stock.

Fifthly, By this Assurance of Re-building, etc. the Brick-Buildings in this
City, would in a great Measure be acquitted of their Name of Candle-Rents.
Those Houses would be esteemed a good Settlement on Marriage, for the Provision
of Wives and Children: And likewise, may be offered as a good Security for the
Supply of the Occasions of the Interessed.

Sixthly, The Inhabitant, or Tenant, by this Assurance made to him, will
undoubtedly enjoy his Habitation, (either the Former, or Latter Rebuilt.) For
the Term of Years he may be concerned in it, he will in a great Measure be
secured from his Covenants of Reparations: And in a short time, after every
such Accident of Fire, he will be restored again to his House, and Trade;
without which, possibly, he might never return to Either.

If the Landlord will not join with the Tenant to perpetuate the Assurance, he
may be admitted only for his Term of Years; when Abatement will be made him
proportionable for the time, to his Satisfaction, etc.

Nor can such Inhabitant, or Tenant, who shall neglect to make his own
Security, reasonably propose, that any other Assurance, which may be made with
this intended Joint Stock, shall give him Ease in his Covenants with his
Landlord for such Reparation, or Re-building, in case of Casualty by Fire.

Seventhly, When the Inhabitant, or Tenant, will not be at the Charge of this
Assurance for his own Security, it will be the Landlord's Interest to do it for
himself: His Estate will be advanced in the Value from Twelve Years Purchase,
to Sixteen Years Purchase, upon the Sales thereof; and will Amount to Four
times the Value of the Money, which he Disburseth toward raising the
Joint Stock. So that, the great Security and Improvement to his Estate, is
purchased at an inconsiderable Hazard, either of Money or Casualty. If toward
the raising of this Joint Stock, he puts in Five Pounds per Cent. on the Charge
of Re-building, How small is that to the Value of his Estate, secured;
especially, when in few Years, he may be receiving Part thereof again by
Dividents, out of the Improvement of the Stock? Or, What can the Hazard be of
any Valuable Devastation amongst those Buildings, when we know, they are
Guarded with so many Thousand Ranks of Party-Brick-Walls? And consequently,
What (probably) can be his Proportion of the Loss on any Casualty; when it is
apparent, If this Joint Stock be raised, should a House to the Value of One
Thousand Pounds, be Burnt down, Five Shillings per each House, on Four Thousand
Houses, will make good that Loss: And so proportionably, a greater or lesser
Casualty might be Repaired amongst those Adventurers?

The Covenants with the best of Tenants for Re-building, is not of that
Security, Continuance, or Improvement to the Estate, as may be promised by an
Assurance of this Joint Stock.

Eighthly, This Design set on foot by this Joint Stock, might be of General
Good and Benefit to the whole City, and Inhabitants, by having in readyness a
further Supply of Persons of Skill, for managing of Engines, Buckets, etc. And
may some otherwise be Improved for the Public Good, no less for the Relief of
the Poor, than for the Convenience of others, the Inhabitants of the City.

Ninethly, The Casualties which may happen by Fire amongst the Timber-Houses,
are in a greater Proportion, more Violent, and Hazardous; and will not, on
equal Terms, be admitted into a Joint-Adventure for Assurances, with those of
the Brick-Buildings; though the Method prepared to carry on the Design for the
Re-building of Brick-Houses, with small Alteration, may be made Practicable, as
well for the Benefit of the Interessed in Timber-Houses, as of all other Cities
and Places in the World, Numerous and Eminent for Buildings.

Tenthly, The Management of the said intended Joint Stock, and the Employment,
with the Improvement thereof, will be solely at the Directions, and for the Use
and Benefit of such the Proprietors, and Inhabitants, who shall be Adventurers
in raising the said Stock; they undoubtedly will be most diligent to consult
their own Interest, and Security; as we find it in the Adventurers of the
East-India-Company, Guinney-Company, and other Corporations.

The great Care of the Adventurers, will be in their Choice of Persons of
Honesty, and Ability, who may faithfully discharge their Trust, in managing
their Stock; whereby it may be best secured, and employed, for Discharge of
that Undertaking it is raised for.

The Design may be set on Foot, by his Majesty's Gracious Letters Patents, for
Erecting a Corporation: And undoubtedly, in the Managing, must discover those
Advantages, which at this distance cannot be foreseen. The Method to make the
Design Practicable, will be produced, when the Proprietors and and Inhabitants
of the Houses, shall be prepared for raising the Stock; or that it may be any
ways Useful for a Public Good.

If it should be asked, Where this Joint Stock shall be Lodged? or, How it
shall be Employed and Improved? It is Answered, It will be at the Disposal of
the Corporation; which probably by them may be fixed in the Chamber of London,
(an Undoubted Security) or may be otherwise disposed of, at their Discretion.

FINIS.

