CCXI. SOCIABLE LETTERS, WRITTEN BY THE Thrice Noble, Illustrious, and
Excellent PRINCESS, THE LADY MARCHIONESS OF NEWCASTLE.

LONDON Printed by WILLIAM WILSON, Anno Dom. M. DC. LXIV.

TO THE LADY MARCHIONESS OF NEWCASTLE, On her Book of EPISTLES.
When all Epistlers you have read, and seek,
Who writ in Latin, English, French, or Greek,
Such Woeful things, as they are only fit
To stop Mustard-pots, to this Lady's Wit,
Nay, were they all Alive, I Swear, I think
They Would Burn their Books, and Throw away their Ink,
Make Pick-Tooths of their Pens, and for their Paper,
Only to light Tobacco, and each Taper;
You Have Spoiled Commerce, Intelligencers, Trade,
None now dares write a Letter, so Afraid
To be thought Fools, and is the Carriers Curse,
To find his Empty Budget, and Lank Purse,
Nay the Post-house's Ruined, and will Complain,
From their Vast Gettings now they have no Gain;
All now by Word of Mouth, and what is spoken,
Or Gilded Nutmegs, or each Tavern-token,
Nicked Sticks for Merchants, Why would you Undo
Your self at once thus, and the whole World too?
After my Hearty Commendations, This,
The Style of Statesmen still Applauded is;
Your Flames of Wit, this Age may think a Sin,
A Proclamation then may call it in.
VV. NEWCASTLE.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LORD MARQUESS OF NEWCASTLE.
MY LORD,
IT may be said to me, as one said to a Lady, Work Lady, Work, let writing
Books alone, For surely VViser Women never writ one; But your Lordship never bid
me to Work, nor leave Writing, except when you would persuade me to spare so
much time from my Study as to take the Air for my Health; the truth is, My
Lord, I cannot Work, I mean such Works as Ladies use to pass their Time
withal, and if I could, the Materials of such Works would cost more than the
Work would be worth, besides all the Time and Pains bestowed upon it. You may
ask me, what Works I mean; I answer, Needle-works, Spinning-works,
Preserving-works, as also Baking, and Cooking-works, as making Cakes, Pyes,
Puddings, and the like, all which I am Ignorant of; and as I am Ignorant in
these Employments, so I am Ignorant in Gaming, Dancing, and Revelling; But yet,
I must ask you leave to say, that I am not a Dunce in all Employments, for I
Understand the Keeping of Sheep, and Ordering of a Grange, indifferently well,
although I do not Busy my self much with it, by reason my Scribbling takes away
the most part of my Time. Perchance some may say, that if my Understanding be
most of Sheep, and a Grange, it is a Beastly Understanding; My answer is, I
wish Men were as Harmless as most Beasts are, then surely the World would be
more Quiet and Happy than it is, for then there would not be such Pride,
Vanity, Ambition, Covetousness, Faction, Treachery, and Treason, as is now;
Indeed one might very well say in his Prayers to God, O Lord God, I beseech
thee of thy Infinite Mercy, make Man so, and order his Mind, Thoughts,
Passions, and Appetites, like Beasts, that they may be Temperate, Sociable,
Laborious, Patient, Prudent, Provident, Brotherly-loving, and Neighbourly-kind,
all which Beasts are, but most Men not. But leaving most Men to Beasts, I
return to your Lordship, who is one of the Best of men, whom God has filled
with Heroic Fortitude, Noble Generosity, Poetical Wit, Moral Honesty, Natural
Love, Neighbourly-kindness, Great Patience, Loyal Duty, and Celestial Piety,
and I pray God as Zealously and Earnestly to Bless you with Perfect Health and
Long Life, as becomes

Your Lordships Honest Wife and Humble Servant M. Newcastle.

TO ALL PROFESSORS OF Learning and Art.
Most Famously Learned,
I Wish I could Write so Wisely, Wittily, Eloquently, and Methodically, as
might be Worthy of your Perusal; but if any of your Noble Profession should
Humble themselves so Low as to Read my Works, or part of them, I pray Consider
my Sex and Breeding, and they will fully Excuse those Faults which must
Unavoidably be found in my Works. But although I have no Learning, yet give me
leave to Admire it, and to wish I were one of your Society, for certainly, were
I Emperess of the World, I would Advance those that have most Learning and
Wit, by which I believe the Earth would rather be an Heaven, since both Men
and Government would be as Celestial, for I am Confident that Wisdom, and for
the most part Virtue, is Inherent in those that are Masters of Learning, and
Endued with Wit; And to this sort of Persons I do Offer my Works, although to
be Condemned on the Altar of their Censure, and rest Satisfied with the Honor
that they thought them Worthy to be Judged. Thus, whether my Works Live or
Dye, I am Devoted to be

Your Servant M. N.

THE PREFACE.
Noble Readers,
I Hope you will not make the Mistake of a Word a Crime in my Wit, as some
former Readers have done, for in my Poems they found Fault that the Number was
not Just, nor every Line Matched with a Perfect Rhyme; But I can answer for that
Book, that there be but some such Errors in it, and those as it were by Chance;
besides, in some Languages, as Latin and Greek, which are accounted the Chief,
they regard not Rimes in their Poems, but only an Exact number of Feet and
Measures; however Rimes and Numbers are only as the Garments, and not as the
Body of Wit; but I have been more Exact in my other Book called Natural
Descriptions, wherein most Verses are Just both for Number and Rimes. As for my
Work, The World's Olio, they may say some Words are not Exactly Placed,
which I confess to be very likely, and not only in that, but in all the rest of
my Works there may be such Errors, for I was not Bred in an University, or a
Free School, to Learn the Art of Words; neither do I take it for a
Disparagement of my Works, to have the Forms, Terms, Words, Numbers, or Rymes
found Fault with, so they do not find Fault with the Variety of the Subjects,
or the Sense and Reason, Wit, and Fancy, for I leave the Formal, or VVorditive
part to Fools, and the Material or Sensitive part to Wise men. Concerning my
Philosophical Opinions, some did say, they were too Obscure, and not Plain
Enough for their Understanding; I must confess, I writ that Book at first at
the same time when I wrote my Poems, but to my Reason it was as Plain as I
could write it, and if some Readers could not Understand it, I am not Nature to
give them Wit and Understanding; yet have I since not only Over-viewed, and
Reformed that Book, but made a great Addition to it, so that I believe, I have
now so clearly Declared my Sense and Meaning therein, that those which
Understand it not must not only be Irrational, but Insensible Creatures. As for
my Book of Plays, some find Fault they are not made up Exactly, nor the Scenes
placed Justly, as also I have not in some Plays caused all the Actors to be of
an Acquaintance, but this same Fault they find, I have Expressed in one of the
Epistles before that Book, which they fling back upon my Work. As for my
Orations, I have heard, that some do Censure me for speaking too Freely, and
Patronizing Vice too much, but I would have them not to be too Rash in Judging,
but to Consider, first, whether there be a sufficient Reason that may move them
to give such a Censure, for truly I am as much an Enemy to Vice, as I am a
Friend to Virtue, and do Persecute Vice with as perfect an Hatred, as I do
Pursue Virtue, with an Entire, and Pure Love, which is Sufficiently Known to
those that Know me; and therefore, it is not out of Love to Vice that I Plead
for it, but only to Exercise my Fancy, for surely the Wisest, and Eloquentest
Orators, have not been Ashamed to Defend Vices upon such Accounts, and why may
not I do the like? for my Orations for the most part are Declamations, wherein
I speak Pro and Con, and Determine nothing; and as for that Part which contains
several Pleadings, it is Fit and Lawful that both Parties should bring in their
Arguments as well as they can, to make their Cases Good; but I matter not their
Censure, for it would be an Endless Trouble to me, to Answer every ones Foolish
Exception; an Horse of a Noble Spirit Slights the Bawling of a Petty Cur, and
so do I. As for the Present Book of Letters, I know not as yet what Aspersion
they will lay upon it, but I fear they will say, they are not written in a
Modestyle, that is, in a Complementing, and Romancical way, with High Words,
and Mystical Expressions, as most of our Modern Letter-writers use to do; But,
Noble Readers, I do not intend to Present you here with Long Complements in
Short Letters, but with Short Descriptions in Long Letters; the truth is, they
are rather Scenes than Letters, for I have Endeavored under the Cover of
Letters to Express the Humors of Mankind, and the Actions of Man's Life by the
Correspondence of two Ladies, living at some Short Distance from each other,
which make it not only their Chief Delight and Pastime, but their Tie in
Friendship, to Discourse by Letters, as they would do if they were Personally
together, so that these Letters are an Imitation of a Personal Visitation and
Conversation, which I think is Better (I am sure more Profitable) than those
Conversations that are an Imitation of Romancical Letters, which are but Empty
Words, and Vain Complements. But the Reason why I have set them forth in the
Form of Letters, and not of Plays, is, first, that I have put forth Twenty
Plays already, which number I thought to be Sufficient, next, I saw that
Variety of Forms did Please the Readers best, and that lastly they would be
more taken with the Brevity of Letters, than the Formality of Scenes, and whole
Plays, whose Parts and Plots cannot be Understood till the whole Play be Read
over, whereas a Short Letter will give a Full Satisfaction of what they Read.
And thus I thought this to be the Best Way or Form to put this Work into, which
if you Approve of, I have my Reward.

UPON HER EXCELLENCY THE AUTHORESS.
THis Lady only to her self she Writes,
And all her Letters to her self Indites;
For in her self so many Creatures be,
Like many Commonwealths, yet all Agree.
Man's Head's a World, where Thoughts are Born and Bred,
And Reason's Emperor in every Head;
But in all Heads does not a Caesar Reign,
A Wise Augustus has not every Brain,
And Reason in some Brains from Rule's put out
By Mad, Rebellious Thoughts, and Factious Rout;
And Great Disorder in such Brains will be,
Not any Thought with Reason will Agree;
But in her Brain does Reason Govern well,
Not any Thought against Reason does Rebel,
But does Obey what Reason does Command,
When it is his Will, does Travel Sea and Land,
As some do Travel out to Kingdoms far,
And Guided are by Observation's Star,
They bring Intelligence from every State,
Their Peace, their Wars, their Factions, and their Hate,
And into every City Travel free,
Relate their Customs, Trafficks, Policy,
Observe each Magistrate, their Formal Face,
And what Authority they bear, or Place,
Whether they Covetously do Extort,
Or are Ambitious, giving Bribes at Court,
To Raise to Places, or to Hide their Crime,
For thus Men do to Wealth and Office Clime;
And some into the Churches go to see
Who Kneels in Prayer, or comes for Company,
Who Courts his Mistress as his only Saint,
Implores her Favor, and makes his Complaint
Be Known, Or who does turn her eyes about,
To show her Face, or seek a Lover out;
And some to Balls, and Masks, and Plays do go,
And some do Crowd to see a Pagan Show,
And some within Kings Courts do get a Place,
Observe the Grandeur, and the Courtly Grace,
The Ceremony and Splendour of a Court,
Their Plays, Balls, Masks, and every several Sport,
And all their Amorous Courtships which they make,
And how the Ladies do each Courtship take,
The Antic Postures of the Younger Race,
Their Mimick Gestures, and Affected Pace,
Their Amorous Smiles, and Glancing Wanton Eyes,
All which do Noble Souls Hate and Despise;
And some amongst the Privy-Counsel get,
Where round a Table Prince and Nobles sit,
Hear what they say, Observe their Cross Debates,
And mark which speaks through Faction, or which Hates
Some Lord that is in Favor more than he,
For in States Matters seldom they Agree.
And thus Her Thoughts, the Creatures of her Mind,
Do Travel through the World amongst Mankind,
And then Return, and to the Mind do bring
All the Relations of each several thing;
And Observation Guides them back again
To Reason, their Great King, that is in the Brain:
Then Contemplation calls the Senses straight,
Which Ready are, and Diligently Wait,
Commanding Two these Letters for to Write,
Touch in the Hand, as also the Eyesight,
These Two the Soul's Clerks are, which do Inscribe,
And Write all Truly down, having no Bribe.
TO THE CENSORIOUS READER.
REader, you will think, perchance, my Wit in Fault,
Like Meat that is too much Brin'd, and Oversalt,
But better Poets far than I have been,
Have written Sharper, and with Greater Spleen,
Yet they have much been Praised for writing so,
And on Advancing Stigues of Fame do go;
But my Poor VVritings they no Malice know,
Nor on a Crabbed Nature did they Grow;
I to Particulars give no Abuse,
My Wit Indites for Profitable Use,
That Men may see their Follies, and their Crimes,
Their Errors, Vanities, and Idle Times,
Not that I think they do not Know them well,
But lest they should Forget, Im' Bold to tell,
For to Remember them, like those that Ride,
Not thinking, on their Way, may chance to Slide,
Or Fall into a Ditch, so I for Fear
Bid them take Heed, Beware, and have a Care,
For there are Stumps of Trees, or a Deep Pit,
Or Dangerous Passages where Thieves do sit
And VVait, or Ravenous Beasts do lie for Prey,
Or such a Lane where is Foul and Dirty Way,
And so of Waters, and each Dangerous place:
But I write not to any man's Disgrace;
Then Censure not my Satyr-wit for Crime,
Nor putting this Epistle into Rhyme.
SOCIABLE LETTERS.
I.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to desire, that, since we cannot converse Personally, we
should converse by Letters, so as if we were speaking to each other,
discoursing our Opinions, discovering our Designs, asking and giving each other
Advice, also telling the several Accidents, and several Employments of our
home-affairs, and what visits we receive, or entertainments we make, and whom
we visit, and how we are entertaind, what discourses we have in our
gossiping-meetings, and what reports we hear of public affairs, and of
particular Persons, and the like; so that our Letters may present our personal
meetings and associatings. Truly, Madam, I take so much delight in your wise,
witty, and virtuous Conversation, as I could not pass my life more pleasing and
delightfully; wherefore I am never better pleased, than when I am reading your
Letters, and when I am writing Letters to you; for my mind and thoughts are all
that while in your Company: the truth is, my mind and thoughts live always
with you, although my person is at distance from you; insomuch, as, if Souls
die not as Bodies do, my Soul will attend you when my Body lies in the grave;
and when we are both dead, we may hope to have a Conversation of Souls, where
yours and mine will be doubly united, first in Life, and then in Death, in
which I shall eternally be,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

II.
MADAM,
THe Lady C. E. ought not to be reproved for grieving for the loss of her
Beauty, for Beauty is the Light of our Sex, which is Eclipsed in Middle age,
and Benighted in Old age, wherein our Sex sits in Melancholy Darkness, and the
remembrance of Beauty past, is as a displeasing Dream. The truth is, a young
beautiful face is a Friend, when as an old withered face is an Enemy, the one
causes Love, the other Aversion: yet I am not of Mrs. U. R.'s. humor, which
had rather dye before her Beauty, than that her Beauty should die before her:
for I had rather live with wrinkles, than die with youth; and had rather my
face clothed with Time's sad mourning, than with Death's white hue; and surely
it were better to follow the shadow of Beauty, than that Beauty should go with
the Corpse to the Grave; and I believe that Mrs. V. R. would do, as the tale is
of a woman, that did wish, and pray she might die before her Husband, but when
Death came, she entreated him to spare her, and take her Husband; so that she
would rather live without him, than die for him. But leaving this sad discourse
of Age, Wrinkles, Ruin and Death, I rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend, and Servant.

III.
MADAM,
I Do not wonder, there are great factions between the three families C. Y. O.
by reason they have no business, or employment to busy their heads about, and
their servants and followers have as little to do, which makes them censure,
backbite, and envy each other; for Idleness and Poverty are the creators of
Faction, and Pride and Ambition the disturbers of Peace. Wherefore Idleness
should be banished out of every family, which will also be a means to be rid of
Poverty, for Industry is the way to thrive: Besides, when men have something to
do, they will have the less time to talk; for many words from discontented
persons increase hate, and make dissentions: the truth is, words for the most
part make more discord than union, and more enemies than friends; wherefore
Silence is more commendable than much Speaking, for the liberty of the tongue
does rather express men's follies, than make known their wit; neither do many
words argue much Judgment; but as the old Saying is, The greatest talkers are
the least actors, they being more apt to speak spitefully, than to act
mischievously; another Saying is, That musing men rather study to do evil, than
contemplate on good; But I am not of that opinion, for if men would think more,
and speak less, the world of mankind would be more honest and wiser than they
are, for Thoughts beget Consideration, Consideration begets Judgment,
Judgment begets Discretion, Discretion begets Temperance, and Temperance
begets Peace in the Mind, and Health in the Body, for when men want Temperance,
they are subject to Insatiable Appetites, unruly Passions, and wandering
Desires, which causes Covetousness and Ambition, and these cause Envy and Hate,
which makes Faction and Strife, which Strife I leave to Busy Natures, Restless
Minds, Vain Humors, and Idle Fools, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

IV.
MADAM,
THe other day was here the Lady I. O. to see me, and her three Daughters,
which are called the three Graces, the one is Black, the other Brown, the third
White, all three different colored beauties; also they are of different
features, statures and shapes, yet all three so equally handsome, that neither
Judgment nor Reason can prefer one before another: Also their behaviors are
different; the one is Majestical, the other Gay and Aerie, the third Meek and
Bashful; yet all three graceful, sweet and becoming: Also their Wits are
different; the one Propounds well, the other Argues well, the third Resolves
well; all which make a harmony in discourse. These three Ladies are resolved
never to marry, which makes many sad Lovers; but whilst they were here, in
comes the Lord S. C. and discoursing with them, at last he asks them, whether
they were seriously resolved never to marry? they answered, they were resolved
never to marry: But, Ladies, said he, Consider, Time wears out Youth, and fades
Beauty, and then you will not be the three young fair Graces; You say true, my
Lord, answered one of them, but when we leave to be the young fair Graces, we
shall then be the old wise Sibyls. By this answer you may perceive, that when
our Sex cannot pretend to be Fair, they will pretend to be Wise; but it matters
not what we pretend to, if we be really Virtuous, which I wish all our Sex may
be, and rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

V.
MADAM,
IN my opinion the marriage between Sir A. G. and Mrs. I. S. is no ways
agreeable, wherefore not probable to be blessed with a happy union, though she
is likelyer to be the happier of the two; for it is better to have an old doting
fool, than a wanton young filly; but he will be very unhappy through Jealousy,
what with his Dotage, and her Freedom, which will be like fire and oil, to set
his mind on a flame, and burn out the lamp of his life: Truly, I did wonder,
when I heard they were married, knowing her nature and his humor, for she
loves young masculine Company, and he loves only young female Companion; so
that he cannot enjoy her to himself, unless she bar her self from all other
men for his sake, which I believe she will not do, for she will not bury her
Beauty, nor put her Wit to silence for the sake of her Husband; for, if I be
not mistaken, she will love a young Servant better than an old Husband; nay, if
her Husband were young, she would prefer variety of Servants, before a single
Husband, insomuch, that if she had been made, when there was but One man, as
Adam, she would have done like her Grand mother Eve, as to have been courted by
the Devil, and would betray her Husband for the Devil's sake, rather than want
a Lover. But leaving the discourse of Jealousy, Age, Courtship, and Devils, I
rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Fr. and S.

VI.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you sent me word, that Sir F. O. was retired to write his
own Life, for he says, he knows no reason, but he may write his own life as
well as Guzman; and since you desire my opinion of his intended work, I can
only say, that his Life for any thing I know to the contrary, has been as
evil as Guzman's, but whether his Wit be as good as Guzman's, I know not, yet
I doubt the vvorst, and to write an Evil life without Wit, will be but a
dull and tedious Story, indeed so tedious and dull, as I believe none will take
the pains to read it, unless he himself read of himself: but it is to be hoped,
that he will be tired of himself, and so desist from his self Story. And if he
do write his own Life, it will be as a masking Dolphin, or such like thing,
where the outside is painted past-board or canvas, and the inside stuffed with
shreds of paper, or dirty rags, scraped from dunghils: and if he set his
Picture before, as a Frontispiece to his Book, it will be like an ill-favored
masking Vizzard. But if he have any Friends, surely they will persuade him to
employ his time about something else; but some are so unhappy, as they have
nothing to employ Time with; they can waste Time, but not employ Time; and as
they waste Time, so Time wastes them. There Is a saying, That men are born to
live, and live to dye; but I think some are only born to dye, and not to live;
for they make small use of life, and life makes small use of them; so that in
effect they were ready for the Grave, as soon as they came forth from the Womb.
Wherefore if Sir F. O. go forward with his work, he will dig his Grave through
the story of his Life, and his Soul-less Wit will be buried therein. But
leaving his dead Wit to his paper Coffin, and his unprofitable Labors to his
black mourning Ink, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

VII.
MADAM,
I Am sorry to hear, Wit is so little known and understood, that Sir W. T.
should be thought Mad, because he has more Wit than other men; indeed Wit
should always converse with Wit, and Fools with Fools; for Wit and Fools can
never agree, they understand not one another; Wit flies beyond a Fools conceit
or understanding, for Wit is like an Eagle, it has a strong wing, and flies
high and far, and when it does descend, it knocks a Fool on the head, as an
Eagle does a Dotril, or a Woodcock, or such like Birds; and surely the world
was never so filled with Fools, as it is in this age, nor has there been
greater Errors, or grosser Follies committed than there has been in this age:
It is not an age like Augustus Caesar's, when Wisdom reigned, and Wit
flourished, which was the cause of Plenty and Peace throughout the whole world:
but in this age Debauchery is taken for Wit, and Faction for Wisdom, Treachery
for Policy, and drunken Quarrels for Valor: Indeed the world is so foolishly
Wicked, and basely Foolish, that they are happiest who can withdraw themselves
most from it: But when I say the world, I mean the world of Men, or rather the
Bodies of Men, for there does not seem to be many Rational Souls amongst them,
they are Soul-less men, Bodies of men that have only Senses and Appetites, or
Sensual Appetites. But you say, every Particular complains of the world, as I
do in this Letter, yet None helps to mend it. Let me tell you, Madam, it is not
in the power of every Particular, nor in a number, But the Chiefest persons
must mend the world; viz. they that govern the world, or else the world will be
out at the heels. But in some ages the world is more tattered and torn, than in
other ages; and in some ages the world is patched and piec'd, but seldom new
and suitable; and it is oftener in a Fools-coat than in a Grave Cassock.
Wherefore leaving the motley, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

VIII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to invite me unto a Ball, to divert my Melancholy Thoughts,
but they are not capable of your Charity, for they are in too deep a Melancholy
to be diverted; like as bodies that are starved, and almost dying for hunger,
so weak as they cannot feed, at least, that want strength to nourish or digest,
having not life enough to re-inkindle the vital fire, which want of food has
near put out. Thus, Madam, I do not refuse your Charity, but I am not capable
to receive it; Besides, my very outward appearance would rather be an
Obstruction to your Mirth, than any Addition to your Pleasures, and for me, it
would be very improper; for a grieved heart, weeping eyes, sad countenance, and
black mourning garments, will not be suitable with dancing legs; In truth, my
leaden Spirits have soder'd up my Joints so stiff, that they will not move so
agilly, as is required in Dancing; I am fitter to sit upon a Grave, than to
tread measures on a Carpet; and there is such an Antipathy in my mind to light
Aires, that they would sooner stop my Ears as Discord, than enter into my
Hearing as Harmony; indeed my Senses are as closed or shut from the world, and
my Mind is benighted in Sorrow, insomuch as I have not one lighted thought,
they are all put out with the memory of my Loss. Thus, Madam, Memory has made
an Oblivion; but though it has buried for the present the worldly Joys of my
Life, yet it has not buried my grateful Thanks for your Favors, for which I
am,

Madam, Your most humble S.

IX.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter I perceive that the Lady N. P. is an actor in some
State-design, or at least would be thought so, for our Sex in this age, is
ambitious to be State-Ladies, that they may be thought to be Wise Women; but
let us do what we can, we shall prove our selves Fools, for Wisdom is an enemy
to our Sex, or rather our Sex is an enemy to Wisdom. It Is true, we are full of
Designs and Plots, and ready to side into Factions; but Plotting, Designing,
Factions, belong nothing to Wisdom, for Wisdom never intermeddles therein or
therewith, but renounces them; it is only cheating Craft and Subtilty that are
the managers thereof: and for deceiving Craft, Women are well practiced
therein, and most of them may be accounted Politicians; for no question but
Women may, can, and oftentimes do make wars, especially Civil wars; witness our
late Civil war, wherein Women were great, although not good actors; for though
Women cannot fight with warring arms themselves, yet they can easily inflame
men's minds against the Governors and Governments, unto which Men are too apt
even without the persuasion of Women, as to make innovation through envy and
emulation, in hopes of advancement in Title, Fortune and Power, of which Women
are as ambitious as Men; but I wish for the honor of our Sex, that Women could
as easily make peace as war, though it is easier to do evil than good, for
every fool can make an uproar, and a tumultuous disorder, such as the wisest
can hardly settle into order again. But Women in State Affairs can do as they
do with themselves, they can, and do often make themselves sick, but when they
are sick, not well again: So they can disorder a State, as they do their
Bodies, but neither can give Peace to the one, nor Health to the other; but
their restless Minds, and unsatiable Appetites, do many times bring Ruin to the
one, and Death to the other; for Temperance and Quietness are strangers to our
Sex. But leaving the Lady N. P. to her petty Designs, and weak Plots, I rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Fr. and S.

X.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you were pleased to tell me for news, that C. V. was newly
made a Lord; truly he deserves it, and if his Title were to be measured, it
would be far short of his Merit, but it is a greater honor to have more Merit
than Title, than to have more Title than Merit. Indeed Title ought to be but as
a Sign; as the King's Arms or Picture to a Shop of a rich Merchandise; so Title
should be but to have it known there is a worthy Person, who is full of Noble
Qualities, Moral Virtues, Sweet Graces, Divine Influences, Learned Sciences,
Wise Counsels, and the like, which ought to be commerced and traffick'd within
the world, for their own and others good, benefit and pleasure; for the riches
of the Mind must do as other riches, which is to disperse about, not to lie
unprofitably hid, and horded up from all use; but they ought to be as Staple
Commodities, and not as Trifles of Vanity, which wear out, or are laid by, as
men's humors change, and are more for fashion than benefit. But some men seem
to be richer than they are, and some to be poorer than they are; they that seem
richer than they are, lay all in their outward Shops, and those that seem
poorer than they are, lay all in their inward Warehouses: Those that lay all
in their outward Shops are vainglorious Persons, those that lay all in their
inward Warehouses are magnanimous Persons; But women's Minds or Souls are like
Shops of small-wares, wherein some have pretty toys, but nothing of any great
value. I imagine you will chide me for this opinion, and I should deserve to be
chidden, if all Women were like to you; but you are but one, and I speak of
Women, not of One woman; and thus I am neither injurious to You, nor partial to
our Sex; but I wish with all my heart, our whole Sex were like you, so I might
hope to be one of your Copies, and though you are an example not to be
pattern'd, yet I will endeavor to imitate you as much as I can, by which I may
be so much the more worthy to be

Your Ladyships Humble Servant.

XI.
MADAM,
I Hear the Lady B. A. and the lady C. D. are gone to be Courtiers, but I
believe they will neither agree with the Court, nor the Court with them; for
the one has been bred fitter for a Nunnery than a Court, and the other bred to
good huswifry, fitter for the Country than a Court; the truth is, Sparing is
unnatural for a Courtier, and Praying is not usual for a Courtier, yet those
Ladies that are Beautiful are made Saints there, and the men are their Devouts,
which offer them Vows, Prayers, Praises, and sometimes Thanksgiving, and many
times they are Penitents; but when the Ladies Beauties decay, the men become
Apostates. Thus you may see many of our Sex are made Saints, though they be
Sinners, but they are Sainted for theit Beauty, not for their Piety, for their
outward Form, not for their inward Grace: Indeed they are worldly Saints, and
the Court is their Heaven, and Nature their Goddess, which indues them with
attractive Graces; to which I leave them, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XII.
MADAM,
I Hear the Lady D. C. makes Politic feasts and entertainments, feasting the
Courtiers, and entertaining them with dancing and carding, to whom she does
Politickly lose her money, and causes her husband to lend them money out of a
Policy, and it is likely she will Politickly ruin her husband; for I believe she
is more Politic with her husband than with the Courtiers, and they more
Politic with her than her husband. But many wives will persuade their husbands
to invite company, pretending some Designs, whenas their chief Design is, to
have Company; and they will be very free and frolic with their guests, making
their husbands believe they are so only to compass, or bring their Designs to
pass; so as they make their husbands Pimps to Cuckold themselves, who think
their wives wise women, both in their Counsels and Actions: Such, and the like
inventions and excuses wives have to be in company; and it is to be observed,
that those wives that love freedom and company, will be so very kind to their
husbands when they bring home company, or are with such company as they like,
that not only strangers, but their husbands think them for that time the best
wives in the world; whenas being all alone, to their husbands, the Furies are
no more turbulent, nor worse natured than they; But in much company all is as
their husbands please, whether to dance or play; upon which kind words and
humble behavior, their husbands are so ravished with joy, as then it is what
their wives please; nay, they entreat their wives to please themselves, and
approve of all they say or do. Other wives, to get, or be in company, will
insinuatingly flatter, and persuade their husbands, that they are the wisest,
or wittiest men in the world, and that there is none that knows how to
entertain company but they; that for their own parts they hate much company, as
nothing so tedious and troublesome, and only take delight to see their
husbands entertain guests, and love to hear them discourse with strangers,
their wit and behavior being so far above others; and to encourage their
husbands, or to flatter them the more, they will repeat their Discourses when
they are alone together, as how well such or such a question was resolved, or
how wittily such or such a one was answered, and the like; whereupon the
husband often invites company, only for his wife to hear his supreme Wit, wise
Sentences, and to see his grave Entertainments, whenas his wife laughs in her
mind to hear what a Fool, and to see what a formal Coxcomb, and how
self-conceited he is. Thus most husbands are either deluded with Politic
wives, or forced to obey, or humor their Turbulent and Peevish wives, or
deceived by their Insinuating and Flattering wives, to betray themselves. But
fearing I should divulge too much of the nature of our Sex, I stop here, and
rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XIII.
MADAM,
MOst of Mrs. L. A's. discourse is of her self, indeed every one is apt to
speak of himself, as being full of self-love, which makes most tongues
discourse of a self-theme; but her theme is, to tell how good a Wife she will
make when she is married, although the proof will be after she is married, if
she can get a Husband; for I believe she wants one, and desires one, because
she talks so much of a Husband, and promises so well for a Husband. Truly, it
is to be observed, that all Maids love to talk of Husbands, all Widows of
Suitors, and all Wives of Lovers: for men may marry, nay do often marry, yet
not for Love, but for Interest, as for Posterity, or the like; and Suitors may
woo, yet not for Love, but Interest, as for Wealth, or the like; But when
Amorous Lovers plead, it is for no other design, but to lie with the Woman
they make their address to; and married Wives are more apt to yield than Maids
or Widows, having a cloak to cover their shame or reproach, and a husband to
father their children; and they are more fond of amorous Courtships than Maids
or Widows, because they are more barred, as being bound in Wedlock's-bonds:
besides, it requires more secrecy and difficulty, both which Women love. But
when Maids, Widows, and Wives, talk of Husbands, Suitors and Lovers, they are so
delighted with the Discourse, as you may perceive, not only by their Speech,
being then quicker, and their Wit sharper, and Words fluenter, but also by
their Looks, their Eyes being livelier, their Countenances pleasanter, and
their Behavior gayer or wantoner, than in any other Discourse, especially if
it be upon particular Persons, such as they fancy, or think they fancy them.
But as for Mrs. L. A. who discourses so much of a Husband, I do verily believe,
she will make a very good Wife, not that she says so, but that she has been
bred strictly and retiredly, and is of a sober, and stayed Nature, not apt to
run into Extravagancies, nor to desire variety of Company, but is Huswifly and
Thrifty, and of an humble and obedient Behavior, and not only Attentive to
good Advices, but Tractable and practive to them; all which makes her deserve a
good Husband, and I wish her one with all my heart; but she must take her
fortune, whether none or any, bad or good; but many a good Batchelour makes an
ill Husband, and many a wild deboyst Batchelour makes a good Husband; and as
for VVidowers, many men that were good Husbands to their first Wives, are ill
Husbands to their second, or third, or fourth, or to some good, and to some
bad; and some that have been ill and unkind Husbands to their first Wives, are
very good, and fond Husbands to their second: the like for Maids, Wives and
Widows; so as none can make a wise choice in hap-hazard; for hap-hazard, as
chance, bars out VVisdom's prudence, it blindfolds Wisdom, having no insight
into Chance; so as a Fool blinded with Ignorance, may choose in the Lottery of
Husbands and Wives, as well as the VVisest, being blinded with the inconstancy
of Mankind. But leaving Mrs. L. A. to the Lottery, and her Matrimonial
Contemplations and Discourses, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XIV.
MADAM,
I Am of your opinion, that Philosophers and Poets certainly should be the
wisest men, for they having so deep an insight, as to pierce even into the
Secrets of Nature, it should be easy for them to have an insight into the
Designs, Counsels, and Actions of Men, and to foresee the Effects of Things;
for they that can Judge of Hidden and Invisible Causes, and find out their
Effects, may easily Judge of Visible Actions or Businesses amongst Mankind; and
there is no man that can be Wise, that has not a deep peircing insight, and a
clear foresight to conceive and foresee, what is, and what may probably be;
for it is not History that makes men Wise, nor Law, nor Logic, nor to be
Learned in all the Sciences, but to have a Natural Ingenuity, as to conceive
Rationally, to judge Solidly, to understand Perfectly, to perceive Readily, to
distinguish Clearly, to compare Rightly, to search Narrowly, to examine
Strictly, to observe Generally, to consider Seriously, of all that has been,
is, or is not, or what may be, or cannot be; In all which, Natural Philosophers
and Poets are the most Ingenious men; But of this sort of men the world has
not many, indeed so sew, as the rest of mankind does not understand them, for
they think them rather Fools than Wise men; for though Wise men know Fools, yet
Fools know not Wise men, nay Fools do not know Fools, but Wise men know Wise
men; for how should a Fool know a Fool, when he knows not Himself? But if any
fault be in Natural Poets and Philosophers, it is that they are so delighted
with Transcendency, as they will not Descend to consider, or regard the Actions
and Designs of Men, no, not the outward and ordinary works of Nature; they are
of Nature's privy Counsel, wherefore they scorn to be in Temporal or Human
Counsels of Men; they are Natural Statesmen, and will not be Temporal
Statesmen, neither they will attend Temporal Princes, being Nature's Chief
Courtiers; and when they chance to observe the Actions and Courses of other
men, they view them with a despising smile, to see their gross Errors,
ridiculous Follies, painful Pleasures, foolish Vices and unprofitable Labors:
also Natural Philosophers and Poets are not only the Wisest, but the Happiest
men; not only in pleasing themselves with their vast Knowledge, supreme Wits,
subtle Conceptions, delightful Imaginations, and curious Fancies, having all
the Delights of the Mind, and Pleasures of Thoughts, but in that they can
Conquer their Unruly Passions, Unsatiable Appetites, and order their Minds
according to their Fortunes; they are Happy in any Condition, having their
Happiness always with them, and in them, and not without them, when other men's
Happiness lies always without, and their Unhappiness within them, their Minds
are always like troubled Waters, and every cross Accident is apt to make a
Storm, when Poets and Philosophers Minds are like the fixed Stars, having only
a twinkling motion; or rather like the Sun, which keeps a constant Course, and
never alters, but yet moves swiftly about the world, and views every corner,
and peirces into the very bowels of the Earth, and their Sun-like Mind is the
Light of their Thoughts; like as the rest of the Planets receive light from the
Sun, so the Thoughts from the Mind; and as the Sun has Heat and Light, so has
the Mind Reason and Knowledge; and as the Sun inlivens several Creatures, so
their Mind conceives several Causes and Effects, and creates several Fancies;
and as the Sun shows the World, and the World of Creatures, so the Mind finds
and shows the Truth of Things. But leaving them to true Knowledge, Wisdom, Wit
and Happiness, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XV.
MADAM,
YEsterday was the Lord N. W. to visit me, where amongst other Discourses we
talked of the Lady T. M. not sooner was her name mentioned, but he seemed to be
rapt up into the third Heaven, and from thence to descend to declare her
Praises; and to repeat his Expressions, they were so extraordinary, as they
will not easily go out of my Memory, so as you shall have them word for word.
First, he said, She was a Lady fit to be the Empress of the whole world, for
though Fortune had not given her a Temporal Imperial Crown, Dignity and Title,
as neither by Inheritance, Victory, nor Choice, nor had not advanced her to a
Temporal Imperial Power, nor placed her on a Temporal Imperial Throne, nor held
she a Temporal Imperial Scepter, yet she was Crowned at her Birth the Empress
of her Sex; for though Fortune had not Crowned her Body, yet Nature had Crowned
her Soul with a Celestial Crown, made of Poetical Flame, instead of Earthly
Gold that Crown's the Body; and instead of Diamonds, Pearls, and other precious
Stones set in Golden Crowns, her Celestial Crown was set with Understanding,
Judgment and Wit, also with clear Distinguishings, oriental Similizings, and
sparkling Fancies, a Crown more glorious than Ariadne's Crown of Stars; and
though she was not advanced on a Temporal Imperial Throne, yet she was set
higher, as on a Throne of Applause; and though she possessed not a Temporal
Imperial Power, nor held a Temporal Imperial Scepter, yet she had a powerful
Persuasion and the tongue of Eloquence; and though she was not adorned with
Imperial Robes, yet she was adorned with Natural Beauty; and though she had not
a Temporal and Imperial Guard, yet she was guarded with Virtue; and though she
was not attended, waited and served with and by Temporal and Imperial
Courtiers, yet she was attended, waited on, and served by and with the sweet
Graces, and her Maids of Honor were the Muses, and Fame's house was her
Magnificent Palace. Thus was she Royally Born, and Divinely Anointed or Endued,
and Celestially Crowned, and may Reign in the memory of every Age and Nation to
the world's end; and not only Reign, but Reign Happily, Gloriously, and
Famously. But when he had said what I have related, I could not choose but
smile, to hear such Poetical commendations of a Woman, doubting none of our Sex
was worthy of such high, and far-fetched Praises; he asked me why I smiled? I
told him, I smiled to observe how the Passion of Love had bribed his Tongue; he
said, he was not guilty of partial Bribes, but Justice had commanded his Tongue
to speak the Truth: I told him, I was glad to find, at least to hear, that
there was Justice in Men, and Merit in Women, as the one to Praise, the other
to be Praiseworthy; but I prayed him to give me leave, or to pardon me, if I
told him, that his Speech showed, or expressed him not a Temporal and Imperial
Courtier, as to praise one Lady to another, and to give so many Praises to an
absent Lady, as to leave no Praises for the present Lady: He prayed me to
pardon him that Error, and that hereafter he would always Praise that Lady he
was present with. But, Madam, those Praises given the Lady T. M. had I been apt
to Envy, it had turned me all into Vinegar, or dissolved me into Vitriol; but
being unspotted, and free from that speckled Vice, I am heightened with joy to
hear any of our Sex so Celestial, as to deserve a Celestial Praise: And leaving
you to the same Joy, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XVI.
MADAM,
I Hope I have given the Lady D. A. no cause to believe I am not her Friend;
for though she has been of Ps. and I of Ks. side, yet I know no reason why
that should make a difference betwixt us, as to make us Enemies, no more than
cases of Conscience in Religion, for one may be my very good Friend, and yet
not of my opinion, every one's Conscience in Religion is betwixt God and
themselves, and it belongs to none other. It Is true, I should be glad my Friend
were of my opinion, or if I thought my Friend's opinion were better than mine,
I would be of the same; but it should be no breach of Friendship, if our
opinions were different, since God is only to be the Judge: And as for the
matter of Governments, we Women understand them not, yet if we did, we are
excluded from intermedling therewith, and almost from being subject thereto; we
are not tied, nor bound to State or Crown; we are free, not Sworn to
Allegiance, nor do we take the Oath of Supremacy; we are not made Citizens of
the Commonwealth, we hold no Offices, nor bear we any Authority therein; we are
accounted neither Useful in Peace, nor Serviceable in War; and if we be not
Citizens in the Commonwealth, I know no reason we should be Subjects to the
Commonwealth: And the truth is, we are no Subjects, unless it be to our
Husbands, and not always to them, for sometimes we usurp their Authority, or
else by flattery we get their good wills to govern; but if Nature had not
befriended us with Beauty, and other good Graces, to help us to insinuate our
selves into men's Affections, we should have been more inslaved than any other
of Natur's Creatures she has made; but Nature be thanked, she has been so
bountiful to us, as we oftener inslave men, than men inslave us; they seem to
govern the world, but we really govern the world, in that we govern men: for
what man is he, that is not governed by a woman more or less? None, unless some
dull Stoic, or an old miserable Usurer, or a cold, old, withered Bachelor, or
a half-starved Hermit, and such like persons, which are but here and there one;
And not only Wives and Mistresses have prevalent power with Men, but Mothers,
Daughters, Sisters, Aunts, Cousins, nay, Maidservants have many times a
persuasive power with their Masters, and a Land-lady with her Lodger, or a
she-Hostess with her he-Guest; yet men will not believe this, and it is the
better for us, for by that we govern as it were by an insensible power, so as
men perceive not how they are Led, Guided, and Ruled by the Feminine Sex. But
howsoever, Madam, the disturbance in this Country has made no breach of
Friendship betwixt us, for though there has been a Civil War in the Kingdom,
and a general War amongst the Men, yet there has been none amongst the Women,
they have not fought pitched battles; and if they had, there has been no
particular quarrel betwixt her and me, for her Ladyship is the same in my
affection, as if the Kingdom had been in a calm Peace; in which Friendship I
shall always remain hers, as also,

Your Ladyships most Humble and Devoted S.

XVII.
MADAM,
THe pure Lady, or Lady Puritan, is so godly, as to follow all those Ministers
she thinks are called and chosen by the Holy Spirit, to preach the Word of God,
whereas those Ministers preach more their own words, than God's, for they
interpret the Scripture to their own Sense, or rather to their Factious Humors
and Designs, and after their Sermons, their female Flocks gossip Scripture,
visiting each other to confer Notes, and make repetitions of the Sermons, as
also to explain and expound them; for first the Minister expounds the
Scripture, and then the Women-hearers expound the Sermon; so that there are
expoundings upon expoundings, and preaching upon preaching, insomuch as they
make such a medly or hash of the Scripture, as certainly the right and Truth is
so hidden and obscured, that none can find it; and surely the Holy Spirit, whom
they talk so much of, knows not what they mean or preach, being so much and
such Nonsense in their Sermons, as God himself cannot turn to Sense; but
howsoever, it works on some to a good effect, and causes as much Devotion
amongst many, as if they preached Learnedly, Eloquently, and interpreted
Rightly, and to the true sense and meaning; for many sorrowful and penitent
tears are shed, but whether they be bottled up in Heaven, I know not: certainly
Mary Magdalen could not Weep faster for the time, or fetch deeper Sighs, or
stronger Groans for her Sins, than they do, which shows that they have been
grievous Sinners; but whether their Sins were of the same kind as hers were, I
cannot tell, and I think they would not confess, for Confession they account
Popish. But truly, and verily, the Lady Puritan who has been to visit me this
afternoon, has so tired me with her preaching Discourse, as I think I shall
not recover my weary Spirits and deafned Ears, this two days, unless a quiet
sleep cure me; nay, she has so filled my head with words, as I doubt it will
hinder my silent Repose; howsoever I Will try: and so taking my leave as going to
bed, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XVIII.
MADAM,
I Observe there is an emulation between the Lord V. A. and the Lord G. V. for
Worth and Merit, striving which shall excel each other in Virtue, Noble
Qualities, Practicable Arts, Learned Sciences, Witty Poetry, and the like; as
for Justice, Temperance, Valor, Fortitude, Generosity, Gratitude, Fidelity and
Loyalty, as also, for Courtesy, Civility, and Obligements; for wise Forecasts,
prudent Managements, industrious Ingenuities, noble Commands, and honest and
conformable Obedience; likewise for graceful Behaviors, and handsome
Demeanours; also, for Fencing, Riding, Vaulting, Wrestling, and the like; for
proper and fit Sciences for Noble Persons to be learned and known, as
Fortification, Navigation, Astronomy, Cosmography, Architecture, Music, and
History; and for Wit, as Scenes, Songs, Poems, and the like: and this Emulation
makes them Admire, Love, Respect, and Praise each other, and watch all
opportunities to Oblige each other, thinking and esteeming it a Happiness so to
do; for the effects of Emulation are quite different from the effects of Envy,
for Envy is full of Dispraise and Detraction, either covertly or openly, and
watches all opportunities to do Mischief, and to obscure the Beauty of Virtue,
and the grace and becoming demeanours of Virtuosoes; whereas Emulation rejoices
when Virtue is visibly Seen, and justly Praised, and Virtuosoes highly
Commended: indeed, Emulation dwells with the Worthiest Persons, Envy with the
Basest. But, Madam, it is a wonder in an age so basely Bad, there should be two
persons so nobly Good; when most men spend their time so idely Vain, that they
should spend their time so ingeniously Prudent; when Vice is advanced, and
Virtue disgraced, that they should should Shun that advancement, and embrace
Virtue; when Treason is Rewarded and Loyalty Punished, that they should loyally
Suffer, and not basely Betray; when Flattery is heard, and Truth rejected, that
they should choose to be Silent, or Speak what they think. They covet not
Office, Authority and Wealth, nor do they ambitiously strive to Command, but
when they are employed, they do not grow proud with their Authority and Place,
nor richer by taking Bribes; nor do they partially Favor their Friends, nor
are they Unjust to their Foes; they use no Malice nor Favor, but are Upright
and Just; and in their Commands in War, or Governments in Peace, although they
are carefully Strict, they are not Imperious nor Cruel; but, in short, they
endeavor to serve their King Loyally, their Country Faithfully, and every
particular Man Generously, if it lie in their power. But leaving these two
Nobles to their Glorious Emulatings, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XIX.
MADAM,
AS the Emulation between the Lord V. A. and the Lord G. V. was Commendable,
and worthy of great Praise, so the Envy between the Lord P. R. and the Lord M.
A. is Discommendable, and worthy to be Condemned; for they strive not to
imitate equally, or surpass each other for Worth and Merit, for Courtesy and
Civility, for Valor and Generosity, for Learning and Poetry; but strive to
imitate equally, or surpass each other in Expenses and Bravery, for Show and
Vain glory, for Offices and Honor, for Vice and Vanity, as which shall make
more luxurious Feasts, delicious Banquets, masking Scenes, dancing Balls, gay
Shows, as brave Clothes, gilded Coaches, laced Liveries, many Pages, Lackies,
hackny Horses, and handsome Mistresses; also they strive for Court Preferments,
each would have All Offices and Honors, although, perchance, neither could
well discharge any One Place or Office Wisely, if Honestly, nor be worthy the
Least Title they are ambitious of; also they strive to be out-Flattered, which
Flatterers they maintain at great charge, and to compass their each
out-stripping, or out-reaching Designs, they will crouch Basely, flatter
Grossly, bribe Liberally, wait Diligently, watch Carefully, and attend
Patiently; But I foresee their Fate, which is, they will die despised Beggars,
for if they get their Designs, they will be Losers, for the Bribes they give
for them, and their Presents and Entertainments, are more than their Designs
are worth, and more than they shall gain by them, if gotten; but if their
Designs fail them, they will be double losers, besides the expense of their gay
Vanities; so what with out-braving, out-bribing, and out-spending each other,
they will both be soon out of their Estates; for if they spend upon their
Stocks, or Credits, or both, they will have nothing left to spend, and when
they are both Poor, Envy may chance to make them Friends, as it does now, being
Rich, Enemies; for though Envy is a following Enemy to Wealth and Prosperity,
yet it is a Friend to Poverty, and for the most dwells with Poverty; to which
I Will leave these two Envious Persons, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XX.
MADAM,
I Remember you told me, that formerly you thought Time troublesome, and every
Place wearisome; as in the Spring, you would wish for Summer, when Summer came,
you would wish for Autumn, and in the Autumn you would wish for Winter, a cold
wish; nay every Day, every Hour, every Minute, you thought Tedious and Long.
Indeed Time runs so fast upon Youth, as it does oppress Youth, which makes
Youth desire to cast it by; and though the Motion of Time is swift, yet the
Desire of Youth is swifter, and the Motions of Thoughts are as far beyond the
Motions of Time, as the Motion of Time is beyond the Motion of Nature's
Architecture; so as Youth through it is Sharp, Greedy, Hungry Appetite, devours
Time, like as a Cormorant does Fish; for as he never stays to chew, but
swallows down whole Fishes, so Youth swallows, as it were, whole Days, Weeks,
Months, Years, until they surfeit with Practice, or are fully satisfied with
Experience: The same reason makes Youth weary of every Place or Company, for
they are not satisfied, because they have not had enough variety of Knowledge,
they know not the right use of Time, the unprofitable use of Vanity, the
restless motions of Variety, nor know they the Deceits, Abuses, and Treacheries
of their own Kind, as Mankind, neither do they know their own Natures and
Dispositions, they know not what to Choose, nor what to Leave, what to Seek,
nor what to Shun; neither have they felt the heavy burdens of Cares, nor
oppressions of Sorrows for Losses and Crosses; they have not been pinched with
Necessity, nor pained with long Sicknesses, nor stung with Remorse; they have
not been terrified with bloody Wars, nor forsaken of Natural Friends, nor
betrayed by feigned Friendships; they have not been robbed of all their
Maintenance, nor been banished their Country. Thus being tenderly Young, they
are Oppressed with the quick repetitions of Time, and their Senses being Sharp,
and their Appetites Hungry, they greedily Devour Time, though in the end Time
devours them, the Meat, the Eater; also the desire of Knowledge makes every
Place and Company wearisom, for Youth takes delight in that which is New, they
being New themselves, for Youth is like Garments new made, and being new
themselves, they Sympathetically delight and love new things, as new Clothes,
new Houses, new Vanities, new Sports, new Countries, new Companies, new Lovers,
new Friends, and any thing that is new to them, insomuch as they would rather
have a new Enemy, than an old Friend; and thus will Youth do, until Time turns
its back, whereupon are written all the Follies of Youth, which Follies they
could not see to read whilst Time was before them, for while Times face is
toward them, they only see their childish desires, which are all written upon
Times breast. But, Madam, I believe, that Time, as troublesome as it has seemed
to you, you would be glad now of its stay; but Time does as all Courting
Amorosoes do, they run to embrace Youth, though they tire Youth with their
troublesome kindness, but when the gloss of Youth is past, they leave off their
Amors, nay, they hate those they made love to, and strive to get away from
them as fast as they can, and as far off: Just so does Time, it makes love to
all, and then forsakes all it has made love to. But, Madam, it has but newly
turned its head from you, but it will turn its whole body; at first it will
seem to pace slowly from you, but it will mend its pace, and at last run from
you, yet let it not run without your repining, or grieving for its neglects,
for no persuasion will make it stay. But, Madam, you will be happier in Times
neglects, than in its imbracements, and will make more advantage from Times
heels than from its head, for Times head is filled with Vanity, and on Times
heels is Experience; yet although Time runs from you, Wisdom will stay with
you, for Wisdom is the Son of Time, and became Wise by his Fathers Follies,
which are written upon his Fathers back; for Wisdom waits always behind his
Father, and neither Wisdom the Son, nor Time the Father, do meet face to face;
and you will find more happiness in Wisdom's Company than in Times Courtships,
for Wisdom's Conversation is Comfortable and Pleasing, it speaks with the
Tongue of an Orator, the Wit of a Poet, and the Advice of a Friend; then who
would be troubled with the fantastical Humors, apish Actions, flattering
Speeches, and subtle Deceits of Time? But lest this Letter should be as tedious
to you as formerly Time was, I Will stop here, and rest,

Madam,

Your Ladyships faithful Fr. and S.

XXI.
MADAM,
I Am sorry that Mrs. P. L. has had so great a loss at cards, as the grief of
the loss caused her to weep; But Gamesters are like Merchant-adventurers, and
for the most part have the same fate, as to die Bankrupts, for more are
impoverished by their losses, than enriched by their gettings; but gaming was
never so much practiced by our Feminine Sex, as it is in this age, and by their
losses, (I know not for their skill) they seem Masculine gamesters, and I
believe they quarrel as much in their play, only they fight not Duels, unless
with their Tongues. But I observe that cards is one of the chief pastimes of
our Sex, and their greatest delight, for few or none of our Sex loves or
delights in Poetry, unless a Copy of Verses made in their praise, wherein for
the most part is more Flattery than Wit; neither does our Sex delight or
understand Philosophy, for as for Natural Philosophy they study no more of
Nature's works than their Faces, and their greatest ingenuity is, to make them
Fairer than Nature did; and for Moral Philosophy, they think that too tedious
to learn, and too rigid to practice; yet I make no question but they have heard
of Temperance, though few are acquainted with it, and Prudence they scorn to
accompany, they despise her as a mean, plain Huswife, and Fortitude can get no
entrance, for strong Fears keep her out; as for Justice, I think our Sex does
only resemble the Emblem or Moral, as Justice is blinded with a band to keep
out Partiality, so our Sex is blinded with Ignorance, which keeps out
Knowledge; and though our Sex holds no Sword in their hands to cut off
Offenses, yet they hold as sharp a Weapon in their mouths, to cut off good
Fame, and will make more Offenses, than the Sword of Justice is able to cut
off; and as for the Balance of Justice, which is Judgment, they never use it,
for they seldom Weigh any thing; and for Faith, Hope, and Charity, they seem to
have no more Faith than to believe their own Praises, and their only Hope is
for pre-eminence of Beauty or Title, for Place or Wealth, and for Vanities; and
as for Charity, they spend so much upon themselves, as they have nothing left
for the Poor; and they are so far from governing their Passions and Appetites,
as their Passions and Appetites govern and rule the whole course of their
Lives; neither does our Sex take much delight in true History, for naturally
our Sex is too lazy to look back into past Times, neither have they the
peircing foresight to see into Future times, they only regard the Present;
neither does our Sex take much pleasure in harmonious Music, only in Violins
to tread a measure; the truth is, the chief study of our Sex is Romances,
wherein reading, they fall in love with the feigned Heroes and Carpet-Knights,
with whom their Thoughts secretly commit Adultery, and in their Conversation
and manner, or forms or phrases of Speech, they imitate the Romancy-Ladies: And
our Sexes chief Pastime is Gaming of all kinds or sorts, but most Cards,
whereby they lose more money than get reputation; indeed Carding is their Work,
for they make it rather a Labor with long and tiresome Sitting, careful
Playing, and painful Vexing and Fretting, than a Pleasure and Recreation; and
our Sexes chief Exercise is Dancing, not alone, amongst themselves, for that
they hate, but in masculine Company, and this they love so well, as to dance
themselves into a fiery heat, if not a Fever; and their only delight is in
Love and Courtships, and their only pleasure Luxury, insomuch as they are for
the most part Eating, whether Sitting, Walking, or Dancing. But leaving our Sex
to their Banquets, Courtships, Dancing and Gaming, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XXII.
MADAM,
YOu said in your last Letter, that Sir G. A. does so brag of his own gallant
Actions, as he saves his neighbor the labor to report them; I am sorry to
hear gallant men should brag of their own Actions, for their bragging takes off
the gloss of their Courage; for as Time takes off Youth or fresh Color off
Beauty, so Self-praise takes off the Esteem and Honor of Merit: But as some
will boast of their own Worth, so others will boast of their own Baseness, as
what subtle Cheats they have practiced, or whom they have Betrayed, or how
ingenious they were in telling Lies, or how many Robberies they have committed;
as also of their Disobedience, Disloyalty, and the like; others will boast of
their Debaucheries, as how often they have had the French Disease, how many
Women they have Debauched, how much they can Drink before they are Drunk, and
how long they can sit a Drinking, what Moneys they have Won or Lost at Play,
how Vain and Expensive they are, or have been, and many the like, which I
wonder at, that men should Glory and take a Pride in that which is Base or
Foolish: But this argues some men to have mean Souls and foolish Brains, full
of idle Discourses, wanting Judgment and Wit; also unprofitable Lives, and
when they Die there is a good riddance, for they were but as Rubbish in the
World, which Death, like as an honest painful Labourer, takes up like as
Dunghils, and throws them into the Grave, and buries them in Oblivion, not
being worthy of a monument of Remembrance, in which Grave I leave those that
are Dead, and those that Live I wish may be Reformed to more Purity; so I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXIII.
MADAM,
IT is not strange that the Lady L. T. and the Lady A. M. should fall out, so,
as to be Enemies, although they were such fond Friends, as not to be pleased in
each others absence, but Friendship that is made out of fond Humors, seldom
lasts long, especially when they live and board together; for first, Fondness
wears away with Use and Acquaintance, next, being borded together, Faults or
Neglects are committed, and Exceptions taken; Self-love of the one person will
be served first, and Self-love of the other person will not suffer it; besides,
many cross Humors, and sometimes little Envies, will appear betwixt equal
Persons that live together, especially Women, and the sooner, if either or both
have Husbands or Lovers; for Women will be sooner jealous of their Husbands or
Lovers for their She-friends, than Men will be of their Wives or Mistresses for
their He-friends: but Household Friends for the most part are Home-lovers, that
is, the He-friend makes love to the Wife, or the She-friend is Courted by the
Husband; and if they be both married, it is likely they Cuckold each other; and
thus, for Example, these Ladies are become Enemies through Jealousy, for
though the Lady L. T. professed to love her Friend the Lady A. M. dearly well,
yet it seems, she will not have her to Share with her of her Husbands Love or
Courtship, although Sir T. O. the Lady L. Ts. Husband, could be no less than a
Servant to his Wives dear Friend; Besides, it is a temptation to an Husband, to
see two She-friends Embrace, and Kiss, and Sport, and Play, which makes the
Husband to desire to do the like, not with his Wife, but his Wives Friend,
for temptation is from that which men are not accustomed to, or to do as they
see others do; but it is likely, when the jealous Humor of the Lady L. T. is
over, they will be Friends again, till the jealous Humor return again. Thus
they may be Friends and Enemies all their Life time, and perchance take a
pleasure in being so, for Women for the most part take delight to make
Friendships, and then to fall out, and be Friends again, and so to and fro,
which is as much Pastime and Recreation to them, as going abroad and staying at
home. But I wish all Friends were as constant Friends as your Ladyship and I,
who are inseparably united, for as long as I live I shall be,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XXIV.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter I perceive the Gallants of the Time, I mean Gallants for
Youth and Bravery, for Vice and Vanity, for Expense and Prodigality, for
foolish Quarrels, and rash Duels, these Gallants, it seems, condemn Age as
unfit for State Affairs, as neither to Govern, Command, Direct, nor Advise; but
certainly those States or Kingdoms that have young Governors and Counselors,
shall have more Combustions and Disorders committed by their Ignorance and
Follies, than the most experienced Age can Rectify: indeed such Kingdoms and
States are rather governed by Chance than Wisdom. It Is true, Fools have Good
Fortune sometimes, but not so often as Bad, which shows they neither have a
Politic Ulysses, nor a Counselling Nestor, for though Young men may Fight as
Achilles, yet they can neither Counsel as Nestor, nor Speak as Ulysses; not but
that some Old men may be Fools, but it is against Nature for Young men to be
Wise, wherefore they are fitter to Obey than to Command, and to be Advised,
than to give Counsel, for it is a wonder whenas young Counselors keep Peace,
or young Generals be Conquerours; and it makes them more Famous, because not
Usual, especially when Fortune favors them, as she does many times their Rash
Adventures, or haughty and Ambitious Enterprises; for good Fortune makes Youth
appear more Glorious than Age; but Fortune many times favors Youth, as she
favors Fools, for a time, and in the end leaves them to their own Ruin; but
where Fortune has little or nothing to do, as in wise Counsels, there their
Ignorance and Follies, Passions and Partialities, Factions and Emulations
appear, especially in the success of their Counsels; wherefore Young men may
better and more safely be trusted with an Army than a City, for it is more safe
to leave them to Fortune, than to trust them with Prudence; for Young men can
tell better how to make Wars, than to keep Peace, being easier to Lead an Army,
than to Rule a Kingdom, to Fight a Battle, than to Order a Commonwealth, to
Distribute Spoils, than to Do Justice, for Fortune has more power in Victory
than Right. It Is true, sometimes there is such a Concurrence and Conjunction in
Affairs of State, as also in Armies, as the Wisest or Valiantest men cannot
make better, nor Fools nor Cowards worse, which is the cause that many times
Wise or Valiant men, or both, may be thought Fools and Cowards, and Fools and
Cowards Wise or Valiant men; and many times Fools are too hard for Wise men, by
reason there be numbers of Fools for few Wise men, nay, numbers of Fools for
One Wise man, which Wise man may be buried in the Rubbish of Fools; but if a
Wise man be not overpowered, he treads down their Follies and Triumphs in Peace
and Prosperity: But Aged men most commonly are assisted and attended by Mercury
and Pallas, and Young men by Mars and Venus. The truth is, it is against Sense
and Reason, that Young men can be so Wise, or proper for Affairs of a
Commonwealth, either to Command, Govern, or Counsel, as Aged men, who have had
long Experience, and great Observations, by Seeing, Hearing, and Knowing much,
so as there is nothing New, or Unacquainted to them, neither in Varieties,
Changes, nor Chances; for Nature, Fortune, and Time, is their long
Acquaintance, by which they know the Appetites, Passions, Humors,
Dispositions, Manners, and Actions of Men, with their Defects, Errors and
Imperfections; also the Revolutions of Time, the Casualties of Chance, the
Change of Fortune, and the Natural Course, Causes, and Effects of several
Things in the World, all which makes Aged men Wise, and want of such
Experience and Observation, makes Young men Fools in comparison of Aged men;
for Young men can have but a Relative, and not an Experienced Knowledge, nor
can they have very much by Relation or Reading, having not time enough for
Instruction and Learning; whereas Aged men have Read, Heard, Seen, Conversed
and Acted in and of several Ages, Societies, Nations, Men, and Business; also
in several Places of several Subjects, and several Matters, to several Men, at
several Times: But Young men are so Conceited, and Opinionative of themselves,
as they think, they neither want Wit, Judgment, Understanding, nor Knowledge,
and that Ancient men rather Dote than Know; but though Young men cannot be Wise
in Nature, unless by Inspiration, yet those are nearest to Wisdom that have
been Bred up, Instructed, and Educated by Wise Age, and so much Better and more
Knowing they are than others which have been Bred, Instructed, and Educated by
Young Pedants or Governors, as the first shall be as Old men, although but
Young, and the others shall be as Boys when they are Young Men, and Young Men
when they are Old, or rather Boys all their life time, although they should
live long; so that one may say, Happy is Youth that lives with Age: But leaving
as well Aged as Young men, to Knowledge and Ignorance, Wisdom and Folly,
Prudence and Fortune, I rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

XXV.
MADAM,
THe Lady P. R. was to visit the Lady S. I. and other Ladies with her, whose
Conversation and Discourse was according to their Female Capacities and
Understandings, and when they were all gone, the Lady S. Is. Husband asked his
Wife, why she did not Talk as the rest of the Ladies did, especially the Lady
P. R. so Loud and Impertinently? She answered, she had neither the Humor,
Breath, Voice, nor Wit, to Speak so Long, so Loud, and so Much of nothing: He
said, her Answer liked him well, for he would not have his Wife so Bold, so
Rude, and so Talking a Fool. Thus, Madam, we may perceive how Discourse in
Conversation is Judged of, and for the most part Condemned by the Hearers, when
perchance the Ladies imagine that they are Applauded and Commended for their
Wit and Confident Behavior; for Self-love thinks all is well Said or Done,
that it self Speaks or Acts, so that Self-love does always Approve it self,
and Dispraise others. But leaving Self-love to Self-admiration, and that
Admiration to others Condemnation, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XXVI.
MADAM,
WE have no News here, unless to hear that the Lady C. R. did beat her
Husband, and because she would have Witness enough, she beat him in a Public
Assembly, nay, being a woman of none of the least Sizes, but one of the
largest, and having Anger added to her Strength, she did beat him Soundly, and
it is said, that he did not resist her, but endured Patiently; whether he did
it out of fear to show his own Weakness, being not able to Encounter her, or
out of a Noble Nature, not to Strike a Woman, I know not; yet I believe the
best: and surely, if he does not, or cannot tame her Spirits, or bind her
Hands, or for Love will not leave her, if she beat him Often, he will have but
a Sore life. Indeed I was sorry when I heard of it, not only for the sake of
our Sex, but because she and he are persons of Dignity, it belonging rather to
mean-born and bred Women to do such unnatural Actions; for certainly, for a
Wife to strike her Husband, is as much, if not more, as for a Child to strike
his Father; besides, it is a breach of Matrimonial Government, not to Obey all
their Husbands Commands; but those Women that Strike or Cuckold their Husbands,
are Matrimonial Traitors, for which they ought to be highly punished; as for
Blows, they ought to be banished from their Husbands Bed, House, Family, and
for Adultery, they ought to suffer Death, and their Executioner ought to be
their Husband. It Is true, Passion will cause great Indiscretion, and Women are
subject to Violent Passions, which makes or causes them so often to err in
Words and Actions, which, when their Passion is over, they are sorry for; but
unruly Passions are only a cause of uncivil Words and rude Actions, whereas
Adultery is caused by unruly Appetites; wherefore Women should be Instructed
and Taught more Industriously, Carefully, and Prudently, to Temper their
Passions, and Govern their Appetites, than Men, because there comes more
Dishonor from their unruly Passions and Appetites, than from Men's; but for the
most part Women are not Educated as they should be, I mean those of Quality,
for their Education is only to Dance, Sing, and Fiddle, to write Complemental
Letters, to read Romances, to speak some Language that is not their Native,
which Education, is an Education of the Body, and not of the Mind, and shows
that their Parents take more care of their Feet than their Head, more of their
Words than their Reason, more of their Music than their Virtue, more of their
Beauty than their Honesty, which methinks is strange, as that their Friends and
Parents should take more Care, and be at greater Charge to Adorn their Bodies,
than to Indue their Minds, to teach their Bodies Arts, and not to Instruct
their Minds with Understanding; for this Education is more for outward Show,
than inward Worth, it makes the Body a Courtier, and the Mind a Clown, and
oftentimes it makes their Body a Baud, and their Mind a Courtesan, for though
the Body procures Lovers, yet it is the Mind that is the Adulteress, for if the
Mind were Honest and Pure, they would never be guilty of that Crime; wherefore
those Women are best bred, whose Minds are civilest, as being well Taught and
Governed, for the Mind will be Wild and Barbarous, unless it be Enclosed with
Study, Instructed by Learning, and Governed by Knowledge and Understanding, for
then the Inhabitants of the Mind will live Peaceably, Happily, Honestly and
Honorably, by which they will Rule and Govern their associate Appetites with
Ease and Regularity, and their Words, as their Household Servants, will be
employed Profitably. But leaving the Lady C. R. and her Husband to Passion and
Patience, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXVII.
MADAM,
YEsterday I employed my time in reading History, and I find in my self an
Envy, or rather an Emulation toward Men, for their Courage, Prudence, Wit,
and Eloquence, as not to Fear Death, to Rule Commonwealths, and to Speak in a
Friend's behalf, or to Pacify a Friend's Grief, to Plead for his own Right, or
to Defend his own Cause by the Eloquence of Speech; yet this is not in all Men,
for some men have Courage and no Wit, and some have Wit and no Conduct, and
some have neither Wit, Courage, nor Conduct; but mistake me not, for I do not
Envy or Emulate a Stubborn Obstinacy, nor a Desperate Rashness, nor an
Inslaving Policy, nor Fine Words and Choice Phrases; but to Fight Valiantly,
to Suffer Patiently, to Govern Justly, and to Speak Rationally, Movingly,
Timely and Properly, as to the purpose, all which I fear Women are not Capable
of, and the Despair thereof makes me Envy or Emulate Men. But though I love
Justice Best, and trust to Valor Most, yet I Admire Eloquence, and would
choose Wit for my Pastime. Indeed Natural Orators that can speak on a Sudden
and Extempore upon any Subject, are Nature's Musicians, moving the Passions to
Harmony, making Concords out of Discords, Playing on the Soul with Delight. And
of all the Men I read of, I Emulate Julius Caesar most, because he was a man
that had all these Excellencies, as Courage, Prudence, Wit and Eloquence, in
great Perfection, insomuch as when I read of Julius Caesar, I cannot but wish
that Nature and Fate had made me such a one as he was; and sometimes I have
that Courage, as to think I should not be afraid of his Destiny, so I might
have as great a Fame. But these wishes discover my Aspiring Desires, and all
those Desires are but Vain that cannot be Attained to; yet although I cannot
attain to Julius Caesar's Fame, it suffices me, to have attained to your
Favor, and to the Honor to subscribe my self,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXVIII.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you were pleased to Condemn me for Admiring Words, so
much, as to prefer Eloquence before all other Music; but pray, Madam, mistake
me not, for I do not Admire the Words, but the Sense, Reason, and Wit, that is
Expressed, and made Known by Words; neither do I Admire Formal Orators, that
speak Premeditated Orations, but Natural Orators, that can speak on a Sudden
upon any Subject, whose Words are as Sweet and Melting as Manna from Heaven,
and their Wit as Spreading and Refreshing as the Serene Air, whose
Understanding is as Clear as the Sun, giving Light of Truth to all their
Hearers, who in case of Persuasion, speak Sweetly, in case of Reproof,
Seasonably, and in all cases, Effectually. And, Madam, if you do Consider well,
you cannot choose but Admire, and Wonder at the Power of Eloquence, for there is
a strange hidden Mystery in Eloquence, it has a Magical Power over mankind,
for it Charms the Senses, and Inchants the Mind, and is of such a Commanding
Power, as it Forces the Will to Command the Actions of the Body and Soul, to
Do, or to Suffer, beyond their Natural Abilities, and makes the Souls of men
the Tongue's Slaves; for such is the power of an Eloquent Speech, as it Binds
the Judgment, Blindfolds the Understanding, and Deludes the Reason; also it
Softens the Obdurate Hearts, and causes Dry Eyes to Weep, and Dryes Wet Eyes
from Tears; also it Refines the Drossy Humors, Polishes the Rough Passions,
Bridles the Unruly Appetites, Reforms the Rude Manners, and Calms the Troubled
Minds; it can Civilize the Life by Virtue, and Inspire the Soul with Devotion.
On the other side, it can Enrage the Thoughts to Madness, and Cause the Soul to
Despair. The truth is, it can make Men like Gods or Devils, as having a Power
beyond Nature, Custom and Force, for many times the Tongue has been too Strong
for the Sword, and often carried away the Victory; also it has been too Subtle
for the Laws, as to Banish Right, and to Condemn Truth; and too hard for the
Natures of Men, making their Passions its Prisoners: and since Eloquence has
such Power over Arms, and Laws, and Men, as to make Peace or War, to Compose or
Dissolve Commonwealths, to Dispose of Souls and Bodies of Mankind; wherefore
those men that are endued with such Eloquence, and overflowing Wit, are both to
be Feared and Loved, to be highly Advanced or utterly Banished; for those whose
Eloquent Wit out-runs their Honesty, are to be Punished, but those that employ
their Eloquent Wit, and Elegant Graces, to the service of the Commonwealth, are
to be Esteemed, Respected, and Relied upon, as Pillars of the Commonwealth. But
to conclude, Wit makes a Ladder of Words, to climb to Fame's high Tower, and
the Tongue carries men further than their Feet, and builds them a Statelier,
and more Lasting Palace than their Hands, and their Wit, more than their
Wealth, does Adorn it. But now, leaving Words and Wit, I rely upon Love and
Friendship, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXIX.
MADAM,
I Heard by your last, that the Lady S. P. was to visit you, where, amongst her
other Discourses, she spoke of me, and was pleased to Censure and Condemn, as
to Censure the Cause, and Condemn the Manner of my Life, saying, that I did
either Retire out of a Fantastic Humor, or otherwise I was Constraind, in not
having the Liberty, that usually other Wives have, to go Abroad, and receive
what Visitors they please: But if she did but know the sweet Pleasures, and
harmless Delights I have by this Retirement, she would not have said what she
did; and to answer to what she said, This course of Life is by my own voluntary
Choice, for I have liberty to do any Thing, or to go any Where, or to keep any
Company that Discretion does Allow, and Honor Approve of; and though I may err
in my Discretion, yet not in cases of Honor, for had I not only Liberty, but
were Persuaded or Enticed by all the World's Allurements, or were Threatened
with Death, to Do, or Act any thing against Honor, or to do any Thing or Act,
Honor did not Approve of, I would not Do it, nay, I would Die first: But in
that which is called Honor, are many Ingrediencies, as Justice, Chastity,
Truth, Trust, Gratitude, Constancy, and many the like. Next I answer, That it
is not out of a Fantastic Humor, that I live so much Retired, which is to
keep my House more than go Abroad, but out of Self-love, and not out of
Self-opinion, and it is Just and Natural for any one to Love himself:
Wherefore, for my Pleasure and Delight, my Ease and Peace, I live a Retired
Life, a Home Life, free from the Intanglements, confused Clamours, and rumbling
Noise of the World, for I by this Retirement live in a calm Silence, wherein I
have my Contemplations free from Disturbance, and my Mind lives in Peace, and
my Thoughts in Pleasure, they Sport and Play, they are not Vexed with Cares nor
worldly Desires, they are not Covetous of worldly Wealth, nor Ambitious of
empty Titles; they are not to be caught with the Baits of Sensual Pleasures,
or rather I may say, Sensual Follies, for they Draw my Senses to them, and run
not out to the Senses; they have no quarrelling Disputes amongst them; they
live Friendly and Sociably together; their only Delight is in their own
Pastimes and harmless Recreations; and though I do not go Personally to Masks,
Balls, and Plays, yet my Thoughts entertain my Mind with such Pleasures, for
some of my Thoughts make Plays, and others Act those Plays on the Stage of
Imagination, where my Mind sits as a Spectator, Thus my Mind is entertained
both with Poets and Players, and takes as much Delight as Augustus Caesar did
to have his Mecaenas, the Patron of Poets, sit and hear Virgil and Horace read
their Works unto them; so my Mind takes Delight in its dear Mecaenas, which is
Contemplation, and to have its Poetical Thoughts, although not like Virgil or
Horace, yet such as they are, it is pleased to have them Repeat their Poems,
and other Works which they make; and those my Mind likes best, it sends them
forth to the Senses to write them down, and then to send them out to the
public view of the World; and many times the Senses send in Objects to the
Mind, who straight commands his Poetical Thoughts to take them for Plots of
Plays, or causes the Grave Philosophical Thoughts to Discourse of them, or his
Oratorical Thoughts to practice their Eloquence on them, or his Critical
Thoughts to Dispute and Argue with them, which done, all their several
Discourses, Disputes, Arguments, Poems, Plays, and the like, made on those
Objects, are sent back to the Senses to write them down, so that the Mind and
the Thoughts employ the Senses, and the Senses employ the Mind and Thoughts,
and thus I take as much Pleasure within my self, if not more, as the Lady S. P.
does without her self; indeed none enjoyes truly himself, but those that live
to themselves, as I do, and it is better to be a Self-lover in a Retired Life,
than a Self-seeker in a Wandering Humor, like a Vagabond, for they go from
Place to Place, from one Company to another, and never are at rest in their
Minds nor Bodies; and how should it be otherwise? for they lose themselves in
Company, and keeping much Company, they know not where to find themselves, for
as for their Dewlling Place, they are sure to miss of themselves there; but
indeed they have no constant Dwelling, for going much Abroad, they dwell Every
where, and yet to speak Metaphorically, No where. But every ones Delights are
different, for the Lady S. P. delights her self with Others, and I delight my
self with my Self; Some delight in Troubles, I delight in Ease, and certainly
much Company and Conversation cannot choose but be Troublesome; for in much
Company are many Exceptions, much Envy, much Suspicion, much Detraction, much
Faction, much Noise, and much Nonsense, and it is impossible, at least
improbable, for any particular Person to please all the several Companies they
come into, or are visited by, if the Resort be many, by reason every one has
as different Humors as Faces, wherein some will be Displeased, if others
should be Pleased, and most commonly they are so far from pleasing All, as None
is Pleased; for if any particular Person should Praise Every one, it would be
thought Flattery, if he should Praise None, it would be conceived to be Envy,
if he should Praise but Some, it would be judged to be Partiality; the like for
Discourse; if one should Address his Discourse to any One, or to Some more than
to Others, it would be taken as a Disrespect, if Generally, to the whole
Company, it would be accounted Pride, as taking ones self to be the only
Singular Person that must have a General Audience; neither can any one Person
fit his Discourse to every one's Humor, Fancy, Capacity, Understanding,
Knowledge or Delight, nay, most commonly, whatsoever is Spoken, is Interpreted
to the worst Sense, at least, Contradicted, and when they are parted, their
Words or Discourse is Repeated to their Disadvantage, and Commented on, and
Interpreted to an evil Sense; and if they say Nothing, or but Little, they are
accounted Ill-natured, or thought Fools, and yet they love not to hear any one
speak but themselves, every one desires to be heard, yet takes it ill not to be
spoken to; also if particular Persons make an Entertainment, if they invite not
those they have no acquaintance with, as well as those of their Acquaintance,
if they are within the distance of coming to the Entertainment, they take it
for an Affront, but if they should leave out any Acquaintance, it is a Breach
for ever, and they become their Enemies: also if particular Persons be
accoustred Bravely, they are Envied, if they be attired in plain, mean
Garments, they are Despised; and if any Woman be more Beautiful than commonly
the rest are, if she appears to the World, she shall be sure to have more
Female Detractors and Slanderers, to ruin her Reputation, than any Monarch has
Soldiers to fight an Enemy, and if any Woman be Ill-favored, it is mentioned
as a Reproach, although it be Nature's fault, and not hers, and if she be
indifferently Handsome, they speak of her as Regardless; if she be in Years,
they will say, she is fitter for the Grave than Company, if Young, fitter for a
School than Conversation, if of middle Years, their Tongues are the
Forerunners of her Decay; if she have Wealth, and no Titles, she is like Meat,
all Fat and no Blood, and if great Title with small Wealth, they say, she is
like a Pudding without Fat, and if she has both Wealth and Title, they Shun
her as the Plague, they Hate to see her, as Owls hate the Light, and if she
has neither Wealth nor Title, they Scorn her Company, and will not cast an eye
toward her; and thus the Generality is to every Particular: wherefore it is
impossible for any Particular either to Please the Humors, or Avoid the
Slanders or Reproaches of the Generality, for every One is against Another;
indeed, every One is against All, and All against every One, and yet through
the itch of Talk, Luxury, Wantonness and Vanity, they will Associate into
Companies, or rather I may say, Gather into Companies, and Frequent each others
Houses, whereas those that endeavor to be truly Happy, will not be Troubled
with such Follies, nor Disturbed with such Toys: But I am not so Retired, as
to bar my self from the Company of my good Friends, or such as are free from
Exception, as not to Translate harmless and simple Words, to an evil Sense or
Meaning, or such as are so Noble, as not to Dispraise, or Detract from such
Persons as they are pleased to take the pains to Visit, or from such as will
not take it for a Neglect, if I do not punctually return their Visit, or
perhaps not Visit them at any time, but will Excuse or Pardon my Lazy Humor,
and not account it a Disrespect, as truly it is none, for I do Honor and
Admire all Civil, Worthy, and Honorable Persons, and would be ready at all
times Honestly to Serve them. But this Retired Life is so Pleasing to me, as I
would not change it for all the Pleasures of the Public World, nay, not to be
Mistress of the World, for I should not desire to be Mistress of that which is
too Big to be Commanded, too Self-willed to be Ruled, too Factious to be
Governed, too Turbulent to live in Peace, and Wars would Fright, at least
Grieve me, that mankind should be so Ill-natured and Cruel to Destroy each
other. To conclude, I am more Happy in my Home-retirement, than I believe the
Lady S. P. is in her Public Frequentments, having a Noble and Kind Husband,
who is Witty and Wise Company, a Peaceable and Quiet Mind, and Recreative
Thoughts, that take harmless Liberty; and all this I have declared to you, that
you may let the Lady S. P. know that my Retirement from the public Concourse
and Army of the World, and Regiments of Acquaintance, is neither through
Constraint, nor Fantastic Humor, but through a Love to Peace, Ease, and
Pleasure, all which you Enjoy; which is the fulfilling of your Ladyships
faithful Friend and Servant's Happiness.

XXX.
MADAM,
YEsterday, being not in the Humor of Writing, I took Plutarch's Lives, or as
some call them, Plutarch's Lies, but Lives or Lies, or a mixture of both, I
read part of the day in that Book, and it was my chance to read the Life of
Pericles the Athenian, in which Story he is Commended for his Gravity,
Government, and Wisdom; this Pericles I did much Admire all the time I read of
him, until I did read where it was mentioned of his marrying Aspasia, a famous
Courtesan, and then I did not think him so Wise a man as I did before, in that
he could not rule his Passion better, but to marry a Whore; neither does
Gravity and Wantonness suit well together, for to my imagination a Grave
Cuckold does appear most Ridiculous: And although she was Constant to him, yet
the Lewdness of her former Life could not but be a great Blemish to him, as to
marry the Dregs and Leavings of other men; But it seemed that she had an
Attractive Power, especially on such as they call Wise men, as Statesmen,
Philosophers, and Governors, and all this Power lay in her Tongue, which was a
Bawd for the other end; nay, so well (it is said) she could Speak, that not
only such men as forementioned did come to hear her, and to learn to speak
Eloquently by her, but many also brought their Wives to hear her, which in my
opinion was Dangerous, lest they might learn her Vice with her Rhetoric; but
it seems the Graecians were not like the Italians concerning their Wives,
although they were like them concerning their Courtesans; but honest Women take
not so much care to Speak well, as to Do that which is Virtuous. And so leaving
Aspasia and Pericles in Plutarch's History, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXI.
MADAM,
I Cannot wonder if I hear that men which are Advanced to Power and Authority
should be Dispraised, because it is usual; but rather I should wonder, if I
should hear such men Praised or Applauded, although their Lives and Actions
were Blameless, nay Wise and Honest; for I have observed, that if any man have
more Wealth, Merit, Power, or Wit, than his Neighbor, he is sure to be
privately Hated, and publicly Railed or Exclaimed against, and to show their
Hate and Dispraise is against his Merit, Wealth, Power, Wit, or the like, if
this man fall from those Favors either of Fortune or Nature, he is not only
Pitied, but dearly Beloved, and highly Praised; and this Ill and Inconstant
Nature and Humor is so frequent in all Ages and Nations, as it may very easily
be believed, that it was Created in the Essence of mankind, insomuch, that had
Men been created before the Angels Fell, they would have Envyed their Glory,
and Accused God of Partiality, in making such difference between Men and
Angels, but whenas those Angels were cast from Heaven to Hell for their
Wickedness, they would Censure God for being too Severe in their Punishment;
Yet, Madam, mistake me not, to believe all men are so Envious and Ill-natured,
but some; for surely though many Angels fell through Spiritual Pride, Envy, and
Ambition, yet many remained in Heaven, as Pure as when first Created; and so
likewise many Men by the Mercy of God are bred to Virtue, and blessed with
Piety, to which I leave them, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXII.
MADAM,
SIr, D. D. and his Lady had invited a great many of their Friends to a
Feasting Dinner, and being Set, they fell to Eating, and soon after to Talking,
for Talking accompanies Eating and Drinking, especially at a Feast; but amongst
other Discourses, they were speaking of Marriage, Husbands and Wives, where Sir
D. D. said somewhat that his Wife had great reason to take Unkindly, knowing
her Virtue had deserved more loving Expressions from him, especially in an open
Assembly, which Unkindness forced Tears through her Eyes, but they were
becoming Tears, for they did not cause the Feature in her Face to be Distorted,
for she appeared in her Countenance Sweet and Amiable, as if there had been no
Discontent in her Mind, neither did she show any Discontent in her Words or
Behavior, for she neither Complained, nor Railed at her Husband, nor Quarreled
with him, nor rose from the Table in a Passion, to the Disturbance of the
Company, as most Women would have done, and often do, when they are Displeased
or Angered, but she wiped the Tears from her Eyes, and Addressed her self, as she
did before, to Entertain her Friends Civilly and Courteously, and when they had
all Dined, and the Cloth taken away, she asked pardon of her Friends for her
Tears, saying her Tears had made their meeting appear rather as a funeral
Condoling, than a merry Feasting: But truly, said she, I could not help it, for
they would not be restrained do what I could, for some words my Husband spoke
caused a Storm of Grief in my mind, which raised up Billows of Tears that
overflowed my Eyes, yet, said she, the Dearest and Loving'st Friends will both
Take and Give Cause of Exception sometimes, for not any Man or Woman is so
Perfect as not to Err; and thus her Discretion did not suffer her Passion to
Disturb her Guests, and her good Nature did Excuse her Husband's Folly, and her
Love did Forgive his Disrespect to her; But the Lady C. C. did not behave her
self so, for her Husband Sir G. C. and she had invited many of their Friends to
a Feasting Dinner, and she, as the Mistress, to order all affairs belonging to
a Wife, took upon her to order the Feast, and being a Mode-Lady, would have a
Mode-Feast; but the Cook knowing his Master loved roast Beef, sent in a Chine of
roast Beef to the Table, and when her Guests were all Set, and beginning to Eat,
she spied the Chine of Beef, whereat she was very angry, to have, as she
thought, her Feast disgraced with an old English fashion, and not only an Old,
but a Country fashion, to have Beef served to their Table; wherefore she, to
show her self a Courtier, rather than a Country-Lady, commanded one of the
waiters to take the Beef from the Table, Sir G. C. her Husband desired not to
have it taken away, for said he, I love Beef better than any other Meat, but
she to express she had a Ladies Nice Stomach, or rather a Nice Lady's Stomach,
said, the Beef was fulsom to her Eyes, and made her Stomach sick to see it, her
Husband bad her to look upon some of the other meat, and to give him leave to
eat of what he liked; but she would not agree to that, for, said she, the very
Smell was Offensive to her, and therefore she would have it taken away, he said
it should not be taken away, until he had eaten as much as he would; but in
fine, their words Multiplied, and gathered together in an outrageous Tumult,
raised their voices into an Uproar, and then from Words they went to Blows,
flinging whatsoever came next to hand at one another head; their Guests being
in danger to be Hurt, rose from the Table, and Sir G. C. and his Lady rose
also, and went to Cuffs, but their Friends did soon part them, and the Lady
went Crying into her Chamber, and was Sick, because she had not her Will, at
least Feigned her self Sick; As for their Guests, they were rather invited to
Fast than to Feast, as it fell out, for all the fine Quelquechose was spoiled,
and overthrown in the hurly burly, but the Beef was so Substantial and Solid,
as it strongly kept its place, on which the Guests might have Fed; but Fright,
Noise and Disorder, had taken away their Appetite to Eating. Thus, Madam, I
have related these Feasts and Entertainings, to let you know the different
Humors and Behaviors of these two Ladies, the one having cause to be Angry,
did Patiently and Discreetly pass over her Injury, appearing Celestial, the
other out of a vain Humor, fell into a raging Passion, the truth is, she
showed her self a Fool, and behaved her self as Mad. But leaving the Angelick
Lady to be a Pattern to her Sex, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XXXIII.
MADAM,
I Do not wonder, that the Lord C. R. should delight in Effeminate Pastimes, as
Dancing, Fidling, Visiting, Junketting, Attiring, and the like, because he is
an Effeminate Man, fitter to Dance with a Lady, than to Fight with an Enemy;
nor do I wonder that the Lord N. W. practices Riding, Fencing, Vaulting,
Shooting, Hunting, Fortifying, Navigating, and the like, because he is an
Heroic Man, fitter to Conquer a Nation, than to Dance a Galliard or Courant;
nor I do not wonder that the Lord A. M. Drinks, Whores, Games, and the like,
because he is a Debauched Man, apter to Quarrel than to Fight; neither do I
wonder that the Lord L. V. Studies, Reads, Writes, Travels, Inquires and
Searches for Right and Truth, because he is a Wise Man; nor I do not wonder at
the Lord F. O. that loves Amorous Courtships, because he is an Idle Man; nor I
do not wonder at the Lord C. H. that Prays to God, Sends to the Sick, and
Relieves the Poor, because he is a Good Man; nor do I wonder at the Lord W. I.
who Extorts, Exacts, and Deceives, because he is a Wicked Man; neither do I
wonder at the Lord C. C. who Visits the Meritorious, Applauds the Worthy,
Assists the Industrious, and the like, because he is a Generous Person; nor I
do not wonder at the Lord G. R. that he Speaks false with his Tongue,
Dissembles in his Countenance, Betrays in his Actions, because he is a Base
Man. Thus, Madam, we may divide Mankind into eight parts, or rather into four;
for those four, as the Effeminate, Idle, Wicked, and Base, are but the Slime
and Dung of Mankind, and only the Heroic, Wise, Good, and Generous, are the
Soul and Body of Mankind; the first are neither good for Citizens, Magistrates,
nor Commanders, but rather fit to be set in the fore-fronts of Battles to be
Destroyed, or to fill up Breaches, being but Rubbish; but then you will say,
this were the way to Destroy most Men in the World, the truth is, if it were
not for such Men and Ravenous Beasts, the World would be rather a Heaven than a
World. But leaving them and Beasts, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXIV.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to Express to me in your last Letter, that you have been in
the Country to see the Lady M. L. who seems Melancholy since she was married,
which is a sign she is not pleased with the Condition of her Life; I believe
one of the causes of her Melancholy is; that she is in the Country, wherein is
little Resort, especially of courting Gallants, for most Women love Variety of
Company, and much Company, even married Wives as well as Maids, neither do all
Widows shun Company; As for Maids, they have an excuse to get them Husbands,
and Widows are at liberty to make a second, third, or fourth Choice, when their
Husbands are dead, but Wives have no excuse for the Company of Courting
Servants, and merry Meetings, but only the Spleen, which nothing can cure but
Company and Jollity, to divert Melancholy, and to remove the Splenetick
Obstructions and Crude Vapors, for which Dancing, Feasting, Gaming, and the
like, is the best Cure, Probatum est; Whereas the lone Company of a Husband is
so far from working any Cure, as it is many times the Cause of the Disease; But
if her Melancholy proceed from want of Variety of Company, I pity both her
Husband and Attendants, for most commonly a Peevish Frowardness does attend
that Melancholy, they will Quarrel with every Thing, and not be Pleased with
Any, take Exceptions at every Word, complain of being Sick, but know not where
their Pains are, even as Weary of Themselves, which makes their Husbands many
times Weary of Them, and to Divert the Grief of their Wives Troubles, they
Solace with their Wives Maids, who are more Pleasant Company, being not
troubled with the Spleen, as not having a Husband, nay, when they do Marry,
their minds are so employed about getting a Livelihood, as they have not time
to think of their Splenes, besides, they are forced to Labor and Work for
their Living, which keeps them from such Obstructions or Disease, and the
Spleen is a Disease which is only amongst the Noble and Rich, whose Wealth
makes them Idle, and their Idleness begets an appetite to Variety of Diets,
Clothes, and Company, whereas Poor, Laborious People know not such Disease. But
leaving this Theme, give me leave to welcome you out of the Country, and to
acquaint you, that I will shortly Personally wait upon you, as is the duty of,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXV.
MADAM,
SIr W. Cs. Wife you know has a Conversable and Ingenious Wit, yet not being
very handsome, her Husband has got him a Mistress, who is very beautiful and
handsome, but yet she is a Fool; a Friend of his asked him why he chose a Fool
for his Mistress? he said, he did not Court her for her Wit, but for her
Beauty; for, said he, now I have a Mistress for Delight, and a Wife for
Conversation, I have a Mistress to Look on, and Admire, and a Wife to Listen to
and Discourse with, and both to Embrace at my Pleasure; but, said his Friend,
if your Wife should come to know you have a Mistress, you will not take much
Pleasure in her Conversation, unless you account mourning Complaints of, or to
you, Exclamations and Curses against you, cross Speeches, opposite Actions, and
hideous Noise, to be Conversable and Delightful; for the truth is, said he,
your Wife's words will be so Salt, Sharp, and Bitter, as they will Corrode your
Mind, Leaven your Thoughts, and make your Life Unpleasant. My Wife, said Sir W.
C. shall not know I have a Mistress; his Friend replied, your often Absence
will Betray you, or else some other will tell her, for Adultery is like Murder,
it seldom escapes finding out; and since that time Sir W. Cs. Lady has heard
of her Husbands Mistress, but she seems not to be Angry at it, but talks of it
with great Patience, saying, that if her Husband takes Pleasure in Variety, he
will be more delighted with her Wit, than with his Mistress's Beauty, and will
sooner be tired with gazing on One Object, than in hearing Diverse Discourses
and Diversions of Wit, Sense, Reason, Judgment, Fancy, and Speech; Besides,
said she, Wit attracts the Mind more to Love, than Beauty to Admiration, and
if my Husband Loves me Best, said she, I am well content he should Admire her
Beauty Most, as also to Embrace her as much as he pleases, for I am so
Delighted, and VVedded to my own Wit, that I regard not my Husbands Amors nor
Imbracings, for Wit is Spiritual and not Corporeal, it lives with the Mind,
and not with the Body, being not subject to the gross Senses, for though Wit,
said she, may be made known by Words and Actions, yet those are but the
Pictures of Wit's Works, not Wit it self, for that cannot be Drawn, it is
beyond all Draughts; and so much Difference, said she, is between my Husband's
Mistress and his Wife, as a Picture and an invisible Spirit, which Spirit can
both Help and Hurt, Delight and Terrify, Damn and Glorify; But howsoever,
said she, my Wit shall not be my Husbands Evil Spirit, neither to Reproach
him, nor to Disgrace, Reprove, Delude, or Anger him, but it shall be always
ready to Defend, Commend, Inform, Delight, and if it could, to Reform him; but
I believe, said she, that is past the power of my Wit, for it is a hard matter
to Restrain Nature from Liberty, especially of the Appetites, for the Passions
of the Mind are more easily Governed, than the Appetites of the Body, for they
are Sensual and Brutal, wherefore Time is a better Reformer of the Appetites
than Reason. But, Madam, this is to let you know the Lady W. Cs. Wit,
Discretion, and Temper, which is more than most of our Sex has; and so leaving
her to her Wit, and her Husband to Reformation, and his Mistress's Beauty to
Time, I rest,

Madam, Your most faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXVI.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to express, how Mr. P. C. is persecuted
by another man's Whore, which is not usual, for though many men are Persecuted
by their own Whores, both in Body, Mind, Course of Life, and Estate, Diseasing
the One, Vexing the Other, Opposing the Third, and Spending the Fourth, yet not
usually by any other man's, but their own, at least believing them to be only
theirs; but I believe Mr. P. C. will not easily clear himself from her, for
Courtesans are often assisted by the Powerful, insomuch as in any Law-sute or
petitioning Request, they shall be heard, and their Suit granted, although
against all Law or Right; Such Power and Favor has Concupiscence, as to
corrupt Magistrates, bribe Judges, fee Lawyers, flatter Courtiers, and the
truth is, entice, allure, and persuade most of Mankind; but although there be
in all Ages and Nations, Courtesans, and Men liable to be Tempted, yet men have
not been frequently tempted, persuaded, or allured to Marry Courtesans, unless
in this Age, wherein Courtesans are so Prevalent and Fortunate, as they do not
only get themselves Husbands, when Beauty and Lovers begin to leave them, but
marry more Richly and Honorably for Dignities, than Honest, Chaste Widows, or
Pure and Innocent Virgins, which is apt to make Honest and Chaste Women to
doubt, their Honesty and Chastity is not blessed with such good Fortune as
Dishonesty is, insomuch as those that are not Honest, merely, and for no other
end, than for Honestie's sake, may be Corrupted through hopes of good Fortune;
but where Virtue takes a through Possession, it never leaves the Habitation; yet
many that have been Base, Wicked, and of Beastly Lives, may be Reformed, so as
to become very Honest, Worthy, and Pure, and such Reclamed Persons ought to be
Esteemed and Respected, for I am not of Mrs. F. Rs. Humor, who Hates a
Reformado. But some Men are of that Humor, as they Hate Honest, Chaste Women,
not only out of a Despair of their Enjoyments, but that they love the Company
and Conversation of Wanton and Free Women, insomuch that a Courtesan shall
have a greater and stronger Power to Cause and Persuade Men to do Actions not
only to the Ruin of their Estates and Families, but to the Ruin of their
Honors and Reputation, nay, to make them Unnatural, Extravagant or Base, than
an Honest Chaste Wife has to Persuade her Husband to keep his Estate, Honor,
or Honesty; for many a Worthy and Honorable Person has Degenerated from his
Birth and Breeding, from his Natural Courage and Generosity, from his Loyalty
and Duty, from his Natural Affection and Sacred Vows, from his Honor and
Reputation, through the Persuasion of Whores; nay, many Men love a Whore so
much more than an Honest and Chaste Woman, as many make better Husbands, and
are more Fond and Kinder to their Wives if they be Libertines, than if they
were Honest and True to their Marriage Bed; But leaving such men to their own
Heads, and their Wives to their Neighbors Beds, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXVII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to tell me in your last Letter, that there was a great and
earnest Dispute between O. G. and C. O. in Divinity, as to prove many things
which are easier to be Believed than Proved; for though Proof makes Knowledge,
yet Belief does not make Proof; for though many thousands of men Believe alike
one Thing or Things a thousand years, yet neither the number of Men, nor of
Years, does prove it to be true, it only proves that so many Men did believe it
for so many Years; for though there be many things in Nature that may be
Conceived, and Demonstrated to Reason, at least, to have a Probability in
Reason, but cannot be Demonstrated to the Senses, yet the Conceptions do
oftener deceive, not only the Reason, but the Senses, than the Senses do the
Reason or Conception, for though the Senses may, and are oftentimes Mistaken
and Deluded, yet they are the most certain and surest Guides and Informers we
have; But Divinity is above all Sense and Reason, as also all Demonstrations,
wherefore Faith is required in all Religions, for what cannot be Conceived or
Apprehended, must be Believed, and if the chief Pillar of Religion is Faith,
Men should Believe more, and Dispute less, for Disputations do argue Weakness
of Faith, nay, they make a Strong Faith Faint, for all Disputes in Divinity are
Enemies to Faith, and are apt through Contradictions and Different Opinions, to
Destroy Religion, making the Thoughts and Mind Atheistical, and the Words
Sophistical, Men spending more time in Disputing than Praying, rather striving
to Express their Wit than to Increase their Knowledge, for Divine Mysteries
are beyond all Natural Capacity, and the Schoolmen have rather taught Men
Contradictions than Truth, and Churchmen rather Division than Union. But all
Disputes and Arguments in Divinity are only fit for Churchmen, whose
Profession is to be Teachers and Instructors in the Divine Laws, and not for
Laymen, unless they intend to be Churchmen: for as all National Laws have
Judges, Sergeants, Barresters, Attorneys, and the like, to Perform and Execute
the Common and Civil Laws, that have been Prudently Enacted for the Good and
Benefit of the Bodily Life and Commonwealth; so there are Bishops, Deans,
Deacons, Parish Priests and Curats, to Perform and Execute the Divine Laws,
which have been Spiritually Enacted for the Salvation of men's Souls; and as
Lawyers are Informers of the National Laws, and Pleaders of Causes, so
Ministers are Informers of the Divine Laws, and Teachers of good Life, and all
Spiritual Causes should be Decided by the Bishops, as all National or Human
Causes by the Judges, otherwise there would be a Confusion both in Church and
State; wherefore those that are not of that Profession, ought not to meddle
therewith, or Dispute thereof, but to Submit to that which our Forefathers
thought fit to Enact, Order, and Dispose, for the good of their Successors, and
Succedent Times; And so leaving O. G. and C. O. to agree if they can, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XXXVIII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to desire, that one of my Servants should inquire for Sir N.
G. and give him a Letter, or to leave the Letter at his Lodgings. Madam, I must
tell you what I hear, which is, that he may be Enquired for, but before he can
be Found, or his Lodgings Known, he will be gone out of the Town; not that he
obscures his Lodging, but that he Stays not any where, for he is like a
Shadow, or a Ghost, when you think it is so near as to speak to it, it straight
appears afar off, or Vanishes away; and he is not only in this City, but in
every Town, for he rides from Town to Town, as Birds fly from Tree to Tree,
and his only business is for Divertisement for Health, so that his Life is as
if it rid Post; but let him ride from Death as far as he can, and do what he
can to Shun it, yet Death will Meet him at his Journeys end, and there Arrest
him, and Imprison his Body in a Grave, for Time has laid an Action of Battery
against him, and has now threescore and fifteen years Summoned him to Appear,
but as yet he keeps out of Sight, and will as long as he can, as we may
perceive by his riding, and short stay in every place he comes to. Indeed
Nature has been his Friend, and seems to be so still, and as long as she
Protects him, Death cannot get him; nay, she has Favored him more than many
of his Neighbors, or Acquaintance, for he never stays so long in one place,
as to make a Neighborhood, but has Acquaintance in every place; neither does
he tronble any Acquaintance with long Visits, but only as to ask how they do,
and so farewell; he does not stay to examine the long Welfare of his old
Acquaintance, nor to make tedious Complements with new Acquaintance, nor stays
to inquire for those Acquaintance he sees not, but he will make new
Acquaintance at first sight; and this Advantage he has by riding to several
places, if it be any, that he hears more News than any other man, for he meets
News in every Town, which his Memory like a Portmantua carries with him, and as
in every Town he takes up some News, so in every Town he leaves some; But such
a Posting Life, were I a Man, would be Wearisom to me, for it would soon Tire
my Life, or Rid me out of the World, at least to my thinking, although to him
it is a Sport and Pleasure, or else he would not do so, since he is not
Constrained thereto. Wherefore, as for your Letter, it must either be sent back
to you again, or else it must lie here as a Watch to Take him, for it is
impossible it should Overtake him, nor can any one tell where to find him,
except those that are in the same place he is, which soon changes to Is not, so
as one may say, he Is, and Is not, he is like a Juglers Ball, it is here, it is
gone; but he is no Jugler himself, for I hear he is a very Worthy Person, and
his Honest and Harmless Endeavor to Prolong his Life, shows him a Wise man;
and so leaving him and your Letter to meet, though I know not when, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXIX.
MADAM,
I May give the Lady F. L. Joy of her second Marriage, for I hear she is
Married again; but I fear it will be applied to her, what is said of another
Lady, who Married first very well for Title and Wealth, her Husband being in
Years, but she very Poor, and amongst much Company it was told, she seemed to
be a Crafty, Witty Woman, that she could get such an Husband; no, said one man,
it was not the Wit or Craft of the Lady, that got her such a Husband, but the
Folly of the Man that Married such a Wife; and after he Died and left her very
Rich, she married a Young man that had no Estate, and then they said, that it
seemed her second Husband was a Wise Man, that he could get so Rich a Wife;
no, said the former Man, it was not the Wisdom of the Man, but the Folly of the
Woman, that caused that Match; so she was even with her first Husband in Folly,
for he played the Fool to Marry her, and she played the Fool to Marry her
second Husband. Thus most of the World of mankind is mistaken, for what they
Attribute to some men's Wit, is other men's Folly, but for Marriages, the truth
is, that Folly makes more Marriages than Prudence; as for Example, Mr. A. B.
has Married a Common Courtesan, if she had been Particular, it had been more
Excusable; but all men are not so foolish, for I hear that Sir W. S. will
rather endure the Persecution of his own Courtesan, than Marry her. But leaving
the Lady F. L. to her new Husband, and Mr. A. B. to his new Wife, and Sir W. S.
to his pursuing Whore, I rest,

Madam, Your most faithful Friend and Servant.

XL.
MADAM,
I Have observed, that in time of Peace most men study the Schoolmen and
Fathers, and in times of War they study Martial-men and Poets, or rather
Practice what former Martial-men have Taught, and Repeat what former Poets have
Written, for when they are in Garrisons, or have any spare time from Fighting,
as Assaulting, or Defending, they will choose to read Homer, Virgil, and Lucian,
rather than St. Ambrose, St. Hierome, St. Augustine, St. Chrysostom, or the
like, or rather than they will read Books of Controversies, as Scotus, Thomas
Aquinas, and others, they will read Caesar's Commentaries; the truth is, though
Schoolmen and Books of Controversies do not Fight Combats, yet they make
Quarrels and Disputations, so that there are More, Oftener, and Continual Wars
in Schools than in the Field, only that their Weapons they use in Schools, are
not so deadly as those that are used in the Field, for there is great
difference between Tongues and Swords, Words and Blows; The truth is, Scholars
and Women quarrel much alike, as after the same manner, wherein is more Noise
than Danger, and more Spite than Mischief; but yet different Opinions in
Religion and Laws in a Commonwealth, cause Cruel Civil Wars, making Factions
and Parties, with Disputations and Arguments, and nothing will decide the
Quarrel but Blood and Death, nor end the War, but Destruction of the Whole, or
Conquering Victory of the one Party over the other, whereof the late Wars in
this Country are a woeful Example, all being brought to Confusion with Preaching
and Pleading, on the one side Preachers and Pleaders became Soldiers, on the
other side, Soldiers became Preachers and Pleaders, so that the Word and the
Sword made great Troubles, and grievous Calamities in these Nations, and though
there has been much Blood Shed, many Lives Lost, Men Banished, and Families
Ruined, yet there are Divisions still; But leaving War and Strife, and Praying
for Peace and Quiet, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XLI.
MADAM,
It Is now become a fashion for men to brag of their Fortunes or Estates, to get
Credit, as to Borrow, or run on the Score, for they think if Tradesmen believe
they are able to Pay, they will be willing to Trust, and if they can get Trust,
they will spend as long as their Credit will last, and when they ow Most, they
bear up Highest, for Tradesmen for fear of Losing what they have Trusted or
Lent, will Trust or Lend more in hope to be paid All at last, so as they fling
the Handle after the Hatchet; and whereas at first the Borrowers are Humble to
get Credit, at last the Creditors become Humble Petitioners for their Own, and
VVait for an Answer with their Caps in their hands, and the Borrower, like a
proud Favorite, will hardly be Seen or Spoken to, nay, when he vouchsafes them
his Presence and Answer, he gives them Words for Pay, and Promises more than
he is able to Perform, and sometimes they have Frowns and Checks, for being so
Presumptuous to Come before they were Sent for, or so Bold to Ask for what was
justly Owing them; But certainly Creditors deserve good Words for their good
Deeds, though they can get no Money for their VVares. But in these needy times
Tradesmen must venture to Trust, or else they will hardly put off their
Commodities, for where one pays ready Money, five, nay twenty, run on the
Score; the reason is, there is not so much Money in Specie, not in all Europe,
nay, in the World, as to pay readily for all that is Bought, for there are
more Commodities than Money, I may say, more Paper than Money, for Paper and
Parchment pays more than Money; a little Money sprinkled amongst many Bills and
Bonds, keeps up Commerce and Trading throughout the World, more than Exchange
of Commodities does. But those live most at Ease that Borrow not, and those
that Lend not have the most Friends, for there is an old Saying, Lend your Money,
and Lose your Friend; the truth is, a man shall sooner lose a Friend with a
Debt, than get a Friend by a Gift. But leaving Debts and Gifts to the Poor and
the Rich, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XLII.
MADAM,
I Am sorry Sir F.O. has Undervalued himself so much below is Birth and
Wealth, as to Marry his Kitchin-maid, but it was a sign he had an Hungry
Appetite, or that he lived a Solitary Life, Seeing no better Company, or
Conversed not with Women of Quality; or else he has been too Privately Kind,
and was loath to have it Publicly Known; or he has tried her Virtue, and so
Married her for Chastity, though many Women will Deny some, and Grant to
others; or else he Married her for Beauty, or Wit, or both, although the
Inferior or meaner sort of People, especially Women, are oftener owners of
Beauty than Wit, and if they have some Wit, it is only Sharp Replies, which
are a kind of a Scolding; and I have heard that the Way or Manner of Courtship
amongst the Inferior sort of People in E. is Scolding, they Scold themselves
into Matrimony, or at least, make Love in a rough, rude Style; But perchance
Sir F. O. Married his Kitchin-maid in hopes she would make a Nimble and
Obedient Wife, which he might fear one of Equal Birth would not be; Indeed he
has chosen one out of the humblest Offices, or Household Employments, for the
Kitchen for the most part is the lowest Room in a House; Yet I write not this
as believing he may not be Happy in his Choice, for it is likely the Match may
be more Happy than Honorable, and if he thinks it no Disgrace, or cares not
for Disgrace, all is well, for it only concerns himself, as having no Parents
living to Grieve or Anger, nor no former Children to Suffer by. But though her
Office and Birth were both Dripping or Basting, yet his Dignity and Wealth has
made her a gay Lady; and so leaving him to his dish of Brewess, I rest,

Madam,

Your faithful Friend and Servant.
XLIII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to desire me to send you my opinion of Mrs. R. Es. Wit, truly
I cannot judge of her Wit until I have a longer Acquaintance with her, for
there are many several Degrees, and diverse Sorts of Wit, as from a Pint to a
Tun, or Teirce, or Pipe of Wit, all which may be drawn Dry, and their Brains
be as Empty Barrels; and some have Rivers, or Seas of Wit, which sometimes Ebb
and some Flow, wherein some have Double Tides; and others have Springs of Wit,
which issue out into small Streams, but make great Floods, by reason they
constantly Flow without Intermission. But there are not many Seas, nor Rivers,
nor Floods, nor Springs of Wit, for there are more Bottels than Springs, and
more Barrels than Seas of Wit. As for Spring Wit, it is Fresh, Sweet, Calm,
Smooth, Pure, Bright and Clear, whereas Sea Wit is Salt, Sad, Fomy, Rough,
Boisterous, Unsteady, and sometimes Dangerous. And as there are several Degrees
of Wit for Quantity, and Sorts of Wit for Quality, so there are Several Weights
of Wit, for Salt Wit is Heavy and Searching, it Presses to the Center, and
Peirces to the Quick, and opens the Obstructions of the World of Mankind, like
as Mineral Waters do the Spleen, or the like parts of the Body, whereas Fresh
Spring Wit is Light and Airy, Running with a Smooth and Quick Motion,
Refreshing the World of Mankind, Bathing the Soul, Cleansing the Thoughts, and
Quenching the Drought of Time, which is Overheated with Running; but least my
Pen should become Dry with Writing, having not Wit enough to Moisten it, I Will
take my leave, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XLIV.
MADAM,
AS it was formerly the Fashion, or Custom of those that received Visits, if
they were Weary of their Visitors, to look in their Watches, or to Gape, or
Yawn; so now it is to have always, or for the most part, Pen, Ink, and Paper
lying upon the Table in their Chamber, for an Excuse they are writing Letters;
as for the first, it is Rude, and the last for the most part is False;
wherefore methinks it would be an Honester and Nobler Custom to speak the
Truth, as to say, they Desire not to be Visited, at such Times as they would
not have Company, or from such Persons as they Care not for, or to tell them
truly, that they cannot Entertain them, having some Occasions which require
their Attendance or Employment, or that they are not Well, and Company would be
Troublesome to them; But to receive their Visits, and then not Entertain them
Handsomely, Civilly, Courteously, but Dissemblingly, Carelessly or
Disrespectfully, is neither fit for Persons of Quality to do to any Company, if
they will think them worthy to receive a Visit of them; neither fit for Persons
of Quality to suffer from any Person; But the Visited and Visitors do not
always know how to Behave themselves, for Noble Births may have Mean Breeding,
for some are Nobly Born and Meanly Bred, and some are Humbly Born and Nobly
Bred, and some are Nobly Born and Nobly Bred, but those are Few, and some are
neither Well Born nor Well Bred, and those are Many, but very Few are Bred so
Exactly, as to know Punctually how to Behave themselves to every particular
Person, and in every several Company, much less in every Action of their Life,
which are almost Innumerous, and as Different. Wherefore those are most to be
Commended, that can go through the Course of their Life with fewest Errors; a
Busy Nature is apt to commit Most, and they that meddle least in the Affairs
of the World, and are most sparing of Speech, commit Fewest. It Is true, every
living man commits some, but thos^ are Happy that can Reckon their Errors,
that they are not past Account. But if I write my Letter longer, I shall add
one Error more to those many that are past, although I am sure you will pardon
those wherewith I have offended you, as believing they were not willingly, but
ignorantly committed by,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XLV.
MADAM,
SInce I writ to you that Letter of the first of the last Month, I have several
times Conversed with Mrs. R. E. and I find her Wit runs in Parts, like as
Music, where there must be several Parties to Play or Sing several Parts; she
is not a whole Consort her self, neither can she Play the grounds of Wit, but
yet she can make a shift to fill up a Note; and it is to be observed, that Wit
in several Persons runs on several Subjects, but few have general Wits, as to
Play Musically upon every Subject, especially without making a Fault, for I
have known some, on some particular Subjects, will be wonderful Witty, and on
others mere Dunces and Idiots. And for parts of Wit, some have Gossiping Wit,
as Midwife and Nurse Wit, also Wafer and Hippocras Wit, Ale and Cake Wit, as in
Christning, Churching, Lying in, and other Gossipings; Others have Bridal Wit,
Game-some Wit, also Gaming Wit, Tavern-Wit, Brothel-VVit, and some have
Court-VVit, which is a Jeering, Scoffing Wit, but all these are but Scums or
Dregs of Wit, only Scum-VVit swims on the top, which soon boyls over, and
Dreg-VVit lies at the bottom, and is hardly stirred without much motion to
raise it up. Thus several sorts of Wit run about amongst Mankind, and Mrs. E.
Rs. Wit is a Platonic Wit, as loving Friendships, and the conversation of
Souls, but take her from the Platonicks, and she is gone, both from Wit and
Understanding, or those are gone from her; and so leaving her to her
single-Self, and her Wit to her Platonick-Lover, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XLVI.
MADAM,
I Have observed, that in all Combustions and Wars, those get more Favor and
Profit that enter into them Latest, for those that are at the Beginning, for
the most part, are Losers, either in Lives, or Estates, or both, and are least
Favored by those they Fight or Adventure for, nay most commonly they are
Disfavour'd; wherefore, if Honor and Honesty would give leave, were I a Man, I
would not enter until the last course, for that is Sweetest, like a Banquet;
But because Honor and Honesty would Exclame against me, for preferring Profit
and Promotion before Them, therefore a Man ought to do his Endeavor in a Just
Cause, for Honor and Honestie's sake, although he were sure to lose his
Liberty, Estate or Life. But leaving War, Loss, Disfavour and Preferment to
Worthy Persons, and Unjust States and Princes, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XLVII.
MADAM,
THE other day the Lady S. M. was to Visit me, and I gave her Joy, she said she
should have Joy indeed if it were a Son, I said, I bid her Joy of her Marriage,
for I had not seen her since she was a Wife, and had been Married, which was
some four VVeeks ago, wherefore I did not know she was with Child; but she
rasping wind out of her Stomach, as Childing-VVomen usually do, making Sickly
Faces to express a Sickly Stomach, and fetching her Breath short, and bearing
out her Body, drawing her Neck downward, and standing in a weak and faint
Posture, as great bellied Wives do, bearing a heavy Burden in them, told me
she had been with Child a fortnight, though by her behavior one would not have
thought she had above a Week to go, or to reckon; But she is so pleased with
the Belief she is with Child (for I think she cannot perfectly Know her self,
at most it is but breeding Child) as she Makes or Believes her self Bigger than
she Appears, and says, she Longs for every Meat that is Difficult to be gotten,
and Eats and Drinks from Morning till Night, with very little intermission, and
sometimes in the Night; whereupon I told her, if she did so, I believed she
would be bigger Bellied and greater Bodied, whether she were with Child or not;
besides Eating so much would make her Sick, if she were not with Child; she
answered, that Women with Child might Eat Any thing, and as Much as they would
or could, and it would do them no Harm. But I have observed, that generally
Women take more Pleasure when they are with Child, than when they are not with
Child, not only in Eating more, and Feeding more Luxuriously, but taking a
Pride in their great Bellies, although it be a Natural Effect of a Natural
Cause; for like as Women take a greater Pride in their Beauty, than Pleasure
or Content in their Virtue, so they take more Pride in Being with Child, than
in Having a Child, for when they are brought to Bed, and up from their Lying
in, they seem nothing so well Pleased, nor so Proud, as when they were great
with Child; and to prove they are Prouder, and take more Pleasure in Being with
Child, and in Lying in, than in Having a Child, is their Care, Pains, and Cost,
in Getting, Making, and Buying Fine and Costly Childbed-Linnen,
Swadling-Cloths, Mantles, and the like; as also fine Beds, Cradles, Baskets,
and other Furniture for their Chambers, as Hangings, Cabinets, Plates,
Artificial Flowers, Looking-glasses, Skreens, and many such like things of
great Cost and Charge, besides their Banquets of Sweetmeats and other Junkets,
as Cakes, Wafers, Biskets, Jellies, and the like, as also such strong Drinks,
as methinks the very Smell should put a Childbed-Wife into a Fever, as
Hippocras and Burnt-Wine, with Hot Spices, Mulled Sack, Strong and
High-colour'd Ale, well Spiced, and Stuffd with Tosts of Cake, and the like,
all which is more chargeable than to bring up a Child when it is Born; nay,
they will rather want Portions for their Children, when they are grown to be
Men or Women, or want sufficiency of Means to pay for their Learning and
Education, than want these Extravagancies of Luxury and Vanity at their Birth;
and their Children being Christ'ned, are like some Brides and Bridegrooms, that
are so Fine on their Wedding Day, as they are forced to go in Rags all their
lives after, which methinks is very strange, that for the Vanity and Show of
one day, they will spend so much as to be Beggars all their lives after; But as
I said, this Proves that Women take a greater Pride and Pleasure in Being with
Child, than in Having Children well Bred, and well-Bestow'd or Maintained, when
grown to Years; and that which makes me wonder more, is, that Wise Men will
suffer their Foolish Wives to be so Foolishly and Imprudently Expensive,
wherefore such men are worthy to be Impoverished, that will suffer their wives
to be so Vain, for it shows them to be better Husbands than Fathers, Kinder to
their Wives than Careful of their Children, also it shows them Fonder Husbands
than Loving Children, because they Ruin their Forefathers Posterity, by
Impoverishing their own Succession, and that only to Please their Wives
Humors, and to Expend for their Wives Vanities. But leaving the Lady S. M. to
her Breeding Pride or Pride of Breeding, to her Sick Pleasure or Pleasurable
Sickness, to her Luxurious Feeding, and Vain Providing, and wishing her a good
Gossiping, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XLVIII.
MADAM,
IT requires Experience, Skill, and Practice, for Men, Civilly, yet Courtly, to
Entertain and Accompany Women in Visiting, or the like; they must sit within a
Respectful Distance, with their Hats off, and Begin a Discourse, but let the
Woman Follow it, which they will do until they are out of Breath; also they
must not Interrupt them in their Talk, but let them Speak as Much, or as Long
as they will, or rather Can, for our Will to Talk is beyond our Power, but
though we want not Words, yet we want Understanding and Knowledge to Talk
Perpetually; Neither must Men Contradict Women, although they should Talk
Nonsense, which oftentimes they do, but must seem to Applaud and Approve, with
gentle Nods and Bows, all they say; also they must View their Faces with
Admiring Eyes, although they were Ill-favored, but those that are Beautiful,
their Eyes must be Fixed on them, or else seem to be Dazzled; likewise they must
seem to Start at their Calls, and Run with an affrighted have, to Obey their
Commands. Such, and many the like Ceremonies and Fooleries there are of this
kind from Men to Women, but these are rather from Strangers than Domestic
Acquaintance. Wherefore setting aside antic Follies, yet a Civil Respect and
Regard is due to the Female Sex from the Masculine, even from the Greatest to
the Meanest; and so leaving Men to their Constrained Civilities and Feigned
Admirations, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XLIX.
MADAM,
I Do not wonder that C. R. will not trust E. D. in any business of great
Concernment, although an Able man to manage great Affairs, by reason he has
been False, although he seems now Faithful and True; but Wise men are as
Jealous of those men that have been Dishonest in the matter of Trust, as of
those women that have been Dishonest in the matter of Love; for though they may
be true Converts, yet those that are Wary will fear they do but Dissemble, for
those that are Evil do not so Easily nor Suddenly turn to Good, as those that
are Good are Apt to turn to Evil, for though Repentance does cast forth the
flowing part of Evil, yet many times there are Dregs, which lie lurking in the
Mind or Soul, which in time, with the help of Opportunity and Advancement, may
Increase again into their former Evil Condition; and Wise men know that there
is less Danger in trusting an Honest Fool than a Subtle Knave; the truth is, it
is pity that Honesty and Ingenuity or Ability should not Inhabit together,
for, for the most part they live asunder, as Ability and Ingenuity with
Dishonesty, which Impowers and Inables such men to do the greater Mischiefs,
for Subtle Wit and great Knavery take delight to do what is VVorst, and
Fortune many times favors them Best, and the Actors Glory most in their
Wicked Deeds; But leaving C. R. to his Wisdom, and E. D. to Truth or
Dissembling, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

L.
MADAM,
I Cannot wonder that Mrs. F. G. is so desirous of a Husband, for I observe,
that all Unmarried Women, both Maids and Widows, are the like, insomuch that
there are more Customers that go to Hymen's Markets, which are Churches,
Plays, Balls, Masks, Marriages, etc. than there are Husbands to be Sold, and
all Prices are bidden there, as Beauty, Birth, Breeding, Wit and Virtue, though
Virtue is a Coin whereof is not much; but Husbands are so scarce, especially
Good ones, as they are at such great Rates, that an indifferent Price will not
Purchase any one, wherefore those that will Buy them, must be so Rich as to be
able to bestow an extraordinary Price of Beauty, Birth, Breeding, Wit or
Virtue, and yet much ado to Purchase any one, nay, some cannot be had without
all those joined into One; But Venus's Markets, which are also Public
Meetings, (for all Markets are Public) are so well stored of all sorts and
degrees of Titles, Professions, Ages, and the like, as they are as Cheap as
stinking Makrel, and all Coins are current there, but Virtue, wherefore that is
never offered; it is true, the Markets of Hymen and Venus are in one and the
same City or Place, yet Hymen and Venus Sell apart, like as several Grasiers
bring their Beasts to one Market or Fair; I call them several Markets, to make
a Distinction of which belongs to Hymen, and which to Venus; but for better
Distinction's sake, I will put them into Shops apart, or into as many Pews in
one Church, or Compare them to several Scenes in one Mask, several Acts in one
Play, for as many Stalls or Shops there are in one Market, and several
Magistrates in one City, so many Shops has Hymen and Venus in one Market; but
the Cheapest that are to be sold out of Hymen's Shops, are young Novices; and
although there is much scarcity in Hymen's Shops, yet the Price of Gold or such
Riches, if they be offered, buys any man that is there to be sold, which are
Batchelours and Widdowers, for there is no Married man in Hymen's Shops, unless
unknown that they were bought before, and once Discovered, they are Punished,
for Married men can neither be Bought nor Sold by Hymen or his Customers, until
they be Widowers; but in Venus Shops there be as many, if not more, Married men
than Batchelours or Widowers; but both in Hymen's and Venus's Shops there are
of all sorts, Better and Worse, as Mean Persons and others of Quality, Handsome
and not Handsome, Old and Young, and of middle Years; And as for Women, few are
Sold in Shops, for they are the Buyers, and Married Women are the best
Customers Venus has; and though Married Women go to the Public Market, which
are Public Meetings, as Fine as they can be Dressed, and to the Public View,
out of pretense to meet there, and speak with such of their Friends that are
Hymen's Customers, as also to help those Friends to Choose and Bargain for a
Husband, or to keep them Company, yet when they go to Venus's Shops they go
Covered with their Veils, or rather Follies, for fear they should be known of
their Husbands that lie there to be sold, for though they go Uncovered to
Hymen's Shops, as with their Friends, to Assist them, yet to Venus's Shops they
go alone. Thus Married and Unmarried take some occasion to be at the Market,
and thus there is more Trade, Traffic and Commerce, in this Market than in any
other; But such Persons as will live Single and Chaste, never come there, unless
some few; and this sort of Persons for the most part live in Diana's Court,
which are Cloisters or Monasteries; also some few Married Wives that live
Retired, do not Frequent this Market, but if they do, they never come into any
of the Shops, but stand in the midst of the Marketplace, that it may be known
they Buy nothing there; But Madam, I will leave this Discourse, for though I am
one of Hymen's Subjects, being a Married Wife, yet I am none of Venus's
Customers, but,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LI.
MADAM,
YEsterday Mrs. P. I. was to Visit me, who prayed me to present her Humble
Service to you, but since you saw her she is become an Alt'red Woman, as being
a Sanctified Soul, a Spiritual Sister, she has left Curling her Hair, Black
Patches are become Abominable to her, Laced Shoes and Galoshoes are Steps to
Pride, to go Bare-neck'd she accounts worse than Adultery; Fans, Ribbonds,
Pendants, Neckcloaths, and the like, are the Temptations of Satan, and the
Signs of Damnation; and she is not only Transformed in her Dress, but her Garb
and Speech, and all her Discourse, insomuch as you would not know her if you
saw her, unless you were informed who she was; She Speaks of nothing but Heaven
and Purification, and after some Discourse, she asked me, what Posture I
thought was the best to be used in Prayer? I said, I thought no Posture was
more becoming, nor did fit Devotion better, than Kneeling, for that Posture did
in a manner Acknowledge from Whence we came, and to What we shall return, for
the Scripture says, from Earth we came, and to Earth we shall return; then she
spoke of Prayers, for she is all for Extemporary Prayers, I told her, that the
more Words we used in Prayer, the Worse they were Accepted, for I thought a
Silent Adoration was better Accepted of God, than a Self-conceited Babbling;
Then she asked me, if I thought one might not be Refined, by Tempering their
Passions and Appetites, or by Banishing the Worst of them from the Soul and
Body, to that Degree, as to be a Deity, or so Divine, as to be above the Nature
of Man; I said no, for put the case Men could turn Brass or Iron, or such gross
Metals, into Gold, and Refine that Gold into its height of Purity, yet it would
be but a Metal still; so likewise the most Refined Man would be but Human
still, he would be still a Man, and not a God; nay, take the Best of Godly Men,
such as have been Refined by Grace, Prayer and Fasting, to a degree of Saints,
yet they were but Human and Men still, so long as the Body and Soul were joined
together, but when they were Separated, what the Soul would be, whether a God,
a Devil, a Spirit, or Nothing, I could not tell; with that she Lifted up her
Eyes, and Departed from me, Believing I was one of the Wicked and Reprobate,
not capable of a Saving Grace, so as I believe she will not come near me again,
lest her Purity should be Defiled in my Company, I believe the next news we
shall hear of her, will be, that she is become a Preaching Sister; I know not
what Oratory the Spirit will Inspire her with, otherwise I believe she will
make no Eloquent Sermons, but I think those of her Calling do defy Eloquence,
for the more Nonsense they Deliver, the more they are Admired by their Godly
Fraternity. But leaving her to her Self-denying, I return to Acknowledge my self,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

LII.
MADAM,
I Do not wonder that there are Pimps or Bawds, for Base Vices and Wicked
Baseness are too Frequent in this Age, to be Wondered at, and certainly the
like is in every Age, for the Composition of Mankind is not so Pure, but there
are both Scum and Dregs, the which are for the most part the Inferior sort of
People, but which I wonder at, is, that the Lord P. B. should be a Pimp, and
the Lady B. B. a Bawd, Persons of such Quality, where it was more likely that
some Inferior Persons should Pimp and Bawd for Them, that they should be so
Low, as to Pimp and Bawd for Others; But perchance some can tell, that they do
make use of such Inferior Persons for their Own turn, as they are for the turn
of Others; howsoever the Actions of this Lord and Lady show, that their Births
were better than their Breeding, or that Fortune has Favored them more with
Titles, than Nature has Endued them with Noble Dispositions; and thus having
more Honor from Fortune than Nature, more Antiquity by Birth than Virtue by
Breeding, it is the Cause that the Practice of their Lives is not answerable to
the Degree of their Dignities; but for the most part such Base Actions are
produced either out of Extreme Poverty, or Covetousness of Presents, or
Ambition of Preferments, for Bauding and Pimping is seldom done Gratis; But
those that are truly Noble, that is, have Noble Souls and Honorable Natures,
can never be Forced, Persuaded, or Enticed to do a Base Action, insomuch as
they will rather choose to do a more Wicked Action (as we hold it) which is not
mixed with Baseness, as Heroically to Kill themselves, than Basely Betray
Chastity, and Beastly Procure Wanton Amors, for where Honor and Virtue takes
a through Possession, they never leave their Habitation, no more than my
Friendship with your Ladyship, for I am, and will ever be,

Madam, Your Ladyships faithful Friend, and humble Servant.

LIII.
MADAM,
MRs. W. S. does not Approve of Sir C. R. she absolutely Refuses him for a
Husband, she says he is Effeminate, and she Hates an Effeminate Man, as Nature
Abhors Vacuity; she says, she had rather have a Debauched Man for a Husband,
by reason Debauchery had some Courage, although the worst part of Courage, for
it durst Encounter Fevers, Gouts, Stone, Pox, and many the like Diseases, not
but that Effeminacy and Debauchery are sometimes joined in one Person, but not
commonly; but, she says, she will never Marry, unless she may have a Valiant,
Wise man, such a man that will not Rashly or Foolishly Quarrel, but Warily and
Resolutely Fight, that does not only measure his Sword, but his Quarrel, by
the Length and Breadth of Honor, a man that is not outwardly Formal, but
inwardly Rational, that weighs not his Words by the Number, but by the Sense,
whose Actions are Levelled by the Rule of Honesty and Prudence; such a Man she
will have for a Husband. The Lady P. E. hearing her, said, she could help her
to an Husband that had the Reputation of Valor and Wisdom, but he was Severe;
Mrs. W. S. said, she had rather a Severe Wise man, than a Facil Fool; but said
the Lady P. E. if you have this man, he will keep you strictly to a Wife's
Obedience; she said, she was Content, were he never so Severe, nay, did his
Severity extend to the Verge of Cruelty, for she had rather be Beaten by a Wise
man, than Kissed by a Fool; But leaving her at this time without a Husband's
Kisses or Blows, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LIVE.
MADAM,
THE other day the Lady D. C. and the Lady G. B. came to Visit me, and being
both met together, as Visitants, they fell into a Discourse of History, and so
of former Times, and Persons of both Sexes, at last they fell into a Discourse
of Married Wives, giving their Opinions of Good and Bad Wives that had lived in
former Ages, and the Lady D. C. said, that Lucretia was the Best Wife that ever
History mentioned, in that she Killed her self to save her Husbands Honor,
being a Dishonor for a Husband to have an Abused, as a Ravished Wife, for
though her Husband was not a Cuckold through her free Consent, yet was he a
Cuckold through her Inforcement, which was a Dishonor in the second Degree;
The Lady G. B. said, that though she did believe Lucretia was a very Chaste
Woman, and a Virtuous and Loving Wife, yet whether she Killed her self to save
her Husbands Honor of her Own, she could not Judge, unless she had the Effect
of a God, to know the Minds and Thoughts of human Creatures, for perchance
Lucretia might know, or verily believe, that when her Husband should come to
know the dishonorable Abuse that was done unto her, he would have Killed her
himself, not so much through a Jealous mistrust of her, but for the Dishonor
or Disgrace of the Abuse, and if so, then the Cause of Lucretia's Killing her
self, was as much through Prudence and Wisdom as through Virtue, for in Killing
her self she gained an Immortal Fame, for Dying by her Own hand she seemed
Innocent, whereas, had she Dyed by her Husband's hand or command, the World
being Censorious, would have thought her a Criminal; wherefore, since Lucretia
must Dye, she chose the best way, to Dye by her own voluntary Act, but had
Lucretia been Unmarried, said she, and had been so Abused, she had been a Fool
to have Killed her self, before she had endeavored to have Killed her Abuser,
for it would be more Justice to have Killed the Murderer of her Honor, than to
have Murdered her Innocent Self, only the Revenge ought in Honor to have been
Executed in some Public Place and Assembly, and then the Private Abuse
Declared, if it had not been Known already: But these two Ladies arguing
whether Lucretia Killed her self for her Husband's Honor of for her Own, at
last grew so Earnest in their Discourse, as they fell to Quarrel with each
other, and in such a Fury they were, as they were ready to Beat one another,
nay, I was afraid they would have Killed each other, and for fear of that
Mischief, I was forced to be a Defender of both, standing between them, and
making Orations to the one and then to the other; at last I entreated them to
Temper their Passions, and to Allay their Anger; and give me leave Ladies, said
I, to ask you what Lucretia was to either of you? was she of your Acquaintance
or Kindred, or Friend, or Neighbor, or Nation? and if she was none of these,
as it was very probable she was not, Living and Dying in an Age so long before
this, nay, so long, as the Truth might Rationally be questioned, if not of the
Person, yet of the Manner of the Action, for perchance the clear Truth was
never Recorded, Falsehood having been written in Histories of much later Times
than that of Lucretia; therefore Allay your Passions, for why should you two
Ladies fall out, and become Enemies for Lucretia's sake, whom you never knew or
heard of, but as in an old Wife's Tale, which is an old History. But howsoever,
Good Ladies, said I, leave Lucretia to live and dye in History, and be you two
Friends in present Life, Abuse not your selves with Rage, concerning Tarquin's
Abusing Lucretia with Lust. Thus talking to them, at last I calmed their
Passions, and made them Friends again, but making Peace between them, I spent
more Breath and Spirits, than the Peace of two Foolish, at least, Choleric
Ladies was worth, for although there is an old Saying, Happy is the
Peacemaker, yet I am happy I am quit at this present of their Company, and
that I can subscribe my self,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LV.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to tell me, that you had been in the
Country, and that you did almost Envy the Peasants for living so Merrily; it is
a sign, Madam, they live Happily, for Mirth seldom dwells with Troubles and
Discontents, neither does Riches nor Grandeur live so Easily, as that
Unconcerned Freedom that is in Low and Mean Fortunes and Persons, for the
Ceremony of Grandeur is Constrained and bound with Forms and Rules, and a great
Estate and high Fortune is not so easily managed as a Less, a Little is easily
ordered, where Much does require Time, Care, Wisdom and Study as
Considerations; but Poor, Mean Peasants that live by their Labor, are for the
most part Happier and Pleasanter than great Rich Persons, that live in Luxury
and Idleness, for Idle Time is Tedious, and Luxury is Unwholsom, whereas Labor
is Healthful and Recreative, and surely Country Huswives take more Pleasure in
Milking their Cows, making their Butter and Cheese, and feeding their Poultry,
than great Ladies do in Painting, Curling, and Adorning themselves, also they
have more Quiet and Peaceable Minds and Thoughts, for they never, or seldom,
look in a Glass to view their Faces, they regard not their Complexions, nor
observe their Decays, they Defy Time's Ruins of their Beauties, they are not
Peevish and Froward if they look not as Well one day as another, a Pimple or
Spot in their Skin Tortures not their Minds, they fear not the Sun's Heat, but
Outface the Sun's Power, they break not their Sleeps to think of Fashions, but
Work Hard to Sleep Soundly, they lie not in Sweats to clear their Complexions,
but rise to Sweat to get them Food, their Appetites are not Queazie with
Surfeits, but Sharp'ned with Fasting, they relish with more Savor their
Ordinary Course Fare, than those who are Pampered do their Delicious Rarities;
and for their Mirth and Pastimes, they take more Delight and true Pleasure, and
are more Inwardly Pleased and Outwardly Merry at their Wakes, than the great
Ladies at their Balls, and though they Dance not with such Art and Measure, yet
they Dance with more Pleasure and Delight, they cast not Envious, Spiteful Eyes
at each other, but meet Friendly and Lovingly. But great Ladies at Public
Meetings take not such true Pleasures, for their Envy at each others Beauty and
Bravery Disturbs their Pastimes, and Obstructs their Mirth, they rather grow
Peevish and Froward through Envy, than Loving and Kind through Society, so that
whereas the Country Peasants meet with such Kind Hearts and Unconcerned
Freedom as they Unite in Friendly Jollity, and Depart with Neighbourly Love,
the Greater sort of Persons meet with Constrained Ceremony, Converse with
Formality, and for the most part Depart with Enmity; and this is not only
amongst Women, but amongst Men, for there is amongst the Better sort a greater
Strife for Bravery than for Courtesy, for Place than Friendship, and in their
Societies there is more Vainglory than Pleasure, more Pride than Mirth, and
more Vanity than true Content; yet in one thing the Better Sort of Men, as the
Nobles and Gentry, are to be Commended, which is, that though they are oftener
Drunken and more Debauched than Peasants, having more Means to maintain their
Debaucheries, yet at such times as at great Assemblies, they keep themselves
more Sober and Temperate than Peasants do, which are for the most part Drunk at
their Departing; But to Judge between the Peasantry and Nobles for Happiness, I
believe where there is One Noble that is truly Happy, there are a Hundred
Peasants; not that there be More Peasants than Nobles, but that they are More
Happy, number for number, as having not the Envy, Ambition, Pride, Vainglory,
to Cross, Trouble, Vex them, as Nobles have; when I say Nobles, I mean those
that have been Ennobled by Time as well as Title, as the Gentry. But, Madam, I
am not a fit Judge for the several Sorts or Degrees, or Courses of Lives, or
Actions of Mankind, as to Judge which is Happiest, for Happiness lives not in
Outward Show or Concourse, but Inwardly in the Mind, and the Minds of Men are
too Obscure to be Known, and too Various and Inconstant to Fix a Belief in
them, and since we cannot Know our Selves, how should we know Others? Besides,
Pleasure and true Delight lives in every ones own Delectation; but let me tell
you, my Delectation is, to prove my self,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

LVI.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you writ how much the Lord N. O. does Admire Mrs. B. U.
and what Addresses he makes to her, for he being in Years has seen much of the
World, and many and Different Beauties, and has Conversed with many and
Different Wits, and has found and observed many and Different Humors, and
has made many and Different Courtships to many and Different Women: yet I have
observed that men in Years would seem Lovers and Admirers, but are not; and
Young men are Lovers and Admirers, and would not seem so; Men in Years Praise
all the Young Women they meet withal, but think not of them when they are out
of their Companies, but Young men Praise some Particulars, and when Absent, are
more Fond and Deeper in Love than when they are personally Present; and it is
to be observed, that the chiefest Employment of the most part of Men is to make
Love, not that they are Really in Love, but Feignedly make themselves so, and
Amorous Courtships are the most general Actions in the World, and the most
general Employments of the Thoughts in men's Minds; and the same is also amongst
Women; so that most of mankind are Amorous Lovers, for Love is the Subject of
their Thoughts, and Courtly Addresses the Action of their Time, and the Chief
Business of their Lives; but if it were a Noble Love, it were Commendable, for
then their Time, Industry, and Actions of their Lives would be Employed in Acts
of Charity, Friendship, Humanity, Magnificence, Generosity, and the like, but
being Amorous Lovers, their Time is Idly Wasted in Adorning, Fashioning,
Flattering, Protesting and Forswearing; besides, Amorous Lovers are Inconstant,
Prodigal, Fantastical, and the like. But leaving them to their Complemental
Addresses, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LVII.
MADAM,
HEre is no News, only I read a Gazet that speaks of a Courtesan, which has
been the Ruin of many Gentlemen's and Noble Men's Estates, by presenting her
with Rich Gifts, and maintaining her in Bravery, and it is likely she has
Ruined their Bodies, if not their Souls, as she has done their Estates; yet it
is to be hoped, that all is not Truth that is Printed in a Gazet, for it is to
be observed, that Gazets are fuller of Lies than Truths, which makes some
Histories that are lately Printed and Published, to have so many Falsehoods in
them, being for the most part Compiled and Formed out of Gazets; But if this
part of the Gazet be true, as concerning the Courtesan, it shows that she has
a Superior Art of Allurements, not only to ensnare one or two, but many,
which Art has a Magic Power to Transform Rational Men to Beastly Adulterers,
Simple Asses, and Prodigal Fools; for certainly it cannot be merely Beauty
alone that can have such Power, for mere Beauty takes oftener the Eye than the
Heart, it has more Admirers than Doting Lovers, and the greatest Gift Beauty
has given, are Praises, which Praises last not Long, by reason Beauty soon
Decays; But when Beauty is attended with Insinuating Arts, as Behavior of
Person, Pleasant Speech, and Harmonious Voice, as also the Arts of Music,
Dancing, Dressing, and the like, it becomes Victorious, and makes its Triumphs
in many Hearts, like as in many Nations; But many times those Arts are
Victorious without Beauty, whereas Beauty is seldom or never Victorious without
them; Indeed Women Skilful in these Arts are like Juglers, which Deceive Sense
and Reason, making an Appearance of that which is not Really so; and thus most
of our Sex Juggle with Men, they Delude them with Artificial Shows and
Insinuating Flattery, and it is their chief Study and Endeavor so to do; But
few Arrive to that Artificial Perfection, as the Courtesan mentioned in the
Gazet; wherefore it would be well if Wives had more of that Art to keep their
Husband's Affections, or at least to keep them from seeking after Variety; and
for Courtesans to have less, that they might not Draw and Entice Husbands from
their Honest Wives, nor Batchelors and Widowers from lawful Marriage: But for
the most part Courtesans with their Arts Usurp the Wives Rights and Maids
hopes; and so leaving the famous Courtesan to her Lovers, and her Lovers to
their Ruins, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LVIII.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you sent me word, you were not of my Opinion, that all men
ought to wear their Swords at all Times, and in all Places and Companies, for
you say it is not fit that Drunkards, or Madmen, or Lovers, should wear
Swords; for Drunkards will use their Swords to the hurt of Others, by reason
they are Quarrelsome and Abusive; and Madmen will use their Swords to the hurt
of Themselves, either through a Frantic Despair or Conceit; and Lovers will
Affright their Mistresses with them. Madam, you have forgotten two or three
Words added thereto, for I said, that all Gallant Gentlemen ought to wear
Swords, at all Times, and in all Places and Companies; but Drunkards and
Madmen, though they may be Gentlemen, yet they cannot be said Gallant men
whilst they are Mad or Drunken, because they want their Reason to Distinguish,
for the Gallantry of the Mind or Soul is Valor, Generosity, Humanity, Justice,
Fidelity, and the like, all which cannot be, at least, not in force in
Irrational Creatures, which Madmen and Drunkards are for that time. And for
Lovers, it is very Requisite they should wear Swords to guard their Mistresses,
for she is but a Foolish Mistress that will be afraid of her Safety; But a
Gallant man wears his Sword for his Honor, King, and Country; as for his
Country, it includes Piety, Friendship, and Natural Affection; for his King, it
includes Fidelity and Loyalty; for his Honor, it includes Truth, Right, Love,
Generosity and Humanity. In truth, Generosity and Humanity is like the Sun and
the Air, for Humanity does like the Air spread equally to all, it enters every
where, and fills up all Vacuities; and Generosity like the Sun, shines every
where, and on every Creature, although not at one Time, yet in such a Compass
of Time as it has strength and motion to extend it self; also his Benefits are
General, he Disputes not Who or What deserves his Light or Heat, but knows his
Light and Heat is Beneficial to all Creatures, which if they Abuse to Evil
Uses, it is none of his Fault. Thus Generosity shines in the Air of Humanity,
and Fortitude is like Heaven, which no Enemy can Enter, it Defends and Guards
the Distressed; and Valor is the Sword of Justice, to Cut off Offenders, and
the Sword of Valor is a sharp metal'd Blade, that Gallant Gentlemen should
always wear about them, and have Skill to Manage it, and Judgment and
Discretion to know When, and on Whom to Use it. But, Madam, lest the mentioning
of a Sword should Fright you, I Will leave it, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LIX.
MADAM,
AS for the Lady P. Y. who, you say, spends most of her Time in Prayer, I can
hardly believe God can be Pleased with so many Words, for what shall we need to
Speak so many Words to God, who knows our Thoughts, Minds and Souls better than
we our selves? Christ did not teach us Long Prayers, but a Short One, nay if it
were lawful for Men to Similize God to his Creatures, (which I think it is not)
God might be Tired with Long and Tedious Petitions or often Repetitions; but,
Madam, Good Deeds are Better than Good Words, in so much, as One Good Deed is
better than a Thousand Good Words, As for Example, One Act of Upright Justice,
or Pure Charity, is better than a Book full of Prayers, a Temperate Life is
better many times than a Praying Life; for we may be Intemperate even in our
Prayers, as to be Superstitious or Idolatrous; Indeed every Good Deed is a
Prayer, for we do Good for Gods sake, as being pleasing to him, for a Chaste,
Honest, Just, Charitable, Temperate Life is a Devout Life, and Worldly labor
is Devout, as to be Honestly Industrious to Get, and Prudent to Thrive, that
one may have where with all to Give; for there is no Poor Beggar, but had
rather a Penny than a Blessing, for they will tell you, that they shall Starve
with Dieu vous assiste, but be Relieved with a Denar. Wherefore the Lady P. Y.
with her much Fasting and long Praying will Starve her Self, and Waste her Life
out before the Natural Time, which will be a Kind of Self-murder, and we hold
Self-murder the Greatest Sin, although it should be done in a Pious Form or
Manner; but to Help a Friend in Distress is Better and more Acceptable, than to
Pray for a Friend in Distress, to Relieve a Beggar in Want, is better than to
Pray for him, to Attend the Sick is better than to Pray for the Sick; But you
will say, both do Well, I say it is Well Said, and Well when it is Done, but
the One must not Hinder the Other, wherefore we ought not to Leave the World to
Pray, but to Live in the World to Act, as to Act to Good Uses, and it is not
enough to Give for the Poor, but to see that the Poor be not Cousen'd of their
Gifts, wherefore they ought to Distribute their Gifts Themselves, and to be
Industrious to Know and to Find out those that do Truly and not Feignedly Want,
neither must their Gifts make the Poor Idle, but set the Idle Poor awork, and
as for those that cannot Work or Help themselves, as the Old, Sick, Decrepit,
and Children, they must be Maintained by those that have Means and Strength and
Health to Attend them; But perchance if the Lady P. Y. heard me, she would say,
I were one of those that did Speak more Good Words, than Act Good Deeds, or
that I neither Spent my Time in Praying nor Pious Acting; Indeed I cannot, as
the Proud Pharisee, Brag and Boast of my Good Deeds, but with the Poor
Publican, I must say, Lord have Mercy on me, a miserable Sinner, yet I must say
thus much Truth of my Self, that I never had Much to Give; for before the
Wars of this Country I was too Young to be Rich, or to have Means in my Own
Power of Disposing, and since the Wars all my Friends being so Ruined, and my
Husband Banished from his Native Country, and Dispossessed of his Inherited
Estate, I have been in a Condition rather to Receive, than to Give: Yet I have
not done much of either, for truly I am as Glad not to Receive, as Sorry not to
Give, for Obligation is as great a Burden to me, as not be Able to Oblige is an
Unhappiness, not that I account it so great an Unhappiness to be in such a
Condition, as to be fit to Receive, but to Receive in such a Condition, as not
to be Able to return the Obligation, for the Truth is, I had rather Suffer for
Want, than Take to be Relieved; But I thank God, I have not had many of those
Burdens of Obligations, some few I have had, but those were from my near
Relative Friends, not from Strangers, which is a Double, nay, a Treble
Blessing; but my Condition is fitter for Prayer, as having not sufficient Means
to do Good Works, my Husband being Robbed of all his Estate, than the Lady P.
Is. who has Saved all she can lay Claim to; Wherefore leaving her to her
Prayers of Thanksgiving, and I to Prayers of Petitioning, I rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

LX.
MADAM,
I Am sorry to hear there is such a Difference betwixt the Lady F. O. and her
Husband, as they are upon Parting, I wish their Humors and Dispositions were
more Agreeable, and their Froward Passions less Violent; I cannot Condemn
Either, nor Excuse Both, for if they Anger each Other, they have Both cause to
be Angry, and are Both to be Blamed for so Doing, and so Both together they
ought to be Condemned, but Each apart to be Excused: But Marriage is a very
Unhappy Life when Sympathy Joins not the Married Couple, for otherwise it were
better to be Barred up within the Gates of a Monastery, than to be Bound in the
Bonds of Matrimony; but whenas Sympathy Joins Souls and Bodies in Marriage,
then those Bonds are like Diamond-Chains to Adorn, not to Inslave them, and
Heroic Honor and Chastity are the two Thrones whereon a Married Couple is
Placed, Heroic Honor is the Throne of the Husband, and Chastity the Throne of
the Wife, on which Love Crowns their Lives with Peace, and Inrobes or Inclothes
them with Happiness, which Happiness you Enjoy, which is also the Joy,

Madam, Of Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXI.
MADAM,
I Am sorry to hear you have lost so Good a Servant as E. L. was, for she was
Faithful, Trusty, Loving, Humble, Obedient, Industrious, Thrifty, and Quiet,
Harmlesly Merry and Free, yet full of Respect and Duty, which Few Servants are
in this Age, for most are Idle, Cousening, Wastful, Crafty, Bold, Rude,
Murmuring, Factious and Treacherous, and what not that is Evil? But truly,
Madam, the Fault ought to be laid on the Masters and Mistresses, who either
give their Servants ill Examples by their Evil or Idle Life, or through a
Creduluos Trust, which is a Temptation to a Poor Servant, and it is a part of
our Prayer, Lead us not into Temptation; or through a Neglect of Governing, for
there is an old true Saying, The Masters Eye makes the Horse Fat; or through a
Timorous Fear of Commanding, for many Masters are Afraid to Command a
Peremptory Servant, being more in Aw of the Servant than the Servant of the
Master; or through much Clemency, giving their Servants their Wills so much as
they neglect their Duties; or through their Prodigality, when to Enrich their
Servants they make themselves Poor, so as the Servant becomes Greater than the
Master, which makes them so Proud, that they Slight their Commands and Neglect
their Services, Forgetting who Advanced them, and are apt to Rebel against
them, just like the Devils, when they were Angels, who perceiving they were so
Glorious Creatures, Rebelled against their Creator, and would be as God
himself; Just so are Poor Servants when their Master gives them fine Clothes to
Adorn them, or Money to Enrich them, or Offices to Advance them, they straight
would be their Masters, nay, they will Envy their Master if they see him have
any thing Better than they. This I have Known by Experience, but They will not
Know it, until they become to be like Devils, that is, in a miserable
Condition, which they deserve for their Ingratitude; but a Good Servant is a
Treasure, says Solomon; and so I think is a Good Master to a Servant, if the
Servant have Wit to perceive it, But a Good Master is to know How to Command,
When to Command, and What to Command; also When to Bestow, What to Bestow, and
How much to Bestow on a Good Servant; also to fit Servants to Employments, and
Employments to Servants; also to know How and When to Restrain them, and when
to give them Liberty; also to observe, which of his Servants be fit to be Ruled
with Austerity or Severity, and which with Clemency, and to Reward and Punish
them Properly, Timely and Justly; Likewise when to make them Work, and when to
let them Play or Sport; as also when to Keep them at a Distance, and when to
Associate Himself with them; And truly, I should sooner choose to Associate my
Self with the Company of my Servants, had they good Breeding, or were Capable
to Learn and Imitate what did belong to good Behavior, than with Strangers,
for Good Servants are Friends as well as Servants, nay, Servants are a Guard to
their Masters, for Good and Faithful Servants will Dye for the Safeguard of
their Masters Life, and they will endure any Torments rather than Betray their
Masters; and it is the Duty of Servants so to Do, for Servants ow almost as
much Duty to their Masters, as Children to their Parents, or Subjects to their
Natural Prince, for Servants are not only Governed, but Instructed, Fed, and
Maintained; and what greater Crime is there, than to be a Traitor to their
Governor, Tutor, and Nourisher of their Life? And every Master, the Meanest
that is, is a Father and a King in his own Family, Wherefore to my Reason they
are very unwise that will go out of their own Dominions, and leaving their own
Obedient Subjects, which are their Servants, Travel into other Kingdoms, which
are other Families, wherein they have neither Power nor Obedience, leaving
their own Servants without Rule or Guide, for when a Master is from Home, his
Family is like a Body without a Head, like as a King should Travel into Foreign
Countries, and leave his Subjects and Kingdom and State Affairs at Random, or
to a Deputy, it is likely his Subjects would Rebel against him through Dislike
to the Deputy, as Scorning to be Ruled or Governed by a Fellow-Subject, or else
the Deputy will get away their Love from their Prince, and then will strive to
thrust the Right Owner out; The same is with a Master and his Servants;
wherefore a Wise, Loving Master will keep Home, and go no oftener Abroad than
Occasion requires, but will Entertain himself with his own Family, and his
Family will Entertain him with Sports and Pastimes, like as Subjects do their
Princes, and whenas a Servant does Rebel, although the Master has not Power
to Banish him the Country or Kingdom, as Princes have, yet has he Power to
turn him out of his Service, and Banish him from his House, if his Fault do
deserve it; but some may think it strange, that there are as few Masters that
know how to Govern their Families Wisely, as there are Kings that know how to
Rule their Kingdoms Wisely; but that is no wonder, for first, where there is
One King of a Kingdom, there are Thousands Masters of Families, and a King is
the Master of all those Families, insomuch as a King has more Masters to
Govern and Rule, than the Richest Master of his Kingdom has Servants; but if
Servants were as they should be, Masters would not only Thrive by the Trusty
Labors of their Servants, and Servants by the Wealth of their Master, but
Masters and Servants would live Easily, by the Diligence of the One, and the
Prudence of the Other; also they would live Delightfully, by their Sports and
Pastimes, where the Master would sit as a Kingly Spectator, whilst his Servants
were Pleasant Actors, in all which both Masters and Servants would be very
Happy, so as this World would seem an Earthly Paradise. But, Madam, if I write
any more, I shall go near to make you a Servant to your Servant, in a Laborious
reading her Long Letter, but it was your Command in your last Letter, that I
should write you Long Letters, and I believe in this I have Fully Obeyed you,
which is my Desire to all your Commands, to let you Know that there is none
more Truly and Faithfully

Your Ladyships Servant than I.

LXII.
MADAM,
MRs. C. R. is very much troubled in her Mind with Doubts and Fears, since she
has heard that the Lady S. P. did Publicly and Privately Praise her, for, she
says, she is afraid the Lady S. P. has observed some Error in her Behavior,
or has heard her Speak Foolishly, or has found out some Decays of Beauty in
her Face, or some Deformities in her Shape, or some of the Masculine Sex have
Dispraised her Beauty, Wit, Person, Behavior, or the like, otherwise, says
she, she is Confident she would never have Praised her, for, says she, it is
so Unusual for one Woman to Praise another, as it seems Unnatural; wherefore
she does not Delight to be Praised by her own Sex, and since that time she
received your last Letter, she will sit in a Silent Musing Posture, Considering
and Examining her self, as Searching to find out what Faults she has, or what
Crimes she is Guilty of, that the Lady S. P. should Praise her, and so Peevish
and Froward she is for it, as I believe she will never be Quiet, or at Rest and
Peace in her Mind, until she hear that the Lady S. P. has Spoken Spitefully of
her, or has Dispraised her some ways or other. The Truth is, she does Confess
as much, for she says, She shall never think her Self Handsome, Conversable,
nor Virtuous, but Ill-favored, Foolish, Base, or Wicked, unless she be
Disprais'd by her own Sex, wherefore if you Hear, as certainly you cannot choose
unless you will stop your Ears, any Femal Discommendations concerning Mrs. C.
R. Pray send her Word of them, by which you will Infinitely Oblige her, and in
the mean time I shall Endeavor to Pacify her Thoughts, and Settle her Mind in
Peace and Quiet, Resting

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXIII.
MADAM,
I Have observed, there are amongst Mankind as often Mode Phrases in Speech, as
Mode Fashions in Clothes and Behavior, and so Moded they are, as their
Discourse is as much Decked with those Phrases as their Clothes with several
Colored Ribbands, or Hats with Feathers, or Bodies with Affected motions, and
whosoever does Discourse out of the Mode, is as much Despised, as if their
Clothes or Behaviors were out of Fashion, they are accounted Fools or Ill-bred
Persons; indeed most Men and Women in this Age, in most Nations in Europe are
nothing but Mode, as mode-Minds, mode-Bodyes, mode-Appetites, mode-Behaviours,
mode-Cloaths, mode-Pastimes or Vices, mode-Speeches and Conversations, which is
strange to have Minds according to the Mode, as to have a mode-Judgment, for
all will give their Judgments and Opinions according to the Mode, and they Love
and Hate according to the Mode, they are Courageous or Cowardly according to
the Mode, Approve or Dislike according to the Mode, nay, their Wits are
according to the Mode, as to Rallery, Clinch, Buffonly Jest, and the like, for
Better Wit is not usually the Mode, as being always out of Fashion amongst
mode-Gallants, but True and Good Wit lives with the Seniors of the Time, such
as Regard not the Mode, but Choose or Prefer what is Best, and not what is Most
in Fashion, unless that which is Best be in Fashion, which is very seldom if
ever Known, for that which is Best or Good, is not General, especially Wit, for
the Right True and Best Wit keeps to Particulars, as being Understood by
Particulars; Some Moders have oftener Wit in their Mouths than in their Brains,
that is, they Speak the Wit of Others, but have none of their Own. But Grave,
Experienced and Wise men give their Judgment or Opinion, not according to the
Mode or Fashion, but according to Probability, Sense and Reason; neither do
they say, such or such a Thing Will or Shall be, or Is so, Why? because it is
the General Opinion, but they say, such or such a Thing May be, or it is Likely
Will be, or Is so, Why? because there is a Probability or Reason for it:
Neither do the Just and Wise Hate or Love, Approve or Dislike, because it is
the Mode, as to Hate what is not Generally Loved, or Love what is not Generally
Hated, or to Despise what is Generally Disliked, or Admire what is Generally
Commended, but they Hate what is Really Bad, Wicked or Base, and not what is
Thought so; and Love what is really Good, Virtuous and Worthy, not for the
general Opinion, but for the Truth, and they Admire and Commend, Despise or
Scorn, Dislike or Disapprove that which is Despisable or Discomnendable or
Scornable, and so the like; neither are they Courageous or Cowardly according
to the Mode, but they are Valiant or Cautious according to the Cause or
Quarrel; they do not Fight out of or in a Bravado, but for Honor, or in
Honor's Quarrel; nor do they Pass by Injury, or Cover an Anger or Affront with
a Rallery or Jest, but because the Person that did the Injury, or gave the
Affront, was either Drunk, Mad, or a Base, Inferior Person, fitter for his
Man's Quarrel, than for his Own; and for Wise men, they Speak not with
Mode-Phrases, but such Words as are most Plain to be Understood, and the Best
to Deliver or Declare Sense and Reason, and their Behaviors are those which
are Most Manly and Least Apish, Fantastical or Constrained; and their Clothes
are such as are most Useful, Easy and Becoming; neither do their Appetites
Relish Mode-Meats or Sauces, because they have the Mode Haut Goust, but they
Relish Best what is most Pleasing or Savoury to their Taste; and so for Drinks
Compounded, as Chocolata, Limmonada, and the like, they will not Drink them
because of the Mode; neither do they Affect Mode-Songs or Sounds, because they
are in Fashion to be Sung or Played, but because they are Well-Set Tunes, or
Well-Compos'd Music, or Witty Songs, and Well Sung by Good Voices, or Well
Played on Instruments; neither do they follow Mode-Vices or Vanities for
Fashion, but for Pleasure, or their own Humor or Fancy; nor do they use those
Exercises that are in Mode, but those they like Best. Thus a Wise Man Follows
not the Mode, but his own Humor, for if it be the Mode to Play at Tennis, or
Paille-maille, or the like, if he like better to Ride or Fence, he will let
alone the mode-Exercises and Use his Own; if it be the mode-Pastime to Play at
Cards or Dice, if he like better to Write or Read, he will leave the
mode-Pastime and Follow his Own; and if it be the mode-Custom to Dine and Sup,
and Meet at Ordinaries or Taverns, if he like better to Sup and Dine at Home
alone, he will not go to Ordinaries or Taverns; if it be the Mode to make
General Courtships; if he Like, or is better pleased with a Particular
Mistress, he will not follow the Mode; neither will he Ride Post because it is
the Mode, but because his Affairs Require it; neither will he Journey from
Place to Place to no Purpose, because it is the Mode, but will VVisely Sit
still or Rest at his own Home, because it is Easy, Peaceable, Quiet, and
Prudent, as not so Chargeable. But leaving the Modists to their mode-Clothes,
Oaths, Phrases, Courtships, Behaviors, Garbs and Motions, to their mode-Meats,
Drinks, Pastimes, Exercises, Pleasures, Vanities and Vices; to their
mode-Songs, Tunes, Dances, Fiddles and Voices; to their mode-Judgements,
Opinions and Wits; to their mode-Quarrels and Friendships, to their Mode-Lying
and Dissembling, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXIV.
MADAM,
It Is usual for Men to Brag, only some Brag more Obscurely or Neatly, and some
more Grossly than others; and it is Natural for Women to Brag; but all Bragging
proceeds from Self-Love, to Covet the World's good Opinion, Esteem and Respect,
for through fear of Obscurity Men Divulge their own Worth, Wealth, Birth,
Qualities, Abilities, Favors and Graces, and those Actions they believe are
Worthy of Praise: but for the most part all Brags are heightened by the help of
Self-partiality or Self-opinion beyond the Truth; so that Brags are like
Romances, the Ground is True, but the Elevation False; indeed a Brag is nearer
a Lie than a Truth, for to speak pure Truth is not so much a Brag as a
Vainglory, at least, a Vanity, which most of Mankind Delight in, although the
Speaker is more Delighted than the Hearer, for few or none Delight to Hear a
Self-praiser, unless it be those that have near Relations, as Parents,
Children, Brothers, Sisters, Husbands and Wives, whose Affections are Delighted
with their Friends Perfections and Good Fortunes, but Strangers and Visiting
Acquaintance Dislike that Vain Truth, and are soon Tired with such a Relation,
nay, have an Aversion to the Sound of a Bragging Tongue, not their Own Tongues,
for no Discourse Pleases them Better, than to Discourse of Themselves, but the
Tongues of Others, which beget rather Envy and Malice in the Hearers, than Love
and Admiration. But leaving this Natural Defect and Vain Effect, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXV.
MADAM,
I Do not wonder that the several Cities and Towns in N. do Dislike their
Governors and Government, by reason the Commons strive to Out-brave the Nobles
in their Building, Garnishing, Furnishing, Adorning and Flourishing in Gold and
Bravery, for even the Mechanics in this City, and I believe in the rest, are
Suffered to have their Coaches, Lacquies, Pages, Waiting-maides, and to wear
Rich and Glorious Garments, Fashioning themselves in all things like the
Nobles, which causes Envy in the Nobility, and Pride in the Commonalty, the
One, to see their Inferiors Outshine them, the Other, that they can Equal or
Out-brave their Betters; This Pride and Envy causes Murmur, and Murmur causes
Faction, which may in time make an Alteration in the State and Government, for
when the Commons once get so High as to Justle the Nobility, a thousand to one
but the Nobles Fall, and with them Royalty, by reason they are the Pillars of
Royalty, or Royal Government; Wherefore the Commons should be kept like Cattle
in Enclosed Grounds, and whenever any did Break out of their Bounds, they
should be Impounded, that is, the Commons should be kept Strictly, not to
Exceed their Rank or Degree in Show and Bravery, but to Live according to their
Qualities, not according to their Wealth; and those that will be so
Presumptuous, should be Imprisoned and Fined great Sums for that Presumption,
this would keep the Commons in Aw, and the Nobles in Power to uphold Royal
Government, which is certainly the Best and Happiest Government, as being most
United, by which the People becomes most Civil, for Democracy is more Wild and
Barbarous than Monarchy; But this is fitter for Monarchs to Consider, than for
Women to Speak of, and therefore leaving the One to the Other, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXVI.
MADAM,
I Was so Surprised with the Lady A. Ns. Letter, as I was Astonished, it being
such a Bitter and Angry Letter; but she had Reason to be Angry, because I had
committed a very great Fault by a Mistake, for I one day sitting a Musing with
my own Thoughts, was Considering and Pondering upon the natures of Mankind, and
Wondering with my Self, why Nature should make all Men some ways or other
Defective, either in Body, or Mind, or both, for a Proof I Chose out One whom I
thought the freest from Imperfections, either in Mind, or Body, which was the
Lady A. N. and I took Pen and Paper, and Writ down all the Defects I could
Think or had Observed in her, and upon an other all the Excellencies she was
Endued with, by Nature, Heaven, and Education, which last Pleased me so Well,
as I was resolved to send her a Copy in a Letter; but when I was to send her
the Letter, both the Papers lying upon my Table together, I mistook the right
Paper that was in her Praise, and sent that which was in her Dispraise, never
reading it when I sent it, and when she did Receive it, it seemed she was in as
much Amaze, as I at her Answer, but afterward she fell into a very Angry
Passion, and in that Passion Writ me an Answer, which I opened with great Joy,
thinking she had been very well pleased with my former Letter, but when I did
read it, and had found out the mistake in sending the wrong Letter, I was as if
I had been Thunder-stricken, my Blood flushing so violently into my Face, as to
my thinking my Eyes flashed out fire like Lightning, and after that there fell
such a Shower of Tears, as I am confident there were more Tears shed than
Letters Written, where I wished that every Letter might have been buried in the
watery Womb or Toomb of every Tear, but it was in Vain, they being too fast
fixed to be Drowned, for they were fixed in her Memory, and so in Mine, but yet
my Tears may wash out my Fault, and my Love will ask her Pardon in the Humblest
and Sorrowfull'st words as I can Speak; Wherefore pray Madam, make my Peace if
you can, go to her and speak for me, and let her Know how it was, (for I dare
not Write to her again,) and so in my stead Beg my Pardon, for I dare swear by
Heaven, as I would have it guard my Innocence, prove the Truth, and save my
Soul, I am not guilty of a Crime to her, for I was free from Malice or Envy, or
any Evil Design, when I writ it, and not only free from any Evil to her, but
I was full of Love and Admiration of her, and I hope she will Pardon me, since
I only writ it as a Philosopher, and not as an Enemy, and since there is none
that lives but has some Faults or Defects, though she has the Least and Fewer
than any other of Natures Creatures, and it is some Praise to have the Least;
but since we are all Guilty in one kind or other, pray her to Pardon my
Mistake, and Philosophical Contemplation of her, and so hoping a Good Success
of your Petition in my Behalf, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXVII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to Ask my Opinion, Judgment, and Advice
of that which you Spoke of when I last Saw you; truly, when any one asks my
Opinion of Causes or Effects, or my Judgment of Affairs, or of any thing
concerning the Actions of the World, as their Successes to Good or Bad, or
Desires my Advice of any Concernment to Particulars, let me tell you, as first,
for Causes and Effects, my Reason Studies, and Observation Watches, to find out
the Cause by the Effects, or to Foresee the Effects by the Causes; and as for
the Success of several Affairs and Actions in the World, I put all the
Probabilities in one Scale, and all the Impossibilities, or at least
Unlikelyhoods, in another, and Weigh them both, and which soever Scale Weighs
Downward, I give my Judgment; and as for Advice to Particulars, I Examine their
Means, Abilities, Strength, Power, Right, Truth, and Justice, according to all
which I give my Advice, for I Search the Bottom, Stirring up the very Dregs, or
Fathoming the Depth; like as Sailers cast their Line and Plummet to Fathom the
Sea, for fear of Quicksands, Shelves, or the like, and then Draw up their Line
to see the Depth, or at least take Notice how much the Line sinks down; so do I
concerning my Opinion, Judgment, or Advice; but you must Pardon me if I give
not my Judgment or Opinion in a Public Letter, concerning Public Affairs, in
which I ought not to meddle, being a Woman; neither ought those of the
Masculine Sex to give their Opinions, or Judgments, or Advices Publicly,
unless they were Desired and Required so to do, as also not Impertinently,
Busily, or Intrudingly, to Meddle, or Censure, or Speak of that which they have
nothing to do, or at least, where they cannot Help or Mend. But pray believe, I
am not so Vain as to think I can Reason, Judge, or Advise Wisely, no, I only
Endeavor, or at least, Desire so to do; and since you have not mentioned under
your handwriting, that which you would have me give my Opinion, Judgment, or
Advice of, I will not give it under my hand, but leave it till such time as we
Meet, for Friends may Talk as freely as Think, fearing no Treathery, and so I
rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

LXVIII.
MADAM,
I Am Sorry that Sir C. A. is Killed, and as Sorry that V. A. has Killed him,
for by Report they were both Worthy and Right Honorable Persons, which causes
me to wonder how such two Persons could Fall out, for surely they were such men
as would be as Unwilling to Give an Offense as to Take an Affront, and if the
Offense was Unwillingly given, as by Chance, they being men of Honor and
Merit, would not be Grieved, at least, not Angry at or for it: but many times a
Third man will make a Quarrel betwixt Two others, and leave them to Fight it
out. You may say, that sometimes Quarrels cannot be Avoided, although they be
betwixt two Noble Persons, as for Example, two Dukes, about the Pre-eminence of
Place, none knowing which of them had the First Place, and neither Yielding,
must needs Fight to Decide it; but such Cases are not often put to the Trial,
or ought not to be, for Heralds are for that purpose Judges. But these two
Noble Persons which you mentioned in your last Letter, whatsoever their Quarrel
was, the one is Killed, the other Banished; and now to speak of such Quarrels
as generally cause Duels between Private Persons, they are either about Words,
or Women, or Hawks, or Dogs, or Whores, or about Cards or Dice, or such
Frivolous, Idle, or Base Causes; I do not say All Quarrels, but Most, for some
are more Honorable, but of all Sorts or Causes of Quarrels, Drunken Quarrels
are the most Senseless; As for the Manner or Fashion of Fighting, Duels in my
opinion are not Proper, for in this Age in most Nations they Fight Private
Duels, somewhat after the manner of a Public Battle, as three against three,
or at least two against two, also they Fight with Pistols and Swords, with
their Doublets on, which serves instead of an Armor, and for the most part a
Horseback; first, they shoot off their Pistols at each other, and then they
come to the Sword, if they be not shot Dead before their time comes to Fight,
for Shooting is not a direct Fighting, because they must stand at some Distance
to take Aim, which in my opinion appears Cowardly, to Pelt at each other, as if
they were Afraid to come near each other; besides, a Child may have so much
Skill and Courage as to shoot off a Pistol, and may chance to Kill a Man, but a
Child cannot tell how to use a Sword, or manage a Horse; also a Peasant or such
mean bred Persons, can shoot off Pistols, or Carbines, or Muskets, but they
have no skill to use a Sword, nor know not how to manage an Horse, unless a
Cart-Horse, and that better in a Cart than when astride: It Is true, Peasants or
Common Soldiers will fight with Force and Fury like as Beasts, and Kill their
Enemy with mere Strength, but not with pure Valor, for they fight as in an
Uproar, and will knock one another down with their Staves, or But-ends of their
Muskets, which is more a Club or Clown-fighting; and if they have Swords, they
fight with the Pummel, not with the Point, for they know not how to use it,
neither is it fit they should, wherefore the Gentlemen are too Strong for them,
for the Gentleman's point of his Sword has the Advantage of the Clown's Club;
and the only Grief to Gallant, Valiant Gentlemen in the day of Battle or Duel,
is, the fear they should be Killed with a Bullet, against which they can show
no Active Valor or Well-bred Skill. The last Observation concerning fighting
Duels in this Age, is, in choosing of Seconds, and the right Use of Seconds in
all Ages that I have heard of, unless these Later, is, to be Overseers,
Witnesses and Judges, wherefore they ought to be Upright, Honest, Judicious,
and Skilful men, and Worthy, and Honorable Persons, for they are to Judge
whether their Quarrel requires Blood, and may not be passed over without
Dishonor; also they are to see that each man may be Equally Armed, and that
there be no Untimely Advantages taken of each other; also they are to Help or
Assist them when they are Wounded, as to Bind up their Wounds, and they are to
witness to the World how they Fought; But in this Age, the Seconds are so far
from being Judges, Overseers, Witnesses, or Helpful Friends, as they become
Duellers themselves, Fighting for Company, not for Injury or Wrong done to each
other, and for Fashions sake, which is an Unjust, Irrational, Inhuman, and
Wicked Fashion or Practice; neither is it Manly or Noble, but Base and Beastly,
as to Fight without Reason or Injury; wherefore Pistols and Fighting Seconds
ought not to be. But, Madam, if any should read this Letter besides your self,
I should be found fault with, it being not Fit, nor Proper for a Woman to
Discourse or Write of Duels or Wars, nor of Horses or Swords, or the like,
but pray, if you hear any say so, tell him, that I have a greater Privilege
than other Women in this Discourse, for my Husband has been a General of an
Army of 30000 men, and has fought Battles; also he is Master of those two
Arts, the Use of the Sword, and the Manage of the Horse, as there is not any
man, nor has never been, so well Known, Skilful, and Practiced, as he, so that
he is the best Horseman and Swordman in the World; also two of my three
Brothers were Soldiers, or Commanders in War, and well Experienced in that
Profession, and my Father was a Swordman, who was Banished for a time, for
Killing a Gentleman in a Duel of Honor. Thus have I been Born, Bred, Lived,
and Married, all with Swordmen, and to my greater Honor, all Valiant men; and
so leaving this Discourse, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

LXIX.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to desire my Opinion of the Lord Bs. Works; truly it seems
by his VVritings, that he was Learned, Eloquent, VVitty, and Wise, fit for
State-Counsel and Advice, to Plead Causes, Decide Controversies, and the like,
and his Works or VVritings have been very Propagating and Manuring other men's
Brains; the truth is, his Works have proved like as some sorts of Meats, which
through Time, or mixture of some Flatuous, or Humid Substance, Corrupt, and
Breed Magots or Worms; so his VVritings have produced several other Books. The
same have Homer's Works, although they were of another Sort than his. But you
may say, I write more of the Transmigration than of the first Formation or
Principle, more of the Effects than the Cause; I confess my Pen has Wandered
from your Question, and Asks your Pardon for my Transgression, and with all
Passionate Love, wherefore I subscribe my self,

Madam, Your Ladyships most Humble and faithful Servant.

LXX.
MADAM,
TO give you an Account, as you desire, of Mrs. H. O. who, you say, is Reported
to be such a Wit; all I can say, is, that I do not perceive a Superfluity; her
Tongue in my Hearing ran as other Women's usually does, but a Friend of here is,
who lives in the same House she does, did tell me, that to some men she does
Railly and Sport with Words, for all her Discourse, or most part of it, is to
Men, and to some she does repeat several Places and Speeches out of Romances,
and several Speeches and Parts of Plays, or Passionate Speeches, and if it be
concerning Love, then she turns up the black of her Eyes and Whines, and lifts
up her Hands after the French Mode; also she is ready and quick in giving Sharp
Replies, for which she is highly Applauded by the Court-Gallants which gather
about her, and whatsoever she says, they Cry out, I faith that is well said,
and then Laugh and Railly with her; then she is Gay and Merry in Sportive
Harmless Abuses, and Dances Much, although not Well, but speaks French like a
Native; then she is very Learned in the Male and Female words, as the Learned
term them, to wit, the Gendres of Words. As for Court-Servants she has had
Many, but now she is wholly Engrossed by One. This is as much as I have Heard
of her, and more than I would have Repeated, had it not been to You, And thus
leaving her and her Wit, I rest,

Madam, Your very Loving Friend and Servant.

LXXI.
MADAM,
THe five Ladies which you Desire to have a Relation of, I cannot of my own
Knowledge give you an Account of, for I have but little Acquaintance with them,
but I can tell you what Report says; As for the Eldest, it is said, she wants
not Experience, though her Experience comes more through Misfortune than Time,
for she is not Old; also that she has a good Judgment, but makes no Good Use
of it, for she is oftener Ruled by others Persuasion than her own Judgment;
neither does she want Wit, but can Speak Well, and Promise Fair, though her
Deeds and Words be not Answerable, nor her Performance to her Promises, for
she will Speak better than Do, and Promise more than Perform; she is very Civil
and Humble to all Persons, to gain their Applause, but she makes no Difference
between the Noblest and Meanest, the Worthy and Unworthy, the Honest and
False, but rather of the Two she Naturally Affects those that are Meanest,
either for Birth, Breeding, or Merit, but to some Particulars she is very
Partial, even so Partial as to do Unjust Actions for their Sakes or by their
Persuasions. Her Confidents are such as have been False, but she believes they
are so Honest now, as only fit for Trust, although in all her Affairs she has
had Ill Success, for all her most Secret Intentions are made Known before they
have been put into Action; but Time may make her VViser. As for the Second
Lady, she seems at the first Acquaintance to be of a very Good and Generous
Nature, but some time Discovers her to be rather of an Easy, Facil, than a
Pure, Good or Generous Nature, a Foolish Kindness, and a Childish Liberality,
that with Flattery is Ruled, Governed and Persuaded, she Loves and Gives but
knows not Why, nor Wherefore; also she is Amorous, and at this time so in Love,
as it is Reported she will Marry a Person, that is so Mean, and far below her
in Birth, as the Marriage will not only Disgrace the Family from whence she
Sprung, but her Posterity that may live after her; neither has her Beloved
Person nor Parts, Wealth nor Fame. Concerning the Third Lady, she is Proud and
Ambitious, and seems rather Obstinate than Facil, and if her Fortune were but
Answerable to her Birth, she in my Opinion would Deceive the Belief of many in
Doing those things that might be Worthy a Person of her Quality and Dignity.
The Fourth Lady is Simple, God know's, most of her Time is Employed in Dancing
and Eating, and in Foolish, Childish Sports and Pastimes; She is as Inconstant
as her Sex can be; she is also Amorous, and would have Love-Servants, if she
were not afraid of those that have some Power and Authority over her, which
Restrain her, but it is believed she will break thorough all Restraints. As for
her Estate, she only thinks of the Present, but never Considers the Future,
which makes her Necessitated, as she will in time be a Beggar. The Fifth Ladies
Time is only spent in Giving and Receiving Visits, in Balling, Dancing, and the
like, but I hear nothing else of her. Thus, Madam, have I written what is
Reported by those that are well Acquainted, as also by their Domestics and
Followers, not that I inquire into the Humors, Natures or Affairs of those
Persons I have no Relation to, but I cannot but hear of many Actions and
Persons and Passages in the World, unless I should stop my Hearing; but in this
Letter I have done only my Duty, in telling you what I Hear of what you Desire
to Know, and as long as I live, I shall be Obedient to all your Commands, and
Industrious to Satisfy all your Desires, and Rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXXII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased the last time you writ, to send me a Poem of your own making
or Composing, and to desire my Opinion of it, which Opinion, were you not such
a Friend as not to be Exceptious, I would not Declare, for though I will not
Dissemble, as to speak against my Conscience, yet I may Conceal or Bury my
Thoughts, Opinion, or Judgment in Silence; but I know your Humor is, that I
should Speak or Write freely my Thoughts, and according to your Desires, give
me leave to tell you, the Poem is good in that kind, but I do not like such
kind of Poems, which are only Complements and Gratulations put into Verses, in
which Poems is seldom much Wit or Fancy, only Flattery, Rhyme, and Number;
wherefore give me leave to Persuade you to alter the Subject of your Poem, and
to take such a Subject as has Ground and Room for Wit and Fancy to move on;
also you desire my Opinion of G. Us. Poems, I cannot Praise them, because the
Wit and Expressions are Stolen out of several Excellent Poets, only he turns
their Fancies and Expressions to other Subjects, so as he only Varies other
men's Wits, but Produces none of his Own, and such Writers may rather be named
Translators than Authors; Indeed, most Writings now a days, not only Verse,
but Prose, are but Variations, and not Creations. But leaving Witstealers, I
return to your Poem, which is not Theft, but an Ill-chosen Subject, which I
desire you to Alter. Thus Professing, as also Declaring my Friendship, in
giving a Free and Plain Judgment, I rest,

Madam, Your most faithful Friend and Servant.

LXXIII.
MADAM,
I Was reading to day some several Satyrs of several Famous Poets, wherein I
find, that they Praise Themselves, and Dispraise all Others, which expresses a
great Self-dotage, and a very Ill Nature; besides, they seem more Covetous than
Generous, to desire All the Praise, and to give their Neighbor not Any; In
truth, VVriters should never speak of themselves, but in Praefatory Epistles,
or in a History of their own Lives, wherein they may freely declare their own
Acts and Opinions. But, Madam, I wish that all Writers would use their Pens as
your Noble Lord and Husband orders his Discourse in Speech, to speak the Best
of all men, and to Bury their Faults in Silence, which would make Virtue an
Emulation, and Faults such a Novelty, as men would be Ashamed to Commit them,
whereas declaring Former Faults, causes Precedent Faults no Strangers, nay, it
causes Precedent Faults to be more Confident and Active; But, Madam, you are
so Innocent and Harmless, as you are not acquainted with the Faults of others,
for which I am,

Madam, Your most humble Servant, and faithful Friend.

LXXIV.
MADAM,
YEsterday a Consort of Learning and Wit came to Visit me, but they became at
last to be a Discord; This Consort was Natural Philosophers, Theological
Scholars, and Poets, and their Discourse was their Music, the Philosophers
were the Bass, the Theologers the Tenor, and the Poets the Treble, all which
made an Harmony wherein was Variety and Delight, but the Poets that love Change
of Place, Company, and Pastime, went away, and left the Philosophers and
Theologers, who began a Serious Discourse, which was Dull and somewhat Tedious,
for it was concerning the Soul, as also the Immortality of the Soul; some of
the Theologers said, the Souls of Men were part of the Spirit of God, others,
the Souls of men were the Breath of God, others, they were a Light proceeding
from God, and all these Concluded that the Souls were an Immaterial or
Incorporeal Form, but the Natural Philosophers said, that Men's Souls or any
such Soul was an Essence, which was the Purest Matter, or Quintessence In and
Of Nature, but the Theologers would not allow that Opinion, and said, the
Natural Philosophers were Atheists, whereupon the Natural Philosophers said,
that the Theologers were Ignorant, and full of Fallacy and Sophistry, for said
they, How can No Matter have a Form or a Being? and if Souls are the Spirit of
God, they cannot possibly be Evil, and if they be the Breath of God, they
cannot be Corruptible, if so, then the Souls of Men cannot be subject to Sin,
and if not subject to Sin, in Justice they were not subject to Punishment, and
if the Souls of all Men were produced from God, as the Beams of Light from the
Sun, although the Beams might be Obscured with Dark Clouds or Gross Vapors,
yet they did not Lose any of their Purity or Propriety, nay, though the Sun
Beams were Capable to Lose their Purity or Propriety, yet the Beams proceeding
from God could not, for whatsoever Proceeds Immediately from God, can neither
be Alterable nor Impure; at last the Theologers and Philosophers became so
Violent and Loud, as I did fear they would have Fought, if they had had any
other Wounding Weapons than their Tongues, but Heaven be praised, they had no
Killing Swords, and so they did no harm to each other, but after the Violence
of their Dispute was past, I ventured to speak, saying, Noble Gentlemen, you
have Discoursed more Learnedly than Knowingly, and more Vainly than Wisely, for
Solomon says, that not any thing is thoroughly Known, and that all is Vanity
under the Sun, as well that which has been, as what is, and shall be, and yet
his Wisdom proceeded from Gods particular Gift; wherefore leave the Foolish
Custom of Disputing, and bring in a Devout Custom of Praying, leaving your
Souls to Gods disposing, without troubling them with Idle Arguments; and
hearing me talk Simply, they laughed at my Innocence, and in their Mirth became
Good Friends and Sociable Companions, and after some time they took their
leave, and left me to relate their Discourse in a Letter to your Ladyship. So
leaving your Ladyship to your own Contemplations, I remain,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

LXXV.
MADAM,
IT is seldom known that a Perfect and Famous Poet or Philosopher was ever very
Cruel, David and Solomon were the most Bloody, but they were Kings, and it
seems Reason of State was too forcible for Good Nature, and there is no Rule
but has some Exception. But had I Children I would endeavor with all the
Rational Arguments and Witty Discourses I were Capable of, to persuade them to
delight in Poetry and Philosophy, that they might be Civil, Generous, and Just,
which would be a Greater and more Lasting Honor to them than Wealth or Titles;
besides the Pleasure of Thoughts and Tranquillity of Mind would be a Heaven
upon Earth, all which Silent Contemplation brings them unto, for Contemplation
brings Consideration, Consideration brings Judgment, Judgment brings Reason,
Reason brings Truth, Truth brings Peace; also Consideration brings Conception,
Conception brings Fancy, Fancy brings Wit, and Wit brings Delight. But you will
say, Nature has not made all Mankind Capable of Good Instruction, it is true,
but give me leave to say, that I believe there are more Faults in Educators
than in Nature; but, Madam, I have no Children, therefore no Tutoress, and if I
had Children, it is likely I should have done as most Parents do, which is, to
Breed them up in Vanity and not in Virtue; but, Madam, you have Children, which
I am confident will be Sweetly Disposed, like your Self, for you Breed them
Gently, rather with Reason than with Rods, wherein you do Wisely and Kindly,
and I wish all Parents and Tutors may take an Example from you, who are a Lady
of such Perfection, as I account my Self Honored to be,

Madam, Your Humble and Devoted Servant.

LXXVI.
MADAM,
SInce I last writ to you, I have been to hear Mrs. P. N. Preach, for now she
is, as I did believe she would be, viz. a Preaching Sister, There were a great
many Holy Sisters and Holy Brethren met together, where many took their turns
to Preach, for as they are for Liberty of Conscience, so they are for Liberty
of Preaching, but there were more Sermons than Learning, and more Words than
Reason, Mrs. P. N. began, but her Sermon I do not well remember, and after she
had Sighed and VVinded out her Devotion, a Holy Brother stood up and Preached
thus, as I shall briefly relate to you.

DEarly beloved Brethren and Sisters, We are gathered together in the Lord with
Purity of Spirit to Preach his Word amongst us, We are the Chosen and Elect
Children of the Lord who have Glorified Spirits and Sanctified Souls, we have
the Spirit of God in us, which Inspires us to Pray and to Preach, as also to
Call upon his Name and to Remember him of his Promise to Unite and Gather us
together into his New Jerusalem, separating us from Reprobates, that we may not
be Defiled with their Presence, for you Dear Brethren Know by the Spirit, that
they are not the Children of the Lord but Satan's Children, they are the
Children of Darkness, we the Children of Light, we are Glorified and Sanctified
by Supernatural Grace, we are a Peculiar People, and the Holy Prophets of the
Lord, to Foresee, Foretell and Declare his Will and Pleasure, also we are to
Encourage and Comfort the Saints in Afflictions and Times of Tribulation and
Consolation, and to Help them to Present their Sanctified Sighs, Tears and
Groans unto the Lord; but the Spirit moves me to Pray and to leave off
Preaching, wherefore let us Pray unto the Lord.

So after the Holy Brother had done his Prayer, Mr. N. N. who was there, pulled
off his Peruick, and put on a Nightcap, wherein he appeared so like a Holy
Brother as they took him for one of their Sect, and he Preached this following
Sermon.

DEarly beloved Brethren, We are here met in a Congregation together, some to
Teach, others to Learn; but neither the Teaching nor Learning can be any other
way but Natural and according to Human Capacity, for we cannot be Celestial
whilst we are Terrestrial, neither can we be Glorified whilst we are Mortal and
subject to Death, nor yet can we arrive to the Purity of Saints or Angels,
whilst we are subject to Natural Imperfections both in Body and Mind, but there
are some Men that Believe they are, or at least may be so Pure in Spirit by
Saving Grace, as to be Sanctified, and to be so much filled with the Holy Ghost
as to have Spiritual Visions, and ordinarily to have Conversation with God,
believing God to be a Common Companion to their Idle Imaginations. But this
Opinion proceeds from an Extraordinary Self-Love, Self-Pride, and
Self-Ambition, as to believe they are the only fit Companions for God himself,
and that not any of God's Creatures are or were Worthy to be Favored, but
They, much less to be made of Gods Privy Counsel, as they believe they are, as
to Know his Will and Pleasure, his Decrees and Destinies, which indeed are not
to be Known, for the Creator is too Mighty for a Creature to Comprehend him,
Wherefore let us Humbly Pray to What we cannot Conceive.

But before he had quite Ended his Sermon, the Holy flock began to Bustle, and
at last Went quite out of the Room, so that he might have Prayed by Himself,
had not I and two or three Ladies more that were of my Company, Stayed, and
when he had done his short Prayer, He told me and the other Ladies, that he had
Done that which the Great Counsel of State could not Do, for he had by one
short Discourse Dispersed a Company of Sectaries without Noise or Disturbance,
but at last we dispersed our selves to our own Houses, although Mr. N. N. would
have given us a Ball after a Sermon, but I was so tired with the One, as I was
not fit for the Other, for we were from Morning till Evening to hear them
Preach; yet as Tired and Weary as I am I could not choose but Repeat these two
of their shortest Sermons which I heard, and so I subscribe my self,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXXVII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to desire me to Read the Romance of A. as also, the Romance
of C. which I have obeyed in reading the Romance of A; but as yet I have not
read any part of C. and to give you an Account of my Perusal, I think there is
more Love than Reason in it, and more Wit than Truth or Probability of Truth;
and certainly it is deplorable, that so much Wit and Eloquence should be wasted
on Amorous Love, as also to bring all Scholastical, as Theological, Physical,
Logistical and the like Arguments, Disputes and Discourses, into the Theme of
Amorous Love, which Love is between Appetite or Desire and Fruition of
Different Sexes of Men and Women; but I perceive that Romance-Writers endeavor
to make all their Romance-Readers believe that the Gods, Nature, Fates,
Destinies and Fortune do employ or busy themselves only in the affairs of
Amorous Lovers, which is a very low Employment or Concern. Also I perceive that
Romance-Lovers are very Rheumatick, for if all the Tears Romances express
Lovers to shed, were Gathered or United, it would cause a second Deluge of the
World; it seems Amorous Love is Composed more of Water than Fire, and more of
Desire than Fruition. But leaving Amorous Lovers to more Folly than Discretion,
to Lose more Time than to Gain Love, and wishing them Sound Lungs for Sighs,
and Moist Eyes for Tears, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXXVIII.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you expressed that you had Presented C. with a Book of Gs.
VVriting, I wonder you would Present that Book to C. by reason that he is a
Gallant for Pleasure, and not a Stoic for Study; also you expressed you sent
one to D. the Student, let me tell you, Madam, I dare swear he will never read
it Half out, not for the Bigness of the Volume, but for the Newness of the
Style and Age, for most Students despise all New Works, and only delight in Old
Worm-eaten Records; the truth is, few Books are read Throughout the First Age,
it is well if at the Fourth Age the End be arrived at, especially in the same
Nation where the Author is a Native, for as our Savior says, A man is not
Esteemed of in his Own Country, and yet in another place he says, A man is
Known by his Works; wherefore the best way for a man that would have his
Writings Known and Esteemed of in his Life time, is to send them to Travel into
Foreign Nations, for at Home they will find but little Applause, no not
Romances, which the World Dotes on, for Distance of Place is next to Distance
of Time, at least resembles it. But if any will present their Works to Persons
of their Own Nation, they must present them to such as are Known to Delight in
such Subjects their Books treat of, and then perchance they may read a leaf or
two, and by that Censure all the Book; But fearing you should Censure me for
writing so Long a Letter, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXXIX.
MADAM,
I Was yesterday presented with a Book Translated out of French into English,
wherein I find the Author of the Book Condemns those that set their Images
before their Books, or that suffer their Friends to give their Opinions of
their Books in Epistles, or that do write many, or some, or few Epistles before
their Books, whereas himself writes so Long an Epistle, in finding Fault with
Others, and civilly Applauding Himself, in not having his Picture or his
Friends Applauses, as that Epistle or Preface is as Long, if not More, than
many Short Epistles, and as Vainglorious as Many Friends Praises. But I am so
far from that Noble Persons Opinion or Modesty, that I wish, whereas I have One
Friend to Praise my Works, although Partially, I had a Thousand, or rather Ten
thousand Millions, nay, that their number were Infinite, that the Issue of my
Brain, Fame, and Name, might live to Eternity if it were possible; neither do I
think or believe it a Sin to Wish it, by reason it proceeds from Pure
Self-love, which is the Root or Foundation of the Love of God and all Moral
Virtues, I do not mean Corrupted Self-love, but as I said, Pure Self-love, by
which God and Nature did Make, and does Order the whole World, or Infinite
Matter. But, Madam, give me leave to say, that this Age does Corrupt all Wit
and Wisdom with Sophistry, and because they cannot write Beyond the Ancients,
they will endeavor to Disgrace them, although most Writers Steal from them.
But for this French Author, setting aside his Epistle, his Book is full of Wit
and Reason, as it is rendered by the Translator, and wishing all Writers could
fill their Books with Wit and Reason, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXXX.
MADAM,
BY Relation, Reading, and Observation, I find that every Age is not alike for
Humor, Judgment and Wit, although alike for Kind, Life and Death; for some
Ages are so Heroic, as all their Thoughts are of War, and all their Actions
Fighting; in other Ages all their Thoughts are Considering, and their Actions
Experiments; in other Ages all their Thoughts are Superstitious, and their
Actions Sermons; in other Ages all their Thoughts are Amorous, and their
Actions Adulteries; and so in many other things, as Humors, Passions,
Appetites, Customs, as also in Diets, Accoustrements, Behavior, Discourse, and
the like; all which I have seriously Considered, what should be the Cause that
men being of One and the same Kind, viz. Mankind, should Differ so much in
several Ages in the Course of their Life; But I cannot find any more Reason for
it, than for several Diseases in several Ages, as for Example, a Disease,
namely, the Sweating Disease, that was Predominant in England, and after in
Germany, and many other Diseases which are Predominant in One Age and not in
Another, which certainly is produced from an Influence from the Planets. But
this is to be observed, that Evils may proceed from the Planets, but what is
Good both for Body and Mind proceeds from a Higher, Celestial Power. And as for
this Age we live in now, it is Prodigal to their Enemies, and Ungrateful to
their Friends; but, Madam, though this Age be so Infected in the Generality,
yet some Particulars escape this Infection, for You and I are as Constant in
Friendship as the Light to the Sun, which is the Happiness of

Madam, Your Humble Servant.

LXXXI.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you desired me to write some Letters of Complement, as
also some Panegyricks, but I must entreat you to Excuse me, for my Style in
Writing is too Plain and Simple for such Courtly Works; besides, give me leave
to inform you, that I am a Servant to Truth and not to Flattery; although I
confess, I rather Lose than Gain in my Mistress's Service, for she is Poor and
Naked, and has not those means to Advance her Servants as Flattery has, who
gives Plenty of Words, and is Prodigal of Praise, and is Clothed in a
Flourishing Style, Imbroydered with Oratory; but my Mistress, Truth, has no
need of such Adornings, neither does she give many Words, and seldom any
Praise, so as her Servants have not any thing to live on or by, but mere
Honesty, which rather Starves than Feeds any Creature; yet howsoever, I being
bred in her Service from my Youth, will never Quit her till Death takes me
away; and if I can Serve you by Serving her, Command me, and I shall Honestly
Obey you, and so rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

LXXXII.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you Condemn me for living a Country Life, saying, I Bury
my self whilst I Live, and you wonder, that knowing I love Glory, I should live
so Solitary a Life as I do; I confess, Madam, both the Manner of my Life and my
Ambitious Nature, If a Solitary Life be not to Live in a Metrapolitan City,
spread broad with Vanity, and almost smothered with Crowds of Creditors for
Debts; and as I Confess my Solitude, so I Confess my Glory, which is to Despise
such Vanities, as will be rather a Reproach to my Life, than a Fame to after
Ages, and I should Weep my self into Water, if I could have no other Fame than
Rich Coaches, Lackies, and what State and Ceremony could produce, for my
Ambition flies higher, as to Worth and Merit, not State and Vanity; I would be
Known to the World by my Wit, not by my Folly, and I would have my Actions so
Wise and Just, as I might neither be Ashamed nor Afrai'd to Hear of my self.
But, Madam, as you Condemn My Life, so I Condemn Yours, for the Nobles that
live in a Metrapolitan City, live but as Citizens, and Citizens that live in
the Country, live like Noble men, with less Expenses and more Liberty, having
large Extension of Lands, and not Imprisoned in One House, and their
Recreations are more Various and Noble, neither do they spend their Time in
Idle Visiting, but Prudent Overseeing; In short, Madam, there is so much
Difference in either sort of Life, as the One is like Heaven, full of Peace and
Blessedness, the Other full of Trouble and Vice; and so living in the sweet Air
of Content, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXXXIII.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you Chid me for Loving too Earnestly, saying, Extreme Love
did Consume my Body and Torment my Mind, and that whosoever Love to a High
Degree are Fools; If so, I Confess, Madam, I am as much a Fool as ever Nature
made, for where I set my Love, it is Fixed like Eternity, and is as Full as
Infinite; My Love is not Fixed Suddenly, for it takes Experience and
Consideration to help to Place it, both which have been my Guides and Directors
to Love you, which makes me Love you Much, and shall make me Love you Long, if
Souls Die not, and so I shall always, and in all occasions be,

Madam, Your Constant Friend and Humble Servant.

LXXXIV.
MADAM,
NOw we be both Returned into our Native Country, let us Meet to Rejoice
together, for though our Husbands have Lost much, yet the Broken parts of their
Estates they have Recovered by the Just Laws of this Kingdom, will afford us
some Recreation, Pastime, and Harmless Sports. As for the Place of our Meeting,
If I may Advise, it shall be N. whose Owner is M. N. a Person that has Lost
the Most of any Subject, yet he is the Best Contented, and so the Happiest, for
he never Troubles himself for any Worldly Wealth, especially when he cannot
tell Honestly which way to Repair his Estate; And though he be Wisely Prudent,
yet he is not Basely Miserable, as to be Miserably Sparing, but will Entertain
us Civilly, Friendly, Generously, Pleasantly, Delightfully. So expecting when
you will appoint the Time, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

LXXXVI.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you did friendly Chide me for my Passionate Anger, and for
some Words I did speak in that Angry Passion, I Confess my Error, but yet you
must Know that my Passion proceeded from Extreme Natural and Honest Love, as to
be Angry in Mind, and Bitter and Sharp in Words, to and of those, I know by
Experience and Practice to be Envious, Spiteful, Malicious, and Ungrateful to
those I do and ought dearly to Love, and this made me Speak that which
Discretion perchance did not Allow or Approve of, although Honesty could not
Forbid it; but had it been in my Own particular Cause or Person, I should
neither have been Angry nor Bitter, neither in Thoughts nor Words, for I can
easily pass over all Hate or Anger, either in Words or Actions to my Self, so
they be neither Contumelious, nor Impairably Dishonorable, the First can
proceed from none but my Superiors, the Other from none but Bestial Ruffians;
As for my Superiors, I count none my Superiors, but those that Surpass me in
Virue, Grace, Wisdom, and Excellency of Mind, except my Natural Parents; and
as for Rude Ruffians, I am of such Quality, as not to Keep such Company, nor to
be Unattended by Servants that Wait upon me, or near my Call. But I Confess my
Indiscretion, for Violent Passion does neither gain Justice, Right, nor Truth,
of Malice, VVrong, and Falsehood, Yet I am obliged to you for your Love, for you
have showed more True Friendship in your Reproof, than Feigned Friends do in
their Flattery, for which I am,

Madam, Your Faithful and most Humble Servant.

LXXXVI.
MADAM,
I Have Read Rs. Book, which you were pleased to send me, and it is written
Learnedly, Eloquently, Wittily, and Christianly, for all which the Author is to
be Applauded and Admired, concerning the Truth, Method, and Ingenuity of the
Work, and had he been a Divine by Order and Profession, the Subject of his
Book, which is, concerning the Scripture, had been most Applaudable, but being
a Layman and not a Consecrated Churchman, the Scripture was not a fit Theme
for his Pen to work upon, at least not in my Opinion, for although I Keep
strictly to the Church of England, yet I think it not fit for a Layman to
busy his Pen concerning the Scripture; for it belongs only to Churchmen, to
Study, Interpret, Expound, Teach and Preach the Scripture, and its an
Usurpation for Laymen to meddle in Church-mens Profession, unless it be
granted that a Layman have more Wit, Reason, Learning and Inspiration than
all the Churchmen have. But truly, Madam, the Book is an Excellent Book in
that Kind, Only give me leave to tell you, that to Defend Scripture is partly
to express Faults in Scripture; and to Dispute upon the Obscurities in
Scripture is to Puzzle the Truth in Scripture. But leaving Scripture to the
Churchmen, and the Author to Fame, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXXXVII.
MADAM,
I Am Sorry Mrs. D. is so Despairingly Melancholy as not to be Comforted, and I
am the more Sorry that the Ground of her Despair is the Bible and Ignorant
Interpreters, such as rather Confound the Clear Expressions therein, than Clear
the Dark and Mystical. But many Pious persons have fallen into the same
Distemper, through want of Deep Capacities, Clear Understandings, and Sound
Judgments, to Interpret the Scripture, or to Conceive the Spiritual
Inspections and Elevations of the Purity of Christian Religion, and all the
several Opinions therein. The Church of England is the Purest, but yet it has
suffered the Scripture to be Read too Commonly, which has caused much
Disturbance, not only to Particular Persons, but in the Church it self, and
has lost much of the Dignity belonging to Churchmen, nay, it has so
Discomposed the Church Government, as it is a wonder it should settle in its
Center again. But the Churchmen say, they give Laymen Leave for to Read the
Scripture, but not to Interpret it, but the Leave of the First gives Leave to
the Latter. But, Madam, these Causes are not for our Sex to Discourse of,
wherefore we will rather Pray for our Afflicted Friend Mrs. D. and so taking my
leave of you, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

LXXXVIII.
MADAM,
I Do not Wonder that the War in E. against O. has no Better Success, since
there are such Petty Commanders and Mean Governors, and I Fear the Warring
designs of G. will have no Better fortune, because the Generals, which are to
Command in Chief, are not much Better than those that are to be Commanded,
neither for Skill, Conduct, Fame, Title, Friends, Wealth nor Power, in all
which a General ought to Surpass those he Commands, for they may be Good
Soldiers for a Troop, Regiment or Brigade, which are not Skillful or Fit for a
General, for to be a Good General, does not only require Skill and Courage, but
Wise Conduct, and VVisdome is not found in every Soldiers brain; besides, a
General must be a man of Note, for an Inferior Person will hardly be Obeyed,
for if he be not a man of Fame, Title, Worth and Merit, every Under Commander
will think himself as Good and fit to be a General as he, and will scorn to be
Commanded by his Equal; Wherefore Superiors are only fit to be Commanders and
Governors: Besides, a General or Governor must be full of Generosity, free
from Covetousness, which Generosity seldom Cohabit's with Poverty or Inferior
Persons; also they must be Just; both to Punish and Reward, Resolute to execute
the one, and Forward to perform the other. But Officers, Governors and
Commanders are for the most part chosen by the means of Bribes, Faction or
Favor, and not for Fitness, VVorth and Merit, which Causes so many Disorders,
Complaints and Rebellions, for few Nations live long in Peace, and most part of
the World, at least all Europe is at this time filled with bloody War, and most
Nations are forced to War with each other to Keep their Natives from Civil
Dissentions. But War is not a Subject proper for our Sex to discourse of,
although in the Ruins of War we suffer Equally with Men; Wherefore leaving
this Discourse of War I Conclude with Peace, for I am,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

LXXXIX.
MADAM,
I Am Sorry to hear Mrs. C. L. is married to one She Dislikes so much, as to
profess she cannot Love her Husband, and to Complain of her Parents, for
forcing her with Threats of Curses to that Match, but it is to be hoped, that
Love will both begin and increase by Acquaintance and Society, and his Kindness
to her, for he is reported to be a very Honest Good-natured man, and then she
will give her Parents Thanks, for it is to be observed, that Hot Amorous Lovers
when they are Married, their Affections grow Cooler, and at last so Cold as to
Dye Insensible, so as the Marriage Bed proves the Grave of Love, I mean of fond
Amorous Love, for certainly Amorous Lovers have Poetical Imaginations of each
other, and Fancy each other not only Beyond what they are, but what is not in
Nature to be, but such Matrimonial Acquaintance proves their Love was built on
Fancy, and not on Reality, they Married Mortal Creatures, not Gods or
Goddesses, nor such Worthy or Constant Damsels as Romances feign, so as their
Love Vanishes as Poetical Airy Castles, or Enchanted Towers, and not any Love
Remains, but if there does, it is but as a Thatched Cottage, a Plain, Homely
Love, whereas they that Marry Discreetly, and not Fondly, their Love is like
Poor Beginners, who have Nothing or very Little to live on, but being Honest
and Industrious, get something, and being Prudent and Thrifty, in time become
Rich, nay, many times so Rich, as to Build stately Palaces, and have Respect
and Honor from all that know them; so in those Marriages where Discretion
joins hands, Honesty begets Love, and thrifty Temperance makes Constancy, which
builds Happiness and Peace for their Lives to live in, and all that Know or
Hear of them, Honor and Respect them for their Worth and Merit, for their
Wisdom and True Love. But as Time joins Honest minds and Temperate persons
with Love, so Time separates Vain Imaginations and Amorous persons with
Dislike, and sometimes with Hate; and so leaving C. L. to Time, Reality,
Temperance, Discretion, and Honesty, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

XC.
MADAM,
I Am sorry the Plague is much in the City you are in, as I hear, and fear your
Stay will Endanger your Life, for the Plague is so Spreading and Penetrating a
Disease, as it is a Malignant Contagion, and Dilates it self throughout a City,
nay, many times, from City to City, all over a Kingdom, and enters into every
Particular House, and does Arrest almost every Particular Person with Death, at
least, lays grievous Sores upon them; Indeed Great Plagues are Death's
Harvest, where he Reaps down Lives like Ears of Corn; wherefore, Madam, let me
persuade you to Remove, for certainly Life is so Precious, as it ought not to
be Ventured, where there is no Honor to be Gained in the Hazard, for Death
seems Terrible, I am sure it does to Me, there is nothing I Dread more than
Death, I do not mean the Strokes of Death, nor the Pains, but the Oblivion in
Death, I fear not Death's Dart so much as Death's Dungeon, for I could
willingly part with my Present Life, to have it Redoubled in after Memory, and
would willingly Die in my Self, so I might Live in my Friends; Such a Life have
I with you, and you with me, our Persons being at a Distance, we live to each
other no otherwise than if we were Dead, for Absence is a Present Death, as
Memory is a Future Life; and so many Friends as Remember me, so many Lives I
have, indeed so many Brains as Remember me, so many Lives I have, whether they
be Friends or Foes, only in my Friends Brains I am Better Entertained; And
this is the Reason I Retire so much from the Sight of the World, for the Love
of Life and Fear of Death: for since Nature has made our Bodily Lives so
short, that if we should Live the full Period, it were but like a Flash of
Lightning, that Continues not, and for the most part leaves black Oblivion
behind it; and since Nature Rules the Bodily Life, and we cannot live Always,
nor the Bounds of Nature be Enlarged, I am industrious to Gain so much of
Nature's Favor, as to enable me to do some Work, wherein I may leave my Idea,
or Live in an Idea, or my Idea may Live in Many Brains, for then I shall Live
as Nature Lives amongst her Creatures, which only Lives in her Works, and is
not otherwise Known but by her Works, we cannot say, she lives Personally
amongst her Works, but Spiritually within her Works; and naturally I am so
Ambitious, as I am restless to Live, as Nature does, in all Ages, and in every
Brain, but though I cannot hope to do so, yet it shall be no Neglect in me; And
as I desire to Live in every Age, and in every Brain, so I desire to Live in
every Heart, especially in your Ladyships, wherein I believe I do already, and
wish I may live Long. Wherefore for my own sake, as well as yours, let me
entreat you to Remove out of that Plaguey City, for if you Die, all those
Friends you Leave, or Think of, or Remember, partly Die with you, nay, some
perchance for Ever, if they were Personally Dead before, and only Live in your
Memory; Wherefore, as you are a Noble Lady, have a Care of your Friends, and go
out of that City as Soon as you can, in which you will Oblige all those you
Favor, or that Love you, amongst which there is none more Truly, Faithfully,
and Fervently, your Friend and Servant, than,

Madam, I, M. N.

XCI.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you say, that the Lady G. P. carried a Letter she received
from Mrs. O. B. from Company to Company to Jest at, because it was not Indicted
after the Courtly Phrase, but after the Old manner and way, beginning thus,
After my hearty Commendation, hoping you are in good Health, as I am at the
writing hereof; this is to let you understand, etc. But I know not why any body
should Jest at it, for it is Friendly to send their Commendations, and to wish
them Good Health, and certainly Friendly and Kind Expressions are to be
Preferred before Courtly Complements, the First sounds like Real Truth, the
Other may be demonstrated to be Feigning, for all Complements Exceed the Truth;
It Is true, the Style of Letters alters and changes as the Fashion of Clothes
does, but Fashions are not always changed for more Commodious or Becoming, but
for the sake of Variety, for an Old Fashion may be more Useful and Graceful
than a Modern Fashion: But I believe the Lady G. P. carried Mrs. O. B s. Letter
about with her for a Pretense to visit Company, like as Gossips do Cakes and
other Junkets to their Neighbors, the Junkets increasing the Company, and the
Company the Junkets, so the Lady G. P. out of a Luxury to Talk and Company,
like as other Gossips out of a Luxury to Talking and Eating, carried the
Letter, to show her several Acquaintance Sport, to get other Acquaintance, and
if she had not had that Letter, it is likely she would have found some other
Pretense rather than have stayed at Home. Indeed, one may say, that in this Age
there is a malignant Contagion of Gossiping, for not only one Woman Infects
another, but the Women Infect the Men, and then one Man Infects another, nay,
it Spreads so much, as it takes hold even on Young Children, so strong and
Infectious is this Malignity; but if any will Avoid it, they must every Morning
Anoint the Soles of their Feet with the Oil of Slackness, and Bath every Limb
in a Bath of Rest, then they must put into their Ears some Drops of Quiet, to
Strengthen the Brain against Vaporous Noise, and Stop their Ears with a little
Wool of Deafness, to keep out the Wind of Idle Discourse, also they must Wash
their Eyes with the Water of Obscurity, lest the glaring light of Vanity should
Weaken them, and they must take some Electuary of Contemplation, which is very
Soverain to Comfort the Spirits, and they must drink Cooling Julips of
Discretion, which are good against the Fever of Company, and if they take some
Jelly of Restraint, they will find it to be an Excellent Remedy against this
Malignity, only they must take great care lest they be too Relax to
Persuasion, but rather so Restringent as to be Obstinate from entering into a
Concourse; for there is nothing more Dangerous in all Malignant Diseases, than
Throngs or Crowds of People; and this is the best Preparative against the
Plague of Gossiping. But for fear with writing too Long a Letter I should fall
into that Disease, I take my leave, and rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

XCII.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you were pleased to tell me, that Sir A. M. was to Visit
you, and hearing that the Lady B. V. was come to See you, he started from the
Place he sat, and went away as in Have, in my Opinion it was Strange he should
do so, since he professes to Love her so much, as the Extremity makes him
Unhappy, for though some may Run away through Fear, yet not for Love, for
whatsoever is Loved or Beloved, is Sought after, and what men are Afraid of,
they Fly from, and what they Love, they Fly to; so that Love Pursues, and Hate
or Fear is as it were Pursued; but perchance he is a Despairing Lover, and
Despair is beyond all other Passions; besides, Despair proceeds from Fear, for
Fear is the Father that begets Despair; or perchance he was afraid that his
Presence in her Company might Injure her Reputation, being Known to be her
Lover; or he might fear his Presence might Displease her, and Lovers had rather
Grieve Themselves, than Injure or Anger their Beloved; or else he was afraid
that the Sight of her would Increase his Torments, or Tormenting Love: But
howsoever, certainly Fear was the cause of his sudden Departure, and it is to be
feared, that his Love is mixed with an Unlawful Desire, that he was afraid to
See her whom he had no Hopes to Enjoy. But leaving Sr. A. M. to Despair, and
her to her Chaste Virtue, I rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

XCIII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to express to me the Reason of the Lady
D. S s. and the Lady E. Ks. Melancholy, which was for Want of Children; I can
not Blame the Lady D. S. by reason her Husband is the Last of his Family unless
he have Children, but the Lady E. Ks. Husband being a Widdower when he Married
her, and having Sons to Inherit his Estate, and to Keep up his Family, I Know
no Reason why she should be troubled for having no Children, for though it be
the part of every Good Wife to desire Children to Keep alive the Memory of
their Husbands Name and Family by Posterity, yet a Woman has no such Reason to
desire Children for her Own Sake, for first her Name is Lost as to her
Particular, in her Marrying, for she quits her Own, and is Named as her
Husband; also her Family, for neither Name nor Estate goes to her Family
according to the Laws and Customs of this Country; Also she Hazards her Life
by Bringing them into the World, and has the greatest share of Trouble in
Bringing them up; neither can Women assure themselves of Comfort or Happiness
by them, when they are grown to be Men, for their Name only lives in Sons, who
Continue the Line of Succession, whereas Daughters are but Branches which by
Marriage are Broken off from the Root from whence they Sprang, and Ingrafted
into the Stock of an other Family, so that Daughters are to be accounted but as
Moveable Goods or Furnitures that wear out; and though sometimes they carry the
Lands with them, for want of Heir-males, yet the Name is not Kept nor the Line
Continued with them, for these are buried in the Grave of the Males, for the
Line, Name and Life of a Family ends with the Male issue; But many times
Married Women desire Children, as Maids do Husbands, more for Honor than for
Comfort or Happiness, thinking it a Disgrace to live Old Maids, and so likewise
to be Barren, for in the Jews time it was some Disgrace to be Barren, so that
for the most part Maids and Wives desire Husbands and Children upon any
Condition, rather than to live Maids or Barren: But I am not of their minds,
for I think a Bad Husband is far worse than No Husband, and to have Unnatural
Children is more Unhappy than to have No Children, and where One Husband proves
Good, as Loving and Prudent, a Thousand prove Bad, as Cross and Spendthrifts,
and where One Child proves Good, as Dutiful and Wise, a Thousand prove
Disobedient and Fools, as to do Actions both to the Dishonor and Ruin of
their Familyes. Besides, I have observed, that Breeding Women, especially
those that have been married some time, and have had No Children, are in their
Behavior like New-married Wives, whose Actions of Behavior and Speech are so
Formal and Constrained, and so Different from their Natural way, as it is
Ridiculous; for New Married Wives will so Bridle their Behavior with
Constraint, or Hang down their Heads so Simply, not so much out of True
modesty, as a Forced Shamefulness; and to their Husbands they are so Coyly
Amorous, or so Amorously Fond and so Troublesome Kind, as it would make the
Spectators Sick, like Fulsome Meat to the Stomach; and if New-married Men were
Wise men, it might make them Ill Husbands, at least to Dislike a Married Life,
because they cannot Leave their Fond or Amorous Wives so Readily or Easily as
a Mistress; but in Truth that Humor does not last Long, for after a month or
two they are like Surfeited Bodies, that like any Meat Better than what they
were so Fond of, so that in time they think their Husbands Worse Company than
any other men. Also Women at the Breeding of their First Children make so many
Sick Faces, although oftentimes the Sickness is only in their Faces, not but
that some are Really Sick, but not every Breeding Women; Likewise they have
such Feigned Coughs, and fetch their Breath Short, with such Feigning Laziness,
and so many Unnecessary Complaints, as it would Weary the most Patient Husband
to hear or see them: besides, they are so Expensive in their Longings and
Perpetual Eating of several Costly Meats, as it would Undo a man that has but
an Indifferent Estate; but to add to their Charge, if they have not what they
Please for Childbed Linen, Mantels, and a Lying-in Bed, with Suitable
Furniture for their Lying-Chamber, they will be so Fretfull and Discontented,
as it will endanger their Miscarrying; Again to redouble the Charge, there must
be Gossiping, not only with Costly Banquets at the Christening and Churching,
but they have Gossiping all the time of their Lying-in, for then there is a
more set or formal Gossiping than at other ordinary times. But I fear, that if
this Letter come to the view of our Sex besides your self, they will throw more
Spiteful or Angry Words out of their mouths against me, than the Unbeleeving
Jews did hard Stones out of their hands at Saint Stephan; but the best is, they
cannot Kill me with their Reproaches, I speak but the Truth of what I have
observed amongst many of our Sex; Wherefore, Pray Madam, help to Defend me, as
being my Friend, and I yours, for I shall Continue as long as I live,

Madam, Your Ladyship's most Faithful and Humble Servant.

XCIV.
MADAM,
IT is to be observed, that Absence Cools Affections, and Presence Heats them,
and Long Presence Burns them up, like as the Sun the Creatures of the Earth,
which are Cold in his Absence, Warmed with his Presence, and Burnt with his
Continuance; But some Affections live always, as at the Poles, Frozen, and as
in a Twy-light, wherein they can never be Seen Perfectly, and the Natures of
such men for the most part are like Bears, Dull and Ravenous, which shows, that
Bears are of Cold Constitutions, living always in the Coldest Climates, for
Cold Congeals the Spirits, Thickens the Skin, Stupifies the Senses, but
Sharpen's the Hungry Appetite; and Different Extremes for the most part meet in
Like Effects, for Extreme Heat Exhales or Exhausts the Spirits, Dimm's or
Weakens the Senses, Hardens the Skin, and Quickens the Appetite of Drought, and
Burning and Freezing is Equally Painful, and the Pains are somewhat Alike, as
both Peircing and Pricking, as if Cold and Heat were Sharply pointed; but a Hot
Love is better than a Cold one, although a Cold Love is likelier to last
Longer, like those that live in Hot Countries, who are not half so Long-Lived
as those that live in Cold, the reason is, that the Spirits Exhaling out of the
Body, carry out Life with them, whereas the Spirits being only Congealed,
Remain still within the Body, and Life keeps in, and lives with them, for
Spirits are Life. But leaving Hot and Cold Love, which is Lukewarm, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XCV.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you were pleased to let me know, how Bravely the Lady F.
O. lives, both for Rich Clothing, Costly Houshold-furniture, and Great
Equipage; truly, for those that have a sufficient Estate to Maintain it, and a
Noble Title to Countenance it, it is very Commendable and Honorable to live in
Grandeur, otherwise it is Prodigal, Vain, Base, and Foolish: Prodigal, to live
Beyond their Means or Wealth; Vain, to make a Fluttering show with the Wast of
their Estate; Base, to Usurp the Grandeur of Noble and Princely Titles; and
Foolish, to make Enemies through Envy to their Vanity, to Triumph on them in
their Poverty, which Poverty must of Necessity follow their Unnecessary Wast,
if they have not a Staple-stock, so that they of Necessity must Break and
become Bankrupts, in which Condition they will be Despised, and so much the
more as they were Envyed for their Vain Bravery, and Hated for their Base
Usurped Grandeur, the more they are Scorned in their Poverty, and Laughed at in
their Misery. Indeed, it is a Ridiculous Sight to see any live Above their
Wealth or Dignity; it is like mercenary Stage Players, that Act the parts of
Princes, but none of the Spectators give them the Respect and Honor due to
Great Princes, knowing they are but Poor Players and Mean Persons; but true
Noble Persons indeed, as they will not Quit any thing that belongs to their
Dignities, so they will not Usurp any thing that belongs not to their Titles,
and when such Persons chance to fall into Misery, yet they fall not into Scorn,
but Pity and Compassion will wait upon them, or meet them with Respect; but in
all Conditions, Degrees, and Dignities, it is better to Live Wisely than
Bravely, and to Live Wisely, is, to Spend Moderately, to Live Plentifully,
Easily, Peaceably, Pleasantly, and so Happily; to Spend Moderately, is, to keep
within the Bounds of their Estate, not to go beyond the Limits of their Comings
in; to Live Plentifully, is, to spend nothing Vainly, nor to spare nothing
Useful, or Proper for their Quality; to Live Peaceably, is, to live Privately,
free from troublesome Company, as Idle Visitors, and Trencher-Guests, who
Censure every Word or Act to the VVorst Intent and Sense, and Slander every one
that is Better than themselves; to Live Easily, is, to have their Family in
Order and Obedience, and all their Affairs to be done Methodically; to Live
Pleasantly, is, to have such Delights as the Estate will Afford them, and such
Pastimes as are Agreeable to their Humors, and the Company of Sociable and
Conversable Friends; also to Banish all Perturbed Passions, and Extravagant
Appetites, all which is to Live Wisely, as your Ladyship does; But whether the
Lady F. O. Live Wisely, I will leave to your Ladyships Judgment, who dwells
Near her, and I at a Greater Distance, although not from your Ladyship, for my
Thoughts and Affections are always with you, so as you are Attended and
VVaited on by the Soul of,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XCVI.
MADAM,
I Wonder that Sir F. E. should turn his Back to his Enemy, as you say you
heard he did, when heretofore he Out-faced his Enemies; wherefore, surely he
either thought those Enemies he Turned from, their Cause to be Juster, or he
had some Burden upon his Conscience that was Unrepented of, and knowing in
himself, he was not fit to Die at that present, endeavored to Preserve his
Life by a Flight; or else he thought he might do some Greater Service if he
Preserved his Life, whereas in that Fight he should Die Unprofitably; or else
it was a Panick Fear, that may seize sometimes on Men of Great Courage,
although True, Sober, Valiant Men are Seldom, if Ever, Seized with that Fear,
by reason they never Venture their Lives but for Honor, and Honor forbids a
Masker'd Flight, though not a Noble Retreat, for it is as Commendable to make a
Wise and Honorable Retreat, as to Fight a Just Quarrel. But I have observed,
that as some are Wise, Honest, and Valiant, or rather Courageous by Fits, so
some are Courageous and Cowardly in several Causes or Cases; as for Example,
Some have Courage to venture Hanging for Robbing or Stealing, yet are afraid of
a Cudgel, to Fight although but at Cuffs; others have Courage to Betray a
Friend, but dare not Assist or Conceal a Persecuted Friend, others have Courage
to Commit Treason, yet dare not Fight an Enemy, and many the like; also some
are very Courageous in a Passion, and mere Cowards when their Passion is over;
also Fear makes some Stout and Courageous, and others Cowards, and so does
Drink, and the like; also Covetousness of Wealth makes more Courageous than any
Thing or Cause else, for an Army of Soldiers, if they know they shall be
Enriched by the Victory, will Fight without all Fear, nay, so as to Die Every
man; but Propose to them Honor, or their Countries Safety, or their Kings
Right, and they for the most part will Run away, unless they be sure to be
Hanged for it, and then perchance they may Fight for Life, rather than Run away
to be sure to Die, for by Staying there is some Hopes, whereas by Running away
there is none; but if they fear not to be Caught, they Fly. But the Commanders
that Fight more for Honor than Spoil, most commonly Stick to the Fight,
fearing a Disgrace more than Death, and loving Fame more than Life. But the
truth is, that generally there are more Cowards than Valiant Men, and more that
have Courage to be Knaves, than to be Honest Men, for it requires both Wisdom
and Valor to be Truly Honest, and Uprightly Just, but few have that Noble and
Prudent Breeding, as to Know what is Truly Just, Honest and Valiant, insomuch
as many Commit Errors and Crimes, and so are Disgraced, merely through
Ignorance, whereas did they Know and rightly Understand the Grounds or
Principles of Honesty and Honor, they would not hazard Infamy; But there are
more that have not Breeding according to their Natures, than Natures according
to their Breeding, for alas, the World wants Good Instructors, which is the
cause of the Follies, Errors, Faults, and Crimes in Men and their Actions. But
leaving the Generality, I am sorry for the Disgrace of Sir F. E. although it
may be hoped, he may Recover himself out of this Reproach, by some Eminent,
Honorable, and Valiant Action, which will be a Grave to Bury this Disgrace,
for there are ways and means for men to Recover a Lost Honor, but none for
Women, for if once they Lose their Honor, it is Lost for Ever without
Redemption, wherefore every one is to regard their own Actions. But lest I
should Commit an Error or Fault, in tyring you with so Long a Letter, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XCVII.
MADAM,
THe Lady G. R. and the Lady A. N. in a Visiting meeting, fell into a Discourse
of Great Princes and Noble Persons, where the Lady G. R. said, that Great
Princes and Noble Persons should or ought to have a Grandeur in their
Behaviors, Habits, Discourses, Attendance, Life and Renown, as to their
Persons, Garments, Speech, Ceremony, Actions and Fame, according to their
Titles, Births and Fortunes; Nay, said the Lady A. N. not according to Fortune,
for Misfortune or Ill Fortune Knocks Grandeur down, and makes it lie as Dead,
also Age does Lessen it: The Lady G. R. said, that True Grandeur did ride in
Triumph upon Misfortunes back, for though Ill Fortune might Degrade Noble
Persons of Wealth, and Poverty Degrade them of Ceremony, yet the Right Grandeur
of True Noble Persons would appear through Rags, and their Low Condition like
as the Sun, which though it could not shine Clear and Bright through Thick,
Black Clouds, yet it made Day in that Hemisphere it moved in, for a Dark Day is
not Night; so, although Ill Fortune may Darken the Grandeur of Noble Persons,
yet it cannot Benight it; and as for Age, said she, it is so far from Lessening
Grandeur as it gives it Addition, for true Noble and Heroic Persons, their
very Shadows do appear with a Majestical Grandeur, and their Fame sounds with a
Solemn Renown, both to beget Respect, Reverence and Honor in the Eyes, Ears
and Minds of all persons, in despite of Fortune or Time, for Grandeur, said
she, lives both in the Ashes and Fame of Noble, Worthy, and Gallant Persons.
But leaving their Discourse together with their Visit, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XCVIII.
MADAM,
I Received your Letter, which is Written in so Eloquent a Style, expressing
such High Praises, that, were I apt to be Self-conceited, I should have become
so Proud upon reading it, as I should have Denied my self, thinking my self not
to be the Same I am; nay, so far I was already to this Pride and Self-denial,
that I had a Better Opinion of my self, whilst I was Reading your Letter than
Usually I have; But with returning thoughts I found my self the Same I am, and
that your Praise did proceed merely from your Civil Respect and Great
Affection, and not from any Merit in me to Deserve it. Wherefore my Obligations
are so much the More, as I do Less merit them, which Obligations shall always
be acknowledged by,

Madam, Your most Humble and Faithful Servant.

XCIX.
MADAM,
I Hear there are many Noble Lords with their Ladies gone into F. which shows
that in this Age there are many Kind Husbands, for usually when Husbands
Travel, they leave their Wives behind, at least, think them to be a Trouble on
their Journies, and counting their Trouble to be more, than the Pleasure of
their Companyes, they are left at Home. But I believe, this Mode-Travelling is
only in this, and not in other Nations, for our Contrymen make Kinder
Husbands than men of other Nations. But since our Wars some are Necessitated
and Forced to Travel into Foreign Countries, being Banished out of their Native
Country, and the Wives of Banished men are forced to Travel to and from their
Husbands, to seek for Means and Subsistence, to Maintain or Relieve their
Necessitated lives, wanting Meat to feed on, and Clothes to cover them; Yet be
there not so many in this Banished Condition for Number as for Worth, for they
are most persons of great Qualities or Dignities, and had great Estates, living
formerly in great Splendour and Plenty, and now in low Despised Poverty and cold
Charity, which makes their Conditions or Fortunes so much the more Sad and
Lamentable, only their Souls and Spirits are not according to their Fortunes,
for their noble Souls and Heroic Spirits yield not to Fortunes Slavery, but
they as Conquerors ride Triumphing on proud Fortun's back, spurring her sides
with Scorn, for though Fortune may Starve or Inslave their Bodies, yet she
cannot Conquer their Minds. But in this Age there are more Women that Travel
for Fashions sake, than out of Want, more that Travel for Breeding than for
Bread, for Company than for Necessity, they spend more in Unnecessary Travels
to see strange Nations and Men, than others can get, that Travel to their own
Native Country and near Relations, for these Travel not for Observation but
Subsistence, they make not their Journies Frolicks of Mirth, but Weeping
Departures, their Minds Swim in Troubled Tears, and are Blown with Sighs in
their Bodily Barks, whilst they are Swimming on the dangerous Sea in Barks or
Ships of Wood blown by blustering Winds; they venture not life for Sport and
Fashion, but for Love and Charity; Indeed whereas other Women, either for
Observation or Fashion, may with their Fathers, Husbands or Sons Travel all the
World over, those Women must for necessity Travel as they can, having no
Choice; And so leaving our Sex either at home or abroad in their own Native or
Foreign Countries, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

C.
MADAM,
I Wonder at that which your Letter did Mention, that Sir C. K. should not Help
his Friend, Sir O. R. in Distress, wherefore the Distress of O. R. does prove,
that Sir C. K. was never a True Friend to him, but only a Seeming, as a
Professing not an Acting Friend, for though Love lives in the Heart, yet the
part of True Friendship Dwells or is only made Known by the Action; But I have
observed, that there is more that are Unkind to their Friends, even their
Natural Friends, than Revengefull to their Enemies, and though both are Bad,
yet the not doing Good or Timely Service to a Friend, is Worse than to do Hurt
to an Enemy; for Preservation may Constrain them to the One, at least it is but
quid for quo, as to Revenge an Injury, but nothing but a Treacherous Nature can
make or Hinder them from doing a Service for a Friend, if they be able thereto;
for it is Inhuman not to do a Timely Courtesy to a Stranger, nay, to an Enemy
in Distress, for a Noble Person will not take Advantage of his Enemy, but
rather Help him in Distress, although he takes Revenge when he is in an able
Condition to Help himself. But not to Help a Friend in Distress, is a Nature
worse than Devils, for sure one Devil will Assist another, if it be but for
Acquaintance: But there are many sorts of Friends, if I may call them so, for
some Friendships are Made in Adversity, which are for the most part Broken in
Prosperity, either through Envy or Pride; and some Friendships are Made in
Prosperity, and are Lost in Adversity, either by Scorn or Fear; some
Friendships are Made by Mirth, which are for the most part Lost in Mourning,
either for the Shunning of Melancholy or Sad Objects, or for the Love to Mirth,
or for the Desire of Forgetfulness; some Friendships are Made by Luxury, which
are Broken in Sickness; some Friendships are Made in Dangers, as to help each
other, which are Lost in Security, and some are Made in Security, which are
Lost in Danger, for to avoid the Dangers of each other; some Friendships are
Made in Amors, and are Lost by Satiety; some Friendships are Made by Faction
and Combination, and are Broken by Separation, and many the like Friendships,
which are Made and Broken; but True, Undissolving Friendships are made by
Faith, Love, Trust, Gratitude, Fortitude, and Honor, for they are always
Valiant for their Friends Safety, Industrious in their Friends Necessity,
Careful for their Friends Security, Secret in their Friends Trust, Faithful in
their Friends Service, Dispatchful in their Friends Affairs, Pleading in their
Friends Suits, Speaking in their Friends Behalf, Fighting in their Friends
Quarrels, Dying in their Friends Causes, nay, ready to endure Torments for
their Friends Ease, or Troubles for their Friends Peace, and there can be no
Bar between True Friends, from Doing or Endeavoring Good for and to each
others Good; Such a Friendship, Madam, is betwixt You and Me, and True Friends
have an Undoubted Belief of each others Love and Fidelity, wherefore it is but
civil Ceremony to tell you, I am,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

CI.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you mentioned that Sir S. P. had lost 500 l. at Tennis,
and 2000. at Cards and Dice, and was now Resolved to Play no more at those
Games, but at Chess; (though Fox and Geese were a better Game for him in my
Opinion) for although he may Lose as great Sums at Chess, yet not so Quickly as
at Dice, Cards, or Tennis, for the Game at Chess takes time to Consider before
he parts from his money, besides, it requires a Good Judgment, which Sir S. P.
did not prove to have by his former Adventures, wherein he had such Losses;
Indeed, Wise men will Venture as little on Fortune as they can, by reason she
never gives Assurance, and is too Inconstant to be Trusted without Bonds or
Engagements of Friends or Lands, but I know none she has, for she never keeps
Friendship with any One, nor Dwells Constantly in any Place, so as she can
neither be Sued, Arrested, nor Imprisoned; wherefore Prudent men will not Trust
her, unless upon Necessity; But, certainly it is through a Covetous Humor,
that causes men to Venture so much at Play; like as greedy Merchants, that will
Venture their Whole Stock upon the Uncertain Winds, and Raging, Rough Seas, in
hope of a Rich Return; and I fear Sir S. P. has Lost his Stock in the
Adventure, as many Merchants do, and so will become a Bankrupt. But to prove
Gaming is out of Covetousness, and not for Pastime or Exercise, is, that Tennis
is too Violent a Motion for Wholesome Exercise, for those that Play much at
Tennis, impair their Health and Strength, by Wasting their Vital Spirits
through much Sweating, and Weaken their Nerves by Overstraining them; neither
can Tennis be a Pastime, for it is too Laborious for Pastime, which is only a
Recreation, and there can be no Recreation in Sweaty Labor, for it is laid as
a Curse upon men, that they shall Live by the Sweat of their Brows, but those
that Lose, shall Want, and become Poor by the Sweat of their Brows; wherefore
Recreation which is Pleasure and Delight, Lives in Ease and Plenty; And thus it
is through a Covetous Humor, that men Play at Cards and Dice, and not for
Pastime nor Exercise, for as Tennis has too Much Motion for Exercise, so
Playing at Cards and Dice has too Little, insomuch that when Gamesters rise
from Play, their Limbs are Stiff, Numb, and Insensible, for want of Use, the
truth is, they fall asleep through Laziness, having no Employment; Neither can
I perceive it to be a Recreation, by reason Cards and Chess require more Study
than Arithmetic, or Logic, or any other Science that sets the Brain awork,
and there is as little Recreation in the Labor of the Mind, as in the Labor
of the Body, in the Labor of the Thoughts, as in the Labor of the Limbs;
besides, their Stakes are Attended and Watched with as many Fears as Hopes, and
both are Troubles of the Mind, for Hopes are built on Doubts; and for the
Increase of their Wealth, Gamesters are like Chimists, that Seek the
Philosophers Stone, in which Search they all become Bankrupts, Losing more Gold
than they Get, in so much that when they Dye, they leave no Wealth behind them,
only their Folly, which they leave at their Death, for Death will not be
troubled therewith; But of Worldly Riches they are as Poor as Lazarus, yet
whether they shall Lie in Abraham's bosom, I Know not. And as Gamesters are
like Lazarus for the matter of Poverty, so Drunkards are like Dives for the
matter of Drought, they are always Dry, for much Strong Liquor causes Heat,
and Heat causes Drought, so as they Drink themselves Dry, and many times in a
Fevorish Distemper desire a Drop of Water to Cool their Parched Tongues, having
Scalding Heat within them, so that their Wine, or Feavour which Wine causes,
proves to their Bodies as Hellfire, and a furious Madness in their Minds; only
there is this Difference, that in Hellfire, its said, the Body never Decays
or Dies, but in the Fire of Wine the Body does Wast by degrees, or is suddenly
Burnt up in Feavours, and so Dies; Also Drunkards have the Fate of Gamesters
and Chemists, which is to be Poor, for as Chemists are Impoverished by a
VVasting Fire, so Drunkards are Impoverished by Inflaming Wine; also Drunkards
are Guilty of Covetousness, not so much of Wealth as of Drink, but they are as
Insatiable for Drink as the others for Gold; and Whoremasters may come amongst
them for Covetousness and Poverty, for should they neither Covet Gold nor
Drink, yet they Covet other Men's Wives, Daughters, Sisters, Aunts, Neeces and
Maidservants, and Impoverish their Estates, either by presenting the Coy with
Gifts, as Bribes to Tempt them, or Maintain them for their Use; also they are
as Short-lived as Drunkards, or as Diseased, and as full of Aches, Pains and
Weakness. Thus some Toss away their Estates and Lives with a Ball, others Throw
away their Estates and Lives with a Dice, some Shuffle away their Estates and
Lives with a pack of Cards, others Spue out their Estates and Lives with Wine,
others Kiss away their Estates and Lives with Mistresses, and so with the Pot
and the Rot, the Ball, the Card and the Dice, men Busy the whole Time of their
Life, or rather Waste the whole Time of their Life, together with their Life;
And not in any one of these Actions is Honor, nor, as I can perceive,
Pleasure; for their can be no Pleasure in Fear of Losing, nor in Sick-spuing,
nor in Painful Rotting, nor is there any Honor in these Actions, for it is
not Honorable to beat a Ball, but to beat an Enemy, nor to deal out Cards, but
to lead out Soldiers, neither is it Honorable to be Dead-drunk in a Tavern,
but to be Wounded in the Field of War, for a Drunken Quarrel is not an
Honorable Fight, the Fury in a Tavern is not the Valor in a Field; to be
Enclosed in a Mistresses soft Arms is not to lie on the hard Ground open to
all the Injuries of the Elements; neither shall men get an Eternal Fame, for
Drinking, Gaming and Whoring, but they sooner may get an Eternal Infamy,
although most are so Happy as to Dye in Oblivion, wherein let them rest; But if
I Write my Letter much Longer, it may become as Troublesome as a Drunken
Quarrelling, or Wrangling Gamester, or an Impatient Adulterer, or an
Impertinent Woman, of which last you may think me to be Guilty by this Letter,
wherein are more Words than Wit, more Truth than Reason, Wherefore I Will Write
no more, only give me leave to subscribe my self,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

CII.
MADAM,
I Was to Visit the Lady C. H. at her Country House, but the House is too Good
and Fine an House for the Situation, for the Air all about is Thick and Foggy,
the Ground Deep and Miry in some places, and Mountainous and Rocky in others,
also it is so Cold, as no Fruits will Ripen or Increase there; The truth is,
she lives as if it were at the Poles, yet she is Merry and Gay, which shows
that a Sun-shining Mind is not Dulled with Cloudy Days, no more than a Cloudy
Mind, or Sad and Melancholy Humor is pleased with Sun-shining days, but that
every Place is Pleasant to a Cheerful Mind and Lively Thoughts, which makes the
Life Happy, for True Happiness Lives Within the Mind or Soul, not Without it,
and whosoever build their Happiness Without it, shall Miss it when they Seek
it, nay, those Buildings are like Airy Castles, which Vanish to nothing, or
rather like Unwholsom, or Ill Vapor; or as a Snuff of a Candle, that goes out,
and leaves an Ill Savor behind it; so those that place their Happiness
Without them, as on the Opinion of Men, or the Vanities of the World, shall
have nothing but Loss, Trouble, and Vexation, instead of Peace, Rest, and
Content; And the Difference betwixt a Wise man and a Fool is, that a Wise man
carries his Happiness still Within him, and a Fool is always Seeking it
Without him, and seldom or never Meets it, the other never Seeks it, for he
always has it; a Wise man does like an Expert Chemist, that can Extract
Cordials out of Poison, but a Fool Converts Cordials into Poison by wrong
Application; But leaving the Fool to his Sick Mind, and Erroneous Practice, and
the Wise man to his Healthful Mind and Experienced Prudence, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

CIII.
MADAM,
SInce it is your Pleasure we should Write to each other, as if we were
Personally Coversing, as Discoursing of what we Think, Say, or Act, and of the
several Employments of our Time, I must tell you, I was Invited to be a Gossip,
to Name the Lady B. Rs. Child, of which she Lies in, and at the Christening
there were many Ladies and Gentlewomen, and being most Married Women, as is
Usual at such Gossiping Meetings, their Discourse was most of Labors and
Child-beds, Children and Nurses, and Household Servants, and of Preserving, and
such like Discourses as Married Women and Mistresses of Families usually have;
at last they fell into a Discourse of Husbands, Complaining of Ill Husbands,
and so from Husbands in General, to their own Particular Husbands, where one
Lady said, that her Husband was the Simplest man that ever Nature made; another
Lady said, her Husband was become a Beggar with Gaming; another, that her
Husband was the greatest Whoremaster in the City, and Corrupted all her Maids,
for if they came Maids into her service, they went away none; another Lady
said, her Husband got Children, and then Grumbled at the Charge of Keeping, and
Bringing them up; another said, that her Husband had so many Faults, as it was
an endless work to Relate them, for his Faults did Surpass all Account; at
last, when they had Railed a Long time, I, to Express the Nature of our Sex,
(which is, that we cannot Refrain our Tongues from Speaking, although it be on
such Themes as we Understand not, or of such Subjects or Causes as we have
nothing to do with, and which do not Concern us) did most Foolishly Speak to
the Ladies, saying, I wondered to hear them Rail at their Husbands, and
Publicly Dispraise them, for if they had Faults, it was the Wives Duty to Wink
at them, at least not to Divulge them, and if their Husbands would Speak of
them, and Tell their Faults, it was likely they would Equal their Husbands
Faults, if not Surpass them; but the Ladies being before Heated with Wine, and
then at my Words, with Anger fell into such a Fury with me, as they fell upon
me, not with Blows, but with Words, and their Tongues as their Swords, did
endeavor to VVound me; wherefore I perceiving my own Folly of Unnecessary
Speaking, and being Sorry for the Indiscretion, became as Silent as if I had
been Dead, only I did Move to show I was Alive, for I took a Silent Leave, as
with a Curtsie, and came away; and it has so Frighted me, as I shall not
hastily go to a Gossiping-meeting again, like as those that become Cowards at
the Roaring Noise of Cannons, so I, at the Scolding Voices of Women; but well
may One Woman be Afraid of Many Women, whenas One Man will be Afraid of another
Man; and so leaving you to Rejoice, as I know you will, at my safe Deliverance
or Escape, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CIV.
MADAM,
I Do not wonder that Mrs. S. P. should Report, she was the Cause, or the Maker
of the Match betwixt your Noble Husband and You, although she Knew nothing of
your Affections, or Intentions of Marriage, until the very Day you were
Contracted; but she is rather to be Pardoned, because she is Poor and Inferior
to so Great a Person as your Ladyship, and a Lie in that Case, and Brag of that
Honor, may Advantage her very much, as I believe it has done, for others
Hearing, and Believing what she Reports, because she was an Attendant and
Follower of your Ladyship, it makes all the Young Men and Women Flock to her,
to get them Husbands and Wives, thinking her a Fortunate and Powerful Woman,
that could bring such Great Persons as you and your Noble Husband, to Meet,
Love, and Marry; wherefore Persons of a Lower Degree perhaps she may Dispose of
as she Pleases, and by Making of Matches, Gain on both sides, for Women do Fee
her to get them Husbands, and Men to get them Rich Wives, so as she is become
the Huckster or Broker of Males and Females, and no doubt but she Cozens them
sometimes, so that they do not always find their Markets or VVares so Rich or
Good as she Pretends they are. Indeed she is a Matrimonial Bawd, and I know not
whether she does as I have heard of other Bawds, who many times give Broken
Maids for Pure Virgins, but if she deals Honestly, one may wish her to Thrive
by her Trade, for Marriage is Honest, and the Procurers may be so too, if they
give True Informations of and to each Person, otherwise they are but Cheats,
and Bribes are great Temptations to Poverty; but Love, Beauty, Wit, Honor,
Title, and Wealth, need no Procurers, every One is sufficient to Match it Self,
wherefore your Ladyship and your Noble Husband, who had all those, had no Use
of any other but your selves, to join your Affections, which Produced a
Marriage, and certainly your Marriage was Designed by Nature, and Decreed in
Heaven, to which Divine Angels were Witnesses, and the Invisible Bridal Guests,
to Bless, and Rejoice at your Union and Nuptials, which makes you both so
Happy, which is the Joy of,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

CV.
MADAM,
HEre were some Ladies to Visit me, amongst the rest, there was one so very
Fair, as I never Saw the like, but let me tell you, that was all which was to
be Admired in her; and Mrs. F. W. who you know is a Salt Speaker, said, that
her Wit was like her Complexion, Weak and Faint, Repeating the old Proverb,
Fair and Foolish, and then she Sung a line of an old Song, Oh the Lovely Brown,
as it is, how it Shames the Lilies! I told her, she Spoke out of Envy, she said,
No, for Fair Women were seldom Handsome, I said, that the Usual Saying was,
that Black men Liked and Loved Fair women best, she answered, that then Black
men were as Foolish as Fair women. Thus you may know how one Woman is Apt to
Dispraise another, for had she been either Brown or Black, although very well
Favored, yet it was likely she would have said somewhat to her Prejudice, for
our Sex Loves or Approves not any Other which is Eminent, either for Wit,
Beauty, Favor, Behavior, or Virtue; But leaving Mrs. T. W. to her Envy,
Opinion, or Fancy, and the Beauty of Mrs. E. D. to Admiration, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

CVI.
MADAM,
I Know not whether I shall give you Thanks for the Present of Fruits you sent
me; By which Present, give me Leave to Tell you, you did Tempt me to Eat a
Forbidden fruit, as the Serpent in Paradise did our great Grandmother Eve, for
though I was not Forbidden to Eat of that Fruit by God, yet Nature did Forbid
me, saying, I should be cast from Health into Sickness, and be Condemned to the
Painful labor of Physic; but it has given me Knowledge as to Know and
Perceive my own Weakness, both for Constitution of Body, and Reason of Mind,
that it could not Govern my Appetite with Temperance, and I must have suffered
the Torments of a Hot burning Fever, had not Letting Blood Saved and Redeemed
me there from. Thus, Madam, your Kind Friendship has been a Devil to me, only
you wanted a Devils Design, which is a Desire Hurtful to Deceive, and you
wanted the Malice, though not the Evil Effect. But some may think, this is a
strange Style, or Conversation of Friendship, as to call my Friend a Devil, but
my Friend being of a Divine Nature and a God-like VVisdome, knows that an Evil
Effect may Proceed from a Good Intention as her Present shows; also she Knows
that I her Friend Love and Honor her Intention, though I Rail and Exclame
against the Effect, so that in the Effect and Intention of Friendship, we are
as Entire and Loving Friends as ever we were, neither do true Friends take
Exceptions at Words, knowing their Souls are so United, as not to be Divided
neither in Life nor Death; But, pray Madam, if you send me any more Fruit, send
me Good Advice with it, as to Advise me not to Eat so much as to make my self
Sick; Howsoever, I will leave it to your Better Judgment, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CVII.
MADAM,
I Am Sorry to hear that Mr. C. D. is Dead, and for Mr. E. A. and R. G. who you
say, were very Busy, or rather Troublesome to Him in his Sickness, in
persuading him to make his Will and Settle his Estate, I must Confess, I wonder
they would Intrude themselves into any man's Private Affairs unless they were
Desired, or had any Interest therein, for though an Honorable Person will not
Deny his Assistance where he can do a Worthy Service and is Desired thereto,
yet he will not Press his Service, for that were to disserve; But to be
forwardly Officious and Busy in a Dying man's Affairs, as in Making, or
Causing of Making Wills, or in Advising and Counselling a Sick man in matters
Concerning his Estate, or about Debts, Legacies, Annuities or the like, not
being Invited or Desired thereunto by the Sick Person, it looks rather with a
Covetous Face than a Friendly Heart, for though the Intention may be Honest
without Self Ends, yet the Appearance is not so, for it Appears, as if he had a
Desire, or did Hope, that the Sick man might make him his Executor or
Administrator, at least to leave him a Legacy for his Care, Acquaintance and
Friendship; but the World is so Covetous and Greedy after Dead-men's Shoos, as
the Saying is, that if any man have an Estate to leave behind him, when he is
Sick or Dying, all his Friends and Acquaintance flock about him like a Company
of Carrion-Crows, to a Dead Body, and all to Devour that Wealth he leaves, when
as a Poor man may be Sick and Dye, and none Come near to Help him; Thus we may
perceive by the Course of the World, that it is not Charity to the Sick, nor
Love to the Man, that brings Visitors or has proffered Service, but Love to the
Wealth. But if all were of my Humor, the Rich should have the Fewest Visitors,
for I, for fear any should Imagine me one of these Human or rather Inhuman
Vultures, should never Visit the Sick, unless they were so Poor as they wanted
Relief. Wherefore, good Madam, have a Care of your Health, if you desire my
Company, lest when you are Sick, I should not Visit you, yet if I should, I
would not bring Lawyers or Notaries to Trouble you, but I would bring you the
most Experienced and Famous Physician I could get, to Cure you, for as long as
Life lasts, no Endeavor ought to be Wanting, it being the part of a Friend to
Regard the Life, not to Search into the Estate, and when a Friend is Dead, to
Execute to the utmost of their Power their Friends Desires, and to Obey
Punctually all their Commands they laid upon them whilst they Lived, and not to
let them be Buried until they were sure they are past Reviving, nor to be laid
upon the Cold Ground, until their Bodies are Colder than the Earth they are
laid on; but, Madam, you are likelier to Live to do this Friendly Office for
me, than I for you, by reason you are Healthful, and I am Sickly, and Sickness
is Death's Sergeant to Arrest Life, and the Grave is the Prison: Yet whilst I
Live, I shall always prove my self to be,

Madam, Your Ladyships faithful Friend and Servant.

CVIII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to tell me in your last Letter, that the Lady I. L. is so
Jealous of her Husband, as the Humor of Jealousy drives her sometimes into a
Passionate Fury, or Furious Passion, insomuch as not only to Exclame and Rail
on those Ladies he does Visit, but on her Husband, which is neither Seemly, nor
Decent, for Wives should Submit to their Husbands Follies, and VVink at their
Crimes, if they cannot Reform them, neither is the way of Reformation by
Railing and Exclamations, but by Gentle Persuasions, Meek Submissions, and
Subtle Insinuations; but say these will not Reform them; therefore shall a
Wife Double her Injuries, as first, to be Injured by her Husbands Inconstancy,
and then by her Own Grief, Rage, and Fury? This were to make his Crimes her
Tormentors, which would neither let the Mind, Thoughts, or Body, live in Rest
or Peace; and why should a Wife Grieve for her Husbands Inconstancy, since she
receives no Dishonor from it? nay, if it be for the Loss of her Husbands
Affection, she is but a Simple Woman that will Trouble her self for him that
Loves her not, or for him that Prefers another Woman in his Affection before
her; neither ought she to Wrong her self by doing Indiscreet, Dishonest, or
Dishonorable Actions, to Revenge her Wrongs, but rather to Strive and
Endeavor to make her self appear more Virtuous; but for the most part Women
are more Jealous through Envy to their own Sex, than Love to their Husbands,
for every Woman would be the Chief for Wit, Beauty, and such like
Attractives, and for my part, I wonder Men should desire Variety, since all
Women are alike, for a Man can have but a Woman; as for Beauty, it is only
to Look on, and Wit to Listen to, but not Amorously to Enjoy; But if all
Wives were as some, Husbands might freely take their Liberties, and their
Wives would never Frown for it; and for the most part Careless Wives have the
Chastest Husbands, I mean Careless, as Free from Jealousy. But leaving the
Lady I. L. to Time, Custom, and Discretion, to Abate her Jealousy, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CIX.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you were pleased to tell me, that you showed the Admirable
Works of A. B. to L. C. and he did not Admire them, which was a sign he did
not Understand them; Certainly, so little Understanding is in the World, that
if the World of Mankind were Divided into Four Parts, Three Parts and a Half of
the Four are Ignorant Dolts, which is the Reason that Rare Qualities, Learned
Sciences, Curious Arts, and Divine Fancies are no more Esteemed or Admired; for
if Understanding were General, Men would Run, Seek, and Sue, to see any One
Person that had the Ingenuity to Invent Arts, or Find out New Sciences, or that
had the Gift of Poetry, or the Deep Conceptions of Philosophy; but for the
most, these enter not into their Capacity, and being not to their Capacity, it
cannot be to their Pleasure or Delight, and so not to their Esteem; as for
Proof, let the most Rare Poems, or some Deep Philosophy be Read to Several men,
and tell them of some New Science, or show them some Curious or Profitable
Arts, and you shall find they will Express they are Weary of them, by their
Yawning, Humming, Hauking, and Spitting, or sit as if they were Statues,
without Life or Sense, as not being Sensible of them; but read to them
something that they Understand, by their Brutish Nature, as Ribbaldry, a
VVanton Song or Scene, or the like, although there be neither Wit nor Sense in
it, and you shall hear them Loud with Laughter or Commendations, Swear all the
Oaths they never heard Better, and Cry up the Author for a mighty Wit; or show
them any Vain or Useless Art, and they will Admire it, if it be but a
Glass-ring, and will Wonder how it came to be Invented, and Admire the Inventor
for a Person of an Ingenious Brain; but if it be an Art that is Rare or
Profitable, they will Slight it, and cast their heads Aside, not out of Envy,
but Ignorance; wherefore, Madam, those that are well Qualified and VVitty, are
Admired but by by a Few, which is by the Wise and Knowing, and those Few are
Worth all the rest; for the Wise and Knowing, indeed, are all the World of
Mankind, the rest are but Mongrels, as Sensual Persons, viz. half Men, and half
Beasts, or Dull, Ignorant Persons, as half Men, and half Stones or Blocks, nay,
for the most part they are Three parts Beasts or Stones, and One part Men. Thus
amongst all Nature's Works True Men are the Scarcest, being the Rarest, as the
most Excellent Works in Nature. This is the reason that the most Excellent
Works of Nature are not Admired by the General Bulk, so as it is no wonder that
L. C. did not Esteem and Praise the Works of A. B. But, Madam, you have not
only Seen and Read them, but Approved and Praised them, which is a Sufficient
Reward to his Ingenious Wit, and an Honor to his Person, as also an Honor to
all those you think Worthy to Favor, of which I am One, although least Worthy,
but I will endeavor to make my self such a one, as you may not be Ashamed to
Acknowledge me,

Madam, Your faithful and humble Servant.

CX.
MADAM,
I Am Glad to hear the Lady U. S. and her Husband live so Happily, as only to
Themselves, and Love so well One Another, as seldom to be Sunder'd by Each
others Absence, and I am Glad that She and He are so Wise as not to be
persuaded from a Loving and Agreeable Course of Life. But I perceive by your
Letter, that their Neighbors and Acquaintance Endeavor by their Little and
Petty Flouts, Jeeres, and the like, to Disunite them, saying, the Husband was
Gentleman Usher to his Wife, and it was out of Fashion for a Husband to go
abroad with his Wife, and her Husband had greater Wealth than Birth, and was a
Plain man and no Gallant, and that a man of Humble Birth and Plain Breeding was
Despised and Scorned amongst Men of Title, and she had Lost the Place of her
Birth by Marriage; But I will Answer in her Behalf, as being my Friend, that as
she had better keep to an Old Fashion, which is Becoming, Easy and Commodious,
than follow a New, Vain and Mis-becoming Fashion, so it is more Seemly,
Graceful and Becoming, for a Wife to have her Husband always with her, to be
a Witness of her Honest Actions, than to give a Suspicion both to her Husband
and the World, as if she desired to be Absent from him and out of his Sight,
that she might take more Liberty to be Wanton; for none can Imagine, a Wife
will Abuse her Husband before his Face, as in his Sight, unless her Husband
were Mad, or Drunk, or an Idiot, as a Natural Fool, and she not only a Whore,
but an Impudent Whore; and for his Wealth being Greater than his Birth, it
shows, her Parents and Friends were Wise to Marry her to Plenty, for with
Poverty lives for the most part Discontent, and it shows, she was Dutiful and
Obedient to Accept of her Parents Choice rather than her Own; and shows her
self to be Wise, preferring Honesty before Vanity, a Plain-Behaviored man
before a Fantastical Fl^tterer; and as for Birth, what Title he wants by
Fortune, Favor and Time, Nature has given him the Title of Merit, which is
far beyond the Titles that Kings and Time give, for Outward Titles are far
Inferior to Inward Worth and Merit; and as for Place, Virtue and Merit take
the First and Best Place in Fame's Palace, though not at Gossipping-Meetings,
Vain Shows, and Expensive and Luxurious Feastings; and for that they say, no
Respect will be given to her Husband by or from men of Title, Place and
Authority, Solomon says, that the Husband of a Uirtuous and Chaste Wife sits
in the Gates amongst the Elders with Honor, so that his Merit and her Virtue
and Chastity will not only keep him from Scorn, but give him Honor, Esteem
and Respect, were he as Poor of Wealth, as Low in Birth; but having Wealth,
had he neither Inward Worth nor Outward Title, he would be Respected, for all
Bow down and Adore the Golden Calf or Image, and as Naturally Mankind loves
Gold and such like Wealth, so Naturally they Love Mischief, wherefore it is out
of Envy, that the Lady U. S s. Neighbors and Acquaintance Dispraise or
Undervalue her Husband, and his Birth and Breeding, and Laugh at their United
Associating, and not out of Love, for true Love Commends true Worth, and Honest
Unity: But as Women Envy Women for Beauty, Bravery, Courtships and Place, So
Men Envy Men for Power, Authority, Honor and Offices. Wherefore leaving the
Generality to Envy and Spite, and the Lady U. S. and her Husband to Love and
Happiness, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXI.
MADAM,
THE other Day the Lord N. N. arguing with others that were in Company, said,
he was of an Opinion that all the Stars were Suns, and that Every one of those
Suns had such Planets above and below them, like as the Sun has that gives
this Earth light; others said, that then those Planets would be Seen, he
Answered, they could not be Seen, for those Suns we call Fixed Stars were at
such a Distance as they appear but like Stars, and their Planets having but
Reflected Lights from those Suns could not be perceived, by reason Reflected
Lights are Faint and Dim in Comparison of Inherent Lights; also he was of an
Opinion, that there were Many Worlds, and that those Worlds were Unalterable
and Unchangeable, and therefore Eternal; Also he said, the several Kinds and
Sorts of Creatures in those Worlds, as Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, and
Elements were Eternal; but the Particulars of every Kind or Sort were
Transmigrable or Transformable; whereupon others in the Company said, it could
not be that those Worlds were Eternal, for if they were, then they had no
Beginning, and that could not be, by reason the World seemed to be Composed,
Made and Ordered by some Infinite Wisdom, causing such Method and Measures,
Proportions, Distinctions, Order, Exactness, Rule, Degrees and Decrees, all
which could not be without Design, and by Chance; N. N. said, that if the World
was Eternal, it was not made by Chance, for Chance proceeded from some
Alteration, or Change of some Motions, and not from Eternity, for Eternity was
not Subject to Chance, although Chance might be Subject to Eternity, and to
prove the World and Worlds were Eternal, he said, the Fundamental Frame, Parts,
Motions, and Form, were not Subject to Change, for they Continue One and the
Same without any Alteration. Thus, Madam, the Sages Discoursed, but they
perceiving I was very Attentive to their Discourse, they asked my Opinion, I
answered, they had left no Room for another Opinion, for the World was Eternal
or not Eternal, and they had given their Opinions of either side; then they
desired me to be a Judge between their Opinions, I said, such an Ignorant Woman
as I will be a very unfit Judge, and though you be both Learned, and VVitty
Men, yet you cannot Resolve the Question, it being impossible for a Small Part
to Understand or Conceive the Whole, and since neither you, nor all Mankind,
were they joined into one Soul, Body, or Brain, can possibly know whether the
World had a Beginning or No Beginning, or if it had, When it was Made, nor of
What it was Made, nor for What it was Made, nor what Power Made it, nor what
the Power is that Made it, nor whether it shall Last or Dissolve; wherefore
said I, the best is to leave this Discourse, and Discourse of some other
Subject that is more Sociable, as being more Conceivable: Then they Laughed,
and said they would Discourse of Women, I said, I did believe they would find
that Women were as Difficult to be Known and Understood as the Universe, but
yet I thought they would find them more Sociable, at which Expression they made
themselves very merry; but being my near Relative Friends, I took their Mirth
in good part, as I hope you will do this Long Letter, Knowing the Length of my
Letter is to Express my Obedience to your Commands, in which I shall prove my
self,

Madam, Your Faithful Servant.

CXII.
MADAM,
YOu writ in your last Letter, that I had given our Sex Courage and Confidence
to Write, and to Divulge what they Writ in Print; but give me leave humbly to
tell you, that it is no Commendation to give them Courage and Confidence, if I
cannot give them Wit. But, Madam, I observe, our Sex is more apt to Read than
to Write, and most commonly when any of our Sex does Write, they Write some
Devotions, or Romances, or Receipts of Medicines, for Cookery or Confectioners,
or Complemental Letters, or a Copy or two of Verses, all which seems rather as
Briefs than Volumes, which Express our Brief Wit in our Short Works, and to
Express my self according to the Wit of our Sex, I will end this Letter, only
give me leave to subscribe my self, as truly I am,

Madam, Your Ladyships faithful Servant.

CXIII.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you were pleased to tell me, you were invited to a
Meeting, where many Ladies and Gentlemen were, and amongst their several
Discourses, the Lady M. L. spoke of me, saying, I lived a Dull, Unprofitable,
Unhappy Life, Employing my time only in Building Castles in the Air. Indeed,
if I were of her Ladyships Humor, I should be Unhappy, but as I am, I would
not change the Course of my Life with her Ladyship, might I have the years of
Methusalem to boot; and as for the Minds Architecture, as Castles in the Air,
or Airy Castles, which are Poetical Conceptions, and Solitary Contemplations,
which produce Poems, Songs, Plays, Masks, Elegies, Epigrams, Anagrams, and the
like, they will be more lasting than Castles of Wood, Brick, or Stone, and
their Architecture, if well Designed and Built, will be more Famous, and their
Fame spread farther than those of Stone, viz. to the View and Prospect of
diverse Nations, if Translated into diverse Languages, whereas Castles of Timber,
Brick, or Stone, cannot be Removed nor Translated, if Built upon the Ground;
neither is the Minds Architecture and Castles subject to Ruin, as Castles of
Stone, which are subject to Time, Accidents, and the Rage of Wars, by which
they are Destroyed, or Moulder to Dust, and are Buried in Oblivion, whenas
Poetical Castles are set in Fames Palace; neither does the Building of Poetical
Castles Impoverish and Ruin the Builder's Families, as Corporeal Castles of
Timber, Brick, or Stone, for the most part do, VVasting their VVorldly Wealth
so much, as they leave nothing for their Posterity, but leave them to Poverty,
which Poverty forces them many times to Act Dishonourably, so that what Fame
they get by building Brave and Sumptuous Castles, Houses, Tombs, and the like,
they lose by their Childrens Base, Sharking, Cheating, Robbing, and Wicked
Actions; and so instead of Fame get Infamy; at best, those Builders are
accounted but Vain and Prodigal, whenas the Architecture of the Mind, which she
names Castles in the Air, give a Reputation, not only to the Building, but to
the Builder's Temporal Posterity; neither does the Builder need any other
Monument or Tomb, than his Own Airy Works, which, if Curiously Composed, and
Adorned with Fancies, Similitudes, Metaphors, and the like, and Carefully
Written and Printed, are more Glorious, Stately, and Durable, than Tombs or
Monuments of Marble, Costly Gilt, and Carved, nay, more Lasting than the Tomb
of Mausolus; for Homer's Works Live, and are Public to the View, whereas that
Famous Monument is Consumed, and only Mentioned there was such a thing, and
yet is was one of the Corporeal Wonders of the World; the like of the great
Colossus; and what is become of the Egyptian Pyramids? By this we see that
Poetical Castles are both Profitable and Lasting, and will be Remembered when
the Lady M. L. is Forgotten; but as much as she Slights Poetical Castles, she
would be well Pleased to have an Epigram made in her Commendation, and she will
Crowd hard, and Sit so Long in a Masking Room upon a Scaffold, as to be
Incommoded in her Seat, and Benumbed with Sitting to see a Mask, and she will
be at the Charge to give Money to See a Play, and will sit two or three hours as
a Spectator, and Weep, or Laugh, as the Poet pleases to have her; also she will
be as Amorous as any Lover the Poet can make. Indeed, the Poet does make her an
Amorous Lover, his Wit moves her Mind to Love and Courtships, or Loving
Courtships; but though she Delights in the Poets Works, yet she Dislikes the
Poets Life, and wants a Poets Wit to build Poetical Castles; and so leaving her
to her Little Wit, and Many Words, to her Gossiping-Life and her Light Heels, I
rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXIV.
MADAM,
IN your last you Expressed, that the Lord G. P. was totally Governed by one of
his Chief men, which shows the Man is the Master, and the Master the Servant;
But there are different Governings; for Subjects are Governed by Laws;
Children, by Natural Love and Fear; Servants by Profit, and Slaves by Force,
but Few are Governed by Reason, and as Few by Honor; also Many are Governed by
Flattery and Partiality, and More by Luxury, for the Sensual Appetites of the
Body have a more Forcible Power for the most part, than Reason and Temperance
has in the Soul, and the Noble Passions or Virtues of the Soul, are made
Slaves to the Base Appetites of the Body, sometimes by Force, but oftener by an
Insinuating Persuasion, and Pleasing Temptation, like as the Lord G. P. is
Ruled by his Flattering and Insinuating Servant, whereas the Appetites should
be but as Servants to be Governed, not Masters to Rule, and although they ought
to be Attended in their Sicknesses, Cherished and Nourished in their Weakness,
Employed in their Healthful Strength, yet they must be Corrected in their
Extravagancies, and Punished for their Disorders; But a Man of Honor, a
Gentleman, ought to be Free from them, as to have his Mind Free from the
Slavery of the Bodily Senses, or Sensual Appetites, as also from Outward
Accidents, Fortunes, or Objects, which is to have his Judgment, Understanding,
Opinion, Justice, Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, and the like, Free from
Partiality, and Enticing Persuasions; and to let Reason, Honor, and Honesty be
Judges, to Decide and Determine all Causes concerning the Actions of Life, for
though Outward Causes or Things must be made Judges or Governors of Reason,
Honor, and Honesty, yet Reason, Honor, and Honesty, must be Rulers and
Governors of Outward Causes and Things, which if they cannot Rule, they may
Condemn them, and if they cannot Punish them, they may choose to Employ them.
Thus men may be Masters and Princes of themselves, for it is Unfit, nay Base,
for a man of Honor, a Gentleman, either to be Led like a Slave, or to be
Driven like a Beast; But a man of Honor, a Gentleman, ought not to Refuse to
be Informed or Guided by Light and Truth, for which, Praise and Commendation,
Love and Respect will follow him, as his Lackies, and Attend and Wait upon him;
which Guides and Attendants I wish all men, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXV.
MADAM,
THe News here is, that there are many Towns and multitudes of People Drowned
in H. I cannot wonder at it, by reason they live Below Water, like Fishes,
only they do not Swim, so that one may say they are Housed-Fishes, or Fishes
in Sluices; indeed, they are Incircled, or Walled in with Water, and for my
part, I think it should be more secure to live in a Floating Boat, or Ship,
Upon the Water, as Rivers, or Seas, than in a Fixed House Under the Water, for
the Water in most Places is Above their Houses; But, though they live like
Fishes, for the Manner, or Matter of Water, yet they are not of the Temper of
Fishes, for the Matter, or Manner of Nature; for, as for Industry, they are
like Ants or Pismires, Prudently Provident, although not absolutely like them
in their Government, for their Government is betwixt a Republic and
Aristocracy. But by their Government and Industry, they do not appear to be
Cold and Stupid, but Hot and Active, they neither want Courage nor Strength,
Policy nor Industry, Wealth nor Jollity; they are as Happy, as yet, to all
Outward Appearance, as any Nation, nay Happier than most Nations are, for now
they live in Peace, only wanting Champain, or Firm Ground. Their Ships bring
them in all Commodities, that are either Useful, Profitable, or Delightful. And
as for their Wit, I do not know whether it be so Sharp and Quick as in Drier
Climats, yet they seem by their Government, to have as Sound Judgments, and
Clear Understanding, as any other Nation: Indeed, they seem to have the
Subtilty of the Serpent, the Craft of the Fox, the Strength of the Lion, the
Prudence of the Ant, the Sight of the Eagle, and the Wisdom of Rational Men;
wherefore I observe, that Men are not according to the Temper of Climats they
are Born and Bred in, but according to the Pleasure of Natures Will in
Creating, or according to Fortune, Chance, or Breeding, Informing, Conforming,
Reforming, Ordering or Disposing. But, Madam, I am not a fit Judge of Nations,
People, nor Numbers, being of the Female Sex, who are seldom made Judges, for
want of Judgment, and being Retired much to my own Thoughts, I want those
Observations that Traveling and Commercing Persons have, or may have, although
most Persons of either Sex are forward to give their Opinions, whether Wise or
Foolish, and are apt to Censure, whether Truly of Falsely, Generously or
Maliciously. But, Madam, lest you should Censure me to be a Tedious Writer, I
take my leave, and rest,

Madam, Your Ladyships faithful Friend and Servant.

CXVI.
MADAM,
HEre was the Lord W. N. to Visit me, whose Discourse, as you say, is like as a
pair of Billows to a Spark of Fire in a Chimney, where are Coals or Wood, for
as this Spark would sooner Go out than Inkindle the Fuel, if it were not Blown,
so his Discourse does set the Hearers Brain on a light Flame, which Heats the
Wit, and Inlightens the Understanding; the truth is, Great Wits might be
Thought, or Seem Fools, if they had not Wit to Discourse, but the Greatest Wits
that are, or ever were, cannot Discourse Wittily, unless they either Imagine,
or else have a Real Witty Opposite to Discourse Wittily to; like as those that
can Skilfully Fence, cannot Fence, unless they have an Opposite to Fence with;
or like as those that can Skilfully Play at Tennis, cannot Play, unless they
have a Skilful Opposite; they may Toss the Ball, but not Play a Game. The same
is in Conversation and Discourse; there is None can Discourse Well, VVisely,
or Wittily, but with Wise, and VVitty Opposites, otherwise their Discourse
will be Extravagant, and as it were, out of Time or Season: But the Lord W. Ns.
Wit is a VVell-season'd Wit, both for Reason, Time, and Company, to which I
leave him, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXVII.
MADAM,
THE other day, at Mrs. D. Us. house, I heard Harmonious, and Melodious Music,
both Instruments and Voices, but in my Opinion, there is no Music so Sweet,
and Powerful as Oratory, for Sweet Words are better than a Sweet Sound, and
when they are Joined together, it Ravishes the Soul; wherefore Lyrick Poetry
has Advantage of all other Poetry, because both Sound and Sense are
Harmonious, wherefore the Ancients had both their Heroic Poems, and Comedies,
and Tragedies, in Verse, and Tunes set to them, and Sung, both in their
Theaters of War and Peace, as in the Fields and Stages, the One raised up their
Spirits to Action, the Other caused more Attention. But, perchance you will
say, that Oratory is Elegant Prose, and not Elegant Verse. Certainly, there is
as much Oratory in Elegant Verse, as in Elegant Prose, for as Oratory, which
perchance some think only Eloquent Prose, moves Passion, and makes all the
Auditory to be of the Orators Opinion; so do Eloquent Verses: for who moves
Passions, as Love, Hate, Anger, Grief, Pity, Piety, and the like, more than
Poets? or who can Persuade more Powerfully than Poets? for so great a Power
have Poets in their Poetry, as to make the Minds of Men to believe Feignings
for Realities, and can there be better Orations, Arguments, and Disputations,
than in Homer, Virgil, and many other Poets Works? But Oratory in Prose and
Verse, is both to Move the Mind, and to Stir up the Spirits, as also to Quiet
the Mind, and to Allay the Spirits, only this Advantage Poets have over
Orators, that there is no Good, or Excellent Poet, but he Naturally is an
Orator, whereas there have been, and may be, very Good Orators, which are no
Good Poets; yet howsoever, both Eloquent Prose and Verse are Harmonious and
Delightful both to the Ears and Mind. And so leaving those Gifts to Natures
Favorites, and Times Practice, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXVIII.
MADAM,
I Do not VVonder, that some Persons which seem so Kind, as to be, as it were,
ready to deliver their Lives for the Sake of some others, they never Saw, nor
Knew, before their Kind Meeting, yet the Next time of Meeting, strive to
Affront those to whom they Made or Professed such Services, Love, and
Adventures, and if they should not endeavor to Affront them, yet will Look
upon them, or Pass by them, as if they had never Seen, or Spoken to them;
Neither do I wonder, that Others in Great Authority and Power, will Advance
Some Persons, when they have but a New Acquaintance, or rather, a Sight of
them, to Place and Office, and before they are Settled in their Offices,
Displace them again, without any Reason, or Knowledge, either of Advancing or
Displacing. Nor do I wonder, Others will be so in Love for two or three Days,
as they almost Sigh out their Breath of Life, for their Wished Desires, and a
Day or two after, Reproach, or Laugh at those they were so much in Love with,
as they Desired their Favor more than Heaven; All this, I say, I do not
VVonder at, Observing and Perceiving the Inconstant Natures of Mankind; But I
wonder to Perceive or Find any one to be Constant Seven Years, or One Year,
much more, to be Constant their Whole Life time; for Constancy is as Seldom or
Rarely Seen, as a Blazing Star; Indeed, Constancy in this World is somewhat
like a Blazing Star, it Lasts for a time, and then Goes out, for it is not as
the Fixed Stars, but rather as the Wandering Planets; though truly I am
constantly Fixed to be,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXIX.
MADAM,
I Give you many Thanks for your Counsel, and Advice concerning my Health, for
certainly an Over-studious Mind does Wast the Body, which is the Cause, for the
most part, that Painful Students are Lean, for the Mind Feeds as much upon the
Body, as the Body upon Meat; But truly, I am sometimes in a Dispute with my
self, whether it be better to live a Long and Idle, than a Short, but
Profitable Life, that is, to Employ a Little time Well, or to Wast a Great Deal
of Time to no Purpose; and I Conclude, that a Little Good is better than
Nothing, or better than a Sum of Evil; for it is better through Industry to
Leave a Little to After Age, than Die so Poor as to Leave Nothing, no not so
much as After Ages may say, there Lived such a one in Former Ages, than to Die,
and be quite Forgotten; and therefore should I live out the Course of Nature,
or could live so Long as Methusalem, when the Time were Past, it would seem as
Nothing, and perchance I should be as Unwilling to Die then, as if I Died in my
Youth, so that a Long, and a Short time of Life, is as one and the same; It Is
true, Death is Terrible to Think of, but in Death no Terror Remains; so as it
is Life that is Painful both to the Body and Mind, and not Death, for the Mind
in Life is Fearful, and the Body is seldom at Ease. But howsoever, I will
endeavor, Madam, so to Divide the time of my Bodily Life, as to Employ part of
my Time for Health, and part for Fame, and all for Gods Favor, and when I Die,
I will Bequeath my Soul to Heaven, my Fame to Time, and my Body to Earth, there
to be Dissolved and Transformed as Nature Pleases, for to her it belongs. I do
not much Care, nor Trouble my Thoughts to think where I shall be Buried, when
Dead, or into what part of the Earth I shall be Thrown; but if I could have my
Wish, I Would my Dust might be Inurned, and mixed with the Dust of those I Love
Best, although I think they would not Remain Long together, for I did observe,
that in this last War the Urns of the Dead were Dug up, their Dust
Dispersed, and their Bones Thrown about, and I suppose that in all Civil or
Home-wars such Inhuman Acts are Committed; wherefore it is but a Folly to be
Troubled and Concerned, where they shall be Buried, or for their Graves, or to
Bestow much Cost on their Tombs, since not only Time, but Wars will Ruin
them. But, Madam, lest I should make you Melancholy with Discoursing of so sad
Subjects as Death and Graves, Bones and Dust, I leave you to Livelier and
Pleasanter Thoughts and Conversation, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXX.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to tell me in your last Letter, that Many have desired your
Charity, which have been Ruined by these last Civil Wars, and that they, who
before this time were able to Relieve many with their Wealth, now do Want
Relief themselves; by which we may know, that neither Riches nor Peace is
Permanent; and many are not only Ruined in their Estates, and Banished their
Native Country, but Forsaken of their Friends, which is a terrible Misery; but
Misery and Friends seldom keep together, and it is to be observed, that a Civil
War does not only Abolish Laws, Dissolve Government, and Destroy the Plenty of
a Kingdom, but it does Unknit the Knot of Friendship, and Dissolve Natural
Affections, for in Civil War, Brothers against Brothers, Fathers against Sons,
and Sons against Fathers, become Enemies, and Spill each others Blood,
Triumphing on their Graves; for when a Kingdom is Inflamed with Civil War, the
Minds of all the People are in a Fever of Fury, or a Furious Fever of Cruelty,
which, by nothing but Letting Blood by the Surgeon of War, can be Cured, and
that not a Little, but Most must Bleed, ere there will be a Perfect Cure; It is
the Plague of the Mind, as well as the Plague of the Body, for the Minds of Men
are Infected with Covetous Desires, Ambitious Designs, Treacherous Plots, and
Murderous Intentions, and so General it is, that Few Minds escape the
Infection, which shows, it proceeds from the Malignity of the Air, or the
Influence of some Raging Planet, and if so, it proceeds from a Natural Cause,
although it be an Unnatural War; or else it proceeds from Unwise Government,
where many Errors gather into a Mass, or Tumor of Evil, which Rises into
Blisters of Discontents, and then Breaks out into Civil War; or else Heaven
sends it to Punish the Sins of the People. Besides, it is to be observed, that
Vices Increase in a Civil War, by reason Civil Government is in Disorder, Civil
Magistrates Corrupted, Civil Laws Abolished, Civil Manners, and Decent Customs
Banished, and in their Places is Rapine, Robbing, Stabbing, Treachery, and
Falsehood, all the Evil Passions and Debauched Appetites are let Loose, to take
their Liberty; But this is so commonly Known to those that have seen a Civil
War, as I should not have needed to Mention it, although those that have Lived
always in Peace will not Believe it, but I have Suffered so much in it, as the
Loss of some of my Nearest, and Dearest Friends, and the Ruin of those that did
Remain, that I may desire to Forget it. Wherefore leaving this sad Discourse, I
rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXI.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you were pleased to tell me, that the Lady E. E. and the
Lady A. A. are always Quarrelling with each other, when they Meet, and Rail on
each other, when they are Asunder, and their Husbands in the Behalf of their
Wives do the like; But I Wonder they should do so, whenas they are both in an
Unfortunate Condition, as being both Wives to Banished Men; and to make their
Condition more Unhappy, their Banishment is Joined with Poverty, which is a
Double, nay, to Live in Wars with Companions in the same Condition, a Treble
Misery. Neither is it Usual, for though Acquaintance, Neighbors, and Friends,
be apt to Quarrel, Rail, and Hate one another, in times of Prosperity, through
Envy and Pride, yet in Adversity Men are apt to Unite in Loving and Agreeable
Societies; But they have this Excuse, that their Misfortunes make them Froward;
and truly, great Misfortunes make us apt to Quarrel with our selves, for
Patience and Misery seldom Dwell together. But leaving the two Ladies to Agree,
I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

CXXII.
MADAM,
I Cannot Blame you, if you cannot Entertain those of your own Sex in
Conversation, as to Please them with such Discourse as is according to their
Humors and Capacities, for if your Discourse be according to your own Capacity
and Wit, you must Discourse to your self, for such Discourse is beyond their
Understanding; but if you will Entertain them with Conversation, you must
Descend from your own Height, and Discourse with them on Even Ground, which is,
you must Speak as Foolishly as they do: the Question only will be, whether you
can do so, or not? Another Help there is, as I have heard from one of our Sex,
who had a Good Wit, and Loved not Gossiping, when she had any Female Visitors,
she, after a little time, would fall to Brag of her self, and tell what Fine
things she would have, or had, whereat they became Inwardly Spiteful or Angry,
and then would soon take their Leaves and be Gone; But whether you will use
this Remedy or not, I cannot tell, for I believe it is against your Nature; yet
you must either use this Remedy, or else you must learn to Gossip, and to
Entertain Gossips, although I believe you will be but a Dull, Untoward Scholar
to Learn; But the best Tutoress I know of, if you will Learn, is, Mrs. T.W. and
if you cannot Civilly Deny Visitors, you must use the Lady M. Ns. Bragging
Medicine, or Mrs. T. Ws. Instructions, to which Instruction or Medicine I leave
you, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXIII.
MADAM,
I Wonder how that Person you mention in your Letter, could either have the
Conscience, or Confidence to Dispraise Shakespeare's Plays, as to say they were
made up only with Clowns, Fools, Watchmen, and the like; But to Answer that
Person, though Shakespeare's Wit will Answer for himself, I say, that it seems
by his Judging, or Censuring, he Understands not Plays, or Wit; for to
Express Properly, Rightly, Usually, and Naturally, a Clown's, or Fool's Humor,
Expressions, Phrases, Garbs, Manners, Actions, Words, and Course of Life, is
as VVitty, Wise, Judicious, Ingenious, and Observing, as to Write and Express
the Expressions, Phrases, Garbs, Manners, Actions, Words, and Course of Life,
of Kings and Princes; and to Express Naturally, to the Life, a Mean Country
Wench, as a Great Lady, a Courtesan, as a Chaste Woman, a Mad man, as a Man in
his right Reason and Senses, a Drunkard, as a Sober man, a Knave, as an Honest
man, and so a Clown, as a VVell-bred man, and a Fool, as a Wise man; nay, it
Expresses and Declares a Greater Wit, to Express, and Deliver to Posterity, the
Extravagancies of Madness, the Subtilty of Knaves, the Ignorance of Clowns, and
the Simplicity of Naturals, or the Craft of Feigned Fools, than to Express
Regularities, Plain Honesty, Courtly Garbs, or Sensible Discourses, for it is
harder to Express Nonsense than Sense, and Ordinary Conversations, than that
which is Unusual; and it is Harder, and Requires more Wit to Express a Jester,
than a Grave Statesman; yet Shakespeare did not want Wit, to Express to the Life
all Sorts of Persons, of what Quality, Profession, Degree, Breeding, or Birth
soever; nor did he want Wit to Express the Diverse, and Different Humors, or
Natures, or Several Passions in Mankind; and so Well he has Expressed in his
Plays all Sorts of Persons, as one would think he had been Transformed into
every one of those Persons he has Described; and as sometimes one would think
he was Really himself the Clown or Jester he Feigns, so one would think, he was
also the King, and Privy Counselor; also as one would think he were Really the
Coward he Feigns, so one would think he were the most Valiant, and Experienced
Soldier; Who would not think he had been such a man as his Sir John Falstaff?
and who would not think he had been Harry the Fifth? and certainly Julius
Caesar, Augustus Caesar, and Antonius, did never Really Act their parts Better,
if so Well, as he has Described them, and I believe that Antonius and Brutus
did not Speak Better to the People, than he has Feigned them; nay, one would
think that he had been Metamorphosed from a Man to a Woman, for who could
Describe Cleopatra Better than he has done, and many other Females of his own
Creating, as Nan Page, Mrs. Page, Mrs. Ford, the Doctors Maid, Bettrice, Mrs.
Quickly, Doll Tearsheet, and others, too many to Relate? and in his Tragic
Vein, he Presents Passions so Naturally, and Misfortunes so Probably, as he
Peirces the Souls of his Readers with such a True Sense and Feeling thereof,
that it Forces Tears through their Eyes, and almost Persuades them, they are
Really Actors, or at least Present at those Tragedies. Who would not Swear he
had been a Noble Lover, that could Woo so well? and there is not any person he
has Described in his Book, but his Readers might think they were Well
acquainted with them; indeed Shakespeare had a Clear Judgment, a Quick Wit, a
Spreading Fancy, a Subtle Observation, a Deep Apprehension, and a most Eloquent
Elocution; truly, he was a Natural Orator, as well as a Natural Poet, and he
was not an Orator to Speak Well only on some Subjects, as Lawyers, who can
make Eloquent Orations at the Bar, and Plead Subtly and VVittily in
Law-Cases, or Divines, that can Preach Eloquent Sermons, or Dispute Subtly
and VVittily in Theology, but take them from that, and put them to other
Subjects, and they will be to seek; but Shakespeare's Wit and Eloquence was
General, for, and upon all Subjects, he rather wanted Subjects for his Wit and
Eloquence to Work on, for which he was Forced to take some of his Plots out of
History, where he only took the Bare Designs, the Wit and Language being all
his Own; and so much he had above others, that those, who Writ after him, were
Forced to Borrow of him, or rather to Steal from him; I could mention Diverse
Places, that others of our Famous Poets have Borrowed, or Stolen, but lest I
should Discover the Persons, I will not Mention the Places, or Parts, but leave
it to those that Read his Plays, and others, to find them out. I should not
have needed to Write this to you, for his Works would have Declared the same
Truth: But I believe, those that Dispraised his Plays, Dispraised them more
out of Envy, than Simplicity or Ignorance, for those that could Read his
Plays, could not be so Foolish to Condemn them, only the Excellency of them
caused an Envy to them. By this we may perceive, Envy does not Leave a man in
the Grave, it Follows him after Death, unless a man be Buried in Oblivion, but
if he Leave any thing to be Remembered, Envy and Malice will be still throwing
Aspersion upon it, or striving to Pull it down by Detraction. But leaving
Shakespeare's Works to their own Defense, and his Detractors to their Envy, and
you to your better Employments, than Reading my Letter, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

CXXIV.
MADAM,
THough I am not Acquainted with my Neighbors, yet I Hear of them sometimes,
and I Know some by Sight, going sometimes Abroad; But one of them is Notedly
Jealous of her Husband, the rest, if they be Jealous, it is not so Publicly
Known as this Lady is; whether it be only her Humor, or her Husband's
Inconstancy, or both, I know not; she is a Proper, Handsome Woman, and, if the
Humors and Conditions of her Mind be Answerable to the Beauty of her Person,
her Husband has no Reason to Seek Abroad, having such a Wife, neither has she
reason to have such an Ill Opinion of her self, as to believe her Husband
should be Weary of her, especially so soon after Marriage, for she has not
been Married above two Years, though perchance some may account, or think Two
Years Twenty Years in Marriage; But this Lady is so Jealous, that she believes
her Husband makes Love to the Greatest Beauties in the City, and that they
Receive her Husbands Addresses; Amongst the rest of those, was one of my
Waiting-maids, who indeed is very Handsome, and I believe, as Honest, as
Handsome; but to tell you, there is an Unfortunate Window, and a Door, (I can
only say, they are so to the Wife) this Window looks out of her House into our
Garden, and the Door Belongs to our Garden, but Opens into this Man's Garden,
which Door is Nailed close up, but out of the VVindow her Husband, it seems,
would Look sometimes, and Spy if he could see my Maids VValking, who many
times in the Morning did Walk there for their Health; also in the Door was a
little Hole, as they tell me, for I had not Observed it, which Hole he would
fill full of Flowers, which they did use to Pull out, not knowing who put them
there; but his Wife hearing of it, was in an Extraordinary Passion, as it
seemed, with her Husband, and such a Falling out they had, as they were upon
Parting, whereupon she sent a Divine to my Husband, to Complain of her Husband,
my Maid, and the Door, Desiring, the Hole of the Door should be Stopped up; My
Husband said, if there were any such Hole, he would give order it should be
Stopped, and if that would not Satisfy her, the Door should be Taken away, and
the Passage VVall'd up, and as for his Wife's Maids, he could not say any
thing, for he never meddled with them, but would tell his Wife; so the Hole of
the Door being Closed, she was Indifferently well Satisfied with that, although
not with her Husband, for he and she, it was said, Lived as Enemies, not as
Friends in Matrimony; But she hearing other Reports, (for when her Humor was
Known, her Neighbors took delight to Vex her, it being the Nature of Mankind
to Add Discontent upon Discontent, and Affliction on Affliction, being never
better Pleased than when Doing, or Speaking Ill, to some or others
Disadvantage) after some Six Weeks, sent a Letter to my Husband, wherein, after
some Complements, she made great Complaints of her Husband, and Named which of
my Maids she was Jealous of, saying, she had received Presents from her
Husband, as Sweetmeats, and Linen, and a great many words of I know not what,
neither can I remember them, though I heard the Letter read, for being in
another Language, I could not read it my self, but my Husband did read it to
me; and when he had read it, Now, says he, what say you to this Letter? Truly,
said I, I am of the Opinion, she would be Courted by some other than her
Husband, since he leaves Courting of her, and Addresses himself to others;
next, I am of the Opinion, she would have all her Neighbors Wives, or at least
some, and my self particularly, as Jealous as her self, otherwise she would
never have Written to you, but to me, especially in a Case concerning the
Women in my House, and if I were of her Jealous Humor, I should Write to her
Husband, how his Wife Writ a Letter to my Husband, Aggravating, (for Jealousy
is always Adding and Aggravating) that you two held a Correspondence by
Letters, and for any thing I knew, had Private Meetings, but being not Jealous,
I Approve of her choice of VVriting to you, wherefore send for her she Accuses,
and Examine her. Truly, not I, said my Husband, I am no Confessor, though I
believe Confessors take great Pleasure in Young Maids Confessions, so my
Husband caused me to Examine my Maid, whether she had received any Presents from
C. K. she said, she never received any from him in her Life, nor had she any
Acquaintance with him, but by Sight, as she had of most of the Town, seeing
them in the Streets; but, said she, I believe these Sweetmeats, and Linen she
mentions in her Letter, is a Handkerchief with Sweetmeats, for the Weather
being Hot, we usually have our Chamber Windows open, until we go to Bed, and my
Chamber-fellow and I, as we were Undressing us one Night, there was flung into
the Window a Lawn, Buttoned Handkerchief, tied up on two or three knots, with
Sweetmeats in them; at the first we were Affrighted, to see a white Bulk come
Flying, as we thought, into the Chamber, and Falling with a Noise upon the
Ground; but at last we took it up, and found it was a Handkerchief full of
Sweetmeats; at first, we Resolved to fling it back, but then we Considered, we
had best Call out of the Window, and Ask who it was that flung them in, so we
Called, but No body would Answer, and then we thought, that if we flung them
out again, they would be taken up by some Stranger; and you were willing, said
I, to Keep, and Eat them, you made so many Doubts? indeed, Madam, said she, we
did Eat them soon after, but we knew not what to do with the Handkerchief, not
knowing the Owner, yet we were Resolved to Ask of all our Acquaintance, if any
would Own the Handkerchief; and making Inquiry for the Owner, one of our
Acquaintance told us, a Fortnight after, it was C. Ks. which when we Knew, we
Durst not Send it to him, for Fear of his Wife, neither Durst we Give, or Fling
it away, lest he should Desire it again, and this, upon the Salvation of my
Soul, said she, is all the Linen, or Sweetmeats we ever had of him; neither
did we know they were his, until a Fortnight after. Now, if she should have
been Judged by the Letter, without any Examination, she might have been
Condemned for a Criminal, whereas her own Confession, and other Witnesses, set
her Free; but Jealousy and Suspicion, for the most part, are False Accusers,
and Cruel Judges. By this we see how Unquiet and Restless some Married Persons
are, being always Tortured with their own Thoughts, and their Minds are Racked
on the Wheels of Suspicion. But my Husband sent for the Divine that formerly
came from her, and told him of her Letter, and of my Maids Confession, and that
she had no Cause to be Jealous of her, for she was very Virtuous, neither had
she any Acquaintance with her Husband. So the Divine went between, and between,
not to bring Unlawful Lovers together, for he was a very Worthy, and Wise man,
but to Pacify a Disquiet Mind, and to make Love and Unity between an Husband
and his Wife. And so leaving them to Agree, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXV.
MADAM,
I Cannot Blame you, if you were in a Passion, as in your Letter you Express
you were, for there is nothing so apt to Inkindle an Anger in my Mind, or to
Inflame my Spirits, than to receive a Contumely from my Superiors, or a Rude
Boldness from my Inferiors, unless Cold Discretion, and Fluent Prudence could
Quench those Flaming Spirits into an Unactive, and Dead Patience; When I say
Superiors, I mean, Superiors for Outward Title, and not for Inward VVorth.
But you must Consider, Madam, that Bold Rudeness, or Negligent Contumely,
proceeds from Ignorance or Envy, as either Ignorant of Civil Manners, being a
Kin to the Brutes; or Envious, having no VVorth or Merit in themselves, and if
you call your Reason to Counsel, and your Judgment to Decide the Cause, those
would let them pass, as Inconsiderable, and not to be Regarded; for Reason and
Judgment will never regard the Braying of an Ass, the Barking of a Dog, the
Buzzing of a Fly, an Idle Drone, the Speech of a Fool, the Follies of a Knave,
nor the Envy of the Base; But, Madam, your Worth and Merit is so Transcendent,
as the Tongue of Malice, nor the Eye of Envy, can never Reach to, no more than
the Blind can See the Light of the Sun, or the Dumb Teach the Truth of
Knowledge; and I am Happy in Knowing that I am,

Madam, Your Humble and Devoted Servant.

CXXVI.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you were Pleased to tell me, that the Works of W. T. were
so much Admired, as many were Desirous to See the Author, and Hear him Speak,
but after they had Seen, and Heard him, they did not Admire his Works so much
as they did before, so as it seems, they did Esteem the Works the Less for the
Author, and not the Author the More for his Works; which in my Opinion is
Unjust, and a sign they either have not Read the Scripture, or not Believed
what there is Written, viz. That a Man is Known by his Works; and we Admire the
Creator Through and By his Works; but the Foolish part of the World, which is
the Most part, thinks that a Man's Learning, or Wit, or Ingenuity, is Printed
in his Face, and Expects he should Speak beyond the Invention of Words, and
such high Raptures as they could not Understand. Indeed, so Foolish are Most,
especially Women, as when they see a Famous, Learned Man, or Witty Poet, or the
like, they will straight say, Lord! Is this the Learned Man that is so Famous,
that Writ such and such Books? how Simply he Looks; or, Is this the Famous Poet
that Writ such Poems, Scenes, and Songs? how Sneakingly he Appears, says
another, I heard no Wit from him, but he Spoke as other men Ordinailry do: But
all such Famous Men, if they would not have their Works the Less Esteemed for
their Presence and Ordinary Conversation, and would be Admired by the Most,
which are the Ignorant, must put on a Constrained Garb, and Speak some
Gibbrigge that sounds not like a Perfect Language, or some ways they must
Speak that they Understand not, and then they shall be Admired, both for their
Conversation and Contemplation, which are their Works; or they must Incloister
themselves from the View of the World; for the World of Mankind is apt to
Despise that which they Know, or have Seen, and only Admire that which they
Understand not. But I have Spoken of this Subject in an Epistle before my Book
of Plays; wherefore I shall not Trouble you with any more Discourse thereon,
but rest,

Madam, Your very Faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXVII.
MADAM,
I May not Discommend the Old Historical, or Heroic Poets, for if I should, I
should be Condemned for a Fool, as not having neither Judgment nor
Understanding, yet I may say, my Reason believes they Writ Unreasonably, not
only of their Feigned Gods, but of their Feigned Fights, and of their Feigned
Fortunes or Successes; The truth is, they are for the most part Romances,
containing more Lies than Truth, more Impossibilities than Probabilities, for
though Feigning is the Ground of Poetry, yet, methinks, such kind of Poetry
should not have such kind of Feignings, for to Reason it can neither be
Pleasant nor Profitable, for Reason takes Delight in Probabilities, not in
Impossibilities, for though the Ground or Subject of an Heroical Story, or
Poem, may be Feigning, yet the several Actions should be Natural, not beyond
the Power of Men, nor Unusual to their Practice; neither can it be Profitable,
for what cannot be Practiced, cannot be Imitated; the Way of VVriting may be
Imitated, but not the Actions; for what One man can Disorder, or Rout an Army,
with his Single Strength or Courage? nay, what One man can Disorder, or Rout a
Brigade, nay, a Company of an Hundred? The truth is, a Hundred to One is too
great Odds to Encounter, and too Many for One man to Overcome; neither can I
believe, a Hundred men should be so Afraid of One man, were he as Big, and as
Strong as Goliath, so as to Run away, unless they did apprehend he had
Followers; but yet when I remember the Story of Sampson, I Dare not say, it
Cannot be, but I Dare say, it cannot be without a Miracle, wherefore most of
the Heroic Poets make their chief Heroes to have the Assistance of particular
Gods and Goddesses, so as to Empower them above the Effects of Nature; but of
all the Heroic Poems I have read, I like Sir W. Ds. as being Most, and Nearest
to the Natures, Humors, Actions, Practice, Designs, Effects, Faculties, and
Natural Powers, and Abilities of Men or Human Life, containing no
Impossibilities or Improbabilities: Indeed, such an Heroic Poem it is, that
there cannot be found any Fault therein, unless he seemed to have too much Care
or Pains taken in the Expression of his Descriptions, for the Language is like
so Curious and Finely Engraven a Seal, as one cannot readily see the Figure
Engraven therein, without a Magnifying glass, or like as many several Figures,
so Curiously Cut, as to be all in the Compass of a Cherry-stone, wherein they
cannot be Distinguished, without often Perusal, and Strict Examination, and
Quick and Ready Sight; But had the Language been as Easy, as Fine, and had not
those Choice Expressions been so Closely Compact, but were as Usual, as his
Descriptions are Natural, certainly it had been a President for all Heroic
Poems; indeed, his Language or Expressions of his Descriptions are like Gold
that is too Pure and Fine to be Wrought, and wants some Allay to make it Proper
and Fit for Use; The Truth is, very Spruce Language, or Extraordinary Choice
Phrases, take off the Pleasure of the Reader, being rather Tedious than
Delightful, whereas Extraordinary, and Courtly Expressions, and Choice, and
Nice Phrases, are to be Highly Commended, in comparison of Clownish, and Rude
Expressions or Phrases, such as are in Homer, I know not whether they be so in
the Original, surely in the Translation they are in many Places, where not
only the Men Speak Rude and Clownish, but he makes the Gods to Speak so too.
Wherefore, for my part, I had rather read Sir W. Ds. Work ten times, than Homer
twice, as he is Translated. But I Will leave off Judging of such Master-Poets as
my Pupil-aged Wit cannot Understand, for should I live to Methusalem's Age, my
Wit would be but a Novice, my Judgment an Ignorant Fool, and my Opinions
Erroneous, for Women are neither fit to be Judges, Tutors, nor Disputers,
neither are we fit to be Commanders, or Rulers, we are always fitter to Learn
than to Teach, and in a Condition rather to Obey than to Command, apter to
Dispute than to Confute, to Prate than to Preach. And so leaving to write more
for this time, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXVIII.
MADAM,
I Should take it for a Favor, if you would be Pleased to send me that
New-fashion'd Garment you mentioned in your last Letter, not that I think to
make use of the Fashion, for I take more Pleasure to Devise a Fashion than to
Follow it, but only to Satisfy my Curiosity, I would see it, whether it be a
Fashion for Use, or Ease, or Becoming, or for Grandeur; for Fashions of Use are
for the several Seasons of the Year, as also for several Actions, for those
Fashions that are Proper for Dancing, are not Proper for Riding; as for
Example, Pumps are of no Use a Horseback, nor Boots, nor Spurs in a Galliard,
or Courant, unless it were to Tear the Ladies Gown the man Dances withal, for
he cannot well cut a Caper in a pair of Boots and Spurs, nor a Horseman Spur a
Horse with a pair of Pumps, but Spurs would be as Hawks Bells in Dancing,
especially if they were Gingling Spurs; yet men either Riding a Horseback, or
Dancing on a Carpet, might wear Feathers in their Hats, for the Head is not
Employed so much in those Actions as the Heels, only a Feather is a Fashion of
no Use, but merely for Grace and Becoming. Many other Fashions I could Repeat
for Use, and Action, but it were too Tedious. As for the Fashions for the
Seasons of the Year, In Winter, Sable Skins, or meaner Fur, to Wear about the
Neck, and Muffs, are both Graceful and Useful, as to keep one from Cold; and
for Summer, Fans, to Cool the Sultry Heat, and to Shadow the Face from the Sun,
who seems to be an Enemy to Beauty, and strives to Burn it off, wherefore it
may be thought Envious; Such, and many other several Fashions there are,
according to the several Seasons of the Year. Besides, there are Fashions for
Ease, which Religious persons Use, as only a Loose Garment, tied Loosly about
their Wast, wherein is neither much Curiosity in Making, nor Labor in
Dressing, nor Pain in Wearing, it is Quickly Put on, and as Quickly Pulled off,
a Garment fit for a Solitary, and Studious Life, wherein must be no
Encumbrances on the Body, to Obstruct, or Hinder the Contemplations of the
Mind; Also there be Fashions of Grandeur, which are more for Grace, and
Becoming, than for Ease, or Use, as Gowns with Long Trains, Straight Bodies,
Heavy Imbroyderies and Laces, Jewels in the Ears, and many the like, High
Heel'd Shoes, Boot-hoses, Feathers, Roses, Hatbands, and many more, which are
Requisite for Grace and Becoming. Again, there are Fashions to Distinguish
Persons, as to know a Priest, a Lawyer, a Mayor and his Aldermen, a Constable,
and many other several Professions and Officers; and thus there should also be
Degrees to Distinguish the Nobles from the Commons, but the Commons have
Incroch'd so much upon the Nobles Prerogative of Fashions, as all Fashions are
Common amongst them: also there are Fashions for Times of Mirth, and Fashions
for Times of Mourning, for Public Meetings and Nuptials, as also for weeping
Funerals; But Fashions of Grandeur are fit only for Courts, at Masks, Plays,
Balls, and Triumphant Shows; Fashions of Cavalry are proper for the Field in
time of War, as for Commanders or Generals; Fashions of Distinguishments are
fit for Cities, as for Magistrates, Officers, Professions, Trades, and the
like; Fashions of Ease are fittest for Cloisters, and a Private Country Life;
and Fashions of Use are fit for all Sorts, Degrees, Professions or Qualities;
But Fashions that are neither Useful, Easy, Proper, Becoming, nor Graceful,
ought to be Banished, if any such there be. But, Madam, I shall Discourse so
long of Fashions, as I shall Forget your Patience, and make you so Angry as to
fling this Letter into the Fire, and so Burn all the Garmental Fashions in my
Letter, where if all Fashions could be as Easily Consumed as my Letter, you
would leave the world of Mankind Naked, unless they would Cloth themselves with
Beasts Skins, or Fig Leaves, which would soon become a Fashion too, if once
worn: wherefore lest I should be stripped of your Favor, I will leave the
Repetition of Fashions, and rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXIX.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to tell me in your last Letter, that you had spent most of
the Mornning in Reading a New Work, which is highly Commended, viz. Paraphrases
on the Life of some of the Holy Prophets and Kings: I cannot say, but it may be
Pleasing to Read, but I doubt whether it will be Well to Write it; for
whosoever does Heighten the Sacred Scriptures, by Poetical Expressions, does
Translate it to the Nature of a Romance, for the Ground of a Romance is for the
most part Truth, but upon those Truths are Feignings built; and certainly the
Scripture and Feignings ought not to be Mixed together, for so Holy a Truth
ought not to be Expressed Fabulously; wherefore in my Opinion no Subject is so
Unfit for Poetical Fancies, as the Scripture, for though Poetry is Divine, yet
it ought not to Obstruct and Obscure the Truth of Sacred Historical Prose. It Is
true, Divine Poetical Raptures, such as David's Psalms, are Commendable and
Admirable, being an Effect of a Devout Soul, and Zealous Spirit, which Flames
into Poetical Raptures, and is Inspired with a Divine Influence, Delivering it
self through Harmonious Numbers, Sympathetical Rithmes, Elegant Phrases, and
Eloquent Language, all which is Presented to God from the Heart, as an
Offering, or Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, or an Imploring of Mercy, or an Humble
Acknowledgment of sins, and Promise of Amendment, which Sacred Poems are
Expressed in a Tragic Vein concerning Sins, and in a Comic Vein concerning
Blessings, and Poets in their Morning Hymns are like the Larks that Begin the
Day, and in their Evening Hymns like the Nightingals which Begin the Night.
Thus Divine Poets are Heaven's Birds, that Sing to God, and their Divine Poems
are their Brood, which are kept in the Cage of Memory, and Sing their Parents
Notes to After Ages. But, Madam, perchance you will think I am very Peremptory,
to give my Opinion of the Poets Work before I see it; but I give my Opinion
only upon the Ground of his Work, which is the Scripture, saying, it ought not
to be Paraphrased, besides, I give it from my Conscience, not from my Conceited
Brain, and perchance I may alter my Opinion, upon more Rational Arguments from
those that are more Learned and Knowing than my self, and if your Opinion
Differs from mine, pray send it me in your next Letter, for I would willingly
be of your Opinion, believing you cannot Err, nor I in Expressing my self,

Madam, Your very Faithful Friend and Devoted Servant.

CXXX.
MADAM,
HEre is the Lady V. R. in this City, who is so Strict to Chaste Wedlock, and so
Fearful of Dishonor or Scandal, as she will have no Usual Conversation with
any Man, but those she is nearly Allied to, or has an Obligation to of Duty or
Gratitude; Nay, she is not only Chaste, but her Life and all her Actions are
Devoted to Chaste Wedlocks, the truth is, She lives as if she were an
Incloister'd Nun, although a Wife, and her Husband is her only Confessor and
Instructor, or rather her Saint, whom she Adores, and Worships, and Prays to,
to Pardon her Sins of Omission, (for of Sins of Commission she is not Guilty,
unless to Omit be to Commit;) and the greatest Sin of Omission is the Neglect
of her Health, which he accounts as a Deadly Sin, and will hardly Pardon unless
she Reform; but although she promises Amendment, as all Penitents do, yet as
soon as she has Promised, she Commits the same Sin again, so as the best part
of her Life is, as it were, Spent in Promises, but not in Performance: And when
she is Sick, she does like the man that was in a Storm, who in the time of
Danger promised the Blessed Virgin Mary, to Offer to her Altar Candle as Big
and as Long as the Mast of the Ship, if ever he came on the Shore; so the Lady
V. R. when she is Sick, promises, if ever she Recover, she will Take the Air,
and Use Exercises, but being Restored to Health, she Forgets her Promise, or
only Looks out of a Window for Once or Twice, and Walks Two or Three turns in a
day in her Chamber, which is as little Exercise as she can do, the truth is,
she Errs as much in living too much a Retired Life, as other Ladies in too Much
and Often Gadding Abroad, wherein she loses as much Health, as they Time, if
not Reputation; But leaving her to her Retired Life and Promising Words, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXXI.
MADAM,
YOu desired me to send you the Sixteen Books I Writ in my Childhood, methinks
they sound like the Twelve Labors of Hercules, only that there are Four
Labors more; but though mine were not so Profitable to the World, nor so
Difficult to Atchieve, nor so Dangerous in their Encounters, yet you will find
my Works like Infinite Nature, that has neither Beginning nor End, and as
Confused as the Chaos, wherein is neither Method nor Order, but all Mixed
together without Separation, like Evening Light and Darkness, so in my Sixteen
Books is Sense and No Sense, Knowledge and Ignorance Mingled together, so that
you will not know what to make of it; or in a Lower Comparison, you will find
every Book like a Frippery, or Brokers-shop, wherein is nothing but Remnants,
Bits and Ends of Several things, or like Tailors Shreds, that are not fit for
any Use; wherefore I cannot Imagine why you should Desire them, unless out of a
Friendship, you will See, and Burn them before I Die, fearing I should Neglect
the Sacrificing of them my self, for you are Pleased not only to send for One,
but all the Sixteen. But, I suppose, you believe them to be so many several
sheets of Paper folded into Quarters, or Half Quarters, as into little
Baby-books, for it was in my Baby-years I Writ them, and it had been well they
had been no Bigger than Baby-Books, but the least of these Books are two or the
Quires of Paper; Neither can you Read them when you have them, unless you have
the Art, or Gift to Read Unknown Letters, for the Letters are not only
Unlegible, but each Letter stands so Cowardly from the other, as all the Lines
of your Sight cannot Draw, or Bring them into Words, nay, they will sooner be
Torn in pieces; besides, it will Weary your Eyesight to Move from Letter to
Letter, it will be almost as great a Journey for your Eyes, as it was for
Coriat's Feet, that Traveled a Foot to Mogorr, I know not whether his Journey
Lamed them, but certainly it Tired them: so will my Books do your Eyes, if they
do not quite Blind them, I cannot say, in Reading them, but Endeavoring to
Read Scribbles for Letters. Moreover, there are such huge Blots, as I may
Similize them to Broad Seas, or Vast Mountains, which in a Similizing Line will
Tire your Eyes to Spread to the Circumference, like as for the Feet to Walk to
the Top of the Alps; Also there are Long, Hard Scratches, which will be as Bad
for your Eyes, as Long, Stony Lanes would be to your Feet; wherefore let me
persuade you as your Friend, not Desperately to Venture to Read them, since you
can neither receive Profit nor Pleasure in the Labor; were there any
Probability to Increase your Knowledge, or to Enrich your Understanding, you
had some reason to Venture, but you will be so far from Increasing your
Knowledge, as you will enter into a vast Wilderness, and Intricate Labyrinth,
wherein you will Lose your Patience, and be so far from Enriching your
Understanding, as you will Impoverish your present Memory; and let me tell you,
that my Sixteen Books will be as Tedious, Troublesome, and Dangerous, to your
Understanding, as the Dry, Deep, Sandy, Barren Deserts of Arabia to Travelers,
and so thick a Mist of Nonsense, and Clouds of Ignorance will fly in the face
of your Understanding, that it will not only Blind it, but be apt to Smother
it, not otherwise than the Clouds, or Hills of Sand, that Fly, and Blind, and
sometimes Choke those that pass through those Deserts. But if no Persuasion
will Alter you, but you are Resolved to See them, send me word in your nest
Letter, and I will send them to you, although much against the will of

Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXXII.
MADAM,
THe Lady S.K. Presents her Service to you; Truly she is not Well, although not
so Sick, as Forced to keep her Bed; I know not how to Judge of her Disease, for
she is both Lean and Fat, like as the Idol mentioned in the Holy Scripture,
which was partly Clay, partly Stone, and partly Metal, only, as I remember,
its Feet and Legs were made of Clay, whereas her Feet and Legs are all Bone,
for they are so Wasted, as they have no Flesh on them, but her Hips, Body, and
Breast are so Fleshy, and Fat, as one may think she had no Bones, by reason
none can be Seen, or Felt; and her Arms, Hands, Neck, and Face are so Pale and
Lean, that they appear White as Silver, and for want of Blood and Flesh, they
are so Dry, as they are so Rough as Unpolished Stone, and with her Sickness she
is become so Melancholy as she appears like a Dead Image, or Senseless Idol;
but her Real Virtue, and Noble Soul, and Honorable Life, has made her more
Worthy of Human Worship, than the Signifying forementioned Idol, or Image, his
Idolatrous, Divine Worship, and she is more Worthy to be set up on an Altar of
Fame, than such Idols on an Altar of Religion, and to have Praises, though not
Prayers, Offered to her. Thus she may be Worshipped as a Goddess, without
Superstitious Idolatry, and have Virtuous Devouts; but yet she desires she may
have the best Doctors Advice for her Health, wherefore she Entreats you to send
her the most Renowned Doctors of Physic that are in your City, she will not
spare Cost, if they have Skill, but Pay them for their Advice; for Doctors sell
their Knowledge, and Patients Buy Healths, and their Knowledge is a
Staple-Commodity, for the more Knowledge Doctors of Physic sell, the more
Knowledge they get for Experience of Diseases; and so all things come in more by
Practice than by Study, and Health gains more by Temperance, Exercise, and Air,
than by Physic; And so Adding my Prayers to her Temperance, the Doctors Skill,
and Physic, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXXIII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to tell me the Complaints of Mrs. W. A. concerning the
Incivilities of Sir A. M. she is not to be Pitied, since it was her own Fault,
to be in the Company of Uncivil Men, but certainly he was Drunk, or she
VVanton, either in her Behavior, or Discourse, or both, otherwise it is not
Easily to be believed, that a Person of his Quality should be so Uncivil to a
Person of her Quality, for Honorable Men are, or should be a Guard to VVomens
Honors, to Protect them Safely, and not to Betray them to their Incivilities.
Wherefore the Surest way for Women is not to Accompany any Man Singly, and
Alone, but when there are more than they themselves, unless it be such Men as
they have a near Relation to, as Husbands, Brothers, Fathers, Sons, Uncles, and
the like; but Women are so far from Shunning Men's Companies, as they go from
place to place to Meet them, and will Invite them to Cards, Dancing, or other
Meetings, and they seem Dull, Melancholy and Indisposed, whenas they are not in
the Company of Men, and for the most part, the Wilder the Men are, the better
Pleased the Women are, at least they seem so. But, perchance Mrs. W. A. is
Jealous of some other Women, for Jealousy is full of Complaints, and their
Tongues are apt to speak Sharply of those they Love best, and that which makes
me think so, is, that Mrs. W. A. has been often in Sir A. Ms. Company, and
never Complained, but seemed best Pleased when he was with her; wherefore, when
the Jealous Humor is Abated, she will perchance Repent of her Complaints,
fearing he may Hear of them, and so be Angry, and come not near to Visit her,
and then it is likely she will Praise him more, than she has Complained, or
Spoken against him, to Invite his Company again; for some Praises are rather to
Entrap or to Allure, as Insinuating Praises, than Just Praises to Reward Merit;
But leaving Mrs. W. A. to her Complaints, or her Complaints to Sir A. M. I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXXIV.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to tell me, that you had Heard of the
Seven Wonders of the World, but you had only Seen that which might be
accounted the Eighth, which are those Books I sent you; But, Madam, it is a
greater VVonder to me, that you would take the Pains to Peruse them, than it
was that I should Write, or Vvast so much Paper, for Girls are always Busy
to no Purpose, they will take delight to scratch a Coal upon a White Wall, or
Ink with a Pen upon Paper, whenas they account it a Torment to be Taught a Fair
Handwriting, or the Art of Limning; and in my Opinion, there is no better
Argument for Free Will, than to Observe how Opposite Constraint and
Inforcement is to the Nature of Mankind; But when I Consider, that Mankind for
the most part Will what is VVorst, and most Hurtful for themselves, or their
Kind, I then am apt to think Mankind are Predestined so to do, otherwise it
were strange that Mankind should VVilfully Hurt themselves, when they have that
which is called Reason, which Informs them, that that which they Will, is
Hurtful for them, or to them. But as for my Books, you might think I have been
bound to the Profession of a Scrivener, not to Write an Intelligible Hand, but
to make VVast Paper, for they being paid for the most part by the Sheets, and
not by the Letters, put as few Letters in a Sheet of Paper as subtly they
can, leaving a Large Space betwixt every Line, and they make their Letters as
Big, and Broad as they may, as not to Mis-shape them, also with Large, and Long
Flourishing Scratches; but my Paper Book is an Advantage to you, who pay
nothing for the VVriting, but your Sight, although Sight, indeed, is more worth
than Pluto's Riches, for it is the most Curious, Glorious, and Precious Jewel
in Nature's Treasury; But, Madam, lest I should Doubly or Trebly Tire your
Sight, as with my Books, and then with this Tedious Letter, I take my leave,
and rest,

Madam, Your Ladyships most faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXXV.
MADAM,
I Am not of the Opinion, that the Planets have an Influence or Power on the
Fortunes, or any Outward Accidents of Men, as that such shall be Slaves, and
such Kings, such be Rich, and such Poor, such be Killed in the Wars, and such
Drowned, or Killd with a Stone falling on their Heads; such be Burnt, such
Hanged, and such Escape those and the like Dangers; such Men and Women shall
Love, and Marry, and such not, also how many Husbands such a Woman shall have,
and such a one shall have None, and so for Men, Mistresses and Wives, for
Advancement and Disgraces, Honors and Dignities, Offices and Authorities, and
for all manner of Fortunes or Accidents, I say, I believe the Planets are not
the Causes of these Outward Effects; but as I believe the Stars and Planets
have an Influence upon the Bodies of men, as their Bodies have on the Planets
and Elements, so they may have an Influence upon the Humors in the Body, as
upon Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy, Blood, and the like, and they may Work Effects
either for Health, Sickness, Pains, and Sores, Rheums, and the like. But I am
in Dispute with my self, whether they also have an Influence, or Work several
Effects upon the Minds of Men, as upon their Bodies; and when I Consider the
various Inconstancies of Men's Minds, and the Alterations and Changes which are
in Men's Minds, I think they are Moved and Altered according to the Motions, and
Influences, and Effects of each Planet, or Star. For if we do Observe, not only
their Thoughts, Passions and Affections Vary and Alter Minutely, Hourly, Daily,
Weekly, Monthly, and Yearly, but also their Capacities, Conceptions, Judgments,
Understandings, Opinions, and Wit; for most have Deeper Capacities, Higher
Conceptions, Sounder Judgments, Clearer Understandings, Probabler Opinions, and
Quicker Wits, at some, than at other times, as at some times they may be
thought Wise men, and at other times mere Fools, sometimes they will speak very
Wittily, at other times mere Nonsense, or at least, Words without Wit,
sometimes they will be able to give as Wise Counsel as Nestor, Ulysses, or
Achitophel, at other times, they are neither able to give, nor to take Counsel;
sometimes they Conceive, and Understand Readily and Clearly, whatsoever is
Conceivable and Understandable by Mankind, at other times they are as if they
had not Sense and Reason; The like for the Qualities, Passions, Affections, and
Virtues of the Mind; as at some times they are very Valiant, at other times
mere Cowards; sometimes Nobly Generous, other times Basely Covetous; sometimes
Uprightly Just, other times Wrongfully Unjust; sometimes very Compassionate,
other times very Cruel, or Uncharitable; sometimes so Angry, as to be so
Furious that none dare Speak to them, at other times so Patient, as to suffer
any one to Pull them by the Nose; sometimes they Love to Death, and sometimes
they Hate to Death, one and the same thing; and this is Usual, and General
amongst Mankind, which makes me lean to the Opinion, that the Stars and the
Planets have an Influence upon the Minds of Men; but I am absolutely of the
Opinion, that they have no Influence or Power on the Educations of Mankind, no
more than they have on the Fortunes or Accidents of and to Mankind; for in
those men that are Educated thoroughly Well, and Wisely, the Effects of
Education are too Strong for the Effects of the Stars or Planets, so that some
men may be Constantly Prudent, Just, Valiant, Generous, Understanding,
Judicious, VVitty, and Wise. Also the Effects of Education, and the Effects of
the Planets, may be Crossing, and Opposing each other, and then the Strongest
Effects bear away the Victory, whether to Good or Ill; and this is the reason
of Long Debates, Doubts, and Considerations, ere some men come to Conclusions
or Resolutions; and truly, I think the Senses have as great an Influence upon
the Mind, as the Stars and Planets have, as Fair Objects, Melodious Sounds,
Sweet Savours, and Delicious Touches, have as great an Influence upon the Mind,
and Cause as Various and Strong Effects, as the Stars and Planets do, or can.
But leaving the Stars, Planets, Education, and the Senses to their Influences,
I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXXVI.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to Desire me to send you my Opinion of
the Lady S. Ks. Sickness or Weakness, but truly, I should not be so
Presumptuous of my own Judgment, as to give my Opinion, if I were not
Commanded, or Desired so to do by your Ladyship, who has Power to Command both
my Mind and Body, to their Utmost Endeavors to Serve and Obey you. As for the
Lady S. K. I believe her Disease comes from the Ostruction of the Meseraick,
and Liver Veins, which being Stopped, either by Clammy Humors, or Dryness, or
Sharpness, cannot Draw or Suck a Sufficient Nourishment, to Spread or Dilate to
the Extreme parts, for Clammy or Slimy Humors Choke the Veins, by Sticking in
the Mouth or Orifice of them; and Sharpness, or Bi^terness, Dries the Veins,
and so Shrinks or Surfles them up, and Closes the Mouth of the Veins, so as
they cannot readily Open themselves, to Draw or Suck in Sufficient Nourishment,
by which the Extreme parts Famish, and the Body becomes Foul and Impure, and it
makes an Overflow in the Body, causing it to Swell out Big, for want of Passage
or Vent, or else it causes an Unnatural Heat, which Dries the Body into a
Hectic Fever, Burning the Intrals, and Noble Vital parts with a Smothering
Heat, which Dries those Parts, like as Neats-Tongues, Bacon, and Hung Beef is
Dried in Smothering Smoke; or it sets those Humors, Gathered, and Heaped up,
on a Flame, like a Stack of Wet Hay, or a Chest full of Wet Linen, wanting
Vent to Breath out Vapor. Thus the Lady S. Ks. Body is Fat, and her Legs and
Arms, Neck and Face, Lean, for those Parts that are next to the Mouth of the
Veins, Nourish, and grow rather too Big, as having more than Nature requires,
for the Inward Parts are Doubly Fed, having the Food, not only that Belongs, or
is Sufficient for them, but also that which Belongs to the Extreme Parts, as
the Legs, Feet, Arms, Hands, Neck, and Face, so that a Stoppage of the Veins
causes the Body to Swell, or Puff Outward, like as when ones Lips are Closed,
and Ascending Vapor, or Forced Wind, Fills the Mouth, the Cheeks, and all the
Face will Swell, and Puff out so much, as to be as Big as a Face and a Half;
the same is with the Body, when the Mouths of the Sucking Veins are Stopped;
also it causes Vomitings, or Fluxes, for when the Veins are too Full of Wind,
or Blood, or are Stopped by Humor, or Dryness, the Body growing too full of
Humor, Over-flows, and so Forces out a Passage, either at one, or both Ends of
the Body, for the Veins being Over-full, can no more receive any Liquor into
them, than when a Stomach is Over-fill'd with Meat or Drink, but are Forced to
Cast out whatsoever is Offered to them, so as the Veins become as an
Overcharged Stomach, and when they are Stopped, they are as if the Throat were
Choked, or the Neck Strangled, and can receive Nothing, for not Any thing will
Pass, which causes them to Cast back whatsoever is Offered to them, so that the
Effect is as one, both of Over-full, and Empty, Stopped Veins, only Over-full
Veins cause the Body to be Swelled, and Puffed, all over the Extreme Parts, as
well as the Inward, or next Adjoining Parts, whereas the Empty, Dry Veins,
cause only the Inward, and Joining Parts to the Mouths of the Veins to be
Swelled, or Puffed out; but for Casting out from them, or Resisting, they are
alike. Thus, Madam, I have Obeyed your Commands, in Writing to you my Opinion;
and Begging your Pardon for being so Tedious in Explaning and Declaring it, I
rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXXVII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to tell me in your Letter, how much out of Countenance you
were, being Surprised with a Visit you Expected not; Truly, Madam, I am very
Sensible of your Pain, insomuch as methinks I Feel what you Suffered, for I my
self have been, and am still, so Troubled with that Imperfection, (if it may be
called one) that I have been often so out of Countenance, as I have not only
Pitied my self, but others have Pitied me, which is a Condition I would not be
in, and the Thoughts that Bashfulness leaves in the Mind, are as great an
Affliction as the Mind can have for a Crimeless Defect, for it is no Crime to be
Bashful, nor a Disgrace, neither to the Life, nor Soul, although it be a
Disadvantage to the Person, for Bashfulness Works diverse Effects upon the Body,
and in the Mind; As for the Mind, it Disturbs the Thoughts so much, as the
Thoughts are all in a Confused Disorder, and not any one Thought moves
Regularly, neither will they Suffer the Words to pass out of the Mouth, or if
they do, they are Uttered without Sense, nay, sometimes in no Language, being
but Pieces of Words, or Pieces of the Letters of Words; and others, quite
contrary, will speak so Much, and Fast, as none can Understand what they Say,
or would Say, Indeed, so Fast, as they make neither Stop, nor Distinction;
Again, others will Speak so Shrill, and Loud, as it Deafens the Ears of the
Hearers, and others so Soft and Low, as it cannot be Heard what they Say; and
some when they are out of Countenance, will Laugh at every Word they Speak, or
is Spoken to them, although the Subject be so Sad and Lamentable, as it is
proper to be attended with Tears: And for the Body, when the Mind is Bashful,
it has Diverse, and Several Misbecoming Motions, as in some their nether Lip
will so Quiver, as it will Draw quite Awry, like as in a Convulsion, and in
some, their Eyes will so Squint, as they can see nothing Perfectly, and some
will Shake their Heads so much, as if they had the Shaking Palsy; and in some
their Legs will so Tremble, as they can hardly bear up the Body from falling;
and some, their whole Body will be as if they were in a Cold Fit of an Ague;
and others, when they are out of Countenance, have such a Suppressing of
Spirits, as they are forced often to Humm, to raise them up; and others, when
they are out of Countenance, will look so Pale, as if they were Departing with
Life, and on the Contrary, others will be so Red, having a Torrent of Blushes
Flow to their Face, that they will appear as if they were Drunk, and that it
were the Spirits of Wine which made that Fiery and Flaming Color, and many
other Misbecoming Countenances, and several Misbecoming Garbs, Postures,
Motions, and Senseless Words, which are not to be Expressed. But howsoever, a
Bashful Countenance Expresses a Sensible Mind, and a Modest Nature, and not a
Guiltiness of Crimes, for those that are so Bold as to Commit a Crime, will not
want Confidence to Outface it. Wherefore, Madam, let not your Bashful
Behavior be a Disturbance to your Harmless Thoughts, and Virtuous Life, to
which Thoughts and Life, I leave you, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXXVIII.
MADAM,
YOu did once, before your last Letter, Desire me to give my Opinion concerning
the Influence of the Stars, I did so, and now you Desire my Opinion again,
which if I do, I may chance to Contradict my self; But truly, I believe the
Planets, or Stars, have no more Influence upon the Bodies, Minds, and Natures
of Men, than one Creature has upon another, or several Creatures upon one, or
one upon more; for though the Bodies, Humors, Constitutions, and Minds of Men
are subject to Alterations and Changes, yet it is from their Principal Natures,
as from the Nature of Mankind, and we see by Experience and Observation, that
the Planets have not Power over Laws, Customs, and Education, which are more
Firmly Settled, than to be Altered by the Various Effects of the Stars and
Planets, which Laws, Customs, and Educations, have Power over the Appetites,
Passions, and Constitutions of Men. But we may observe, that the Effects of the
Planets Vary Perpetually, for if they were Constant in their Effects, there
would be no Change or Alteration, and if they had an Absolute Power over the
rest of Nature's Works, as many think, or as others say, only over Mankind,
their Cross Effects or Influences would make such a Confusion, as it would make
an Utter Destruction of that they have Power of, which would Cross and Hinder
Natures Methodical Proceedings, and certain Rules and Decrees, by which she
Governs, unless you will say, the Stars, or Planets, are the Fates and
Destinies to all Mankind, if so, there needs no Education, Laws, or Justice;
but the Stars and Planets are too Inconstant and Changing to Decree and
Destinate any thing, for there is no Assurance or Certainty in the Effects or
Influence of the Stars and Planets, there is more Assurance in the Educations,
and Customs of Men, and Custom and Education has Stronger Effects, for Custom
and Education can Alter the Unaptness in Natural Capacities and Understandings,
the Dull Dispositions, Froward, or Evil Passions of the Mind; also it
oftentimes Tempers the Irregular Humors of the Body, and can Restrain the
Unsatiable Appetites of the Body and Senses, and Long Custom Alters the Nature
of Men: Besides, Healthful and Strong Constitutions will become Sick and Faint
with Debaucheries and Irregularities, and Sick and Weak Constitutions will grow
Healthful and Strong with Temperance and Regularity; also Education makes a Man
a Thief, and a Thief an Honest Man, and it is Fortune that makes Kings and
Beggars, and not the Planets, for all that are Born at one point of Time, have
not the same Fortune, as when a King is Born, or else there would be thousands
of Kings, so many Children being Born at the same point of Time. Likewise all
that were Born in such or such a point of Time, would be Poets, Natural
Philosophers, and the like, whereas there are as Few of them as of Kings; also
all that are Born in such a point of Time, would be Wise, Just, and Prudent
men, according to the Influence of the Stars; but if so, I believe there would
be more Wise, and Just men than there are, whereas now for One Wise man there
are Millions of Fools; Besides, it would show the Stars to have more Power, and
greater Influence, to Produce Fools, Knaves, Slaves, and Beggars, than Wise,
Just, Free, and Rich Noble men; and if the Planets had no Power over the
Fortunes, nor over the Minds of Men, but over the Bodies of Men, then the
Influence the Soul has on the Body, would Contradict the Influence of the
Planets, and the Planets Influence would Contradict the Influence of the Soul,
so as by their Crossness the Body would be Perpetually Tortured, and the Mind
Disquieted; and if the Planets had an Influence over the Soul and Body, then we
would be Good and Bad, Wicked and Pious, Valiant and Cowards, Sick and Well,
Hungry and Dry, or otherwise have no Appetite, according as the Planets please,
or according to their Influences; also all men would be Good and Bad, Sick and
Well, Wise and Fools, Valiant and Cowardly, just at one time, as the Sign or
Influence is, so that all men under the Domination of such Stars or Planets,
would be alike at one Minute, and if all Men should Like or Love one Woman, at
one Minute and Time, or all Women one Man, that is, as many as See her or him,
that Woman would have more Servants and Suitors than she could Please or Answer,
and the Man more Mistresses than the Great Turk. Also, if it were according to
the Dominion of the Planets, thousands on a Sudden would be Inspired with
Poetical Raptures, and soon after be Dull, and Stupid Dolts whenas that
Influence Changed: but I believe there is greater Influence from one Nation on
another, according to Interest, Strength and Potency, and so from one Man to
another, according to Interest, Power, and Authority, than the Stars and
Planets have on Several Nations, and Several, and Particular Men, which
Produces greater Effects, than the Planets Effects and Influences can do; not
but that I believe the Planets can Work as Sudden Effects, nay, far Suddener
and Immediate, as we see by the Effects of the Heat, and Light of the Sun; but
I believe, that Beauty and Wit have a greater Influence upon the Passions of
the Mind, and Senses, and Appetites of the Body, than the Stars; and why may
not we think as well, that the Actions, especially the General Actions of men,
might have as great an Influence or Power over the Stars and Planets, as the
Stars and Planets are thought to have over Men? for I see no reason to the
contrary, since they are Fellow Creatures, and not Gods. But surely, every
several part and particle in Nature has an Influence on each other, from which
are produced several Effects, and Effects have Influence upon Effects, some on
some, and some on others, or perchance they have all a Working Effect to each
other, as many Grains of Corn are ground for one Loaf of Bread, many several
Materials go to one House, many several Families to one Commonwealth, many
several Nations, to one World, and many several Worlds to one Universe. Thus,
Madam, I have Obeyed your second Command, concerning the Influences of the
Stars and Planets, as I did your first, but in this Later Discourse, I seem to
have no Belief that the Stars have an Influence over the Bodies or Minds, no
more than the Bodies or Minds have over the Planets, and so over Fortune,
Education, Laws, Custom, and the like, whereas in my Former Letter, I said,
they had over the Body, and was apt to Believe they had also over the Mind; but
since I Writ the Former Letter concerning this Subject, I have thought of it
more than I had then, and Believe every Creature has some Influence to each
other. But I leave both Letters, and the Opinions and Arguments written
therein, to your Better Judgment, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXXXIX.
MADAM,
I Am sorry to hear that Sir S. K. is so full of the Dropsy, as to be Dying,
indeed the Dropsy is a Disease that Quenches out the Fire, or Flame of Life,
as a Torch, Candle, or Lamp, having more Water than Radical Oil, or Vital Heat,
so that one may say, those that are full of the Dropsy, have a River, or Sea
in their Body, they are Drowned, not with Water Without, but Within them, it
is an Inward Deluge; and a Dropsical Body is like Noah's Flood, wherein the
Inward Parts are as the several Nations, and the Animal Spirits as the People
Drowned therein, but the Soul, as Noah, is Saved in the Ark of Heaven, and at
the Day of Judgment is to be Restored to the Bodily World again. But leaving
this Similizing, Dropsy pro(...)m Diverse Causes, as sometimes through
(...)ometimes through an Hot, and sometimes through a Cold Cause, some Dropsy
through a VVasting Cause, some through an Obstructive, and some through a
Superfluous Cause; In some the Effects may be Cured, by Altering, or Removing
the Causes, in others, the Cause is Essential, not to be Removed, but by Death,
and so not to be Cured in Life; but whatsoever the Cause be, whether Curable or
Incurable, the best Remedy either to Prolong the Life of the Diseased Body, or
to Cure those that are Curable, is to make Issues, which as Sluices, Drain the
Water out of the Body, or so much as to keep it from Overflowing, or they are
like Taps set to Barrels full of Liquor, which runs forth at the Tap-holes: But
there must not only be One Sluice, or Tap-hole, but Two or Three, to Vent the
Superfluity of the Water that Comes, or is Bred in the Body. It Is true, I have
heard those that have Issues, say, they are somewhat Troublesome, but yet they
are not so Troublesome as a Swelled, Unwieldy Bulk, or Sick, and Indisposed
Body. But by your Letter I perceive that Sir S. Ks. Body is so much Overflowed,
as it cannot be Drained so soon as to Save his Life, but it will be Drowned,
and Overwhelmed in the Whirlpool of Death. And so leaving his Soul to God, I
rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXL.
MADAM,
YOu writ in your last Letter, that the Lady G. D. takes Cooling Julips in the
Morning, and Cordials when she goes to Bed, to Digest Crude Humors; but my
Reason says, she is in an Error, as for Example, Dry Wood and Wet Wood, or
Sear Wood and Green Wood, although there should be put much Fire to the Green,
or Wet VVood, it will not hastily Burn, nay, such VVood does oftener put Out
the Fire, than the Fire does Inkindle the VVood, for the moist Vapors that
Issue, or are Drawn forth by the Heat of the Fire, do Destroy that Heat that
Drew those Vapors out, whereas on the other side, Dry, or Sear VVood, when
Kindled, and all of a Fiery Flame, fling but a little Water on it, and it will
Quench out the Flaming Fire. The like are the Bodies of Mankind, they are
easier Cooled, when Inflamed, Applying Cooling Liquors, as Julips, Ptisan,
Barley Water, and the like, than to Heat them with Cordials, when they are full
of Raw, Crude, and Waterish Humors; for Fevers, although Violent, if they
Proceed from no other Cause but a Supernatural Heat, are Sooner, and Easier
Cured, than Cold Palsies, and other Cold Diseases; wherefore it is better to
take Hot things first, and Coolling after, than to take Hot things after
Cooling, for Hot thinps after Cooling do rather make a Smothering Heat, than a
Concocting, Digesting, or Expelling Heat, so as it only fills the Body full of
Vapors, like as Wet, or Green Fuel fills a Room with Smoke, but a Healthful
Body must neither be too Hot, nor too Cold, nor too Dry, nor too Moist. And so
leaving the Lady D. G. to her Julips and Cordials, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXLI.
MADAM,
I Was sorry to hear you intended to return into E. for I know that nothing but
Necessity could Force you thither, although your Native Country, having been so
Unnaturally Bereaved of all your Maintenance, by the Covetous Purloyning of
your Unnatural Countrymen, and left to Seek, in a Wandering Condition, Fortunes
Favor, which is as Inconstant as they are Cruel, but I perceive by your
staying that Journey, that Fortune, as Inconstant as she Usually is, yet has
had more Pity and Compassion of your Sufferings, than they who keep you from
the Extremity of Misery they have Exposed you to; yet those who have your
Estate, cannot be much Happier, although you never have it again, for they
cannot Enjoy it Long, the Longest Life being but Short, and there is an Old
Saying, We cannot Carry our VVorldly goods to the Grave; indeed Death has no
Use of them, nor Life so much Pleasure, as Trouble with them; the truth is,
it is best to have no more than for Necessity, a Superfluity most commonly runs
into Luxury, which causes Painful Diseases in the Body, Restless Desires in the
Mind, and Hinders the Life from that Sweet Repose it would have in a
Satisfactory Temperance, and in a Moderate Fortune; and surely, it is the Best,
and Happiest Life, to be neither Oppressed with Riches, nor Distressed with
Poverty, and if Heaven Bless us from the Misery of the one, we shall not have
cause to Repine at the Loss of the other; thus, it is likely, those may Suffer
more that have Robbed you of your great Estate, by their Griping, and Accusing
Consciences, and Uncertain Possessions, than you, that are Robbed of all, but
what they could not get, as your Virtuous Nature, your Honorable Mind, your
Peaceable Thoughts, and Heavens Protection, to which I leave you, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXLII.
MADAM,
IT is to be Observed, that most Men and Women are so Busy to find out other
Men's, or VVomens Faults, as they Forget their own, and when they Perceive any
Faults in others, they are so Joy'd, as their Tongues are like Trumpets, to
Sound out their Reproach; also they are Busy in the Inquiry of others
Misfortunes, but never Consider, the Same, or some other Misfortunes may Light
upon them; also they are Busy to Inquire of every Particular Persons Private
Affairs, as their Wealth, Ordering their Families, their Pleasures, or their
Discontents, nay, of every Person, or Thing that Concerns them not; but these
Busy Natures or Humors Dwell with Idle Persons, as the most part of the
Gentry, and not with Laborious, nay, with the most Foolish of the Gentry, not
with the VVisest of them, for Wise men never Inquire into other men's Affairs
that Concern them not, nor Meddle with other men's Faults, if they Touch them
not; they VVish Well to All, but Regard Nothing but their own Affairs; they
let other men Suffer for their own Crimes, and will have a care that they may
not be guilty of Crimes to Suffer for; they will Inquire how Provision is Sold,
when they are to Buy, not what their Neighbors Spend; they go not to Sessions
or Assizes, to hear the Accusations or Condemnations, unless they be Commanded
or Called, nor do they Inquire what Thieves are Hanged, or how many, but are
careful that no Thief may Rob them; and if they be Country-Gentlemen, and not
Courtiers, they Inquire not what Masks, Balls, and Plays are at the Court, but
what Hawks and Hounds are in the Country, for their own Sports and Exercises,
and if they be Wise Courtiers (although not Wise Men) they do not Inquire what
Wakes and Fairs there are in the Country, but what Offices, or Places they may
Beg; neither do Wise Citizens Inquire after Hawks and Hounds in the Contry, nor
what Mode-Congies are at the Court, nor of the Courtiers Amors, but they
Inquire after their Merchandises, and how they may Sell off their Wares, and
what Fairs to send them to; indeed they will Inquire after a Courtier, if he Ow
them Money; Neither do Wise Farmers Inquire after the Price of Satin, but how
the Market goes for Corn, nor do their Wives Inquire how Paint is Sold, but
what Cheesemongers will Buy their Cheeses and Pots of Butter; wherefore, in my
Opinion, Societies should be apart by themselves, like several Commonwealths,
Courtiers should only Converse with Courtiers, or Courtly Persons, and Country
Gentlemen with Country Gentlemen, Citizens with Citizens, Farmers with Farmers,
and I think they do so, at least, are most pleased with the Conversation of
their own likeness: Also Statesmen should only Converse with Statesmen, Learned
men with Learned men, Wits with Wits, or else their Wit will be Lost; indeed,
Societies should be Chosen, and not Mixed, and every Society should Move in its
own Sphere, for the truth is, in Mixed Societies is Confusion of Tongues, of
Wits, of Capacities, and the like. But lest I should make a Confusion of Words
in this Letter, I take my leave of you, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXLIII.
MADAM,
I Heard the Ship was Drowned, wherein the man was that had the Charge and Care
of my Plays, to carry them into E. to be Printed, I being then in A. which
when I heard, I was extremely Troubled, and if I had not had the Original of
them by me, truly I should have been much Afflicted, and accounted the Loss of
my Twenty Plays, as the Loss of Twenty Lives, for in my Mind I should have
Died Twenty Deaths, which would have been a great Torment, or I should have
been near the Fate of those Plays, and almost Drowned in Salt Tears, as they
in the Salt Sea; but they are Destinated to Live, and I hope, I in them, when
my Body is Dead, and Turned to Dust; But I am so Prudent, and Careful of my
Poor Labors, which are my Writing Works, as I always keep the Copies of them
safely with me, until they are Printed, and then I Commit the Originals to the
Fire, like Parents which are willing to Die, whenas they are sure of their
Childrens Lives, knowing when they are Old, and past Breeding, they are but
Useless in this World: But howsoever their Paper Bodies are Consumed, like as
the Roman Emperors, in Funeral Flames, I cannot say, an Eagle Flies out of
them, or that they Turn into a Blazing Star, although they make a great Blazing
Light when they Burn; And so leaving them to your Approbation or Condemnation,
I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXLIV.
MADAM,
YOu Expressed in your last Letter, that Sir O. B. told an Acquaintance of
yours, he did not Understand my Philosophical and Physical Opinions, and I
believe him, because he has not a Philosophical Brain, and therefore cannot
Understand Philosophical Reasons, but had he said, there was no Sense and
Reason in those Opinions, I could not have Believed him, unless he would have
Proved it, which I am Confident he Cannot: But it is impossible to Expect my
Book should be Understood of every one that Reads it, for there is more
Strength of Brain required to Understand it, than to Understand a Horn-book;
besides, it is harder, because they are New Opinions, never Vented before; as
for Example, if a man did make an Oration in such a Language which his Auditors
never heard before, and because they do not Understand the Language, would they
Condemn this Oration? that were not only Unjust, but Foolish, to Condemn what
they cannot Judge of, as not Understanding it; or would they say, it cannot be
Understood, because they never Learned that Language? If every one were of that
Opinion, there would be no Languages Taught or Learned, but every one would
keep to their Native Language; nay, all Languages would Cease, for they would
not teach them their Children, because it would be a Lost Labor, and so they
would Forget whatever they did Learn themselves, or else that Opinion could not
hold; wherefore, whatsoever has been Invented, may be Taught, and Learned by
good Capacities. But this is only to Express how Simply People Judge, or
Spitefully Censure, and I believe that the Opinions or Doctrines of former
Natural Philosophers, were no more Understood at first, than if they had
Written, or Spoken in Unknown Languages, till by Degrees their Language was
Learned, that is, their Opinions were Understood by those that did make it
their Employment to Study, and so to Understand them, but they had this
Advantage, being Men, that they had liberty not only to Write their Opinions,
but to Preach, Teach, and Instruct others to Understand them; Pythagoras
imposed five years Silence to his Pupils, because he would not have their
Speaking Hinder their Studying, or Obstruct their Understanding, and there is
not any Famous Philosopher, that ever I heard of, which did not Teach and
Explane his Own Opinions, besides Inscribing them either in Letters, Figures,
Cifres, or the like. Wherefore I fear the Right Understanding of my
Philosophical Opinions are likely to be Lost, for want of a Right Explanation,
for they may be Interpreted not that way I Conceived them, that is, not to my
Sense or Meaning, for it is not Proper for my Sex to be a Public Orator, to
Declare or Explane my Opinions in Schools, and if it were, yet I have neither
Confidence nor Learning to Speak to an Assembly, nor in such Forms or Phrases,
as Masters of Learning Use; Neither is it fit I should be a Private
School-Mistress, to Teach and Instruct Scholars, although concerning only my
Philosophical Opinions, nor do I believe I have so much Patience, being a
Woman, for that Profession, as to Hammer, or Beat in Understanding into Dull
Capacities, and Hard Brains; wherefore I must leave that Work of mine
Unexplaned by Words, though I have Written it as Plain fot Understanding, as
the Nature, or Matter, or Subject, does Afford, or give Way to; But I leave it
to Heavens Protection, and Nature's Reward, as to Favor and Bless my Harmless
Labors, and to Reward my Natural Studies with Right Understanding, and Due
Commendations, that neither Spite nor Ignorance may Condemn them, but that Time
may Keep, and Fame Divulge them, that they may Live to and in After Ages, so
that this Work that Sir O. B. Understands not, may be Understood when Sir O.
B. Lives not, and Live when Sir O. B. is Dead and Forgotten. But, Madam, lest I
should Forget my self in writing so Long a Letter, as it may Trouble your
Pastime to read it, I rest,

Madam, Your Ladyships very faithful Friend and Servant.

CXLV.
MADAM,
I Am sorry, that when you were last in this City, I was forced through my
being Sick, to deny my self the Honor of your Company, but I did it rather out
of Respect to your self, than to my self, for your Company would have been some
Recompense for the Absence of my Health; but though your Presence would have
been as a Cordial to me, and might have Refreshed, and Nourished my Faint
Spirits, yet I should have been to you as a Draught of Pudled Water, for
Sickness is full of Trouble, and a Sick Body cannot have a Sociable Mind, nor
Pleasing Discourses, your Ears would have been filled with nothing but
Complaints and Groans, your Eyes would have been Benighted in a Dark Chamber,
wherein the Light was Shut out. Thus would you have been as in a Tomb, for a
Sick Bodies Chamber is in a Degree of a Dead Bodies Grave, and their Groans as
a Passing Bell, which would not have been Agreeable to your Ladyships Humor,
who has a Healthful Constitution, which makes your Mind like as the Spring,
and your Thoughts like Nightingals, Singing with Pleasure and Delight therein.
And thus, had I received your Charitable Visit, I should have been as a Dark
Cloud to the Sunshine of your Mirth; But since I am Recovered to Health, I
shall come to that City you are in, to give your Ladyship Thanks for your
Favors, and to Express how much I am Really,

Madam, Your Ladyships most Humble Servant.

CXLVI.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to Request me to send you my Opinion of
Virgil and Ovid, as which I thought was the better Poet; Truly, Madam, my
Reason, Skill, or Understanding in Poetry and Poets, is not Sufficient to give
a Judgment of two such Famous Poets, and their Poetry, for though I am a
Poetess, yet I am but a Poetastress, or a Petty Poetess, but howsoever, I am a
Legitimate Poetical Child of Nature, and though my Poems, which are the Body of
the Poetical Soul, are not so Beautiful and Pleasing, as the rest of her
Poetical Childrens Bodies are, yet I am nevertheless her Child, although but a
Brownet. But you may say, you asked my Opinion of two Famous Poets, and I Talk
of my self; Truly, Madam, I am forced to do so, in order to your Commands, at
least to your Desires, for my Will is to Obey you, and first, to let you know,
that though I am not a Learned, or Supreme Judge, yet I am an Inferior Officer
in the Poetical Court, and therefore not altogether Ignorant in Poetical Causes
or Cases; But, Madam, I am in a Dispute with my self, as whether it be
Warrantable for me, a Private Person, to give my Judgment in so Public a
Cause, for though those two Persons, if they were Living, might with an United
Consent appoint me to be a Judge between them, yet a Third Person, as your
Ladyship, cannot Properly make a Judge without their Knowledge and Consent,
unless you were a Caesar, and had the Power to make what Judges, or Laws you
pleased; But yet by reason you are my Caesar, to Rule, Govern, and Command me,
as you Please, I will Obey you, and as I hope, without Partiality, for I am
neither of their Country, or their Kindred, nor have I taken Bribes from
either, nor hope to have a Reward from any, but rather I fear a Censure for
Punishment, howsoever, for your sake, I will Venture, and thus I give my
Opinion, That Virgil was the Craftier, but Ovid the Wittier man, that Virgil
was the better Flatterer, but Ovid the better Poet, that Virgil was the more
Fortunate, and Ovid the more Unhappy. And to Prove Virgil's Craft, he Flattered
the Emperor, and the most Noble Families in Rome; and as for his Flattery, he
made the Ground of his Poems or Poetry, the Antiquity and Original of the
Emperor, and the Noble Families of Rome, whether False or True, I leave to his
own Belief and Knowledge, although Poetry, for the most part is Feigning, at
least so Illustrated, that the End is False; yet howsoever he gained the
Applause of Caesar, and all the Chief of the Romans, and one Great and Eminent
Persons Praise, is the Foundation of a Hundred Inferior Persons Commendations,
Admirations, Estimations, and Fame or Renown; Again, to Prove his good Fortune,
he was in the Emperors Favor so much, as to be Honored with his Company,
Privacies, Counsels, Affections, and Enriched with his Gifts, whereas Ovid was
Banished from his Friends and Country, into an Unwholsom Air, although his
Fault was not so Notorious as to be Visible, or Publicly Known, so as one may
Judge, that Ovid's Banishment was through Caesar's Partial Envy to him for
Virgil's sake, and not for any Crime, for he Banished Ovid, fearing he might
Outshine Virgil, his Flattering Favorite, and Deifier, at least, Glorifier;
but Ovid was too Rich, and Nobly born, to be a Flatterer, at least, so Gross a
one as Virgil, he rather thought to be Flattered, than to Flatter; neither had
he an Insinuating Craft to get Applause and Wealth, for he was Open and Free,
not Bound up to Subtilty; And for his Wit, it is said, that his Prose was only
Dissolved Verse, and his Poetry was Brief, and yet Satisfactory, it was full of
Fancy, yet Natural, Moral, and Human Descriptions, it was full of Variety, yet
Compendious, so that his Poetry Expressed his Judgment, Understanding,
Learning, Wit, Eloquence, and Fancy; Neither did he spend his Reason, Judgment,
Wit, and Fancy, on One Tedious Feigned Story, but on Hundreds of Stories, and
Expressed himself in his Metamorphosis, as much a Moral, and Natural
Philosopher, a Courtly Lover, an Heroic Soldier, a Valiant and Prudent
Commander, a Politic Statesman, a Just Governor and Ruler, a Wise and
Magnificent Prince, a Faithful Citizen, a Navigator, Fortificator, Architect,
Astronomer, and the like, as also a Learned Scholar, and had an Insight into
Arts and Husbandry, as well as Virgil in his Georgicks, nay far more, as having
more Variety; neither was he so Palpable an Imitator as Virgil was; the truth
is, in my Opinion, Ovid was the far Wiser, Wittier, Ingenious, and Nobler Poet,
and by his Poetry we may perceive, that though he was not one of Augustus
Caesar's Favorites, yet he was Nature's Favorite, and was Beloved of all the
Muses, and though Caesar took away his Right of Human Inheritance, and Native
Soil, yet he could not take away his Natural Poetical Birth, for he had his
Worthy Due in the place he was Banished to, having, as I have heard, Divine
Honors given him after his Death, and great Respect and Love in his Lifetime,
by those People he Lived amongst, by which we may say, Happy Ovid, in an
Unhappy Condition; And for Language, wherein Virgil is so Highly Praised, I
cannot Perceive in the Translation, but that Ovid is fully as Copious,
Significant, Sweet, Eloquent, and Illustrious, as Virgil, I cannot tell what it
is in Latin. But to Conclude, had Ovid's Design been Favor, and his Poetry
Flattery, fitted to the Genius, Humor, or Pride of those Times he Lived in,
Virgil would have been Buried in his Fame; but it is to be Observed, that not
only the Inferiors of the same Time, Follow, Imitate, or Believe, according to
a Grand Superior, but Following Ages do the like, so Powerful and Lasting is a
Grand Superiour's Esteem, Favor, or Opinion. And thus, Madam, I have given
Judgment, at least my Opinion, for Ovid, not but that I do Highly Admire and
Reverence Virgil, but yet not so much as I do sweet Ovid, whose Fancy, Wit, and
Language, is like his Birth, Soft, Gentle, and Noble, Rational, Observing,
Understanding, and Judicious, Quick, Ingenious, and Delightful, Beautiful,
Graceful, and Taking, or Moving, Heroic, Generous, and Magnificent, Eloquent,
Elegant, and Fluent, Distinguishing, Similizing, Forming, Winding, Composing,
Contriving and Uniting; to all which I leave his Poetry, and his Fame to
Everlasting Life, or Memory, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXLVII.
MADAM,
THE other day Mr. H. Us. Daughter and Niece were here to Visit me, and I
Endeavoring to Entertain them Kindly and Friendly, Talked so much, as they
might easily believe, my Tongue was in a Perpetual Motion, especially being
Strangers to me, not knowing my Solitary, Silent Humor, who Speak only much
when I Entertain Strangers, which I do but seldom, so that my Talking is like
Fits of a Quartan Ague, and as hard to be Cured, for much Talking is a Disease,
or a Natural Defect, or rather Effect in the Female Sex, and the Defects and
Effects of Nature may be Obscured, but not Altered, so that it is very
Improbable, if not Impossible, for a Woman to be Silent; indeed it is against
the Nature of Women, so that a Silent Woman would be as a Monster in Nature;
but howsoever, my Desire is rather to be a Monster for Silence, than a Natural
in Talk; wherefore, lest I should Commit a Double Fault, in overmuch Writing of
my overmuch Talking, I take my leave of you, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

CXLVIII.
MADAM,
I Thank you for the Cup you sent me, but I cannot Guess whether it be Glass,
Metal, or Stone, for it seems too Light to be Metal, too Thin to be Stone, and
too Strong to be Glass, but I suppose it is of a Mixed Nature, as many things
are; as for Example, Feathers seem to be betwixt Hair and Wool, for the Quils
seem to be somewhat like Soft Souls, being Hollow, and within them a Pith,
somewhat like Brains, and the Small Sprigs of Feathers are like as Hair Growing
thereupon, and Sprouting thereout, and the Downy part of Feathers which Grow
toward the Bottom, or Root of the Quils, are of the Nature and Likeness of
Wool; so the Scales of Fishes seem to be betwixt Sinews or Gristles, and Skin,
for they are like Gristles in being Tough and Clammy, and like Skin in being
Smooth, Slick, and Thinner than Sinews are; Also Horns of Beasts, Hoofs, and
Claws, Bills of Fowls, and Nails of Men, are betwixt Bones and Gristles, as to
be Harder than Gristles, and Softer than Bones. Also there are many several
Creatures, which seem to be of a Mixed Kind, as a Bat seems to be betwixt a
Beast and a Bird, having a Body like a Mouse, and Wings like a Bird, and an Owl
seems somewhat like a Cat, and has the Nature of a Cat, to catch Mice, and
many other Creatures could be brought for Examples, which would be too Tedious
for a Letter. But to return to your Present, which is now my Cup, I am so
Pleased with it, as to my thinking my Drink is nothing so Tastable out of any
other thing as out of that, for if I Drink out of any thing that is Metal,
methinks my Drink tastes Brackish, as if it were mixed with Mineral Waters,
although it were Gold, and out of any thing made of Earth, methinks my Drink
has a Musty Taste, although out of Purceline; and out of Glass, it is so Cold
in Winter time, that it Deads my Taste so much, as if it had no Taste at all. But
these Faults are found only since I have the Cup you sent me; wherefore by this
you may see, a New Acquaintance is Preferred before an Old, like as Men that
find so many Sweet Graces in a New Mistress, at least do think so, and so many
Foul Faults in a Wife, as the Wife is cast By, and the Mistress only made Use
of. But it is most Probable, I am so Pleased with the Cup because it was yours,
and now it is mine, yet it is yours still, for whatsoever is mine, is yours,
for I my self am so, as,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

CXLIX.
MADAM,
I Am sorry to hear, as by your last Letter, that Mrs. B. U. is so Sick; Truly,
I do believe, she takes too many Cordial Waters; if there were a Mean betwixt
her Diet and mine, I believe it would be better for us both, for as I Quench
out my Spirits by Over-cooling and Moistening Drinks, as Water, and Clarified
VVhay, so she Burns up hers, with too Hot, and Dry Cordials, as Hot Waters;
but the Fire of Life should neither be Burnt up, nor Quenched out, although
Quenching is less Dangerous than Burning out, for if the Fuel of Life be Burnt
to Ashes, there is no hopes of Reinkindling that Fire again, by reason those
Ashes are Insipid, and yield no Nourishing Food, nor Oily Flame, but if it be
only Quenched out, and the Fuel Remaining, it is probable it may be Enlightened
again with a few live Coals, that is two or three Spoons full of Cordial
Water, so as that which will Kill her, if she take too much of it, may in
Extremity Cure me, if I take a little; the Fuel of Life are the Vital Parts,
the Fire of Life are the Vital Spirits, the Fuel of the Vital Parts is Food,
the Fuel of the Vital Spirits is Radical Moisture, which is an Oily, or
Balsamic Substance; when this Radical Moisture is too Thin, it Quenches the
Spirits out, and when it is Consumed with Excessive Heat, as being Burnt up, or
Evaporated, there is nothing for the Spirits to Feed on. Thus Radical Moisture
is the Prolonging, or Decaying of Life, it is the Oil to the Lamp of Life. But
Mrs. B. U. Drinks not Cordials through an Appetite to those Strong Liquors, no
more than I do Drink Tastless Water; But we being both Studious Persons, are
Conceited, for all Students are Conceited more or less, especially concerning
their Diets, for Contemplative Persons either Change oftener in the Course of
their Diet, than Fantastical Persons in the Fashion of their Clothes, or be so
Obstinate in one particular Diet, as neither Sense nor Reason shall be able to
Persuade them from it, nay, they will rather Die in their Obstinacy; But I hope
Mrs. B. V. will be Ruled, and none has such Power to Persuade her as your
Ladyship, neither is any one so Able to Advise her; And so leaving her to your
Ladyships Advice, and Heavens Protection, I rest,

Madam, Your Ladyships faithful Friend and Servant.

CL.
MADAM,
MY Thoughts, although not my Actions, have been so busily Employed about
Huswifry these three or four Days, as I could think of nothing else, for I
hearing my Neighbors should say, my Waiting-Maids were Spoiled with Idleness,
having nothing to do, but to Dress, Curl, and Adorn themselves, and they
Excusing themselves, laying the Blame upon me, that I did not set them to any
Employment, but whereas they were ready to Obey my Commands, I was so Slow in
Commanding them, as I seldom took any Notice of them, or Spoke to them, and
that the truth was, they oftener Heard of their Lady, than Heard, or Saw her
themselves, I living so Studious a Life, as they did not See me above once a
Week, nay, many times, not once in a Fortnight; wherefore, upon the Relation of
these Complaints, I sent for the Governess of my House, and bid her give order
to have Flax and Wheels Bought, for I, with my Maids, would sit and Spin. The
Governess hearing me say so, Smiled, I asked her the Reason, she said, she
Smiled to think what Uneven Threads I would Spin, for, said she, though Nature
has made you a Spinster in Poetry, yet Education has not made you a Spinster
in Huswifry, and you will Spoil more Flax, than Get Cloth by your Spinning, as
being an Art that requires Practice to Learn it; besides, said she, the Noise
the Wheels make with Turning round, will be Offensive to your Hearing. I was
very much Troubled to hear what she said, for I thought Spinning had been
Easy, as not requiring much Skill to Draw, and Twist a Thread, nay, so Easy I
thought it was, as I did imagine I should have Spun so Small, and Even a
Thread, as to make Pure Fine Linen Cloth, also, that my Maids and I should
make so much, as I should not have needed to Buy any, either for Household
Linen, or Shifts. Then I bid her leave me, to Consider of some other Work; and
when I was by my self alone, I called into my Mind several Sorts of Wrought
Works, most of which, though I had Will, yet I had no Skill to Work, for which
I did Inwardly Complain of my Education, that my Mother did not Force me to
Learn to Work with a Needle, though she found me always Unapt thereto; at last
I Pitched upon Making of Silk Flowers, for I did Remember, when I was a Girl, I
saw my Sisters make Silk Flowers, and I had made some, although Ill-favour'dly;
wherefore I sent for the Governess of my House again, and told her, that I
would have her Buy several Colored Silks, for I was Resolved to Employ my Time
in making Silk-Flowers; she told me, she would Obey my Commands, but, said she,
Madam, neither You, nor any that Serves You, can do them so Well, as those who
make it their Trade, neither can you make them so Cheap, as they will Sell them
out of their Shops, wherefore you had better Buy those Toys, if you Desire
them, for it will be an Unprofitable Employment, to Wast Time, with a Double
Expense of Money. Then I told her I would Preserve, for it was Summer time, and
the Fruit Fresh, and Ripe upon the Trees; she asked me for whom I would
Preserve, for I seldom did Eat Sweetmeats my self, nor made Banquets for
Strangers, unless I meant to Feed my Household Servants with them; besides, said
she, you may keep half a score Servants with the Money that is laid out in Sugar
and Coals, which go to the Preserving only of a Few Sweetmeats, that are good
for nothing, but to Breed Obstructions, and Rot the Teeth. All which when I
heard, I conceived she spoke Reason; at last I considered, that I and my Maids
had better be Idle, than to Employ Time Unprofitably, and to spend Money Idely;
and after I had Mused some time, I told her, how I heard my Neighbors
Condemned me, for letting my Servants be Idle without Employment, and that my
Maids said it was my Fault, for they were willing to be Employed in Huswifry;
she said, my Neighbors would find Fault, where no Fault was, and my Maids
would Complain more if they were kept to Work, than when they had liberty to
Play; besides, said she, none can want Employment, as long as there are Books
to be Read, and they will never Enrich your Fortunes by their Working, nor
their Own, unless they made a Trade of Working, and then perchance they might
get a poor Living, but not grow Rich by what they can do, whereas by Reading
they will Enrich their Understandings, and Increase their Knowledges, and
Quicken their Wit, all which may make their Life Happy, in being Content with
any Fortune that not in their Power to Better, or in that, as to Manage a
Plentiful Fortune Wisely, or to Endure a Low Fortune Patiently, and therefore
they cannot Employ their Time better, than to Read, nor your Ladyship better
than to Write, for any other Course of Life would be as Unpleasing, and
Unnatural to you, as Writing is Delightful to you; besides, you are Naturally
Addicted to Busy your time with Pen, Ink, and Paper; but, said I, not with
Wit, for if Nature had given me as much Wit to Write, as Fortune has given me
Leisure, my Writing might have been for some Use, but now my Time and Paper is
Unprofitably Waste in VVriting, as my Time and Flax would be in Spinning, but
since I am fit for no other Employment but to Scratch Paper, leave me to that
Employment, and let my Attending Maids have Books to read. Thus, Madam, for a
time did I Trouble my Mind, and Busy my Thoughts to no Purpose, but was Forced
to Return to my VVriting-VVork again, not knowing what else to do, and if I had
been as Long Absent from my Lord as Penelope was from her Husband Ulysses, I
could have never Employed my Time as she did, for her work only Employed her
Hands, and Eyes, her Ears were left open to Loves Pleadings, and her Tongue was
at liberty to give her Suitors Answers, whereas my Work Employes all the
Faculties and Powers of my Soul, Mind, and Spirits, as well as my Eyes and
Hands, and my Thoughts are so Busy in my Brain, as they neither Regard, nor
take Notice what Enters through the Ears; indeed those Passages are as Stopped
up, or Barred close, whereas had Penelope's Ears been so Barred, her Lovers
Petitions, Suits, and Pleadings, would have been kept without doors, like a
Company of Beggars, they might have Knocked, but not Entered, nor any of the
Mind's Family would have asked them what they Desired; neither would the
Tongue, the Mind's Almner, have given them one word of Answer, and then it was
likely her Amorous Lovers would have gone away, and not stayed to Feed upon her
Cost and Charge, as they did. But, Madam, give me leave to beg your Pardon for
VVriting so Long a Letter, though it is your Desire I should, I will Tire you
no Longer, but Subscribe my self,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLI.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to tell me, that you did see the Lady C.
C. and that her Face seems Young, although she be Old in Years; but, Madam,
Youthful Appearance is like Green Moss on Aged Trees, and not as the Green of
Springing Buds, or Flourishing Leaves; the truth is, some Bodies are Happy in
being so Healthful, and of so Lasting a Constitution; for like as the Holly,
Ivy, Bay, or Laurel, last Green all their Time, not only in Summer, but also in
VVinter; so some Men and Women will appear Young in the VVinter of their Age,
with a Fresh, and Lively Color, and so Smooth, and Free from VVrinkles, as if
Time had no Power on them; But there are not many Bodies, or Faces, that can
Boast they are too Strong for Time, and although they should be Victorious over
Time for a Time, yet Time Ruins them all at Last. And so leaving the Lady C. C.
to her Old Years, and Young Face, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLII.
MADAM,
THe Messenger you sent, is returning to you again, and with him I have sent
some Babies, and other Toys this City Affords, as a Token to your Daughter, I
do not send them for Bribes, to Corrupt her from Edifying Learning, and Wise
Instructions, for I would not have her Bred to Delight in Toys, and Childish
Pleasures, but I send them as Gifts, to Allure her to that which is most
Profitable, and Happiest for her Life, for Children are sooner Persuaded by the
Means of Tinsell-Toyes, and Flattering Words, to Listen to Wise Instruction, to
Study Profitable Arts or Sciences, to Practice Good, Graceful Behaviors, and
Civil Demeanours, than they can be Forced thereto, by Terrifying Threats, and
Cruel Blows; it is true, they may be Forced to the Outward Forms, or Actions of
Learning, but not to the Understanding, Profit, Grace, or Becoming, for Force
Breaks the Understanding, Destroys all Ingenuity, for the Fear of Punishment
Confuses the Brain, and Disquiets the Mind so much, as it makes them Incapable
of Right Impressions, whereas the Hope of Rewards Delights the Mind, and
Regulates the Motions in the Brain, and makes them so Smooth, as the least
Impression of Learning Prints Fairly therein, and so Plainly, as to be
Remembered in their Elder Years; also it makes their Thoughts and Actions
Industrious, to Merit those Rewards, and their Endeavors will be the more
Active, through a Covetous Desire to Increase those Rewards; so that those
Toys which are given to Children in their Childish Years, may be a Means to
Teach them, when Grown to Elder Years, to Know, and Acknowledge, that all Toys
are Vanities, and that nothing is to be Prized, or Esteemed, but what is
Useful, and Best, either for their Present, or Future Life, as the Life of
their Memory, or Renown. Thus, Madam, the Toyish Present is to a Good Design,
and may prove to a Good End, which is the Wish of,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLIII.
MADAM,
THE other day the Lady M. L. was to Visit me, and by her sad Countenance I
perceived she was full of Melancholy, ready to be Delivered of the Burden, as
to Vent her Grief through her Mouth, but I Observing she could not Readily make
her Complaints, did as a Midwife, Help them forth, by asking her what the Cause
of her Sadness was; with that Tears Flowed forth her Eyes, as Ushers to her
Complaints; said she, although I was a Joyful Bride, yet I am an Unhappy Wife,
for on my Wedding day I Joyed, because I had Married such a man as had Proved
himself to be Valiant, Generous, and Wise, all which I thought was a Greater
Honor, to be the Wife of such a Worthy man, than if he had been Rich, Handsome,
and Dignified with Title, although he did neither Want those, which was an
Addition to my Joy; nor did I think my self Unhappy, that he Married me not
through his Own Choice, but his Friends Persuasions, or that he did seem not to
Love me, for I thought when Time had Proved my Virtue, Duty, and Obedience,
Justice would have Persuaded him to have Loved me; neither did I think my self
Unhappy, that he Endeavored to make me a Servant, nay a Slave to his Mistress,
because I thought he desired by this means to keep me from Jealousy, and to
learn me Patience; neither did I think my self Unhappy, that he Tortured me,
nay Threatened Death to me, to Force me to Serve his Concubines, because I took
more Comfort in that my Resolution was so Strong, as neither Pain, nor Fear of
Death could Alter it, and Gloried more in my Sufferings, than Grieved for my
Pains, as that I would rather Die than do a Base Act, as to be a Bawd to my
Husbands Whores; But my Unhappiness is, that my Husband will be Divorced from
me, which Divorcement is far Worse than Death, or Bodily Pains in Life, for in
the Grave I shall lie in Rest and Peace, and if I be not Remembered with Honor,
yet I Die not in Disgrace; and for the Pains in Life, it Learns me to Practice
Moral Philosophy; but to be Divorced, is to Live in Disgrace and Scorn, which
is Worse than any Pain, or Death, for he having got the Reputation of a
Worthy Man, the World will think I am a very Unworthy Woman if he Forsakes
me, and that he knows me to be guilty of some Notorious Faults, but that he
will not Divulge them, for Fear of his Own Dishonor, or out of Respect to the
Female Sex. Thus, by a Divorcement, I shall be left to the Censure, and Scandal
of the World, whilst he will be thought a Wise man for Parting from me, as
being not Honorable for him to Live with me; with that she Wept, as if her
Eyes had been two Perpetual Springs, and mean'd to make a Deluge of their
Tears, and with seeing her, my Eyes began to Drop too; at last I told her, I
did verily believe her Husband did but Pretend a Divorce, only to Fright her to
what he would have her, and intended not a Divorce to Grieve her, for though he
was a man that did take a liberty of Variety of Women, knowing that Liberty
could be no Dishonor to the Masculine Sex; and though he loved a VVanton
Mistress, yet certainly he was not so Unjust, or Unwise, as to Hate a Chaste
Wife, or to Part from a Virtuous Wife, for the sake of a Lewd Mistress, and
therefore I thought she might take Comfort, and the best Remedy, at least,
Cordial, for Grief, was Patience, for though her Husband was an Independent to
Amor, yet he was an Orthodox to Honor, and Moral Honesty, only he wanted some
Temperance, at which she Smiled; by that I perceived her Complaints and my
Opinion had somewat Removed the Heavy Oppression of Melancholy, and after some
time, she took her leave of me, giving me Thanks both for hearing her Discourse
of her own Grief, and for Comforting her; and by this Relation you have as it
were Received the same Visit, as also a Visit from me, so as we have been both
with you, only a Letter does Carry us to you instead of a Coach. But now I
think it is time to leave you, and rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

CLIV.
MADAM,
YOu writ in your last Letter, that Mrs. P.C. drinks New Milk every Morning
Fasting, for Nourishment, and to Increase Natural Moisture; truly, I believe
she had better Drink Cream, for as Milk has Thin Whay in it, so it has also
Hard, Dry Curds in it, for Milk is Compounded by Nature, of three Substances,
as Butter, Curd, and Whay, as the Oily, Earthy, and Watery Part, whereas Cream
has only the Oily and Watery Part, for Thick Cream cannot be turned into a
Hard Curd, which makes it so much the Better, for Dry Curd is of the Nature of
Horn, as we may observe by such Cheeses as are made of Fleeted Milk, which are
Tough, Hard, and Insipid, whereas Cream-Cheeses are only Pressed Butter;
indeed, it is not to be done, as to make a Cheese, or Cheese-Curd, only of
Thich Cream, unless there be Water, or Thin Milk mixed with it. It Is true, the
VVhay of Cream, which is Butter-milk, will Curdle, that is, when the Oily Part
is taken out of it, and this is the reason that I say Cream is more Nourishing,
and Moistening than Milk; but I may chance to Plead the Good Effects of Cream,
and leave out the Evil, as I did once for Brown Bread, which was, that Brown
Bread in Effect was much Cooler than White, my reason was, that the Flowery part
being Boulted out, wherein lies the Strength, and so consequently the Heat, the
Remainder, as the Branny part, was like Grains, which is the Insipid part of
Barley, so that Brown Bread in Effect, is like Small Ale, and White Bread like
Strong, and for this Reason I did eat Brown Bread, but my VVeak Stomach soon
grew Sick, for though my Reason found out the Cool Effect, yet it did not
perceive, that the Grossness made it Hard of Digestion, until Experience Taught
it: so some may Object, that Cream being Thicker than Milk, may not pass out of
the Stomach so Easily, but surely, if the Milk Curdles in the Stomach, as
certainly it most Usually does, those Curds will not only be Harder to Digest,
but Breed great Obstructions, whereas Cream, which is as Butter, will make the
Body Soluble. Yet though I Argue for it, I Eat little of it, by reason the
nature of Cream is Hot, and my Diet is for the most part Cooling; some may say,
by reason Milk Nourishes Children, it may Nourish those that are Grown up to
Years, but Experience tells us, that the Nature of Mankind, for the most part,
Alters with Time, and that which is Natural to a Child, may be Unnatural to a
Man; but perchance some have Childish Constitutions all their Lifetime, and
the truth is, that Diet is much according to the Constitution, for, that which
will Agree with some, will Disagree with others, and for Milk, it better Agrees
with VVeak Constitutions than Strong, yet VVomens Milk, and Asses Milk does
Agree better than any other Milk, by reason those Milks are Thinner, and not so
full of Curds. But leaving Mrs. P. C. to her Milk, I rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

CLV.
MADAM,
TWo or three days since the Lady M. L. was to Visit me again, with a
Countenance as Joyful, as formerly it was Sad, I told her I was very glad to
see such an Alteration in her Face, which showed her Mind to be more Cheerful
than it was; she said, it was true, for she hoped she would be as Happy, as she
thought she was Unhappy, for my Husband has Confessed said she, that his
Unkindness to me was rather Seeming than Real, more to Prove my Virtue, than to
Dislike my Person or Humor, and that if he were Unmarried, and Free to Choose
any Woman through the World, he would Choose me for his Wife, and he says,
he would not Part from me, were he sure to be the Master of the World, by
being Perfid, or Divorced from me, and hereafter he would endeavor to be as
Good a Husband as I am a Wife, and with this Joyful Relation, her Blood
Flushed into her Cheeks, which showed, that her Cold, Dark, Melancholy Thoughts
were Dispersed, like as the Sun breaks through Dark, and Broken Clouds, which
Clouds, when Joined, Obscured his Light, and Abated his Heat; the truth is, her
Joy was so much, as I may say it was Contagious and Infectious, for it Affected
me with Joy, to See, and Observe her, and if all her Neighbors were the like
Affected, she might do as the man, that called his Neighbors and Friends, to
Rejoice at the Finding his Lost Sheep; but her Husbands Affections were not so
much Lost, as Hidden, or Obscured from her Knowledge; and truly, she deserves
to be Loved, for her Virtue, Chastity, Love, and Honor, for there are but Few
Women that make so good Wives as she, for many Wives Dislike their Husbands,
not out of a Dislike to their Faults, but out of Love to Variety, and some Hate
their Husbands through Hate to their Faults, making no Distinction between the
Man and the Faults, nay, some Dislike their Husbands Virtues, and Good
Qualities, through a Dislike to their Persons, and many Wives care not whether
their Husbands Love or Hate them, Live From, or With them, nay, for the most
part, they love their Husbands Absence better than their Presence, and will
make Quarrels to Part; but the Lady M. L. is not of the number of such Wives,
for she Loves her Husband, which Love makes her Wink at her Husband's Faults,
she is Patient with her Husband's Anger, Rejoices at her Husband's Presence, is
Proud of her Husband's Favors, Obedient to her Husband's Honest Commands, and
had rather Die, or Endure Torment, than to Part, or be Divorced from him; All
which every Good Wife ought to do. But leaving the Lady M. L. to her Virtue,
Joy, and Happiness, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLVI.
MADAM,
I Am sorry to hear you are not Well, but if your Disease be only a
Faint-tiredness, or Weakness, when you stand still any time, since you can Walk
an hour together, and find no Weariness, but rather Ease, there is no Danger of
Death, for to be Weary when you Stand still, so as to be near Fainting, and to
find Rest and Ease by Walking, is a Natural Effect of a Natural Cause, the
reason is, that when any one Stands still, the Nerves and Sinews are Stretched
straight out at Length, but when one VValks or Moves, they have Liberty, as
being Unbent, and Unstretch'd; as for Example, when Mankind Stands, their Legs,
Thighs, Hams, and Back, are Straight, as one Straight Line, but when they Go,
their Legs Tuck up, as first one Leg, then the other, which Pulling, or Tucking
up, Slackens all the Nerves and Sinews, from the Back Downwards, and that gives
Ease; for it is not only Change that gives Ease, but the Slacking of the Nerves
and Sinews, which are as if they were Stretched upon a Rack, when they are
Drawn Straight out at Length by Standing, but it shows, your Sinews and Nerves
are not very Tough and Strong, but rather Tender and VVeak, being soon Weary
in Standing Still, for the Nerves and Sinews are as Strings, or Cords, which
Tie, or Knit the several Parts of the Body together, where some are Stronger,
and Tougher, as not easily Stretched; like as VVyer, or Lute-strings, or
Bow-strings, some are so Hard, as they will sooner Break than Stretch, others
so Limber, as to Stretch into a Hairs Smallness, which makes them not so Firm
nor Steady, but apt to Tremble and Shake, at the least Touch, or Motion of the
Air, whenas those that are Hard and Tough, require some Strength to Stir them.
The like is with the Nerves and Sinews, those that are Weak and Tender, when
Stretched, are apt to Move, which is the reason that many with Standing Long,
will so Tremble and Shake, as to be ready to fall to the Ground, the Lower
Parts of their Body being not able to bear them up, being as it were, Loose, or
Untied, or Over-stretch'd; and this is the reason that when Soft and Delicate
Persons take up a great Weight, or hold a Weight something above their
Strength, their Arms, or Hands, or Bodies, will be as if they had the Shaking
Palsy in them for an hour after, for the Weight did Over-stretch their Sinews
and Nerves. But, Madam, I am Troubled with the same Tenderness, insomuch as it
is Tiresom to my Life, and certainly the best Remedy will be to endeavor to
Strengthen our Sinews and Nerves, only the Mischief will be, that what is good
to Strengthen the Sinews and Nerves, is Hurtful, and apt to Obstruct the Liver,
Spleen, and Veins, so as the Remedy may prove worse than the Disease, for
Gluttonous Meats are Good for the Sinews and Nerves, but Naught for
Obstructions. But Physicians perchance can tell Remedies, for I that am none
may be Mistaken in the Cause, and Ignorant of the Cure, wherefore I will leave
you to the Advice of the Learned Practicers, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLVII.
MADAM,
THose that take Exceptions at my Philosophical Opinions, as for Example, when
I say there is no such thing as First Matter, nor no such thing as First Power,
are either Fools in Philosophy, or Malicious to Philosophy; As for Infinite
Power, it is in God, and God has no Beginning, nor his Power, as being
Infinite and Eternal, wherefore there can be no First, or Beginning, either in
Quantity or Quality; And as for Matter, or Substance, let it be as is Believed,
that Matter, or Substance were made out of Nothing, that is, that God was the
First Producer of the Matter that made the World, yet the Power that God Had,
and Has, to make the Matter, was Infinite and Eternal, and the Matter being in
the Infinite and Eternal Power, is also Infinite and Eternal, without Beginning
or Ending, so as the Produced has no more Beginning than the Producer; the
like for the Form, Figure and Motion; but to answer every Idle Objection, or to
Instruct every Shallow Understanding, were Infinitely Troublesome, and Tedious,
if not Impossible; and there are not many that Read and Argue with a Deep
Consideration, or Clear Understanding, for when they Argue, they Argue in a
Misty Understanding, which makes many Objections which Reason Stumbles at, and
make so many Words, as they Confound Reason and Sense, and when they Read, or
Hear any other Argue, or Discourse of Nature, they Read, or Hearken
Superficially, rather Listening to the Sound, than Marking, Observing, or
Considering the Sense and Reason, or the Ground and Composition; like as those
that Barely View a Picture, but Understand nothing of the Art, yet will Censure
the Painters Skill, and many times out of a Presumptuous Opinion of their own
Understanding, do give a Midas Judgment, Preferring, not only in their Opinion,
but in their Commendation, Sign-Posts, or Sign-Pictures, before the Rarest, and
most Curious Pieces, Drawn to the Life. But leaving them to their Dull
Understanding, and Foolish Judgments, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLVIII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to tell me in your last Letter, that the Lady D. M. and you
were Fallen out, about some Speeches she should Speak in your Dispraise, and
those, when you were not by to Answer for your self. Truly, Madam, I cannot
Imagine what Fault she could perceive in your Ladyship, to Dispraise you,
unless Envy have power to make Virtue Vice, Beauty Deformity, and to turn the
Graces into Furies; But, Madam, I have often Observed, that Women with Women
seldom Agree, for our Sex is so Self-loving, as we cannot Endure a Competitor,
much less a Superior, especially for Beauty, Wit, and Worth; Birth, Title, and
Wealth are somewhat Easier to Endure, yet neither so well, but that we are apt
to look a Squint upon them that Surpass us therein, and therefore the less
Acquaintance we have with each other, the better, unless they be Chosen by an
Immaculate, and Pure Sympathy, and Honor Knit the Knot of Friendship,
otherwise the more Acquaintance we have, the more Enemies we have; wherefore to
Live Quietly, Peaceably, and Easily, is to be Strangers to our own Sex, and to
Live Honorably, is to be Strangers to the Masculine Sex, for Masculine
Acquaintance most commonly Causes Suspicion, and a Masculine Friendship never
fails of an Aspersion; wherefore a Retired Life is most Happy, as being most
Free from Censure, Scandals, Disputes, and Effeminate Quarrels, I mean not
Retired from those we have Relation to, as by Nature, Birth, Marriage,
Breeding, Obligation, and the like, for that were to be Buried Quick, but to be
Retired from those we call Strangers, such as we have no Relation to, or
Obligation from; but our Sex is so far from Retirement, as they seek all
Occasions, and let no Opportuty slip, by which they can go to Public Meetings,
or Private Visitings, or Home-Entertainments, they will Ruin their Friends,
Fortunes, or Fame, rather than Miss, or Want Company. But if this Letter were
not written to you, but to another Lady, it were Probable that Lady would
become my Enemy upon this Subject, as speaking so much against our Sex;
wherefore there is Male-Gossipping, and Male-Brabling as well as Female, and
there are more Effeminate Men than Masculine Women, that is, there are few
Women so Wise as Men should be, and many Men as Foolish as Women can be; But
now you may think me like a Priest of a Parish, that Exclames against his
Parishioners Faults, but never Mentions his own, or perhaps has the the same
Faults, but thinks to Obscure them by speaking against them in other Persons;
And therefore being already sensible of my Fault, in writing so Long a Letter
to you, I do Beg your Pardon, only Subscribing my self,

Madam, Your Ladyships faithful Friend and humble Servant.

CLIX.
MADAM,
YOu desire me to Explane that Chapter of Atoms, which is before my Book of
Philosophical Opinions, but truly I cannot Explane it more Clearly than I have
done, which is, that I thought this World could not be made out of Atoms, but
if it was made by Atoms, they must be both the Architects and Materials,
neither could they do that Work, unless every Atome was Animated with Life and
Knowledge, for an Animated Substance is a Living, Knowing Substance, which Life
and Knowledge is Sense and Reason; and thus every Atome must have a Body, which
is a Substance, and that Substance Sense and Reason, and so Probably Passions
and Appetites, as well as Wit and Ingenuity, to make Worlds, and Worlds of
Creatures, as also Passions and Appetites that Sympathize and Antipathize, as
not only to Create, but to Dissolve the Self-creating Figures, which Sympathy
and Antipathy might cause the Continuation of the World, for if they did
always Agree, there would be no Change, and if they did always Disagree,
there would be a Confusion. But I have written so much of Atoms, in my Book of
Poems, as I cannot well write more of that Small, though Infinite Substance;
wherefore leaving them to Better Judgments, Learning, and Rational Arguments
than mine, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLX.
MADAM,
YOu desire me to give my reason why much Cream is apt to make a Cake Heavy, I
say, the same reason that much Butter makes Pye-crust Heavy, for it is much
Moisture that causes such things to be Heavy, like as Dough is much Heavier
than when it is thoroughly Baked, for the Fire Drying up the Moisture, causes it
to be Light; also when the Sun Drinks up the Moisture of the Earth, it causes
it to be Dusty, and Dust is Lighter than Water, and much Lighter than Dirt,
which is Earth and Water mixed together, for although Rarefied Water is so
Light as to Ascend, yet when Water is an United Body, it is Heavy, even so
Heavy, as to Descend Weightily; Indeed Vapor one may say is the Dusty Part of
Water; but leaving Dust and Water, I return to Cake and Pye-crust, Cream and
Butter; the more Cakes and Pies are Baked, the Lighter they will be, and much
Lighter, if the Flower be Dried before it is Mixed, and by reason Cream and
Butter are of a very Moist Nature, when there is much of them in Cakes, and
such like Meats, it is not easily Dried up, which makes them require so much
the more Baking and VVorking; but many Good Huswifes put the Fault in the Cream
and Butter, when it is the Fault of the Oven, and many Impatient Huswives will
have their Cake before it is Baked, they will not stay the time, their
Appetites being Hotter than their Ovens; but there is an Old Saying, Too much
Cost Spoils a Pudding, and in my Opinion, it is too much Have that Spoils it,
for Good Ingredients Well ordered, cannot be Amiss. But, Madam, having had no
Practice, I cannot have much Skill in these Meats, and it is Probable my Cook
can give better Reasons than I can, yet howsoever to Obey your Commands, I have
given you my Opinion, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXI.
MADAM,
YOu desire my Opinion whether there be a Vacuum or not, I have written of it
in my Former Books, as in my Poems, Olio, and Philosophical Opinions, and
cannot write More, nor Better of it, than I have done there, unless I had more
Learning, or Judgment, or Wit, or Conceptions, or Understanding; but yet to
Satisfy you, I Will send you the same Opinion, or but little different, which
is, that if there were no Vacuum, but that all the Universe were full, only the
Gross Bodies Moved in the Thin Bodies, as is held by many they do, then the
Places of each Solid or Bulky Body must be fitted just to their Measures, and
their Places must be Supplied so, as when they Move, the Liquid, or Rare Bodies
must Contract and Dilate, according to the Motion of those Bulky Bodies, to
fill up their former Places, or following Places, and to Contract, to make Room
and Place for those Solid and Grosser Bodies, otherwise there would be a
Vacuum, or a Stoppage of all Natural Motions. But I cannot conceive how the
Thin or Rare Matter, can Contract or Dilate, if there be no Vacuum, for to my
Reason, there must be a Space to Dilate, and Contract into, so as the Rare
Parts must be Porous to Contract, and there must be Empty Places, or Space to
Dilate, and if they say the Space or Place is the Place or Space where the
Solid Bodies were in, which they fill up as soon as they Moved out, yet the
Space or Place must be Empty before the Rare Bodies Enter, for two Bodies
cannot be in one Place at one Time, and if the Great, or Solid Bodies, leave no
Places or Spaces, but always Move in Full Matter, I cannot Imagine how they
should Move if all Places be Full, although they should move in Rare, or Thin
Matter, for as I said, the Thin Matter must be Porous to Contract and Dilate,
to make Way, or Fill up, for if there were not Pores, or Spongy, or Hollow
Spaces and Places, that which is Liquid and Rare would be as Firm as Brass or
Glass, nay more, for those, no doubt, are Porous, for if there were no Vacuum,
every part would be Pressed, and Joined into a Firm Body or Substance, nay
surely there would be great Confusion amongst all the Works of Nature. But why
may not Dilatation and Contraction cause Vacuum to be sometimes more, and
sometimes less? But one would think there were no Vacuum in Nature, because
Nature is Forced, or seems to be so, as to make Way for Life by Death, as if
she had no Room, or Space for Life, but what was caused by Death. But leaving
these Empty and Filling Opinions, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXII.
MADAM,
REmember, when we were very young Maids, one day we were Discoursing about
Lovers, and we did enjoin each other to Confess who Professed to Love us, and
whom we Loved, and I Confessed I only was in Love with three Dead men, which
were Dead long before my time, the one was Caesar, for his Valor, the second
Ovid, for his Wit, and the third was our Countryman Shakespeare, for his Comical
and Tragical Humor; but soon after we both Married two Worthy men, and I will
leave you to your own Husband, for you best know what he is; As for my Husband,
I know him to have the Valor of Caesar, the Fancy, and Wit of Ovid, and the
Tragical, especially Comical Art of Shakespeare; in truth, he is as far beyond
Shakespeare for Comical Humor, as Shakespeare beyond an Ordinary Poet in that
way; also he is the Best Heroic Poet in this Age, nay in my Judgment, in any,
for I have seen him make Twenty Songs upon one Theme or Subject, as Music, and
not one Song like another; and for Comedies, he Hits, or Meets, or Imitates the
Humors of Men so Justly, as he seems to go even with Nature; Indeed he is such
a Person, that I Glory more to be his Wife, than Livia to be Augustus's Wife,
or had I been Titus's Wife, who was called the Delight of Mankind, although I
never heard he had any; for in my Opinion he is as Wise a man as Augustus, and
of as Sweet a Nature as Titus, all which is my Happiness in any Condition of
Worldly Fortune, in which Happiness I know you Rejoice, and this Rejoice proves
us Inseparable Friends.

CLXIII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to desire me to let my Steward receive five hundred Pounds
for you here in this Town, but you must have a little Patience, for they will
pay no Money, although it be Due, until these Christmas Holidays be past, I
know not whether they are so Strict as to Receive none, methinks they should be
apt to Take, for they are all busy in Entertainments, Eating, Drinking, and
Feasting; but I observe some things which I wonder at, viz. that Money should
pass, or move so Slowly in Matters or Affairs of Right and Due, as Debts,
Rewards, and Gratitudes, or concerning Honor, as Generosity, or for Heaven's
sake, as Charity, whenas in Causes of Injustice and Wrong, as in Bribes, or
Wars, or for Vice and Vanity, as for Unlawful Love, Gaming, Drinking,
Gluttonous Feasting, Vain shows, and Superfluous Bravery, it runs about with
that Swift Speed, that there is no Catching hold of, as to Stay it; but it
seems to be the Minds of Men that hold it from going forth to Good and Noble
Uses, and the Appetites of Men that make it run to Base, Wicked, Vain, and
Foolish Employments, so that we may perceive that the Appetites have more Power
to do Evil, than the Mind has Will to do Good. But, Madam, my Will has a Mind
to Serve you, although I have not Means, nor Power to do it, yet in what I can,
your Ladyship shall always find me,

Your most faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXIV.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you writ, that your Employment was to read the History of
King Charles the First, written by S. A. give me leave to tell you, Madam, you
lose your time in reading that History, for it is only a number of Weekly
Gazets Compiled into a History, wherein are more Falsehoods than Truth, for he
being Mean and Poor, had not Wealth nor Power to Inform himself Truly of every
Particular Action, much less of their Designs; but you tell me, he mentions an
Entertainment my Lord made the King, where he says it cost 5000 l. or
thereabout, Condemning another Writer of the same Subject, for saying it cost
more; let me tell you, Madam, that neither of them was my Lords Steward, nor
Treasurer, to know the Expenses, but only what they have heard Reported; and
therefore in this I cannot say S. A. writes False nor True, for it is a
Mistake, for when the King went into Scotland to be Crowned, in the Way he was
pleased to take a Dinner at one of my Lords Houses, namely Welbeck, which cost
between four and five thousand Pounds, and the next Summer following, as I
heard my Lord say, the King sent him word, that he and the Queen would make a
Progress into the Northern Parts, and Liking his former Entertainment, he
Desired my Lord should do the like, which he Obeyed, for, whenas the King came
with his Queen thither, my Lord, to show his Love, Duty, and Loyalty, made them
an Entertainment, as one Dinner, and a Banquet, that cost fifteen thousand
Pounds Sterling, at his House at Bolesover, which is five Miles from the former
House called Welbeck, which Entertainment it seems S. A. Mistook, setting down
the first for the last, or for both; but this is not the only Mistake in his
History, for there are many, and not only Gross Mistakes, but very False
Relations, which I can Prove; as for Example, concerning the Wars in the
Northern Parts, I know every Particular from the Chief Actor, which was my
Lord, and he is a most True Speaker, as being both a Noble Person, and a Just,
and Honest man, which all that know him must, if Conscience speaks, witness for
him. But, Madam, you desire me to ask my Lord concerning his Army, viz. the
Number, and by what Power he raised so many men, as also of the several
Successes, and how many several Armies were against him, I desire you will
pardon me, if I do not send you a Relation, by reason I intend to Write the
History of my Lord's Life, if I live, and he pleases to Inform me, as he has
promised he will, in which History I intend to Write all the Several Passages,
and Particular Actions of the Wars in those Parts, where my Lord was the Chief
for the King, as being General to Command all the Kingdom of that side, and I
will Write it Truly, Honestly, and Uprightly, without any Aggravation, or
Feigned Illustration, for my Lord and I believe that the Chief Principle of
Religion, Honor, and Honesty, is Speaking Truth, and Doing Justly in all our
Actions, and I take Heaven to witness, that I have Observed in him, and Found
in my self, not so much as an Inclination to do otherwise, but always a
Delight and Pleasure in Truth and Right; But, Madam, to return to speak of
General Histories, they are for the most part mere Fables, and it is almost
impossible they should be otherwise, unless every Particular Author do Write
his own Story, nay, those may be False through Vainglory and Self-partiality,
unless they be such Noble and Worthy Persons, as make Justice, Honor, and
Honesty, the Ground and Foundation of their Relations upon which they build
their Story. And, Madam, by reason you desire some particular Passages and
Affairs concerning my Lord's Actions, I shall be the more earnest with him to
set some time apart to Declare them to me; in the mean time, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXV.
MADAM,
AS for our Husbands going into their Native Country in a Glorious Condition,
as you were pleased to say in your last Letter you were in hope they should do,
give me leave to tell you, I hope well of our going into our Native Country,
but I doubt of the Glory, for our Noble Husbands Losses will Eclipse that
Splendour, for we shall only find Ruins, meet with Opposers, and have Debts
Attend upon us; it is true, I believe we shall be in some better Condition in
our Return than in our Banishment, but not very much, unless we be Restored to
our Lands, and our Losses Repaired, and our Debts Paid, all which I doubt, for
it is probable that those Persons that were the First Honest Actors, will be
the Last Honest Sufferers; Had our Masculine Friends been as Prudent as Honest,
they would have done like to the Old Saying, To be at the Beginning of a Feast,
and at the Later end of a War, but our Friends being at the Beginning of the
War, will have none of the Feast. But setting aside our Losses, Crosses, and
Misfortunes, our National Agreement will make you and me Happy, although they
Restore not our Husbands to their Riches, for then we shall Enjoy each others
Company, where we shall more Freely Converse by Words than we now do by
Letters. In the mean time I shall Please my self with the Hopes of that
Happiness, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXVI.
MADAM,
I Am sorry to hear that the Lady H. R. should have any Aspersion cast upon the
Honor of her Chastity; truly, I do believe she does not deserve it, but so
full of Detraction the World is, that neither Maids, Wives, nor Widows, can
Escape their Slandering Tongues, whether Old, Ill favored, Poor, or Diseased,
much less those that are Young, Beautiful, Rich, and Healthful, nay, not
Incloistered Women, which have Vowed Virginity, are free from Slanders, only I
believe Sucking Females are not subject to be Mistrusted; and it is not only
Men that Slander Women, but one Woman Slanders another, indeed, Women are the
Chief Dishonourers of their own Sex, not so much by their Crimes, as by the
Reproaches of each other, some through Envy, and some through Jealousy; but
it is always a certain Rule, that those that are Guilty, will never fail to
Accuse the Innocent, thinking it Hides their Faults, or at least Lessens them,
in having it thought that all other Women are as Bad as they themselves; some
may say, then it is to no purpose to live a Strict Life, since a Cloister
cannot secure them from Slandering Tongues; I answer, that Slanders must not
Deterr Virtuous Women from a Reserved Behavior and Course of Life, but these
must Endeavor by their Actions and Sober Life, to prove Slanders to be
Slanders; and say all Women were Slandered, and none did Escape, yet Heaven
forbid that Virtuous Women should be thought Guilty, no, their Virtuous Life
will Quit them, and Beget thoughts of Respect and Esteem in every Mind, even in
their Enemies, for though Ill-natured Minds have Ill-spoken Tongues, yet they
cannot Believe what they speak, if they have no Ground, nor Probability for
their Belief. Wherefore Women should behave themselves so as to get a Good
Belief, if they cannot get a Good Report, but if Women behave themselves so as
to cause a Suspicion, they are Justly Served if they be Censured both in Words
and Thoughts. And as Virtuous Women Suffer in Report through the Envy, and
Jealousy, and the like, of their own Sex, so through the Base Vainglory of
some Men, who think it an Honor to be thought Servants to Fair Ladies,
especially if they be Eminent Persons, Professing in all Companies how much
they are in Love with them, and going to every Place or Company they are in,
where every Particular will Address himself to one he Pretends to be in Love
with, and Scrape, and Complement only to her, whereupon the Company straight is
apt to imagine she has given him some Signs or Favors to Encourage his Hopes,
for if he had no Hopes, he would Cease or Desist from his Courtships, and he is
Pleased they should Think so, although he Knows the contrary; and when he is
with his Companions, they will Jest and Sport with his Pretended Amorous
Passions, and Name the Lady to him, whereupon he Shrugs, Sighs, and Lifts up
his Eyes, Professing himself an Unfortunate Man, but he will Order these
Actions so, as to make the Company Believe he is not in Despair. Besides, the
very Joining of a Man's and Woman's Names begets in time a Suspicion, especially
in those that are Strangers to the Lady, when perchance the Lady Hates that Man
worse than Death, out of fear she might Suffer in her Reputation, through his
Vain Folly; nay many times such Men will Pretend to be in Love with such or
such a Lady, although they have no Acquaintance at all with her; and some are
so Basely Wicked, as to Report they have Favors from such and such Ladies,
when all is False they say; yet these are most Inferior Persons, whereas those
of the First Description are often amongst the Higher Sort. But then for a
Virtuous Woman's Comfort, the Reports, or Suspicions that are Raised by such
Unworthy Persons, Vanish like the Steam or Breath upon a Glass, which leaves no
Stain behind it; for the Base Humor of the Man is soon perceived, and then the
Credulous Suspecters and Rash Reporters Condemn the Man, and Extol the Woman,
Scorn the Man, and Honor the Woman, the which Wipes away all Dusty Aspersions;
and so I hope will be the Aspersion of the Lady H. R. she is but Clouded for a
time, but when those Vaporous Reports are Vanished, she will appear as Pure and
Bright as ever she did. But my Concernment for her has made me forget I was
writing a Letter, which should be Brief, wherefore, I pray Pardon me, Dear
Madam, and I will promise you the next shall be Shorter, yet my Friendship
shall not, for I shall be to the end of my Life,

Madam, Your Ladyships faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXVII.
MADAM,
YOu may Chide me for my Idle, Vain Discourse, when you were last to Visit me,
but though I may for Pastime speak Vainly of Vanities, yet I do not make them
the Object, or Subject of my Thoughts, nor the Employment of my Mind, nor do I
suffer them to Dwell therein, they may Peep in sometimes, but they are straight
Thrust out, as Cheating Deceivers; for should they Visit my Mind often, they
would Cause such Troubles and Discontents, with Idle Desires, as my Life would
be Unhappy; for though I am Ambitious, yet it is not for such Trifles as
Worldly Wealth, Gay Shows, and Empty Titles, but for Inward Worth, Just
Actions, and Outward Fame, for which my Endeavors shall never be wanting, as
long as my Life does last, not that I would refuse Fortunes Favors or
Bounties, but I am not Covetous of them; the truth is, my Tongue is Vainer than
my Heart, and my Outward Ceremonies and Adornments more for the Foolish World,
than any Pleasure I take therein, for the World Respects nothing but Golden
Outsides, whereas my Happiness is, that I can be Content with any Fortune, so
Heaven would but Spare the Life of my Friends, for Fortune can neither Affright
nor Surprise me, although she be so Powerful, as to Advance and Ruin whom she
pleases; but though she has Power over the Body, and Estates of men, yet she
has none over the Souls, or Minds of some men, I say Some, as Wise, and Honest
men, for Knaves and Fools alter their Minds according to Fortunes Frowns or
Smiles; but my Noble Husband's Constancy and Patience can neither be Altered
with the one nor the other, for he is one and the same both in Prosperitiy and
Adversity, by whose Example I have Learned Patience, and am Constantly,

Madam, Your Faithful and Unfeigned Servant.

CLXVIII.
MADAM,
IF the Lady P. R. be as much in Heaven's Favor, as she is in Nature's and
Fortune's, she is not only Happy, but Blessed, for Nature has given her Beauty
and Wit, and Fortune has given her Riches and Honor, and if Heaven give her
Grace to Use those Well, she may be Crowned the Glory of her Sex; But as
Beauty, Wit, Honor, and Riches, are like Load-stones, to draw Love,
Admiration, and Respect, so they draw Envy and Malice; she has many Suitors,
but whether they be all Lovers I cannot tell, nay I dare say, she cannot tell
whether they be True Lovers or not, yet no doubt but they all Swear they are,
for Suitors and Courtly Lovers make no Conscience of Oaths; wherefore if she
have a Judgment answerable to her Wit, she will choose a Husband Wisely, and not
Fondly, a Man rather for Merit, than Person, or Wealth, for Wit rather than
Title; for a Woman that Marries a Fool, a Knave, or a Shark, is as Unhappy as a
Man that Marries a Scold, a Whore, or a Slut. But you will say, these three
later are only amongst the Meaner Sort of Women; I answer, I wish the Better
Sort were free from those Vices; but there be many Cleanly, Patient, and Honest
Women that are Poor, and Humbly Born, when those of Higher Birth and Greater
Wealth are not so, for all are not Sluts out of Poverty, but through Miserable
Covetousness, and some out of Laziness; it is true, I never heard Great Persons
called Scolds, but High Spirits, but the High Spirits have Sharp Tongues; and
for Adultery, Idleness and Delicious Feeding is apter to make Wanton Minds in
the Better Sort, than Painful Labor, and Spare, or Coarse Diet in the Meaner
Sort. But leaving this Discourse, as also the Lady P. R. to her Lovers, and
those to their Fortune, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXIX.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to tell me, that Learned men are held now
in as much Derision and Scorn, as Poets and Soldiers were some twenty years
since, it is a sign that Ignorance has gotten the Mastery, and that Learning is
beaten out of Schools and Colleges, and it is no wonder, since the Protectors of
Learning, as Royalty, Nobility, and Gentry, are Beaten out of Power; but these
are Punished now, for Undervaluing the Poets and Soldiers, a Poet and a
Captain were names of Derision, they would look upon a Poet, as a Poor,
Sneaking Fellow, and upon a Commander, as a Man out of Fashion, which was a
sign they had lived Long in Peace; indeed, a Poet and a Captain were accounted
names of such Reproach, as Men thought it a Disgrace to be seen in their
Companies, especially Young Fluttering Gallants, who would Shun them more than
the Pox, and your Grave Formalists would cast a Despising Smile on them, and
Busy Statesmen did think it were fitter they should be Banished, than Live in
a Commonwealth, although a Commonwealth could neither have Pleasure nor
Security without them, and in Danger they would have Desired, nay Flattered the
Soldiers to Guard them with their Courage, and to Direct, and Advise them with
their Skill, also they would have Entreated the Poet to Grace their Triumphs;
and if it were not for the Poet, they could neither have Masks to Please their
Eyes and Ears, nor Plays to Feed their Thoughts, and Entertain their Time; but
though they Despised the Poet, yet they would Steal the Poets Wit, although
they could not Steal his VVorth, to Court their Mistresses, or to Entertain
Visitors: Thus they did Basely Steal, Proudly Scorn, Vainly Despise,
Maliciously Detract, Foolishly Laugh at Poets and Soldiers, who yet are
Persons that are most Honored by Renown, and Best Entertained by Fame, Fame
placing them in the Chiefest Places in her Palace, for Soldiers and Poets are
Fames Nobles, and so Greater Men to After Posterity, and more Honored, than
Bare Titles in the Present Age; and of all Degrees there have been and will be
Poets and Soldiers, from the Palace to the Cottage, and they are so beloved of
Fame, as Fame Advances those whom Poets Favor; but those that do Despise, or
give not an Honorable Respect to those Persons wherein lives Wit and Courage,
let them Live in Fear, and Die in Oblivion, and I believe your Ladyship will
say Amen to it, as not only being a Lover of Merit, but a Possessor, for which
I am,

Madam, Your Ladyships Honourer, Admirer, and Servant.

CLXX.
MADAM,
MIstress D. O. and Mistress G. B. were the other day to Visit me, where
Mistress D. O. told for News, that Sir B. C. had Changed his religion,
whereupon G. B. said, she was Sorry for that, for she did verily believe he
could not Change for a Better than he formerly Professed; then she asked D. O.
to which Religion he was Turned, for there were but four that ever she could
hear of, viz. the Gentil, the Jewish, the Christian, and the Mohammedan, and,
said she, in every one of these Religions were Different Opinions, and those
Opinions almost Innumerable, yet they were not Different Religions; wherefore
D. O. said she had been Mistaken, for it was only a Different Opinion from the
Opinion he Professed before; G.B. said that was no wonder, for many did Change
their Party for Interest, and it was to be Observed, that what Opinion a King
or Chief Governor did Profess, the most part of their Subjects did the same,
and so many Strangers that did but dwell in their Territories, either for
Safety, or Traffic, or Example, but Natives Changed out of hope of Preferment,
as some for Honors, Offices, and Commands, others to Enjoy their Estates, and
to save Fines, or Taxes, or the like, some through Persuasion of Friends, some
for Fashions sake, and some for fear of Banishment or Death: Thus some for
Fear, and some for Favor, some through Covetousness, and some for Humor,
changed their Opinions in Religion, but few for Conscience, and none for
Reason, for Opinions in Religion are all built upon Faith, wherein Reason has
no Place, at least no Foundation; but if any Changed for Conscience, said she,
it were the Meaner, and most Ignorant sort of People, who are most apt to Fear,
for Moral Conscience, said she, is the most Tender Effect of a Fearful Passion,
but Divine Conscience is an Effect of Grace, which the Common People has but
little of: Whereupon Mrs. D. O. told Mrs. G. B. that her Discourse proceeded
from an Uncharitable Mind; Mrs. G. B. answered, her Discourse proceeded from
the Observation of the course of the World, and from the Actions of Mankind,
which she thought were the Best Informers of their Inward Dispositions, but if
D. O. had Observed otherwise, she desired her to tell; D.O. said, she did not
take so much notice of the World of Mankind; then said G.B. you did not well to
Judge me; And hereupon D. O. asked her of her Opinion, as whether she thought
Sir B. C. was not in a Dangerous Condition; G.B. asked her, whether she meant
Dangerous to his Soul, Body, or Estate; D. O. said, for the Salvation of his
Soul; Truly, answered G. B. I do believe, that the Great Omnipotent God is
Good, Wise, Powerful, Knowing, Foreseeing, and Just, as not to Damn a man for
that which he could not possibly know, or for that which Nature made him to do,
neither was he Ignorant, as not to Foresee what Man could, or would do, and if
Man could do nothing without Gods Permission, Gods Mercy would not Permit, or
Suffer Man to Damn himself, for that would be to Make Man to that End, Knowing
it before, as Foreseeing it, and if he gave Man a Free Will, that were to give
away one of his Attributes, and so to make Man Great, and himself Less, and
only to Empower Man to Damn himself; or for God to Make Man, and then Damn him,
whereby to show his Power, would neither stand with God's Justice nor Goodness;
but certainly God could show his Power other ways, than by Damning those
Creatures he Made, or Makes; and that God be as much, if not more Glorified by
the Damned as by the Blessed, is but an Odd Belief, that Gods Glory should
Arise from Torments, as if God had no other way to be Glorified, this would not
Express Justice so much as Severity, if not Cruelty, as first, to Foresee the
Evil, then to make the Creature, and at last to Suffer that Evil, and to Damn
the Creature for the Evil; neither, said she, can that Rational Part that God
has given me, perceive how it can stand with his Goodness and Mercy, or his
Wisdom and Glory, to Suffer more Devils, than to Make Saints; neither does it
stand with his Wisdom and Power, to have more Enemies than Friends, for Wicked
men and Devils are said to be the Enemies, and Good men and Saints to be the
Friends, and Servants of God; but most Men have Blasphemous Opinions, as to
make God either Cruel, or Ignorant, as not to Foreknow, or else to Make to
Damn. But the Lady W. N. who was also Present at their Discourse, prayed Mrs.
G. B. to Break off, since Man was so Ignorant, as he Knew not himself, yet
would Pretend to Know God, and his Attributes, Counsels, Laws, Rules, and
Decrees, also whom he Loved, and whom he Hated, who should be Damned, and who
should be Saved, what Angels were in Heaven, and what Devils in Hell, who
Served him a Right, and who Served him a Wrong way; also Man is so
Presumptuous, as to Assimilize God, as also to Pretend to know what God says,
making him to Speak like Man; also to Express him to have Passions; but if God
be Absolute, and Incomprehensible, it is an High Presumption to Assimilize God
to any Creature; besides, it is Absurd and Ridiculous to Compare that which is
Incomprehensible, for if he cannot be Conceived, how shall he be Expressed?
Also to say God's Goodness and Humanity is such, as to Bow to Man, since Man
cannot Fully, or Knowingly Rise to Him, for it is Ridiculous to think that God's
Great Omnipotency, or Incomprehensibility, can either Bow, Submit, or Humble it
self; for God cannot Lessen himself, no more than Heighten himself, for he
cannot be More nor Less, there are no Degrees in God, nor Contractions, nor
Dilatations, for he is all Fulfilling; Indeed he is that which no Creature can
tell, but something that is too Great and Mighty to be Declared, his Works are
only a Glimpse of his Might; yet Proud Men call themselves God's Friends; O
Foolish and Conceited Men! O Great and Incomprehensible God! Thus, Madam, I
write the Several Discourses which these three Ladies had, by which Relation,
I, and my three Visitors, have as it were, Visited you; but lest our too long
Stay should be Troublesome, I take my leave for this time, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXI.
MADAM,
MY Life is so Solitary, my Mind so Peaceable, my Thoughts so Quiet, and my
Senses so Lazy, as I have nothing to write to you, but to tell you I am Well,
and I hope you are so too, according to the Old fashioned Style of Letters.
It Is true, if my Life were Active, my Mind Busy, or Factious, my Thoughts
Wandering, my Senses Inquisitive, I might find out some Subject, or make some
Business to write, but since I am neither Factious, Busy, Inquisitive, nor
Active, my Letters will be like a Bladder filled with Wind, and not like a Bag
filled with Gold or Silver; or they will be like Paper that is only filled with
Cifres, without any Figures; But although my Letters may be as Cifres; yet you,
to whom I write, are the Chief Figure in my Thoughts, which Expresses
Thousands; indeed, you are as Infinite it self, for your Merits are Numberless,
and there is no End of your Goodness, for which Eternal Happiness will be your
Reward in Heaven; But, Madam, I love my self so well, as I would not have you
there yet, for I would have you in this World as long as I Live, which without
you would seem to me as the Description of the Infernals, whereas now your Life
is as an Heaven to my Life, which is the Joy and Happiness,

Madam, Of your Faithful Servant.

CLXXII.
MADAM,
I Am so full of Fear, as I write this Letter with great Difficulty, for all
this City has been in an Uproar, and all through a Factious Division betwixt
the Common Council, and those they call the Lords, which are the Higher
Magistrates, the Common People gather together in Multitudes, Pretending for
the Right of their Privileges, but it is thought the Design is to Plunder the
Merchants Houses, and the Churches, by the last they seem to Regard, and Covet
more the Goods of the World than Heaven; indeed the World makes men apt to
Forget Heaven, as loving Mammon more than God; the truth is, they have
Plundered one of the Chief Magistrates, and were hardly kept from Plundering
the Bishop, which Act Expresses their Covetousness, and Divulges their Designs;
and this Disorder causes the Trumpets to Sound, the Drums to Beat, the
Soldiers to Arm, and the Women to Weep, and to make it the more Fearful, the
Great Bell, which is only Rung in time of Danger, either in cases of Fire, or
War, or Mutinies, or the like, sounds Dolefully, all which makes me Tremble
Fearfully, and that which increases my Fear the more, is, that my Maids being
possessed with the like Fear, come often to me with Masker'd Faces, and tell me
Diverse, and Different Reports, some, that the Army is coming to Destroy the
City, and others, that the Soldiers have liberty to Abuse all the Women,
others, that all in the City shall be put to the Sword; the Best Report is,
that all shall be Plundered, but for this last, my Husband and I am safe, for
we are Plunder-Free, having had all our Goods and Estate taken from us in our
own Country, so that now we have no such Goods or Wealth as is worth the
Taking; the truth is, we are rather in a Condition to Plunder, than to be
Plundered, so that if they will but spare our Persons and Lives, I fear not our
Goods, the only Misery is, that we cannot well go out of this City, by reason
we have here some Credit to take up Moneys, or Provisions, in time of
Necessity, for my Husband has Lived here so Long, as he can Challenge the
Privilege of a Burger, and therefore we may rise up with the Tumult, and cry
out Mutinously for our Rights and Privileges. But for all this I am Extremely
Afraid, insomuch that at every Noise I hear, if I be not with my Husband, I run
to find him out, so that I write this Letter but by Starts, yet my Husband
endeavors to Allay my Fears, telling me, that the Beating of Drums, and
Blowing of Trumpets, and Arming of Soldiers, is the Way and Means to Quiet
this Mutiny, and to keep us in Peace and Safety, but for all that, I hear my
Husband say, that it is a Scurvy Business, and a Dangerous Example; Howsoever,
I leave all to his Prudence and Care; for I believe, if he did perceive any
great Danger, he would Remove me out of the City, but then he must Go with me,
for I will not Part from him, regarding not my Safety when he is in Danger, and
I had rather Die with him than Live after him. But, Madam, hoping the next
Letter to you will be more Comfortable, and that all will be as Quiet and
Peaceable as it was, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXIII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to Express how the Lady C. D. did read
some of M. Ns. Plays, and that she read the Passionate Sad Parts so Whiningly,
that where it should have moved Compassion, it caused an Aversion; Truly,
Madam, Women for the most part, Spoil all Good Writing with Ill Reading, and
not only Women, but most Men, for I heard a Man who was a Great Scholar, and a
Learned Man, having Read much, and one that Pretended to be a Good Poet, and
Eloquent Orator, Read Mr. W. Ns. Excellent Works quite out of Tune and Time,
neither Humouring the Sense nor Words, but always persisting in the same Tune,
which was Dull, and Flat, and made my Sense of Hearing as Dull as his Reading,
but yet it was better than if he had made a greater Noise in his Reading, for
that would have put me beyond all Patience, Grating, or Wounding my Ears,
which would have Discomposed my Thoughts extremely, for my Thoughts live so
Peaceably and Silently, and take such Delight therein, as they Hate a Noise;
but in truth I never heard any man Read Well but my Husband, and have heard
him say, he never heard any man Read Well but B. I. and yet he has heard many
in his Time, but I know my Husband Reads so Well, that he is like Skilful
Masters of Music, which can Sing and Play their Parts at the first Sight, so
my Husband at the first Reading will so Humor the Sense and Words of the
Work, as if he himself had Made, and Writ it, nay, I have heard him Read some
Works, that have been but Mean and Plain Pieces, so Well, as to give a Grace to
the Author, and to make his Work Sound Harmoniously, like as an Ill Instrument
Well Played on, whereas others put Rare Instruments out of Tune; wherefore
knowing the Difference, as what Harmony or Discord Reading makes, I am so
Affected with fear of Unskilful Readers for my Poor Works, as when I Look upon
them, I cannot choose but Mourn for their Danger of Disreputation; yet to
Pacify my Grief, I imagine that every several Person likes his own way of
Reading Best, and so will not Dislike my Writing, for want of Well Reading. But
for Fear I should Anger your Patience to Read so Long a Letter, I take my
leave, and rest,

Madam, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXIV.
MADAM,
THe Lady F. N. and her Pretty Young Daughter had the other day a Quarrel,
insomuch as her Mother intended to Whip her, but she Disputed so well for her
self, as her Mother Forgave her Fault, and the chief Cause of the Forgiveness
was, that she told her Mother, she had rather be Racked as a Traitor, than be
Whipped as a Slave, although, said she, I have neither Committed Treason, nor
Deserved Thraldom or Slavery; besides, said she, I am Ten years of Age, too
Old to be Whipped, almost Old enough for an Husband; but whilst the Daughter and
Mother were Disputing, in came the Father, and Sir W. S. who found her Weeping,
but they Comforted her, saying, they came Purposely to Save her; she told them,
that as long as she was in her Mothers Power, she was subject to be Whipped;
Sir W. S. asked her, if she would Live with him, since she was Displeased with
her Mother; she said, yes, if he pleased to take her; but her Father said, he
would not Agree to that, unless he would make her his Wife; Sir W. S. said, she
was too Young for a Wife; the Father told him, that Three or Four years would
make her Old enough; he said, not for him, for he would neither be a Nurse, nor
a Tutor, for he knew Women were not Capable to be Instructed, until they were
Thirteen or Fourteen years of Age, and then they must have some time to Learn,
Seven years at least, neither can they Keep themselves as they ought; but when
I Marry, said he, I will Marry a Wife of such an Age, as has been Instructed
both to know Good and Evil, to know Evil by Relation, and Good by Practice;
such a one as can be a Companion, and is not a Nursling; such a one as can
Converse Rationally, and not one that can speak a VVitty Word or two by
Chance, as Children do; such a one as may bring me Strong, Healthful Children,
not Children that will be Children all the time of their Lives, if they Live,
as being Infirm, VVeak, and Sickly; or else do Die as soon as they are Born,
and from the Womb, go into the Grave; and to have a Wife that is fit for
Breed and Conversation, she must be Two or Three and Twenty at least; the truth
is, said he, I had rather Marry a Wife of Four-score, than of Fourteen, for I
could take more Content to Admire Antiquity, or to Listen to an Aged Sybil, or
Read in an Old Chronicle, than to Play with a Baby, to Listen to a Parrat, or
to Read the Horn-book, there being so much Difference between Youth and Age;
but when I Marry, said he, I will Marry a Wife that is near to my own Age, for
if I Marry a Wife much Younger than my self, I shall be Jealous of her, and if
I Marry one much Older than my self, my Wife will be Jealous of me, so as we
shall be Unhappy either ways; besides, in Unequal Ages Men and their Wives
are apt to Upbraid one another Age, but when their Age is Equal, neither has
Cause to Dislike each others, and for the most part in Equal Ages are Equal
Loves, and Fearless Lives, as neither of them is Jealous, and if we have Equal
Strength and Constitutions, we shall not Outlive one another Long, nor Wish
one another Death, nor grow Weary of one another Life; but I will, if you
will Consent, Keep your Daughter as a Baby, or a Toy for a Closet, but not take
her for a Wife, to Govern my House and Family; by my Faith, said her Father,
she shall be no Toy, if I can help it, but if you will take her for a Wife, I
will give her ten Thousand Pound, and if I have no more Children, I will
Double, or Treble it; said Sir W. S. I am Content, for though she be too Young
to Govern my Family, I am Old enough to Dispose of her Wealth, and for Society
and Conversation, I know no better Companion, no better Governor, nor no
better Friend than Money, it is Beloved of every one, but Loves no man, so as I
shall not Fear Money will Cuckold me, it will rather Bawd for me, and so for
Love to Money I will take your Daughter to Wife; VVhereat her Father said he
should have her, and so much Money too. And so leaving them to Conclude the
Match, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

CLXXV.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you Advised me to Write a Book of Orations, but how
should I Write Orations, who know no Rules in Rhetoric, nor never went to
School, but only Learned to Read and Write at Home, Taught by an Ancient
Decayed Gentlewoman whom my Mother kept for that Purpose? which my Ill hand (as
the Phrase is) may sufficiently Witness; yet howsoever, to follow your Advice,
I did try to Write Orations, but I find I want Wit, Eloquence, and Learning for
such a Work, and though I had Wit, Eloquence, and Learning, I should not find
so many Subjects, to Write so many Orations as will Fill a Book, for Orations
for the most part, are concerning War, Peace, and Matters of State, and
Business in the Commonwealth, all which I am not Capable of, as being a Woman,
who has neither Knowledge, Ability, nor Capacity in State Affairs, and to Speak
in VVriting of that I Understand not, will not be Acceptable to my Reading
Auditors: Nevertheless, to let you see how Powerful your Persuasions are with
me, I will send you those two or three Orations I have Written for a Trial, if
you Approve of them, I will Write as many as I can find Subjects to make
Orations of, and if I can get so many as will make a Book, I will set them
forth in Print, although I have no Hopes, nor Confidence in that Work, for I
fear it will be Lost Labor, and Wast Time; but I am in all Times,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXVI.
MADAM,
SOme Ladies the other day did Visit me, and in their Discourse they spoke of
the Duke of D. the Marquess of C. the Earl of F. and Vicount G. but I observed
that in their Discourse they only gave them the Title of a Lord; It Is true, a
Lord is a Noble Title, but yet the forementioned Titles be of Higher Degrees,
by which they ought to be Mentioned or Named; truly, in my Opinion, those Men
or Women that do not give every Person their Highest Titles, are either
Ill-bred, Foolish, or Spiteful, for it is through Envy, or a Low, Base Nature,
to Detract, or Take from any one his Just Rights and Dues, but Noble, Generous,
and Heroic Persons, will rather give more than what is Due, than Lessen ones
Due Rights, which shows, such Persons have more Civility than others have
Justice; the truth is, it is a kind of a Cosenage, or Theft, to keep back the
best Part of a Title, as to mention several Degrees of Men, and not to give
them their due Titles of Honor; but if they should be so Uncivil to Knights
and Doctors, as to Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Viscounts, there would be many
Quarrels in this Nation; for a Knight would take it for an Affront to be called
Master, and not Sir, and so a Doctor; but the most Ridiculous thing in this
Nation is, that when any one asks a Poor Tradesman, as a Cobbler, he will say,
Pray Sir how does your Lady? or, Remember my Service to your Lady, meaning the
Cobblers Wife, which is as much in Extremes this way as the other; But this
Nation is apt to Run into Extremes, in which I leave them, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXVII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to Tell or Express in your last Letter, that I was Accused
for some Words I had spoken concerning G. K. and L. O. which Words were
Prejudicial to their Great Affairs, and Dangetous Designs, as Doubting their
Successes, and Slighting their Proceedings; I confess I did Doubt of their
Successes, and did not Approve of their Proceedings, but yet I did not Slight
them, for then I should not have Mentioned them; and truly those Words I Spoke,
were not through an Evil Design, or a Malicious Nature, but out of a Deep
Consideration of the Evil that was likely to Ensue both to their Honor, and
Disadvantage of their Affairs, and the Present and Future Condition of their
most Approved Friends and Faithful Servants; and as for Doubting their
Successes, indeed my Fear was the Ground of my Doubts, for perceiving no
Visible Power, yet hearing of Present Action and Dangerous Adventures, and
Hazard of their Persons, it made me rather Fear a Treachery, than Hope for a
Victory, and I Declared my Opinion, by reason I had a near Relation to them,
hoping it might make them Circumspect, and Cautious in their Adventures, as to
Consider their own Weakness, and their Enemies Power, and not Rashly to Venture
Hand over Head, or rather Heels over Head, but to let Wisdom Counsel before
Courage Fights, for though Hellish Furies, or Spiteful Fortune, may Disturb
Human Wisdom for a time, yet Human Wisdom constantly Followed, does Charm
Hellish Furies in the End, Binding them within a Circle of Fear, and it makes
Fortune's Wheel turn to Wisdoms own Bias; but had I Spoken Harsh, or Sharp
words, they might well Forgive me, because Love and not Hate Produced them, for
many times False Hearts Produce Dissembling Words, in a Flattering Style,
whenas a True Heart sends forth Stormy Words, being Driven out by a Violent
Passion of Fear; wherefore I Appeal to their Justice to Acquit me from an Evil
Construction of my Good Intention. Neither were these Words Spoken in a Public
Assembly, but in my Private House, and to some Particular Persons, and every
ones House is, or should be a Privileged Place, out of which Informers ought to
be Banished, rather than the Owners Condemned or Accused; but what I said, I
desired should be Told, for the Reasons before Mentioned, that my Opinion or
Words might Alter their Designs, for I did not desire my Words should be
according to the Old Saying, A Private Speech in a Sleepy Ear. But sometimes
some may Speak so, as not only to desire their Speech should lie in a Sleepy
Ear, but to be Buried under a Silent Tongue, and those Speeches ought not to be
Dug up by the Memory, lest their VVandring and Restless Ghosts, or Spirits
(for Words are Incorporeal) should Affright the Present Times, or some
Particular Persons, which, if their Incorporalities were not Molested with
Repetitions, would Rest Quietly in the Pit or Grave of Oblivion; but if I have
said any Words that have Displeased those Persons you Mention, which are my
Dear and Near Relatives, pray them to Pardon me, since it was a Superfluity of
Love, which Overflowed the Banks of Discretion, and made my Words Float on the
Seas of Affection, without the Ballast of Judgment, or Guide of Prudence, which
being Tossed on the Billows of Fear, and Storms of Imaginary Danger, I am
likely to be Drowned in Sorrow and Tears, as being Driven against their
Displeasures, unless their Friendship and near Relation Save me, and bring me
to the Harbor of their Favor, which my Faith tells me they will, or otherwise
tell them I will never Believe them more; But howsoever, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXVIII.
MADAM,
I shall not Trouble you now to buy the Round of Feathers that came out of
France, for I have one made here in this Town both Cheaper and Better than
those were; but I have sent as many several Messages, or Letters, concerning
the Cap and Feathers, as I have heard a Lady did to her Husband, being in the
Chief City, and she in the Country, who sent to him to buy her a Hat and
Feather, the next Week she sent to buy her a Hat, but not a Feather, the third
Week, to buy her a Feather but not a Hat, the fourth Week she would have
neither Hat nor Feather; but I have bought a Cap, and many Feathers, not only
that they are in Fashion, but for Use, for the Hanging, or Falling Feathers
shadow my Face from the Burning Sun, and Fan a Gentle Air on my Face, that
Cools the Sultry Heat, so that were it not a General Fashion, it should be my
Particular Fashion in Summer time; Indeed, Feathers, in my Opinion, Become
Women better than Men, for Women are more of the Nature of Birds than Beasts,
not only for their Hopping and Dancing, which Resembles Flying, but because
they are more Useless Creatures, for most Birds are of no Use but to Sing, and
some to Prate, they are neither Useful for Labor nor War, as most Beasts are;
it is true, Vulturs, Ravens, Crows, and such like Birds, will be at the end of a
Battle, but it is only to Feed on the Dead Carcasses slain in the Battle, like
those that Feed on the Slanders of their Sex; Also Feathers are Light, not for
Shining, but in Weight, and so Women have Light Natures; Feathers are
Unsteady and Restless, so are Women both in Body and Mind; indeed Feathers and
Muffs are not so Seemly for Men as for Women, for how can a Man Guide his
Horse, or Use his Sword, when his Hands are in a Muff? yet it was all the
Fashion the last Winter for Men to wear Muffs, tied to a long String about
their Necks, the Muffs hanging at the lower end of the String, and when they
had an Occasion to lay by their Muffs, they flung them behind their Backs,
which seems like as Poor, Beggarly Soldiers Knapsacks, or as Tinkers Budgets,
and the String about their Neck seems like as if they were going to be Hanged
for Stealing some Bread and Cheese, or for Robbing an Apple-Orchard, or for
Stealing Ragged Linen off the Hedges, or some such Petty, or VVorthless
things; But Men are as Inconstant in their Fashions as Women, if not more, so
as it is to be hoped they will Change to a more Manly Fashion than Muffs, and a
more Handsome Fashion than Boot-hose tied up to their short Breeches, which
Boot-hose about the Knees appear like Wens, and Swelled Sores ready to be
Lanced, to let out the Corruption that is Gathered therein; truly, to me it
would appear more seemly for Women to wear Swords, than Men to wear Muffs, for
Women, though Weak, and Unskilful to Handle and Use a Sword, yet had they
Courage, they might make a shift to Assist an Assaulted Friend, or to Protect
their Honor against Violation, whenas a Muff does as it were Tie up a Man's
Hands, and is a Hinderance either to Assault or Defend. But Women have no
Occasion to wear Swords, for they are Protected by the Civil Laws of all
Nations, besides, all Noble Gentlemen are Guards to the Female Sex, and for the
Assistance of Friends, there be few that are Assaulted in their own Houses, and
Women are not suffered to Fight in the War; neither are they Chosen for
Seconds, nor is it fit they should be in Drunken Quarrels; and as for Thieves,
it is an Old Saying, Thieves are too Strong for True men, for Thieves will
seldom Assault One, under Two or Three, not but that Women ought to do their
Endeavor to Assist a Friend in Distress, though they were sure to do them no
Good, but their striving to Help must do them no Hurt, by hindering them to
Help themselves; as for Example, some Women that see an Enemy Assault their
Husbands, Sons, Father or Brother, or are by when they Quarrel with any other
Man, will in a Fright take hold of their Friends, thinking to Pull them from
Hurt, whenas that holding may be the Cause of their being Killed, as not being
suffered to Defend themselves. Thus may their Loving Fear be the Cause of their
Death; but I have wandered too far, from Feathers and Women, to Swords and
Death; wherefore leaving all to Fates and Fashions, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXIX.
MADAM,
I Hear by your last Letter, that the Lady H. W. does Entertain a Maidservant
that has lately Served in my House, and therefore desires you to write to me,
to send her word whether she was a Good Servant when she Served me, and whether
she was Trusty and Chaste; first, she must Excuse me, for I will not Dispraise a
Servant out of my Service, unless it were as a Punishment to some Notorious
Faults; for Servants may be Better and Worse in Several Services, according to
the Several Employments, or Places, or Labors they are Employed in; for some
Servants may be very Proper and Fit, Industrious, and Prudent in some sorts of
Places or Labors, as to be Excellent Servants, and in others be very Ill
Servants, so as it may be the Fault of the Master or Mistress not to Employ
them Properly, or that perhaps such Places which are Proper for such a Servant
are Supplied; and perchance a Servant may See his own Errors, and Repent the
Faults Committed in one Service, as not to do the like in another, so as it may
be Injustice for a Master or Mistress to Dispraise a Servant, which may prove
to his Ruin, as to hinder him from a Good Service; Neither ought a Master or
Mistress to give a Servant an Undeserved Praise, for that were to speak
Untruth, besides, it would be a Cheat to Prefer a Servant with a False Report,
or to Cozen a Master with a Servants Undeserved Praise, like as Tradesmen do
put off Ill Commodities upon their Word, that they are Good, and the Buyer
relying upon the Sellers Word, as believing him to be a True Speaker, is
Cozened; nay, if the Wares be Good, Praise is their Due, but yet Sellers must
Speak their Praise but of that which they have found Good and Serviceable in
them; wherefore the best way is to let every Master or Mistress prove their
Servants by their Services. The next is, the Lady H. W. would know whether she
be Trusty and Chaste? As for Trust, I Entrust my Servants as Little as I can,
but just what of Necessity I must, for there is an Old Saying, that in Trust
lies Treason, and I will not Tempt, or Enable them to be Traitors, if I can
Avoid it; As for the Chastity of my Servants, I do not Inquire what
Constitution they are of, but what Service they are fit for in my Household
Affairs; neither am I Porter, or Spy of my Maids Lower Parts, it is too Foul an
Office or Employment for any Mistress; but if I hear they do not Demean
themselves as Good and Honest Servants ought, in an Honorable, Governed House,
they have Warning to be Gone, paying them such Wages as their Bargain was. But
the truth is, though my Husband is pleased to make me Mistress of his House and
Houshold-servants, yet I seldom take any Servants, or turn them away, for I
have an Under-Officer as my Lieutenant General, which is the Governess of my
House, and she receives my General Orders, and Executes the Particular
Households Affairs, which belongs to the Government of a Mistress that has a
Master, which is a Husband. This, Madam, I have Related to you, although I
think you well Know it your self, and may Relate it to the Lady H. W. and so
taking my leave of you for this time, I rest,

Madam, Your Ladyships faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXX.
MADAM,
HEre is a Lady in this City, who is the only Child of her Parents, and so
Handsome, that when we came first hither, she was Gazed on as much as if she had
been a Blazing Star, and those Churches she did Frequent were always the
Fullest of People, which seems, they went to Church rather to See than to Pray,
more for the Admiration of a Creature, than for Devotion to the Creator, and it
shows, she was the only Saint that was Regarded, for thus she was Admired and
Followed; but as Blazing Stars soon Vanish, so Beauty soon Fades, although her
Beauty was likely to Last, being more in Favor than Color, for indeed she had
Extraordinary Well-favour'd and Pleasing Features in her Face, but now they are
Altered, and that in Few Years, which shows, Time was more Spiteful and
Mischievous to her Face, than it Usually is to others, and as Time was Spiteful
to her, so was also Fortune, for she is yet Unmarried, and begins now to be
Melancholy, some say, for want of a Husband; for indeed most Maids account it a
great Misfortune to live Long Unmarried, it seems they Know not, or will not
Believe the Cares and Troubles that Accompany a Married Life; but perchance her
Melancholy may proceed from the Decay of her Beauty, seeing her self Neglected,
and not Regarded, for now when she goes to Church, not any body takes a
Particular Notice of her, by which we may observe, that Flourishing Beauties
are like as Flourishing Favorites, Admired, Flattered, and Followed for the
time they are in Favor; or like Conquering Generals, being Famous whilst they
gain Victories, but if Fortune Frowns, they are Neglected, if not Despised, the
like for Beauty when Faded; and Fortune for the most part is an Enemy to
Beauty, for she does not so often Advance the Owners, as those that are but
Indifferent. But leaving Beauty to Youth, and the Lady to her Parents Care, to
get her a Rich, and Good Husband, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

CLXXXI.
MADAM,
THe Lady B. D. was the other day to Visit me, and whilst she was with me in
came the Lady A. B. whose Hair is as White as Snow, not White by Birth, but by
Time; yet her Face appears Young, which is a Wonder; but some Persons Hairs
will turn White, before their Years grow Old; but whether she be Old, or in her
Autumn, or Young, I will not Question, yet she made a Graceful Show, and to my
Fancy seemed very Handsome, and her Gray Head Became her Well, for she had
Curled her Gray Hair as Curiously as the Youngest Woman could have done, and
certainly the Lady B. D. thought she appeared too Handsome, for I never saw any
Woman appear more Envious or Spiteful in my Life, both in Countenance,
Behavior, or Words, than the Lady B. D. did against the Lady A. B. and the
Lady A. B. perceiving the Lady B. D. not to be in a Good Humor, endeavored to
Gain her Favor with all the Obliging Civilities she could, but all would not
do; by which we may perceive, that nothing can Cure or Abate that Peevish, and
Self-loving Humor, as to desire to be Absolute above the rest of our Sex, but
a Self-denial caused by a Heavenly Grace Infused into the Soul by a Divine
Power, to which Divine Power I leave all our Sex, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXXII.
MADAM,
I Heard that the Lord D. D. declares he will Challenge the Lord E. E. to Fight
a Duel, by which he declares his Present Fear, rather than his Future
Intention, otherwise his Neighbors would have heard of his Fighting Actions
before they had heard of his Boasting Words: but I suppose Drink Produced
those Words, and not his Will; the truth is, Strong Drink, or rather the
Vapor of it, is not only apt to Produce Vain Speeches, but Foolish, and
sometimes Desperate Actions, for much Drink many times will cause Cowards to
Fight, and then Fury Possesses the Room of Fear. But leaving the Lord D. D. to
his Intended Duel, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXXIII.
MADAM,
I Do not VVonder, that those which are Endued and Adorned with the Bounteous
Gifts of Nature, should Seek, and Endeavor to Divulge them; the truth is, it
were not Fit nor Well, that those Gifts, as Courage, Judgment, Wit, and
Beauty, should be Buried in Obscurity; but there are many that believe through
Partial Self-love (for all Mankind have that Love) they are Endued and Adorned
with such Gifts, when all their Neighbors and Friends see they are not so much
Favored, but rather Disfavoured with Defects, for each man sees each others
Defects, though not their own; But I have Observed, that there is a Disagreeing
between Nature and Fortune, for those that Nature Smiles on, for the most part
Fortune Frowns on, as if Fortune did Envy Nature's Bounties, for though Destiny
and Fate hinders Fortunes Malice sometimes, yet they more often Assist her, or
rather Fortune does Assist them, for Fortune is the Servant to Fate, by which
we may perceive, that Nature has Powerful Opposers, or Overruling Potents.
But leaving Fate, Destiny, and Fortune, to their Decrees, Power, and Fate, I
rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

CLXXXIV.
MADAM,
YOu Expressed in your last Letter, that Sir W. N. was to Visit you, and that
you fell into a Discourse of the Humors, and Natures of Mankind; the truth is,
the Nature of Mankind is like an Endless Labyrinth, past finding out; also you
Expressed you fell into a Discourse of Governments, and I can tell you what I
have heard of my Husband, viz. that the greatest part of the World of Mankind
is Governed by Lies and Fables, which is, that all the World is Governed by
Religion, and there is no Truth certainly but in Christian Religion, why then,
all the Heathen, Jews, and Turks, are Governed by Lies and Fables, and those
are much more than three Parts of the World, which shows that most of Mankind
are Fools, and yet all Men think themselves Wise, for although all Mankind are
so Ambitious and Covetous, as not to be Satisfied, yet all men are Satisfied
with their Wisdom and Wit, thinking they have enough, for every man thinks he
has more Wit, and is VViser than his Neighbor, and is Conceited with himself
for it, and yet every man sees his Neighbors Follies; (for Follies are easy
to be Seen, but Wit and Wisdom lies Obscure) whereas if every man had Wit, and
were Wise, there would be no Fools; but Mankind is not only Foolish, but False,
I mean most Men, in truth there is no Trust in them, concerning which I have
heard my Husband say, that the Wisest thing for this World is, to Believe as
Little as a man can, and for the next World, to Believe as Much as a Man can;
indeed, Facility and Credulity in this World, are great Enemies to a man's
self, for they often Betray him into Misfortune and Unhappiness, at least into
great Errors and Follies, for which he is never Pitied, but Scorned. But I will
write you my Husbands Discourse concerning the Natures of Men, in his own
words; said he, The Disposition of Mankind for the most part is such, as you
shall seldom see them Smile or Laugh, but at the Follies or Misfortunes of
other Men, which shows they have so much Love for Themselves, as they have no
room left for Others, nay, you shall hardly Converse with any speaking of other
men, but they will find some Fault or other with them, for finding Fault shows
they could Mend it, and by that means they think they cry themselves up still
for the Wiser, nay, you shall meet with Few Discoursing of others, but they
will lay Load on them, even sometimes to Railing, though they never Offended
them, which shows most Extreme Ill Natures, and if they do Commend him, it is
very Coldly, saying, He has his Faults for all that as well as other men, and
the Epilogue of their Discourse is, He has Rare Parts, but for this, and but
for that, and but for the other; but if they hear any thing to a man's
Prejudice, how Rejoiced they are, and will Believe it presently, though it be
never so Improbable, and bring Reasons to Fortify the Prejudice; and if it be
any thing to a Man's Honor and Reputation, they will Pull it down presently by
Detracting, saying it is Impossible it should be so, and Fortify it with the
best Reasons they have: Certainly they think other Men's Faults make them
Virtuous, though they have ten times more Faults themselves; but surely their
Faults do not Glorify them, except others would take Warning by them not to Do
the like, which I dare Answer for, they will not. But every Man has his Weak
and his Strong Side, and if he do Compare himself with another, he does it not
Justly, for he Compares his Strong Parts with the other man's Weak Parts, and it
seems Truth when so Compared, and makes him Proud, but did he Compare his Weak
Parts with the other's Weak Parts, and his Strong Parts with the other's Strong
Parts, truly I doubt then he would be much out of Countenance. But some have no
Strong Parts to Compare, and yet will Rail on others, and that is Craftily
done, to Pull down others, to make them Equal to themselves, and then they are
as Fine men as any; but I will, said he, End my Discourse with a Saying of that
Noble Sir Philip Sidny, concerning those that will; says he, Has a man any
Good thing in him? Love him for that, for there are many that have none, and
One Virtue, or Good Quality, is worth a Thousand Vices, and I can make a
Benefit of his Good, and leave his Vices to him to Mend, without Playing the
part of his Schoolmaster; which was most VVisely, Nobly, and Honorably said.
By this, Madam, we may perceive, though Mankind is Generally Bad, yet some
Particulars are Wise, VVitty, Good, and Noble, and I wish for the sake of
Mankind all were so, but though this cannot be hoped, yet I am,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXXV.
MADAM,
THe War is likely to be Continued, and I am Sorry for the sake of our Sex,
not only that Women are Shiftless in time of Misery, as in Misfortunes, but
that they live in Torment, not in their Bodies, but in that which is far Worse,
in their Minds, for Fear is the Torment of the Mind, insomuch as it is more
Happy to be Dead, than to Live in Fear, it Rakes the Mind, and makes the Body
Restless, and this Fear I mention, is not so much for Themselves, as their
Friends that Hazard their Lives in the Wars; for though Worthy men go to the
Wars with Joy, hoping to gain Honor, yet Women Depart from those Friends with
Grief, for fear of their Death, and in their Absence they never enjoy a Minutes
Rest or Quiet, for there is not only a War in the Mind, as betwixt Hope and
Doubt, but a Tyrant, which is Fear, for Fear is an Absolute Conqueror, and a
Tyrannical Possessor of the Mind, Plundering the Mind of all Content and
Happiness, Banishing all Hopes, and then Inhabiting it only with the VVorst of
Passions, as with Grief, Sorrow, and Impatience, making Despair Governor
thereof. And this, Madam, by Woeful Experience, I have found my self, praying I
may never be the like again, for I had rather live as I do, in a Peaceable
Banishment with my Husband, although Accompanied with Pinching Poverty, than to
be Possessed with Fears in my own Native Country; but those that never had the
Sweetness of Peace, or have not known the Misery of War, cannot be truly and
rightly Sensible of either. Wherefore leaving at this time what is Past, and
making the best use of the Present, I rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXXVI.
MADAM,
THe other day the Lady E. E. and the Lady A. A. were to See me, and they
Discoursing of several Subjects, at last fell into a Discourse of Baseness and
Wickedness; said the Lady E. E. I would choose rather to be Wicked than Base,
for I would rather Steal a Man's Purse than Steal his Wit, and I had rather
Deny a Friend, than Betray a Foe, and to Fight for my Bread, than to Flatter
for my Meat, to Kill a Man's Person, than Detract from his Fame; also I would
rather be a Whore than a Bawd, though I were sure to have the Pox for my Hire;
said the other Lady, I am not of your mind, but I had rather be Rude, than Base
or Wicked, for I would rather choose to Tell a Bold Truth, than a Civil Lie, to
Deny Plainly, than to Promise Feignedly; and they asked me, of which mind I
was, I said, I would neither be Wicked, Base, nor Rude, but I would take no
Affronts, but rather Affront a Rude Person if I could; they said, put the case
I was Forced to be Wicked, or Base? I answered, I would not be Forced, neither
with Pain, nor Death; said they, this was Easy to Say so, but Hard to Do it; I
replied, it was true, but yet there have been Examples, that Resolution and
Patience have Overcome Torment and Death, and said I, I hope Well of my self,
although the Proof does lie in the Trial. Thus, Madam, we pass our Time with
more Words than Deeds, for we did nothing but Talk; and lest I should Weary you
with the Repetition of our Discourse, I take my leave, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXXVII.
MADAM,
MY Employment continues as yet, which is, to read Plutarch's Lives, and
amongst the rest, I find Described the Life of Cato Uticensis, whose Story, if
true, makes me love the Memory of this Cato, for his Courage, Honesty, and
Wisdom, and for the Love to his Country; but yet I cannot Allow his Death for
the Love of his Country, for surely he Mistook the Principle, and Ground of his
Love; for put the case Philip King of Macedonia had been alive when his Son did
Conquer Persia, and he seeing his Son follow the Fashions of the Persians,
should have Killed himself for the Change of Fashions, from the Macedonians to
the Persians, (although it was from a Worse to a Better) or he should have
killed himself, if the Laws and Customs of Macedonia should have been Changed
into the Laws and Customs of the Persians, although it might have made the
Kingdom of Macedonia Flourish the more, and be more Happy and Peaceable; or put
the case a man that has been Born and Bred in this Country, and should chance
to be carried into Turkey, as there to live, should Kill himself for Changing
Countries, although he neither Changed his Religion, nor lived in less Safety,
Peace, or Plenty, and had all his Friends near, and round about him; or if one
of the States should make himself Monarch, all the rest should Kill themselves,
having as much Plenty, and Prosperity, and more Safety than they had, this
would seem Strange, and like a Lunacy, as a Defect of Reason, indeed a mere
Madness. The same is with Cato, for he perceiving his Country was like to be
Governed as a Monarchy, which was before a Republic, Killed himself, although
he knew the old Government was so Corrupted, as it caused great Riots, Tumults,
Seditions, Factions, and Slaughters, Killing and Murdering even in the
Marketplace, so as it could not be Worse what Chance soever came, but was
Probable a Change of Government might make it more Peaceable and Safe;
wherefore Cato did not Kill himself for the Peace and Safety of his Country,
but for the Government, as choosing rather to have it Governed Ill by the Old
way, than to have it Governed Well another way; but if the Change of
Government had been likely to Alter their Religion, to Destroy their Natives,
to Torture their Friends, to Disperse the Ashes of their Dead Ancestors, and to
Pull down their Monuments, and his Country to be Enjoyed, Possessed, Ruled and
Governed by Strangers, he had Chosen Well, to have Voluntarily Died, rather
than to Live to see those Miseries, Calamities and Destructions, but he knowing
his Country fell unto the Government of a Noble Native, who had Conquered many
Nations to Enlarge it, and Brought in much Wealth to Enrich it, and many
Vassals to Serve it, and had not only Courage, but Power and Skill to Protect
it, Prudence and Justice to Rule and Govern it, and Clemency and Tenderness to
Love it, and yet Cato to Kill himself, because Caesar was to be Chief in it,
was strange; yet howsoever Cato did Nobler to Kill himself, than those that
Killed Caesar, for Cato's Death showed only a Dislike to the Change of the
Government, and not a Hate to the Man that Governed, whereas the Murderers of
Caesar showed more an Envy to the Governor, than a Dislike to the Government;
But the Wisest men may Err sometimes, so did Cato in his Death in my Opinion;
Wherefore leaving Honest Cato to Honorable Fame, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXXVIII.
MADAM,
TO give you a Relation of the Four Rich Widows, as you desired me in your last
Letter, is, that one of them seems Grave and Formal, the other Jolly and Merry,
the third Sad and Sighing, the fourth seems neither Formal, Merry, nor very
Sad; The first Mourns Ceremoniously, and all her Family, the second Mourns
after the French Mode, the third Mourns Dolefully, as to sit in Darkness, the
fourth Regards not what Mourning she wears; the first keeps an Hospitable
House, and Entertains all Company, the second goes to all Public Meetings, and
is Entertained, the third Receives Condoling Visits, the fourth follows her
dead Husbands Will, and endeavors to Execute his Living Desires, which he
would have Performed when Dead; the first Pretends to be a Wise Widow, the
second a Brave Widow, the third a Sorrowful Widow, the fourth a Good Widow. Now
to give my Opinion of them, I cannot, for Women cannot be Judged of, their
Natures being past finding out, for a Woman cannot Guess at her self, should
she Study all her Life time; the truth is, our Sex is so Various and
Inconstant, that the Length of Time cannot Prove us, no not Death it self, for
a Woman may Die in a Humor, which had she Lived, she would have been in
another. But leaving the Four Widows to their Different Humors, and our Sex
to their Inconstant Natures, I rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

CLXXXIX.
MADAM,
THe Four Rich Widows I formerly mentioned in a Letter to you, give me leave
now to tell you, one of them is Married again, and another of them is Dead; the
Sighing, Weeping VVidow is Married to a man that was an Under-officer of her
Former Husband's, but I know not why she should Marry him, unless out of
Charity, for he is miserably Poor, neither has he such VVorth and Merit as her
former Husband had, also he is reported to be Debauched, if so, it is likely he
will love his Pleasures better than his Wife, and will maintain them with her
Estate; wherefore it is Probable, she will have as much cause to VVeep and Mourn
for her Second Marriage, as for the Death of her First Husband. But the Good
VVidow is Dead, and in the time of her Sickness I went to Visit her, and being
with her, I told her I was sorry she was so Ill, she answered me, that she was
never so Well since her Husband Died, for I account my self Well, said she,
when my Mind is free from Trouble, although my Body be Sick; for when my Body
was in Health, my Mind was Sick with Discontented Thoughts, that Nature should
make me of a Longer Life than my Husband, but now, said she, I am near a
Perfect Health both in Mind and Body, for in Death there is no Sickness, and
this Sick Body of mine, is but as a Medicine to a Perfect Cure; I told her, it
Proved her Love to her Husband was a Firm Love, as to Continue to Death; I
hope, said she, to Continue in Death as much as to Death; but, said she, my
Love to my Husband was not only a Matrimonial Love, as betwixt Man and Wife,
but a Natural Love, as the Love of Brethren, Parents, and Children, also a
Sympathetical Love, as the Love of Friends, likewise a Customary Love, as the
Love of Acquaintance, a Loyal Love, as the Love of a Subject, an Obedient Love,
as the Love of a Servant, a Moral Love, as the Love to Virtue, an Uniting Love,
as the Love of Soul and Body, a Pious Love, as the Love to Heaven, all which
several Loves did Meet and Intermix, making one Mass of Love, but Death seized
on this Treasure of Love, and left me Poor, and having no more such Love in
Store, it made my Life to Pine away, like those that Starve for Want, but now,
said she, Death has Invited me to a Feast of Joys; with that she turned her
head and Died. As for the other two Widows, viz. the Formal and Grave, and the
Merry and Gay Widow, they are neither Married nor Dead, they Prefer a Courtship
before Marriage, and will use all means to keep back Death; the Formal Widow
loves to be Courted incognito, the Gay Widow takes a Pride to have Public
Courtships, both taking Pleasure in Variety of Lovers, or rather Flatterers. By
this you may know that the one Widow has done Foolishly, the two others
Wickedly, the last Died Lovingly. But leaving those two to Amorous Embraces,
the third to Repentance, and the fourth to Death, I rest,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

CXC.
MADAM,
GIve me leave to tell you, that I write this Letter with no Small Difficulty,
for though I sit so near the Fire, as I have Burned a part of my Clothes, yet
the Cold is so Furious, as it does not only Freez the Ink in the Standish, but
in the Pen I am writing with, so that I am but a Cold Writer, nay, the very
Thoughts seem to be Frozen in my Brain, for they Love very Slowly, as if they
were Stupefied, only my Love to your Ladyship keeps Warm in my Heart; indeed,
your Love does help to maintain the Fire of Life; I know not how Cold it is at
the Poles, for I never was there in Person, but in my Imagination yet, it
cannot be Colder there, than it is here at this present time; for my part, I
could almost think, that this Cold has Traveled from the Poles hither, but
this thought of mine would be Contradicted through two Reasons, the One, that
Cold Moves Slowly, although to bring Reason against Reason, it seems Probable
that Cold is very Quick, for it catches every Mankind by the Fingers, and by
the Noses, as Soon as it comes near them, even as Soon as Burning Fire would
do, and much Sooner; the Other Reason is, that Cold in the Long Journey would
get it self a Heat, and so Wast by the way; but leaving these Reasons, Though
the Senses know not from what Places, or Parts, Cold comes, or what it Causes,
yet they know that we have here at this time Cold with all its Potent Strength,
as an Army of Flakes of Snow, with Ammunition of Hail for Bullets, and VVind
for Powder, also Huge Ships of Ice, which Float in the Main Sea, and Stop up
all the Narrow Rivers; also Cold and its Army Shooting forth the Peircing
Darts, which fly so Thick and Fast, and are so Sharp, as they Enter into every
Pore of the Flesh of all Animal Creatures, whereby many Animals are Wounded
with Numbness, and Die Insensibly, although Mankind bring what Strength they
can get against Cold, as an Army of Furs, where every Hair stands out like a
Squadron of Pikes, to Resist Cold's Assault; and Ammunition of Coals serves for
Bullets, and Ashes for Powder, with great Loggs for Cannons, Billets for
Muskets and Carbines, Brush Faggots for Pistols, where the Bellows as
Firelocks, make them fly up in a Flame; also great Pieces of Beef for Ships
for Men of War, with Cabbage for Sails, Sawsages for Tacklings, Carrots for
Guns, and Marrow-bones for Masts, Ballasted with Pepper, and Pitched or Tarr'd
with Mustard, the Card and Needle being Brewis and Neats Tongues, the
Steers-men Cooks, besides many Pinnaces of Pork, Mutton, and Veal, and Flying
Boats, which are Turkies, Capons, Geese, and the like, all which Swim in a
Large Sea of Wine, Beer, and Ale; yet for all this we are Beaten into the
Chimney-corner, and there we sit Shaking and Trembling like a Company of
Cowards, that dare not stir from their Shelter; and many in the Sea Fight have
been Drowned, from whence some have been taken up Dead-Drunk, then carried and
Buried in a Feather-bed, where, after a Long Sleep, they may have a
Resurrection, but how they will be Judged at that time they Rise, whether
Damned with Censure, or Saved by Excuse, I cannot tell. Thus, Madam, I thought
it was the part of a Friend to give you a true Relation of our Cold Condition,
but in all Conditions or Extremities I shall always be,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

CXCI.
MADAM,
IF you were here in this City, now all the ground of the Streets is covered
with Snow, you would see the Young men and their Mistresses ride in Sleds by
Torch-light, the Women and the Men dressed Antickly, as also their Horses that
Draw their Sleds, and then every Sled having a Fair Lady, at least to her
Lovers thinking, sitting at one end of the Sled, dressed with Feathers and Rich
Clothes, and her Courting Servant like a Coachman, or rather a Carter, Bravely
Accoustred, driving the Horses with a Whip, which draw the Sled upon the Snow
with a Galloping pace, whilst Footmen run with Torches to light them; but many
of these Lovers, not using to drive Horses so often as Court Mistresses, for
want of Skill overturn the Sled, and so tumble down their Mistresses in the
Snow, whereupon they being in a Frighted Have, take them up from that Cold Bed,
and then the Mistress appears like a Pale Ghost, or Dead Body in a Winding
sheet, being all Covered with white Snow, and the Sled, when the Mistress is
Seated again, instead of a Triumphant Chair, seems like a Virgins Funeral
Hearse, carried, and Buried by Torch-light, and her Feathers seem like a Silver
Crown, that Usually is laid thereon, also the Sled is Drawn then in a Slow,
Funeral Pace, for fear of a second Fall. By this Custom and Practice you may
know, we have here Recreations for every Season of the Year, and as the Old
Saying is, that Pride in Winter is never Cold, so it may here be said, that
Love in Winter is never Cold; indeed, I have heard say, that Love is Hot, and
to my Apprehension it must be a very Hot Amorous Love that is not Cold this
VVeather. But leaving the Hot Lovers in the Cold Snow, I rest, by the Fireside,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

CXCII.
MADAM,
ALthough I am as Unwilling to stir from the Fireside this Cold Weather, as
Criminals are to go to their Execution, (for indeed the Sharp Cold is to me as
a Sharp Ax, and the Peircing Motions like Points of Swords) yet my Husbands
Persuasion, which is as Powerful on me, as the Powerfullest Authority of States
to particular Persons, Forced me out of the City, as without the VValls, to see
Men Slide upon the Frozen Moat, or River, which Runs, or rather Stands about
the City VValls, as a Trench and Security thereof; and I being Warm Enclosed in
a Mantle, and Easily Seated in my Coach, began to take some Pleasure to see
them Slide upon the Ice, insomuch as I wished I could, and might Slide as they
did, but yet I would Slide as one of the Skilfullest, and most Practiced, and
with a Security the Ice was so Firm as not to Break; but since I neither had
the Agility, Art, Courage, nor Liberty, I returned Home very well Pleased with
the Sight, and being alone to my self, I found I had a River, Lake, or Moat
Frozen in my Brain, into a Smooth, Glassy Ice, whereupon diverse of my Thoughts
were Sliding, of which, some Slid Fearfully, others as if they had been Drunk,
having much ado to keep on their Incorporeal Legs, and some Slid quite off
their Feet, and Fell on the Cold Hard Ice, whereof some Sliding upon Imaginary
Shoes, with the Imaginary Fall were tossed up into the Air of my Brain, yet
most of my Thoughts Slid with a good Grace and Agility, as with a Swift, and
Flying Motion. but after I had sat by the Fireside some time, the Imaginary
Ice began to Melt, and my Thoughts Prudently Retired, or Removed, for fear of
Drowning in the Imaginary River in my Brain. And so leaving this Imagination, I
profess my self really,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXCIII.
MADAM,
The Other day a man was brought to me, to be seen for a VVonder, that being
above an Hundred Years old, had all his Senses Free from the Defects of Age;
but I believe he made himself Older by his own Report, than he was, being a
Poor man, and got Money by Showing himself, and to make him appear Older, he let
his Beard Grow down to the Small of his VVast, so as he was a Mountebanck for
Beard, as some Italians are for Drugs; the truth is, his Beard was the Stock of
his Livelihood, for he was Fed and Maintained by it, his Chin, like Fertile
Land, did yield a Goodly Crop of Hair, but whereas Crops of Corn or the like,
must be Mowed or Reaped before a Profit can be made, his Profit was to have his
Unreaped or Unmowed, which is, to be Unshaved; But in my Opinion, there is
nothing so Ill-favored as for men to wear great Beards, it is neither Becoming
nor Cleanly, but Misbecoming and Slovenly, and it is as an Alms-basket, or the
like, for Crumbs, or as a Tub for Drops of Drink; indeed men that wear Great
Beards had need to Perfume them well, or else they will Smell of Scraps,
Tappings, and Grease, after Eating and Drinking, and if they be Amorous men,
they will hardly Gain a Mistress with Kissing; besides, Long Beards make Men
look like Goats; yet howsoever, a Great Long Beard was Beneficial to the Poor
Old man; and so leaving him to it, or his Beard to him, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXCIV.
MADAM,
MY Aguish Indisposition hinders me from taking that Pleasure I Used to do this
Carneval Time, which is Shrovetide, for this is the most Pleasant and Merry
time in all the Year, in this City, for Feasting, Sporting, and Maskarading; as
for Feasting, Fasting is the Cause, for by reason Lent is a Spare time for
Diet, the People in this, and so in many other Places, do as it were,
Fore-store their Stomachs, like those that do Fore-store their Provisions
Foreseeing a Dearth, insomuch as they Eat not according to their Appetites,
but according to the Time, by reason Lent is only for Fish, or other such Cold
and Spare meat, and therefore they Prudently will Surfeit of Flesh this
Shrove-tide, that they may not Covet Flesh, as to have a Longing desire
thereto; also there Sporting is after the same kind and like for the same End,
by reason they are to Pray as well as to Fast, like as those that will, or
think it Lawful to Commit what Sins they can, or please, before a Confession,
Penance and Pardon; But truly, these are Harmless Sports, consisting only in
several Attires, or Accoustrements, as to wear Vizards, etc. and some of the
Women do Accoustre themselves in Men's Habits, and the Younger sort of Men in
Women's Habits, where the Women seem to be well Pleased, and take a Pride to be
Accoustred like Men, but the Men seem to be more out of Countenance to be
Accoustred like Women, as counting it a Disgrace to their Manhood, although
they do not seem so, being dressed in the most Ill-favored dress that can be
Devised, to Imitate Devils, but whether they Imitate them Rightly for outward
Form, I know not, for I believe they never were in Hell to Learn, or Know how
Devils are Formed, or Bodied, or Accoustred, I believe they may Sooner, and
more Aptly Imitate their Wickedness than their Figures; but these Sports I went
abroad to See, being Persuaded to go forth, by reason it was very Fair Weather,
and Sun-shiny Days, although to my Sense of Feeling, I had Frost and Snow
within me, or was as if I had been Shaken with a Cold North Wind, having a Cold
Fit of an Ague upon me, which Cold and Stormy Indisposition of the Body, did
Dull, and Darken the Mirth of Pleasure, as Dark Clouds do the Light of the Sun,
for Health and Sickness are like Fair and Foul Days. But the sorts or kinds of
Sports are done for this Year, and all the Men, Women, and Children, were
Marked the next day, which was Ash Wednesday, with a Black Mourning Cross on
their Forheads, I know not whether it be to Cross out their Former Sins, or a
Barricado to Keep out Following Sins, although I fear it is not in the power of
a Cross to keep back Sin, I know not what it can do to keep back Punishment,
but they all seem to be very Devout in Frequenting the Churches. Yet this is
but the Beginning of Lent, but toward the later End, I suppose they will be as
if they were half, or three parts Tired, not so much with Fasting as Praying,
for though they eat not Flesh meat, yet they eat oftener other Good meats, as
Fish, Spoon-meat, Sweetmeats, and the like, also they have the liberty to
Drink more Wine; indeed most Christians all the Lent time, as also on many
Fasting days in the Year, live for the manner of Diet somewhat like the
Pythagoreans or Gentiles; But I, being not well in Health, have the liberty to
Eat what will or can; and so leaving the Generality to their Lent-diet, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXCV.
MADAM,
TO tell you what Pastimes this City has, they be several Sights and Shows,
which are to be seen for Money, for even Pastime is Bought; for at several times
of the Year come hither Dancers on the Ropes, Tumblers, Juglers, Private
Stage Players, Mountebanks, Monsters, and several Beasts, as Dromedaries,
Camels, Lions, Acting Baboons, and Apes, and many the like, which would be as
Tedious to me to Relate as to See, for I would not take the pains to See them,
unless some Few; amongst the rest there was a Woman brought to me, who was like
a Shagg-dog, not in Shape, but Hair, as Grown all over her Body, which Sight
stayed in my Memory, not for the Pleasantness, but Strangeness, as she troubled
my Mind a Long time, but at last my Mind kicked her Figure out, bidding it to
be gone, as a Dog-like Creature; and though I am of so Dull and Lazy a Nature,
as seldom to take the Pains to See Unusual Objects, yet here coming an Italian
Mountebank, who had with him several persons to Dance, and Act upon the open
Stage, also one which did Act the part of a Fool, and that all to draw a
Company of People together, to hear him tell the Virtues, or rather Lies of his
Drugs, Cures, and Skill, and to Entice, or Persuade them to Buy, and to be
Cozened and Deceived, both in Words, Drugs, and Money; I saw this Fool Act his
Part so Well, that many of the People bought more Drugs for the Fool's sake,
than for the Apocryphal Physician's, which was the Mountebank; indeed, Madam, a
Fool's Part, as it is the Pleasantest, so it is the most Difficult to Act, I
say, to Act it Well, for it does require more Ingenuity and Wit than any other
Part Acted on the Stage, for though the World is full of Fools, yet there are
not many Feigned Fools, for most men endeavor to seem Wiser than they are, but
Feigned Fools endeavor to seem Foolisher than they are; But where there is one
Feigned Fool in the World, there are a thousand Feigned Wise men, and where
there is one Professed Mountebank, or Jugler, there are thousands that are so,
but will not be Known, or Thought to be so. Upon this Professed Mountebank's
Stage, there were two Handsome Women Actors, both Sisters, the one of them was
the Mountebank's, the other the Fool's Wife, and as the Saying is, that Fools
have Fortune, his Wife was far the Handsomer, and better Actor, and Danced
better than the other; indeed she was the Best Female Actor that ever I saw;
and for Acting a Man's Part, she did it so Naturally as if she had been of that
Sex, and yet she was of a Neat, Slender Shape; but being in her Dublet and
Breeches, and a Sword hanging by her side, one would have believed she never
had worn a Petticoat, and had been more used to Handle a Sword than a Distaff;
and when she Danced in a Masculine Habit, she would Caper Higher, and Oftener
than any of the Men, although they were great Masters in the Art of Dancing,
and when she Danced after the Fashion of her own Sex, she Danced Justly,
Evenly, Smoothly, and Gracefully; wherefore in this Woman, and the Fool her
Husband, I took such Delight, to see them Act upon the Stage, as I caused a
Room to be hired in the next House to the Stage, and went every day to See
them, not to Hear what they said, for I did not Understand their Language, and
their Actions did much delight my Sight, for I believe they were better than
their Wit, which, as I suppose, were but some Stale, Bald Jests, and Broken
Pieces, or Senseless Speeches, taken out of some Romances, or such like Foolish
Books; But after they had been in this City some Short time (for so it seemed
to me) to my great Grief, the Magistrate Commanded them out of the Town, for
fear of the Plague, which was then in the City, although some said, the
Physicians through Envy to the Mountebank, Bribed them out; the truth is, they
had Reason, for the Mountebank was then so much in Request, as most of the
People made him their Doctor, and Iaen Potage (for so the Fool was named) was
their Apothecary; But they being gone, I was troubled for the Loss of that
Pastime which I took in Seeing them Act; wherefore to please me, my Fancy set
up a Stage in my Brain, and then brought out some Incorporeal Drugs for
Incorporeal Diseases, to be Bought by Incorporeal People, and the Incorporeal
Thoughts were the several Actors, and my Wit played the Jack Fool, which
Pleased me so much, as to make me Laugh Loud at the Actions in my Mind, whereas
otherwise I seldom Laugh Heartily, as the Phrase is; but after my Thoughts had
Acted, Danced, and Played the Fool, some several times of Contemplating, my
Philosophical and Physical Opinions, which are as the Doctors of, and in the
Mind, went to the Judgment, Reason, Discretion, Consideration, and the like, as
to the Magistrates, and told them, it was very Unprofitable to let such Idle
Company be in the Mind, which Robbed the multitude of Thoughts, of Time and
Treasure; whereupon the Magistrates of the Mind Commanded the Fancy-Stage to be
taken down, and the Thought-Actors to go out, and would not Suffer them to
Cheat, or Fool any Longer; And so leaving my Mind Free of such Strangers, I
rest,

Madam, Your faithful Fr. and S.

CXCVI.
MADAM,
HEre is no News, but that the Lord N.N. lives Nobly, Plentifully, and
Pleasantly, which is to live Happily, although there is not any man that knows
of any great means he has to Live on, which makes it a Wonder he can Live so
Well, having so Little whereupon; the Lord C. R. asked him, how it came that
he Lived, and Maintained his Family so Honorably, being a Ruined man in his
Estate and Fortunes? He answered, he had Fortunatus's Purse; said the Lord C.
R. if you have Fortunatus's Purse, you may make War, and Conquer Kings and
Kingdoms, for it is the Nature of that Purse never to be Empty, but whatsoever
is Taken out, is Replenished again; the Lord N. N. said it was true, but, said
he, the Nature of that Purse is, whenever any Money is offered to be taken out
to make War, the Golden Pistols turn to Leaden Bullets, and Bullets without
Guns, Powder, Arms, and Men can be of no Use; then, said he, you may Relieve
all the Poor, and Distressed Persons, which are many in this Age; Yes, said the
Lord N. N. more than can be Relieved, for that Purse, said he, has another
Nature, for if any offer to take out Money to Give or Lend it away, above the
Owners Use, it becomes Invisible, for though the Owner knows he has it, yet he
cannot find it, and the Purse is a Sensible Purse, for it knows as well as the
Owner, to what use his Stores shall be Employed; Why, said the Lord C. R. you
Maintain your Servants, and Near Friends; yes, said the Lord N. N. but Servants
are for my Use, and Children, Brothers, and Sisters, are Part of my self, like
as a Piece of Cloth that is divided into many Parts, yet is still the same
Cloth, for the Dividing Alters not the Nature or Quality. But the truth is,
Madam, Fortunatus's Purse is Prudence and Good Management, which keeps out
Poverty from a Family, and makes a man Thrive, as making a Great Show with a
Little Substance, and such a Purse all Wise men are Masters of. But leaving the
Lord N. N. and his Purse, I rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXCVII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased in your last Letter to Desire me to write to you my
Contemplations, which, should I Express, you would Understand they were very
Vain; for Solomon says, All is Vain under the Sun, which if so, our most
Pious, and Devoutest Contemplations are Vain; but my last Contemplation had the
full measure of Vanity, where I did imagine my self Empress of the whole World,
which World was to be Governed by my Fancy, Opinion and Approvement; and first,
I would have my Counsel-Ministers of State, and Magistrates, Philosophers, both
Natural and Moral, and my Court-Officers and Attendants, Poets of all sorts, so
should I Govern Wisely, and Live Pleasantly, by which I Imagined the World of
Men would be so United in Peace, Concord, and Tranquillity, as it would be
Harmonious. But leaving these Vain Imaginations, I am really,

Madam, Your very faithful Servant.

CXCVIII.
MADAM,
IN your last Letter you Expressed to me, that Mr. F. R. was to Visit you, and
his Discourse was bent all against Women, saying, that most of their Actions
were spent in Dressing, and their Thoughts in Devising and Inventing of
Fashions, and that they were Composed of Nothing but Vanity, and made up with
Art, so that by their Dressing, they might be thought rather to be Artificial,
than Natural Creatures; but you Answered him Well, when you told him he was
more Artificial with Formality, than Women with Vanity, and that all Men were
as much Artified as Women, and I having nothing to do, after I had read your
Letter, made a Copy of Verses upon the Theme of his Discourse, I confess they
are not Good ones, but such as they are, I send them you, as following.

THou Seeming Wise man, what is that to thee,
If I to Please my self, Accoustre me
According to my Mind? Must naught be worn
That does the Body Handsomely Adorn?
If we must nothing Artificial wear,
Then go stark Naked, and all the Body Bare,
For if thou wear'st a Rag, though never so Plain,
Yet Artificial still thou will remain;
Nay, if with Fig Leaves thou do make thy Breeches,
It Is Artificial still, if sowed with Stitches;
If thou do Shave thy Beard, or Cut thy Hair,
Or Pair thy Nails, or Corns, it is Art, I Swear;
But if thou Artificial things think Vain,
Then like a Beast in Woods and Fields remain,
And feed on Grass Vnmow'd, and Herbs Unset,
And Fruit that is Wild, if thou but can them get,
For Nature's not so Bountiful to give
All Creatures a Sufficiency to Live;
For if that Art did not Increase the Store
Of every thing, the World would be but Poor,
Nay Beasts would Sterve, and Men with Famine Dye,
If Art did not use Skill and Industry;
But Art and Nature do so well Agree,
Like Man and Wife, they Propagators be,
And therefore Scholars, as Grammarians, miss
When they say Both the Female Gender is.
But, Lord! what Fools these Seeming Wise men are,
Or those that are Precise, and do not wear,
Nor will allow that any thing be worn
Which may the Body Handsomely Adorn,
But Rail at those that Newer Arts Attire,
And nothing but Old-fashioned Clothes Admire,
When in those Older Clothes and Fashions too,
Art had as much as in new Modes to do.
When Women fine are Dressed, and Curled their Hair,
They Rail, and say they Artificial are,
They are not Handsome, 'cause the are Artified,
With several colored Ribbands they are tied,
Worthy is only she to be Admired
That Is only in her Natural Dress Attired,
And thus they Talk; but if her Dress be so,
She Naked as her Mother Eve must go.
What shall I say to these Grave Fools their Talk,
Who with an Artificial Pace do walk,
And yet Condemn the Art that Women use,
And think therein they Nature much Abuse?
They may as well Condemn the Husband's Care,
Who does Manure his Lands to make them Bear,
Or Gardners that do Plant, or Set sweet Flowers,
Or make fine Arbors, or Cool Shady Bowers;
Or Cooks that do dress Meat with wondrous Skill,
Which Nourishes the Body, and does Fill;
Or Apothecaries, which do Drugs Compound,
To Help the Life, and make the Body Sound;
Or States, or Commonwealths, which do provide
What makes Good Laws the Vulgar for to guide,
That men may live in Neighborhood and Peace,
In which Mankind does Thrive, and much Increase.
They may as well call all the Preachers Fools,
Because they Preach and Teach by Logic Rules.
Yet Preachers in their Pulpits do Declame
Against Dressing Arts, and all our Sex do Blame
For Plaited Braids, Pendents, and Curled Hair,
And all our several Garments which we wear,
A Feathered Fan, though it Cools the Sultry Heat,
With terrible Threats they in our Ears do beat,
Black patches on our Face, Pimples to hide,
They Rail against, and call them marks of Pride,
And every thing indeed which we do wear,
The Exclame against, as if their Throats they would tear.
Sure they would have us Adamites, yet know,
Against Bare-necks they Thundering Words out throw,
This last, I do conelude without all doubt,
It Is that we are not Naked quite throughout;
But let them Rail at Clothes and Curling Pins,
Black patches, Fans, and such like other things,
We are Revenged, for with their Fiery Tongues,
They Spend their Spirits, and do Hurt their Lungs;
For sure a Man no Reason yet can show,
Nor has Intelligence the Truth to know,
That God should be Displeased at our Dress,
As for a Patch Damnation, and no less.
Would he make Souls for Devils to Possess,
And none as made his Goodness for to Bless?
It Is not a Feathered Fan, or Curled Hair,
Can make him Angry, when we them do wear,
For Prayers may to Heaven High be sent
With as much Zeal from Souls as Innocent,
That have their Bodies Beautiful and Fair,
Their Garments Useful, Comely, Rich, and Rare,
For Garments Rich do not the Soul Pollute,
Nor can Poor Clothes against Great Sins dispute;
Devotion in Prosperity may live,
And praise God for the Gifts that he does give;
As for Example, Job in's Happy State
Was as Devout, as when Unfortunate,
When he was Rich, and all in Purple Clad,
As often to his God Recourses had,
And Abram Rich, who lived like a King,
He many Offerings to his God did bring.
Thus Rich men be'as Devout, as those that are
Both Mean and Poor, and rather Foul than Fair.
Devotion may in Palaces be found,
As soon as in a Cell under the Ground,
Or Cottage that is Poor, Thatched, Mean, and Low,
Wherein the Dwellers no Religion Know,
For they not having Means for to be Taught,
Do neither Seek, nor Practice what they ought,
And Deadly Sin in Poor men's Hearts may Dwell,
As often as in Rich men's whose Wealths Excel,
And had but Poor men Wealth, they soon would grow
So Proud and High, as not themselves to Know.
And if Rich men can Serve their God as well
As those that in Low Poverty do Dwell,
Why should they Quit their Wealth, and choose to Live
With Poverty, that nothing has to Give?
Does all Devotion in Shaved Heads still dwell?
Is there no way to Heaven but through a Cell?
Must Tubs, as Pulpits, only be for Prayer,
Or must to Zealous Night-caps we Repair?
Has none the Grace, or Spirit of God but those
Who all are clad in Puritanical Clothes?
Their very Looks and Gate with Art is Dressed,
The Picture of Hypocrisy Expressed;
It Is not the Outside makes the Soul Divine,
No more than Earth does make the Sun to shine;
Extremes in all Religions are not well,
It Keeps from Heaven, and Draws down to Hell.
But now I send you these Verses, Madam, you must not let F. R. See, nor Hear
them, for if he knows they were made upon his Discourse, he will leave off
Railing against the Generality of our Sex, and fall only on Me, so as it will
draw the whole Malice upon Me, by reason I have Answered in the Behalf of the
Generality; also I have called him a Seeming Wise man, which will Anger him
more, for it is almost as bad as if I should call him a Fool, for a man takes
it for as Great an Affront to be called a Fool, as a Woman does when she is
said not to be Handsome. But howsoever I leave my Poem to your Discretion, to be
Disposed of as you Please, and rest,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

CXCIX.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to desire me to send you word how the Poets were Feasted, and
I my self amongst the rest, which was thus; Nature sent the Muses to Invite all
the Poets to a Banquet of Wit, and Invited also me a Poetess, or rather
Poetastress; I went, and entered into a Large Room of Imagination, Hung with
Imaginary Hangings of Conception, wherein were the Pictures of Ideas, in which
Room were a number of Poets met, as Nature's Guests, which when I Saw, I was
extremely out of Countenance, as being all Men, and never a Woman but my self,
insomuch as I knew not how to Behave my self, but at last, holding up my Head,
which was bent downwards through Bashfulness, I saw my Lord one of the Chief
Guests amongst them, which Sight gave me Confidence, insomuch as I went to him,
and stood close by him, but the Muses to Oblige one of their Sex, came to me,
and Saluted me, and bid me very Welcome, and after they had Saluted me, they
Crowned every Poet there with Poetical Bays, and Placed every one in a Chair
of Celestial Flame, which had you seen, you would have thought we had been in
so many Fiery Chariots ready to Ascend up to the Heavens; then was every one
Placed round about the Table, and we took our Places according to every ones
Poetical Inspiration, but the Table we were set to, was a strange Table, for
never was seen the like, it was made of all the Famous Old Poets Sculs, and the
Table-cloth or Covering was made of their Brains, which Brains were Spun by the
Muses, for they are Spinsters of Men's Brains, as the Fates are of the Lives of
Men; but these Old Poets Brains were Spun into Cobweb Threads, as Soft and Thin
as Air, and then Women into a Piece, or Web, and Old Time was the Weaver
which VVeaved this Web like Damask or Diaper, in Works and Figures of Golden
Numbers. Thus we see Nature Transforms Souls into Tables, and Brains into Table
Coverings, the Napkins for the Hands was Pure Fine White Paper, all
over-wrought with Black Letters, and the Edges round about were Gilded; also
there were upon the Table, Plates, Salt-sellers, Knives and Forks, the Plates
were made of the Films or Drums of Sensible Ears, and the Knives that were to
cut the Meat laid thereon, were Orators Tongues, the Trencher Salt-sellers,
which were set by every Plate, were made of the Chrystalline part of Observing
Eyes, and the Salt that was put therein, was made of Seawater, or Salt-tears,
which usually Flow from a Tragic Vein, the Forks that were to bear up the Meat
to the Taste of the Understanding, were Writing pens; The Table being thus
Covered and Ordered, and the Guests set round, ready for the Feast, in came the
Muses with Basins of Water, fetched from the Well, or Spring of Helicon, for
the Poets to Wash before they did Eat, and after they had Washed, the Muses
carried those Basins forth, and then brought in many several Dishes of Poetical
Meats, Placing them on the Table; the first was a Great dish of Poems,
Excellently well Dressed, and Curious Sauce made of Metaphors, Similitudes, and
Fancies, and round the Sides or Verges of the Dish, were laid Numbers and
Rimes, like as we use on Corporeal Dishes and Meats, to lay Dates, or Flowers,
or Slices of Limmons, or the like; then was there a Dish of Songs, brought by
the Lyricks, it was very Delicious Meat, and had a most Sweet Relish, it was
Dressed with a Compounded Savvce of many several Airs, Notes, and Strains;
then were there two Dishes of Epigrams, I think one of them was Martial's,
for they were Powdered, or Brined Highly with Satirical Salt, the other Dish
was so Luscious with Flattery, as I could not Feed much thereon; then there
was a Dish of Epithalamiums, but that Meat was Dressed so Strong and Rank, as
it was Nauseous to me; then there was a Hash of Anagrams, Letters, and Names,
Hashed, or Minced together, but I did not like it; then there was a Dish of
Funeral Elegies well Dressed, but it was so Sad and Heavy Meat, as I durst not
Feed much thereon; then there was a Dish of Comedies, Excellently well Dressed,
with Scenes, the Sauce was Compounded, but very Savoury, being Compounded of
diverse Humors, and the Dish Graced or Garnished with Smiles and Laughter; the
next dish to that were Tragedies, but those were Dressed as we Dress Corporeal
Shoulders of Mutton, or Venison, in the Blood, Stuffed with Sighs, as the other
with Herbs, and Salted with Tears. Then came an Olio, or Bisk of Characters,
and after that was a Dish of Morals, which is a Meat more Wholesome than
Pleasant, the Chief Sauce was Temperance, but it was mixed with other several
Virtues and Passions; then was a Dish of Natural Philosophy, a Dish I love to
Feed on, although the Meat is very Hard, and not Easily to be Digested; it is
Dressed with Diverse and Different Compounds and Ingredients, as the four
Elements, and all manner of Vegetables and Minerals, the Gold is Cordial, and
the Iron or Steel is Strengthening, as also Opening Obstructions, which is very
Wholesome; then there were Joynted, or rather I may say Chopped, Animals, as
Blood, Bones, and Flesh, all Chopped, Stewed, Boiled, and Baked together in
their own Fat or Grease; this Dish was so Great and Full, as it might have Fed
Numbers, indeed it was an Infinite Hash, and an Infinite deal of Meat; then
there was a Grand Sallet of Rhetoric, with Oil of Eloquence, also a
Bag-pudding of Sciences, made of Mathematical Cream, Logistical Eggs, and
Astronomical Spices, which were Strewed as Thick as the Stars of the Sky;
Likewise a Great Pie of Arts, Made, or Raised by Prentices, and Baked in the
Oven of Time, Heated with the Fire of Labor, and was seven years a Baking, the
Crust was Hard, Strong, and Thick; then there was a Quelquechose of Rallery,
but whatsoever the Meat was, the Sauce was Naught, for it was made of
Ingredients, as bad as Poor People Dress their Corporeal Meat with, as
Lamp-oyl, Dead Vinegar, Rotten Pepper, and Stinking Garlic, as Foolish Jests,
Dull, Spiteful Replies, Rude Familiarity, often Repetitions, and Reproaches, so
as there was Sweet, Bitter, Sour, and altogether Mixed, of this Dish I Tasted
not, I was Sick at the Presence of it; as for the Desert, it was Music of all
sorts, Sweet, and Harmonious; the Drink we had at this Feast was Animal Spirits
instead of Sack, and Vital Spirits for Rhenish Wine, but when we had Feasted as
much as we would, or could, we Rose from the Table, saying a Grace of Thanks to
Nature, and intending to take our Leaves, but the Muses persuaded us to walk up
to the Top of Pernassus Hill, to Digest our Feast, lest we should Surfeit, and
when we came up to the Top of the Hill, we saw round about a most Pleasant
Prospect of Nature's Works, but because we should see Farther than her Ordinary
Work, the Muses gave every one a Prospective Glass, where we saw other Worlds,
Creatures, and Celestials, but some saw not so Far, or so Much as others, not
but that the Prospective Glasses were all of an Equal Goodness, but some had
not so Good an Eyesight as others; and after we had walked down the Hill,
every one took his leave of the Muses and Departed, but the Lyrick, and the
Comic Muse did so Embrace and Kiss my Lord, as they made me almost Jealous,
for though all the Muses made Civil and Obliging Addresses to him, yet not so
Pleasant, and so Galliard as these two were, and therefore I made the more Have
to Depart, that I might Separate my Lord from them, and so returning home to my
House, I rest,

Madam, Your Ladyships faithful Friend and Servant.

CC.
Dear Sister Pie,

DIstance of Place, nor Length of Time, cannot Lessen my Natural, or rather
Supernatural Affection to you, for certainly my Love for you is more than a
Sisters Love, nay, such a Love, as when I Lived with you, it could not choose
but be somewhat Troublesome, by reason my Love was Accompanied with such Fears,
as it would neither let you Rest, Pray, nor Eat in Quiet, for though it was a
Watchful Love, yet it was a Fearful Love, for I remember I have oftentimes
Waked you out of your Sleep, when you did Sleep Quietly, with Soft Breathing,
fearing you had been Dead, and oftener have I laid my Face over your Mouth, to
feel if you Breathed, insomuch as I have kept my Self Waking, to Watch your
Sleeps, and as Troublesome I was to you concerning your Feeding, as I was in
your Sleeping, for I was Afraid that that which was to Nourish you, should Kill
you, and I remember, I was so doubtful of every Meat you did eat, as you were
used to tell me, I was Sancapancha's Doctor; Neither could I let you Pray in
Quiet, for I have often Knocked at your Closet door, when I thought you were
Longer at your Prayers than Usual, or at least, I did think the time Longer, so
as I could not forbear to ask you how you did, and whether you were Well, and
many the like Impertinencies which my Extraordinary Love Troubled you with, of
which Trouble you are now Quit, living so far asunder; But though I am too far
off to Watch, yet I Pray for your Health and Long Life, and though I thought it
was impossible I could Love any Creature better than you, yet I find by
Experience I do, for since I am Married, I Love my Husband a Degree above you,
yet howsoever, my several Affections are like God and Nature, both Infinite,
and if Love Lives in the Soul, and the Soul never Dies, my several Affections
may be Eternal. But you may say, if my Love was so Troublesome to you, what is
it to my Husband? I must tell you, I have some more Discretion now than I had
then, and though Extraordinary Love will hardly Allow, or Admit Discretion, yet
Reason does Persuade Love, and brings many Arguments not to be Impertinently
Troublesome; but though I do not ask my Husband so many Impertinent Questions as
I did you, yet my Love to him is not less Watchful, Careful, and Fearful, but
rather more, if more can be, and all the Powers and Endeavors of my Life are
ready to Serve him and you, only he must be Served first, which I am confident
you will take no Exception at, but Approve of, for you are a Wife, and know
what the Love to a Husband is, and so leaving you to your Beloved Husband, I
rest,

Your most Affectionate Sister.

CCI.
Dear Sister Ann,

I Cannot Advise you to Marry, unless Men's Souls, Minds, and Appetites, were
as Visible to your Knowledge as their Persons to your Eyes, for though there
may be much Deceit even in Outward Forms, or Aspects, yet not so much, but (if
there be Defects) there will be some Appearance, but the Defects of the Mind,
Soul, or Appetites, may be so Obscured, as not to be Perceived till you find
you are Unhappy by them; indeed there is so much Danger in Marrying, as I
wonder how any dare Venture, yet there is less Danger for Women than Men, by
reason a Man may receive a Fixed Disgrace both to himself and his Posterity, by
the Wifes Adultery, where the Wife can receive no Dishonor if she be Honest
and Chaste; but though she can receive no Dishonor by her Husband's Adultery,
yet she may be very Unhappy by his Opposite Disposition, Cross Humors, and
Unruly Passions, which Antipathy may not only be a Hindrance to the Peace of
this Life, and Tranquillity of the Mind, but Endanger the Glory of a Future
Life, for Mankind is apt from the Troubles of their Minds, to Curse Fortune,
and to Murmur against Heaven, unless they have a Supernatural Patience;
besides, Men are most apt to run into Vices in a Discontented Humor, and are
always Wandering Abroad to Divert their Home-Disquiets, not that they need to
go out of Doors to Seek Vice, for Vice Dwells in most Houses or Families, but
that by going into many Houses or Families, they may take Infection from every
one, for Vice many times is Multiplied by Acquaintance, I mean General
Acquaintance, not Particular Societies; but I speak not this, as Believing you
can be Infected, being Secured by the Antidote of Virtue, the Spirit of Grace,
and the Balsam of Honor, which Nature, Heaven, and Education gave you; but
though you cannot be Infected, yet should you seek Diversion by much Company,
being of the Female Sex, you might be Suspected; Neither will I have you think
by this Discourse, as if I did not Approve of Marriage, for if you do, you
Mistake me, there being no Life I Approve so well of, as a Married Life, where
as much Sympathy Joins Souls, and Affection Hearts, as Ceremony Joins Hands;
but to live with Antipathy must needs be very Unhappy, and if you be so, there
is no way to Help your self, for if you be once Tied with the Matrimonial Bond,
there can be no Honorable Divorce but by Death, for all other Divorces are
Marked with some Disgrace, either more or less, and the Least Disgrace is too
Much; wherefore, if you Marry, choose a Husband rather by the Ear than the Eye,
for the World seldom gives an Undeserved Praise, but often Detracts from the
Deserver, for it seldom gives Merit its Due; But the Safest Way is to Live a
Single Life, for all Wives, if they be not Slaves, yet they are Servants,
although to be a Servant to a Worthy Husband, is both Pleasure and Honor, for
true Affection takes more Pleasure to Serve than to be Served, and it is an
Honor to Obey the Meritorious; but where there is a Hazard in the Choice, and
a Security in not Choosing, the Best is to be Mistress of your self, which in a
Single Life you are. But whether Married or not Married, my Wishes and Prayers
are, that you may be as Happy as this World can make you, and in that I shall
be a Sharer with you, as being

Your very Loving Sister.

CCII.
Sweet Madam Eleonora Duarti,

THe last Week your Sister Kath'rine and your Sister Frances were to Visit me,
and so well Pleased I was with their Neighbourly, and Friendly Visit, as their
Good Company put me into a Frolic Humor, and for a Pastime I Sung to them
some Pieces of Old Ballads; whereupon they desired me to Sing one of the Songs
my Lord made, your Brother Set, and you were pleased to Sing; I told them
first, I could not Sing any of those Songs, but if I could, I prayed them to
Pardon me, for neither my Voice, nor my Skill, was not Proper, nor Fit for
them, and neither having Skill nor Voice, if I should offer to Sing any of
them, I should so much Disadvantage my Lord's Poetical Wit, and your Brother's
Musical Composition, as the Fancy would be Obscured in the one, and the Art in
the other, nay, instead of Music, I should make Discord, and instead of Wit,
Sing Nonsense, knowing not how to Humor the Words, nor Relish the Notes,
whereas your Harmonious Voice gives their Works both Grace and Pleasure, and
Invites and Draws the Soul from all other Parts of the Body, with all the
Loving and Amorous Passions, to sit in the Hollow Cavern of the Ear, as in a
Vaulted Room, wherein it Listens with Delight, and is Ravished with Admiration;
wherefore their Works and your Voice are only fit for the Notice of Souls, and
not to be Sung to Dull, Unlistning Ears, whereas my Voice and those Songs,
would be as Disagreeing as your Voice and Old Ballads, for the Vulgar and
Plainer a Voice is, the Better it is for an Old Ballad; for a Sweet Voice, with
Quavers, and Trilloes, and the like, would be as Improper for an Old Ballad, as
Golden Laces on a Thrum Suit of Cloth, Diamond Buckles on Clouted or Cobled
Shoes, or a Feather on a Monks Hood; neither should Old Ballads be Sung so much
in a Tune as in a Tone, which Tone is betwixt Speaking and Singing, for the
Sound is more than Plain Speaking, and less than Clear Singing, and the Rumming
or Humming of a Wheel should be the Music to that Tone, for the Humming is
the Noise the Wheel makes in the Turning round, which is not like the Music of
the Spheres; and Ballads are only Proper to be Sung by Spinsters, and that only
in Cold Winter Nights, when a Company of Good Huswifes are Drawing a Thread of
Flax; but as these Draw Threads of Flax, so Time Draws their Thread of Life, as
their Web makes them Smocks, so Times Web makes them Deaths Shirts, to which,
as to Death, afterward those Good Huswifes are Married, and lie in the Bed of
Earth, their House being the Grave, and their Dwelling in the Region of
Oblivion; and this is the Fate of Poor Spinsters, and Ballad-Singers, whenas
such a Singer as you, such a Composer as your Brother, such a Poet as my Lord,
are Clothed with Renown, Marry Fame, and Live in Eternity, wherein Death has
no Power, Time no Limit, and Destinies Shears are Useless; but though I am
willing to Sing an Old Ballad, yet not to Dwell in Oblivion, for I love your
Company so well, as I would Live in Eternity with you, and would be Clothed as
you, with Renown, for no Fashioned Garments Please me so well, and though the
Stuff or Substance is not the same with yours, the Substances being as
Different as the Several Qualities, Faculties, Proprieties, Virtues, or Sweet
Graces, and the like, yet I will have as Good as I can get, I will Search
Nature's Warehouse, or Shop, and though I cannot have a Piece or Measure of
Silver Sound, or Broccaded Art, yet certainly I hope to get a Piece or Measure
of Three-poil'd Philosophy, or Flowered Fancy, for though my Lord has taken
many several Pieces or Packs out of Nature's Shop, and has Inhaunced the
Prices, yet he must not Ingross this last Commodity to himself; It Is true, he
has Engrossed two Commodities, as Weapons, and Riding, out of Art's Shop, the
Handmaid of Nature, yet sure he will be never able to Ingross all the several
Kinds, and diverse Sorts of Wares that Nature and Art yet have in their
Storehouses. But I perceive that you three, as my Lord, You, and your Brother,
do Traffic so much with Nature and Art, as I shall be but as a Pedlar;
Howbeit, it is better to have some Dealings than none at all, and I will rather
Trade with Toys, than Starve for want of a Living, and in order to make my
self Capable, I have bound my self Prentice to my Lord, and am willing to Serve
out my Time, but my Lord is so Generous, as to give me my Freedom, and I must
also desire you to give me at present so much Freedom, as to Subscribe my self,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

CCIII.
MADAM,
YOu ought not to take it Ill if I do not Obey your Commands, in Speaking to A.
F. to Grant your Requests, by reason I think those Requests would Prejudice
you, should they be Granted, so that if I Speak as you Desire, I must Plead
against your Good, and my own Conscience, which I will never do, although I
were sure to have your Hate, for I had rather you should Hate me for the Love
and Esteem I have for you, than you should Love me for doing an Unfriendly Part
or Act, for I Prefer your Good before your Love; neither must you take it Ill
that I send your Present back to you again, for it did appear to me like a
Bribe; besides, I desire to keep my self free from such Obligations, your Love
being all that I desire, and more worth than all the Service of my Life, should
I Live Long, and Act Much; But if you think I have Omitted your Commands, out
of an Evil Design, or Malice, Spleen, or Spite, you do me wrong, for you should
find me, if I were able to Serve you, neither Cross, Negligent, nor Unwilling,
but most Industrious, Ready, and Joyful to your Service, nay, were it to Engage
my Life; wherefore whatsoever you Conceive of me, yet I have this Satisfaction
in my Conscience, that I am, was, and will be as long as I Live,

Madam, Your Ladyships faithful Friend and Servant.

CCIV.
Sweet Madam C. H.

I Am sorry to hear that you are Parted from your Parents through a Discontent,
which is in the way to Disobedience, and let me tell you, that Unnatural
Unkindness is many times the Death of Natural Affection; our Parents are our
Makers, and will you Rebel against your Maker? your Father is your Earthly
God, and your Mother your Earthly Goddess, to whom you ought to Kneel down,
Pray, Worship, and Obey, and not to Murmur, Cross, or Neglect them; all the
Endeavors of your Life are due to them until you have a Husband, nay, a
Husband must not hinder you to Assist them to the utmost of your Power, which
Power it is likely will be according to your Husbands Will, but a Good Wife
most commonly has the Power of her Husband's Will, and he is a very Ill
Husband that will not Condescend to his Wifes Reasonable Requests, for a Good
Wife will Request nothing but what is within the Limits of Reason. Thus
Married, or Unmarried, you must Endeavor your Parents Good and Contentment,
otherwise you will raise Clouds of Grief in your Parents Minds, from whence may
Rain Showers of Curses on your Life, which may cause Floods of Misfortunes,
wherein all your Future Happiness may be Drowned; for it is to be Observed,
that in Curses especially, which Proceed from Parents, lies an Obscure, but
Potent Power, from whence fly Shafts, whereof every one is Headed with a Curse,
and where it Wounds, it leaves the Head Behind it; wherefore to Avoid them,
Return to your Parents again, Ask Pardon for your Fault, Promise Obedience, and
Desire their Blessing, and in so doing, you will be a Friend to your self, and
a Comfort to them, and believe this Advice is given you by her who is

Your very loving Friend.

CCV.
Noble Sir,
I Am of your Opinion, that most of Mankind are of Lazy Dispositions, and love
not to Trouble themselves in Public Affairs, but though they be Lazy to the
Public Good, yet they are Active and Industrious to and for their Private
Pleasure, or their Particular Designs; and though Mankind are Lazy to the
Public Good, yet they are oftentimes Active to the Public Hurt, either for
their Ambitious and Covetous Ends, or many times through Envy and Malice to
some Particular Person who is more Eminent than the rest, for rather than they
will Suffer One to Overtop All, they will Ruin All to Pull down that One; the
truth is, Men are not like Beasts, to Work to a General Profit, but like
Drones, to Rob the Particular Labors in the Commonwealth; neither is it
amongst Mankind as amongst Beasts, for amongst Beasts there are more Bees than
Drones, but amongst Mankind there are more Drones, as I may say, than Bees,
that is, there are more Unprofitable, than Good Commonwealths men; But Nature
seems to be in Fault that Mankind is so Bad, for if it were only Custom, the
Evil would be but in some Particular Nations, and not throughout the whole
World as it is; but as Nature has not made all Creatures alike, for all Flies
are not like the Be, nor all Worms like the Ant, nor all Beasts like the
Sheep, nor all Birds like the Nightingal; so indeed Mankind is of a mixed
Nature, and as it were a Composition of all other Animal Creatures, for one may
perceive the Natures of other Animal Creatures mixed in Man, and there is no
Motion that belongs most Properly to other Creatures, but Man can Imitate it,
nay his very Shape is a Mixed Shape of all other Creatures, for though he has
not directly four Legs, as Beasts, yet his Arms are something like Legs, and
Birds have but two Legs, only Birds Legs are set in the Middle of their Bodies,
and Men's are set Below their Bodies, and though Man has not Fins as Fishes,
yet his Arms serve him for the same Use, as to Swim, and so of every Particular
Part with the Whole you may find some Mixture, either more or less, of all
other Creatures Shapes, as well as Dispositions; and by this Natural Mixture
and Composition of Man, you may Compare every other Creature to Man, and Man to
every other Creature; and since Man is a Creature made partly of all other
Animal Creatures in Mind and Body, as Passions, Humors, Appetites, Senses and
Shape, it is no Wonder if he be more Various than other Creatures are; but some
Men have a Higher Composition than others, as having some Mixture of Celestial
Parts, Ingredients, or Influences, with their Terrestrial, yet those are but
Few, and a Degree nearer to the Nature of Gods than other Men, and amongst
those Few, Sir, you are one, for which I Admire you, and rest,

Sir, Your Humble Servant and Affectionate Sister in Law.

CCVI.
Madam Eleonora Duarti,

THe last time I was to Visit you, we fell into a Discourse of the Elixar, and
the Philosophers Stone, you being of the Opinion that Gold might be made by the
Art of Chemistry, I of the Opinion, it could not be made any other ways than
by the Natural way, as in the Earth. But it may be questionable, whether Gold
is made by an Increasable way, or whether it was made all at first, and that
there is no more than what was made when the World was made, for I cannot find
a Reason against it, but that Gold may be as the Sun, which is Undecayable, and
not Increasable, for it is to be Observed, that what is not Decayable, is not
Increasable, otherwise it would be Infinite in this World, or Universe, which
World, or Universe, has no Room, or Place for Infinite, and the Sun which is
Undecayable, Produces no other Suns, neither does it Multiply it self, nor
Alter from it self; the like of Gold, we cannot make Gold to be no Gold, for
Pure Gold cannot be turned into Dross, or into other Dust, whereas all other
Creatures, as Minerals, and so Vegetables, and Animals, may, and do
Transmigrate, except the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and I do verily believe, it is
as Impossible to Fix the Elixar, as to Fix the Sun. But the Difference betwixt
the Sun and Gold, for the matter of Outward Form, as well as Several Effects,
is, that the Sun is one Entire Body, which is Spherical, and Gold is in many
several Parts, which lies in many several Places in the Earth; but Stars which
are of the like Undecayable Nature as the Sun, are also in Several Bodies, and
at Several Distances, and yet they are Stars nevertheless, and all seem to be
as of one Kind or Sort, only some are Fixed, and others Moveable; so Gold is
Gold though in Several Parts, and Several Distances, only I think none is
Fixed, but what cannot be found, for though Gold is not Moveable in it self,
yet it is subject to be Moved, and so may the Fixed Stars, for any Reason to
the contrary that ever I heard; And as for Effects and Influences, as the Sun
and Stars have several Effects and Influences upon other Creatures, yet we
cannot perceive that other Creatures have Effects or Influences upon the Stars
or Sun; so Gold has an Influence, and Works several Effects upon other
Creatures, but none upon Gold, I mean in Altring or Changing its Nature, so
that Gold seems to me to be the Sun, or Stars of the Earth, which Men in these
Ages Adore, as the Heathen did the Sun, and by their Practice one may believe
men Commit Idolatry to it; and in comparison to Gold, all other Metals are like
Meteors, which do Shine like Stars, but their Light goes oftentimes out,
leaving a Jelly, or Slime, as Dross. So other Metals may be Changed from what
they were, as from one Metal into another, or from being Metal, but Gold
cannot, at least could not as yet, be Altered by the Art of Man, so as it seems
that Gold is of as Durable a Nature as the Sun or Stars; neither can I readily
believe Gold can Increase, or Multiply it self, no more than the Sun or Stars,
for any thing we can perceive; neither can I readily believe, that Gold can be
Increased by the Art of Man, as by Chimistry, by reason Artificial Limbicks are
not like the Natural Limbick of the Earth, nor the Fire that Chemists use is
not like the Fire of the Sun, or the Constant Fire in the Center of the Earth;
wherefore it is not Probable, that Art should Increase Gold by a Small
Artificial Limbick, and a Wasting, Uncertain Fire, which must be always
Renewed, and Blown, and if it be Improbable that Art can Increase, or Multiply
Gold, it is less Probable that Art can Create Gold or any other Creature,
though Chemists Pretend they can, they may Imitate Nature by Art, but not
Create as Nature does; as for Natural Poets, who are far beyond Artificial
Chemists, their Creation of Fancies is by a Natural way, not an Artificial, and
if Gold could be Created as Fancies, Chemists would be Rich, and not so Poor as
Poets are, but surely it is impossible for Art to do as Nature does, for Art
neither Knows, nor can Comprehend, at least not put in Practice, the Subtle,
and Intricate Motions, Diverse Temperaments and Substances put together; neither
does Art know the Timing of Motions and Mixtures, to Create so as Nature does,
for some Creatures in Nature require more Curiosity than others, and some more
Several, and Subtle Mixtures than others, and some require Longer Time and
Pains than others, so as Man may as well believe he can Create a World, as
Create Gold, or any other Creature, as Animals and Vegetables, as Chemists
believe they can do by their Art; Men like Painters, may Draw to the Life the
Figures of Creatures, but not Create Living Figures, or Real Creatures; it is
true, Art may Hinder, or Oppose, or Hasten Nature's Works, to a more Sudden
Maturity, but not in an Unnatural way; and as for Opposing, or Hindering Nature,
Man may Set a Slip, or Kernel, or Seed, and when it is Fixed, or has taken
Root, Man can Pull it up, and Dissolve it, so as not to be capable to Grow and
Increase, nay, man can Dissolve it from its Nature, and Turn it into some other
Nature, yet it is Natural for such Dissolvable Creatures to be Transformed into
other things, so as it is but a Natural way; but Man cannot Create by Art, for
that were an Unnatural way, Man may Increase and Multiply, not only his own
Kind, but all Increasable things, but they must be done after their Natural
way, or else Man cannot Increase and Multiply. Some, as Chemists, Conceive, or
Imagine (for it is but Imaginable) that there are Seeds, or Slips, or Branches
of Gold, which may be Producible as Plants are, but I know not where they
should find them, nor do I believe if they should Search for them, they would
find them, first, as not knowing where they lie, for what Man can Search all
the Earth, or Fathom the Earth, or Dig to the Center of the Earth? next, they
do not Know those Branches, Slips, or Seeds to be such; thirdly, if they did
Know them, and Had them, yet they Know not how, or when, or where to Set, or
Ingraft those Slips or Branches, or to Sow those Seeds, or to Order them in
their Limbicks; but I perceive they would make their Limbicks their Increasable
Grounds, and every Limbick should be as an Acre of Ground, or a Field, indeed
every Still would be worth a Lordship, nay, a Kingdom; fourthly, Man knows not
the Time those Slips, Branches, or Seeds, require to be brought to Maturity,
for all Creatures are not brought to Maturity in the same distance of Time; as
for Example, Animal Creatures, some are Produced in a Month, some in no less
time than a Year; so for Plants, some are at Maturity in a Few Hours, at least
Days, and others not under an Hundred Years, as Oaks; so for any thing we
know, Gold could not be brought to Maturity under an Hundred Years, nay a
Thousand, Hasten Nature what they can, and nothing can be Hastened in an
Unnatural way; nay, in some Creatures Art cannot Hasten Nature, as Animals
cannot be Hastened to Perfection sooner than their Natural Time, Art may cause
Abortion, as to make the Womb cast forth the Burden before the Natural Time of
Birth, but not to bring it to Perfection, and if Man, which is Decayable and
Increasable, yet is Ten Months, or say Seven, e're he comes to Maturity, well
may Gold, which seems of an Unalterable, or Undecayable Nature, be Seven Ages;
and though the Elements seem to be both Decayable and Increasable as Mankind
is, yet not the Fixed, or Celestial Elements, for though Fire Begets Fire, when
Fuel is put to it, and goes out for want of Fuel, or may be Quenched out, (for
if it did Increase and not Decrease, it would Burn all the World) and though
Water be Increasable (although not so Increasing as Fire) as also Decayable, as
to Evaporate from its Nature, for else it would Drown the World, yet I do not
perceive the Sun or the Earth to be Increasable or Decayable, for if the Sea
and Earth did Multiply, the Terrestrial Globe would grow so Big, as the Sun
could not Compass it in a Year, and it might grow so Big as not to be Compassed
in Many Years; but we observe by the Motion of the Sun, that it is neither
Decayable nor Increasable, for if it were Decayable, the Compass of the Sun
would be in a Less Circle, as to Compass the Terrestrial Globe in Less than a
Year, but whatsoever is not Decayable, is not Increasable, and whatsoever is
Increasable is Decayable; and since we find by Experience that Gold is not
Decayable, as not to be Changed from its Principal Nature, viz. from being
Gold, it may be faithfully believed it is not Increasable, otherwise there
would be a Word, nay Worlds of Gold. Thus, Madam Eleonora, I cannot perceive in
my Reason, that Gold can be either Created, or Multiplied by Art, wherefore in
my Opinion, Chemists may Break their Limbicks, and Quench out their Fire, and
Endeavor to get Natural Gold a Provident way, and not to Impoverish themselves
with Art. But leaving them to their Brittle Limbicks, and Quenchable, or
Decayable Fire, their Great Expenses, and Little Profit, I rest,

Your very Loving Fr. and S.

CCVII.
Reverend Sir,
I Give you thanks for your Visit, although I made little Profit thereby, for
whereas I should have sat and Listened to your Discourse, out of which I should
have Learned much Good, both for my Understanding and Course of Life, I was so
full of Discourse my self, as I neither gave you time to Speak, nor my self to
Hear; indeed it was not so much a Discourse as Words, for in a Discourse there
is some Coherence, whenas a Number of Words may be Spoken without any Coherence
therein; after that rate I believe I Entertained you, for which I ask your
Pardon, which you may the Freelier give me, because I am a Woman, and it is
according to our Nature to Speak more Words than Sense, and so well we Love
Speaking, as Men might think we had rather be Damned, at least Condemned, for
Talking, than be Praised, or Saved for Silence; yet give me leave to say
somewhat in my own Behalf; though I am full of Words when I do Talk, yet I do
not give my self Liberty to Speak often, for were the Years of my Life Divided,
not Half a part of Four had been Spent in Speech; but howsoever, what I do
Speak is too much, for the truth is, Women should never Speak more than to Ask
Rational Questions, or to give a Discreet Answer to a Question Asked them,
unless it be in their Huswifry, and then they may take License to Speak as much
as they will, or at Childbed Gossipings they may have the Privilege of the
Tongue, but other ways or times, they ought to be Sparing of Speech,
especially in Company of Men, but the truth is, our Sex does not love to be
Tonguetied; but lest I should Express too much the Nature of our Sex, by
Speaking too much of them, although I speak now but to your Eyes, not to your
Ears, for Letters are more a Discourse to the Eyes than Ears, I will take my
leave for this time, only Subscribe my self,

Sir, Your very loving Friend and Servant.

CCVIII.
Worthy Sir,
YOu may think it a Presumption and an Incroachment upon your Profession, to
give my Opinion of Mrs. Ts. Disease, but it is neither Presumption, nor
Confidence of my Judgment, that causes this Writing to you, but an Affection to
your Patient, who deserves my Concernment concerning her Malady, which Forces
me to write to you my Opinion, which is, that I do believe her Pain and that
which Accompanies it, is Caused through an Inward Heat, which Rarfies the
Humors into a Fluent Distillation, also it Rarifies the Blood, making it to
Flow, or Overflow, for Cold is not so Active, but Congeals and Thickens, as we
shall see when any Body is let Blood, the Blood whilst it is Hot, runs Freely
forth of the Veins, and remains Thin and Fluid when it is out, but when it has
stood some Time, and begins to be Cold, it Thickens, and Congeals to a Cake; so
when any has used Exercise, which Heats, and Thins the Blood, the Color
appears in the Skin, Caused by the Flowing to the Outward Parts; the like in
Hot Weather, whereas in Cold Weather, or when the Blood is not Heated, the Skin
appears Pale and Lank; wherefore my Opinion is, that her Pain Proceeds from
Heat, for it is to be Observed, that all Inflammations are Painful, as all Sores
or Swellings that are Inflamed, whereas those Sores that are not Inflamed, or
those Swellings we call White Swellings, are not Painful, also for the Gout,
the Pain is caused through the Inflammation; but mistake me not, I mean all
Pulsive Pains, for there be many other Pains, as some which are caused through
Wind, and those Pains are Painful Stitches, and most commonly caused from Hot
Humors, as Bilious Choler, or some Salt Phlegm, also Headaches are caused for
the most part from Hot Vapors, or Rheums, the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder
is caused through Heat, so that most Pains are caused through Heat, unless it
be Childbearing Pains, and such like; and these Considerations make me believe
that Mrs. Ts. Pain in her Back is Produced from Heat; for although it be an
Intermitting Pain, and not Constant, yet it may nevertheless be Produced from
Heat; as for Example, the Gout is not a Continual Pain, but it is only Painful
when the Inflamed Humor falls on the Joint, yet for the most part it always
Falls or Resorts to one and the same Place, wherefore I believe Cooling
Medicines must be her Cure, for I do not perceive that Purging, Sweating, and
Dry Dieting, which are all Heating, do her any Good, but she seems rather the
Worse, and Trial is the True Touchstone of Experience. But you may use the Old
Saying to me, which is, Physician Cure thy self; I answer, that all Preachers
do not Practice what they Preach, and some may give better Counsel than take
Good Counsel, also Solomon says, that a Wise Saying may pass through a Fool's
Mouth, and the best Physicians when they are Sick, Rely not upon their own
Skill for themselves, but will send for other Physicians, for no man can Judge
well of himself, either for Health, Sickness, or any other thing, by reason
Partial Self-love, Fearful Doubts, Flattering Hopes, Bribe, Corrupt, or
Terrify the Judgment; but setting aside my own Judgment as Weak, either for my
self or others, and Relying on yours in Case of your Patient, I rest,

Your very Loving Friend.

CCIX.
Worthy Sir,
I Received your Letter, and am Glad to see you write, that you doubt not of
Curing Mrs. T. of her Painful Disease; as for the Numbness in her Hand, Thigh,
Leg, and Foot, give me leave to tell you my Opinion, which is, that it Proceeds
not from a Coldness but a Dryness, for if it were only a Stupifying Cold, her
Sweating would have Rarefied and Evaporated that Congealed Cold, or her Purging
would have Carried or Driven out that Gross, Cold Humor, or her Dry, Strict
Diet would have Consumed that Obstructed Cold, or Cold Obstruction, but she
has felt that Numb Disease since she has used those Remedies, at least, it is
more Apparent, which shows, it Proceeds not from Cold, but Dryness, which
Inward Heat and Dryness causes a Cold outward Effect, for Numbness and Deadness
of Parts Proceed from Diverse, and Different Causes, as from Cold, either
Outwardly taken, by the Cold Weather, or Climat, or Clothing, or the like, or
by Inward Cold, as by Overcooling Meats, or Drinks, or Cold Obstructing, or
want of Blood, or too much Watery Humors, which Quench out the Natural Heat, and
this Numbness is easily Cured. Another Numbness Proceeds from Obstructions of
the Inward Parts, or Veins, either by Clammy Humors, or by Burnt and Adust
Humors. Another Numbness Proceeds from a Dryness of some Particular Parts,
which being Insipid, cannot be Active, or Move according to their Functions, or
Faculties, or Proprieties, and a Ceasing of Motion is Death. Another Numbness
Proceeds from some Cold, or Thick Gross Humors that fall upon the Sinews or
Muscles. Another Numbness is caused through Excessive Heat, which has Burnt
out the Natural Heat. Another Numbness Proceeds from a Decay of some Noble
Parts, and this Numbness is Incurable. But the Reason why I think Mrs. Ts.
Numbness Proceeds from Dryness, is, that she has been of a very Spare Diet
three or four Years, Eating and Drinking but once a Day, and that not Much, her
Meat being for the most part Roast Mutton, and when she was with Child, she did
Eat so Little, and Seldom, as sometimes not in two or three Days, as I have
often wondered how she could Live, and Nourish her Child within her, which
Excessive Fasting must oeeds Dry, and so consequently Heat her, for though
Fasting may Cool after Excess, Wasting the Superfluities, which would otherwise
cause too many Vapors, or Corruption, which Corruption, or Vapors, might cause
an Unusual, or Unnatural Heat, yet in Scarcity, or where there be no
Superfluities, Fasting does Heat, the like does Sweating; and thus Mrs. T.
finding her Stomach Weak, or rather Ill Digesting, to Strengthen or Ease it,
has Overheated, and Dried the other Parts of her Body, and has filled her
Body, or rather her Thread-Veins, with Thin, Sharp, Salt, Bitter Humor, which
Humor Proceeds from Heat, and Heat and Dryness many times Proceed from those
Humors; wherefore there should be Applied such Remedies as to Draw out those
Pernicious Humors which are Corroding, Burning, and Drying, and therefore I
pray Use Cooling and Moistening Remedies, lest in striving to Cure one Disease,
a Worse be Produced, but Cooling and Moistening will not only Cure her
Numbness, but the Overflowing of her Natural Flux, which is caused through
Heat, which Over Rarifies the Blood, and makes it Flow when it should Ebb, like
as a Double Tide; But I leave all to your Better Judgment, Skill, Practice,
Observation, and Wisdom, and rest,

Your very loving Friend.

CCX.
MADAM,
I Hope you will not be Angry, that I do not take your Advice to Leave the
Country, and Live in the City, for I have so many Reasons which persuade me not
to do it, as this Letter cannot Compass, yet lest I should Offend you, I Will set
down some Few: The first is, that it is more Agreeing with my Humor to live in
the Country, for Naturally my Humor is a Solitary, Musing, and Contemplating
Humor, and my Delight is, to Write those Fancies and Conceptions which my
Contemplation does Produce; all which would be Disturbed with the several
Noises that are made in Populous Cities. The second Reason is, the Preserving
of my Health, for I have not a very Strong Body, nor a very Healthful
Constitution, although, I thank God, not any Particular Disease, yet so I am,
as I do not find my self so Healthful as I wish I were, and therefore a Great
and Populous City is not so well agreeing with my Health, as the Sweet, and
Fresh Air in the Country, where the Sun and the Wind have Freedom and Power to
Disperse, and so to Destroy Malignant Vapors. The third Reason is, that my
Husband had an House in the City, but by the Occasion of the Civil Wars, his
Estate being Torn in pieces, amongst many Parts which are quite taken from him,
and his Posterity, the said House is one, so that we have no House for the
present in the City to Live in; But if I had one, truly, Madam, I should not be
willing to Live there, for I am so much pleased with a Solitary Country Life,
that I cannot bring any Argument to my self, which can Induce or Persuade me to
a City Life, which is but a Gossiping, and Vain Life, where there are in
Conversations more Idle Words Spoken, than Good Works Done, and more Money Spent
than their Estates are able to Pay; and if I Lived there, and should not Speak
Idely, and Spend Vainly, as others do, I should be out of the Fashion, and
there is an Old Saying, Better be out of the World than out of the Fashion; But
your Chief Argument to persuade me to Live in the City, is, that in a Great and
Populous City there are many Learned and Witty Persons, with whom I might
Converse, whose Conversation would Increase my Knowledge, Better my
Understanding, Quicken my Wit, and by Practice Refine my Speech or Language;
Truly, Madam, the Advantage would be Great if I could Alter the Nature of our
Sex, as not to Speak much, but that is Impossible, for all Women, and so I
amongst the rest, are more apt to Talk, than to Learn with Attention, so that I
should rather Discover my Imperfections by the Superfluity of my Discourse,
than gain Applause by my Wit, for I, in my Conversation, Speak, as I may say,
without Thinking, or rather Considering, but when I Write, I Think without
Speaking; wherefore the Wisest way for me is, rather to Write than to Speak,
for then my Speech will not Disgrace my Writings; for most men Judge their
Acquaintance rather according to their Words than their Works, and those are
most Applauded that are least Known, for the least Error either in Discourse
or Behavior makes not only the Person of less Esteem, but all the Labors of
their Life, were they never so Exact, Wise, or Heroic; wherefore it is a
Madness to desire to Converse with much Company, especially for those that
desire to keep up a Fame once gotten, unless it be in Public Actions or
Employments; neither does that last, unless their Actions are like Pyramids
which rise still Higher and Higher. But for the most part Man's Nature is so
Ambitious as to desire to do Wonders, not contenting themselves with a Mean,
and then their Building proves like Babels Tower, full of Confusion. But,
Madam, I only desire to keep up those small Mole-hills I have made, that is,
the Reputation of my Books, whereas if I did appear to the Public World, I
should be found a Blind Creature as a Mole is, not Blind of the Eyes of my
Head, but my Understanding, which is Worse. And as for Conversation and
Company, give me leave to tell you, Madam, I do not want a Wise, and VVitty
Companion, so long as my Lord Lives, neither can I want Friends so long as you
both Live, which I pray God to continue to many Years, for these are the
constant Prayers of,

Madam, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

CCXI.
MADAM,
AS I began this Book with those Letters to you, so I will End it, hoping you
will Pardon me for Mixing some other Letters with those to your self, for the
Assurance and Belief of your Pardon Persuaded me to do it, they are only to my
Near and Dear Relations, and Kind and Obliging Friends. But, Madam, I know your
Nature and Friendship is such, that what is Fit and Convenient for me to do,
you will Approve, and upon that ground, I am Confident you will not be Angry
with me, that I do not Join the Answers to those Letters, wherein you were
pleased to Propound several Philosophical Questions to me to Resolve, to this
Book, for truly, Madam, they are so many, and my Answers to them so Long, that
if I should have Joined them to these, it would have been as a Type, or
Resemblance of Infinite Nature, and I am careful not to be too Tedious, or
Wearisom to my Readers. Besides, the said Letters containing nothing but
Philosophical Questions and Answers, are not so Fit or Proper for this Book,
wherein are only Described Humors; wherefore I am Resolved to put your
Philosophical Questions and my Answers in a Book by themselves. It Is true, many
of your Questions are Subtiler than I have Wit to Answer, but according to my
Duty, and the Laws of Friendship, I have done as much as I was able, and more I
hope you do not Expect, and therefore, though I have not Answered them so well
as I should have done, and have more reason to fear rather to be Censured, than
to hope for any Applause for Publishing them, yet I am satisfied that I have
Answered your Desire, for I had rather the World should Condemn me for a Fool,
than you for the Breach, or but a Neglect in Friendship, for as long as I Live
I shall Prove my self,

Madam, Your constant Friend and faithful Servant.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 31. lin. ult. leave out should. p. 37. l. 2. leave out Not. p. 42. l. 11.
sor but read for. p. 72. l. ult. leave out is. p. 87. l. 8. for is read his. p.
88. l. 14. for Or r. and p. 89. l. 2. r. sometimes. p. 108. l. 6. r. had rather
have. p. 114. l. 14. after Trouble set and p. 139. l. 14 r. thunder-strucken.
p. 146. l. 22. leave out Wherefore. p. 164. l. 24. sor Sermons r. Ceremonies.
p. 168. l. 6. for either r. each. p. 172. l. 2. r. it is. p. 181. l. 16. r.
relaxive. p. 185. l. 16. r. Shamefaceness. ibid. l. 20. r. Were not. p. 190. l.
13. for the r. their. p. 202. l. 11. r. it is likewise. p. 213. l. ult. leave
out thereto. p. 221. l. 21. r. behaved. ibid. l. 22. r. flutterer. p. 231. l.
2. for and r. of. p. 267. l. 29 for the r. three. p. 291. l. 2. r. things. p.
307. l. 9. for Souls r. Sculls. p. 314. l. 9. r. that is. p. 320. l. 23. for
their r. her. p. 322. l. 19. r. thick. p. 338. l. 20. for Heroic r. Lyrick. p.
366. l. 2. sar either r. both. p. 385. l. 31. r. those that will find fault
with others. p. 389. l. 3. r. passed. p. 395. l. 26. for Love r. Move. p. 399.
l. 5. for Chair r. Chariot. p. 403. l. 6 for there r. their. p. 418. l. 21. for
Souls r. Sculls.


