DVBLIN January the 28th.

A TRVE AND PERFECT Occurrance of the present state of DVBLIN.

And of every several passage between the Protestants and the Rebels there.

BEENG The substance of several Letters which was sent from Sir Henry
Tichborne, and Captain Studley, to some friends of theirs now resident here.

Which Letters by Reason of their true relation were desired by diverse
Gentlemen to be Printed, to give this City a full satisfaction, whose names
are here incerted and now published, By W. N. Gent.

London, Printed for George Thompson. 1642.

DVBLIN The twentieth Eight of January.
YEsterday Captain Studley returned hither, and brought us Letters from Sir
Henry Tichborne, at the entrance of our Shipping, our men were encountered by
many thousand of the Rebels on both sides of the river where they exchanged a
thousand shotts, in the end the enemy having lost three score men, and we nor
a man; our shipping fired their passage to the town where you may imagine they
were very well and joyfully received as in deed they were. On wednesday
morning some three hundred of the Rebels an hour before day through the
treachery of some Papists of the town had broken down an old door in the
town wall, and so got into the town, and were advanced in the streets in
rank and file before the Larum given, and a little before day they were
discovered, and Sir Henry and his Soldiers so played the men, as they killed
the most of them, took three score prisoners, and some leaping over the wall
broke their necks, some lie yet hidden in some of the Townes-mens houses as
some prisoners inform; so the town was preserved with that slaughter of the
enemies and not above four of our men killed; the fight being hot, and feirce
in the night, sir Henry least his Soldiers should hurt one another, he caused
them to put white papers in their hearts to difference them from the enemy.

On Thurseday our Pinnace was coming away, she struck aground in the Harbor
too far for sir Henry to relieve them, and too near the Rebels, where there
was a terrible fight, our poor Pinnace lying a ground, being not able to use
her Ordinance; many Muskets shot on both sides, in the end the Rebbels waded
to the side of the Pinnance, being but knee deep above a hundred of them, and
fell on the Pinnace with Iron Crows and other engines to batter her) Captain
Studley threw then amongst them some grenades which killed many of them, and
by the help of his Grannadoes having slain many of them, they ran away and
quitted the Pinnace, whereof they held themselves so sure, until the Grenades
slew amongst them, as that they thought Studley their prisoner, bidding him
yield.

After that fight where we lost only on man a Lieutenant of sir Simon Harcots
Regiment whose name was Lieftenant Spark, under Captain Verneth. The Pinnace
stood on ground until Monday, and the Rebels fearing the Grenades, durst not
attempt him any more, so Captain Studley with his Pinnace came away and
arrived here last night.

Dublin the twentieth Eighth of January.
THe rebels reasaulted Tredarth the next day after the repulse, notwithstanding
their loss and danger, but Sir Henry Tichborne entertained them with a fuller
breakfast then supper, the night before he slew 800 of them or as most consent
600 of them, he took fifty Friars and Preistes and hanged them, and although
it may seem strange that so many Grasehoppers should be together in one place
yet it is the less Marvel since all the Papists are confident that their
son is riseing in Ireland and to shine full upon them.

There was a command of horse last night appointed at Dublin to surprise the
Rebbels that Lay under the mountains, and near it in their kenells; but the
serpents in our own bosoms the faithful Inteligence from the Papist in
Dublin, is such, that the Rebbels have notice of every particular in our
design before we can act any thing 300. of them took to their best help
their ^les, and fled to the mountains for five or six miles together but our
Soldiers killed eight of them that lay to long in their Caves; Forty of the
Rebbels entered a Castle there with, in that we wanted materials we could not
go further, but in the enterprise we lost sieve of our horses and one man
short, yet by good happ we regaind five of theirs and remounted onr men and
returned to Dublin, haueing prevented the nesling of the Rebels nerethe town
to make our own sleep the more sound and secure.

Three Captains of every regiment are appointed to search the City of dublin
amongst the Papists, for ammunition and victualles to distribute among the
Soldiers, by which many are like to fare the better, and noe dout but the
Cooks will lick their own fingers.

They begin to want money at Dublin so as every house keeper is commanded to
keep a fit number of the Soldiers proportionable to their estates until
supply of money and victuals come from England which God speedly grant, Vale.

The Gentlemen's names that received these Letters.
Master Henry Tichborne. Charles Latham. John Studley. George Wilford.




FINIS.

