THE Best Acquaintance AND HIGHEST HONOR OF CHRISTIANS. OR, A DISCOURSE of
Acquaintance with GOD.

By Matthew Newcomen, Minister of the Gospel.

Job 22.21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace.

John 8.16. I am not alone, but I and the Father which has sent me.

1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of his
Son Christ Jesus our Lord.

1 John 1.3. And truly our fellowship is with the father and with his Son
Christ Jesus.

James 2.23. Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness, and he was called the friend of God.

Psalm. 149.10. This honor have all his Saints.

John 1^* 1^. Henceforth I call you not servants, but I (...) called you
friends.

London, Printed in the Year, 1668.

THE Best Acquaintance, AND Highest Honor, OF CHRISTIANS.
Job 22. verse. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace: thereby
good shall come unto thee.


CHAP. I. The opening of the words, and of the nature of the great duty of
acquainting our selves with God.
THe words are the words of Eliphaz, one of Job's three friends, and as it
should seem, the chiefest of the three, either for age, or dignity, or wisdom:
for the other two give him the priority in speaking. He having in the beginning
of the Chapter given Job a bitter pill to chew upon, in verse. 5, 6, 7. that he
might not leave the mind of Job exulcerated, toward the latter end of his
discourse attempers his speech to a milder and sweeter strain, giving him first
counsel, verse. 21, 22. then promising him comfort, verse. 23. to the end.

In this 21. v. we have two things. Officium, Beneficium. A work to be done, or
a duty to be performed by Job, and indeed by every one. And that in these
words. Acquaint now thy self with him. 2. A benefit to be obtained by the
performance of this duty, and that is peace and good. Acquaint now thy self
with him, and be at peace: so shall good come unto thee.

Acquaint. The word translated acquaint is diversely rendered by Interpreters.
The Chaldee paraphrase renders it, Learn of him; The Greek, (...), be thou hard
or stout, meaning patient in bearing Affliction. The Vulgar Latin, Acquiesce
ei. Munster, Conveniat tibi cum eo. The Syriack and Arabic, Coaequa te ei. The
Tigurine, Accommoda te illi. Coccejus, Fac periculum. Pagnine and Junius,
Assuesce te illi. The French, Accointe-toy. An old English translation reads
it, Reconcile thy self unto him. Our Translation reads it, Acquaint thy self
with him. Making choice of a word that takes in both the Chaldees, disce ab eo.
And the vulgars, Acquisce; and the Tigurine, Accommoda te illi. And Munsters,
Conveniat tibi cum eo. And the old English, Reconcile thy self to him. As we
shall see afterward God willing. The Hebrew word (...) has (as many other
words in the Hebrew) various significations, and some of them seemingly
contrary to others, as Prodesse, Increpare, arguere, assuescere, thesaurizare,
recondere, nocere, depauperare, periclitari significatione Rabbinis consuera.
Pagnin. The septuagint render it sometimes by (...), sometimes by (...),
sometimes by (...), sometimes by (...), sometimes by (...), sometimes by (...),
sometimes by (...). Kircher. Marius de Calasio observes four principal
acceptations of the word in Scripture. 1. Prodesse, or utilem esse. 2.
Thesaurizare. 3. Calefacere. 4. Depauperare, to which he adds a fifth of the
Rabbis and Chaldees, which is, periculum facere, or periclitari. And this
great difference of significations which this word is capable of, is the reason
why there is so great variety in the translation of this Text.


The word in the Original translated acquaint, is (...) which is used in that
Conjugation Hiphil, but in two places besides this in all the Scripture. The
one is Numb. 22.30. where Balaams ass says to him, (...) Nunquid assuescendo
assuetus sum; Was I ever wont to do thus. The other is, Psalm. 139.2. where the
Psalmist says, Thou art acqainted with all my ways. In the Original it is
(...) which our singing Psalms according to the Emphasis of the Original well
render. And by familiar custom art acquainted with my ways.

Acquaint thy self now: (...) that is an expletive particle, and signifies as
much as nunc, ideo, quaeso, and accordingly some here read, Acquaint now thy
self. Others, acquaint therefore thy self. Others, acquaint I pray thee thy
self. It is a particle that implies seriousness in him that speaks, and weight
and moment in the thing that is spoken of.

Acquaint now thy self with him, that is, with God. The Almighty spoken of
before, v. 17. and again v. 23. Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace,
that is, thou shall be at peace; for so, as the learned Mercer observes, it is
usual with the Hebrews to put the Imperative mood for the Future tense. Thou
shall be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee. Good, that is all kind of
good, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, as is exemplified afterward in the
following verses, to the end of the Chapter. That which from the words thus
opened commends it self to our observation is this.

That the great concernment of every man is to acquaint himself with God. I
say, The great concernment of every man, that which every man should make his
greatest study and business, and look upon himself as most concerned in, is to
acquaint himself with God.

I shall immediately fall upon the opening of the Nature of this acquainting
our selves with God in these three particulars that are necessarily included in
it.

First, This acquainting our selves with God implies a true and right knowledge
of God. For you will all readily conclude, it is impossible for a man to have
acquaintance with a person whom he has never had any knowledge of. If a man
should come to one of us, and name to us a man that lives at Rome or
Constantinople, or the Indies, and ask us if we be acquainted with such a man,
we would presently say we do not so much as know him, therefore how should we
have any acquaintance with him? Ignorance of God you know is rendered as a
reason of men's being estranged from God: Ephesians. 4.18.
therefore they that would have acquaintance with God, must labor to know God.
This David exacts of his son Solomon. And thou Solomon my son, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
know thou the God of thy Fathers, etc.

Now there is a threefold knowledge of God. A knowledge by the ear. A knowledge
by the eye. And a knowledge by the taste. Or if you will, A knowledge of notion
or speculation. A knowledge of faith. And a knowledge of experience. And all
this necessary to our acquaintance with God.

First, There is a knowledge of God that is a knowledge of notion or
speculation, when men know there is a God, and who, and what this God is, and
how he is distinguished from all other persons and things whatsoever. That he
is a Spirit, or spiritual substance, one in essence, distinguished into three
equally blessed, and glorious Persons, the eternal beginning of all beings, the
incomprehensible Author and fountain of all life and motion, the almighty
Creator, upholder, and ruler of the whole universe, who is all life, and all
wisdom, and all power, and all goodness, and all truth, and all blessedness,
and all glory, whose truth, power, goodness, mercy, glory, is his very essence,
and being. This knowledge men may have of God by the hearing of the ear; and
this men may have, and yet have no acquaintance with God; this knowledge alone
is not sufficient to acquaintance with God, and yet this is so necessary, that
without it there can be no acquaintance.

There is therefore, Secondly, A further degree of knowledge, and that is a
knowledge of God by the eye; and this is that which we call the knowledge of
Faith. Faith you know is compared to the eye, and though Faith it self come by
hearing, and the knowledge that we get by hearing, is preparatory to the
knowledge of Faith, yet it is not the very knowledge of faith; no, that imports
something more.

Now there is a twofold faith. A faith of effectual persuasion, whereby the
soul yields such a full and effectual assent to the things it knows, as that
the heart is affected toward them, and with them, according to the nature of
them. Secondly, There is a faith of particular application, whereby the soul
applies to it self the things that it knows, as its own portion. Proportionably
there is a double knowledge of God by faith.

First, The knowledge of the faith of effectual persuasion, whereby the soul
does by the eye of faith see God in his nature, and attributes, and glory, so
clearly and evidently, that his eye affects his heart with love, and fear, and
reverence, and all holy affections answerable to the goodness and greatness of
that God whom by faith he sees. And he says with Job, Now mine eye sees
thee, Job 42.5, 6.
wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

Secondly, There is a knowledge of God by faith, which is the faith of
particular application; that is, when a man so knows God, as that he knows him
to be his God in particular, and can say with Thomas My Lord and my God. And
can join with the Church in heart as well as voice in singing that, Psalm.
48.14. This God is our God for ever and ever. Now the first of these, that is,
such a knowledge of God as may effectually work our hearts to the love, and
reverence, and fear of God, to desire after him, and delight in him; this is
absolutely necessary to our acquainting our selves with God, for without this
we shall never indeed seek acquaintance with God, nor prize, but slight it; and
without this God will never condescend to acquaint himself with us, but disdain
and abhor us; therefore this knowledge of God is necessary ad ipsum esse, to
the very being of our acquaintance with God. But then the other knowledge of
God by faith, that is, by the faith of a particular application this is indeed
necessary, ad been esse, to our more free and comfortable acquainting our
selves, and conversing with God. For as he said, Quid mihi Deus si non meus.
What is God to me, if he be not mine? yet this is not so absolutely necessary
to our first acquainting our selves with God as the former, but is rather a
fruit, and a consequent of our acquainting our selves with God.

There is a third knowledge of God, and that is a knowledge of Experience. In
Scripture phrase, men are said to know those things that they have experience
of, and not to know those things that they have had no experience of, And this
experimental knowledge is in Scripture in special manner called Acquaintance.
It is said of the Lord Christ, That he was a man of sorrows, Isa. 53.3.
and acquainted with griefs. That is, he had felt, and tasted, and had
experience of griefs and sorrows of all kinds. Now this is an experimental
knowledge; such a knowledge of God as this, is that which the Apostle John
speaks of, That which we have heard, 1 Job. 1.1.
which we have seen with our eyes, which our hands have handled of the word of
life, declare we unto you. And this is that which Peter supposes in the
Saints. 1 Pet. 2.3.
If so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

A second thing included in this acquaintance with God, it is peace and
reconciliation with God. Therefore Munster, as I told you, renders the word,
Conveniat tibi cum eo. Make agreement with him. And our old English translation
renders it, Reconcile thy self to him. This we must know, that we are all by
nature not only mere strangers to God, for then a little matter might bring us
into acquaintance with him, so gracious is he, and communicative of himself and
love; but we are enemies to God, and God is an enemy to us. We that are
infinitely beneath him, are enemies to him unjustly, and without cause; and
have done him all the mischief and despite that possibly we can; and he is
justly become an enemy to us. And while terms stand thus, what acquaintance can
there be between God and us? Will any man take one into his acquaintance, that
has been his ancient, constant, and bitter enemy, till first he be reconciled
to him? What King would take an open enemy into his Court, and make him his
favorite, till-first he has made his peace with him? Can two walk together
except they be agreed? Amos 3.3.
says God by the Prophet. We must be reconciled to God, and get our peace made
in Christ, if we would acquaint our selves with him. That is a second thing
included in this acquaintance with God. Acquaintance is only between friends,
therefore friends and acquaintance are Synonyma, both in our ordinary language,
and in the language of Scripture, Psalm. 55.13.

A third thing employed in this acquaintance with God, it is converse with God.
A conversing familiarly with God, as one friend converseth with another. Only
this we must take notice of, That among men there is a twofold friendship and
familiarity, either inter pares, or inter inoequales. And where familiarity and
converse is between those, between whom there is great inequality, there it
must be managed with that decorum that becomes the distance that is between
their persons. As suppose a King should take an affection to some mean and
ordinary person, and take him into intimate converse with himself, this Man
must not think now to treat the King as he would do one with whom he is, as we
say, hail fellow well met: but with much reverence, and observing the distance
that is between the King and him, or else he may quickly forfeit his interest
in the Kings favor, and familiarity: So here, the distance between God and us
is infinite, therefore we must manage our converse and familiarity with God
with lowest humility, and greatest reverence, and a deportment of our selves
every way answerable to the distance that is between God and us.

CHAP. II. Of Converse with God, and wherein it consists.
NOw this converse and familiarity with God, so far as it is to be managed and
carried on by us, consists in these seven particulars.

First. In a frequent and daily visiting of God. Friends and Acquaintance, you
know they do often visit one another, and that is the way to get and keep
acquaintance: so should we often visit God. First, By short and ejaculatory
prayers. Secondly, By set and solemn prayers every day, morning and evening.

And we must look upon this, not as matter of courtesy but of duty. It was
anciently a custom among the Romans, that the meaner sort of people among them,
did constantly go every morning to the house of some or other of the Senators
or chief men of Rome, whom they had chosen for their patron, and solemnly
salute him; Alex. ab Alex. li. 5. c. 24.
and this the great man looked for from his clients as their duty, and this the
poor people looked upon as their concernment and advantage, this being the
means to retain him still for their friend and patron. I find also, that among
the same Romans it was a custom in the families of great Persons, that all the
Children and servants of the family should every morning come in a body
together into the presence of the Lord, and Master of the family, and give him
a solemn Salve, and every evening make their appearance together again before
him, and give him a solemn Vale: God is that Sovereign Lord and Father, of whom
the whole family of heaven and earth is named, as the Apostle Paul speaks;
should not therefore all his Children, all his Servants, and all his Friends
visit him and salute him morning and evening with their prayers? There are some
indeed that never visit God but when they are in extremities, like those, Isa.
26.16. Lord, in trouble they have visited thee.

A Second thing in which this converse with God consists, is in a being much in
the presence and company of God. Friends and acquaintance, you know, they do
not only visit one another, Ne valeam si non totis Deciane, diebus. Et tecum
totis noctibus esse velim Martial.
but they stay some while each with other, they cannot content themselves with
short visits, with a how do you, and no more; but they love to be in the
presence and company of one another, and if it were possible, and if their
other necessary occasions would permit it, they would never part, they would be
together all the day long. So it is here in this converse with God; there is not
only a visiting of God frequently and daily, every morning and every evening,
but there is an abiding in the presence of God. What is that? Why there is a
twofold presence of God. There is a general presence of God whereby we are
present unto God, Psalm. 139.7.
God seeing and beholding us, and this is no more than is common to all the
creatures upon earth, yea to the devils and damned in hell: and there is a
special presence of God, whereby God is present unto us, and we do in the
secret of our souls apprehend him as really present to us, as if we saw him
with our eyes. Of this David speaks, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always
before me. Now it is this presence of God in which this Converse with God
consists, when the Soul does apprehend in it self that God is present with him,
and set himself as in the presence of God, this is a piece of the Souls
converse with God. To be, as we always are, in the general presence of God,
without the special apprehensions of his presence, is rather a hinderance to
converse and acquaintance with God, than any thing else. If the best friend I
have in the world should come into the room where I were, and pass too and
again by me, and stand right before me, all the day long, I should be so busy
in talking with other men, about other matters, that I should not regard him,
nor take any notice of him, and this one day after another; this were the way
rather to break off the intercourse and acquaintance that is between us, than
to continue it: So here, wherever we are, God is present with us, before us,
behind us, round about us; if our heads and hearts be so taken up with the
world, and lusts and vanities, that we mind not God, though present, nor take
no notice of him, this is the way rather to lose than to gain acquaintance with
God. If therefore we would converse with God, we must take notice of, and
acknowledge the presence of God. First, by a frequent and actual remembrance of
him, and lifting up our thoughts and desires to him. Secondly, by a reverent
demeanor of our selves continually, as before him. This is that the holy Ghost
calls for. In all thy ways acknowledge him. Prove. 3.6. chap. 23.17.
And, Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. And this, they that
have any acquaintance with God desire to be, and do, to acknowledge God in all
their ways, to be in the thoughts of God, and in the apprehensions and
breathings after God all the day long, and it is their grief that they can be
so no more, and they can at at least say with David, That the thoughts of God
are precious to them, Psalm. 139.17.
as the presence of an intimate friend is precious unto us, and it grieves us
that we can have no more of it. Besides this, there is a solemn presence of God
in his Ordinances, in regard of which, they which attend these Ordinances are
said to appear before God, and to stand in the presence of the Lord. And God
has appointed set and solemn times for all that are or would be acquainted
with him, thus to appear before him, and to stand in his presence, and in our
so doing consists a great part of our acquaintance with God.

A third thing wherein this Converse with God stands, is in our improving God,
and our interest in him, and acquaintance with him. If I have one that is my
intimate friend and acquaintance, this is the benefit I have by it, I have one
now into whose bosom I can entrust all my secrets, and ease all my griefs and
troubles, I have one with whom I can consult in all my difficult and weighty
affairs, with whom I may make bold in all my wants and exigencies; so I neither
can, nor will do, with another that is a stranger, and none of my acquaintance.
True friendship and acquaintance stands not in bare words and complemental
visits, but in real communication of offices and benefits: so here, converse
and acquaintance with God stands in our improving God, and our interest in him,
so as to acquaint him with all our secrets, so as to impart unto him all our
griefs and fears, so as to rely upon him to guide us in all our ways, and to
supply all our wants. This God looks we should do, and takes it unkindly when
we do otherwise: as a true friend that is willing and able to help his friend,
takes it unkindly if he go to any other, thinks himself either distrusted or
slighted, and it is almost a matter of falling out between them; so God takes
it unkindly, when we in our wants, or fears, or streights, in any kind
whatsoever, go to any creature in heaven or earth, but only to him; God even
falls out with us upon it. What says he? 2 Kings 1.3.
Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of
Baalzebub the god of Ekron?

A fourth thing wherein this converse and acquaintance with God consists, is in
our compliance with God. Among men you see, he that would have acquaintance,
and keep acquaintance with one, especially that is his superior, he must study
compliance, he must be careful to accommodate himself to the genius and
disposition of the other, and be as it were transformed and molded into his
very image. Amicus alter idem. So it is here, this converse with God consists
in a complying with God. Therefore, as I said before, the Tigurine translation
renders the word. Accommoda te illi. Accommodate thy self to him. There can be
no converse, no acquaintance with God, unless we resign and accommodate our
selves to him, and comply with him in all things. Ais aio. Negas nego. To say
as God says, to like what he likes, to dislike what he dislikes, to love what
he loves, and to hate what he hates; this is the way to converse and
acquaintance with God.

A fifth thing wherein this converse and acquaintance with God consists, is in
a wise observing his goings toward us, and his dealings with us, and in a
thankful acknowledging even the least of his favors and courtesies bestowed
upon us. Thus we deal with men, there is none of us all, but if a friend of
ours send us but a small token, or do us a small courtesy, we think our selves
engaged in point of common humanity, to take notice of it, and thank him for
it; that is common between friends, and that is the way to continue friendship:
O that we could be as punctual, and as exact with God this way, as we are with
men; but who is there that does not receive many more mercies from God, than he
takes notice of, or acknowledges with thankfulness?

A sixth thing wherein this acquaintance with God lies, is in our being
acquainted with Gods secrets. According to that of the Psalmist, The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him. And, Psalm. 25.14. Prove. 3.32.
His secret is with the righteous. Not that the most intimate of Gods
acquaintance know all Gods secrets. No, there are some that are Arcana
inscrutabilia, but they know more of Gods secrets, than any other in the world
do. And there are some secrets that they may without any offense desire God to
make known unto them, as the secret counsel of God in their Election, and the
writing of their names in heaven, before the foundations of the world were
laid. This is a secret that God imparts to none but his special friends. And
this, all that are of Gods acquaintance, may boldly beg of God to have imparted
to them.

A seventh thing wherein this converse and acquaintance with God consists, is
in God's visiting us, and our entertaining of these visits. It is a great
favor and honor that God does us, that he will give us leave to visit him
with our prayers and supplications, but that he should condescend so low as to
come and visit us; this is a greater favor and honor. For the King to come to
a private man's house, and give him a friendly visit, is more than to give him
leave to come to Court, and present his petition; that is as it were, a common
courtesy in respect of the other. Now what kind of things these visits are, I
cannot explain unto you, they are things, in a manner, unutterable, and if I
could speak of them never so distinctly and clearly, you that have not had
experience of them, could never understand what I mean; and you that have
experience, know more already of them, than either you or I can express. But
all they that have acquaintance with God, do highly prize these visits, and
therefore first do earnestly solicit God that he would please to bestow a
visit upon them, thinking long for it, and saying with David, Psalm. 101.2.
Oh when will thou come unto me? Secondly, If God please to honor them with a
visit, they entertain it with greatest thankfulness, and rejoicing. One visit
from God, does them more good than an hundred other blessings bestowed by God
upon them. When Mary the Mother of our Lord went to give her Cozen Elizabeth a
visit, she was so affected with the honor, that not only her heart in her
belly, but the Babe in her womb leaped for joy. And whence is this, says she,
that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? Luke 1.43.44.
for as soon as the voice of thy salvation sounded in mine ears, the babe
leaped in my womb for joy. O then, when the Lord himself, the Lord of life and
glory shall please to come and visit a poor sinful soul, what joy, what triumph
will there be? what crying out! as Mr. Glover, when he was going to the stake
to burnt, O Austine, he is come, he is come! What admiration! crying out with
Elizabeth, Whence is this that my Lord should come to me!

Thus I have showed you what this acquaintance with God is, and wherein it
consists. And when I say, the great concernment of every man is to acquaint
himself with God, the meaning of it is this: That it greatly concerns every one
of us to labor to know God, and that not only with a knowledge of notion and
speculation, but with a knowledge of faith and experience; as also, to get our
peace made with God, and then to converse familiarly with him; and to that end,
1. To visit him often with our prayers. 2. To be frequently in his presence. 3.
To improve our interest in him upon all occasions. 4. To comply with him,
framing our hearts and ways according to his will in all things. 5. To observe
and give him thanks for all his favors. To beg, 6. That he would acquaint us
with his secrets. And 7. Honor us with his visits. And this is to acquaint our
selves with God.

CHAP. III. Showing the Reasons, why it is the great concernment of every Man
to acquaint himself with God.
MAn is, as the Proverb tells us, a sociable creature, God at the first framed
him for company and society, therefore of Man in his Innocence, God pronounced
this; It is not good for man to be alone. Genesis 2.18.
Hence it is that every Man naturally seeks to associate and acquaint himself
with some Companion or other, but since the nature of man is become so
corrupted and vitiated by the fall of Adam, it concerns every man to be very
careful whom he does acquaint and associate himself with, not only for his
reputation and honor sake, because Noscitur ex socio qui non dignoscitur ex
se; but also for his souls sake, because a man's associate and acquaintance has
a secret and powerful influence upon his mind and spirit, to make it either
better or worse, according as his acquaintance is. Therefore it is that the
holy Ghost gives that necessary caution; Make no friendship with an angry man,
Prove. 22.24.
and with a furious man thou shall not go, lest thou learn his ways, and get a
snare to thy soul. The same may be said of a drunkard, of a swearer, of a
despiser of the Word and Ordinances of God, of a perverter of the truths of
God, and of every other sinner whatsoever. Make no friendship with him, lest
thou get a snare to thy soul. But O, how is this wholesome and necessary counsel
of the holy Ghost forgotten; and how unwary are most men in the choice of their
friends and acquaintance, though the holy Ghost again tells us, With the pure
men will learn purity, Psalm. 18.27.
and with the froward they will learn frowardness. So our English Translation
reads it. Et cum perverso perverteris; Sic Clemens Alexandr. Tertullian.
Athanas. Ambrosius, Cyrillus, Augustinus, aliique locum interpretantur.
so the Vulgar Latin But now I propound unto you here an acquaintance, from
whence you need not fear any hurt or danger, but rather on the contrary may
expect much good; for so says the Text: Acquaint now thy self with him, and be
at peace; so shall good come unto thee. The first benefit of this acquaintance
is peace, peace with God, peace with thine own conscience, peace with the rest
of the creatures. First, Peace with God, that must needs be, because
reconciliation and peace with God, is as you have heard, one ingredient of this
acquaintance with God. Secondly, Peace with conscience, for conscience is but
Gods Deputy, Gods Advocate and Notary in the soul; and as among men, when a man
has made his peace with the principal Creditor or party that had a
controversy in Law against him, the Advocate, the Solicitor his mouth is
stopped, he has no more to say: so here, having peace with God, thou have
peace with conscience; to be sure then, thou have jus ad rem, if not jus in re.
Thirdly, Peace with the creatures. Job 5.23, 24.
For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field: and the beasts of
the field shall be at peace with thee, etc. And Secondly, Good shall come unto
thee, and that a threefold good; Utile, Honestum, or Honorificum, Jucundum.
For, First, this acquaintance with God is the most profitable acquaintance.
Secondly, It is the most honorable acquaintance. And, Thirdly, It is the most
comfortable acquaintance.

First, I say, acquaintance with God is the most profitable acquaintance; there
never was any man, that ever was acquainted with God, nor never will be, but
got abundance of good by that acquaintance. I have read of Calvin and Beza, and
other men of eminent learning and holiness, that the men of their acquaintance
have protested, that they never were in their company, but they returned
doctiores, aut meliores, either more learned, or made better; what then may,
and must, and will those say, that are acquainted with God? If the light of a
glowworm will help a man so much, what will the light of the Sun? When Moses
had been conversing with God upon the Mount but for a little time, forty days
and forty nights, the Text says, his face did shine. Exodus 24.29.
Our acquaintance with men may sully and deform us, they may affricate some of
their errors or vices to us, Uva ut mucorem contacta traxit ab uva. But now
conversing with God, acquainting our selves with God, that will make our faces
to shine. O how humble, how holy, how heavenly, how God-like will that man grow
that acquaints himself with God?

Secondly, As this acquaintance with God is a profitable acquaintance, so it is
an honorable acquaintance. Men count it an honor to have acquaintance with
those that are their Superiors; hence it is that many seek the Rulers favor.
Prove. 29.26.
You read of one Zabud the son of Nathan, that he was the principal officer in
Solomon's Court, 1 Kings 4.5.
and that he was the Kings friend. Which of those think you, did he count his
greatest honor? and if he must have been put to his choice to part with one of
them, which of them do you think he would most willingly have parted with? It
is easily determined. Surely to be the Kings friend was more to him than his
office, whatever his office were. O then, what is it to be the friends of God,
to be admitted into familiarity and acquaintance with God, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords? It is spoken of Abraham as his great honor, and the
great reward of his faith, that he was called the friend of God. James 2.23.
Cuicunque haec sors contigerit ut amicus Dei sit is humanae foelicitatis
terminos transcendit, says Philo. Whose lot soever it be to be the friend of
God, he has transcended the bounds of humane felicity. And yet this honor
have all the children of faithful Abraham, as well as himself; and indeed this
honor all may have that will. Therefore that Soldier whom Austine mentions,
lib. 8. Confess. cap. 6. said wisely, Dic quaeso, omnibus laboribus nostris quo
ambimus pervenire? quid quaerimus? cujus rei causa militamus? Majoresne esse
poterint spes nostrae in palatio quam ut amici imperatoris fiamus? and ibi quid
non fragile, plenumque periculis? Et per quot pericula pervenitur ad grandius
periculum? Et quamdiu istud erit? Amicus autem Dei (voluero ecce nunc fio. Tell
me I pray, whither do we by all our adventures aspire? what seek we? what run
we the hazard of war for? can our hopes in the Palace rise higher, than to be
accounted Friends to the Emperor? and in that honor, what is there that is
not frail, and full of danger? and how long will that endure? But the friend of
God, if I will, I may be made now presently. And who but madmen or fools,
would refuse such honor.

Thirdly, This acquaintance with God, as it is most profitable and honorable,
so it is most comfortable, pleasant, and delightful. And here I must appeal to
all those that have ever had experience of acquaintance with God, if they have
not found more true, real, solid joy and comfort in one quarter of an hours
secret converse with God, yea in one friendly look or word of God, than ever
they did in all their lives besides? you that are strangers to this, I know
will not believe it, nor cannot think it; but those that have experience of it,
will bear me witness that I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, nor
hyperbolize. What is the comfort and joy of heaven it self, but the presence of
God, sweet communion and converse with God; so far therefore as we can attain
this upon earth, so far we have an heaven upon earth. The Jews have a saying
concerning the last day of the feast of Tabernacles which Scripture calls the
last and great day of the feast, Joh. 7.37. that he who never knew the joy of
that day, never knew joy in all his life: but I am sure it is much more true
here; he that never knew the comfort and joy of acquaintance with God, never
knew true joy and comfort in all his life.

profit, honor, and comfort of acquaintance with God, be not enough to
persuade you, that it is the great concernment of every one of you to get and
keep this acquaintance, I have but one thing more to add, and that is, that it
is necessary for every one of you to acquaint your selves with God. For tell
me, can you be content when you shall come to lie a dying, and then knock at
the gate of mercy, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; Luke 13.25.
can you be content, that God should answer you as it is there, I know you not
whence you are? Or, can you be content, that when you come to appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, he should profess to you, I never knew you, Mat. 7.23.
depart from me ye workers of iniquity? If not, O then labor to get
acquaintance with God and Christ now, for can you imagine that God and Christ
will know them in death and judgment, who care not for knowing him, and
acquainting themselves with him in the time of their lives?

CHAP. IV. Calling us to take notice of the wonderful condescension of God
toward us, in vouchsafing to admit us into his Acquaintance; and of the
madness and folly of those that care not for this Acquaintance.
HEre then see the infinite goodness and condescension of God toward us his
poor and worthless creatures, who though he be infinitely above us, and stands
not at all in need of of us, nor cannot be in the least benefited or advantaged
by us, or by his acquaintance with us; but before there was made either Man or
Angel, he was infinitely satisfied, and infinitely blessed in the enjoyment of
himself; yet was he pleased to create Angels and Men, not only to a fitness and
capacity of, but unto an actual communion and acquaintance with himself; which
was more than needed on God's part, or was owing on our parts; and when we like
foolish and unthankful wretches, upon the very first motion of the devil, gave
away this honor and happiness of acquaintance and communion for an apple, as
Esau sold his birthright for a mess of pottage, and thereby not only made our
selves unworthy for ever to be admitted into Gods favor and acquaintance, but
unfit for it too, as well as unworthy; that God should yet please to stoop so
low as to take us yet again into acquaintance with himself: this speaks the
wonderful goodness of God, his infinite (...), or love to mankind.

When Esau had once undervalued the birthright, so far as to sell it for a
mess of pottage, though afterward it grieved him for what he had done, and he
sought earnestly, and that with tears, to recover that blessing and birthright
which he had so foolishly lost, yet it could not be: so God might have dealt
with Adam, and every one of us. The Text tells us, Adam lived 930 years after
his sin; now if Adam had spent all those years in nothing but weeping and
mourning, for his folly and madness in parting with his birthright, his
acquaintance and communion with God, for an apple, and in seeking earnestly,
and that with tears, to recover communion and acquaintance with God again, and
after all, had been denied it, yet God had been altogether just and righteous.

But behold the kindness of God, and his love toward mankind! As it is said of
David, when Absalom by his villainies had banished himself from his Fathers
Court and presence, it is said, The soul of King David longed to go forth unto
Absalom: that is, 2 Samuel 13.39.
David's heart was full of fatherly affection toward him, and he longs to be
friends with him again: so did the heart of God even long toward man, after
his sin and fall, and he did even long to be friends with him again, and to
renew his acquaintance and converse with him.

And this gracious disposition of his toward sinful man, this great desire and
inclination which God has after peace and renewed acquaintance with sinful
man, God has abundantly declared and testified.

First, By appointing, ordaining, and giving one to be a Mediator, a
Reconciler, a Peacemaker a Friend-maker, between God and us.

Secondly, By appointing and giving no other nor meaner Person to this work,
than his own blessed and dear Son, who is the express image of his person, Heb.
1.3.
and the brightness of his glory.

Thirdly, By giving this Son of his to be a Mediator, not only by way of
Intercession, but also by way of satisfaction, to make peace for us by paying
our debts, and satisfying for our sins, which he could not do but by shedding
his blood, and laying down his precious life; and yet rather than God would
quite lose and abandon all his interest in us, and acquaintance with us, he
would not spare his own Son.

Fourthly, By testifying and proclaiming unto all men in the Ministry of the
Gospel, that he is reconciled to the world, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
and by recalling and inviting sinners unto peace and acquaintance with himself.

Fifthly, By profering his acquaintance unto sinners upon such easy,

Sixthly, By his not only offering acquaintance with us upon those terms, by
his Ambassadors, his Ministers, Jesus Christ, Behold I stand at the door and
knock; Rev. 3.20.
if any man hear my voice, and open to me, I will come in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with me. The Greeks and Romans of old were wont always to
have their feasts at supper; therefore when it is said here, I will come in to
him, and sup with him, it is as if he had said, I will come in to him and feast
with him. And feasting together was of old a Symbol of perfect reconciliation,
and intimate friendship and acquaintance. Now, behold here the wonderful
goodness and condescension of God, and his gracious disposition and inclination
toward peace and acquaintance with his poor creatures. May we not here now
take up that admiring expression of David, And is this the manner of men, O
Lord. Did you ever read or hear of any King or Prince, 2 Samuel 7.19.
that when his Subjects had highly provoked him, by their rebellion against
him, and he had power enough to crush and destroy them, would yet not only send
his Heralds and Ambassadors to them to offer terms of peace and
reconciliation; but would himself, go in his own person, from house to house,
and from man to man, entreating them severally, and by name, that they would be
friends with him their Sovereign Lord and King; and offering if they will but
open the door to him, that he will forgive them, and be friends with them: did
you ever read or hear of such a thing? and is this the manner of men? but this
is the manner of Gods dealing with his enemies. Behold therefore, I say, and
admire the gracious disposition of God toward sinful man, and the great desire
he has toward peace and renewed acquaintance with him.

In the next place, see here the folly and madness of all those that are not
acquainted with God. And this I fear is the state of not a few among us,
whatever they may think of themselves; of whom it may be said, as our Savior
said of the Jews, John 5.37.
Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. They were a
People that had read and heard the word of God; Ay, but yet they had never
heard the voice of God, they had never heard God himself speaking in his word;
they had seen the temple, and the Altar, and the rest of those sacred Symbols
that were the testimonies of Gods presence, ay, but they had never seen the
face of God in those Ordinances, and therefore though they looked upon
themselves as the only people in the world that were acquainted with God, yet
our Savior tells them they were mistaken, they were mere strangers to him. Ye
have, says he, neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

O that it were not so with some of us, who hear of God indeed, but hear not
God, who have heard of God by the hearing of the ear, but never heard God
himself by the hearing of the heart, who have seen the sanctuaries and
Ordinances of God, but have never seen the face of God in his Ordinances, and
in his Sanctuaries, and so remain strangers to God, and unacquainted with him.

Particularly here are two sorts, whose woeful condition this is.

First, Those that are ignorant of God. Secondly, Those that have no converse
with God.
First, Those that are ignorant of God, who know not God: they must needs be
strangers to God, and God to them; for knowledge is the first step to
acquaintance. Now, by persons ignorant of God, I mean, not only those that are
grossly ignorant, who have not a true notion of the Nature, Attributes, and
Persons in the Deity, of which there are too many every where; but by ignorant
perfons, I mean, those, who though they have a true notion of God, yet want the
real, effectual, and powerful knowledge of God: their knowledge of God is
merely notional, and God is to them, as it were, merely, Notio secunda and ens
rationis, as the Logicians speak. To know God really and indeed, is as I said
before, to know him not only by an airy speculation, but to know him by a faith
of effectual persuasion, so to know him, as to believe him indeed to be, the
most powerful, wife, and good, the most just, and holy, Creator, preserver, and
Governor of the whole universe, and accordingly to have our hearts affected
with love unto him, with desire after him, with fear and reverence of him, and
delight in him. This, and this only, is the true knowledge of God, and
whosoever they be that are destitute of this knowledge, whatever they may think
of themselves, and of their own knowledge, they are yet ignorant of God, and
strangers from God, through the ignorance that is in them.

Now, do we thus know God all of us? do we thus know God? thus as to
acknowledge him, love him, fear him, desire him delight in him. The ox, the
horse, and the dog, thus knows his Master and owner; and if we do not thus know
our Creator, our Preserver, our Feeder and Maintainer, O how ignorant and
brutish are we? Isa. 1.3.

Secondly. Others there are that have no converse with God, whatever they know
of him, they have no converse with him, Ephesians. 2.12.
but live without God in the world, as the Apostle speaks of some. That are as
mindless of God, as regardless of God, and of all converse with him, as if
there were no God at all: who are so far from visiting God daily with their
prayers, that they never visit God by prayer at all; who are so far from being
often in the presence of God, as those are that acquaint themselves with God,
and converse with God, that they are never in the presence of God at all. Psalm.
10.4.
God is not in all their thoughts, as the Psalmist speaks, and makes it the
very description of a wicked man. Now how many such are there among us, of whom
it may most truly be said, God is not in all their thoughts?

One man he awakes, and rises in the morning, and as soon as he is up,
presently without ever taking notice of God, or turning his thoughts to him, he
rusheth into his shop, or into his worldly businesses, and is engaged in them
soul and body, heart and hand, and so he continues, till of necessity he must
intermit his labors to take a little food, and when he has done that, he
returns to his work again, and there continues till late at night, and then he
takes his supper, and goes to bed, and sleeps till morning, and then he rises
and spends the second day as he spent the first, and the third as the second,
and so on, one day after another, and one week after another, and one year
after another, but God is not in all his thoughts. Another is no sooner up and
clad, but he is presently for his sports and games, or his company and cups,
and these he pursues all the day long. There are that rise early in the morning
to follow strong drink, Isa. 5.11.
and continue until night, ^ill the wins inflame them. And as they spend one
day, so they resolve to spend a second and a third, and so they would spend
every day. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine; Chap. 56.12.
and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this
day, and much more abundant. When I shall awake, Prove. 23.35.
I will seek it yet again. A man may without suspicion of the least breach of
charity conclude of these, that they have no acquaintance with God: God is not
in all their thoughts.

I confess, that even the Saints themselves have God too little in their
thoughts, but they take notice of it, and bewail it, which makes one of them
cry out, O Deus aeterne quomodo semper memor es ejus qui tui semper
obliviscitur? quomodo continuatam habes memoriam ejus qui perpetuam tui habet
oblivionem? O Deus proesentissime, and remotissime! proesentissime quidem quod
in te est omnibus creaturis t^is, remotissimus vero hominibus terrenis propter
profundam qua tenentur joblivionem quod tu fis in eis. Me miserum obliviscor
Dei qui mecum est, and beneficiorum quae continuo in me confert, praeceptorum
quae mihi imponit, praemiorum quae promittit, suppliciorum quae minatur, and
denique judicii quod instituet. O Pater misericordiarum aufer a me pernitiosam
adeo oblivionem tui, ut semper sim tui memor sicut tu es mei. O eternal God,
how is it that thou art always mindful of one who is always unmindful of
thee? how is it that thou have a continual remembrance of him who has a
perpetual forgetfulness of thee? O O God, who art most present to me, and most
remote from me! As for thee, thou art most present to all thy creatures, but
most remote from earthly men, because of their profound forgetfulness, that
thou art in them, Ah, wretched man that I am, I forget that God that is ever
with me, the benefits that he continually bestows upon me, the precepts which
he imposes on me, the rewards which he promises me, the punishments wherewith
he threatens me, the Judgments which he will execute. O Father of mercies, take
away from me this so pernicious forgetfulness of thee, and grant that I may be
ever mindful of thee, as thou art of me. But, O how few are there that are thus
sensible of their forgetfulness of God, and their mindlessness of him, and
bewail it, and pray against it? No, my brethren, the generality of men live in
a mindlessness and regardlessness, and total and constant forgetfulness of God,
and love to live so; this is their folly and their madness, they shun the
thoughts of God, and all converse with God, as men that have sore eyes shun the
light of the Sun. Job 21. 14.
They say unto the Almighty, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways. Would you think it possible, that men should ever arrive at that
height of madness, as not only to live strangers from God, and unacquainted
with him, but to be contented so to live, yea to ref use all knowledge of him,
and scorn all acquaintance with him?

CHAP. V. Exhorting all to labor to get acquaintance with God, and propounding
several Motives thereunto.
MY next work therefore shall be to exhort and invite every one of you to this
acquaintance with God. Let me bespeak every one, into whose hands these lines
may come, in the words of my Text, Acquaint thy self with him.

There are three things, that are the great attractives, and incentives to make
us seek acquaintance with men. First, The worthiness of the person. Secondly,
The benefit we may reap by their acquaintance. Thirdly, Easiness of access and
acquaintance. Now all these are eminently and transcendently in God.

First, The worthiness of the person. Men that are of great eminency, either
for learning and wisdom, or for holiness and pretty, or for power and authority,
or for honor and dignity, O how ambitions are prudent and intelligent men of
getting acquaintance with such? In all these particulars, who is like unto God,
or who may be compared with him? who is infinite in wisdom and holiness,
infinite in Majesty, power, and glory; He is the only Potentate, King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, whose acquaintance is more worth than the acquaintance of
all the men in the world. For,

Secondly, What benefit can you reap or expect from acquaintance with any man
in the world, which is not infinitely more to be had in God, and that in all
abundance? do you look that your friend and acquaintance should counsel you in
your streights, protect you in dangers, defend you against enemies, pity you
in your afflictions, supply your wants, comfort you in your heaviness, deliver
you in all your troubles? who so able, so willing to do all this, as God for
those that are his friends and acquaintance? And such an one thou may be if
thou will, and have indeed a mind to it. For,

Thirdly, God is of open and easy access. Ingrediamur aulas, obsecro, and
obstupescemus tantum argenti and auri effundi ad propitias Principum aures
impetrandas. Quandoque non hebdomades solum, sed menses, sed and annos totos
expect andum est, dum Principis conclave and aures pateunt orationem acturo, Ad
Deum immensa Majestatis Dominum, omni hora, momentis omnibus patet aditus. Rex
coeli nunquam non propitias and vacivas habet aures. Importunitatis hic nemo
insimulatur. Gratior est, qui frequentior, and importunior. Adeste terrae
vermiculi, prorepite scarabaeoli, accurrito homunculi miselli, liberrimum vobis
est cum conditore vestro colloquium. Nec est, quod vel causae vestra vel
facundiae quidquam diffidatis: quo simplicius perorabitis, hoc melius: modo non
fr^geat, aut exerret oration vestra: modo eum, quem rogatis, ex oculis non
vestra sponte amittatis. Cassiodorus id asserens: Ad penetralia judicis, ait,
precator admittitur, and nullus inde respuitur, nisi qui tepidus invenitur.
Drexel. Rhet. Cael. lib. 1. cap. 13.
It is not his being an invisible Majesty, nor his dwelling in light
inaccessible, that can render our acquaintance and converse with him, either
impossible or difficult. Not his being invisible, for the souls of men are
invisible, and yet the converse that men have one with another, is betweeen
their souls rather than their bodies; it is the soul that discourses, reasons,
understands, wills, loves; and if we can converse and grow into acquaintance
with a soul, whose essence or shape we never saw, why may we not converse with
an unseen God too?

Nor does it hinder our converse and acquaintance with God, that he inhabiteth
eternity, that he dwells in the high and holy place; for though he be
infinitely above us, yet he condescends to communicate himself to us, according
to our capacities. He dwells on high, and yet he humbles himself to behold
the things that are done in earth, Psalm. 113.5, 6.
as well as in heaven, to converse with men as well as Angels. As the Sun in
heaven is far above us, and yet does not disdain to inlighten, and warm, and
quicken the poorest worm that crawls upon the earth, as well as the Eagle that
soars aloft above the clouds, and can gaze the Sun in the face. Let not
therefore any poor soul be discouraged, and think or say, It is not for such a
worm, for such a nothing as I am to aspire to acquaintance and converse with
God. No, no, Men may be too high for thee to reach, and too great for thee to
grasp and compass acquaintance with, but the great God will stoop to entertain
acquaintance with thee, if thou will acquaint thy self with him.

He disdaineth not the acquaintance of the least of men, nor of the greatest of
sinners. Such was the condescension of the divine nature, that it disdained not
the near acquaintance with the humane nature: to take it into personal union
with himself; and such was the condescension of God in our nature, that when he
was upon earth he disdained not the acquaintance of those who upon common
account were the vilest of men, even Publicans and sinners. Mat. 9.11.
And such is still the gracious condescension of God in Christ, that he
disdaineth not the acquaintance of the meanest Persons or vilest sinners that
seek acquaintance of him. Nay,

Secondly, He offers and tenders this acquaintance to them; and this is not
usual for great persons to do to their Inferiors; he entreats and beseeches
poor sinners that they would be reconciled to him, and acquainted with him. And
this he does.

Thirdly, Out of his mere grace and favor only, for their good and benefit,
not for any gain or advantage to himself. Can a man be profitable to God? says
Eliphaz. No, Job 22.2.
God cannot be a gainer by our acquaintance: that he offers it, seeks it, is
for our good and benefit, that we may be made happy and blessed by it. O then,
let not this grace of God be in vain to us, but accept we this gracious offer
of God, acquainting our selves with him.

CHAP. VI. Particularly exhorting those that never yet had acquaintance with
God, now to labor for it. With Directions for the attaining of it.
NOw here are three sorts that I would apply my self unto.

First. Those that never yet were acquainted with God. My Exhortation to them
shall be, that they would now acquaint themselves with God, now presently,
without any further delay.

Secondly. To those that have acquainted themselves with God, that they would
labor to keep and maintain their acquaintance with him inviolate and
uninterrupted.

Thirdly. To those whose acquaintance with God is intermitted, and they have in
a manner lost it, that they would labor to renew it.

First. Such as never yet had any acquaintance with God. O labor now to get
into acquaintance with him. Acquaint thy self now with him, now presently,
immediately, without any further delay. O consider how long you have lived
strangers to God already, enemies to God already. Is it not enough that you
have lived twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years already, without any intimacy or
acquaintance with God? O if you love God, if you love your own souls, live not
a day longer, live not an hour longer in that strange condition. The time past
of our life may suffice us to have lived in lasciviousness, lust, excess of
wine, 1 Pet. 4.3.
etc. says the Apostle Peter. And it is high time to awake out of sleep, says
the Apostle Paul. Romans 13.11.
So say I, the time past may suffice us to have lived without God in the world,
and it is now high time for every one of us to begin to acquaint our selves
with him.

Acquaint therefore now thy self with him. Now, now, while God is pleased to
offer and tender this acquaintance. Now is the day of grace, 2 Cor. 6.2.
now is the accepted time. Now, while the golden scepter is held forth, while
the Gospel is preached unto you. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts. Heb. 3.7.
If God speak to your hearts, and bespeak your acquaintance with him, see that
ye refuse not him that speaks, but acquaint thy self now with him.

If any say,

I answer, were come thus far to seek after God, as seriously to enquire how
they might be acquainted with God! you that are so, take these directions.

First. Labor to be fully convinced of an absolute necessity of acquainting
your selves with God. Look upon it as your great duty, look upon it as that
upon which not only the comfort of your lives, but the eternal salvation of
your souls does depend. There are three times especially wherein this
acquaintance with God will be found of great and absolute necessity.

First. In a time of common calamity. Such a time as our Savior speaks of.
Luke 21.25, 26.
When there shall be distress of Nations upon the earth, with perplexity, men's
hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things that are
coming upon the earth; (and how near such times may be to us, and how fast they
may be hastening upon us, who can tell?) O then happy are those that have
acquaintance with God, they have a friend, an acquaintance that will not fail
them, when their own hearts are ready to fail them, and would undoubtedly fail
them, were it not for their acquaintance with God. Whereas they that have not
acquainted themselves with God, will find God himself a terror to them in the
day of their calamity, God will deal with them as he threatens. I will show
them the back, Jer. 18.17.
and not the face, in the day of their calamity.

Into thy hands Lord I commend my spirit; Lord Jesus receive my soul, is the
prayer, or at least the wish of every dying man and woman, that does not dye
like Nabal, stupid and senseless as a stock or stone. But do you think that God
will do this for every one at the first asking? surely no. They that never
regarded to acquaint themselves with God in the time of their life, God will
not so easily own them at the hour of their death; but they that have
acquainted themselves with God in the time of their life, they may with much
comfort and assurance commend their souls into the hand of God, when they are
at the point of death. And may say with Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have believed, and that he is able to keep that good thing that
I have committed unto him against that day. It was a noble speech of good Dr.
Preston when he lay a dying, and full of Christian confidence and comfort. I
shall change my place, but not my company. The meaning was, that he had so
acquainted himself with God here upon earth, and had so much conversed with
him, that now that he was to dye, his company should still be the same after
death, that it was in life. How far are they from being able to speak this at
their death, that have had no care to acquaint themselves with God, and to
converse with him in the course of their life?

Thirdly. In the day of Judgment it will then be necessary that you should have
acquaintance with God. Can you your selves imagine but that God, who is the
righteous Judge of all the world, will in that great day look, and judge, and
pronounce, far otherwise upon those that have been here acquainted with him,
than upon those that have lived and dyed strangers and enemies to him? To the
one he will say, Come ye blessed, ye have known me, and I have known you; you
have loved me, and I have loved you; you have visited me, and I have visited
you, and you have thankfully and gladly entertained those visits, you have been
of my old acquaintance, many a prayer have I received from you, and many a tear
have you dropped into my bottle; come therefore, come ye blessed, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. But to the other he
will say, go ye cursed, ye have not known me, ye have not loved me, ye have not
regarded to acquaint your selves with me, ye have set at naught all my
counsels, and would none of my reproofs; ye have said unto me, depart from us,
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Therefore now I say unto you, depart
from me into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. O
dreadful sentence, dreadful to hear, intolerable to bear, which yet ye can no
ways avoid, but by acquainting your selves with God. You must of necessity
acquaint your selves with God, or dye miserably, and perish eternally. O press
these and the like considerations upon your selves, till you be thoroughly and
effectually convinced of an absolute necessity of acquainting your selves with
God. Then,

Secondly. Labor to be seriously and deeply humbled, that you have lived so
^ong as you have done, and lived unacquainted with God. Let me plead with you
as Moses does with Israel; Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people, Deuteronomy.
32.6.
and unwise? is not he thy father that has bought thee? has he not made thee,
and established thee? Is not he that God that has given thee life and being,
that has preserved thee, upheld thee, maintained thee, fed thee, clothed thee?
is not he the God in whose hands thy breath, and all thy ways are? upon whose
pleasure and favor thou dependest for all thy present and eternal good, who is
able to kill or cause to live, to save or to destroy, to make blessed, or to
make miserable, to all eternity? And have thou lived twenty, thirty, or forty
years before this God, yea, upon this God, and all this while never acquainted
thy self at all with him? O what unthankfulness, what disingenuity, what folly,
what brutishness is this? If thou had fed a horse or a dog but the tenth part
of that time that God has fed thee, he would have taken more knowledge and
acquaintance of thee than thou did ever do of God.

Yea, thou have not only not acquainted thy self with God, but thou have not
cared, thou have not regarded to acquaint thy self with him, but have lived in
a continual mindlessness and regardlessness of God. Of the rock that begat
thee, Deuteronomy. 32.18.
thou art unmindful, and have forgotten the God that formed thee.

Yea, thou have not only neglected acquaintance with God, but thou have
despised it, undervalued it, preferred converse with the world, and with thy
lusts above converse and acquaintance with God, as if a man should prefer the
company and consortship of beggars and thieves, and whores, and such like lewd
persons, before the favor, familiarity, and acquaintance of his Sovereign
King: such an affront have thou put upon the great God of heaven and earth. O
let the thoughts of this afflict and humble thee in time, or else know that
hereafter it will torment thee to all eternity, and make thee tear thy flesh,
and gnaw thy tongue, and curse thy self for rage and indignation at this thy
present folly.

Thirdly. When you have thus convinced your selves of a necessity of getting
acquaintance with God, wall of separation between God and us, that keeps God
and us from meeting together, and from acquainting one with another. Your sins
have separated between God and you, and have hid his face from you. Isa. 59.2.
Therefore says God, Wash you, make you clean, Isa. 1.16, 17.
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil,
learn to do well. Come now and let us reason together. As if God had said, Ay,
now you have repented, and made your selves clean from sin, now you are fit for
God to treat withal, before you were not fit to come near him, nor approach his
presence. A rebel that would be admitted into his Princes favor and
acquaintance, must first throw down his weapons of rebellion: so must they that
would have any acquaintance with God, they must put away sin, all sin.

Sin is the only thing that God hates, and is an enemy against, for its own
sake; they therefore that would have any acquaintance with God, must renounce
all acquaintance and familiarity with sin. If I regard iniquity in my heart:
Psalm. 66.18.
God will not hear my prayer. Let a man pray never so often, and never so
earnestly, and beg acquaintance with God never so much, yet if he regard
iniquity in his heart, God will not regard him, nor his prayers. We must
therefore resolve to break off all our leagues with sin, to give a bill of
divorce to every lust, to renounce for ever all acquaintance with sin, or else
to renounce all acquaintance with God. Now which of these two would you rather
do?

Fourthly. When you have thus convinced your selves of a necessity of
acquainting your selves with God, and have humbled your selves for living so
long without acquaintance with God, and have not only resolved, but have
actually renounced every evil way: you must not now think, that for your
humiliation, or for your repentance, or for your forsaking of your sins God is
obliged or bound to take you for his friends, or to admit you into his
acquaintance. No, these things you must do, or else never look for acquaintance
with God: and when you have done all this, you must acknowledge, that if God
should cast away you from his presence, and refuse to know your souls, it were
but just and righteous. And if God does ever admit you into his familiarity, it
is of his mere condescension and grace, and therefore, In the fourth place, you
must make use of a Mediator to bring you into acquaintance with God. This
course men take, who desire to get the favor and acquaintance of their Prince,
or Sovereign, being themselves strangers, much more if they have been enemies
to him, they make use of some special favorite to make way for them, to
procure access into his presence, and to ingratiate them with him, that so they
may get acquaintance. Now, such is the condition of all of us by nanature in
respect of God: we are not only strangers to him, but enemies, Alienated,
Colos. 1.21.
and enemies in our minds by wicked works. And being such, our only way to get
acquaintance with God, is to make use of a Mediator; What Mediator? Peter or
Paul, or the Virgin Mary, or any other of the Saints in glory, as the Papists
do? Alas, Abraham knows us not, Isa. 63.16.
and Israel is ignorant of us. If they were not, yet they are not high enough
in the favor of God to prevail for us. No, no, as there is but one God, so
there is but one Mediator betwixt God and Man, 1 Timothy 2.5.
the man Christ Jesus. He is the great favorite of heaven, who alone can bring
us into acquaintance with God. O therefore make use of him.

If you ask, What is the use you should make of Christ the Mediator,

To the first of these, I answer. The use you are to make of Christ the
Mediator,

First. You are to make use of Christ the Mediator for your reconciliation and
peace with God. Peace must be before acquaintance can be. And he must be your
peace, Ephesians. 2.14.

Secondly. You must make use of Christ for bringing of you into Gods presence.
As Joseph being the favorite of the Court of Egypt, brought Jacob and his Sons
into the presence of the King. It is Christ in whom we have boldness and access
with confidence. Ephesians. 3.12
The Original (...) is very significant. Never come into Gods presence, but get
Christ to take thee by the hand.

Thirdly. You must make use of Christ to procure you acceptance with God. For
as the Apostle says, He has made us accepted in the beloved. Ephesians. 1.6.


Fourthly. Christ for the giving of you the true, and saving, and spiritual,
and effectual knowledge of God, without which you can never have true
acquaintance with him. No man knows the Father, but the Son, Mat. 11.27.
and he to whom the Son will reveal him.

Fifthly. Christ for the procuring and sending down of that holy Spirit,
without which we can never have any true converse or familiarity with God. Our
converse with God lies partly in our visiting God in prayer, that we cannot do
without his holy Spirit, which is a spirit of prayer, and partly it lies in
Gods visiting us, which he does not but by the breathings, and motions, and
excitations, and inlargements, and consolations of his blessed Spirit.

Sixthly. Christ, as to bring us into the favor of God, so to keep and
preserve us in the favor and acquaintance of God.

If you ask,

I answer. God, the Mediator, the Advocate of sinners, to do all this for us.

This therefore do when the guilt of your sins looks you in the face, commit
your self and cause unto Christ, rely upon him to answer for you. When the
doors of mercy, and of access to God, seem to be shut against you, fly to him
that bears the keys, and can at any time open to you, and let you into Gods
presence. Desire him to undertake for you, to answer for you to God, to your
own consciences, to Satan's accusations, and rely boldly and confidently upon
him, to do it for you. By him alone you may boldly and comfortably converse
with God, but without him, no drawing near, Heb. 12.29.
for our God is a consuming fire.

Fifthly. When you have thus convinced your selves of a necessity of
acquaintance with God, when you have humbled your selves for living so long as
you have done without it, when you have removed obstructions, when you have
engaged the Mediator, Then in the fifth place, do your duty. Ne tibi desis, do
all that may possibly be done for the bringing of you into acquaintance with
God. As namely,







Ruths gleaning among Boaz his servants, was the first way of bringing her into
Boaz his knowledge, and acquaintance, and of all the preferments that followed
to her thereupon.

visit from God by his Spirit, and be importunate, be impudent here, take no
denial, be not satisfied in one, or in few, but beg still more and more; say
with the Psalmist, Remember me, O Lord, with the favor thou bear unto thy
people: Psalm 106.4.
O visit me with thy salvation.

Sixthly, and Lastly.

CHAP. VII. Exhorting those that have acquaintance with God, to keep and
maintain it.
MY next work is to exhort those that have acquaintance with God, that they
would be very careful to keep and maintain that acquaintance that they have
with God. And to move to this, I hope I shall need do no more than tell you,
that it is a very possible thing for you to lose that acquaintance and
familiarity which you have with God. Though it is true, Once the Lords, and
ever the Lords; and, whom God loves once, he loves always; and it is not
possible for any that have ever been reconciled unto God, and brought into his
favor by Jesus Christ, totally and finally to fall out of his favor again;
yet it is possible for you to lose that sweet intimacy, and familiarity, and
intercourse, and acquaintance that you had with God, which was both the fruit
and evidence of the love of God, and of your being in favor with him, it is
possible for you to lose your acquaintance with God, so far as that you may
look upon God as a stranger, and God may look upon you as a stranger, as one
whom he takes no notice of, of whom he has no acquaintance with; you may look
upon God as an enemy, and God may look upon you as an enemy, so far may you
lose your acquaintance with God. This I must tell you.

And when I have told you this, I need tell you no more; for you that have
indeed had this acquaintance with God, have I know found so much sweetness in
it, and do so prize and value it, that if you were put to your choice, whether
you would part with the acquaintance of the dearest friend you had, Father, or
Mother, or Brother, or Sister, or Husband, or Wife, or part with your
acquaintance with God; nay, whether you would part with all you are worth, nay,
with your very lives, or part with your acquaintance with God; I know you would
part with all, rather than part with that. I look therefore, that upon the very
hearing that there is but so much as a possibility for you to lose it, you
should presently ask me, What you should do to retain it? I answer.

First. Maintain in your hearts this high esteem of your intimacy and
acquaintance with God, prize it above any other of your enjoyments whatsoever.
Seems it a small matter in your eyes to be the Son-in-law of a King? 1 Samuel
13.23.
says David to Saul's servants: so say to thine own soul, Is it a small matter
to have acquaintance with God, to be the friend, the favorite of God, to have
familiar access to, and intercourse with God? O prize it, and let God know thou
do prize it as thou would prize heaven it self.

Secondly. Maintain not a discouraging and distrustful, but a vigilant and
wakeful fear, of losing this precious enjoyment. Optimus thesauri custos timor
est. Fear is the best keeper and preserver of things that are dear and
precious, many a jewel is lost through carelessness and rechlessness that might
have been kept with fear and watchfulness.

Thirdly. Take heed of all such things as may unsoder and dissolve the
acquaintance that is between God and you. As for instance.

First. vexes God, yet will thou sin? this is an argument thou valuest
friendship and acquaintance with God at a low rate. And if thou thus sin and
vex God, and slight his acquaintance, I tell thee, God will shake thee off from
all acquaintance with him, and become thine enemy; nay, himself tells thee so.
But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit, Isa. 63.10
therefore he was turned to be their enemy. Take heed therefore of vexing God
by willing and known sin.

Secondly. Take heed of being too familiar, and holding too much correspondency
and intimacy with wicked and ungodly men that are Gods enemies; we our selves
will not take him for our friend, that is inward and entire with our professed
Adversaries. Zabud was Solomon's friend: Solomon had three special and known
enemies. 1 King. 11
Hadad, Rezon, and Jeroboam. Now if Zabud meant to hold in with Solomon, it had
been no wisdom in the world for him to fall into acquaintance with any of these
three persons, it had been enough to cast him out of the favor of Solomon for
ever: so here, if we fall into intimacy and acquaintance with Gods open
professed, branded enemies, what can we look for but that God should cashiere
us his acquaintance, and say to us as he did to Jehoshaphat, Should thou help
the ungodly, 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath come upon thee from the
Lord.

Thirdly. Take heed of dealing treacherously with God. Jeremiah; Surely, as a
wife treacherously departs from her husband: Jer. 3.20.
or as the Original has it, from her friend: so have you dealt treacherously
with me, O house of Israel, says the Lord. A Wife may have her failings, upon
which the Husband possibly may frown and chide, and give her round language,
but for all that he will be friends with her still, and continue in habitation
with her still; but if once he come to perceive that she deals treacherously
with him, that she imbraceth the bosom of a stranger, that she loves another
man better than she loves him; this quite breaks in sunder the knot of conjugal
love and society between them, this is an unpardonable sin, and an iniquity to
be punished by the Judge, Job 31.11.
as Job speaks: So it is here, the friends and acquaintance of God may have
their failings and miscarriages, for which God may frown upon them, chide and
rebuke them, but yet retain them in his favor still: but if once he perceive
that they deal treacherously with him, if once they come to prefer any thing in
their love before himself, and his acquaintance, this will be a breach indeed
between God and them. O therefore, as you prize acquaintance with God, take
heed of the inordinate love of the world, and the things of the world. Remember
what the Apostle James says, James 4.4.
Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world
is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the
enemy of God. Take heed therefore of the world.

Fourthly. dissecare amicitiam, chop in sunder friendship and acquaintance, as
it were, at one stroke, and some things do dissuere amicitiam, unrip and unsew
it, and loosen it by little and little; great unkindnesses, wrongs, and
injuries, these cut the bands of love and friendship in sunder; but long
absence of friends one from another, and discontinuance of converse and
familiarity, and letting fall the performance of friendly offices, visits,
colloquies, and the like; these loosen friendship by degrees, and cause it to
languish and dye. Hence the Proverb of amicitia Academica,
University-friendship, that holds only for a time. Scholars while they live
together in the same University, often meeting, and walking, and talking
together, they grow into great familiarity and acquaintance one with another;
but afterward being parted, and living at distance one from another, their
friendship and acquaintance dies, and is extinct: so it is here, absence from
God, disuse and discontinuance of communion with him, not frequenting Gods
company, not often resorting to him, and speaking to him, will not only loosen,
but lose our acquaintance with him.

If therefore we would maintain our acquaintance with God, we must often and
daily visit him, frequent his house and Ordinances, be frequent in reading,
hearing, praying; converse with him by holy meditations, and soliloquies,
invite him home to us, importune him to visit our hearts with his Spirit: as we
do by our other friends, we often visit them, and invite them to visit us,
assuring them that our house, and any thing that we have, is at their service:
th^s must we deal with God, and this is the way to maintain communion and
acquaintance with him.

Fifthly. knows they are as bitter to them as death it self) and yet they do
think, that for these God will fall quite out with them, and tantum non, cast
them down to hell; and by these hard thoughts they grieve God, they break the
law of friendship, they discourage and dishearten themselves from converse with
God, and so their hearts are alienated and estranged from God, and then they
(measuring God by themselves, as if he were like one of us) think God is
estranged from them, and fallen out with them, when indeed it is, they are
fallen out with him. Therefore take heed of these thoughts of God.

Sixthly. Take heed that Satan do not set in his foot between God and you; take
heed you give no ear to what he will tell you concerning God, and the purposes
and dispensations of God toward you. You know what the holy Ghost faith, A
whisperer separateth chief friends. Pro. 16.28.
There are no two friends in the world so great, but if either of them listen
and give way to whisperers, or detractors, that seek to set strife and variance
between them, and believe every tale that they tell, bands of friendship will
quickly be loosed, and they will be as great enemies as ever they were friends;
we know that Satan's great design is to set strife between God and Man; he began
this game in paradise, God and Man were perfect friends, till the Devil comes
like a whisperer and slanders God, and tells Eve that it was out of mere envy
and ill will that God had forbidden her and her husband to eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, and she believing this slander did eat, and so the
league of friendship was broken between God and her: so deals the Devil still,
not indeed with those whom he knows to be Gods enemies, he does not trouble
their heads much with the thoughts of God, but fills their heads with the
thoughts of other matters; but where he knows, or but suspects any to be the
friends of God, or perceives them but to be seeking after reconciliation and
acquaintance with God, O the strange thoughts of God that he buzzeth into their
minds! sometimes he tells them that God hates them worse than he hates a dog or
a toad: that it is in vain for them to pray, or repent, or to do any thing, God
has rejected them, they are reprobate from all eternity; if God afflict them,
he tells them, that now they may see and feel, if they will, that God is angry
with them, and hates them, and these afflictions are but the forerunners and
beginnings of hell, and what they feel here is nothing to what they shall feel
hereafter: of God spare them from affliction, he tells them, God does this but
to fat them against the day of slaughter, and that they may the sooner fill up
the measure of their sin and be ripe for hell. And thus Satan slanders God in
all his ways, and that not to the wicked, and those that are Gods enemies, but
to those that are his friends; and the believing of those lies and slanders of
Satan against God, proves many times, the very bane and breakneck, as I may so
say, of acquaintance with God. Therefore take heed of giving credit to the
Devil and his suggestions, and whatever Satan tells you of God, believe it not,
but believe the contrary to be true, because that which Satan speaks of God
cannot but be false. Thus I have shown you what the things are we must take
heed of, if we would maintain our acquaintance with God. Which is the third
direction.

Fourthly. If thou would maintain thy acquaintance with God, look that thy
heart be sincere and upright with him. No man would entertain into his bosom,
as his entire friend, one that he knows does but flatter and dissemble with
him, and in his heart does not love him. You know what Jehu said to Jonadab, 2
Kings 10.15.
Is thine heart right as my heart is with thy heart? And when he said, It is,
then he bid him give him his hand, and he took him up to him into the chariot.
God need not ask any of us that question, Is thine heart right? for if it be
not, he knows it well enough; and if it be not, he will never give us the hand
of friendship, nor never take us up into the chariot of acquaintance with
himself. To this therefore let us look that our hearts be right with God, that
what profession we make of our love, and of our desires of acquaintance with
him, may come from a good and honest heart.

Fifthly. If you would maintain and keep your acquaintance with God, then
labor to increase your acquaintance with God, and to grow in it. For as grace,
so the privileges of grace are of that nature, that they cannot stand at a
stay, but are like the Sun, always either ascending or descending, like the
Sea, that is ever either ebbing or flowing, so these are ever either increasing
or decreasing, either growing or decaying. If therefore you would not have your
acquaintance with God decay and dye, have a care that it may increase and grow.
And to that end labor to grow in those things wherein acquaintance with God
lies; as namely, 1. In the knowledge of God, Hos. 6.3. 2. In converse with God.
3. In considence in God. 4. In conformity unto God. Converse with God will
conform us unto God, and conformity unto God will confirm and increase our
converse with God.

Sixthly. Be willing to be ruled by God in all things, be punctual in observing
his commands; exactly careful to please him well in all things. So in the verse
after the Text, Receive the Law from his mouth, Job 22.22.
and lay up his words in thine heart. Let Gods word be a Law to thee, Joh.
14.21, 23.

Lastly. Be much in converse with those that are the friends and acquaintance
of God. Let them be thy companions, so they were David's; Psalm. 119.63.
I am a companion of all them that fear thee. Let them be thy delight, so they
were David's; To the Saints that are in the earth, Psalm. 16.3.
and to the excellent in whom is all my delight. As consorting our selves with
the wicked, and such as are Gods enemies, is the ready way to lose our
acquaintance with God; so on the contrary, consorting with the Saints that are
Gods friends, is the way to keep and hold our acquaintance with God. 1 John 1.3.
That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VIII. Exhorting those who have lost their acquaintance with God, to
endeavor the recovery of it.
I Come now to exhort those who have sometimes had acquaintance with God, but
have lost it again, that they would by all means possible endeavor the
recovery of it. Now this is a state and condition not impossible for the true
Saints and friends of God to be reduced into. This is frequently mentioned in
Scripture under several notions and terms, sometimes under the notion of Gods
withdrawing himself. I opened to my Beloved, Cant. 56.
but my Beloved has withdrawn himself; sometimes of Gods hiding himself. How
long, Lord, Psalm. 89.46.
will thou hide thy self for ever? some, times of casting out. I will cast you
out of my sight: sometimes of shutting out. Lam. 3.8.
Also, when I cry and shout, he shuts out my prayer: sometimes of casting
off: Psalm. 43.2.
Why do thou cast me off? And every one of these may seem to be a several
degree or increase of loss of acquaintance with God.

First. When God does withdraw himself, and does not so frequently visit the
soul with his grace and Spirit, as he was wont, here now is some abatement,
some diminution of the acquaintance that was between God and the soul. But then,

Secondly. When God hides himself, that is, when the soul is sensible of Gods
withdrawing, does set it self seriously and earnestly to seek God, and would
fain find him, and re-injoy his presence and communion with him, and God hides
himself, and the soul cannot find him, but it is as it was with those we read
of in Hosea. They shall go with their flocks, Hos. 5.6.
and with their herds to seek the Lord; but they shall not find him, he bath
withdrawn himself from them. This now is more. But,

Thirdly. When God does not only thus hide himself, but cast the soul as it
were out of his sight; this is more and heavien. As if a man, when one that
has been his acquantance comes to his house, he should not only refuse to see
him* or speak with him, but plainly turn him out of doors; this were a sign of
great alteration, and alienation of mind in one that had been a friend.

Fourthly. When God does not only cast the soul out, but shut him out, shut the
door of mercy as it were upon him, this is yet more.

Fifthly and L^stly. When God not only does this, but even casts off the soul,
renounceth as it were all friendship and amity with it for the future, saying
as the Romans were wont to do to their Wives, when they gave them a divorce,
Res tuas tibi habeto, Look to your own matters, I will have no more to do with
you, or as the people did when they rejected the posterity of David from
reigning. 1 Kings 12.16.
Now see to thine own house David. Thus high may the breach come to be between
God and those that have been his friends and acquaintance.

Now a child of God, a friend, and acquaintance of God, does then think and
conclude, that God deals thus with him, withdraws himself, hides himself, casts
him out, casts him off, when he finds God suspending and withholding the
wonted influences of the Spirit of grace from him.

For this acquaintance between God and our souls, as the Lord Jesus Christ is
the procurer of it, so the Spirit of grace is the Internuncius, the manager and
worker of it; we can neither acquaint our selves with God, but by that Spirit,
nor does God acquaint himself with us, or communicate himself unto us, but by
the same Spirit. When therefore the soul finds those influences of the Spirit
of God that it was wont to have, in praying, and hearing, and Sacraments, and
other holy duties, when the soul finds them withdrawn, it presently fears, yea
concludes God is grown a stranger, hides himself, and casts the soul off.

Now the influences of Gods Spirit into the hearts of his people, are of two
sorts; Either influences of comfort, or influences of grace.

First. There are influences of comfort, which the Spirit of God sends into the
hearts of the Saints, shedding the love of God abroad in their hearts, Romans 5.5.
giving them such a real, sweet, powerful taste, and feeling of the love of God
in their souls, as fills them with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Now when
these sweet and comfortable influences of the Spirit of God are suspended and
withdrawn, this cannot but make an alteration in the soul, in its apprehensions
of Gods love, and their in erest in him, and acquaintance with him.

Secondly. There are influences of the Spirit of God, which are influences of
grace, and these are threefold. Either,

First. That influence of the Spirit, whereby grace is first infused and
wrought in the soul. Or,

Secondly. That influence of the Spirit, whereby grace when it is infused, is
actuated and set on work in the soul. Or,

Thirdly. That influence of the Spirit, whereby grace is increased and caused
to grow in the soul.

Now for the infusing and working of grace in the soul, one single influence of
the Spirit is sufficient; but for the actuating and increasing of grace,
renewed and repeated influences are requisite. As one act of divine power and
providence is enough for the producing of the creatures into being; but for the
continuance of their being, and for their operations, there is required a
continual efflux of providence; so it is here. Now when these influences of the
Spirit are suspended and withdrawn, the soul can neither keep up and carry on
his acquaintance with God in a way of duty, so as it should, nor apprehend God
communicating himself and Spirit to him, so as it would, and so cannot but from
both conclude an interruption of that acquaintance and familiarity that has
been between God and it.

Now to those whose condition this is, give me leave to propound,

First. Some things by way of support and consolation.

Secondly. Some things by way of counsel and direction. And,

First. By way of support and consolation, several things I have to say.

First is this. That how sad and strange soever thy condition may seem to be,
thou art not the first, nor art like to be the last of the Friends and Saints
of God, whose condition this has been or may be. Read but over the Book of the
Psalms; how often do you find there the Saints complaining of Gods hiding his
face from them, casting them out; casting them off, forsaking, forgetting them,
shutting out their prayers, and the like. Now this may be some comfort to thee,
as it is to a man that is in a wilderness, to find the tract and footsteps of
men that have gone that way before him.

There are, as Gerson observes, three sorts of Christians.

Gerson de monte contemplat. cap. 22.
Some that are in a winter condition. In winter you know the days are short,
and the nights are long, and the days for the most part are cloudy and dark,
the Sun being obscured with many clouds and fogs; there are sharp colds and
great rains, and now and then it may be a fair day, but very rarely: so some
Christians they have short days, and long nights, short visits, and long
absence of God, they have much darkness and little light, Rara hora brevis
mora. Bernard.
much coldness and little heat in their spirits, many showers of griefs and
tears, rarely now and then a gleam of comfort.

Other Christians, says he, are as it were in the spring, in primo vere. In
the Spring you know, it is one day fair and clear, another day cloudy and
rainy; but we see the Sun oftener in the Spring, and the beams of it are more
vigorous and warmthful than in the winter: now these are such whom the Sun of
righteousness does more frequently visit than the former, and sheds more
warmthful and vigorous influences into their hearts, and yet withdraws himself
from them sometimes: sometimes their Sun is under a cloud. Ut modicum illum
videant, and modicum non videant; and they have their wet and sorrowful days
and times too.

Others there are with whom it is Midsummer, their Sun is seldom clouded: but
when it is, it is more terrible, there are greater tempests of thunder, and
lightning, and rain many times in summer than in winter, though not so constant
rain. These are the best and highest form of Christians: who though they enjoy
a more constant serenity, and more constant peace and communion with God, than
the other, yet now and then meet with more violent and strong temptations, and
deeper desertions than the former, their temptations are very sharp, but then
they are short. So that you see by this distribution there is no state of a
Christian life on this side heaven exempted and privileged from this hiding of
Gods face, and suspending the influences of his grace and love. Whether then
thou be in thy Winter, or in thy Spring, or in thy Summer, clouds may come over
thy soul that may hide the face of God from thee, and intercept the influences
of his Spirit and grace; th s is common to Christians, whatever degree of grace
they have attained: therefore say no more, that never any was in such a
condition as thou.

The Second thing I have to say to thee is this; That the worst of thy
condition is this, It is a withdrawing, not of the love of God from thee, but
of wonted expressions of his love, it is but a withdrawing of the influence of
his Spirit from thee, not the presence of his Spirit from thee; I say it is but
a withdrawing of the manifestation of Gods love from thee; God does not look so
kindly upon thee when thou come to seek his face, as he was wont to do; God
does not speak so comfortably to thee, he does not speak so to thine heart when
thou come to hear his word, as he was wont to do; God does not make thee so
welcome to his table when thou come there, nor give thee such a double portion
of the marrow and fatness of his Ordinances as he was wont to do. I confess
here is a great change in the outward carriage of God, and a great abatement of
the wonted expressions of his love; but there is no change at all in the mind
and will of God, no abatement at all in the love of God, which is as
unchangeable as God himself. David loved Absalom as dearly all that three years
in which he would not endure him to come into his presence, nor permit him to
see his face, as he did before in any time of his life, though in wisdom he did
conceal and smoother his love: so God may conceal his love for a while, but he
loves thee still as well as ever.

He has taken away the wonted influences of his Spirit from thee, but his
Spirit it self he has not taken from thee. Joh. 14.16.
Christ's prayer and engagement is, that the Spirit where once he is given shall
abide for ever. Therefore I say, the influences of the Spirit may be suspended,
but the Spirit it self is not departed, as it was with Eutychus when they
thought he was dead; his life, says Paul, that is, his Spirit, his soul is in
him, and yet all the influences of his soul into his body, either visible to
others, or sensible to himself, were for the present suspended: so is it here,
the visible sensible influences of the Spirit may be suspended, but the Spirit
is not departed, the band of union is not dissolved.

Thirdly. As it is the influence, and not the presence of the Spirit that is
withdrawn, so it is not the total influence of the Spirit that is withdrawn
from thee, but only part of it; all the influences of the Spirit are not
withdrawn, but only some of them. For the influences of the Spirit are of two
sorts. Either such as are necessary to the being of a Christian in the state of
grace, and these are secret, hidden, and unsensible; or else such as tend to
the well and comfortable being of a Christian, and these are evident and
sensible: as in the body there are some influences of the soul, that are
necessary to the animation and quickening of the body, and these remain when
the body is in a swoon, though they be secret and hidden, and neither felt by
the body it self, nor discerned by the beholders; other influences there are
that tend to the perfection of life in the body, as tending to motion and
sense, these are both sensible to themselves, and visible in the effects of
them to others; now these latter influences of the soul into the body, may be
suspended, when yet the other are continued: so it is here, they are but the
sensible and arbitrary influences of the Spirit that are suspended, the
necessary influences of the Spirit are yet continued.

Fourthly. As it is the influence and not the presence of the Spirit that is
withdrawn, and as it is but some of the influences, not the whole influence
that is withdrawn: so fourthly, this influence is but suspended, it is not
quite cut off; and there is a great difference between these two. If water be
conveyed through a pipe, from a fountain to a cistern; if that pipe be stopped,
the stream is suspended, and it is but unstopping the pipe, removing the
obstruction, and the water will flow as plentifully as ever it did before; but
if the stream be cut off or turned another way, then the case is otherwise, the
matter is irrecoverable: Poor soul, because thou have not those influences
fresh and lively from the Spirit of God that thou have had, thou think the
stream is quite cut off, the heart of God thou think is quite turned away
from thee. Alas, thou art mistaken; it is only the pipe is stopped, something
lies in the way that obstructs the influences of the Spirit of God into thee;
remove but that, and the influences of the Spirit will come in upon thee, in as
full a stream as ever. For (which is the last thing that I have to propound to
thee for thy consolation) thou must not think

In the fifth place; That because God hides himself, and withdraws himself, and
carries himself at present, not as a friend, but rather as a stranger, as an
enemy to thee, do not think that he will always do so. When he has said
plainly, He will not always chide; Psalm. 103.9. Isa. 57.16. I^am. 3.31, 32.
neither keeps he his anger for ever. He will not contend for ever, neither
will he be always wroth. He will not cast off for ever. But though he cause
grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies.
These are clear and express promises of a true and faithful God; heaven and
earth shall fail before one word or tittle of these promises shall fail. It is
therefore a great infirmity in thee, to think, that because God now hides his
face from thee, he will do so for ever; or because, that God seems to be fallen
out with thee, therefore he will never more be friends with thee. Thus to
think, is I say, a great infirmity in thee. So Asaph acknowledges for himself,
when he had been questioning with his own soul. Will the Lord cast off for
ever? and will he be favorable no more? Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10.
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for ever? Has God
forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? He
concludes, This is my infirmity. As who should say, It is a great weakness in
me so to imagine; so it is in thee, if thou do so think.

These things thus premised, as grounds of hope and consolation, I proceed now
to show what course you must take to recover favor with God, and your
acquaintance with him again. And so,

First. Enquire whether you have not given God cause thus to estrange and
absent himself from you, and break off acquaintance with you. To that end make
use of the particulars laid down before. 1. Enquire whether you have not fallen
into some known and gross sin. 2. Whether you have not held too much
correspondence with, and delighted too much in the company of wicked and
ungodly men. 3. Whether you have not been too much carried away with the
inordinate love of the world, and of the things of the world. 4. Whether you
have not too much absented your selves from God, and neglected your wonted and
appointed times of meeting him, and acquainting your selves with him. 5.
Whether you have not dealt unfriendly with God, by entertaining jealousies and
hard thoughts of God. And, 6. giving too much credit to Satan's lies, and
slanders. Inquire seriously, whether you have not been guilty in some or other
of these particulars; for usually, I must tell you, the breach begins on our
part, we give God cause to estrange himself from us. When thou have done this:
Then,

Secondly. Take the counsel the holy Ghost gives; Do this now, my Son, Prove.
6.3.
and deliver thy self, when thou art come into the hand of thy friend: go,
humble thy self, and make sure thy friend. Or as the Margent reads it, Go
humble thy self, and prevail with thy friend. Humble thy self, that is the way
to prevail with God, and to make him yet thy sure friend, though he seems to be
thine enemy. Humble thy self, and that upon a twofold account.

First. For the sad condition that thou art in at present.

Secondly. For the sin that has brought thee into this sad condition.

First. Humble thy self for the sad condition that thou art in. Think and say
thus to thy self, Woe is me for my God, my life is departed from me, and how am
I changed? O how was I wont to meet God in his Ordinances? and what sweet
communion and acquaintance had I once with him, but now he hides himself, and
will not come at me. I pray, but he hears me not; I hearken after him, but he
speaks not; I call, but he answers not. Behold, I go forward, but he is not
there; and backward, Job 23.8, 9.
but I cannot find him. On the left hand where he does work, but I cannot
behold him: he hides himse f on the right hand, that I cannot see him. And say
again as Job; O that it were with me as in months past, Job 29.2, 3, 4.
as in the days when God preserved me: When his candle shined upon my head,
and when by his light I walked through darkness. When the secret of God was
upon my tabernacle, and the Almighty was yet with me. It is an excellent
meditation Bernard has to this purpose. Whence comes this barrenness that
possesses my soul? whence is it that my heart is dried up like a bottle in the
smoke, and my soul is like the dry and parched wilderness? Non possum lachrymas
fundere, Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 74.
I cannot weep, I find no savor in Psalms, I have no delight in reading of the
Scriptures; prayer does not refresh me, I have no heart to meditation, or any
thing that is good. Hei mihi, Woe is me! God visits the mountains of my
companions, but skips over my mountain, and never touches it. Here is one
ravished into the third heavens in holy meditations. There is another prays, as
if he would rend the heavens with his prayers; another excels in zeal, another
in patience, another in humility, another in holiness. These are Souls whom God
visits, these are "mountains upon which God commands the rain of blessing, Sed
ego miser qui nihil horum sentio, but wretched I that feel none of these
things; what am I but as one of the mountains of Gilboa, upon whom there falls
neither dew nor rain, nor are there fields of offering there. Thus humble thy
self, and bewail thy state and condition.

Secondly. Humble thy self again, for thy sin that has brought thee into this
sad condition. Think and say thus with thy self. Oh, what a thing is this, that
I should by my sin provoke him to leave me, in whose presence I have had such
life, such light, such liberty, such peace, such joy. O wretch that I am! that
that communion and acquaintance that I had with God, was of no more esteem with
me, but that I should thus lose it by my folly! I have been careful to keep my
interest and acquaintance with this and that man, but have not been careful to
keep my interest and acquaintance with God. That which I begged with tears, and
was many a year a getting, how have I by my sin lost it on a sudden? O what
have I done against my God, yea against my self? O my folly, that have lost
that for want of care, that now I would redeem again, if it were possible, with
my blood.

Thirdly. Follow God with mournful cries and prayers, beg of him that he would
return unto thee, and renew acquaintance with thee; importune him by all the
ancient love that has been between him and thee, that he would be gracious yet
unto thee; put him in mind of his ancient love to thee. Say as the Church,
Lord, Psalm. 89.49.
where are thy former loving kindnesses? Lord, what is become of all that love
which sometimes thou barest and expressedst to thy worthless servant? And
humbly put God in remembrance of thy ancient love to him; seeing God is pleased
to be so gracious as to vouchsafe to remember it. Jer. 2.2.
I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when
thou wentest after me in the wilderness, etc. Entreat God to remember, there
was a time when thy love was more vigorous, and more fervent to him than it is
now, when thou could have followed him through a wilderness, through a sea,
through fire and water; tell him, it is thy grief that thou can not so love
him now: entreat him by renewing his love to thee, to revive thy love to him,
beg of him that all old kindnesses may not be forgotten; cast up thy weeping
eyes with the sad complaint of a bleeding soul to thy ancient friend, and his
bowels will roll, his compassions will relent toward thee.

Fourthly. Submit to any conditions of reconcilement, and accept of the lowest
degree of restoration to favor and acquaintance with God. Say, Lord, chide,
rebuke, smite me, command, impose, do what thou will with me, only cast me not
out of thy presence, cashiere me not wholly and for ever: say as the poor
Prodigal, Make me but as one of thine hired servants: as the woman of Canaan,
Let me but gather up the crumbs among the dogs. Lord, if I have so far sinned,
as that I may not be restored to that degree of nearness that I had before, if
I may not have a place among thy children, among thy friends; Lord set me among
thy servants, thy hired servants, yea, if it be but among the dogs of thy
family, Lord, so I may be in thy presence, and see thy face I shall be thankful
even for so much.

Fifthly. Go to the Lord Jesus Christ, the Dayes-man, the Friend-maker, between
God and Enemies; much more between God, and those that sometimes were his
friends. Go to him, pray him to take thee by the hand, yet once again, and
reconcile thee anew to God. He as God, is a middle person between the Father
and the Spirit; and as God-man, he is a middle Person between God and Man: he
is our Peace, he is our Advocate with the Father. Who with one appearing in
heaven for us, with one opening of his mouth, can make God and us friends, if
we had never been friends before; therefore go to him, engage him by his Name,
by his Office, by his Undertakings, to do this for thee.

Sixthly. Go to the Saints of God that are upon earth, that are Gods favorite
and acquaintance, make thy case known to them, entreat them to strive with God
in prayer for thee. This direction God gave the friends of Job, as you may see
in Chapt. 42. v. 8. Go to my servant Job, and my servant Job shall pray for
you, for him will I accept.

Seventhly. Whatever the issue of this thy mourning, praying, and going to
Christ, begging the prayers of others be; though God should hide his face still,
and carry it strangely, still, yet think thou, and speak thou honorably of God
however. Following that president of the Psalmist, or rather of the Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom the Psalmist was but a type. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Psalm. 22.1, 2, 3.
Why art thou so far from helping me, etc. But thou art holy, O thou that
inhabitest the praises of Israel.

Lastly. If God yet seem still to be angry with thee, take the counsel the holy
Ghost gives. When the spirit of the Ruler rises up against thee leave not thy
place, Eccles. 10.4.
for yielding pacifieth great offenses. So now, when the Spirit of God seems to
be provoked against thee, leave not thy place, leave not thy station, leave not
praying, and hearing, and waiting upon God in all holy Ordinances. Henry the
fourth, Emperor of Germany, waited three whole days in the depth of Winter,
barefoot and bare-legged at the gate of the Pope's Castle, before he could
obtain admission into his presence, and recover his grace and favor. Upon
occasion of a displeasure conceived by the Pope against the City and State of
Venice. Franciscus Dandalus, afterward Duke of Venice, was sent Ambassador to
Rome to seek reconciliation; and when no other means would mollify the Pope's
proud and enraged heart, the Prince at length so far abased himself, as to put
upon his neck a collar and chain, and couch under the Pope's table, like a dog
at his feet, to see if by that means he might at length obtain.

Now shall Princes and Emperors thus abase themselves in seeking the favor of
a mortal man, and wait in these abasements long; O how low should we lie, how
long should we wait, if by any means, or at any time we may recover the favor
of God, and readmission into his presence!

FINIS.

