A New-Years-Gift To the Honorable Admiral Russel, On his Glorious Victory
over the French Fleet.
LOng did the Languishing Brittania grown
Beneath French Power on the English Throne!
French Councills, French Debauch'ry ruled the Roast,
And generous English Courage quite was lost.
Blake, Deane, and Lawson, whose each single Name,
Without an Epithet, swells the Cheeks of Fame;
England's brave Hero's, who disdained to Bear
The Romish Yoke, or Gallic Fetters wear;
Who all the Naval Power of Europe Swayed,
And sturdy Algerines their Laws obeyed:
Laden with glory, These their Lives resign,
And their loved Names in Fames bright Annals shine.
Great Ruport, and brave Monk a while Support
The English Valor, since made Europes sport,
With these fell the Honor of our English Fleet,
Degenerate Souls Degenerous acts commit!
Soft Daliance now Emasculates the Land,
Old Captains laid aside, and Boys Command;
For Balls and Masquerades highly renowned,
And Tilting Beedles in their Midnight-round;
Effeminate Courts Effeminate Youths employ,
These keep not up our glory, but destroy.
An English King Managed by Bourillion,
Is a fit Tool to advance the Gallic Throne!
Thus We who gave the boundless Ocean Law,
And our Confederate Neighbors kept in Awe,
Scorned and despised like Abjects, were become
Slaves to the French, and Proselites to Rome.
At length Great Britains better Genius saw,
The heavy Yoke her Sons were forced to draw,
And with Compassion touched the Generous Nassaw.
Nassaw the Darling of Heavens kinder Powers,
Our Native Freedom to our Isle Restores;
Like the First Kings or Chiefs, with Courage stout,
He to the Battle leads his Captains out,
In hottest Actions Foremost he appears,
Nor shuns the Combat checked by Guilty Fears,
His Martial Heat the Old English Courage warms,
Raised, and Revives the Credit of her Arms:
From Ravenous Lewis he a Kingdom tore,
Forced him his Boasted Ireland to Restore,
And drove his baffled Troops home to their slavish Shore,
With winged Force pursues him on the Main,
And checks the Progress of his Grand Campain;
Whilst shifting Luxemburgh in Entrenchments hides
His sneaking Troops, and Fastnesses proyides:
His vaunting Squadrons dares not ours engage,
But dread the shock of Conquering Nassaw's Rage;
The Battle of the glorious Field they shun,
And avoiding Fighting, may be said to Run.
Brave England's King, who knows not to b' afraid,
Has all the Daring Stratagems essaid,
But all in vain, since the Inglorious French,
Fearful of Vengeance, meanly do Entrench.
Honor and Arms Great Orange Nobly Courts,
Lewis to Treacherous Poisonings Resorts;
Conscious, when those his hellish Arts shall fail,
He never can by his Guilty Arms prevail.
On the French Conquests now our Monarch stands,
And makes them Tributary to our Bands,
With English Troops Dunkirk in Pound he keeps,
And betwixt Lewis and his Dunkirk sleeps;
Dunkirk that is lodged in Lewis's panting Breast,
As of her Callais Mary once expressed:
Dunkirk before, by English Valor taken,
And for French Pistols basely Sold again:
Great William's Sword must now the Knot untie,
And regain by Arms what France with Gold did buy:
Whilst our great King, on Land, such Glories meet,
To You he leaves the Conduct of his Fleet;
You who have laid fresh Laurels at his Feet.
Russel before England's Respects might Claim
For a Champion, and a Martyr of that Name,
You more a Debtor have your Country made,
And raised that Fund of Honor they had laid.
True to the Trust the Royal Pair Reposed,
Their Interest and their Kingdoms You espoused.
The first Years Expedition spent in vain,
Hunting for Tourvill on the Foaming Main;
That blustering Monsieur, who the Year before
Showed his great French Armada on our Shore,
Burning five Fisher-Boats, durst attempt no more.
At Land, and Sea the French like Courage show,
With equal Force they dare not see their Foe.
The English Navy over the Ocean Rides,
Proud of that glorious Burden on her Tides.
With Indignation scowres the Channel Round,
But neither Tourvil nor his Fleet were found;
Our eager Youth near mad with Martial Rage,
Hunting a Foe they could not come to engage;
Perplexed, and Raving, scarcely they forbear,
With violent Hands their very flesh to tear.
Mean while our Hero with great pain suppressed
The burning Indignation in his Breast,
He forced his swelling Passion to obey,
And for the next fit time for Vengeance stay.
Kind Heaven agreed, and with a wished for gale
Upon our Fleet this year drove fifty Sail,
Their warm Reception quickly made them know,
They now in earnest met a generous Foe,
Would try their Courage e're they would let 'em go.
With pompous Rage the Admirals Admirals meet;
Ours glad they would found at last, the Gallic Fleet,
And whatsoever detracting Frenchmen say,
But Forty of our Ships could come in play;
The unequal Odds our Captains scorn to shun,
The Lesser Number Greater Glory won.
With Peals of Joy our Men the Welkin tear,
And with presaging Huzza's cleave the Air,
Glorie's their aim, and that they close pursue,
With warmth the French were unaccustomed too.
Stout Carter who too early lost a Thigh,
With his last Breath did still the Foe defy;
He saw himself Revenged e're he expired,
And to the bed of Glory strait retired.
Through gusts of Thunder bright Brittania's hurld.
To ^^^d the Mistress of the Watery World,
She whom vainglorious Lewis built to sway
The Ocean, as the Land, must him obey;
M^^ ^h^ the Omen of his Fortune be,
And his Arms at Land succeed as those at Sea!
Resolved Russel storms her lofty sides,
Humbles the vaunting Motto of her pride,
All heat, all indignation, peals of Fire
Break from his roaring tyres, the affrighted Air
Trembling and wounded, to the French Coast flies,
And Eccho's out their Navy's Obsequies.
Tourvill, with warmth not seen in French before
Receives the broad-sides which our Cannons pour,
He all his Force, and all his Skill applied
To keep Victorious Russel from his side,
But all in vain, Englands Brave Admiral knew
The Oceans Soverainty was Englands due;
Close to the Monsieurs fiery sides he bore,
And with fresh Thunder Storms him over and over;
Their Murdering Ball thick as their hail shot flew,
And every broadside does their rage renew;
With Fire Brittania clouds the Rising Sun,
And in flaming Circles on his Orb does run,
Arm-yard to Arm-yard closely they Engage,
And in loud roaring vollies tell their Rage;
Never on the Sea was greater bravery shown,
Nor Honors prize with greater Glory won.
After Five Hours dispute in Smoaky Clouds,
Storming of Hulls, Rending of Sinwey Shrouds,
With all the Horrid pomp a Naval Fight
Could e're present, or Scaly Squadrons 'fright;
The Rising Sun sinks in the Watery deep,
And his Shining Glories in her Waves does steep.
The Immortal Palm You Mighty Sir have won,
And have Eclipst proud Lewis's Rising Sun.
So have I seen in a disturbed Air
Two Sable Clouds meeting from Regions far,
Grown big with Tempests, at each other Flash,
'Till their loud Storms have made Heavens vault to crash,
Their Fires meet, and Combat in the Sky,
And Bellow out their Thunders from on High,
Disgorging Flame, as if the Globe they would burn,
And Earths Foundations into Ashes turn;
Their Sulfurous Store being spent, they melt in showers,
And Rapid Torrents from the Mountains pour:
In Lightning they begin, in Rain Expire,
And Neptunes Flood Extinquisht Vulcans Fire.
Nor did your Captains little Bravery show,
They signalliz'd their Courage on the foe,
Your great Example did their Spirits Raise;
Each Fought for, and deserved a Conquerers Bays.
Your Master, on the Land, his Troops Inspires,
At Sea You Animate with your Martial Fires.
Three mighty Ships into the Air were blown,
Monsieurs flew capering up, came tumbling down:
The rest of the shattered Fleet make to La-Hogue,
And seek Protection from St. Patrick's Brogue;
Lillie-Boliero's, who their Country lost,
Were now made Guardians of the Norman Coast,
These saw their Burning Squadrons in the Bay,
On their own Coasts their Ships became our prey.
Boast not of Mons, by Treacherous Priests betrayed,
Nor Namur which the Floods thy Captive made!
Whilst Heaven with faint Te Deums Lewis mocks,
And with False Tryumphs buoys his senceless Stocks,
On his own Shore his Flaming Flota lies,
To the English Admiral a Sacrifice:
Brave Russel scorns his Glorious King to greet
With a less Bonfire than the Gallic Fleet.
Methinks I see the King of the great Deep
With all his Trytons Halcyon Revels keep,
Glad their Right Lords Resume their Ancient sway;
Swearing Allegiance to Brittannia.
The Sirens our Brittania's Tryumphs sing,
And in Shells of Pearl Quaf Healths to Britains King,
The joyful Sea Gods pledge the Bumper round,
And with shril whistles make the Sea resound.
Stave a French-prize, quoth Neptune, and Advance
A Health to England in the Wine of France;
That Conquering Hero shall their Topsails Lower,
And Tributary France shall own his Power;
Annals to come shall with his Conquests swell,
Turkey, and India shall his Tryumphs tell.
To the Levant, and Utmost East then Fly,
And tell each Port this Glorious Victory,
This said they all Obeyed.
But more substantial Votes att^nd (...) ^^aise,
Caesar, the Senate, and the (...)
Eternal Trophies to their Admirals Name,
Shall equalize the longest date of Fame.
So the Old Romans, when their Generals prove,
By brave Exploits, worthy their Country's love;
Raise Obelisks, and Statues to make known
The Victories, and Battles they had won.
When future Parliaments shall come to Note
In their Records our August Senates Vote,
With what Unanimous consent they own
The Courage, Conduct, Faith your zeal has shown:
Restored its former Glory to our Isle,
And of a Navy made a Funeral Pile;
This in times Callendar shall far surpass
The Roman Marble, or Corinthian Brass.
It Is Englands Thanks that are acknowledged due
By her great Representatives to you!
May no Invidious Vermin ever tear
That sacred Vellom, let it always bear
To future times the Mighty things you have done,
And an obliged Kingdoms praise have won.
May pale and Treacherous Envy ever hide
Her guilty head; whilst still each flowing Tide
Shall waft fresh Tryumphs to great Russel's Name,
And far as the Ocean Rowls your high desert Proclaim.
Licensed according to Order,

E. Bohun.

ADVERTISEMENT.
When this was Written; Dixmuyd and Fernes were in the English Hands

London, Printed and Sold by T. Moore. 1693.


