The Country CAPTAIN, And the VARIETY, Two COMEDIES, Written by a Person of
HONOR. Lately presented by His MAJESTY'S Servants, at the Blackfriars.

LONDON, Printed for Hum: Robinson at the Three-Pidgeons, and Hum: Moseley at
the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1649.

(...)twelvemoneth, thou have lost thy complexion, by too much study. Why thou
shale be an heir and rule the roaste of half a shire, if thy Father would
but dye once, come to the Assizes with a band of Ianisaries to equal the grand
Signior, all thy tennants shall at their own charge make them selfs fine and
march, like Cavaliers with tyltinge feathers gaudy as Agamemnons in the play
after whom thou like a St George on horse back, or the high Sheriff, shall
make the Country people fall down in Adoration of thy crupper and silver
sturrup, my right worshipful. A pox on buckoram and the luggage in it, papers
defild with court hand and long dashes or secretary lines, that straddle, more
then Frenchmen, and less wholesome to the client! Is thy head to be filled with
P^olamations Rejoyndere and hard words beyond the Alkemist? Be ruld, and live
like a fine Gentleman, that may have hawks, and hounds, and whores; and
horses, and then thou art fit Company.


Court. You talk wildly; I would you saw your error; that plaee all your
happiness upon such course delights I should degenerate, and too much forfeift
my education.


Saek. Education? he has got a tune; I do not think but thou will leave thy
law, And exercise thy talent in compassing some Treatises against long-hayre
and drinkinge that most unchristian weed, yclept Tobacco: preach to the Punies
of the Inn sobriety and abstinence from shaving of leawd Bailiffes that will
com shortly to your chamber doors and there with reverence entreat your
worships come forth and be arrested: precious tad-poles: I would not willingly
despair of thee; for thy Lands sake and cause I am thy Countryman: one
generous vagary, if thou were w^se, would break some bodies heard, within a
seven night, and then thou art lord of all; have but the grace to dine with me
at the Tavern, and I Will tell thy Friends, there is some hope.


Court. My Friends.


Sack. Thy Father is in Essex, if he live, he will, purchase Rumford if he dye
sooner, then the Town's our own, Spend but an acre a day and thou may live
till all the world be weary of thee; between, us too, what think you of a
wench?


Court. Nothing.


Sack. You mean, one wench between us too is nothing; I know a hundred
Leverett^; things that will bound like a dancer on the rope, and kiss thee in
thy natural Complexion; a sinner that will climb thee like a squirrell.


Court. And crack me as a nutt; I have no kirnell to spare for her sweet tooth.


Sack. That was a metaphor; he is not desqerate.


Court. Buy' my dear Captain.


Sack. Why farewell Countryman. I may live to see thy conversion. Exit.


Enter Footman. Court. How does my Uncle.


Foot. He desires presently to speak with you at his lodging.


Court. I Will attend him. Exeunt.


Enter Vnderwitt and Thomas. Vnd. And have thou been careful of all those
things I gave in charge to be provided?


Tho. There is a noate of the particulars.


Vnd. It Is very well done, Thomas, let me see, Inprimis.


Tho. The Captain will not faileto be with you Sir, he was not at his
lodging, and enquiring at the horn Tavern, I heard he had bin there with two
or three citizens that owed him money.


Vnd. That he owed money too.


Tho. It Is all one I think; Sir; for when Captains have not pay, Creditors may
pay themselves, here they said, he did mollify the heart of the habberdasher,
and drank himself a little mellow ere they parted which gave me some hope I
might find him ere night, at the devil, where indeed I fetched him out of
the fire, and gave him your letter.


Vnd. And the gold too.


Tho. That was the first word He read, if you had writ it in text, he could
not have fownd it out so soon, his eye was no sooner on the inside, but his
arm flew out with an open month, and his very fingers ends cried give me the
gold which presuming to be weight he put into his hocus ^ocus a little dormer
under his right skirt, and so taking his word to come down and turninge over
your horse to him, with some caution, not to be drunk and forget your,
worship, I took my leave and went about my Inventory.


Vnd These things are very right Thomas, let me see now the books of Martial
discipline.


Tho. I bought up all that seem to have relation to war and fighting.


Vnd. That was well done; well done; Item the Sword-salve.


Tho. Sir if you be hurt you need go no further then the blade for A surgeon.


Vnd. The Buckler of faith.


Tho. You had the sword before, Sir.


Vnd. A book of Mortification.


Tho. I Sir, that is A kind of killing, which I thought very necessary for A
Captain.


Vnd. Item the Book of Cannons; Shakspeares works. Why Shakspeares works?


Tho. I had nothing for the Pike men before.


Vnd. They are plays.


Tho. Are not all your musteringes in the Country so, Sir? pray readon.


Vad. Bellarmines Controversies, in Six Tomes.


Tho. That I took upon the stationers word, who had been Apretty scholar at
Paul's; for the word Bellarmine, he said, did comprehend war, weapons and
words of defiance (...) words provoake men to draw their swords and fightinge
makes an end of the business and all this is controversies, pray go on Sir.


Vnd. Two pair of Tables; Tables? for what?


Tho. Oh Sir for Ticktack; you know it was in my note, which though I doubted
at first yet consideringe you were newly made A Captain I conceave it was fit
you should learn to set and order your men.


Vnd. Tackticks man; thou did mistake: they are books of war.


Tho. You cannot know these from books as they are painted I warrant you.


Vnd. Why do thou think these will make A Soldier.


Tho. Not of them selves, Sir, and therefore I provided; please you read on
Sir.


Vnd. Persons resolutions; and Felthams Resolves.


Tho. All is nothing, I know Sir without resolution.


Vnd. Somma totalis 23. 19. and 7. thou have undon me.


Tho. If you do not like the penny worthes; It Is but the charges of my self
and a horse again to London: I will loose but the three odd pownds nynteene
shillings and seavenpence. It may be you do not understand these Authors;
when the Captain comes, he will expound them to you.


Vnd. What a Coxcombe have I to my man? but I dare not be angry with him,
well, carry them into my study; Thoma^. Exit.


Enter Device. Dev. My most honored Captain.


Vnd. My complete Monsieur Device: This is a grace to us; you come to visit
your Mistress my cousen:

Enter Lady, Sister, and Doroth^y. And see as if by instinct, she had
knowledge of your approach, she is come to meet you: shall I never get
opportunity with that she waiter. If I get her with child my man Thomas
shall marry her.


Enter Thomas. Tho. Sir the Captain is newly alighted.


Vnd. Get a botle of sack up to my chamber presently.


Lad. You are a Gentleman of your word.


Sist. And such a Gentleman is to be trusted:


Dev. He is an Infidel Madam, that will break his word with A Lady.


Sist. I suspect servant you have many Mistresses.


Dev. Nor by this white hand, I must acknowledge there are some Ladies in the
court in whose eyes and opinions I am favored; I cannot obscure my self from
their observations: but my heart with contempt of all other indeerements, is
only devoted to your service.


Sist. Is it not a charge to dress your self in such varieties of Ribbands
every day?


Dev. Is that your scruple? it is the mode to express our fancy upon every
occasion; to show the turn, or present state of our hopes or fears in our
affections. Your colors, to an understandinge lover, carry the interpretation
of the heart, as plainly as we express our meaning one to an other in
Characters. Shall I decypher my colors to you now; here is Azure and peach.
Azure is constant, and peach is love; which signifies my constant affection.


Lad. A pretty Moral.


Dev. It saves the trouble of writing, where the Mistress and servant are
learned in this Amorous Blazon, yesterday I wore fuillemote; greedeline; and
Isabella; fuille-mote is withered, greedeline is absent, and Isabella is
beauty: which put together exprest'd, I did wither or languish for your absent
beauty.


Sist. But is thereany reason for their distinctions?


Dev. Yes Lady for example, your fuillemote is a withered leaf; which does
morrallize decay; your yellow is joy, because: --


Lad. Why yeallow Sir is jealous.


Dev. Noe it is your lemon color, a pale kind of yeallow is jealous; your
yeallow is perfect joye: your white is death, your milk white Innocent, your
Black moorninge, your orange spightfull, your flesh color ^ascivious, your
maid-blush envy, your red is defiance, your gold avaritious, your straw,
plenty, your grass green, hope; your sea green Innocent, your violett,
religious; your willow, forsaken.


Sist. We may then committ a solecisme and be strangely interpreted by some
curious expounders in the rash election and wearinge of our colors, I perceave.


Lad. It Is pity but there should be some books written for our instructions
in this Art.


Dev. Your Hieroglyphick was the Aegiptian wisdom. Hebrews had their Caball;
the Romans had their symbolle* and Imprese, and Emblem, but these are
absolute. Your modern Invention of Character, an Alphabeticall key trite and
conspicuous your motto or rebus, too open, and demonstrative but the science
and curiosity of your Ribbands, is not only instructive but an ornament, and
the nearest comentator of love, for as love is entertained first by the eye,
or, to speak more plain, as the object affected is took in first by these
optics, which receave the species of things colored and beautified, so it is
answerable to nature that in the progress of our passion we should
distingvish by our eye the change or constancy of our affections, in Apt, and
significant colors.


Sist. You have taken pains, to study this learned Blazon.


Dev. It is the only gentile knowledge; or Philosophy in the world: I
willundertake to open any man or woman's heart: --


Lad. Heaven for bidd.


Dev. Tell the most secrett imaginations and designs, conclude every passion
and scruple if they be but careful to observe the Artificial Method of their
Colors.


Sist. Why this may be a way of fortune ^^llinge too.


Dev. You say right Lady. Physiognomy and Chiromancy are but mere tri^^es
your geomancy mere conjecturall, the erection of your scheme circumstantiall,
and fallible: but your queint a la Mode wear of your fancy, more then
Astrologicall.


Lad. It Is a kind of divinity.


Dev. You say true Madam, and comes near to prophetical, if the minds of
Ladies and Gentlemen were elevated to the sublime consideration.


Sist. What pains he takes to be ridiculous? Aside.


Dor. This Gentleman has a notable fancy, and talks Poetically.


Sist. Yes; yes; he can make Verses.


Dor. Well I have red Authors in my days and knew the length of the Poets in
my time too which was an Hexameter, and which A Pentameter, but the wits are
not, as they have been, right and straight.


Sist. Why D^rothey.


Dor. Why because wind is the cause of many things, now if the wind be not
in the right corner, it is, the ill wind, the proverb speaks of, which
blows no body good; for when vapors and wind fly up into the head it cannot
be in two places at one time and that is the reason your men of most wit do
seldom love A woman. But here coms my Master and Sir Francis.


Enter Sir Richard; Sir Francis and Master Courtwell. Sir Rich. This is a
double honor to us Sir Francis; I shall want Langvage, but not A friendly
heart, to entertain you and your noble Kinsman. What my exquisite Cavaliere
Device? It Is to no purpose. I see, to remove into the Country, to save charges
and be quiet, the whole City will come hither, if I stay: I have no stomach
to my court knight. Aside.


Fran. I hope Madam, you will be no Enemy to my Kinsman.


Lad. Sister I present this Gentleman; observe and cherish him; he has bin in
the universitie.


Sist. Any degree Sir?


Court. Only batchelour, forsooth.


Sir Rich. If he winn you to marriage; Lady Quickfillver.


Sist. He will be Master of his Art.


Sir Rich. My vote is for him.


Dev. I like not the induction of this Rival.


Sir Rich. He studies the law: and that is the next high way to preferment,
Sister.


Sist. Indeed it is the high way in which some deliver up their purses: he may
clymbe to searlett, but that he has to good a face:


Dev. Sir, I hope --


Sir Rich. Troth do not Sir; I mean trouble your self, he is to bashful to
prevail upon your spirited Mistress. let us leave them.


Enter Engine. Engine. Sir Richard.


Sir Rich. More Customers; Master Engine, welcome. your presence was expected
in the Country.


Eng. It Was my Ambition with some intents to serve you, Sir, please you vouch
safe your privacie, I bring affairs worth your entertainment; I have rid
hard.


Court. What Cavaliere is this uncle?


Fran. He is the inventor of new projectes ^ouzen, they say, and pattents;
one that lives like a moth upon the common wealth.


Court. He looks like one.


Sir Ric. You will excuse me gentlemen. Make much of Sir Francis Madame. Exit.


Fran. We Will leave my Nephew and your Sister Madame: And take A turn in the
garden. Exit. with Lady.


Sist. You may be confident.


Dev. I do not like the fancy in his hat: that Gules is war and will be
ominous. Exit.


Court. I must seem a modest coxcombe now to preserve my uncles Character.


Sist. The Gentleman is turned Statue, bless me how he stares upon me, and
takes root? I think it moves, and now to earth is fixed again; oh how it
walks and sadly marches this way? Is It not a ghost? he will fright me; oh;
sweet Sir, speak if you can and say who murdered you: it points at me: my
eyes, ungentle eyes to kill so at first sight, I Will have my looks Arraigned
for it and small cupid shall be judge who for your sake will make me blind, as
he is.


Court. Lady


Sist. The man is a live again and has A tongue, discretion guide it; he but
sent his soul forth of an Errant; it is returned; now we shall have some
sentences.


Court. Such, are the strange varieties of love, Such heates, such desperate
colds --


Sist. No more winter if you love me; unless you can command the coal pitts;
we have had a hard time of it already, for want of fuel


Court. I Am all turned ears, and, Lady, long to hear you;
But, pressing to you, doubt I am to near you.
Then I would speak but cannot, naught affords
Expression, the Alphabet's to poor in words.
He that knows love knows well that every hour
Lo^e^s glad; love's sweet --

Sist And some times sower;

These words would go well to a Tune, pray let us hear you singe: I do not
think but you can make; me A Jointure of four Nobles a year in ballads, in
lamentable ballads, for your wit lies Tragical, did not you make the Ladies
downfall? you express a passion rarely, but pray leave your couppletts, and
say somthinge in blanke verse before you go.


Court. Before I go; breath not that killinge Langvage;

There is no Sun but in your eyes: and when I once take leave of those
Celestial beams It Is darkness through the world.


Sist. Oh; pitiful; if I were a widow then youl'd keep me waking for fear
I shut my eyes, and your discretion loose the way home.


Court. Where strech'don sable grownd, I down shall lay
My mournful body, and with foulded Arms:
Hear sadder notes upon the Irish harp;
And while my Footman plays; sigh out my part,
And drop division with my brinish tears.

Sist. This must be lamentable music sure.


Court. But I will find an Art to cure this wound;
For I with fancies pencill, will so draw
Your picture in the table of my heart
Your absence shall but like dark shadows stand,
To set you of, and see you, Lady better
Then love will let me when I look upon you.

Sist. Could this be true and meant, sweet Sir, to me;
I should be kinder then the gentlest spring
That warmes the world, and makes feirce beasts so tame
And trees to swell themselves to cheerful green
More jocond then the proudest Quire of birds,
What ere they be, that in the woods so wide
Do singe their merry catches.
Sure he does but counterfeit. Aside.

Court. Oh now I see that love
Is sweet; as flowers in their fragrant birth,
Gentle as silk; and kind as clouds to earth.

Sist. One rithme more and you undo my love for ever, out upon it; Peddlers
French is a Christian language to this. I had rather you should put me a case
out of Littleton: they say you are a pretty lawyer.


Court. Tennant par la curtesy d'Angliterre, est son home prent samme self en
see simple est fee tail general en self comme heir de la tail especial and
ad Issu per la mesme feme male ou female ^pes on nife soit Issue apres mort ou
en diu de la feme debie la baron tiendra la terra durant sa vie per le ley
d'Angliterre.


Sist. Nay here is enough in conscience: what a noise this confusion of
Languages makes; this is almost as good as A bear baytinge, hark you Sir, you
are never like to recover me by law.


Court. You are not the first sweet Lady^; has been overcome in common law.


Sist. Not by ten thousand, Sir: Confessed, but I have no mind to come to
Issue with A lawyer: when he should consider my case at home, he will be at
West minster teaching men their statutes! no; no; I will not marry a Judge.


Court. Why Lady.


Sist. They are casual things and men that hold such strange opinions, they
are not safe; no, not in their own lambskins.


Court. Lady you may be misinformed; Astraea has not quite left the earth and
the Abuses of some, which shame the calling, are but like patches of beauty
on the face of law to set the Native whiteness off.


Sist. Farewell; Sir; you are in love with a barred Gown, not beauty; if you
will follow my learned counsel, leave it. This young thing is a fool or a
fine fellow. Exit.


Court. She kicks and stinges out like a colt unwayd. Her witt's a better
portion then her money I would not love her, yet, if I could help it. (My
Uncle and his Mistress) I Will not hinder them. Exit.


Enter Sir Francis and the Lady. Lad. It is no honor, Sir, if Armed with so
much eloquence, you overcome A woman; I blush to say I love you now too much. I
wish you would release what your Sweet charms wonn from my toungue: I shall
repent my promise.


Fran. Make me not miserable after so much blessinge. Why, Madame, it is upon
honorable terms since not upon the first attempt, but, after a tedious seige
to your fair love, you give up what shall enrich us both: It were A sin to
fear you can retract what both our lips have sealed, and loose a happiness so
near and so secure; your husband holds his pleasure of early huntinge
constant, and when he persues his timorous heart to morrow morninge, Cupid will
wait, to bring me to Elysium, your bed, where every kiss will new create us.


Lad. You must be wise in your excuse to quitt his importunity.


Fran. Leave that to me. I were not worth the name of him that served you to
lose my glorious hope for want of such a thin Device; In your thought wish me
prosperous and I am fortified against the power of fate to separate us; and
when thou art with in the Amorous Circle of mine Arms, we will make laws to
love, teach time new Actions, or chain him with the cordadge of his hair;
like a tame thing to wake and watch our pillow; and be our pleasures centenell.


Lad. I see my husband, it is not safe he should observe us. Be wise and
constant. Exit.


Fran. All that's sweet attend thee. So; I am saylinge now to my own Indies:
and see the happy coast too; how my wings do spread to catch the wind which
coms to cover them. And the green sea enamord on my bark, does leap to see
how cupid sits, at the helm and steeres my soul to his new world.


Enter Sir Richard and Engine. Sir Rich. A monopoly, say you, for periwiggs?


Fran. Bin visitinge your grounds?


Sir Rich. My hounds rather, Sir Francis, and some horses, that takes up my
Country recreations; it is Supper time.


Eng. Is It not a rare design? and by such Art and reasons I can name most
beneficial to the common wealth, preventing the diseases which some
unwholesome hair breeds in men's heads. It will be worth our agitation Sir,
and you after the rate of every thousand per Annum milkt out of the common
purse into your own, may easily defalke to me a hundred for my first
projection; did I not love you, Sir, I could make coin of other Abell men that
would be glad to multiply their money.


Sir Rich. Sir I thank you, but have no mind to thrive upon abuse of my
princes favor, nor the Peoples curse. Here is a Gentleman; Sir Francis
Courtwell, perhaps, will undertake it.


Fran. What; Sir Richard?


Sir Rich. A monopoly for composing and sellinge of periwiggs.


Fran. Excuse me Sir, I dare not deal in them; do not you hear things of
this nature questioned?


Eng. How Sir questioned?


Fran. There Is one among the rest, I cannot hitt upon his name in fair
election to be hanged, one Engine.


Eng. Oh Sir.


Fran. What ayle you Sir?


Eng. A meagrim in my head.


Enter Servante and Thomas. Sir Rich. Who Is there? look to Master Engine here,
he faints, and send to your Lady for some cordial waters presently.


Tho. There is a sovereign well hard by, has done strange cures, please you;
I Will throw him into that. Exit.


Sir Rich. Though I distaste his business, I would not he should miscarry
here, you frighted him. It Is supper time, I shall expect your company in the
morninge, Sir Francis: I have a pack of dogs will make the forest ringe.


Fran. I Will carefully attend Sir: as early as you please I love the sport too.


Sir Rich. I wish we had all pleasures to delight you; but nothing wants in my
true love to serve you.


Fran. Yet I must cuckold him, I cannot help it.


Exeunt. Actus tertius. Scaena prima.
Sir Richard and his Lady in Bed Enter Thomas (with Sir Richards boots.) Tho.
Sir.


Sir Rich. Who is that? Thomas?


Tho. The Sunn is up before you Sir, here be your boots.


Sir Rich. That Is well.


Lad. Prithee do not rise, it is hardly day, Sir, who bid you call him so
early? Sir Richard will not rise yet.


Tho. I cannot help it, it is none of my fault.


Lad. Where is Dorothy.


Dor. Here, Madame; what make you up so soon, Thomas.


Tho. Oh Mistress Dorothy it is even long of you for beetweene sleep and wake
your remembrance came to me this morninge, and Thomas was up presently.


Sir Rich. You must excuse me; I mean to kill a brace of hares before you
think it is day. Come, on with my boots. Thomas; And Dor thy go you to Sir
Francis chamber tell him the day grows old and I am ready: our horses and our
merry hounds expect us. Exit Dorth.


Lad. Any excuse to leave me.


Sir Rich. You may take your ease in bed still Madam, I Will not loose one
morninge, that invites so pleasantly, to hear my Dogs, for a new
mayden-head. It Was for these sportes and my excess of charge I left the Town;
besides the City foggs and steame of brickhills almost stifled me. This Air
is pure, and all mine own.


Tho. My Lady means she would have you get an other Heir Sir for your land,
though, it be against my Master the young Captain yet she speaks but
reason and now, I talk of the Captain, Sir. would you had given him council.


Sir Rich. To what.


Tho. Before he took this huffinge trade upon him to have been a man of
peace, I mean, a Justice, nature has made him fits for both a like; he is now
at charge to keep a Captain Schoolmaster: he might have saved the
Quarteridge of his Tutor if I had been his clarke, and then the in come that
broaken heads bring in; and New years gifts from soadred virgins and their
she Provincialls whose warren must be licensed from our Office. --


Sir Rich. Away you pratinge knave; what is he ready?


Enter Dorth. Dor. Alas he is almost dead.


Sir Rich. How dead?


Dor. He has bin troubled with a fit of the stone Sir, all this night poor
Gentleman, he groans and sweates and cannot: --


Sir Rich. What?


Dor. Make urine Sir.


Tho. I heard my Lady has an excellent receipt to cure the stone. She is a
piece of a rare surgeon.


Sir Rich. Well-away and get the horses ready; sir; or I shall ride you and
your wit together.


Tho. Alas any fool may ride me, but I would feign see any man ride Mistress
Dorothy. Exit.


Dor. How Sir.


Sir Rich. I am sorry I must leave such a companion but more lament the cause,
I wish him health: my presence cannot serve him, morrow wife, I will not lose
my sport. Exit.


Dor Nor she; when you are gone; my Lady does expect an other bunts upp


Dad. Now I must trust thy service.


Dor. You shall not doubt me; Madam; and to assure you my faith, I have a suite
to your ^adiship, whose grant, were there noe other bonds upon me, would tie me
to everlastinge silence.


Lad. What is it; but name it and I shall soon consirme thee


Dor. Our Captain of the train band has bin offeringe to chaffer Mayden-heads
with me; I must confess I can affect the fool. upon good terms, and could
devise to nooze my Amorous woodcock if you assist me privately, and dare trust
me with some Jewel of price, that is not known, which shall be faithfully
restored, Madame.


Lad. I that dare trust my honnour with thee, shall not suspect thy faith in
any treasure else, choose from my cabbinets, but, prithee, draw the curtains
while I expect this friend, I needs must hide my blushes thou may discover
from my gallery window when they are horsed, I tremble, to consider what I have
promised.


Dor. Tremble to meet a ghost; you are more fearful then a Virgin; Madame;
why this setts me a longinge, but I Will watch: this is the timorous world of
flesh and blood. Exit.


Enter Sir Richard. Lad. Alas what do you mean? retire for heavens sake: my
husband is not gone, I heard his voice yet, this rashness will undo my fame
for ever, should he return.


Sir Rich. Howe's this? retire for heavens sake, my husband is not gone, I
heard his voice this will undo my same. It was my wife and this is sure my bed
chamber. She looks out.


Lad. I have undone my self, it is my husband.


Sir Rich. My forehead sweates; where are you; Madame; whom did you talk too;
or take me for? Ha; a sleep already; or do I dream; I am all wonder; Madame.


Lad. Nay; nay kill him; if it please you; sweet heart, I cannot abide a
blackemoore Faynes sleeping.


Sir Rich. How Is, this? wife.


Lad. Help, help, dear husband strangle him with one of my lute strings;
do, do, do.


Sir Rich. If she be a sleep: she was nor wont to talk thus, She has had
some hideous dream, she spoke to me, too. Who should I strangle sweet heart,
with a lute stringe?


Lad. The king of Moroco I think.


Sir Rich. It is so, she dreams, what strange chymaeras we fancy in our
sleep: I were best wake her, Madame, Madame.


Lad. Oh Murder, Murder.


Sir Rich. Sweet heart, Madame, wake.


Lad. What Is that?


Sir Rich. It Is I.


Lad. Sir Richard? oh, you have delivered me from such a dream I quake to
think upon it.


Sir Rich. I must confess you frighted me at first.


Enter Dorothy. Dor. My Master come back? if he had found the sick Sir
Francis here.


Sir Rich. How, now, art thou frighted, too.


Dor. Frighted quoth a; o Madame; the key of the closett, quickly, I must have
some cordial water for Sir Francis I fear this (...) will kill him.


Lad. Alas good Gentleman make have.


Dor. His appearance would betray all Thus prevented. Exit.


Lad. Nay sweet heart, you shall not leave me till I told what a cruel dream
I had, me thought a king of blackamoores was in love with me, and havinge, by
flatteringe courtship drawn me to his bed chamber, by my consent, or force,
swore to en^oy me. I knew not by what reasons to dive^t the Rauisher; but told
him that I heard thy voice, I bid him if he loved his life retire, for thou
would, (dear,) revenge my honnour, but he persuinge me, I cried out murder
and having nere a sword, I councelld thee to strangle him with a lute stringe;
for which cruelty of mine me thought he threw an Arrowe at me, which if thou
had not waked me as thou did would, as I slept; with my strong fears have
killed me.


Sir Rich. This was the king of Moroco; well, I am glad I came to take away
thy fright.


Lad. But, sweet, you left me, with a resolution to hunt this morninge, have
you done already?


Sir Rich. The thieves prevented me, my stable has bin robbed to night, two
geldings and my Roane n^gg are vanished.


Lad. How?


Sir Rich. Nay do not thou vex, I have sent Hue and cry that may overtake
them; but come I Will leave thee to thy glass, and visit Sir Francis, now she
is returned. How does your Noble guest? Enter Dorothy.


Dor. He is pretty well, Sir He has voided one stone since and now finds
ease.


Sir Rich. It Is well, attend your Mistress. Exit.


Lad. Oh wench, I had almost undone my self, come on the other side, reach me
that petticote. I le tell thee the story as I make me ready. Exeunt.


Enter Sister and Device. Sist. Is it possible you can talk thus, and be no
Scholar?


Dev. I have traveled in my fancy: took the Air about the world with the
muses, and do for my recreation of wit, compose some wonders in Verse,
Poetical Essa^es: as one upon report of a heat that was in Aegipt.


Sist. Let Us hear them.


Dev. In Countries I have been;
Under the Aequinoctiall, where I have seen
The Sun disperse such a prodigious heat
That made our sive-like skinns to rain with sweat:
Men would have given, for an Eclipse, their lives
Or one whisper of Air, yet each man strives
To throw up grass, feathers; nay women too
To find the wind, all falls like lead, none blew,
The dog starr spitts new fire, till't came to pass
Each eye became his neighbors burninge glass.
Lean men did turn to As^hes presently
Fatt men did roast to lean Anatomy.
Young women's heat did get them selves with child
For none but they them selves, them selves defild.
Old women naturally to witches turned
And only rubbinge one an other, burnd.
The beasts were bakt, skin turned to crust they say
And fishes in the river boild away
Birds in the Air were roasted, and not burnd
For, as they fell down, all the way, they turned.

Sist. Most excellent.


Dev. I have seen Larkes in that motion at fire with an Engine of packthred
perpendicular.


Sist. What would they have given for a shower in those Countries.


Dev. Now you talk of a shower, you shall hear another Copy of Verses that I
made of a mighty rain which fell once in the Indies.


Sist. That you made? if you will venture your lungs let me hear some more
impossible stories to pass away the time.


Dev. Heaven did not weep, but in its swellinge eye
Whole seas of rheum and moist catharrs did lie
Which so bespauld the lower world men see
Corn blasted, and the fruit of Every tree,
Air was condensed to water against their wish
And all their foul was turned to flyinge fish,
Like watermen they throung'd to plye a fair
And thought it had bin navigable Air.
Beasts lost the natural motion of each lymme.
Forgot to go with practisinge to swim.
A trowte now here, you would not think How soon
Taken ready, dressed for the Empress of the Moon.
The fixed stars, though to our eyes were missinge
We knew yet were by their continual hissinge
Women were Mermaydes saylinge with the wind,
The greatest miracle was fish behind.
But men were all kept chaste against their wish
And could comitt but the cold sin of fish.

Sist. And that sin would puzzell all the civil lawyers in the Kingdom. Sins
of the flesh they are perfect in, they know well enough what belongs to
Adultery and simple fornication: but you would much improve and oblidge the
practice of the court if you could bring this sin of fish under their
commission. But now I hope the rain is over; and we shall have fair weather.


Dev. Now can I tell you Lady, what a. strange frost was in one part of the
world


Sist. I shall cry out fire if you do: I Would rather have some discourse to
keep me warm.


Dev. Or how the whole world was troubled with the wind colic.


Sist. No more Earth quakes I beseech you: some friends of mine lost a great
deal of Land the last term and for ought I know, it is never to be recoverd.
Why all these Verses you have honored me to hear, were translated out of
French.


Dev. You say very true Lady.


Sist. Noe, noe; they are out of Spanish as I remember.


Dev. I think it be out of Spanish indeed.


Sist. Or else out of the Italian.


Dev. Troath Madame; I know not which very well.


Sist. And yet you made them: some Gentlemen have the faculty to make Verses,
and forgett what Language, was the Original. ^is a la Mode, I confess, Sir.


Dev. There is the mischief in Poetry; A man might have told a hundred lies in
prose upon his own name and never miscarry, but leavinge these lewd Rymes,
Lady, how do you like the Novice that Sir Richard commended.


Sist. Master Courtwell?


Dev. Is he not a pretty Chrysome; I could not Choose but laugh to observe in
what rural deportment he came to salute you that should have made his address
in these postures: --


Sist. It is enough, Sir, I apprehend what you would do: the truth is,
touching that thing in black; I do not love him.


Dev. I know it is impossible.


Sist. Why is it impossible? The man is a pretty indifferent meaning man but
I must have one of a more Active spirit: noe, noe; the man is a coward.


Dev. He looks like one.


Sist. I put him to it, he dares not fight, and he that expects my favor to
so high a degree as Marriage, must be none of my Lord Mayors whiffelers; he
must be valiant in Arms; I am not taken with a ringe or a Carkenett as some
avaricious Ladies: he that presents me with the sword of his rival, is more
welcome then all the silken soft natured 600. a year widgeons that will be
baffled in their best clothes; and go down into the Country every vacation,
like Attorneys to be beaten against the next tear^ me, and get damages by it.
But I forget some affairs that concerns me, and take my leave: your deserts
upon me are eminent and many; and for all your noble services, I will promise
you nothing, you apprehend me. --


Dev. It Is too much, sweet Lady.


Sist. I am so weary I can stay no longer with you. Exit.


Dev. You make me over happy, so; so; the matters done. I may visit my
friends; hum! well thought upon, I shall leaveher Joys with out any bound to
entertain me, if I first beat this foolish rival of mine, and present her
with his sword; she assures me he dares not fight: it shall be so, thus
with one baffeling and disarminge him I shall secure my Mistress; and get the
reputation of a fighting Cavalier, which may save me many knocks here after,
among men of strong faith, that shall hea^e how much honor I have else where
taken up upon the Tickett. Exit.


Enter Vnderwitt and Sackbury. Vnd. Stand right to your files, -- Make even
your ranks, -- Silence -- Front to the right hand, -- As you were, -- To the
right hand about, -- By the left hand, as you were, -- Ranks -- To the right,
double -- Ranks as you were, -- Ranks to the left double, -- Middle men to
the right hand double the front, -- Middle men to the right entire, double the
front -- Files to the right, -- To the left, -- To the right hand -- Counter
march to the right -- To the left -- Wheel about. --


Sack. Rantan! enough, you must not, waste your lunges at once; march fair and
make a Captain. When these words of command are rotten, we will sow some
other military seeds; you bear a brain and memory.


Vnd. I hope so.


Sact. And now you are chosen a Captain for the Country, you must give good
example to your soldiers, and cherish nature: after exercise you must drink
sack; sack is a fortifier. Come we will to the Town.


Vnd. With all my heart; Enter Master Court.

Here is one Master Courtwell let us take him with us.


Sack. My costiue Countryman; he is an Anabaptist, he will not drink, and yet
he kissed the cupp often; last night, me thought, when his mistress drank to him.
We Will try; how is it, my man of moral breedinge?


Court. My man of war, Tresbone; your servant, Captain.


Sack. Why this was spoake like one of us, can do it again? thy voice is
more Authentic, sownds as I have heard a Cavalier in a Tavern; or like the
merry Master of the dragon. Small Neptune, that comptroules the rich Canaries
when he commands the Tritons of his celler; scud and bring wine you varletts,
with a flavor for my Nobillitie; we were conspiringe to go to the Tavern.


Court. I Will make one Gentlemen; to wast away some melancholy.


Sack. Spoake boldly like an Argonaut.


Court. I am not now in London; upon a hall day marchinge with the Puinees
Twenty of us in a Teeme, to Westminster in our torn gowns embrodered with
strand dirt, to hear the law.


Sack. Is not thy Father dead? thou talke'st so well? how I was couzend' in
thee; come a way.


Enter Thomas. Vnd. Here Is my man Thomas.


Sack. Now the news, Sir Tristram?


Tho. Oh; the Gentleman is mad.


Vnd. What Gentleman?


Tho. Why Master Engine, that did faint last night.


Vnd. With fear of being hanged for his projections.


Court. My Uncle told me of him.


Sack. Send him to Bedlam then; what makes he here? clean straw and a good
whipp are held restoratives.


Tho. He walks and talks the madliest, twenty midwifes are nothing to him,
he drownes all their noyce his tongue is twenty ringes of bells; and yet he
seems so merry.


Enter Engine. Eng. Save you Gentlemen; Gallants; Cavaleires; how far travel
you? me thinks you are finely accomodated: are you a doctor Sir?


Sack. No; but I can tell you; how to purge if it please you.


Eng. You say very well; troth Gentlemen you must pardon me; cry you mercy:
your name is Captain Vnderwi^^.


Vnd. Yes, Sir: but my Mother came of the Overmuches by the Peake: she broake
my Fathers heart, and Sir Richard buried her. Things must be as please the
Stars.


Eng. What think you; of the Blazinge Start in Germany according to Ptolomy?
it is very strainge; does the race hold at Newmarkett for the cupp? when is the
cookinge, Gentleman there are a parcel of rich jewels to be sold now if a
man had (...): I do mean to build a very fine house next summer, and fish
ponds. What did you hear of the new play? I am affrayed the wits are broaken,
there be men will make affidavit, they have not heard a good jest since
Ta^leton died: pray may I crave your name Sir?


C^urt. My name is Courtwell Sir.


Eng. In your ear, I have a cast of the best Marlens in England: but I am
resolve'd to go no more by water, but in my coach: did you ever see the great
Shipp?


Sack. I have been one of the twenty that have dined in her Lantern.


Eng. It may be so, she is a good sailer; but, I Will tell you one thing, I
mean to have the best pack of hounds in Europe, Sir Richard loves the sport
well, and then if I can but find out the reason of the load stone, I were
happy and would write non ultra.


Sack. The Philosophers stone were better in my opinion: have you no project to
get that?


Court. That has startled him; I doubt this fellow does but counterfeit. Aside.


Vnd. What think you of the Dromedary, that was to be seen on the back side
of the Bell?


Eng. I have seen a stranger beast.


Sack. So have I; I have seen you before now, Sir.


Eng. Why then I Will tell you; the straingest beast that ever I saw was an
Ostriche that eat up the Iron-mines: but, now you talk of birds, I saw an
Eliphant beat a tailor in the fencing schole, at his own weapon.


Tho. The Spanish needle?


Eng. He did out eat him in bread, and that was miraculous, I have seen a
cattamountaine once, but all was nothing, to the Lady, that turned round and
threaded needles.


Court. Troth Sir I think you have turned round too, and are not setteled yet.


Eng. Now you talk of settelinge I knew a Gentleman, that was borne to a great
fortune, sold all his land, went to sea in a Hollander, was taken by a
Dunckercke, at 7. years and stole away in a English bottom after that, saw
both the Indies, for all this, was taken by a Turkish man of war put into the
Galleys, and, for ought I hear by credible report, is not settled yet.


Tho. Sure he is a great Scholar; a man cannot understand him.


Vnd. His brains are out of tune.


Eng. Now you talk of music; there is noe man in the world loves music
better then I: I Will give you the reason: I have been deaf almost this half
year; it came with a cold sitting up at Primero.


Court. Now you talk of a cold, it puts me in mind of the new Device of fire,
for brewing and baking: had you no hand in that project?


Sack. Again he is startled: come he shall to the Tavern with us and
confess all; if he does not stripp his soul stark naked to us; say I am no
fortune teller.


Vnd. What think you of a cupp of medium wine?


Sack. That will spoil all: please you to honnour our society? we are goeing
to Indulge at the Tavern.


Eng. Oh the neates tongues and Asparagus that I have eaten at the Stillyarde!
But of all things in the world I do not love a black catt, next a brewers
cart, there is nothing will stay a man so much in the night as a Constable;
one word before you go and I beseech you give me your opinion clearly; was
not the Morocco Ambassador, a very fine Gentleman for a Pagan?


Sac. Yes sure; and the Lead mines in Darbysheire hold still. Marry for the
Allome businesses -- But come, will you walk?


Eng. I do use to go a foot some times, but when I ride; and then I must
confess there is noe striving with the stream: you were in London lately they
say the people are more affected to Bearebaytinge then in former time.


Court. There are some of late are drawn like bears to a stake but for your
own part the gout and the grand pox are all one to you: what price bears
meat in the shambles?


Eng. Flesh rises and fales; as it uses to do; Sir: But a Country life is the
best when all is done: are we all of one religion? what think you of a bridge
from Lion Key to Flandres, you may guess I talk at random, Gentlemen, but
you must not interpret all foolish discourse a distemper of the brain; Lords
would take it for a scandalum magnatum, and your Ladies would be Angry too;
now you talk of Ladies.


Enter Sir Francis and the Lady. Sack. By noe means Master Engine: that
Gentleman loves you not. Come, I le bring up the Rear, where is Thomas?


Exit with the rest. Tho. I Will follow Sir; I would give my 4. marks a year
that I could talk like that mad Gentleman; he is here, and there, and every
where: how will his tongue runn when his Coggs are oyled? they will drench him.
Exit.


Fran. Although I missed a happiness, ^applaude your nimble wit that secured
both our honors: you have an excellent instrument to your Gentlewomen.


Lad. Oh she delivered so toth' life, how you were troubled with the stone, at
first I did beleive't my self, and think of the sad consequence: but time is
precious now; although our stars have not been yet propitious to our meeting,
I Will try my Art to night to make them shine with happy influence on our loves.


Sir Fran. Most excellent, Madam; how?


Lad. I Will not engage your visit to my chamber, since the first proved so
unfortunate, but come to yours.


Sir Fran. This night? wo'not your husband be at home?


Lad. Yes.


Sir Fran. You enjoy but one Bed?


Lad. Without witchcraft Sir. I have a stratagem to delude my husband and all
his jealous waking eyes: A plot that cannot fail, if you dare but expect me.


Sir Fran. I grow immortal with my hopes, and fancy more than the worlds most
glorious Empire, in my first embrace, I should run back into an infant once
again, and by degrees and time, grow up to meet so vast a happiness: Ages in
expectation spent were poor and easy sufferings weighed against this triumph.
Me thinks I am not man, but something of a more exalted essence, humane Nature
has not Capacity to understand and own these precious blessings.


Lad. No more rapture, but with the confidence of a lover, spread your equal
thoughts, and in your heart and Arms Prepare an entertainment for that guest
that has no life nor name but what you give. A kiss, and leave our souls to
think upon the joys this night attends us.


Sir Fran. Sullen day
Do not tire now it is down hill all the way.

Exeunt severally. Actus quartus Scaena prima.
A Catch Sung, after which Enter Thomas with a Cloak and a Sword. COme let us
throw the dice who shall drink,
Thine is twelve and his sice sinck.
Six and Four is a cast,
Six and three not too fast.
Come aloft sink tray,
Sice ace fair play,
Cator duce is your throw sir,
Cator ace they run low sir.
Two duces we see,
Duce Ace is but three.
Oh where is the wine, come fill up his glass,
For here is the man that has thrown Am^ace.
Tho. They are all drunk already, and such a confusion in their heads and
tongues: my Master kisses the next man and calls him Mistress Dorothy, Master
Courtwell possessed with the spirit of defiance to Cupid is ready to beat him
for being in love. My Projector's dead drunk in archaire, and the Captain
peeping into his mouth like a toothdrawer and pouring down Sack, which he
feels not, but his chapps shut again like a spring-lock, till he return with
a key to open his teeth to pour in the next health.


Enter Master Courtwell. Court. My Cloak and Sword Drawer.


Tho. It Is here sir.


Court. Thou art a pretty fellow; there is half a crown, say I am gone Thomas.


Tho. You are a petty well.


Enter Vnderwit and Captain. Under. What shalls do with him? this Engine
burns like Etna.


Cap. Throw him into the River.


Under. He Is able to mull the Thames. Well for mine own part, would Mistress
Dorothy were here to open her files.


Court. Did not you name a woman?
I will have no mention of any thing that's Femall.

Exit. Under. May not a man talk of sack?


Cap. Sack is a sovereign medicine.


Under. Oh very sovereign.


Enter Musicians. Cap. It is hic and hac sack, both for he and she. Stay, is my
Countryman gone? come my Apollos, my Orpheus's, or my Bachus his Minstrells;
which to leave poetical expressions, in broader phrase, is Tavern fiddlers,
some of your Tunes my masters, do you hear?


Musi. Do you mean Master Adsons new airs si^?


Cap. I sir. But they are such fantastical airs as it puts a Poet out of his
wits to ryme to them but let me hear --


Music --


Cap. No I do not like that? --


Musi. --


Cap. Nor that: no, no, no, neither:


Musi. An't please your worship Master Captain our boys can sing songs to
these.


Cap. No, no, saving your presence, your boys have nothing surreverence but
love songs, and I hate those things monstrously to make things appear better
than they are, and that is but Deceptio visus, which after some embracing, the
parties see presently what it is.


Music --


The Captain sings and reeles, Then Phillips all the while with his fingers.
(after speaks.) Cap. I, I, this thumping tune I like a lise; a Song, a song to
it.


Song.
The Juice of Spanish squee'zd grapes is it
That makes a dull brain so full of wit,
So Lemonado's clear sparkling wine
The grosser wits too does much refine,
Then to be fox'dit is no crime,
Since thickest and dull brains it makes sublime.
The Stilyards Renish wine, and Devils white,
Who does not in them sometimes take delight?
If with mimique gestures you will keep you from sadness
Then drink lusty Claret, twill make you in madness.
And then to settle you no hopes in beer,
But wholesome po^ts of Scotch ale though it is dear.
Cap. But hark you child, you say in your song the Devils white, you have
been ill catechized boy, for a white Devil is but a Poetical fiction, for the
devil bless us child is black.


Boy. No Captain, I say white wine at the Devil.


Cap. That's true, that's a good boy indeed -- Vnderwit, lend me a piece, lend me
a piece to give these harmonious men -- The^e, -- and now be gone my masters;
without noise, for I will have no more fidle fadles for my money; no tunes of
superrogation after the musical bill is paid, -- Exit Music.

Come hither Thomas, do you think I am drunk?


Tho. Truly Captain, I cannot tell.


Cap. You cannot tell, there is your ignorance, drink is a vice I am as little
given to as another, for I do abhor it in my self, I do wonder how any
reasonable man can be drunk, etc -- man can be drunk, therefore every wise man
take counsel and example by me, and he may see very plainly what an odious
thing it is, for you must follow your Leader, and Virtue which is an ancient --


Tho. Virtue an Ancient?


Cap. I, an ancient old Gentlewoman, that is grown very poor, and no body
knows where she dwells, very hard to find her out, especially for a Captain,
you will find it very difficult for a Lieutenant, but we will endeavor the
best we can. You see my courses, I have traveled to find her out, and I could
never yet see her at a baudihouse?


Vnd. Who is this to be seen at a Baudihouse?
To the righthand -- Countermarch.

Tho. He talks of virtue sir.


Vnd. Virtue? she never comes there, why do you think she should be there
Captain?


Cap. Why? because she is an old Gentlewoman, and might keep the house.


Tho. Alas Captain Mistress Virtue is poor and lean.


Cap. Nay then she is not fit to be a Baud; but tell me, did you ever see her,
or if so, did you ever --


Vnd. No, but 'twas none of my fault. I know not what I may do in time, when
she understands the words of command.


Tho. He does not mean Mistress Dorothy; but Captain, I would ^aine know the
reason why your Bauds are so fatt still?


Cap. A plain case, they lie fallow and get heart, then they keep themselves
so in health, and so soluble with stewd prumes, and then sipping of sack is a
great matter to fatten them. But they are as good people as a man can keep
company withal, and bring up the young gentlewomen so virtuously; I came into
one of their houses the other day for a carreere, and I found the Baud very sick
upon her deathbed, very religious, and much given to repentance, for those
poor sins she had committed; when she had taken order for her soul, she
told me the young Gentlewoman I looked for was in the next room, and desiring
her upon her blesting to give me content, she turns her to the wall, and gives
up the Ghost very privately, because she was loath to trouble us.


Vnd. By your relation Captain, these appear to be very good people what if
we went to visitt one of these Matrones? I have a great mind to exercise


Sack. Why you speak like an understandinge Soldier and one that may come to
somthinge in the end, therefore let us march on.


Vnd. March on to venus wars.


Sack. For you know, Thomas that the spider and the Be do somthinge, but I
have forgett what it is.


Vnd. It Is no matter, come let us go.


Sack. Go? no more but go, though I be a Captain if I have not commission
in this imploiment, --


Tho. What then Captain?


Sack. Why then I cannot go.


Tho. Very right. Exit.


Vnd. Do you hear Captain? for all this; I have a great mind to a wench,
and a wench I must have, if there be one above ground; oh, oh; London;
London. Thou art full of frank tennants, give me London shall we wheel about
thither, yett?


Sack. Give you London? will not cheapside serve your turn or the Exchainge?


Enter Thomas. Tho. Oh Gentlemen, Master Engine is truly bewitched.


Vnd. Why, what is the matter?


Sack. Bring the witch and Master Engine before us.


Tho. He does vomitt the straingest things yonder. --


Sack. Did not I say, murder will out?


Tho. I think he has eaten and drunken nothing but monopolyes: and, being
too hard to be disgested they all come up again, I must hold his head.
Within: Oh


Sack. Did not I tell you somthinge would come out?


Tho. Pins; Pins; they lay cross his throat, I told you he was bewitched? Hey
day cards and dice, and with them the devil is a gamester. And pays the box
soundly, now; now; now: Within: Oh.


Vnd. What Is that.


Tho. It Is something clammy; oh it is Soape.


Sack. Soape? give a man leave to wash his mouth.


Vnd. Does not the lime burn his throat Thomas?


Tho. Alas poor Gentleman, something now again is ready to strangle him, I
think they are Hides, and the horns stuck in his gullett, well straind! what
a foul stomach he has: Within: Oh.


Sack. Open his mouth, thrust down a pottle pott.


Tho. I have Sir; and it is come up full of medium wine. If you have any
charity come and healpe to hold his head: now again.


Eng. Oh; Oh; Oh:


Vnd. It Is very strainge Captain; the man is certainly enchanted.


Eng. Oh; Oh.


Tho. Master Master; hey! will you take Tobacco in the Roll? here is a whole
shipladinge, variety of Bermoda's and one little two penny paper of Verina's,
with a super subscription, to my very Friends of the custom house.


Sack. Put up that for a relic, Thomas: and open it upon high days to clear
the fore eyes of your Spanish Merchants, Thomas; noe more, but call the Drawer,
an understanding Drawer and one writes Orthography and do you pay the
Reckoninge.

Enter Drawer. Sir I charge you set A padlock on the chamber door: there is
a dangerous fellow must be bronght to his purgation and look all the goods
that he has vomited be forth cominge. While we discreetely go and inform
the Magistrates: at your peril Sir, at your peril: Seal up the door and
do you pay the Reckoninge.


Vnd. Sir Richard is a Justice; there is your money, and yet we need not pay;
the Gentleman has left enough for the Reckoninge in the next room.


Draw. I have made him fast; you are very welcome Gentlemen: all is paid in the
Por't cullis. Exeunt.


Enter Master Courtwell and Sister. Sist. I Will walk no further; if you have a
Secret to impart, you need not fear this place. The trees, and hedges will
not listen, what is the business? I hope your phlegmaticall stock of verse is
spent.


Cour. Why then in prose the worst that I can speak; I do not love you Lady.


Sist How? you have not traind me thus far to tell me that?


C^urt. You are. --


Sist. You do not mean to quarrel, now you have betrayed me to the field,
and beat me, Sir?


Court. What is there in your face more, to attract me, then that red cowes
comple^xion? why the devil do you think, I should doat upon your person?
that thing when she is stroak'd gives milk.


Sist. By that I understand, all this is in revenge, because you think I did
neglect you: pray, Sir, tell me, and tell me seriously; put the case that I
should love you: could you love again?


Court. In troth, I think I could not.


Sist. Do you but think:


Court. I will bind it with an oath before the parrish.


Sist. What reasons?


Court. I shall be loath to say your eyes are twinckelinge stars again your
lips twyn cherries, and out blu^h the rubies; your Azure veins vie beauty
with the Sapphire: or that your swellinge breast are hills of ^vorie pillowes for
Joue to rest his Amorous head. When my own conscience tell me that Bunn --
hill is worth a hundred of them, and but High gate compared with them is a
paradise, noe I thank you.


S^st. But how come you so cur^d? you weere a passionate, I may say, fool, in
hope you will deserve it: what physic took you, that has thus restored you?


Court. A little sack had power to cure this madness.


Sist. I hope you are not sober yet; the humor may chainge when you have slept.


Court. I Will rather stich my eye lids up with Sisters-threed, and
stareperpetually.


Sist. When you may see me again.


Court. I think I shall not, unless it be to wonder when you are in that
^vie bush; that face cut upon taffata, that cream and prunes so many plumbes
in white broth, that Scutcheon of pretense. powderd with Ermines. How sell you
grapes? your hair does curle in bunches: your lips look like the Parsons
gleabe; full of redd, blue, and yellow flowers; how they are chapp'd and look
like trenches made to draine the meadows?


Sist. This rudeness is beyond the manner of a Gentleman.


Court. I cannot help it and I hope you think so.


Sist. But if your passion have not drowned all reason; I pray let us part
civilly.


C^urt. With all my heart, I dare then take my leave too.


Sist. Who is that.


Court. Where.


Sist. Behind that tree.


Court. You have no plot t'accuse me for a rape? it was at the worst, but
felony with cherryes, that look as if they had bin a fort night gathered:


Sist. I know you will bring me home in courtesy.


Court. Not I; I will not trust my self and you: fare well Lady: do you see
that bull?


Sist. Yes Sir.


Court. That is a happy beast.


Sist Why happy Sir?


Court. He writes noe verses to his Mistress, is not cozened nor forsworn:
to get her favor, bestows no rings, nor empties his exchequer to appear still
in new rich suites but lives free upon the stock of nature, yet loves none.
Like the great Turk, he walks in his Seraglio and does command which
Concubine best pleases, when he has done, he falls to graze or sleep, and
wakes, as he had never known the dun, white, redd, or brended Cow.


Sist. You are unmanly.


Court. Nay, I know you will rail now: I shall like it: call me a skirvy
fellow, proud, and saucy, and ill bred crooked clown, I Will hear. This,
rather then live upon your pity, and yet do not: For if you rail too men
that know you can dissemble, may believe you love me, and it is not my Aim.


Sist. You are a fine man


Court. I am in my best clothes.


Sist. I perceive it is true now, what the world says of you, and yet it is
strainge.


Court. It Is strainge it should be otherwise.


Sisst. You give your tongue a license, nor will I hope your malice should
spare me a broad, that have so prodigally abused a Ladies fame that deserves
nobly from you; but you men care not whose name you blast with a loose
Character, so you maintain your pride of Talk.


Court. How is this? it is confessed I have talked in my time and talked too
much, but not too much of you; for I but seldom thought of such a woman, or
any other.


Sist. Nay Sir I am satisfied, you can talk your pleasure.


Court. Have I not done it, too?


Sist. Yes by your own report, and with a Lady so much in virtue and in birth
above you? and therefore I expect not your modest language of me.


Court. Stay. This moves me; I never took a pleasure yet to lie with Ladies
fames: or ever thought that sport lie in the tongue; such humors are for men:
that live by Brothell offices, let me but know who has traduced me to you
thus, he shall be known noe more.


Sist. I Will not be guilty Sir: of any murder; when we meet again and you
in better humor I may tell you: so farewell Gondari^o, nothinge's lost when
you turn woman hater. Exit.


Court. She has vexed me, if we two make a matrimony after this rate, the
devil is like to dance at our Wedding. Enter Device.


Dev. He Is here, a lone too, and the place most opportune! how shall I begin.
Master Courtwell, do you love any friend of mine?


Court. Not to my knowledge, Sir, I should be sorry.


Dev. Do you not love a Gentlewoman, Sir?


Court. If she be a friend of yours, I Will take the first occasion to neglect
her, for your sake.


Dev. It will become your wisdom, and your safety.


Court. What mischief have you done to your face?


Dev. My face?


Court. You look so scurvily, come hither thou new monster, with more feet
then a caterpiller what time of the day is it? you that move upon so many
wheels, say Monsieur, are you not a walkinge clock; I have a mighty mind to
see you took in pieces.


Dev. I do not like this: you cannot put me, Sir, together again.


Court. I will not take the pains, why do you smile now?


Dev. At your conceit, to think I was a clock I am a watch; I never strike,
He Is valiant. Aside.


Court. You have pretty colors their are these your Mistresses.


Dev. If you did know the mystery you would applaud them: you have read Lievre
de B'azon^, what mean you?


Court. I will bestow them upon some forehorse; they will become a Country
^eeme rarely.


Dev. Morr*d^e^! why you dare fight it seems, and I was told, you were no
Cavalier: A very dream, a wedge for men to break their swords upon, I shall
never trust fame again for your sake.


Court. Thou never did^st cousen me. --


Dev. I was never so Illitterate in a man.


Court. For (...) did ever think thou durst not fence but at a complexion,
aglisteringe vapor: a thing of clothes, and fit for Chambermaydes to whett
their wits upon: but now resolve either to have your skine flead off; or fight
with me for troublinge my present meditations.


Dev. Why Sir if you be serious I shall quitt that prejudice you have upon my
valor look you Sir I can draw, and thus provoke'd I dare chastise you, too
cause I was merry I am not bound to feed your spleen eternally with laughter,
yet I am not Ignorant what an advantage, Sir, your weapon gives you in length.


Court. We Will change why this is honnour in thee. They measure and Device g^^s
both weapons.


Dev. Now, Sir, keep of.


Court. Sure thou art not so base.


Dev. I never cozend you, do you remember? these two will guide me on the rope.


Court. You mean to dance then.


Dev. Yes but with quicker time then you I hope can follow. Thus I begin; fa
la, la. Exit.


Court. What a heathen coward is this? how the rogue tripps like a fayrie: to
the town with them, he has bin a footman sure I have not breath enough to
overtake him, and it will be dark presently if I loose the sight of him; I Will
search the Town and if I find him not there, pursue him with hue and cry, and
after hang him. Exit.


Enter Sir Francis: (A Taper prepared.) Fran. The sun, whose busy eye is still
Employed a spy upon our Actions, tire'd with waytinge is drowsy gone to bed,
about whose pillow night has hunge all her wings, and set up Tapers as if the
day were timorous like a child and must have light to sleep by, welcome all
the hours that govern pleasure, but be slow when you have blessed me with
my wishes, time and love shall dwell like twins, make this your bower and
charm the air to sweetness, and to silence: favor me now, and you shall
chainge your states: Time shall be old no more, I will contract with destiny,
if he will spare his wings, to give him youth and beauty, that we may find
every minute a fresh child of pleasure: love shall be proud to be no more a
boy but grow to perfect strength and hold consistance: for when two active
lovers meet so happy as we whose equal flames do light Embraces twill be
noe weight to number many years in our delights and think all age a blessing:
but language is too narrow to express what I expect, it is fit my soul retire
till she present her self, and if it can measure my hop'd-for Joys with
thoughts prepare to entertain the happiness. Exit.


Enter Dorothy (with a light) to Sir Richard and his Lady, (in bed) Dor. I
have set already my design a moveing to take my Captain, Vnderwit, who in
wine was late more feirce upon me; in the mean time I cannot choose but laugh
at the Device we hope to cheat my Master with sure the devil is agreat
friend to women that love men! He does so furnish us with quainte inventions:
presently after supper, she began her sit of tooth atch, and did counterfeit so
naturally; but since she went to bed she almost rau'd by turns; I heard her
at it.


Lad. Oh oh; whose there.


Dor It Is I for sooth, I heard you groan and I have not the heart to sleep,
shall I watch by you?


Lad. Oh no! get you to bed, make fast the chamber: I cannot endure. --


D^roib^ puts out the candle at the door and returns. Sir Rich. Dear heart,
be patient.


Lad. I, you have your homilyes of patience, but if you had my pain, it would
make you mad, oh; oh.


Sir Rich. I Will send for the french tooth drawer in the morninge.


Lad. There is no rack nor torture like it, oh; what shall I do; I shall never
sleep again.


Sir Rich. Which tooth is it.


Do^. The sweet one you may be sure troubles her


Lad. This, this; oh that there. --


Sir Rich. They are happy that are old and have no teeth.


Lad. Oh take heed; now it shoots up to my head.


Sir Rich. Thou make my heada^ke with thy noise.


Lad. If you knew what I suffer, your head would ache, in deed, I must rise and
walk in the chamber, there is no remedy.


Ser Rich. You Will catch more cold.


Lad. Oh noe; dear life do not cross me; if you weere in my torment, you
would rise; and try any thing, for a little ease It cannot be worse the pain
sure came with a cold and who knows but an other cold may cure me.


Sir Rich. I prithee come to bed again.


Lad. So, so do not trouble me. I am now in some little ease it is a
heavenly thing to be goeing.


Sir Rich. Do thou hear?


Lad Your noise will bring my pain back again, if you knew what a vexation
it is for me to speak you would not put me to it so, if you do talk I will
not answer a word more. Exit.


S^r Rich. Well! by this noe light I Will to London to morrow. I see it is possible
a woman's Tooth may be as trouble so me, as her tongue


Dor. Oh; oh.


Sir Rich. I cannot choose but pity her: that any woman should hold so much
pain in a hollow Tooth!


Dor. If my Master touched with so much compassion should rise and force me to
bed to him, I must not cry out a rape. It Is at the worst on my side, but
fornication in my own defense.


Sir Rich. Prithee come to bed.


Dor. Oh; oh; oh:


Sir Rich. The music at a convocation of catts, at a witches upsittinge is the
spheres to this catterwawlinge. I will thrust my head into the pillow, as
Diana did, in the bush when the bear was cominge, and then I shall not hear
her.


Dor. Oh! this is a kind of purgatory for the sines of the flesh: if she
should fall a sleep with the other knight; it is not possible I should hold
out till morninge that which would fright away an ague has put me into a
fever: I shall have the tooth atch in deed with counterfeitinge. I have
known some men taught the Stammers so, my gumes do murmur, there is fear all
over my flesh she will stay too long, and then, --


Ser Rich. Vh; uh:


Dor. Oh; oh; I Will shift places to show more distraction at the worst my noise
shall be within his reach it may give her warninge to return too. Exit.


Enter Lady to Sir Francis (a sleep) a table Ink and paper set out. Lad. I am
full of fears and my own motion frights: me this furious love is a strange
Pilott: Sir where are you, ha; a sleep? can any dullness that is not death
possess a Gentleman so valiant in desires, when he expects to meet his
Mistress? how I blush to raise him? was I not worth thy wakinge expectation,
farewell: yet something like a chain that is fastened to my poor heart
restraines me, ink and paper: Writes.

I Will leave him a short monument of his shame and my neglected love. He knows
my hand, farewell forgetful lover. Exit.


Fran. What? have I slept? some witchcraft did betray my eyes to so much
darkness, yet my dream was full of rapture such as I with all my wakinge
sense would sly to meet; me thought I saw a thousand cupids slide from heaven
and landinge here made this there scene of Reuells clappinge their goulden
feathers, which kept time while their own feet struck music to their dance
as they had trod and touched so may Lutes: This done with in a cloud formed
like A throne, she to whom love had consecrate this night my Mistress, did
descend, and cominge toward me my soul that ever wakes, angry to see my body
made a prisoner, and so mocked, shook of the chains of sleep, least I should
loose essential pleasures for a dream. It Is happy: I will not trust my self
with ease and silence. But walk and wait her coming that must bless me.
Forgive me you bright Stars, and do not frown that I have not attended as
became one that must live by your kind Influence. Not yet appear? she did
command I should with confidence expect her; Ha! what is here? this Character
was not visible before; " That man's too much composed of phlegm
" Will loose his Mistress, for a dream.
It Is hers. I know she has been here; Oh fatal! and findinge me a sleep
scorned to uncharme my dull and cursed silence, this distracts me. Have I so
long, with so much Art and Study labourd this hour and obtained, what my
ambition looked at, her consent, and when the tree itself bowed down Its
goulden fruit and tempted me to gather, must I make my self incapable and be
guilty of so black so base a forfeite? I could tear my eye lidds off, that
durst let in a mist so dark and so destroyinge: must I sleep at such a time?
that the devil must be over watched too? this hour has blasted such a hope
as the Earth never teemed with nor the spring gave up in smiling blossoms to
the breath of those sweet winds that whisper from the west, a tale of triumph
to the year, I could dissolve, with cursinge of my Le^hargie. How shall I
look upon her face, whose love and bold adventure I have thus rewarded? but
passion will not cure my wound which must bleed till I see her, and then
either cease blessed by her pardon; or dismiss a life though just, too poor
a sacrifice to her Anger. Where shall I hide my self and shame for ever? Exit.


Actus quintus. Scaena prima.
Enter Sister and (presently after) Master Courtwell. Sist. I cannot forgett my
careless Gentleman; his neglect and reproaches have wrought strangly upon me;
he is here.


Court. Is there not a weazle crept in to your chamber, Lady.


Sist. A weazle Sir?


Court. Yes, a Monsieur suckegg.


Sist. Do you take my chamber for a hens nest, Sir?


Court. There Is a Thing that calls him self Device, one that will break the
heart of a post-horse to continue a hand gallop with him, your a la mode, your
fightinge fayrie, fethered footed servant, when saw you him?


Sist. My fightinge servant, has he beaten you Sir? perhapps he thought you
were his rival: surely I saw him not since yesterday.


Court. Be'e Lady how many mile is it to the next Cutler? the rogue has pawnd
or sold my sword.


Sist. Do you hear Sir? I can tell you now what Lady; it was you did abuse so


Court. I abuse a Lady? Tell me the slave reported it; I hope it will prove
this Monsieur if ere we meet again; -- Who was it?


Sist. Upon condition Sir you will requite me but with one Gentle favor.


Court. Any thing.


Sist. You must sit down and hear me then, while lat a distance, thus deliver.


Court. It Is more state.


Sist. I am most unfortunate.


Court. For what dear Damsel?


Sist. And wrong d by a Gentleman I loved.


Court. Can he be a Gentleman that dares wrong so much love and beauty?
what s the offense?


Sist. He will not love again.


Court. And you would have the stubborn man corrected?


Sist I would be revenged, if I know how, and honor him, should do me
justice.


Court. Name the man: I Will do it.


Sist. I cannot.


Court. How.


Sist. Yet turn your face: alas! it is your self: I have your word to punish
him.


Court. Sweet Lady I am well acquainted wi^h the worthy Gentleman, but will
not kill nor strike him: for I know he has just reason not to love you, you,
of all your sex; he told me so.


Sist. His reason?


Court. Was in these words, suppose you hear him speak it. Now do you sit;
Lady; when I consider you to a perfect form of what we can call hands^me with
all your attributes of soul and body where no Addition or detraction can by
cupids, ^icer critticks find a fault, or Mercury with your eternal frame and
then consider what a thing I am to this high Character of you; so low so lost
to noble merits, I despair to love a Mistress cannot love again.


Sist. This is as much dissembled modesty.


Court. No let it all alone, I have other reasons, Lady, among my papers, to
love, or to be in love is to be gulled, that is the plain English of cupids
latin besides, all reverence to the calling, I have vowed never to marry: and
you know, love may bring a man to*t at last and therefore my fine gewgaw, do
not abuse me.


Sist. How can I when you will neither love me nor marry me?


Court. I was not made for a husband.


Sist. But I would make you.


Court. I know what you would make me.

Enter Servant.
Serve. Monsieur Device if you be alone would present his service to you.


Court. Is he come?


Sist. Do me but one favor, I Will recant my love, I will not have so much as
one good thought of you, I will neglect you, Sir, but for three minutes.


Court. I Will have patience so long. He^ hides.


Sist. Admit him. I will be revenged on somebody? now Sir: Enter Device.


Dev. I'have broug'ht you a weapon Lady.


Sist. Me, what to do Sir.


Dev. It Is justice I present it to your feet, whose love Armed me to vindicate
your honor.


Sist. My honor?


Dev. This is but the first of my valor in your cause; if you affect these
monuments, I Will make you up an Armory: mean time receive my service with this
sword; if he provoake me to fight with him again; I Will cut his hand off and
bring it with me, to present the next.


Sist. Whose hand dear Servant?


Dev. He is not worth the naminge, alas; this does not deserve your knowledge;
only think what I dare do, when your bright name is questioned: and I in time
may merit to be called the darlinge of your Virgin thoughts.


Sist Pray stay; my name traduced? who was so impudent? do me the grace to let
me know on whom your valor has bin exercised.


Dev. Why upon the formal thing, called Courtwell, I would call him
Gentleman, but that I have baffled him; you need noe other witness then his
sword: She shuts the door. With the fine holliday hilt.


Sist. Look you Sir I have made fast the door because I mean before you go,
to have a satisfaction for the base Injury you have done me.


Dev. I done you Injury?


Sist. Not that I value Courtwell whom you would pretend has bin too saucy
with my honor, but cause I scorn to own a goodness should depend upon your
sword or vindication: I Will fight with thee my self in this small volume
against your bulk in folio.


Court. Excellent wench.


Dev. I was your champion, Lady.


Sist. I had rather have no fame then have thee name it; thou fight for a
Ladies honor, and disarme a Gentleman? thou fence before the Pageants and make
room for the porters, when like Elephants they carry once a year the Cyttie
Castles: or go a feastinge with the drum or schole boys to the bank side and
save the bears a whippinge that day: come Sir I mean to have about with you.


Dev. At what weapon?


Sist. This, and none other, Sir.


Dev. I Will rather bleed to death then lift a sword in my defense* whose
inconsiderate brightness may fright the roses from your Cheeks, and leave the
lyllyes to Lament the rude divorce: but were a man to dare me, and your enemy,
my rage more nimble then the M^dian shaft should fly into his bosom, and your
eye change Anger into smiles, to see me fight and cut him into a ragged staff.


Court. I cannot hold no longer; you have got a stomach Sir with running, I Will
try how you can eat a Sword.


Dev Have you an ambush Lady; I Will cry out murder, it is two to one. Fair play!


Court. Let me but cut one leg off to mar his running.


Dev. Hold: let me speak.


Court. What can thou say for thy baseness?


Dev. Some men love wit, and can without dishonor endure a Jest; Why? do
you think I knew not you were here and but observed to see my humor? I came
to wait upon you with your sword.


Court. How came you by it? Confess before this Lady.


Dev. Do think her witt's so lymber to believe I could compel it from
thee, it was a trick, a mere conceit of mirth, thou shall have mine: Do
think I stand upon a sword? I Will give thee a case of pistolls, when we come
to London; and shoot me when I love thee not: pox on it, thou apprehendest me
well enough.


Court. But I am not satisfied, do you love this Gentlewoman?


Dev. Hum;


Court. You will resolve Sir.


Dev. As may become a stranger; I will not lose thy friendshipp for all woman
kind.


Court. He dares, not own you.


Sist. I easily forgive him: I should hate my self if I depended on his pity.


Court. Thou art a noble wench: shall we leave of these Jiggs, and speak our
minds in earnest by these twyn lips, I love thee extremely.


Sist. Swear by your own.


Court. They shall be mine: Monsieur, for your penance you shall a long and
witness.


Sist. What I pray.


Cou. The priest shall tell you, come, we have both dissembled, we do love
one an other.


Sist. It Is not possible.


Court. Unless you will deny me in the church. I have vowed to lie with you
this night: Device, amble before, and find the Parson out; we will be
friends, and thou shall be her Father.


Dev. I must maintain my honor, or be beaten.


Co. Com we will have no more acquaintance.


Sist. Very pretty! I may deceave you yet for all your confidence.


Court. If the sky fall, we will have the darkes to supper. Exeunt.


Enter Lady Sir Francis and Dorothy. Lad. It was a strange neglect, Sir.


Fran. I confess it, and not deserve to live for it, yet if you but knew my
sufferings.


Lad. Let her be Judge.


Fran. By no means Madame.


Lad. You may trust her knowledge.


Fran. This is worse then a whippinge now, these Ladies have no mercy on a
delinquent; I must stand to it; there is no tyrant to a chambermayde, made
judge in such a case; I Will give a limb to be quitt now; but if she choose, I
am a criple for this world.


Dor. Is it possible? A man and such a beast?


Fran. So: I must to the shambles.


Lad. What punishment can be equal to the offense?


Dor. He looks with some compunction for his fault, troth, Madame, such an
other night: and try whether he will sleep again.


Fran. Merciful wench; if we piece again; it shall be a good turn in thy
way.


Lad. My husband is resolved this day for London. It is his humor, or else
worse, suspicion: there is noe pretense for him to stay behind.


Dor. You have made ill use of your time Sir Francis; I know not how to help
you; seven years hence you may have such an other opportunity.


Lad. Watch if my husband come not this way, Dorothy, well Sir, though your
transgression deserve no pardon, yet I am charitable upon condition.


Fran. Any thing, Madame: this shows excellent in you. No penance shall
displease, so you absolve me. Bid me to clyme some rock or piramide, upon
whose narrow spear you have advanced my peace, and I will reach it, or else
fall lost to the world in my contempt.


Lad You speak gloriously, the condition that assures your pardon, is only
this, that you conclude, here, all your loose desires, with a resolve never to
prosecute or hope to enjoye me:


Fran. Call you this charity, let me rather loose your pardon, then ever be
thus Divorced: bind me never to see you, (and yet that were cruelty) then,
charm me to forget that I am man, or have a heart, and you a beauty which
your absence can as well make nothing, as divide from my adoreing It is not
cure but killing to prescribe I never must enjoy you, if you have resolved
death upon me, let it be when we like lovers have embraced.


Lad It is not possible.


Fran. nothing in love can be impossible to willing mynds. I Will tell you,
Madame, Sure the devil has forsworn the flesh, there may be a plott, I have
it. An excellent rare Dovice, if you but favor it: your husband is immediately
for London I must in modesty ride with him; you are left behind.


Lad. How can that proffit you?


Dor. What a deal of submission these foolish men trouble us women with, that
are more forward to be friends again, then they?


Fran. I will counterfeit a fall.


Lad. A fall?


Fran. I, from my horse, observe me then.


Dor. My confederate I hope by this time is at the gate enquiringe for Sir
Richard very formally from the old Knight his Master and good Lady: the follow
has wit to manage it.


Fran. My F^o man shall pretend himself the surgeon to attend me; Is It not
rare? stand but to it fate in this and if I fail I will sit down a convert
and renownce all wanton hope hereafter. Dearest Madame if you did mean this
honor to me before let not your louinge thoughts freeze in a minute; my genius
is a prophet.


Dor. Sir Richard, Madame, is cominge this way.


Fran Shall I hope again


Lad. I will not say you shall despair.


Fran. You bless me. Exit.


Dor. My business is on foot, your Jewel Madame will credit much the cause.


Lad. We will with draw; and let me know how you, have cast the plott. Exeunt.


Enter Sir Richard (openinge a letter) and Footman. Sir Rich. From thy Master?
his name?


Foot. Sir William Litleland.


Sir Rich. I do not know him.


Foot. His name is well known in Lincolneshire near the Fenns; there were of
his family Ancient Gentlemen before the conquest, some say, ever since the
flood,


Sir Rich. Little Land?


Foot. But he has now more land then 3. of the best of the sheere, thank the
dutch men that have drunk up all the water.


Sir Rich. They water -- drinkers?


Foot. Why not, as well as eat dry land? they are lyn'd with butter; Sir; they
fear noe dropsies.


Sir Rich. She has bin absent these two years, the occasion her dislike and
disaffection to a Gentleman whom I confess, I did severely urge her to marry,
if she have lived with you, as my late intelligence informs me in the nature
of a Servant, which is be^^ath my wish and her condition, I hope upon this
knowledge, you will with consider of her qualittie she being my only child
and heir to my fortunes, use her like a Gentlewoman: and though my pears have
made me unfitt for travel I do Intend upon the return of my daughter, whom
I shall receive as a new blessinge from you, to express my self for your
favor

Your true Friend and Servant WILLIAM LITTELAND.


My maid Dorothy A knights daughter and heir? do you know your young
Mistrisse?


Foot. I shall be happy to see her, with a Letter and token from her Lady
Mother.


Sir Rich. I pray trust me to deliver it.


Foot. I, With all my heart, Sir; you may command.


Sir Rich. T^omas, pray entertain this Footman in the buttery: let him drink
and refresh him self and set the cold chine of beef before him he has runn
hard.


Tho. That will stay his stomach indeed; but claret is his only binder.


Foot. Sack while you live after a heat, Sir.


Tho. Pease you, I Will show you the way to be drunk. Exit with Footman.


Sir Rich. To my lovinge daughter? may not this be a trick? Enter Vnderwitt.

By your favor Madame; Captain, gather you the sense of that Letter, while I
peruse this, you know Mistress Dor^thy?


Vnd. I have had a great desire to know her, I confess, but she is still
like the bottom of the mapp, Terra incognita, I have been a long time hoveringe
about the Magellan straytes but have made no new discoveryes.


Sir Rich. Ha! This is no counterfeit; I dare trust my own Judgment; it is a
very rich one I am confirmed, and I will seal them up again. My Ladies Woman
Sir William Littelands daughter and heir? what say you now of Mistress
Dorothy?


Vnd. A great deal better then I did, and yet I have loud her this half year
in a kind of way, of my conscence, why may not I marry her?


Sir Rich. This Jewel was sent by her Mother to her.


Vnd. Dear Uncle conceal it till I have talk with her, oh for some
witchcraft to make all sure.


Sir Rich. I like this well: she is here.


Enter Dorothy. Vnd. I vow, Mistress Dorothy; if I were immodest, it was the
mere impudence of my sack, and not my own disposition but if you please to
accept my love now by the way of marriage I Will make you satisfaction, like a
Gentleman in the point of honor.


Dor. your birth and estate is to high and unequal for me, Sir.


Vnd. What care I for portion or a face, she that has good eyes, has good --
Give me virtue.


Dor. You are pleased to make your mirth of me.


Vnd. By this ruby nay; you shall wear it in the broad eye of the world; do
think I jest?


Dor. Sir Richard: --


Vnd. If he were ten Sir Richards, I am out of my wardship


Dor. How he flutters in the lyme-bush: it takes rarely. Aside.


Vnd. What a necessary thing were a household chapline? Exit.


Sir Rich. So; so; the wench inclynes, I will hasten my jornie that I may
appear with more excuse, when they are married in my absence. Exit.


Enter Master Courtwell, Sister and Device. Court. Come we are fast enough,
and now I have thee, I Will tell the all the fault I find, thou have a little
two much wit, to be a wife: it could not be too nimble for a Mistress. There
is a part of your penance still behind Device; you would pretend to be a
poet, I Will not disgrace the name to call thee one, but let me have times
against we go to bed, Two Anagrames that weigh an ownce with coment, and
after that, in verse your affidavitt that you do wish us joye, and I Will
discharge you.


Dev. It Is time I were at study then.


Exit Device. Court. About them, your double congie, and depart with silence:
now prithee tell me who reported I had wronged a Lady? Was it not thy revenge
to make me Angry?


Sist. It was indeed Now tell me; why at the first approach seemed you so
modest? you have confidence to spare, now.


Court. Troth I came not with any wooinge purpose: only to please my Uncle, and
try thy wit and that converted me. Enter Tho.


Tho. Did you see my Master Captain Vnderwit?


Court. Yes he is talkinge with a priest and Mistress Dorothy.


Tho. Her Fathers Footeman is here, she is a Knights daughter and heir, but
she does not know it.


Sist. I think so?


Court. Where Is my Uncle?


Tho. A mile on his way to London, by this time with Sir Richard, I long to
see my Master. Exit.


Court. We shall want Company to dance.


Enter Lady. Sist. My Sister.


Court. If you please Madame, you may call me, Brother, we have been at, I John
take thee Elisabeth, a possett and four naked thighs in a bed to night,
we will bid fair earnest for a boy too.


Sist. It Is even so Madame; the Priest has done it


Lad. Nay then all joys attend you; if this had bin known, it might have,
stayed Sir Richard, and your Uncle one day more.


Enter Vnderwit, Dorothy, Sackbury, Thomas. Vnd. Room for an other couple.


Tho. In hell, my Master is married.


Lad. My husband left some letters, and a token was sent you Mistress Dorothy,
you did Ill to obscure your self so much, you shall not want hereafter all
respects that may become you.


D^r Madame I know not what you mean.


Cap. She will not take it upon her, yet.


Vnd. There is the sport Enter Device.


Dev. Oh Madame, news; Ill news; an Accident which will blast all your mirth,
Sir Francis; --


Court. What of him.


Dev. Has broake; --


Court. His neck?


Dev. You guess very near it, it is but, his shoulder has saved that Joint; a
fall from his horse they say has much endangerd him.


Court. My Uncle hurt? Exit.


Lad. He has kept his word; now if he counterfeyte handsomely.


Vnd. Monsieur Device, I must entreat a courtesy: you have wit and I will have
a Masque to entertain my new Father in Law Sir William Littleland; Mistress
Dorothy now my wife is his only daughter and heir


D^r. Who has gulled you thus? I am no Knights daughter.


Dev. Give you Joy Captain


Vnd. She is still loath to confess it.


Enter Sir Francis; Master Courtwell, Lady, Sister, Sackbury. Fran. If you love
charity; a bone setter.


Lad. He counterfeites rarely, where is Sir Richard.


Fran. He rid before, but I sent my Footeman, to tell him my misfortune; oh;
Madame.


Lad. This is better then the tooth atch; he carries it excellently.


Fran. Ask me no torturinge questions, I desire Madame a little conference
with you, I Will thank the rest if they will with draw.


Court. Lett's leave him.


Vnd. We Will to my chamber, Captain.


Sack. You have a mind to examine the business privately.


Vnd No, good Captain you may be present, come; Thomas, thou shall be
witness too. Exeunt.


Lad. They are gone, you feign most Artificially, let me embrace you.


Fran. Oh take heed.


Lad. What Is the matter.


Fran. It Is noe dissembling, Madame; I have had a fall indeed: a dreadful
fall, I feel it, I think my horse saw the devil in some hedge, ere I had
rid three furlongs: gave a start, pitched me off his back like a bar and
broake a flynt with my shoulder, I think; which struck fire too there was
something like it in my eyes; I am punished.


Lad. But is this serious, are you hurt indeed?


Fran. Hurt? I have broake my shoulder, feelingly, and I am of opinion when I
do enjoy you, Madame, I shall break my neck: that will be the next; I Will
take this for a warninge and will leave of in time.


Lad. It makes me tremble.


Fran. I will be honest now, and so forgive me, is not the surgeon come yet?


Lad. Heaven has cured us both.


Fran. I am not cured yet, oh for the bone setter, if ever I counterfeit again.


Lad. There is a blessing fallen upon my blood: your only thoughts charm had
power to make my thoughts wicked, and your conversion disenchants me: may both
our lives be such as heaven may not greeve, to have showed this bounty.


Enter Courtwell and the rest with Sir Richard. Court. Sir Richard; Madame:


Lad. You may enter now, Sir.


Sir Rich. I do not like this Stratagem, Sir Francis must not here practice
his court tricks, I will not trust my wifes surgery:

Enter Su^geon. He Is come; Sir Francis is led out.

How is it noble Sir Francis; best with draw, I Will see him dressed my self.


Vnd. Madame and Gentleman; Mistrisse D^rothy will not acknowledge she is a
Knights daughter she swears she knows no Littleland.


Dor. Till it appear to whom, this ^emm was meant, deaf Madame, be you
treasurer, I confess I have wealth enough in such a noble husband.


Lad. It shall belong to thee; be honest Dorothy, and use him well.


D^r. With my best study^, Madame;


Sack. Where is this Foo^^man you talk of?


Tho. He p^etended letters to carry two miles off to a Kinsmans of his Masters
and return presently: he drunk 3. or 4. beer glasses of Sack and he rune
away so lightly.


Dor. His reward shall overtake him.


Vnd. Will you have her; she will do you service, Captain at a low Country
leager or thou Thomas I le give thee a coppihold.


Tho. You have one life to come in that lease yet, I thank you I am free, and
that is Inheritance. For ought I know she may serve us both.


Sack. Come you may persuade her to take it upon her for your creditt, the
gullery is yet with in these walls let your shames go noe further, the wench
may prove right; she may.


Enter Sir Richard. Lad. What news from Sir Francis.


Sir Rich. Wife I heartily ask thy forgiveness: I had jealous thoughts, but
all is right again.


Lad. I will deserve your confidence.


Sir Rich. No great danger, his blade bone dislocated: the man has put every
thing in his right place


Vnd. Do you hear Sir Richard, we are married.


Sir Rich. It Is well done it is to my mind, send you Joy;


Vnd. Come hither Dorothy.


Dor. My Mother dyed, I have it by tradition, so, as soon as I was borne my
Father but no Knight, is now in the Indies a poor Merchant that broake for
20000.


Sir Rich. The ships may come home, ha;


Dor. You had best use me well now we are married, I will be sworn you
forced me to the church and thrice compeld me there to said, I Dorothy -- The
Parsons oath and mine, for ought I know may make it half a rape.


Sir Rich. There is no remedy we can prove no conspiracy; and because I have
bin gulled my self, get her with child; my Do is barren, at birth of her
first baby I Will give thee a hundred pieces.


Vnd. That Is somewhat yet: when charge coms on, thy hand, a wife can be but a
wife: it shall cost me 500. but I Will make thee a Laay in earnest.


Enter Sir Francis and surgeon. Sir Rich. How is it Sir Francis.


Fran. My Surgeon says no danger: when you please I may venture Sir to London.


Sir Rich. Noe have now.


Court. Not to night, Sir, we must have revells, and you salute my bride.


Vnd. And mine.


Tho. A Knights daughter and heir.


Fran. May all Joys thrive upon your Jove's; then you are cozened of your
Mistress Monsieur, but your nephew knows I have met with my match if not put
to the worst.


Sir Rich. Come we loose time.


Fran. Preserve your Marriage faith: a full increase of what you wish confirm
your happiness.


Exeunt. FINIS.
THE VARIETY, A COMOEDY, Lately presented by His Majesty's Servants at the
Blackfriars.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1649.

Dramatis personae.
SIr William, A Suitor to the Lady Beaufield. Master Newman, A Suitor to Mistress
Lucy. Master Manley. Galliard, A French Dancing Master. Simpleton, A Country
Chiause. James, his Man. Jeer. Major. Companion to Simpleton. Jeer. Minor.
Companion to Simpleton. Formal, Gentleman Usher to the Lady Beaufield. A
Justice and his Clarke. Lady Beaufield, A Widow. Mistress Lucy, her Daughter.
Mistress Voluble. Nice, A Chambermaid. Mother to Simpleton. Barbara, A
Chambermaid. Ladies. A Surgeon. A Coachman. Wenches. Constable and Officers.
Servants and Attendants.
THE VARIETY
Act I. Scaene I.
Enter Sir William (at one door:) Mr Manly (at the other.) Sr. Will. I Ack
Manly, well met.


Man. Noble Sir William the humblest of your servants.


Sr. Will. Come, thou shall along with me.


Man. Whither?


Sr. Will. To see my Mistress.


Man. May you thrive in your courtship to her: at this time I am engaged to
other business.


Sr Will. Can any thing concern a Gentleman equal with a handsome Lady?


Man. Yes, the receiving of money is more considerable with me at this time,
than all the women in the world. But who is your Mistress Knight?


Sr Will. I dare tell thee, Madam Beaufield, the Lady of spirit, and
entertainment, the only Magnetic widow in the Town.


Man. They talk her a wit, and a most superstitious observer of persons, and
their garbes; I never had the happiness to kiss her hand, or be known to her,
but I converse with some who are very high and loud in her character; another
time Enter Jeere Major, and Minor. I Will wait upon you. Who are these?


Sr Will. In what grott have thou spent thy time, that thou art ignorant of
these people? These two are held the wits; That is the remarkable Jeerer of the
Town, and 'has purchased to himself the title of a Jeere Major.


Man. Why, Is there a Regiment of Jeerers?


Sr Will. You shall pardon me, there are sets of them, as there are of Fiddlers;
there is first a set of Court Jeerers, spruce half-witted men, confident, and
fierce in their opinions; these are men that make themselves music, and their
cloths make room for their wic; and go before in all companies: Then there is
the town Jeerers, like Hoboyes or Waits of the City, that think they are wise
when they are loud, and make a noise when they come to Plays, to distract the
next man's understanding. There are Jeerers at time of the year that go down
into the Country, and infect Wakes, and Faires, and the Sizes, with their
impudence, with which they save charges, and are never without the name of a
great Lord, to whom they are cousin Germane.


Man. But what has he deserved to be called (...) Jeere Major, and to bear
such a title? I have seen the Rooke.


Sr Will. An excellent ill nature has preferred him to opinion: the other has
merited but the name of a Jeere minor; yet they can see me pleasant in their
reproaches, and laugh in their own defense, which many times keeps off the
cudgel.


Man. Nay, Jeering is a blessing that every man may have if he give his mind to
it: but wit (if I remember what I was taught) happens not to one amongst five
hundred on 'em. But I forget my affair.


Sr Will. Shall's meet and be merry this Evening.


Man. There Is no music in me without my singing birds about me, then I am a
Lord, and when I put on my habit of Leister, I am his own excellence.


Sr Will. Do thou preserve that him or still?


Man. I may chance by the false light of the Evening march to thy Lodging.


Sr Will. Do know where it is? I am removed. (whisper.


Man. So, no discoveries what Prince I am.


Sr Will. A match: that shape will beget us some mirch.


Man. Your most humble servant. Exit.


Sr Will. My Mistress is somewhat melancholy, if he come in that fantastical
habit, we shall have rare sport beyond his expectation, to have the Ladies
laugh at him. Exit.


Enter Simpleton, and Jeerers. Simp. This is very fine wit ysaith, and soon
learnd I think; a little more on it sweet Gentlemen.


Jeer. Suppose you were foxd last night; thus I come to you, and accost; Save
you Sir; you must know I must laugh all the while; how fare you Sir? Do not
some fumigations remain, some vapors not dissipated, a kind of Vertigo, a
weakening of the Nerves, or so? Ha, ha, ha, what thinks your Worship of milk
now, thin broth, or a Julip of pitiful Six for a penance to settle you, or a
hair of the same whelp? Ha, ha, ha, there is wit for you.


Simp. There Is no harm in the world in it, nor no exceptions if you laugh in
the right place.


2 Jeer. Now imagine you met an honorable Gentleman that had got a hurt in the
groine; thus I invade you; but the laugh must hold me too.


Simp. By any means, I cannot choose but laugh my self.


1 Jeer. There is no safe jeering without it.


2 Jeer. Sir, you have been at push of pike and received a hurt, upon some
unslaught in some female service, Ha, ha, ha; your breath is Aromatic since
you kissed your Mistress, and your water out-smells the violet, ha, ha, ha; by
the powerful -- yclipped Turpentine, it is true; what pity it is you went without
a charm, or had no acquaintance with a Laplander, to make you Venus-shot-free?
Ha, ha, ha; and how many french tennistalls have you in your flank now? ha,
ha, ha.


1 Jeer. You sat up at play all night, and lost your money; another now.


Simp. Not I a penny, I sent a buffe Gentleman that looked big upon me, after an
ill hand, twenty pieces upon half a dozen oaths.


1 Jeer. A good pawn, keep his oaths, if he do not pay your money, take the
forfeit, and if he be a Gamester he will be undone for want of swearing.


2 Jeer. Suppose it lost?


1 Jeer. Me thinks Cavallier you look pale since you came from the
charnelhouse, did the bones affright you? you are a most religious Gentleman
when you are at dice, and do so pray for 3 fives 3 foures at in and in: with
what devotion you look on the seven of Spades and eight of Diamonds at
cribbish? ha, ha; how zealouly you invoke the Saints to fit you with cards at
picket, or lebet.


Simp. I invoke the Saints?


1 Jer. I speak to the catholic gamester, that understands all games.


Simp. By the way though, do you think there are any gamesters in heaven?


1 Jeer. It is to be feared, they may lose so much upon earth, they will hardly
purchase a place there, or if any get thither, (which must be excellent
throwing) he would be more called upon, and perhaps pulled down again, upon every
dispute at play to be Groom porter.


2 Jeer. How like you these?


Simp. You shall both with me to my Mistress, and help to Jeere my rivalls.


1 Jeer. Your Mistress?


Simp. I Mistress Luoy, Lady Beaufeilds daughter, my Landlady Mistress Voluble
has commended me to her, and I hope to carry her, if one Gentl. that she loves
better do not get her away?


Ambo. We Will jeere him to death.


Simp. That were an excellent way, I think there is no statute against that, I
care not what becomes on him, he put bitter jests upon me the other day before the
Ladies, and I making use of your wit Gentlemen, he told me to my face, that I
talked nothing but clinches; as I am a Gentleman he did.


2 Jeer. Oh barbarous!


1 Jer. You shall wound him with his own weapon, and by a direction we can
give you, you shall so jeere him, that he shall offer boot to change
understandings with you.


2 Jeer. We Will make him so ridiculous, he shall laugh at himself.


Simp. That will be rare; I have sent for my Mother to town to be acquainted
with Ladies, and learn dressing; my Landlady, has promised to commend a
Gentlewoman to wait upon her, and teach her the art of painting, and all the
postures of a great woman; I do mean she shall marry some Knight or other, and
be Ladified.


2 Jeer. It will be necessary.


Simp. Though I say it, the woman is flexible, and has been in her days -- My
Father might have been a Knight, and he had not been an Ass, and loved his
money; but we lose time, let us to my Mistres Gentlemen.


Both We attend sir. Exeunt.


Enter Formal (with a Table Book.) For. The same day, a Dolphin taken in a
net at Woolidge, and ten live Pilchards in a Salmons belly -- strange things!
the 13. of July, the Caramountaine kittend in the Tower: an Eeleship spring a
leak shooting the Bridge, -- here are prodigious things. Enter Newman.

Mr. Newman.


New Mr. Usher, how does your Lady?


For. She is in health.


New. And Mistress Lucy?


For. Both in the Garden. Sir you have good intelligence, what news abroad? a
touch to your servant.


New. Alas you are acquainted with the state mysteries.


For. Troth Sir, I know little, or if I did, I would be loath to speak it, but
to a friend, the times are dangerous.


New. You Are right Mr. Formal, but be not nice, I know you are furnished with
news, as well as some that give pensions, though 'twere to a Captain in these
warlike-times, to have it made for 'em; you being a quotidian ambler upon
impertinent visits, must needs gleane the secrets of the court and state.


For. Sir I dare trust you with any thing, but pray do not speak on it; there is
a great man in the world --


New. Think you so?


For. That --


New. What has he done?


For. You shall excuse me; but --


New. What his name?


For. You shall excuse me for that too; a word to the wise; you can guess what
I mean, and let that pass; and now we talk of state affairs, there is a
packet come out of the North, and abox -- in your ear sir.


New. What is said to be in that packet?


For. There Is the business, but that no body knows.


New. Is It possible?


For. Take It upon my word; you are a friend, I hear further at Mr. Secretaries,
but you must say nothing of it, you undo me if you do, the King goes to
Hampton Court next week, but how long he stays is uncertain. Sir, you see I
put my self into your hands.


New. But is this done like a wiseman to reveal these mysteries, to trust
these secrets to one you have not known above 7 Year, if I should inform what
will become of you, and your estate? oh you must be cautious, though for my
part --


For. Oh Sir! I know to whom I speak, and will tell you more, for I dare trust
you with my soul; they say the Northern progress holds this year, and that
the Elke is dead in the new great park


New. I hope not.


For. It Is as I tell you, by the fall of a tree, do not you remember a tempest
four nights ago? then 'twas, blustering times Mr. Newman.


New. That makes Van Trumpe so troubled with the wind colicke, but now the
Hollanders, as they report, have many Engineers and Mathematitians set a work,
how to keep and vent it at their pleasure, and so to serve in Navigation for
their ships, that there may be ventus liber, as well as ventus clausus,
answerable to the two Seas.


For. Ha, ha! that is news indeed, alas mine is but domestic, but what do you
hear of London Bridge? it is whispered by some it will, and some again point
blank say it will not be repaired; but make not me the Author.


New. And I do hear the Camells decay at Tiballs: but pray no more of it from
me.


For. You shall not doubt me Sir, you do not hear of the Dolphin --


New. Of France?


For. Taken as Woolidge in a net.


New. Of Italian cutworke.


For. The news is not common of the Pilchards, the Catamountaine, nor the
Eeleship?


New. Not a word.


For. You shall hear more; I am your servant. Here is Mistress Lucy Sir, and
Mistress Voluble.


Enter Lucy and Voluble. Vol. I confess he has no overcharge of wit, that will
be your happiness, he has a good estate, and you may live with more delight
than a court Lady, he is a handsome man too, I am bound to give you my advise,
for your mothers sake, whose servant I am by many obligations, she has been my
customer for face-water, and pomatum these many years.


Lu. But if you be so skillful, as you are professed, and read in the secrets of
nature, you can tell by your art where I shall fix my affection, do not you
know Mr. Newman.


Vol. I never see the Gentleman, but I am not ignorant that he matches in the
Vanne, and leads the file of your amorous servants, but --


Lu. But what?


Vol. If you love your self. --


Luc. He is a well-bred Gentleman, and one deserves my good opinion, he is here.


New. They observe me -- Exit Form:

I kiss your hand fair Mistress Lucy: what is she that looks so like one of the
Sibills?


Vol. Is this the Gentleman you declare so civil, and well-bred, Lady? If I
have any skill take heed on him, he has an unlucky countenance.


New. This Gypsey will but cozen you.


Lu. She is excellent cunning, and has foretold str ange things, believe it.


New. If my Mistress have an opinion of her Art, she may do me a displeasure; I
have heard much talk of this woman, some say she is a Witch too, and wears the
Devil in her thumb Ring, I would not anger one of her Familiars. Take no
offense Mistress at the rudeness of my Language, this Lady shall give a very
fair pawn, the word of a Gentlewoman, that I shall be of good behavior, if
you please not to interpret me too hastily.


Vol. There is some texs in your forehead Sir that wants a comment, but I Will not
so much study your satisfaction.


Lu. Nay, thou shall not be displeased with him.


Enter Lady Beaufield, and Sir William. Vol. Alas, I am not angry; here is my
Lady and Sir William.


Beau. You are Master of an excellent language Sir.


Sr Will. You honor me too much, it is because you are the excellent Subject
Madam, and being the perfection of your Sex, an argument to create Eloquence
in every tongue.


Beau Then I must think you flatter; these praises are misplaced. I shall
suspect you love me not, or are not wise.


Sr Will. Why Madam?


Beau. You take such pains, and make a pilgrimage to that's within your reach;
I must confess I like Discourse, but think not all my soul placed in my ear;
although I love a Lute well, it follows not I should dote upon a Cimball.


Sr Will. A Cimball?


Beau. And dance as I were stong with a Tarantula, when you are at it, rosting
of a Galliard? You overdo this instrument, give me your courtship in a phrase
is fit to own and understand.


Sr Will. Your pardon Madam; I affect not bold and over-rack'd Hyperboles,
although I might insist upon the wealth and fullness of your merits, to which,
all praise, that can flow from me, is Justice, such command you have upon your
humble Servant, I rather wish my tongue a forfeit to perpetual silence, then
with one harsh sound offend your ear; you will give me leave I hope to say I love
you.


Beau. This is English Sir, and some do call it sense; it is fair, and fit,
when any Lady's private with her Servant; it is what I learned a child, I have
not yet outgrown the knowledge.


Sr Will. Did you love so young?


Beau. I understand the meaning of your language, it is not perplexed, and you
may love me too, and tell me so, and I may understand you; what need
compartments here, freeses, and words of Architecture, that will make things
hard to the understanding? As you could not build a sense in love without 'em?
Yet I bar not the freedom of Discourse, and use of Metaphors: And you may
praise us too in Verse, or Prose, to show the exaltation of your wit in
company, but it is the worst discourse when we are private.


Sr Will. If I had confidence she would direct me -- action I believe when
opportunity Invites --


Beau. To what good Knight? be not mistaken, I commend courtship in words, that
are made round like pills fit to be swallowed, and not ragged bullets.


Sr Will. It Is a strange Lady, I know not how to take her.


Vol. My Lady? Madam --


Beau. Art thou come?


Vol. Is it your Ladyships pleasure I shall read to day?


Beau. By any means, the Ladies will not fail, we should forget our Academy:
Sir William we must entreat your patience, and Master Newman. Vol. whispers to
Sr Will.


Enter Servant. Ser. Madam, the Ladies.


Beau. Say I wait upon 'em.


Sr Will. I Will take my opportunity.


Vol. You will engage him to credulity, and prepare some mirth.


Enter Formal. For. Mounsier Galliard the Dancer attends Madam.


Beau. He must give way to another exercise; Sir William you shall do us a
favor if you please to entertain a little time with him in the next Chamber,
our Lecture will not be long, and sweet Mr Newman the Frenchman will delight
you with his discourses, he has a tongue as confident as his feet, if you can
but humor him.


Sr Will. You shall command us Madam.


Beau. That Done we will join societies and mirth. Come Mrs Voluble.


Vol. I hope you will excuse my imperfections. Exeunt.


Act II. Scaene I.
Table and six Chaires set out. Enter Lady Beaufield, Lucy, and other Ladies,
Mistress Voluble. Vol. IT is an infinite favor, (most excellent Ladies) and
must needs speak the sweetness of your nature and dispositions, that you are
pleased to hear me, so weak and unworthy of the Chair, rather deserving to be
in the number of Disciples, than a professor in any of the female sciences; but
as your virtues are more exemplary, in this honor to me, the humblest of your
Servants, it will become me, in the gratitude to so noble a bounty, not to
waste time, but succinctly to deliver, what I could not finish without
trespass on your patience; at my last reading I did conclude with old Ladies,
that will cozen Nature, and Time, and abuse the men they love best; to these I
only add, it is not Mercury to change their skins like Snakes, but they must
fill up wrinckles as well as hide gray hairs: your red leather is for Country
Wenches, your white wash, or Spanish Fucus is the best, but a tire woman, or
coverer of time or nakedness must be kept in pension: sor it is now fashionable
to buy one of her apprencice Girls out of her time, as Lords and Gentlemen do
Barbers boys. Amongst other ornaments, Ribbands challenge no mean place, the
variety, and blason of these, I have elsewhere examined. For your finest Laces,
the Angel in Cheap, but they must be dearer then others, because they come in
Coaches, for pride or stateliness in any thing adds charges. Touching Gloves,
might I advise, I would have a few selected Ladies, to procure some ingenious
Gentleman at a reasonable pension to lie Lerger for them at Rome for Frangepane
Gloves, and such other correspondent things as may be of moment and great
consequence to your Ladyships: But then I must advertise, and most seriously,
that he may be a man of parts, and somewhat smelling toward the Roman Wash,
that he may give you intelligence of that State, and humors of the Gardinals,
or those that pretend to it, be they little or great, for this concerns the
state Ladies here: For your swarfie Mountebanke Italian, he utters
sophisticated Holborne Gloves for Frangepane, Esse^ Cheese for Parmesan, rotten
post for sweet powder, pickled white Leather for Mushromes, and cozens more
with his broken English, then the wits can get honesily with their best
language.


1 Lady The Merchant of Italian Saulsages, A meet Quack.


Vol. But then I would advise your Ladyships to have another Gentleman sent
into Spain for perfumes, pocket Fannes, orange flower water, Orange flower
butter beauty, Aqua de Chedrey, and many provocatives, as Contra yerua, and
Joco lata.


2 Lady It is a very learned Gentlewoman.


Vol. For Holland, it is too dear in Spain, therefore for a conscionable
cozenage over and above, here are honest Dutchmen will serve you most
faithfully. For Jewels, you may buy them at what rates you please, they add
luster to a Lady, and you may sell them at a fifth or sift part, which is very
well for a great Madam, if you would put them off at the best rate, you must
get some Doctor of Physic, or broking Apocriphall Captain, to show them (as if
there were fornication in it) behind the door, hanging or curtain, which
makes his fingers like Jewellers cards to set rings on, for there are bawdes
for rings and Jewels, as well as for other commodities.


Beau. What do you think of this caution Madam?


Vol. For your Linen, it must be fine, and fresh every day, therein consists
humane delight. For linen breeches, though some think them cleanly, in my
opinion they imitate a Dutch Stove too much. For Aprons, plain Holland is most
becoming, starched Lawne was in Queen Elizabeth's time, and will not endure
rumpling, every thing must be squared by use and elegance; but for your white
Shoes, rich Roses, light-coloured silk Stockings, and such variety below
stairs, they are great Inducers, as a learned man told me, (I will not say a
Divine) for Love, most excellent Ladies, does sometimes ascend, as well as
descend.

But still remember Ladies, that your Fan be so little, as not to lose the
least smirke, or grace of your countenance for it, for then being so small,
when you put it to your face, some Courtiers may take it for a black patch.
Then for your oaths, I protest is out of fashion, I profess for a Justice of
Peaces Wise, I vow too masculine, in faith for a Chambermaid, In Troth for a
Landerer, As you hope to live, too like a Prayer; Never stir, would
disadvantage a Lady many ways, besides visits; For the active wenches of the
time, May they be damned eternally, and lose all their designs if it be not so;
Upon my honor sounds well, which in a great Lady can never be forfeited if she
be in love, for great women have their privilege of Nobility, and can never be
forsworn like the Common people.


Lu. Is Perjury in women no breach of Laws?


4 Lady. You have the Doctors opinion.


Vol. One touch, if you grow old, which I omitted formerly, When time, which is
the moath of beauty, creeps upon you, you must be sure to have so many leaves
and curtains before your windows, that you may show your selves at more
varions lights than the most cozening Mercer his faded and deceitful Wares,
for the youth of your white Satin will be then but pearl color at the best,
it may be but ash color, and therefore refuse no advantage to give it gloss,
according to the conclusion of a modern Poet, which at this present shall be
mine.

Wise Ladies must refuse no Art
For age will snow upon their heart:

Beau. You have done us a great honor, and Ladies you shall not deny me this
favor to taste of a small banquet that waits upon you in the next room,
shall I show the way. Exeunt.


Enter Sir William, Mr. Newman, Monsieur Galliard. Gal. Me be content to have
de litell patience, and be my trot, me tell you, vat me have seen a to day, de
fine sport in devarle, me come into de great man to day, me make de reverence
Alamode, come ill faut, and he make me de estrange a Sir reverence de tird
time, dat ever you saw.


Sir VVil. That was not civil.


New. Oh Monsieur, every man has not the activity of your feet.


Gal. By my fat, it is very estrange a ding, dat dey will suffer a des men to be
near a de King, a de Queen, de Prince, or de Princess, dey vil marra de
understanding very mush.


Sir Will. Why Mounsieur that lies at the other end.


Gal. Begar you shall excuse a me, for de Courtier Alamode, dear de vit lie in
de foot, begar dear is nobodie can be viseman, dat does no make a de most
excellent reverence, dat is most certain, dat is the best ting in de hole
varle.


Sir Will. I am clear of his opinion.


New. But do you think Caesar Sir, or most of the Emperors or worthies of the
world, studied the liberal science of the foot, or puissant toe?


Gal. No, but begar dat make them dye all unfortunate, for if dey had tinke of
noting but de reverence, dey might ha live a great a while.


Sir Will. Excellent well argued, and very clear in my understanding.


New. I confess the wisdom of it Sir, but for the wit do you think that
lies there?


Gal. Dat be de best vit can be possible, for your vit, vat is your vit? your
vit is to break a de jest, vel, look you now a me, me vil break a de jest,
dat is like dat a me lor, dat is like dat of de Knight, dat is like dat of de
Ientilman, ha, ha, ha! dear is now one, two, tree very good jeasts, by my trot
dey are so very good jest, dat make a me sick wide laugh, and begar me vil
make a de page, de lacquey, and all de fool in de court, break a des very
good jest, very quickly, dat is a noting.


Sir VVil. To any purpose?


New. What do you think of the grave Aldermen? they are wise, and yet they
do not trouble themselves much about legs.


Gal. Be my trot, me speak a to de King, and to de Queen, to give me a
patten, dat none shall teach a de Aldermen to make a de reverence but my self,
and me vil undertake dat vid in one 12 a mont, but den dey must do nothing
else, dey shall make a de reverence, vid de Aldermen in de paris, and dance a
Coran, a Cereban, a Mountague, and dat vil be very brave.


Sir VVil. What faculties some men have?


New. But what shall business do in the mean time Mounsieur?


Gal. Is not dis very great a business? may begar, me vil undertake to de King
and to de Queen to make a my Lor Mayre de Sheriff and de Aldermen very fine a
mask.


Sir VVil. And to write it Mounsieur?


Gal. Aw, de write? dat is noting alamode, your speesh two, tree, yard long,
pshaw? give a me de quick a spirit, de fancy, de brave scene, de variety of
de Antimasque, de nimble a foot, no matre de sense, begar it vole be de
braveting in de christian varle.


Sir VVil. There is no question to be made.


Gal. And be my trot if me have a noder patten for de counsel learned in the
law, for to teach them de reverence, dat vil be very great varke, but my
diligence, and skill in dat matre, have no despair, to effect in time dis
great benefit, and dat vil make a de law flourish; and Englan a brave Englan,
begar.


New. I will not doubt your abilityes, but I fear the capacity of the Gentlemen
you undertake.


Sir VVil. But what will you look for now, for your pains Mounsieur? that is
considerable.


Gal. Begar me look for very mush, for it is mush pain, and it is brave ting,
beside me look for a statur of de brass, in de palace yard, ven me go out
of dis varle.


Sir VVil. You will deserve it as a rare patriot; but what manner of reverence
would you have the grave lawyers to Imitate, you must consider their robes:


Gal. Observe a me.


New. Such a reverence under your favor, would not become men of their
gravity, one always looks for a Coranto after it, and provokes a man to
whistle, or fing when he sees it, and makes one think still, what you would
have a month, a little too much of the activity.


Gal. Begar you no understand de matre, vere is your breine? dear is noting in
de varle like a dat motion, for de Ientillman, and for de Ientilvoman.


Sir VVil. Yes by your leave sir there is something else that is as good for
them.


Gal. I will tell you now, begar, here is a de kinsman dat is a me, and he live
here very much time, before he come, dey vent in vid deir toes, and hold der
cloak just a dear, and de hat so, fie, le diable! and now dey valk vid deir
toes out for brave genty, you call dat a de splay foot, but me vonder dat de
Lady no come, begar me no use to dis patience, and de vaite, pray tell you
Madam dat me have autre business vid de Lor, and de autre Lady have de use of my
foot begar.


New. Oh Monsieur by no means.


Sr Will. Let us prevail.


Gal. It Is no good you hold a me, begar, me no stay two minute to save a your
soul, dat is de resolution of de Cavalier de France. -- Exit


Sr Will. Would any man believe there should be so much folly in this Cubit
square?


New. Do you think he is a French Dancer? let that answer you, and wonder he
has no more Caprichios. But these Ladies are very tedious, we must have this
Lecture put down.


Sr Will. They are more like to purchase Gresham College, and enlarge it for
public Professors, you may live to see another University built, and only
women commence Doctors.


New. But now we talk of learned women, you have been acquainted with Mistress
Voluble, has she the abilities the women talk of? they say she is a
Fortune Tellers.


Sr Will. She is for more then Artificial White and Red, some think her guilty
of the Black-Art, she has foretold so many strange things; she has had two
Husbands, and prophesied long before, how, and when they should give up the
Ghost, if she be not a Witch she has the more wrong, for she is believed a
devilish cunning woman.


New. Possible!


Sr Will. There Is no^ a Lady with child but consults her Astrology, whether it
shall be male or female; and the waiting women how long they shall keep their
maidenheads, and who shall father the first borne, the Master or the
servingman; she is held a Sibill in the City, and tells oraculously whether the
Husband or the Wife shall die first, how, when, and where, and all this
sometime by observation of the hand, or forehead; she can see a maid through a
mask, and is excellent at stolen goods, for she can see a thief through a
millstone as well as a conjuring glass; in brief, she is held prodigious at
Divination, and most specially seldom fails in her Judgment of the two
destinies, Matrimony, and Hanging, this I have heard Sir.


Enter Simpleton, and Jeerers Sim. Sr William Your Servant, Master Newman?
that is he.


1 Jeer. Jeere him soundly.


New. What Gentlemen are these?


2 Jeer. He has betrayed his ignorance already, he does not know us.


Simp. What, not the Major, and the Minor?


New. Not the Major, nor the Minor.


1 Jeer. Cede majori Sir, Cede majori.


2 Jeer. Parce minori Sir, Parce minori.


New. Here will be a fine conclusion from these premises, and they were worth
considering.


Simp. These two are wits.


Sr Will. Are they your wits? Pray heaven you may not lose 'em.


Simp. If you love wit observe a little, and if I do not make you laugh, never
laugh while you live.


Sr Will. I thank you Sir.


Simp. You shall here how I will jeere Newman, my Rival now; such wit, wit of
the last Edition: Let me have fair play, and these most ingenious friends of
mine shall be judges.


Sr Will. I think so, 'twill pass time till the Ladies come.


Simp. Mr Newman, you are a pretty Scholar, pray what is wit?


Sr Will. A thing you want.


1 Jeer. A very pretty Problem.


New. Will you or these Gentlemen be bound to understand me?


Simp. Ha, ha, ha, that is a clinch, to understand me.


New. A clinch?


Sr Will. I understand none.


Simpl. Oh sir, a palpable clinch; Ha, ha, ha, ask my friend.


New. Is that your opinion?


Simp. There Is another clinch in faith, ha, ha, ha.


New. Pray sir, what is it a clock?


Sr Will. The mystery of this?


New. What is a clinch sir, do you know what it is?


Simp. I neither know, nor care what it is, so I laugh, and swear it is a
clinch, that is disgrace and reproach enough to any man. With what ease can we
cry up our own wit and another down, only by saying that is a clinch. I think I
ha jeerd him.


1 Jeer. Oh the ways to wit are much shortened in these latter times, it is a
picant age.


New. They have a gunpowder-plot to blow up sense; pray Gentlemen take truce
with your spleenes, and the wisest of you three inform me what is wit; you
have; no patience to hear me; or if you will not define it, speak something
that is witty, and in fashion.


1 Jeer. I Will tell you then:


Simp. You speak English to be understood, O base!


New. What language is your wit?


Simp. English, but elaborate, for example -- now beat up your kettle drums.


1 Jer. Sir, if my optics fail not, I have read

Each mystic line within your brow, my Genius

Is much exalted at your gaudy Phisnomy;

Shal's to the house of mighty noise and surfets,

There tinctiour souls with blood of purple grape?


New. What Is all this?


Simp. Ha, ha, I thought you were ignorant.


1 Jeer. Give him the Paraphrase.


2 Jeer. All this is, he remembers perfectly he has seen you before.


Simp. And desires you but to go to the Tavern, and drink a pint of wine;
here is language!


Sr Will. Is It possible?


New. What a deal of Embroydery is spent upon I am glad to see you well; How
long has this been a vulgar language? You would court a Mistress rarely in this
Cabale.


Sr Will. But how shall a man beget such high conceits?


Simp. Have you a desire to know Sir William? shall I tell him?


1 Jeer If he will make it a secret.


Simp. Why, turn your self round as fast as you can, and the first things you
speak, your head being dissie, will be these.


Enter Beaufield, Lucy, Voluble. New. What a beavy of Buffoons have we here?


Beau. We are at your mercy Gentlemen; but you that had a patience to expect
so long, cannot want virtue to forgive, since we had no intent to make so great
a trespass; where is Monsieur Galliard?


Sr Will. Madam, he is gone, something displeased you had no more regard to a
Gentleman of his quality; his time was precious, and some other Lords and
Ladies expected him.


Beau. His absence will admit of easy pardon, it is a most superstitious fool;
what Gent. are these?


Sr Will. They are things were meant by nature, Madam, a cure for melancholy,
we have had such sport and nonsense with 'em


Beau. We shall lose time upon 'em, please you, we will take a turn in the
Gallery.


(Ex. Beau. and Sir Will. Simp. Mistress Lucy be tenderhearted to these
Gentlemen.


New. They are only fit for your compassion.


Sim. They are worth your acquaintance, Master Newman knows 'em; have not their
wits a pretty edge?


New. Dismiss your Beagles I shall beat you all three else, and monstrously,
indeed I shall; be ruled, and keep your wits warm, I shall sling out like
winter.


Simp. I thank you sir and you be in earnest; I

Enter James. protest Major, and Minor, the man's in wrath, away.

Exeunt Ieer. How now James.


Ia. I am glad I ha found you sir, your mother's come to town, she rode behind
me.


Simp. Not too loud, where is she? I would not have it known till she have
other clothes, and better breeding.


Ia. She Is at your Lodging sir.


Simp. Mistress Voluble, my mother's come by directions, mum, and make haste;
sweet Mistress Lucy, I beseech you take it not unkindly if I depart.


Lu. By no means noble sir.


Simp. This is my man that has brought me news out of the Country forsooth.


Lu. None of your Tenants dead I hope?


Simp. Some are Coppyholders, and I hope you wish me no harm, but I vow it is
not my fault that I must take my leave so abruptly.


Lu. You have a cheerful license sir.


Simp. As I hope to make new Leases, and sell a hundred Acres of wood this
Term, I am very sorry, but I will wait upon you in the Evening. Noble Mr. New.


New. Ha, ha, that is a clinch.


Simp. I am your humble Servant.


New. Another Clinch I protest. Ex. Sim:


Lu. Now we have opportunity I preethee Mrs Voluble for my sake tell him his
Fortune; I have been a s^tor to know your destiny.


New. It will be a favor, it was in my ambition to desire it.


Enter Servant. Ser. My Lady desires your presence in the gallery.


Lu. I must observe her command, but you may satisfy the Gentleman in my
absence, and Mr: Newman when you know how the stars have determined of you,
make not me a more stranger.


New. I shall be only fortunate to be yours.

Exit Lucy and Servant. Now Mistress Voluble, if you be acquainted with my
stars, and know what fortune they decree me, I stand full prepared; what
lines are in my forehead, you observe so?


Vol. Pray let me see your hand.


New. Freely command it.


Vol. Some that do make a trade of fortunetelling (which is beneath my
practice) flatter mea for their base end of profit, I Will be plain.


New. Truth loves no other habit, you prepare me to give you the more faith.


Vol. It Is very strange, but this is most prophetical, you are --


New. What?


Vol. In love.


New. It Is very likely.


Vol. It may not prove so lucky, love is a malanchoy business.


New. I think it be. Is this all you can tell by your art?


Vol. You would know your destiny.


New. What please my stars and you?


Vol. Take this for oracle then, you will do something in a melancholy humor
will enda^ger your neck.


New. My neck? shall I be hanged? better the witch were burned.


Vol. Fare you well Sir. Exit.


New. A pox a your prognostic, she has put me

Into a sweat, and I do more than half

Believe she is a witch, or worse, in a melancholy humor; must I do something
to endanger my neck? unth? I shall put my self into a desperate melancholy
with thinking on it; I will be mercy, it is time to laugh and sing, thoughts do
not vex me to a new tune, there is no way but to a Tavern, I Will seek out company.

Love by your leave a while, and lazy folly,
Sack is the Antidote to melancholy.

Exit. Act. III. Scaena. I.
Enter Simpleton, Mother (in riding clothes) Mrs. Voluble, fames. Moth. I Have
obeyed you son, but I shall never sadge with these things you talk of.


Simp. Then you are an ass, every child can do it.


Moth. I, if I had been a Gentlewoman of a child, much might ha been done.


Vol. Alas after a little time, you will take pride every day of your self; I
wonder this wench comes not! what? your son has a care of you, and it is never
too late to learn to be a Lady; this maid I commend to you, is a very rare
dresser to a pin, and will keep your linen with all variety of sweet bags
and powders, that can be imagined; and for your rich gowns, she will preserve
'em with the new fashion-sereclothes, and make them outlast Egyptian bodies.


Ja. But must my old Mistress be a Lady? that will be fine in faith.


Simp. The Taylour has taken measure for a Lady I am sure, and three or four
yards of Satin, more than will serve for a Gentlewoman.


Ja. Then she mun be kirstned, and called Madam.


Simp. Peace and harken to my Landlady.


Vol. Besides she has the rarest receipts to destroy moathes, and such a
sovereign medicine against fleas, that your maids need never to squeak as if
they were ravished, peeping into their smocks before they go to bed.


Mo. That will be fine.


Vol. The weneh I tell you on, knows how to consume Corns too, and for
fidelity about your box of teeth, false hair, your glass eye. --


Simp. My Mother has two eyes of her own, but that one squints.


Vol. Then for all manner of Caudles, Aleberries, Possets, and preserves in all
kinds, and should you lie in this maid will be the most diligent creature about
warming of clothes, and for brothes and gellies most excellent, and for all
strengthners of nature; then if any of your women be to apt to conceive any
thing that is ill, she has her drinks of retention, and expulsion -- but Madam


Simp. She is no Lady yet.!


Vol. Sir I speak what I foresee, and therefore among our selves, Madam again,
this maid is very discreet, you will know what that means, not troublesome when
your Ladyship would be private, nor suffer any else to trouble you, and beside
she will never be in love, which is no small matter for a waiting woman; she is
here already -- Enter Nice. Mrs. Nice you are fortunate to be recommended, to
attend this, (but a Gentlewoman yet.).


Moth. She is too fine.


Simp. Hold your prating, and hear my Landlady, have not you clothes to come
home?


Nice. I shall think my stars have been careful of me, if I may have the
happiness to show my duty to so noble a Lady.


Moth. She calls me Lady too.


Simp. They know what will become on you.


Moth. Oh that I could speak so gainely; I am but new come out of the Country,
but if you please to be as good as your word, I will do the best I can, to be
thankful, as they say.


Simp. My mothers very raw, you must coddle her, you will have but a foul hand
with her, do you think she will ever come to any good? the truth is, I am
ashamed on her, and therefore be not a known that she is my mother, till you
have disciplined her, she must live very privately.


Vol. How shall her name, person and estate be published? do not you mean to
have her a Lady?


Ja. By any means sir, and let me be one of her Gentlemen.


Vol. I have it; do you observe the maid I commended to her? She is a
Gentlewoman always bred among Ladies, and knows how to talk, and carry her
self, before any Knight or Lord in the Court: What, if for the more expedite
way to your mothers instructions this wench should take upon her sometime to be
her Mistress, and in her name, before strangers, exercise some pride and
courtship? it is a nearer way by example than precept to arive at any thing; and
by observing her Fashion, Garb, and Language, your mother may be sooner ripe
for a Ladyship by at least two months, beside all the rules she may receive
from us in private.


Simp. Admirable! My mother is a towardly old woman.


Vol. Old? you do not know how painting may transform Age; and the wench is
not so young as she seems; howsoever this will be only to strangers, and you
may with more reputation own her for your mother among Gallants, it is but
saying she was married at twelve, and you pop'd into the world before thirteen.


Simp. I will leave her to your tuition, and this Gentlewomans education.


Vol. Then it is thus Madam, come hither Nice.


Simp. James, thou shall wait upon me to my Mistress when thou have better
clothes.


Ia. I have a new suite coming up from top to toe.


Simp. I Will never live in the Country again, such another clod was I when I came
to London; mother you must be dutiful, it is for your own good; but do you
hear Landlady, have you spoke the powerful word to my Mistress? Shall I have
her from Newman?


Vol. I have read his destiny, and if things hit with his credulous nature, he
will make himself incapable of her affection; you are the next in preferment,
never fear it, and leave your mother to our method and government, we will
both edify, and Ladifie her.


Simp. With all my heart: buoy Lady mother.


Vol. If please you we will withdraw; you must be secret James. Exeunt.


Enter Manly (in Leisters habit) the two Ieerers meet him. 1 Ieer: What have we
here?


2 Ieer. The Ghost of Leister?


1 Ieer. Thus I have seen him painted,
It Is some humorous Gentleman.

2 Ieer. A proper fellow?


Man. It is not dark enough; how they gape at me?


1 Ieer. Let Us make sport with him, he shows admirably by twilight, he has not
traveled far sure; such a shape would get money in Bartholmew Fair.


2 Ieer. Are you a high German sir?


1 Ieer. Yes, it is a Fencer; did you not hear of a Swisse that came over to be
beaten at eight several weapons?


2 Ieer. By your favor sir, no, it is no high German, those breeches are not
worn in Switzerland, there is something of the codpiece --


1 Ieer. It Is not His Majesty's Operatour for the Teeth, that hangs about
Fleet-bridge.


2 Ieer. He Is not so hansome.


1 Ieer. Were not you one of the brothers that guarded the Dyall at Bow Church,
and used to put Cheapside in mind of their quarters?


2 Ieer. No, he wants a Pollaxe; do you think he came not off some Conduit?


1 Ieer. I am sure he came not off of the saltseller, He is a size too tall.


Man. These rogues will draw a Regiment of Prentices about me presently, and
then shall I be apprehended for some sea monster, and thrown into the Thames at
the next Stairs, to show their worships how well I can swim -- have you any
thing to say to me?


2 Jeer. It Is English that he speaks, he is one of us.


Man. I am one that will venture to beat you both in the same language, if you
leave me not the sooner.


1 Jeer. It Is some that skulkes in this disguise for debt; we will say we are
Officers, and pretend to arrest him.


Man. Nay then have at you bandogs --

Enter Newman, and Gentlemen, (their swords drawn.) A reskue?


2 Ieer. Hold.


New. Down with the Bayliffes, arrest a Gentleman in the Kings high way -- Ex.
Manly


Gent. So, so, he is escaped. Ex. Gent.


New. You cursed tadpoles, cannot a Gentleman walk in the streets, but such
Tenterhookes must catch him by the cloak?


1 Ieer. Noble Master Newman, we are your servants; do not you know us? we are
no officers.


New. Ha? If my optics err not, I have read
Each mystic line within your brows,
Ye shall both --

1 Ieer. Have our skins cut into measures.


New. To the Tavern with me.


2 Jeer. With all our hearts.


New. We will be drunk together.


Both. You shall command us..


New. At my new Tavern where the wine shall flow as at a Coronation; fifty
Fiddles, and a noise of Trumpets come along with me; you two shall send your
tickets out for wenches.


1 Ieer. Of all complexions, and degrees, from the Madam Alamode, to the humble
Wastcoteere. Exeunt.


Enter Formal, and Lucy. For. I beseech you Mrs Lucy make not me the Author, I
affect Mr Newman, but this I received from good intelligence.


Lu. I am miserable; I did not think his nature could degenerate into so wild a
change, it is some witchcraft, I must grieve for him though I dare not show it.


Fo. There is a report, I would be loath you should name me in it, but they
confidently say; I dare not justify upon my knowledge, that he has killed --


Lu. Good heaven defend; then I am more undone.


For. Nay, these are the fruits of wine and surfets; I did not see him bleed,
but I heard it from a man of quality, and one that had been Collector in the
Parish, who told me for certain that Mr Newman did kill him.


Lu. Whom? my afflicted heart.


For. It was an Ossicer that was slain.


Lu. The more unpardonable. -- Where?


For. In the Parish of Alhallowes Barking, the Bell man never dawnd since,
coming drunk out of a Tavern at twelve -- he made no more ado -- there was
not such another dog within the Walls; it waited upon the foresaid Bell-man a
nights in His Majesty's service, to waken the Parish, and all day was hired out
by a Blind-man, that begged, with a Bell about his neck.


Lu. Is that all the murder he has committed?


For. All? you do not consider the blind Beggar that is undon by it, or who shall
carry the Lantern at midnight, to light Gentlemen to the best Ale, and a
Bawdy House; but for my part I Will be no evidence, if the City will suffer such
an injustice within their VValls I can be silent, and think.


Lu. Would this were all the danger, but I sear since he took up this
rudeness and strange carriage he may deserve more sorrow.


For. I love not to meddle in other men's affairs, but I know something.


Lu. I prithee tell me all.


For. The Tavern he frequents he has made his Pheater at his own charge to act
intemperance; over the great Room be uses to be drunk in, they say, he has
built a heaven, a Players heaven, and thence a Throne's let down, in which,
well heated, successively they are drawn up to the clouds to drink their
Mistress health, while the mad mortals adore their God of Grape, and gaping look
like earth that is chap'd with heat, although before within three minutes they
were drenched.


Lu. Do know that place?


For. You shall excuse me, I know nothing.


Lu. Prithee be not so cautious, I am his friend, and pity him; if for my sake
thou woo't but find him out, and tell him I desire to change but a few words,
trust me, I may amply requite this service.


For. You must then keep secret what I undertake, I Will do it. Be cautious to whom
you speak, we must be circumspect. I will go off invisible. Exit.


Enter Galliard. Lu. Monsieur Galliard, my Lady expects you.


Gal. Begar me no like a dat reverence, me vil change a dat:


Lu. It Is the French fashion as you taught Me Monsieur.


Gal. Ouy, it is de French fashion, but de French fashion is always to change,
and dis reverence displease a me very mush, because you go back, back vid your
buttock, as if some vod take you by dat, to vat me vil give a no name.


Enter Sir William, and Simpleton. Sr Will. Monsieur Galliard my Lady will be
here presently.


Simp. Sweet Mrs Lucie.


Gal. Dat de reverence is no good of de man, me must change dat too; by me trot
me doubt dat dis great business vil almost break a my brain, dis great varke,
and before a mask of de King and de Queen, me can eat a no meat, no drink,
no sleep, and me grow so very a lean, vid de contemplation, a so much, by my
trot de privy counsel is no so much troubled as me be vid dis, oh, le Diable!
deirs is noting, dey sit all the vile dey do deir business, me bissey bo'te
head, and de foot cap a pie, in de french tune, and dat is great matre begar.


Sir Will. You esteem it highly Mounsieur.


Gal. Me tell you, and me tell you no tale, it is great matre to make a de Lor,
to make a de Lady, to make a de Gentleman, to make a de Gentilvoman, and de
autre man to dance, and to make a de good reverence, for begar dat vil make a
de King, de great kin in de varle.


Sir Will. How can that be Sir?


Gal. Me tell you, ven dey are so bissey, to learn a de dance, dey vil never
tinke of de Rebellion, and den de reverence is obedience to Monarchy, and begar
obedience is ale de ting in de varke.


Sir VVil. I Will swear your state affairs ly in your foot, and you are wifer
there, than some heads are, and may be a president for after ages; but what
music would you govern the people by?


Gal. Begar by de best french fidles can be got?


Sir VVil. What think you of an Irish harp, a state organ, or a pastionate
voice to a lovers lute?


Gal. Des dull tings make a de men melancholique, and den dey tinke on de
Devil, and de treason, and do any ting dat is no good, but begar des french
fidles do fidle all deis tings out of deir head, vid such a Jearke, as ma foy
make a them so fantastical, and make a them as good subject, as any is in de
France begar.


Luc. I must wait upon my Mother.


Simp. She will be here immmediately. --

Exit Lucy. She is not right yet.


Gal. Here be one of my coliers, Mounsieur Simplaton, say you no dat de french
fidle make a de brave government in de varle?


Simp. I say any thing becomes a Gentleman.


Gal. Observe you dat? he have been but two are mont and he say any thing, dat
is very brave? he have de grand understanding in de foot; tell a me, ven you
hear a de little fidell, vat is your tinke? is your head no free from de
treason, and plot of de rebel, as your leg? begar you no stand upon de ground
for Joy of de Coran, de Cerebran, de Marquess, de Mountague, ha!


Enter Lady Beaufield and Lucy. Sir VVil. My Lady.


Gal. Me be your humble servant Madam, and stay one two tree hour.


Beau. I am now ready for you Mounsieur, come Lucy the practice of the last he
taught us.


Lady and Lucy dance, Mounsieur singing, and correcting them in tune. Enter
Servant. Ser. The Gentleman you expect Sir William is come.


Sir Will. Madam prepare your self for mirth, 'twill be a sight beyond the
pageants.


Beau. We Will not be seen at first, Lucy withdraw. -- Exit Lady and Lucy.


Flourish. -- Enter Manly (habited) Man. What means this flourish? have you a
play in hand?


Sir VVil. To bid your excellence welcome to this lodging.
Fore Jove he looks prodigiously, vouchsafe
Us the honor of your hand.

Man. Ha!


Enter Lady and Lucy. Gal. Vat Antic be dis?


Simp. One of the supporters of the Brewers Arms.


Beau. Ha, ha, ha, does he take upon him to be a Prince too, and will he speak?


Sir VVil. These Ladies have ambition to kiss your hand, and have a great
desire to know, how fares the camp at Tilbury, and please your Excellency.


Beau. It Is one of Arthurs Knights of the round Table.


Sir Will. With his circular sippets; would you think that a pigmy poisoned
should swell thus?


Man. I am betrayed, there is no retreat with honor, I must be confident.


Sir Will. Laugh and Jeere him hansomely.


Simp. Oh that the Major, and the Minor had been here now, they would teeze him
in faith, Mounsieur, ask that Maypole and he can dance.


Gal. Plait il Mounsieur? a la Galiard, de Goran, la Princess, le Buckingham,
heigh!


Man. Put up your rosin, and your catsguts presently and be gone, or I shall
find a grave for you in the pocket of my sleeve, and this shall be your winding
sheet.


Gal. Me no play dat lesson, pocket de sleeve, dat is no tune de France, poket,
le grand pock: -- (Manly offers to strike him) pardonne moy Mounsieur: me put
up my fidell and be gone, adieu Madam, Serviteur gentilhomes; pocket de sleeve?
Exit.


Man. But I must not seem angry, Lady, my business is to you.


Beau. Business to me?


Man. I am bold to present a suit to you, I confess it was not made by a
French Tailor, I can make a leg and kiss my hand too after the fashion of my
clothes, this served in those honest days, when Knights were Gentlemen, and
proper men took the walls of dwarfes; here is a belly piece, that looks like
armor, with what comeliness may a man unbutton his dublet, when he seems to
take the wall to make urine? your sleeve so near your nose, with a
handkerchiefe, which I take out thus with a grace, after Emunction, I put up
again, with the corianders hanging out, Geometrical breeches in several
slises, in which a man is not ashamed of his thighs, nor hides his bow legs,
which at the bottom surrounded with points make him look like a roughsooted
Pigeon, these things were worn when men of honor flourished, that tamed the
wealth of Spain, set up the States, helped the French King, and brought
Rebellion to reason Gentlemen.


Simp. So they do now.


Man. Peace pepper corn; and all this at less charge than a masque comes to
now, with the rare and new invention of hobbiehorses; which of our two habits
(be you Lady, but the indifferent Judge, and squint not,) is the more grave and
manly, his lean upper chinne, or this goodly promontory? my Trunkes with a
round walk paved with gold and silver, or your trouses, cut close to your
dock, and drawn on with a screw? in which if you venture but half a crown,
looks like a poltisse, or a swelling in the groine; your habit is
fantastical as the time, you squirt into your dublet, which you wear so
careless as you had not buttoned it since you came from a bawdy house, where
men of this garb, coming from the stews, march with that gravity as they came
from a conventicle, so soherly they would carry it.


Sir Will. I see whoring was equal in all times, only the carrying of it.


Man. Why that is all?


Sir Will. But surely I do wonder, how my Grandfather could kiss my
Grandmother, or embrace in that strange apparel.


Man. They made a shift Knight, or else your wise worship had not been here;
but that I want so much beard, I could show how your Grandfather stroak'd his
three or four handful of hair, to the terror no doubt of the standers by,
and could stab I warrant you, with his two handed beard then, as well as you
with your dagger beard now. It was never a good time since these clothes went
out of fashion; oh, those honorable days and persons!


Sir Will. Is It possible?


Beau. As how?


Sir VVil. I pray enlarge your self.


Man. To have seen but a St. Georges feast then.


Sir Will. Why, what difference sir?


Man. When they were installed, to see the twenty mile to Windsor strow'd with
blewcoates, feathers and cognizances, as they do country towns with boughs,
and flowers for Princes Entries, and not to go privately in a coach, with a
page and a barber to cut off charges.


Simp. How do you like this Gentleman, Is It not a pretty humor?


Man. Then you should have the best knight of the Country, with the ragged
staff on their sleeves.

The Bear, the Boar, and Talbot with his tuskish white,
Oh so sore that he would bite,
The Talbot with his Tuskish white
Soudledum Soudledum;
The Talbot with his Tuskish white Soudledum, bell.
The Talbott with his Tuskish white
Oh so sore that he would bite
Orebecke soudledum, sing orum bell.
Every Knight had his hundreds, and these would take up all the Tavernes in the
Town, be druoke to the honor of their Lords, and rather than not pay their
reckoning, pawn their chains, though they pawned something for them the night
before, and such merry catches then, as

Sings. The Heart loves the high wood,
The Hare loves the hill,
The Knight loved his bright sword,
And the Lady loved her will.

Beau. So the Ladies do still.


Man. It may be so, but for your Knights bright Sword it is at pawn, or at home
in his Armory; then we had, God bless the Duke of Norfolk, there was a jest,
and another Song.

The great Choe bent,
The little Choe bent,
Sir Piercy leigh under the line;
God bless the good Earl of Shrewsbury
For he is a good friend of mine.

Sr Will. He Is very confident.


Beau. Alas, he is compelled to it.


Simp. How do you like this Mrs Lucy, is he not a pretty ill-favored Gentleman
in this habit?


Lucy. He sings rarely.


Sr Will. No question he can dance too, in that disguise he looks like famous
Cardell the dancing. Master in Queen Elizabeth's time, I have seen his Picture.


Man. And he with your Worships favor, was held a wise man, and for his
gravity he might have been Treasurer, he went with that settled and solid
Pian-piano.


Sr Will. And when he danced a measure, you should have had him with his Rapier,
short Cloak, his black Cap, and his white Feather, his single and double, both
backward and forward, with that excellency --


Man. And now he must be in Cuerpo, or like a fellow on the ropes, or a Tumbler
when he shoots his body through a hoop; there was music then, and a Heaven and
Earth, beyond your braules, or your Mountague, with a la, la, la, like a
Bachanalian dancing the Spanish Morisce, with knackers at his fingers.


Sr Will. It must needs be a rare sight.


Man. He played to himself on a grave Lute, or a modest Citterne, with a
politic quill, far beyond your Geofrey fiddle, or your French kit, that looks
like a broken faggot stick, at the biggest, and sounds as if it had got the
French disease, when it snivels out a Coranto, or so hoarse with a cold, as if
some great base Fiddle had filenc'd it.


Sr Will. What misery is it, the Monsieur is gone now? here had been a French
Duel.


Man. But had you seen my Lord Lofty dance the Galliard, with such capers,
such half capers, such turns o'th toe, and above ground, you would have sworn
'em sound for nine Generations, and for Lavaltoes, La, la, la, etc. and then
the Lady.


Beau. How did he use her?


Man. With wonderful skill, he put his right arm about her, and took her lest
hand in his, and then he did so touze her with his right thigh and leg, and
list her up so high, and so fast, and so round --


Sr Will. As what I pray, be courteous.


Man. Marry as soon as he had ended his dance she would lie down as dead as a
swing'd chicken, with the head under the wing, so dissie was she, and so out of
breath; and all these wonders were extant Knight when this old Cap was new.


Sr Will. Is not this very fine sport Madam?


Beau. Sir, you are welcome; pray excuse me, if being prepared for some folly,
your garb and person seemed at first ridiculous; you have changed my opinion,
and there wants but such a noble leader to reduce, and make this habit
fashionable; it shows a proper man, and if I were worthy to advise, or could
lay an obligation upon you, I should take it for an honor if you would often
visit me in these ornaments, I like 'em infinitely, and the Wearer shall be
ever welcome; please you we will walk and talk a turn in the Gallery.


Man. You too much grace me Madam.


(Ex. Lady, and Manly. Sr Will. How Is this?
I have wound my self into a pretty business,
She neglects me.

Simp. In my judgment it is an indifferent pretty fellow, but that his clothes
are out of fashion.


Lu. They are most becoming; I do not like your new fantastical shapes, that
transform a man from his masculine aspect; you appear to me like a Jackanaps;
there is a waste, and a Long lane cut close to your hanches. Exit.


Simp. Hum! she takes after the old one, I will try and shift my self, if the
mother be taken with the habit in Qu. Elizabeth's days, why may not the
daughter affect that in K. Jameses, and so the humor run in a blood? I am
resolved; she loves singing too, I am furnish' with Ballads, of my conscience
this will do it; I Will fit her with a fashion, and about it presently. Exit.


Enter Beausield, and Manly. Sr Will. They are here again, and laugh at me: How
familiar the Turtles are?


Man. Ha, ha, ha.


Bea. We Will taste some air in the garden, ha, ha, ha.


(Ex. Lady, Manly. Sr Will. So, so, if I did love this widow for her self, what
a case were I in? but I must not sit down thus, and something must be thought
on for my honor. Exeunt.


Act. IIII. Scaene I.
Enter Mistress Voluble, and Nice, (having a Jewel.) Vol. SO, so, thou do
carry it excellently, it spreads like a Proclamation, what a rich widow lies
at my house, her wealth, and wit, must be exercised.


Ni. She must not appear to be herself yet but in private, and the Chiause her
Son has bestowed this Jewel upon me for expedition, for he dares not yet
acknowledge her; she wonders at herself now she is painted, and swears in her
conscience she looks by her glass like one of four and twenty, and simpers,
and licks her leatherne lips as she had eaten Marmalade.


Vol. Sir William has heard of her, and (upon some affront, as I conjecture
received from my Lady) has writ to me, and articled already to dispose her
affections, I expect him every minute.


Ni. He will discover us.


Vol. He shall never see thee act her part.


Ni. Do you think he can affect her?


Vol. Courtiers do not marry into the City for love, and this Farmers wife has
wealth enough to Enter Simpleton, and James, (with his clothes.) buy a
Ladyship; here is the gull, away and be diligent. Exit Nice.


Ja. They Will fit you as well as my self for whom they were made in the Country.


Vol. How now sir, preparing for a race?


Simp. Is no body else with you? Do not enquire what stratagem is in hand,
there be more ways to catch a Mistresses heart; how does my mother?


Vol. She is pretty apt for one of her years: I can tell you news, there is a
Knight about her already.


Simp. She shall have him.


Vol. Not with your favor if a greater person Interpose, I have so much care
of her honor, now she is my charge.


Enter Nice. Ni. Mistress Voluble, here is a Footman, laced all over, enquires
for you, he serves a French Lord, he says he must needs speak with you, he has
a letter. Exit.


Vol. What if this Lord come hither for the same purpose?


Simp. It Is too much happiness; I Will not be seen thus, nor let my Mother appear
in her roughcast, use the Footman kindly, if his message concern us, away --
Exit Vol.

And will this Fashion become me, do think? I prithee tell me some old
stories in to'ther reign, thou can talk and make me ready too.


Ja. Ah sir, I knew a time, when two and twenyeares was but a merry Christmas,
nothing but Ambassadors, Masks, Plays, Entertainements, Hawking, Hunting,
Winter and Summer, New Market and Roiston mourn now, ha! had you seen the
Court fox'd upon Gouries night, and the Gunpouder treason began then; oh we had
rare sport, and then every body was knighted, they hardly lest a Gentleman in
those days; and afterward they got a trick of making Lords.


Simp. For what?


Ja. I know not that, but they hardly left a Knight, man, woman, and child
were made right honorable.


Simp. Right honorable, right worshipful, and well beloved, I have heard that
in the Countr^y.


Ja. But the fashion of welbeloved is left off, for we do not now love one
another.


Simp. But had you no misfortunes?


Ja. Faith Sir, a rainy day was the worst, and that had but made the ground
more soluble the next day for hunting.


Simp. No complaints James?


Ja. Oh yes sir! I hard a Gentleman complain mightily that he had lost the
highest flying tassell gentle, that ever was seen, another that he had pricked
his gray Nag, that was an excellent buckhunter; a third, that he had fretish'd
his best hound, Beauty, and that Lilly was killed at a Bay a stag-hunting, it
had almost cost the Genleman his life.


Simp. And what else James?


Ja. By my troth sir, a Gentleman waiter, that shall be namelesse, removing a
pasty of Venison, spilt it all, on a new satin doublet, and spoiled it
utterly, there was such laughing, but his Master being gracious gave him a suit
for his doublet, I think it was a Knight; but the Knight market is risen now.


Simp. I and the Lord Market too, James.


Ja. And please your worship, they say, the Herald would not make a Gentleman
now, under ten pound.


Simp. Oh yes, they will take reason to my knowledge, and give the prettiest
fantastical arms, I have all the colors of the Rainebow in my new coat,
every fool may be a Gentleman of three generations now.


Ja. I can derive my self knave three descents under your ancesters.


Simp. Then thy children may write themselves knaves of blood, take that upon
my Heraldry; but had not you brave songs then James?


Ja. In those days was the quintessence of ballads, you went to school with
'em, I remember and learned no other books, I shall never forget the Lord of
Lornes son in Scotland and the false steward, to the tune of green sleeves,
those were the days indeed, oh there was then such a company for dancing
singing and fooling, I do not mean the wits, for sooling is another thing
clear from it; It does so bravely in company, when there is a great many that
care not for wit, and pleases better than all the wit in the world; and then
there was such brave jeasts, at the death of a Stag, and Buck; to throw blood
up and down, upon folks faces; the very Footn en and Pages understood those
Jeasts then; there was a time; and the Landerers were as well Employed in a
progress then as now, and the Surgeons got as much by 'em too; oh, I shall
never forget those times.


Simp. So, so, how do I look in this transformation? will any body know me
do think? Mistress Lucy, shall have the first sight of my shape; some body is
gone into the dining room, let us out at the back door James. Exeunt.


(Enter Nice. (dressing the Mother, painted) (at another Door) Mrs. Voluble.
Vol. It Is well done Nice to be careful about your Mistress.


Ni. I am giving her some instructions about dressing, and was saying, she must
not go above once to court in black, it would be very scandalous without
intermixing colors, in her petticote, sleeves, and stomacher, and the colors
now in fashion are blew, pincke, and incarnadine, yellow is much worn too.


Vol. But it is very material, what lace you will choose, as silver and gold for
blew, (Tha^'s a court maxim) and plain silver for incarnadine, single or mixed
will serve for pincke color.


Moth. I shall never remember all this.


Vol. It is your Gentlewomans duty to remember.


Ni. Let me alone Madam. When you will keep house, a long handkercheife, or a
round one with a quaife tied under your chin, and a little hair curled, with a
black taffa ta hood, or white sarfenet.


Vol. When you pretend to have a cold, you must show no hair, but wear a
forehead cloth, with a pinner over that, these clothes are much worn by old
Ladies, with which they bind down a piece of sea recloth upon their forehead,
to keep wrinckles in obedience. How is her hair?


Ni. That little that she has is crazie.


Vol. She has enough to curle, and you have the discretion to know what
proportion is to be lest out, according to the latitude of her face; and to be
curled with pinnes and orrice powder, which will neither hurt nor break it,
and then in the Morning to let the comb pass through it once, and open it,
between a curle and a freeze, and draw up some of the curles with a bodkin
within the other hair.


Moth. My hair will never endure all this.


Vol. You must endure more, if you mean to be a Lady of fashion, and
attractive; where be the pendants?


Ni. Must she not wear a Feather?


Vol. Not without a diamond bodkin; have you no Jewels?


Moth. Yes, In the knot of my handkerchiefe.


Vol. Oh fie, you must buy a Cabinet. What Is here? a Toad stone, two Turkies,
six thumbrings, three Aldermens seals, five Gemmals, and four Deaths-heads;
these are Alehouse ornaments -- Yet these Diamonds are tolerable, and these
Pearls will make a half Chain.


Ni. Would she were hanged in the fellow, condition we had the rest.


Vol. They must be changd, but Nice may wear these til you get new, they will
serve to practice in. (Knock within.


Ni. There Is a Coach at door.


Vol. I Will pawn my ability the French Lord, it is about the time I gave
directions to his Footman; for his entertainment, you must take upon you the
rich widow, and be you careful to observe Mrs Nices Language, garb, and
behavior, to men of his quality; your Rings and Jewels upon her will credit
the cause, and person he comes to visit, which is your self, but under a veil.
I Will prepare his Lordship. Exit.


Ni. This is all for your instruction; these rings fit me excellent well, and
hereaster you may take pride upon you by my example.


Mo. I hope I shall learn in time; but I shall be more than a Lady if I marry
with a Lord.


Ni. Alas, I am but the Lady in the Play.


Mo. Now you put me in mind, I have seen pretty harlotry Ladies in a Country
Play, so proud, and so knavish, one would have sworn they had been women indeed.


Enter Galliard, and Voluble. Ni. He Is here, you must be modest, and observe
your distance now; Is this the Lord? He looks like an overgrown Monkey.


Mo. What pretty foolish things some of these young Lords are?


Vol. Your Lordship is bountiful; that is she whom fame has delivered to you;
your honor may advance.


Gal. Begar dis rish viddow look young as my self.


Vol If my eyes be not in a mist this is the French Dancer.


Gal. Vat is your name?


Vol. He means to catechize her.


Mo. I shall be happy if your Lordship please to own me by the title of your
servant.


Vol. You must learn to complement thus -- It Is Galliard sure.


Gal. She kiss very vel begar, she have de Alamode touch of de lip ma foy; can
you dance Madam?


Vol. I am now confirmed.


Mo. Will he kiss me too?


Gal. Vat is she?


Ni. A Gentlewoman that attends me for the present.


Gal. Dat is a de reverence for de devil, she look like a de wihch Madam, but
me tell you Madam, for me love you very mush in the little time, as any man in
de varle; me be French Lor, and me have lodging in de autre street, Duke de
Memorency my kinsman, and two tree hundred great Lors have lose deir head in
France begar for no matre, and me fly to Englan to save a me neck by me trot.


Ni. Were you guilty of any treason?


Gal No more begar than your little self.


Ni. What is your estate?


Gal. Begar very grand estate in Orleance, me have two tree Lettre from de
Cardinal, and he write a me, dat de King send for me to kiss his hand: Now as
me vas in de resolution to take a de ship for France, me hear of you Madam in
de Strand, and me very glad to marry you before me go presently.


Ni. Your Lordship is very brief, but I find not my self inclined to cross
the Seas.


Mo. The Sea, mary shield, I Will not see the salt water for any Lord in
Christendom, I, I Will rather be no Lady.


Ni. Who, how now insolence, how dare you interpose?


Vol. Will you be ridiculous, and betray your self now?


Gal. Begar you have de Gypsey complexion, and look like de sign of-de Robin
Hood and maid a Marian.


Mo. Robin Hood in thy face, does he maid a Marian me?


Ni. She is not worth your Lordships passion, I shall teach you better manners.


Gal. Begar you shall have mush need of dat.


Ni. My Lord, you did ask me if I could dance.


Vol. The wench has found him.


Gal. Dear is noting in de varle for de Lady, like a de understanding in de
foot.


Ni. I cannot praise my own ability, but I admire the excellency of other
Ladies, and should be fortunate to meet with some Master in thafaculty, that
would Instruct, and exercise me in private.


Gal. Me love you de bettre for da^, begar no body exercise you in private but
my self, me teach you Alamode de Court dance, hold up your litel fingre you
command a my foot.


Ni. Your Lordship is too humble, it is an office would become one that is
mercenary; I affect dancing infinitely, oh that we had but some music here;
la, la, ra. (She sings, Gal. draws out his Fiddle.


Vol. ^is coming out.


Mo. What Is that a bedstaffe?


Vol. It is a French pocket-pistoll.


Mo. Will he shoot it often here? I could never endure a gun. Exit.


Gal Forboon, brave, ah, dat is like a de Princess, Allez.


N^ You shall not be so public in your graces to me; conceal your Fiddle
tillsome private oppo^runity.


Gal. Me understand.


Vol. How does your Lordship like her? You have her in an excellent humor.


Gal. Kiss a me madam -- hah? it is heaven? de Poet talk of de Nectar, begar
here is it; me never drink de^vine blanke or de Claret, so me have but two tree
drop divine from your lip -- Metresse speak a for me.


Ni. The fool is extasied; in his worst condition he will serve for a husband;
how he dances in a Net?


Vol. He has money, and a Trade, he will serve wench.


Gal. If me get dis rish widow, me cozen 'em both begar.


Ni. Do you think he loves me indeed. Ex. Vol.


Gal. You no tinke madam dat me be so hot in love, and do burn, dat my reine a
do melt, as me vere in de oven, me need a go into de river presantly to cool
and vater my heart, vere is de Mistress de la Maison? Gone? dat is vel, dear
is no honor like a dat, as you take a de litel air in my Coach.


Ni. I have not been abroad to day, but I dare trust my self with your Lordship.


Gal. Oh Madam, a vostre service, now if me get a de Priest all is perfect.


Enter Sir William, and Voluble. Sr Will. Be all these Trunkes hers?


Vol. We ha not stowage enough for half, she is infinitely rich.


Sr Will. Have thou prepared her?


Vol. I find her very apt, it is her only ambition to be a Lady, a French Lord
has her in chase, but I have delivered your character, and what privilege she
may have by charter of her Knight.


Sr Will. I long to see her, is she handsome?


Vol. What she wants in beauty and breeding, she has in estate Sir.


Sr Will. That, that is enough, I can have beauty in other places, and will
exceed what I conditioned for, if I prosper. I will have this Widow in spite.


Vol. How Sir William?


Sr Will. To spite the Lady Beaufield, and her Magog that affronted me; I
would lose no opportunity, a widow must be taken in the pick; say I am come and
commend me to the heavens, I Will make all good.


Vol. To the heavens? will you dye before her?


Sr Will. For that we must take our chance; thou shall be sure of a good lease
for thy life, and destiny agree upon us afterward.


Vol. Shall I direct you?


Sr Will. Shall be my evening, and my morning star. Exeunt.


Enter Lucy, and Barbara. Bar. You too much afflict your self Mistress Lucy,
it is but some humor he put on to try the strength of your affection.


Lu. He is lost; not for my sake, but for his own I pity him, and I am
confident, if I were so happy to speak with him again, I should prevail to win
him to his first and noble temper; my end being so just, I could dispense with
modesty to find him out, and perfect the act of charity.


Bar. You have imployd Formoll, from whom you may expect to hear such an
account, as may dry up your sorrows.


Enter Beaufield, and Manly. Beau. I see Sir you preserve your confidence.


Man. I dare be just in your commands, and in a service you but smile upon,
despise the censure of the world.


Beau. Saw you not the Knight since?


Man. The sweet hopes that he swallowed, to prepare me a ridiculous object to
you Madam, was gall upon his stomach, when he found you had mercy on my
confidence; he dares not converse with so unlick'd a bear, as this shape must
present Enter Simpleton, and James. his critical eye sight. What Is here? one
sent to affront me?


Simp. When Robin came to Nottingham dery, dery down,
His dinner all for to dine:
There met him fifteen ^olly Foresters,
Were drinking Ale, and Wine, hey down.
Madam your most humble servant; there be other men, and manners, and garbes as
fashionable in the eyes of discreet Ladies.


Man. Have we got Adam Bell, and Clim o'th Clough?


Ja. We be three, good Mr William of Cloudesly.


Man. It Is so.


Simp. And how, and how show matters Mistress Lucy? every man's Cap is not made
of the same matter.

Sing. Have you felt the wool of Beaver?

Man. -- Or sheep down ever?

Sim. -- Have you smelt of the bud of the Rose?

Man. -- In his pudding hose.

Sim. -- Or have tasted the bag of the Be?
Oh so fine!

Man. -- Oh so fond!

Sim. -- Oh so brave!

Man. -- Such a knave!

Sim. -- Such a knave is he.

(Manly offers to draw. Beau. Sir, this is most uncivil, and your rashness,
beside the forfeit of your own discretion, will lay an imputation to wound my
fame; within my presence, and beneath my roof, which should protect all
strangers, to affront a Gentleman that visits me --


Man. How Is this?


Beau. Be bold sir, and presume you have my favor, you never appeared handsome
till this minute; bear up, your mirth becomes you rarely.


Simp. Dos't isaith?


Lu. What does my mother mean?


Simp. Spit of thy hand, and clap me oth' shoulder James, the widow her self
is in love with me.

Sings. She cast an eye on little Musgrave
As bright as the summers sun.
I may turn over the Daughtet to thee.


Ja. I would I had her in an Embroiderd clout.


Man. Sure my Lady is but in jest.

Sings. Show me said he whose men ye be
That hunt so boldly here,
That without my consent do chase
And kill my follow Dear. --

Ja. His follow Dear?


Simp. Sings Ere thus I will out braved be
One of us two shall dye,
I know thee well an Earl thou art,
Lord Percy, so am I.

Ja. Thou Douglas?


Man. This Lady has but fooled me all this while; make much of your new Antic
Madam, I can shift into my self again, and if that thing were worth my anger,
or my envy, beat him; you have a pretty humor, cherish it, and that William
of the Wispe, till I visit you again. -- Exit


Beau. The Gentleman is jealous.


Simp. I protest Madam if it had hot been not your sake, and that it had been
pity to have spilt any blood, in your Dining room, I would ha done something


Ja. In his breeches.


Simp. But I shall report your nobleness abroad.


Beau. Do not play the fool to much, I am out of the humor to laugh at you;
he cannot leave me thus. -- Exit Beau.


Ja. This was no trick to catch the old one.


Lu. How came you into this habit Simpleton?


Simp. By reading Ovids Metamorphosis, and to show the variety of my wit.


Luc. Let me entreat you hold your feet together, -- now you put me mind of a
Smiths bellows, your body is not all of a piece sure, but several limbs
thrust into several pudding bags, you would show terrible to the crows in a
wheat field, you are no living creature.


Simp. Persuade me to that, am I not sensible?


Luc. He that does that cure upon you, will deserve a chronicle; so desiring
you would take home your flaile there, for here is like to be no thrashing
work, I commit you to the Barn, where like another Orpheus, you will draw the
horse, and sheep, to the melody of your voice, and ravish all the Cowes in the
Country, to hear you sing Packingtons pound. -- Exit.


Ja. She has made a coxcombe on you.


Lu. Hum? I wo'not out of the pit for all this, I have another devise, and thou
shall assist me, if that fail, I Will dye a bachelor, and make thee my heir.


Ja. I shall but pray for your death sir.


Simp. Back again, back again quoth the Pindar,
The wrong way have you go^, etc.

Exit Singing. A Table, Stools, Bottles of wine, and Glasses, set out by two
Drawers. -- then Enter Newman, the two Jeerers, Wenches, Musicians. New. So,
so, I Will dance no more, a song, lets have a song now.


1 Wen. Take heed of the old ballads, eccliped, Like Hermit poor, eyes hide my
love, or Panae in the brazen Tower.


2 Wen. Or the lamentable complaint of Ariadne, and Theseus, and the more
lamentable for being so long.


New. Do you hear Madam virtue, Lady modesty cannot you play your part?


1 Je. Not upon the violin.


2 Je. They are both for the Gambo.


New. You shall play the part of my Mistress, you must be witty then, and
extreme coy and scurvy, in your answers; go behind that hanging, I will
suppose it your chamber; now Boy the Song I made to the window, while I mustle
my self with the fiddlers, to bid my Mistrisse good morrow in the street,
observe the conjuration.


Song.
I conjure thee, I conjure thee, by thy skin that is so fair,
Thy dainty curled hair,
And thy favor and thy grace,
With the patches on thy face,
And thy hand that does invite
The cold, dullest appetite,
-- Appear appear,
Upon these terms I do invite thee,
And if thou come I will delight thee.
If not so, I do not care,
Though thy breasts be never so bare,
Roses rich, with shoe that is white,
Or thy Venus best delight,
If not touch thy softer skin
What care I for thee a pin,
Appear appear.
For to hear, and not to see
Is a dull flat history,
And to see and not to touch
If you think the last too much,
Know all woman's but one joy
If we men not them enjoy,
Appear appear.
New. She Is not awake, play a rattling tune that may startle her; where is this
whore? ha! --


1 Jer. She Is gone.


2 Jer. Vanished? so he might have sung away his lungs.


New. It may be, she is retired, for you know what Lady; come let us drink.


2 Wench. Was your Muse at all this expense to the fidles? do you write to no
other company sir?


New. Till they have my liveries; I Will maintain 'em in songs, wind up your
voice again*


Song.
Thine eyes to me like suns appear
Or brighter stars their light;
Which makes it summer all the year,
Or else a day of night:
But truly I do think they are
But eyes, and neither sun nor star.
Thy brow is as the milky way,
Whereon the gods might trace:
Thy lips Ambrosia I dare say
Or Nectar of thy face:
But to speak truly I do vow
They are but women's lips and browe.
Thy check it is a mingled bath
Of Lillyes and of Roses;
But here there is no man power has
To gather loves fresh posies:
Believe it here the flowers that bud
Are but a woman's flesh and blood.
Thy nose a promontory fair,
Thy neck a neck of land;
At natures gifts that are so rare
All men amazed do stand:
But to the cleerer judgment those
Are but a woman's neck and nose.
For four lines in passion I can dye
As is the lovers guise,
And dabble too in Poetry
Whilst love possessed, then wise
As greatest Statesmen, or as those
That know love best, yet live in Prose.
1 Jeer. The pure spirit of Sack in it.


2 Jeer. The wits Elixar.


New. No jeering Gentlemen, I shall grow loud and break the peace.


2 Wen. These Gentlemen are for nothing but song and drink, I see no market all
this while; I Will get me hence too; if please you, I Will see if I can find out my
sister. Ex. 2 Jeer.


New. There Is but one stool in the counting house, and Lady you shall stay
till she return; Gentlemen there is no life in you; I cannot do this roaring and
whoring handsomely; little thinks Lucy what Comrades I have got.


2 Wen. I have a precious confidence in you Gentlemen, to trust my single
modesty amongst so many.


New. What would you give to be ravished now? thou have an excellent
complexion for it.


2 Wen. Ravished? preserve the Gentleman's dear wits Sack I beseech thee.


1 Jeer. You would not lose by it if he ravish you.


New. another Song, and direct your voice to this Lady.


Song.
I Would have her merry, laugh, and smiles
And then look grave and sad:
In every humor but a while,
Make love as it is, that is made
I Would have your dress of sever all shapes,
Like Proteus carved, not he,
In humor a she coy Jackanapes
Then a grave Monkey be.
Discourse of all that comes to sense,
But speak none, yet still speak,
No matter here is no offense,
But to speak matter weak.
With thy soft voice sing me asleep,
Then startle me awake,
With Loves notes-passion make me weep,
Then merry for thy sake.
Enter Jeere Minor (the Song ended.) Jeer. Mi. A discovery?


New. What newfound Land?


Jeer. Mi. The Pigeon that left us has been in another room with Mr Formal
my Lady Beaufields Gentleman Usher, there he sits like the picture of a Harry
Sovereign in a chair, while she is picking on's pocket.


New. Fetch him, and his Fairy hither, but for his Mrs sake usher him with loud
music. Ex. Jeer.

We Will have some sport. (Flowrish.


Enter the two Jeerers, and Formal. New. Where Is the wench?


2 Jeer. The wench has made an escape, she had a glimpse before and suspected
me, but here is the wicked Elder.


New. What says my wise* Lu^ullus?


For. Sir, my business was to you, though I met a Remera that is already sunk,
I was sent by a Gentlewoman, but no body must know it.


New. We hear no business till he have wound up a bottle, and then he shall
have audience.


1 Jeer. That Is but your fee for entrance, your garnish only; come sir there is
no remedy.


For. I hope you will conceal it Gentlemen.

(They circle him, and sing.
Song.
Why then let us drink,
Away skurvy think,
And do it till we wink;
Which is just to be
So drunk not to see.
First Maudlin to weep,
Then after to sleep;
Why they let us drink,
And do it till we wink,
Away skurvy' think.
For. VVhar will become of me? would you and I Lady were in a back room.


New. So now speak my Lord Ambassador, I know your sovereign Lady greets us
well.


For. Alas sir, my Lady does not know of my coming; I would speak with you
from one that shall be nameless, who thinks you are a debauched Gentleman,
under the Rose, and desires to talk with you when you are sober: I would be
loath to disgrace you before this good company, neither was I willing to tell
her what I heard about your drinking and whoring.


New. To the point.


1 Jeer. I, I, to the point.


For. The principal matter then, and indeed my whole employment at this time
to you is --


New What in the name of circumspection?


For. You shall excuse me sir, filence is a virtue; but if you knew who sent me
--


Wen. He would make a costive Statesman.


For. It is sufficient one desires to speak with you, I name no time, nor
person, I know my office; Mistress Lucy is not to be named at all times.


New. Mistress Lucie, I am her servant; come drink this narrow sea to her
health, you must be drunk insallibly, I Will give a reason; I swear by Muscadell
That I do love her well; come ye Mermaids --


For. I Will do you reason then; but is this Muscadell? Mr Newman has sworn; for
my own part, Gentlemen, I desire it should go no further.


Song.
I swear by Muscadell
That I do love thee well,
And more than I can tell.
By the White, Claret, and Sack
I do love thy Black, black, black,
I do love thy black, black, black.
No Goddess amongst them all
So slender, and so tall,
And grateful too with all,
Which makes my smews to crack
For thy black, black, black,
For thy dainty black, black.
So lovely, and so fair,
Though shaddow'd with thy hair,
So nimble, just like air;
All these set me on loves wrack
For thy black, black, black,
For thy dainty black, black.
Thy kind and cunning eye,
When first it did espy,
Our love it did descry,
Dumb speaking, what do you lack?
Mine answered, thy black, black,
Thy dainty black, black, black.
1 Jeer. Excellent!


New. Now give Mr Formal his cup.


For. I have had the narrow sea, I cannot drink an Ocean.


New. His the other cup; you had my wench as I remember, and I Will prescribe you a
penance; there is another whore for you, drink to her and she shall pledge.


For. Give me thy hand, and set thy foor to mine.


1 Jeer. You may trust your single modesty with him.


For. For my own part, I had rather do things privately; come kiss me first --
here is to thee, my flesh tingles --


New. A word with you two Squiers.


Wen. Any thing for a shelter, I foresee a storm; and what is one Cat among so
many Mastives?


(She creeps under the Table. 1 Jeer. You are melancholy.


New. You lie, you that say nothing lie, if you be of his opinion.


2 Jeer. Me thinks we are very merry.


1 Jeer. We are exceeding merry.


New. Have you discharged your Culvering? where is the paraquito?


For. I drunk it off.


1 Jeer. She is vanished too.


New. Then we are our selves, and make me your example; you know your Province
Sir, make ready for an Angel, sing the design of honor, and of fancy. Ex.
boy.


Song.
But first in Fancy we will fool,
Pull off our Dublets, drink more cool,
Our hats upon our heads not stay,
For each health we will throw them away
So Periwig, or Fringe, or Border,
The naked truth we will drink in order.
And to the Music as they play
A Fancy Piece we will throw away,
Until we are drein'd, can draw no more,
And the next day all cry therefore.
New. Off With Formalls Doublet, off with his Doublet, throw't into the fire,
that is a good phansic; now he is Formal right.


For. I did not drink hard, for I am cold, the wench would keep me warm, she is
a notable firedrake; will it please you sir to go to the party?


New. Now does he betray what a Bawd he would be.


For. Does no body know where to get a Serpent with two legs that has never a
sting?


New. I have a great mind to drink a health in one of my boots.


For. I drink no beer glasses, if a shoe will serve turn --


New. His shoe, my scabberd, a match.


1 Jeer. My glove.


2 Ieer. His cap.


New. Fill brimmers, every man to his Mistress; now do not I like this fancy.


Omnes. We ha don't.


New. There Is wool in my scabbard, which is a spungious matter, and when I ha
done (Music Throne descends I may leave my drink behind me, and that is a
hanging matter, which I am principally to avoid -- Do you hear the Music of
the Spheres Gentlemen?


For. What Is that?


1 Ieer. From the roof a Throne?


New. This room is mine, and called the field of Tempe; Because I woonot stay
while (The Wench peeps from under the Table. the Plays are done when I have a
humor to be merry, and drink healths in the clouds, I built this Elisium; and
when bright Sack has crowned my brow, how soon I am made immortal, you may
guess.


A Song in the Throne.
As I singing now came down,
I do bring you Bacchus Crown:
From the plumpe Lord of the vine
Clusterd grapes to make you wine,
Your sweld Temples circling in,
Crowned with this, and bathed within;
Therefore your best wishes bring,
Place this Garland on your King.
New. Is not Bacchus the best good fellow God on 'em all? Let me see, Formal
shall be King, and he sent to heaven presently.


For. Send me to heaven? why should I be sent thither before another man?


2 Ieer. Ret, Ret, verily Ret, here is the Fartridge under the Table.


New. They Will be good company, they shall both be immortal together, help
Gentlemen. Boy you must be deposed.


VVench. Alas what shall I do?


New. You shall to heaven Lady?


VVench. What before my time? and whether I will or no?


New. It shall be with as much ease, as if it were in a Featherbed.


For. Let us sleep together.


VVench. Ah pity a poor Gentlewoman, if you have hearts of flesh, do not use
me worse than heathen Prentices.


New. So crown 'm, and give to each a glass of wine, for a scepter.


For. Gentlewoman, if we must mount, it is none of our seeking, we are but
Angels in our own defense, for my own part, I desire to go thither in no
better company.


New. Up with 'em, and preserve your scepter glasses, do not spill your blood
royal.


Wench. Alas, hold there for heavens sake, I must meet three Innes of court
Gentlemen at the Stillyard to night, it may be out of my way 20. pound,
consider your own cases.


For. Peace gentle Queen of grapes.


Wench. Thou art a traitor too, oh!


For. Do not jog the chariot, let us take our preserment patiently, and drink
a health to the humble mortals, that turn up their whites to us, this is
pretty high drinking.


Wench. Drunkards, devils? oh that I were upon earth again. --


She throws down the wine. 1 Jeer. Is this the Gentlewomans wine, or water?


Enter Drawer. 2 Jeer. He mounts insensibly.


New. They have a heavenly time on it; you know me sir.


Draw. Noble Mr. Newman.


New. There Is for your attendance.


Jeer. What Is to pay?


New. They shall pay you the reckoning in the other world, you know the back
way thither; come my boys to the departed, having paid all rites

We now return.


Jeerers. Like woeful Adamites.


Exeunt. Act. V. Scaena. I.
Enter Simpleton, James, (little Table set out.) Simp. IAm resolved, since
fair means cannot prevail with Mistress Lucy, to steal her away, this is the
key of the back-gate of the garden, to the fields, be ready when I give the
sign to hurry her into the coach, and when I have her at my Countrey-House,
I Will take in her maiden town, upon my own composition.


Ja. You wo'not ravish her.


Simp. There are twenty ways to deal with a woman, and never ravish her; no,
I have played the fool too much.


Ja. I am of your opinion.


Simp. But she shall find if I get possession. --


Ja. The Coachman is a lusty fellow too, and will help to clap her abroad; the
curtains being close she cannot be heard, and the horses will run, as the
devil were in the poope, for he drives like a Tamberlaine.


Simp. Holla ye pamperd Jades.


Ja. One Traitor more were not amiss for all that.


Simp. Thou say right, for though she be a little woman, her voice may be too
strong for us.


Ja. Let us alone, mind your own part.


Simp. Be resolute James. -- Exit Simp.


Enter Newman. New. The course I am in, has brought some men to the Gallows,
and do I take it for prevention?


Ia. What desperate fellow's that?


New. I am weary of wine and noise, is there no other cure for melancholy? I
do not love the cramp in my neck.


Ja. He looks like a Gentleman that were in debt; my friend do you come
hither to find a tree? thou art a proper fellow, do want employment, for
though your clothes have a good gloss, they look as they were ill lined,
they want money.


New. I suffer that which made the old woman mend her pace fir.


Ja. Do as I Will direct thee.


New. Whom do you serve?


Ia. I serve my self; my Master is a fool; did you never hear of Simpleton?


New. That worshipful puppy?


Ia. He knows him. I have seen you before, but it is no matter where; I like
thy countenance; can keep counsel? walk of this hand of me.


Enter Simpleton and Lucy. Sim. Nay a little further Mistress Lucy, it seems
Mrs Voluble told him no great good fortune, she saw it in his stars, for you
know she wears Astrology at her apron strings; but she told me in private who
should be the man, your dear Endymion.


Lucy. Who I beseech you?


Simp. The object is presented, and it is in vain to oppose the Constellations,
what must be must be, and there were no more Ladies in the world, I am the man.


Enter Coachman, and an other. New. To steal her away?


Ja. My Master is resolved. They are here; close.


New. She is betrayed. --


Simp. Now. --


Lu. Help; thieves.


Ia. Stop her mouth.


New. Then every man take his chance.


(He strikes down Simpleton. Lucy runs eff.) Sim. Murder, murder.


Ja. Are you so cunning sir? you shall along with us. (They disarme New.


New. Worried by Hedghogs!


Ja. Are you not killed outright sir?


Sim. I am not certain, be sure you hold him fast; to the next Justice; I must
get a Surgeon. You are my rival, I know you well enough, if I miscarry, it
shall cost me a hundred pound, but I Will ha thee hanged for it. Exeunt.


Enter Justice and Voluble. Just. I understand you perfectly Mistress Voluble,
and like your proposition; but a word more of the widow that is at your'
house, she is very rich you say?


Vol. Not in understanding.


Just. It Is the better.


Vol. Here Is all your worship must promise her, to be knighted, for she has a
great mind to be a Lady.


Just. I know where a blanck lies dormant for a Baronet, it will carry more
noise and authority on the bench too.


Vol. You have done me some discourtesie here tofore, in believing the
complaints of Intemperate tongues against me, but you see my charity I desire
to live in your worships fair opinion (...) a neighbor.


Just. I will make you amends sweet Mistress V^luable, you are a virtuous
Gentlewoman on my conscience: but how shall this widow be wrought?


Vol. That's done already. The truth is she inquired of me, (for we women use to
open our secrets one to another) for some stayed Gentleman that was a Lawier,
(because she has so great an estate, and many suits to follow) on whom she
might bestow her self, for the security of her fortune, and I have already
prepared her, and such a commendation of your person, and learned gravity, a
Justice of Peace and Quorum, out of my private respects to you, without desire
or expectation of any bribe or reward.


Just. I understand that very well.


Vol. I know you do.


Just. How much I am bound to your virtue?


Vol. The widow has a great mind to see you, but I will contrive it for your
honor, she shall come hither, as to her learned Counsel.


Just. The invincible wit of a woman! how I honor it.


Vol. There can be no loss in it if you get a Chaplain in readiness, widows
are taken in the opportunity.


Enter Richard (the Clarke.) Rich. A Gentleman brought to be examined, that has
wounded one Master Simpleton.


Vol. Simpleton? that is the widows son.


Just. Richard, send to the Curate of the Parish, say I would speak with him
presently.


Enter Simpleton (wounded.) Vol. Alas who hurt you?


Simp. My rival Master Newman, Is this the justice?


Just. A former quarrel; if you die, I have ^aw enough to make it murder, for
your good Mothers sake.


Simp. Cannot you make it manslaughter, and let me live? for I desire but his
death.


Vol. He shall make it what you please. This Gentleman is to be Knighted, and
loves your mother above all the world, things meet as close, as if they went to
engender.


Simp. My Mother is worth six thousand pound, if you will promise to make her a
Lady, and do your best to hang the Gentleman, you shall be my Father in Law,
when my Landlady says the word.


Vol. Sir I Will take my leave.


Just. Sweet Mistress Voluble, leave your friend to me, I understand the matter
perfectly, and it shall go hard, but we will have all the Law on our side.
Call in the offender; please you sit; Richard be ready with your Ammunition,
Pen, Ink and Paper.


Enter Surgeon, Newman, James, Coachman, Constable and officers. Just. What is
your name sir?


Surg. My name is Sear.


Clar. He is the Surgeon sir.


Just. I Will teach you ^o follow your profession sir, I Will make you an example
to all Phlebotomers; how often have you been indicted for letting of blood
firra?


Sur. I understand you nor.


Just. But I understand you sir; how durst you vi and armis, felloniously
assault this noble Gentleman in contempt of piece, and the Kings Law, his
Crown and dignity? answer me sir to that. I Will seeze him.


Sur. You Worship is mistaken, I never see the Gentleman before, I was sent
for --


Ia. He is the Surgeon sir, that is come to take measure of my Masters wounds,
it was that Gentleman that let him blood.


Just. Why do they not change faces then? away you knave, and look to the
Gentleman; you stand idling here to stumble authority with a fellonious
countenance.


Ia. Let us be for sworn both in a tale.


Enter Lucie. Luc. Sir, you are one that should do Justice; where is my poor
friend? be not so much dejected, you did but rescue me sir from dishonor.


New. I was in a melancholy humor; it is come about as the wise woman
concluded.


Luc. VVher's Simpleton? I may accuse him for a Rape.


Just. Take heed what you say.


Luc. Or some such black intent; this Gentleman but interposed to save me from
their surie, and with his sword punished a bold offender by letting out some
blood that was corrupted.


Just. That's not material; will you confess you wounded Master Simpleton?
come to the matter.


New. I confess it sir, but hear the reason.


Just. I will hear no reason, that were simple justice; take him aside, and
you may follow your business. Stay young Gentlewoman, I must examine you.


Clar. Shall I withdraw, and shut the door?


Exeunt all but Justice and Lucie. Luc. What Justice ^ir, or Law is this?


Just. It is not Polton, Crompton, nor Fitzerhert, A Justice ought to have some
discretion without book, especially in these cases. I grant you are the root
and cause of this misfortune.


Luc. I ^ir?


Just. Be wise, and understand me; nd being endued with such gifts of nature,
native beauty and favor, (come a little nearer) and you to abuse your self --


Luc. How sir?


Just. Or suffer your self to be abused (come a little nearer) is not to be
thankful for those excellent benefits.


Luc. Will you translate an Insolence in others upon my guilt?


Just. You accuse an honest Gentleman for an intent of rape; alas poor soul,
it was pure affection in him, he would have ravished you no doubt, with your
own consent, the fault was your Ingratitude, (a little nearer) Seneca does
write much of Ingratitude, that I may come (a little nearer) or else Nero had
not let him blood, (yet nearer) this Nero was a most wicked Tyrant, for all he
could play upon a fidle, make ballads, and sing them himself, and therefore
take heed of cruelty, and be gentle, he kiss^th her. ^or, sweetheart Nero
died a violent death.


Enter Beaufield. Lu. My Mother.


Beau. Lucy you made haste.


Lu. Your pardon Madam.


Just. I understand she is a Lady.


Lu. In the defense of my own virtue, and the noble Gentleman that suffers for
his charity to me --


Beauf. I came to assist you. It were an injury to doubt your justice. My name
is Beaufield. If my credit may be interposed security for Newman my daughters
knowledge in the cause will Enter Clarke. give a most clear satisfaction.


Just. Richard, call in the delinquent, this Lady has spoken very much to the
matter, as I understand it. Has the Surgeon done yet?


Clar. They are coming down.


Ent^r Surgeon, Newman, Simpleton, James, Constable, Officers. Just. Now sir,
how many of his wounds are mortal?


Sur. There is not one considerable, the Gentleman is in no danger.


Simp. But have not you authority to hang him? I Will take my oath, he had an
intent to kill me. My Lady and Mistress Lucie? James, I Will stay no longer, since
I am not mortally wounded, sneake after me.


Exeunt Simpleton and James. New. My hanging ^it is over, and the witchcraft, I
am now my self again, if you can pardon Enter Manley. me Madam this too great
an honor to your worthless servant.


Just. How now? what saucie fellow's this?


Man. She Is here too. I am bold Cozen to visit you, they say, there is a
Gentleman brought before you, for breach of the peace, I come to bail him.


Just. We take no forrainers; what outlandish thing are you, pray?


Man. You know me sir, my name is Manley, you ca^ld me cozen yesterday.


Lust. I never saw you before. I know that name, and a Gentleman that ownes it,
a kinsman of mine too, but he is no such Brandemart. Richard, do you know this
Mahound? he calls himself my cozen Manly.


New. Why in this habit?


Just Transmigration?


Beau. Is it not some spy ^ir?


Just Constable take him to your charge. I Will teach you sir, to usurp a
Gentleman's name; it is felony ipso facto, write his mittimus.


Man. By what statute? Trigesimo Secundo of King Phillip? I do not Madam
desire your cer^ificate.


Beau. Y'ar^ a stranger sir to me, yet I dare be engaged for his forth
coming, he has an honest face.


Man Come hither Richard, there is half a piece, rub thy eyes woo't, are they
open yet?


Clar. I see you plainly now ^ir, you are my Masters cozen, it is Master Manley.


Man. It Is your best course to own me too; is it so long since you took
bribes, since you divided and manumisd a crooked chambermaid that robbed her
Mistress of old Gold? there was a Lancepresado stripped a hedge, when you were out
of Linen; Peuter has been left at the back-doore, when you did study Alchymie;
I leave the trick you showed the Sailors wife in your Closet, when you
promised a reprieve to her goodman from Wapping; I know not that you have run
your withered motley face into a prem^nire; do not know me, why do you no^
charge the constable?


Just. What is a Justice without eyes, I mean spectacles? it is he indeed, I
understand, and see him perfectly; welcome, a Chair for my Cosen?


Man. So then. Madam a word with you, I Will make you know me too, ere I have done.


Enter Galliard, and Nice. Just. There is a matted Chamber and a Couch -- More
business?


Gal. Vere is de matre Justice? begar dey have put de sheare upon me, me expect
de rish vidow, and have marry the chambermaid, she confess dat, Maitre
Justice, pray take her to your self, me desire your varrant, for Metresse
Voluble, dat she bring the vidow Simplaton to marry me sans ceremoine, dat is
your commission, or begar me complain of you to de King.


Just. Did you expect the rich widow Simpleton? h^, ha! I know this trifle, my
Clarke knows her better


Gal. Bergar Matre Justice, and Matre Clarke make your division, dat is all you
see.


Nice. Sir I have only cause to complain, he told me he was a French Lord,
Mistress Voluble shall make affidavit, and courted me to be his Lady, and now we
are married, he proves but a cinquepace. I looked for thousands per annum, and
he is but one, two, three, four, and five.


Just. How, did he pretend himself to be a Lord? it is Scandalum Magnatum in
the highest degree: and by a statute quinquagesimo of the Queen, if she
prosecute, he is to be whipped, and lose his ears three several market days.


Ni. How will you divide his Ears into three equal portions?


Gal. Me give a de whip, and me Iose a mine 'ares!


Ni. You hear the law, if I complain.


Enter Ieers Minor. I. Ieer. Sir -- Mistress Voluble --


Iu. Is the widow come?


I Ieer. The Gentlewoman is come, and desires to speak with your worship in
private.


Enter Clarke. Cla. The Curat's in the Hall sir.


Iu. So, so, I must entreat your patience for a few minutes; how I am blessed!
Exit.


Gal. Tell a me de trot, have you no Argent, no portion?


Ni. But I have a trade.


New. I dare be sworn thou have.


Gal. Aw dat is someting, here is my hand, you no tell a de tale, a me, and me
keep your Enter Sir William, and Mother. secret by my trot.


Sir Will. I took boldness Madam upon sight of your Ladyships new Coach at the
door, to entrude and present a poor forsaken servant; give you joy of your
old fashioned young Gentleman.


Man. Your companion wants no antiquity, if she have no Visard on.


Beau. I hope you are not married Sir?


Sir Will. The matters done, and it is more honorable to make a Lady than to
marry one. Does any body know this Gentlewoman, she was a widow till this
morning, and a rich one I thank my stairs, and wants the subtle art, some
Ladies have to make themselves ridiculous, by doting upon anticks.


Beau. What name has your most reverend Lady?


Sir Will. She was called the wealthy widow of old Simpleton, before I married
her.


Gal. Ha, ha, ha!


Sir Will. What Is It makes you so merry Mounsieur?


Gal. Begar some body make arrant ass of de Knight, hold a me, or me shall
crack a my rib wi'de laugh, dat is no Simplaton, but an autre Chambermaid, de
servant to my vife, begar he be sheated too.


Ni. I must confess she waited upon me.


Sir Will. How?


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha!


Gal. Ma foy dat is certain, ha, ha, ha!


Moth. I desie her, that was but a plot.


Gal. Begar it was very fine a plot, me have patience, dat dear be more fool
in de comedy.


Moth. Mistress Voluble can justify what I am, that I am, or would I might nere
be, a Lady, and I be'nt, that I be'nt.


Enter Justice, and Richard. Sir Will. I will have Justice.


New. You may have him sir.


Justice The reason of this noise my right worshipful?


Sir VVil. Give me a warrant presently.


Iu. Against whom?


Sir VVil. Vol^ble, I Will have her whipped.


Iu. Wrong not the virtuous Gentlewoman.


Sir VVil. Virtuous? vexation.


Man. Why do you take on so, of my conscience she is honest enough; does this
woman look like a whore?


Moth. I thank you Gentleman.


Man. She has gravity enough to be a bawd, and then the worst is past.


Just. Is not the widow weight, not perfect sterling?


Sir VVil. This is not the widow.


Just. What widow?


Sir VVil. The rich widow Simpleton.


Just. I do believe it, did she promise you marriage?


Sir VVil. The devils proctor Mistress Voluble made me believe so.


Just. Do not wrong I say again that virtuous Gentlewoman Mistress Voluble, I
know her, and know her virtuous, but the rich widow Simpleton, you talk of
(thanks be to providence) is newly married, the Priest has scarce wiped his
oraculous lips, since they pronounced us, Man Enter Voluble, and two Ieerers
(at one door) Simpleton, at the other.) and Wife, in my stone Parlour, in good
faith la, she is here, her own tongue will confirm it Gentlemen.


New. Why does she veil her face.


Just. It is her modesty, to hide her blushes, that I should so soon prevail
upon her: and thus the morning breaks out of the clouds.


^impl. By your leave Landlady, where is my mother.


Omnes. Mistress Voluble?


Moth. Here Is my son, he shall be a witness I am his mother, I am married to
this Knight, and they would persuade me out of my self.


Sir Will. It Is come about again, Is this your mother?


Simp. I have asked her blessing in my days.


Vol. There is no remedy, 'twas your own Curate did it.


Ieer Give you joy Mr. Justice.


Just. Conspiracy, is there no law for this?


New. Yes, yes, the canon law, and you must keep her.


Vol. Let me obtain Madam your fair construction, Sir William you are sped to
your desires, and you are fitted Mounsieur Galliard, but Nice, the Jewels must
return to their right owner.


Gal. Excuse a moy.


Ni. It must be so, I keep my wedding ring for thee sweet heart.


Vol. I ask you pardon sir, and Mistress Lucy, I had a plot upon your loves, to
endeare young Simpleton, in hope your credulous nature, to avoid melancholy,
might have been engaged to some licentious rudeness, and so made your self
unworthy of her affection, but here I must confess I have no skill in stars
nor fortune telling, and am but one among the rest that have deceived your easy
faith, forgive me, as I wish you may thrive in your affections.


New. I am confirmed.


Beau. Nay then let marriages go round, with this take both possession of my
heart and fortunes.


Man. You but enlarge my power to do you service.


New. Your love, and joys be constant. Mr. Justice you must embrace Mistress
Voluble.


Iu. Well, I will love thee for thy wit; but no more wandering.


Vol. You wholly sir shall steer me, and to invite more welcome from you sir,
I have not lived upon the common charity, I have a state is not to be despised.


Enter Ieere Mayor. Just. Say thou so, we will put our stocks together and live
merrily.


New. Will they not take his word? alas poor Formal, there, there is their
ransom, bid the whore be honest, I Will plead his reconcilement to my Lady.


Ieere Ma. I am gone.


Simp. But do you hear, must I have no wench, at the end of the play? that have
taken all this pains? what will you do with me?


Just. Well remembered, this Lady did accuse him; though I missed of the Mother,
I will make sure of the son, make his warrant for Newgate presently.


Simp. How Sir?


Clark. I know how very well Sir.


Lu. You called it love before, I freely pardon him.


Sir Will. Let this Day be consecrate to peace, and Hymen.


Just. And the Night to Venus; let it be so, and thank this Gentlewoman.


Simp. I thank you all, and will never trust a witch for your sake, I Will go
seek out my wits.


Just. Let no man part, so many hearts here tid'd,
Stay till we drink a health to every Bride.
Flourish --

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

