OBSERVATIONS UPON EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY. To which is added, THE DESCRIPTION
OF A New Blazing World.

WRITTEN By the Thrice Noble, Illustrious, and Excellent PRINCESS, THE Duchess
of Newcastle.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, in the Year, 1666.

TO HER GRACE THE Duchess of Newcastle, On her OBSERVATIONS upon EXPERIMENTAL
PHILOSOPHY.
THis Book is Book of Books, and only fits
Great searching Brains, and Quintessence of Wits;
For this will give you an Eternal Fame,
And last to all Posterity your Name:
You conquer Death, in a perpetual Life;
And make me famous too in such a Wife.
So I will Prophecy in spite of Fools,
When dead, then honored, and be read in Schools,
And Ipse dixit lost, not He, but She
Still cited in your strong Philosophy.
William Newcastle.

TO HIS GRACE THE Duke of Newcastle.
My Noble Lord,
IN this present Treatise, I have ventured to make some observations upon
Experimental Philosophy, and to examine the Opinions of some of our Modern
Microscopical or Dioptrical Writers; and though your Grace is not only a lover
of Vertuosoes, but a Vertuoso your self, and have as good, and as many sorts of
Optic Glasses as any one else; yet you do not busy your self much with this
brittle Art, but employ most part of your time in the more noble and heroic
Art of Horsemanship and Weapons, as also in the sweet and delightful Art of
Poetry, and in the useful Art of Architecture, etc. which shows that you do not
believe much in the Informations of those Optic glasses, at least think them
not so useful as others do that spend most of their time in Dioptrical
inspections. The truth is, My Lord, That most men in these latter times, busy
themselves more with other Worlds, then with this they live in, which to me
seems strange, unless they could find out some Art that would carry them into
those Gelestial Worlds, which I doubt will never be; nay, if they did, it would
be no better then Lucian's, or the French-mans Art, with Bottles, Bladders,
etc. or like the man's that would scrue himself up into the Moon: And therefore
I confess, I have but little faith in such Arts, and as little in Telescopical,
Microscopical, and the like inspections, and prefer rational and judicious
Observations before deluding Glasses and Experiments; which, as I have more at
large declared in this following work, so I leave it to your Graces perusal and
judgment, which I know is so just, so exact, and so wise, that I may more
safely rely upon it, then all others besides; and if your Grace do but approve
of it, I care not if all the world condemn it; for your Graces Approbation is
all that can be desired from,

My Lord, Your Graces honest Wife, and humble Servant, M. N.

TO THE MOST FAMOUS UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDG.
Most Noble, and Eminently-Learned,
DO not judge it an Impertinency, that now again I presume to offer unto you
another piece of my Philosophical Works; for when I reflect upon the honor you
have done me, I am so much sensible of it, that I am troubled I cannot make you
an acknowledgment answerable to your great Civilities.

You might, if not with scorn, with silence have passed by, when one of our
Sex, and what is more, one that never was versed in the sublime Arts and
Sciences of literature, took upon her to write, not only of Philosophy, the
highest of all humane Learning, but to offer it to so famous and celebrated a
University as yours; but your Goodness and Civility being as great as your
Learning, would rather conceal, then discover or laugh at those weaknesses and
imperfections which you know our Sex is liable to; nay, so far you were from
this, that by your civil respects, and undeserved commendations, you were
pleased to cherish rather, then quite to suppress or extinguish my weak
endeavors.

For which Favor, as I found my self doubly indebted to you, so I thought it
my duty to pay you my double acknowledgments; Thanks, you know, can never be
unseasonable, when petitions may; neither can they be unpleasing, when
petitions often are troublesome; and since there is no sacrifice, which God is
more delighted with, then that of Thanksgiving, I live in hopes you will not
refuse this repeated offer of Gratitude, but favorably, as a due to your
Merits, receive it from her, who both of your Ingenuity, Learning and Civility
is the greatest admirer, and shall always profess her self,

Your most Obliged and Devoted Servant.

THE PREFACE TO THE ENSUING TREATISE.
It Is probable, some will say, that my much writing is a disease; but what
disease they will judge it to be, I cannot tell; I do verily believe they will
take it to be a disease of the Brain, but surely they cannot call it an
Apoplexical or Lethargical disease: Perhaps they will say, it is an
extravagant, or at least a Fantastical disease; but I hope they will rather
call it a disease of wit. But, let them give it what name they please, yet of
this I am sure, that if much writing be a disease, then the best Philosophers,
both Moral and Natural, as also the best Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, Poets,
Historians, Orators, Mathematicians, Chemists, and many more have been
grievously sick, and Seneca, Plinius, Aristotle, Cicero, Tacitus, Plutarch,
Euclid, Homer, Virgil, Ovid, St. Augustine. St. Ambrose, Scotus, Hippocrates,
Galen, Paracelsus, and hundreds more, have been at deaths door with the disease
of writing; but to be infected with the same disease, which the devoutest,
wisest, wittiest, subtilest, most learned and eloquent men have been troubled
withal, is no disgrace, but the greatest honor, even to the most ambitious
person in the world: and next to the honor of being thus infected, it is also
a great delight and pleasure to me, as being the only Pastime which imploys my
idle hours; in so much, that, were I sure no body did read my Works, yet I
would not quit my pastime for all this; for although they should not delight
others, yet they delight me; and if all Women that have no employment in
worldly affairs, should but spend their time as harmlesly as I do, they would
not commit such faults as many are accused of.

I confess, there are many useless and superfluous Books, and perchance mine
will add to the number of them; especially is it to be observed, that there
have been in this latter age, as many Writers of Natural Philosophy, as in
former ages there have been of Moral Philosophy; which multitude, I fear, will
produce such a confusion of Truth and Falsehood, as the number of Moral Writers
formerly did, with their over-nice divisions of Virtues and vices, whereby they
did puzle their Readers so, that they knew not how to distinguish between them.
The like, I doubt, will prove amongst our Natural Philosophers, who by their
extracted, or rather distracted arguments, confound both Divinity and Natural
Philosophy, Sense and Reason, Nature and Art, so much as in time we shall have
rather a Chaos, then a well-ordered Universe by their doctrine: Besides, many
of their Writings are but parcels taken from the ancient; but such Writers are
like those unconscionable men in Civil Wars, which endeavor to pull down the
hereditary Mansions of Noblemen and Gentlemen, to build a Cottage of their
own; for so do they pull down the learning of Ancient Authors, to render
themselves famous in composing Books of their own. But though this Age does
ruin Palaces, to make Cottages; Churches, to make Conventicles; and
Universities to make private Colleges; and endeavor not only to wound, but
to kill and bury the Fame of such meritorious Persons as the Ancient were, yet,
I, hope God of his mercy will preserve State, Church, and Schools, from ruin
and destruction; Nor do I think their weak works will be able to overcome the
strong wits of the Ancient; for setting aside some few of our Moderns, all the
rest are but like dead and withered leaves, in comparison to lovely and lively
Plants; and as for Arts, I am confident, that where there is one good Art found
in these latter ages, there are two better old Arts lost, both of the
Egyptians, Grecians, Romans, and many other ancient Nations; (when I say lost,
I mean in relation to our knowledge, not in Nature; for nothing can be lost in
Nature) Truly, the Art of Augury was far more beneficial then the lately
invented Art of Micrography; for I cannot perceive any great advantage this Art
does bring us. Also the Eclipse of the Sun and Moon was not found out by
Telescopes, nor the motions of the Loadstone, nor the Art of the Card, nor the
Art of Guns and Gunpowder, nor the Art of Printing, and the like, by
Microscopes; nay, if it be true, that Telescopes make appear the spots in the
Sun and Moon, or discover some new Stars, what benefit is that to us? Or if
Microscopes do truly represent the exterior parts and superficies of some
minute Creatures, what advantages it our knowledge? For unless they could
discover their interior, corporeal, figurative motions, and the obscure actions
of Nature, or the causes which make such or such Creatures, I see no great
benefit or advantage they yield to man: Or if they discover how reflected light
makes loose and superficial Colors, such as no sooner percieved, but are again
dissolved; what benefit is that to man? For neither Painters nor Dyers can
enclose and mix that Atomical dust, and those reflections of light to serve
them for any use. Wherefore, in my opinion, it is both time and labor lost;
for the inspection of the exterior parts of Vegetables, does not give us any
knowledge how to Sow, Set, Plant, and Graft; so that a Gardener or Husbandman
will gain no advantage at all by this Art: The inspection of a Be, through a
Microscope, will bring him no more Honey, nor the inspection of a grain more
Corn; neither will the inspection of dusty Atoms, and reflections of light,
teach Painters how to make and mix Colors, although it may perhaps be an
advantage to a decayed Ladies face, by placing her self in such or such a
reflection of Light, where the dusty Atoms may hide her wrinkles. The truth
is, most of these Arts are Fallacies, rather then discoveries of Truth; for
Sense deludes more then it gives a true Information, and an exterior inspection
through an Optic glass, is so deceiving, that it cannot be relied upon:
Wherefore Regular Reason is the best guide to all Arts, as I shall make it
appear in this following Treatise.

It may be the World will judge it a fault in me, that I oppose so many eminent
and ingenious Writers, but I do it not out of a contradicting or wrangling
nature, but out of an endeavor to find out truth, or at least the probability
of truth, according to that proportion of sense and reason Nature has bestowed
upon me; for as I have heard my Noble Lord say, that in the Art of Riding and
Fencing, there is but one Truth, but many Falsehoods and Fallacies: So it may be
said of Natural Philophy and Divinity; for there is but one Fundamental Truth
in each, and I am as ambitious of finding out the truth of Nature, as an
honorable Dueller is of gaining fame and repute; for as he will fight with
none but an honorable and valiant opposite, so am I resolved to argue with
none but those which have the renown of being famous and subtle Philosophers;
and therefore as I have had the courage to argue heretofore with some famous
and eminent Writers in Speculative Philosophy; so have I taken upon me in this
present work, to make some reflections also upon some of our Modern
Experimental and Dioptrical Writers. They will perhaps think my self an
inconsiderable opposite, because I am not of their Sex, and therefore strive to
hit my Opinions with a side stroke, rather covertly, then openly and directly;
but if this should chance, the impartial World, I hope, will grant me so much
Justice as to consider my honesty, and their fallacy, and pass such a judgment
as will declare them to be Patrons, not only to Truth, but also to Justice and
Equity; for which Heaven will grant them their reward, and time will record
their noble and worthy Actions in the Register of Fame, to be kept in
everlasting Memory.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Do ingeniously confess, that both for want of learning and reading
Philosophical Authors, I have not expressed my self in my Philosophical Works,
especially in my Philosophical and Physical Opinions, so clearly and plainly as
I might have done, had I had the assistance of Art, and the practice of reading
other Authors: But though my Conceptions seem not so perspicuous in the
mentioned Book of Philosophical Opinions; yet my Philosophical Letters, and
these present Observations, will, I hope, render it more intelligible, which I
have writ, not out of an ambitious humor, to fill the World with useless
Books, but to explain and illustrate my own Opinions; For what benefit would it
be to me, if I should put forth a work, which by reason of its obscure and hard
notious, could not be understood? especially, it is knowil, that Natural
Philosophy is the hardest of all humane learning, by reason it consists only
in Contemplation, and to make the Philosophical Conceptions of ones mind known
to others, is more difffcult then to make them believe, that if A. B. be equal
to C. D. then E. F. is equal to A. B. because it is equal to C. D. But as for
Learning, that I am not versed in it, no body, I hope, will blame me for it,
since it is sufficiently known, that our Sex is not bread up to it, as being
not suffered to be instructed in Schools and Universities; I will not say, but
many of our Sex may have as much wit, and be capable of Learning as well as
Men; but since they want Instructions, it is not possible they should attain to
it; for Learning is Artificial, but Wit is Natural. Wherefore, when I began to
read the Philosophical Works of other Authors, I was so troubled with their
hard words and expressions at first, that had they not been explained to me,
and had I not found out some of them by the context and connection of the sense,
I should have been far enough to seek; for their hard words did more obstruct,
then instruct me. The truth is, if any one intends to write Philosophy, either
in English, or any other language; be ought to consider the propriety of the
language, as much as the Subject be writes of; or else to what purpose would it
be to write? If you do write Philosophy in English, and use all the hardest
words and expressions which none but Scholars are able to understand, you had
better to write it in Latin; but if you will write for those that do not
understand Latin, Your reason will tell you, that you must explain those hard
words, and English them in the easiest manner you can; What are words but marks
of things? and what are Philosophical Terms, but to express the Conceptions of
ones mind in that Science? And truly I do not think that there is any Language
so poor, which cannot do that; wherefore those that fill their writings with
hard words, put the horses behind the Coach, and instead of making hard things
easy, make easy things hard, which especially in our English writers is a
great fault; neither do I see any reason for it, but that they think to make
themselves more famous by those that admire all what they do not understand,
though it be Nonsense; but I am not of their mind, and therefore although I do
understand some of their hard expressions now, yet I shun them as much in my
writings as is possible for me to do, and all this, that they may be the better
understood by all, learned as well as unlearned; by those that are professed
Philosophers as well as by those that are none: And though I could employ some
time in studying all the hardest phrases and words in other Authors, and write
as learnedly perhaps as they; yet will I not deceive the World, nor trouble my
Conscience by being a Mountebanck in learning, but rather prove naturally wise
then artificially foolish; for at best I should but obscure my opinions, and
render them more intricate instead of clearing and explaining them; but if my
Readers should spy any errors slipped into my writings for want of art and
learning, I hope they will be so just as not to censure me too severely for them,
but express their wisdom in preferring the kernel before the shells.

It is not possible that a young Student, when first he comes to the
University, should hope to be Master of Art in one Month, or one Year; and so
do I likewise not persuade my self, that my Philosophy being new, and but
lately brought forth, will at first fight prove Master of Understanding, nay,
it may be not in this age; but if God favor her, she may attain to it in
aftertimes and if she be slighted now and buried in silence, she may perhaps
rise more gloriously hereafter; for her Ground being Sense and Reason, She may
meet with an age where she will be more regarded, then she is in this.

But Courteous Reader, all what I request of you at present, is, That if you
have a mind to understand my Philosophical Conceptions truly, You would be
pleased to read them not by parcels, here a little, and there a little, (for I
have found it by my self, that when I read not a book thoroughly from beginning
to end, I cannot well understand the Authors design, but may easily mistake his
meaning; I mean such Books as treat of Philosophy, History, etc. where all
parts depend upon each other,) But if you will give an impartial judgment of my
Philosophy, read it all, or else spare your Censures; especially do I recommend
to you my Philosophical Opinions, which contain the Grounds and Principles of
my Philosophy, but since they were published before I was versed in the reading
of other Authors, I desire you to join my Philosophical Leters, and these
observations to them, which will serve as Commentaries to explain what may seem
obscure in the mentioned Opinions; but before all, read this following
Argumental Discourse wherein are contained the Principles and grounds of
Natural Philosophy, especially concerning the constitutive parts of Nature and
their properties and actions; as also be pleased to peruse the later discourse
of the first part of this Book, which treats of Perception; for Perception
being the chief and general action of Nature, has occasioned me to be more
prolix in explaining it, then any other subject; You Will find that I go much by
the way of argumentation, and framing objections and answers; for I would fain
hinder and obstruct as many objections as could be made against the grounds of
my Opinions; but since it is impossible to resolve all, for as Nature and her
parts and actions are infinite, so there may also endless objections be raised;
I have endeavored only to set down such as I thought might be most material;
but this I find, that there is no objection but one may find an answer to it;
and as soon as I have made an answer to one objection, another offers it self
again, which shows not only that Natures actions are infinite, but that they
are poised and balanced so that they cannot run into extremes.

However I do not appland my self so much, as to think that my works can be
without errors, for Nature is not a Deity, but her parts are often irregular,
and how is it possible that one particular Creature can know all the obscure
and hidden infinite varieties of Nature? if the Truth of Nature were so easily
known, we had no need to take so much pains in searching after it; but Nature
being Material, and consequently dividable, her parts have but divided
knowledges, and none can claim a Universal infinite knowledge. Nevertheless,
although I may err in my arguments, or for want of artificial Terms; yet I
believe the Ground of my Opinions is True, because it is sense and reason.

I found after the perusal of this present book, that several places therein
might have been more perspicuously delivered, and better cleared; but since it
is impossible that all things can be so exact, that they should not be subject
to faults and imperfections; for as the greatest beauties are not without
moles, so the best Books are seldom without Errors; I entreat the ingenuous
Reader to interpret them to the best sense; for they are not so material, but
that either by the context or connection of the whole discourse, or by a
comparing with other places, the true meaning thereof may easily be understood;
and to this end I have set down this following explanation of such places, as
in the perusal I have observed, whereby the rest may also easily be mended.

When I say, that Discourse shall sooner find out Natures t I. c. 2., 6.
Corporeal figurative Motions, then Art shall inform the Senses. By Discourse,
I do not mean speech, but an Arguing of the mind, or a Rational inquiry into
the Causes of Natural effects; for Discourse is as much as Reasoning with our
selves, which may very well be done without Speech or Language, as being only
an effect or action of Reason.

When I say, That Art may make Pewter, Brass, etc. C. 3. page 8.
I do not mean as if these Figures were Artificial, and not Natural; but my
meaning is, That if Art imitates Nature in producing of Artificial Figures,
they are most commonly such as are of mixed Natures, which I call
Hermaphroditical.

When I say, That Respiration is a Reception and C. 4. page 15;
Emission of parts through the pores or passages proper to each particular
figure, so that when some parts issue, others enter; I do not mean at one and
the same time, or always through the same passages; for, as there is variety of
Natural Creatures and Figures, and of their perceptions; so of the manner of
their perceptions, and of their passages and pores; all which no particular
Creature is able exactly to know or determine: And therefore when I add in the
following Chapter, That Nature has more ways of composing and dividing of
parts, then by the way of drawing in, and sending forth by pores; I mean, that
not all parts of Nature have the like Respirations: The truth is, it is enough
to know in general, That there is Respiration in all parts of Nature, as a
general or universal action; and that this Respiration is nothing else but a
composition and division of Parts; but how particular Respirations are
performed, none but Infinite Nature is capable to know.

When I say, That there is a difference between Respiration C. 5. Page 16.
and Perception; and that Perception is an action of figuring or patterning;
but Respiration an action of Reception and Emission of Parts: First, I do not
mean, that all Percaption is made by patterning or imitation; but I speak only
of the Perception of the exterior senses in Animals, at least in man, which I
observe to be made by patterning or imitation; for as no Creature can know the
infinite perceptions in Nature, so he cannot describe what they are, or how
they are made Next, I do not mean, that Respiration is not a Perceptive action;
for if Perception be a general and universal action in Nature, as well as
Respiration, both depending upon the composition and division of parts, it is
impossible but that all actions of Nature must be perceptive, by reason
perception is an exterior knowledge of foreign parts and actions; and there can
be no commerce or intercourse, nor no variety of figures and actions; no
productions, dissolutions, changes and the like, without Perception; for how
shall Parts work and act, without having some knowledge or perception of each
other? Besides, wheresoever is self-motion, there must of necessity be also
Perception; for self-motion is the cause of all exterior Perception. But my
meaning is, That the Animal, at least Humane respiration, which is a receiveing
of foreign parts, and discharging or venting of its own in an animal or humane
Figure or Creature, is not the action of Animal Perception, properly so called;
that is, the perception of its exterior senses, as Seeing, Hearing, Tasting,
Touching, Smelling; which action of Perception is properly made by way of
patterning and imitation, by the innate, figurative motions of those Animal
Creatures, and not by receiving either the figures of the exterior objects into
the sensitive Organs, or by sending forth some invisible rays from the Organ
to the Object; nor by pressure and reaction. Nevertheless, as I said, every
action of Nature is a Knowing and Perceptive action; and so is Respiration,
which of necessity presupposes a knowledge of exterior parts, especially those
that are concerned in the same action, and can no ways be performed without
perception of each other.

When I say, That if all men's Opinions and Fancies Chap. 15. page 44.
were Rational, there would not be such variety in Nature as we perceive there
is; by Rational I mean Regular, according to the vulgar way of expression, by
which a Rational Opinion is called, That which is grounded upon regular sense
and reason; and thus Rational is opposed to Irregular: Nevertheless, Irregular
Fancies and Opinions are made by the rational parts of matter, as well as those
that are regular; and therefore in a Philosophical and strict sense, one may
call Irregular Opinions as well Rational, as those that are Regular; but
according to the vulgar way of expression, as I said, it is sooner understood
of Regular, then of Irregular Opinions, Fancies or Conceptions.

When I say, that None of Natures parts can be C. 16. pa. 47.
called Inanimate, or Soul-less; I do not mean the constitutive parts of
Nature, which are, as it were, the Ingredients whereof Nature consists, and is
made up; whereof there is an inanimate part or degree of matter, as well as
animate; but I mean the parts or effects of this composed body of Nature, of
which I say, that none can be called inanimate; for though some Philosophers
think that nothing is animate, or has life in Nature, but Animals and
Vegetables; yet it is probable, that since Nature consists of a commixture of
animate and inanimate matter, and is self-moving, there can be no part or
particle of this composed body of Nature, were it an Atome, that may be called
Inaminate, by reason there is none that has not its share of animate, as well
as inanimate matter, and the commixture of these degrees being so close, it is
impossible one should be without the other.

When enumerating the requisites of the Perception of Cap. 20. Page 63.
Sight in Animals, I say, that if one of them be wanting, there is either no
perception at all, or it is an imperfect perception; I mean, there is no Animal
perception of seeing, or else an irregular perception.

When I say, that as the sensitive perception knows Cap. 21. Page 76.
some of the other parts of Nature by their effects; so the rational perceives
some effects of the Omnipotent Power of God; My meaning is not, as if the
sensitive part of matter has no knowledge at all of God; for since all parts of
Nature, even the inanimate, have an innate and fixed self-knowledg, it is
probable that they may also have an interior self-knowledg of the existency of
the Eternal and Omnipotent God, as the Author of Nature: But because the
rational part is the subtilest, purest, finest and highest degree of matter; it
is most conformable to truth, that it has also the highest and greatest
knowledge of God, as far as a natural part can have; for God being Immaterial,
it cannot properly be said, that sense can have a perception of him, by reason
he is not subject to the sensitive perception of any Creature, or part of
Nature; and therefore all the knowledge which natural Creatures can have of God,
must be inherent in every part of Nature; and the perceptions which we have of
the Effects of Nature, may lead us to some conceptions of that Supernatural,
Infinite, and Incomprehensible Deity, not what it is in its Essence or Nature,
but that it is existent, and that Nature has a dependence upon it, as an
Eternal Servant has upon an Eternal Master.

But some might say, How is it possible that a Corporeal finite part, can have
a conception of an Incorporeal, infinite Being; by reason that which
comprehends, must needs be bigger then that which is comprehended? Besides, no
part of Nature can conceive beyond it self, that is, beyond what is Natural or
Material; and this proves, that at least the rational part, or the mind, must
be immaterial to conceive a Deity? To which I answer, That no part of Nature
can or does conceive the Essence of God, or what God is in himself; but it
conceives only, that there is such a Divine Being which is Supernatural: And
therefore it cannot be said, that a natural Figure can comprehend God; for it
is not the comprehending of the Substance of God, or its patterning out, (since
God having no Body, is without all Figure) that makes the knowledge of God; but
I do believe, that the knowledge of the existency of God, as I mentioned before,
is innate, and inherent in Nature, and all her parts, as much as self-knowledg
is.

Speaking of the difference between Oil and other liquors; Cap. 24. Page 83.
for the better understanding of that place, I thought fit to insert this Note:
Flame is fluid, but not liquid, nor wet: Oil is fluid and liquid, but not wet;
but Water is both fluid, liquid and wet. Oil will turn into flame, and increase
it; but Water is so quite opposite to flame, that if a sufficient quantity be
poured upon it, it will totally extinguish it.

When I say, that Sense and Reason shall be the Cap. 25. Page 93.
Ground of my Philosophy, and not particular natural effects; My meaning is,
that I do not intend to make particular Creatures or Figures, the Principles of
all the infinite effects of Nature, as some other Philosophers do; for there is
no such thing as a Prime or principal Figure of Nature, all being but effects
of one Cause. But my Ground is Sense and Reason, that is, I make self-moving
matter, which is sensitive and rational, the only cause and principle of all
natural effects.

When it is said, That Ice, Snow, Hail, etc. return Cap. 27. Page 100.
into their former Figure of Water, whenever they dissolve; I mean, when they
dissolve their exterior Figures, that is, change their actions.

When I say, That the Exterior Object is the Agent, Cap. 29. Page 126.
and the Sentient Body the Patient; I do not mean that the Object does chiefly
work upon the Sentient, or is the immediate cause of the Perception in the
Sentient body, and that the Sentient suffers the Agent to act upon it; but I
retain only those words, because they are used in Schools; But as for their
actions, I am quite of a contrary Opinion, to wit, That the sentient body is
the principal Agent, and the external body the Patient; for the motions of the
sentient in the act of perception, do figure out or imitate the motions of the
object, so that the object is but as a Copy that is figured out, or imitated by
the sentient, which is the chiefly Agent in all transforming and perceptive
actions that are made by way of patterning or imitation.

When I say, That one finite part can undergo infinite Cap. 31. Page 136.
changes and alterations; I do not mean one single part, whereof there is no
such thing in nature; but I mean, one part may be infinitely divided and
composed with other parts; for as there are infinite changes, compositions and
divisions in Nature, so they must be of parts; there being no variety but of
parts; and though parts be finite, yet the changes may be infinite; for the
finiteness of parts is but concerning the bulk or quantity of their figures;
and they are called finite, by reason they have limited and circumscribed
figures; nevertheless, as for duration, their parts being the same with the
body of Nature, are as eternal, and infinite as Nature her self, and thus are
subject to infinite and eternal changes.

When I say, A World of Gold is as active interiously, Ibid. P. 140.
as a world of Air is exteriously; I mean, it is as much subject to changes and
alterations as Air; for Gold though its motions are not perceptible by our
exterior senses, yet it has no less motion then the activest body of Nature;
only its motions are of another kind then the motions of Air, or of some other
bodies; for Retentive motions are as much motions, as dispersing or some other
sorts of motions, although not so visible to our perception as these; and
therefore we cannot say that Gold is more at rest than other Creatures of
Nature; for there is no such thing as Rest in Nature; although there be degrees
of Motion.

When I say, That the parts of Nature do not Cap. 31. Page 138,
drive or press upon each other, but that all natural actions are free and
easy, and not constrained; My meaning is not, as if there was no pressing or
driving of parts at all in Nature, but only that they are not the universal or
principal actions of Natures body, as it is the opinion of some Philosophers,
who think there is no other motion in nature, but by pressure of parts upon
parts: Nevertheless, there is pressure and reaction in Nature, because there
are infinite sorts of motions.

Also when I say in the same place, That Natures actions are voluntary; I do
not mean, that all actions are made by rote, and none by imitation; but by
voluntary actions I understand self-actions; that is, such actions whose
principle of motion is within themselves, and does not proceed from such an
exterior Agent, as does the motion of the inanimate part of matter, which
having no motion of it self, is moved by the animate parts, yet so, that it
receives no motion from them, but moves by the motion of the animate parts, and
not by an infused motion into them; for the animate parts in carrying the
inanimate along with them, lose nothing of their own motion, nor impart no
motion to the inanimate; no more than a man who carries a stick in his hand,
imparts motion to the stick, and loses so much as he imparts; but they bear the
inanimate parts along with them, by virtue of their own self-motion, and remain
self-moving parts, as well as the inanimate remain without motion.

Again, when I make a distinguishment between voluntary Cap. 37. Page 212.
actions, and exterior perceptions; my meaning is not, as if voluntary actions
were not made by perceptive parts; for whatsoever is self-moving and active, is
perceptive; and therefore since the voluntary actions of Sense and Reason are
made by self-moving parts, they must of necessity be perceptive actions; but I
speak of Perceptions properly so called, which are occasioned by Foreign
parts; and to those I oppose voluntary actions, which are not occasioned, but
made by rote; as for example, the perception of sight in Animals, when outward
Objects present themselves to the Optic sense to be perceived, the perception
of the Sentient is an occasioned perception; but whenever, either in dreams,
or in distempers, the sensitive motions of the same Organ, make such or such
figures, without any presentation of exterior objects, then that action cannot
properly be called an exterior perception; but it is a voluntary action of the
sensitive motions in the organ of sight, not made after an outward pattern, but
by rote, and of their own accord.

When I say, That Ignorance is caused by division, Cap. 9. p. 33.
and knowledge by composition of parts; I do not mean an interior, innate
self-knowledg, which is, and remains in every part and particle of Nature, both
in composition and division; for wheresoever is matter, there is life and
self-knowledg; nor can a part lose selfknowledg, any more then it can lose
life, although it may change from having such or such a particular life and
knowledge; for to change and lose, are different things; but I mean an exterior,
perceptive knowledge of foreign parts, caused by self-motion, of which I say,
that as a union or combination of parts, makes knowledge, so a division or
separation of parts, makes Ignorance.

When I say, There Is difference of Sense and Reason Cap. 15. p. 49
in the parts of one composed Figure; I mean not, as if there were different
degrees of sense, and different degrees of Reason in their own substance or
matter; for sense is but sense, and reason is but reason; but my meaning is,
That there are different, sensitive and rational motions, which move
differently in the different parts of one composed Creature.

These are (Courteous Reader) the scruples which I thought might puzle your
understanding in this present Work, which I have cleared in the best manner I
could; and if you should meet with any other of the like nature, my request is,
You would be pleased to consider well the Grounds of my Philosophy; and as I
desired of you before, read all before you pass your Judgments and Censures;
for then, I hope, you will find but few obstructions, since one place will give
you an explanation of the other. In doing thus, you will neither wrong your self,
nor injure the Authoress, who should be much satisfied, if she could benesit
your knowledge in the least; if not, she has done her endeavor, and takes as
much pleasure and delight in writing and divulging the Conceptions of her mind,
as perhaps some malicious persons will do in censuring them to the worst.

AN Argumental Discourse
Concerning some Principal Subjects in Natural Philosophy, necessary for the
better understanding, not only of this, but all other Philosophical Works,
hitherto written by the AUTHOEESSE.

WHen I was setting forth this Book of Experimental Observations, a Dispute
chanced to arise between the rational Parts of my Mind concerning some chief
Points and Principles in Natural Philosophy; for some New Thoughts endeavoring
to oppose and call in question the Truth of my former Conceptions, caused a war
in my mind, which in time grew to that height, that they were hardly able to
compose the differences between themselves, but were in a manner necessitated
to refer them to the Arbitration of the impartial Reader, desiring the
assistance of his judgment to reconcile their Controversies, and, if possible,
to reduce them to a settled peace and agreement.

The first difference did arise about the question, How it came, that Matter
was of several degrees, as Animate and Inanimate, Sensitive and Rational? for
my latter thoughts would not believe that there was any such difference of
degrees of Matter: To which my former conceptions answered, That Nature, being
Eternal and Infinite, it could not be known how she came to be such, no more
then a reason could be given how God came to be: for Nature, said they, is the
Infinite Servant of God, and her origin cannot be described by any finite or
particular Creature; for what is infinite, has neither beginning nor end; but
that Natural Matter consisted of so many degrees as mentioned, was evidently
perceived by her effects or actions; by which it appeared first, that Nature
was a self-moving body, and that all her parts and Creatures were so too: Next,
That there was not only an animate or self-moving and active, but also an
inanimate, that is, a dull and passive degree of Matter; for if there were no
animate degree, there would be no motion, and so no action nor variety of
figures; and if no inanimate, there would be no degrees of natural figures and
actions, but all actions would be done in a moment, and the figures would all
be so pure, fine and subtle, as not to be subject to any grosser perception
such as our humane, or other the like perceptions are. This Inanimate part of
Matter, said they, had no self-motion, but was carried along in all the actions
of the animate degree, and so was not moving, but moved; which Animate part of
Matter being again of two degrees, viz. Sensitive and Rational, the Rational
being so pure, fine and subtle, that it gave only directions to the sensitive,
and made figures in its own degree, left the working with and upon the
Inanimate part, to the Sensitive degree of Matter, whose Office was to execute
both the rational parts design, and to work those various figures that are
perceived in Nature; and those three degrees were so inseparably commixt in the
body of Nature, that none could be without the other in any part or Creature of
Nature, could it be divided to an Atome; for as in the Exstruction of a house
there is first required an Architect or Surveigher, who orders and designs the
building, and puts the Laborers to work; next the Laborers or Workmen
themselves, and lastly the Materials of which the House is built: so the
Rational part, said they, in the framing of Natural Effects, is, as it were,
the Surveigher or Architect; the Sensitive, the laboring or working part, and
the Inanimate, the materials, and all these degrees are necessarily required in
every composed action of Nature.

To this, my latter thoughts excepted, that in probability of sense and reason,
there was no necessity of introducing an inanimate degree of Matter; for all
those parts which we call gross, said they, are no more but a composition of
self-moving parts, whereof some are denser, and some rarer then others; and we
may observe, that the denser parts are as active, as the rarest; for example,
Earth is as active as Air or Light, and the parts of the Body are as active, as
the parts of the Soul or Mind, being all self-moving, as it is perceiveable by
their several, various compositions, divisions, productions and alterations;
nay, we do see, that the Earth is more active in the several productions and
alterations of her particulars, then what we name Celestial Lights, which
observation is a firm argument to prove, that all Matter is animate or
self-moving, only there are degrees of motion, that some parts move flower,
and some quicker.

Hereupon my former Thoughts answered, that the difference consisted not only
in the grossness, but in the dullness of the Inanimate parts; and that, since
the sensitive animate parts were laboring on, and with the inanimate, if these
had self-motion, and that-their motion was flower then that of the animate
parts, they would obstruct, cross and oppose each other in all their actions,
for the one would be too slow, and the other too quick.

The latter Thoughts replied, that this slowness and quickness of motion would
cause no obstruction at all; for, said they, a man that rides on a Horse is
carried away by the Horses motion, and has nevertheless also his own motions
himself; neither does the Horse and Man transfer or exchange motion into each
other, nor do they hinder or obstruct one another.

The former Thoughts answered, it was True, that Motion could not be
transferred from one body into another without Matter or substance; and that
several self-moving parts might be joined, and each act a part without the
least hinderance to one another; for not all the parts of one composed Creature
(for example Man) were bound to one and the same action; and this was an
evident proof that all Creatures were composed of parts, by reason of their
different actions; nay, not only of parts, but of self-moving parts: also they
confessed, that there were degrees of motion, as quickness and slowness, and
that the slowest motion was as much motion as the quickest. But yet, said they,
this does not prove, that Nature consists not of Inanimate Matter as well as of
Animate; for it is one thing to speak of the parts of the composed and mixed
body of Nature, and another thing to speak of the constitutive parts of Nature,
which are, as it were, her ingredients of which Nature is made up as one entire
self-moving body; for sense and reason does plainly perceive, that some parts
are more dull, and some more lively, subtle and active; the Rational parts are
more agil, active, pure and subtle then the sensitive; but the Inanimate have
no activity, subtilty and agility at all, by reason they want self-motion; nor
no perception, for self-motion is the cause of all perception; and this
Triumvirate of the degrees of Matter, said they, is so necessary to balance
and poise Natures actions, that otherwise the creatures which Nature produces,
would all be produced alike, and in an instant; for example, a Child in the
Womb would as suddenly be framed, as it is figured in the mind; and a man would
be as suddenly dissolved as a thought: But sense and reason perceives that it
is otherwise; to wit, that such figures as are made of the grosser parts of
Matter, are made by degrees, and not in an instant of time, which does
manifestly evince, that there is and must of necessity be such a degree of
Matter in Nature as we call Inanimate; for surely although the parts of Nature
are infinite, and have infinite actions, yet they cannot run into extremes, but
are balanced by their opposites, so that all parts cannot be alike rare or
dense, hard or soft, dilating or contracting, etc. but some are dense, some
rare, some hard, some soft, foam dilative, some contractive, etc. by which the
actions of Nature are kept in an equal balance from running into extremes. But
put the case, said they, it were so, that Natures body consisted altogether of
Animate Matter, or corporeal self-motion, without an intermixture of the
inanimate parts, we are confident that there would be framed as many objections
against that opinion as there are now against the inanimate degree of Matter;
for disputes are endless, and the more answers you receive, the more objections
you will find; and the more objections you make, the more answers you will
receive; and even shows, that Nature is balanced by opposites: for, put the
case, the Inanimate parts of Matter were self-moving; then first there would be
no such difference between the rational and sensitive parts as now there is;
but every part, being self-moving, would act of, and in it self, that is, in
its own substance as now the rational part of Matter does: Next, if the
inanimate part was of a slower motion then the rational and sensitive, they
would obstruct each other in their actions, for one would be too quick, and the
other too slow; neither would the quicker motion alter the nature of the
slower, or the slower retard the quicker; for the nature of each must remain as
it is; or else it would be thus, then the animate part might become inanimate,
and the rational the sensitive, etc. which is impossible, and against all sense
and reason.

At this declaration of my former Thoughts, the latter appeared somewhat better
satisfied, and had almost yielded to them, but that they had yet some scruples
left, which hindered them from giving a full assent to my former rational
conceptions. First they asked, how it was possible, that that part of Matter
which had no innate self-motion, could be moved? for, said they, if it be
moved, it must either be moved by its own motion, or by the motion of the
animate part of Matter: by its own motion it cannot move, because it has none;
but if it be moved by the motion of the animate, then the animate must of
necessity transfer motion into it: that so, being not able to move by an innate
motion, it might move by a communicated motion.

The former Thoughts answered, that they had resolved this question heretofore
by the example of a Horse and a Man, where the Man was moved and carried along
by the Horse, without any Communication or Translation of motion from the Horse
into the Man; also a Stick, said they, carried in a Man's hand, goes along with
the man, without receiving any motion from his hand.

My latter Thoughts replied, That a Man and a Stick were parts or Creatures of
Nature, which consist of a commixture of Animate or self-moving Matter, and
that they did move by their own motions, even at the time when they were
carried along by other parts; but with the Inanimate part of Matter it was not
so; for it having no self-motion, could no ways move.

You say well, answered my former Thoughts, that all the parts of Nature,
whenever they move, move by their own motions; which proves, that no
particular Creature or effect of composed Nature, can act upon another, but
that one can only occasion another to move thus or thus; as in the mentioned
example, the Horse does not move the man, but occasions him only to move after
such or such a manner; also the hand does not move the Stick, but is only an
occasion that the Stick moves thus, for the Stick moves by its own motion.

But as we told you before, this is to be understood of the parts of the
composed body of Nature, which as they are Natures Creatures and Effects, so
they consist also of a commixture of the forementioned degrees of animate and
inanimate Matter; but our discourse is now of those parts which do compose the
body of Nature, and make it what it is: And as of the former parts none can be
said moved, but all are moving, as having self-motion within them; so the
inanimate part of Matter considered as it is an ingredient of Nature, is no
ways moving, but always moved: The former parts, being effects of the body of
Nature, for distinctions sake may be called Effective parts; but these, that
is; the Animate and Inanimate, may be called constitutive parts of Nature:
Those follow the composition of Nature, but these are the Essential parts,
which constitute the body of Nature; whereof the Animate, by reason of their
self-motion, are always active and perceptive; but the Inanimate is neither
active nor perceptive, but dull and passive; and you may plainly perceive it,
added my former thoughts, by the alleged example; for as the Stick has no
animal motion, and yet is carried along by and with the animal wheresoever it
goes; so the Inanimate Matter, although it has no motion at all, yet it goes
along with the animate parts wheresoever they will have it; the only difference
is this, as we told you before, that the Stick being composed of animate as
well as inanimate Matter, cannot properly be said moved, but occasioned to such
a motion by the animal that carries it, when as the inanimate part cannot be
said occasioned, but moved.

My later Thoughts replied, That the alleged example of the carried Stick,
could give them no full satisfaction as yet; for, said they, put the case the
Stick had its own motion, yet it has not a visible, exterior, local,
progressive motion, such as Animals have, and therefore it must needs receive
that motion from the animal that carries it; for nothing can be occasioned to
that which it has not in it self.

To which the former answered first, that although animals had a visible
exterior progressive motion, yet not all progressive motion was an animal
motion: Next, they said, that some Creatures did often occasion others to alter
their motions from an ordinary, to an extraordinary effect; and if it be no
wonder, said they, that Cheese, Roots, Fruits, etc. produce Worms, why should
it be a wonder for an Animal to occasion a visible progressive motion in a
vegetable or mineral, or any other sort of Creature? For each natural action,
said they, is local, were it no more then the stirring of a hairs breadth, nay,
of an Atome; and all composition and division, contraction, dilation, nay, even
retention, are local motions; for there is no thing in so just a measure, but
it will vary more or less; nay, if it did not to our perception, yet we cannot
from thence infer that it does not at all; for our perception is too weak and
gross to perceive all the subtle actions of Nature; and if so, then certainly
Animals are not the only Creatures that have local motion, but there is local
motion in all parts of Nature.

Then my later Thoughts asked, that if every part of Nature moved by its own
inherent self-motion, and that there was no part of the composed body of Nature
which was not self-moving, how it came, that Children could not go so soon as
born? also, if the selfmoving part of Matter was of two degrees, sensitive and
rational, how it came that Children could not speak before they are taught? and
if it was perceptive, how it came that Children did not understand so soon as
born?

To which the former answered, That although there was no part of Matter that
was figureless, yet those figures that were composed by the several parts of
Matter, such as are named natural Creatures, were composed by degrees, and some
compositions were sooner perfected then others, and some sorts of such figures
or Creatures were not so soon produced or strengthened as others; for example,
most of four legged Creatures, said they, can go, run and skip about so soon as
they are parted from the Dam, that is, so soon as they are born; also they can
suck, understand, and know their Dam's, when as a Bird can neither feed it
self, nor fly so soon as it is hatched, but requires some time before it can
hop on its legs, and be able to fly; but a Butterfly can fly so soon as it
comes out of the shell; by which we may perceive, that all figures are not
alike, either in their composing, perfecting or dissolving, no more then they
are alike in their shapes, forms, understanding, etc. for if they were, then
little Puppies and Kitlings would see, so soon as born, as many other Creatures
do, when as now they require nine days after their birth before they can see;
and as for speech, although it be most proper to the shape of Man, yet he must
first know or learn a language before he can speak it; and although when the
parts of his mind, like the parts of his body, are brought to maturity, that
is, to such a regular degree of perfection as belongs to his figure, he may
make a language of his own; yet it requires time, and cannot be done in an
instant: The truth is, although speech be natural to man, yet language must be
learned; and as there are several selfactive parts, so there are several
Languages; and by reason the actions of some parts can be imitated by other
parts, it causes that we name learning not only in Speech, but in many other
things.

Concerning the question why Children do not understand so soon as born: They
answered, that as the sensitive parts of Nature did compose the bulk of
Creatures, that is, such as were usually named bodies; and as some Creatures
bodies were not finished or perfected so soon as others, so the self-moving
parts, which by conjunction and agreement composed that which is named the mind
of Man, did not bring it to the perfection of an Animal understanding so soon
as some Beasts are brought to their understanding, that is, to such an
understanding as was proper to their figure. But this is to be noted, said
they, that although Nature is in a perpetual motion, yet her actions have
degrees, as well as her parts, which is the reason, that all her productions
are done in that which is vulgarly named Time; that is, they are not executed
at once, or by one act: In short, as a House is not finished, until it be
thoroughly built, nor can be thoroughly furnished until it be thoroughly finished;
so is the strength and understanding of Man, and all other Creatures; and as
perception requires Objects, so learning requires practice; for though Nature
is self-knowing, self-moving, and so perceptive; yet her self-knowing,
self-moving, and perceptive actions, are not all alike, but differ variously;
neither does she perform all actions at once, otherwise all her Creatures would
be alike in their shapes, forms, figures, knowledges, perceptions, productions,
dissolutions, etc. which is contradicted by experience.

After this my later Thoughts asked, how it came that the Inanimate part of
Matter had more degrees then the Animate?

The former answered, That, as the Animate part had but two degrees, to wit,
the sensitive and rational, so the Inanimate was but grosser and purer; and as
for density, rarity, softness, hardness, etc. they were nothing but various
compositions and divisions of parts, or particular effects; nor was it density
or hardness that made grossness; and thinness or rarity of parts that made
fineness and purity; for Gold is more dense then dross, and yet is more pure
and fine; but this is most probable, said they, that the rarest compositions
are most suddenly altered; nor can the grossness and fineness of the parts of
Nature be without Animate and Inanimate Matter; for the dullness of one degree
poises the activity of the other; and the grossness of one, the purity of the
other; all which keeps Nature from extremes.

But replied my later Thonght, You say that there are infinite degrees of
hardness, thickness, thinness, density, rarity, etc.

Truly, answered the former, if you will call them degrees, you may; for so there
may be infinite degrees of Magnitude, as bigger and bigger, but these degrees
are nothing else but the effects of self-moving Matter, made by a composition
of parts, and cannot be attributed to one single part, there being no such
thing in Nature; b they belong to the infinite parts of Nature, joined in one
body; and as for Matter it self, there are no more degrees, but animate and
inanimate; that is, a self-moving, active and perceptive, and a dull, passive,
and moved degree.

My later Thoughts asked, since Natures parts were so closely joined in one
body, how it was possible that there could be finite, and not single parts?

The former answered, That finite and single parts were not all one and the
same; for single parts, said they, are such as can subsist by themselves;
neither can they properly be called parts, but are rather finite wholes; for it
is a mere contradiction to say single parts, they having no reference to each
other, and consequently not to the body of Nature; But what we call finite
Parts, are nothing else but several corporeal figurative motions, which make
all the difference that is between the figures or parts of Nature, both in
their kinds, sorts and particulars: And thus finite and particular parts are
all one, called thus, by reason they have limited and circumscribed figures, by
which they are discerned from each other, but not single figures, for they are
all joined in one body, and are parts of one infinite whole, which is Nature;
and these figures being all one and the same with their parts of Matter, change
according as their parts change, that is, by composition and division; for were
Nature an Atome, and material, that Atome would have the properties of a body,
that is, be dividable and composable, and so be subject to infinite changes,
although it were not infinite in bulk.

My later Thoughts replied, That if a finite body could have infinite
compositions and divisions, then Nature need not to be infinite in bulk or
quantity; besides, said they, it is against sense and reason that a finite
should have infinite effects.

The former answered first, As for the infiniteness of Nature, it was certain
that Nature consisted of infinite parts; which if so, she must needs also be of
an infinite bulk or quantity; for where soever is an infinite number of parts
or figures, there must also be an infinite whole, since a whole and its parts
differ not really, but only in the manner of our conception; for when we
conceive the parts of Nature as composed in one body, and inseparable from it,
the composition of them is called a whole; but when we conceive their different
figures, actions and changes, and that they are dividable from each other, or
amongst themselves, we call them parts; for by this one part is discerned from
the other part; as for example, a Mineral from a Vegetable, a Vegetable from an
Element, an Element from an Animal, etc. and one part is not another part; but
yet these parts are, and remain still parts of infinite Nature, and cannot be
divided into single parts, separated from the body of Nature, although they may
be divided amongst themselves infinite ways by the selfmoving power of Nature.
In short, said they, a whole is nothing but a composition of parts, and parts
are nothing but a division of the whole.

Next, as for the infinite compositions and divisions of a finite whole, said
they, it is not probable that a finite can have infinite effects, or can be
actually divided into infinite parts; but yet a body cannot but have the
proprieties of a body as long as it lasts; and therefore if a finite body
should last eternally, it would eternally retain the effects, or rather
proprieties of a body, that is, to be dividable and composable; and if it have
self-motion, and was actually divided and composed, then those compositions and
divisions of its parts would be eternal too; but what is eternal is infinite,
and therefore in this sense one cannot say amiss, but that there might be
eternal compositions and divisions of the parts of a finite whole; for
wheresoever is self-motion there is no rest: But, mistake us not, for we do not
mean divisions or compositions into single or infinite parts, (...) perpetual
and eternal change and self-motion of the parts of that finite body or whole
amongst themselves.

But because we speak now of the parts of Infinite Nature, which are Infinite
in number, though finite, or rather distinguished by their figures; It is
certain, said they, that there being a perpetual and eternal selfmotion in all
parts of Nature, and their number being infinite, they must of necessity be
subject to infinite changes, compositions, and divisions; not only as for
their duration, or eternal self-motion, but as for the number of their parts;
for parts cannot remove but from and to parts; and as soon as they are removed
from such parts, they join to other parts, which is nothing else but a
composition and division of parts; and this composition and division of the
Infinite parts of Nature, hinders that there are no actual divisions or
compositions of a finite part, because the one counterbalances the other; for
if by finite you understand a single part, there can be no such thing in
Nature, since what we call the finiteness of parts, is nothing else but the
difference and change of their figures, caused by self-motion; and therefore
when we say Infinite Nature consists of an infinite number of finite parts, we
mean of such parts as may be distinguished or discerned from each other by
their several figures; which figures are not constant, but change perpetually
in the body of Nature; so that there can be no constant figure allowed to no
part, although some do last longer then others.

Then my later Thoughts desired to know, whether there were not degrees of
Motion, as well as there are of Matter?

The former answered, That without question there were degrees of motion; for
the rational parts were more agil, quick and subtle in their corporeal actions
then the sensitive, by reason they were of a purer and finer degree of Matter,
and free from laboring on the inanimate parts: but withal they told them, that
the several different and opposite actions of Nature hindered each other from
running into extremes: And as for the degrees of Matter, there could not
possibly be more then Animate and Inanimate, neither could any degree go beyond
Matter, so as to become immaterial. The truth is, said they, to balance the
actions of Nature, it cannot be otherwise, but there must be a Passive degree
of Matter, opposite to the active; which passive part is that we call
Inanimate; for though they are so closely intermixed in the body of Nature, that
they cannot be separated from each other, but by the power of God;
nevertheless, sense and reason may perceive that they are distinct degrees, by
their distinct and different actions, and may distinguish them so far, that one
part is not another part, and that the actions of one degree are not the
actions of the other. Wherefore as several self-moving parts may be joined in
one composed body, and may either act differently without hinderance and
obstruction to each other, or may act jointly and agreeably to one effect; so
may the sensitive parts carry or bear along with them the inanimate parts,
without either transferring and communicating motion to them, or without any
cooperation or selfaction of the inanimate parts; and as for Matter, as there
can be no fewer degrees then Animate and Inanimate, sensitive and rational; so
neither can there be more; for as we mentioned heretofore, were there nothing
but animate or self-moving Matter in Nature, the parts of Nature would be too
active and quick in their several productions, alterations and dissolutions,
and all things would be as soon made, as thoughts. Again, were there no
Inanimate degree of Matter, the sensitive corporeal motions would retain the
figures or patterns of exterior objects, as the rational do; which yet we
perceive otherwise; for so soon as the object is removed, the sensitive
perception is altered; and though the sensitive parts can work by rote, as in
dreams and some distempers, yet their voluntary actions are not so exact, as
their Exterior perceptive actions, nor altogether and always so regular as the
rational; and the reason is, that they are bound to bear the inanimate parts
along with them in all their actions. Also were there no degree of Inanimate
Matter, Natures actions would run into extremes; but because all her actions
are balanced by opposites, they hinder both extremes in Nature, and produce
all that Harmonious variety that is found in Natures parts.

But said my later Thoughts, wheresoever is such an opposition and crossing of
actions, there can be no harmony, concord or agreement, and consequently no
orderly productions, dissolutions, changes and alterations, as in Nature we
perceive there be.

The former answered, That though the actions of Nature were different and
opposite to each other, yet they did cause no disturbance in Nature, but they
were ruled and governed by Natures wisdom; for Nature being peaceable in her
self, would not suffer her actions to disturb her Government; wherefore
although particulars were crossing and opposing each other, yet she did govern
them with such wisdom and moderation, that they were necessitated to obey her
and move according as she would have them; but sometimes they would prove
extravagant and refractory, and hence came that we call Irregularities. The
truth is, said they, contrary and opposite actions are not always at war; for
example, two men may meet each other contrary ways, and one may not only stop
the other from going forward, but even draw him back again the same way he
came; and this may be done with love and kindness, and with his good will, and
not violently by power and force: The like may be in some actions of Nature.
Nevertheless, we do not deny, but there is many times force and power used
between particular parts of Nature, so that some do overpower others, but this
causes no disturbance in Nature; for if we look upon a well-ordered Government,
we find that the particulars are often at strife and difference with each
other, when as yet the Government is as orderly and peaceable as can be.

My later thoughts replied, That although the several and contrary actions in
Nature did not disturb her Government, yet they moving severally in one
composed figure at one and the same time, proved that Motion, Figure and Body
could not be one and the same thing.

The former answered, That they had sufficiently declared heretofore that
Matter was either moving, or moved: viz. That the Animate part was self-moving,
and the Inanimate moved, or carried along with, and by the Animate; and these
degrees or parts of Matter were so closely intermixed in the body of Nature,
that they could not be separated from each other, but did constitute but one
body, not only in general, but also in every particular; so that not the least
part (if least could be) nay, not that which some call an Atome, was without
this commixture; for wheresoever was Inanimate, there was also Animate Matter;
which Animate Matter was nothing else but corporeal self-motion, and if any
difference could be apprehended, it was, said they, between these two degrees,
to wit, the Animate and Inanimate part of Matter, and not between the animate
part and self-motion, which was but one thing, and could not so much as be
conceived differently; and since this Animate Matter, or corporeal self-motion
is thoroughly intermixed with the Inanimate parts, they are but as one body (like
as soul and body make but one man) or else it were impossible that any Creature
could be composed, consist, or be dissolved; for if there were Matter without
Motion, there could be no composition or dissolution of such figures as are
named Creatures; nor any, if there were Motion without Matter, or (which is the
same) an Immaterial Motion; For can any part of reason, that is regular,
believe, that that which naturally is nothing, should produce a natural
something? Besides, said they, Material and Immaterial are so quite opposite to
each other, as it is impossible they should commix and work together, or act one
upon the other: nay, if they could, they would make but a confusion, being of
contrary natures: Wherefore it is most probable, and can to the perception of
Regular sense and reason be no otherwise, but that self-moving Matter, or
corporeal figurative self-motion, does act and govern, wisely, orderly and
easily, poising cr ballancing extremes with proper and fit oppositions, which
could not be done by immaterials, they being not capable of natural
compositions and divisions; neither of dividing Matter, nor of being divided?
In short, although there are numerous corporeal figurative motions in one
composed figure, yet they are so far from disturbing each other, that no
Creature could be produced without them; and as the actions of retention are
different from the actions of digestion or expulsion, and the actions of
contraction from those of dilation; so the actions of imitation or patterning
are different from the voluntary actions vulgarly called Conceptions, and all
this to make an equal poise or balance between the actions of Nature. Also
there is difference in the degrees of motions, in swiftness, slowness, rarity,
density, appetites, passions, youth, age, growth, decay, etc. as also between
several sorts of perceptions: all which proves, that Nature is composed of
self-moving parts, which are the cause of all her varieties: But this is well
to be observed, said they, that the Rational parts are the purest, and
consequently the most active parts of Nature, and have the quickest actions;
wherefore to balance them, there must be a dull part of Matter, which is the
Inanimate, or else a World would be made in an instant, and every thing would
be produced, altered and dissolved on a sudden, as they had mentioned before.

Well, replied my later Thoughts, if there be such oppositions between the
parts of Nature, then I pray inform us, whether they be all equally and exactly
poised and balanced?

To which the former answered, That though it was most certain that there was a
poise and balance of Natures corporeal actions; yet no particular Creature was
able to know the exactness of the proportion that is between them, because they
are infinite.

Then my later Thoughts desired to know, whether Motion could be annihilated?

The former said, no: because Nature was Infinite, and admitted of no addition
nor diminution; and consequently of no new Creation nor annihilation of any
part of hers.

But, said the later, If Motion be an accident, it may be annihilated.

The former answered, They did not know what they meant by the word Accident.

The later said, That an Accident was something in a body, but nothing without
a body.

If an Accident be something, answered the former, Then certainly it must be
body; for there is nothing but what is corporeal in Nature; and if it be body,
then it cannot be nothing at no time, but it must of necessity be something.

But it cannot subsist of, and by it self, replied my later Thoughts, as a
substance; for although it has its own being, yet its being is to subsist in
another body.

The former answered, That if an Accident was nothing without a body or
substance, and yet something in a body; then they desired to know, how, being
nothing, it could subsist in another body, and be separated from another body;
for composition and division, said they, are attributes of a body, since
nothing can be composed or divided but what has parts; and nothing has parts
but what is corporeal or has a body, and therefore if an accident can be in a
body, and be separated from a body, it would be nonsense to call it nothing.

But then my later Thoughts asked, that when a particular Motion ceased, what
became of it?

The former answered, it was not annihilated, but changed.

The later said, How can motion be corporeal, and yet one thing with body?
Certainly if body be material, and motion too, they must needs be two several
substances.

The former answered, That motion and body were not two several substances; but
motion and matter made one self-moving body; and so was place, color, figure,
etc. all one and the same with body.

The later replied, That a Man, and his action were not one and the same, but
two different things.

The former answered, That a Man, and his actions were no more different, then
a man was different from himself; for, said they, although a man may have many
different actions, yet were not that man existent, the same actions would not
be; for though many men have the like actions, yet they are not the same.

But then replied the later, Place cannot be the same with body, nor color;
because a man may change his place and his color, and yet retain his body.

Truly, said the former, If Place be changed, then Body must change also; for
wheresoever is Place, there is Body; and though it be a vulgar phrase, That a
man changes his place when he heremoves, yet it is not a proper Philosophical
expression; for he removes only from such parts, to such parts; so that it is
a change or a division and composition of parts, and not of place: And as for
color, though it changes, yet that proves not that it is not a body, or can be
annihilated. The truth is, though Figure, Motion, Color, etc. do change, yet
they remain still in Nature, and it is impossible that Nature can give away, or
lose the least of her corporeal Attributes or Proprieties; for Nature is
infinite in power, as well as in act; we mean, for acting naturally; and
therefore whatsoever is not in present act, is in the power of Infinite Nature.

But, said my later Thoughts, if a body be divided into very minute parts as
little as dust, where is the color then?

The Color, answered the former, is divided as well as the body; and though
the parts thereof be not subject to our sensitive perception, yet they have
nevertheless their being; for all things cannot be perceptible by our senses.

The later said, That the Color of a Man's face could change from pale to red,
and from red to pale, and yet the substance of the face remain the same; which
proved, that color and substance was not the same.

The former answered, That although the color of a man's face did change
without altering the substance thereof, yet this proved no more that Color was
Immaterial, then that Motion was Immaterial; for a man may put his body into
several postures, and have several actions, and yet without any change of the
substance of his body; for all actions do not necessarily import a change of
the parts of a composed figure, there being infinite sorts of actions.

We will leave Accidents, said my later Thoughts, and return to the Inanimate
part of Matter; and since you declare, that all parts of Nature do worship and
adore God, you contradict your self in allowing an Inanimate degree of Matter,
by reason, where there is no self-motion, there can be no perception of God,
and consequently no Worship and Adoration.

The former answered, That the knowledge of God did not consist in exterior
perception; for God, said they, being an Infinite, Incomprehensible,
supernatural and Immaterial Essence, void of all parts, can no ways be subject
to Perception. Nevetheless, although no part can have an exterior perception of
the substance of God, as it has of particular natural Creatures, yet it has
Conceptions of the Existence of God, to wit, that there is a God above Nature,
on which Nature depends, and from whose Immutable and Eternal Decree it has its
Eternal Being, as God's Eternal Servant; but what God is in his Essence,
neither Nature, nor any of her parts or Creatures is able to conceive. And
therefore although the Inanimate part of Matter is not perceptive, yet having
an innate knowledge and life of it self, it is not improbable but it may also
have an interior, fixed, and innate knowledge of the Existency of God, as that he
is to be adored and worshipped: And thus the Inanimate part may after its own
manner worship and adore God, as much as the other parts in their way: for it
is probable, that God having endued all parts of Nature with self-knowledg, may
have given them also an Interior knowledge of himself, that is, of his
Existency, how he is the God of Nature, and ought to be worshipped by her as
his Eternal servant.

My later Thoughts excepted, That not any Creature did truly know it self, much
less could it be capable of knowing God.

The former answered, That this was caused through the variety of self-motion;
for all Creatures (said they) are composed of many several parts, and every
part has its own particular self-knowledg, as well as self-motion, which causes
an ignorance between them; for one parts knowledge is not another parts
knowledge; nor does one part know what another knows; but all knowledge of
exterior parts comes by perception; nevertheless, each part knows it self and
its own actions; and as there is an ignorance between parts, so there is also
an acquaintance (especially in the parts of one composed Creature) and the
rational parts being most subtle, active and free, have a more general
acquaintance then the sensitive; besides, the sensitive many times inform the
rational, and the rational the sensitive, which causes a general agreement of
all the parts of a composed figure, in the execution of such actions as belong
to it.

But how is it possible, replied my later Thoughts, that the inanimate part of
matter can be living and self-knowing, and yet not self-moving? for Life and
Knowledge cannot be without self-motion; and therefore if the inanimate parts
have Life and Knowledge, they must necessarily also have self-motion.

The former answered, That Life and Knowledge did no ways depend upon
self-motion; for had Nature no motion at all, yet might she have Life and
Kowledg; so that self-motion is not the cause of Life and Knowledge, but only
of Perception, and all the various actions of Nature; and this is the reason
said they, that the inanimate part of matter is not perceptive, because it is
not self-moving; for though it has life and self-knowledg as well as the
Animate part, yet it has not an active life, nor a perceptive knowledge. By
which you may see, that a fixed and interior self-knowledg, may very well be
without exterior perception; for though perception presupposes an innate
self-knowledg as its ground and principle, yet self-knowledg does not
necessarily require perception, which is only caused by self-motion; for
self-motion, as it is the cause of the variety of Natures parts and actions, so
it is also of their various perceptions: If it was not too great a presumtion,
said they, we could give an instance of God, who has no local self-motion, and
yet is infinitely knowing: But we will forbear to go so high, as to draw the
Infinite, Incomprehensible God, to the proofs of Material Nature.

My later Thoughts replied, first, That if it were thus, then one and the same
parts of matter would have a double life, and a double knowledge.

Next they said, That if perception were an effect of self-motion, then God
himself must necessarily be self-moving, or else he could not perceive Nature
and her parts and actions.

Concerning the first objection my former thoughts answered, That the parts of
Nature could have a double life and knowledge no more, then one man could be
called double or treble: You might as well said they, make millions of men of
one particular man, nay, call every part or action of his a peculiliar man, as
make one and the same part of matter have a double life and knowledge.

But mistake us not, added my former thoughts, when we say, that one and the
same part cannot have a double life and knowledge; for we mean not, the composed
creatures of Nature, which as they consist of several degrees of matter, so
they have also several degrees of lives and knowledges; but it is to be
understood of the essential or constitutive parts of Nature; for as the
rational part is not, nor can be the sensitive part, so it can neither have a
sensitive knowledge; no more can a sensitive part have a rational knowledge, or
either of these the knowledge of the inanimate part; but each part retains its
own life and knowledge. Indeed it is with these parts as it is with particular
creatures; for as one man is not another man, nor has another man's knowledge, so
it is likewise with the mentioned parts of matter; and although the animate
parts have an interior, innate self-knowledg, and an exterior, perceptive
knowledge; yet these are not double knowledges; but perception is only an
effect of interior self-knowledg, occasioned by self-motion.

And as for the second, they answered, That the Divine Perception and Knowledge
was not any ways like a natural Perception, no more than God was like a
Creature; for Nature (said they) is material, and her perceptions are amongst
her infinite parts, caused by their compositions and divisions; but God is a
Supernatural, Individable, and Incorporeal Being, void of all Parts and
Divisions; and therefore he cannot be ignorant of any the least thing; but
being Infinite, he has an Infinite Knowledge, without any Degrees, Divisions, or
the like actions belonging to Material Creatures. Nor is he naturally, that is,
locally self-moving; but he is a fixed, unalterable, and in short, an
incomprehensible Being, and therefore no comparison can be made between Him and
Nature, He being the Eternal God, and Nature his Eternal Servant.

Then my later Thoughts said, That as for the knowledge of God, they would not
dispute of it; but if there was a fixed and interior, innate knowledge in all
Natures parts and Creatures, it was impossible that there could be any error or
ignorance between them.

The former answered, that although Errors belonged to particulars as well as
ignorance, yet they proceeded not from interior self-knowledg, but either from
want of exterior particular knowledges, or from the irregularity of motions;
and Ignorance was likewise a want not of interior, but exterior knowledge,
otherwise called Perceptive knowledge: for, said they, Parts can know no more of
other parts, but by their own perceptions; and since no particular Creature or
part of Nature can have an Infallible, Universal, and through perception of all
other parts; it can neither have an infallible and universal knowledge, but it
must content it self with such a knowledge as is within the reach of its own
perceptions; and hence it follows, that it must be ignorant of what it does not
know; for Perception has but only a respect to the exterior figures and
actions of other parts; and though the Rational part is more subtle and active
then the Sensitive, and may have also some perceptions of some interior parts
and actions of other Creatures, yet it cannot have an infallible and through
perception of all their interior parts and motions, which is a knowledge
impossible for any particular Creature to attain to.

Again my later Thoughts objected, That it was impossible that the parts of one
and the same degree could be ignorant of each others actions, how various
soever, since they were capable to change their actions to the like figures.

The former answered first, That although they might make the like figures, yet
they could not make the same, because the parts were not the same. Next they
said, that particular parts could not have infinite perceptions, but that they
could but perceive such objects as were subject to that sort of perception
which they had; no not all such; for oftentimes objects were obscured and
hidden from their perceptions, that although they could perceive them if
presented, or coming within the compass and reach of their perceptive faculty
or power; yet when they were absent, they could not; besides, said they, the
sensitive parts are not so subtle as to make perceptions into the interior
actions of other parts, no not the rational are able to have exact perceptions
thereof; for Perception extends but to adjoining parts and their exterior
figures and actions, and if they know any thing of their interior parts,
figures or motions, it is only by guess or probable conclusions, taken from
their exterior actions or figures, and made especially by the rational parts,
which as they are the most inspective, so they are the most knowing parts of
Nature.

After these and several other objections, questions and answers between the
later and former thoughts and conceptions of my mind, at last some Rational
thoughts which were not concerned in this dispute, perceiving that they became
much heated, and fearing they would at last cause a Faction or Civil War
amongst all the rational parts, which would breed that which is called a
Trouble of the Mind, endeavored to make a Peace between them, and to that end
they propounded, that the sensitive parts should publicly declare their
differences and controversies, and refer them to the Arbitration of the
judicious and impartial Reader. This proposition was unanimously embraced by
all the rational parts, and thus by their mutual consent this Argumental
Discourse was set down and published after this manner: In the mean time all
the rational parts of my Mind inclined to the opinion of my former conceptions,
which they thought much more probable then those of the later; and since now it
is your part, Ingenious Readers, to give a final decision of the Cause,
consider well the subject of their quarrel, and be impartial in your judgment;
let not Self-love or Envy corrupt you, but let Regular Sense and Reason be your
only Rule, that you may be accounted just Judges, and your Equity and Justice
be Remembered by all that honor and love it.

THE TABLE OF All the Principal Subjects contained and discoursed of in this
BOOK.
Observations upon Experimental Philosophy.
1. OF Humane Sense and Perception. 2. Of Art and Experimental Philosophy. 3.
Of Micrography, and of Magnifying and Multiplying Glasses. 4. Of the production
of Fire by Flint and Steel. 5. Of Pares. 6. Of the Effluviums of the Loadstone.
7. Of the Stings of Nettles and Bees. 8. Of the Beard of a wild Oat. 9. Of the
Eyes of Flies. 10. Of a Butter-Flye. 11. Of the walking Motions of Flies, and
other Creatures. 12. Whether it be possible to make man, and some other Animal
Creatures, fly as Birds do? 13. Of Snails and Leeches, and whether all Animals
have Blood? 14. Of Natural Productions. 15. Of the Seeds of Vegetables. 16. Of
the Providence of Nature; and some Opinions concerning Motion. 17. Des Carts
Opinion of Motion Examined. 18. Of the blackness of a Charcoal, and of Light.
19. Of the Pores of a Charcoal, and of Emptiness. 20. Of Colors. 21. Whether
an Idea have a Color, and of the Idea of of a Spirit? 22. Of Wood petrified.
23. Of the Nature of Water. 24. Of Salt, and of Sea or Salt Water. 25. Of the
motions of Heat and Cold. 26. Of the Measures, Degrees, and different sorts of
Heat and Cold. 27. Of Congelation or Freezing. 28. Of Thawing, or dissolving of
frozen Bodies. 29. Several Questions resolved concerning Cold and Frozen
Bodies. 30. Of Contraction and Dilation. 31. Of the Parts of Nature, and of
Atoms. 32. Of the Celestial parts of this World, and whether they be
alterable? 33. Of the Substance of the Sun, and of Fire. 34. Of Telescopes. 35.
Of Knowledge and Perception in general. 36. Of the different Perceptions of
Sense and Reason. 37. Several Questions and Answers concerning Knowledge and
Perception.
Further Observations upon Experimental Philosophy, reflecting withal upon
some Principal Subjects in Contemplative Philosophy.
1. Ancient Learning ought not to be Exploded; nor the Experimental Part of
Philosophy preferred before the Speculative. 2. Whether Artificial Effects may
be called Natural; and in what sense? 3. Of Natural Matter and Motion. 4.
Nature cannot be known by any of her Parts. 5. Art cannot produce new Forms in
Nature. 6. Whether there be any Prime or Principal Figures in Nature, and of
the true Principles of Nature. 7. Whether Nature be self-moving? 8. Of Animal
Spirits. 9. Of the Doctrine of the Scepticks concerning the Knowledge of Nature.
10. Of Natural Sense and Reason. 11. Of a general Knowledge and Worship of God,
given him by all Natural Creatures. 12. Of a particular Worship of God given
him by those that are his Chosen and Elect People. 13. Of the Knowledge of man.
14. A Natural Philosopher cannot be an Atheist. 15. Of the Rational Soul of
Man. 16. Whether Animal Parts separated from their Bodies, have life? 17. Of
the Spleen. 18. Of Anatomy. 19. Of preserving the Figures of Animal Creatures.
20. Of Chemistry, and Chemical Principles. 21. Of the Universal Medicine, and
of Diseases. 22. Of outward Remedies. 23. Of several sorts of Drink and Meat.
24. Of Fermentation. 25. Of the Plague. 26. Of Respiration.
Observations upon the Opinions of some Ancient Philosophers.
1. Upon the Principles of Thales. 2. Some few Observations on Plato's
Doctrine. 3. Upon the Doctrine of Pythagoras. 4. Of Epicurus his Principles of
Philosophy. 5. On Aristotle's Philosophical Principles. 6. Of Skepticism, and
some other Sects of the Ancient. An Explanation of some obscure and doubtful
Passages occurring in the Philosophical Works hitherto Published by the
Authoress.
A CATALOGUE OF ALL THE WORKS Hitherto Published by the AUTHORESSE.
SInce it is the fashion to declare what Books one has put forth to the public
view, I thought it not amiss to follow the Mode, and set down the Number of all
the Writings of mine which hitherto have been Printed.

1. Poems in Fol. Printed twice, whereof the last Impression is much mended. 2.
Natures Pictures; or Tales in Verse and Prose, in Fol. 3. A Little Tract of
Philosophy, in 8o 4. Philosophical and Physical Opinions, in Fol. 5. The same
much Enlarged and Altered, in Fol. 6. Philosophical Letters, in Fol. 7. The
Worlds Olio, now to be reprinted. 8. Plays in Fol. 9. Orations in Fol. 10.
Sociable Letters in Fol.
There are some others that never were Printed yet, which shall, if God grant
me Life and Health, be Published ere long.

OBSERVATIONS UPON EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY.
1. Of Humane Sense and Perception.
BEfore I deliver my observations upon that part of Philosophy which is called
Experimental, I thought it necessary to premise some discourse concerning the
Perception of Humane Sense. It is known that man has five Exterior Senses, and
every sense is ignorant of each other; for the Nose knows not what the Eyes
see, nor the Eyes what the Ears hear, neither do the Ears know what the Tongue
tastes; and as for Touch, although it is a general Sense, yet every several
part of the body has a several touch, and each part is ignorant of each others
touch: And thus there is a general ignorance of all the several parts, and yet
a perfect knowledge in each part; for the Eye is as knowing as the Ear, and the
Ear as knowing as the Nose, and the Nose as knowing as the Tongue, and one
particular Touch knows as much as another, at least is capable thereof: Nay,
not only every several Touch, Taste, Smell, Sound or Sight, is a several
knowledge by it self, but each of them has as many particular knowledges or
perceptions as there are objects presented to them: Besides, there are several
degrees in each particular sense; As for example, some Men (I will not speak of
other animals) their perception of sight, taste, smell, touch, or hearing, is
quicker to some sorts of objects, then to others, according either to the
perfection or imperfection, or curiosity or purity of the corporeal figurative
motions of each sense, or according to the presentation of each object proper
to each sense; for if the presentation of the objects be imperfect, either
through variation or obscurity, or any other ways, the sense is deluded.
Neither are all objects proper for one sense, but as there are several senses,
so there are several sorts of objects proper for each several sense. Now if
there be such variety of several knowledges, not only in one Creature, but in
one sort of sense; to wit, the exterior senses of one humane Creature; what may
there be in all the parts of Nature? It Is true, there are some objects which
are not at all perceptible by any of our exterior senses; as for example,
rarefied air, and the like: But although they be not subject to our exterior
sensitive perception, yet they are subject to our rational perception, which is
much purer and subtiler then the sensitive; nay, so pure and subtle a knowledge,
that many believe it to be immaterial, as if it were some God, when as it is
only a pure, fine and subtle figurative Motion or Perception; it is so active
and subtle, as it is the best informer and reformer of all sensitive
Perception; for the rational Matter is the most prudent and wisest part of
Nature, as being the designer of all productions, and the most pious and
devoutest part, having the perfectest notions of God, I mean, so much as Nature
can possibly know of God; so that whatsoever the sensitive Perception is either
defective in, or ignorant of, the rational Perception supplies. But mistake me
not: by Rational Perception and Knowledge, I mean Regular Reason, not Irregular;
where I do also exclude Art, which is apt to delude sense, and cannot inform so
well as Reason does; for Reason reforms and instructs sense in all its actions:
But both the rational and sensitive knowledge and perception being divideable as
well as composeable, it causes ignorance as well as knowledge amongst Natures
Creatures; for though Nature is but one body, and has no sharer or copartner,
but is entire and whole in it self, as not composed of several different parts
or substances, and consequently has but one Infinite natural knowledge and
wisdom, yet by reason she is also divideable and composeable, according to the
nature of a body, we can justly and with all reason say, That, as Nature is
divided into infinite several parts, so each several part has a several and
particular knowledge and perception, both sensitive and rational, and again that
each part is ignorant of the others knowledge and perception; when as otherwise,
considered altogether and in general, as they make up but one infinite body of
Nature, so they make also but one infinite general knowledge. And thus Nature
may be called both Individual, as not having single parts subsisting without
her, but all united in one body; and Divideable, by reason she is partable in
her own several corporeal figurative motions, and not otherwise; for there is
no Vacuum in Nature, neither can her parts start or remove from the Infinite
body of Nature, so as to separate themselves from it, for there is no place to
flee to, but body and place are all one thing, so that the parts of Nature can
only join and disjoyn to and from parts, but not to and from the body of
Nature. And since Nature is but one body, it is entirely wise and knowing,
ordering her self-moving parts with all facility and ease, without any
disturbance, living in pleasure and delight, with infinite varieties and
curiosities, such as no single Part or Creature of hers can ever attain to.

2. Of Art, and Experimental Philosophy.
SOme are of opinion, That by Art there can be a reparation made of the
Mischiefs and Imperfections mankind has drawn upon it self by negligence and
intemperance, and a wilful and superstitious deserting the Prescripts and Rules
of Nature, whereby every man, both from a derived Corruption, innate and born
with him, and from his breediug and converse with men, is very subject to slip
into all sorts of Errors. But the all-powerful God, and his servant Nature,
know, that Art, which is but a particular Creature, cannot inform us of the
Truth of the Infinite parts of Nature, being but finite it self; for though
every Creature has a double perception, rational and sensitive, yet each
creature or part has not an Infinite perception; nay, although each particular
creature or part of Nature may have some conceptions of the Infinite parts of
Nature, yet it cannot know the truth of those Infinite parts, being but a
finite part it self, which finiteness causes errors in Perceptions; wherefore
it is well said, when they confess themselves, That the uncertainty and
mistakes of humane actions proceed either from the narrowness and wandering of
our senses, or from the slipperiness or delusion of our memory, or from the
confinement or rashness of our understandiug. But, say they, It is no wonder
that our power over natural Causes and Effects is so slowly improved, seeing we
are not only to contend with the obscurity and difficulty of the things
whereon we work and think, but even the forces of our minds conspire to betray
us: And these being the dangers in the process of Humane Reason, the remedies
can only proceed from the Real, the Mechanical, the Experimental Philosophy,
which has this advantage over the Philosophy of discourse and disputation,
That whereas that chiefly aims at the subtilty of its deductions and
conclusions, without much regard to the first groundwork, which ought to be
well laid on the sense and memory, so this intends the right ordering of them
all, and making them serviceable to each other. In which discourse I do not
understand, first, what they mean by our power over natural causes and effects;
for we have no power at all over natural causes and effects, but only one
particular effect may have some power over another, which are natural actions;
but neither can natural causes nor effects be over-powred by man so, as if man
was a degree above Nature, but they must be as Nature is pleased to order them;
for Man is but a small part, and his powers are but particular actions of
Nature, and therefore he cannot have a supreme and absolute power. Next, I say,
That Sense, which is more apt to be deluded then Reason, cannot be the ground
of Reason, no more then Art can be the ground of Nature: Wherefore discourse
shall sooner find or trace Natures corporeal figurative motions, then deluding
Arts can inform the Senses; For how can a Fool order his understanding by Art,
if Nature has made it defective? or how can a wise man trust his senses, if
either the objects be not truly presented according to their natural figure and
shape, or if the senses be defective, either through age, sickness, or other
accidents, which do alter the natural motions proper to each sense? And hence I
conclude, that Experimental and Mechanic Philosophy cannot be above the
Speculative part, by reason most Experiments have their rise from the
Speculative, so that the Artist or Mechanic is but a servant to the Student.

3. Of Micrography, and of Magnifying and Multiplying Glasses.
ALthough I am not able to give a solid judgment of the Art of Micrography, and
the several dioptrical instruments belonging thereto, by reason I have neither
studied nor practiced that Art; yet of this I am confident, that this same Art,
with all its Instruments, is not able to discover the interior natural motions
of any part or creature of Nature; nay, the questions is, whether it can
represent yet the exterior shapes and motions so exactly, as naturally they
are; for Art does more easily alter then inform: As for example; Art makes
Cylinders, Concave and Convex-glasses, and the like, which represent the figure
of an object in no part exactly and truly, but very deformed and misshaped:
also a Glass that is flaw'd, cracked, or broke, or cut into the figure of
Lozanges, Triangles, Squares, or the like, will present numerous pictures of
one object. Besides, there are so many alterations made by several lights,
their shadows, refractions, reflections, as also several lines, points, mediums,
interposing and intermixing parts, forms and positions, as the truth of an
object will hardly be known; for the perception of sight, and so of the rest of
the senses, goes no further then the exterior Parts of the object presented;
and though the Perception may be true, when the object is truly presented, yet
when the presentation is false, the information must be false also. And it is
to be observed, that Art, for the most part, makes hermaphroditical, that is,
mixed figures, as partly Artificial, and partly Natural: for Art may make some
metal, as Pewter, which is between Tin and Lead, as also Brass, and numerous
other things of mixed natures; In the like manner may Artificial Glasses present
objects, partly Natural, and partly Artificial; nay, put the case they can
present the natural figure of an object, yet that natural figure may be
presented in as monstrous a shape, as it may appear misshapen rather then
natural: For example; a Lowse by the help of a Magnifying-glass, appears like a
Lobster, where the Microscope enlarging and magnifying each part of it, makes
them bigger and rounder then naturally they are. The truth is, the more the
figure by Art is magnified, the more it appears misshapen from the natural, in
so much as each joint will appear as a diseased, swelled and tumid body, ready
and ripe for incision. But mistake me not; I do not say, that no Glass presents
the true picture of an object; but only that Magnifying, Multiplying, and the
like optic Glasses, may, and do oftentimes present falsely the picture of an
exterior object; I say, the Picture, because it is not the real body of the
object which the Glass presents, but the Glass only figures or patterns out
the picture presented in and by the Glass, and there may easily mistakes be
committed in taking Copies from Copies. Nay, Artists do confess themselves,
that Flies, and the like, will appear of several figures or shapes, according
to the several reflections, refractions, mediums and positions of several
lights; which if so, how can they tell or judge which is the truest light,
position, or medium, that does present the object naturally as it is? and if
not, then an edge may very well seem flat, and a point of a needle a globe; but
if the edge of a knife, or point of a needle were naturally and really so as
the microscope presents them, they would never be so useful as they are; for a
flat or broad plain-edged knife would not cut, nor a blunt globe pierce so
suddenly another body, neither would or could they pierce without tearing and
rending, if their bodies were so uneven; and if the Picture of a young
beautiful Lady should be drawn according to the representation of the
Microscope, or according to the various refraction and reflection of light
through such like glasses, it would be so far from being like her, as it would
not be like a humane face, but rather a Monster, then a picture of Nature.
Wherefore those that invented Microscopes, and such like dioptrical Glasses, at
first, did, in my opinion, the world more injury then benefit; for this Art has
intoxicated so many men's brains, and wholly employed their thoughts and bodily
actions about phenomenon, or the exterior figures of objects, as all better
Arts and Studies are laid aside; nay, those that are not as earnest and active
in such employments as they, are, by many of them, accounted unprofitable
subjects to the Commonwealth of Learning. But though there be numerous Books
written of the wonders of these Glasses, yet I cannot perceive any such, at
best, they are but superficial wonders, as I may call them. But could
Experimental Philosophers find out more beneficial Arts then our Forefathers
have done, either for the better increase of Vegetables and brute Animals to
nourish our bodies, or better and commodious contrivances in the Art of
Architecture to build us houses, or for the advancing of trade and traffic to
provide necessaries for us to live, or for the decrease of nice distinctions
and sophistical disputes in Churches, Schools and Courts of Judicature, to make
men live in unity, peace and neighbourly sriendship, it would not only be
worth their labor, but of as much praise as could be given to them: But as
Boys that play with watery Bubbles Glass-tubes.
, or fling Dust Atoms.
into each others Eyes, or make a Hobbyhorse Exterior figures.
of Snow, are worthy of reproof rather then praise; for wasting their time with
useless sports; so those that addict themselves to unprofitable Arts, spend
more time then they reap benefit thereby. Nay, could they benefit men either in
Husbandry, Architecture, or the like necessary and profitable employments, yet
before the Vulgar sort would learn to understand them, the world would want
Bread to eat, and Houses to dwell in, as also Cloths to keep them from the
inconveniences of the inconstant weather. But truly, although Spinsters were
most experienced in this Art, yet they will never be able to spin Silk, Thread,
or Wool, etc. from loose Atoms; neither will Weavers weave a Web of Light from
the Sun's Rays, nor an Architect build an House of the bubbles of Water and
Air, unless they be Poetical Spinsters, Weavers and Architects; and if a
Painter should draw a Lowse as big as a Crab, and of that shape as the
Microscope presents, can any body imagine that a Beggar would believe it to be
true? but if he did, what advantage would it be to the Beggar? for it does
neither instruct him how to avoid breeding them, or how to catch them, or to
hinder them from biting. Again: if a Painter should paint Birds according to
those Colors the Microscope presents, what advantage would it be for Fowlers
to take them? Truly, no Fowler will be able to distinguish several Birds
through a Microscope, neither by their shapes nor colors; They will be better
discerned by those that eat their flesh, then by Micrographers that look upon
their colors and exterior figures through a Magnifying-glass. In short,
Magnifying-glasses are like a high heel to a short leg, which if it be made
too high, it is apt to make the wearer fall, and at the best, can do no more
then represent exterior figures in a bigger, and so in a more deformed shape
and posture then naturally they are; but as for the interior form and motions
of a Creature, as I said before, they can no more represent them, then
Telescopes can the interior essence and nature of the Sun, and what matter it
consists of; for if one that never had seen Milk before, should look upon it
through a Microscope, he would never be able to discover the interior parts of
Milk by that instrument, were it the best that is in the World; neither the
Whey, nor the Butter, nor the Curds. Wherefore the best optic is a perfect
natural Eye, and a regular sensitive perception, and the best judge is Reason,
and the best study is Rational Contemplation joined with the observations of
regular sense, but not deiuding Arts; for Art is not only gross in comparison
to Nature, but, for the most part, deformed and defective, and at best produces
mixed or hermaphroditical figures, that is, a third figure between Nature and
Art: which proves, that natural Reason is above artificial Sense, as I may call
it: wherefore those Arts are the best and surest Informers, that alter Nature
least, and they the greatest deluders that alter Nature most, I mean, the
particular Nature of each particular Creature; (for Art is so far from altering
Infinite Nature, that it is no more in comparison to it, then a little Fly to
an Elephant, no not so much, for there is no comparison between finite and
Infinite.) But wise Nature taking delight in variety, her parts, which are her
Creatures, must of necessity do so too.

4. Of the Production of Fire by a Flint and Steel.
SOme learned Writers of Micrography, having observed the fiery sparks that are
struck out by the violent motion of a Flint against Steel, suppose them to be
little parcels either of the Flint or Steel, which by the violence of the
stroke, are at the same time severed and made red hot; nay, sometimes to such a
degree as they are melted together into glass. But whatsoever their opinion be,
to my sense and reason it appears very difficult to determine exactly how the
production of Fire is made, by reason there are so many different sorts of
Productions in Nature, as it is impossible for any particular Creature to know
or describe them: Nevertheless, it is most probable, that those two bodies do
operate not by incorporeal but corporeal motions, which either produce a third
corporeal figure out of their own parts, or by striking against each other, do
alter some of their natural corporeal figurative parts, so as to convert them
into fire, which if it have no fuel to feed on, must of necessity die; or it
may be, that by the occasion of striking against each other, some of their
looser parts are metamorphosed, and afterward return to their former figures
again; like as flesh being bruised and hurt, becomes numb and black, and after
returns again to its proper figure and color; or like as Water that by change
of motion in the same parts, turns into Snow, Ice, or Hail, may return again
into its former figure and shape; for Nature is various in her corporeal
figurative motions. But it is observable, that Fire is like seeds of Corn sown
in Earth, which increases or decreases according as it has nourishment; by
which we may see that Fire is not produced from a bare immaterial motion (as I
said before;) for a spiritual issue cannot be nourished by a corporeal
substance, but it is with Fire as it is with all, at least most other natural
Creatures, which require Respiration as well as Perception; for Fire requires
Air as well as Animals do. By Respiration, I do not mean only that animal
respiration which in Man, and other animal Creatures, is performed by the
lungs, but a dividing and uniting, or separating and joining of parts from and
to parts, as of the exterior from and to the interior, and of the interior from
and to the exterior; so that when some parts issue, others do enter: And thus
by the name of Respiration I understand a kind of Reception of foreign Matter,
and emission of some of their own; as for example, in Animals, I mean not only
the respiration performed by the lungs, but also the reception of food, and of
other matter entering through some proper organs and pores of their bodies, and
the discharging of some other matter the sameway; and if this be so, as surely
it is, then all or most Creatures in Nature have some kind of Respiration or
Reciprocal breathing, that is, Attraction and Expiration, receiving of
nourishment and evacuation, or a reception of some foreign parts, and a
discharging and venting of some of their own. But yet it is not necessary that
all the matter of Respiration in all Creatures should be Air; for every sort of
Creatures, nay every particular has such a matter of Respiration, as is proper
both to the nature of its figure, and proper for each sort of respiration.
Besides, although Air may be a fit substance for Respiration to Fire, and to
some other Creatures, yet I cannot believe, that the sole agitation of Air is
the cause of Fire, no more then it can be called the cause of Man; for if this
were so, then Houses that are made of Wood, or covered with Straw, would never
fail to be set on fire by the agitation of the Air. Neither is it requisite
that all Respirations in all Creatures should be either hot or cold, moist or
dry, by reason there are many different sorts of Respiration, acording to the
nature and propriety of every Creature, whereof some may be hot, some cold;
some hot and dry, some cold and dry; some hot and moist, some cold and moist,
etc. and in Animals, at least in Mankind, I observe, that the respiration
performed by the help of their lungs. is an attraction of some refrigerating
air and an emission of some warm vapor. What other Creatures respirations may
be, I leave for others to inquire.

5. Of Pores.
AS I have mentioned in my former Discourse, that I do verily believe all or
most natural Creatures have some certain kind of respiration, so do I also find
it most probable, that all or most natural Creatures have Pores: not empty
Pores; for there can be no Vacuum in Nature, but such passages as serve for
respiration, which respiration is some kind of receiving and discharging of
such matter as is proper to the nature of every Creature: And thus the several
Organs of Animal Creatures, are, for the most part, employed as great large
pores; for Nature being in a perpetual motion, is always dissolving and
composing, changing and ordering her self-moving parts as she pleases. But it
is well to be observed, that there is difference between Perception and
Respiration; for Perception is only an action of Figuring or Patterning, when
as the Rational and Sensitive Motions do figure or pattern out something: but
Respiration is an action of drawing, sucking, breathing in, or receiving any
ways outward parts, and of venting, discharging, or sending forth inward parts.
Next, although there may be Pores in most natural Creatures, by reason that
all, or most have some kind of Respiration, yet Nature has more ways of
dividing and uniting of parts, or of ingress and egress, then the way of
drawing in, and sending forth by Pores; for Nature is so full of variety, that
not any particular corporeal figurative motion can be said the prime or
fundamental, unless it be self-motion, the Architect and Creator of all
figures: Wherefore, as the Globular figure is not the prime or fundamental of
all other figures, so neither can Respiration be called the prime or
fundamental motion; for, as I said, Nature has more ways then one, and there
are also retentive Motions in Nature, which are neither dividing nor composing,
but keeping or holding together.

6. Of the Effluvium's of the Loadstone.
IT is the opinion of some, that the Magnetical Effluviums do not proceed
intrinsecally from the stone, but are certain extrinsecal particles, which
approaching to the stone, and finding congruous pores and inlets therein, are
channelled through it; and having acquired a motion thereby, do continue their
current so far, till being repulsed by the ambient air, they recoil again, and
return into a vortical motion, and so continue their revolution for ever
through the body of the Magnet. But if this were so, then all porous bodies
would have the same Magnetical Effluviums, especially a Char-coal, which, they
say, is full of deep pores: besides, I can hardly believe, that any Microscope
is able to show how those flowing Atoms enter and issue, and make such a
vortical motion as they imagine. Concerning the argument drawn from the
experiment, that a Magnet being made red hot in the fire, not only amits the
Magnetical Vigor it had before, but acquires a new one; does not evince or
prove that the Magnetical Effluviums are not innate or inherent in the stone;
for fire may overpower them so as we cannot perceive their vigor or force,
the motions of the Fire being too strong for the motions of the Loadstone; but
yet it does not follow hence, that those motions of the Loadstone are lost,
because they are not perceived, or that afterward when by cooling the
Loadstone they may be perceived again, they are not the same motions, but new
ones, no more then when a man does not move his hand the motion of it can be
said lost or annihilated. But say they, If the Polary direction of the Stone
should be thought to proceed intrinsecally from the Stone, it were as much as
to put a Soul or Intelligence into the Stone, which must turn it about, as
Angels are feigned to do Celestial Orbs. To which I answer; That although the
turning of the Celestial Orbs by Angels may be a figment, yet that there is a
soul and intelligence in the Loadstone, is as true, as that there is a soul in
Man. I will not say, that the Loadstone has a spiritual or immaterial soul, but
a corporeal or material one, to wit, such a soul as is a particle of the soul
of Nature, that is, of Rational Matter, which moves in the Loadstone according
to the propriety and nature of its figure. Lastly, as for their argument
concluding from the different effluviums of other, as for example, electrical
and odoriferous bodies, etc. as Camphire, and the like, whose expirations, they
say, fly away into the open air, and never make any return again to the body
from whence they proceeded; I cannot believe this to be so; for if odoriferous
bodies should effluviate and waste after that manner, then all strong
odoriferous bodies would be of no continuance, for where there are great
expenses, there must of neeessity follow a sudden waste: but the contrary is
sufficiently known by experience. Wherefore, it is more probable, that the
Effluviums of the Loadstone, as they call them, or the disponent and directive
faculty of turning it self toward the North, is intrinsecally inherent in the
stone it self, and is nothing else but the interior natural sensitive and
rational corporeal motions proper to its figure, as I have more at large
declared in my Philosophical Letters, and Philosophical Opinions; then that a
stream of exterior Atoms, by beating upon the stone, should turn it to and
fro, until they have laid it in such a position.

7. Of the Stings of Nettles and Bees.
I Cannot approve the opinion of those, who believe that the swelling, burning,
and smarting pain caused by the stinging of Nettles and Bees, does proceed from
a poisonous juice, that is contained within the points of Nettles, or stings of
Bees; for it is commonly known, that Nettles, when young, are oftentimes eaten
in Sallets, and minced into Broths; nay, when they are at their full growth,
good-huswifes use to lay their Cream-cheeses in great Nettles, whereas, if
there were any poison in them, the interior parts of animal bodies, after
eating them, would swell and burn more then the exterior only by touching
them. And as for stings of Bees, whether they be poisonous or not, I will not
certainly determine any thing, nor whether their stings be of no other use (as
some say) then only for defense or revenge; but this I know, that if a Be
once loses its sting, it becomes a Drone; which if so, then surely the sting
is useful to the Be, either in making Wax and Honey, or in drawing, mixing and
tempering the several sorts of juices, or in penetrating and piercing into
Vegetables, or other bodies, after the manner of broaching or tapping, to cause
the Liquor to issue out, or in framing the structure of their comb, and the
like; for surely Nature does not commonly make useless and unprofitable things,
parts, or creatures: Neither does her design tend to an evil effect, although I
do not deny but that good and useful instruments may be and are often employed
in evil actions. The truth is, I find that stings are of such kind of figures
as fire is, and fire of such a kind of figure as stings are; but although they
be all of one general kind, nevertheless they are different in their particular
kinds; for as Animal kind contains many several and different particular kinds
or sorts of animals, so the like do Vegetables, and other kinds of Creatures.

8. Of the beard of a wild Oat.
THose that have observed through a Microscope the beard of a wild Oat, do
relate that it is only a small black or brown bristle, growing out of the side
of the inner husk, which covers the grain of a wild Oat, and appears like a
small wreathed sprig with two clefts; if it be wetted in water, it will appear
to unwreath it self, and by degrees to streighten its knee, and the two clefts
will become straight; but if it be suffered to dry again, it will by degrees
wreath it self again, and so return into its former posture: The cause of which
they suppose to be the differing texture of its parts, which seeming to have
two substances, one very porous, loose and spongy, into which the watery steams
of air may very easily be forced, which thereby will grow swelled and extended;
and a second, more hard and close, into which the water cannot at all or very
little penetrate; and this retaining always the same dimensions, but the other
stretching and shrinking, according as there is more or less water or moisture
in its pores, it is thought to produce this unwreathing and wreathing. But that
this kind of motion, whether it be caused by heat and cold, or by dryness and
moisture, or by any greater or less force, proceeding either from gravity and
weight, or from wind, which is the motion of the air, or from some springing
body, or the like, should be the very first foot-step of sensation and animate
motion, and the most plain, simple and obvious contrivance that Nature has made
use of to produce a motion next to that of rarefaction and condensation by heat
and cold, as their opinion is, I shall not easily be persuaded to believe; for
if Animate motion was produced this way, it would, in my opinion, be but a weak
and irregular motion. Neither can I conceive how these, or any other parts,
could be set a moving, if Nature her self were not selfmoving, but only moved:
Nor can I believe, that the exterior parts of objects are able to inform us of
all their interior motions; for our humane optic sense looks no further then
the exterior and superficial parts of solid or dense bodies, and all Creatures
have several corporeal figurative motions one within another, which cannot be
perceived neither by our exterior senses, nor by their exterior motions; as for
example, our Optic sense can perceive and see through a transparent body, but
yet it cannot perceive what that transparent bodies figurative motions are, or
what is the true cause of its transparentness; neither is any Art able to
assist our sight with such optic instruments as may give us a true information
thereof; for what a perfect natural eye cannot perceive, surely no glass will
be able to present.

9. Of the Eyes of Flies.
I Cannot wonder enough at the strange discovery made by the help of the
Microscope concerning the great number of eyes observed in Flies; as that, for
example, in a gray Drone-flie should be found clusters which contain about
14000 eyes: which if it be really so, then those Creatures must needs have more
of the (...) sense then those that have but two, or one eye; (...) cannot
believe, that so many (...) be made for no more use then one or two eyes are:
for though Art, the emulating Ape of Nature, makes often vain and useless
things, yet I cannot perceive that Nature her self does so. But a greater
wonder it is to me, that Man with the twinkling of one eye, can observe so many
in so small a Creature, if it be not a deceit of the optic instrument: for as
I have mentioned above, Art produces most commonly hermaphroditical figures,
and it may be, perhaps, that those little pearls or globes, which were taken
for eyes in the mentioned Fly, are only transparent knobs, or glossie shining
spherical parts of its body, making refractions of the rays of light, and
reflecting the pictures of exterior objects, there being many Creatures, that
have such shining protuberances and globular parts, and those full of quick
motion, which yet are not eyes. Truly, my reason can hardly be persuaded to
believe, that this Artificial Informer (I mean the Microscope) should be so
true as it is generally thought; for in my opinion it more deludes, then
informs: It is well known, that if a figure be longer, broader and bigger then
its nature requires, it is not its natural figure, and therefore those
Creatures, or parts of Creatures, which by Art appear bigger then naturally
they are, cannot be judged according to their natural figure, since they do not
appear in their natural shape; but in an artificial one, that is, in a shape or
figure magnified by Art, and extended beyond their natural figure; and since
Man cannot judge otherwise of a figure then it appears, besides, if the
Reflections and Positious of Light be so various and different as Experimental
Philophers confess themselves, and the instrument not very exact, (for who
knows but hereafter there may be many faults discovered of our modern
Microscopes which we are not able to perceive at the present) how shall the
object be truly known? Wherefore I can hardly believe the Truth of this
Experiment concerning the numerous Eyes of Flies; they may have, as I said
before, glossy and shining globular protuberances, but not so many eyes; as for
example, Bubbles of Water, Ice, as also Blisters and watery Pimples, and
hundreds the like, are shining and transparent Hemispheres, reflecting light,
but yet not eyes; Nay, if Flies should have so many numerous Eyes, why can they
not see the approach of a Spider until it be just at them; also how comes it
that sometimes, as for example, in cold weather, they seem blind, so as one may
take or kill them, and they cannot so much as perceive their enemies approach?
surely if they had 14000 Eyes, all this number would seem useless to them,
since other Creatures which have but two can make more advantage of those two
eyes, then they of their vast number. But perchance some will say, That Flies
having so many eyes, are more apt to be blind then others that have but few, by
reason the number is the cause that each particular is the weaker. To which I
answer, That if two Eyes be stronger then a Thousand, then Nature is to be
blamed that she gives such numbers of Eyes to so little a Creature. But Nature
is wiser then we or any Creature is able to conceive; and surely she works not
to no purpose, or in vain; but there appears as much wisdom in the fabric and
ftructure of her works, as there is variety in them. Lastly, I cannot well
conceive the truth of the opinion of those, that think all eyes must have a
transparent liquor, or humor within them, for in Crabs and Lobsters Eyes I can
perceive none such; and there may also be many other animal Creatures which
have none: for Nature is not tied to one way, but as she makes various
Creatures, so she may and does also make their parts and organs variously, and
not the same in all, or after one and the same manner or way.

10. Of a Butter-flie.
COncerning the Generation of Butter-flies, whether they be produced by the way
of Eggs, as some Experimental Philosophers do relate, or any other ways; or
whether they be all produced after one and the same manner, shall not be my
task now to determine; but I will only give my Readers a short account of what
I my self have observed: When I lived beyond the Seas in Banishment with my
Noble Lord, one of my Maids brought upon an old piece of wood, or stone (which
it was I cannot perfectly remember) something to me which seemed to grow out of
that same piece; it was about the length of half an inch or less, the tail was
short and square, and seemed to be a Vegetable, for it was as green as a green
small stalk, growing out of the aforesaid piece of stone or wood; the part next
the tail was like a thin skin, wherein one might perceive a perfect pulsation,
and was big in proportion to the rest of the parts; The part next to that, was
less in compass, and harder, but of such a substance as it was like Pewter or
Tin: The last and extreme part opposite to the first mentioned green tail or
stalk, seemed like a head, round, only it had two little points or horns
before, which head seemed to the eye and touch, like a stone, so that this
Creature appeared partly a Vegetable, Animal and Mineral; But what is more, it
was in a continual motion, for the whole body of it seemed to struggle as if it
would get loose from that piece of wood or stone the tail was joined to, or out
of which it grew; But I cutting and dividing its tail from the said piece, it
ceased to move, and I did not regard it any further. After some while I found
just such another insect, which I laid by upon the window, and one morning I
spied two Butter-flies playing about it; which, knowing the window had been
close shut all the while, and finding the insect all empty, and only like a
bare shell or skin, I supposed had been bred out of it; for the shell was not
only hollow and thin, but so brittle as it straight fell into pieces, and did
somewhat resemble the skin of a Snake when it is cast; and it is observable,
that two Butter-flies were produced out of one shell, which I supposed to be
male and female. But yet this latter I will not certainly affirm, for I could
not discern them with my eyes, except I had had some Microscope, but a thousand
to one I might have been also deceived by it; and had I opened this insect, or
shell, at first, it might perhaps have given those Butter-flies an untimely
death, or rather hindered their production. This is all I have observed of
Butter-flies, but I have heard also that Caterpillars are transformed into
Butter-flies; whether it be true or not, I will not dispute, only this I dare
say, that I have seen Caterpillars spin as Silkworms do, an oval ball about
their seed, or rather about themselves.

11. Of the Walking Motions of Flies, and other Creatures.
WHat Experimental Writers mention concerning the feet of Flies, and their
structure, to wit, that they have two claws or talons, and two palms or soles,
by the help of which they can walk on the sides of glass, or other smooth
bodies perpendicularly upwards; If this be the only reason they can give, then
certainly a Dormouse must have the same structure of feet; for she will, as
well as a fly, run straight upwards on the sharp edg of a glazed or
well-polished Sword, which is more difficult then to run up the sides of Glass:
And as for Flies, that they can suspend themselves against the undersurface of
many bodies; I say, not only Flies, but many other Creatures will do the same;
for not only great Caterpillars, or such worms as have many legs, as also
Spiders, but a Neut, which is but a little Creature, will run up a wall in a
perpendicular line; nay, walk as Flies do with its back down, and its legs
upwards. Wherefore it is not, in my opinion, the Pores of the surface of the
body, on which those Creatures walk; as for example, that a Fly should run the
tenters or points of her feet, which some have observed through a Microscope,
into the pores of such bodies she walks on, or make pores where she finds none;
(for I cannot believe, that in such close and dense bodies, where no pores at
all can be perceived, a small and weak leg of a Fly should pierce a hole so
suddenly, and with one step) Nor an Imaginary Glue, nor a dirty or smoaky
substance adhering to the surface of glass, as some do conceive; nor so much
the lightness of their bodies that makes those Creatures walk in such a
posture; for many can do the same that are a thousand times heavier then a
little Fly; but the chief cause is the shape of their bodies; which being
longer then they are deep, one counterpoises the other; for the depth of their
bodies has not so much weight as their length, neither are their heads and
legs just opposite: Besides, many have a great number of feet, which may
easily bear up the weight of their bodies; and although some Creatures, as
Horses, Sheep, Oxon, etc. have their legs set on in the same manner as Mice,
Squirrels, Cats, etc. yet they cannot run or climb upwards and downwards in a
perpendicular line, as well as these Creatures do, by reason of the depth of
their bodies from the soles of their feet to the surface of their back, the
weight of their depth over-powering the strength of their legs. Wherefore the
weight of a Creature lies for the most part in the shape of its body, which
shape gives it such sorts of actions as are proper for it; as for example, a
Bird flies by its shape, a Worm crawls by its shape, a Fish swims by its shape,
and a heavy Ship will bear it self up on the surface of water merely by its
exterior shape, it being not so much the interior figure or nature of Wood that
gives it this faculty of bearing up, by reason we see that many pieces of
Timber will sink down to the bottom in water. Thus Heaviness and Lightness is
for the most part caused by the shape or figure of the body of a Creature, and
all its exterior actions depend upon the exterior shape of its body.

Whether it be possible to make Man and other Animal Creatures that naturally
have no Wings, fly as Birds do.
SOme are of opinion, that is not impossible to make Man, and such other
Creatures that naturally have no wings, fly as Birds do; but I have heard my
Noble Lord and Husband give good reasons against it; For when he was in Paris,
he discoursing one time with Mr. H. concerning this subject, told him that he
thought it altogether impossible to be done: A Man, said he, or the like animal
that has no Wings, has his arms set on his body in a quite opposite manner then
Birds wings are; for the concave part of a Birds wing, which joins close to his
body, is in man outward; and the inward part of a man's arm where it joins to
his body, is in Birds placed outward; so that which is inward in a Bird, is
outward in Man; and what is inward in Man, is outward in Birds; which is the
reason that a Man has not the same motion of his arm which a Bird has of his
wing. For Flying is but swimming in the Air; and Birds, by the shape and
posture of their wings, do thrust away the air, and so keep themselves up;
which shape, if it were found the same in Man's arms, and other animals legs,
they might perhaps fly as Birds do, nay, without the help of Feathers; for we
see that Bats have but flesh-wings; neither would the bulk of their bodies be
any hinderance to them; for there be many Birds of great and heavy bodies,
which do nevertheless fly, although more slowly, and not so nimbly as Flies,
or little Birds: Wherefore it is only the different posture and shape of Men's
arms, and other Animals legs, contrary to the wings of Birds, that makes them
unapt to fly, and not so much the bulk of their bodies. But I believe, that a
fourlegg'd Creature, or Animal, may more easily and safely go upright like Man,
although it has its legs set on in a contrary manner to Man's arms and legs;
for a four-legg'd animals hind-leggs resemble man's arms, and its fore-leggs
are just as man's legs. Nevertheless there is no Art that can make a four
legged Creature imitate the actions of man, no more then Art can make them have
or imitate the natural actions of a Bird: For, Art cannot give new motions to
natural parts, which are not proper or natural for them, but each part must
have such proper and natural motions and actions as Nature has designed for it.
I will not say, but Art may help to mend some defects, errors or irregularities
in Nature, but not make better that which Nature has made perfect already.
Neither can we say Man is defective, because he cannot fly as Birds: for
flying is not his natural and proper motion; We should rather account that Man
monstrous that could fly, as having some motion not natural and proper to his
figure and shape; for that Creature is perfect in its kind, that has all the
motions which are naturally requisite to the figure of such a kind: But Man is
apt to run into extremes, and spoils Nature with doting too much upon Art.

13. Of Snails and Leeches, and whether all Animals have blood.
WHether Snails have a row of small teeth, orderly placed in the Gums, and
divided into several smaller and greater; or whether they have but one small
bended hard bone, which serves them instead of teeth, to bite out pretty large
and half-round bits of the leaves of trees to feed on, Experimental
Philosophers may enquire by the help of their Microscopes; My opinion is, That
Snails are like Leeches, which will not only bite, but suck; but this I do
verily believe, that Snails only bite Vegetables, not Animals, as Leeches do;
and though Leeches bite into the skin, yet they do not take any part away, but
suck only out the juicy part, that is, the blood, and leave the grosser
substance of flesh behind; and so do Snails bite into herbs, to suck out the
juicy substance, or else there would be found flesh in Leeches, and herbs in
Snails, which is not; so that Snails and Leeches bite for no end, but only to
make a passage to suck out the juicy parts; and therefore I cannot perceive
that they have bones, but I conceive their teeth or parts they pierce withal,
to be somewhat of the nature of stings, which are no more Bones then the points
of Fire are; I do not certainly affirm they are stings, but my meaning is, that
they are pointed or piercing figures, that is, as I said, of the nature of
stings, there being many several sorts of pointed and piercing figures, which
yet are not stings, like as there are several sorts of grinding and biting
figures which are not teeth; for there are so many several sorts of figures in
Vegetables, Minerals, Animals and Elements, as no particular Creature is able
to conceive. Again, it is questioned, whether those Creatures that suck blood
from others, have blood themselves, as naturally belonging to their own
substance; and my opinion is, that it is no necessary consequence, that that
should be a part of their substance on which they feed; food may be converted
into the substance of their bodies by the figurative transforming motions, but
it is not part of their substance before it is converted; and so many Creatures
may feed on blood, but yet have none of themselves as a natural constitutive
part of their being: besides, there are Maggots, Worms, and several sorts of
Flies, and other Creatures, that feed upon fruits and herbs, as also Lobsters,
Crabs, etc. which neither suck blood, nor have blood, and therefore blood is
not requisite to the life of every animal, although it is to the life of man,
and several other animal Creatures; Neither do I believe, that all the juice in
the veins, is blood (as some do conceive) for some of the juice may be in the
way of being blood, and some may have altered its nature from being blood, to
corruption, which later will never be blood again, and some may only be
metamorphosed from blood, and reassume its own color again; for it is as
natural for blood to be red, as for the Sun to be light: Wherefore when some
learned are of opinion, that those white, or yellow, or black juices which are
found in the veins of small insects, are their blood, they might as well say,
that brains are blood, or that the marrow in the bones, is blood; or if the
brain should all be turned to water, say, that this water is brains; which
would be as much as if one should call a man's body turned to dust and ashes, an
animal Creature, or a man; for there are natural properties which belong to
every Creature, and to each particular part of a Creature, and so is blood in
some animals a natural vital part proper to the conservation of its life,
without which it cannot subsist: for example, a young Maid in the
Green Sickness, when her veins are fuller of water, then blood, appears pale,
and is always sickly, weak and faint, not able to stir, by reason her veins are
fuller of water then blood, but were it all water, she would presently die.
Wherefore all juices are not blood; nay, I cannot believe as yet, that those
they call veins in some insects, are veins, much less that they contain blood,
and have a circulation of blood, nor that their motions proceed from Muscles,
Nerves and Tendons; but this I may say, that the veins are the proper and
convenient vehicles or receptacles of blood, as the head is of brains, and the
bones of marrow; also it is as proper for blood to be red, as for veins to
contain blood, for bones to contain marrow, and for the head to contain brains;
and when they alter or change from their particular natures, they are no more
blood, brains nor marrow: Wherefore those Creatures that have a juice which is
not red, have no blood; and if no blood, they have no veins. I will not say,
that all those that have veins must of necessity have them full of blood; for
in Dropsies, as also in the Green Sickness, as I mentioned above, they are
fuller of water then blood, but they must of necessity have some blood in their
veins, by reason the veins are the most proper receptacles for blood, and no
man can live without blood, but when all blood is turned to water, he must of
necessity die.

14. Of Natural Productions.
I Cannot wonder with those, who admire that a Creature which inhabits the air,
does yet produce a Creature, that for some time lives in the water as a fish,
and afterward becomes an inhabitant of the air, for this is but a production of
one animal from another; but what is more, I observe that there are productions
of and from Creatures of quite different kinds; as for example, that Vegetables
can and do breed Animals, and Animals, Minerals and Vegetables, and so forth:
Neither do I so much wonder at this, because I observe that all Creatures of
Nature are produced but out of one matter, which is common to all, and that
there are continual and perpetual generations and productions in Nature, as
well as there are perpetual dissolutions. But yet I cannot believe, that some
sorts of Creatures should be produced on a sudden by the way of transmigration
or translation of parts, which is the most usual way of natural productions;
for both natural and artificial productions are performed by degrees, which
requires time, and is not done in an instant. Neither can I believe, that all
natural things are produced by the way of seeds or eggs; for when I consider
the variety of Nature, it will not give me leave to think that all things are
produced after one and the same manner or way, by reason the figurative motions
are too different, and too diversely various, to be tied to one way of acting in
all productions; Wherefore as some Productions are done by the way of
transmigration or translation of parts, as for example, the Generation of Man,
and other Animals, and others by a bare Metamorphosis or Transformation of
their own parts into some other figure, as in the Generation of Maggots out of
Cheese, or in the production of Ice out of water, and many the like, so each
way has its own particular motions, which no particular Creature can persectly
know. I have mentioned in my Philosophical Sect. 4. Let. 2
Letters, that no animal Creature can be produced by the way of Metamorphosing,
which is a change of Motions in the same parts of Matter, but (as I do also
express in the same place) I mean such animals which are produced one from
another, and where the production of one is not caused by the destruction of
the other; such Creatures, I say, it is impossible they should be produced by a
bare Metamorphosis, without Transmigration or Translation of parts from the
Generator: but such insects, as Maggots, and several sorts of Worms and Flies,
and the like, which have no Generator of their own kind, but are bred out of
Cheese, Earth and Dung, etc. their Production is only by the way of
Metamorphosing, and not Transslation of parts. Neither can I believe, as some
do, that the Sun is the common Generator of all those insects that are bred
within the Earth; for there are not only Productions of Minerals and
Vegetables, but also of Animals in the Earth deeper then the Sun can reach, and
the heat of the Sun can pierce no further then cold can, which is not above two
yards from the surface of the Earth, at least in our climate: But why may not
the Earth, without the help of the Sun, produce Animal Creatures, as well as a
piece of Cheese in a deep Cellar, where neither the Sun nor his Beams enter?
Truly, I wonder men will confine all Productions to one principal agent, and
make the Sun the common Generator of all or most living insects, and yet
confess that Nature is so full of variety, and that the Generations and
Productions of insects are so various, as not only the same kind of Creature
may be produced from several kinds of ways, but the very same Creature may
produce several kinds. Nevertheless, I believe that natural Creatures are more
numerously and variously produced by dissolution of particulars by the way of
Metamorphosing, then by a continued propagation of their own species by the way
of translation of parts; and that Nature has many more ways of Productions,
then by seeds or seminal Principles, even in Vegetables, witness the Generation
or Production of Moss, and the like Vegetables that grow on Stones, Walls, dead
Animals sculls, tops of houses, etc. so that he who does confine Nature but to
one way of acting or moving, had better to deprive her of all motion, for
Nature being Infinite, has also infinite ways of acting in her particulars.
Some are of opinion, that the seed of Moss being exceeding small and light, is
taken up, and carried to and fro in the air into every place, and by the
falling drops of rain, is washed down out of it, and so dispersed into all
places, and there takes only root and propagates where it finds a convenient
soil for it to thrive in; but this is only a wild fancy, and has no ground,
and no experimental Writer shall ever persuade me, that by his Dioptrical
glasses he has made any such experiment; wherefore I insist upon sense and
reason, which inform me of the various productions of Nature, which cannot be
reduced to one principal kind, but are more numerous then man's particular and
finite reason can conceive. Neither is it a wonder to see Plants grow out of
the Earth without any waste of the Earth, by reason there are perpetual
compositions and divisions in Nature, which are nothing else but an uniting and
disjoyning of parts to and from parts, and prove that there is an
interchangeable ingress and egress, or a reciprocal breathing in all Natures
parts, not perceptible by man; so that no man can tell the association of
parts, and growing motions of any one, much less of all Creatures.

15. Of the Seeds of Vegetables.
SOme do call the seeds of Vegetables, the Cabinet of Nature, wherein are laid
up her Jewels; but this, in my opinion, is a very hard and improper expression;
for I cannot conceive what Jewels Nature has, nor in what Cabinet she preserves
them. Neither are the seeds of Vegetables more then other parts or Creatures of
Nature: But I suppose some conceive Nature to be like a Granary or Storehouse
of Pinebarley, or the like; which if so, I would fain know in what grounds
those seeds should be sown to produce and increase; for no seeds can produce of
themselves if they be not assisted by some other matter, which proves, that
seeds are not the prime or principal Creatures in Nature, by reason they depend
upon some other matter which helps them in their productions; for if seeds of
Vegetables did lie never so long in a storehouse, or any other place, they
would never produce until they were put into some proper and convenient ground:
It is also an argument, that no Creature or part of Nature can subsist singly
and precised from all the rest, but that all parts must live together; and
since no part can subsist and live without the other, no part can also be
called prime or principal. Nevertheless all seeds have life as well as other
Creatures; neither is it a Paradox to say, seeds are buried in life, and yet do
live; for what is not in present act, we may call buried, intombed or inurned
in the power of life; as for example, a man, when his figure is dissolved, his
parts dispersed, and joined with others, we may say his former form or figure
of being such a particular man is buried in its dissolution, and yet lives in
the composition of other parts, or which is all one, he does no more live the
life of a Man, but the life of some other Creature he is transformed into by
the transforming and figuring motions of Nature; nay, although every particle
of his former figure were joined with several other parts and particles of
Nature, and every particle of the dissolved figure were altered from its former
figure into several other figures, nevertheless each of these Particles would
not only have life, by reason it has motion, but also the former figure would
still remain in all those Particles, though dispersed, and living several sorts
of lives, there being nothing in Nature that can be lost or annihilated, but
Nature is and continues still the same as she was, without the least addition
or diminution of any the least thing or part, and all the varieties and changes
of natural productions proceed only from the various changes of Motion. But to
return to seeds; some Experimental Writers have observed, that the seed of
Corn-violets, which looks almost like a very small Flea, through the Microscope
appears a large body covered with a tough, thick and bright reflecting skin,
very irregularly shrunk and pitted, insomuch that it is almost an impossibility
to find two of them wrinkled alike, and wonder that there is such variety even
in this little seed: But to me it is no wonder, when I consider the variety of
Nature in all her works, not only in the exterior, but also in the interior
parts of every Creature; but rather a wonder to see two Creatures just alike
each other in their exterior figures. And since the exterior figures of
Creatures are not the same with the interior, but in many or most Creatures
quite different, it is impossible that the exterior shape and structure of
bodies can afford us sure and excellent instructions to the knowledge of their
natures and interior motions, as some do conceive; for how shall a feather
inform us of the interior nature of a Bird? we may see the exterior flying
motions of a Bird by the help of its wings, but they cannot give us an
information of the productive and figurative motions of all the interior parts
of a Bird, and what makes it to be such a Creature, no more then the exterior
view of a man's head, arms, legs, etc. can give an Information of his interior
Parts, viz. the spleen, liver, lungs, etc. Also in Vegetables; although those
sorts of Vegetables which are outwardly burning may be outwardly pointed, and
they that are hot and burning within may be inwardly pointed, yet no Microscope
is able to present to our view those inward points by the inspection of the
exterior figure and shape of those Vegetables: Neither does it follow, that all
those which are outwardly pointed, must needs be of a hot and burning nature,
except they be also pointed inwardly. Nay although some particular Creatures
should seem to resemble each other in their exterior shapes and figures so much
as not to be distinguished at the first view, yet upon better acquaintance we
shall find a great difference betwixt them; which shows that there is more
variety and difference amongst Natures works, then our weak senses are able to
perceive; nay, more variety in one particular Creature, as for example, in Man,
then all the kind or sort of that Creature, viz. Mankind, is able to know. And
if there be such difference betwixt the exterior figures of Creatures of one
sort, what may there be betwixt their exterior shapes and interior natures?
Nevertheless, although there be such variety, not only in the General kinds of
Creatures, but in every Particular, yet there is but one ground or principle of
all this variety, which is self-motion, or self-moving Matter. And I cannot
enough admire the strange conceits of some men, who perceiving and believing
such a curious variety and various curiosity of Nature in the parts of her
body, and that she is in a perpetual motion, and knows best her own Laws, and
the several proprieties of bodies, and how to adapt and fit them to her
designed ends, nay, that God has implanted a faculty of knowing in every
Creature, do yet deny, nay, rail against Natures self-moving power, condemning
her as a dull, inanimate, senseless and irrational body, as if a rational man
could conceive, that such a curious variety and contrivance of natural works
should be produced by a senseless and irational motion; or that Nature was full
of immaterial spirits, which did work Natural matter into such various figures;
or that all this variety should be caused by an Immaterial motion, which is
generated out of nothing, and annihilated in a moment; for no man can conceive
or think of motion without body, and if it be above thought, then surely it is
above act. But I rather cease to wonder at those strange and irregular opinions
of Mankind, since even they themselves do justify and prove the variety of
Nature; for what we call Irregularities in Nature, are really nothing but a
variety of Natures motions; and therefore if all men's conceits, fancies and
opinions were rational, there would not be so much variety as there is.
Concerning those that say, there is no variety in the Elemental Kingdom, as
Air, Water, and Earth; Air and Water having no form at all, unless a
potentiality to be formed into globules, and that the clods and parcels of
Earth are all Irregular. I answer, This is more then Man is able to know: But
by reason their Microscopes cannot make such Hermaphroditical figures of the
Elements, as they can of Minerals, Vegetables and Animals, they conclude there
is no such variety in them; when as yet we do plainly perceive that there are
several sorts of Air, Fire, Water, Earth, and no doubt but these several sorts,
and their particulars, are as variously figured as other Creatures: Truly it is
no consequence to deny the being of that which we do not see or perceive; for
this were to attribute a Universal and Infinite knowledge to our weak and
imperfect senses. And therefore I cannot believe, that the Omnipotent Creator
has written and engraven his most mysterious Designs and Counsels only in one
sort of Creatures; since all parts of Nature, their various productions and
curious contrivances, do make known the Omnipotency of God, not only those of
little, but also those of great sizes; for in all figures, sizes and actions is
apparent the curious variety of Nature, and the Omnipotency of the Cretor, who
has given Nature a self-moving power to produce all these varieties in her
self; which varieties do evidently prove, that Nature does not work in all
Creatures alike: nor that she has but one Primary or Principal sort of motions
by which she produces all Creatures, as some do conceive the manner of
wreathing and unwreathing, which they have observed in the beard of a Wild-oat,
mentioned before, to be the first foot step of sensation and animate motion,
and the most plain, simple and obvious contrivance Nature has made use of to
produce a motion next to that of rarefaction and condensation by heat and cold;
for this is a very wild and extravagant conceit, to measure the infinite
actions of Nature according to the rule of one particular sort of motions,
which any one that has the perfect use of his sense and reason may easily see,
and therefore I need not to bring many arguments to contradict it.

16. Of the Providence of Nature, and of some Opinions concerning Motion.
COncerning those that speak of the Providence of Nature, and the preserving of
Vegetables, to wit, that Nature is very curious and careful in preserving their
seminal principles, and lays them in most convenient, strong and delicate
cabinets for their safer protection from outward danger: I confess, Nature may
make such protections, that one Creature may have some defense from the
injuries and assaults of its Fellow Creatures; but these assaults are nothing
but dissolving motions, as friendly and amiable associations are nothing else
but composing motions; neither can any thing be lost in Nature, for even the
least particle of Nature remains as long as Nature her self. And if there be
any Providence in Nature, then certainly Nature has knowledge and wisdom; and if
she has knowledge and wisdom, then she has sense and reason; and if sense and
reason, then she has self-motion; and if Nature has self-motion, then none of
her parts can be called inanimate or soul-less: for Motion is the life and soul
of Nature, and of all her parts; and if the body be animate, the parts must be
so too, there being no part of the animate body of Nature that can be dead, or
without motion; whereof an instance might be given of animal bodies, whose
parts have all animal life, as well as the body it self: Wherefore those that
allow a soul, or an informing, actuating and animating form or faculty in
Nature and her parts, and yet call some parts inanimate or soul-less, do
absolutely contradict themselves. And those that say, all the varieties of
Nature are produced, not by self-motion, but that one part moves another, must
at last come to something that moves it self: besides, it is not probable, that
one part moving another, should produce all things so orderly and wisely as
they are in Nature. But those that say Motion is no substance, and consequently
not material, and yet allow a generation and annihilation of Motion, speak, in
my opinion, nonsense: for first, how can self-motion, the Author and Producer
of all things, work all the varieties that are in Nature, and be nothing it
self? Next, how can that which is nothing (for all that is not Material is
nothing in Nature, or no part of Nature) be generated and annihilated? Nay, if
Motion be Material, as surely it is, yet there can neither be a new generation,
nor an annihilation of any particular Motion in Nature; for all that is
material in Nature has its being in and from Infinite Matter, which is from
Eternity, it being impossible that any other new Matter should be created
besides this Infinite Matter out of which all natural things consist, or that
any part of this matter should be lost or annihilated. But perhaps those that
believe new generations and annihilations of particular motions, may say, that
their opinion is not as if those particular Motions were generated out of some
new matter, but that the matter of such motions is the same with the matter of
all other natural Creatures, and that their perishing or annihilation is not an
utter destruction or loss of their being out of Nature, but only of being such
or such a motion, like as some Vegetables and Elements are generated and perish
in one night: Truly, if their meaning be thus, then it were better to name it
an alteration or change of Motion, rather then a new Generation, and a
Perishing or Annihilation. But my intention is not to plead for other men's
opinions, but rather to clear my own, which is, that Motion is material; for
Figure, Motion and Matter are but one thing; and that no particular Motion is
or can be lost in Nature, nor created anew; as I have declared more at large
elsewhere.

17. Des Carts Opinion of Motion examined.
I Cannot well apprehend what Des Carts means, by Matter being at first set a
moving by a strong and lively action, and by his extraordinary swift rotation
or whirling motion about the Center; as also by the shavings of his ethereal
subtle Matter which filled up all vacuities and pores, and his ethereal
globules; I would ask whether this kind of motion did still continue; if so,
then not only the rugged and uneven parts, but also the ethereal globules
would become less by this continual rotation, and would make this world a very
weak, dizzie, and tottering world; and if there be any such shaving and
lessening, then according to his principles there must also be some reaction,
or a reacting and resisting motion, and then there would be two opposite
motions which would hinder each other. But I suppose he conceived, that Nature,
or the God of Nature, did produce the world after a Mechanical way, and
according as we see Turners, and such kind of Artificers work; which if so,
then the Art of Turning is the prime and fundamental of all other Mechanical
Arts, and ought to have place before the rest, and a Turner ought to be the
prime and chief of all Mechanics, and highly esteemed; but alas! that sort of
people is least regarded; and though by their turning Art they make many dusty
shavings, yet they get but little profit by them; for all they get is by their
several wooden figures they make, as Spoons, Ladles, Cups, Bowls, Trenchers,
and the like, and not by their shavings. Wherefore as all other Mechanics do
not derive their Arts from Turners, so neither is it probable, that this world
and all natural Creatures are produced by a whirling Motion, or a spherical
rotation, as if some spirits were playing at Bowls or Football; for as I have
often mentioned, Nature has infinite ways of Motions, whereof none is prime or
principal, but self-motion, which is the producer of all the varieties Nature
has within her self. Next, as for his Opinion of transferring and imparting
Motion to other bodies, and that that body which imparts Motion to another
body, loses as much as it gives, I have answered in my Philosophical Letters;
to wit, that it is most improbable, by reason Motion being material and
inseparable from Matter, cannot be imparted without Matter; and if not, then
the body that receives Motion would increase in bulk, and the other that loses
Motion would decrease, by reason of the addition and diminution of the parts of
Matter, which must of necessity increase and lessen the bulk of the body, the
contrary whereof is sufficiently known.

18. Of the blackness of a Charcoal, and of Light.
I Cannot in reason give my consent to those Dioptrical Writers, who conceive
that the blackness of a Charcoal proceeds from the Porousness of its parts, and
the absence of light, viz. that light, not being reflected in the Pores of a
Charcoal, does make it obscure, and consequently appear black; for the opinion
which holds that all Colors are caused by the various reflection of Light, has
but a weak and uncertain Ground, by reason the refraction or reflection of
light is so inconstant, as it varies and alters continually; and there being so
many reflections and positions of Light, if they were the true cause of Colors,
no Color would appear constantly the same, but change variously, according to
the various reflection of Light; whereas, on the contrary, we see that natural
and inherent Colors continue always the same, let the position and reflection
of Light be as it will; besides, there being different colored Creatures, if
all had the same position and reflection of light, they would not appear of
diverse, but all of one color, the contrary whereof is proved by experience. I
will not say, but the refraction and various position of light may vary and
alter a natural and inherent color exteriously so, as to cause, for example, a
natural blew to appear green, or a natural green to appear red, etc. but those
figures which light makes, being but superficially and loosely spread upon
other natural and substantial figures, are so uncertain, inconstant and
momentary, that they do change according as the reflection and position of light
alters; and therefore they cannot cause or produce any natural or inherent
colors, for these are not superficial, but fixed, and remain constantly the
same. And as for blackness, that it should be caused by the absence of light, I
think it to be no more probable, then that light is the cause of our sight; for
if the blackness of a Charcoal did proceed from the absence of light in its
pores, then a black Horse would have more or deeper pores then a white one, or
a sorrel, or any other colored Horse; also a black Moor would have larger
Pores then a man of a white complexion; and black Satin, or any black Stuff,
would have deeper pores then white Stuff: But if a fair white Lady should
bruise her arm, so as it did appear black, can any one believe that light would
be more absent from that bruised part then from any other part of her arm that
is white, or that light should reflect otherwise upon that bruised part, then
on any other? Also can any body believe, that the reflection of light on a
decayed Ladies face, should be the cause that her complexion is altered from
what it was when she was young, and appeared beautiful and fair? Certainly
Light is no more the cause of her Complexion then of her Wrinkles, or else she
would never complain of Age, but of Light. But to prove further, that the
entering of light into the pores of exterior bodies, can neither make
perception nor colors; if this were so, then the entering of light into the
pores of the Eye, would make it perceive all things of as many colors as a
Rainbow has: besides, if several Eyes should have several shaped Pores, none
would agree in the perception of the color of an exterior object, or else it
would so dazzle the sight, as no object would be truly perceived in its natural
color; for it would breed a confusion between those reflections of light that
are made in the pores of the eye, and those that are made in the pores of the
object, as being not probable they would agree, since all pores are not just
alike, or of the same bigness; so as what with Air, Light, Particles, and Pores
jumbled together, and thrust or crowded into so small a compass, it would make
such a confusion and Chaos of colors, as I may call it, that no sight would be
able to discern them; wherefore it is no more probable that the perception of
sight is caused by the entering of light into the pores of the Eye, then that
the perception of smoke is caused by its entrance into the Eye: And I wonder
rational men do believe, or at least conceive Natures actions to be so confused
and disordered, when as yet sense and reason may perceive that Nature works
both easily and orderly, and therefore I rather believe, that as all other
Creatures, so also light is patterned out by the corporeal figurative and
perceptive motions of the optic sense, and not that its perception is made by
its'entrance into the eye, or by pressure and reaction, or by confused
mixtures, by reason the way of Patterning is an easy alteration of parts, when
as all others are forced and constrained, nay, unsettled, inconstant and
uncertain; for how should the fluid particles of air and light be able to
produce a constant and settled effect, being so changeable themselves, what
instances soever of Geometrical figures be drawn hither to evince it? if Man
knew Natures Geometry, he might perhaps do something, but his artificial
figures will never find out the architecture of Nature, which is beyond his
perception or capacity. But some may object, That neither color, nor any other
object can be seen or perceived without light, and therefore light must needs
be the cause of colors, as well as of our optic perception. To which I
answer, Although we cannot regularly see any other bodies without light, by
reason darkness does involve them, yet we perceive darkness and night without
the help of light. They will say, We perceive darkness only by the absence of
light. I answer, If all the Perception of the optic sense did come from light,
then the Perception of night or darkness would be no perception at all, which
is a Paradox, and contrary to common experience, nay, to sense and reason, for
black requires as much Perception as white, and so does darkness and night.
Neither could we say, it is dark, or it is night, if we did not perceive it to
be so, or had no perception at all of it: The truth is, we perceive as much
darkness as we do light, and as much black as we do white; for although
darkness does not present to our view other objects, so as light does, but
conceals them, yet this does not infer that darkness is not perceived; for
darkness must needs do so, by reason it is opposite to light, and its corporeal
figurative motions are quite contrary to the motions of light, and therefore it
must also of necessity have contrary effects; wherefore the error of those that
will not allow darkness to be a corporeal figurative motion, as well as light,
but only a privation or absence of light, cannot make it nothing; but it is on
the contrary well known, that darkness has a being as well as light has, and
that it is something, and not nothing, by reason we do perceive it; but he that
perceives, must needs perceive something, for no perception can be of nothing:
besides, I have declared elsewhere, that we do see in dreams, and that mad men
see objects in the dark, without the help of light: which proves, it is not the
presence or entering of light into the eye, that causes our seeing, nor the
absence of light, which takes away our optic Perception, but light only does
present exterior objects to our view, so as we may the better perceive them.
Neither is a color lost or lessened in the dark, but it is only concealed
from the ordinary perception of humane sight; for truly, if colors should not
be colors in the dark, then it might as rationally be said, that a man's flesh
and blood is not flesh and blood in the dark, when it is not seen by a humane
eye: I will not say, that the smalness and fineness of parts may not make
colors appear more glorious; for colors are like artificial Paintings, the
gentler and finer their draughts and lines are, the smoother and glossier
appear their works; but smalness and fineness is not the true cause of colors,
that is, it does not make colors to be colors, although it makes colors
fine. And thus black is not black through the absence of Light, no more then
white can be white by the presence of light; but blackness is one sort of
color, whiteness another, redness another, and so of the rest: Whereof some
are superficial and changeable, to wit, such as are made by the reflection of
light, others fixed and inherent, viz. such as are in several sorts of Minerals,
Vegetables and Animals; and others again are produced by Art, as by Dying and
Painting; which Artists know best how to order by their several mixtures.

19. Of the Pores of a Charcoal, and of Emptiness.
ALthough I cannot believe, that the absence of Light in the Pores of a
Charcoal is the cause of its blackness; yet I do not question the truth of its
Pores: for that all, or most Creatures have Pores, I have declared before;
which Pores are nothing else but passages to receive and discharge some parts
of matter; and therefore the opinion of those that believe an entering of some
Particles of exterior bodies through the Pores of animal Creatures, and an
intermixing with their interior parts; as that, for example, in the bathing in
Mineral Waters, the liquid and warm vehicles of the Mineral Particles, do by
degrees insinuate themselves into the pores of the skin, and intermix with the
inner parts of the body, is very rational; for this is a convenient way of
conveighing exteterior parts into the body, and may be effectual either to good
or bad; and although the pores be very small, yet they are numerous, so that
the number of the pores supplies the want of their largeness. But yet although
Pores are passages for other bodies to issue or enter, nevertheless they are
not empty, there being no such thing as an emptiness in Nature; for surely God,
the fullness and Perfection of all things, would not suffer any Vacuum in
Nature, which is a Pure Nothing; Vacuum implies a want and imperfection of
something, but all that God made by his All-powerful Command, was good and
perfect; Wherefore, although Charcoals and other bodies have Pores, yet they
are filled with some subtle Matter not subject to our sensitive perception,
and are not empty, but only called so, by reason they are not filled up with
some solid and gross substance perceptible by our senses. But some may say, if
there be no emptiness in Nature, but all fullness of body, or bodily parts, then
the spiritual or divine soul in Man, which inhabits his body, would not have
room to reside in it. I answer, The Spiritual or Divine Soul in Man is not
Natural, but Supernatural, and has also a Supernatural way of residing in man's
body; for Place belongs only to bodies, and a Spirit being bodiless, has no
need of a bodily place. But then they will say, That I make Spirit and Vacuum
all one thing, by reason I describe a Spirit to be a Natural Nothing, and the
same I say of Vacuum; and hence it will follow, that particular Spirits are
particular Emptinesses, and an Infinite Spirit an Infinite Vacuum. My answer
is, That although a Spirit is a Natural nothing, yet it is a Supernatural
something; but a Vacnum is a Pure nothing, both Naturally and Supernaturally;
and God forbid I should be so irreligious, as to compare Spirits, and
consequently God, who is an Infinite Spirit, to a Vacuum; for God is
All-fulfilling, and an Infinite Fullness and Perfection, though not a Corporeal
or Material, yet a Supernatural, Spiritual, and Incomprehensible fullness; when
as Vacuum, although it is a corporeal word, yet in effect or reality is
nothing, and expresses a want or imperfection, which cannot be said of any
supernatural Creature, much less of God.

20. Of Colors.
ALthough the sensitive perception does pattern out the exterior figure of
Colors, as easily as of any other object, yet all perceptions of Colors are
not made by Patterning; for as there are many perceptions which take no
patterns from outward objects, so there are also perceptions of Colors which
never were presented to our sensitive organs: Neither is any perception made by
exterior objects, but by interior corporeal figurative motions; for the object
does not print or act any way upon the eye, but it is the sensitive motions in
the eye which pattern out the figure of the object: and it is to be observed,
that as the parts of some bodies do consist of several different figures, which
the learned call Heterogeneous, one figure being included within another; and
some again, their parts are but of one kind of figure, which they call
Homogeneous bodies, as for example, Water: so it may be with Colors; for some,
their parts may be quite through of one color, and others again, may be of
several colors; and indeed, most Creatures, as they have different parts, so
those different parts have also different colors; and as those parts do alter,
so do their colors: For example, a Man that is in good health, looks of a
sanguine complexion, but being troubled with the Yellow or black Jaundies, his
complexion is of the color of the humor; either black, or yellow; yet it does
not proceed always from the overflowing of the humor toward the exterior
parts; for many times, when the humor is obstructed, it will cause the same
effect; but then the corporeal motions in the extreme parts alter by way of
Imitation or Metamorphosing, as from a sanguine color into the color of the
predominant humor: Wherefore it is no more wonder to see colors change in the
tempering of Steel (as some are pleased to alledg this experiment) then to see
Steel change and rechange its temper from being hard to soft, from tough to
brittle, etc. which changes prove, that colors are material as well as steel,
so that the alteration of the corporeal parts, is the alteration of the
corporeal figures of colors. They also prove, that Light is not essential to
colors; for although some colors are made by several Reflections, Refractions
and Positions of Light, yet Light is not the true and natural cause of all
colors; but those colors that are made by light, are most inconstant,
momentany and alterable, by reason light and its effects are very changeable:
Neither are colors made by a bare motion, for there is no such thing as a bare
or immaterial Motion in Nature; but both Light and Colors are made by the
corporeal figurative motions of Nature; and according to the various changes of
those Motions, there are also various and different Lights and Colors; and the
perception of light and Colors is made and dissolved by the sensitive
figurative motions in the optic sensorium, without the exchange of exterior
objects; but as the slackest, loosest or rarest parts are of least solid or
composed corporeal figures, so are they most apt to change and rechange upon
the least disorder, as may well be observed in colors raised by Passions, as
fear, anger, or the like, which will change not only the complexion and
countenance, but the very features will have some alteration for a short time,
and many times the whole body will be so altered, as not to be rightly composed
again for a good while; nay, often there follows a total dissolution of the
whole figure, which we call death. And at all this we need not wonder, if we do
but consider that Nature is full of sense and reason, that is, of sensitive and
rational perception, which is the cause that oftentimes the disturbance of one
part causes all other parts of a composed figure to take an alarm; for, as we
may observe, it is so in all other composed bodies, even in those composed by
Art; as for example, in the Politic body of a Commonwealth, one Traitor is apt
to cause all the Kingdom to take arms; and although every member knows not
particularly of the Traitor, and of the circumstances of his crime, yet every
member, if regular, knows its particular duty, which causes a general agreement
to assist each other; and as it is with a Commonwealth, so it is also with an
animal body; for if there be factions amongst the parts of an animal body, then
straight there arises a Civil War. Wherefore to return to Colors; a sudden
change of Colors may cause no wonder, by reason there is oftentimes in Nature
a sudden change of parts, that is, an alteration of figures in the same parts:
Neither is it more to be admired, that one color should be within another,
then one figurative part is within another; for colors are figurative parts;
and as there are several Creatures, so there are also several Colors; for the
Color of a Creature is as well corporeal as the Creature it self; and (to
express my self as clearly as I can) Color is as much a body as Place and
Magnitude, which are but one thing with body: wherefore when the body, or any
corporeal part varies, whether solid or rare; Place, Magnitude, Color, and the
like, must of necessity change or vary also; which change is no annihilation or
perishing, for as no particle of Matter can be lost in Nature, nor no
particular motion, so neither can Color; and therefore the opinion of those,
who say, That when Flax or Silk is divided into very small threads, or fine
parts, those parts lose their colors, and being twisted, regain their colors,
seems not conformable to Truth; for the division of their parts does not
destroy their colors, nor the composing of those parts regain them; but they
being divided into such small and fine parts, it makes their colors, which are
the finest of their exterior parts, not to be subject to our optic perception;
for what is very small or rare, is not subject to the humane optic sense;
wherefore there are these following conditions required to the optic
perception of an exterior object: First, The object must not be too subtle,
rare, or little, but of a certain degree of magnitude; Next, It must not be too
far distant, or without the reach of our sight; then the medium must not be
obstructed, so as to hinder our perception; And lastly, our optic sensorium
must be perfect, and the sensitive motions regular; of which conditions, if any
be wanting, there is either no perception at all, or it is an imperfect
perception; for the perception of seeing an exterior object, is nothing else
but a patterning out of the figure of that same object by the sensitive
figurative and perceptive motions; but there are infinite parts that are beyond
our humane perception, and it would be but a folly for us to deny that which we
cannot see or perceive; and if the perceptive motions be not regular in our
optic sense, we may see different colors in one object; nay, the corporeal
figurative motions in the eye may make several figurative colors, even without
the patterns of outward objects; and as there are several colors, so there are
also several corporeal figurative motions that make several colors in several
parts; and the more solid the parts are, the more fixed are their inherent
natural colors: But superficial colors are more various, though not so
various as they would be, if made by dusty Atoms, flying about as Flies in
Sunshine; for if this opinion were true, all colors, and other Creatures
would be composed or made by chance, rather then by reason, and chance being so
ignorantly inconstant, not any two parts would be of the like color, nor any
kind or species would be preserved; but Wise Nature, although she be full of
variety, yet she is also full of reason, which is knowledge; for there is no
part of Nature that has not sense and reason, which is life and knowledge; and
if all the infinite parts have life and knowledge, Infinite Nature cannot be a
fool or insensible: But mistake me not, for I do not mean, that her parts in
particular are infinitely knowing, but I say Infinite Nature has an Infinite
knowledge; and by reason Nature is material, she is divideable as well as
composeable, which is the cause that there is an obscurity in her Parts, in
particular, but not in general, that is, in Nature her self; nay, if there were
not an obscurity in the Particulars, men would not endeavor to prove inherent
and natural figures by superficial Phaenomena's. But as for Color, some do
mention the example of a blind man, who could discover colors by touch; and
truly I cannot account it a wonder, because colors are corporeal figurative
motions, and touch being a general sense, may well perceive by experience
(which is gained by practice) some Notions of other sensitive perceptions; as
for example, a blind man may know by relation the several touches of Water,
Milk, Broth, Jelly, Vinegar, Vitriol, etc. as well as what is hot, cold, rare,
dense, hard, soft, or the like; and if he have but his touch, hearing, speaking
and smelling, perfectly, he may express the several knowledges of his several
senses by one particular sense, or he may express one senses knowledge by
another; but if the senses be imperfect, he cannot have a true knowledge of any
object. The same may be said of Colors; for several Colors being made by
several corporeal figurative motions, may well be perceived by a general sense,
which is Touch: I will not say, that touch is the principle of all sensitive
knowledge, for then I should be of the opinion of those Experimental
Philosophers, which will have one principal motion or figure to be the cause of
all Natural things; but I only say, animal touch may have some Notion of the
other animal senses by the help of rational perception: all which proves, that
every part is sensible, and every sense knowing, not only in particular, but
that one sense may have some general notion or knowledge of the rest; for there
are particular and general perceptions in sensitive and rational matter, which
is the cause both of the variety and order of Nature's Works; and therefore it
is not necessary, that a black figure must be rough, and a white figure smooth:
Neither are white and black the Ground-figures of Colors, as some do conceive,
or as others do imagine, blew and yellow; for no particular figure can be a
principle, but they are all but effects; and I think it is as great an error to
believe Effects for Principles, as to judge of the Interior Natures and Motions
of Creatures by their Exterior Phenomenon or appearances, which I observe in
most of our modern Authors, whereof some are for Incorporeal Motions, others
for Prime and Principal Figures, others for First Matter, others for the
figures of dusty and insensible Atoms, that move by chance: when as neither
Atoms, Corpuscles or Particles, nor Pores, Light, or the like, can be the
cause of fixed and natural colors; for if it were so, then there would be no
stayed or solid color, insomuch, as a Horse, or any other Creature, would be
of more various colors then a Rainbow; but that several colors are of
several figures, was always, and is still my opinion, and that the change of
colors proceeds from the alteration of their figures, as I have more at large
declared in my other Philosophical Works: Indeed Art can no more force certain
Atoms or Particles to meet and join to the making of such a figure as Art
would have, then it can make by a bare command Insensible Atoms to join into a
Uniform World. I do not say this, as if there could not be Artificial Colors,
or any Artificial Effects in Nature; but my meaning only is, that although Art
can put several parts together, or divide and disjoyn them, yet it cannot make
those parts move or work so as to alter their proper figures or interior
natures, or to be the cause of changing and altering their own or other parts,
any otherwise then they are by their Natures. Neither do I say, that no Colors
are made by Light, but I say only, that fixed colors are not made by Light;
and as for the opinion, that white bodies reflect the Light outward, and black
bodies inward, as some Authors do imagine; I answer, It Is probable, some bodies
may do so, but all white and black Colors are not made by such reflections; the
truth is, some conceive all Colors to be made by one sort of Motion, like as
some do believe that all sensation is made by pressure and reaction, and all
heat by parts tending outward, and all cold by parts tending inward; when as
there are not only several kinds of heat and cold, as Animal, Vegetable,
Mineral and Elemental heat and cold, but several sorts in each kind, and
different particulars in each sort; for there is a moist heat, a dry heat, a
burning, a dissolving, a composing, a dilating, a contracting heat, and many
more: The like for colds; all which several kinds, sorts and particulars, are
made by the several changes of the corporeal figurative Motions of Nature, and
not by Pressure and Reaction, or by tending inward and outward. And as there is
so great a variety and difference amongst natural Creatures, both in their
Perceptions and interior natures, so there are also varieties of their colors,
the natural colors of men being different from the natural colors of Beasts,
Birds, Fish, Worms, Flies, etc. Concerning their interior Natures, I Will alledg
but few examples; although a Peacock, Parrot, Pie, or the like, are gay Birds,
yet there is difference in their Gayety: Again; although all men have flesh and
blood, and are all of one particular kind, yet their interior natures and
dispositions are so different, as seldom any two men are of the same
complexion; and as there is difference in their complexions, so in the exterior
shapes and features of their exterior parts, in so much as it is a wonder to
see two men just alike; nay, as there is difference in the corporeal parts of
their bodies, so in the corporeal parts of their minds, according to the old
Proverb, So many Men, so many Minds: For there are different Understandings,
Fancies, Conceptions, Imaginations, Judgments, Wits, Memories, Affections,
Passions, and the like. Again: as in some Creatures there is difference both in
their exterior features and interior natures, so in others there is found a
resemblance only in their exterior, and a difference in their interior parts;
and in others again, a resemblance in their interior, and a difference in their
exterior parts; as for example, black Ebony, and black Marble, are both of
different natures, one being Wood, and the other Stone, and yet they resemble
each other in their exterior color and parts; also, white, black, and gray
Marble, are all of one interior Nature, and yet to differ in their exterior
color and parts: The same may be said of Chalk and Milk, which are both white,
and yet of several natures; as also of a Turquois, and the Sky, which both
appear of one color, and yet their natures are different: besides, there are
so many stones of different colors, nay, stones of one sort, as for example,
Diamonds, which appear of diverse colors, and yet are all of the same Nature;
also Man's flesh, and the flesh of some other animals, does so much resemble,
as it can hardly be distinguished, and yet there is great difference betwixt
Man and Beasts: Nay, not only particular Creatures, but parts of one and the
same Creature are different; as for example, every part of man's body has a
several touch, and every bit of meat we eat has a several taste, witness the
several parts, as legs, wings, breast, head, etc. of some Fowl; as also the
several parts of Fish, and other Creatures. All which proves the Infinite
variety in Nature, and that Nature is a perpetually self-moving body, dividing,
composing, changing, forming and transforming her parts by self-corporeal
figurative motions; and as she has infinite corporeal figurative motions, which
are her parts, so she has an infinite wisdom to order and govern her infinite
parts; for she has Infinite sense and reason, which is the cause that no part
of hers is ignorant, but has some knowledge or other, and this Infinite variety
of knowledge makes a general Infinite wisdom in Nature. And thus I have declared
how Colors are made by the figurative corporeal motions, and that they are as
various and different as all other Creatures, and when they appear either more
or less, it is by the variation of their parts. But as for the experiment of
Snow, which some do alledg, that in a darkened room, it is not perceived to have
any other light then what it receives, does not prove that the whiteness of
Snow is not an inherent and natural color, because it does not reflect light,
or because our eye does not see it, no more then we can justly say, that blood
is not blood, or flesh is not flesh in the dark, if our eye do not perceive it,
or that the interior parts of Nature are colorless, because the exterior light
makes no reflection upon them.. Truly, in my judgment, those opinions, that no
parts have color, but those which the light reflects on, are neither probable
to sense nor reason; for how can we conceive any corporeal part without a
color? In my opinion, it is as impossible to imagine a body without color, as
it is impossible for the mind to conceive a natural immaterial substance; and
if so pure a body as the mind cannot be colorless, much less are grosser
bodies. But put the case all bodies that are not subject to exterior light were
black as night, yet they would be of a color, for black is as much a color as
green, or blew, or yellow, or the like; but if all the interior parts of Nature
be black, then, in my opinion, Nature is a very sad and melancholy Lady; and
those which are of such an opinion, surely their minds are more dark then the
interior parts of Nature; I will not hope that clouds of dusty Atoms have
obscured them. But if not any Creature can have imagination without figure and
color, much less can the optic sensitive parts; for the exterior sensitive
parts are more gross then the rational, and therefore they cannot be without
color, no more then without figure: and although the exterior parts of Animals
are subject to our touch, yet the countenances of those several exterior parts
are no more perceptible by our touch, then several colors are: By
Countenances, I mean the several exterior postures, motions, or appearances of
each part; for as there is difference betwixt a face, and a countenance; (for a
face remains constantly the same, when as the countenance of a face may and
does change every moment; as for example, there are smiling, frowning, joyful,
sad, angry countenances, etc.) so there is also a difference between the
exterior figure or shape of a Creature, and the several and various motions,
appearances or postures of the exterior parts of that Creatures exterior
figure, whereof the former may be compared to a Face, and the later to a
Countenance. But leaving this nice distinction; If any one should ask me,
Whether a Barbary-horse, or a Gennet, or a Turkish, or an English-horse, can be
known and distinguished in the dark? I answer: They may be distinguished as
much as the blind man (whereof mention has been made before) may discern
colors, nay, more; for the figure of a gross exterior shape of a body may
sooner be perceived, then the more fine and pure countenance of Colors. To
shut up this my discourse of Colors, I will briefly repeat what I have said
before, viz. that there are natural and inherent colors which are fixed and
constant, and superficial colors, which are changeable and inconstant, as also
Artificial colors made by Painters and Dyers, and that it is impossible that
any constant color should be made by inconstant Atoms and various lights.
It Is true, there are streams of dust or dusty Atoms, which seem to move
variously, upon which the Sun or light makes several reflections and
refractions; but yet I do not see, nor can I believe, that those dusty
particles and light are the cause of fixed and inherent colors; and therefore
if Experimental Philosophers have no firmer grounds and principles then their
Colors have, and if their opinions be as changeable as inconstant Atoms, and
variable Lights, then their experiments will be of no great benefit and use to
the world. Neither will Artificial Characters and Geometrical Figures be able
to make their opinions and experiments more probable; for they appear to me
like Dr. Dee's numbers, who was directed by I know not what spirits, which
Kelley saw in his holy stone, which neither of them did understand; much less
will Dioptrical glasses give any true Information of them, but they rather
delude the sight; for Art is not only intricate and obscure, but a false
informer, and rather blinds then informs any particular Creature of the Truth
of Nature: but my reason perceives that Nature loves sometimes to act or work
blindfold in the actions of Art; for although they be natural, yet they are
but Natures blind, at least her winking or juggling actions, causing some parts
or Creatures to deceive others, or else they are her politic actions by which
she deceives her Creatures expectations, and by that means keeps them from
knowing and understanding her subtle and wise Government.

21. Whether an Idea have a Color, and of the Idea of a Spirit.
I Have declared in my former discourse, that there is no Color without body,
nor a body without color, for we cannot think of a body without we think of
color too. To which some may object, That if color be as proper to a body as
matter, and if the mind be corporeal, then the mind is also colored. I answer,
The Mind, in my opinion, has as much color as other parts of Nature. But then
perhaps they will ask me, what color the Mind is of? My answer is, That the
Mind, which is the rational part of Nature, is no more subject to one color,
then the Infinite parts of Nature are subject to one corporeal figurative
motion; for you can no more confine the corporeal mind to a particular
complexion, then you can confine Infinite matter to one particular color, or
all colors to one particular figure. Again, they may ask, Whether an Idea have
a color? and if so, whether the Idea of God be colored? To which I answer, If
the Ideas be of corporeal finite figures, they have colors according to the
nature, or property, or figure of the original; but as for the Idea of God, it
is impossible to have a corporeal Idea of an infinite incorporeal Being; for
though the finite parts of Nature may have a perception or knowledge of the
existence of God, yet they cannot possibly pattern or figure him, he being a
Supernatural, Immaterial, and Infinite Being: But put the case (although it is
very improbable, nay, against sense and reason) there were natural immaterial
Idea's, if those Idea's were finite, and not infinite, yet they could not
possibly express an infinite, which is without limitation, by a finite figure
which has a Circumference. Some may say, An Immaterial Idea has no
Circumference. But then I answer, It is not a finite Idea, and it is impossible
for an Idea to be Infinite: for I take an Idea to be the picture of some
object, and there can be no picture without a perfect form; neither can I
conceive how an immaterial can have a form, not having a body; wherefore it is
more impossible for Nature to make a picture of the Infinite God, then for Man,
which is but a part of Nature, to make a picture of infinite Nature; for Nature
being material, has also a figure and matter, they being all one, so that none
can be without the other, no more then Nature can be divided from her self.
Thus it is impossible for Man to make a figure, or picture of that which is not
a part of Nature; for pictures are as much parts of Nature, as any other parts,
nay, were they monstrous, as we call them; for Nature being material, is also
figurative, and being a self-moving matter or substance, is divideable, and
composeable; and as she has infinite corporeal figurative motions, and
infinite parts, so she has infinite figures, of which some are pictures,
others originals; and if any one particular Creature could picture out those
infinite figures, he would picture out Nature; but Nature being Infinite,
cannot be pictured or patterned by any finite and particular Creature, although
she is material; nevertherless she may be patterned in parts: And as for God,
He being individeable and immaterial, can neither be patterned in part, nor in
whole, by any part of Nature which is material, nay, not by infinite Nature her
self: Wherefore the notions of God can be no otherwise but of his existence, to
wit, that we know there is something above Nature, who is the Author and God of
Nature; for though Nature has an infinite natural knowledge of the Infinite
God, yet being divideable as well as composeable, her parts cannot have such an
infinite knowledge or perception; and being composeable as much as divideable,
no part can be so ignorant of God, as not to know there is a God. Thus Nature
has both an infinite and finite perceptions; infinite in the whole, as I may
say for better expressions sake, and finite in parts. But mistake me not, I do
not mean, that either the infinite perception of Nature, or the finite
perceptions of natural parts and Creatures, are any otherwise of that
supernatural and divine being then natural; but yet they are the most purest
parts, being of the rational part of Nature, moving in a most elevating and
subtle manner, as making no exact figure or form, because God has neither
form nor figure; but that subtle matter or corporeal perceptive motion
patterns out only an overruling power, which power all the parts of Nature
are sensible of, and yet know not what it is; like as the perception of Sight
seeeth the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, or the motion of the Sun, yet knows
not their cause; and the perception of Hearing hears Thunder, yet knows not how
it is made; and if there be such ignorance of the corporeal parts of Nature,
what of God? But to conclude, my opinion is, That as the sensitive perception
knows some of the other parts of Nature by their effects, so the rational
perceives some effects of the Omnipotent power of God; which effects are
perceptible by finite Creatures, but not his Infinite Nature, nor Essence, nor
the cause of his Infiniteness and Omnipotency. Thus although Gods Power may be
perceived by Natures parts, yet what God is, cannot be known by any part: and
Nature being composeable, there is a general acknowledgment of God in all her
parts; but being also divideable, it is the cause there are particular
Religions, and opinions of God, and of his divine Worship and Adoration.

22. Of Wood Petrified.
I Cannot admire, as some do, that Wood does turn into stone, by reason I
observe, that Slime, Clay, Dirt, nay Water, may and does often the same, which
is further off from the nature of Stone then Wood is, as being less dense, and
its interior figurative motions being dilating: but yet this does not prove
that all other Creatures may as easily be metamorphosed into stone as they; for
the parts of water are composed but of one sort of figure, and are all of the
same nature; and so is wood, clay, shells, etc. whose parts are but of one
figure, at least not of so many different figures as the parts of Animals, or
other Creatures; for as Animals have different parts, so these parts are of
different figures, not only exteriously, but intericusly; as for example, in
some or most Animals there are Bones, Gristles, Nerves, Sinews, Muscles, Flesh,
Blood, Brains, Marrow, Choler, Phlegm, and the like; besides, there are
several sorts of flesh, witness their interior and exterior parts, as the
Heart, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Guts, and the like; as also the Head, Breast,
Arms, Body, Legs, and the like: all which would puzzle and withstand the power
of Ovid's Metamophosing of Gods and Goddesses. Wherefore it is but a weak
argument to conclude, because some Creatures or parts can change out of one
figure into another without a dissolution of their composed parts, therefore
all Creatures can do the like; for if all Creatures could or should be
metamorphosed into one sort of figure, then this whole World would perhaps come
to be one Stone, which would be a hard World: But this Opinion, I suppose,
proceeds from Chemistry; for since the last Art of Chimystry (as I have heard)
is the Production of glass, it makes perhaps Chemists believe, that at the last
day, when this Word shall be dissolved with Fire, the Fire will calcine or turn
it into Glass: A brittle World indeed! but whether it will be transparent, or
no, I know not, for it will be very thick.

23. Of the Nature of Water.
THe Ascending of Water in Pipes, Pumps, and the like Engines, is commonly
alleged as an argument to prove there is no Vacuum: But, in my opinion,
Water, or the like things that are moist, liquid and wet, their interior
corporeal and natural motion is flowing, as being of a dilating figure; and
when other parts or Creatures suppress those liquors, so that they cannot rise,
they will dilate; but when solid and heavy bodies are put into them as Stones,
Metals, etc. which do sink, then they will rise above them, as being their
nature to overflow any other body, if they can have the better of it, or get
passage: For concerning the floating of some bodies, the reason is not so much
their levity or porousness, but both their exterior shape, and the waters
restlesness or activity, the several parts of water endeavoring to drive those
floating bodies from them; like as when several men playing at Ball, or
Shittle-cock, or the like, endeavor to beat those things from and to each
other; or like as one should blow up a feather into the Air, which makes it not
only keep up in the air, but to wave about: The like does water with floating
bodies; and the lighter the floating parts are, the more power have the liquid
parts to force and thrust them about. And this is also the reason why two
floating bodies of one Nature endeavor to meet and join, because by joining
they receive more strength to resist the force of the watery parts: The same may
be said when as floating bodies stick or join to the sides of Vessels; but many
times the watery parts will not suffer them to be at rest or quiet, but drive
them from their strong holds or defenses. Concerning the suppression of water,
and of some floating bodies in water by air or light, as that air and light
should suppress water, and bodies floating upon it (as some do conceive) I see
no reason to believe it; but the contrary rather appears by the levity of air,
which is so much lighter, and therefore of less force then either the floating
bodies, or the water on which they float. Some again are of opinion, That Water
is a more dense body then Ice, and prove it by the Refractions of light,
because Water does more refract the rays of light then Ice does: but
whatsoever their experiments be, yet my reason can hardly believe it; for
although Ice may be more transparent then water, yet it may be more dense then
water: for Glass is more transparent then water, and yet more dense then water;
and some bodies will not be trasparent if they be thick, that is, if they have
a great number of parts upon parts, when as they will be transparent if they be
thin, that is, if they have few thin parts upon each other; so that transparent
bodies may be darkened, and those that are not transparent of themselves, may be
made so by the thickness or thinness of parts, that one may see or not see
through them; and thus a thin body of Water, may be more transparent then a
thick body of Ice, and a thin body of Ice may be more transparent then a thick
body of water. As for the expansion of Water, it does not prove, that Water is
more dense then Ice, but on the contrary, it rather proves, that it is more
rare; for that body whose parts are close and united, is more dense then that
whose parts are fluid and dilating. Neither does Expansion alter the interior
nature of a body, any more then contraction, but it alters only the exterior
posture; as for example, when a man puts his body into several postures, it
does not alter him from being a man, to some other Creature, for the stretching
of his legs, spreading out of his arms, puffing up his cheeks, etc. changes
his nature, or natural figure, no more then when he contracts his limbs close
together, crumpling up his body, or folding his arms, etc. but his posture is
only changed; the like for the expansions and contractions of other sorts of
Creatures. Nor can I readily give my assent to their opinion, that some liquors
are more dense then others; I mean such as are perfectly moist, liquid and wet,
as water is; for there be numerous sorts of liquors, which are not thoroughly
wet as water; and although their Circular lines may be different, as some
edged, some pointed, some twisted, and the like; yet they do not differ so
much, but that their inherent figures are all of Circular lines; for the
interior nature or figure of water, and so of all other moist and wet liquors,
is Circular: and it is observable, that as Art may be an occasion of
diminishing those points or edges of the Circular lines of some liquors, or of
untwisting them; so it may also be an occasion that some liquid and wet bodies
may become so pointed, edged, twisted, etc. as may occasion those circles to
move or turn into such or such exterior figures, not only into triangular,
square, round, and several other forms or figures, as appears in Ice, Hail,
Frost, and flakes of Snow, but into such figures as they name Spirits; which
several sorts of figures belonging all to one sort of Creatures, may cause
several refractions, reflections and inflections of the rays of light.
Wherefore Mechanics may very much be mistaken concerning the truth of the
interior Nature of bodies, or natural Creatures, by judging them only
according to their exterior figures.

24. Of Salt, and of Sea- or Salt Water.
THe reason, why Salt is made, or extracted out of Salt Water, is, that the
Circular lines of Sea- or Salt Water, are pointed exteriously, but not
interiously, which is the cause that the saltish parts may be easily divided
from those watery lines; and it is to be observed, that those points when joined
to the watery circles, are rare, but being once separated, either by Art, or a
more natural way, by some sorts of dividing motions, they become more dense;
yet not so dense, but they may melt or return again into the first figure,
which is a rare figure, and so become liquid salt, and afterward they may be
densed or contracted again; for there is no other difference between dry and
liquid salt, but what is made by the rarity or density of those sorts of
points. As for that sort of Salt, which is named volatile, it is when some of
those rare points become more dilated or rarefied, then when they are joined to
the watery circle-lines; I say some, not all; for as some points do condense or
contract into fixed salt, so others do dilate or arise into volatile salt. But
perchance some will say, How can there be several sorts of points, since a
point is but a point? I answer; There may very well be several sorts,
considering the Nature of their substance; for some sorts are rare, some dense,
some contracting, some dilating, some retenting, etc. besides, all points are
not alike, but there is great difference amongst several pointed figures, for
all are not like the point of a Pin or Needle, but (to alledg some gross
examples) there be points of Pyramids, points of Knives, points of Pins, points
of the flame of a Candle, and numerous other sorts, which are all several
points, and not one like another; for I do not mean a Mathematical or imaginary
point, such as is only made by the rational matter in the mind, (although even
amongst those imaginary points there is difference; for you cannot imagine, or
think of the several pointed figures of several sorts or kinds of Creatures, or
parts, but you will have a difference in your mind) but I mean pointed figures,
and not single points. It is also to be observed, that as some watery Circles
will and may have points outwardly, so some have also points inwardly; for some
watery Circles, as I have mentioned in my Philosophical Opinions, are edged, to
wit, such as are in vitriol water; others pointed, as those in salt water; and
others are of other sorts of points, as those in cordial or hot waters; but
those last are more artificial; and all these are different in their sorts or
kinds, although a litttle difference in their own natures may appear great in
our humane perception. Concerning Oil, there is also difference between Oil and
other wet bodies; for Oil, although it be rare, liquid and moist, yet we cannot
say, it is absolutely that which we name wet, as other liquors are, viz. Water
and Wine, or natural juices; and since the interior natural figure of oil is
burning and hot, it is impossible to divide those interior fiery points from
the circle figure of Oil without dissolving those liquid circle lines. But as
the Penetrations of other acid and salt liquors are caused by their exterior
points, so oil, whose points are interiously in the circle-lines, cannot have
such quick effects of penetration as those that are exteriously pointed: But
mistake me not, I do not mean such exterior parts as are only subject to our
humane perception, but such as cause those Creatures or parts to be of such a
figure or nature.

25. Of the Motions of Heat and Cold.
THose which affim that Heat and Cold are the two primary and only causes of
the Productions of all natural things, do not consider sufficiently the variety
of Nature, but think that Nature produces all by Art; and since Art is found
out and practiced by Man, Man conceits himself to be above Nature; But as
neither Art, nor any particular Creature can be the cause or principle of all
the rest, so neither can heat and cold be the prime cause of all natural
productions, no more then paint can produce all the parts of a man's face, as
the Eyes, Nose, Forehead, Chin, Cheeks, Lips and the like, or a (...) can
produce a natural Head, or a suit of Clothes can make the body of Man, for then
whenever the fashioned Garments or Mode-dresses do change, men would of
necessity change also; but Art causes gross mistakes and errors, not only in
sensitive, but also in rational perceptions; for sense being deluded, is apt to
delude Reason also, especially if Reason be too much indulgent to sense; and
therefore those judgments that rely much upon the perception of sense, are
rather sensitive then rational judgments; for sense can have but a perception
of the exterior figures of objects, and Art can but alter the outward form or
figure, but not make or change the interior nature of any thing; which is the
reason that artificial alterations cause false, at least uncertain and various
judgments, so that Nature is as various in men's judgments, as in her other
works. But concerning heat and cold, my opinion is, that they are like several
Colors, some Natural, and some Artificial; of which the Artificial are very
inconstant, at least not so lasting as those that are not made by Art; and they
which say, that both heat and cold are not made by the sensories or sensitive
organs, are in the right, if their meaning be that both heat and cold in their
natures and with all their proprieties, as they are particular Creatures, are
not made or produced by humane or animal senses; nevertheless the sensitive
animal perception of heat and cold is made by the sensitive motions in their
sensitive organs, for what heat and cold soever an animal Creature feels, the
perception of it is made in the sense of touch, or by those sensitive motions
in the parts of its body; for as the perception of any other outward object is
not made by a real entrance of its parts into our sensories, so neither is all
perception of heat and cold made by the intermixture of their particles with
our flesh, but they are patterned and figured out by the sensitive motions in
the exterior parts of the body as well as other objects: I will not say, that
cold or heat may not enter and intermix with the parts of some bodies, as fire
does intermix with fuel, or enters into its parts; but my meaning is, that the
animal perception of heat and cold is not made this way, that is, by an
intermixture of the parts of the Agent with the parts of the Patient, as the
learned call them; that is, of the exterior object, and the sentient; or else
the perception of all exterior objects would be made by such an intermixture,
which is against sense and reason; and therefore even in such a commixture,
where the parts of the object enter into the body of the sentient, as fire does
into fuel, the perception of the motions of fire in the fuel, and the fuels
consumption or burning, is not made by the fire, but by the fuels own
perceptive motions, imitating the motions of the fire; so that fire does not
turn the fuel into ashes, but the fuel does change by its own corporeal
figurative motions, and the fire is only an occasion of it: The same may be
said of Cold. Neither is every Creatures perception alike, no more then it can
be said, that one particular Creature, as for example Man, has but one
perception; for the perception of sight and smelling, and so of every sense,
are different; nay, one and the same sense may have as many several perceptions
as it has objects, and some sorts of peceptions in some Creatures, are either
stronger or weaker then in others; for we may observe, that in one and the same
degree of heat or cold, some will have quicker and some slower perceptions then
others; for example in the perception of touch, if several men stand about a
fire, some will sooner be heated then others; the like for Cold, some will
apprehend cold weather sooner then others, the reason is, that in their
perception of Touch, the sensitive motions work quicker or slower in figuring
or patterning out heat or cold, then in the perception of others. The same may
be said of other objects, where some sentient bodies will be more sensible of
some then of others, even in one and the same kind of perception. But if in all
perceptions of cold, cold should intermix with the bodies of animals, or other
Creatures, like as several Ingredients, then all bodies upon the perception of
cold would dissolve their figures, which we see they do not; for although all
dissolving motions are knowing and perceptive, because every particular motion
is a particular knowledge and perception, yet not every perception requires a
dissolution or change of its figure: It Is true, some sorts or degrees of
exterior heat and cold may occasion some bodies to dissolve their interior
figures, and change their particular natures, but they have not power to
dissolve or change all natural bodies. Neither does heat or cold change those
bodies by an intermixture of their own particles with the parts of the bodies,
but the parts of the bodies change themselves by way of imitation, like as men
put themselves into a mode-fashion, although oftentimes the senses will have
fashions of their own, without imitating any other objects; for not all sorts
of perceptions are made by Imitation or patterning, but some are made
voluntarily, or by rote; as for example, when some do hear and see such or such
things without any outward objects. Wherefore it is not certain steams, or
agitated particles in the air, nor the vapors and effluviums of exterior
objects, insinuating themselves into the pores of the sentient, that are the
cause of the Perception of Heat and Cold, as some do imagine; for there cannot
probably be such differences in the pores of animal Creatures of one sort, as
for example of Men, which should cause such a different perception as is found
in them; for although exterior heat or cold be the same, yet several animals of
the same sort will have several and different perceptions of one and the same
degrees of exterior heat and cold, as above mentioned; which difference would
not be, if their perception was caused by a real entrance of hot and cold
particles into the pores of their bodies: Besides, Burning-Fevers and
Shaking-Agues, prove that such effects can be without such exterior causes.
Neither can all sorts of Heat and Cold be expressed by Wind, Air and Water, in
Weather-glasses; for they being made by Art, cannot give a true information of
the Generation of all natural heat and cold; but as there is great difference
between Natural and Artificial Ice, Snow, Colors, Light, and the like; so
between Artificial and Natural Heat and Cold; and there are so many several
sorts of heat and cold, that it is impossible to reduce them all to one certain
cause or principle, or confine them to one sort of Motions, as some do believe
that all sorts of Heat and Cold are made by motions tending inward and outward,
and others, that by ascending and descending, or rising and depressing motions,
which is no more probable, then that all Colors are made by the reflection of
Light, and that all White is made by reflecting the beams of light outward, and
all black by reflecting them inward; or that a Man when he is on Horseback, or
upon the top of an House, or Steeple, or in a deep Pit or Mine, should be of
another figure then of the figure and nature of man, unless he were dissolved
by death, which is a total alteration of his figure; for neither Gravity nor
Levity of Air, nor Almospherical Pillars, nor any Weather-glasses, can give us
a true information of all natural heat and cold, but the several figurative
corporeal motions, which make all things in Nature, do also make several sorts
of heat and cold in several sorts of Creatures. But I observe experimental
Philosophers do first cry up several of their artificial Instruments, then make
doubts of them, and at last disapprove them, so that there is no trust nor
truth in them, so much as to be relied on; for it is not an age, since
Weather-glasses were held the only divulgers of heat and cold, or change of
weather, and now some do doubt they are not such infallible Informers of those
truths; by which it is evident, that Experimental Philosophy has but a brittle,
inconstant and uncertain ground, and these artificial Instruments, as
Microscopes, Telescopes, and the like, which are now so highly applauded, who
knows, but may within a short time have the same fate, and upon a better and
more rational enquiry, be found deluders rather then true Informers. The truth
is, there is not any thing that has and does still delude most men's
understandings more, then that they do not consider enough the variety of
Natures actions, and do not employ their reason so much in the search of
natures actions, as they do their senses, preferring Art and Experiments before
Reason, which makes them stick so close to some particular opinions, and
particular sorts of Motions or Parts, as if there were no more Motions, Parts,
or Creatures in Nature, then what they see and find out by their Artificial
Experiments.

Thus the variety of Nature is a stumbling block to moft men, at which they
break their heads of understanding, like blind men that run against several
posts or walls; and how should it be otherwise, since Natures actions are
Infinite, and Man's understanding finite? for they consider not so much the
interior Natures of several Creatures, as their exterior figures and
Phonomena's, which makes them write many Paradoxes, but few Truths, supposing
that Sense and Art can only lead them to the knowledge of truth, when as they
delude rather their judgments instead of informing them. But Nature has placed
Sense and Reason together, so that there is no part or particle of Nature which
has not its share of reason as well as of sense; for every part having
self-motion, has also knowledge, which is sense and reason, and therefore it is
fit we should not only employ our senses, but chiefly our reason in the search
of the causes of natural effects; for Sense is only a workman, and Reason is
the designer and surveigher, and as reason guides and directs, so ought sense
to work. But seeing that in this age, sense is more in fashion then reason, it
is no wonder there are so many irregular opinions and judgments amongst men;
However, although it be the mode, yet I for my part shall not follow it, but
leaving to our Moderns their Experimental or Mode-Philosophy built upon
deluding Art, I shall addict my self to the study of Contemplative-Philosophy,
and Reason shall be my guide. Not that I despise sense or sensitive knowledge,
but when I speak of sense, I mean the perception of our five exterior senses,
helped (or rather deluded) by Art and Artificial instruments; for I see that in
this present Age, Learned men are full of Art and Artificial trials, and when
they have found out something by them, they presently judge that all natural
actions are made the same way; as for example, when they find by Art that Salt
will make Snow congeal into Ice, they instantly conclude from thence that all
natural congelations are made by saline particles, and that the Primum
Frigidum, or the Principal cause of all natural cold must needs be salt, by
reason they have found by Art that salt will do the same effect in the
aforesaid commixture with Snow. But how grossly they are deceived, rational men
may judge: If I were a Chemist, and acknowledged their common Principles, I
might perchance have some belief in it, but not whilst I follow reason; nay, I
perceive that oftentimes our senses are deluded by their own irregularities, in
not perceiving always truly and rightly the actions of Art, but mistaking them,
which is a double error; and therefore that particular sensitive knowledge in
man which is built merely upon artificial experiments, will never make him a
good Philosopher, but regular sense and reason must do it, that is, a regular
sensitive and rational inquisition into the various actions of Nature; For put
the case a Microscope be true concerning the magnifying of an exterior object,
but yet the magnitude of the object cannot give a true information of its
interior parts, and their motions, or else great and large bodies would be
interiously known even without Microscopes: The truth is, our exterior senses
can go no further then the exterior figures of Creatures, and their exterior
actions, but our reason may pierce deeper, and consider their inherent natures
and interior actions; and although it do sometimes err, (for there can be no
perfect or universal knowledge in a finite part concerning the Infinite actions
of Nature) yet it may also probably guess at them, and may chance to hit the
Truth. Thus Sense and Reason shall be the ground of my Philosophy, and no
particular natural effects, nor artificial instruments; and if any one can show
me a better and surer ground or Principle then this, I shall most willingly and
joyfully embrace it.

26. Of the Measures, Degrees, and different sorts of Heat and Cold.
SOme Experimental Philosophers are much inquisitive into the measures of Heat
and Cold; and as we have settled standards for weight and magnitude, and time,
so they endeavor to measure the varying temperature, and gradual differences
of heat and cold; but do what they can, their artificial measures or weights
neither will nor can be so exact as the natural are, to wit, so as not to make
them err in more or less: Neither is it possible, that all the degrees of heat
and cold in Nature can be measured; for no man can measure what he does not
know, and who knows all the different sorts of heats and colds? Nay, if man did
endeavor to measure only one sort of heat or cold, as for example, the
degrees of the heat or coldness of the air, how is it possible that he should
do it, by reason of the continual change of the motions of heat or cold of the
air, which are so inconstant, that it were surer to measure the fluidity of the
air, then to measure the degrees of heat or cold of the air; for the temper of
the air and of its heat and cold, may vary so, as many times we shall never
find the same measure again. Wherefore if we desire to have some knowledge of
the degrees of some sorts of heat or cold, my opinion is, that we may more
easily attain to it by the help of rational perception, then by a sensitive
inspection of artificial Weather-glasses, or the like; for reason goes beyond
sense; and although the sensitive perception is best next the rational, yet the
rational is above the sensitive. But some of the learned conceive the degrees
of heat and cold are made by bare divisions, whenas, in my opinion, they are
made by the several degrees of their corporeal figurative motions: They do also
imagine, that there is no degree but must ascend from one, to two; from two, to
three; and so forth through all numbers: and that from one to twenty, there be
so many degrees as there be numbers; when as, in my opinion, there is no more
but one degree required from one to a Million, or more; for though both in
Nature and Art there are degrees from one single figure to another, yet there
may also be but one degree from one to a million, without reckoning any
intermediate degrees or figures: so that a body, when it moves quick or slow,
needs not to go through all the intermediate degrees of quickness or slowness,
as to move quicker and quicker, slower and slower; but may immediately move
from a very slow, to a very quick degree: the truth is, no man is able to
measure the infinite degrees of natural motions; for though Nature consists of
particular finites, yet it does also consist of infinite particulars; finite in
figure, infinite in number; and who can number from finite to infinite? But
having discoursed hereof elsewhere, I return to heat and cold, and let others
dispute whether the degrees of heat and cold in the air, be the same with the
degrees of animal perceptions, or with the degrees of animal cold and heat; my
opinion is, that there being several sorts, and several particular heats and
colds, they cannot be just alike each other, but there is some difference
betwixt them; as for example, there are shaking, freezing, chilly, windy, numb,
stiff, rare, dense, moist, dry, contracting, dilating, ascending, descending,
and other numerous sorts of colds; nay, there are some sorts of candied figures
made by heat, which appear as if they were frozen: Also there are fluid colds
which are not wet, as well as fluid heats that are not dry; for Phlegm is
fluid, and yet not wet; and some sorts of air are fluid, and not wet; I say
some, not all; for some are hot and moist, others hot and dry. The same may be
said of some sorts of heat and cold; for some are moist, and some dry; and
there may be at one and the same time a moist cold in the air, and a dry cold
in water; which, in my opinion, is the reason that in sealed Weather-glasses,
according to some Experimenters relations, sometimes the air does not shrink,
but rather seems to be expanded when the weather grows colder, and that the
water contracts; not that the cold contraction of water causes an expansion of
the air to prevent a Vacuum; for there cannot be any such thing as a Vacuum in
Nature; but that there is a moist cold in the air, and a dry cold in the water,
whereof the dry cold causes a contraction, and the moist cold an expansion;
nay, there is often a moist and dry cold in the air at one and the same time;
so that some parts of the air may have a moist cold, and the next adjoying
parts a dry cold, and that but in a very little compass; for there may be such
contractions and dilations in Nature, which make not a hairs breadth
difference, Nature being so subtle and curious, as no particular can trace her
ways; and therefore when I speak of contractions and dilations, I do not mean
they are all such gross actions perceptible by our exterior senses as the works
of Art, but such as the curiosity of Nature works. Concerning the several sorts
of animal heat and cold, they are quite different from the Elemental, and other
sorts of heat and cold; for some men may have cold fits of an Ague under the
Line, or in the hottest Climates; and others Burning-Feavers under the Poles,
or in the coldest climates. It Is true, that Animals, by their perceptions, may
pattern out the heat or cold of the air, but these perceptions are not always
regular or perfect; neither are the objects at all times exactly presented as
they should, which may cause an obscurity both in Art, and in particular
sensitive perceptions, and through this variety the same sort of Creatures may
have different perceptions of the same sorts of heat and cold. Besides it is to
be observed, that some parts or Creatures, as for example, Water, and the like
liquors, if kept close from the perception either of heat or cold, will neither
freeze, nor grow hot; and if Ice and Snow be kept in a deep Pit, from the
exterior object of heat, it will never thaw, but continne Ice or Snow, whenas
being placed near the perception of the Sun, Fire, or warm Air, its exterior
figure will alter from being Ice to Water, and from being cold to hot, or to an
intermediate temper betwixt both; nay, it may alter from an extreme degree of
cold to an extreme degree of heat, according as the exterior object of heat
does occasion the sensitive perceptive motions of Water or Ice to work; for
extremes are apt to alter the natural temper of a particular Creature, and many
times so as to cause a total dissolution of its interior natural figure; (when
I name extremes, I do not mean any uttermost extremes in Nature; for Nature
being Infinite, and her particular actions being poised and balanced by
opposites, can never run into extremes; but I call them so in reference only
to our perception, as we use to say, it is extreme hot, or extreme cold) And
the reason of it is, that Water by its natural perceptive motions imitates the
motions of heat or cold, but being kept from the perception of them, it cannot
imitate them. The same reason may be given upon the experiment, that some
bodies being put into water, will be preserved from being frozen or congealed;
for they being in water, are not only kept from the perception of cold, but
the water does as a guard preserve them; which guard, if it be overcome, that
is, if the water begin to freeze, then they will do so too. But yet all colds
are not airy, nor all heats sunny or fiery; for a man, as I mentioned before,
may have shaking fits of an Ague in the hottest climate, or season, and burning
fits of a Fever in the coldest climate or season; and as there is difference
between elemental and animal cold and heat, so betwixt other sorts; so that it
is but in vain to prove all sorts of heat and cold by Artificial
Weather-glasses, suppressions and elevations of water, Atmosphaerical parts,
and the like; for it is not the air that makes all cold, no not that cold which
is called Elementary, no more then it makes heat; but the corporeal,
figurative, self-moving, perceptive, rational and sensitive parts of Nature,
which make all other Creatures, make also heat and cold. Some Learned make much
ado about Antiperistasis, and the flight of those two contrary qualities, heat
and cold, from each other; where, according to their opinion, one of them being
surrounded and besieged by the other, retires to the innermost parts of the
body which it possesses, and there by recollecting its forces, and animating it
self to a defense, is intended or increased in its degree, and so becomes able
to resist its adversary; which they prove by the cold expelled from the Earth,
and Water by the Sunbeams, which they say retires to the middle region of the
Air, and there defends it self against the heat that is in the two other, viz.
the upper, and the lower Regions; and so it does in the Earth; for, say they,
we find in Summer, when the air is sultry hot, the cold retreats into Cellars
and Vaults, and in Winter when the air is cold, they are the Sanctuary and
receptacle of heat; so that the water in wells and springs, and the like places
under ground, is found warm and smoking, when as the water which is exposed to
the open air, by cold is congealed into Ice. But whatsoever their opinion be, I
cannot believe that heat and cold run from each other as Children at Boe-peep;
for concerning the Earths being warm in Winter, and cold in Summer, it is not,
in my opinion, caused by hot or cold Atoms, flying like Birds out of their
nests, and returning to the same; nor is the Earth like a Storehouse, that
hoards up cold and heat at several seasons in the year, but there is a natural
temper of cold and heat as well in the Earth, as in other Creatures; and that
Vaults, Wells, and Springs under ground, are warm in Winter, when the exterior
air is cold; the reason is, not that the heat of the air, or the Calorifick
atoms, as they call them, are retired thither to defend themselves from the
coldness of the air; but they being so deep in the Earth where the cold cannot
enter, are kept from the perception of cold, so as they cannot imitate so well
the motions of cold as other Creatures that are exposed to the open air. The
like may be said of the heat of the Sun in Summer, which cannot penetrate
deeper into the bowels of the Earth then cold can. The truth is, the Earth is
to them like an Umbrello, which defends or keeps men from the Sun, rain, wind,
dust, etc. but although it defends them from the heat of the Sun, or coldness
of wind, yet they have those qualities naturally within themselves, sometimes
more, and sometimes less: and so has the Earth its natural temper of heat and
cold; But what Umbrello the middle region has, whether it be some Planet, or
any thing else, I am not able to determine, unless I had been there and
observed it; nay, ten to one but I might even then have been mistaken.
Wherefore all the contentions and disputes about the doctrine of
Antiperistasis, are, in my judgment, to little purpose, since we are not able
to know all the differences of heat and cold; for if men conceive there is but
one heat and cold in Nature, they are mistaken; and much more if they think
they can measure all the several sorts of heat and cold in all Creatures by
artificial experiments; for as much as a Natural man differs from an artificial
statue or picture of a man, so much differs a natural effect from an
artificial, which can neither be so good, nor so lasting as a natural one: If
Charles's Wain, the Axes of the Earth, and the motions of the Planets, were
like the pole, or axes, or wheels of a Coach, they would soon be out of order.
Indeed artificial things are pretty toys to employ idle time; nay, some are
very useful for our convenience, but yet they are but Natures bastards or
changelings, if I may so call them; and though Nature takes so much delight in
variety, that she is pleased with them, yet they are not to be compared to her
wise and fundamental actions; for Nature, being a wise and provident Lady,
governs her parts very wisely, methodically and orderly; also she is very
industrious, and hates to be idle, which makes her employ her time as a good
Huswife does, in Brewing, Baking, Churning, Spinning, Sowing, etc. as also in
Preserving for those that love Sweetmeats, and in Distilling for those that
take delight in Cordials; for she has numerous employments, and being
infinitely self-moving, never wants work, but her artificial works are her
works of delight, pleasure and pastime: Wherefore those that employ their time
in Artificial Experiments, consider only Natures sporting or playing actions;
but those that view her wise Government, in ordering all her parts, and
consider her changes, alterations and tempers in particulars, and their causes,
spend their time more usefully and profitably; and truly to what purpose should
a man beat his brains, and weary his body with labors about that wherein he
shall lose more time, then gain knowledge? But if any one would take delight in
such things, my opinion is, that our female sex would be the fittest for it,
for they most commonly take pleasure in making of Sweetmeats, Possets, several
sorts of Pyes, Puddings, and the like; not so much for their own eating, as to
employ their idle time; and it may be, they would prove good Experimental
Philosophers, and inform the world how to make artificial Snow by their Creams
or Possets beaten into froth, and Ice by their clear, candied or crusted
quiddinies or conserves of fruits; and Frost by their candied herbs and
flowers; and Hail by their small comfits made of water and sugar with whites of
Eggs; and many other the like figures which resemble Beasts, Birds, Vegetables,
Minerals, etc. But the men should study the causes of those Experiments, and by
this society the Commonwealth would find a great benefit; for the Woman was
given to Man not only to delight, but to help and assist him; and I am
confident, Women would labor as much with Fire and Furnace as Men, for they will
make good Cordials and Spirits; but whether they would find out the
Philosophers-stone, I doubt; for our sex is more apt to waste, then to make
Gold; however, I would have them try, especially those that have means to
spend; for who knows but Women might be more happy in finding it out, then Men,
and then would Men have reason to employ their time in more profitable studies,
then in useless Experiments.

27. Of Congealation and Freezing.
THe Congelation of Water into Ice, Snow, Hail, and the like, is made by its
own corporeal figurative motions, which upon the perception of the exterior
object of cold, by the way of imitation, do contract and condense water into
such or such a figure. Some are of opinion, that Water, or the like liquors,
are not contracted, but expanded or rarefied by freezing; which they prove both
by the levity of congealed Water, and the breaking of Glasses, Earthen Bottles,
or other the like Vessels in which water is contained when it freezes: But
although IN mentioned in my former discourse, that there are several sorts of
colds, as for example, moist and dry colds, whereof these contract and
condense, those dilate and rarifie; so that there are cold dilations, as well
as cold contractions; yet Freezing or Congelation being none of the sorts of
moist, but of dry colds; it is not made by expanding or dilating, but by
contracting and condensing motions; for, that liquid bodies when frozen are
more extended, it is not the freezing motions that cause those extensions; but
water being of a dilative nature, its interior parts strive against the
exterior, which figurative motions do imitate the motions of cold, or frost,
and in that strife the water becomes extended or dilated, when congealed into
Ice: But the question is, Whether solid bodies do dilate or extend when they
freeze? and my opinion is they do not; for that solid bodies, as Metal, and the
like, are apt to break in a hard frost, does not prove an expansion, but the
division of their parts is rather made by contraction; for though the motions
of cold in metal are not so much exteriously contracting as to be perceived by
our optic sense, in its bulk or exterior magnitude, as they are in the body of
water, whose interior nature is dilative; yet by the division which cold
causes, it may well be believed, that freezing has an interior contractive
effect, otherwise it could not divide so as many times it does; Wherefore I
believe that solid bodies break by an extreme and extraordinary contraction of
their interior parts, and not by an extraordinary expansion. Besides this
breaking shows a strong self-motion in the action of congealing or freezing,
for the motions of cold are as strong and quick as the motions of heat: Nay,
even those Experimental Philosophers which are so much for expansion, confess
themselves that water is thicker and heavier in Winter then in Summer; and that
Ships draw less water, and that the water can bear greater burdens in Winter
then in Summer; which does not prove a rarefaction and expansion, but rather a
contraction and condensation of water by cold: They likewise affirm, that some
spirituous liquors of a mixed nature, will not expand, but on the contrary, do
visibly contract in the act of freezing. Concerning the levity of Ice, I cannot
believe it to be caused by expansion; for expansion will not make it lighter,
but it is only a change of the exterior shape or figure of the body; Neither
does Ice prove Light, because it will float above water; for a great Ship of
wood which is very heavy, will swim, when as other sorts of bodies that are
light and little, will sink. Nor are minute bubbles the cause of the Ice's
levity, which some do conceive to stick within the Ice, and make it light; for
this is but a light and airy opinion, which has no firm ground; and it might as
well be said that airy bubles are the cause that a Ship keeps above water; but
though wind and sails make a Ship swim faster, yet they will not hinder it from
sinking. The truth is, the chief cause of the levity or gravity of bodies, is
quantity of bulk, shape, purity and rarity, or grosness and density, and not
minute bubles, or insensible atoms, or pores, unless porous bodies be of less
quantity in water, then some dense bodies of the same magnitude. And thus it is
the Triangular figure of Snow that makes it light, and the squareness that
makes Ice heavier then Snow; for if Snow were porous, and its pores were filled
with atoms, it would be much heavier then its principle, Water. Besides, It is
to be observed, that not all kind of Water is of the same weight, by reason
there are several sorts of Circle-lines which make water; and therefore those
that measure all water alike, may be mistaken; for some Circle-lines may be
gross, some fine, some sharp, some broad, some pointed, etc. all which may
cause a different weight of water. Wherefore freezing, in my opinion, is not
caused by rarifying and dilating, but by contracting, condensing and retenting
motions: and truly if Ice were expanded by congelation, I would fain know,
whether its expansions be equal with the degrees of its hardness; which if so,
a drop of water might be expanded to a great bigness; nay, if all frozen
liquors should be enlarged or extended in magnitude, according to the strength
of the freezing motions, a drop of water at the Poles would become, I will not
say a mountain, but a very large body. Neither can rarefaction, in my opinion,
be the cause of the Ice's expansion; for not all rarefied bodies do extend; and
therefore I do rather believe a clarefaction in Ice, then a rarefaction, which
are different things. But some may object, That hot and swelling bodies do
dilate, and diffuse heat and scent without an expansion of their substance. I
answer, That is more then any one is able to prove: the truth is, when a
fiery-coal, and an odoriferous body cast heat and scent (as we use to say) it is
not that they do really and actually expand or dilate heat or scent without
body, for there can be no such thing as an immaterial heat or scent: neither
can Nothing be dilated or expanded, but both heat and scent being one thing
with the hot and smelling body, are as exterior objects patterned out by the
sensitive motions of the sentient body, and so are felt and smelt, not by an
actual emission of their own parts, or some heating and smelling atoms, or an
immaterial heat and smell, but by an imitation of the perceptive motions in the
sentient subject. The like for cold; for great shelves or mountains of Ice, do
not expand cold beyond their icy bodies; but the air patterns out the cold, and
so does the perception of those Seamen that sail into cold Countries; for it is
well to be observed, that there is a stint or proportion in all natures
corporeal figurative motions, to wit, in her particulars, as we may plainly see
in every particular sort or species of Creatures, and their constant and
orderly productions; for though particular Creatures may change into an
infinite variety of figures, by the infinite variety of natures corporeal
figurative motions, yet each kind or sort is stinted so much as it cannot run
into extremes, nor make a confusion, although it makes a distinguishment
between every particular Creature even in one and the same sort. And hence we
may conclude, that Nature is neither absolutely necessitated, nor has an
absolute free will; for she is so much necessitated, that she depends upon the
All-powerfull God, and cannot work beyond her self, or beyond her own nature;
and yet has so much liberty, that in her particulars she works as she
pleases, and as God has given her power; but she being wise, acts according to
her infinite natural wisdom, which is the cause of her orderly Government in
all particular productions, changes and dissolutions, so that all Creatures in
their particular kinds, do move and work as Nature pleases, orders and directs;
and therefore, as it is impossible for Nature to go beyond her self; so it is
likewise impossible that any particular body should extend beyond it self or
its natural figure. I will not say, that heat or cold, or other parts and
figures of Nature, may not occasion other bodies to dilate or extend; but my
meaning is, that no heat or cold can extend without body, or beyond body, and
that they are figured and patterned out by the motions of the sentient, which
imitating or patterning motions of the sentient body cannot be so perfect or
strong as the original motions in the object it self. Neither do I say, that
all parts or bodies do imitate, but some, and at some times there will be more
Imitators then at others, and sometimes none at all; and the imitations are
according as the imitating or patterning parts are disposed, or as the object
is presented. Concerning the degrees of a visible expansion, they cannot be
declared otherwise then by the visibly extended body, nor be perceived by us,
but by the optic sense: But, mistake me not, I do not mean, that the degrees
of heat and cold can only be perceived by our optic sense, but I speak of
bodies visibly expanded by heat and cold; for some degrees and sorts of heat
and cold are subject to the humane perception of sight, some to the perception
of touch, some to both, and some to none of them; there being so many various
sorts and degrees both of heat and cold, as they cannot be altogether subject
to our grosser exterior senses, but those which are, are perceived, as I said,
by our perception of sight and touch; for although our sensitive perceptions do
often commit errors and mistakes, either through their own irregularity, or
some other ways; yet next to the rational, they are the best informers we have;
for no man can naturally go beyond his rational and sensitive perception. And
thus, in my opinion, the nature of Congelation is not effected by expanding or
dilating, but contracting and condensing motions in the parts of the sentient
body, which motions in the congelation of water do not alter the interior
nature of water, but only contract its exterior figure into the figure either
of Ice, Snow, Hail, Hoarfrost, or the like, which may be proved by their return
into the former figure of water, whenever they dissolve; for wheresoever is a
total change, or alteration of the interior natural motions of a Creature, when
once dissolved, it will never regain its former figure; and therefore although
the exterior figures of congealed water are various and different, yet they
have all but one interior figure, which is water, into which they return as
into their principle, whenever they change their exterior figures by
dissolving and dilating motions; for as a laughing and frowning countenance
does not change the nature of a man, so neither do they the nature of water. I
do not speak of artificial, but of natural congealed figures, whose congelation
is made by their own natural figurative motions; But although all congelations
are some certain kind of motions, yet there may be as many particular sorts of
congelations, as there are several sorts of frozen or congealed bodies; for
though I name but one figure of Snow, another of Ice, another of Hail, etc. yet
I do not deny, but there may be numerous particular sorts and figures of Ice,
Snow, Hail, etc. all which may have their several freezing or congealing
motions; nay, freezing in this respect may very well be compared to burning, as
being opposite actions; and as there are various sorts of burning, much
differing from each other, so there are of freezing; for although all burning
is of the nature of fire, yet not all burning is an elemental fire; for
example, Lime, and some Vegetables, and other Creatures have burning effects,
and yet are not an Elemental fire: neither does the Sun and ordinary fire burn
just alike. The same may be said of Freezing; and I observe, that fluid and
rare parts are more apt to freeze, then solid and dense bodies; for I do not
believe all sorts of metal can freeze, so as water, or watery liquors, unless
they were made liquid. I will not say, that Minerals are altogether insensible
of cold or frost, but they do not freeze like liquid bodies; nay, not all
liquid bodies will freeze; as for example, some sorts of spirituous liquors,
Oil, Vinous spirits, Chemical extracts, etc. which proves, that not all (that
is to say) the infinite parts of Nature, are subject to one particular kind of
action, to wit, the action of freezing; for if Congelation did extend to the
infinite parts of Nature, it would not be a finite and particular, but an
infinite action; but, as I said, liquid bodies are more apt to freeze,
(especially water and watery liquors,) then dense and hard bodies, or some
sorts of oil, and spirits; for, as we see that fire cannot have the same
operation on all bodies alike, but some it causes to consume and turn to ashes,
some it hardens, some it softens, and on some it has no power at all: So its
opposite Frost or Cold cannot congeal every natural body, but only those which
are apt to freeze or imitate the motions of cold. Neither do all these bodies
freeze alike, but some slower, some quicker; some into such, and some into
another figure; as for example, even in one kind of Creatures, as animals; some
Beasts, as Foxes, Bears, and the like, are not so much sensible of cold, as
Man, and some other animal Creatures; and dead animals, or parts of dead
animals, will freeze much sooner then those which are living; not that living
animals have more natural life then those we call dead; for animals, when
dissolved from their animal figure, although they have not animal life, yet
they have life according to the nature of the figure into which they did
change; but, because of their different perceptions; for a dead or dissolved
animal, as it is of another kind of figure then a living animal, so it has also
another kind of perception, which causes it to freeze sooner then a living
animal does. But I cannot apprehend what some Learned mean by the powerful
effects of cold upon inanimate bodies; whether they mean, that cold is only
animate, and all other bodies inanimate; or whether both cold and other bodies
on which it works, be inanimate; if the later, I cannot conceive how inanimate
bodies can work upon each other, I mean such bodies as have neither life nor
motion, for without life or motion there can be no action: but if the former, I
would fain know whether Cold be self-moving? if not, I ask, What is that which
moves it? Is it an Immaterial Spirit, or some corporeal being? If an Immaterial
Spirit, we must allow, that this Spirit is either self-moving, or must be moved
by another; if it be moved by another Being, and that same Being again by
another; we shall after this manner run into infinite, and conclude nothing;
But if that Imaterial Spirit have self-motion, why may not a natural corporeal
being have the like? they being both Creatures of God, who can as well grant
self-motion to a corporeal, as to an incorporeal Being; nay, I am not able to
comprehend how Motion can be attributed to a Spirit; I mean, natural motion,
which is only a propriety of a body, or of a corporeal Being: but if Cold be
self-moving, then Nature is self-moving; for the cause can be no less then the
effect; and if Nature be self-moving, no part of Nature can be inanimate; for
as the body is, so are its parts; and as the cause, so its effects. Thus some
Learned do puzle themselves and the world with useless distinctions into
animate and inanimate Creatures, and are so much afraid of self-motion, as they
will rather maintain absurdities and errors, then allow any other self-motion
in Nature, but what is in themselves; for they would fain be above Nature, and
petty Gods, if they could but make themselves Infinite; not considering that
they are but parts of Nature, as all other Creatnres: Wherefore I, for my part,
will rather believe as sense and reason guides me, and not according to
interest, so as to extol my own kind above all the rest, or above Nature her
self. And thus to return to Cold; as Congelation is not a Universal or Infinite
action, which extends to the Infinite parts of Nature, and causes not the like
effects in those Creatures that are perceptible of it; so I do also observe,
that not any other sorts of bodies but Water will congeal into the figure of
Snow, when as there are many that will turn into the figure of Ice; besides, I
observe that air does not freeze beyond its degree of consistency; for if it
did, no animal Creature would be able to breath, since all or most of them are
subject to such a sort of respiration, as requires a certain intermediate
degree of air, neither too thick, nor too thin; what respirations other
Creatures require, I am not able to determine; for as there are several
infinite parts and actions of Nature, so also several sorts of Respirations;
and I believe, that what is called the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, may be
the Seas Respiration; for Nature has ordered for every part or Creature that
which is most fitting and proper for it.

Concerning Artificial Congelations, as to turn Water or Snow into the figure
of Ice, by the commixture of Salt, Nitre, Alum, or the like, it may, very
probably, be effected; for Water and watery liquors, their interior figure
being Circular, may easily change, by contracting that Circular figure into a
Triangle or square; that is, into Ice or Snow, (for Water, in my opinion, has a
round or Circular interior figure, Snow a Triangular, and Ice a square; I do
not mean an exact Mathematical Triangle or Square, but such a one as is proper
for their figures) and that the mixture of those, or the like ingredients,
being shaken together in a Vial, does produce films of Ice on the outside of
the Glass, as Experimenters relate; proves, not only that the motions of Cold
are very strong, but also that there is perception in all parts of Nature, and
that all Congelations, both natural and artificial, are made by the corporeal
perceptive motions which the sentient has of exterior cold; which is also the
reason, that Salt being mixed with Snow, makes the liquor always freeze first on
that side of the Vessel where the mixture is; for those parts which are
nearest, will imitate first the motions of frost, and after them the
neighboring parts, until they be all turned into Ice: The truth is, that all
or most artificial experiments are the best arguments to evince, there is
perception in all corporeal parts of Nature; for as parts are joined, or commix
with parts; so they move or work accordingly into such or such figures, either
by the way of imitation, or otherwise; for their motions are so various, as it
is impossible for one particulare to describe them all; but no motion can be
without perception, because every part or particle of Nature, as it is
self-moving, so it is also self-knowing and perceptive; for Matter,
Self-motion, Knowledge and Perception, are all but one thing, and no more
differing nor separable from each other, then Body, Place, Magnitude, Color
and Figure; Wherefore Experimental Philosophers cannot justly blame me for
maintaining the opinion of Self-motion, and a general Perception in Nature.

But to return to Artificial Congelations; there is as much difference between
Natural and Artificial Ice and Snow, as there is between Chalk and Cheese; or
between a natural Child, and a Baby made of Paste or Wax, and Gummed-silk; or
between artificial Glass, and natural Diamonds; the like may be said of Hail,
Frost, Wind, etc. for though their exterior figures do resemble, yet their
interior natures are quite different; and therefore, although by the help of
Art some may make Ice of Water or Snow, yet we cannot conclude from hence that
all natural Ice is made the same way, by saline particles, or acid Spirits, and
the like; for if Nature should work like Art, she would produce a man like as a
Carver makes a statue, or a Painter draws a picture: besides, it would require
a world of such saline or acid particles to make all the Ice that is in Nature.
Indeed it is as much absurdity, as impossibility, to constitute some particular
action the common principle of all natural heat or cold, and to make a
Universal cause of a particular effect; for no particular Part or Action can be
prime in Nature, or a fundamental principle of other Creatures or actions,
although it may occasion some Creatures to move after such or such a way.
Wherefore those that will needs have a Primum Frigidum, or some Body which they
suppose must of necessity be supremely cold, and by participation of which, all
other cold Bodies obtain that quality, whereof some do contend for Earth, some
for Water, others for Air; some for Nitre, and others for Salt, do all break
their heads to no purpose; for first, there are no extremes in Nature, and
therefore no Body can be supreamely cold, nor supreamly hot: Next, as I said,
it is impossible to make one particular sort of Creatures the principle of all
the various sorts of heat or cold that are in Nature; for there is an Elemental
heat and cold, a Vegetable, Mineral, Animal heat and cold; and there may be
many other sorts which we do not know; and how can either Earth or Water, or
Nitre, or Salt, be the Principle of all these different colds? Concerning the
Earth, we see that some parts of the Earth are hot, and some cold; the like of
Water and Air; and the same parts which are now hot, will often in a moment
grow cold, which shows they are as much subject to the perception of heat and
cold, as some other Creatures, and does plainly deny to them the possibility of
being a Primum Frigidum. I have mentioned in my Poetical Works, that there is a
Sun in the Center of the Earth; and in another place, I have described a
Chemical heat; but these being but Poetical Fancies, I will not draw them to
any serious proofs; only this I will say, that there may be degrees of heat
and cold in the Earth, and in Water, as well as there are in the Air; for
certainly the Earth is not without Motion, a dull, dead, moveless and inanimate
body; but it is as much interiously active, as Air and Water are exteriously;
which is evident enough by the various productions of Vegetables, Minerals, and
other bodies that derive their offspring out of the Earth: And as for Nitre
and Salt, although they may occasion some sorts of Colds in some sorts of
Bodies, like as some sorts of food, or tempers of Air, or the like, may work
such or such effects in some sorts of Creatures; yet this does not prove that
they are the only cause of all kinds of heat and cold that are in Nature. The
truth is, if Air, Water, Earth, Nitre, or Salt, or insensible, roving and
wandering atoms should be the only cause of cold; then there would be no
difference of hot and cold climates, but it would freeze as well under the
Line, as it does at the Poles. But there is such a stir kept about Atoms, as
that they are so full of action, and produce all things in the world, and yet
none describes by what means they move, or from whence they have this active
power.

Lastly, Some are of opinion, that the chief cause of all cold, and its
effects, is wind; which they describe to be air moved in a considerable
quantity, and that either forwards only, or in an undulating motion; which
opinion, in my judgment, is as erroneous as any of the former, and infers
another absurdity, which is, that all Winds are of the same nature, when as
there are as many several sorts and differences of Winds, as of other
Creatures; for there are several Winds in several Creatures; Winds in the Earth
are of another kind then those in the Air, and the Wind of an animal breath, is
different from both; nay, those that are in the air, are of different sorts;
some cold and dry, some hot and moist, and some temperate, etc. which how they
can all produce the effect of cold or freezing by the compression of the air, I
am not able to judge: only this I dare say, that if Wind causes cold or frost;
then in the midst of the Summer, or in hot Climates, a vehement wind would
always produce a great Frost; besides it would prove, that there must of
necessity be far greater winds at the Poles, then under the AEquinoctial, there
being the greatest cold: Neither will this principle be able to resolve the
question, why a man that has an Ague feels a shaking cold, even under the Line,
and in the coldest weather when there is no stirring of the least wind: All
which proves, that it is very improbable that Wind should be the principle of
all Natural Cold, and therefore it remains firm, that self-moving Matter, or
corporeal, figurative self-motion, as it is the Prime and only cause of all
natural effects, so it is also of Cold, and Heat, and Wind, and of all the
changes and alterations in Nature; which is, and has always been my constant,
and, in my simple judgment, the most probable and rational opinion in Natural
Philosophy.

28. Of Thawing or dissolving of Frozen bodies.
AS Freezing or Congelation is caused by contracting, condensing, and retentive
Motions; so Thawing is nothing else, but dissolving, dilating, and extending
motions; for Freezing and Thawing are two contrary actions; and as Freezing is
caused several ways, according to the various disposition of congelable bodies,
and the temper of exterior cold; so Thawing, or a dissolution of frozen bodies,
may be occasioned either by a sympathetical agreement; as for example, the
thawing of Ice in water, or other liquors, or by some exterior imitation, as by
hot dilating motions. And it is to be observed, That as the time of freezing,
so the time of dissolving is according to the several natures and tempers both
of the frozen bodies themselves, and the exterior objects applied to frozen
bodies, which occasion their thawing or dissolution: for it is not only heat
that does cause Ice, or Snow, or other frozen bodies to melt quicker or slower,
but according as the nature of the heat is, either more or less dilative, or
more or less rarifying; for surely an exterior actual heat is more rarifying
then an interior virtual heat; as we see in strong spirituous liquors which are
interiously contracting, but being made actually hot, become exteriously
dilating: The like of many other bodies; so that actual heat is more dissolving
then virtual heat. And this is the reason why Ice and Snow will melt sooner in
some Countries or places then in others, and is much harder in some then in
others; for we see that neither Air, Water, Earth, Minerals, nor any other
sorts of Creatures are just alike in all Countries or Climates: The same may be
said of heat and cold. Besides, it is to be observed, that oftentimes a
different application of one and the same object will occasion different
effects; as for example, if Salt be mixed with Ice, it may cause the contracted
body of Ice to change its present motions into its former state or figure, viz.
into water; but being applied outwardly, or on the outside of the Vessel
wherein Snow or Ice is contained, it may make it freeze harder, instead of
dissolving it. Also Ice will oftentimes break into pieces of its own accord,
and without the application of any exterior object; and the reason, in my
opinion, is, that some of the interior parts of the Ice, endeavoring to return
to their proper and natural figure by virtue of their interior dilative
motions, do break and divide some of the exterior parts that are contracted by
the motions of Frost, especially those which have not so great a force or power
as to resist them.

But concerning Thawing, some by their trails have found, that if frozen Eggs,
Apples, and the like bodies, be thawed near the fire, they will be thereby
spoiled; but if they be immersed in cold water, or wrapped into Ice or Snow, the
internal cold will be drawn out, as they suppose, by the external; and the
frozen bodies will be harmlesly, though not so quickly thawed. And truly this
experiment stands much to reason; for, in my opinion, when frozen bodies
perceive heat or fire, the motions of their frozen parts upon the perception,
endeavor to imitate the motions of heat or fire, which being opposite to the
motions of cold, in this sudden and hasty change, they become irregular in so
much as to cause in most frozen parts a dissolution of their interior natural
figure; Wherefore it is very probable, that frozen bodies will thaw more
regularly in water, or being wrapped into Ice or Snow, then by heat or fire; for
Thawing is a dilating action, and Water, as also Ice and Snow (which are
nothing but congealed water) being of a dilative nature, may easily occasion a
thawing of the mentioned frozen parts by Sympathy, provided, the Motions of the
exterior cold do not overpower the motions of the interior frozen parts; for
if a frozen body should be wrapped thus into Ice or Snow, and continue in an
open, cold frosty air, I question whether it would cause a thaw in the same
body, it would preserve the body in its frozen state from dissolving or
disuniting, rather then occasion its thawing. But that such frozen bodies, as
Apples, and Eggs, etc. immersed in water, will produce Ice on their outsides,
is no wonder, by reason the motions of Water imitate the motions of the frozen
bodies; and those parts of water that are nearest, are the first imitators, and
become of the same mode. By which we may see, that some parts will cloth
themselves, others only vail themselves with artificial dresses, most of which
dresses are but copies of other motions, and not original actions; It makes
also evident, that those effects are not caused by an ingress of frigorifick
atoms in water, or other congelable bodies, but by the perceptive motions of
their own parts. And what I have said of Cold, the same may be spoken of heat;
for it is known, that a part of a man's body being burned with fire, the burning
may be cured by the heat of the fire; which, in my opinion, proceeds from a
sympathetical agreement betwixt the motions of the fire, and the motions of the
burned part; for every part of a man's body has its natural heat, which is of
an intermediate temper; which heat being heightened by the burning motions of
fire beyond its natural degree, causes a burning and smarting pain in the same
part; and therefore as the fire did occasion an immoderate heat, by an
intermixture of its own parts with the parts of the flesh; so a moderate heat
of the fire may reduce again the natural heat of the same parts, and that by a
sympathetical agreement betwixt the motions of the Elemental and Animal heat;
But it is to be observed, first, that the burning must be done by an
intermixture of the fire with the parts of the body: Next, that the burning
must be but skin deep (as we use to call it) that is, the burned part must not
be totally overcome by fire, or else it will never be restored again. Neither
are all burned bodies restored after this manner, but some; for one and the
same thing will not in all bodies occasion the like effects; as we may see by
Fire, which being one and the same, will not cause all fuels to burn alike; and
this makes true the old saying, One Man's Meat is another Man's Poison. The truth
is, it cannot be otherwise; for though Nature, and natural self-moving Matter
is but one body, and the only cause of all natural effects; yet Nature being
divided into infinite, corporeal, figurative self-moving parts, these parts, as
the effects of that only cause, must needs be various; and again, proceeding
from one infinite cause, as one matter, they are all but one thing, because
they are infinite parts of one Infinite body. But some may say, If Nature be
but one body, and the Infinite parts are all united into that same body; How
comes it that there is such an opposition, strife, and war betwixt the parts of
Nature? I answer: Nature being Material, is composeable and divideable; and as
Composition is made by a mutual agreement of parts, so division is made by an
opposition or strife betwixt parts; which opposition or division does not
obstruct the Union of Nature, but, on the contrary, rather proves, that without
an opposition of parts, there could not be a union or composition of so many
several parts and creatures, nor no change or variety in Nature; for if all the
parts did unanimously conspire and agree in their motions, and move all but one
way, there would be but one act or kind of motion in Nature; when as an
opposition of some parts, and a mutual agreement of others, is not only the
cause of the Miraculous variety in Nature, but it poyses and balances, as it
were, the corporeal, figurative motions, which is the cause that Nature is
steady and fixed in her self, although her parts be in a perpetual motion.

29. Several Questions resolved concerning Cold, and Frozen Bodies, etc.
FIrst, I will give you my answer to the question, which is much agitated
amongst the Learned concerning Cold, to wit, Whether it be a Positive quality,
or a bare Privation of Heat? And my opinion is, That Cold is both a Positive
quality, and a privation of heat: For whatsoever is a true quality of Cold,
must needs be a privation of Heat; since two opposites cannot subsist together
in one and the same part, at one point of time. By Privation, I mean nothing
else, but an alteration of Natures actions in her several parts, or which is
all one, a change of natural, corporeal motions; and so the death of Animals
may be called a privation of animal life; that is, a change of the animal
motions in that particular Creature, which made animal life, to some other kind
of action which is not animal life. And in this sense, both Cold and Heat,
although they be positive qualities, or natural beings, yet they are also
privations; that is, changes of corporeal, figurative motions, in several
particular Creatures, or parts of Nature. But what some Learned mean by Bare
Privation, I cannot apprehend; for there is no such thing as a bare Privation,
or bare Motion in Nature; but all Motion is Corporeal, or Material; for Matter,
Motion and Figure, are but one thing. Which is the reason, that to explain my
self the better (...) of Motion, I do always add the word corporeal (...)
^^gurative; by which, I exclude all bare or immaterial Motion, which expression
is altogether against sense and reason.

The second Question is, Whether Winds have the power to change the Exterior
temper of the Air? To which, I answer: That Winds will not only occasion the
Air to be either hot or cold, according to their own temper, but also Animals
and Vegetables, and other sorts of Creatures; for the sensitive, corporeal
Motions in several kinds of Creatures, do often imitate and figure out the
Motions of exterior objects, some more, some less; some regularly, and some
irregularly, and some not at all; according to the nature of their own
perceptions. By which we may observe, that the Agent, which is the external
object, has only an occasional power; and the Patient, which is the sentient,
works chiefly the effect by virtue of the perceptive, figurative motions in its
own sensitive organs or parts.

Quest. 3. Why those Winds that come from cold Regions, are most commonly cold,
and those that come from hot Regions are for the most part hot? I answer; The
reason is, That those Winds have more constantly patterned out the motions of
cold or heat in those parts from which they either separated themselves, or
which they have met withal. But it may be questioned, Whether all cold and hot
winds do bring their heat and cold along with them out of such hot and cold
Countries? And I am of opinion they do not; but that they proceed from an
imitation of the nearest parts, which take patterns from other parts, and these
again from the remoter parts; so that they are but patterns of other patterns,
and copies of other copies.

Quest. 4. Why Fire in some cold Regions will hardly kindle, or at least not
burn freely? I answer; This is no more to be wondered at, then that some men do
die with cold; for cold being contrary to fire, if it have a predominate power,
it will without doubt put out the fire; not that the cold corporeal motions do
destroy fire by their actual power over it, but that fire destroys it self by
an imitation of the motions of cold; so that cold is only an occasional cause
of the fires destruction, or at least of the alteration of its motions, and the
diminution of its strength. But some might ask, What makes or causes this
imitation in several sorts of Cretures? I answer, The wisdom of Nature, which
orders her corporeal actions to be always in a mean, so that one extreme (as
one may call it) does countervail another. But then you will say, There would
always be a right and mean temper in all things. I answer: So there is in the
whole, that is, in Infinite Nature, although not in every particular; for
Natures Wisdom orders her particulars to the best of the whole; and although
particulars do oppose each other, yet all opposition tends to the conservation
of a general peace and unity in the whole. But to return to Fire; since Air is
the proper matter of respiration for fire, extreme colds and frosts, either of
air or vapor, are as unfit for the respiration of fire as water is; which if
it do not kill it quite, yet it will at least make it sick, pale and faint; but
if water be rarefied to such a degree, that it becomes thin vapor, then it is
as proper for its respiration, as air. Thus we see, although fire has fuel,
which is its food, yet no food can keep it alive without breath or respiration:
The like may be said of some other Creatures.

Qu. 5. Whether Wood be apt to freeze? My Answer is, That I believe that the
moist part of Wood, which is sap, may freeze as hard as Water, but the solid
parts cannot do so; for the cracking noise of Wood is no proof of its being
frozen, because Wainscot will make such a noise in Summer, as well as in
Winter. And it is to be observed, that some bodies will be apter to freeze in a
weak, then in a hard frost, according to their own dispositions; which is as
much to be considered, as the object of cold or frost it self; for some bodies
do more, and some less imitate the motions of some objects, and some not at
all: and thus we see that solid bodies do only imitate the contractive motions
of cold, but not the dilative motions of moisture, which is the cause they
break in a hard frost, like as a string, which being tied too hard, will fly
asunder; and as they imitate Cold, so they do also imitate Thaw.

Quest. 6. Whether Water be fluid in its nature, or but occasionally by the
agitation of the air? I answer: That Waters is fluid in its own nature, needs
no proof, but it is known enough by the force of its dilating motions; for
Water, when it gets but liberty, it overflows all, and dilates everywhere;
which proves it is not air that makes it fluid, but it is so in its own nature.

Quest. 7. What produces those great Precipices and Mountains of Ice which are
found in the Sea, and other great waters? I answer: That Snow, as also thick
Fogs and Mists, which are nothing but rarefied water, falling upon the Ice,
make its outside thicker, and many great shelves and broken pieces of Ice
joining together, produce such Precipices and Mountains as mentioned.

Quest. 8. Whether Fishes can live in frozen Water? I answer: If there be as
much water left unfrozen, as will serve them for respiration, they may live;
for it is well known, that Water is the chief matter of respiration for Fish,
and not Air; for Fish being out of water, cannot live long, but whilst they
live, they gasp and gape for water: I mean such kinds of Fish which do live
altogether in Water, and not such Creatures as are of a mixed kind, and live in
water as well as by land, which the Learned call Amphibious Creatures; as
Otters, and the like, which may live in the air, as well as in water: Those
Fish, I say, if the water be thoroughly frozen, or if but the surface of water be
quite frozen over to a pretty depth, will often die, by reason the water that
remains unfrozen, by the contraction of Ice has altered for that time its
dilative motions, to retentive motions; and like as men are smothered in a
close air, so Fish in close water, that is, in water which is quite covered and
enclosed with Ice: but at some men have not so nice and tender natures as
others, and some have larger organs for respiration then others, and some are
more accustomed to some sorts of air then others, which may cause them to
endure longer, or respire more freely then others; so some Fishes do live
longer in such close waters, then others; and some may be like Men that are
frost-bitten, which may chance to live even in those waters that are quite
thoroughly frozen, as Experimenters relate; but yet I cannot believe, that the
water, in which Fishes have been observed to live, can be so thoroughly frozen to
solid Ice, that it should not leave some liquidity or wetness in it, although
not perceptible by our sight, by which those Fishes were preserved alive:
However, it is more probable for Fish to live in Ice, then for other Creatures,
because the Principle of Ice is Water, which is the matter of the Fishes
respiration, which keeps them alive.

Quest. 9. Whether in decoctions of Herbs, when congealed or frozen into Ice,
the figures of the Herbs do appear in the Ice? This is affirmed for Truth by
many Learned; and though I do not deny, but that such liquors in freezing may
have some resemblance of their solid parts; yet I do not believe it to be
universal; for if the blood of an animal should be congealed into Ice, I doubt
it would hardly represent the figure of an animal. Indeed there is much
difference between the exterior figures of Creatures, and their interior
natures, which is evident even in frozen water, whose exterior Icy figures are
numerous, when as their interior nature is but water; and there may also
several changes and alterations of exterior figures be made by Art, when their
interior nature is but one and the same.

Quest. 10. Whether Cold does preserve Bodies from Corruption? I answer: That,
in my opinion, it may be very probable: For Corruption or Putrefaction is
nothing but irregular dissolving motions; when as Freezing or Congelation is
made by regular contracting and condensing motions; and so long as these
motions of Freezing are in force, it is impossible the motions that make
Corruption should work their effect. But that such bodies as have been thoroughly
frozen, after being thawed, are most commonly spoiled; the reason is, that the
freezing or congealing motions, being not natural to those bodies, have caused
such a thorowalteration of the natural motions of their parts, as a hundred to
one but they will never move regularly and orderly again afterward; but on the
contrary, their interior motions do quite and absolutelely change, by which the
figure is totally altered from its former nature: but if a solid body be not
thoroughly frozen, it may be reduced to a perfect regularity again; for those
natural motions that are not altered, may occasion the rest to act as formerly,
to the preservation of that figure.

30. Of Contraction and Dilation.
THere have been, and are still great disputes amongst the Learned concerning
Contraction and Extension of bodies; but if I were to decide their
controversy, I would ask first, Whether they did all agree in one principle?
that is, whether their principle was purely natural, and not mixed with divine
or supernatural things; for if they did not well apprehend one another
meaning, or argued upon different principles, it would be but a folly to
dispute, because it would be impossible for them to agree. But concerning
Contraction and Dilation, my opinion is, That there can be no Contraction nor
Extension of a single part, by reason there is no such thing as a single or
individeable part in Nature; for even that which the learned call an atome,
although they make it a single body, yet being mateterial or corporeal, it must
needs be divideable: Wherefore all Contraction and Dilation consists of parts
as much as body does, and there is no body that is not contractive and
dilative, as well as it is divideable and composeable; for parts are, as it
were, the effects of a body, by reason there is no body without parts; and
contraction and extension are the effects of parts, and magnitude and place are
the effects of contraction and extension; and all these are the effects of
corporeal figurative self-motion, which I have more fully declared in several
places of my Philosophical Works.

But some may say, It is impossible that a body can make it self bigger or less
then by Nature it is? My answer is, I do not conceive what is meant by being
little or great by Nature; for Nature is in a perpetual motion, and so are her
parts, which do work, intermix, join, divide and move according as Nature
pleases without any rest or intermission. Now if there be such changes of parts
and motions, it is impossible that there can be any constant figure in Nature;
I mean, so as not to have its changes of motions as well as the rest, although
they be not all after the same manner; And if there can be no constant figure
in Nature, there can neither be a constant littleness or greatness, nor a
constant rarity or density, but all parts of Nature must change according to
their motions; for as parts divide and compose, so are their figures; and since
there are contracting and dilating motions, as well as there are of other
sorts, there are also contracting and dilating parts; and if there be
contracting and dilating parts, then their magnitude changes accordingly; for
magnitude does not barely consist in quantity, but in the extension of the
parts of the body, and as the magnitude of a body is, so is place; so that
place is larger, or less, according as the body contracts or dilates; for it is
well to be observed, that it is not the interior figure of any part of Creature
of Nature that alters by contraction or dilation; for example, Gold or
Quicksilver is not changed from being Gold or Quicksilver when it is rarefied,
but only that figure puts it self into several postures. Which proves, that
the extension of a body is not made by an addition or intermixture of foreign
parts, as composition; nor contraction, by a diminution of its own parts, as
division; for dilation and composition, as also division and contraction, are
different actions; the dilation of a body is an extension of its own parts, but
composition is an addition of foreign parts; and contraction, although it
makes the body less in magnitude, yet it loses nothing of its own parts: The
truth is, as division and composition are natural corporeal motions, so are
contraction and dilation; and as both composition and division belong to parts,
so do contraction and dilation; for there can be no contraction or dilation of
a single part.

31. Of the Parts of Nature, and of Atoms.
ALthough I am of opinion, that Nature is a self-moving, and consequently a
self-living and self-knowing infinite body, divideable into infinite parts; yet
I do not mean that these parts are Atoms; for there can be no Atome, that is,
an individeable body in Nature, because whatsoever has body, or is material,
has quantity, and what has quantity is divideable. But some may say, if a part
be finite, it cannot be divideable into Infinite. To which I answer, that there
is no such thing as one finite single part in Nature; for when I speak of the
parts of Nature, I do not understand, that those parts are like grains of Corn,
or sand in one heap, all of one figure or magnitude, and separable from each
other; but I conceive Nature to be an Infinite body, bulk or magnitude, which
by its own self-motion is divided into infinite parts, not single or
individable parts, but parts of one continued body, only discernable from each
other by their proper figures, caused by the changes of particular motions; for
it is well to be observed, first, that Nature is corporeal, and therefore
divideable: Next, That Nature is selfmoving, and therefore never at rest; I do
not mean exteriously moving; for Nature being infinite, is all within it self,
and has nothing without or beyond it, because it is without limits or bounds;
but interiously, so that all the motions that are in Nature are within her
self, and being various and infinite in their changes, they divide the
substance or body of Nature into infinite parts; for the parts of Nature, and
changes of Motion are but one thing; for were there no Motion, there would be
no change of figures: It Is true, Matter in its own nature would be divideable,
because wheresoever is body, there are parts; but if it had no motion, it would
not have such various changes of figures as it has; wherefore it is well to be
considered, that selfmotion is throughout all the body of Nature, and that no
part or figure, how small soever, can be without self-motion; and according as
the motions are, so are the parts; for infinite changes of motions make
infinite parts; nay, what we call one finite part, may have infinite changes,
because it may be divided and composed infinite ways. By which it is evident,
first, that no certain quantity or figure can be assigned to the parts of
Nature, as I said before of the grains of corn or sand; for infinite changes of
motions produce infinite varieties of figures; and all the degrees of density,
rarity, levity, gravity, slowness, quickness; nay, all the effects that are in
Nature: Next, that it is impossible to have single parts in Nature, that is,
parts which are individeable in themselves, as Atoms; and may subsist single,
or by themselves, precised or separated from all other parts; for although
there are perfect and whole figures in Nature, yet are they nothing else but
parts of Nature, which consist of a composition of other parts, and their
figures make them discernable from other parts or figures of Nature. For
example: an Eye, although it be composed of parts, and has a whole and perfect
figure, yet it is but a part of the Head, and could not subsist without it:
Also the Head, although it has a whole and perfect figure, yet it is a part of
the Body, and could not subsist without it. The same may be said of all other
particular and perfect figures. As for example: an Animal, though it be a whole
and perfect figure, yet it is but a part of Earth, and some other Elements, and
parts of Nature, and could not subsist without them; nay, for any thing we know
to the contrary, the Elements cannot subsist without other Creatures: All which
proves, that there are no single Parts, nor Vacuum, nor no (...) of loose
Atoms in Nature; for if such a whole and perfect figure should be divided into
millions of other parts and figures, yet it is impossible to divide it into
single parts, by reason there is as much composition, as there is division in
Nature; and as soon as parts are divided from such or such parts, at that
instant of time, and by the same act of division they are joined to other
parts; and all this because Nature is a body of a continued infiniteness,
without any holes or vacuities: Nay, were it possible that there could be a
single part, that is, a part separated from all the rest; yet being a part of
Nature, it must consist of the same substance as Nature her self; but Nature is
an Infinite composition of rational, sensitive and inanimate matter; which
although they do constitute but one body because of their close and inseparable
conjunction and commixture; nevertheless they are several parts (for one part
is not another part) and therefore every part or particle of Nature consisting
of the same commixture, cannot be single or individable. Thus it remains firm,
that selfmotion is the only cause of the various parts and changes of figures;
and that when parts move or separate themselves from parts, they move and join
to other parts at the same point of time; I do not mean that parts do drive or
press upon each other, for those are forced and constraint actions, when as
natural self-motions are free and voluntary; and although there are pressures
and re-actions in Nature, yet they are not universal actions: Neither is there
any such thing as a stoppage in the actions of Nature, nor do parts move
through Empty spaces; but as some parts join, so others divide by the same act;
for although some parts can quit such or such parts, yet they cannot quit all
parts; for example, a man goes a hundred miles, he leaves or quits those parts
from whence he removed first; but as soon as he removes from such parts, he
joins to other parts, were his motion no more then a hairs breadth; so that all
his journey is nothing else but a division and composition of parts,
wheresoever he goes by water, or by land; for it is impossible for him to quit
parts in general, although it be in his choice to quit such or such particular
parts, and to join to what parts he will.

When I speak of Motion, I desire to be understood, that I do not mean any
other but corporeal motion; for there is no other motion in Nature; so that
Generation, Dissolution, Alteration, Augmentation, Diminution, Transformation;
nay, all the actions of Sense and Reason, both interior, and exterior, and what
motions soever in Nature are corporeal, although they are not all perceptible
by our exterior senses; for our senses are too gross to perceive all the
curious and various actions of Nature, and it would be but a folly to deny what
our senses cannot perceive; for although Sense and Reason are the same in all
Creatures and parts of Nature, not having any degrees in themselves, no more
then self-knowledg has; for self-knowledg can but be self-knowledg, and sense
and reason can but be sense and reason; yet they do not work in all parts of
Nature alike, but according as they are composed: and therefore it is
impossible for any humane eye to see the exterior motions of all Creatures,
except they be of some grosser bodies; For who can see the motion of the Air,
and the like? Nay, I believe not that all exterior motions of grosser bodies
can be perceived by our sight, much less their interior actions; and by this I
exclude Rest: for if Matter, or corporeal Nature be in a perpetual motion,
there can be no rest in Nature, but what others call rest, is nothing else but
retentive motions, which retentive motions, are as active as dispersing
motions; for Mr. Des Carts says well, that it requires as much action or force
to stay a Ship, as to set it a float; and there is as much action required in
keeping parts together, as in dispersing them. Besides, interior motions are as
active as some exterior; nay, some more; and I believe, if there were a World
of Gold, whose parts are close and dense, it would be as active interiously, as
a world of air, which is fluid and rare, would be active exteriously. But some
may say, How is it possible that: there can be a motion of bodies without an
empty space; for one body cannot move in another body? I answer: Space is
change of division, as Place is change of magnitude; but division and magnitude
belong to body; therefore space and place cannot be without body, but
wheresoever is body, there is place also: Neither can a body leave a place
behind it; so that the distinction of interior and exterior place is needless,
because no body can have two places, but place and body are but one thing; and
whenever the body changes, its place changes also. But some do not consider
that there are degrees of Matter; for Natures body does not consist of one
degree, as to be all hard or dense like a stone, but as there are infinite
changes of Motion, so there are in Nature infinite degrees of density, rarity,
grossness, purity, hardness, softness, etc. all caused by self-motion; which
hard, gross, rare, fluid, dense, subtle, and many other sorts of bodies, in
their several degrees, may more easily move, divide and join, from and with
each other, being in a continued body, then if they had a Vacuum to move in;
for were there a Vacuum, there would be no successive motions, nor no degrees
of swiftness and slowness, but all Motion would be done in an instant. The
truth is, there would be such distances of several gaps and holes, that Parts
would never join if once divided; in so much as a piece of the world would
become a single particular World, not joining to any part besides it self;
which would make a horrid confusion in Nature contrary to all sense and reason.
Wherefore the opinion of Vacuum is, in my judgment, as absurd as the opinion of
senseless and irrational Atoms, moving by chance; for it is more probable that
atoms should have life and knowledge to move regularly, then that they should
move regularly and wisely by chance, and without life and knowledge; for there
can be no regular motion without knowledge, sense and reason; and therefore
those that are for Atoms, had best to believe them to be self-moving, living
and knowing bodies, or else their opinion is very irrational. But the opinion
of Atoms, is fitter for a Poetical fancy, then for serious Philosophy; and
this is the reason that I have waved it in my Philosophical Works: for if there
can be no single parts, there cannot be Atoms in Nature, or else Nature would
be like a Beggars coat full of lice; Neither would she be able to rule those
wandering and straggling atoms, because they are not parts of her body, but
each is a single body by it self, having no dependence upon each other;
Wherefore if there should be a composition of Atoms, it would not be a body
made of parts, but of so many whole and entire single bodies meeting together
as a swarm of Bees: The truth is, every Atome being single, must be an absolute
body by it self, and have an absolute power and knowledge; by which it would
become a kind of a Deity; and the concourse of them would rather cause a
confusion, then a conformity in Nature, because all Atoms, being absolute,
they would all be Governors, but none would be governed.

Thus I have declared my opinion concerning the parts of Nature, as also
Vacuum, and Atoms; to wit, That it is impossible there can be any such things
in Nature. I will conclude after I have given my answer to these two following
Questions.

First, It may be asked, Whether the Parts of a Composed figure do continue in
such a Composition until the whole figure be dissolved? I answer, My opinion
is, that in some compositions they do continue, at least some longer then
others; but although some parts of a figure do disjoin from each other, and
join with others; yet the structure of the Creature may nevertheless continue.
Neither is it necessary, that those which begin a buiding, must needs stay to
the end or perfection of it, for some may begin, others may work on, and others
may finish it; also some may repair, and some may ruin; and it is well to be
observed, that the compositions of all Creatures are not alike, nor do they
continue or dissolve all alike, and at the same time.

Secondly, It may be questioned, Whether there can be an infinite distance
between two or more parts? And my answer is, That distance properly does not
belong to infinite, but only to finite pars; for distance is a certain measure
between parts and parts, and wheresoever is a measure, there must be two
extremes; but there are no extremes nor ends in infinite, and therefore there
can be no infinite distance between parts. Indeed, it is a mere contradiction,
and nonsense to say, Infinite between parts, by reason the word Between,
implies a finiteness, as between such a part, and such a part. But you will
say, Because Nature is an infinite body, it must have an infinite measure; for
wheresoever is body, there is magnitude and figure; and wheresoever is
magnitude and figure, there is measure. I answer: It Is true, body, magnitude
and figure, are all but one thing; and according as the body is, so is its
magnitude and figure; but the body of Nature being infinite, its magnitude and
figure must also be infinite. But mistake me not: I do not mean a circumscribed
and perfect exterior magnitude, by reason there is nothing exterior in respect
to Infinite, but in relation to its infinite parts. The truth is, Men do often
mistake in adscribing to Infinite that which properly belongs to particulars;
or at least they consider the attributes of an infinite and a finite body,
after one and the same manner; and no wonder, because a finite capacity cannot
comprehend what infinite is; but although we cannot positively know what
infinite is, yet we may guess at it by its opposite, that is, by Finite; for
infinite is that which has no terms, bounds or limits; and therefore it cannot
be circumscribed; and if it cannot be circumscribed as a finite body, it cannot
have an exterior magnitude and figure as a finite body, and consequently no
measure. Nevertheless, it is no contradiction to say, it has an Infinite
magnitude and figure; for although Infinite Nature cannot have any thing
without or beyond it self, yet it may have magnitude and figure within it self,
because it is a body, and by this the magnitude and figure of infinite Nature
is distinguished from the magnitude and figure of its finite parts; for these
have each their exterior and circumscribed figure, which Nature has not. And as
for Measure, it is only an effect of a finite magnitude, and belongs to finite
parts that have certain distances from each other. It Is true, one might in a
certain manner say, An infinite distance; as for example, if there be an
infinite Line which has no ends, one might call the infinite extension of that
line an infinite distance; but this is an improper expression, and it is better
to keep the term of an infinite extension, then call it an infinite distance;
for as I said before, distance is measure, and properly belongs to parts: Nay,
if it were possible that there could be an infinite distance of parts in
Nature, yet the perpetual changes of Motions, by which parts remove, and join
from and to parts, would not allow any such thing in Nature; for the parts of
Nature are always in action, working, intermixing, composing, dividing
perpetually; so as it would be impossible for them to keep certain distances.

But to conclude this Discourse, I desire it may be observed.

1. That whatsoever is body, were it an Atome, must have parts; so that body
cannot be without parts.

2. That there is no such thing as rest or stoppage in Infinite Matter; but
there is self-motion in all parts of Nature, although they are not all
exteriously, locally moving to our perception; for reason must not deny what
our senses cannot comprehend: although a piece of Wood or Metal has no exterior
progressive motion, such as is found in Animals; nevertheless, it is not
without Motion; for it is subject to Generation and Dissolution, which
certainly are natural corporeal motions, besides many others; the truth is, the
harder, denser, and firmer bodies are, the stronger are their motions; for it
requires more strength to keep and hold parts together, then to dissolve and
separate them.

3. That without motion, parts could not alter their figures, neither would
there be any variety in infinite Nature.

4. If there were any such thing as Atoms, and Vacuum, there would be no
conformity, nor uniformity in Nature.

Lastly, As there is a perpetual self-motion in Nature, and all her parts, so
it is impossible that there can be perfect measures, constant figures, or
single parts in Nature.

32. Of the Celestial Parts of this World; and whether they be alterable?
IT may be questioned, Whether the celestial parts of the world never alter or
change by their corporeal figurative motions, but remain constantly the same
without any change or alteration? I answer: Concerning the general and
particular kinds or sorts of Creatures of this world, humane sense and reason
does observe, that they do not change, but are continued by a perpetual supply
and succession of Particulars without any general alteration or dissolution;
but as for the singulars or particulars of those kinds and sorts of Creatures,
it is most certain, that they are subject to perpetual alterations, generations
and dissolutions; for example, humane sense and reason perceives, that the
Parts of the Earth do undergo continual alterations; some do change into
Minerals, some into Vegetables, some into Animals, etc. and these change again
into several other figures, and also some into Earth again, and the Elements
are changed one into another; when as yet the Globe of the Earth it self
remains the same without any general alteration or dissolution; neither is
there any want or decay of general kinds of Creatures, but only a change of
their particulars; And though our perception is but finite, and must contain it
self within its own compass or bounds, so that it cannot judge of all
particulars that are in Nature: Nevertheless, I see no reason, why the
Celestial parts of the World should not be subject to alteration, as well as
those of the Terrestrial Globe; for if Nature be full of self-motion, no
particular can be at rest, or without action; but the chief actions of Nature
are Composition and Division, and changes of Parts: Wherefore, although to our
humane perception, the Stars and Planets do not change from their general
nature, as from being such or such composed figures, but appear the same to us,
without any general or remarkable change of their exterior figures; yet we
cannot certainly affirm, that the parts thereof be either moveless or
unalterable, they being too remote from our perception, to discern all their
particular motions: For put the case, the Moon, or any other of the Planets,
were inhabited by animal Creatures, which could see as much of this terrestrial
Globe, as we see of the Moon, although they would perceive perhaps the
progressive motion of the whole figure of this terrestrial Globe, in the same
manner as we do perceive the motion of the Moon, yet they would never be able
to discern the particular parts thereof, viz. Trees, Animals, Stones, Water,
Earth, etc. much less their particular changes and alterations, generations and
dissolutions. In the like manner do the Celestial Orbs appear to us; for none
that inhabit this Globe will ever be able to discern the particular parts of
which the Globe of the Moon consists, much less their changes and motions.
Indeed, it is with the Celestial Orbs, as it is with other composed parts or
figures of Nature, which have their interior, as well as exterior; general, as
well as particular motions; for it is impossible, that Nature, consisting of
infinite different parts, should have but one kind of motion; and therefore as
a Man, or any other animal, has first his exterior motions or actions, which
belong to his whole composed figure, next his Internal figurative motions by
which he grows, decays, and dissolves, etc. Thirdly, As every several part and
particle of his body has its interior and exterior actions; so it may be said
of the Stars and Planets, which are no more then other parts of Nature, as
being composed of the same Matter which all the rest consists of, and partaking
of the same self-motion; for although our fight cannot discern more then their
progressive, and shining or twinkling motion; nevertheless, they being parts of
Nature, must of necessity have their interior and exterior, particular and
general motions; so that the parts of their bodies may change as much as the
parts of this Globe, the figure of the whole remaining still the same; for as I
said before, they being too far from our perception, their particular motions
cannot be observed; nay, were we able to perceive the exterior actions of their
parts, yet their interior motions are no ways perceptible by humane sight; we
may observe the effects of some interior motions of natural Creatures; for
example, of Man, how he changes from infancy to youth, from youth to old age,
etc. but how these actions are performed inwardly, no Microscope is able to
give us a true information thereof. Nevertheless, Mankind is as lasting, as the
Sun, Moon and Stars; nay, not only Mankind, but also several other kinds and
species of Creatures, as Minerals, Vegetables, Elements, and the like; for
though particulars change, yet the species do not; neither can the species be
impaired by the changes of their particulars; for example, the Sea is no less
salt, for all there is so much salt extracted out of salt water, besides that
so many fresh Rivers and Springs do mingle and intermix with it; Neither does
the Earth seem less for all the productions of Vegetables, Minerals and
Animals, which derive their birth and origin from thence: Nor does the race of
Mankind seem either more or less now then it was in former ages; for every
species of Creatures is preserved by a continued succession or supply of
particulars; so that when some die or dissolve from being such natural figures,
others are generated and supply the want of them. And thus it is with all parts
of Nature, both what we call Celestial and Terrestrial; nor can it be
otherwise, since Nature is self-moving, and all her parts are perpetually
active.

33. Of the substance of the Sun, and of Fire.
THere are diverse opinions concerning the matter or substance of the Sun; some
imagine the Sun to be a solid body set on fire; others that it is a fluid body
of fire, and others again, that it is only a body of Light, and not of fire;
so as I know not which opinion to adhere to: but yet I do rather believe the
Sun to be a solid, then a fluid body; by reason fluid bodies are more
inconstant in their motions then solid bodies; witness Lightning, which is a
fluid fire, and flashes out through the divided clouds, with such a force as
water that is pumpt; and being extended beyond the degree of flame, alters to
something else that is beyond our humane perception. Indeed, it is of the
nature of Air, or else Air inflamed; and as some sorts of Air are more rare,
subtle and searching then others, so are some sorts of Lightning, as it is known
by experience: or it is like several sorts of flame, that have several sorts of
fuel to feed on; as for example, the flame of Oil, the flame of Wood, the flame
of Aqua-vitae, the flame of Gums, and the like; all which are very different,
not only in their several tempers and degrees of heat, but also in their
several manners of burning or flaming; for the flame of Aqua-vitae is far
thinner and blewer, then the flame of Wax, Wood, Tallow, or the like; in so
much, that there is as much difference between them, as there is between the
Azure Sky, and a white Cloud; which shows, that the flame of spirituous bodies
is more airy and rare then the flame of others: For Flame is only the rare and
airy part of fire, and there is a natural body of Fire, as well as of Air,
Earth and Water; and as there are several sorts of Earth, Water and Air, so
there are also several sorts of Fire; and as there are springs of Water, and
springs of Air, so there may also be springs of Fire and Flame. But to return
to the Sun; though I am not able certainly to determine of what substance it
is, yet to our perception it appears not to be a fluid, but a solid body, by
reason it keeps constantly the same exterior figure, and never appears either
ebbing or flowing, or flashing, as lightning is; nor does the whole figure of
its body dissolve and change into another figure; nevertheless, it being a
natural creature, and consisting of self-moving parts, there is no question but
its parts are subject to continual changes and alterations, although not
perceptible by our sight, by reason of its distance, and the weakness of our
organs; for although this Terrestrial Globe, which we inhabit, in its outward
figure, nay, in its interior nature remains still the same; yet its parts do
continually change by perpetual compositions and dissolutions, as is evident,
and needs no proof. The same may be said of the Sun, Moon, Stars and Planets;
which are like a certain kind or species of Creatures; as for example, Animal
or Mankind; which species do always last, although their particulars are
subject to perpetual productions and dissolutions. And thus it is with all
composed figures or parts of Nature, whose chief action is Respiration (if I
may so call it) that is, composition and division of parts, caused by the
selfmoving power of Nature.

34. Of Telescopes.
MAny Ingenious and Industrious Artists take much labor and pains in studying
the natures and figures of Celestial objects, and endeavor to discover the
causes of their appearances by Telescopes, and such like Optic Instruments;
but if Art be not able to inform us truly of the natures of those Creatures
that are near us, How may it delude us in the scarch and enquiry we make of
those things that are so far from us? We see how Multiplying-glasses do present
numerous pictures of one object, which he that has not the experience of the
deceitfulness of such Glasses, would really think to be so many objects. The
like deceits may be in other optic Instruments for ought man knows. It Is true,
we may perhaps through a Telescope see a Steeple a matter of 20 or 30 miles
off; but the same can a natural Eye do, if it be not defective, nor the medium
obstructed, without the help of any such Instrument; especially if one stand
upon a high place: But put the case, a man should be upon the Alps, he would
hardly see the City of Paris from thence, although he looked through a
Telescope never so perfect, and had no obstruction to hinder his sight: and
truly the Stars and Planets are far more distant from us then Paris from the
Alps. It is well known, that the sense of sight requires a certain proportion
of distance betwixt the Eye and the Object; which being exceeded, it cannot
perform its office; for if the object be either too near, or too far off, the
sight cannot discern it: and as I have made mention in my Philosophical Letters
of the nature of those Guns, that according to the proportion of the length of
the barrel, shoot either further or shorter; for the Barrel must have its
proportioned length; which being exceeded, the Gun will shoot so much shorter
as the barrel is made longer; so may Prospective-glasses perhaps direct the
sense of seeing within a certain compass of distance; which distance, surely
the Stars and Planets do far exceed; I mean so, as to discern their figures as
we do of other objects that are near us; for concerning their exterior
progressive motions, we may observe them with our natural eyes as well as
through Artificial Tubes: We can see the Suns rising and setting, and the
progressive motion of the Moon, and other Planets; but yet we cannot see their
natural figures, what they are, nor what makes them move; for we cannot
perceive progressive local Motion otherwise, then by change of distance, that
is, by composition and division of Parts, which is commonly, (though
improperly) called change of Place, and no glasses or tubes can do more. Some
affirm, they have discovered many new Stars, never seen before, by the help of
Telescopes; but whether this be true, or not, or whether it be only a delusion
of the glasses, I will not dispute; for I having no skill, neither in the art
of Optics, nor in Astronomy, may chance to err, and therefore I will not
eagerly affirm what I do not certainly know; I only endeavor to deliver my
judgment as reason directs me, and not as sense informs, or rather deludes me;
and I chose rather to follow the guidance of regular Reason, then of deluding
Art.

35. Of Knowledge and Perception in General.
SInce Natural Knowledge and Perception is the Ground and Principle, not only
of Philosophy both Speculative and Experimental, but of all other Arts and
Sciences, nay, of all the Infinite particular actions of Nature; I thought it
not amiss to join to the end of this part a full declaration of my opinion
concerning that subject.

First, It is to be observed, That Matter, Self-motion and Self-knowledg, are
inseparable from each other, and make Nature, one Material, self-moving, and
selfknowing Body.

2. Nature being Material, is dividable into parts; and being infinite in
quantity or bulk, her parts are infinite in number.

3. No part can subsist singly, or by it self, precised from the rest; but they
are all parts of one infinite body; for though such parts may be separated from
such parts, and joined to other parts, and by this means may undergo infinite
changes by infinite compositions and divisions; yet no part can be separated
from the body of Nature.

4. And hence it follows, That the parts of Nature are nothing else but the
particular changes of particular figures, made by self-motion.

5. As there can be no annihilation; so there can neither be a new Creation of
the least part or particle of Nature, or else Nature would not be infinite.

6. Nature is purely corporeal or material, and there is nothing that belongs
to, or is a part of Nature, which is not corporeal; so that natural and
material, or corporeal, are one and the same; and therefore spiritual beings,
non-beings, mixed beings, and whatsoever distinctions the Learned do make, are
no ways belonging to Nature: Neither is there any such thing as an Incorporeal
motion; for all actions of Nature are corporeal, being natural; and there can
no abstraction be made of Motion or Figure, from Matter or Body, but they are
inseparably one thing.

7. As Infinite Matter is divided into Infinite parts, so Infinite knowledge is
divided into Infinite particular knowledges, and Infinite self-motion into
Infinite particular self-actions.

8. There is no other difference between self-knowledg, and particular
knowledges, then betwixt selfmotion, and particular self-actions; or betwixt a
whole, and its parts; a cause, and its effects: for self-knowledg is the ground
and principle of all particular knowledges, as self-motion is the ground and
principle of all particular actions, changes and varieties of natural figures.

9. As Infinite Nature has an infinite self-motion and self-knowledg, so every
part and particle has a particular and finite self-motion and self-knowledg, by
which it knows it self, and its own actions, and perceives also other parts and
actions; which latter is properly called Perception; not as if there were two
different Principles of knowledge in every particular Creature or part of
Nature; but they are two different acts of one and the same interior and
inherent self-knowledg, which is a part of Natures infinite self-knowledg.

10. Thus Perception, or a perceptive knowledge, belongs properly to parts, and
may also be called an exterior knowledge, by reason it extends to exterior
objects.

11. Though self-knowledg is the ground and principle of all particular
knowledges and perceptions, yet self-motion, since it is the cause of all the
variety of natural figures, and of the various compositions and divisions of
parts, it is also the cause of all Perceptions.

12. As there is a double degree of corporeal selfmotion, viz. Rational, and
Sensitive; so there is also a double degree of Perception, Rational, and
Sensitive.

13. A whole may know its parts, and an Infinite a Finite; but no particular
part can know its whole, nor one finite part that which is infinite. I say, no
particular part; for when parts are regularly composed, they may by a general
Conjunction or Union of their particular knowledges and perceptions, know more,
and so judge more probably of the whole, or of Infinite; and although by the
division of parts, those composed knowledges and perceptions, may be broke
asunder like a ruined house or Castle, Kingdom or Government; yet some of the
same Materials may chance to be put to the same uses, and some may be joined to
those that formerly employed themselves otherways: And hence I conclude, That
no particular parts are bound to certain particular actions, no more then
Nature her self, which is self-moving Matter; for as Nature is full of variety
of motions or actions, so are her parts; or else she could not be said
self-moving, if she were bound to certain actions, and had not liberty to move
as she pleases: for though God, the Author of Nature, has ordered her so that
she cannot work beyond her own nature, that is, beyond Matter; yet has she
freedom to move as she will; neither can it be certainly affirmed, that the
successive propagation of the several species of Creatures is decreed and
ordained by God, so that Nature must of necessity work to their continuation,
and can do no otherwise; but humane sense and reason may observe, that the same
parts keep not always to the same particular actions, so as to move to the same
species or figures; for those parts that join in the composition of an animal,
alter their actions in its dissolution, and in the framing of other figures; so
that the same parts which were joined in one particular animal, may, when they
dissolve from that composed figure, join severally to the composition of other
figures; as for example, of Minerals, Vegetables, Elements, etc. and some may
join with some sorts of Creatures, and some with others, and so produce
creatures of different sorts, when as before they were all united in one
particular Creature; for particular parts are not bound to work or move to a
certain particular action, but they work according to the wisdom and liberty of
Nature, which is only bound by the Omnipotent God's Decree not to work beyond
her self, that is, beyond Matter; and since Matter is dividable, Nature is
necessitated to move in parts; for Matter can be without parts, no more then
parts can be without a whole; neither can Nature, being material, make her self
void of figure, nor can she rest, being self-moving; but she is bound to divide
and compose her several parts into several particular figures, and dissolve and
change those figures again infinite ways: All which proves the variety of
Nature, which is so great, that even in one and the same species, none of the
particulars resemble one another so much as not to be discerned from each other.

But to return to Knowledge and Perception; I say they are general and
fundamental actions of Nature; it being not probable that the infinite parts of
Nature should move so variously, nay, so orderly and methodically as they do,
without knowing what they do, or why and whether they move; and therefore all
particular actions whatsoever in Nature, as respiration, digestion, sympathy,
antipathy, division, composition, pressure, reaction, etc. are all particular
perceptive and knowing actions; for if a part be divided from other parts, both
are sensible of their division: The like may be said of the composition of
parts. And as for Pressure and Reaction, they are as knowing and perceptive as
any other particular actions; but yet this does not prove, that they are the
principle of perception; and that there is no Perception but what is made by
Pressure and Reaction, or that at least they are the ground of Animal
Perception; for as they are no more but particular actions, so they have but
particular perceptions; and although all Motion is sensible, yet no part is
sensible but by its own motions in its own parts; that is, no corporeal motion
is sensible but of or by it self: Therefore when a man moves a string, or
tosses a Ball; the string or ball is no more sensible of the motion of the
hand, then the hand is of the motion of the string or ball, but the hand is
only an occasion that the string or ball moves thus or thus. I will not say,
but that it may have some perception of the hand according to the nature of its
own figure, but it does not move by the hands motion, but by its own; for there
can be no motion imparted without matter or substance.

Neither can I certainly affirm, that all Perception consists in patterning out
exterior objects, for although the perception of our humane senses is made that
way, yet Natures actions being so various, I dare not conclude from thence that
all the perceptions of the infinitely various parts and figures of Nature are
made all after the same manner. Nevertheless, it is probable to sense and
reason, that the infinite parts of Nature have not only interior
self-knowledg, but also exterior perceptions of other figures or parts, and
their actions; by reason there is a perpetual commerce and intercourse between
parts and parts, and the chief actions of Nature are composition and division,
which produce all the variety of Nature; which proves, there must of necessity
be perception between parts and parts; but how all these particular perceptions
are made, no particular creature is able to know, by reason of their variety;
for as the actions of Nature vary, so do the perceptions. Therefore it is
absurd to confine all perception of Nature, either to pressure and reaction, or
to the animal kind of perception, since even in one and the same animal sense;
as for example, of seeing, there are numerous perceptions; for every motion of
the Eye, were it no more then a hairs breadth, causes a several perception;
besides, it is not only the five organs in an animal, but every part and
particle of his body that has a peculiar knowledge and perception, because it
consists of self-moving Matter: Which if so, then a Looking-glass that patterns
out the face of a Man, and a Man's Eye that patterns again the copy from the
Glass, cannot be said to have the same perception, by reason a Glass, and an
animal, are different sorts of Creatures; for though a piece of Wood, Stone, or
Metal, may have a perceptive knowledge of Man, yet it has not a Man's
perception, because it is a Vegetable or Mineral, and cannot have an Animal
knowledge or perception, no more, then the Eye patterning out a Tree or Stone,
can be said to have a Vegetable or Mineral Perception; nay, when one Animal, as
for example one man, perceives another, he does not perceive his knowledge; for
it is one thing to perceive the exterior figure of a Creature, and another
thing to perceive its interior, proper, and innate actions; also it is one
thing to perceive exterior objects, and another to receive knowledge; for no
part can give away to another its inherent and proper particular nature,
neither can one part make it self another part; it may imitate some actions of
another part, but not make it self the same part; which proves, that each part
must have its own knowledge and perception, according to its own particular
nature; for though several parts may have the like perceptions, yet they are
not the same; and although the exterior figures of some objects may be alike,
yet the perceptions may be quite different; it is true, sensitive and rational
knowledge is general and infinite in Nature; but every part being finite, can
have but a finite and particular knowledge, and that according to the nature of
its particular figure; for as not all Creatures, although they be composed of
one Matter, are alike in their figures, so not all can have the like knowledges
and perceptions, though they have all self-motion; for particular Creatures and
actions are but effects of the only Infinite self-moving Matter, and so are
particular perceptions; and although they are different, yet the difference of
effects does not argue different causes; but one and the same cause may produce
several and different effects; so that although there be infinite different
motions in Nature, yet they are all but motions, and cannot differ from each
other in being motions or self-moving parts; and although there be infinite
several and different perceptions, yet they are all perceptions; for the
effects cannot alter the cause, but the cause may alter the effects: Wherefore
rational and sensitive corporeal motions cannot change from being motions,
though they may change from moving thus, to move thus; nor perceptions from
being perceptions, though they may change from being such or such particular
perceptions; for the change is only in particulars, not in the ground or
principle which continues always the same. The truth is, as it is impossible
that one figure should be another figure, or one part another part; so likewise
it is impossible, that the perception of one part should be the perception of
another; but being in parts, they must be several, and those parts being
different, they must be different also: But some are more different then
others; for the perceptions of Creatures of different sorts, as for example, of
a Vegetable and an Animal, are more different then the perception of
particulars of one sort, or of one composed figure; for as there is difference
in their interior natures, so in their perceptions; so that a Mineral or
Vegetable that perceives the figure of an Animal, has no more the perception of
an Animal, then an Animal which perceives or patterns out the figure of a
Mineral or Vegetable, has the perceptions of those Creatures; for example, when
a man lies upon a stone, or leans on a tree, or handles and touches water, etc.
although these parts be so closely joined to each other, yet their perceptions
are quite different; for the man only knows what he feels, or sees, or hears,
or smells, or tastes, but knows not what sense or perception those parts have;
nay, he is so far from that, that even one part of his body does not know the
sense and perception of another part of his body; as for example, one of his
hands knows not the sense and perception of his other hand; nay, one part of
his hand knows not the perception of another part of the same hand; for as the
corporeal figurative motions differ, so do particular knowledges and
perceptions; and although sensitive and rational knowledge is general and
infinite in infinite Nature, yet every part being finite, has but finite and
particular perceptions, besides, perception being but an effect, and not a
cause, is more various in particulars; for although all Creatures are composed
of rational and sensitive Matter, yet their perceptions are not alike; neither
can the effect alter the cause; for though the several actions of sensitive and
rational Matter be various, and make several perceptions, yet they cannot make
several kinds of sensitive and rational Matter; but when as perceptions change,
the parts of the sensitive and rational matter remain the same in themselves;
that is, they do not change from being sensitive or rational parts, although
they may make numerous perceptions in their particular parts, according to the
various changes of self-motion.

But some may say, If the particular parts of one composed figure be so
ignorant of each others knowledge, as I have expressed, How can they agree in
some action of the whole figure, where they must all be employed, and work
agreeably to one effect? As for example; when the Mind designs to go to such a
place, or do such a work; How can all the parts agree in the performing of this
act, if they be ignorant of each others actions? I answer: Although every Parts
knowledge and perception, is its own, and not another; so that every part knows
by its own knowledge, and perceives by its own perception; yet it does not
follow from thence, that no part has any more knowledge then of it felf, or of
its own actions; for, as I said before, it is well to be observed, that there
being an intercourse and commerce, as also an acquaintance and agreement
between parts and parts, there must also of necessity be some knowledge or
perception betwixt them, that is, one part must be able to perceive another
part, and the actions of that same part; for wheresoever is life and knowledge,
that is, sense and reason, there is also perception; and though no part of
Nature can have an absolute knowledge, yet it is neither absolutely ignorant,
but it has a particular knowledge, and particular perceptions, according to the
nature of its own innate and interior figure. In short, as there are several
kinds, sorts and particular perceptions, and particular ignorances between
parts, so there are more general perceptions between some parts, then between
others; the like of ignorance; all which is according to the various actions of
corporeal self-motion: But yet no part can have a through perception of all
other parts and their actions, or be sure that that part which it perceives has
the like perception of it again; for one part may perceive another part, and
yet this part may be ignorant of that part, and its perception; for example, my
eye perceives an object, but that object is not necessitated to perceive my eye
again; also my eye may perceive the pattern of it self made in a Looking-glass,
and yet be ignorant whether the Glass do the like. Again, when two parts touch
each other, one part may perceive the other, and yet be ignorant whether to
other does the like; for example, a man joins both his hands together; they may
have perception of each other, and yet be ignorant of each others perception;
and most commonly, one part judges of another perception by its own; for when
one man perceives the actions of another man, he judges by those actions what
perceptions he has, so that judgment is but a comparing of actions; for as
likeness of interior motions makes sympathy, so comparing of actions makes
judgment, to know and distinguish what is alike, and what is not. Therefore
perception of exterior objects, though it proceeds from an interior principle
of self-knowledg, yet it is nothing else but an observation of exterior parts
or actions; so that parts in their several compositions and divisions may have
several perceptions of each other, according to the nature of their figurative
corporeal motions; and although each parts knowledge is its own, yet parts may
have as much knowledge of each other, as they can perceive, or observe of each
other; for the perceptive motions of one part, may inform themselves of the
actions of other parts. The truth is, every particular part has its own motions
figures, sense and reason, which by a conjunction or composition of parts,
makes a general knowledge; for as the division of parts causes a general
obscurity, so composition of parts makes a general knowledge and understanding;
and as every part has self-motion, so it has self-knowledg and perception.

But it is to be observed, That since there is a double perception in the
infinite parts of Nature, sensitive and rational; the perception and
information of the rational parts is more general, then of the sensitive, they
being the most prudent, designing and governing parts of Nature, not so much
encumbred with laboring on the inanimate parts of matter as the sensitive:
Therefore the rational parts in a composed figure, or united action, may sooner
have a general knowledge and information of the whole then the sensitive; whose
knowledge is more particular; as for example, a man may have a pain in one of
the parts of his body, although the perception thereof is made by the sensitive
corporeal motions in that same part, yet the next adjoining sensitive parts may
be ignorant thereof, when as all the rational parts of the whole body may take
notice of it. Thus the rational parts having a more general acquaintance then
the sensitive, and being also the designing and architectonical parts, they
employ the sensitive parts to work to the same effect; but these are not always
ready to obey, but force sometimes the rational to obey them, which we call
irregularity; which is nothing but an opposition or strife between parts; as
for example, a man designs to employ the exterior strength and action of his
exterior parts; but if through irregularity the legs and arms be weak, the
stomach sick, the head full of pain; they will not agree to the executing of
the commands of the rational parts. Likewise the mind endeavors often to keep
the sensitive motions of the body from dissolution; but they many times follow
the mode, and imitate other objects, or cause a dissolution or division of that
composed figure by voluntary actions.

Thus the sensitive and rational motions do oftentimes cross and oppose each
other; for although several parts are united in one body, yet are they not
always bound to agree in one action; nor can it be otherwise; for were there no
disagreement between them, there would be no irregularities, and consequently
no pain or sickness, nor no dissolution of any natural figure.

And such an agreement and disagreement is not only betwixt the rational and
sensitive parts, but also betwixt the rational and rational, the sensitive and
sensitive; for some rational Parts, may in one composed figure have opposite
actions; as for example, the Mind of Man may be divided so, as to hate one
person, and love another; nay, hate and love one and the same person for
several things at the same time, as also rejoice and grieve at the same time.
For example, a man has two Sons; one is killed in the Wars, and the other comes
home with victory and honor; the Father grieves for the slain Son, and
rejoices for the victorious Son: for the Mind being material, is dividable as
well as composable; and therefore its parts may as well oppose each other, as
agree; for agreement and friendship is made by composition, and disagreement by
division; and sense and reason is either stronger or weaker, by composition or
division, regularity or irregularity, for a greater number of parts may
overpower a less; also there are advantages and disadvantages amongst parts,
according to the several sorts of corporeal figurative motions; so that some
sorts of corporeal motions; although fewer or weaker, may overpower others
that are more numerous and strong; but the rational being the most subtle,
active, observing and inspective parts, have, for the most part, more power
over the sensitive, then the sensitive have over them; which makes that they,
for the most part, work regularly, and cause all the orderly and regular
compositions, dissolutions, changes and varieties in the infinite parts of
Nature; besides, their perception and observation being more general, it lasts
longer; for the rational continue the perception of the past actions of the
sensitive, when as the sensitive keep no such records.

Some say, that Perception is made by the Ideas of exterior objects entering
into the organs of the sentient; but this opinion cannot be probable to sense
and reason; for first, If Ideas subsist of themselves, then they must have
their own figures, and so the figures of the objects would not be perceived,
but only the figures of the Ideas. But if those Ideas be the figures of the
objects themselves, then by entering into our sensories the objects would lose
them; for one single object can have no more but one exterior figure at one
time, which surely it cannot lose and keep at one and the same time; But if it
be a Print of the object on the Air, it is impossible there could be such
several sorts of Prints as there are Perceptions, without a notable confusion.
Besides: when I consider the little passages, as in the sense of touch, the
pores of the flesh, through which they must enter, I cannot readily believe it;
nay, the Motions and Prints would grow so weak, and faint in their journey,
especially if the object be a great way off, as they would become of no effect.
But if their opinion be, that Ideas can change and alter, then all immaterial
substances may do the same, and spirits may change and alter into several
immaterial figures; which, in my opinion cannot be: for what is supernatural,
is unalterable; and therefore the opinion of Ideas in perception, is as
irregular, as the opinion of senseless atoms in the framing of a Regular World.

Again: Some of our Modern Philosophers are of opinion, That the subject
wherein Color and Image are inherent, is not the object or thing seen; for
Image and Color, say they, may be there where the thing seen is not: As for
example, The Sun, and other visible objects, by reflection in Water or Glass; so
that there is nothing without us really which we call Image or Color; for the
Image or Color is but an apparition unto us of the motion and agitation which
the object works in the brain or spirits, and diverse times men see directly the
same object double, as two Candles for one, and the like. To which I answer:
That all this does not prove that the object is not perceived, or that an
object can be without image or color, or that figure and color are not the
same with the object; but it proves, that the object enters not the eye, but is
only patterned out by the perceptive motions in the optic sense; for the
reflection of the Sun in Water or Glass, is but a copy of the original, made by
the figurative perceptive motions in the Glass or Water, which may pattern out
an object as well as we do; which copy is patterned out again by our optic
perception, and so one copy is made by another. The truth is, Our optic sense
could not perceive either the original, or copy of an exterior object, if it
did not make those figures in its own parts; and therefore figure and color
are both in the object, and the eye; and not, as they say, neither in the
object, nor in the eye; for though I grant that one thing cannot be in two
places at once, yet there may be several copies made of one original, in
several parts, which are several places, at one and the same time; which is
more probable, then that figure and color should neither be in the object, nor
in the eye, or according to their own words, that figure and color should be
there where the thing seen is not; which is to separate it from the object, a
thing against all possibility, sense and reason; or else, that a substanceless
and senseless Motion should make a progressive journey from the object to the
sentient, and there print, figure and color upon the optic sense by a bare
agitation or concussion, so that the perception or apparition, (as they call
it) of an object, should only be according to the stroke the agitation makes;
as for example, the perception of light after such a manner, figure after such,
and color after another; for if Motion be no substance or body, and besides
void of sense, not knowing what it acts; I cannot conceive how it should make
such different strokes upon both the sensitive organ, and the brain, and all so
orderly that every thing is perceived differently and distinctly. Truly this
opinion is like Epicurus's of Atoms; but how absurd it is to make senseless
corpuscles the cause of sense and reason, and consequently of perception, is
obvious to every ones apprehension, and needs no demonstration.

Next, as Color, according to their opinion, is not inherent any otherwise in
the object, but by an effect thereof upon us, caused by such a motion in the
object; so neither, say they, is sound in the thing we hear, but in our selves;
for as a man may see, so he may hear double or trebble by multiplication of
Echoes, which are sounds as well as the Original, and not being in one and the
same place, cannot be inherent in the body; for the Clapper has no sound in it,
but motion; and makes motion in the inward parts of the Bell; neither has the
Bell motion, but sound; and imparts motion to the air, the air again imparts
motion to the ear and nerves, until it comes to the brain, which has motion,
not sound; from the brain it rebounds back into the nerves outward, and then it
becoms an apparition without, which we call sound. But Good Lord, what a
confusion would all this produce, if it were thus! What need is there of
imparting Motion, when Nature can do it a much easier way? I wonder how
rational men can believe that motion can be imparted without matter: Next, that
all this can be done in an instant: Again, that it is the organ of the sentient
that makes color, sound, and the like, and that they are not really inherent
in the object it self. For were there no men to perceive such or such a color,
figure or sound, can we rationally think that object would have no color,
figure nor sound at all? I will not say, That there is no pressure or reaction,
but they do not make sense or reason; several parts may produce several effects
by their several compositions, but yet this does not prove that there can be no
perception but by pressure upon the organ, and consequently the brain, and that
the thing perceived is not really existent in the object, but a bare apparition
to the sentient; the Clapper gives no Motion to the Bell, but both the Clapper,
and the Bell, have each their own Motion by which they act in striking each
other, and the conjunction of such or such parts makes a real sound, were there
no Ear to hear it.

Again: Concerning the sense of Touch, the heat, say they, we feel from the
Fire, is in us; for it is quite different from that in the fire; our heat is
pleasure, or pain; according as it is great or moderate; but in the Coal there
is no such thing. I answer: They are so far in the right, that the heat, we
feel, is made by the perceptive motions of, and in our own parts, and not by
the fires parts acting upon us; but yet if the fire were not really such a
thing as it is, that is, a hot and burning body, our sense would not so readily
figure it out as it does; which proves, it is a real copy of a real object, and
not a mere fantasme, or bare imparted motion from the object to the sentient,
made by pressure and reaction; for if so, the fire would waste in a moment of
time, by imparting so much motion to so many sentients; besides, the several
strokes which the several imparted motions make upon the sentient, and the
reaction from the sentient to the exterior parts, would cause such a strong and
confused agitation in the sentient, that it would rather occasion the body to
dissolve through the irregularities of such forced motions. But having
discoursed enough of this subject heretofore, I will add no more, but refer
both their and my own opinions, to the judicious and unpartial Reader; Only
concerning Fire, because they believe, it is the only shining body upon Earth,
I will say this: If it were true; then a Glowworms tail, and Cats eyes, must
be fire also; which yet Experience makes us believe otherwise.

As for Sleep, they call it a privation of the act of sense; To which I can no
ways give my consent, because I believe sense to be a perpetual corporeal
self-motion without any rest. Neither do I think the senses can be locked up in
sleep; for if they be self-moving, they cannot be shut up, it being as
impossible to deprive self-motion of acting, as to destroy its nature; but if
they have no self-motion, they need no locking up at all; because it would be
their nature to rest, as being moveless. In short, sense being self-motion, can
neither rest nor cease; for what they call cessation, is nothing else but an
alteration of corporeal self-motion; and thus Cessation will require as much a
self-moving Agent, as all other actions of Nature.

Lastly, say they, It is impossible for sense to imagine a thing past, for
sense is only of things present. I answer, it is true, by reason the sensitive
corporeal motions work on and with the parts of Inanimate Matter; nevertheless,
when a repetition is made of the same actions, and the same parts, it is a
sensitive remembrance: And thus is also Experience made: which proves, there is
a sensitive perception and self-knowledg; because the senses are well
acquainted with those objects they have often figured or patterned out; and to
give a further demonstration thereof, we see that the senses are amazed, and
sometimes frighted at such objects as are unusual, or have never been presented
to them before. In short, Conception, Imagination, Remembrance, Experience,
Observation, and the like, are all made by coporeal self-knowing, perceptive
self-motion, and not by insensible, irrational, dull, and moveless Matter.

36. Of the different Perceptions of Sense and Reason.
HAving declared in the former discourse, that there is a double Perception in
all Parts of Nature, to wit, Rational and Sensitive; some might ask, How these
two degrees of Motions work; whether differently or unitedly in every part to
one and the same perception?

I answer: That regularly the animal perception of exterior objects, is made by
its own sensitive, rational, corporeal and figurative motions; the sensitive
patterning out the figure or action of an outward object in the sensitive
organ; and the rational making a figure of the same object in their own
substance; so that both the rational and sensitive motions work to one and the
same perception, and that at the same point of time, and as it were by one act;
but yet it is to be observed, that many times they do not move together to one
and the same perception; for the sensitive and rational motions do many times
move differently even in one and the same part; as for the rational, they being
not encumbered with any other parts of matter, but moving in their own degree,
are not at all bound to work always with the sensitive, as is evident in the
production of Fancies, Thoughts, Imaginations, Conceptions, etc. which are
figures made only by the rational motions in their own matter or substance,
without the help of the sensitive; and the sensitive, although they do not
commonly work without the rational, yet many times they do; and sometimes both
the rational and sensitive work without patterns, that is, voluntarily and by
rote; and sometimes the sensitive take patterns from the rational, as in the
invention of arts, or the like; so that there is no necessity that they should
always work together to the same perception. Concerning the perception of
exterior objects, I will give an instance, where both the rational and
sensitive motions do work differently, and not to the same perception: Suppose
a man be in a deep contemplative study, and some body touch or pinch him, it
happens often that he takes no notice at all of it, nor does not feel it, when as
yet his touched or pinched parts are sensible, or have a sensitive perception
thereof; also a man does often see or hear something without minding or taking
notice thereof, especially when his thoughts are busily employed about some
other things; which proves, that his Mind, or rational motions work quite to
another perception then his sensitive do. But some perhaps will say, because
there is a through mixture of animate (rational and sensitive) and inanimate
matter, and so close and inseparable a union and conjunction betwixt them, it
is impossible they should work differently, or not together: Besides, the
alleged example does not prove, that the rational and sensitive motions in one
and the same part that is touched or pinched, or in the organ which hears or
sees, do not work together, but proves only, that the sensitive motions of
the touched part or organ, and the rational motions in the head or brain, do
not work together; when as nevertheless, although a man takes no notice of
another man's touching or pinching, the rational motions of that same part may
perceive it. To which I answer: First, I do not deny that there is a close
conjunction and commixture of both the rational and sensitive parts in every
body or creatnre, and that they are always moving and acting; but I deny that
they are always moving to the same perception; for to be, and move together,
and to move together to the same perception, are two different things. Next,
although I allow that there are particular, both rational and sensitive
figurative motions in every part and particle of the body; yet the rational
being more observing and inspective then the sensitive, as being the designing
and ordering parts, may sooner have a general information and knowledge of all
other rational parts of the composed figure, and may all unitedly work to the
conceptions or thoughts of the musing and contemplating man; so that his
rational motions in the pinched part of his body, may work to his interior
conceptions, and the sensitive motions of the same part, to the exterior
perception: for although I say in my Philosophical Opinions, that all Thoughts,
Fancies, Imaginations, Conceptions, etc. are made in the head, and all Passions
in the heart; yet I do not mean that all rational figurative actions are only
confined to the head, and to the heart, and are in no other parts of the body
of an Animal, or Man; for surely, I believe there is sense and reason, or
sensitive and rational knowledge, not only in all Creatures, but in every part
of every particular Creature. But since the sensitive organs in man are joined
in that part which is named the head, we believe that all knowledge lies in the
head, by reason the other parts of the body do not see as the eyes, nor hear as
the ears, nor smell as the nose, nor taste as the tongue, etc. all which makes
us prefer the rational and sensitive motions that work to those perceptions in
the mentioned organs, before the motions in the other parts of the body; when
as yet these are no less rational or sensible then they, although the actions
of their sensitive and rational perceptions are after another manner; for the
motions of digestion, growth, decay, etc. are as sensible, and as rational as
those five sensitive organs, or the head; and the heart, liver, lungs, spleen,
stomach, bowels, and the rest, know as well their office and functions, and are
as sensible of their pains, diseases, constitutions, tempers, nourishments,
etc. as the eyes, ears, nostrils, tongue, etc. know their particular actions
and perceptions; for although no particular part can know the Infinite parts of
Nature, yet every part may know it self, and its own actions, as being
self-moving. And therefore the head or brains cannot ingross all knowledge to
themselves; but the other parts of the body have as much in the designing and
production of a Creature, as the brain has in the production of a Thought; for
Children are not produced by thoughts, no more then digestion or nourishment is
produced by the eyes, or the making of blood by the ears; or the several
appetites of the body by the five exterior sensitive organs; But although all,
(interior as well as exterior) parts of the body have their particular
knowledges and perceptions different from those of the head and the five
sensitive organs, and the heads and organs knowledge and perception are
differing from them; nevertheless, they have acquaintance or correspondence
with each other; for when the stomach has an appetite to food, the mouth and
hands endeavor to serve it, and the legs are willing to run for it: The same
may be said of other Appetites. Also in case of Oppression, when one part of
the body is oppressed, or in distress, all the other parts endeavor to relieve
that distressed or afflicted part. Thus although there is difference between
the particular actions, knowledges and perceptions of every part, which causes
an ignorance betwixt them, yet by reason there is knowledge and perception in
every part, by which each part does not only know it self, and its own
actions, but has also a perception of some actions of its neighboring parts;
it causes a general intelligence and information betwixt the particular parts
of a composed figure; which information and intelligence, as I have mentioned
heretofore, is more general betwixt the rational then the sensitive parts; for
though both the sensitive and rational parts are so closely intermixed that they
may have knowledge of each other, yet the sensitive parts are not so generally
knowing of the concerns of a composed figure as the rational, by reason the
rational are more free and at liberty then the sensitive, which are more
encumbered with working on and with the inanimate parts of Matter; and therefore
it may very well be, that a man in a deep contemplative study does not always
feel when he is pinched or touched; because all the rational motions of his
body concur or join to the conception of his musing thoughts; so that only the
sensitive motions in that part do work to the perception of touch, when as the
rational, even of the same part, may work to the conception of his thoughts.
Besides, it happens often that there is not always an agreement betwixt the
rational and sensitive motions, even in the same parts; for the rational may
move regularly, and the sensitive irregularly; or the sensitive may move
regularly, and the rational irregularly; nay, often there are irregularities
and disagreements in the same degree of motions, as betwixt rational and
rational, sensitive and sensitive; And although it be proper for the rational
to inform the sensitive, yet the sensitive do often inform the rational; only
they cannot give such a general information as the rational; for one rational
part can inform all other rational parts in a moment of time, and by one act:
And therefore rational knowledge is not only in the head or brains, but in
every part or particle of the body.

Some Learned conceive, That all knowledge is in the Mind, and none in the
senses: For the senses, say they, present only exterior objects to the mind;
who sits as a Judge in the kernel or fourth ventricle of the brain, or in the
orifice of the stomach, and judges of them; which in my apprehension is a very
odd opinion: For first, they allow that all knowledge and perception comes by
the senses, and the sensitive spirits; who like faithful servants run to and
fro, as from the sensitive organs to the brain and back, to carry news to the
mind; and yet they do not grant that they have any knowledge at all: which
shows, they are very dull servants, and I wonder how they can inform the mind
of what they do not know themselves. Perchance, they will say, it is after the
manner or way of intelligence by Letters, and not by word of mouth; for those
that carry Letters to and fro, know nothing of the business that intercedes
betwixt the correspondents, and so it may be betwixt the mind, and the external
object. I answer: First, I cannot believe there is such a correspondence between
the object and the mind of the sentient, or perceiver; for if the mind and the
object should be compared to such two intelligencers, they would always have
the like perception of each other, which we see is not so; for oftentimes I
have a perception of such or such an object, but that object may have no
perception of me; besides, there is nothing carried from the object to the mind
of the sentient by its officers the sensitive spirits, as there is betwixt two
correspondents; for there is no perception made by an actual emission of parts
from the object to the mind; for if Perception were made that way, not only
some parts of the object, but the figure of the whole object would enter
through the sensitive organ, and presentit self before the mind, by reason all
objects are not perceived in parts, but many in whole; and since the exterior
figure of the object is only perceived by the senses, then the bare figure
would enter into the brain without the body or substance of the object: which
how it could be, I am not able to conceive; nay, if it were possible, truly it
would not be hidden from the Minds officers the sensitive spirits, except they
did carry it veiled or covered; but then they would know at least from whence
they had it, and to whom and how they were to carry it. Wherefore it is absurd,
in my opinion, to say, that the senses bring all knowledge of exterior objects
to the mind, and yet have none themselves; and that the mind chiefly resides
but in one part of the body; so that when the heel is touched, the sensitive
spirits, who watch in that place, do run up to the head, and bring news to the
mind. Truly if the senses have no knowledge of themselves, How comes it that a
man born blind cannot tell what the light of the Sun is, or the light of a
Candle, or the light of a Glowworms tail? For though some objects of one sense
may be guessed by the perception of another sense, as we may guess by touch the
perception of an object that belongs to sight, etc. yet we cannot perfectly
know it except we saw it, by reason the perception of sight belongs only to
the optic sense. But some may ask, if a man be so blind, that he cannot make
use of his optic sense, what is become of the sensitive motions in that same
part of his body, to wit, the optic sensorium? I answer, The motions of that
part are not lost, because the man is blind, and cannot see; for a privation or
absence of a thing, does not prove that it is quite lost; but the same motions
which formerly did work to the perception of sight, are only changed, and work
now to some other action then the perception of sight; so that it is only a
change or alteration of motions in the same parts, and not an annihilation; for
there is no such thing as an annihilation in Nature, but all the variety in
Nature is made by change of motions. Wherefore, to conclude, the opinion of
sense and reason, or a sensitive and rational knowledge in all parts of Nature,
is, in my judgment, more probable and rational, then the Opinion which confines
all knowledge of Nature to a man's Brains or Head, and allows none neither to the
Senses, nor to any part of Nature.

37. Several Questions and Answers concerning Knowledge and Perception.
I Am not ignorant that endless questions and objections may be raised upon one
subject; and to answer them would be an infinite labor: But since I desire to
be perspicuous in delivering my opinions, and to remove all those scruples
which seem to obstruct the sense thereof, I have chosen rather to be guilty of
prolixity and repetitions, then to be obscure by too much brevity. And
therefore I will add to my former discourse of knowledge and perception the
resolution of these following questions, which, I hope, will render it more
intelligible.

Q. 1. What difference is there between Self-knowledg, and Perception?

I answer: There is as much difference betwixt them, as betwixt a whole, and
its parts; or a cause, and its effects: For though Self-motion be the
occasional cause of particular perceptions, by reason it is the cause of all
particular actions of Nature, and of the variety of figures; yet self-knowledg
is the ground or fundamental cause of Perception; for were there not
selfknowledg, there could not be perception, by reason perceptions are nothing
else, but particular exterior knowledges, or knowledges of exterior parts and
actions, occasioned by the various compositions and divisions of parts; so that
self-moving Matter has a perceptive self-knowledg; and consisting of infinite
Parts, those parts have particular self-knowledges and perceptions, according
to the variety of the corporeal figurative motions, which, as they are
particular, cannot be infinite in themselves; for although a whole may know its
parts, yet the parts cannot possibly know the whole; because an infinite may
know a finite, but a finite cannot know an infinite. Nevertheless, when many
parts are regularly composed, those parts by a conjunction or union of their
particular self-knowledges and perceptions of each other, may know more, and so
judge more probably of infinite, as I have declared above; but as for single
parts, there is no such thing in Nature, no more then there can be an Infinite
part.

Q. 2. Whether the Inanimate Part of Matter, may not have self-knowledg as well
as the Animate?

I answer: That, in my opinion, and according to the conceptions of my sense
and reason, the Inanimate part of matter has self-knowledg as well as the
Animate, but not Perception; for it is only the animate part of matter that is
perceptive, and this animate matter being of a twofold degree, sensitive and
rational; the rational not being encumbered with the inanimate parts, has a more
clear and freer perception then the sensitive; which is well to be observed;
for though the rational, sensitive, and inanimate parts of matter make but one
infinite self-moving body of Nature, yet there are infinite particular
self-knowledges, for Nature is divided into infinite parts, and all parts of
Nature are self-knowing: But as all are not animate, so all are not perceptive;
for Perception, though it proceeds from self-knowledg, as its ground or
principle, yet it is also an effect of self-motion; for were there no
selfmotion, there would be no perception; and because Nature is self-moving,
all her parts are so too; and as all her parts are moving, so they have all
compositions and divisions; and as all are subject to compositions and
divisions, so all have variety of self-knowledg; so that no part can be
ignorant: And by reason self-knowledg is the ground and Principle of
Perception, it knows all the effects by the variety of their changes; therefore
the Inanimate part of Matter may, for any thing I know or perceive, be as
knowing as the other parts of Nature; for although it be the grossest part, and
so the dullest, wanting self-motion; yet by the various divisions and
compositions which the animate parts do make, the inanimate may be as knowing
as the animate.

But some may say, If Inanimate Matter were knowing of it self, then it would
also be sensible of it self. I answer, Self-knowledg is so far sensible of it
self, that it knows it self; and therefore the inanimate part of Matter being
self-knowing, may be sensible of its own self-knowledg; but yet it is not such
a sense as self-moving matter has; that is, a perceptive sense; for the
difference of animate and inanimate Matter consists herein, that one is
self-moving, and consequently perceptive, but the other not; and as animate
matter is self-moving as well as self-knowing, so it is the chief and
architectonical part of Nature, which causes all the variety that is in Nature;
for without animate Matter there could be no composition and division, and so
no variety; and without inanimate Matter, there could not be such solid
compositions of parts as there are; for the animate part of Matter cannot be so
gross as the inanimate; and therefore without these degrees there would be no
variety of figures, nor no composition of solid figures, as Animals,
Vegetables, Minerals, etc. so that those effects which our sense and reason
perceives, could not be without the degrees of animate and inanimate Matter;
neither could there be perception without animate Matter, by which all the
various effects of Nature are perceived; for though one Creature cannot
perceive all the effects, yet the infinite parts of Nature, by their infinite
actions, perceive infinitely.

Again: Some may object, That if the Inanimate part of Matter have
self-knowledg and sense, it must of necessity have life also. To which I
answer: That the Inanimate part of Matter may have life, according as it has
sense and knowledge, but not such a life as the animate part of Matter has, that
is, an active life, as to compose and divide the infinite body of Nature into
infinite parts and figures, and to produce infinite varieties of them, for all
this cannot be withont motion; nevertheless, it has so much life as to know it
self, and so much sense as to be sensible of its own self-knowledg. In short,
the difference between animate and inanimate Matter's life, sense and
self-knowledg, is, that the animate Matter has an active life, and a perceptive
sense and self-knowledg, which the inanimate part of Matter has not; because it
wants self-motion, which is the cause of all actions and perceptions in Nature.

Q. 3. Whether the Inanimate Matter could have parts without self-motion?

I answer, Yes: For wherefoever is body or matter, there are also parts;
because parts belong to body, and there can be no body without parts; but yet
were there no self-motion, there could be no various changes of parts or
figures. The truth is, Nature considered as she is, and as much as our sense
and reason can perceive by her various effects, must of necessity be composed
or consist of a commixture of animate, both rational and sensitive, and
inanimate matter; for were there no inanimate matter, there would be no ground
or grosser substance to work on, and so no solid figures; and were there no
animate sensitive matter, there would be no labourer, or workman, as I may call
it, to form the inanimate part of matter into various figures; nor would there
be such infinite changes, compositions, divisions, productions, dissolutions,
etc. as we see there are. Again: were there no animate rational Matter, there
would be no designer or surveigher, to order and direct all things
methodically; nor no Fancies, Imaginations, Conceptions, Memory, etc. so that
this Triumvirate of the degrees of matter, is so necessary a constitutive
principle of all natural effects, that Nature could not be without it; I mean,
Nature considered, not what she might have been, but as she is, and as much as
we are able to perceive by her actions; for Natural Philosophy is no more but a
rational inquisition into the causes of natural effects; and therefore, as we
observe the effects and actions of Nature, so we may probably guess at their
causes and principles.

Q. 4. How so fine, subtle and pure a part as the Animate Matter is, can work
upon so gross a part as the Inanimate?

I answer; More easily then Vitriol or Aquafortis, or any other high extracts,
can work upon metal, or the like; nay, more easily then fire can work upon
wood, or stone, or the like. But you will say, That, according to my opinion,
these bodies are not wrought upon, or divided by the exterior agent, as by
fire, vitriol, etc. but that they divide themselves by their own inherent
self-motion, and that the agent is no more but an occasion that the patient
moves or acts thus, or thus. I answer, It Is very true: For there is such a
commixture of animate and inanimate matter, that no particle in Nature can be
conceived or imagined, which is not composed of animate matter as well as of
inanimate; and therefore the patient, as well as the agent, having both a
commixture of these parts of matter, none can act upon the other, but the
patient changes its own parts by its own self-motion, either of its own accord,
or by way of imitation. But the inanimate part of Matter considered in it self,
or in its own narure, has no self-motion, nor can it receive any from the
animate; but they being both so closely intermixed, that they make but one
self-moving body of Nature, the animate parts of Matter bear the inanimate with
them in all their actions; so that it is impossible for the animate parts to
divide, compose, contract, etc. but the inaimate must serve them, or go along
with them in all such corporeal figurative actions.

Q. 5. How is it possible, that Parts being ignorant of each other, should
agree in the production of a figure?

I answer: When I speak of Ignorance and knowledge, my meaning is, not that
there is as much ignorance in the parts of Nature, as there is knowledge, for
all parts have self-knowledg; but I understand a perceptive knowledge, by which
parts do perceive parts; and as for the agreeing actions of parts, they cannot
readily err, unless it be out of wilfulness to oppose or cross each other: for
put the case the sensitive parts were as ignorant of perceptions as the
inanimate, yet the rational being thoroughly intermixed with them, would cause
agreeable combinations and connexions of parts in all productions, because they
being not encumbered with the burdens of other parts, make more general
perceptions then the sensitive, and moving freely in their own degree, there is
a more perfect acquaintance between them, then the sensitive parts; which is
the cause that the rational design and order, when as the sensitive labor and
work; I mean, when they move regularly, or to one and the same effect; for then
they must needs move agreeably and unitedly: But because the sensitive parts
are perceptive as well as the rational, and perceive not only the rational
adjoining parts, but also those of their own degree, they cannot so grossly err,
as some believe, especially since the sensitive parts do not only know their
own work, but are also directed by the rational; but as I have often said, the
several sorts, both of the sensitive and rational perceptions are well to be
considered, which are as various as the actions of Nature, and cannot be
numbered, by reason every figurative action is a several perception, both
sensitive and rational; and infinite Matter being in a perpetual motion, there
must of necessity be infinite figures, and so infinite perceptions amongst the
infinite parts of Nature.

Q. 6. Whether there be single Self-knowledges, and single Perceptions in
Nature?

I answer: If there can be no such thing as a single part in Nature, there can
neither be a single self-knowledg or perception; for body and parts can never
be separated from each other, but wheresoever is body, were it an atome, there
are parts also; and when parts divide from parts, at the same time, and by the
same act, they are joined to other parts; so that composition and division is
done by one act. The like for knowledge: For knowledge, being material, consists
of parts; and as it is impossible that there can be single parts, or parts
subsisting by themselves, without reference to each other, or the body of
Nature; so it is impossible that there can be single knowledges. Neither can
there be a single magnitude, figure, color, place, etc. but all that is
corporeal, has parts; and by reason Nature is a self-moving, and self-knowing
body, all her parts must of necessity be so too. But particular composed
figures, and particular degrees of Matter, are not single parts, nor are
particular actions single actions, no more then a particular Creature is a
single part; for it would be nonsense to say single compositions, and single
divisions; and therefore particular and single are not one and the same; and as
there can be no such thing as Single in Nature, so there can neither be single
knowledges and perceptions: Which is well to be observed, lest we introduce a
Vacuum in Nature, and so make a confusion between her parts and actions.

Q. 7. How is it possible, since there is but one Selfknowledg in Nature, as
there is but one Self-motion, that there can be a double degree of this
Self-knowledg, as also a double Perception, viz. Rational, and Sensitive?

I answer: As the several degrees of Matter are not several kinds of Matter; so
neither are Rational and Sensitive knowledge several kinds of Self-knowledges,
but only different degrees of one self-knowledg; for as there is but one
Matter, and one Self-motion, so there is also but one Self-knowledg in Nature;
which consists of two degrees, Rational and Sensitive, whereof the rational is
the highest degree of self-knowledg; for it is a more pure, subtle, active and
piercing knowledge then the sensitive, by reason it is not bound to work on and
with the inanimate parts of Matter, but moves freely in its own degree, when as
the sensitive is encumbered with laboring on the inanimate parts of Matter:
Indeed, there is as much difference between those two degrees of self-knowledg,
as betwixt a chief Architect, Designer or Surveigher, and betwixt a Labourer or
Workman; for as the Labourer and Surveigher, though they be different
particulars, are yet both of one kind, viz. Mankind: so it is likewise with
self-knowledg; for were Matter divided into infinite degrees, it would still
remain Matter; and though self-motion be divided into infinite degrees of
motions, yet it is still but self-motion: The like for self-knowledg: for
self-moving matter can but know it self; and as Matter is the ground or
constitutive Principle of all the parts and figures in Nature (for without
matter there could be no parts, and so no division) and selfmotion is the
ground or principle of all particular actions, so is self-knowledg the ground
of all particular knowledges and perceptions. Again: as one part cannot be
another part, so neither can one parts knowledge be another parts knowledge;
although they may have perceptions of each other: When I speak of parts, I mean
not single parts; for there can be no such thing as a single part in Nature;
but by parts I understand particular self-moving figures, whether they be such
composed figures, as, for distinctions sake, we call finite wholes; as for
example, an Animal, a Tree, a Stone, etc. or whether they be parts of those
finite figures; for it is impossible to describe or determine exactly what the
parts of Nature are, by reason Nature, although it is but one body, yet being
self-moving, it is divided into infinite figures, which by self-motion are
infinitely changed, composed, dissolved, etc. which compositions and divisions
hinder that there can be no single parts, because no part, though it should be
infinitely changed, composed and divided, can be separated from the body of
Nature, but as soon as it is divided from such parts, it is composed with other
parts; nay, were it possible that it might be separated from the body of
Nature, it would not be a part then, but a whole; for it would have no
reference to the body of Nature: besides, if it continued body, or matter, it
would still have parts; for wheresoever is body, there is a composition of
parts.

But if any one desires to know or guess at the parts of Nature, he cannot do
it better then by considering the corporeal figurative motions or actions of
Nature; for what we name parts, are nothing but the effects of those figurative
motions; so that motions, figures and parts, are but one thing: and it is to be
observed, that in composed figures there are interior and exterior parts; the
exterior are those which may be perceived by our exterior senses, with all
their proprieties, as color, magnitude, softness, hardness, thickness,
thinness, gravity, levity, etc. but the interior parts are the interior,
natural, figurative motions, which cause it to be such or such a part or
Creature; as for example, Man has both his interior and exterior parts, as is
evident; and each of them has not only their outward figure or shape, but also
their interior, natural, figurative motions, which did not only cause them to
be such or such parts; as for example, a leg, a head, a heart, a spleen, a
liver, blood, etc. but do also continue their being; the only difference is,
that those figurative motions, which did first form or produce them,
afterward, when they were finished, became retentive motions: By retentive
motions, I do not only mean such as keep barely the parts of the composed
figures together, but all those that belong to the preservation and continuance
of them; under which are comprehended digestive motions, which place and
displace parts; attractive motions, which draw nourishment into those parts;
expulsive motions, which expel superfluous and hurtful parts; and many the
like: for there are numerous sorts of retentive motions, or such as belong to
the preservation and continuance of a composed figure, as well as there are of
creating or producing motions. By which we may plainly see, that one figure
lies within another; that is, one corporeal figurative motion is within
another, and that the interior and exterior parts or figures of Creatures, are
different in their actions; for example, the ebbing and flowing, or the
ascending and descending motions of water, are quite different from those
interior figurative motions that make it water; the like may be said of
Vegetables, Minerals, Animals, and all other sorts of Creatures; nay, though
both the interior and exterior parts, figures or motions do make but one
composed figure or Creature, as for example, Man; and are all but parts of that
same figure; yet each being a particular motion, has also its peculiar
self-knowledg and perception; for the difference of particular knowledges and
perceptions depends upon the difference of Natures actions; which as by the
division of parts, they cause an ignorance between them; so by composition they
cause also perceptions. I do not mean, an interior or self-ignorance, which
cannot be in Nature, by reason every part and particle has self-knowledg; but
an exterior, that is, an ignorance of foreign parts, figures or actions,
although they be parts of one composed figure; for the parts of the hand do not
know the parts of the stomach, and their actions. Neither do I mean an interior
self-perception, which can neither be in Nature, because perception presupposes
ignorance; and if there cannot be a selfignorance, there can neither be a
self-perception, although there may be an interior self-knowledg; Nor is it
proper to say, a part may perceive it self, or have a perception of it self:
But by perception, I mean an exterior or foreign knowledge; that is, a knowledge
of other parts, figures, or actions. These perceptions, I say, are different,
according to the difference of the corporeal figurative motions; for it is
impossible, that such or such parts should have such or such perceptions, if
they have not such or such corporeal motions. Therefore though all parts have
self-knowledg, as well as self-motion, yet by reason all parts do not move
alike, they cannot make the like perceptions; and though self-knowledg, as it
is the ground and fountain, not only of all particular knowledges, but also of
all exterior perceptions, is but one in it self, as a fixed being, and cannot be
divided from its own nature; (for as Matter cannot be divided from being
Matter, or self-motion from being self-motion, so neither can self-knowledg be
divided from being self-knowledg; nor can they be separated from each other,
but every part and particle of natural matter has self-knowledg and perception,
as well as it has self-motion) Yet all this hinders not, but there may be
degrees of self-knowledg according to the degrees of Matter; for as there is
rational and sensitive matter, so there is also rational and sensitive
self-knowledg; nay, there are infinite particular self-knowledges and
perceptions, according to the infiniteness of parts and motions; and yet all is
but one self-moving and self-knowing Nature; for parts are nothing else but a
division of the whole, and the whole is nothing else but a composition of
parts. All which I desire may be taken notice of, lest my sense be
misinterpreted, for when I speak of rational and sensitive self-knowledg, I do
not mean as if there were more self-knowledg then one in the only infinite
Matter, to wit, a double kind of self-knowledg, but I speak in reference to the
parts of Matter; for the rational part is more pure, and so more agil, quick
and free then the sensitive; and the animate part is self-knowing, but the
inanimate not: and thus in respect to parts, as they are divided, so they have
several self-knowledges and perceptions, as also numerous lives and souls in
one composed figure or Creature; and as infinite parts belong to one infinite
whole, so infinite self-knowledges and infinite perceptions, belong to the
infinite actions of those infinite parts. But some may ask, Why there are no
more degrees of Matter but two, viz. Animate, and Inanimate; and no more
degrees of Animate, but Rational, and Sensitive? I answer, humane sense and
reason cannot conceive it possible there should be more or fewer; for the
rational and sensitive are the purest degrees Matter can be capable of; and
were there any purer then these, they would be beyond the nature of Matter;
which is impossible, because Nature cannot go beyond it self. Again: some may
perhaps desire to know, why there are more degrees of Inanimate Matter, then of
Animate, to wit, of thickness and thinness, rarity and density, lightness and
heaviness, and c? I answer, These are nothing else but the actions of the
material parts, and do not belong to the nature of Matter, so that they cannot
make Parts less or more material, for all is but Matter; neither can they alter
the nature of Matter; for Matter is still Matter, however it moves. Lastly,
some may ask, How it is possible, that such an infinite variety can proceed but
from two degrees of Matter, to wit, Animate and Inanimate? I answer; As well as
Infinite effects can proceed from one Infinite cause; for Nature being an
Infinite body, must also have Infinite parts; and having an Infinite
self-motion, must of necessity have an infinite variety of parts; and being
infinitely selfknowing, must also have infinite self-knowing parts; which
proves, that Natures body must of necessity consist of those two degrees, viz.
Animate and Inanimate Matter; for were there no Animate matter, which is
corporeal self-motion, there would never be such variety of figures, parts and
actions in Nature as there is, nor no perceptions; for Self-knowledg, or
Matter, without self-motion, could never make any variety in Nature; and
therefore although self-motion causes an obscurity by the division of parts,
yet it causes also particular perceptions between parts; and as the motions
vary, so do perceptions of parts. In short, there is but one infinite body, and
infinite parts; one infinite selfknowledg, and infinite particular
self-knowledges; one infinite self-motion, and infinite particular actions; as
also infinite particular perceptions: for self-motion is the cause of all the
variety of Nature; and as one figure or part of Nature lies within another, so
one perception is within another.

Q. 8. How can there be Self-knowledg and Perception in one and the same part?

I answer: As well as the being or substance of a thing and its actions can
consist together, or as a cause and its effects; for though they are so far
different from each other, that the cause is not the effect, nor the effect the
cause; as also that the effect must of necessity depend upon the cause, but the
cause may choose whether it will produce such or such effects; as for example,
though action or motion depends upon matter, yet matter does not depend upon
motion, as being able to subsist without it; and though perception depends upon
self-knowledg, yet self-knowledg does not depend upon perception; nevertheless,
wheresoever is perception, there is also self-knowledg; by reason, that
wheresoever there is an effect in act or being, there is also its cause; and
although perception depends also upon outward objects, yet outward objects do
not depend upon perceptions; but perception, as it depends upon self-knowledg,
so it depends also upon self-motion; for without self-knowledg and self-motion,
there would be no perception; so that both exterior perceptions, and all
interior voluntary actions, proceed from selfknowing and self-moving matter;
but the difference between particular interior self-knowledges and perceptions,
is caused by the changes of corporeal, figurative self-motion.

Q. 9. Whether particular Parts or Figures be bound to particular perceptions?

I answer: Particular Parts make Perceptions, according to the nature of their
corporeal, figurative motions, and their perceptions are as numerous as their
actions; for example, those parts that are composed into the figure of an
Animal, make perceptions proper to that figures corporeal, interior, natural
motions; but if they be dissolved from the animal figure, and composed into
Vegetables, they make such perceptions as are proper for Vegetables; and being
again dissolved and composed into Minerals, they make perceptions proper to
Minerals, etc. so that no part is tied or bound to one particular kind of
perception, no more then it is bound to one particular kind of figures; but
when the interior motions of that figure change, the perceptions proper to that
same figure change also; for though self-knowledg, the ground of all
perceptions, is a fixed, and inherent, or innate knowledge, yet the perceptions
vary according to their objects, and according to the changes and compositions
of their own parts; for as parts are composed with parts, so are their
perceptions; nay, not only perceptions, but also particular self-knowledges
alter according to the alteration of their own parts or figures, not from being
selfknowledg, for self-knowledg can be but self-knowledg, but from being such
or such a particular self-knowledg; and since there is no part or particle of
Nature but is self-knowing, or has its particular self-knowledg, it is certain,
that as the interior nature of the figure alters by the changes of motion, the
interior self-knowledg of that figure alters too; for if a Vegetable should
turn into a Mineral, it cannot retain the self-knowledg of a Vegetable, but it
must of necessity change into the selfknowledg of a Mineral; for nothing can
have a knowledge of it self otherwise then what it is; and because selfknowledg
is the ground of Perception, as self-knowledg alters, so does perception; I
mean, that kind of perception that belonged to such a figure, alters to another
kind of perception proper to another figure; so that it is with perception, as
it is with other Creatures: For example, as there are several kinds of
Creatures, as Elements, Animals, Minerals, Vegetables, etc. so there are also
several kinds of perceptions, as Animal, Vegetative, Mineral, Elemental
perception; and as there are different particular sorts of these mentioned
kinds of Creatures, so there are also of perceptions; nay, as one particular
Creature of these sorts consists of different parts; so every part has also
different perceptions; for self-motion, as it is the cause of all the various
changes of figures and parts of Nature, so it is also of the variety of
perceptions; for put the case Matter were of one infinite figure, it would have
but self-knowledg, or at least no variety of perceptions, because it would have
no variety of corporeal figurative motions; and it is well to be observed, that
although numerous different parts may agree in perception; that is, their
sensitive and rational figurative motions may all perceive one and the same
object; yet the manner of their perceptions are different, according to the
difference of their figures, or rather of their interior, corporeal, figurative
motions: for example, a Man, a Tree, and a Stone, may all have perceptions of
one object, but yet their perceptions are not alike; for the Tree has not an
Animal or Mineral, but a Vegetative perception; and so has the Man, not a
Vegetative or Mineral, but an Animal perception; and the Stone, not an Animal
or Vegetative, but a Mineral perception, each according to the interior nature
of its own figure.

Q. 10. Whether there could be Self-knowledg without Perception?

I answer: Self-knowledg being the ground of all Perceptions, which are nothing
else but exterior knowledges, might as well subsist without them, as Matter
would subsist without Motion; but since self-motion is the cause of all the
various changes of figures and parts, and of all the orderly Productions,
Generations, Transformations, Dissolutions, and all other actions of Nature;
These cannot be performed without Perception; for all actions are knowing and
perceptive; and were there no perception, there could not possibly be any such
actions; for how should parts agree either in the generation, composition or
dissolution of composed figures, if they had no knowledge or perception of each
other? Therefore although selfknowledg is a fixed interior Being, and the ground
of all perceptions; yet were there no self-motion, there could be no action,
and consequently no perception, at least no variety of perceptions in Nature;
but since Nature is one self-moving and self-knowing body, self-knowledg can no
more be separated from perception, then motion can be divided from matter, but
every part and particle of Nature, were it an Atome, as it is self-moving, so
it is also self-knowing and perceptive. But yet it is not necessary that
Perception must only be betwixt neighboring or adjoining parts; for some
parts may very well perceive each other at a distance, and when other parts are
between; nay, some perceptions do require a distance of the object, as for
example, the optic perception in Animals, as I have declared before Part 1. c.
20. Of Colors, p. 63.
, where I do mention the requisites of the Animal perception of sight; whereof
if one be wanting, there is either no perception at all, (I mean, no perception
of seeing in that Animal) or the perception is imperfect. But some may ask,
Whether, in such a case, that is, in the perception of an object which is
distant from the sentient, the intermediate parts are as well perceived as the
object it self, to which the perception directy tends? I answer: That, if the
intermediate parts be subject to that kind of perception, they may as well be
perceived as the object that is distant; nay, sometimes better; but most
commonly, the intermediate parts are but slightly or superficially perceived:
For example, in the forementioned sense of Seeing, if the organ of sight be
directed to some certain object that is distant, and there be some parts
between the organ and the object, perceptible by the same sense, but such as do
not hinder or obstruct the perception of the said object; not only the object,
but also those intermediate parts will be perceived by the optic sense, Also
if I cast my eye upon an object that is before me, in a direct line, the eye
will not only perceive the object to which it is chiefly directed, but also
those parts that are joined to it, either beneath, or above, or on each side of
that object, at the same point of time, and by the same act; the sole
difference is, that the said object is chiefly and of purpose patterned out by
the sensitive and rational figurative motions of the eye, when as the other
intermediate or adjoining parts are but superficially and slghtly looked over.

And this proves, first, that Nature is composed of sensitive, rational and
inanimate matter, without any separation or division from each other; for could
matter be divided into an atome, that very atome would have a composition of
these three degrees of matter; and therefore although the parts of Nature do
undergo infinite divisions and compositions, so that parts may be composed and
divided infinite ways; yet these three degrees can never be separated or
divided from one another, because of their close union and commixture through
infinite Nature.

Next it proves, that there can be no single parts in Nature; for what commonly
are called parts of Nature, are nothing else but changes of motion in the
infinite body of Nature; so that parts, figures, actions, and changes of
motion, are one and the same, no more differing from each other, then body,
place, magnitude, figure, color, etc. for self-motion is the cause of the
variety of figures and parts of Nature; without which, although there would
nevertheless be parts, (for wheresoever is matter or body, there are parts
also) yet Nature would be but a confused heap or Chaos, without the distinction
of any perfect figures; which figures make perfect perceptions of perfect
objects; I say, of perfect objects; for if the objects be not perfect, the
sensitive perceptions can neither be perfect; but then the rational being
joined with the sensitive, and being more subtle, active and piercing, may find
out the error either of the object, or sense; for both the rational and
sensitive parts being united in one figure or action, can more easily perceive
the irregularities of each others actions, then of exterior objects; all which
could not be, were there single parts in Nature, neither could such acts be
performed by chance or senseless atoms; nay, could there be any single parts in
Nature, there would consequently be a Vacuum to discern and separate them from
each other, which Vacuum would breed such a confusion amongst them, as there
would be no conformity or symmetry in any of their figures. Therefore I am
absolutely against the opinion of senseless and irrational atoms, moving by
chance; for if Nature did consist of such atoms, there would be no certain
kinds and species of Creatures, nor no uniformity or order; neither am I able
to conceive how there could be a motion by chance, or an irrational and
senseless motion, no more then I can conceive how motion can be without matter
or body; for self-motion as it is corporeal, so it is also sensitive and
rational.

Q. 11. Whether Perception be made by Patterning?

I answer: My Sense and Reason does observe, That the animal, at least humane
Perception, performed by the sensitive and rational motions in the organs
appropriated for it, is made by patterning or framing of figures, according to
the patterns of exterior objects; but whether all other kinds and sorts of
perceptions in the infinite parts of Nature be made the same manner or way,
neither my self, nor no particular Creature is able to determine, by reason
there are as many various sorts of perceptions as there are of other actions of
Nature, and according as the corporeal figurative motions do alter and change,
so do particular perceptions; for Perception is a corporeal, figurative action,
and is generally in all parts and actions of Nature; and as no part can be
without self-motion and self-knowledg, so none can be without perception; and
therefore I dare truly say, that all perceptions are made by figuring, though I
cannot certainly affirm, that all are made by imitation or patterning. But it
is well to be observed, that besides those exterior perceptions of objects,
there are some other interior actions both of sense and reason, which are made
without the presentation of exterior objects, voluntarily, or by rote; and
therefore are not actions of patterning, but voluntary actions of figuring: As
for example, Imaginations, Fancies, Conceptions, Passions, and the like; are
made by the rational, corporeal, figurative motions, without taking any copies
of foreign objects; also many Generations, Dissolutions, Alterations,
Transformations, etc. are made by the sensitive motions without any exterior
patterns; for the generation of Maggot in a Cheese, of a Worm in the root of a
Tree, of a Stone in the Bladder, etc. are not made by patterning or imitation,
because they are not like their producers, but merely by a voluntary figuring;
and therefore it is well to be observed, that figuring and patterning are not
one and the same; figuring is a general action of Nature: for all corporeal
actions are figurative, when as patterning is but a particular sort of
figuring; and although I observe, that some perceptions are made by patterning,
yet I cannot say the same of all; neither are the interior voluntary actions
made by patterning, but both the sensitive and rational motions frame such or
such figures of their own accord; for though each part in the composition of a
Creature knows its own work, and all do agree in the framing and producing of
it; yet they are not necessitated always to imitate each other; which is
evident, because the composition of one and the same Creature is various, and
different by reason of the variety of its parts.

And this is the difference between exterior perceptions, and interior
voluntary actions; for though both are effects of self-knowledg and
self-motion, yet perceptions are properly concerning foreign parts, figures
and actions, and are occasioned by them; but the voluntary actions are not
occasioned by any outward objects, but make figures of their own accord,
without any imitation, patterns or copies of foreign parts or actions; and as
the figures and parts alter by their compositions and divisions, so do both
interior and exterior particular knowledges; for a Tree, although it has
sensitive and rational knowledge and perception, yet it has not an animal
knowledge and perception; and if it should be divided into numerous parts, and
these again be composed with other parts, each would have such knowledge and
perception as the nature of their figure required; for self-knowledg alters, as
their own parts alter; perception alters as the objects alter; figures alter as
the actions alter; and the actions alter as Nature pleases, or is decreed by
God to work.

But I desire it may be observed, first, That although there are both voluntaay
actions of figuring, and occasioned actions of perceiving exterior objects,
both in sense and reason, whereof those I call interior, these exterior; yet
both of them are innate and inherent actions of their own parts, as proceeding
from the ground and fountain of self-knowledg; and the reason why I call the
voluntary actions interior, is, because they have no such respect to outward
objects, at least are not occasioned by them as perceptions are, but are the
own figurative actions of sense and reason made by rote; when as perceptions do
tend to exterior objects, and are made according to the presentation of their
figures, parts or actions.

Next, It is to be observed, That many times the rational motions take patterns
from the sensitive voluntary figures; As for example, in Dreams, when the
sensitive motions make voluntary figures on the inside of the sensitive organs,
the rational take patterns of them, and again the sensitive do many times take
patterns of the rational when they make figures by rote, as in the invention
and delivery of Arts and Sciences; so that there is oftentimes an imitation
between the rational and sensitive motions; for the rational voluntary figures,
are like exterior objects, to be patterned out by the sensitive perceptive
motions; and the sensitive voluntary figures, are like exterior objects, to be
patterned out by the rational perceptive motions; and yet all their perceptive
actions are their own, and performed inwardly, that is, by their own motions:
Which proves, that by naming Perception an exterior action, I do not mean that
it is an action exteriously perceptible or visible; for if it were thus, then
one part would presently know another parts perception, when and how it
perceives; which we find it does not; for although a man perceives a Tree, or
Stone, yet he does not know whether the Tree or Stone perceives him, much less
what perceptions they make: but, as I said before, Perception I name an
exterior action, because it is occasioned by an object that is without the
perceiving parts; for although both sensitive and rational perception are so
closely intermixed, that none can be without the other in every part or particle
of Nature, were it no bigger then what is called an Atome; yet considered in
themselves, they are without each other so far, that the rational perceptive
part is not the sensitive, nor the sensitive the rational; or else they would
not be several parts or actions, neither would there be any imitation betwixt
them.

Lastly, I desire that notice may be taken, when I say that every action of
Nature is perceptive; for since there are no single parts in Nature, but
whatsoever is body, consists of parts; there can neither be any such thing as a
single action, that is an action of a single part; but in all natural actions
there is a commerce, intercourse, or agreement of parts; which intercourse or
agreement, cannot be without perception of knowledge of each other; Wherefore it
must of necessity follow, that every action is perceptive, or that perception
between parts is required in every action of Nature; nay, even in those which
are called voluntary actions; for though the rational and sensitive parts of a
composed figure, can make voluntary figures within themselves, without taking
any patterns of foreign objects; yet those parts must needs know and perceive
each other even in the composition or framing of their voluntary figures; so
that exterior knowledge or perception, is as universal as self-motion; for
wheresoever is self-motion, there is perception also. But it is well to be
observed, first, That Perception or Perceptive knowledge is only between Parts;
Next, That although every action in Nature is perceptive, yet not every action
is the action of Perception properly so called; which Perception, in composed
figures, at least in Animals, is an action of patterning out exterior parts or
objects, performed by the rational and sensitive corporeal figurative motions
in their proper organs; But there are Infinite other actions, which although
they require perceptive parts, yet they are not such actions of Perceptions as
are made by Patterning out, or imitating outward objects; As for example,
Respiration, Digestion, Contraction, Dilation, Expulsion, Generation,
Retention, Dissolution, Growth, Decay, etc. Nevertheless, all those actions are
perceptive; that is, the parts which perform those actions have perception of
each other, or else they would never agree to produce such effects. The truth
is, that even the action of Perception properly so called, presupposes many
particular perceptions between those parts that concur to the performance of
that act; for it is impossible, that both the rational and sensitive parts in a
composed figure, should make the act of Perception, without they know and agree
what they are to do, and how they are to perform it, as I mentioned before. And
this is the reason, that I have made N. 5. Of Pores.
a difference between Perception and Respiration, and called them different
actions; not as if Respiration was not a perceptive action, or presupposes not
knowledge and perception between those parts that make respiration; but it is
not the action of Perception properly so called; as for example, the perception
of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, etc. in Animals, but it is properly an
action of drawing, sucking, breathing in, or receiving any ways outward parts;
and of venting, discharging or sending forth inward parts: nevertheless, all
this cannot be done without perception or knowledge, no more then without
motion; for wheresoever is motion, there is perception also; and therefore
Respiration is a perceptive action. In short, I desire it may be observed, 1.
That there is Perception in every action, but that not every Perception is made
by patterning. 2. That all self-moving parts are perceptive. 3. That
Perception, Perceptive knowledge, and Exterior knowledge are all one thing, and
that I take them indifferently. 4. That all voluntary actions, both of sense
and reason, are made by perceptive parts; and therefore when I make a
distinguishment between voluntary actions, and perceptions; I mean the
perceptions of a composed figure, and not the particular perceptive knowledges
between those parts that join in the act of such Perceptions, or in the making
of voluntary figures.

But it may be objected, That if all motions be perceptive, they would be
wholly employed in nothing else but in making copies of exterior parts or
objects.

My answer is, Although I say, that all motions are perceptive; yet I do not
positively affirm, that all perceptions in Nature are made by Patterning or
Imitation; for we are to consider, that there are as many different sorts of
perceptions, as there are of motions; because every particular motion has a
particular perception; and though in a composed figure or Creature, some
motions may work to the paterning out of exterior objects, yet all the rest may
not do so, and be nevertheless perceptive; for like as a Man, or any other
animal Creature, is not altogether composed of Eyes, Ears, Noses, or the like
sensitive organs; so not all perceptive motions are imitating or patterning,
but some are retentive, some expulsive, some attractive, some contractive, some
dilative, some creating or producing, some dissolving, some imitating or
patterning, and so forth; and as there are degrees of parts and motions, so
some perceptions may be so much purer, finer, and subtiler then others, as much
as pure Air is beyond gross Earth. The truth is, we cannot judge of Natures
actions any otherways then we observe them by our own sensitive and rational
perceptions; and since we find that the sensitive and rational motions in our
sensitive organs do work by the way of patterning or imitation; we may surely
conclude, that some perceptions are made that way; but that all other
perceptions in all natural parts or Creature should be after the same manner,
would be too presumptuous for any particular Creature to affirm, since there
are infinite several sorts of perceptions; and although we may justly and with
all reason believe, that all parts of Nature are perceptive, because they are
self-moving and self-knowing; yet no particular Creature is able to judge how,
and in what manner they perceive, no more then it can know how they move. And
by this it is evident, how in one and the same organ of the eye, some motions
or parts may work to the act of perception, properly so called, which is made
by patterning out the figure of an exterior object; and other motions or parts
may work to the retention of the eye, and preserving it in its being: others
again may work to its shutting and opening, and others to its respiration, that
is, venting of superfluous, and receiving of nourishing parts, which motions
are properly subservient to the retentive motions, and hundreds the like; and
yet all these motions are as knowing and perceptive after their way, as those
that work to the act of Perception, properly so called, that is, to the act of
seeing, made by patterning or imitation. But it is well to be observed, That
although the eye has the quickest action in the Perception of seeing; yet is
this action most visible, not only by its motions, but by the figures of the
objects that are represented in the eye; for if you look into another eye, you
will plainly perceive therein the picture of your own figure; and had other
objects but such an optic perception as Animals, they would, without question,
observe the same. Some will say, Those figures in the Eye are made by
reflection; but reflections cannot make such constant and exact patterns or
imitations; Others believe it proceeds from pressure and reaction; but pressure
and reaction being but particular actions, cannot make such variety of figures.
Others again say, That the species of the objects pass from the objects to the
optic organ, and make figures in the air; but then the multitude of those
figures in the air would make such a confusion, as would hinder the species's
passing through; besides, the species being corporeal, and proceeding from the
object, would lessen its quantity or bulk. Wherefore my opinion is, that the
most rare and subtilest parts in the animal sensitive organs, do pattern out
the figures of exterior objects, and that the perception of the exterior animal
senses, to wit, sight, hearing, tasting, touching, smelling; is certainly made
by no other way, then by figuring and imitation.

Q. 12. How the bare patterning out of the Exterior figure of an object, can
give us an information of its Interior nature?

My answer is, That although our sensitive Perception can go no further then
the exterior shape, figure and actions of an object; yet the rational being a
more subtle, active and piercing Perception, by reason it is more free then the
sensitive, does not rest in the knowledge of the exterior figure of an object,
but by its exterior actions, as by several effects, penetrates into its
interior nature, and does probably guess and conclude what its interior
figurative motions may be; for although the interior and exterior actions of a
composed figure be different, yet the exterior may partly give a hint or
information of the interior; I say, partly, because it is impossible that one
finite particular Creature should have a perfect knowledge or perception of all
the interior and exterior actions of another particular Creature; for example,
our sensitive Perception patterns out an Animal, a Mineral, a Vegetable, etc.
we perceive they have the figure of flesh, stone, wood, etc. but yet we do not
know what is the cause of their being such figures; for the interior,
figurative motions of these Creatures, being not subject to the perception of
our exterior senses, cannot exactly be known; nevertheless, although our
exterior senses have no perception thereof, yet their own parts which are
concerned in it, as also their adjoining or neighboring parts may: For
example, a man knows he has a digestion in his body; which being an interior
action, he cannot know by his exterior senses how it is made; but those parts
of the body where the digestion is performed, may know it; nay, they must of
necessity do so, because they are concerned in it, as being their proper
employment: The same may be said of all other particular parts and actions in
an Animal body, which are like several workmen, employed in the building of a
house; for although they do all work and labor to one and the same end, that
is, the exstruction of the house; and every onemay have some inspection or
perception of what his neighbor does; yet each having his peculiar task and
employment, has also its proper and peculiar knowledge how to perform his own
work; for a Joiner knows best how to finish and perfect what he has to do, and
so does a Mason, Carpenter, Tiler, Glasier, Stone-cutter, Smith, etc. And thus
it is with all composed figures or Creatures; which proves, That Perception has
only a respect to exterior parts or objects; when as self-knowledg is an
interior, inherent, inate, and, as it were, a fixed being; for it is the ground
and fountain of all other particular knowledges and perceptions, even as
self-motion is the cause and principle of all other particular actions; and
although self-knowledg can be without perception, yet perception cannot be
without self-knowledg; for it has its being from self-knowledg, as an effect
from its cause; and as one and the same cause may produce numerous effects, so
from one self-knowledg proceed numerous perceptions, which do vary infinitely,
according to the various changes of corporeal self-motion. In short,
self-knowledg is the fundamental cause of perception, but self-motion the
occasional cause; Just like Matter and self-motion are the causes of all
natural figures; for though Perception could not be without self-knowledg, yet
were there no self-motion, there would be no variety of figures, and
consequently not exterior objects to be perceived.

Q. 13. How is it possible, that several figures can be patterned out by one
act of Perception? for example, how can a man, when he sees a statue or a
stone, pattern out both the exterior shape of the statue, the matter which the
statue is made of, and its color, and all this by one and the same act?

I answer, First it is to be observed, That Matter, Color, Figure, Magnitude,
etc. are all but one thing, and therefore they may easily be patterned out by
one act of Perception at one and the same time. Next, I say, That no sense is
made by one single part, but every sense consists of several parts, and
therefore the perception of one sense may very well pattern out several objects
at once; for example, I see an embroidred bed; my eye patterns out both the
Velvet, Gold, Silver, Silk, Color, and the Workmanship, nay, superficially the
figure of the whole Bed, and all this by one act, and at one the same time. But
it is to be observed, That one object may have several proprieties, which are
not all subject to the perception of one sense; as for example, the smell of an
odoriferous body, and its color, are not subject to the same sense; neither is
the hardness or softness, roughness or smoothness of its parts, subject to the
sense of smelling or seeing, but each is perceived by such a sense as is proper
for such a sort of Perception. Nevertheless, these different perceptions do not
make them to be different bodies; for even one and the same attribute or
propriety of a body may be patterned out by several senses; for example,
Magnitude or shape of body may be patterned out both by fight and touch: which
proves, that there is a near affinity or alliance betwixt the several senses,
and that Touch is, as it were a general sense, which may imitate some other
sensitive perceptions. The truth is, it is as easy for several senses to
pattern out the several proprieties of one body, as it is for several Painters
to draw the several parts of one figure; as for example, of a burning Candle,
one may draw the wax or tallow, another the wick, another the flame: The like
for the Perceptions of several senses; Sight may pattern out the figure and
light of a Candle; Touch may pattern out its weight, hardness or smoothness;
the Nose may pattern out its smell; the Ears may pattern out its sparkling
noise, and c. All which does evidently prove, That Perception cannot be made by
pressure and reaction; or else a fire coal by the perception of sight, would
burn out the eye, because it would by pressure inflame its next adjoining
parts, and these again the next, until it came to the eye. Besides, it proves
that all objects are material; for were Light, Color, Figure, Heat, Cold, and
c. immaterial, they would never be patterned out by corporeal motions; for no
Painter is able to copy out, or draw an immaterial mode or motion; Neither
could immaterial motions make pressure, nor be subject to reaction. Lastly, it
proves, That Perception is an effect of knowledge in the sentient, and not in
the external object; or else there would be but one knowledge in all parts, and
not several knowledges in several parts; whereof sense and reason inform us
otherwise, viz. that particular figures have variety of knowledges, according
to the difference and variety of their corporeal figurative motions.

But then some will say, That the actions of Matter would be more infinite then
the parts. I answer; There can be neither more nor less in infinite: For
infinite can be but infinite; but since parts, figures, changes of motion and
perceptions, are one and the same; and since division and composition are the
chief actions of Nature, it does necessarily follow, That as the actions vary,
so do also their parts and particular perceptions.

Q. 14. How is it possible that any Perception of outward objects can be made
by patterning, since patterning does follow perception; for how can any one
pattern out that which he has no perception of?

I answer: Natural actions are not like Artificial; for Art is but gross and
dull in comparison to Nature; and although I alledg the comparison of a
Painter, yet is it but to make my meaning more intelligible to weaker
capacities; for though a Painter must see or know first what he intends to draw
or copy out; yet the natural perception of exterior objects is not altogether
after the same manner; but in those perceptions which are made by patterning,
the action of patterning, and the perception, are one and the same; for as
self-knowledg is the ground of Perception, so self-motion is the action of
Perception, without which no perception could be, and therefore perception and
self-action are one and the same. But I desire, that it may well be observed
what I have mentioned heretofore, to wit, That although there is but one
self-knowledg, and one selfmotion in Nature, yet they being material, are
divideable; and therefore as from one infinite cause, there may flow infinite
effects, and one infinite whole may be divided into infinite parts; so from one
infinite selfknowledg and self-motion there may proceed infinite particular
actions and perceptions.

But some may perhaps ask, 1. Why those particular knowledges and perceptions
are not all alike, as being all but effects of one cause? To which I answer,
That if the actions or motions of Nature were all alike, all parts would have
the like knowledges and perceptions; but the actions being different, how can
it be otherwise, but the perceptions must be different also? for since every
perception is a particular self-action, then as the actions of Nature vary, and
as parts do divide and compose, so are likewise their perceptions.

2. It may be objected, That if the Perception of the exterior senses in
animals be made by the way of patterning, then when a part of the body feels
pain, the rational motions by patterning out the same, would be pained, or sick.

I answer: This does no more follow, then that the Eye patterning out the
exterior figure of Water, Fire, Earth, and c. should become of the same nature;
for the original is one thing, and the copy another: the picture of a house of
stone, is not made of natural stone, nor is the picture of a Tree, a natural
Tree; for if it were so, Painters would do more then Chemists by fire and
furnace; but by reason there is a very close conjunction between the rational
and sensitive perceptive motions, so that when the sensitive motions of the
body pattern out some exterior object, the rational most commonly do the same;
That which we call pain or sickness in the body, when patterned out by the
mind, is called trouble, or grief; for as there are degrees in their purity,
subtilty and activity, so their perceptions are also different. But it is well
to be observed, That although some parts are ignorant of others, when they work
not to one and the same perception, yet sometimes there is a more general
knowledge of a disease, pain, or soreness; for example, a man may have an
inflammation or soreness in one part of his arm or leg, and all the rest of the
parts of that limb may be ignorant thereof; but if the inflammation, soreness or
pain, extend throughout the whole arm or leg, then all the parts of that limb
are generally sensible of it.

3. It may be objected, That if the rational perceptive motions take patterns
from the sensitive, then reason can never judge of things as naturally they are,
but only of their copies, as they are patterned out by the sensitive motions.

I answer, first, That reason is not so necessitated, as to have no other
perception then what sense presents; for Reason is the instructor and informer
of sense, as an architect or surveigher is in the extruction of a house. Next,
I say, That in the act of Perception, Reason does not only perceive the copies
of the senses, but it perceives with the sense also the original; for surely
the rational part of Matter, being intermixed with the sensitive, must perceive
as well the original, as sense does; for it is not so involved within the
sensitive; that it cannot peep out, as a Jack-in-a-Box; but both being closely
intermixed, one makes perceptions as well as the other, as being both
perceptive; and by reason the rational part makes the same perception as the
sensitive does, it seems as if the rational did take copies from the
sensitive; which although it does, yet this does not hinder it from making a
perception also of the original.

But then some may say, if the rational Part has liberty to move as it will,
then it may perceive without sense; that is, Reason may make perceptions of
outward objects in the organs of the senses, when the senses make none; as for
example, the rational motions in the eye may perceive light, when the sensitive
do not; and sound in the ear, when the sensitive do not.

To which I answer; It Is probable, that the rational do many times move to
other perceptions then the sensitive; as I have often declared; but if their
actions be orderly and regular, then most commonly they move to one and the
same perception; but reason being the purer and freer part, has a more subtle
perception then sense; for there is great difference between sense and reason,
concerning the subtilty of their actions; sense does perceive, as it were, in
part, when as reason perceives generally, and in whole; for if there be an
object which is to be patterned out with all its proprieties, the color of it
is perceived only by sight; the smell of it is perceived by the Nose; its
Sound is perceived by the Ear, its taste is perceived by the Tongue, and its
hardness or softness, coldness or heat, dryness or moisture, is perceived by
Touch; so that every sense in particular, patterns out that object which is
proper for it; and each has but so much knowledge of the said object as it
patterns out; for the sight knows nothing of its taste, nor the taste of its
touch, nor the touch of its smell; and so forth: But the mind patterns out all
those figures together, so that they are but as one object to it, without
division: which proves, that the rational perception, being more general, is
also more perfect then the sensitive; and the reason is, because it is more
free, and not encumbered with the burdens of other parts; Wherefore the rational
can judge better of objects then the sensitive, as being more knowing; and knows
more, because it has a more general perception; and has a more general
perception, because it is more subtle and active; and is more subtle and
active, because it is free, and not necessitated to labor on, or with any
other parts.

But some may say, How is it possible, that the rational part, being so closely
intermixed with the sensitive and the inanimate, can move by it self, and not
be a labourer, as well as the sensitive?

I answer: The reason is, because the rational part is more pure and finer then
the sensitive, or any other part of Matter; which purity and fineness makes
that it is so subtle and active, and consequently not necessitated to labor
with, or on other parts.

Again: Some may ask, Whether those intermixed parts continue always together
in their particulars? as for example, whether the same rational parts keep
constantly to the same sensitive and inanimate parts, as they are commixed?

I answer: Nature is in a perpetual motion, and her parts are parts of her own
self-moving body; wherefore they must of necessity divide and compose; but if
they divide and compose, they cannot keep constantly to the same parts.
Nevertheless, although particular parts are divideable from each other, yet the
Triumvirate of Nature, that is, the three chief degrees or parts of Matter, to
wit, rational, sensitive and inanimate, which belong to the constitution of
Nature, cannot be separated or divided from each other in general; so that
rational matter may be divided from sensitive and inanimate, and these again
from the rational, but they must of necessity continue in this commixture as
long as Nature lasts. In short, rational, sensitive and inanimate Matter are
divideable in their particulars; that is, such a particular part of inanimate
Matter is not bound to such a particular part of sensitive or rational Matter,
etc. but they are individeable in general, that is, from each other; for
wheresoever is body, there is also a commixture of these three degrees of
Matter.

4. Some may say, How is it possible, That Reason can be above Sense; and that
the rational perception is more subtle and knowing then the sensitive; since
in my Philosophical Opinions, I have declared that the sensitive perception
does inform the rational: or that Reason perceives by the information of the
senses?

To which I answer: My meaning is not, that Reason has no other perception, but
by the information of the senses; for surely the rational perception is more
subtle, piercing and penetrating, or inspective, then the sensitive, and
therefore more intelligent and knowing; but when I say, that sense informs
reason, I speak only of such perceptions where the rational figurative motions
take patterns from the sensitive, and do not work voluntarily, or by rote.

Besides, It is to be observed, That in the mentioned Book, I compare Thoughts,
which are the actions of the rational figurative motions, to the sensitive
Touch; so that Touch is like a Thought in sense, and Thought like a Touch in
reason: But there is great difference in their purity; for though the actions
of Touch and Thought are much after the same manner, yet the different degrees
of sense and reason, or of animate, sensitive and rational matter, cause great
difference between them; and as all sensitive perception is a kind of touch, so
all rational perception is a kind of thoughtfulness: But mistake me not when I
say, Thought is like Touch; for I do not mean, that the rational perception is
caused by the conjunction or joining of one part to another, or that it is an
exterior touch, but an interior knowledge; for all self-knowledg is a kind of
thoughtfulness, and that Thought is a rational Touch, as Touch is a sensitive
Thought; for the exterior perceptions of reason resemble the interior actions
or knowledge of sense. Neither do I mean, that the perception of touch is made
by pressure and reaction, no more then the perception of sight, hearing, or the
like; but the patterns of outward objects being actions of the body sentient,
are, as it were, a self-touch, or self-feeling, both in the sensitive and
rational perceptions. Indeed that subtle and learned Philosopher, who will
persuade us that Perception is made by pressure and reaction, makes Perception
only a fantasme: For, says he, Reaction makes a Fantasme, and that is
Perception.

5. Some perhaps will say, That if the Perception of the exterior animal senses
be made by Patterning, then that animal which has two or more eyes, by
patterning out an exterior object, will have a double or trebble perception of
it, according to the number of its eyes.

I answer: That when the corporeal motions in each eye move irregularly; as for
example, when one eye moves this, and the other another way, or when the eyes
look asquint; then they do not pattern out the object directly as they ought;
but when the eyes move regularly, then they pattern out one and the same object
alike, as being fixed but upon one point; and the proof thereof is, if there be
two eyes, we may observe that both have their perceptions apart, as well as
jointly; because those parts that are in the middle of each eye, do not make at
the same time the same perceptions with those that are the side or extreme
parts thereof, but their perceptions are different from each other: For
example, the eyes of a Man, or some other Animal, pattern out a Tree which
stands in a direct line opposite to them; but if there be Meadows or Hedges on
each side of the Tree, then the extreme or side parts of each eye pattern out
those meadows or hedges; for one eyes perception, is not the other eyes
perception; which makes them perceive differently, when otherwise they would
perceive both alike. But if a thousand eyes do perceive one object just alike,
then they are but as one eye, and make but one perception; for like as many
parts do work or act to one and the same design; so do several corporeal
motions in one eye, pattern out one object; the only difference is, that, as I
said, every eye is ignorant of each others perception.

But, you will say, There are so many copies made, as there are objects.

I answer, It Is true: But though there are many composed parts which join in
the making of one particular perception; yet if they move all alike, the
perception is but one and the same: for put the case there were a hundred
thousand copies of one original; if they be all alike each other, so as not to
have the least difference betwixt them; then they are all but as one Picture of
one Original; but if they be not alike each other, then they are different
Pictures, because they represent different faces. And thus for a matched pair
of eyes in one Creature; if they move at the same point of time, directly to
one and the same parts, in the same design of patterning out one and the same
object; it seems but as one act of one part, and as one perception of one
object.

Q. 15. How comes it, that some parts, for all they are Perceptive, can yet be
so ignorant of each other, that in one composed figure, as for example, in the
finger of a Man's hand, they are ignorant of each other; when as other parts do
make perceptions of one another, at a great distance, and when other parts are
between?

I answer: This question is easily resolved, if we do but consider, that the
differerence of Perception depends upon the difference of the corporeal
figurative motions; for if the parts be not the same, the perceptions must
needs be different; nay, there may infinite several perceptions be made by one
and the same parts; if Matter be eternal, and perpetually moving. And hence it
follows, that some parts may make perceptions of distant parts, and not of
neighboring parts; and others again may make perceptions of neighboring or
adjoining parts, and not of those that are distant: As for example, in the
animal Perception, taste and touch are only perceptions of adjoining objects,
when as sight and hearing do perceive at a distance; for if an object be
immediately joined to the optic sense, it quite blinds it. Wherefore it is
well to be observed, that there are several kinds and sorts of Perceptions, as
well as of other composed figures: As for example, there are Animals,
Vegetables, Minerals, and Elements; and these comprehend each several
particular kinds of Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, etc. Again, these particular
kinds are divided into several sorts, and each of them contains so many
particulars; nay, each particular has so many different parts, of which it
consists, and each part has its different particular motions. The same may be
said of Perceptions: For as the several compositions of several parts are, so
are they: not that the bare composition of the parts and figures is the cause
of Perception; but the self-knowing and self-moving parts compose themselves
into such or such figures; and as there are proprieties belonging to such
compositions, so to such composed perceptions; so that the composed parts at
the end of a finger, may not have the same perceptions with the middle parts of
the same finger.

But some may say, If there be such ignorance between the parts of a composed
figure, How comes it, that many times the pain of one particular part, will
cause a general distemper throughout all the body?

I answer; There may be a general perception of the irregularities of such
particular composed parts in the other parts of the body, although they are not
irregular themselves; for if they had the same compositions, and the same
irregularities as the distempered parts, they would have the same effects; that
is, pain, sickness, or numbness, etc. within themselves; but to have a
perception of the irregularities of other parts, and to be irregular
themselves, are different things. Nevertheless, some parts moving irregularly,
may occasion other parts to do the same. But it is well to be observed, That
adjoining parts do not always imitate each other, neither do some parts make
perceptions of foreign objects so readily as others do; as for example, a man
plays upon a Fiddle, or some other instrument, and there are hundreds, or more
to hear him; it happens often, that those at a further distance do make a
perfecter perception of that sound, then those which are near; and oftentimes,
those that are in the middle, as between those that are nearest, and those that
are furthest off, may make a perfecter perception then all they; for though all
parts are in a perpetual motion, yet all parts are not bound to move after one
and the same way; but some move slower, some quicker, some livelier, some
duller; and some parts do move so irregularly as they will not make perceptions
of some objects, when as they make perceptions of others; and some will make
perfect perceptions of one and the same objects at some times, and not at other
times: As for example, some men will hear, see, smell, taste, etc. more
perfectly at some, then at other times. And thus to repeat what I said before,
The several kinds, sorts and particulars of Perceptions, must well be
considered; as also, that the variety of Nature proceeds but from one cause,
which is self-knowing and selfmoving Matter.

Q. 16. Why a Man's hand, or any other part of his body, has not the like
Perception as the eye, the ear, or the nose, etc. because there are sensitive
and rational motions in all the parts of his body?

I answer: The reason why the same perception that is within the eye cannot be
in the hand, or in any other part of a man's body, is, that the parts of the
hand are composed into another sort of figure then the eyes, ears, nose, etc.
are; and the sensitive motions make perceptions according to the compositions
of their parts; and if the parts of the hand should be divided and composed
with other parts, into another figure; as for example, into the figure of an
eye, or ear, or nose; then they would have the perception of seeing, hearing
and smelling; for perceptions are according to the composition of parts, and
the changes of Natures self-motions.

But then some will say, perhaps, That an Artificial eye, or ear, will have the
same perceptions, etc. being of the same figure.

I answer: That if its interior nature, and the composition of its parts were
just the same as its exterior figure; as for example, if an artificial eye, or
ear, were of animal flesh, and the like; it would have the like perception,
otherways not.

Q. 17. How do we perceive Light, Fire, Air, and c?

I answer: By their exterior figures, as we do other objects: As for example,
my Eye patterns out the exterior figure of Light, and my Touch patterns out the
exterior figure of Heat, etc.

But then you will say, If the Eye did pattern out the figure of Light, it
would become Light it self; and if Touch did pattern out the figure of Heat, it
would become Fire.

I answer: No more then when a Painter draws Fire or Light, the copy should be
a natural Fire or Light. For there is difference betwixt the copy, and the
original: and it is to be observed, that in the Perception of sense, especially
of sight, there must be a certain distance betwixt the object, and the sentient
parts; for the further those are from each other, the weaker is the perception,
by reason no corporeal figurative motion is infinite, but finite; and therefore
it can have but fueh a degree of power, strength, or activity as belongs to
such a figurative action, or such a part or degree of Matter. But as for Fire
and Light, it is a certain and evident proof, that some perceptions, at least
those of the exterior animal senses, are made by patterning; for though the
nature of Fire and of Light (for any thing we know) be ascending, yet if Fire
be made in such a manner, that several may stand about, underneath, and above
it; yet they all have the perception of the heat of fire, in what place soever,
provided they stand within a limited or determinate compass of it: I say, of
the heat which is the effect of fire; for that is only patterned out, and not
the substance of the flame or fire it self: But on the contrary, if the heat of
the fire did actually and really spread it self out to all the places
nominated, as well downwards, upwards and sideways; then certainly it would be
wasted in a little time, and leave its cause, which is the fire, heatless.
Besides, that there are Copies and Originals, and that some perceptions are
made by patterning, is evident by the appearance of one Candle in several
distances, which several appearances can be nothing else, but several copies of
that Candle made by those parts that take patterns from the Original; which
makes me also believe, that after the same manner, many Stars which we take for
Originals, may be but so many copies or patterns of one Star, made by the
figurative motions of those parts where they appear.

Q. 18. Whether the Optic Perception is made in the Eye, or Brain, or in both?

I answer: The perception of Sight, when awake, is made on the outside of the
Eye, but in sleep on the inside; and as for some sorts of Thoughts or
Conceptions, which are the actions of reason, they are to my apprehension made
in the inner part of the head, although I am not able to determine properly
what part it is; for all the body is perceptive, and has sense and reason, and
not only the head; the only difference is, that the several actions of
several parts, cause several sorts of perceptions; and the rational parts being
the most active, and purest, and moving within themselves, can make more
figures in the same compass or magnitude, and in a much shorter time then the
sensitive, which being burdened with the inanimate parts, cannot act so agily
and freely: Neverthess, some of the sensitive actions are much agiler and
nimbler then others, as we may perceive in several sorts of productions. But
the rational parts being joined with the sensitive in the exterior parts of a
figure, do, for the most part, work together with the same; otherwise, when
they move by themselves in Thoughts, Conceptions, Remembrance, and the like;
they are more inward, as within the head; for there are Perceptions of interior
parts, as well as of exterior; I mean, within a composed figure, by reason all
parts are perceptive: Neither does this prove, that if there be so many
perceptions in one composed figure, there must be numerous several perceptions
of one object in that same figure; for every part knows its own work, or else
there would be a confusion in Natures actions: Neither are all perceptions
alike, but as I said, according as the several actions are, so are the
perceptions.

Q. 19. What is the reason, that the nearer a stick or finger is held against a
Concave-glass, the more does the pattern of it, made by the glass, appear to
issue out of the glass, and meet with the object that is without it?

I answer: It Is not that something really issues out of the Glass; but as in a
plain Looking-glass, the further the object goes from it, the more does its
copy or image seem to be within the glass: So, in the same manner does the
length of the stick, which is the measure of the object, or distance that
moves: For, as to a man that rides in a Coach, or sails upon Water, the Shore,
Trees, Hedges, Meadows, and Fields, seem to move; when as yet, it is the man
that moves from them; so it is with the figure in a Looking-glass: Wherefore it
is only a mistake in the animal sense, to take the motion of one, for the
motion of the other.

Q. 20. Whether a Part or Figure repeated by the same Motions, be the same part
or figure as the former, or only like the former; as also whether an action
repeated, be the same with the former?

I answer: That if the Parts, Figures and Actions be the same, they will always
remain the same, although they be dissolved and repeated millions of times; as
for example, if you make a figure of wax, and dissolve it, and make that figure
again just as it was before, and of the same parts, and by the same action, it
will be the very same figure; but if you alter either the parts, or the figure,
it may be like the former figure, but not the very same. The like for action;
if one and the same action be repeated without any alteration, it is nothing
else but a repetition of the corporeal figurative motions; but if there be any
alteration in it, it is not made by the same figurative motions, and
consequently, it is not the same action; for though the self-moving parts be the
same, yet the figurative motions are not the same; not that those figurative
motions are not in the same parts, but not repeated in the same manner.
Wherefore it is well to be observed, that a Repetition is of the same parts,
figures and actions that were before, but an alteration is not a repetition;
for wheresoever is but the least alteration, there can be no exact repetition.

Q. 21. Whether there may be a Remembrance in Sense, as well as there is in
Reason?

I answer, Yes: for Remembrance is nothing else but a Repetition of the same
figure, made by the same corporeal figurative motions; and as there is a
rational remembrance, which is a repetition of the same figures, made by the
rational, corporeal figurative motions, so there is also a sensitive
remembrance, that is, a repetition of the same figures, made by the sensitive,
corporeal, figurative motions: For example, I see an object; the sensitive
motions in the eye, pattern out the figure of that object; but as soon as the
object is removed, the perception is altered. It may be, I see the same object
again in a dream, or in a frenzy, or the like distemper; and then the same
figure is repeated which was made first by the sensitive motions of the figure
of the object, when it was really present; which is a sensitive remembrance,
whether the repetition be made after a Pattern or by rote, although it is more
proper to say, that remembrance is only a repetition of such figures as are
made by rote, then of those that are made after a Pattern; for a repetition of
those figures that are made after a Pattern; is rather a present perception of
a present object; when as remembrance is of objects that are absent.

Q. 22. Whether the rational Parts can quit some Parts and join to others?

I answer: Our sense and reason perceives they do; or else there would be no
Motion, no Separation, Composition, Dilation, Contraction, Digestion,
Production, Transformation, Infancy, Youth, Age, nor no Action in the World
whatsoever: And by this it also evident, that (as I said before) particular,
rational and sensitive parts, are not bound to move always together, or to keep
constantly to the same parts, no not in the action of perception; for though
they most commonly work together when they move regularly; yet many times they
do not: as for Example, the sensitive do not always make perceptions of
exterior objects, but many times make figures by rote; as it is manifest in mad
men and such as are in high Fevers and the like distempers, which see or hear,
taste or smell such or such objects when none are present; and the Rational
Parts being regular, do perceive both the sensitive figures made by rote, and
that there are no such exterior objects really present; also the Rational parts
make figures by rote, and without any outward pattern; but such voluntary
figures cannot properly be named Perceptions, by reason Perceptions are
occasioned by outward objects; but they are rather voluntary Conceptions.

Q. 23. If it be so, that Parts can divide themselves from some Parts, and join
to other Parts: Why may not the soul do the same, and change its Vehicles, that
is, leave such, and take other Vehicles?

I answer: Concerning the Natural soul of man, which is part of Nature, and
consists of the purest and subtilest degree of matter, which is the Rational,
it is without question, that it is divideable and composeable, because it is
material, and therefore subject to changes and transmutations; But as for the
supernatural soul, because she is spiritual and consequently individable, as
having no parts, and therefore not the propriety of a body which is to have
figurative actions, it cannot be said of her that she is subject to
compositions, divisions, transmutations, etc. However, put the case the
supernatural soul should have those proprieties of a body, although no body her
self; Yet there could be but one infinite soul in one infinite body, and as the
body did divide, so the soul must of necessity do also otherwise one soul would
have many bodies, and some bodies would be soul-less; which would cause a
horrid confusion between souls and bodies. Wherefore in my opinion Pythagoras's
doctrine concerning the transmigration of souls, or that one soul can take
several bodies, is as absurd, as that one body can quit one place and acquire
an other, and so have more places then bodies; which if it were thus, we might
with as much probability affirm, that many bodies could be in one place, and in
the resurrection of bodies there would certainly arise a great dispute between
several bodies for one soul, and between several souls for one body, especially
if one body was particularly beloved of more then one soul; all which would
breed such a war between souls and bodies, souls and souls, and bodies and
bodies, that it would put all the world into a confusion; and therefore my
opinion is, that Nature is but one only infinite body, which being selfmoving,
is divideable and composeable, and consists of infinite parts of several
degrees, which are so intermixed, that in general they cannot be separated from
each other, or from the body of Nature, and subsist single and by themselves;
Neither can it be otherwise, unless Nature had several bodies, but though she
has infinite parts, yet has she but one infinite body; for parts and body are
but one Corporeal, self-moving, self-living and self-knowing Nature; And as for
the degrees of animate and inanimate matter, they are also but parts of that
one body of Nature, and the various and infinite knowledges, perceptions,
lives, etc. considered in general, are nothing else but the life, knowledge and
perception of the infinite body of Nature. And from hence it follows, that one
man may have numerous souls, as well as he has numerous parts and particles;
which as long as the whole figure of man lasts, their functions and actions are
according to the nature of that figure; but when the figure of man dissolves
(which dissolution is nothing else but a change of those motions that were
proper to the nature of its figure) then all the parts of that figure, if they
be joined and composed with other parts and figures, become not soul-less, or
life-less; but because they consist all of a commixture of animate and
inanimate matter, they retain life and soul, only the actions of that life and
soul are according to the nature of those figures which the parts of the animal
body did change into. Thus, as I have mentioned in my Philosophical Letters
Preface
, no Creature can challenge a particular life and soul to it self, but every
Creature may have by the dividing and composing-nature of this self-moving
Matter, more or fewer natural souls and lives.

And thus much of knowledge and perception; which since it is not only the
ground of Natural Philosophy, but a subject of a difficult Nature, I have
insisted somewhat longer upon it then I have done upon any other, and
endeavored to clear it as well as I could; so that now, I hope, all that I
have declared hitherto, will be sufficient to give the ingenious Reader a true
information of my opinion thereof, and a satisfactory answer to any other
scruples that should happen to puzzle his brain; I Will add no more at this
present, but conclude with a brief repetition of those few Notes concerning the
principles, which by that small portion of Reason and Judgment that Nature has
allowed me, I have endeavored to declare and prove in my works of Natural
Philosophy.

1. There is but one Matter, and infinite Parts; one self-motion, and infinite
Actions; one Self-knowledg, and infinite particular Knowledges and Perceptions.

2. All parts of Nature are living, knowing, and perceptive, because all are
self-moving, for self-motion is the cause of all particular effects, figures,
actions, varieties, changes, lives, knowledges, perceptions, etc. in Nature,
and makes the only difference between animate and inanimate Matter.

3. The chief and general actions of Nature, are division and composition of
parts, both which are done but by one act; for at the same time, when parts
separate themselves from such parts, they join to other parts; and this is the
cause there can be no Vacuum, nor no single parts in Nature.

4. Every particular part of figure is infinitely divided and composed from and
with other parts.

5. The infinite divisions and compositions hinder, that Nature cannot run into
extremes in her particulars, but keep the parts and actions of Nature in an
equal balance.

6. The Inanimate part of Matter has life, sense, and self-knowledg, as well as
the animate; but being not moving in it self, or its own Nature, it has not
such a perceptive sense and self-knowledg, nor such an active life as the
animate has.

7. The parts of Inanimate Matter alter according to their commixture with the
Animate, and so do their particular self-knowledges.

8. As parts alter by the changes of motions, so do particular perceptions.

9. Though all perceptions are figurative actions, yet no particular Creature
can undoubtedly affirm, that all are made by patterning or imitation; by reason
as the parts and actions of Nature are infinite, so are also particular
perceptions; and being infinite, they cannot be known by any particular
Creature.

10. There are besides exterior perceptions, voluntary actions, both of sense
and reason, not made by imitation, but freely and by rote; and these may be
called conceptions, rather then perceptions.

11. Those are much in the wrong, who believe, that man can know no more then
what his five senses do inform him; for the rational part, which is the purest,
subtilest, most active, and inspective part of Nature, does inform it self of
things which the sensitive cannot; as for example, how was the new world and
the Antipodes found out? for they were neither seen, nor heard of, nor tasted,
nor smelled, nor touched. Truly our reason does many times perceive that which
our senses cannot; and some things our senses cannot perceive until reason
informs them; for there are many inventions which owe their rise and beginning
only to reason. It is not sense, but reason that knows or perceives, there is
something beyond it self, and beyond Nature, which is the Only, Eternal, and
Omnipotent God, and there can be no higher conception then this; for what is
beyond it, is supernatural, and belongs to supernatural Creatures; as for
example, those divine souls which God has given to men, above their rational
material souls: but as for the wicked souls, they come not from God, but are
irregularities of Nature, which God certainly will punish, as a Master does the
evil actions of his Servant.

12. Art is but a Natural Creature or effect, and not a Creator of any thing.

13. Color, Magnitude, Figure, Place, Time, Gravity, Levity, Density, Rarity,
Compositions, Divisions, Alterations, etc. are all one and the same with
self-moving Matter, and nothing else but the various actions of Nature; which
actions can no more be separated from body, then body can from Matter, or parts
from their whole; for all that is natural, is corporeal; and therefore the
distinction into substances and accidents, is to no purpose, since there cannot
really be, no not imagined, such a thing as an incorporeal or substanceless
motion or action in Nature.

But some perhaps will say, If every part and (...) of Nature has Magnitude,
Color, Figure, Place, etc. How is it possible that they can be one and the
same with body, since they are subject to several perceptions?

To which I answer, The several perceptions do not make them to be several
bodies, but they are patterned out or perceived as several proprieties or
attributes of one body, or as several effects of one cause; for though there is
but one cause in Nature, which is self-moving matter; yet that only cause must
of necessity have several effects or proprieties, as Figure, Color, Place,
Magnitude, etc. and if I may without offense make a comparison between the
Creator and a Creature, God is but one in his Essence, as one Infinite and
Eternal God, and yet has several Divine Attributes; and though the parts of
Nature cannot comprehend, conceive, or perceive God, yet they may conceive
somewhat of his several Attributes, after several manners or ways: In the like
manner, although there is but one matter, yet that matter may be perceived
after several manners or ways, it being impossible that matter, or any part of
particle of matter, although it were single, should be without those several
mentioned proprieties; for can any one conceive or imagine a body without
Figure, Magnitude, Place or Color, were it as little as an Atome? and since
there are no Natural Figures or Creatures but consist of parts, those composed
Figures may have a different Magnitude, Place, Color, etc. from their parts
and particles were they single; but being self-moving, those figures may alter
by self-motion; for it is as impossible for a body to be without parts, as for
parts to be without body; but if matter were not self-moving, there would
neither be alterations, perceptions, nor any natural actions, although there
might be a fixed self-knowledg in Natures parts. And thus it is no wonder how
there can be several perceptions of one figure, by reason there is no figure but
is composed of parts; and as we can conceive a whole and its parts, which yet
are one and the same thing, several ways; (for a whole we conceive as a
composition of parts; and parts we conceive as a division of the whole) so we
may Figure, Place, Magnitude, etc. And as we cannot conceive nor perceive
motion without body; so neither can we conceive those mentioned proprieties
without body, or body without them, they being nothing else but the corporeal,
figurative actions of Nature.

FURTHER OBSERVATIONS UPON EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY, Reflecting withal upon some
Principal Subjects in CONTEMPLATIVE PHILOSOPHY.
1. Ancient Learning ought not to be exploded, nor the Experimental part of
Philosophy preferred before the Speculative.
IN this present age those are thought the greatest Wits that rail most against
the ancient Philosophers, especially Aristotle, who is beaten by all; but
whether he deserve such punishment, others may judge. In my opinion, he was a
very subtle Philosopher, and an ingenious Man; it is true, he was subject to
errors as well as other men are, (for there is no creature so perfect but may
err, nay, not Nature her self; but God only who is Omnipotent) but if all that
err should be accounted fools, and destitute of regular reason, then those
deserve it most who think themselves wiser then they are, and upon that account
few in this age would escape this censure. But concerning the Opinions of
ancient Philosophers, condemned by many of our modern Writers, I for my
particular, do very much admire them; for although there is no absolute
perfection in them, yet if we do but rightly consider them, we shall find, that
in many things, they come nearer to truth then many of our Moderns; for surely
the ancients had as good and regular rational and sensitive perceptions, and as
profitable Arts and Sciences as we have; and the world was governed as well,
and they lived as happily in ancient times, as we do now, nay more. As for
example; how well was the World governed, and how did it flourish in Augustus's
time? how many proud and stately Buildings and Palaces could ancient Rome show
to the world, when she was in her flower? The Cedars, Gold, and many other
curiosities which Solomon used in the structure of that Magnificent Temple,
(the like whereof our age cannot show) were as safely fetched and brought to
him out of foreign places, as those commodities which we have out of other
Countries either by Sea or Land: Besides, I doubt not but they had as
profitable and useful Arts and knowledges, and as skilful and ingenious Artists
as our age can boast of; if not the very same, yet the like, and perhaps
better, which by the injury of time have been lost, to our great disadvantage;
it may be they had no Microscopes or Telescopes, but I think they were the
happier for the want of them, employing their time in more profitable studies:
What learned and witty people the Egyptians were, is sufficiently known out of
ancient Histories, which may inform us of many more. But I perceive the
knowledge of several ages and times, is like the increase and decrease of the
Moon; for in some ages Art and Learning flourishes better then in others, and
therefore it is not only an injury, but a sign of ill nature, to exclaim
against ancient Learning, and call it Pedantry; for if the ancients had not
been, I question whether we should have arrived to that knowledge we boast of at
this present; for they did break the Ice, and showed us the way in many things,
for which we ought to be thankful, rather then reward them with scorn. Neither
ought Artists, in my opinion, to condemn Contemplative Philosophy, nay, not to
prefer the Experimental part before her; for all that Artists have, they are
beholden for it to the conceptions of the ingenious Student, except some few
Arts which ascribe their original to change; and therefore speculation must
needs go be fore practice; for how shall a man practice, if he does not know
what or which way to practice? Reason must direct first how sense ought to
work, and so much as the Rational knowledge is more noble then the Sensitive, so
much is the Speculative part of Philosophy more noble then the Mechanical. But
our age being more for deluding Experiments then rational arguments, which some
call a tedious babble, does prefer Sense before Reason, and trusts more to the
deceiving sight of their eyes, and deluding glasses, then to the perception of
clear and regular Reason; nay, many will not admit of rational arguments, but
the bare authority of an Experimental Philosopher is sufficient to them to
decide all Controversies, and to pronounce the Truth without any appeal to
Reason; as if they only had the Infallible Truth of Nature, and engrossed all
knowledge to themselves. Thus Reason must stoop to Sense, and the Conceptor to
the Artist, which will be the way to bring in Ignorance, instead of advancing
knowledge; for when the light of Reason begins to be Eclipsed, darkness of
Understanding must needs follow.

2. Whether Artificial Effects may be called Natural, and in what sense.
IN my former discourses I have declared that Art produces Hermaphroditical
Effects, that is, such as are partly Natural, and partly Artificial; but the
question is, whether those Hermaphroditical Effects may not be called Natural
Effects as well as others, or whether they be Effects quite different and
distinct from Natural? My answer is, When I call Artificial effects
Hermaphroditical, or such as are not Natural; I do not speak of Nature in
general, as if they were something else besides Nature; for Art it self is
natural, and an effect of Nature, and cannot produce any thing that is beyond,
or not within Nature; wherefore artificial effects can no more be excluded from
Nature, then any ordinary effect or Creature of Nature; But when I say they are
not natural, I understand the particular nature of every Creature, according to
its own kind of species; for as there is Infinite Nature which may be called
General Nature, or Nature in General, which includes and comprehends all the
effects and Creatures that lie within her, and belong to her, as being parts of
her own self-moving body; so there are also particular natures in every
Creature, which are the innate, proper and inherent interior and substantial
forms and figures of every Creature, according to their own kind or species, by
which each Creature or part of Nature is discerned or distinguished from the
other; as for example, although an Animal and a Vegetable be fellow Creatures,
and both Natural, because Material, yet their interior particular Natures are
not the same, because they are not of the same kind, but each has its own
particular Nature quite different from the other; and these particular Natures
are nothing else but a change of corporeal figurative motions, which make this
diversity of figures; for were the same interior and natural motions found in
an Animal as are in a Vegetable, an Animal would be a Vegetable, and a
Vegetable an Animal without any difference; and after this rate there would be
no variety at all in Nature; but self-motion acting diversely and variously, not
only in every kind and species, but in every particular Creature and part of
Nature, causes that wonderful variety which appears every where even to our
admiration in all parts of Nature. But to return to artificial effects, it is
known that Nature has her own ways in her actions, and that there are constant
productions in every kind and sort of natural Creatures, which Nature observes
in the propagation and increase of them; whose general manner and way is always
the same; (I say, general, because there are many variations in the particular
motions belonging to the production of every particular Creature.) For example,
all Mankind is produced after one and the same manner or way, to wit, by the
copulation of two persons of each Sex; and so are other sorts of Creatures
produced other ways: also a perfect Creature is produced in the same shape, and
has the same interior and exterior figure as is proper to it according to the
nature of its kind and species to which it belongs, and this is properly called
a natural production: But when the figurative motions in particular productions
do not move after this ordinary way, as in the productions of Monsters, it is
called a praeter-natural or irregular production, proceeding from the
irregularity of motions; not praeternatural in respect to general Nature, but
in respect to the proper and particular nature of the figure. And in this
regard I call Artifical effects Hermaphroditical, that is, partly Natural, and
partly Artificial; Natural, because Art cannot produce any thing without
natural matter, nor without the assistance of natural motions, but artificial,
because it works not after the way of natural productions; for Art is like an
emulating Ape, and will produce such figures as Nature produces, but it does
not, nor cannot go the same way to work as Nature does; for Natures ways are
more subtle and mysterious, then that Art, or any one particular Creature
should know, much less trace them; and this is the true construction of my
sense concerning natural and artificial production; whereby it is manifest that
I am not of the opinion of that Experimental Writer who thinks it no
improbability to say that all natural effects may be called artificial, nay,
that Nature her self may be called the Art of God; for Art is as much inferior
to Nature, as a part is inferior to the whole, and all Artificial Effects are
Irregular in comparison to Natural; wherefore to say God or Nature works
Artificially, would be as much as to say they work irregularly.

3. Of Natural Matter and Motion.
IAm of that Learned Authors mind, who counts those but narrow souls, and not
worthy the name of Philosophers, that think any body can be too great, or too
vast, as also too little in its natural dimensions, and that Nature is stinted
at an atome, and brought to a nonplus of her sub-divisions; for truly, if there
cannot be Extremes in Infinite, there can also be none in Nature, and
consequently there can neither be smallest nor biggest, strongest nor weakest,
hardest nor softest, swiftest nor slowest, etc. in Nature, by reason Nature is
Infinite in her actions, as well as in her parts, and has no set bounds or
limits; and therefore the Corpuscularian or Atomical Writers, which do reduce
the parts of Nature to one certain and proportioned Atome, beyond which they
imagine Nature cannot go, because their brain or particular finite reason
cannot reach further, are much deceived in their arguments, and commit a
fallacy in concluding the finiteness and limitation of Nature from the
narrowness of their rational Conceptions. Nevertheless, although Natures
actions and parts are Infinite, considered in general, yet my opinion is, that
Nature never does actually run into Infinite in her particular actions and
parts; for as there are infinite divisions, so there are also infinite
compositions in Nature; and as there are infinite degrees of hardness, slowness
and thickness, so there are also infinite degrees of softness, swiftness,
thinness, etc. so that every particular motion or action of Nature is balanced
and poised by its opposite, which hinders a running into infinite in natures
particulars, and causes a variety of natural figures; for although Infinite
Matter in it self and its own essence is simple and homogeneous, as the learned
call it, or of the same kind and nature, and consequently is at peace with it
self, yet there is a perpetual opposition and war between the parts of nature,
where one sometimes gets the better of the other, and overpowers it either by
force or slight, and is the occasion of its dissolution into some other figure;
but there is no part so powerful as to reduce any thing into nothing, or to
destroy it totally from being Matter; nay, not Nature her self has such a
power, but God alone, who as he has made Nature, so he may destroy her; for
although Nature has an Infinite power, yet she is not omnipotent, but her power
is a natural infinite power, when as Omnipotency is an attribute only
belonging to God; neither has she a divine, but a natural infinite knowledge;
by which it is evident, that I do not ascribe divine attributes to Nature,
which were to make her a God, nor detract from Nature that which properly
belongs to her; for Nature being infinite in body and parts, it would be absurd
to confine her to a finite power and knowledge. By parts, I understand not only
the infinite figures and fizes, but also the infinite actions of Nature: and I
am of Des Carts opinion, that the parts of Matter may be made bigger or less
by addition or subtraction of other parts; but I cannot yield to him when he
says, that Motion may be swifter and slower by addition given to the movent by
other contiguous bodies more swiftly moving, or by subduction of it by bodies
slower moved, and that Motion may be transferred out of one body into another;
for Motion cannot be conceived, much less subsist without Matter; and if Motion
should be transferred or added to some other body, Matter must be added or
transferred also: Neither does the addition of some parts of Matter add always
exterior local motion to the body it is joined to, but they retain the motion
proper to their own figure and nature; as for example, if a stone be added to
an animal, it will rather hinder then help its exterior motions. But I must
refer the Reader to my other Philosophical Works, in which I have discoursed
more of this subject.

4. Nature cannot be known by any of her Parts.
IAm not of Plinius's Opinion, That Nature in her whole power is never more
wholly seen then in her smallest Works; For how can Nature be seen in a part,
when as Infinite cannot be known neither in nor by any Part, much less a small
Part? Nay, were Nature a great finite body, it could not be perceived entirely
in and by a small or minute part, no more then a humane eye can see all this
world Celestial and Terestial at once. It Is true, Reason being joined to Sense,
may make a better discovery then if they were separated; but as the humane
optic sense is not capable to perceive the greatest, so neither the smallest
creatures exterior, much less their interior parts, although assisted by Art;
for Art, (as I mentioned before) many times deludes rather then informs, making
hermaphroditical figures; and Nature has more variety and curiosity in the
several forms, and figurative corporeal motions of one of the smallest
creatures, then the most observing and clearest optic sense can perceive. But
mistake me not; I do not say, that Arts are not profitable, but that they are
not truly and thoroughly intelligent or knowing of all Natures works; for several
Arts are like several other Creatures, which have their particular natures,
faculties and proprieties, beyond which they cannot go, and one Creature is not
able to comprehend or know all other Creatures, no not any one single Creature
perfectly, which ifso, then none can inform what it does not know. Nay, not
only one particular Creature is not able to know it, but not one particular
kind or sort of Creatures: as for example; all Mankind that ever have lived,
or are at present living in this world, could never find out the truth of
Nature, even in the least of her parts, nay, not in themselves: For what man is
he that knows the figurative corporeal motions, which make him to be such a
Creature as Man, or that make any part of him? and what Man or Art can inform
us truly of the figurative motions that make the nature of blood, flesh, bones,
etc. or can give a reason why the heart is triangular, and the head spherical,
and so for every differently-shaped part of his body? I will not say, but that
Man may guess at it, but not infallibly know it by any Art; wherefore Reason
will more truly discover so much of Nature as is discoverable to one kind or
fort of Creatures, then Art can do; for Art must attend Reason as the chief
Mistress of Information, which in time may make her a more prudent and
profitable servant then she is; for in this age she is become rather vain then
profitable, striving to act beyond her power, as I do undertake to write beyond
my experience, for which, it is probable Artists will condemn me; but if I err,
I ask their pardon, and pray them to consider the Nature of our sex, which
makes us, for the most part, obstinate and wilful in our opinions, and most
commonly impertinently foolish: And if the Art of Micrography can but find out
the figurative corporeal motions that make or cause us to be thus, it will be
an Art of great same, for by that Artists may come to discover more hidden
causes and effects; but yet I doubt they will hardly find out the interior
nature of our fex by the exterior form of their faces or countenances, although
very curious, and full of variety of several beauties; nay, I dare on the
contrary say, had a young beautiful Lady such a face as the Microscope
expresses, she would not only have no lovers, bnt be rather a Monster of Art,
then a picture of Nature, and have an aversion, at least a dislike to her own
exterior figure and shape; and perchance if a Lowse or Flea, or such like
insect, should look through a Microscope, it would be as much affrighted with
its own exterior figure, as a young beautiful Lady when she appears
ill-favored by Art. I do not say this, as if Optic Glasses could not present
the true figure of an Original; for if they do not exceed the compass of
natural dimensions, they may; but when they endeavor to go beyond them, and do
more then Nature has done, they rather present monstrous, then truly natural
figures. Wherefore those, in my opinion, are the best Artists, that keep
nearest to Natures Rules, and endeavor not to know more then what is possible
for a finite part or creature to know; for surely there is no better way to be
rightly and truly informed of Natures works, then by studying Natures corporeal
figurative motions, by the means of which study, they will practice Arts (as
far as Art is able to be practiced) more easily and successfully then they will
do without it. But to conclude this discourse, some parts of Nature are more
endued with regular reason then others, which is the cause that some creatures
of one and the same fort or kind, as for example, Mankind, are more wife and
ingenious then others; and therefore it is not art, but regular sense and
reason, that makes some more knowing, and some more wife and ingenious then
others; and the irregular motions of sense and reason that make some more
ignorant or more extravagant in their opinions then others.

5. Art cannot introduce new forms in Nature.
SOme account it a great honor, That the Indulgent Creator, although he gives
not to Natural Creatures the power to produce one atome of matter, yet allows
them the power to introduce so many forms which Philosophers teach to be nobler
then matter, and to work such changes amongst Creatures, that if Adam was now
alive, and should survelgh the great variety of man's production, that are to be
found in the shops of Artificers, the Laboratories of Chemists, and other well
furnished Magazines of Art, he would admire to see what a new world it were.
Where, first, I do not understand, how man, or any other creature, should have
the power of making or introducing new forms, if those forms were not already
in Nature; for no Creature by any Art whatsoever, is able to produce a new
form, no more then he can make an atome of new matter, by reason the power lies
in Nature, and the God of Nature, not in any of her Creatures; and if Art may
or can work changes amongst some fellow creatures, they are but natural, by
reason Nature is in a perpetual Motion, and in some parts in a perpetual
transformation. Next, as for the Question, Whether forms be more noble then the
matter? my opinion is, that this can with no more ground of truth be affirmed,
then that the effect is nobler then its cause, and if any creature should have
power to make forms, which are more noble then matter it self, then certainly
that creature would be above Nature, and a creator rather then a creature.
Besides, form cannot be created without matter, nor matter without form; for
form is no thing subsisting by it self without matter, but matter and form make
but one body; and therefore he that introduces a new form, must also introduce
a new matter; and though Art changes forms, yet it cannot be said to introduce
a new form; for forms are and have been eternally in Nature as well as Matter,
so that nothing is created anew, which never was in Nature before. It Is true,
if Adam were alive now, he might see more variety, but not more Truth; for
there are no more kinds and sorts of natural Creatures, then there were at his
time, though never more metamorphosed, or rather I may say disfigured,
unnatural and hermaphroditical issues then there are now, which if they should
make a new world by the Architecture of Art, it would be a very monstrus one:
But I am sure art will never do it; for the world is still as it was, and new
discoveries by Arts, or the deaths and births of Creatures will not make a new
world, nor destroy the old, no more then the dissolving and composing of
several parts will make new Matter; for although Nature delights in variety,
yet she is constant in her groundworks; and it is a great error in man to study
more the exterior faces and countenances of things, then their interior natural
figurative motions, which error must undoubtedly cause great mistakes, in so
much as man's rules will be false, compared to the true Principles of Nature;
for it is a false Maxim to believe, that if some Creatures have power over
others, they have also power over Nature: it might as well be believed, that a
wicked Man, or the Devil, has power over God; for although one Part may have
power over another, yet not over Nature, no more then one man can have power
over all Mankind: One Man or Creature may overpower another so much as to make
him quit his natural form or figure, that is, to die and be dissolved, and so
to turn into another figure or creature; but he cannot overpower all
Creatures; nay, if he could, and did, yet he would not be an absolute destroyer
and Creator, but only some weak and simple Transformer, or rather some
artificial disfigurer and misformer, which cannot alter the world, though he
may disorder it: But surely as there was always such a perpetual Motion in
Nature, which did and does still produce and dissolve other Creatures, which
Production and Dissolution is named birth and death, so there is also a Motion
which produces and dissolves Arts, and this is the ordinary action and work of
Nature, which continues still, and only varies in the several ways or modes of
dissolving and composing.

6. Whether there be any Prime or Principal Figures in Nature, and of the true
Principles of Nature.
SOme are of opinion, that the Prime or Principal figures of Nature are Globes
or Globular figures, as being the most perfect; but I cannot conceive why a
globular or spherical figure should be thought more perfect then any other, for
another figure may be as perfect in its kind, as a round figure is in its kind:
for example, we cannot say a Bird is a more perfect figure then a Beast, or a
Beast a more perfect figure then a Fish, or Worm; neither can we say Man is a
more perfect figure then any of the rest of the Animals: the like of
Vegetables, Minerals and Elements; for every several sort has as perfect a
figure as another, according to the nature and propriety of its own kind or
sort: But put the case man's figure were more perfect then any other, yet we
could not say, that it is the Principle out of which all other figures are
made, as some do conceive that all other figures are produced from the Globular
or Spherical; for there is no such thing as most or least perfect, because
there is no most nor least in Nature. Others are of opinion, that the Principle
of all natural Creatures is salt, and that when the World dissolves, it must
dissolve into salt as into its first Principle; but I never heard it determined
yet, whether it be fixed or volatile salt: Others again are of opinion, that the
first principle of all Creatures is Water; which if so, then, seeing that all
things must return into their first principle, it will be a great hinderance to
the conflagration of the world, for there will be so much water produced as may
chance to quench out the fire. But if Infinite Nature has Infinite parts, and
those Infinite parts are of Infinite figures, then surely they cannot be
confined to one figure: Sense and Reason proves that Nature is full of variety,
to wit, of corporeal figurative motions, which as they do not ascribe their
original to one particular, so neither do they end in one particular figure or
creature. But some will wonder that I deny any Part or Creature of Nature
should have a supremacy above the rest, or be called Prime or Principal, when
as yet I do say that Reason is the Prime Part of Nature. To which, I answer:
That, when I say, no Creature in Nature can be called Prime or Principal, I
understand Natural effects, that is, Natural composed Parts or Creatures: as
for example, all those finite and particular Creatures that are composed of
Life, Soul and Body, that is, of the Animate both Rational and Sensitive, and
the Inanimate parts of Matter, and none of those composed Creatures, I mean,
has any superiority or supremacy above the rest, so as to be the Principle of
all other composed Creatures, as some do conceive Water, other Fire, others all
the four Elements to be simple bodies, and the principles of all other Natural
Creatures, and some do make Globous bodies the perfectest figures of all
others; for all these being but effects, and finite particulars, can be no
principles of their fellow creatures, or of Infinite Nature. But when I say
that Reason, or the Rational part of Matter is the Prime Part of Nature, I
speak of the Principles of Nature, out of which all other Creatures are made or
produced, which Principle is but one, viz. Matter, which makes all effects or
Creatures of Nature to be material, for all the effects must be according to
their principle; but this matter being of two degrees, viz. animate and
inanimate, the animate is nothing but self-motion; (I call it animate matter,
by reason I cannot believe, as some do, that Motion is Immaterial, there being
nothing belonging to Nature which is not material, and therefore corporeal
selfmotion, or animate matter is to me one and the same) and this animate
matter is again subdivided into two degrees, to wit, the rational and
sensitive; the rational is the soul, the sensitive the life, and the inanimate
the body of Infinite Nature; all which, being so intermixed and composed, as no
separation can be made of one from the other, but do all constitute one
Infinite and self-moving body of Nature, and are found even in the smallest
particles thereof (if smallest might be said) they are justly named the
Principles of Nature, whereof the rational animate matter, or corporeal
selfmotion is the chief designer and surveigher, as being the most active,
subtle and penetrating part, and the sensitive the workman: but the inanimate
part of Matter being thoroughly intermixed with this animate self-moving Matter,
or rather with this corporeal selfmotion, although it have no motion in it
self, that is, in its own nature, yet by virtue of the commixture with the
animate, is moving as well as moved; for it is well to be observed, that
although I make a distinction betwixt animate and inanimate, rational and
sensitive Matter, yet I do not say that they are three distinct and several
matters; for as they do make but one body of Nature, so they are also but one
Matter; but as I mentioned before, when I speak of self-motion, I name it
animate matter, to avoid the mistake, lest self-motion might be taken for
immaterial; for my opinion is, that they are all but one matter, and one
material body of Nature. And this is the difference between the cause or
principle, and the effects of Nature, from the neglect of which comes the
mistake of so many Authors, to wit, that they ascribe to the effects what
properly belongs to the cause, making those figures which are composed of the
foresaid animate and inanimate parts of matter, and are no more but effects,
the principles of all other Creatures, which mistake causes many confusions in
several men's brains, and their writings. But it may be, they will account it
paradoxical or absurd, that I say Infinite Matter consists of two parts, viz.
animate and inanimate, and that the animate again is of two degrees, rational
and sensitive, by reason the number of two is finite, and a finite number
cannot make one infinite whole, which whole being infinite in bulk, must of
necessity also consist of infinite parts. To which I answer, My meaning is not,
that Infinite Nature is made up of two finite parts, but that she consists out
of a co-mixture of animate and inanimate Matter, which although they be of two
degrees or parts (call them what you will) yet they are not separated parts,
but make one infinite body, like as life, soul and body, make but one man; for
animate matter is (as I said before) nothing else but self-motion, which
self-motion joined with inanimate matter makes but one self-moving body, which
body by the same self-motion is divided into infinite figures or parts, not
separated from each other, or from the body of Nature, but all cohering in one
piece, as several members of one body, and only distinguished by their several
figures; every part whereof has animate and inanimate matter as well as the
whole body: Nay, that every part has not only sensitive, but also rational
matter, is evident, not only by the bare motion in every part of Nature, which
cannot be without sense, for wheresoever is motion, there is sense; but also by
the regular, harmonious and well-ordered actions of Nature, which clearly
demonstrate, that there must needs be reason as well as sense in every part and
particle of Nature; for there can be no order, method or harmony, especially
such as appears in the actions of Nature, without there be reason to cause that
order and harmony. And thus motion argues sense, and the well-ordered motion
argues Reason in Nature, and in every part and particle thereof, without which
Nature could not subsist, but would be as a dull indigested and unformed heap
and Chaos. Besides, it argues that there is also knowledge in Nature, and all
her parts; for wheresoever is sense and reason, there is also sensitive and
rational knowledge, it being most improbable, that such an exactly-ordered and
harmonious consort of all the infinitely-various actions of Nature should be
without any knowledge, moving and acting, producing, transforming, composing,
dissolving, etc. and not knowing how, whether, or why to move; and Nature being
infinite in her own substance as well as in her parts, there in bulk, here in
number, her knowledge in general must of necessity be infinite too, but in her
particulars it cannot but be finite and particular; and this knowledge differs
according to the nature of each figure or creature; for I do not mean, that
this sense and knowledge I speak of, is only an animal sense and knowledge, as
some have mis-interpreted; for animal sense and knowledge is but particular, and
belongs only to that sort of Creatures which are Animals; but I mean such
sense and knowledge as is proper to the nature of each figure; so that Animal
Creatures have animal sense and knowledge, Vegetables a vegetative sense and
knowledge, Minerals a mineral sense and knowledge; and so of the rest of all
kinds and sorts of Creatures. And this is my opinion of the Principles of
Nature, which I submit to the examination of the ingenious and impartial Reader
to consider, whether it contains not as much probability, as the opinion of
those whose Principles are either Whirl-pools, insensible Minima's, Gas, Blas
and Archeus, dusty Atoms, thrusting backwards and forwards, which they call
reaction, and the like; or of those that make the ground and foundation of the
knowledge of Nature artificial Experiments, and prefer Art before Reason: for my
Principles and Grounds are sense and reason; and if they cannot hold, I know
not what will; for where sense and reason has no admittance, there nothing can
be in order, but confusion must needs take place.

7. Whether Nature be self-moving.
THere are some, who cannot believe, That any Man has yet made out, how Matter
can move it self, but are of opinion, that few bodies move but by something
else, no not Animals, whose spirits move the nerves, the nerves again the
muscles, and so forth the whole body. But if this were so, then certainly there
must either be something else that moves the spirits, or they must move of
themselves; and if the spirits move of themselves, and be material, then a
material substance or body may move of it self; but if immaterial, I cannot
conceive, why a material substance should not be self-moving as well as an
immaterial. But if their meaning be, that the Spirits do not move of
themselves, but that the Soul moves them, and God moves the Soul; then it must
either be done by an All-powerful Command, or by an Immediate action of God:
The later of which is not probable, to wit, that God should be the Immediate
Motion of all things himself; for God is an Immovable and Immutable Essence;
wherefore it follows, that it is only done by an Omnipotent Command, Will and
Decree of God; and if so, Why might not Infinite Matter be decreed to move of
it self as well as a Spirit, or the Immaterial Soul? But I perceive, Man has a
great spleen against self-moving corporeal Nature, although himself is part of
her, and the reason is his Ambition; for he would fain be supreme and above all
other Creatures, as more toward a divine Nature: he would be a God, if
arguments could make him such, at least God-like, as is evident by his fall,
which came merely from an ambitious mind of being like God. The truth is, some
opinions in Philosophy are like the Opinions in several Religions, which
endeavoring to avoid each other, most commonly do meet each other; like Men in
a Wood, parting from one another in opposite ways, oftentimes do meet again; or
like Ships which travel toward East and West, must of necessity meet each
other; for as the learned Dr. Donn says, the furthest East is West, and the
furthest West is East; in the same manner do the Epicurean, and some of our
modern Philosophers meet; for those endeavor to prove matter to be somewhat
like a God, and these endeavor to prove man to be something like God, at least
that part of man which they say is immaterial, so that their several opinions
make as great a noise to little purpose, as the dogs barking or howling at the
Moon; for God the Author of Nature, and Nature the servant of God, do order all
things and actions of Nature, the one by his Immutable Will, and Allpowerful
Command, the other by executing this Will and Command; the one by an
Incomprehensible, Divine and Supernatural Power, the other in a natural manner
and way; for God's Will is obeyed by Natures self-motion, which self-motion God
can as easily give and impart to corporeal Nature, as to an Immaterial Spirit;
but Nature being as much dividable, as she is composeable, is the cause of
several opinions as well as of several other creatures; for Nature is fuller of
variety then men of arguments, which variety is the cause there are so many
extravagant and irregular opinions in the world: and I observe, that most of
the great and famous, especially our modern Authors, endeavor to deduce the
knowledge of causes from their effects, and not effects from their causes, and
think to find out Nature by Art, not Art by Nature: whereas, in my opinion,
Reason must first consider the cause, and then Sense may better perceive the
effects; Reason must judge, Sense execute: for Reason is the prime part of
Nature, as being the corporeal soul or mind of Nature. But some are so much in
love with Art, as they endeavor to prove not only Nature, but also Divinity,
which is the knowledge of God, by Art, thus preferring Art before Nature, when
as Art is but Natures foolish changeling Child; and the reason is, that some
parts of Nature, as some Men, not knowing all other parts, believe there is no
reason, and but little sense in any part of Nature but themselves; nay, that it
is irreligious to say, that there is, not considering, that God is able to give
Sense and Reason to Infinite Nature, as well as to a finite part. But those are
rather irreligious, that believe Gods power is confined, or that it is not
Infinite.

8. Of Animal Spirits.
I am not of the opinion of those that place the cause of all Sense and Motion
in the animal Spirits, which they call the Purest and most ethereal particles
of all bodies in the World whatsoever, and the very top and perfection of all
Natures operations: For Animal Spirits, in my opinion, are no more then other
effects of Nature, only they are not so gross as some, but are parts of a most
pure, refined and rare sort of Inanimate Matter, which being intermixed with
the parts of Animate Matter, and enlivened by them, become very subtle and
active; I will not say, that they are of the highest and last degree of
Inanimate Matter, nearest to the Animate, (as they do say, they have the
nearest alliance to spiritualities, which in my opinion, is as much as to say,
they are almost nothing) or of the first degree of sensitive matter, there
being no such thing as first and last in Nature, but that they are only such
pure and rare parts of Inanimate Matter, as are not subject to the exterior
perception of humane sense; for example, as the matter of respiration, or the
like: for as there are Infinite parts of Inanimate Matter, so there are also
infinite degrees of strength, weakness, purity, impurity, hardness, softness,
density, rarity, swiftness, slowness, knowledge, ignorance, etc. as also several
sorts and degrees of complexions, statures, constitutions, humors, wits,
understanding, judgment, life, death, and the like; all which degrees, although
they be in and of the infinite body of Nature, yet properly they belong to
particular Creatures, and have only a regard to the several parts of Nature,
which being Infinite in number, are also of Infinite degrees, according to the
Infinite changes of self-motion, and the propriety and nature of each figure;
wherefore that opinion which makes Animal Spirits the prime or principal motion
of all things, and the chief Agent in Natures three Kingdoms, Mineral, Animal
and Vegetable, reduces Infinite Nature to a finite Principle; whereas any one
that enjoys but so much of humane sense and reason as to have the least
perception or insight into Natural things, may easily conceive that the
Infinite effects of Nature cannot proceed from a finite particular cause; nay,
I am firmly persuaded, that they who believe any finite part to be the cause
and Principle of Infinite selfmoving Nature, do, in my opinion, not only sin
against Nature, but against God the Author of Nature, who out of his Infinite
bounty gave Nature the Power of self-motion. But if any one desire to know,
what then the true cause and Principle of all Natures Creatures and Figures be;
I answer, In my opinion, it is not a Spirit or Immaterial substance, but
Matter; but yet not the Inanimate part of Matter, but the Animate; which being
of two degrees, rational and sensitive; both of them are the Infinite Life and
Soul of the Infinite body of Nature; and this Animate Matter is also the cause
of all infinite works, changes, figures and parts of Nature, as I have declared
above more at large. Now as great a difference as there is between Animate and
Inanimate, Body and Soul, Part and Whole, Finite and Infinite, so great a
difference there is also between the Animal Spirits, and the Prime Agent or
Movent of Nature, which is Animate Matter, or (which is all one thing)
corporeal self-motion; and as it would be paradoxical, to make Inanimate Matter
to be the cause of Animate, or a part to be the cause of the whole, whose part
it is, or a finite to be the cause of Infinite; so paradoxical would it also be
to make Animal Spirits the top and perfection of all Natures operations; nay,
so far are they from being the Prime Movent of other bodies, as they are but
moved themselves; for to repeat what I mentioned in the beginning, Animal
Spirits are only some sorts of rare and pure Inanimate Matter, which being
thoroughly intermixed with the animate parts of Matter, are more active then some
sorts of more dense and grosser parts of Inanimate Matter; I say some; for I do
believe, that some of the most solid bodies are as active as the most rare and
fluid parts of Matter, if not exteriously, yet interiously; and therefore we
cannot say, that rare and fluid parts are more active then fixed and solid, or
that fixed and solid are less active then fluid bodies, because all parts are
self-moving. But if I was to argue with those that are so much for Animal
Spirits, I would ask them, first, whether Animal Spirits be self-moving? If
they say, they are, I am of their opinion, and do infer thence, that if animal
spirits, which are but a small part of Nature, have self-motion, much more has
Nature her self: But if not, I would ask, what gives them that motion they
have? If they say Nature, then Nature must be self-moving. Perchance they will
say, God moves Nature: It Is true, God is the first Author of Motion, as well as
he is of Nature; but I cannot believe, that God should be the Prime actual
Movent of all natural Creatures, and put all things into local motion, like as
one wheel in a Clock turns all the rest; for Gods Power is sufficient enough to
rule and govern all things by an absolute Will and Command, or by a Let it be
done, and to impart self-motion to Nature to move according to his order and
decree, although in a natural way. Next, I would ask whether any dead Creature
have such Animal Spirits? If they affirm it, I am of their mind; if not, then I
would ask, what causes in dead bodies that dissolution which we see? Thirdly, I
would ask, whether those animal spirits be annihilated and generated anew? If
they answer, not, I am of their opinion: but if they say, they are annihilated
and generated anew; then I would fain know who is their Generator and
Annihilator, for nothing can generate and annihilate it self? And if they say,
God: I answer, It is not probable that God should have made any thing
imperfect, especially in the production of Nature; for if there be things
created anew which never were before in Nature, it argues that Nature was not
perfect at first, because of a new addition of so many Creatures; or if any
thing could be annihilated in Nature, it would likewise argue an imperfection
in Nature, viz. that Nature was perfecter before those things were annihilated.
And thus it would infer, as if God had not power either to have made Nature
perfect at first, or that God wanted work, and was forced to create and
annihilate every moment; for certainly, the work of creation and annihilation
is a divine action, and belongs only to God. Lastly, concerning the functions
and offices which the animal spirits perform in animal, or at least humane
bodies, by their several motions and migrations from the brain through the
spinal marrow, nerves, tendons, fibers, into all the parts of the body, and
their return to the brain; I have declared my opinion thereof twelve years
since, in my work of Poetical Fancies, which then came out the first time; and
I thought it not unfit to insert here, out of the same book, these following
lines, both that my meaning may be the better understood, and that they may
witness I have been of that opinion so many years ago.

The reason why Thoughts are made in the Head.
Each Sinew is a small and slender string Poem. Impres. 2. p. 52.

Which all the Senses to the body bring,
And they like pipes or gutters hollow be,
Where animal spirits run continually;
Though small, yet they such matter do contain
As in the skull does lie, which we call brain.
Which makes, if any one do strike the heel,
That sense we quickly in the brain do feel:
It is not sympathy, but all one thing,
Which causes us to think, and pain does bring;
For had the heel such quantity of brain
As does the head and scull therein contain,
Then would such thoughts as in the brain dwell high
Descend into our heels, and there they'ld lie:
Insinews small brain scattered lies about,
It wants both room and quantity, no doubt;
For did a sinew so much brain but hold,
Or had so large a skin it to infold
As has the scull, then might the toe or knee,
Had they an optic nerve, both hear and see;
Had sinews room Fancy therein to breed,
Copies of Verse might from the heel proceed.
And again of the motion of the Blood.
Some by their industry and Learning found P. 53.

That all the blood like to the Sea turns round;
From two great arteries it does begin,
Runs through all veins, and so comes back again.
The muscles like the tides do ebb and flow,
According as the several spirits go:
The sinews, as small pipes, come from the head,
And they are all about the body spread,
Through which the animal spirits are conveyed
To every member, as the pipes are laid;
And from those sinew-pipes each sense does take
Of those pure spirits, as they us do make.
9. Of the Doctrine of the Scepticks concerning the Knowledge of Nature.
WHen Scepticks endeavor to prove that not any thing in Nature can be truly
and thoroughly known, they are, in my opinion, in the right way, as far as their
meaning is, that not any particular Creature can know the Infinite parts of
Nature; for Nature having both a divideable and composeable sense and reason,
causes ignorance as well as knowledge amongst Particulars: But if their opinion
be, that there is no true knowledge at all found amongst the parts of Nature,
then surely their doctrine is not only unprofitable, but dangerous, as
endeavoring to overthrow all useful and profitable knowledge. The truth is,
that Nature, being not only divideable, but also composeable in her parts, it
cannot be absolutely affirmed that there is either a total ignorance, or a
universal knowledge in Nature, so as one finite part should know perfectly all
other parts of Nature; but as there is an ignorance amongst Particulars, caused
by the division of Natures parts, so there is also a knowledge amongst them,
caused by the composition and union of her parts: Neither can any ignorance be
attributed to Infinite Nature, by reason she being a body comprehending so many
parts of her own in a firm bond and indissoluble union, so as no part can
separate it self from her, must of necessity have also an Infinite wisdom and
knowledge to govern her Infinite parts. And therefore it is best, in my
judgment, for Scepticks and Dogmatists to agree in their different opinions,
and whereas now they express their wit by division, to show their wisdom by
composition; for thus they will make an harmonious consort and union in the
truth of Nature, where otherwise their disagreement will cause perpetual
quarrels and disputes both in Divinity and Philosophy, to the prejudice and
ruin of Church and Schools; which disagreement proceeds merely from self-love:
For every Man being a part of Nature, which is self-loving as well as
selfmoving, would fain be, at least appear, wiser then his fellow creatures.
But the Omnipotent Creator has ordered Nature so wisely, as to divide not only
her power, but also her wisdom into parts, which is the reason that she is not
Omnipotent, being divideable and composeable; When as God can neither be
divided nor composed, but is one, simple and individual incomprehensible being,
without any composition of parts, for God is not material.

10. Of Natural Sense and Reason.
THose Authors which confess, That vulgar Reason is no better then a more
refined Imagination, and that both Reason, Fancy and the Senses, are influenced
by the bodies temperament, and like the Index of a Clock, are moved by the
inward springs and wheels of the corporeal Machine, seem, in my opinion, to
confirm, that natural sense and reason is corporeal, although they do it in an
obscure way, and with intricate arguments. But truly, do what they can, yet
they must prove reason by reason; for irrational discourse cannot make proofs
and arguments to evince the truth of Nature: But first it must be proved, what
Sense and Reason is, whether Divine or Natural, Corporeal or Immaterial. Those
that believe natural sense and reason to be immaterial, are in my opinion in a
great error, because Nature is purely corporeal, as I have declared before; And
those which affirm, that our understanding, will and reason are in some manner
like to God's, shall never gain my assent; for if there be so great a
difference between God's Understanding, Will and Decree, and between Natures,
as no comparison at all can be made betwixt them, much more is there between a
part of Nature, viz. Man, and the Omnipotent and Incomprehensible God; for
there is an Infinite difference between Divine Attributes and Natural
Properties; wherefore to similize our Reason, Will, Understanding, Faculties,
Pasions, and Figures, etc. to God, is too high a presumption, and in some
manner a blasphemy. Nevertheless, although our natural reason and faculties are
not like to divine attributes, yet our natural rational perceptions are not
always delusions; and therefore it is certain, that Natures knowing parts, both
sensitive and rational, do believe a God, that is some Being above Nature: But
many Writers endeavor rather to make divisions in Religion, then promote the
honor and worship of God by a mutual and united agreement, which I confess, is
an irregularity and imperfection in some parts of Nature, and argues, that
Nature is not so perfect but she has some faults and infirmities, otherwise she
would be a God, which she is not.

11. Of a General Knowledge and Worship of God, given him by all Natural
Creatures.
IT is not the sight of the beauteous frame of this world (as some do conceive)
that makes men believe and admire God, but the knowledge of the existence of God
is natural, and there is no part of Nature but believes a God; for, certainly,
were there not any optic sense in Nature, yet God would be the God of Nature,
and be worshipped and adored by her Creatures, which are her parts; for it is
irreligious to say, God should want admiration and adoration for want of an
eye, or any other of the animal or humane organs; surely Nature has more ways
then five to express and declare God's Omnipotency: It is Infinite sense and
reason that does worship and adore God, and the several perceptions of this
sense and reason know there is a God that ought to be worshipped and adored,
and not only Ears, or Eyes, or the like exterior organs of man. Neither is it
man alone, but all Creatures, that do acknowledge God; for although God cannot
be perfectly known what he is in his Essence, yet he may be known in as much as
Nature can know of him. But since Nature is dividable in her parts, each part
has but a particular knowledge of God, which is the cause of several Religions,
and several opinions in those Religions; and Nature being also composeable, it
causes a conformity and union of those Opinions and Religions in the
fundamental knowledge, which is, the existence of God: Wherefore that which
makes a general and united knowledge of the Existence of God, is, that Nature is
entire in her self, as having but one body, and therefore all her parts which
are of that body have also one knowledge of God; for though the parts be
different in the Worship of God, yet they have not a different belief of the
Existence of God; not that God can be perfectly known either by Nature, or any
of her parts, for God is Incomprehensible, and above Nature; but in as much as
can be known, to wit, his Being; and that he is All-powerful, and that not any
thing can be compared or likened to him; for he is beyond all draught and
likeness, as being an Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, Incorporeal, Individual,
Immovable Being. And thus it is not one part or creature viewing another that
causes either the knowledge or admiration of God, but the soul and life of
Nature, which are her sensitive and rational parts; and Nature being the
Eternal servant and Worshipper of God, God has been also eternally worshipped
and adored; for surely God's Adoration and Worship has no beginning in time:
neither could God be worshipped and adored by himself so, as that one part of
him should adore and worship another; for God is an individual and simple
Being, not composed of parts; and therefore, as it is impossible for me to
believe, that there is no general Worship and Adoration of God, so it is
impossible also to believe, that God has not been adored and worshipped from
all Eternity, and that Nature is not Eternal; for although God is the Cause of
Nature, and Nature the Effect of God, yet she may be Eternal however, there
being nothing impossible to be effected by God; but he, as an Eternal Cause, is
able to produce an Eternal Effect, for although it is against the rules of
Logic, yet it is not above the power of God.

12. Of a Particular Worship of God, given him by those that are his chosen and
elect People.
NAtural Philosophy is the chief of all sorts of knowledges; for she is a
Guide, not only to other Sciences, and all sorts of Arts, but even to divine
knowledge it self; for she teaches that there is a Being above Nature, which is
God, the Author and Master of Nature, whom all Creatures know and adore. But to
adore God, after a particular manner, according to his special Will and
Command, requires his Particular Grace, and Divine Instructions, in a
supernatural manner or way, which none but the chosen Creatures of God do know,
at least believe, nor none but the sacred Church ought to explain and
interpret: And the proof, that all men are not of the number of those elect and
chosen people of God, is, that there can be but one True Religion, and that yet
there are so many several and different opinions in that Religion; wherefore
the Truth can only be found in some, which are those that serve God truly,
according to his special Will and Command, both in believing and acting that
which he has been pleased to reveal and command in his holy Word: And I pray
God, of his infinite mercy, to give me Grace, that I may be one of them, which
I doubt not but I shall, as long as I follow the Instruction of our blessed
Church, in which I have been educated. It Is true, many persons are much
troubled concerning Free Will and Predestination, complaining, that the
Christian Church is so divided about this Article, as they will never agree in
one united belief concerning that point; which is the cause of the trouble of
so many Consciences, nay, in some even to despair. But I do verily believe,
that if man do but love God from his soul, and with all his power, and pray for
his saving Graces, and offend not any Creature when offenses can or may be
avoided, and follow the only Instructions of the sacred Church, not
endeavoring to interpret the Word of God after his own fancy and vain
imagination, but praying zealously, believing undoubtedly, and living
virtuously and piously, he can hardly fall into despair, unless he be disposed
and inclined toward it through the irregularities of Nature, so as he cannot
avoid it. But I most humbly thank the Omnipotent God, that my Conscience is in
peace and tranquillity, beseeching him of his mercy to give to all men the like.

13. Of the Knowledge of Man.
SOme Philosophical Writers discourse much concerning the knowledge of Man, and
the ignorance of all other Creatures; but I have sufficiently expressed my
opinion hereof, not only in this, but in my other Philosophical Works, to wit,
that I believe other Creatures have as much knowledge as Man, and Man as much in
his kind as any other particular Creature in its kind; But their knowledges
being different, by reason of their different natures and figures, it causes an
ignorance of each others knowledge; nay, the knowledge of other Creatures many
times gives information to Man: As for example; the Egyptians are informed how
high the River Nilus will rise by the Crocodil's building her nest higher or
lower, which shows, that those Creatures foresee or foreknow more then Man
can do: also many Birds foreknow the rising of a Tempest, and shelter
themselves before it comes: the like examples might be given of several other
sorts of Animals, whose knowledge proceeds either from some sensitive
perceptions, or from rational observations, or from both; and if there be such
a difference in the rational and sensitive knowledge of one kind of Creatures,
to wit, Animals, much more in all other kinds, as Vegetables, Minerals,
Elements, and so in all Natures Works: Wherefore he that will say, there is no
knowledge but in Man, at least in Animal kind; does, in my opinion, say more
then ever he will be able to prove; nay, the contrary is so evident, as it is
without all dispute: But Man, out of self-love, and conceited pride, because he
thinks himself the chief of all Creatures, and that all the World is made for
his sake; does also imagine that all other Creatures are ignorant, dull,
stupid, senseless and irrational, and he only wise, knowing and understanding.
And upon this ground some believe, that Man is bound and decreed to pray to God
for all other Creatures, as being not capable to pray for themselves; like as a
Minister is bound to pray for his Flock. But really, if the Pastor should only
pray, and his Sheep not, but they did continue in their sins, I doubt his
Prayers would be of little effect, and therefore it is well if their Prayers
and Petitions be joined together. The like may be said of all other Creatures:
for the single knowledge and devotion of Mankind cannot benefit other
Creatures, if they be ignorant, and not capable to know, admire, adore and
worship God themselves. And thus no man, with all the force of Logic, will
ever be able to prove, that he is either the chief above all other Creatures,
or that he only knows and worships God, and no natural Creature else: for it
is without dispute, that other Creatures, in their kinds, are as knowing and
wise, as Man is in his kind.

14. A Natural Philosopher cannot be an Atheist.
IWonder how some of our learned Writers can imagine, that those who study
Reason and Philosophy should make them their Vouchees of Licentious practices,
and their secret scorn of Religion, and should account it a piece of wit and
gallantry to be an Atheist, and of atheism to be a Philosopher; considering
that Reason and Philosophy is the only way that brings and leads us to the
natural knowledge of God: for it would be as much absurdity to say, Reason and
Philosophy induce Atheism, as to say, Reason is not Reason; for Reason is the
most knowing and wisest part of Nature, and the chief knowledge of Nature is to
know there is a God; wherefore those that do argue in such a manner, argue
without reason, and by calling others weak heads and fools, prove themselves
Irrational. But I perceive their supposition is built upon a false ground; for
they are of opinion, That the Exploding of Immaterial substances, and the
unbounded prerogative of Matter must needs infer Atheism: which whether it do
not show a weaker head then those have that believe no Immaterial substances in
Nature, Rational men may judge: For by this it is evident, that they make
Immaterial substances to be Gods, by reason they conclude, that he who believes
no Immaterial substance in Nature is an Atheist: And thus by proving others
Atheists, they commit Blasphemy themselves; for he that makes a God of a
Creature, sins as much, if not more, then he who believes no God at all. And as
for the unbounded prerogative of Matter, I see no reason, why men should
exclaim against it; for why should Immaterial substances have more prerogative
then Material? Truly, I may upon the same ground conclude the prerogative of
Matter, as well as they do the prerogative of Spirits; for both are but
Creatures, and in that case, one has no more prerogative then the other, for
God could make a Material Being to move it self as well as a Material Nothing.
Nevertheless, although Matter is self-moving, yet it has not a Godlike
omnipotent power, nor any divine attributes; but an Infinite Natural power,
that is, a power to produce infinite effects in her own self, by infinite
changes of Motions: Neither does it argue that Nature is above God, or at least
God-like; for I do not say, that Nature has her self-moving power of her self,
or by chance, but that it comes from God the Author of Nature; which proves
that God must needs be above Nature, although Nature is Infinite and Eternal;
for these proprieties do not derogate any thing from the Attributes of God, by
reason Nature is naturally Infinite, which is Infinite in quantity and parts;
but God is a Spiritual, Supernatural and Incomprehensible Infinite; and as for
the Eternity of Nature, it is more probable to Regular Reason, then that Nature
should have any beginning; for all beginning supposes time, but in God is no
time, and therefore neither beginning nor ending, neither in himself, nor in
his actions; for if God be from all Eternity, his actions are so too, the chief
of which is the production or creation of Nature. Thus natural reason may
conceive that Nature is the Eternal servant of God; but how it was produced
from all Eternity, no particular or finite creature is able to imagine; by
reason that not only God, but also Nature is Infinite, and a finite Creature
can have no Idea or conception of Infinite.

15. Of the Rational Soul of Man.
OF all the opinions concerning the Natural Soul of Man, I like that best which
affirms the Soul to be a self-moving substance; but yet I will add a Material
self-moving substance; for the Soul of Man is part of the Soul of Nature, and
the Soul of Nature is Material; I mean only the Natural, not the Divine Soul
of Man, which I leave to the Church. And this natural Soul, otherwise called
Reason, is nothing else but corporeal natural self-motion, or a particle of the
purest, most subtle and active part of Matter, which I call animate; which
animate Matter is the Life and Soul of Nature, and consequently of Man, and all
other Creatures: For we cannot in Reason conceive that Man should be the only
Creature that partakes of this soul of Nature, and that all the rest of Natures
parts, or most of them, should be soul-less, or (which is all one) irrational,
although they are commonly called, nay believed to be such. Truly, if all other
Creatures cannot be denied to be Material, they can neither be accounted
Irrational, Insensible, or Inanimate, by reason there is no part, nay, not the
smallest particle in Nature, our reason is able to conceive, which is not
composed of Animate Matter, as well as of Inanimate; of Life and Soul, as well
as of Body; and therefore no particular Creature can claim a prerogative in
this case before an other; for there is a through mixture of Animate and
Inanimate Matter in Nature, and all her Parts. But some may object, That if
there be sense and reason in every part of Nature, it must be in all parts
alike, and then a stone, or any other the like Creature, may have reason, or a
rational soul, as well as Man. To which, I answer: I do not deny that a Stone
has Reason, or does partake of the Rational Soul of Nature as well as Man does,
because it is part of the same Matter Man consists of; but yet it has not
animal or humane sense and reason, because it is not of animal kind; but being
a Mineral, it has Mineral sense and reason: for it is to be observed, that as
Animate self-moving Matter moves not one and the same way in all Creatures, so
there can neither be the same way of knowledge and understanding, which is sense
and reason, in all Creatures alike; but Nature being various, not only in her
parts, but in her actions, it causes a variety also amongst her Creatures; and
hence come so many kinds, sorts and particulars of Natural Creatures, quite
different from each other; though not in the General and Universal principle of
Nature, which is self-moving Matter, (for in this they agree all) yet in their
particular interior natures, figures and proprieties. Thus although there be
Sense and Reason, which is not only Motion, but a regular and well-ordered
self-motion, apparent in the wonderful and various Productions, Generations,
Transformations, Dissolutions, Compositions, and other actions of Nature, in
all Natures parts and particles; yet by reason of the variety of this
self-motion, whose ways and modes do differ according to the nature of each
particular figure, no figure or creature can have the same sense and reason,
that is, the same natural motions which another has; and therefore no Stone can
be said to feel pain as an Animal does, or be called blind because it has no
Eyes; for this kind of sense, as Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, Touching and
Smelling, is proper only to an Animal figure, and not to a Stone, which is a
Mineral; so that those which frame an argument from the want of animal sense
and sensitive organs, to the defect of all sense and motion; as for example,
that a Stone would withdraw it self from the Carts going over it, or a piece of
Iron from the hammering of a Smith, conclude, in my opinion, very much against
the artificial rules of Logic; and although I understand none of them, yet I
question not but I shall make a better argument by the Rules of Natural Logic:
But that this difference of sense and reason is not altogether impossible, or
at least improbable to our understanding, I will explain by another instance.
We see so many several Creatures in their several kinds, to wit, Elements,
Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals, which are the chief distinctions of those
kinds of Creatures as are subject to our sensitive perceptions; and in all
those, what variety and difference do we find both in their exterior figures,
and in their interior natures? truly such, as most of both ancient and modern
Philosophers have imagined some of them, viz. the Elements, to be simple
bodies, and the principles of all other Creatures; nay, those several Creatures
do not only differ so much from each other in their general kinds, but there
is no less difference perceived in their particular kinds: for example,
concerning Elements, what difference is there not between heavy and contracting
Earth, and between light and dilating Air? between flowing Water, and ascending
Fire? so as it would be an endless labor to consider all the different natures
of those Creatures only that are subject to our exterior senses. And yet who
dares deny that they all consist of Matter, or are material? Thus we see that
Infinite Matter is not like a piece of Clay, out of which no figure can be
made, but it must be clayie, for natural Matter has no such narrow bounds, and
is not forced to make all Creatures alike; for though Gold and Stone are both
material, nay, of the same kind, to wit, Minerals, yet one is not the other,
nor like the other. And if this be true of Matter, why may not the same be said
of self-motion, which is Sense and Reason? Wherefore, in all probability of
truth, there is sense and reason in a Mineral, as well as in an Animal, and in
a Vegetable as well as in an Element, although there is as great a difference
between the manner and way of their sensitive and rational perceptions, as
there is between both their exterior and interior figures and Natures. Nay,
there is a difference of sense and reason even in the parts of one and the same
Creature, and consequently of sensitive and rational perception or knowledge;
for, as I have declared heretofore more at large, every sensitive organ in man
has its peculiar way of knowledge and perception; for the Eye does not know
what the Ear knows, nor the Ear what the Nose knows, etc. All which is the
cause of a general ignorance between Natures parts: And the chief cause of all
this difference is the variety of selfmotion; for if natural motion were in all
Creatures alike, all sense and reason would be alike too; and if there were no
degrees of matter, all the figures of Creatures would be alike, either all
hard, or all soft; all dense, or all rare and fluid, etc. and yet neither this
variety of motion causes an absence of motion, or of sense and reason, nor the
variety of figures an absence of Matter, but only a difference between the
parts of Nature, all being nevertheless self-moving, sensible and rational, as
well as Material; for wheresoever is natural Matter, there is also self-motion,
and consequently sense and reason. By this we may see, how easy it is to
conceive the actions of Nature, and to resolve all the Phenomenon or
appearances upon this ground; and I cannot admire enough, how so many eminent
and learned Philosophers have been, and are still puzzled about the Natural
rational soul of man. Some will have her to be a Light; some an Entilechy, or
they know not what; some the Quintessence of the four Elements; some composed
of Earth and Water, some of Fire, some of Blood, some an hot Complexion, some
an heated and dispersed Air, some an Immaterial Spirit, and some Nothing. All
which opinions seem the more strange, the wiser their Authors are accounted;
for if they did proceed from some ignorant persons, it would not be so much
taken notice of; but coming from great Philosophers, who pretend to have
searched the depth of Nature, and disclosed her secrets, it causes great
admiration in any body, and may well serve for an argument to confirm the
variety and difference of sensitive and rational knowledge, and the ignorance
amongst natural parts; for if Creatures of the same particular kind, as men,
have so many different Perceptions, what may there be in all Nature? But
Infinite Nature is wise, and will not have that one part of hers should know
more then its particular nature requires, and she taking delight in variety,
orders her works accordingly.

16. Whether Animal Parts separated from their Bodies have Life.
SOme do question, Whether those Parts that are separated from animal Bodies do
retain life? But my opinion is, That all parts of Nature have life, each
according to the propriety of its figure, and that all parts of an animal have
animal life and motion as long as they continue parts of the animal body; but
if they be separated from the body to which they did belong, although they
retain life, yet they do not retain animal life, because their natural motions
are changed to some other figure when they are separated, so that the parts
which before had animal life and motion, have then such a kind of life and
motion as is proper and natural to the figure into which they are changed or
transformed. But some separated parts of some Creatures retain longer the life
of that composed figure whose parts they were, then others, according as the
dissolving and transforming motions are slower or quicker; as for example, in
some Vegetables, some Trees, if their boughs, arms, or branches, be lopt or
cut from a lively stock, those boughs or branches will many times remain
lively, according to the nature of the figure whose parts they were, for a good
while; nay, if they be set or planted, they will grow into the same figure as
the stock was; or if joined into another stock, they will be partly of the
nature of the stock which they did proceed from, and partly of the nature of
the stock into which they were ingrafted; But yet I do not perceive that animal
kind can do the like; for I make a question, whether a man's arm, if cut off
from his body, and set to another man's body, would grow, and keep its natural
form and figure, so as to continue an arm, and to receive nourishment from that
body it is joined to? nevertheless, I will not eagerly contradict it,
considering that Nature is very different and various both in her productions
and nourishments, nay, so various, as will puzzle, if not confound, the wisest
part or Creature of Nature to find them out.

17. Of the Spleen.
COncerning the spleen of an animal Creature, whether it may artificially be
cut out, and the body closed up again, without destruction of the animal
figure, as some do probably conceive, I am not so good an artist as to give a
solid judgment thereof; only this I can say, that not all the parts of an
animal body are equally necessary for life; but some are convenient more then
necessary: Neither do I perfectly know whether the Spleen be one of the prime
or principal vital parts; for although all parts have life, yet some in some
particular Creatures are so necessary for the preservation of life, as they
cannot be spared; whereas others have no such relation to the life of an
Animal, but it may subsist without them: And thus although some parts may be
separated for some time, yet they cannot continue so, without a total
dissolution of the animal figure; but both the severed, and the remaining parts
change from their nature, if not at all times suddenly, yet at last: And as for
the spleen, although the separation should not be so great a loss as the pain
in loosing it, yet some persons will rather lose their lives with ease, then
endure great pain to save them: but the question is, if a man was willing to
endure the pain, whether he would not die of the wound; for no creature can
assure another of its life in such a case, neither can any one be assured of
his own; for there is no assurance in the case of life and death, I mean such a
life as is proper to such a Creature, for properly there is no such thing in
Nature as death, but what is named death, is only a change from the
dissolution of some certain figure to the composition of another.

18. Of Anatomy.
I Am not of the opinion of those, who believe that Anatomifts could gain much
more by dissecting of living then of dead bodies, by reason the corporeal
figurative motions that maintain life, and nourish every part of the body, are
not at all perceptible by the exterior Optic sense, unless it be more
perceiving and subtiler then the humane optic sense is; for although the
exterior grosser parts be visible, yet the interior corporeal motions in those
parts are not visible; wherefore the dissecting of a living Creature can no
more inform one of the natural motions of that figure, then one can by the
observing of an egg, be it never so exact, perceive the corporeal figurative
motions that produce or make the figure of a Chicken: Neither can artificial
optic glasses give any advantage to it; for Nature is so subtle, obscure and
various, as not any sort or kind of Creatures can trace or know her ways: I
will not say, but her parts may in their several Perceptions know as much as
can be known; for some parts may know and be known of others, and so the
infinite body may have an infinite information and knowledge; but no particular
Creature, no not one kind or sort of Creatures can have a perfect knowledge of
another particular Creature; but it must content it self with an imperfect
knowledge, which is a knowledge in Parts. Wherefore it is as improbable for
humane sight to perceive the interior corporeal figurative motions of the parts
of an animal body by Anatomy, as it is for a Micrographer to know the interior
parts of a figure by viewing the exterior; for there are numerous corporeal
figures or figurative motions of one particular Creature, which lie one within
another, and most commonly the interior are quite different from the exterior;
as for example, the outward parts of a man's body are not like his inward parts;
for his brain, stomach, liver, lungs, spleen, midriff, heart, guts, etc. are of
different figures, and one part is not another part, no not of the like nature
or constitution; neither has a man a face on the inside of his head, and so of
the rest of his parts; for every part has besides its exterior, interior figure
and motions, which are not perceptible by our exterior senses. Nevertheless
there is some remedy to supply this sensitive ignorance by the perception of
Reason; for where sense fails, reason many times informs, it being a more clear
and subtle perception then sense is; I say many times, because reason can
neither be always assured of knowing the Truth; for particular Reason may
sometimes be deceived as well as sense; but when the Perceptions both of sense
and reason agree, then the information is more true, I mean regular sense and
reason, not irregular, which causes mistakes, and gives false informations;
also the Presentation of the objects ought to be true, and without delusion.

19. Of preserving the Figures of Animal Creatures.
I Am absolutely of the opinion of those, who believe Natural Philosophy may
promote not only Anatomy, but all other Arts, for else they would not be worth
the taking of pains to learn them by reason the rational perceptions are beyond
the sensitive. I am also of opinion, that there may be an Art to preserve the
exterior shapes of some animal bodies, but not their interior forms; for
although their exterior shapes, even after the dissolution of the animal
figure, may be some what like the shapes and figures of their bodies when they
had the life of an animal, yet they being transformed into some other Creatures
by the alteration of their interior figurative motions, can no ways keep the
same interior figure which they had when they were living animals. Concerning
the preserving of blood by the means of spirit of Wine, as some do probably
believe, my opinion is, That spirit of Wine, otherwise called Hot-water, if
taken in great quantity, will rather dry up or putrify the blood, then
preserve it; nay, not only the blood, but also the more solid parts of an
animal body, insomuch as it will cause a total dissolution of the animal
figure; and some animal Creatures that have blood, will be dissolved in Wine,
which yet is not so strong as extracts or spirit of Wine: But blood mingled
with spirit of Wine, may perhaps retain somewhat of the color of blood,
although the nature and propriety of blood be quite altered. As for the
instance of preserving dead fish or flesh from putrefying and stinking,
alleged by some; we see that ordinary salt will do the same with less cost;
and as spirits of Wine, or hot Waters, may like salt preserve some dead bodies
from corruption, so may they, by making too much or frequent use of them, also
cause living bodies to corrupt and dissolve sooner then otherwise they would
do. But Chemists are so much for extracts, that by their frequent use and
application, they often extract humane life out of humane bodies, instead of
preserving it.

20. Of Chemistry and Chemical Principles.
IT is sufficiently known, and I have partly made mention above, what a stir
Natural Philosophers do keep concerning the principles of Nature and natural
Beings, and how different their opinions are. The Schools following Aristotle
are for the Four Elements, which they believe to be simple bodies, as having no
mixture in themselves, and therefore fittest to be principles of all other mixed
or compounded bodies; But my Reason cannot apprehend what they mean by simple
bodies; I confess that some bodies are more mixed then others; that is, they
consist of more differing parts, such as the learned call Heterogeneous; as for
example, Animals consist of flesh, blood, skin, bones, muscles, nerves,
tendons, gristles, and the like, all which are parts of different figures:
Other bodies again are composed of such parts as are of the same nature, which
the learned call Homogeneous; as for example, Water, Air, etc. whose parts have
no different figures, but are all alike each other, at least to our perception;
besides, there are bodies which are more rare and subtle than others,
according to the degrees of their natural figurative motions, and the composion
of their parts; Nevertheless I see no reason, why those Homogeneous bodies
should be called simple, and all others mixed, or composed of them; much less
why they should be principles of all other natural bodies; for they derive
their origin from matter, as well as the rest; so that it is only the
different composure of their parts, that makes a difference between them,
proceeding from the variety of self-motion, which is the cause of all different
figures in nature; for as several workmen join in the building of one house,
and several men in the framing of one Government; so do several parts in the
making or forming of one composed figure.

But they will say, it is not the likeness of parts that makes the Four Elements
to be principles of natural things; but because there are no natural bodies,
besides the mentioned Elements that are not composed of them, as is evident in
the dissolution of their parts; for example, A piece of Green wood that is
burning in a Chimney, we may readily discern the Four Elements in its
dissolution, out of which it is composed; for the fire discovers it self in the
flame, the smoke turns into air, the water hisses and boils at the ends of the
wood, and the ashes are nothing but the Element of earth: But if they have no
better arguments to prove their principles, they shall not readily gain my
consent; for I see no reason why wood should be composed of the Four Elements,
because it burns, smoaks, hisses, and turns into ashes; Fire is none of its
natural ingredients, but a different figure, which being mixed with the parts of
the wood, is an occasion that the Wood turns into ashes; neither is Water a
principle of Wood; for Water is as much a figure by it self; as Wood or Fire
is, which being got into the parts of the wood, and mixed with the same, is
expelled by the fire, as by its opposite; but if it be a piece of dry, and not
of green wood, where is then the water that boils out? Surely dry wood has no
less principles, then green wood; and as for smoke, it proves no more, that it
is the Element of Air in Wood, then that Wood is the Element of Fire; for Wood,
as experience witnesses, may last in water, where it is kept from the air; and
smoke is rather an effect of moisture, occasioned into such a figure by the
commixture of fire.

Others, as Helmont, who derives his opinion from Thales and others of the
ancient Philosophers, are only for the Element of Water; affirming, that that
is the sole principle, out of which all natural things consist; for say they,
the Chaos where of all things were made, was nothing else but water, which
first settled into slime, and then condensed into solid earth; nay, some
endeavor to prove by Chemical Experiments, that they have disposed water
according to their Chemical way, so that it visibly turned into earth, which
earth produced animals, vegetables and minerals. But put the case it were so,
yet this does not prove water to be the only principle of all natural beings;
for first, we cannot think, that animals, vegetables and minerals are the only
kinds of creatures in Nature; and that there are no more but them: for nature
being infinitely various, may have infinite Worlds, and so infinite sorts of
Creatures: Next I say, that the change of water into earth, and of this again
into vegetables, minerals and animals, proves no more but what our senses
perceive every day, to wit, that there is a perpetual change and alteration in
all natural parts, caused by corporeal self-motion, by which rare bodies change
into dense, and dense into rare, water into slime, slime into earth, earth into
animals, vegetables and minerals, and those again into earth, earth into slime,
slime into water, and so forth: But I wonder why rational men should only rest
upon water, and go no further, since daily experience informs them, that water
is changed into vapor, and vapor into air; for if water be resolveable into
other bodies, it cannot be a prime cause, and consequently no principle of
Nature; wherefore they had better, in my opinion, to make Air the principle of
all things. It Is true, Water may produce many creatures, as I said before, by a
composition with other, or change of its own parts; but yet I dare say, it does
kill or destroy as many, nay more, then it produces; witness vegetables and
others, which Husbandmen and Planters have best experience of; and though some
animals live in water as their proper Element; yet to most it is destructive, I
mean, as for their particular natures; nay if men do but dwell in a moist
place, or near marrish grounds, or have too much watery humors in their bodies,
they will sooner die then otherwise. But put the case, water were a principle of
Natural things, yet it must have motion, or else it would never be able to
change into so many figures; and this motion must either be naturally inherent
in the substance of water, or it must proceed from some exterior agent; if from
an exterior agent, then this agent must either be material, or immaterial; also
if all motion in Nature did proceed from pressure of parts upon parts; then
those parts which press others, must either have motion inherent in themselves;
or if they be moved by others, we must at last proceed to something which has
motion in it self, and is not moved by another, but moves all things; and if we
allow this, Why may not we allow self-motion in all things? for if one part of
Matter has selfmotion, it cannot be denied of all the rest: but if immaterial,
it must either be God himself, or created supernatural spirits: As for God, he
being immovable, and beyond all natural motion, cannot actually move Matter;
neither is it Religious, to say, God is the Soul of Nature; for God is no part
of Nature, as the soul is of the body; And immaterial spirits, being
supernatural, cannot have natural attributes or actions, such as is corporeal,
natural motion. Wherefore it remains, that Matter must be naturally
self-moving, and consequently all parts of Nature, all being material; so that
not only Water, Earth, Fire, and Air, but all other natural bodies whatsoever,
have natural self-motion inherent in themselves; by which it is evident, that
there can be no other principle in Nature, but this self-moving Matter, and
that all the rest are but effects of this only cause.

Some are of opinion, That the three Catholic or Universal principles of
Nature, are, Matter, Motion and Rest; and others with Epicure, that they are
Magnitude, Figure and Weight; but although Matter and Motion, or rather
self-moving Matter, be the only principle of Nature; yet they are mistaken in
dividing them from each other, and adding rest to the number of them, for
Matter and Motion are but one thing, and cannot make different principles; and
so is figure, weight and magnitude. It Is true, Matter might subsist without
Motion, but not Motion without Matter; for there is no such thing as an
immaterial Motion, but Motion must necessarily be of something; also if there
be a figure, it must of necessity be a figure of something; the same may be
said of magnitude and weight, there being no such thing as a mean between
something and nothing, that is, between body, and no body in Nature: If Motion
were immaterial, it is beyond all humane capacity to conceive, how it could be
abstracted from something; much more, how it could be a principle to produce a
natural being, it might easier be believed, that Matter was perishable or
reduceable into nothing, then that motion, figure and magnitude should be
separable from Matter, or be immaterial, as the opinion is of those who
introduce a Vacuum in Nature; and as for Rest, I wonder how that can be a
principle of any production, change or alteration, which it self acts nothing.

Others are for Atoms and insensible particles, consisting of different
figures and particular natures; not otherwise united but by a bare apposition,
as they call it; by which although perhaps the composed body obtains new
qualities, yet still the ingredients retain each their own Nature, and in the
destruction of the composed body, those that are of one sort associate, and
return into Fire, Water, Earth, etc. as they were before: But whatever their
opinion of Atoms be, first I have heretofore declared that there can be no such
things as single bodies or Atoms in Nature: Next, if there were any such
particles in composed bodies, yet they are but parts or effects of Matter, and
not principles of Nature, or Natural beings.

Lastly, Chemists do constitute the principles of all natural bodies, Salt,
Sulphur and Mercury. But although I am not averse from believing that those
ingredients may be mixed with other parts of Nature in the composition of
natural figures, and that (especially) Salt may be extracted out of many
Creatures; yet that it should be the constitutive principle of all other
natural parts or figures, seems no ways conformable to truth; for salt is no
more then other effects of Nature; and although some extractions may convert
some substances into salt figures, and some into others, (for Art by the leave
of her Mistress, Nature, does oftentimes occasion an alteration of natural
Creatures into artificial) yet these extractions cannot inform us how those
natural creatures are made, and of what ingredients they consist; for they do
not prove, that the same Creatures are composed of Salt, or mixed with Salt; but
cause only those substances which they extract, to change into saline figures,
like as others do convert them into Chemical spirits; all which are but
Hermaphroditical effects, that is, between natural and artificial; Just as a
Mule partakes both of the nature or figure of a Horse, and an Ass:
Nevertheless, as Mules are very beneficial for use, so many Chemical effects,
provided they be discreetly and seasonably used; for Minerals are no less
beneficial to the life and health of Man, then Vegetables, and Vegetables may
be as hurtful and destructive as Minerals by an unseasonable and unskilful
application; besides, there may be Chemical extracts made of Vegetables as well
as of Minerals, but these are bestused in the height or extremity of some
diseases, like as cordial waters in fainting fits; and some Chemical spirits
are as far beyond cordial waters, as fire is beyond smoke; which cannot be but
dangerous, and unfit to be used; except it be to encounter opposite extremes.
By extremes, I mean not the extremes of Nature, but the height of a distemper,
when it is grown so far, that it is upon point of destroying or dissolving a
particular animal figure; for Nature, being infinite, has no extremes; neither
in her substance, nor actions; for she has nothing that is opposite to Matter,
neither is there any such thing as most or least in Nature, she being infinite,
and all her actions are balanced by their opposites; as for example, there is
no dilation but has opposite to it contraction; no condensation but has its
opposite, viz. rarefaction; no composition but has its opposite, division; no
gravity without levity; no grossness without purity; no animate without
inanimate; no regularity without irregularity: All which produces a peaceable,
orderly, and wise Government in Natures Kingdom, which wise Artists ought to
imitate.

But you may say, How is it possible, That there can be a peaceable and orderly
Government, where there are so many contrary or opposite actions; for
contraries make war, not peace?

I answer: Although the actions of Nature are opposite, yet Nature, in her own
substance is at peace, because she is one and the same; that is, one material
body, and has nothing without her self to oppose and cross her; neither is she
subject to a general change, so as to alter her own substance from being
Matter, for she is Infinite and Eternal: but because she is selfmoving, and
full of variety of figures, this variety cannot be produced without variety of
actions, no not without opposition; which opposition is the cause, that there
can be no extremes in particulars; for it balances each action, so that it
cannot run into infinite, which otherwise would breed a horrid confusion in
Nature.

And thus much of Principles: Concerning the particulars of Chemical
preparations, I being not versed in that Art, am not able to give my judgment
thereof, neither do I understand their terms and expressions: as first, what
Chemists mean by Fixation; for there is nothing in Nature that can properly be
called fixed, because Nature, and all her parts, are perpetually selfmoving;
only Nature cannot be altered from being material, nor from being dependant
upon God.

Neither do I apprehend what some mean by the unlocking of bodies, unless they
understand by it, a separation of natural parts proper for artificial uses;
neither can natural effects be separated by others, any otherwise but
occasionally; so that some parts may be an occasion of such or such alterations
in other parts. But I must say this, that according to humane sense and reason,
there is no part or particle in Nature which is not alterable, by reason Nature
is in a perpetual motion, and full of variety. It Is true, some bodies, as Gold
and Mercury, seem to be unalterable from their particular natures; but this
only appears thus to our senses, because their parts are more fixed and
retentive then others, and no Art has been found out as yet which could alter
there proper and particular figures, that is, untie and dissolve, or rather
cause an alteration of their corporeal retentive motions, that bind them into
so fixed and consistent a body; but all that is mixed with them, has hitherto
been found too weak for the alteration of there inherent motions; Nevertheless,
this does not prove, that they are not altogether unalterable; for though Art
cannot do it, yet Nature may; but it is an argument that they are not composed
of straying Atoms, or most minute particles; for not to mention what I have
often repeated before, that there cannot be such most minute bodies in Nature,
by reason Nature knows of no extremes, it is altogether improbable, nay,
impossible, that wandering corpuscles should be the cause of such fixed effects,
and by their association constitute such indissoluble masses or clusters, as
some do conceive, which they call primary concretions; for there is no such
thing as a primary concretion or composition in Nature; only there are several
sorts and degrees of motions, and several sorts of compositions; and as no
particular creature can know the strength of motion, so neither can it know the
degrees of strength in particular natural bodies. Wherefore although
composition and division of parts are general motions, and some figures may be
more composed then others, that is, consist of more or fewer parts then others;
yet there is none that has not a composition of parts: The truth is, there is
nothing prime or principal amongst the effects of Nature, but only the cause
from which they are produced, which is self-moving Matter, which is above
particular effects: yet Nature may have more ways then our particular reason
can apprehend; and therefore it is not to be admired that Camphor, and the like
bodies do yield differing effects, according to the different occasions that
make them move thus or thus; for though changes and alterations of particulars
may be occasioned by others; yet they move by their own corporeal figurative
motions; as it is evident by the power of fire, which makes other bodies move
or change their parts and figures, not by its own transforming motion, but
only by giving an occasion to the inherent figurative motions of those bodies,
which by imitating the motions of fire, change into such or such figures by
their own proper, innate and inherent motions; otherwise if the alteration of
combustible bodies proceeded from fire, they would all have the like motions,
which is contradicted by experience. I will not deny, but there is as much
variety in occasioning, as there is in acting; for the imitation is according
to the object, but the object is not the immediate agent, but only an
occasional efficient; so that, according to my opinion, there is no such
difference, as the learned make between Patient and Agent, when they call the
exterior occasional cause; as for example, Fire, the Agent; and the combustible
body the Patient; for they conceive that a body thrown into fire, acts nothing
at all, but only in a passive way suffers the fire to act upon it, according
to the degree of its own, to wit, the fires strength, which sense and reason
perceives otherwise; for to pass by what I mentioned before, that those bodies
on which they suppose fire does work, change according not to the fires, but
their own inherent figurative motions; it is most certain, that if Nature and
all her parts be self-moving, which regular reason cannot deny; and if
Self-motion be corporeal, then every part of Nature must of necessity move by
its own motion; for no body can impart motion to another body, without
imparting substance also; and though particular motions in particular bodies
may change infinite ways, yet they cannot quit those bodies, so as to leave
them void and destitute of all motion, because Matter and Motion are but one
thing; and therefore though fire be commixed with the parts of the fuel, yet
the fuel alters by its own motion, and the fire does but act occasionally; and
so do Chemical spirits or extracts, which may cause a separation, and alter
some bodies as readily as fire does; for they are a certain kind of fire, to
wit, such as is called a dead or liquid fire; for a flaming fire, although it
be fluid, yet it is not liquid: The same may be said of the Antimonial-Cup. For
it is not probable to sense and reason, there should be certain invisible
little bodies, that pass out of the Cup into the liquor, and cause such
effects, no more then there are magnetical effluviums issuing out of the
Lodestone toward Iron, there being many causes, which neither impart nor lose
any thing in the production of their effects; but the liquor that is within the
Antimonial Cup, does imitate the corporeal figurative motions of the Cup, and
so produces the same effects, as are proper to Antimony, upon other bodies or
parts of Nature. In the same manner does the Boodstone stop bleeding; not by
imparting invisible Atoms or Rays to the affected parts, (or else if it were
long worn about ones body, it would be wasted, at least alter its proper figure
and virtue) but by being imitated by the corporeal figurative motions of the
distempered parts. Thus many other examples could be alleged to prove, that
natural motions work such or such effects within their own parts, without
receiving any from without, that is, by imitation, and not by reception of
Motion. By which it is evident, that properly there is no passive, or suffering
body in Nature, except it be the inanimate part of Matter, which in its own
nature is moveless or destitute of motion, and is carried along with, and by
the animate parts of Matter: However, although inanimate Matter has no motion
inherent in it self, as it is inanimate; yet it is so closely mixed with the
animate parts, that it cannot be considered without motion, much less be
separable from it; and therefore although it acts not of it self, yet it acts
by virtue of the animate parts of Matter.

Next: I cannot conceive what some Chemists mean, when they call those
Principles or Elements, which, they say, composed bodies consist of, distinct
substances; for though they may be of different figures, yet they are not of
different substances; because there is but one only substance in Nature, which
is Matter, whose several actions cause all the variety in Nature. But if all
the parts of Natural bodies should be called Principles or Elements, then there
would be infinite Principles in Nature, which is impossible; because there can
be no more but one principle, which is, self-moving Matter; and although
several Creatures, by the help of fire, may be reduced or dissolved into
several different particles, yet those particles are not principles, much less
simple bodies, or else we might say, as well, that ashes are a principle of
Wood: Neither are they created anew, because they are of another form or figure
then when composed into one concrete body; for there is nothing that is
material, which is not pre-existent in Nature; no nor figure, motion, or the
like, all being material, although not always subject to our humane sensitive
perception; for the variation of the corporeal figurative motions blinds our
particular senses, that we cannot perceive them, they being too subtle to be
discerned either by Art or humane perception. The truth is, if we could see the
corporeal figurative motions of natural creatures, and the association and
division of all their parts, we should soon find out the causes which make them
to be such or such particular natural effects; but Nature is too wise to be so
easily known by her particulars.

Wherefore Chemists need not think they can create any thing anew; for they
cannot challenge to themselves a divine power, neither can there be any such
thing as a new Creation in Nature, no not of an Atome; Nor can they annihilate
any thing; they (...) sooner waste their Estates, then reduce the least
particle of Matter into nothing; and though they make waste of some parts of
natural bodies, yet those are but changes into other figures, there being a
perpetual inspiration and expiration, that is, composition and division of
parts; but composition is not a new Creation, nor division an annihilation; and
though they produce new forms, as they imagine; yet those forms, though they be
new to them, are not new in Nature; for all that is material, has been existent
in Nature from all Eternity; so that the combination of parts cannot produce
anything that is not already in Nature. Indeed the generation of new figures,
seems to me much like the generation of new motions; which would put God to a
perpetual Creation, and argue that he was not able to make Nature or Matter
perfect at first, or that he wanted employment. But, say they, it is not Matter
that is created anew, but only figures or forms. I answer: If any one can show
me a figure without Matter, I shall be willing to believe it; but I am
confident Nature cannot do that, much less Art, which is but a particular
effect; for as Matter cannot be without Figure, so neither can Figure be
without Matter, no more then body without parts, or parts without body; and if
so, no figure or form can be created without Matter, there being no such thing
as a substanceless form. Chemists should but consider their own particular
persons; as whether they were generated anew, or had been in Nature before they
were got of their Parents; if they had not been pre-existent in Nature, they
would not be natural, but supernatural Creatures; because they would not
subsist of the same matter, as other Creatures do. Truly, Matter being
Infinite, how some new material creatures could be created without some parts
of this Infinite Matter, is not conceivable by humane sense and reason; for
infinite admits of no addition; but if there could be an addition, it would
presuppose an annihilation, so that at the same time when one part is
annihilating or perishing, another must succeed by a new creation, which is a
mere Paradox.

But that which puzles me most, is, how those substances, which they call Tria
Prima, and principles of natural things, can be generated anew; for if the
principles be generated anew, the effects must be so too; and since they,
according to their supposition, are Catholic or Universal principles, all
natural effects must have their origin from them, and be, like their
principles, created continually anew; which how it be possible, without the
destruction of Nature, is beyond my reason to conceive. Some endeavor to
prove, by their Artificial Experiments, that they have and can produce such
things out of natural bodies, which never were pre-existent in them; as for
example, Glass out of Vegetables, without any addition of foreign parts only,
by the help of fire. To which I answer: That, in my opinion, the same Glass was
as much pre-existent in the matter of those Vegetables, and the Fire, and in
the power of their corporeal figurative motions, as any other figure
whatsoever; otherwise it would never have been produced; nay, not only Glass,
but millions of other figures might be obtained from those parts, they being
subject to infinite changes; for the actions of self-moving Matter are so
infinitely various, that according to the mixture, or composition and division
of parts, they can produce what figures they please; not by a new Creation, but
only a change or alteration of their own parts; and though some parts act not
to the production of such or such figures; yet we cannot say, that those
figures are not in Nature, or in the power of corporeal, figurative selfmotion;
we might say, as well, that a man cannot go, when he sits; or has no motion,
when he sleeps; as believe, that it is not in the power of Nature to produce
such or such effects or actions, when they are not actually produced; for, as I
said before, although Nature be but one material substance, yet there are
infinite mixtures of infinite parts, produced by infinite self-motion, infinite
ways; in so much, that seldom any two Creatures, even those of one sort, do
exactly resemble each other.

But some may say, How is it possible, That figure, being all one with Matter,
can change; and matter remain still the same without any change or alteration?

I answer: As well as an animal body can put it self into various and different
postures, without any change of its interior animal figure; for though figure
cannot subsist without matter, nor matter without figure, generally considered;
yet particular parts of matter are not bound to certain particular figures:
Matter in its general nature remains always the same, and cannot be changed
from being Matter, but by the power of selfmotion it may change from being such
or such a particular figure: for example, Wood is as much matter as Stone; but
it is not of the same figure, nor has it the same interior innate motions which
Stone has, because it has not the like composition of parts, as other
creatures of other figures have; and though some figures be more constant or
lasting then others, yet this does not prove, that they are not subject to
changes as well as those that alter daily, nay, every moment; much less, that
they are without motion; for not all motions are dividing or dissolving; but
some are retentive, some composing, some attractive, some expulsive, some
contractive, some dilative, and infinite other sorts of motions, as it is
evident by the infinite variety which appears in the differing effects of
Nature: Nevertheless it is no consequence, that, because the effects are
different, they must also have different principles; For first, all effects of
Nature are material; which proves, they have but one principle, which is the
only infinite Matter: Next, they are all self-moving; which proves, that this
material principle has self-motion; for without self-motion there would be no
variety or change of figures, it being the nature of selfmotion to be
perpetually acting.

Thus Matter and Self-motion, being inseparably united in one infinite body,
which is self-moving material Nature, is the only cause of all the infinite
effects that are produced in Nature, and not the Aristoteleon Elements, or
Chemists Tria prima, which sense and reason perceives to be no more but
effects; or else if we should call all those Creatures principles, which by the
power of their own inherent motions, change into other figures, we shall be
forced to make infinite principles, and so confound principles with effects;
and after this manner, that which is now an effect, will become a principle;
and what is now a principle, will become an effect; which will lead our sense
and reason into a herrid confusion and labyrinth of ignorance.

Wherefore I will neither follow the Opinions of the Ancient, nor of our
Moderns in this point, but search the truth of Nature, by the light of regular
reason; for I perceive that most of our modern Writings are not filled with new
Inventions of their own, but like a lumber, stuffed with old Commodities,
botch'd and dressed up anew, contain nothing but what has been said in former
ages. Nor am I of the opinion of our Divine Philosophers, who mince Philosophy
and Divinity, Faith and Reason, together; and count it Irreligious, if not
Blasphemy, to assert any other principles of Nature, then what they (I will not
say, by head and shoulders) draw out of the Scripture, especially out of
Genesis, to evince the finiteness, and beginning of Nature; when as Moses does
only describe the Creation of this World, and not of Infinite Nature: But as
Pure natural Philosophers do not meddle with Divinity, or things Supernatural,
so Divines ought not to entrench upon Natural Philosophy.

Neither are Chemists the only natural Philosophers, because they are so much
tied to the Art of Fire, and regulate or measure all the effects of Nature
according to their Artificial Experiments; which do delude rather then inform
their sense and reason; and although they pretend to a vast and greater
knowledge then all the rest, yet they have not dived so deep into Nature yet, as
to perceive that she is full of sense and reason, which is life and knowledge;
and in parts, orders parts proper to parts, which causes all the various
motions, figures and changes in the infinite parts of Nature; Indeed, no
Creature, that has its reason regular, can almost believe, that such wise and
orderly actions should be done either by chance, or by straying Atoms, which
cannot so constantly change and exchange parts, and mix and join so properly,
and to such constant effects as are apparent in Nature. And as for Galenists,
if they believe that some parts of Nature connot leave or pass by other parts,
to join, meet, or encounter others, they are as much in an error as Chemists,
concerning the power of fire and furnace; for it is most frequently observed
thus amongst all sorts of Animals; and if amongst Animals, I know no reason but
all other kinds and sorts of Creatures may do the like; nay, both sense and
reason inform us they do, as appears by the several and proper actions of all
sorts of drugs, as also Minerals and Elements, and the like; so that none ought
to wonder how it is possible, that medicines that must pass through digestions
in the body, should, neglecting all other parts, show themselves friendly only
to the brain or kidneys, or the like parts; for if there be sense and reason in
Nature, all things must act wisely and orderly, and not confusedly; and though
Art, like an Emulating Ape, strives to imitate Nature, yet it is so far from
producing natural figures, that at best, it rather produces Monsters instead of
natural effects; for it is like the Painter, who drew a Rose instead of a Lion;
nevertheless Art is as active as any other natural Creature, and does never
want employment; for it is like all other parts, in a perpetual self-motion;
and although the interior actions of all other parts do not appear to our
senses, yet they may be perceived by regular reason; for what sense wants,
reason supplies, which oftener rectifies the straying and erring senses, then
these do reason, as being more pure, subtle and free from laboring on the
inanimate parts of Matter, then sense is, as I have often declared; which
proves, that reason is far beyond sense; and this appears also in Chemistry,
which yet is so much for sensitive experiments; for when the effects do not
readily follow, according to our intentions, reason is fain to consider and
enquire into the causes that hinder or obstruct the success of our designs. And
if reason be above sense, then Speculative Philosophy ought to be preferred
before the Experimental, because there can no reason be given for any thing
without it. I will not say, that all Arts have their first origin from Reason;
for what we name chance, does often present to the sensitive perception such
things which the rational does afterward take into consideration; but my
meaning is, that for the most part, Reason leads and directs the ways of Art;
and I am of opinion, that Contemplative Philosophy is the best Tutoress, and
gives the surest instructions to Art, and amongst the rest to the Art of
Chemistry, which no doubt is very profitable to man many several ways, and very
sovereign in many desperate diseases, if discreetly and moderately used; but if
Chemical medicines should be so commonly applied as others, they would sooner
kill, then cure; and if Paracelsus was as frequently practiced as Galen, it
would be as bad as the Plague: Wherefore Chemical Medicines are to be used as
the extreme Unction in desperate cases, and that with great moderation and
discretion.

21. Of the Universal Medicine, and of Diseases.
IAm not of the opinion, that there can be a Universal Medicine for all
diseases, except it be proved, that all kinds of Diseases whatsoever, proceed
from one cause; which I am sure can never be done, by reason there is as much
variety in the causes of diseases, as in the diseases themselves. You may say,
All diseases proceed but from irregular motions. I answer: These irregular
motions are so numerous, different and various, that all the Artists in Nature
are not able to rectify them. Nay, they might sooner make or create a new
Matter, then rectify the irregularities of Nature more then Nature herself is
pleased to do; for though Art may be an occasion of the changes of some parts
or motions, of their compositions and divisions, imitations, and the like; like
as a Painter takes a copy from an original, yet it cannot alter infinite
Nature; for a man may build or pull down a house, but yet he cannot make the
materials, although he may fit or prepare them for his use: so Artists may
dissolve and compose several parts several ways, but yet they cannot make the
matter of those parts; and therefore although they may observe the effects, yet
they cannot always give a true or probable reason why they are so, nor know the
several particular causes which make them to be so: To see the effects, belongs
to the perception of sense; but to judge of the cause, belongs only to reason;
and since there is an ignorance as well as a perceptive knowledge in Nature, no
creature can absolutely know or have a through perception of all things, but
according as the corporeal figurative motions are, so are the perceptions; not
only in one composed figure, but also in every part and particle of the same
figure; for one and the same parts may make several perceptions in several
Creatures, according to their several figurative motions. But reason being
above sense, is more inspective then sense; and although sense does many times
inform reason, yet reason being more subtle, piercing and active, does oftener
inform and rectify the senses when they are irregular; nay, some rational
parts inform others, like as one man will inform another of his own voluntary
conceptions, or of his exterior perceptions; and some sensitive parts will
inform others, as one Artist another; and although Experimental Philosophy is
not to be rejected, yet the Speculative is much better, by reason it guides,
directs and governs the Experimental; but as knowledge and understanding is more
clear, where both the rational and sensitive perception do join; so
Experimental and Speculative Philosophy do give the surest informations, when
they are joined or united together.

But to return to the Universal Medicine; although I do not believe there is
any, nor that all Diseases are curable; yet my advice is, that no applications
of remedies should be neglected in any disease whatsoever; because diseases
cannot be so perfectly known, but that they may be mistaken, and so even the
most experienced Physician may many times be deceived, and mistake a curable
disease for an incurable; wherefore Trials should be made as long as life
lasts. Of Dropsies, Cancers, Kings-evils, and the like diseases, I believe some
may be cureable, especially if taken at the first beginning, and that without
great difficuly, and in a short time; but such diseases, which consist in the
decay of the vital parts, I do verily believe them incurable; as for example,
those Dropsies, Consumptions, dead Palsies, etc. which are caused either
through the decay of the vital parts, or through want of radical substance:
Neither do I think a natural Blindness, Dumbness, Deafness, or Lameness,
curable; nor natural Fools, or Idiots: Nay, I fear, the best Chemist will be
puzzled to cure a settled or fixed Gout, or the Stone, in such bodies as are apt
to breed it; for Stones are produced several ways, and as their productions are
different, so are they; wherefore although many do pretend to great things, yet
were their cures so certain, they would be more frequent. I will not say, but
many times they perform great cures; but whether it be by chance, or out of a
fundamental knowledge, I know not; but since they are so seldom performed, I
think them rather to be casual cures. In my opinion, the surest way, both in
Diseases and Applications of Remedies, is, to observe the corporeal, figurative
motions of both; which are best and surest perceived by the rational
perception, because the sensitive is more apt to be deluded.

22. Of Outward Remedies.
REmedies, which are applied outwardly, may be very beneficial; by reason the
bodies of Animal Cratures are full of Pores, which serve to attract
nourishment, or foreign matter into the body, and to vent superfluities.
Besides, the interior parts of those bodies, to which outward Remedies are
applied, may imitate the qualities or motions of the remedies, by the help of
their own sensitive motions, and therefore the application of outward remedies
is not altogether to be rejected. But yet I do not believe, that they do always
or in all persons, work the like effects; or that they are so sure and
sovereign as those that are taken inwardly. The truth is, as Remedies properly
and seasonably applied, can work good effects; so they may also produce ill
effects, if they be used improperly and unseasonably; and therefore wise
Physicians and Surgeons know by experience, as well as by learning and reason,
what is best for their Patients in all kind of distempers: Only this I will
add concerning diseases, that in the productions of diseases, there must of
necessity be a conjunction of the Agent and Patient, as is evident even in
those diseases that are caused by conceit; for if a man should hear of an
infectious disease, and be apprehensive of it; both the discourse of him that
tells it, and the mind of him that apprehends it, are Agents or causes of that
disease, in the body of the Patient, and concur in the production of the
disease; the difference is only, that the discourse may be called a remoter
cause, and the rational motions, or the mind of the Patient, a nearer or
immediate cause; for as soon as the mind does figure such a disease, the
sensitive, corporeal motions, immediately take the figure from the mind, and
figure the disease in the substance or parts of the body of the Patient; the
Rational proving the Father, the Sensitive the Mother; both working by consent.
Whereby we may also conclude, that diseases, as well as other sorts of
Creatures, are made by Natures corporeal, figurative motions; and those parts
that occasion others to alter their natural motions, are most predominant; for
although Nature is free, and all her parts self-moving; yet not every part is
free to move as it pleases, by reason some parts overpower others, either
through number, strength, slight, shape, opportunity, or the like advantages;
and natural Philosophy is the only study that teaches men to know the
particular natures, figures and motions of the several composed parts of
Nature, and the rational perception is more intelligent then the sensitive.

23. Of several sorts of Drink, and Meat.
SOme Physicians, when they discourse of several sorts of Drinks, and Meats, do
relate several wonderful Cures which some Drinks have effected: And truly, I am
of opinion, that they may be both beneficial, and hurtful, according as they
are used properly, and temperately; or improperly, and excessively: but I find
there are more several sorts for curiosity and luxury, then for health and
necessity: Small Ale, or Beer, is a sovereign remedy to quench drought; and one
Glass of Wine, proves a Cordial; but many Glasses may prove a kind of poison,
putting men oftentimes into Fevers, and the like diseases. And for
Diet-drinks, I believe they are very good in some sorts of diseases; and so may
Tea, and Coffee, and the water of Birches, for any thing I know, for I never
had any experience of them; but I observe; that these latter drinks, Tea, and
Coffee, are now become mode-drinks, and their chief effects are to make good
fellowship, rather then to perform great cures; for I can hardly believe, that
such weak liquors, can have such strong effects. Concerning several sorts of
Meats, I leave them to experienced Physicians, for they know best what is fit
for the bodies of their Patients; Only, as for the preservation, or keeping of
several sorts of meats from putrefaction, I will say this; That I have
observed, that what will keep dead Flesh, and Fish, as also Vegetables, from
putrefaction; will destroy living Animals; for if living Animals should, like
dead flesh, be pickled up, and kept from air, they would soon be smothered to
death; and so would Fire, which yet is no Animal. Neither can Ladies and
Gentlewomen preserve their lives, as they do several sorts of fruit:
Nevertheless, both this, and several other Arts, are very necessary and
profitable for the use of man, if they be but fitly and properly employed; but
we may observe, that when as other Creatures have no more then what is
necessary for their preservation, Man troubles himself with things that are
needless; nay, many times, hurtful: Which is the cause there are so many
unprofitable Arts, which breed confusion, instead of proving beneficial and
instructive.

24. Of Fermentation.
FErmentation, of which Helmont, and his followers make such a stir, as it is
enough to set all the world a fermenting or working; is nothing else, but what
is vulgarly called digestion; so that it is but a new term for an old action:
And these digestions or Fermentations, are as various and numerous as all other
actions of Nature, to wit, Respiration, Evacuation, Dilation, Contraction, etc.
for action and working are all one.

But there are good and ill Fermentations; those are done by a sympathetical
agreement of parts, but these by an antipathetical disagreement: Those tend to
the preservation of the subject, these to its destruction; Those are regular,
these irregular: So that there are numerous sorts of fermentations, not only
in several sorts of Creatures, but in several parts of one and the same
Creature: for Fermentation or Digestion is according to the composition of the
fermenting or digestive parts, and their motions.

25. Of the Plague.
IHave heard, that a Gentleman in Italy fancied he had so good a Microscope,
that he could see Atoms through it, and could also perceive the Plague; which
he affirmed to be a swarm of living animals, as little as Atoms, which entered
into men's bodies, through their mouths, nostrils, ears, etc.

To give my opinion hereof, I must confess, That there are no parts of Nature,
how little soever, which are not living and self-moving bodies; nay, every
Respiration is of living parts; and therefore the Infection of the Plague, made
by the way of respiration, cannot but be of living parts; but that these parts
should be animal Creatures, is very improbable to sense and reason; for if this
were so, not only the Plague, but all other infectious diseases would be
produced the same way, and then fruit, or any other surfeiting meat, would
prove living Animals: But I am so far from believing, that the Plague should be
living animals, as I do not believe it to be a swarm of living Atoms, flying
up and down in the Air; for if it were thus, then those Atoms would not remain
in one place, but infect all the places they passed through; when as yet we
observe, that the Plague will often be but in one Town or City of a Kingdom,
without spreading any further. Neither do I believe (as some others say) that
it is always the heat of the Sun, or Air, that causes, or at least increases
the Plague; for there are Winterplagues, as well as Summer-plagues; and many
times the Plague decreases in Summer, when it is hot; and increases in Winter,
when it is cold: Besides, the air being generally hot, over all the Country or
Kingdom, would not only cause the infection in one Town or City, but in all
other parts.

Therefore, my opinion is, that as all other diseases are produced several
manners or ways, so likewise the Plague; and as they generally do all proceed
from the irregularities of corporeal natural motions, so does also the Plague:
But since it is often observed, that all bodies are not infected, even in a
great Plague; it proves, that the Infection is made by imitation; and as one
and the same agent cannot occasion the like effects in every Patient; as for
example, Fire in several sorts of Fuels; nay, in one and the same sort; as for
example, in Wood; for some wood takes sooner fire, and burns more clearly, and
dissolves more suddenly then some other; so it is also with the Plague, and
with all other diseases, that proceed from an outward Infection; for the
exterior agent is not an immediate cause, but only an occasion that the
Patient has such or such motions; and as the imitating motions are stronger or
weaker, quicker or flower; so is the breeding of the disease. I will not deny,
but there may be such figurative, corporeal motions in the Air or Earth, which
may cause infections amongst those animals that live within the compass
thereof, and many times the Air or Earth may be infected by Animals; But some
particulars not being infected at all, though they be frequently with those
that have the Plague; it proves, that the figurative motions of their bodies do
not imitate those motions that make the Plague; when as, if the Air were filled
with infectious Atoms, none would escape; nay, they would not only enter into
Men, but Beasts and Birds, etc.

Concerning the Spotted-Plague, it proceeds from a general irregularity of
dissolving motions, which cause a general Gangrene of all the body; and to find
a cure for this disease, is as difficult, as to find the Philosophers-stone;
for though many pretend to cure it, yet none has as yet performed it; what may
be done hereafter I know not; but I doubt they will be more able to raise a man
from the dead, or renew old age, and change it into youth, then do it.

As for other Diseases, I refer the Reader to my other Works, especially my
Philosophical Opinions; for my design is not now to make a Physical Treatise;
and there they will find of the disease called Ague, that its cause is the
irregularity of the digestive or concoctive motions, and so of the rest: for in
this present work I intended nothing else, but to make reflections upon
Experimental Philosophy, and to explain some other Points in Natural
Philosophy, for the better understanding of my own Opinions, which if I have
done to the satisfaction of the Reader, I have my aim, and desire no more.

26. Of Respiration.
HAving made mention both in the foregoing discourse, and several other places
of this Book, of Respiration; I Will add to the end of this part a full
declaration of my opinion thereof.

First, I believe that there are Respirations in all Creatures and Parts of
Nature, performed by the several passages of their bodies, to receive foreign,
and discharge some of their own parts. Next, I believe, That those Respirations
are of different sorts, according to the different sorts of Creatures. Thirdly,
As the Respirations of natural Parts and Creatures are various and different,
so are also the pores or passages through which they respire; as for example,
in Man, and some other animals, the Nostrils, Ears, Mouth, Pores of the skin,
are all of different figures: And such a difference may also be between the
smaller pores of the skin, of the several parts of man, as between the pores of
his breast, arms, legs, head, etc. also the grain or lines of a man's skin may
be different, like as several figures of wrought Silks or Stuffs sold in
Mercers shops; which if they did make several colors by the various
refractions, inflections, reflections and positions of light, then certainly a
naked man would appear of many several colors, according to the difference of
his pores or grains of the skin, and the different position of light. But sense
and reason does plainly observe, that the positions of light do not cause such
effects; for though every several man, for the most part, has a peculiar
complexion, feature, shape, humor, disoposition, etc. different from each
other, so that it is a miracle to see two men just alike one another in all
things; yet light alters not the natural color of their bodies, no more then
it can alter the natural figures and shapes of all other parts of their bodies;
but what alteration soever is made, proceeds from the natural corporeal motions
of the same body, and not from the various positions, refractions and
reflections of light; whose variety in Nature, as it is infinite, so it
produces also infinite figures, according to the infinite Wisdom of Nature,
which orders all things orderly and wisely.

OBSERVATIONS UPON THE OPINIONS OF SOME Ancient Philosophers.
ALthough the indisposition of my body did in a manner dissuade me from
studying and writing any more; yet the great desire I had to know the Opinions
of the Ancient Philosophers, and whether any came near my own, overcame me so
much, that even to the prejudice of my own health, I gave my self to the
perusing of the works of that learned Author Mr. Stanly, wherein he describes
the lives and opinions of the ancient Philosophers; in which I found so much
difference betwixt their conceptions and my own in Natural Philosophy, that
were it allowable or usual for our sex, I might set up a sector School for my
self, without any prejudice to them; But I, being a woman, do fear they would
soon cast me out of their Schools; for though the Muses, Graces and Sciences
are all of the female gender, yet they were more esteemed in former ages, then
they are now; nay, could it be done handsomely, they would now turn them all
from Females into Males; so great is grown the selfconceit of the Masculine,
and the disregard of the Female sex.

But to let that pass: The Opinions of the Ancient, though they are not exempt
from errors no more then our Moderns, yet are they to be commended that their
conceptions are their own, and the issue of their own wit and reason; when as
most of the opinions of our Modern Philosophers, are patched up with theirs:
Some whereof do altogether follow either Aristotle, Plato, Epicurus,
Pythagoras, etc. others make a mixture of several of their Opinions, and others
again take some of their opinions, and dress them up new with some additions of
their own; and what is worst, after all this, instead of thanks, they reward
them with scorn, and rail at them; when as, perhaps, without their pains and
industry, our age would hardly have arrived to that knowledge it has done. To
which ungrateful and unconscionable act, I can no ways give my consent, but
admire and honor both the ancient, and all those that are real Inventors of
noble and profitable Arts and Sciences, before all those that are but botchers
and brokers; and that I do in this following part, examine, and mark some of
their opinions, as erroneous; is not out of a humor to revile or prejudice
their wit, industry, ingenuity and learning, in the least; but only to show,
by the difference of their opinions and mine, that mine are not borrowed from
theirs, as also to make mine the more intelligible and clear, and, if possible,
to find out the truth in Natural Philosophy; for which were they alive, I
question not, but I should easily obtain their pardon.

1. Upon the Principles of Thales.
THales, according to Historical Relation, was the first that made
disquisitions upon Nature, and so the first Natural Philosoper. His chief
points in Philosophy are these: 1. He says, That Water is the Principle of all
natural bodies: 2. That Nature is full of Demons, and spiritual substances: 3.
That the Soul is a self-moving Nature, and that it both moves it self, and the
body: 4. That there is but one World, and that finite: 5. That the World is
animate, and God is the soul thereof, diffused through every Part: 6. That the
World is contained in a place: 7. That Bodies are divisible into infinite.

Concerning the First, viz. That Water is the Principle of all natural things;
Helmont does embrace this opinion, as I have declared in my Philosophical
Letters, and in the foregoing part of this Book, and have given withal my
reasons why water cannot be a principle of natural things, because it is no
more but a natural effect; for though humidity may be found in many parts or
Creatures of Nature, yet this does not prove, that water is a principle of all
natural bodies, no more then fire, earth, air, or any other Creature of Nature;
and though most Philosophers are of opinion, that Elements are simple bodies,
and all the rest are composed of them, yet this is no ways probable to reason,
because they consist of the same matter as other bodies do, and are all but
effects of one cause or principle, which is infinite Matter.

Next, That Nature is full of Demons, or Spiritual substances, is against
sense and reason; for what is incorporeal, is no part of Nature, and upon this
account, the soul cannot be immaterial, although he makes her to be a
self-moving Nature; for what has a natural motion, has also a natural body;
because Matter and Motion are but one thing; neither can a Spiritual substance
move a corporeal, they being both of different natures.

As for the World, That there is but one, I do willingly grant it, if by the
World he did mean Nature; but then it cannot be finite. But Thales seems to
contradict himself in this Theoreme, when as he grants, that Bodies are
divisible in infinite; for if there be infinite actions, as infinite divisions
in Nature; then surely the body of Nature it self must be infinite.

Next, he says, That God is the Soul of the World; which if so, God being
Infinite, he cannot have a Finite body to animate it; for a Finite Body, and an
Infinite Soul, do never agree together; but that God should be the Soul of the
World, no regular Reason can allow, because the Soul of Nature must be
corporeal, as well as the Body; for an incorporeal substance cannot be mixed
with a corporeal. Next, the World as the body of Nature, being dividable, it
would follow, that God, which is the Soul, would be dividable also: Thirdly,
Every part of the world, would be a part of God, as partaking of the same
nature; for every part, if the Soul be diffused through all the Body, would be
animate.

Lastly, Concerning Place, as that the World is contained in a place; my
opinion is, that place is nothing else, but an affection of body, and in no
ways different or separable from it; for wheresoever is body; or matter, there
is place also; so that place cannot be said to contain the world, or else it
would be bigger then the world it self; for that which contains, must needs in
compass or extent, exceed that which it contains.

2. Some few Observations on Plato's Doctrine.
1. PLato says, That Life is two fold, Contemplative, and Active; and that
Contemplation is an office of the Intellect, but Action an operation of the
Rational soul?

To which I answer, first, That I know no other difference between Intellect
and Reason, but that Intellect is an effect, or rather an Essential Propriety
of Reason, if Reason be the Principle of Nature; for the Rational part is the
most Intelligent part of animate Matter. Next, I say, That Contemplation is as
much an action, as any other action of Nature, although it be not so gross as
the action of the body; for it is only an action of the mind, which is more
pure and subtle then either the sensitive or inanimate parts of matter are,
and acts within it self, that is, in its own substance or degree of Matter.

2. He says, That Sense is a passion of the Soul.

I answer: There is as much difference between Sense, and the Soul, as there is
between Sense, and Reason, or a sensitive life, and a rational soul; for the
Rational parts of Matter, are not the Sensitive, nor the Sensitive the
Rational; a Fool may have his sense regular, and his reason irregular; and
therefore sense and reason are not one and the same, although they have an
inseparable Communion in the body or substance of Nature.

3. He argues thus: That which moves in it self, as being the principle of
Motion in those things which are moved, is always moved, and consequently
Immortal, Ungenerable and Incorruptible; but the Soul is so. Ergo, etc.

I answer: Natural Matter being thus self-moving, is the same.

4. From, says he, is joined to Matter.

I answer: Form and Matter are but one thing; for it is impossible to separate
Matter from Form, or Form from Matter; but what is not dividable, is not
composable; and what cannot be separated, cannot be joined

5. Qualities, says he, are incorporeal, because they are accidents.

I answer: If Qualities be Incorporeal, they do not belong to Nature; for since
the Principle of Nature is Matter, all that is natural, must also be material
or corporeal; and therefore all natural qualities or accidents must of
necessity be corporeal, by reason quality can no more be divided from Matter,
then figure, magnitude, color, place, and the like; all which are but one and
the same with body, without any separation or abstraction.

6. What Plato affirms, of that which never is, and never had a Beginning, and
of that which has a Beginning, and not a Being, is more then he or any body can
rationally prove; for what never was, nor is, no man can know or imagine;
because all what is known or imagined, has its real being, if not without, yet
within the Mind; and all thoughts have not only a being, but a material being
in Nature; nay, even the Thought of the existence of a Deity, although Deity it
self is Immaterial.

7. I wonder so witty a Philosopher as Plato can believe, that Matter in it
self, as it is the Principle of Nature, is void of all form; for he affirms
himself, That whatsoever has parts, has also figure; but Matter has parts,
(by reason there can be no single part in Nature, but wheresoever is body or
matter, there are parts also) and therefore matter cannot be void of figure.
But if by Form, he mean the innate and inherent self-motion of Matter, he
contradicts himself; for how can all things be made of matter, as their
principle, if matter be destitute of self-motion? Wherefore Infinite Matter has
not only self-motion, but also figure, though not a circumscribed or limited
figure: Neither can it be proved, that Nature, being infinite, is not
qualitative, no more then she can be proved to have no parts, or to be finite.
In short, it is impossible for my reason to believe, that Matter should be
capable of, and subject to all forms, and yet be void of all quality, form, and
species; for whatsoever has neither form, figure, nor quality, is no body, and
therefore Plato's Matter is immaterial, or incorporeal. If it were possible,
that there could be some converse or meeting between his and my soul, I would
ask his soul how he would prove, that one and the same thing could exist, and
not exist at one and the same time; that is, how matter could be no matter, or
something and nothing at the same time; and whence it came to be thus? For
though our reason does believe, that the Omnipotent Creator can make something
of nothing, and reduce something into nothing; yet no reason is able to
comprehend how God could make a being which is neither something, nor nothing;
neither corporeal, nor incorporeal. But Plato concludes that Matter is
destitute of all form, because it is subject to change of forms and figures in
its particulars, which is a very great mistake; for the changes of forms or
figures, do not alter the nature of Matter; but prove rather, that wheresoever
there is form or figure, there is matter also; so that none can be without the
other at no time; A piece of Wax may be transformed into millions of figures,
but it can never be deprived of all figure; no more can Matter.

8. Concerning Ideas, Plato's Opinion is, That they are Principles of Nature,
and the Eternal Notions of God, perfect in themselves; or an External exemplar
of things which are according to Nature. But I would ask him, what Notions are,
and whence they come; and, if they be pictures or patterns of all things in
Nature, What makes or causes them? He will say, They are the Thoughts of God.
But what Creature in the Universe is able to describe the Thoughts or Notions
of God? For though I do humbly acknowledge God to be the Author of Nature; and
with the greatest reverence and fear, adore that Infinite Deity; yet I dare not
attribute any Notions or Ideas to God, nor in any manner or way express him
like our humane condition; for I fear I should speak irreverently of that
Incomprehensible Essence, which is above all finite Capacity, Reason, or Idea.

Next, he says, That those Ideas are not of things made by Art, nor of
singulars, nor of preternatural accidents, as diseases, nor of vile and abject
things, nor of Relatives. Which if so, I would enquire whence those effects do
proceed? for if the Eternal Ideas, according to his opinion, are Principles of
all natural things, they must also be principles of the aforementioned effects,
they being also natural: If they do not proceed from any principle, they must
proceed from themselves; which cannot be, by reason they are effects of Nature:
but if they have another principle besides the Eternal Notions, or Ideas; then
there must be another power besides these, which power would oppose the divine
power, or the power God has endued Nature withal. In short, If the Ideas of God
be the Principle of Nature, they must be a principle of all natural things; for
that which is not Universal, can never be a principle: which if so, then the
Ideas or Notions of God, would not only be the Cause and Principle of all
Goodness, but of all evil effects; and if there be more wicked or evil souls in
the World then good ones, there would proceed more evil from God then good;
which is not only impossible, but impious to affirm. But Perchance he will
say, That the Ideas of the aforementioned effects are generated and
annihilated. I answer: As for Nature, she being Eternal and Infinite, is not
subject to new generations and annihilations in her particulars; neither can
Principles be generated and annihilated; and as for supernatural or immaterial
Ideas, they being incorporeal, cannot be subject to a new generation, or
annihilation; for what is supernatural, is not capable of natural affections,
nor subject to a natural capacity any ways. In truth, Plato, with his Ideas in
God, in the Angelick Mind, in the Soul, etc. makes a greater stir then needs,
and breeds more confusion in Nature then she really knows of; for Nature is as
easy to be understood in her general principles, that regular sense and reason
may conceive them without framing any such Ideas or Minds. He distinguishes
also the Idea or exemplar of an house which the architect has in his mind; and
as his pattern exactly strives to imitate, from the building or structure of
the house it self by this, that he calls that intelligible, but this material
and sensible; when as yet the form or pattern in the Architects mind, is as
much material, as the builded house it self; the only difference is, that the
Exemplar, or figure in the Mind, is formed of the rational matter only, which
is the purest, finest and subtilest degree, and the other is made of grosser
materials.

9. The Soul of the World he makes immaterial, but the body material; and hence
he concludes the World to be Eternal; because the soul is such which is not
capable to be without body; and although it be incorporeal, yet its office is
to rule and govern corporeal Nature. But concerning the Soul of Nature, I have
sufficiently declared my opinion thereof in other places; to wit, that it is
impossible she should be immaterial; for if the body of Nature be dividable and
composable, the soul must be so too; but that which is not material, cannot
admit of division, nor composition; wherefore the soul cannot be immaterial, or
else some parts of the world would be destitute of a soul, which might deserve
it as well as the rest, which would argue a partiality in the Creator. I wonder
wise men will attribute bodily affections to immaterial beings, when as yet
they are not able to conceive or comprehend them; by which they confound and
disturb Nature, which knows of no Immaterials, but her Essence is Matter.

10. As for his Ethics, where he speaks of Beauty, Strength, Proportion, etc.
I Will only say this, That of all these, there are different sorts; for there is
the strength of the Mind, and the strength of the Body; and these are so
various in their kinds and particulars, that they cannot be exactly defined;
also Beauty, considering only that which is of the body, there are so many
several sorts, consisting in features, shapes and proportions of bodies, as it
is impossible to describe properly what Beauty is, and wherein it really
consists; for what appears beautiful to some, may seem ill-favored to others;
and what seems extraordinary fair or handsome to one, may have but an
indifferent character of another; so that in my opinion, there is no such thing
as a Universal Beauty, which may gain a general applause of all, and be judged
alike by every one that views it; nay, not by all immortal souls, neither in
body, nor mind; for what one likes, another may dislike; what one loves,
another may hate; what one counts good, another may proclaim bad; what one
names just, another may call unjust: And as for Temperance which he joins to
Justice; what may be temperance to one, may be intemperance to another; for no
particular knows the just measures of Nature; nay, even one and the same thing
which one man loves to day, he may chance to hate, or at least dislike, to
morrow; for Nature is too various to be constant in her particulars, by reason
of the perpetual alterations and changes they are subject to; which do all
proceed from self-moving Matter, and not from incorporeal Ideas. Thus Rational
souls are changeable, which may be proved by the changes of their Fancies,
Imaginations, Thoughts, Judgments, Understandings, Conceptions, Passions,
Affections, and the like; all which are effects or actions of the rational
soul; nay, not only natural rational souls, but even divine souls, if they
were all good, none would be bad, nor vary as we find they do; and therefore I
cannot believe that all souls can have the same likeness, being so different
amongst themselves.

3. Upon the Doctrine of Pythagoras.
1. THe most Learned of the Pythagoreans do assert, That things apparent to
sense, cannot be said Principles of the Universe; for whatsoever consists of
things apparent to sense, is compounded of things not apparent; and a Principle
must not consist of any thing, but be that of which the thing consists.

To which I answer: First, I cannot conceive what they mean by things apparent
to sense; if they mean the sensitive organs of humane Creatures, they are
mistaken; for there may be, and are really many things in Nature, which are not
apparent to humane sense, and yet are not Principles, but natural effects;
wherefore not all things that are not apparent to humane sense, are principles
of Nature: Besides, there may be many other Creatures which do far exceed Men
or Animals in their sensitive perceptions; and if things be not subject to
humane sense, they may be subject to the sense of other Creatures. But if by
sense they mean the sensitive life of Nature, they commit a far greater error;
for there is nothing which is not subject, or has a participation of this
Universal sense in Nature, as well as of Reason. It Is true, particular senses
cannot perceive the infinite figurative motions of Nature, neither can the
subtilest sense have a perception of the interior, innate, figurative motions
of any other Creature; but I do not speak of particular senses, but of that
infinite sense and reason, which is self-moving Matter, and produces all the
effects of Nature.

But you will say, How can Infinite be a principle of particular Finites?

I answer: As well as the Infinite God can be the Author of Nature, and all
natural Beings; which though they be finite in their particular figures, yet
their number is Infinite.

2. Concerning the Numbers of Pythagoras, which he makes so great a value of; I
confess, wheresoever are Parts, and compositions, and divisions of parts, there
must also be number, but yet as parts cannot be principles, so neither can
numbers; for self-moving Matter, which is the only principle of Nature, is
infinite, and there are no more principles but this one. It Is true, regular
compositions and divisions are made by consent of parts, and presuppose number
and harmony, but number and harmony cannot be the cause of any orderly
productions, without sense and reason; for how should parts agree in their
actions, if they did not know each other, or if they had no sense nor reason?
truly there can be no motion without sense, nor no orderly motion without
reason; and though Epicurus's Atoms might move by chance without reason, yet
they could not move in a concord or harmony, not knowing what they are to do,
or why, or whither they move; nay, if they had no sense, it is impossible they
should have motion; and therefore, in my opinion, it is the rational and
sensitive parts which by consent make number and harmony; and those that will
deny this sensitive and rational self-moving Matter, must deny the principles
of motion, and of all constant successions of all sorts and kinds of Creatures,
nay, of all the variety that is in Nature. Indeed I am puzzled to understand
Learned men, what they mean by Principles, by reason I see that they so
frequently call Principles those which are but effects of Nature; some count
the Elements Principles; some Numbers; some Ideas; some Atoms; and the like:
And by their different opinions, they confirm, that there is as well discord
and division, as there is concord and composition of the parts of Nature; for
if this were not, there would be no contrary actions, and consequently no
variety of figures and motions.

3. Whatsoever is comprehended by man, says Pythagoras, is either body, or
incorporeal; amongst which Incorporeals he reckons also time: But this opinion
is contradicted by regular sense and reason; for no humane, nor any other
natural Creature, is able to comprehend an incorporeal, it self being
corporeal; and as for time, place, and the like, they are one and the same with
body, which is so, how can they be incorporeal? Neither is it possible, that
incorporeal Beings, should be principles of Nature, because there is as much
difference between corporeal, and incorporeal, as there is between Matter, and
no Matter; but how no Matter can be a principle of matterial effects, is not
conceivable. For God, though he be an Immaterial Essence, and yet the Author of
material Nature, and all natural Beings; yet he is not a natural, material
Principle, out of which all natural things consist, and are framed, but a
supernatural, decreeing, ordering and commanding Principle, which cannot be
said of created Incorporeals; for though Nature moves by the powerful Decree of
God, yet she cannot be governed by finite Incorporeals; by reason they being
finite, have no power over a material Infinite, neither can there be any other
Infinite Spirit, but God himself.

4. Pythagoras's Doctrine is, That the World, in its nature, is Corruptible,
but the Soul of the World is Incorruptible; and that without the Heavens, there
is an Infinite Vacuum, into which, and out of which the World repairs. As for
the corruptibility of the World, I cannot understand how the Soul can be
incorruptible, and the World it self corruptible; for if the World should be
destroyed, what will become of the Soul? I will not say, That the All-powerfull
God may not destroy it when he pleases, but the infiniteness and perpetual
self-motion of Nature, will not permit that Nature should be corruptible in it
self; for God's Power goes beyond the power of Nature. But it seems Pythagoras
understands by the World, no more then his senses can reach; so that beyond the
Celestial Orbs he supposes to be an infinite Vacuum; which is as much as to
say, an infinite Nothing; and my reason cannot apprehend how the World can
breath and respire into nothing, and out of nothing.

5. Neither am I able to conceive the Truth of his assertion, That all lines
are derived from points, and all numbers from unity, and all figures from a
circle; for there can be no such thing as a single point, a single unity, a
single circle in Nature, by reason Nature is infinitely dividable and
composable; neither can they be principles, because they are all but effects.

6. Concerning the Soul, the Pythagoreans call her a self-moving number, and
divide her into two parts, rational and irrational, and derive the beginning of
the soul from the heat of the brain.

The Sold of Animate Creatures, as they call them, they allow to be rational,
even those which others call irrational, to wit, those in all other animals
besides man; but they act not according to reason, for want of speech. The
Rational Soul, say they, is immortal, and a self-moving number; where by
number, they understand the Mind, which they call a Monad. These, and the like
opinions, which Pythagoreans have of the Soul, are able to puzle Solomon's wit
or understanding to make any conformity of Truth of them; and I will not
strictly examine them, but set down these few Paradoxes.

1. I cannot apprehend, how the same soul can be divided into substances of
such differing, nay, contrary proprieties and natures, as to be rational and
irrational, mortal and immortal.

2. How the heat of the brain can be the Principle of the soul; since the soul
is said to actuate, move, and inform the body, and to be a Principle of all
bodily actions: Besides, all brains have not the like Temperament, but some are
hot, and some cold, and some hotter then others; whence it will follow, that
all animals are not endued with the like souls; but some souls must of
necessity be weaker, and some stronger then others.

3. How Irrational Creatures can have a Rational Soul, and yet not act
according to Reason for want of speech: for Irrational Creatures are called so,
because they are thought to have no reason; and as for speech, it is an effect,
and not a Principle of Reason; for shall we think a dumb man irrational,
because he cannot speak?

4. I cannot conceive how it is possible, that the soul is a self-moving
number, and yet but a Monad, or Unite; for a Unite, they say, is no number, but
a principle of number: Not, how the Soul, being incorporeal, can walk in the
air, like a body; for incorporeal beings cannot have corporeal actions, no more
then corporeal beings can have the actions of incorporeals. Wherefore I will
leave those points to the examination of more Learned Persons, then my self;
and as for the Pythagorean Transmigration of Souls, I have declared my opinion
thereof heretofore, in the first part.

4. Of Epicurus his Principles of Philosophy.
1. COncerning the World, Epicurus is of opinion, That it is not Eternal and
Incorruptible; but that it was generated, and had a beginning, and shall also
have an end, and perish: For, says he, It is necessary that all compounded
things be also dissipated, and resolved into those things of which they were
compounded. By the World, he understands a portion of the universe; that is,
the circumference of Heaven, containing the Stars, the Earth, and all things
visible; For Heaven he supposes to be the extreme, or outmost part of the
World; and by the Universe, he understands Infinite Nature, which consists of
Body, and Vacuum; for he thinks bodies could not move, were there no Vacuum to
move in.

Whereof I do briefly declare my opinion, thus: If the Universe or Nature it
self be Infinite, Eternal and Incorruptible, all parts of Nature, or the
Universe, must be so too; I mean, in themselves, as they are Matter, or Body;
for were it possible, that some of them could perish, or be annihilated; the
Universe would be imperfect, and consequently not infinite, as wanting some
parts of its own body. It Is true, particular natural figures may be infinitely
changed, dissolved, transformed; but they can never be dissolved from being
Matter, or parts of Nature; and if not, they cannot perish, no not the figures
of finite parts, for as Matter cannot perish, so neither can figure, because
matter and figure are but onething; and though one part be transformed into
millions of figures, yet all those figures do not perish in their changes and
alterations, but continue still in Nature, as being parts of Nature, and
therefore material. Thus, change, alteration, dissolution, division,
composition, and all other species of motions, are no annihilation, or
perishing; neither can it be proved, that parts dissolve more then they unite;
because dissolution, or division and composition of parts, are but one act; for
whenever parts separate themselves from some, they must of necessity join to
others; which does also prove, that there can be no Vacuum in Nature; for if
there were, there would be division without composition: besides, there would
be no parts, but all parts would be several wholes, by reason they would
subsist by themselves. Thus Nature would not be one infinite body, composed of
Infinite parts; but every part being a whole by it self, would make some kind
of a finite world; and those parts which separate themselves from each other by
the intervals of Vacuum, would subsist precised from each other, as having no
relation to one another, and so become wholes of parts; nay, if several of
those entire and single bodies should join closely together, they would make
such a gap of Vacuum, as would cause a confusion and disturbance both amongst
themselves, and in the Universe. Wherefore sense and reason contradicts the
opinion of Vacuum; neither is there any necessity of introducing it, by reason
of the motion of natural bodies; for they may move without Vacuum better then
within Vacuum, since all bodies are not of the like Nature, that is, dense,
close, or compact; but there are fluid bodies, as well as hard bodies; rare, as
well as dense; subtle, as well as gross; because there is animate and
inanimate matter in Nature. But concerning the World, it seems, Epicurus does
not mean by the dissolution of the world, an absolute annihilation, but only a
reduction into its former principles, which are Atoms; however, if this be his
meaning, he contradicts himself, when he affirms, that the universe, whose
portion the World is, was ever such as it is now, and shall ever be thus; for
if it shall continue so for ever as it is now, how is it possible, that it
should be reduced into Atoms. He says also, That the Vniniverse is immovable
and immutable. If he mean it to be so in its Essence or Nature, so that it
cannot be changed from being material; and that it is immovable, so that it
cannot be moved, beyond, or without it self; I am of his opinion: For Nature
being purely and wholly material, cannot be made immaterial, without its total
destruction; and being infinite, has nothing without it self to move into:
Otherwise, Nature is not only a self-moving body, but also full of changes and
varieties; I mean, within her self, and her particulars. As for his infinite
Worlds, I am not different from his opinion, if by Worlds he mean the parts of
infinite Nature; but my Reason will not allow, that those infinite Worlds do
subsist by themselves, distinguished from each other by Vacuum; for it is mere
nonsense to say, the Universe consists of body and Vacuum; that is, of
something, and nothing; for nothing cannot be a constitutive principle of any
thing, neither can it be measured, or have corporeal dimensions; for what is no
body, can have no bodily affections or properties. God, by his Omnipotency, may
reduce the World into nothing; but this cannot be comprehended by natural
reason.

2. The Matter or Principle of all natural Beings, Epicurus makes Atoms: For,
say he, There are Simple, and Compounded bodies in the Universe; the Simple
bodies are the first matter, out of which the Compounded bodies consist, and
those are Atoms; that is, bodies indivisible, immutable, and in themselves
void of all mutation; consisting of several infinite figures; some bigger, and
some less. Which opinion appears very Paradoxical to my reason; for if Atoms
be bodies, I do not see how they can be indivisible, by reason wheresoever is
body, there are also parts; so that divisibility is an essential propriety or
attribute of Matter or Body. He counts it impossible, that one finite part
should be capable of infinite divisions; but his Vacuum makes him believe there
are single finite parts, distinguished from each other by little spaces or
intervals of vacuity, which in truth cannot be; but as soon as parts are
divided from such or such parts, they immediately join to other parts; for
division and composition, as I mentioned before, are done by one act; and one
countervails the other. It Is true, there are distinctions of parts in Nature,
or else there would be no variety; but these are not made by little intervals
of vacuity, but by their own figures, interior as well as exterior, caused by
self-motion, which make a difference between the infinite parts of Nature. But
put the case there were such Atoms, out of which all things are made; yet no
man that has his sense and reason regular, can believe, they did move by
chance, or at least without sense and reason, in the framing of the world, and
all natural bodies, if he do but consider the wonderful order and harmony that
is in Nature, and all her parts. Indeed I admire so witty and great a
Philosopher as Epicurus, should be of such an extravagant opinion, as to divide
composed bodies into animate and inanimate, and derive them all from one
Principle, which are senseless and irrational Atoms; for if his Atoms, out of
which all things consist, be self-moving, or have, as he says, some natural
impulse within themselves, then certainly all bodies that are composed of them,
must be the same. He places the diversity of them only in figure, weight and
magnitude, but not in motion, which he equally allows to all; nay, moreover, he
says, that although they be of different fifiures, weight and magnitude, yet
they do all move equally swift; but if they have motion, they must of necessity
have also sense, that is, life and knowledge; there being no such thing as a
motion by chance in Nature, because Nature is full of reason as well as of
sense, and wheresoevever is reason, there can be no chance; Chance is only in
respect to particulars, caused by their ignorance; for particulars being finite
in themselves, can have no Infinite or Universal knowledge; and where there is
no Universal knowledge, there must of necessity be some ignorance. Thus
ignorance, which proceeds from the division of parts, causes that which we call
chance; but Nature, being an infinite self-moving body, has also infinite
knowledge; and therefore she knows of no chance, nor is this visible World, or
any part of her, made by chance, or a casual concourse of senseless and
irrational Atoms; but by the All-powerful Decree and Command of God, out of
that preexistent Matter that was from all Eternity, which is infinite Nature;
for though the Scripture expresses the framing of this World, yet it does not
say, that Nature her self was then created; but only that this world was put
into such a frame and state, as it is now; and who knows but there may have
been many other Worlds before, and of another figure then this is: nay, if
Nature be infinite, there must also be infinite Worlds; for I take, with
Epicurus, this World but for a part of the Universe; and as there is
self-motion in Nature, so there are also perpetual changes of particulars,
although God himself be immovable; for God acts by his Allpowerful Decree or
Command, and not after a natural way.

3. The Soul of Animals, says Epicurus, is corporeal, and a most tenuious and
subtle body, made up of most subtle particles, in figure, smooth and round,
not perceptible by any sense; and this subtle contexture of the soul, is mixed
and compounded of four several natures; as of something fiery, something
aerial, something flatuous, and something that has no name; by means whereof it
is endued with a sensitive faculty. And as for reason, that is likewise
compounded or little bodies, but the smoothest and roundest of all, and of the
quickest motion. Thus he discourses of the Soul, which, I confess, surpasses my
understanding; for I shall never be able to conceive, how senseless and
irrational Atoms can produce sense and reason, or a sensible and rational
body, such as the soul is, although he affirms it to be possible: It Is true,
different effects may proceed from one cause or principle; but there is no
principle, which is senseless, can produce sensitive effects; nor no rational
effects can flow from an irrational cause; neither can order, method and
harmony proceed from chance or confusion; and I cannot conceive, how Atoms,
moving by chance, should only make souls in animals, and not in other bodies;
for if they move by chance, and not by knowledge and consent, they might, by
their conjunction, as well chance to make souls in Vegetables and Minerals, as
in Animals.

4. Concerning Perception, and in particular, the Perception of sight, Epicurus
affirms, that it is performed by the gliding of some images of external objects
into our eyes, to wit, that there are certain effluxions of Atoms sent out
from the surfaces of bodies, preserving the same position and order, as is
found in the superficies of them, resembling them in all their lineaments; and
those he calls Images, which are perpetually flowing in an interrupted course;
and when one Image goes away, another immediately succeeds from the superficies
of the object in a continued stream; and this entering into our eyes, and
striking our sight, with a very swift motion, causes the Perception of seeing.

This strange opinion of his, is no less to be admired then the rest, and
shows, that Epicurus was more blind in his reason, then perhaps in his
Eyesight: For, first, How can there be such a perpetual effluxion of Atoms,
from an external body, without lessening or weakening its bulk or substance,
especially they being corporeal? Indeed, if a million of eyes or more, should
look for a long time upon one object, it is impossible, but that object would
be sensibly lessened or diminished, at least weakened, by the perpetual
effluxions of so many millions of Atoms: Next, how is it possible, that the
Eye can receive such an impress of so many Atoms, without hurting or offending
it in the least? Thirdly, Since Epicurus makes Vacuities in Nature, How can the
images pass so orderly through all those Vacuities, especially if the object be
of a considerable magnitude? for then all intermediate bodies that are between
the sentient, and the sensible object, must remove, and make room for so many
images to pass through. Fourthly, How is it possible, that, especially at a
great distance, in an instant of time, and as soon as I cast my eye upon the
object, so many Atoms can effluviate with such a swiftness, as to enter so
suddenly through the Air into the Eye; for all motion is progressive, and done
in time? Fifthly, I would fain know, when those Atoms are issued from the
object, and entered into the eye, what does at last become of them? Surely they
cannot remain in the Eye, or else the Eye would never lose the sight of the
object; and if they do not remain in the Eye, they must either return to the
object from whence they came, or join with other bodies, or be annihilated.
Sixthly, I cannot imagine, but that, when we see several objects at one and the
same time, those images proceeding from so many several objects, be they never
so orderly in their motions, will make a horrid confusion; so that the eye will
rather be confounded, then perceive any thing exactly after this manner.
Lastly, A man having two eyes; I desire to know, Whether every eye has its own
image to perceive, or whether but one image enters into both; if every eye
receives its own image, then a man having two eyes, may see double; and a great
Drone-flie, which Experimental Philosophers report to have 14000 eyes, may
receive so many images of one object; but if but one image enters into all
those eyes, then the image must be divided into so many parts.

5. What Epicurus means by his divine Nature, cannot be understood by a natural
capacity; for, he says it is the same with corporeal Nature; but yet not so
much a body, as a certain thing like a body, as having nothing common to it
with other bodies, that is, with transitory, generated, and perishable things.
But, in my opinion, God must either be Corporeal, or Incorporeal; if Corporeal,
he must be Nature it self; for there is nothing corporeal, but what is natural;
if incorporeal, he must be supernatural; for there is nothing between body, and
no body; corporeal and incorporeal; natural, and supernatural; and therefore to
say, God is of a corporeal nature, and yet not a body, but like a body, is
contrary to all sense and reason. It Is true, God has actions, but they are not
corporeal, but supernatural, and not comprehensible by a humane or finite
capacity: Neither is God naturally moving, for he has no local or natural
motion, nor does he trouble himself with making any thing, but by his
All-powerfull Decree and Command he produces all things; and Nature, which is
his Eternal servant, obeys his Commands: Wherefore the actions of Nature cannot
be a disturbance to his Incomprehensible felicity, no not to Nature, which
being self-moving, can do no otherwise, but take delight in acting, for her
actions are free and easy, and not forced or constrained.

6. Although he affirms, That God, or Nature, considers Man no more then other
Creatures; yet he endeavors to prove, That Man is the best product of his
Atoms; which to me seems strange, considering that all compositions of Atoms
come by chance, and that the Principles of all Creatures are alike. But truly,
take away the supernatural or divine soul from man, and he is no better then
other Creatures are, because they are all composed of the same matter, and have
all sense and reason, which produces all sorts of figures, in such order,
method and harmony, as the wisdom of Nature requires, or as God has ordered it;
for Nature, although she be Infinite and Eternal, yet she depends upon the
Incomprehensible God, the Author of Nature, and his All-powerfull Commands,
Worshipping and Adoring him in her infinite particulars; for God being
Infinite, must also have an infinite Worship; and if Nature had no dependence
on God, she would not be a servant, but God her self. Wherefore Epicurus his
Atoms, having no dependence upon a divine power, must of necessity be Gods;
nay, every Atome must be a peculiar God, each being a single body, subsisting
by it self; but they being senseless and irrational, would prove but weak Gods:
Besides his Chance is but an uncertain God, and his Vacuum an empty God; and if
all natural effects were grounded upon such principles, Nature would rather be
a confused Chaos, then an orderly and harmonical Universe.

5. On Aristotle's Philosophical Principles.
HAving viewed four of the most Eminent of the Ancient Philosophers, I will
proceed now to Aristotle, who may justly be called the Idol of the Schools, for
his doctrine is generally embraced with such reverence, as if Truth it self had
declared it; but I find he is no less exempt from errors, then all the rest,
though more happy in fame. For Fame does all, and whose name she is pleased to
record, that man shall live, when others, though of no less worth and merit,
will be obscured, and buried in oblivion. I shall not give my self the trouble
of examining all his Principles; but as I have done by the former, make my
observations on some few points in his Philosophy.

1. The sum of his Doctrine concerning Motion, and the first Mover, is
comprehended in these few Theorems. 1. There are three sorts of motion,
Accretion and Diminution, Alteration and Local motion. 2. Rest is a privation
of Motion. 3. All Motion is finite, for it is done in Time, which is finite. 4.
There is no infinite Quantity or Magnitude in act, but only in power, and so
no body can be actually infinite. 5. Whatsoever is moved, must necessarily be
moved by another. 6. There is a first mover in Nature, which is the cause and
origin of all motions. 7. This first mover is Infinite, Eternal, Indivisible
and Incorporeal. 8. Motion it self is Eternal, because Time, the measure of
Motion, is Eternal.

Concerning the first, I answer, That Nature and all her parts are perpetually
self-moving; and therefore it is needless to make three sorts of motions: we
might say rather, there are infinite sorts of Motions; but yet all is
self-motion, and so is accretion, diminution, and alteration; for though our
senses cannot perceive the motions of all bodies, how, and which way they move,
yet it does not follow from thence, that they are not moving; for solid
composed bodies, such as Minerals, may (though not to our humane sense) be more
active then some rarer and thinner bodies, as is evident in the Loadstone and
Iron, and the Needle; nay, in several other bodies applied by Art Physically:
for if Nature be self-moving, as surely she is, then her parts must necessarily
be in a continual action, there being no such thing as rest or quiescence in
Nature. Next, Aristotle seems to contradict himself, when he says, that all
Motion is finite, because it is done in Time, and yet affirms, that both Motion
and Time are Eternal; for Eternal is that which has neither beginning, nor
end; and if Motion and Time be thus, how can they be finite? 3. I deny, that
whatsoever is body or quantitative, cannot be infinite in act, but is only
infinite in power; for if it be probable, that there can be an Eternal motion,
and Eternal time, which is infinite in act; why should it not also be probable,
that there is an infinite quantity? For motion is the action of body, and it is
absurd, in my opinion, to make body finite, and the action infinite. Truly, if
Aristotle means the World to be finite, and yet eternal, I do not conceive how
they can consist together; for if the World be finite in quantity, he must
allow an infinite Vacuum beyond it; which if he does, why may not he allow as
well an infinite quantity? But he has no more ground to deny there is a
quantity actually infinite, then he has ground to affirm that it is only
infinite in power; for if that which is in power, may be deduced into act, I
see no reason, but the World, which is Nature, may be said infinite in act, as
well as in power. 4. I deny also his Theoreme, That whatsoever is moved, must
necessarily be moved by another; for wheresoever is selfmotion, there needs no
exterior movent; but Nature and all her parts have self-motion, therefore they
stand in no need of an exterior Movent. It Is true, one part may occasion
another by its outward impulse or force, to move thus or thus; but no part can
move by any others motion, but its own, which is an internal, and innate
motion; so that every part and particle of Nature has the principle of motion
within it self, as consisting all of a composition of animate or self-moving
Matter; and if this be so, what need we to trouble our selves about a first
Mover? In Infinite and Eternity there is neither first nor last, and therefore
Aristotle cannot understand a first mover of Time; and as for motion it self,
if all parts move of themselves, as I said before, there is no necessity of an
exterior or first Mover. But I would fain know what he means by the action of
the first Mover, whether he be actually moving the world, or not? if he be
actually moving, he must of necessity have natural motion in himself; but
natural selfmotion is corporeal; and a corporeal propriety cannot be attributed
to an incorporeal substance; But if he be not actually moving, he must move
Nature by his powerful Decree and Command; and thus the first mover is none
else but God, who may be called so, because he has endued Nature with
self-motion, and given it a principle of motion within it self, to move
according as he has decreed and ordered it from all Eternity; for God, being
immovable and incorporeal, cannot actually move the Universe, like the chief
wheel in a Watch. And as for his incorporeal Intelligences, which are Eternal
and immovable, president over the motions of the inferior orbs, Forty seven in
number; this is rather a Poetical Fancy, then a probability of truth, and
deserves to be banished out of the sphere of Natural Philosophy, which inquires
into nothing but what is conformable to the truth of nature; and though we are
all but guessers, yet he that brings the most probable and rational arguments,
does come nearer to truth, then those whose Ground is only Fancy without
Reason.

2. Heaven, says Aristotle, is void of Generation and Corruption, and
consequently of accretion, diminution and alteration; for there are no
contraries in it, nor has it Levity, or Gravity; neither are there more Worlds
but one, and that is finite; for if there were more, the Earth of one would
move to the Earth of the other, as being of one kind. To which I answer: first,
As for Generation, Difsolution, Accretion, Diminution and Alteration of
Celestial bodies; it is more then a humane Creature is able to know; for
although we do not see the alterations of them, yet we cannot deny they have
natural motion, but wheresoever is motion, there is also change and alteration.
For, put the case the Moon were such another body as this terrestrial Globe we
inhabit, we can only perceive its outward progressive motion; nevertheless it
may contain as many different particulars, as this Globe of the Earth, which
may have their particular motions, and be generated, dissolved, composed,
divided and transformed many, nay, infinite ways: The same may be said of the
rest of the Planets, and the fixed Stars. And as for Gravity, and Levity, we do
only perceive they are qualities of those parts that belong to this
terrestrial Globe; but we cannot judge of all bodies alike: we see air has
neither gravity nor levity; for it neither ascends, nor descends; nay, this
terrestrial Globe it self, has neither gravity nor levity, for it is surrounded
by the fluid air, and neither ascends nor descends: The truth is, there is no
such thing as high and low, in Nature; but only in reference to some parts;
and therefore gravity and levity are not Universal, and necessary attributes of
all natural bodies. Next, concerning the multiplicity of Worlds, that there can
be no such thing, but that the Earth of one, would move toward the Earth of
the other: I answer first, There Is no necessity that all Worlds must have a
Terrestrial Globe; for Nature has more varieties of Creatures, then Elements,
Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals. Next, if it were so, yet I see no reason
that one Creature must necessarily move to another of the same kind: For, put
the case, as I said before, the Moon was such another terrestrial Globe as
this, yet we see they do not move one to another, but each remains in its own
Sphere or Circle.

3. I admire, Aristotle makes the Principles of Nature, Matter, Form and
Privation, and leaves out the chief, which is Motion; for were there no motion,
there would be no variety of figures; besides, Matter and Form are but one
thing, for wheresoever is Matter, there is also form or figure; but privation
is a nonbeing, and therefore cannot be a principle of natural bodies.

4. There is no such thing as simple bodies in Nature; for if Nature her self
consists of a commixture of animate and inanimate Matter, no part can be called
simple, as having a composition of the same parts: besides, no part can subsist
single, or by it self; wherefore the distinction into simple and mixed bodies is
needless; for Elements are as much composed bodies, as other parts of Nature,
neither do I understand the difference between perfect and imperfect mixed
bodies, for Nature may compose, mix and divide parts as she pleases.

5. The primary Qualities of the Elements, as Heat, and Cold, Humidity and
Siccity, says Aristotle, are the cause of Generation, when heat and cold
overcome the Matter. I wonder he makes qualities to be no substances, or
bodies, but accidents; which is something between body, and no body, and yet
places them above Matter, and makes Generation their effect; But whatsoever he
calls them, they are no more but effects of Nature, and cannot be above their
cause, which is Matter; neither is it probable, there are but eighteen passive
qualities; he might have said, as well, there are but eighteen sorts of
motions; for natural effects go beyond all number, as being infinite.

6. Concerning the Soul, Aristotle does not believe, That it moves by it self,
but is only moved accidentally, according to the Motion of the body; but he
does not express from whence the motion of the Soul proceeds, although he
defines it to be that, by which we live, feel and understand: Neither, says he,
is there a Soul diffused through the World, for there are inanimate bodies as
well as animate; but sense and reason perceives the contrary, to wit, that
there is no part of Nature but is animate; that is, has a soul. Sense, says he,
is not sensible of it self, nor of its organ, nor of any interior thing; for
sense cannot move it self, but is a mutation in the organ, caused by some
sensible object: But the absurdity of this opinion I have declared heretofore;
for it is contrary to humane Reason to believe, first, that sense should be
sensible of an outward object, and not of it self, or (which is all one) have
perception of exterior parts, and not self-knowledg. Next, that an external
object should be the cause of sense, when as sense and reason are the chief
principles of Nature, and the cause of all natural effects. Again, Sense, says
he, is in all Animals, but Fancy is not, for Fancy is not Sense; Fancy acts in
him that sleeps, Sense not. To which I answer, first, Fancy or Imagination is a
voluntary action of Reason, or of the rational parts of Matter, and if reason
be in all Animals, nay, in all Creatures, Fancy is there also; Next, it is
evident that Sense acts as much asleep as awake, the difference I have
expressed elsewhere, viz. That the sensitive motions, Work inwardly in sleep,
and outwardly awake. The Intellect to Aristotle, is that part of the Soul by
which it knows and understands, and is only proper to man, when as sense is
proper to animals: It is twofold, Patient and Agent, whereof this is Immortal,
Eternal, not mixed with the body, but separable from it, and ever in action: The
Patient Intellect, is mortal, and yet void of corruptive passion, not mixed with
the body, nor having any corporeal organs. But these, and many other
differences of Intellects, which he rehearses, are more troublesome to the
understanding, then beneficial for the knowledge of Nature: And why should we
puzzle our selves with multiplicity of terms and distinctions when there is no
need of them: Truly Nature's actions are easy, and we may easily apprehend
them without much ado. If Nature be material, as it cannot be proved otherwise,
sense and reason are material also, and therefore we need not to introduce an
incorporeal mind, or intellect: Besides; if sense and reason be a constitutive
principle of Nature, all parts of Nature do partake of the same; nor has man a
prerogative before other Creatures in that case, only the difference and
variety of motions makes different figures, and consequently different
knowledges and perceptions; and all Fancies, Imaginations, Judgment, Memory,
Remembrance, and the like, are nothing else but the actions of reason, or of
the rational parts of Animate Matter; so that there is no necessity to make a
Patient and Agent Intellect, much less to introduce incorporeal substances, to
confound and disturb corporeal Nature.

6. Of Scepticisme, and some other Sects of the Ancient.
THere are several sorts of Scepticks different from each other; for though
almost every one of the ancient Philosophers has his own opinions in Natural
Philosophy, and goes on his own grounds or principles, yet some come nearer
each other, then others do; and though Heraclitus, Democritus, Protagoras, and
others, seem to differ from the Scepticks, yet their opinions are not so far
asunder, but they may all be referred to the same sect.

Heraclitus is of opinion, That contraries are in the same thing; and Scepticks
affirm, That contraries appear in the same thing; but I believe they may be
partly both in the right, and partly both in the wrong. If their opinion be,
that there are, or appear contraries in Nature, or in the essence of Matter,
they are both in the wrong; but if they believe that Matter has different and
contrary actions, they are both in the right; for there are not only real, but
also apparent, or seeming contraries in Nature, which are her irregularities;
to wit, when the sensitive and rational parts of Matter do not move exactly to
the nature of their particulars: As for example, Honey is sweet to those that
are sound, and in health; but bitter to those that have the overflowing of the
Gall: where it is to be observed, that Honey is not changed from its natural
propriety, but the motions of the Gall being irregular, make a false copy, like
as mad men who think their flesh is stone; or those that apprehend a Bird for a
Stone, a Man for a Tree, etc. neither the Flesh, nor Stone, nor Tree are
changed from their own particular natures; but the motions of humane sense in
the sentient, are irregular, and make false copies of true objects; which is
the reason that an object seems often to be that, which really it is not.
However, those irregularities are true corporeal motions; and thus there are
both real and seeming contraries in Nature; but as I mentioned before, they are
not contrary matters, but only contrary actions.

Democritus says, That Honey is neither bitter, nor sweet, by reason of its
different appearance to differently affected persons; but if so, then he is
like those that make neutral beings, which are between body, and no body, which
is a Paradox to regular reason.

The Cyrenaick Sect affirms, That all bodies are of an incomprehensible nature;
but I am not of their opinion: for although the interior, corporeal figurative
motions are not subject to every Creatures perception, yet in Nature they are
not incomprehensible: As for example, the five senses in man are both knowing
and ignorant, not only of each others perception, but of the several parts of
exterior objects; for the Eye only perceives the exterior figure, magnitude
and color, and not the Nose; the Nose perceives its scent, but not its color
and magnitude; the Ear perceives neither its magnitude, color, nor scent, but
only its sound, and so forth. The like may be said of the infinite perceptive
parts of Nature, whereby they are both obscured and discovered to particulars,
and so may be truly known in general, but not in particular by any finite
Creature, or part of Nature.

The Academicks say, That some Fancies are credible, others incredible; and of
those that are credible, some are credible only, and some credible, and
circumcurrent: As for example, A Rope lying loosely in a dark room, a man
receives a credible fancy from it, and runs away; another considering it more
exactly, and weighing the circumstances, as that it moves not, that it is of
such a color, and the like, to him it appears a rope, according to the
credible and circumcurrent fancy. To which I answer: A mistake is an
irregularity of sense, and sometimes of reason too; if sense be only mistaken,
and not reason, reason rectifies sense; and if reason be only mistaken, and
not sense, then sense rectifies reason; but when both sense and reason are
mistaken, the irregularity does either last longer, or changes into regularity
by the information of some other circumstances, and things which may rectify
sometimes the irregular motions both of sense and reason; that is, the
sensitive and rational motions of other parts may rectify those irregularities.

I could make many more Observations, not only upon the aforementioned, but
several others of the ancient Philosophers; but my design is not to refute
their opinions, but, as I mentioned in the beginning, to show the difference
between theirs, and my own; and by this we may see, that irregularities do not
only appear in our present age, but have been also in times past; nay, ever
since Nature has been, or else there would never have been such extravagant
opinions concerning the Truth of Nature.

But the chief which I observe is, That most of the Ancient make a commixture
of natural, and supernatural; corporeal, and incorporeal beings; and of
animate, and inanimate bodies: some derive reason from fancy; and some
introduce neutral beings, which are neither corporeal, nor incorporeal, but
between both; especially they do make general principles of particular effects,
and abstract Quality, Motion, Accidents, Figure, Place, Magnitude, etc. from
Matter, which causes so many confusions and differences in their opinions; nor
can it be otherwise, because of the irregularities and divisions of Natures
corporeal actions; and most of our Moderns do either follow altogether the
opinions of the ancient Philosophers, putting them only into a new dress, or
patch them up with some of their own, and so make a Gallimafry in Natural
Philosophy.

AN EXPLANATION OF Some obscure and doubtful passages occurring in the
Philosophical Works, hitherto published BY THE AUTHORESSE.
AS I have made a beginning in my Philosophical Letters Sect. 4. Let. 33. p.
529.
to clear some doubtful passages which I marked in my Philosophical Opinions;
so I thought it necessary to second them with these following Notes, and to add
not only what was forgot in the same Book, but to explain also some other
passages which hitherto I observed in the mentioned Book of Letters. For though
I know that it is but in vain to hinder all objections, yet I Will endeavor, as
much as lies in me, to prevent such as might be occasioned by the obscurity of
my Writings. No Creature can be so perfect as not to commit Errors sometimes;
and so may I in my Philosophical Works, where the causes of natural effects are
not obvious to every ones sense: Wherefore, if in some things, which yet are
but few, I have altered my Conceptions from those I maintained heretofore,
none, I hope, will condemn me for it, but rather account me so great a friend
to Truth, that instead of being wedded to my own opinions, as some or most
Philosophers are, who think it a great disgrace to go but a hairs breadth from
the least tittle of what they have once asserted, though the Error be as plain
as Noonday: I am most willing to desert what hitherto I have maintained upon
more rational and probable arguments then mine, and shall joyfully embrace
whatever I am in reason convinced to come nearer to Truth. But finding, as yet,
my opinions grounded upon sense and reason, I am resolved to maintain them so
long, till the contrary be proved; and therefore left their obscurity occasion
a wrong interpretation in the mind of the Reader, I have (as mentioned) added
an explanation of these following Passages.

Whenever, in my Philosophical Opinions, I say Animate Matter and Motion, or
the motions of Animate Matter; I do not take them to be two different things,
but one and the same; and therefore, both in my Philosophical Letters, and
these present Observations, instead of that expression, I say Corporeal
figurative Motion; for Self-motion, and Animate Matter, are one and the same
thing.

Also, when I call Phil. Opin. part. 1. c. 24.
the Animate part of Matter the Cause of Motion; I do not mean that considered
in general, they are two distinct things, as a Cause and Effect uses to be;
for, as I said before, Self-moving Matter, and Corporeal Self-motion, are
equivalent, and signify the same; but I speak of particular motions, which are
particular actions of Infinite self-moving Matter, which I call effects; and
are nothing else but infinite parts of an Infinite whole.

Again: when I name Animate and Inanimate Matter, my meaning is not, that they
are two distinct matters or substances, as two wholes; but two degrees or parts
of one only Matter whose Nature is one and the same, that is, to be material.

When I say Part. 1. c. 3.
, that every part or degree of only Matter is Infinite, I do not mean the
particular effects, parts or figures of self-moving Matter; for it is
impossible that a part or particular figure can be infinite, as I have often
declared: But I speak of the three prime degrees of Matter, which are the
constitutive principles of Nature, and the cause of all natural effects, viz.
the animate (sensitive and rational) and the inanimate; which as they are
intermixed together, are infinite in the body or substance of Nature, that is,
they make but one infinite, corporeal, self-moving Nature; and therefore I
desire that my expression of the mentioned parts, may be understood as of
united, and not as of separated parts; for it is impossible almost, to conceive
them divided, much less to separate them actually from each other: and since
Nature is one infinite body, that is, of an infinite bulk or extension, and
consists of animate and inanimate parts of Matter; it must of necessity follow,
that these mentioned parts are infinite also; for there is no particle of
Nature whatever, nay, could it be an Atome, that consists not of those
mentioned parts or degrees. Thus wheresoever I name Infinite degrees of
Infinite Matter Part. 1. c. 4, 9, 11.
, I call them Infinite, not as divided, or several, but as united in one body;
producing infinite effects; for, as I said, they make but one Infinite body of
Nature.

Also when in my Philosophical Letters Sect. 4 Let. 33. p. 530.
, I say, that the Animate part of Matter, considered in it self, could not
produce Infinite effects without the Inanimate, having nothing to work upon,
and withal; some perhaps will think I contradict my self, because in other
places, I have declared, that the rational part of animate Matter works or
makes figures in its own degree, without the help either of the sensitive or
inanimate; besides, it being matter, or material, why should it not be able to
produce effects in it self, as well as with other parts: To which I answer, my
opinion is, that the animate part of Matter, by which I include the sensitive
as well as the rational, could not without the inanimate part of Matter,
produce such infinite variety of effects as Nature has, and as are partly
subject to our perception; for without it there would be no grosser substance
for the sensitive to work on, nor nothing for the rational to direct: besides,
there would be no such degrees of Matter as thicker and thinner, rarer and
denser, etc. nor no variety of figures; nay, were there no inanimate part of
Matttr as well as animate, all productions, dissolutions; and what actions
soever would be done in an instant of time, and a man, or any other natural
Creature would be produced as soon as a thought of the mind; wherefore to poise
or balance the actions of Nature, there must of necessity be an inanimate,
dull, or passive degree of Matter, as well as there is an animate, active and
self-moving; and this triumvirate of the constitutive degrees of material
nature is so necessary, that Nature could not be what she is, nor work such
variety of figures, as she does, without it

When I say Part 1. c. 13.
, that Matter cannot know it self, because it is infinite; I do no not mean as
if it had not selfknowledg; for as Matter is self-moving, so it is also
selfknowing; nay, that the Inanimate part of Matter has also self-knowledg, I
have sufficiently declared heretofore; but my meaning is, that its knowledge
cannot be limited or circumscribed; and that it is an infinite natural
self-knowledg.

Also when in the same place I say, That Nature has no free will, and that no
change or alteration can be made in infinite and eternal Matter; I mean
concerning its own nature; for Matter cannot go beyond its nature, that is,
change from being Matter to something immaterial, or from a natural being, to a
non-being; nevertheless, Nature in her particular actions works and changes her
effects as she pleases, and according to the wisdom and liberty God has given
her,

When I say, that the sensitive animate part of Matter is the life of the
rational soul; I do not mean, as if the rational part was not living as well as
the sensitive; but I speak comparatively, in comparison to man; who as he has
humane life, soul and body, all three constituting or composing, but one entire
man; so in the composition of Nature, I name the Inanimate part the Body, the
Sensitive, the Life, and the Rational, the Soul of Nature; nevertheless all
parts have life and knowledge; for the inanimate, although it is not selfmoving,
and has not an active life and a perceptive knowledge, yet has it life and
knowledge according to the nature of its degree, that is, an innate and fixed
self-life and self-knowledg; and the sensitive, although it is not so subtle,
piercing and active a degree of self-moving Matter as the rational, yet has it
an active life and knowledge, according to the Nature of its degree; and it is
well to be observed, that each degree in their various commixtures, do never
change their natures; for the sensitive does not acquire a rational life and
knowledge, nor the rational a sensitive; neither does the inanimate part get an
active life and a perceptive knowledge, for all they are so closely commixt, but
each retains the nature of its degree; for as one part cannot be another part,
so one parts life and knowledge, cannot become another parts life and knowledge;
or else it would produce a confusion in Nature and all her actions.

In what place soever, both in my Philosophical Opinions and Letters, I say,
that the inanimate part of Matter has neither life nor self-knowledg; I mean,
it has not an active life and a perceptive self-knowledg, such as the animate
part of Matter has; for though the inanimate part of Matter is moved, yet it is
not selfmoving, but it moves by the help of the animate parts of Matter; which
by reason of their close and inseparable union and commixture, bear it along in
all their actions and operations, and thus its motions or actions are only
passive, not active: Nevertheless, although it has not self-motion, yet may it
have life and self-knowledg, according to its own Nature; for self-knowledg
does not depend upon motion, but is a fixed and innate being: In short, all
parts or degrees of Matter are living and knowing, but not all are self-moving,
but only the animate.

When I say, that all Matter lives in figures and * Phil. Opin. part. 2. c. 2.
Creatures, and all figures and Creatures lie or live in Matter; I mean, that
Infinite Matter moves figuratively, and that all Creatures are composed by
corporeal figurative motion; for in what places soever of my Philosophical
Works, I say Figure and Motion, I do not mean they are two several things
distinct from body, but I understand by it, corporeal figurative motion, or
self-moving figurative Matter, which is one and the same.

When I say Part. 2. c. 9.
, That the Rational part of Matter lives in the Sensitive, and the Sensitive in
the Inanimate; I do not mean, that one lies within the other like as several
Boxes are put together, the lesser in the bigger; but I use this expression
only to denote the close conjunction of these three degrees, and that they are
inseparably mixed together.

Concerning the Chapter of Vacuum in my Philosophical Opinions Part. 1. c. 6.
though I was doubtful then which opinion to adhere to, yet I have sufficiently
declared my meaning thereof in the foregoing observations, to wit, that there
can be no vacuity in Natures body.

When I name six Principal Motions, viz. Attraction, Phil. Opin. part 1. c. 9.
Contraction, Dilation, Digestion, Retention, Expulsion; I do not mean that
they are the principles of all motions, no more then a circular motion can be
said the principle of all natural motions, as I have declared before; for
particular motions are but effects of self-moving Matter. But I call them
principal, because to our humane sense they seem to be some chief sorts of
motions, in those natural bodies that are subject to our perception; but there
may be infinite other sorts of motions which we know not of; the same may be
said when I speak of the ground of Infinite compositions, which is symmetry;
and infinite divisions, which is number; for to speak properly, there is no
other ground, but self-moving Matter in Nature

When I make a distinction Phil. Let. Sect. 1. Let. 5. p. 23.
between forced, or Artificial and Natural Motions; as that, for example, the
motion of a Watch, or a Clock, is artificial, and not natural; my meaning is
not, as if artificial motions were something super, or praeter-natural, and had
no relation to Nature; but by the word Natural, I understand the particular
nature of some certain figure or Creature; and when such a figure has some
other exterior motions besides those which are proper to its particular nature,
caused by Art, I call them artificial, and do distinguish them from such
motions as are proper and natural to it; as for example, man's exterior natural
local motions, are going, leaping, dancing, running, etc. but not flying; which
is a motion to Birds, and winged Creatures: Now if a man should by some
Artacquire this motion of flying, and imitate such winged Creatures to whom it
is natural, then it would be an artificial or forced action to him, and not a
natural; also the nature of Iron or Steel is not to have an exterior
progressive local motion, such as animals and other Creatures have, and
therefore the motion of the wheels of a Watch is forced, or artificial:
Nevertheless, I say, that all these motions, although they be forced or
artificial, do not proceed from some exterior agent any otherwise but
occasionally, and that all motions whatsoever are intrinsecally inherent in the
body, or which is in motion; for motion cannot be transferred out of one body
into another, but every body moves by its own motion. Thus the intrinsecal
principle and cause of all particular, both interior and exterior motions or
actions, is in the body, which is in motion, even of those we call forced or
artificial, and proceeds not from some exterior agent, but occasionally; for
every part and particle of Nature is selfmoving, as consisting of a commixture
of animate Matter; and no motion can be imparted without body, by reason
there is no such thing as an incorporeal motion.

When I say, There is no rest in Nature; I mean, that all parts are either
moving, or moved; for although the inanimate part of Matter has no self-motion,
yet it is moved, and consequently never at rest; Nor can we say, that things do
rest, or have no motion at all, when they have not exterior progressive motion,
such as is perceptible by our sight; for this is but a gross exterior motion;
and a world of Gold may be as active interiously, as a world of Air is
exteriously; that is, the actions of Gold are as alterable, as those of air.

When, contradicting the opinion of Mr. Hobbes * Phil. Let. Sect. 1. 1. 12.
concerning voluntary motions, who says, That voluntary motions, as going,
speaking, moving our lips, depend upon a precedent thought of whither, which
way, and what, etc. I answer, that it implies a contradiction, to call them
Voluntary Motions, and yet say they depend on our imagination; for if the
imagination draws them this or that way, how can they be voluntary? My meaning
is not as if those actions were not self-actions, nor as if there were no
voluntary actions at all; for to make a balance between Natures actions, there
are voluntary, as well as occasioned actions, both in sense and reason; but
because Mr Hobbs says, that those actions are depending upon Imagination and
Fancy, and that Imagination is the first internal beginning of them, which sets
them a going, as the prime wheel of a Watch does the rest: My opinion is, that
after this rate they cannot properly be called voluntary, but are rather
necessitated, at least occasioned by the Mind or Fancy; for I oppose voluntary
actions to those that are occasioned or forced; which voluntary actions are
made by the self-moving parts by rote, and of their own accord; but occasioned
actions are made by imitation, although they are all self-actions, that is,
move by their own inherent self-motion.

When I say, That Animals by their shapes are not Phil. Opin. p. 2. c. 6.
tied or bound to any other kind of Creature, either for support or
nourishment, as Vegetables are, but are loose and free of themselves from all
others: My opinion is not, as if the animal figure were a single figure,
precised from all the rest of natural parts or figures, or from the body of
Nature, and stood in no need either of nourishment or support, but could
subsist of it self without any respect or relation to other Creatures: But I
speak comparatively, that in comparison to Vegetables, or such like Creatures,
it is more free in its exterior progressive local motions then they, which as
we see, being taken out of the ground where they grow, wither and change their
interior natural figures; for animals, may by a visible progressive motion
remove from such parts to other parts, which Vegetables cannot do: nevertheless
Animals depend as much upon other parts and Creatures, as others depend on
them, both for nourishment and respiration, etc. although they may subsist
without being fixed to some certain parts of ground: The truth is, some animals
can live no more without air, then fishes can live without water, or Vegetables
without ground; so that all parts must necessarily live with each other, and
none can boast that it needs not the assistance of any other part, for they are
all parts of one body.

When discoursing of the growth of an Animal, I Phil. Opin. part 2. c. 3.
say, that attractive motions do gather and draw substance proper to and for
that figure; I mean, that such sorts of corporeal motions attract and invite by
sympathy other parts to help to form that Creature; so that every where by
several substances, I mean several parts which are particular substances; that
is, corporeal particular figures; and by several places in the same Chapter, I
understand several distances of parts.

When in my Philosophical Letters I do mention that all Perception is made by
Patterning, I mean chiefly the perception of the exterior sensitive organs in
animals, as smelling, hearing, seeing, tasting, touching; whose perception, I
mean, is made by that sort of motion which is called patterning; for in my Book
of Philosophical Letters, I do only prove, that all perceptions cannot be made
by one sort of motion; as also that perception is not immediately made by the
exterior object, but by the perceiving or sentient parts: Nor do I treat in it
of all kinds or sorts of perceptions belonging to all kinds or sorts of
Creatures in Infinite Nature; for they are too numerous to be known by one
particular; How can an Animal tell what perception a Vegetable or Mineral has?
We may perceive that the Air, which is an Element, does pattern out sound; for
it is not done by reverberation, as pressure and reaction, by reason there will
be in some places, not only two several Echoes of one sound, but in some
three, or four; but surely one sound cannot be in several distant places at one
time: Also a Looking-glass, we see, does pattern out the figure of an object;
but yet we cannot be certainly affirmed, that either the Glass, or the Air,
have the same perceptions which Animals have; for although their patterns are
alike, yet their perceptions may be different: As for example, the picture of a
Man may be like its original, but yet who knows what perception it has? for
though it represents the exterior figure of an Animal, yet it is not of the
nature of an Animal; and therefore although a man may perceive his picture, yet
he knows not what perception the picture has of him; for we can but judge by our
selves of the perceptions of our own kind, that is, of Animal kind; and not of
the perceptions of other Creatures; for example, I observe, that the perception
of my exterior senses is made by an easy way of patterning out exterior
objects, and so conclude of the rest of my own kind, to wit, that the
perception of their exterior sensitive organs, is made after the same manner or
way; nay, I perceive, that also some perceptions of several other sorts of
Creatures are made by way of patterning, as in the forementioned examples of
the Air and Glass, and in Infectious Diseases; where several Creatures will be
infected, by one object; which certainly is not by an immediate propagation on
so many numerous parts, proceeding from the object, but by imitation of the
perceiving parts; but yet I cannot infer from thence, that all perceptions in
Nature are made by imitation or patterning; for some may, and some may not: and
although our rational perception, being more subtle then the sensitive, may
perceive somewhat more, and judge better of outward objects then the sensitive;
yet it cannot be infallibly assured, that it is only so, and not otherwise;
for we see that some animals are produced out of Vegetables, whose offspring
is not any ways like their producer; which proves, that not all actions of
Nature are made by imitation or patterning. In short, our reason does observe,
that all perception in general whatsoever, is made by corporeal figurative
self-motion, but it cannot perceive the particular figurative motions that make
every perception; and though some Learned are of opinion, that all perceptions
are made by pressure and reaction, yet it is not probable to sense and reason;
for this, being but one sort of action, would not make such variety of
perceptions in the infinite parts of Nature, as we may perceive there are.

Whenever I say, that outward objects work or cause such or such effects in
the body sentient; I do not mean, that the object is the only immediate cause
of the changes of those parts in the sentient body; but that it is only an
external or occasional cause, and that the effects in the sentient proceed from
its own inherent natural motions; which upon the perception of the exterior
object, cause such effects in the sentient, as are either agreeable to the
motions of the object, and that by way of imitation, which is called Sympathy;
or disagreeable, which is called Antipathy.

When I say, Phil. Opin. part 3. c. 19.
That the several senses of Animals, pattern out the several proprieties of one
object; as for example, the Tongue patterns out the taste; the Nostrils the
smell; the Ears the noise; the Eyes the exterior figure, shape, color, etc.
and do prove by this, that they are different things, dividable from each
other; and yet in other places, do affirm, that color, place, figure, quantity
or magnitude, etc. are one and the same with body, and inseparable from each
other, it is no contradiction; for to be dividable from such or such parts, and
to be dividable from Matter, are several things: Smell and Taste, although they
be material or corporeal, and cannot be divided from Matter, yet there is no
necessity that all parts of Nature must be subject to smell, or taste, or that
such parts must have such smells, and such tastes; for though Color, Place,
Taste, Smell, etc. are material, and cannot be without body; yet may they be
conceived by our sense and reason to be different and several figures, parts or
actions; for as there is no such thing as single parts, or single divisions in
Nature, but all compositions, divisions, changes and alterations, are within
the body of Nature; and yet there is such a variety and difference of natural
figures and actions, that one figure is not another, nor one action another; so
it is likewise with the mentioned proprieties, or what you will call them; which,
although they cannot be separated from body or matter, yet they may be altered,
changed, composed and divided with their parts several ways, and be perceived
as various and different actions of Nature, as they are; for as one body may
have several different motions at one and the same time; so it may also have
several proprieties, though not dividable from Matter (for all that is in
Nature, is material; nor can there be any such thing as Immaterial accidents,
qualities, properties, and the like) yet discernable by their different
actions, and changeable by the self-moving power of Nature.

But mistake me not, when I say they are several different figures, parts or
actions; for my meaning is not, as if body and they were different things
separable from each other; or as if Color, Place, Figure, Magnitude, etc. were
several parts of matter; for then it would follow, that some parts could be
without place, some without figure, some without color, etc. which is
impossible; for could there be a single Atome, yet that Atome would have
Color, Place, Figure, Magnitude, etc. only there would be no motion for want
of Parts, and consequently no Perception: But my meaning is, That the several
properties of a Body, as for example, Taste, Touch, Smell, Sound, being
perceived by the several senses of Animals, to wit, the Taste by the Tongue, the
Smell by the Nose, and Color and Figure by the Eye, etc. it proves that they
are several corporeal actions; for the Taste is not the Smell, nor Smell the
Sound, nor Sound the Color: Nevertheless they are all proprieties of the same
body, and no more dividable from body, then motion is from body, or body from
matter; only they are made according to the several compositions and divisions
of parts: And as for Color, Place, Magnitude, Figure, etc. as I said before,
could there be an Atome, it would have Color, Place, Figure; and though parts
be changed millions of ways, yet they cannot lose Color, Place and Figure. The
truth is, as there are no single finite parts in Nature, so there can neither
be single actions, or single perceptions; but as the parts or actions of Nature
move in one body, and not singly, several infinite ways, so the self-active
parts in one composed figure, make perceptions of those several compositions in
exterior objects.

But since my Opinion is, that the Perception of the exterior animal senses is
made by that sort of motion which is called Imitation or Patterning, as for
example, that the perception of Seeing is made by the sensitive, corporeal,
figurative motions in the Organ of sight, (which is the Eye) by their
patterning out the figure of an exterior object; some perhaps will question,
how it be possible that an eye, as also a glass, which is a more solid and
dense body than an eye, should pattern out so many different figures of
exterior objects, and yet keep their own figures perfect?

To which I answer, first, That not all the corporeal motions of an Object, are
perceptible by animal sense, which is too gross a sort of perception to
perceive them all; for can we say that Air, Light, Earth, etc. have no other
motions but what we perceive? We observe in a Sun-dial, that the light removes,
but we cannot see how it removes; and therefore our eye cannot perceive all the
motions or actions of an object. Next I say, as for the patterns of the
sensitive motions, the framing of them is no hinderance to those motions that
preserve the organ in its being; for there are many numerous and different
sorts of motions in one composed figure, and yet none is obstructive to the
other, but each knows its own work, and they act all unanimously to the
conservation of the whole figure; also when some actions change, it is not
necessary that they must all change at the same time; for if it were so, there
would be no difference between the actions of Nature, nor no difference of
figures.

Again, it may be objected, That if we can perceive the figure of an object,
then we must of necessity perceive the substance also; figure and body being
but one thing; for example, if we can perceive the figure of a thought, we must
also perceive that degree of matter which is named Rational; the same may be
said of the other degrees of matter, the Sensitive and Inanimate.

I answer, That although the Figures are perceived; yet the degree of matter
cannot be perceived, at least not in all objects, nor by all our sensitive
organs; for though the eye perceives light, yet it does not perceive what light
is made of, neither does the Ear perceive it, but only the Eye; also the Ear
perceives sound, yet the Eye does not; nor does the Ear know or perceive the
proper and immediate motions and parts that make the sound. Again, although the
Eye, or rather the sensitive motions that make the perception of sight,
perceive the light of fire, yet they do not perceive the heat thereof, which is
only subject to Touch; the same may be said of Smell and Taste; so that not all
the parts are subject to one sense; and if this be only in one sort of
Creatures, what difference of perception may there be in the infinite parts of
Nature? The truth is, our humane perception is stinted, so that we cannot
perceive all objects, but those that are within the compass of being perceived
by our senses; nay it is without question, but that there are more perceptions
in man than these Five, because there are Numerous different perceptive parts,
which have all their peculiar perceptions which we do not know of, what they
are, nor how they are made. But, as I said before, although the figure may be
perceived, yet the substance may not; and yet this does not prove that figure
and body are not one thing; for though such a figure is not bound to such
parts, yet parts cannot be figureless, no more then figure can be bodiless; and
the change of figures is not an annihilation or a total separation of figure
from body; a man's face may change from being red, to pale, and from pale to
red, and yet the substance of his face may remain the same; the like may be
said of the figures in our Eyes, or of the figures made by a Lookingglass, of
exterior objects, they may change, and yet the Eye remain perfect; and although
the subtilest corporeal motions cannot be perceived by us so perfectly as the
grosser actions of Nature, yet we cannot but know by our rational perception,
that there are such subtle actions which are no ways subject to our exterior,
sensitive perception: For though all actions of Nature are perceptive, yet none
can be more agil and active then the rational; and next to them, none more but
the sensitive action of imitation and patterning; for as we may perceive, the
actions of production, dissolution, growth, decay, etc. are far more slower
then the actions of patterning or copying out of exterior objects, by reason
those sorts of actions are gross, but these are subtle, purer and finer, and
therefore quicker and agiler.

But some may ask, Whether in the sensitive action of imitating or patterning
out the figures of foreign objects, there be inanimate matter mixed with it?

I answer, Yes; for it is impossible that one should either be, or work without
the other, by reason it is the propriety of the sensitive corporeal motions to
work upon, and with the inanimate parts, and the chief difference that is
between the rational and sensitive parts; for the rational can act within their
own degree of matter, but the sensitive are always encumbered with laboring on
the inanimate, and cannot work so as the rational do.

But then they will say, If the sensitive parts be so encumbered with the
inanimate, how is it possible that they can make such quick perceptions as we
observe they do?

I answer; There are many kinds and sorts of Perceptions, whereof some are
slower, and some quicker then others, according to the several degrees of
grossness and purity of the inanimate parts; so that we have no reason to
wonder at the variety of perceptions, and how some come to be quicker, and some
slower; for some parts of inanimate matter may be so pure and fine, that, were
they subject to our perception, we should take them to be parts of the Animate
degree.

Lastly; Some might say, That although the sensitive degree of matter be not
the same with the inanimate, yet they being so closely intermixed, as I have
described, may by a voluntary agreement, alter the parts of Nature as they
please, as, from a Vegetable into a Mineral; from a Mineral into an Animal,
etc. and that either of their own accord, or by imitation.

I answer; It may be possible in Nature, but yet it is not probable that they
do so, by reason all the self-moving parts do not in all composed figures work
agreeably, or alike; but their actions are for the most part poised by
Opposites, not only in infinite Nature, but also in all composed figures,
especially those that consist of different parts: Besides, the rational parts
of matter being the surveighing, ordering and designing parts, do not suffer
them in such actions to work as they please, but order them all according to
the Wisdom of Nature; and though sometimes it may happen that they work or move
irregularly, yet that is not perpetual in all actions, but sometimes; for
wheresoever is crossing and opposition, there must of necessity be sometimes
irregularities and disorders.

When in my Philosophical Letters, I say, That Sect. 1. Let. 10. 12.
there is difference between Life and Knowledge; by Life I understand Sense, or
the sensitive parts of matter; and by Knowledge Reason, or the Rational parts of
Matter; not as if the sensitive parts had not Knowledge as well as the rational,
or the rational Life as well as the sensitive; but I speak comparatively, in
the same sense as I name the sensitive part the Life, the rational the Soul,
and the inanimate the Body of Nature.

And thus much for the present.

There may be many more the like places in my Philosophical Works, especially
my Philosophical and Physical Opinions, which may seem dubious and obscure; but
I will not trouble you now with a long Commentary or Explanation of them; but
if God grant me life, I intend to rectify that mentioned Book of Philosophical
Opinions, in the best manner I can, because it contains the Ground of my
Philosophy, in which I hope there will be no labor lost, but it will
facilitate the Understanding of the Reader, and render my Conceptions easy and
intelligible, which is the only thing I am at, and labor for.

THE DESCRIPTION OF A NEW WORLD, CALLED The Blazing World.

WRITTEN By the Thrice Noble, Illustrious, and Excellent PRINCESS, THE Duchess
of Newcastle.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, in the Year, 1666.

TO THE DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE, ON HER New Blazing World.
OUr Elder World, with all their Skill and Arts,
Could but divide the World into three Parts:
Columbus then for Navigation famed,
Found a new World, America it is named:
Now this new World was found, it was not made,
Only discovered, lying in Times shade.
Then what are You, having no Chaos found
To make a World, or any such least ground?
But your creating Fancy, thought it fit
To make your World of Nothing, but pure Wit.
Your Blazing-world, beyond the Stars mounts higher,
Enlightens all with a Celestial Fire.
William Newcastle.

TO THE READER.
If you wonder, that I join a work of Fancy to my serious Philosophical
Contemplations; think not that it is out of a disparagement to Philosophy; or
out of an opinion, as if this noble study were but a Fiction of the Mind; for
though Philosophers may err in searching and enquiring after the Causes of
Natural effects, and many times embrace falsehoods for Truths; yet this does not
prove, that the Ground of Philosophy is merely Fiction, but the error proceeds
from the different motions of Reason, which cause different Opinions in
different parts, and in some are more irregular then in others; for Reason
being dividable, because material, cannot move in all parts alike; and since
there is but one Truth in Nature, all those that hit not this Truth, do err,
some more, some less; for though some may come nearer the mark then others,
which makes their Opinions seem more probable and rational then others; yet as
long as they swerve from this only Truth, they are in the wrong: Nevertheless,
all do ground their Opinions upon Reason; that is, upon rational probabilities,
at least, they think they do: But Fictions are an issue of man's Fancy, framed
in his own Mind, according as he pleases, without regard, whether the thing, he
fancies, be really existent without his mind or not; so that Reason searches
the depth of Nature, and enquires after the true Causes of Natural Effects; but
Fancy creates of its own accord whatsoever it pleases, and delights in its own
work. The end of Reason, is Truth; the end of Fancy, is Fiction: But mistake me
not, when I distinguish Fancy from Reason; I mean not as if Fancy were not made
by the Rational parts of Matter; but by Reason I understand a rational search
and enquiry into the causes of natural effects; and by Fancy a voluntary
creation or production of the Mind, both being effects, or rather actions of
the rational part of Matter; of which, as that is a more profitable and useful
study then this, so it is also more laborious and difficult, and requires
sometimes the help of Fancy, to recreate the Mind, and withdraw it from its
more serious Contemplations.

And this is the reason, why I added this Piece of Fancy to my Philosophical
Observations, and joined them as two Worlds at the ends of their Poles; both
for my own sake, to divert my studious thoughts, which I employed in the
Contemplation thereof, and to delight the Reader with variety, which is always
pleasing. But left my Fancy should stray too much, I chose such a Fiction as
would be agreeable to the subject I treated of in the former parts; it is
a'Description of a New World, not such as Lucian's, or the French man's World
in the Moon; but a World of my own Creating, which I call the Blazing-World:
The first part whereof is Romancical, the second Philosophical, and the third
is merely Fancy, or (as I may call it) Fantastical; which if it add any
satisfaction to you, I shall account my self a Happy Creatoress; if not, I must
be content to live a melancholy Life in my own World; I cannot call it a poor
World, if poverty be only want of Gold, Silver, and Jewels; for there is more
Gold in it then all the Chemists ever did, and (as I verily believe) will ever
be able to make. As for the Rocks of Diamonds, I wish with all my soul they
might be shared amongst my noble female friends, and upon that condition, I
would willingly quit my part; and of the Gold I should only desire so much as
might suffice to repair my Noble Lord and Husband's Losses: For I am not
Covetous, but as Ambitious as ever any of my Sex was, is, or can be; which
makes, that though I cannot be Henry the Fifth, or Charles the Second, yet I
endeavor to be Margaret the First; and although I have neither power, time nor
occasion to conquer the world as Alexander and Caesar did; yet rather then not
to be Mistress of one, since Fortune and the Fates would give me none, I have
made a World of my own: for which no body, I hope, will blame me, since it is
in every ones power to do the like.

THE DESCRIPTION OF A NEW WORLD, CALLED The Blazing World.
A Merchant traveling into a foreign Country, fell extremely in Love with a
young Lady; but being a stranger in that Nation, and beneath her both in Birth
and Wealth, he could have but little hopes of obtaining his desire; however his
love growing more and more vehement upon him, even to the slighting of all
difficulties, he resolved at last to steal her away; which he had the better
opportunity to do, because her Fathers house was not far from the Sea, and she
often using to gather shells upon the shore, accompanied not with above two or
three of her servants, it encouraged him the more to execute his design. Thus
coming one time with a little light Vessel, not unlike a Packet-boat, manned
with some few Seamen, and well victualled, for fear of some accidents, which
might perhaps retard their journey, to the place where she used to repair, he
forced her away: But when he fancied himself the happiest man of the World, he
proved to be the most unfortunate; for Heaven frowning at his theft, raised
such a Tempest, as they knew not what to do, or whither to steer their course;
so that the Vessel, both by its own lightness, and the violent motion of the
Wind, was carried as swift as an Arrow out of a Bow, toward the North Pole,
and in a short time reached the Icy Sea, where the wind forced it amongst huge
pieces of Ice; but being little, and light, it did by assistance and favor of
the Gods to this virtuous Lady, so turn and wind through those precipices, as
if it had been guided by some Experienced Pilot, and skilful Mariner: But alas!
those few men which were in it, not knowing whither they went, nor what was to
be done in so strange an adventure, and not being provided for so cold a
Voyage, were all frozen to death, the young Lady only, by the light of her
Beauty, the heat of her Youth, and Protection of the Gods, remaining alive:
Neither was it a wonder that the men did freeze to death; for they were not
only driven to the very end or point of the Pole of that World, but even to
another Pole of another World, which joined close to it; so that the cold
having a double strength at the conjunction of those two Poles, was
insupportable: At last, the Boat still passing on, was forced into another
World; for it is impossible to round this Worlds Globe from Pole to Pole, so as
we do from East to West; because the Poles of the other World, joining to the
Poles of this, do not allow any further passage to surround the World that way;
but if any one arrives to either of these Poles, he is either forced to return,
or to enter into another World; and least you should scruple at it, and think,
if it were thus, those that live at the Poles would either see two Suns at one
time, or else they would never want the Suns light for six months together, as
it is commonly believed; You must know, that each of these Worlds having its
own Sun to enlighten it, they move each one in their peculiar circles; which
motion is so just and exact, that neither can hinder or obstruct the other; for
they do not exceed their Tropicks, and although they should meet, yet we in
this world cannot so well perceive them, by reason of the brightness of our
Sun, which being nearer to us, obstructs the splendour of the Suns of the other
Worlds, they being too far off to be discerned by our optic perception, except
we use very good Telescopes, by which skilful Astronomers have often observed
two or three Suns at once.

But to return to the wandering Boat, and the distresed Lady, she seeing all
the Men dead, found small comfort in life; their bodies which were preserved
all that while from putrefaction and stench, by the extremity of cold, began
now to thaw, and corrupt; whereupon she having not strength enough to fling
them overboard, was forced to remove out of her small Cabine, upon the deck,
to avoid that nauseous smell; and finding the Boat swim between two plains of
Ice, as a stream that runs betwixt two shores, at last perceived land, but
covered all with snow: from which came walking upon the Ice strange Creatures,
in shape like Bears, only they went upright as men; those Creatures coming
near the Boat, catched hold of it with their Paws, that served them instead of
hands; some two or three of them entered first; and when they came out, the rest
went in one after another; at last having viewed and observed all that was in
the Boat, they spoke to each other in a language which the Lady did not
understand, and having carried her out of the Boat, sunk it, together with the
dead men.

The Lady now finding her self in so strange a place, and amongst such a
wonderful kind of Creatures, was extremely stricken with fear, and could
entertain no other Thoughts, but that every moment her life was to be a
sacrifice to their cruelty; but those Bear-like Creatures, how terrible soever
they appeared to her sight, yet were they so far from exercising any cruelty
upon her, that rather they showed her all civility and kindness imaginable; for
she being not able to go upon the ice, by reason of its slipperiness, they took
her up in their rough arms, and carried her into their City, where instead of
houses, they had Caves under ground; and as soon as they entered the City, both
Males and Females, young and old, flockt together to see this Lady, holding up
their paws in admiration; at last having brought her into a certain large and
spacious Cave, which they intended for her reception, they left her to the
custody of the Females, who entertained her with all kindness and respect, and
gave her such victuals as they were used to eat; but seeing her constitution
neither agreed with the temper of that Climate, nor their Diet, they were
resolved to carry her into another Island of a warmer temper; in which were men
like Foxes, only walking in an upright shape, who received their neighbors
the Bear-men with great civility and courtship, very much admiring this
beauteous Lady, and having discoursed some while together, agreed at last to
make her a present to the Emperor of their world; to which end, after she had
made some short stay in the same place, they brought her cross that Island to a
large River, whose stream run smooth and clear, like Crystal; in which were
numerous Boats, much like our Fox-traps; in one whereof she was carried, some
of the Bearand Fox-men waiting on her; and as soon as they had crossed the
River, they came into an Island where there were Men which had heads, beaks,
and feathers, like Wild-geese, only they went in an upright shape, like the
Bear-men and Fox-men; their rumps they carried between their legs, their wings
were of the same length with their bodies, and their tails of an indifferent
size, trailing after them like a Ladies Garment; and after the Bear- and
Fox-men had declared their intention and design to their neighbors, the Geese-
or Bird-men, some of them joined to the rest, and attended the Lady through
that Island, till they came to another great and large River, where there was a
preparation made of many Boats, much like Birds nests, only of a bigger size;
and having crossed that River, they arrived into another Island, which was of a
pleasant and mild temper, full of Woods, and the inhabitants thereof were
Satyrs, who received both the Bear- Fox- and Bird-men, with all respect and
civility; and after some conferences (for they all understood each others
language) some chief of the Satyrs joining to them, accompanied the Lady out of
that Island to another River, wherein were very handsome and commodious Barges;
and having crossed that River, they entered into a large and spacious Kingdom,
the men whereof were of a Grass-green complexion, who entertained them very
kindly, and provided all conveniences for their further voyage: hitherto they
had only crossed Rivers, but now they could not avoid the open Seas any longer;
wherefore they made their Ships and tacklings ready to sail over into the
Island, where the Emperor of their Blazingworld (for so it was called) kept his
residence; very good Navigators they were; and though they had no knowledge of
the Lodestone, or Needle, or pendulous Watches, yet (which was as serviceable
to them) they had subtle observations, and great practice; in so much that
they could not only tell the depth of the Sea in every place, but where there
were shelves of Sand, Rocks, and other obstructions to be avoided by skillful
and experienced Seamen: Besides, they were excellent Augurers, which skill
they counted more necessary and beneficial then the use of Compasses, Cards,
Watches, and the like; but above the rest, they had an extraordinary Art, much
to be taken notice of by experimental Philosophers, and that was a certain
Engine, which would draw in a great quanty of air, and shoot forth wind with a
great force; this Engine in a calm, they placed behind their ships, and in a
storm, before; for it served against the raging waves, like Canons against an
hostile Army, or besieged Town, it would batter and beat the waves in pieces,
were they as high as steeples; and as soon as a breach was made, they forced
their passage through, in spite even of the most furious wind, using two of
those Engines at every Ship, one before, to beat off the waves, and another
behind to drive it on; so that the artificial wind had the better of the
natural; for it had a greater advantage of the waves then the natural of the
ships; the natural being above the face of the water, could not without a
downright motion enter or press into the ships; whereas the artificial with a
sideward motion did pierce into the bowels of the waves: Moreover, it is to be
observed, that in a great tempest they would join their ships in battle array,
and when they feared wind and waves would be too strong for them, if they
divided their ships, they joined as many together as the compass or advantage
of the places of the liquid Element would give them leave; for their ships were
so ingeniously contrived, that they could fasten them together as close as a
honeycomb without waste of place; and being thus united, no wind nor waves
were able to separate them. The Emperors ships were all of Gold, but the
Merchants and Skippers of Leather; the Golden ships were not much heavier then
ours of Wood, by reason they were neatly made, and required not such thickness,
neither were they troubled with Pitch, Tar, Pumps, Guns, and the like, which
make our Wooden-ships very heavy; for though they were not all of a piece, yet
they were so well sodder'd, that there was no fear of leaks, chinks, or clefts;
and as for Guns, there was no use of them, because they had no other enemies
but the winds; but the Leather ships were not altogether so sure, although much
lighter; besides, they were pitched to keep out water.

Having thus prepared and ordered their Navy, they went on in despite of Calm
or Storm, and though the Lady at first fancied her self in a very sad
condition, and her mind was much tormented with doubts and fears, not knowing
whether this strange adventure would tend to her safety or destruction; yet she
being withal of a generous spirit, and ready wit, considering what dangers she
had past, and finding those sorts of men civil and diligent attendants to her,
took courage, and endeavored to learn their language; which after she had
obtained so far, that partly by some words and signs she was able to apprehend
their meaning, she was so far from being afraid of them, that she thought her
self not only safe, but very happy in their company: By which we may see, that
Novelty discomposes the mind, but acquaintance settles it in peace and
tranquillity. At last, having passed by several rich Islands and Kingdoms, they
went toward Paradise, which was the seat of the Emperor; and coming in sight
of it, rejoiced very much; the Lady at first could perceive nothing but high
Rocks, which seemed to touch the Skies; and although they appeared not of an
equal height, yet they seemed to be all one piece, without partitions; but at
last drawing nearer, she perceived a clift, which was a part of those Rocks,
out of which she spied coming forth a great number of Boats, which afar off
showed like a company of Ants, marching one after another; the Boats appeared
like the holes or partitions in a Honeycomb, and when joined together, stood
as close; the men were of several complexions, but none like any of our World;
and when both the Boats and Ships met, they saluted and spoke to each other
very courteously; for there was but one language in all that world, nor no more
but one Emperor, to whom they all submitted with the greatest duty and
obedience, which made them live in a continued peace and happiness, not
acquainted with other foreign wars, or homebred insurrections. The Lady now
being arrived at this place, was carried out of her Ship into one of those
Boats, and conveyed through the same passage (for there was no other) into
that part of the world where the Emperor did reside; which part was very
pleasant, and of a mild temper: within it self it was divided by a great number
of vast and large Rivers, all ebbing and flowing, into several Islands of
unequal distance from each other, which in most parts were as pleasant,
healthful, rich, and fruitful, as Nature could make them; and, as I mentioned
before, secure from all foreign invasions, by reason there was but one way to
enter, and that like a Labyrinth, so winding and turning among the rocks, that
no other Vessels but small Boats, could pass, carrying not above three
passengers at a time: On each side all along this narrow and winding River,
there were several Cities, some of Marble, some of Alabaster, some of Agat,
some of Amber, some of Coral, and some of other precious materials not known in
our world; all which after the Lady had passed, she came to the Imperial City,
named Paradise, which appeared in form like several Islands; for Rivers did run
betwixt every street, which together with the Bridges, whereof there was a
great number, were all paved; the City it self was built of Gold, and their
Architectures were noble, stately, and magnificent, not like our Modern, but
like those in the Romans time; for our Modern Buildings are like those houses
which Children use to make of Cards, one story above another, fitter for Birds,
then Men; but theirs were more large, and broad, then high; the highest of them
did not exceed two stories, besides those rooms that were underground, as
Cellars, and other offices. The Emperors Palace stood upon an indifferent
ascent from the Imperial City; at the top of which ascent was a broad Arch,
supported by several Pillars, which went round the Palace, and contained four
of our English miles in compass: upon the top of the Arch stood the Emperors
Guard, which consisted of several sorts of men; at every half mile was a Gate
to enter, and every Gate was of a different fashion; the first, which allowed a
passage from the Imperial City into the Palace, had on either hand a Cloister,
the outward part whereof stood upon Arches sustained by Pillars, but the inner
part was close: Being entered through the Gate, the Palace it self appeared in
its middle like the Isle of a Church, a mile and a half long, and half a mile
broad; the roof of it was all arched, and rested upon Pillars, so artificially
placed, that a stranger would lose himself therein without a Guide; at the
extreme sides, that is, between the outward and inward part of the Cloister,
were Lodgings for Attendants, and in the midst of the Palace, the Emperors own
rooms; whose lights were placed at the top of every one, because of the heat of
the Sun: the Emperors appartement for State was no more enclosed then the rest;
only an Imperial Throne was in every appartement, of which the several
adornments could not be perceived until one entered, because the Pillars were
so just opposite to one another, that all the adornments could not be seen at
once. The first part of the Palace was, as the Imperial City, all of Gold, and
when it came to the Emperors appartement, it was so rich with Diamonds, Pearls,
Rubies, and the like precious stones, that it surpasses my skill to enumerate
them all. Amongst the rest, the Imperial Room of State appeared most
magnificent; it was paved with green Diamonds (for in that World are Diamonds
of all colors) so artificially, as it seemed but of one piece; the Pillars
were set with Diamonds so close, and in such a manner, that they appeared most
Glorious to the sight; between every Pillar was a bow or arch of a certain sort
of Diamonds, the like whereof our World does not afford; which being placed in
every one of the arches in several rows, seemed just like so many Rainbows of
several different colors. The roof of the Arches was of blew Diamonds, and in
the midst thereof was a Carbuncle, which represented the Sun; the rising and
setting Sun at the East and West side of the room were made of Rubies. Out of
this room there was a passage into the Emperors Bedchamber, the walls whereof
were of Jet, and the floor of black Marble; the roof was of mother of Pearl,
where the Moon and Blazing-stars were represented by white Diamonds, and his
Bed was made of Diamonds and Carbuncles.

No sooner was the Lady brought before the Emperor, but he conceived her to be
some Goddess, and offered to worship her; which she refused, telling him, (for
by that time she had pretty well learned their language) that although she came
out of another world, yet was she but a mortal; at which the Emperor rejoicing,
made her his Wife, and gave her an absolute power to rule and govern all that
World as she pleased. But her subjects, who could hardly be persuaded to
believe her mortal, tendered her all the veneration and worship due to a Deity.

Her accoustrement after she was made Empress, was as follows: On her head
she wore a Cap of Pearl, and a Half Moon of Diamonds just before it; on the top
of her Crown came spreading over a broad Carbuncle, cut in the form of the Sun;
her Coat was of Pearl, mixed with blew Diamonds, and fringed with red ones; her
Buskins and Sandals were of green Diamonds: In her left hand she held a
Buckler, to signify the Defense of her Dominions; which Buckler was made of
that sort of Diamond as has several different Colors; and being cut and made
in the form of an arch, showed like a Rainbow; In her right hand she carried a
Spear made of a white Diamond, cut like the tail of a Blazing-star, which
signified that she was ready to assault those that proved her Enemies.

None was allowed to use or wear Gold but those of the Imperial race, which
were the only Nobles of the State; nor durst any one wear Jewels but the
Emperor, the Empress, and their Eldest Son; notwithstanding that they had an
infinite quantity both of Gold and precious Stones in that World; for they had
larger extents of Gold, then our Arabian Sands; their precious Stones were
Rocks, and their Diamonds of several Colors; they used no coin, but all their
Traffic was by exchange of several Commodities.

Their Priests and Governors were Princes of the Imperial Blood, and made
Eunuchs for that purpose; and as for the ordinary sort of men in that part of
the World where the Emperor resided, they were of several Complexions; not
white, black, tawny, oliveor ash-colored; but some appeared of an Azure, some
of a deep Purple, some of a Grass-green, some of a Scarlet, some of an
Orange-colour, etc. Which Colors and Complexions, whether they were made by
the bare reflection of light, without the assistance of small particles, or by
the help of well-ranged and ordered Atoms; or by a continual agitation of
little Globules; or by some pressing and reacting motion, I am not able to
determine. The rest of the Inhabitants of that World, were men of several
different sorts, shapes, figures, dispositions, and humors, as I have already
made mention heretofore; some were Bear-men, some Worm-men, some Fish- or
Mear-men, otherwise called Syrenes; some Bird-men, some Fly-men, some Ant-men,
some Geese-men, some Spider-men, some Lice-men, some Fox-men, some Ape-men,
some Jack-daw-men, some Magpie-men, some Parrot-men, some Satyrs, some Giants,
and many more, which I cannot all remember; and of these several sorts of men,
each followed such a profession as was most proper for the nature of their
species, which the Empress encouraged them in, especially those that had
applied themselves to the study of several Arts and Sciences; for they were as
ingenious and witty in the invention of profitable and useful Arts, as we are
in our world, nay, more; and to that end she erected Schools, and founded
several Societies. The Bear-men were to be her Experimental Philosophers, the
Bird-men her Astronomers, the FlyWorm-and Fish-men her Natural Philosophers,
the Ape-men her Chemists, the Satyrs her Galenick Physicians, the Fox-men her
Politicians, the Spider- and Lice-men her Mathematicians, the Jackdaw-Magpieand
Parrot-men her Orators and Logicians, the Giants her Architects, etc. But
before all things, she having got a sovereign power from the Emperor over all
the World, desired to be informed both of the manner of their Religion and
Government, and to that end she called the Priests and Statesmen, to give her
an account of either. Of the Statesmen she enquired, first, Why they had so
few Laws? To which they answered, That many Laws made many Divisions, which
most commonly did breed factions, and at last brake out into open wars. Next,
she asked, Why they preferred the Monarchical form of Government before any
other? They answered, That as it was natural for one body to have but one head,
so it was also natural for a Politic body to have but one Governor; and that a
Commonwealth, which had many Governors was like a Monster of many heads:
besides, said they, a Monarchy is a divine form of Government, and agrees most
with our Religion; for as there is but one God, whom we all unanimously worship
and adore with one Faith, so we are resolved to have but one Emperor, to whom
we all submit with one obedience.

Then the Empress seeing that the several sorts of her Subjects had each their
Churches apart, asked the Priests whether they were of several Religions? They
answered her Majesty, That there was no more but one Religion in all that
World, nor no diversity of opinions in that same Religion; for though there
were several sorts of men, yet had they all but one opinion concerning the
Worship and Adoration of God. The Empress asked them, Whether they were Jews,
Turks, or Christians? We do not know, said they, what Religions those are; but
we do all unanimously acknowledge, worship and adore the Only, Omnipotent, and
Eternal God, with all reverence, submission, and duty. Again, the Empress
enquired, Whether they had several Forms of Worship? They answered, No: For our
Devotion and Worship consists only in Prayers, which we frame according to our
several necessities, in Petitions, Humiliations, Thanksgiving, and c, Truly,
replied the Empress, I thought you had been either Jews, or Turks, because I
never perceived any Women in your Congregations; But what is the reason, you
bar them from your religious Assemblies? It is not fit, said they, that Men and
Women should be promiscuously together in time of Religious Worship; for their
company hinders Devotion, and makes many, instead of praying to God, direct
their devotion to their Mistresses. But, asked the Empress, Have they no
Congregation of their own, to perform the duties of Divine Worship, as well as
Men? No, answered they: but they stay at home, and say their Prayers by
themselves in their Closets. Then the Empress desired to know the reason why
the Priests and Governors of their World were made Eunuchs? They answered, To
keep them from Marriage: For Women and Children most commonly make disturbance
both in Church and State. But, said she, Women and Children have no employment
in Church or State. It Is true, answered they; but although they are not
admitted to public employments, yet are they so prevalent with their Husbands
and Parents, that many times by their importunate persuasions, they cause as
much, nay, more mischief secretly, then if they had the management of public
affairs.

The Empress having received an information of what concerned both Church and
State, passed some time in viewing the Imperial Palace, where she admired much
the skill and ingenuity of the Architects, and enquired of them, first, why they
built their Houses no higher then two stories from the Ground? They answered
her Majesty, That the lower their buildings were, the less were they subject
either to the heat of the Sun, to Wind, Tempest, Decay, etc. Then she desired
to know the reason, why they made them so thick? They answered, That the
thicker the Walls were, the warmer were they in Winter, and cooler in Summer,
for their thickness kept out both cold and heat. Lastly, she asked, why they
arched their roofs, and made so many Pillars? They replied, That Arches and
Pillars, did not only grace a building very much, and caused it to appear
Magnificent, but made it also firm and lasting.

The Empress was very well satisfied with their answers; and after some time,
when she thought that her new founded societies of the Vertuoso's had made a
good progress in their several employments, which she had put them upon, she
caused a Convocation first of the Bird-men, and commanded them to give her a
true relation of the two Celestial bodies, viz. the Sun and Moon, which they
did with all the obedience and faithfulness befitting their duty.

The Sun, as much as they could observe, they related to be a firm or solid
Stone, of a vast bigness, of color yellowish, and of an extraordinary
splendour; but the Moon, they said, was of a whitish color; and although she
looked dim in the presence of the Sun, yet had she her own light, and was a
shining body of her felf, as might be perceived by her vigorous appearance in
Moon-shiny nights; the difference only betwixt her own and the Suns light was,
that the Sun did strike his beams in a direct line; but the Moon never
respected the Center of their World in a right line, but her Center was always
excentrical. The spots both in the Sun and Moon, as far as they were able to
perceive, they affirmed to be nothing else but flaws and stains of their stony
bodies. Concerning the heat of the Sun, they were not of one opinion; some
would have the Sun hot in it self, alleging an old Tradition, that it should
at some time break asunder, and burn the Heavens, and consume this world into
hot embers, which, said they, could not be done, if the Sun were not fiery of
it self. Others again said, This opinion could not stand with reason; for Fire
being a destroyer of all things, the Sun-stone after this manner would burn up
all the near adjoining bodies: besides, said they, Fire cannot subsist
withoutfuel; and the Sunstone having nothing to feed on, would in a short time
consume it self; wherefore they thought it more probable that the Sun was not
actually hot, but only by the reflection of its light; so that its heat was an
effect of its light, both being immaterial: But this opinion again was laughed
at by others, and rejected as ridiculous, who thought it impossible that one
immaterial should produce another; and believed that both the light and heat of
the Sun proceeded from a swift Circular motion of the ethereal Globules, which
by their striking upon the optic nerve, caused light, and their motion
produced heat: But neither would this opinion hold; for, said some, then it
would follow, that the sight of Animals is the cause of light, and that, were
there no eyes, there would be no light; which was against all sense and reason.
Thus they argued concerning the heat and light of the Sun; but which is
remarkable, none did say, that the Sun was a globous fluid body, and had a
swift circular motion; but all agreed it was fixed and firm like a center, and
therefore they generally called it the Sun-stone.

Then the Emperess asked them the reason, Why the Sun and Moon did often appear
in different postures or shapes, as sometimes magnified, sometimes diminished,
sometimes elevated, otherwhiles depressed, now thrown to the right, and then to
the left? To which some of the Bird-men answered, That it proceeded from the
various degrees of heat and cold, which are found in the air, from whence did
follow a differing density and rarity; and likewise from the vapors that are
interposed, whereof those that ascend are higher and less dense then the
ambient air, but those which descend are heavier, and more dense. But others
did with more probability affirm, that it was nothing else but the various
patterns of the Air; for like as Painters do not copy out one and the same
original just alike at all times, so, said they, do several parts of the Air
make different patterns of the luminous bodies of the Sun and Moon, which
patterns, as several copies, the sensitive motions do figure out in the
substance of our eyes.

This answer the Emperess liked much better then the former, and enquired
further, what opinion they had of those Creatures that are called the motes of
the Sun? To which they answered, That they were nothing else but streams of
very small, rare and transparent particles, through which the Sun was
represented as through a glass; for if they were not transparent, said they,
they would eclipse the light of the Sun; and if not rare and of an airy
substance, they would hinder Flies from flying in the air, at least retard
their flying motion: Nevertheless, although they were thinner then the thinnest
vapor, yet were they not so thin as the body of air, or else they would not be
perceptible by animal sight. Then the Emperess asked, Whether they were living
Creatures? They answered, Yes: Because they did increase and decrease, and were
nourished by the presence, and starved by the absence of the Sun.

Having thus finished their discourse of the Sun and Moon, the Emperess desired
to know what Stars there were besides? But they answered, that they could
perceive in that World none other but Blazing-stars, and from thence it had the
name that it was called the Blazingworld; and these Blazing-stars, said they,
were such solid, firm and shining bodies as the Sun and Moon, not of a
Globular, but of several sorts of figures, some had tails, and some other kinds
of shapes.

After this, The Emperess asked them, What kind of substance or creature the
Air was? The Bird-men answered, That they could have no other perception of the
air, but by their own respiration: For, said they, some bodies are only
subject to touch, others only to sight, and others only to smell; but some
are subject to none of our exterior senses: For Nature is so full of variety,
that our weak senses cannot perceive all the various sorts of her Creatures;
neither is there any one object perceptible by all our senses, no more then
several objects are by one sense. I believe you, replied the Empress; but if
you can give no account of the Air, said she, you will hardly be able to inform
me how Wind is made; for they say that Wind is nothing but motion of the Air.
The Bird-men answered, That they observed Wind to be more dense then Air, and
therefore subject to the sense of Touch; but what properly Wind was, and the
manner how it was made, they could not exactly tell; some said, it was caused
by the Clouds falling on each other, and others, that it was produced of a hot
and dry exhalation, which ascending, was driven down again by the coldness of
the air that is in the middle Region, and by reason of its lightness, could not
go directly to the bottom, but was carried by the Air up and down: Some would
have it a flowing water of the Air; and others again a flowing Air moved by the
blas of the Stars.

But the Emperess seeing they could not agree concerning the cause of Wind,
asked, whether they could tell how Snow was made? To which they answered, That
according to their observation, Snow was made by a commixture of Water, and
some certain extract of the element of Fire that is under the Moon; a small
portion of which extract being mixed with Water, and beaten by Air or Wind,
made a white froth called Snow, which being after some while dissolved by the
heat of the same spirit, turned to Water again. This observation amazed the
Emperess very much; for she had hitherto believed, That Snow was made by cold
motions, and not by such an agitation or beating of a fiery extract upon water:
Nor could she be persuaded to believe it until the Fish-or Mear-men had
delivered their observation upon the making of Ice, which, they said, was not
produced, as some had hitherto conceived, by the motion of the Air, raking the
Superficies of the Earth, but by some strong saline vapor arising out of the
Seas, which condensed Water into Ice; and the more quantity there was of that
vapor, the greater were the Mountains or Precipices of Ice; but the reason
that it did not so much freeze in the Torrid Zone, or under the Ecliptic, as
near or under the Poles, was, that this vapor in those places being drawn up
by the Sunbeams into the middle Region of the Air, was only condensed into
water, and fell down in showers of rain; when as, under the Poles, the heat of
the Sun being not so vehement, the same vapor had no force or power to rise so
high, and therefore caused so much Ice, by ascending and acting only upon the
surface of water.

This Relation confirmed partly the observation of the Bird-men concerning the
cause of Snow; but since they had made mention that that same extract, which by
its commixture with Water made Snow, proceeded from the Element of Fire, that
is under the Moon; The Emperess asked them of what nature that Elementary Fire
was; whether it was like ordinary fire here upon Earth, or such a fire as is
within the bowels of the Earth, and as the famous mountains Vesuvius and AEtna
do burn withal, or whether it was such a sort of fire as is found in flints,
etc. They answered, That the Elementary Fire, which is underneath the Sun, was
not so solid as any of those mentioned fires; because it had no solid fuel to
feed on; but yet it was much like the flame of ordinary fire, only somewhat
more thin and fluid; for flame, said they, is nothing else but the airy part of
a fired body.

Lastly, the Emperess asked the Bird-men of the nature of Thunder and
Lightning? and whether it was not caused by roves of Ice falling upon each
other? To which they answered, That it was not made that way, but by an
encounter of cold and heat; so that an exhalation being kindled in the Clouds,
did dash forth Lightning, and that there were so many rentings of Clouds as
there were founds and Cracking noises: But this opinion was contradicted by
others, who affirmed that Thunder was a sudden and monstrous blas, stirred up
in the Air, and did not always require a Cloud; but the Emperess not knowing
what they meant by blas (for even they themselves were not able to explain the
sense of this word) liked the former better; and to avoid hereafter tedious
disputes, and have the truth of the Phaenomena's of Celestial bodies more
exactly known, commanded the Bear-men; and will never lead you to the knowledge
of Truth; Wherefore I command you again to break them; for you may observe the
progressive motions of Celestial bodies with your natural eyes better then
through Artificial Glasses. The Bear-men being exceedingly troubled at her
Majesty's displeasure concerning their Telescopes, kneeled down, and in the
humblest manner petitioned that they might not be broken; for, said they, we
take more delight in Artificial delusions, then in natural truths. Besides, we
shall want employments for our senses, and subjects for arguments; for were
there nothing but truth, and no falsehood, there would be no occasion for to
dispute, and by this means we should want the aim and pleasure of our
endeavors in consuting and contradicting each other; neither would one man be
thought wiser then another, but all would either be alike knowing and wise, or
all would be fools; wherefore we most humbly beseech your Imperial Majesty to
spare our Glasses, which are our only delight, and as dear to us as our lives.
The Emperess at last consented to their request, but upon condition, that their
disputes and quarrels should remain within their Schools, and cause no factions
or disturbances in State, or Government. The Bear-men, full of joy, returned
their most humble thanks to the Emperess; and to make her amends for the
displeasure which their Telescopes had occasioned, told her Majesty, that they
had several other artificial Optick-glasses, which they were sure would give
her Majesty a great deal more satisfaction. Amongst the rest they brought forth
several Microscopes, by the means of which they could enlarge the shapes of
little bodies, and make a Lowse appear as big as an Elephant, and a Mite as big
as a Whale. First of all they showed the Emperess a gray Drone-flye, wherein
they observed that the greatest part of her face, nay, of her head, consisted
of two large bunches all covered over with a multitude of small Pearls or
Hemispheres in a Trigonal order, which Pearls were of two degrees, smaller and
bigger; the smaller degree was lowermost, and looked toward the ground; the
other was upward, and looked sideward, forward and and backward: They were all
so smooth and polished, that they were able to represent the image of any
object, the number of them was in all 14000. After the view of this strange and
miraculous Creature, and their several observations upon it, the Emperess asked
them what they judged those little Hemispheres might be? They answered, That
each of them was a perfect eye, by reason they perceived that each was covered
with a Transparent Cornea, containing a liquor within them, which resembled the
watery or glassie humor of the Eye. To which the Emperess replied, That they
might be glassie Pearls, and yet not eyes, and that perhaps their Microscopes
did not truly inform them: But they smilingly answered her Majesty, That she
did not know the virtue of those Microscopes; for they did never delude, but
rectify and inform their senses; nay, the World, said they, would be but blind
without them, as it has been in former ages before those Microscopes were
invented.

After this, they took a Charcoal, and viewing it with one of their best
Microscopes, discovered in it an infinite multitude of pores, some bigger, some
less; so close and thick, that they left but very little space betwixt them to
be filled with a solid body; and to give her Imperial Majesty a better
assurance thereof, they counted in a line of them an inch long, no less then
2700 pores; from which observation they drew this following conclusion, to wit,
that this multitude of pores was the cause of the blackness of the Coal; for,
said they, a body that has so many pores, from each of which no light is
reflected, must necessarily look black, since black is nothing else but a
privation of light, or a want of reflection. But the Emperess replied, That if
all colors were made by reflection of light, and that black was as much a
color as any other color; then certainly they contradicted themselves in
saying, that black was made by want of reflection. However, not to interrupt
your Microscopical inspections, said she, let us see how Vegetables appear
through your Glasses; whereupon they took a Nettle, and by the virtue of the
Microscope, discovered that underneath the points of the Nettle there were
certain little bags or bladders, containing a poisonous liquor, and when the
points had made way into the interior parts of the skin, they like
Syringe-pipes served to conveigh that same liquor into them. To which
observation the Emperess replied, That if there were such poison in Nettles,
then certainly in eating of them, they would hurt us inwardly, as much as they
do outwardly? But they answered, That it belonged to Physicians more then to
Experimental Philosophers, to give reasons hereof; for they only made
Microscopial inspections, and related the figures of the natural parts of
Creatures according to the presentation of their glasses.

Lastly, They showed the Emperess a Flea, and a Lowse; which Creatures through
the Microscope appeared so terrible to her sight, that they had almost put her
into a swoon; the description of all their parts would be very tedious to
relate, and therefore I Will forbear it at this present. The Emperess after the
view of those strangely-shaped Creatures, pitied much those that are molested
with them, especially poor Beggars, which although they have nothing to live on
themselves, are yet necessitated to maintain and feed of their own flesh and
blood, a company of such terrible Creatures called Lice, who instead of thanks,
do reward them with pains, and torment them for giving them nourishment and
food. But after the Emperess had seen the shapes of these monstrous Creatures,
she desired to know whether their Microscopes could hinder their biting, or at
least show some means how to avoid them? To which they answered, That such Arts
were mechanical and below that noble study of Microscopical observations. Then
the Emperess asked them whether they had not such sorts of Glasses that could
enlarge and magnify the shapes of great bodies, as well as they had done of
little ones? Whereupon they took one of their best and largest Microscopes, and
endeavored to view a Whale through it; but alas! the shape of the Whale was so
big, that its circumference went beyond the magnifying quality of the Glass;
whether the error proceeded from the Glass, or from a wrong position of the
Whale against the reflection of light, I cannot certainly tell. The Emperess
seeing the insufficiency of those Magnifying-glasses, that they were not able
to enlarge all sorts of objects, asked the Bear-men whether they could not make
glasses of a contrary nature to those they had showed her, to wit, such as
instead of enlarging or magnifying the shape or figure of an object, could
contract it beneath its natural proportion: Which, in obedience to her
Majesty's Commands, they did; and viewing through one of the best of them, a
huge and mighty Whale appeared no bigger then a Sprat; nay, through some no
bigger then a Vinegar-Eele; and through their ordinary ones, an Elephant seemed
no bigger then a Flea; a Camel no bigger then a Lowse; and an Ostrich no bigger
then a Mite. To relate all their optic observations through the several sorts
of their Glasses, would be a tedious work, and tire even the most patient
Reader, wherefore I Will pass them by; only this was very remarkable and worthy
to be taken notice of, that notwithstanding their great skill, industry and
ingenuity in Experimental Philosophy, they could yet by no means contrive such
Glasses, by the help of which they could spy out a Vacuum, with all its
dimensions, nor Immaterial substances, Non-beings, and Mixt-beings, or such as
are between something and nothing; which they were very much troubled at,
hoping that yet, in time, by long study and practice, they might perhaps attain
to it.

The Bird-and Bear-men being dismissed, the Emperess called both the Syrenes,
or Fish-men, and the Worm-men, to deliver their observations which they had
made, both within the Seas, and the Earth. First she enquired of the Fish-men
whence the saltness of the Sea did proceed? To which they answered, That there
was a volatile salt in those parts of the Earth, which as a bosom contain the
Waters of the Sea, which salt being imbibed by the Sea, became fixed; and this
imbibing motion was that they called the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea; for,
said they, the rising and swelling of the water, is caused by those parts of
the volatile salt as are not so easily imbibed, which striving to ascend above
the water, bear it up with such a motion, as Man, or some other animal
Creature, in a violent certainly those may be said to be of such a mixed nature,
that is, partly flesh, and partly fish: But how is it possible, replied the
Emperess, that they should live both in Water, and on the Earth, since those
Animals that live by the respiration of air, cannot live within Water, and
those that live in Water, cannot live by the respiration of Air, as experience
does sufficiently witness. They answered her Majesty, That as there were
different sorts of Creatures, so they had also different ways of respirations;
for respiration, said they, was nothing else but a composition and division of
parts, and the motions of nature being infinitely various, it was impossible
that all Creatures should have the like motions; wherefore it was not
necessary, that all animal Creatures should be bound to live either by the air,
or by water only, but according as Nature had ordered it convenient to their
species. The Emperess seemed very well satisfied with their answer, and desired
to be further informed, Whether all animal Creatures did continue their species
by a successive propagation of particulars, and whether in every species the
offspring did always resemble their Generator or Producer, both in their
interior and exterior figures? They answered her Majesty, That some species or
sorts of Creatures, were kept up by a successive propagation of an offspring
that was like the producer, but some were not; of the first rank, said they,
are all those animals that are of different sexes, besides several others; but
of the second rank are for the most part those we call insects, whose
production proceds from such causes as have no conformity or likeness with
their produced effects; as for example, Maggots bred out of Cheese, and several
others generated out of Earth, Water, and the like. But said the Emperess,
there is some likeness between Maggots and Cheese, for Cheese has no blood, and
so neither have Maggots; besides, they have almost the same taste which Cheese
has. This proves nothing, answered they; for Maggots have a visible, local,
progressive motion, which Cheese has not. The Emperess replied, That when all
the Cheese was turned into Maggots, it might be said to have local, progressive
motion. They answered, That when the Cheese by its own figurative motions was
changed into Maggots, it was no more Cheese. The Emperess confessed that she
observed Nature was infinitely various in her works, and that though the
species of Creatures did continue, yet their particulars were subject to
infinite changes. But since you have informed me, said she, of the various
sorts and productions of animal Creatures, I desire you to tell me what you
have observed of their sensitive perceptions? Truly, answered they, Your
Majesty puts a very hard question to us, and we shall hardly be able to give a
satisfactory answer to it; for there are many different sorts of Creatures,
which as they have all different perceptions, so they have also different
organs, which our senses are not able to discover, only in an Oystershell we
have with admiration observed, that the common sensorium of the Oyster lies
just at the closing of the shells, where the pressure and reaction may be
perceived by the opening and shutting of the shells every tide.

After all this, the Emperess desired the Worm-men to give her a true Relation
how frost was made upon the Earth? To which they answered, That it was made
much after the manner and description of the Fish- and Bird-men, concerning the
Congelation of Water into Ice and Snow, by a commixture of saline and acid
particles; which relation added a great light to the Ape-men, who were the
Chemists, concerning their Chemical principles, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury. But,
said the Emperess, if it be so, it will require an infinite multitude of saline
particles to produce such a great quantity of Ice, Frost and Snow: besides,
said she, when Snow, Ice and Frost, turn again into their former principle, I
would fain know what becomes of those saline particles? But neither the
Wor-men, nor the Fish-and Bird-men, could give her an answer to it.

Then the Emperess enquired of them the reason, Why Springs were not as salt as
the Sea is? also, why Springs did ebb and flow? To which some answered, That
the ebbing and flowing of some Springs was caused by hollow Caverns within the
Earth, where the Seawater crowding through, did thrust forward, and draw
back-ward the Spring Water, according to its own way of ebbing and flowing; but
others said, That it proceeded from a small proportion of saline and acid
particles, which the Spring Water imbibed from the Earth; and although it was
not so much as to be perceived by the sense of Taste, yet was it enough to
cause an ebbing and flowing motion. And as for the Springwater being fresh,
they gave, according to their observation, this following reason: There is,
said they, a certain heat within the bowels of the Earth, proceeding from its
swift circular motion upon its own axe, which heat distills the rarest parts of
the Earth into a fresh and insipid water, which water being through the pores
of the Earth, conveyed into a place where it may break forth without
resistance or obstruction, causes Springs and Fountains; and these distilled
waters within the Earth do nourish and refresh the grosser and dryer parts
thereof. This Relation confirmed the Emperess in the opinion concerning the
motion of the Earth, and the fixedness of the Sun, as the Bird-men had informed
her; and then she asked the Worm-men, whether Minerals and Vegetables were
generated by the same heat that is within the bowels of the Earth? To which
they could give her no positive answer; only, this they affirmed, That heat
and cold were not the primary producing causes of either Vegetables or
Minerals, or other sorts of Creatures, but only effects; and to prove this our
assertion, said they, we have observed, that by change of some sorts of
corporeal motions, that which is now hot, will become cold; and what is now
cold, will grow hot; but the hottest place of all, we find to be the Center of
the Earth: Neither do we observe, that the torrid Zone does contain so much
Gold and Silver as the Temperate; nor is there great store of Iron and Lead
wheresoever there is Gold; for these metals are most found in colder climates
toward either of the Poles. This observation, the Emperess commanded them to
confer with her Chemists, the Ape-men, to let them know that Gold was not
produced by a violent, but a temperate degree of heat. She asked further,
Whether Gold could not be made by Art? They answered, That they could not
certainly tell her Majesty, but if it was possible to be done, they thought
Tin, Lead, Brass, Iron and Silver, to be the fittest metals for such an
Artificial transmutation. Then she asked them, Whether Art could produce Iron,
Tin, Lead, or Silver? They answered, not, in their opinion. Then I perceive,
replied the Emperess, that your judgments are very irregular, since you believe
that Gold, which is so fixed a metal, that nothing has been found as yet which
could occasion a dissolution of its interior figure, may be made by Art, and
not Tin, Lead, Iron, Copper or Silver, which yet are so far weaker, and meaner
metals then Gold is. But the Worm-men excused themselves, that they were
ignorant in that Art, and that such questions belonged more properly to the
Ape-men, which were Her Majesty's Chemists.

Then the Emperess asked them, Whether by their sensitive perceptions they
could observe the interior corporeal, figurative motions both of Vegetables and
Minerals? They answered, That their senses could perceive them after they were
produced, but not before; Nevertheless, said they, although the interior,
figurative motions of natural Creatures are not subject to the exterior,
animal, sensitive perceptions, yet by their rational perception they may judge
of them, and of their productions if they be regular: Whereupon the Emperess
commanded the Bear-men to lend them some of their best Microscopes; at which
the Bearmen smilingly answered her Majesty, that their Glasses would do them
but little service in the bowels of the Earth, because there was no light; for,
said they, our Glasses do only represent exterior objects, according to the
various reflections and positions of light; and wheresoever light is wanting,
the glasses will do no good. To which the Worm-men replied, that although they
could not say much of refractions, reflections, inflections, and the like; yet
were they not blind, even in the bowels of the Earth; for they could see the
several sorts of Minerals, as also minute Animals, that lived there, which
minute animal Creatures were not blind neither, but had some kind of sensitive
perception that was as serviceable to them, as sight, taste, smell, touch,
hearing, and c. was to other animal Creatures: By which it is evident, That
Nature has been as bountiful to those Creatures that live under ground, or in
the bowels of the Earth, as to those that live upon the surface of the Earth,
or in the Air, or in Water. But howsoever, proceeded the Worm-men, although
there is light in the bowels of the Earth, yet your Microscopes will do but
little good there, by reason those Creatures that live under ground have not
such an optic sense as those that live on the surface of the Earth: wherefore,
unless you had such glasses as are proper for their perception, your
Microscopes will not be any ways advantageous to them. The Emperess seemed well
pleased with this answer of the Worm-men; and asked them further, whether
Minerals and all other Creatures within the Earth, were colorless? At which
question they could not forbear laughing; and when the Emperess asked the
reason why they laughed; We most humbly beg your Majesty's pardon, replied they;
for we could not choose but laugh, when we heard of a colorless body. Why, said
the Emperess, color is only an accident, which is an immaterial thing, and
has no being of it self, but in an other body. Those, replied they, that
informed your Majesty thus, surely their rational motions were very irregular;
For how is it possible, that a natural nothing can have a being in Nature? If
it be no substance, it cannot have a being, and if no being, it is nothing;
Wherefore the distinction between subsisting of it self, and subsisting in
another body, is a mere nicety, and nonsense; for there is nothing in Nature
that can subsist of, or by it self, (I mean singly) by reason all parts of
Nature are composed in one body, and though they may be infinitely divided,
commixed and changed in their particulars, yet in general, parts cannot be
separated from parts as long as Nature lasts; nay, we might as probably affirm,
that Infinite Nature would be as soon destroyed, as that one Atome could
perish; and therefore your Majesty may firmly believe, that there is no body
without color, nor no color without body; for color, figure, place,
magnitude and body, are all but one thing, without any separation or
abstraction from each other.

The Emperess was so wonderfully taken with this discourse of the Worm-men,
that she not only pardoned the rudeness they committed in laughing at first at
her question, but yielded a full assent to their opinion, which she thought the
most rational that ever she had heard yet; and then proceeding in her
questions, enquired further, whether they had observed any seminal principles
within the Earth free from all dimensions and qualities, which produced
Vegetables, Minerals, and the like? To which they answered, That concerning the
seeds of Minerals, their sensitive perceptions had never observed any; but
Vegetables had certain seeds out of which they were produced. Then she asked,
whether those seeds of Vegetables lost their species; that is, were annihilated
in the production of their offspring? To which they answered, That by an
annihilation, nothing could be produced, and that the seeds of Vegetables were
so far from being annihilated in their productions, that they did rather
numerously increase and multiply; for the division of one seed, said they, does
produce numbers of seeds out of it self. But replied the Empress, A particular
part cannot increase of it self. It Is true, answered they: but they increase
not barely of themselves, but by joining and commixing with other parts, which
do assist them in their productions, and by way of imitation form or figure
their own parts into such or such particulars. Then, I pray inform me, said the
Emperess, what disguise those seeds put on, and how they do conceal themselves
in their transmutations? They answered, That seeds did no ways disguise or
conceal, but rather divulge themselves in the multiplication of their
offspring; only they did hide and conceal themselves from their sensitive
perceptions so, that their figurative and productive motions were not
perceptible by animal Creatures. Again, the Emperess asked them, whether there
were any Non-beings within the Earth? To which they answered, That they never
heard of any such thing; and that, if her Majesty would know the truth thereof,
she must ask those Creatures that are called Immaterial Spirits, which had a
great affinity with Nonbeings, and perhaps could give her a satisfactory answer
to this question. Then she desired to be informed, what opinion they had of the
beginning of forms? They told her Majesty, That they did not understand what
she meant by this expression; For, said they, there is no beginning in Nature,
no not of Particulars, by reason Nature is Eternal and Infinite, and her
particulars are subject to infinite changes and transmutations by virtue of
their own corporeal, figurative self-motions; so that there is nothing new in
Nature, nor properly a beginning of any thing. The Emperess seemed well
satisfied with all those answers, and inquired further, whether there was no
Art used by those Creatures that live within the Earth? Yes, answered they: for
the several parts of the Earth do join and assist each other in composition or
framing of such or such particulars; and many times, there are factions and
divisions, which cause productions of mixed species's; as for example, weeds,
instead of sweet flowers and useful fruits; but Gardeners and Husbandmen use
often to decide their quarrels, and cause them to agree; which though it shows
a kindness to the differing parties, yet it is a great prejudice to the Worms,
and other animal Creatures that live under ground; for it most commonly causes
their dissolution and ruin, at best they are driven out of their habitations.
What, said the Emperess, are not Worms produced out of the Earth? Their
production in general, answered they, is like the production of all other
natural Creatures, proceeding from the corporeal figurative motions of Nature;
but as for their particular productions, they are according to the nature of
their species; some are produced out of flowers, some out of roots, some out of
fruits, some out of ordinary Earth. Then they are very ungrateful Children,
replied the Emperess, that they feed on their own Parents which gave them life.
Their life, answered they, is their own, and not their Parents; for no part or
creature of Nature can either give or take away life, but parts do only assist
and join with parts, either in the dissolution or production of other parts and
Creatures.

After this, and several other Conferences, which the Emperess held with the
Worm-men, she dismissed them; and having taken much satisfaction in several of
their answers, encouraged them in their studies and observations. Then she made
a convocation of her Chemists, the Ape-men, and commanded them to give her an
account of the several Transmutations which their Art was able to produce. They
begun first with a long and tedious discourse concerning the Primitive
Ingredients of Natural bodies, and how, by their Art, they had found out the
principles out of which they consist. But they did not all agree in their
opinions; for some said, That the Principles of all natural bodies were the
four Elements, Fire, Air, Water, Earth, out of which they were composed: Others
rejected this Elementary commixture, and said, There were many bodies out of
which none of the four Elements could be extracted by any degree of Fire
whatsoever; and that, on the other side, there were diverse bodies, whose
resolution by fire reduced them into more then four different ingredients; and
these affirmed, that the only principles of natural bodies were Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercury: Others again declared, That none of the forementioned could be
called the True principles of natural bodies, but that by their industry and
pains which they had taken in the Art of Chemistry, they had discovered, that
all natural bodies were produced but from one Principle, which was Water; for
all Vegetables, Minerals and Animals, said they, are nothing else, but simple
water distinguished into various figures by the virtue of their seeds. But
after a great many debates and contentions about this subject, the Emperess
being so much tired that she was not able to hear them any longer, imposed a
general silence upon them, and then declared her self in this following
discourse:

I am too sensible of the pains you have taken in the Art of Chemistry, to
discover the principles of natural bodies, and wish they had been more
profitably bestowed upon some other, then such experiments; for both by my own
contemplation, and the observations which I have made by my rational and
sensitive perception upon Nature, and her works, I find, that Nature is but one
Infinite self-moving body, which by the virtue of its self-motion, is divided
into infinite parts, which parts being restless, undergo perpetual changes and
transmutations by their infinite compositions and divisions. Now, if this be
so, as surely, according to regular sense and reason, it appears no otherwise;
it is in vain to look for primary ingredients, or constitutive principles of
natural bodies, since there is no more but one Universal principle of Nature,
to wit, self-moving Matter, which is the only cause of all natural effects.
Next, I desire you to consider, that Fire is but a particular Creature, or
effect of Nature, and occasions not only different effects in several bodies,
but on some bodies has no power at all; witness Gold, which never could be
brought yet to change its interior figure by the art of Fire; and if this be
so, Why should you be so simple as to believe that fire can show you the
principles of Nature? and that either the four Elements, or Water only, or
Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, all which are no more but particular effects and
Creatures of Nature, should be the Primitive ingredients or Principles of all
natural bodies? Wherefore, I will not have you to take more pains, and waste
your time in such fruitless attempts, but be wiser hereafter; and busy your
selves with such Experiments as may be beneficial to the public.

The Emperess having thus declared her mind to the Ape-men, and given them
better Instructions then perhaps they expected, not knowing that her Majesty
had such great and able judgment in Natural Philosophv, had several conferences
with them concerning Chemical Preparations, which for brevities sake, I Will
forbear to rehearse: Amongst the rest, she asked, how it came, that the
Imperial Race appeared so young, and yet was reported to have lived so long;
some of them two, some three, and some four hundred years? and whether it was
by Nature, or a special Divine blessing? To which they answered, That there was
a certain Rock in the parts of that World, which contained the Golden Sands,
which Rock was hollow within, and did produce a Gum that was a hundred years
before it came to its full strength and perfection; this Gum, said they, if it
be held in a warm hand, will dissolve into an Oil, the effects whereof are
following: It being given every day for some certain time to an old decayed
man, in the bigness of a little Pea, will first make him spit for a week, or
more; after this, it will cause Vomits of Phlegm, and after that it will bring
forth by vomits, humors of several colors; first of a pale yellow, then of a
deep yellow, then of a green, and lastly of a black color; and each of these
humors have a several taste, some are fresh, some salt, some sower, some
bitter, and so forth; neither do all these Vomits make them sick, but they come
out on a sudden and unawares, without any pain or trouble to the patient: And
after it has done all these mentioned effects, and cleared both the stomach
and several other parts of the body, then. it works upon the brain, and brings
forth of the nose such kind of humors as it did out of the mouth, and much
after the same manner; then it will purge by stool, then by urine, then by
sweat, and lastly by bleeding at the nose, and the Emerodes; all which effects
it will perform within the space of six weeks, or a little more; for it does
not work very strongly, but gently, and by degrees: Lastly, when it has done
all this, it will make the body break out into a thick scab, and cause both
Hair, Teeth and Nails to come off; which scab being arrived to its full
maturity, opens first along the back, and comes off all in a piece like an
armor, and all this is done within the space of four months. After this the
Patient is wrapped into a searcloth, prepared of certain Gums and Juices, wherein
he continues until the time of nine Months be expired from the first beginning
of the cure, which is the time of a Child's formation in the womb. In the mean
while his diet is nothing else but Eagles-eggs, and Hinds-milk; and after the
Sear-cloth is taken away, he will appear of the age of Twenty, both in shape,
and strength. The weaker sort of this Gum is sovereign in healing of wounds,
and curing of slight distempers. But this is also to be observed, that none of
the Imperial race does use any other drink but Limewater, or water in which
Limestone is immerged; their meat is nothing else but Fowl of several sorts,
their recreations are many, but chiefly Hunting.

This Relation amazed the Emperess very much; for though in the world she came
from, she had heard great reports of the Philosophers-stone, yet had she not
heard of any that had ever found it out, which made her believe that it was but
a Chymera; she called also to mind, that there had been in the same world a man
who had a little Stone which cured all kinds of Diseases outward and inward,
according as it was applied; and that a famous Chemist had found out a certain
liquor called Alkahest, which by the virtue of its own fire, consumed all
diseases; but she had never heard of a Medicine that could renew old Age, and
render it beautiful, vigorous and strong: Nor would she have so easily believed
it, had it been a medicine prepared by Art; for she knew that Art, being
Natures Changeling, was not able to produce such a powerful effect, but being
that the Gum did grow naturally, she did not so much scruple at it; for she
knew that Natures Works are so various and wonderful, that no particular
Creature is able to trace her ways.

The Conferences of the Chemists being finished, the Emperess made an Assembly
of her Galenical Physicians, her Herbalists and Anatomists; and first she
enquired of her Herbalists the particular effects of several Herbs and Drugs,
and whence they proceeded? To which they answered, that they could, for the
most part, tell her Majesty the virtues and operations of them, but the
particular causes of their effects were unknown; only thus much they could
say, that their operations and virtues were generally caused by their proper
inherent, corporeal, figurative motions, which being infinitely various in
Infinite Nature, did produce infinite several effects. And it is observed, said
they, that Herbs and Drugs are as wise in their operations, as Men in their
words and actions; nay, wiser; and their effects are more certain then Men in
their opinions; for though they cannot discourse like Men, yet have they sense
and reason, as well as Men; for the discursive faculty is but a particular
effect of sense and reason in some particular Creatures, to wit, Men, and not a
principle of Nature, and argues often more folly then wisdom. The Emperess
asked, Whether they could not by a composition and commixture of other Drugs,
make them work other effects then they did, used by themselves? They answered,
That they could make them produce artificial effects, but not alter their
inherent, proper and particular natures.

Then the Emperess commanded her Anatomists to dissect such kinds of Creatures
as are called Monsters. But they answered her Majesty, That it would be but an
unprofitable and useless work, and hinder their better employments; for when we
dissect dead Animals, said they, it is for no other end, but to observe what
defects or distempers they had, that we may cure the like in living ones, so
that all our care and industry concerns only the preservation of Mankind; but
we hope your Majesty will not preserve Monsters, which are most commonly
destroyed, except it be for novelty; neither will the dissection of Monsters
prevent the errors of Natures irregular actions; for by dissecting some, we
cannot prevent the production of others; so that our pains and labor will be
to no purpose, unless to satisfy the vain curiosities of inquisitive men. The
Emperess replied, That such dissections would be very beneficial to
Experimental Philosophers. If Experimental Philosophers, answered they, do
spend their time in such useless inspections, they waste it in vain, and have
nothing but their labor for their pains.

Lastly, her Majesty had some Conferences with the Galenick Physicians about
several Diseases, and amongst the rest, desired to know the cause and nature of
Apoplexy, and the spotted Plague. They answered, That a deadly Apoplexy was a
dead palsy of the brain, and the spotted Plague was a Gangrene of the Vital
parts, and as the Gangrene of outward parts did strike inwardly; so the
Gangrene of inward parts, did break forth outwardly; which is the cause, said
they, that as soon as the spots appear, death follows; for then it is an
infallible sign, that the body is throughout infected with a Gangrene, which is
a spreading evil; but some Gangrenes do spread more suddenly then others, and
of all sorts of Gangrenes, the Plaguygangrene is the most infectious; for other
Gangrenes infect but the next adjoining parts of one particular body, and
having killed that same Creature, go no further, but cease; when as, the
Gangrene of the Plague, infects not only the adjoining parts of one particular
Creature, but also those that are distant; that is, one particular body infects
another, and so breeds a Universal Contagion. But the Emperess being very
desirous to know in what manner the Plague was propagated and became so
contagious, asked, Whether it went actually out of one body into another? To
which they answered, That it was a great dispute amongst the Learned of their
profession, whether it came by a division and composition of parts; that is, by
expiration and inspiration; or whether it was caused by imitation: Some
Experimental Philosophers, said they, will make us believe, that by the help of
their Microscopes, they have observed the Plague to be a body of little Flies
like Atoms, which go out of one body into another, through the sensitive
passages; but the most experienced and wisest of our society, have rejected
this opinion as a ridiculous fancy, and do for the most part believe, that it
is caused by an imitation of Parts, so that the motions of some parts which are
sound, do imitate the motions of those that are infected, and that by this
means, the Plague becomes contagious and spreading.

The Emperess having hitherto spent her time in the Examination of the Bird-
Fish- Worm- and Apemen, etc. and received several Intelligences from their
several employments; at last had a mind to divert her self after her serious
discourses, and therefore she sent for the Spider-men, which were her
Mathematicians, the Lice-men which were her Geometricians, and the Magpie-
Parrot- and Jackdaw-men, which were her Orators and Logicians. The Spider-men
came first, and presented her Majesty with a table full of Mathetical points,
lines and figures of all sorts of squares, circles, triangles, and the like;
which the Emperess, notwithstanding that she had a very ready wit, and quick
apprehension, could not understand; but the more she endeavored to learn, the
more was she confounded: Whether they did ever square the circle, I cannot
exactly tell, nor whether they could make imaginary points and lines; but this
I dare say, That their points and lines were so slender, small and thin, that
they seemed next to Imaginary. The Mathematicians were in great esteem with the
Emperess, as being not only the chief Tutors and Instructors in many Arts, but
some of them excellent Magicians and Informers of Spirits, which was the reason
their Characters were so abstruse and intricate, that the Emperess knew not
what to make of them. There is so much to learn in your Art, said she, that I
can neither spare time from other affairs to busy my self in your profession;
nor, if I could, do I think I should ever be able to understand your Imaginary
points, lines and figures, because they are Non-beings.

Then came the Lice-men, and endeavored to measure all things to a hairs
breadth, and weigh them to an Atome; but their weights would seldom agree,
especially in the weighing of Air, which they found a task impossible to be
done; at which the Emperess began to be displeased, and told them, that there
was neither Truth nor Justice in their Profession; and so dissolved their
society.

After this the Emperess was resolved to hear the Magpie- Parrot- and
Jackdaw-men, which were her professed Orators and Logicians; whereupon one of
the Parrot-men rose with great formality, and endeavored to make an Eloquent
Speech before her Majesty; but before he had half ended, his arguments and
divisions being so many, that they caused a great confusion in his brain, he
could not go forward, but was forced to retire backward, with the greatest
disgrace both to himself, and the whole society; and although one of his
brethen endeavored to second him by another speech, yet was he as far to seek
as the former. At which the Emperess appeared not a little troubled, and told
them, That they followed too much the Rules of Art, and confunded themselves
with too nice formalities and distinctions; but since I know, said she, that
you are a people who have naturally voluble tongues, and good memories; I
desire you to consider more the subject you speak of, then your artificial
periods, connexions and parts of speech, and leave the rest to your natural
Eloquence; which they did, and so became very eminent Orators.

Lastly, her Imperial Majesty being desirous to know, what progress her
Logicians had made in the Art of disputing, Commanded them to argue upon
several Themes or sujects; which they did; and having made a very nice
discourse of Logistical terms and propositions, entered into a dispute by way
of Syllogistical Arguments, through all the Figures and Modes: One began with
an argment of the first mode of the first figure, thus:

Every Politician is wise:

Another contradicted him with a Syllogism of the second mode of the same
figure, thus:

No Politician is wise:

The third made an Argument in the third Mode of the same figure, after this
manner:

Every Politician is wise:

The Fourth concluded with a Syllogism in the fourth Mode of the same figure,
thus:

No Politician is wise:

After this they took another subject, and one propounded this Syllogism:

Every Philosopher is wise:

But another said that this Argument was false, therefore he contradicted him
with a Syllogism of the second figure of the fourth Mode, thus:

Every Philosopher is wise:

Thus they argued, and intended to go on, but the Emperess interrupted them: I
have enough, said she, of your chopped Logic, and will hear no more of your
Syllogismes; for it disorders my reason, and puts my brain on the rack; your
formal argumentations are able to spoil all natural wit; and I Will have you to
consider, that Art does not make Reason, but Reason makes Art; and therefore as
much as Reason is above Art, so much is a natural rational discourse to be
preferred before an artificial: For Art is, for the most part, irregular, and
disorders men's understandings more then it rectifies them, and leads them into
a Labyrinth whence they will never get out, and makes them dull and unfit for
useful employments; especially your Art of Logic, which confists only
contradicting each other, in making sophismes, and obscuring Truth, instead of
clearing it.

But they replied her Majesty, That the knowledge of Nature, that is, Natural
Philosophy, would be imperfect without the Art of Logic, and that there was an
improbable Truth which could no otherwise be found out then by the Art of
disputing. Truly, said the Emperess, I do believe that it is with Natural
Philosophy, as it is with all other effects of Nature; for no particular
knowledge can be perfect, by reason knowledge is dividable, as well as
composable; nay, to speak properly, Nature her self cannot boast of any
perfection, but God himself; because there are so many irregular motions in
Nature, and it is but a folly to think that Art should be able to regulate them,
since Art it self is, for the most part, irregular. But as for Improbable
Truth, I know not what your meaning is; for Truth is more then Improbability;
nay, there there is so much difference between Truth and Improbability, that I
cannot conceive it possible how they can be joined together. In short, said
she, I do no ways approve of your profession; and though I will not dissolve
your society, yet I shall never take delight in hearing you any more; wherefore
confine your disputations to your Schools, lest besides the Commonwealth of
Learning, they disturb also Divinity and Policy, Religion and Laws, and by that
means draw an utter ruin and destruction both upon Church and State.

After the Emperess had thus finished the Discourses and Conferences with the
mentioned Societies of her Vertuoso's, she considered by her self the manner of
their Religion, and finding it very defective, was troubled, that so wise and
knowing a people should have no more knowledge of the Divine Truth; Wherefore
she consulted with her own thoughts, whether it was possible to convert them
all to her own Religion, and to that end she resolved to build Churches, and
make also up a Congregation of Women, whereof she intended to be the head her
self, and to instruct them in the several points of her Religion. This she had
no sooner begun, but the Women, which generally had quick wits, subtle
conceptions, clear understandings, and solid judgments, became, in a short
time, very devout and zealous Sisters; for the Emperess had an excellent gift
of Preaching, and instructing them in the Articles of Faith; and by that means,
she converted them not only soon, but gained an extraordinary love of all her
subjects throughout that World. But at last, pondering with her self the
inconstant nature of Mankind, and fearing that in time they would grow weary,
and desert the divine Truth, following their own fancies, and living according
to their own desires, she began to be troubled that her labors and pains
should prove of so little effect, and therefore studied all manner of ways to
prevent it. Amongst the rest, she called to mind a Relation which the Bird-men
made her once, of a Mountain that did burn in flames of fire; and thereupon did
immediately send for the wisest and subtilest of her Worm-men, commanding them
to discover the cause of the Eruption of that same fire; which they did; and
having dived to the very bottom of the Mountain, informed her Majesty, That
there was a certain sort of Stone, whose nature was such, that being wetted, it
would grow excessively hot, and break forth into a flaming-fire, until it
became dry, and then it ceased from burning. The Emperess was glad to hear this
news, and forthwith desired the Worm-men to bring her some of that stone, but
be sure to keep it secret: She sent also for the Bird-men, and asked them
whether they could not get her a piece of the Sunstone? They answered, That it
was impossible, unless they did spoil or lessen the light of the World: but,
said they, if it please your Majesty, we can demolish one of the numerous Stars
of the Sky, which the World will never miss.

The Emperess was very well satisfied with this proposal, and having thus
employed these two sorts of men, in the mean while builded two Chapels one
above another; the one she lined throughout with Diamonds, both Roof, Walls and
Pillars; but the other be done by any other means, then by the help of
Immaterial Spirits; wherefore she made a Convocation of the most learned, witty
and ingenious of all the forementioned sorts of men, and desired to know of
them, whether there were any Immaterial Spirits in their World. First, she
enquired of the Worm-men, whether they had perceived some within the Earth?
They answered her Majesty, That they never knew of any such Creatures; for
whatsoever did dwell within the Earth, said they, was imbodied and material.
Then she asked the Flye-men, whether they had observed any in the Air? for you
having numerous eyes, said she, will be more able to perceive them, then any
other Creatures. To which they answered her Majesty, That although Spirits,
being immaterial, could not be perceived by the Worm-men in the Earth, yet they
perceived that such Creatures did lodge in the vehicles of the Air. Then the
Emperess asked, Whether they could speak to them, and whether they did
understand each other? The Fly-men answered, That those Spirits were always
clothed in some sort or other of Mateterial Garments; which Garments were
their Bodies, made, for the most part, of Air; and when occasion served, they
could put on any other sort of substances; but yet they could not put these
substances into any form or shape, as they pleased. The Emperess asked the
Fly-men, whether it was possible that she could be acquainted, and have some
conferences with them? They answered, They did verily believe she might.
Hereupon the Emperess commanded the Fly-men to ask some of the Spirits, whether
they would be pleased to give her a visit? This they did; and after the Spirits
had presented themselves to the Emperess, (in what shapes or forms, I cannot
exactly tell) after some few complements that passed between them, the Emperess
told the Spirits that she questioned not, but they did know how she was a
stranger in that World, and by what miraculous means she was arrived there; and
since she had a great desire to know the condition of the World she came from,
her request to the Spirits was, to give her some information thereof,
especially of those parts of the world where she was born, bred, and educated,
as also of her particular friends and acquaintance; all which, the Spirits did
according to her desire; at last, after a great many conferences and particular
intelligences, which the Spirits gave the Emperess, to her great satisfaction
and content, she enquired after the most famous Students, Writers, and
Experimental Philosophers in that World, which they gave her a full relation
of; amongst the rest she enquired, whether there were none that had found out
yet the Jews Cabbala? Several have endeavored it, answered the Spirits, but
those that came nearest (although themselves denied it) were one Dr. Dee, and
one Edward Kelly, the one representing Moses, and the other Aaron; for Kelly
was to Dr. Dee, as Aaron to Moses; Is there not Divine Reason, as well as there
is Natural? No, answered they: for there is but a Divine Faith, and as for
Reason it is only natural; but you Mortals are so puzzled about this divine
Faith, and natural Reason, that you do not know well how to distinguish them,
but confound them both, which is the cause you have so many divine Philosophers
who make a Gallimafry both of Reason and Faith. Then she asked, Whether pure
natural Philosophers were Cabbalists? They answered, No; but only your
Mystical or Divine Philosophers, such as study beyond sense and reason. She
enquired further, Whether there was any Cabbala in god, or whether God was full
of Ideas? They answered, There could be nothing in God, nor could God be full
of any thing, either forms or figures, but of himself; for God is the
Perfection of all things, and an Unexpressible Being, beyond the conception of
any Creature, either Natural or Supernatural. Then I pray inform me, said the
Emperess, Whether the Jews, or any other Cabbala, consist in numbers? The
Spirits answered, No: for numbers are odd, and different, and would make a
disagreement in the Cabbala. But said she again, Is it a sin then not to know
or understand the Cabbala? God is so merciful, answered they, and so just, that
he will never damn the ignorant, and save only those that pretend to know him
and his secret Counsels by their Cabbala's, but he loves those that adore and
worship him with fear and reverence, and with a pure heart. She asked further,
which of these two Cabbala's was most approved, the Natural, or Theological?
The Theological, answered they, is mystical, and belongs only to Faith; but
the Natural belongs to Reason. Then she asked them, Whether Divine Faith was
made out of Reason? No, answered they, for Faith proceeds only from a Divine
saving Grace, which is a peculiar Gift of God. How comes it then, replied she,
that Men, even those that are of several opinions, have Faith more or less? A
natural belief, answered they, is not a Divine Faith. But, proceeded the
Emperess, How are you sure that God cannot be known? The several opinions you
Mortals have of God, answered they, are sufficient witnesses thereof. Well
then, replied the Emperess, leaving this inquisitive knowledge of God, I pray
inform me, whether you Spirits give motion to natural bodies? No, answered
they; but, on the contrary, natural material bodies give Spirits motion; for we
Spirits, being incorporeal, have no motion but from our corporeal vehicles, so
that we move by the help of our bodies, and not the bodies by the help of us;
for pure Spirits are immovable. If this be so, replied the Emperess, How comes
it then that you can move so suddenly at a vast distance? They answered, That
some sorts of matter were more pure, rare, and consequently more light and agil
then others; and this was the reason many in this age do think their
Forefathers have been Fools, by which they prove themselves to be such. The
Emperess asked further, whether there was any Plastic power in Nature? Truly,
said the Spirits, Plastic power in a hard word, signifies no more then the
power of the corporeal, figurative motions of Nature. After this, the Emperess
desired the Spirits to inform her where the Paradise was, whether it was in the
midst of the World as a Center of pleasure? or whether it was the whole world,
or a peculiar world by it self, as a world of life, and not of matter; or
whether it was mixed, as a world of living animal Creatures? They answered, That
Paradise was not in the world she came from, but in that world she lived in at
present; and that it was the very same place where she kept her Court, and
where her Palace stood, in the midst of the Imperial City. The Emperess asked
further, whether in the beginning and Creation of the World, all Beasts could
speak? They answered, That no Beasts could speak, but only those sorts of
Creatures which were Fish-men, Bear-men, Worm-men, and the like, which could
speak in the first Age, as well as they do now. She asked again, whether they
were none of those Spirits that frighted Adam out of the Paradise, at least
caused him not to return thither again. They answered they were not. Then she
desired to be informed, whither Adam fled when he was driven out of the
Paradise? Out of this World, said they, you are now Emperess of, into the world
you came from. If this be so, replied the Emperess, then surely those
Cabbalists are much out of their story, who believe the Paradise to be a world
of Life only, without Matter; for this world, though it be most pleasant and
fruitful, yet it is not a world of mere immaterial life, but a world of living,
material Creatures. Without question, they are, answered the Spirits; for not
all Cabbalas are true. Then the Emperess asked, That since it is mentioned in
the story of the Creation of the World, that Eve was tempted by the Serpent,
whether the Devil was within the Serpent, or whether the Serpent tempted her
without the Devil? They answered, That the Devil was within the Serpent. But
how came it then, replied she, that the Serpent was cursed? They answered,
because the Devil was in him: for are not those men in danger of damnation
which have the Devil within them, who persuades them to believe and act
wickedly? The Emperess asked further, whether Light and the Heavens were all
one. They answered, That that Region which contains the Lucid natural Orbs, was
by mortals named Heaven; but the beatifical Heaven, which is the Habitation of
the blessed Angels and Souls, was so far beyond it, that it could not be
compared to any natural Creature. Then the Emperess asked them, whether all
Matter was fluid at first? They answered, That Matter was always as it is; and
that some parts of Matter were rare, some dense, some fluid, some solid, etc.
Neither was God bound to make all matter fluid at first. She asked further,
whether Matter was immovable init self? We have answered you before, said they,
That there is no motion but in Matter; and were it not for the motion of
Matter, we Spirits, could not move, nor give you any answer to your several
questions. After this, the Emperess asked the Spirits, whether the Universe was
made within the space of six days, or whether by those six days, were meant so
many Decrees or Commands of God? They answered her, that the World was made by
the All-powerful Decree and Command of God; but whether there were six Decrees
or Commands, or fewer, or more, no creature was able to tell. Then she
inquired, whether there was no mystery in numbers? No other mystery, answered
the Spirits, but reckoning or counting, for numbers are only marks of
remembrance. But what do you think of the number of Four, said she, which
Cabbalists make such ado withal, and of the number of Ten, when they say that
Ten is all, and that all numbers are virtually comprehended in four? We think,
answered they, that Cabbalists have nothing else to do but to trouble their
heads with such useless fancies; for naturally there is no such thing as prime
or all in numbers; nor is there any other mystery in numbers, but what man's
fancy makes; but what men call Prime, or All, we do not know, because they do
not agree in the number of their opinion. Then the Emperess asked, whether the
number of six was a symbol of Matrimony, as being made up of Male and Female,
for two into three is six. If any number can be a symbol of Matrimony,
answered the Spirits, it is not Six, but Two; if two may be allowed to be a
number: for the act of Matrimony is made up of two joined in one. She asked
again, what they said to the number of Seven? whether it was not an Emblem of
God, because Cabbalists say, that it is neither begotten, nor begets any other
number, There can be no Emblem of God, answered the Spirits; for if we do not
know what God is, how can we make an Emblem of him? Nor is there any number in
God, for God is the perfection himself, but numbers are imperfect; and as for
the begetting of numbers it is done by Multiplication and Addition; but
Substraction is as a kind of death to numbers. If there be no mystery in
numbers, replied the Emperess, then it is in vain to refer the Creation of the
World to certain numbers, as Cabbalists do. The only mystery of numbers,
answered they, concerning the Creation of the World is, that as numbers do
multiply, so does the world. The Emperess asked, how far numbers did multiply?
The Spirits answered, to Infinite. Why, said she, Infinite cannot be reckoned,
nor numbered. No more, answered they, can the parts of the Universe; for God's
Creation, being an Infinite action, as proceeding from an Infinite Power, could
not rest upon a finite number of Creatures, were it never so great. But leaving
the mystery of numbers, proceeded the Emperess, Let me now desire you to inform
me, whether the Suns and Planets were generated by the Heavens, or Ethereal
Matter? The Spirits answered, That the Stars and Planets were of the same
matter which the Heavens, the Ether, and all other natural Creatures did
consist of; but whether they were generated by the Heavens or Ether, they
could not tell: if they be, said they, they are not like their Parents; for the
Sun, Stars, and Planets, are more splendorous then the Ether, as also more
solid and constant in their motions: But put the case, the Stars and Planets
were generated by the Heavens, and the Ethereal Matter; the question then
would be, out of what these are generated or produced? if these be created out
of nothing, and not generated out of something, then it is probable the Sun,
Stars and Planets are so too; nay, it is more probable of the Stars and
Planets, then of the Heavens, or the fluid Ether, by reason the Stars and
Planets seem to be further off from mortality, then the particular parts of the
Ether; for no doubt but the parts of the Ethereal Matter alter into several
forms, which we do not perceive of the Stars and Planets. The Emperess asked
further, whether they could give her information of the three principles of
Man, according to the doctrine of the Platonists; as first of the Intellect,
Spirit, or Divine Light: 2. Of the Soul of Man her self: and 3. Of the Image of
the Soul, that is, her vital operation on the body? The Spirits answered, that
they did not understand these three distinctions; but that they seemed to
corporeal sense and reason, as if they were three several bodies, or three
several corporeal actions; however, said they, they are intricate conceptions
of irregular fancies. If you do not understand them, replied the Emperess, how
shall humane Creatures do then? Many, both of your modern and ancient
Philosophers, answered the Spirits, endeavor to go beyond sense and reason,
which makes them commit absurdities; for no corporeal Creature can go beyond
sense and reason; no not we Spirits, as long as we are in our corporeal
Vehicles. Then the Emperess asked them, whether there were any Atheists in
the World? The Spirits answered, that there were no more Atheists then what
Cabbalists make. She asked them further, Whether Spirits were of a globous or
round Figure? They ansvvered, That Figure belonged to body, but they being
immaterial had no figure. She asked again, Whether Spirits were not like Water
or Fire? They answered, that Water and Fire was material, were it the purest
and most refined that ever could be; nay, were it above the Heavens: But we are
no more like Water or Fire, said they, then we are like Earth; but our Vehicles
are of several forms, figures and degrees of substances. Then she desired to
know, whether their Vehicles were made of Air? Yes, answered the Spirits, some
of our Vehicles are of thin Air. Then I suppose, replied the Emperess, That
those airy Vehicles, are your corporeal summersuits. She asked further, whether
the Spirits had not ascending and descending motions, as well as other
Creatures? They answered, That properly there was no ascension or descension in
Infinite Nature, but only in relation to particular parts; and as for us
Spirits, said they, we can neither ascend nor descend without corporeal
Vehicles; nor can our Vehicles ascend or descend, but according to their
several shapes and figures, for there can be no motion without body. The
Emperess asked them further, whether there was not a World of Spirits, as well
as there is of material Creatures? No, answered they; for the word World
implies a quantity or multitude of corporeal Creatures, but we being
Immaterial, can make no world of Spirits. Then she desired to be informed when
Spirits were made? We do not know, answered they, how and when we were made,
nor are we much inquisitive after it; nay, if we did, it would be no benefit,
neither for us, nor for you mortals to know it. The Emperess replied, That
Cabbalists and Divine Philosophers said, men's rational Souls were Immaterial,
and stood as much in need of corporeal Vehicles, as Spirits did. If this be so,
answered the Spirits, then you are Hermaphrodites of Nature; but your
Cabbalists are mistaken, for they take the purest and subtillest parts of
Matter for Immaterial Spirits. Then the Emperess asked, when the souls of
Mortals went out of their bodies, whether they went to Heaven or Hell, or
whether they remained in airy Vehicles? God's Justice and Mercy, answered they,
is perfect, and not imperfect; but if you mortals will have Vehicles for your
Souls, and a place that is between Heaven and Hell, it must be Purgatory, which
is a place of Purification, for which action Fire is more proper then Air, and
so the Vehicles of those souls that are in Purgatory cannot be airy, but fiery;
and after this rate there can be but four places for humane souls to be in,
viz. Heaven, Hell, Purgatory, and this World; but as for Vehicles, they are but
fancies, not real truths. Then the Emperess asked them, where Heaven and Hell
was? Your Savior Christ, answered the Spirits, has informed you, that there is
Heaven and Hell, but he did not tell you what, nor where they are; wherefore it
is too great a presumption for you Mortals to inquire after it; if you do but
strive to get into Heaven, it is enough, though you do not know where or what
it is, for it is beyond your knowledge and understanding. I am satisfied,
replied the Emperess, and asked further, whether there were any figures or
characters in the Soul? They answered, where there was no body, there could be
no figure. Then she asked them, whether Spirits could be naked? and whether
they were of a dark, or a light color? As for our nakedness, it is a very odd
question, answered the Spirits; and we do not know what you mean by a naked
Spirit; for you judge of us as of corporeal Creatures; and as for Color, said
they, it is according to our Vehicles; for Color belongs to Body, and as there
is no Body that is colorless, so there is no Color that is bodiless. Then the
Emperess desired to be informed, whether all souls were made at the first
Creation of the World? We know no more, answered the Spirits, of the origin of
humane souls, then we know of our selves. She asked further, whether humane
bodies were not burdensome to humane souls? They answered, That bodies made
Souls active, as giving them motion; and if action was troublesome to souls,
then bodies were so too. She asked again, whether souls did choose bodies? They
answered, That Platonicks believed, the souls of Lovers lived in the bodies of
their Beloved; but surely, said they, if there be a multitude of souls in a
world of Matter, they cannot miss bodies; for as soon as a soul is parted from
one body, it enters into another; and souls having no motion of themselves,
must of necessity be clothed or imbodied with the next parts of Matter. If
this be so, replied the Emperess, then I pray inform me, whether all matter be
soulified? The Spirits answered, They could not exactly tell that; but if it
was true, that Matter had no other motion but what came from a spiritual power,
and that all matter was moving, then no soul could quit a body, but she must of
necessity enter into another soulified body, and then there would be two
immaterial substances in one body. The Emperess asked, whether it was not
possible that there could be two souls in one body? As for immaterial souls,
answered the Spirits, it is impossible; for there cannot be two immaterials in
one inanimate body, by reason they want parts, and place, being bodiless; but
there may be numerous material souls in one composed body, by reason every
material part has a material natural soul; for Nature is but one Infinite
self-moving, living and self-knowing body, consisting of the three degrees of
inanimate, sensitive and rational Matter, so intermixed together, that no part
of Nature, were it an Atome, can be without any of these three degrees; the
sensitive is the life, the rational the soul, and the inanimate part, the body
of Infinite Nature. The Emperess was very well satisfied with this answer, and
asked further, whether souls did not give life to bodies? No, answered they;
but Spirits and Divine Souls have a life of their own, which is not partable,
being purer then a natural life; for Spirits are incorporeal, and consequently
individable. But when the Soul is in its Vehicle, said the Emperess, then me
thinks she is like the Sun, and the Vehicle like the Moon. No, answered they,
but the Vehicle is like the Sun, and the Soul like the Moon; for the Soul has
motion from the Body, as the Moon has light from the Sun. Then the Emperess
asked the Spirits, whether it was an evil Spirit that tempted Eve, and brought
all the mischiefs upon Mankind, or whether it was the Serpent? They answered,
That Spirits could not commit actual evils. The Emperess said they might do it
by persuasions. They answered, That Persuasions were actions; but the Emperess
not being contented with this answer, asked whether there was not a
supernatural Evil? The Spirits answered, That there was a supernatural Good,
which was God; but they knew of no supernatural Evil that was equal to God.
Then she desired to know, whether Evil Spirits were reckoned amongst the Beasts
of the Field? They answered, That many Beasts of the field were harmless
Creatures, and very serviceable for Man's use; and though some were accounted
fierce and cruel, yet did they exercise their cruelty upon other Creatures, for
the most part, to no other end, but to get themselves food, and to satisfy
their natural appetite; but certainly, said they, you men are more cruel to one
another, then evil Spirits are to you; and as for their habitations in desolate
places, we having no communion with them, can give you no certain account
thereof. But what do you think, said the Emperess, of Good Spirits? may not
they be compared to the Fowls of the Air? They answered, There were many cruel
and revenous Fowls as well in the Air, as there were fierce and cruel Beasts on
Earth; so that the good are always mixed with the bad. She asked further,
whether the fiery Vehicles were a Heaven, or a Hell, or at least a Purgatory to
the Souls? They answered, That if the Souls were immaterial, they could not
burn, and then fire would do them no harm; and though Hell was believed to be
an undecaying and unquenchable fire, yet Heaven was no fire. The Emperess
replied, That Heaven was a Light. Yes, saidthey, but not a fiery Light. Then
she asked, whether the different shapes and sorts of Vehicles, made the Souls
and other Immaterial Spirits, miserable, or blessed? The Vehicles, answered
they, make them neither better, nor worse; for though some Vehicles sometimes
may have power over others, yet these by turns may get some power gain over
them, according to the several advantages and disadvantages of particular
natural parts. The Emperess asked further, whether animal life came out of the
spiritual World, and did return thither again? The Spirits answered, they could
not exactly tell; but if it were so, then certainly animal lives must leave
their bodies behind them, otherwise the bodies would make the spiritual World a
mixed World, that is, partly material, and partly immaterial; but the Truth is,
said they, Spirits being immaterial, cannot properly make a World; for a World
belongs to material, not to immaterial Creatures. If this be so, replied the
Emperess, then certainly there can be no world of lives and forms without
matter? No, answered the Spirits, nor a world of Matter without lives and
forms; for natural lives and forms cannot be immaterial, no more then Matter
can be immovable. And therefore natural lives, forms and matter, are
inseparable. Then the Emperess asked, whether the first Man did feed on the
best sorts of the fruits of the Earth, and the beasts on the worst? The Spirits
answered, That unless the beasts of the field were barred out of manured fields
and gardens, they would pick and choose the best fruits as well as men; and you
may plainly observe it, said they, in Squirrels and Monkies, how they are the
best chusers of Nuts and Apples, and how Birds do pick and feed on the most
delicious fruits, and Worms on the best roots, and most savoury herbs; by which
you may see, that those Creatures live and feed better then men do, except you
will say, that artificial Cookery is better and more wholesome then the natural.
Again, the Emperess asked, whether the first Man gave names to all the several
sorts of Fishes in the Sea, and fresh waters? No, answered the Spirits, for he
was an Earthly, and not a watery Creature, and therefore could not know the
several sorts of Fishes. Why, replied the Emperess, he was no more an airy
Creature then he was a watery one, and yet he gave names to the several sorts
of Fowls and Birds of the Air. Fowls answered they, are partly Airy, and partly
Earthly Creatures, not only because they resemble Beasts and Men in their
flesh, but because their rest and dwelling places are on Earth; for they build
their nests, lay their eggs, and hatch their young, not in the Air, but on the
Earth. Then she asked, Whether the first Man did give names to all the various
sorts of Creatures that live on the Earth? Yes, answered they, to all those
that were presented to him, or he had knowledge of, that is, to all the prime
sorts; but not to every particular; for of Mankind, said they, there were but
two at first, and as they did increase, so did their names. But, said the
Emperess, who gave the names to the several sorts of Fish? The posterity of
Mankind, answered they. Then she enquired, Whether there were no more kinds of
Creatures now, then at the first Creation? They answered, That there were no
more nor fewer kinds of Creatures then there are now; but there were, without
question, more particular sorts of Creatures now, then there were then. She
asked again, Whether all those Creatures that were in Paradise, were also in
Noah's Ark? They answered, That the principal kinds had been there, but not all
the particulars. Then she would fain know, how it came, that both Spirits and
Men did fall from a blessed into so miserable a state and condition they are
now in. The Spirits answered, By disobedience. The Emperess asked, Whence this
disobedient sin did proceed? But the Spirits desired the Emperess not to ask
them any such questions, because they went beyond their knowledge. Then she
begged the Spirits to pardon her presumption; for, said she, It is the nature
of Mankind to be inquisitive. Natural desire of knowledge, answered the Spirits,
is not blameable, so you do not go beyond what your natural reason can
comprehend. Then I Will ask no more, said the Emperess, for fear I should commit
some error; but one thing I cannot but aquaint you withal: What is that, said
the Spirits? I have a great desire, answered the Emperess, to make a Cabbala.
What kind of Cabbala asked the Spirits? The Emperess answered, The Jews
Cabbala. No sooner had the Emperess declared her Mind, but the Spirits
immediately disappeared out of her sight; which startled the Emperess so much,
that she fell into a Trance, wherein she lay for some while; at last being come
to her self again, she grew very studious, and considering with her self what
might be the cause of this strange disaster, conceived at first, that perhaps
the Spirits were tired with hearing and giving answers to her questions; but
thinking by her self, that Spirits could not be tired, she imagined that this
was not the true cause of their disappearing, till after diverse debates with
her own thoughts, she did verily believe that the Spirits had committed some
fault in their answers, and that for their punishment they were condemned to
the lowest and darkest Vehicles. This belief was so fixed in her mind, that it
put her into a very Melancholic humor; and then she sent both for her Fly- and
Worm-men, and declared to them the cause of her sadness. 'T is not so much,
said she, the vanishing of those Spirits that makes me Melancholic, but that I
should be the cause of their miserable condition, and that those harmless
Spirits should, for my sake, sink down into the black and dark abyss of the
Earth. The Worm-men comforted the Emperess, telling her, that the Earth was not
so horrid a dwelling, as she did imagine; for, said they, not only all
Minerals and Vegetables, but several sorts of Animals can witness, that the
Earth is a warm, fruitful, quiet, safe and happy habitation; and though they
want the light of the Sun, yet are they not in dark, but there is light even
within the Earth, by which those Creatures do see that dwell therein. This
relation settled her Majesty's mind a little; but yet she being desirous to know
the Truth, where, and in what condition those Spirits were, commanded both the
Fly- and Worm-men to use all labor and industry to find them out, whereupon
the Worm-men straight descended into the Earth, and the Fly-men ascended into
the Air. After some short time, the Worm-men returned, and told the Emperess,
that when they went into the Earth, they inquired of all the Creatures they met
withal, whether none of them had perceived such or such Spirits, until at last
coming to the very Center of the Earth, they were truly informed, that those
Spirits had stayed some she will without question, be ready to do you all the
service she can. The Lady then, said the Emperess, will I choose for my scribe,
neither will the Emperor have reason to be jealous, she being one of my own
sex. In truth, said the Spirit, Husbands have reason to be jealous of Platonic
Lovers, for they are very dangerous, as being not only very intimate and
close, but subtle and insinuating. You say well, replied the Emperess;
wherefore I pray send me the Duchess of Newcastle's Soul; which the Spirit did;
and after she came to wait on the Emperess, at her first arrival the Emperess
embraced and saluted her with a spiritual kiss; then she asked her whether she
could write? Yes, answered the Duchess's Soul, but not so intelligibly that any
Reader whatsoever may understand it, unless he be taught to know my Characters;
for my Letters are rather like Characters, then well-formed Letters, Said the
Emperess, you were recommended to me by an honest and ingenious Spirit. Surely,
answered the Duchess, the Spirit is ignorant of my handwriting. The truth is,
said the Emperess, he did not mention your handwriting; but he informed me,
that you writ sense and reason, and if you can but write so, that any of my
Secretaries may learn your hand, they shall write it out fair and intelligible.
The Duchess answered, That she questioned not but it might easily be learned in
a short time. But, said she to the Emperess, What is it that your Majesty would
have written. She answered, The Jews Cabbala. Then your only way for that is,
said the Duchess, to have the Soul of some famous Jew; nay, if your Majesty
please, I scruple not, but you may as easily have the soul of Moses, as of any
other. That cannot be, replied the Emperess, for no mortal knows where Moses
is. But, said the Duchess, humane Souls are immortal; however, if this be too
difficult to be obtained, you may have the Soul of one of the chief Rabbis or
Sages of the Tribe of Levi, who will truly instruct you in that mystery; when
as, otherwise, your Majesty will be apt to mistake, and a thousand to one, but
commit gross errors. No, said the Emperess, for I shall be instructed by
Spirits. Alas! said the Duchess, Spirits are as ignorant as Mortals in many
cases; for no created Spirits have a general or absolute knowledge, nor can they
know the Thoughts of Men, much less the Mysteries of the great Creator, unless
he be pleased to inspire into them the gift of Divine Knowledge. Then, I pray,
said the Emperess, let me have your counsel in this case. The Duchess answered,
If your Majesty will be pleased to hearken to my advice, I would desire you to
let that work alone; for it will be of no advantage either to you, or your
people, unless you were of the Jews Religion; nay, if your were, the vulgar
interpretation of the holy Scripture would be more instructive, and more easily
believed, then your mystical way of interpreting it; for had it been better and
more advantageous for the salvation of the Jews, surely Moses would have saved
after ages that labor by his own explanation, he being not only a wise, but a
very honest, zealous and religious Man: Wherefore the best way, said she, is to
believe with the generality the literal sense of the Scripture, and not to make
interpretations every one according to his own fancy, but to leave that work
for the Learned, or those that have nothing else to do; Neither do I think,
said she, that God will damn those that are ignorant therein, or suffer them to
be lost for want of a mystical interpretation of the Scripture. Then, said the
Emperess, I Will leave the Scripture, and make a Philosophical Cabbala. The
Duchess told her, That sense and reason would instruct her of Nature as much as
could be known; and as for numbers, they were infinite, but to add nonsense to
infinite, would breed a confusion, especially in humane understanding. Then,
replied the Emperess, I Will make a moral Cabbala. The only thing, answered the
Duchess, in morality, is but to fear God, and to love his Neighbor, and this
needs no further interpretation. But then I Will make a Political Cabbala, said
the Emperess. The Duchess answered, That the chief and only ground in
Government, was but Reward and Punishment, and required no further Cabbala;
But, said she, If your Majesty were resolved to make a Cabbala, I would advise
you, rather to make a Poetical or Romancical Cabbala, wherein you can use
Metaphors, Allegories, Similitudes, etc. and interpret them as you please. With
that the Emperess thanked the Duchess, and embracing her soul, told her she
would take her Counsel: she made her also her favorite, and kept her sometime
in that world, and by this means the Duchess came to know and give this
Relation of all that passed in that rich, populous, and happy world; and after
some time the Emperess gave her leave to return to her Husband and Kindred into
her native world, but upon condition, that her soul should visit her now and
then; which she did, and truly their meeting did produce such an intimate
friendship between them, that they became Platonic Lovers, although they were
both Females.

One time, when the Duchess her Soul was with the Emperess, she seemed to be
very sad and melancholy; at which the Emperess was very much troubled, and
asked her the reason of her melancholic humor? Truly said the Duchess to the
Emperess (for between dear friends there is no concealment, they being like
several parts of one united body) my Melancholy proceeds from an extreme
ambition. The Emperess asked, what the height of her ambition was? The Duchess
answered, That neither she her self, nor no Creature in the World was able to
know either the height, depth or breadth of her ambition; but said she, my
present desire is, that I would be a great Princess. The Emperess replied, so
you are; for you are a Princess of the fourth or fifth degree; for a Duke or
Duchess is the highest title or honor that a subject can arrive to, as being
the next to a Kings Title; and as for the name of a Prince or Princess, it
belongs to all that are adopted to the Crown; so that those that can add a
Crown to their arms, are Princes, and therefore a Duke is a Title above a
Prince; for example, the Duke of Savoy, the Duke of Florence, the Duke of
Lorraine, as also Kings Brothers are not called by the name of Princes, but
Dukes, this being the higher Title. It Is true, answered the Duchess, unless it
be Kings eldest Sons, and they are created Princes. Yes, replied the Emperess,
but no Soverain does make a subject equal to himself, such as Kings eldest sons
partly are: And although some Dukes be sovereign, yet I never heard that a
Prince by his Title is sovereign, by reason the Title of a Prince is more a
Title of Honor, then of Soverainty; for, as I said before, it belongs to all
that are adopted to the Crown. Well, said the Deuchess, setting aside this
dispute, my ambition is, that I would fain be as you are, that is, an Emperess
of a World, and I shall never be at quiet until I be one. I love you so well,
replied the Emperess, that I wish with all my soul, you had the fruition of
your ambitious desire, and I shall not fail to give you my best advice how to
accomplish it; the best informers are the Immaterial Spirits, and they will soon
tell you, whether it be possible to obtain your wish. But, said the Duchess, I
have little acquaintance with them, for I never knew any before the time you
sent for me. They know you, replied the Emperess; for they told me of you, and
were the means and instrument of our coming hither: Wherefore I Will conser with
them, and enquire whether there be not another World, whereof you may be
Emperess as well as I am of this? No sooner had the Emperess said this, but
some Immaterial Spirits came to visit her, of whom she inquired, whether there
were but three Worlds in all, to wit, the Blazing-world where she was in, the
World which she came from, and the World where the Duchess lived? The Spirits
answered, That there were more numerous Worlds then the Stars which appeared in
these three mentioned Worlds. Then the Emperess asked, whether it was not
possible, that her dearest friend the Duchess of Newcastle, might be Emperess
of one of them? Although there be numerous, nay, infinite Worlds, answered the
Spirits, yet none is without Government. But is none of these Worlds so weak,
said she, that it may be surprised or conquered? The Spirits answered, That
Lucian's World of Lights, had been for some time in a snuff, but of late years
one Helmont had got it, who since he was Emperor of it, had so strengthened
the Immortal parts thereof with mortal outworks, as it was for the present
impregnable. Said the Emperess, If there be such an Infinite number of Worlds,
I am sure, not only my friend, the Duchess, but any other might obtain one.
Yes, answered the Spirits, if those Worlds were uninhabited; but they are as
populous as this, your Majesty governs. Why, said the Emperess, it is not
impossible to conquer a World. No, answered the Spirits, but, for the most
part, Conquerers seldom enjoy their conquest, for they being more feared then
loved, most commonly come to an untimely end. If you will but direct me, said
the Duchess to the Spirits, which World is easiest to be conquered, her Majesty
will assist me with means, and I will trust to Fate and Fortune; for I had
rather die in the adventure of noble achievements, then live in obscure and
sluggish security; since by the one, I may live in a glorious Fame, and by the
other I am buried in oblivion. The Spirits answered, That the lives of Fame
were like other lives; for some lasted long, and some died soon. It Is true, said
the Duchess; but yet the shortest-lived Fame lasts longer then the longest life
of Man. But, replied the Spirits, if occasion does not serve you, you must
content your self to live without such achievements that may gain you a Fame:
But we wonder, proceeded the Spirits, that you desire to be Emperess of a
Terrestrial World, when as you can create your self a Celestial World if you
please. What, said the Emperess, can any Mortal be a Creator? Yes, answered the
Spirits; for every humane Creature can create an Immaterial World fully
inhabited by immaterial Creatures, and populous of immaterial subjects, such as
we are, and all this within the compass of the head or scull; nay, not only
so, but he may create a World of what fashion and Government he will, and give
the Creatures thereof such motions, figures, forms, colors, perceptions, etc.
as he pleases, and make Whirl-pools, Lights, Pressures and Reactions, etc. as
he thinks best; nay, he may make a World full of Veins, Muscles, and Nerves,
and all these to move by one jolt or stroke: also he may alter that world as
often as he pleases, or change it from a natural world, to an artificial; he
may make a world of Ideas, a world of Atoms, a world of Lights, or whatsoever
his fancy leads him to. And since it is in your power to create such a world,
What need you to venture life, reputation and tranquillity, to conquer a gross
material world? For you can enjoy no more of a material world then a particular
Creature is able to enjoy, which is but a small part, considering the compass
of such a world; and you may plainly observe it by your friend the Emperess
here, which although she possesses a whole world, yet enjoys she but a part
thereof; neither is she so much acquainted with it, that she knows all the
places, Countries and Dominions she Governs. The truth is, a Sovereign Monarch
has the general trouble; but the Subjects enjoy all the delights and pleasures
in parts; for it is impossible, that a Kingdom, nay, a County should be enjoyed
by one person at once, except he take the pains dusty and misty particles, she
endeavored to create a World according to Aristotle's Opinion; but remembering
that her mind, as most of the Learned hold it, was Immaterial, and that
according to Aristotle's Principle, out of Nothing, Nothing could be made; she
was forced also to desist from that work, and then she fully resolved, not to
take any more patterns from the Ancient Philosophers, but to follow the
Opinions of the Moderns; and to that end, she endeavored to make a World
according to Des Carts Opinion; but when she had made the Ethereal Globules,
and set them a moving by a strong and lively imagination, her mind became so
dizzie with their extraordinary swift turning round, that it almost put her
into a swoon; for her thoughts, by their constant tottering, did so stagger, as
if they had all been drunk: wherefore she dissolved that World, and began to
make another, according to Hobbs's Opinion; but when all the parts of this
Imaginary World came to press and drive each other, they seemed like a company
of Wolves that worry Sheep, or like so many Dogs that hunt after Hares; and
when she found a reaction equal to those pressures, her mind was so squeesed
together, that her thoughts could neither move forward nor backward, which
caused such an horrible pain in her head, that although she had dissolved that
World, yet she could not, without much difficulty, settle her mind, and free it
from that pain which those pressures and reactions had caused in it.

At last, when the Duchess saw that no patterns would do her any good in the
framing of her World; she was resolved to make a World of her own invention,
and this World was composed of sensitive and rational self-moving Matter;
indeed, it was composed only of the rational, which is the subtilest and
purest degree of Matter; for as the sensitive did move and act both to the
perceptions and consistency of the body, so this degree of Matter at the same
point of time (for though the degrees are mixed, yet the several parts may move
several ways at one time) did move to the Creation of the Imaginary World;
which World after it was made, appeared so curious and full of variety, so well
ordered and wisely governed, that it cannot possibly be expressed by words, nor
the delight and pleasure which the Duchess took in making this world of her own.

In the mean time the Emperess was also making and dissolving several worlds in
her own mind, and was so puzzled, that she could not settle in any of them;
wherefore she sent for the Duchess, who being ready to wait on the Emperess,
carried her beloved world along with her, and invited the Emperess's Soul to
observe the frame, order and Government of it. Her Majesty was so ravished with
the perception of it, that her soul desired to live in the Duchess's World; but
the Duchess advised her to make such another World in her own mind; for, said
she, your Majesty's mind is full of rational corporeal motions, and the
rational motions of my mind shall assist you by the help of sensitive
expressions, with the best instructions they are able to give you.

The Emperess being thus persuaded by the Duchess to make an imaginary World of
her own, followed her advice; and after she had quite finished it, and framed
all kinds of Creatures proper and useful for it, strengthened it with good
Laws, and beautified it with Arts and Sciences; having nothing else to do,
unless she did dissolve her imaginary world, or made some alterations in the
Blazing-world, she lived in, which yet she could hardly do, by reason it was so
well ordered that it could not be mended; for it was governed without secret
and deceiving Policy; neither was there any ambition, factions, malicious
detractions, civil dissensions, or homebred quarrels, divisions in Religion,
foreign Wars, etc. but all the people lived in a peaceful society, united
Tranquillity, and Religious Conformity; she was desirous to see the world the
Duchess came from, and observe therein the several sovereign Governments, Laws
and Customs of several Nations. The Duchess used all the means she could, to
divert her from that Journey, telling her, that the world she came from, was
very much disturbed with factions, divisions and wars; but the Emperess would
not be persuaded from her design; and lest the Emperor, or any of his subjects
should know of her travel, and obstruct her design, she sent for some of the
Spirits she had formerly conversed withal, and inquired whether none of them
could supply the place of her soul in her body at such a time, when she was
gone to travel into another World? They answered, Yes, they could; for not
only one, said they, but many Spirits may enter into your body, if you please.
The Emperess replied, she desired but one Spirit to be ViceRoy of her body in
the absence of her Soul, but it must be an honest and ingenious Spirit; and if
it was possible, a female Spirit. The Spirits told her, that there was no
difference of Sexes amongst them; but, said they, we will choose an honest and
ingenious Spirit, and such a one as shall so resemble your soul, that neither
the Emperor, nor any of his subjects, although the most Divine, shall know
whether it be your own soul, or not: which the Emperess was very glad at, and
after the Spirits were gone, asked the Duchess, how her body was supplied in
the absence of her soul? who answered Her Majesty, That her body, in the
absence of her soul, was governed by her sensitive and rational corporeal
motions. Thus those two female souls traveled together as lightly as two
thoughts into the Duchess her native World; and which is remarkable, in a
moment viewed all the parts of it, and all the actions of all the Creatures
therein, especially did the Emperess's soul take much notice of the several
actions of humane Creatures in all the several Nations and parts of that World,
and wondered that for all there were so many several Nations, Governments,
Laws, Religions, Opinions, etc. they should all yet so generally agree in being
Ambitious, Proud, Self-conceited, Vain, Prodigal, Deceitful, Envious,
Malicious, Unjust, Revengeful, Irreligious, Factious, etc. She did also admire,
that not any particular State, Kingdom or Commonwealth, was contented with
their own shares, but endeavored to encroach upon their neighbors, and that
their greatest glory was in Plunder and Slaughter, and yet their victorie's
less then their expenses, and their losses more then their gains, but their
being overcome in a manner their utter ruin. But that she wondered most at,
was, that they should prize or value dirt more then men's lives, and vanity more
then tranquillity; for the Emperor of a world, said she, injoys but a part, not
the whole; so that his pleasure consists in the opinions of others. It is
strange to me, answered the Duchess, that you should say thus, being your self,
an Emperess of a World, and not only of a world, but of a peaceable, quiet,
and obedient world. It Is true, replied the Emperess, but although it is a
peaceable and obedient world, yet the Government thereof is rather a trouble,
then a pleasure; for order cannot be without industry, contrivance and
direction; besides, the Magnificent state, that great Princes keep or ought to
keep, is troublesome. Then by your Majesty's discourse, said the Duchess, I
perceive that the greatest happiness in all Worlds consist in Moderation: No
doubt of it, replied the Emperess; and after these two souls had visited all
the several places, Congregations and Assemblies both in Religion and State,
the several Courts of Judicature, and the like, in several Nations, the
Emperess said, That of all the Monarchs of the several parts of that World, she
had observed the Grand-Signior was the greatest; for his word was a Law, and
his power absolute. But the Duchess prayed the Emperess to pardon her that she
was of another mind; for, said she, he cannot alter Mahomets Laws and Religion;
so that the Law and Church do govern the Emperor, and not the Emperor them.
But, replied the Emperess, he has power in some particulars; as for example, to
place and displace subjects in their particular Governments of Church and
State, and having that, he has the Command both over Church and State, and none
dares oppose him. It Is true, said the Duchess; but if it pleases your Majesty,
we will go into that part of the world whence I came to wait on your Majesty,
and there you shall see as powerful a Monarch as the Grand-Signior; for though
his Dominions are not of so large extent, yet they are much stronger, his Laws
are easy and safe, and he governs so justly and wisely, that his subjects are
the happiest people of all the Nations or parts of that world. This Monarch,
said the Emperess, I have a great mind to see: Then they both went, and in a
short time arrived into his Dominions; but coming into the Metropolitan City,
the Emperess's soul observed many Galants go into an house, and enquiring of
the Duchess's soul, what house that was? She told her, It was one of the
Theaters where Comedies and Tragedies were acted. The Emperess asked, Whether
they were real? No, said the Duchess, They are feigned. Then the Emperess
desired to enter into the Theater, and when she had seen the Play that was
acted, the Duchess asked her how she liked that Recreation? I like it very
well, said the Emperess; but I observe, that the Actors make a better show then
the Spectators, and the Scenes a better then the Actors, and the Music and
Dancing is more pleasant and acceptable then the Play it self; for I see, the
Scenes stand for wit, the Dancing for humor, and the Music is the Chorus. I
am sorry, replied the Duchess, to hear your Majesty say so; for if the Wits of
this part of the world should hear you, they would condemn you. What, said the
Emperess, would they condemn me for preferring a natural face before a
sign-post, or a natural humor before an artificial dance, or Music before a
true and profitable Relation? As for relation, replied the Duchess, our Poets
defy and condemn it into a Chimney-corner, fitter for old Women's Tales, then
Theaters. Why, said the Emperess, do not your Poets actions comply with their
judgments? for their Plays are composed of old stories, either of Greek or
Roman, or some newfound World. The Duchess answered her Majesty, that it was
true, that all or most of their Plays were taken out of old Stories, but yet
they had new actions, which being joined to old stories, together with the
addition of new Prologues, Scenes, Music and Dancing, made new Plays.

After this, both the Souls went to the Court, where all the Royal Family was
together, attended by the chief of the Nobles of their Dominions, which made a
very magnificent show; and when the soul of the Emperess viewed the King and
Queen, she seemed to be in amaze, which the Duchess's soul perceiving, asked
the Emperess how she liked the King, the Queen, and all the Royal Race? She
answered, that in all the Monarchs she had seen in that World, she had not
found so much Majesty and affability mixed so exactly together, that none did
overshadow or eclipse the other; and as for the Queen, she said, that Virtue
sat Triumphant in her face, and Piety was dwelling in her heart, and that all
the Royal Family seemed to be endued with a Divine splendour: but when she had
heard the King discourse, she believed, that Mercury and Apollo had been his
Celestial instructors; and my dear Lord and Husband, added the Duchess, has
been his Earthly Governor. But after some short stay in the Court, the
Duchess's soul grew very Melancholy; the Emperess asking the cause of her
sadness? She told her, that she had an extreme desire to converse with the soul
of her noble Lord and dear Husband, and that she was impatient of a longer
stay. The Emperess desired the Duchess to have but patience so long, until the
King, the Queen, and the Royal Family were retired, and then she would bear her
company to her Lord and Husbands Soul, who at that time lived in the Country
some 112 miles off; which she did: and thus these two souls went toward those
parts of the Kingdom where the Duke of Newcastle was.

But one thing I forgot all this while, which is, That although thoughts are
the natural language of souls, yet by reason souls cannot travel without
Vehicles, they use such language as the nature and propriety of their Vehicles
require, and the Vehicles of those two souls being made of the purest and
finest sort of air, and of a humane shape; this purity and fineness was the
cause that they could neither be seen nor heard by any humane Creature; when
as, had they been of some grosser sort of Air, the sound of that Airs language
would have been as perceptible as the blowing of Zephyrus.

And now to return to my former Story; when the Emperess's and Duchess's Soul
were traveling into Nottingham-shire, for that was the place where the Duke
did reside; passing through the forest of Sherewood, the Emperess's soul was
very much delighted with it, as being a dry, plain and woody place, very
pleasant to travel in both in Winter and Summer; for it is neither much dirty,
nor dusty at no time: at last they arrived at Welbeck, a House where the Duke
dwell'd, surrounded all with Wood, so close and full, that the Emperess took
great pleasure and delight therein, and told the Duchess she never had observed
more wood in so little a compass in any part of the Kingdom she had passed
through; The truth is, said she, there seems to be more wood on the Seas, she
meaning the Ships, then on the Land. The Duchess told her, the reason was, that
there had been a long Civil War in that Kingdom, in which most of the best
Timber Trees and Principal Palaces were ruined and destroyed; and my dear Lord
and Husband, said she, has lost by it half his Woods, besides many Houses,
Land, and moveable Goods; so that all the loss out of his particular Estate,
did amount to above half a Million of Pounds. I wish, said the Emperess, he had
some of the Gold that is in the Blazing-world, to repair his losses. The
Duchess most humbly thanked her Imperial Majesty for her kind wishes; but, said
she, wishes will not repair his ruins: however, God has given my Noble Lord
and Husband great Patience, by which he bears all his losses and misfortunes.
At last, they entered into the Dukes House, an habitation not so magnificent,
as useful; and when the Emperess saw it, Has the Duke, said she, no other house
but this? Yes, answered the Duchess, some five miles from this place, he has a
very fine Castle, called Bolesover. That place then, said the Emperess, I
desire to see. Alas! replied the Duchess, it is but a naked house, and
unclothed of all Furniture. However, said the Emperess, I may see the manner
of its structure and building. That you may, replied the Duchess: and as they
were thus discoursing, the Duke came out of the House into the Court, to see
his Horses of manage; whom when the Duchess's soul perceived, she was so
overjoyed, that her aereal Vehicle became so splendorous, as if it had been
enlightened by the Sun; by which we may perceive, that the passions of Souls or
Spirits can alter their bodily Vehicles. Then these two Ladies Spirits went
close to him, but he could not perceive them; and after the Emperess had
observed the Art of Manage, she was much pleased with it, and commended it as
a noble pastime, and an exercise fit and proper for noble and heroic Persons:
But when the Duke was gone into the house again, those two Souls followed him;
where the Emperess observing, that he went to the exercise of the Sword, and
was such an excellent and unparalleled Master thereof, she was as much pleased
with that exercise, as she was with the former: But the Duchess's soul being
troubled, that her dear Lord and Husband used such a violent exercise before
meat, for fear of overheating himself, without any consideration of the
Emperess's soul, left her aereal Vehicle, and entered into her Lord. The
Emperess's soul perceiving this, did the like: And then the Duke had three
Souls in one Body; and had there been but some such Souls more, the Duke would
have been like the Grand-Signior in his Seraglio, only it would have been a
Platonic Seraglio. But the Dukes soul being wise, honest, witty, complaisant
and noble, afforded such delight and pleasure to the Emperess's soul by her
conversation, that these two souls became enamoured of each other; which the
Duchess's soul perceiving, grew jealous at first, but then considering that no
Adultery could be committed amongst Platonic Lovers, and that Platonism was
Divine, as being derived from Divine Plato, cast forth of her mind that Idea of
Jealousy. Then the Conversation of these three souls was so pleasant, that it
cannot be expressed; for the Dukes soul entertained the Emperesses soul with
Scenes, Songs, Music, witty Discourses, pleasant Recreations, and all kinds of
harmless sports; so that the time passed away faster then they expected. At
last, a Spirit came and told the Emperess, that although neither the Emperor,
nor any of his subjects knew that her soul was absent; yet the Emperors soul
was so sad and melancholy, for want of his own beloved soul, that all the
Imperial Court took notice of it. Wherefore he advised the Emperess's Soul to
return into the Blazing-world, into her own body she left there; which both the
Dukes and Duchess's soul was very sorry for, and wished, that if it had been
possible, the Emperess's soul might have stayed a longer time with them; but
seeing it could not be otherwise, they pacified themselves: But before the
Emperess returned into the Blazing-world, the Duchess desired a favor of her,
to wit, that she would be pleased to make an agreement between her Noble Lord,
and Fortune. Why, said the Emperess, are they enemies? Yes, answered the
Duchess, and they have been so ever since I have been his Wife; nay, I have
heard my Lord say, that she has crossed him in all things ever since he could
remember. I am sorry for that, replied the Emperess, but I cannot discourse
with Fortune without the help of an Immaterial Spirit, and that cannot be done
in this World, for I have no Fly-nor Bird-men here, to send into the region of
the Air, where, for the most part, their habitations are. The Duchess said, she
would entreat her Lord to send an Attorney or Lawyer, to plead her cause.
Fortune will bribe them, replied the Emperess, and so the Duke may chance to be
cast; Wherefore the best way will be for the Duke to choose a friend on his
side, and let Fortune choose another, and try whether by this means it be
possible to compose the difference. The Duchess said, They will never come to
an agreement, unless there be a Judge or Umpire to decide the Case. A Judge,
replied the Empersss, is easy to be had, but to get an Impartial Judge, is a
thing so difficult, that I doubt we shall hardly find one; for there is none to
be had neither in Nature, nor in Hell, but only from Heaven, and how to get
such a Divine and Celestial Judge, I cannot tell: Nevertheless, if you will go
along with me into the Blazing-world, I Will try what may be done. It Is my duty,
said the Duchess, to wait on your Majesty, and I shall most willingly do it,
for I have no other interest to consider. Then the Duchess spoke to the Duke
concerning the difference between him and Fortune, and how it was her desire
that they might be friends. The Duke answered, That for his part, he had always
with great industry, sought her friendship, but as yet he could never obtain
it, for she had always been his enemy: However, said he, I Will try, and send my
two friends, Prudence and Honesty, to plead my cause. Then these two friends
went with the Duchess and the Emperess into the Blazing-world; (for it is to be
observed, that they are somewhat like Spirits, because they are immaterial,
although their actions are corporeal:) and after their arrival there, when the
Emperess had refreshed her self, and rejoiced with the Emperor, she sent her
Fly-men for some of the Spirits, and defired their assistance, to compose the
difference between Fortune, and the Duke of Newcastle. But they told her
Majesty, That Fortune was so inconstant, that although she would perhaps
promise to hear their cause pleaded, yet it was a thousand to one, but she
would never have the patience to do it: Nevertheless, upon Her Majesty's
request, they tried their utmost, and at last prevailed with Fortune so far,
that she chose Folly, and Rashness, for her Friends, but they could not agree
in choosing a Judge; until at last, with much ado, they concluded, that Truth
should hear, and decide the cause. Thus all being prepared, and the time
appointed, both the Emperess's and Duchess's soul went to hear them plead; and
when all the Immaterial company was met, Fortune standing upon a Golden-Globe,
made this following Speech:

Noble Friends, We are met here to hear a Cause pleaded concerning the
difference between the Duke of Newcastle, and my self; and though I am willing
upon the persuasions of the Ambassadors of the Emperess, the Immaterial
Spirits, to yield to it, yet it had been fit, the Dukes Soul should be present
also, to speak for her self; but since she is not here, I shall declare my self
to his Wife, and his Friends, as also to my Friends, especially the Emperess,
to whom I shall chiefly direct my Speech. First, I desire, your Imperial
Majesty may know, that this Duke who complains or exclaims so much against me,
has been always my enemy; for he has preferred Honesty and Prudence before me,
and slighted all my favors; nay, not only thus, but he did fight against me,
and preferred his Innocence before my Power. His friends Honesty and Prudence,
said he most scornfully, are more to be regarded, then Inconstant Fortune, who
is only a friend to Fools and Knaves; for which neglect and scorn, whether I
have not just reason to be his enemy, your Majesty may judge your self.

After Fortune had thus ended her Speech, the Duchess's Soul rose from her
seat, and spoke to the Immaterial Assembly in this manner:

Noble Friends, I think it fit, by your leave, to answer Lady Fortuue in the
behalf of my Noble Lord and Husband, since he is not here himself; and since
you have heard her complaint concerning the choice my Lord made of his friends,
and the neglect and difrespect he seemed to cast upon her; give me leave to
answer, that, first concerning the Choice of his Friends, He has proved himself
a wise man in it; and as for the dis-respect and rudeness, her Ladyship accuses
him of, I dare say, he is so much a Gentleman, that I am confident he would
never slight, scorn or disrespect any of the Female Sex in all his life time;
but was such a servant and Champion for them, that he ventured Life and Estate
in their service; but being of an honest, as well as an honorable Nature, he
could not trust Fortune with that which he preferred above his life, which was
his Reputation, by reason Fortune did not side with those that were honest and
honorable, but renounced them; and since he could not be of both sides, he
chose to be of that which was agreeable both to his Conscience, Nature and
Education; for which choice Fortune did not only declare her self his open
Enemy, but fought with him in several Battles; nay, many times, hand to hand;
at last, she being a Powerful Princess, and as some believe, a Deity, overcame
him, and cast him into a Banishment, where she kept him in great misery, ruined
his Estate, and took away from him most of his Friends; nay, even when she
favored many that were against her, she still frowned on him; all which he
endured with the greatest patience, and with that respect to Lady Fortune, that
he did never in the least endeavor to disoblige any of her Favorites, but was
only sorry that he, an honest man, could find no favor in her Court; and
since he did never injure any of those she favored, he neither was an enemy to
her Ladyship, but gave her always that respect and worship which belonged to
her power and dignity, and is still ready at any time honestly and prudently to
serve her; he only begs her Ladyship would be his friend for the future, as
she has been his enemy in times past.

As soon as the Duchess's Speech was ended, Folly and Rashness started up, and
both spoke so thick and fast at once, that not only the Assembly, but
themselves were not able to understand each other: At which Fortune was
somewhat out of countenance, and commanded them either to speak singly, or be
silent: But Prudence told her Ladyship, she should command them to speak
wisely, as well as singly; otherwise, said she, it were best for them not to
speak at all: Which Fortune resented very ill, and told Prudence, she was too
bold; and then commanded Folly to declare what she would have made known: but
her Speech was so foolish, mixed with such nonsense, that none knew what to
make of it; besides, it was so tedious, that Fortune bid her to be silent, and
commanded Rashness to speak for her, who began after this manner:

Great Fortune; The Duchess of Newcastle has proved her self, according to
report, a very Proud and Ambitious Lady, in presuming to answer you her own
self, in this noble Assembly without your Command, in a Speech wherein she did
not only contradict you, but preferred Honesty and Prudence before you;
saying, that her Lord was ready to serve you honestly and prudently; which
presumption is beyond all pardon; and if you allow Honestly and Prudence to be
above you, none will admire, worship or serve you; but you will be forced to serve
your self, and will be despised, neglected and scorned by all; and from a
Deity, become a miserable, dirty, begging mortal in a Church-yard-Porch, or
Noble-mans Gate: Wherefore to prevent such disasters, fling as many misfortunes
and neglects on the Duke and Duchess of Newcastle, and their two friends, as
your power is able to do; otherwise Prudence and Honesty will be the chief and
only Moral Deities of Mortals.

Rashness having thus ended her Speech, Prudence rose and declared her self in
this manner:

Beautiful Truth, Great Fortune, and you the rest of my noble Friends; I am
come a great and long journey in the behalf of my dear Friend the Duke of
Newcastle, not to make more wounds, but, if it be possible, to heal those that
are made already. Neither do I presume to be a Deity; but my only request is,
that you would be pleased to accept of my offering, I being an humble and
devout supplicant, and since no offering is more acceptable to the Gods, then
the offering of Peace; in order to that, I desire to make an agreement between
Fortune, and the Duke of Newcastle.

Thus she spoke, and as she was going on, up started Honesty (for she has not
always so much discretion as she ought to have) and interrupted Prudence.

I came not here, said she, to hear Fortune flattered, but to hear the Cause
decided between Fortune and the Duke; neither came I hither to speak
Rhetorically and Eloquently, but to propound the case plainly and truly; and
I Will have you know, that the Duke, whose Cause we argue, was and is my
Foster-son; For I Honesty bred him from his Childhood, and made a perpetual
friendship betwixt him and Gratitude, Charity and Generosity; and put him to
School to Prudence, who taught him Wisdom, and informed him in the Rules of
Temperance, Patience, Justice, and the like; then I put him into the University
of Honor, where he learned all honorable Qualities, Arts, and Sciences;
afterward I sent him to travel through the World of Actions, and made
Observation his Governor; and in those his travels, he contracted a friendship
with Experience; all which, made him fit for Heavens Blessings, and Fortunes
Favors: But she hating all those that have merit and desert, became his
inveterate Enemy, doing him all the mischief she could, until the God of
Justice opposed Fortunes Malice, and pulled him out of those ruins she had
cast upon him: For this Go'ds Favors were the Dukes Champions; wherefore to be
an Enemy to him, were to be an Enemy to the God of Justice: In short, the true
cause of Fortunes Malice to this Duke, is, that he would never flatter her; for
I Honesty, did command him not to do it, or else he would be forced to follow
all her inconstam ways, and obey all her unjust commands, which would cause a
great reproach to him: but, on the other side, Prudence advised him not to
despise Fortunes favors, for that would be an obstruction and hinderance to
his worth and merit; and He to obey both our advice and counsels, did neither
flatter nor despise Her, but was always humble and respectful to her, so far as
Honor, Honesty and Conscience would permit: all which I refer to Truths
Judgment, and expect her final sentence.

Fortune hearing thus Honesties plain Speech, thought it very rude, and would
not hearken to Truths Judgment, but went away in a Passion: At which, both the
Emperess and Duchess were extremely troubled, that their endeavors should have
no better effect: but Honesty chid the Duchess, and said, she was to be
punished for desiring so much Fortunes favors; for it appears, said she, that
you mistrust the Gods blessings: At which the Duchess wept, answering Honesty,
that she did neither mistrust the Gods blessings, nor rely upon Fortunes
favors; but desired only that her Lord might have no potent Enemies. The
Emperess being much troubled to see her weep, told Honesty in anger, she wanted
the discretion of Prudence; for though you are commendable, said she, yet you
are apt to commit many indiscreet actions, unless Prudence be your guide. At
which reproof Prudence smiled, and Honesty was somewhat out of countenance; but
they soon became very good friends: and after the Duchess's soul had stayed
some time with the Emperess in the Blazing-world, she begged leave of her to
return to her Lord and Husband; which the Emperess granted her, upon condition
she should come and visit her as often as convenintly she could, promising that
she would do the same to the Duchess.

Thus the Duchess's soul, after she had taken her leave of the Emperess, as
also of the Spirits, who with great civility, promised her, that they would
endeavor in time to make a peace and agreement between Fortune and the Duke,
returned with Prudence and Honesty into her own World: But when she was just
upon her departure, the Emperess sent to Her, and desired that she might yet
have some little conference with her before she went; which the Duchess most
willingly granted her Majesty, and when she came to wait on Her, the Emperess
told the Duchess, that she being Her dear Platonic friend, of whose just and
impartial judgment, she had always a very great esteem, could not forbear,
before she went from her, to ask her advice concerning the Government of the
Blazing-world; For, said she, although this World was very well and wisely
ordered and governed at first, when I came to be Emperess thereof; yet the
nature of Women, being much delighted with change and variety, after I had
received an absolute Power from the Emperor, did somewhat alter the Form of
Government from what I found it; but now perceiving that the world is not so
quiet as it was at first, I am much troubled at it; especially there are such
continual contentions and divisions between the WormBear- and Fly-men, the
Ape-men, the Satyrs, the Spider-men, and all others of such sorts, that I fear
they will break out into an open Rebellion, and cause a great disorder and ruin
of the Government; and therefore I desire your advice and assistance, how I may
order it to the best advantage, that this World may be rendered peaceable, quiet
and happy, as it was before. Whereupon the Duchess answered, That since she
heard by her Imperial Majesty, how well and happily the World had been governed
when she first came to be Emperess thereof, she would advise her Majesty to
introduce the same form of Government again, which had been before; that is, to
have but one Sovereign, one Religion, one Law, and one Language, so that all
the World might be but as one united Family, without divisions; nay, like God,
and his Blessed Saints and Angels: Otherwise, said she, it may in time prove as
unhappy, nay, as miserable a World as that is from which I came, wherein are
more Sovereigns then Worlds, and more pretended Governors then Governments,
more Religions then Gods, and more Opinions in those Religions then Truths;
more Laws then Rights, and more Bribes then Justices, more Policies then
Necessities, and more Fears then Dangers; more Covetousness then Riches, more
Ambitions then Merits, more Services then Rewards, more Languages then Wit,
more Controversy then Knowledge, more Reports then noble Actions, and more
Gifts by partiality, then according to merit; all which, said she, is a great
misery, nay, a curse, which your blessed Blazing-world never knew, nor it is
probable, will never know of, unless your Imperial Majesty alter the Government
thereof from what it was when you began to govern it: And since your Majesty
complain much of the factions of the Bear- Fish- Fly- Ape- and Wormmen, the
Satyrs, Spider-men, and the like, and of their perpetual disputes and quarrels,
I would advise your Majesty to dissolve all their societies; for it is better to
be without their intelligences, then to have an unquiet and disorderly
Government. The truth is, said she, wheresoever is Learning, there is most
commonly also Controversy and Quarrelling; for there be always some that will
know more, and be wiser then others; some think their arguments come nearer to
truth, and are more rational then others; some are so wedded to their own
opinions, that they will never yield to Reason; and others, though they find their
Opinions not firmly grounded upon Reason, yet for fear of receiving some
disgrace by altering them, will nevertheless maintain them against all sense
and reason, which must needs breed factions in their Schools, which at last
break out into open Wars, and draw sometimes an utter ruin upon a State or
Government. The Emperess told the Duchess, that she would willingly follow her
advice, but she thought it would be an eternal disgrace to her, to alter her
own Decrees, Acts and Laws. To which the Duchess answered, That it was so far
from a disgrace, as it would rather be for her Majesty's eternal honor, to
return from a worse to a better, and would express and declare Her to be more
then ordinary wise and good; so wise, as to perceive her own errors, and so
good, as not to persist in them, which few did; for which, said she, you will
get a glorious same in this World, and an Eternal glory hereafter; and I shall
pray for it so long as I live. Upon which advice, the Emperess's Soul embraced
and kissed the Duchess's soul with an immaterial kiss, and shed immaterial
tears, that she was forced to part from her, finding her not a flattering
Parasite, but a true friend; and, in truth, such was their Platonic
Friendship, as these two loving Souls did often meet and rejoice in each others
Conversation.

(...) where all her Friends and Relations did live, at which the Emperess was
extremely troubled; insomuch that the Emperor perceived her grief by her tears,
and examining the cause thereof, she told him that she had received
Intelligence from the Spirits, that that part of the World she came from, which
was her native Country, was like to be destroyed by numerous Enemies that made
war against it. The Emperor being very sensible of this ill news, especially of
the Trouble it caused to the Emperess, endeavorred to comfort her as much as
possibly he could, and told her, that she might have all the assistance which
the Blazing-world was able to afford. She answered, That if there were any
possibility of transporting Forces out of the Blazing-world, into the World she
came from, she would not fear so much the ruin thereof: but, said she, there
being no probability of effecting any such thing, I know not how to show my
readiness to serve my Native Country. The Emperor asked, Whether those Spirits
that gave her Intelligence of this War, could not with all their Power and
Forces assist her against those Enemies? She answered, That Spirits could not
arm themselves, nor make any use of Artificial Arms or Weapons; for their
Vehicles were Natural Bodies, not Artificial: Besides, said she, the violent
and strong actions of War, will never agree with Immaterial Spirits; for
Immaterial Spirits cannot fight, nor make Trenches, Fortifications, and the
like. But, said the Emperor, their Vehicles can; especially if those Vehicles
be men's Bodies, they may be serviceable in all the actions of War. Alas,
replied the Emperess, that will never do; for first, said she, it will be
difficult to get so many dead Bodies for their Vehicles, as to make up a whole
Army, much more to make many Armies to fight with so many several Nations; nay,
if this could be, yet it is not possible to get so many dead and undissolved
bodies in one Nation; and for transporting them out of other Nations, would be
a thing of great difficulty and improbability: But put the case, said she, all
these difficulties could be overcome, yet there is one obstruction or
hinderance which can no ways be avoided; for although those dead and
undissolved Bodies did all die in one minute of time, yet before they could
Rendezvouze, and be put into a posture of War, to make a great and formidable
Army, they would stink and dissolve; and when they came to a fight, they would
moulder into dust and ashes, and so leave the purer Immaterial Spirits naked:
nay, were it also possible, that those dead bodies could be preserved from
stinking and dissolving, yet the souls of such bodies would not suffer
Immaterial Spirits to rule and order them, but they would enter and govern them
themselves, as being the right owners thereof, which would produce a War
between those Immaterial Souls, and the Immaterial Spirits in Material Bodies;
all which would hinder them from doing any service in the actions of War,
against the Enemies of my Native Country. You speak Reason, said the Emperor,
and I wish with all my Soul I could advise any manner or way, that you might be
able to assist it; but you having told me of your dear Platonic Friend the
Duchess of Neweastle, and of her good and prositable Counsels, I would desire
you to send for her Soul, and conser with her about this business.

The Emperess was very glad of this motion of the Emperor, and immediately sent
for the Soul of the said Duchess, which in a minute waited on her Majesty. Then
the Emperess declared to her the grievance and sadness of her mind, and how
much she was troubled and afflicted at the News brought her by the Immaterial
Spirits, desiring the Duchess, if possible, to assist her with the best
counsels she could, that she might show the greatness of her love and affection
which she bore to her Native Country. Whereupon the Duchess promised her
Majesty to do what lay in her power; and since it was a business of great
Importance, she desired some time to consider of it; for, said she, Great
Affairs require deep considerations; which the Emperess willingly allowed her.
And after the Duchess had considered some little time, she desired the Emperess
to send some of her Syrenes or Mear-Men, to see what passages they could find
out of the Blazing-World, into the World she came from; for said she, if there
be a passage for a Ship to come out of that World into this; then certainly
there may also a Ship pass through the same passage out of this World into that.
Hereupon the Mear-or Fish-men were sent out; who being many in number, employed
all their industry, and did swim several ways; at last having found out the
passage, they returned to the Emperess, and told her, That as their
Blazing-World had but one Emperor, one Government, one Religion, and one
Language, so there was but one Passage into that World, which was so little,
that no Vessel bigger than a Packet-Boat could go through; neither was that
Passage always open, but sometimes quite frozen up. At which Relation both the
Emperess and Duchess seemed somewhat troubled, fearing that this would perhaps
be an hinderance or obstruction to their Design.

At last the Duchess desired the Emperess to send for her Ship-wrights, and all
her Architects, which were Giants; who being called, the Duchess told them how
some in her own World had been so ingenious, and contrived Ships that could
swim under Water, and asked whether they could do the like? The Giants
answered, They had never heard of that Invention; nevertheless, they would try
what might be done by Art, and spare no labor or industry to find it out. In
the mean time, while both the Emperess and Duchess were in a serious Counsel,
after many debates, the Duchess desired but a few Ships to transport some of
the Bird-Worm-and Bearmen. Alas! said the Emperess, What can such sorts of Men
do in the other World? especially so few? They will be soon destroyed, for a
Musket will destroy numbers of Birds at one shot. The Duchess said, I desire
your Majesty will have but a little patience, and rely upon my advice, and you
shall not fail to save your own Native Country, and in a manner become Mistress
of all that World you came from. The Emperess, who loved the Duchess as her own
Soul, did so; the Giants returned soon after, and told her Majesty, that they
had found out the Art which the Duchess had mentioned, to make such Ships as
could swim under Water; which the Emperess and Duchess were both very glad at,
and when the Ships were made ready, the Duchess told the Emperess, that it was
requisite that her Majesty should go her self in body as well as in Soul; but,
I, said she, can only wait on your Majesty after a Spiritual manner, that is,
with my Soul. Your Soul, said the Emperess, shall live with my Soul, in my
Body; for I shall only desire your Counseland Advice. Then said the Duchess,
Your Majesty must command a great number of your Fish-men to wait on your
Ships; for you know that your Ships are not made for Cannons, and therefore are
no ways serviceable in War; for though by the help of your Engines they can
drive on, and your Fish-men may by the help of Chains or Ropes, draw them which
way they will, to make them go on, or fly back, yet not so as to fight: And
though your Ships be of Gold, and cannot be shot through, but only bruised and
battered; yet the Enemy will assault and enter them, and take them as Prizes;
wherefore your Fishmen must do you Service instead of Cannons. But how, said
the Emperess, can the Fish-men do me service against an Enemy, without Canons
and all sorts of Arms? That is the reason, answered the Duchess, that I would
have numbers of Fish-men, for they shall destroy all your Enemies Ships, before
they can come near you. The Emperess asked in what manner that could be? Thus,
answered the Duchess: Your Majesty must send a number of Worm-men to the
Burning-Mountains (for you have good store of them in the Blazing-World) which
must get a great quantity of the Fire-stone, whose property, you know, is, that
it burns so long as it is wet; and the Ships in the other World being all made
of Wood, they may by that means set them all on fire; and if you can but
destroy their Ships, and hinder their Navigation, you will be Mistress of all
that World, by reason most parts thereof cannot live without Navigation.
Besides, said she, the Fire-stone will serve you instead of light or torches;
for you know, that the World you are going into, is dark at nights (especially
if there be no Moonshine, or if the Moon be overshadowed by Clouds) and not so
full of Blazing-Stars as this World is, which make as great a light in the
absence of the Sun, as the Sun does when it is present; for that World has but
little blinking Stars, which make more shadows then light, and are only able
to draw up Vapors from the Earth, but not to rarifie or clarify them, or to
convert them into serene air.

This Advice of the Duchess was very much approved, and joyfully embraced by
the Emperess, who forthwith sent her Worm-men to get a good quantity of the
mentioned Fire-Stone. She also commanded numbers of Fish-men to wait on her
under water, and Bird-men to wait on her in the air; and Bear-and Worm-men to
wait on her in Ships, according to the Duchess's advice; and indeed the
Bear-men were as serviceable to her as the NorthStar; but the Bird-men would
often rest themselves upon the Decks of the Ships; neither would the Emperess,
being of a sweet and noble Nature, suffer that they should tire or weary
themselves by long flights; for though by Lard they did often fly out of one
Country into another, yet they did rest in some Woods, or on some Grounds,
especially at night, when it was their sleeping time: And therefore the
Emperess was forced to take a great many Ships along with her, both for
transporting those several sorts of her loyal and serviceable Subjects, and to
carry provisions for them: Besides, she was so wearied with the Petitions of
several others of her Subjects who desired to wait on her Majesty, that she
could not possibly deny them all; for some would rather choose to be drowned,
then not tender their duty to her.

Thus after all things were made fit and ready, the Emperess began her Journey,
I cannot properly say, she set Sail, by reason in some Part, as in the passage
between the two Worlds (which yet was but short) the Ships were drawn under
water by the Fish-men with Golden Chains, so that they had no need of Sails
there, nor of any other Arts, but only to keep out water from entering into
the Ships, and to give or make so much Air as would serve for breath or
respiration, those Land Animals that were in the Ships; which the Giants had so
Artificially contrived, that they which were therein found no inconveniency at
all: And after they had passed the Icy Sea, the Golden Ships appeared above
water, and so went on until they came near the Kingdom that was the Emperess's
Native Country; where the Bear-men through their Telescopes discovered a great
number of Ships which had beset all that Kingdom, well rigged and manned.

The Emperess before she came in sight of the Enemy, sent some of her Fish-and
Bird-men to bring her Intelligence of their Fleet; and hearing of their number,
their station and posture, she gave order that when it was Night, her Bird-men
should carry on their backs some of the mentioned Fire-stones, with the tops
thereof wetted; and the Fish-men should carry them likewise, and hold them out
of the Water; for they were cut in the form of Torches or Candles, and being
many thousands, made a terrible show; for it appeared as if all the Air and Sea
had been of a flaming Fire; and all that were upon the Sea, or near it, did
verily believe, the time of Judgment, or the Last Day was come, which made them
all fall down, and Pray.

At the break of Day, the Emperess commanded those Lights to be put out, and
then the Naval Forces of the Enemy perceived nothing but a Number of Ships
without Sails, Guns, Arms, and other Instruments of War; which Ships seemed to
swim of themselves, without any help or assistance: which sight put them into a
great amaze; neither could they perceive that those Ships were of Gold, by
reason the Emperess had caused them all to be colored black, or with a dark
color; so that the natural color of the Gold could not be perceived through
the artificial color of the paint, no not by the best Telescopes. All which
put the Enemies Fleet into such a fright at night, and to such wonder in the
morning, or at day time, that they knew not what to judge or make of them; for
they knew neither what Ships they were, nor what Party they belonged to,
insomuch that they had no power to stir.

In the mean while, the Emperess knowing the Colors of her own Country, sent a
Letter to their General, and the rest of the chief Commanders, to let them
know, that she was a great and powerful Princess, and came to assist them
against their Enemies; wherefore she desired they should declare themselves,
when they would have her help and assistance.

Hereupon a Council was called, and the business debated; but there were so
many cross and different Opinions, that they could not suddenly resolve what
answer to send the Emperess; at which she grew angry, insomuch that she
resolved to return into her Blazingworld, without giving any assistance to her
Countrymen: But the Duchess of Newcastle in treated her Majesty to abate her
passion; for, said she, Great Councels are most commonly slow, because many men
have many several Opinions: besides, every Councellor striving to be the
wisest, makes long speeches, and raises many doubts, which cause retardments.
If I had long speeched Councillors, replied the Emperess, I would hang them,
by reason they give more Words, then Advice. The Duchess answered, that her
Majesty should not be angry, but consider the differences of that and her
Blazing-world; for, said she, they are not both alike; but there are grosser
and duller understandings in this, then in the Blazing-world.

At last a Messenger came out, who returned the Emperess thanks for her kind
profer, but desired withal to know from whence she came, and how, and in what
manner her assistance could be serviceable to them? The Emperess answered, That
she was not bound to tell them whence she came; but as for the manner of her
assistance, I will appear, said she, to your Navy in a splendorous Light,
surrounded with Fire. The Messenger asked at what time they should expect her
coming? I Will be with you, answered the Emperess, about one of the Clock at
night. With this report the Messenger returned; which made both the poor
Counselors and Seamen much afraid; but yet they longed for the time to behold
this strange sight.

The appointed hour being come, the Emperess appeared with Garments made of the
Star-stone, and was born or supported above the Water, upon the Fishmens heads
and backs, so that she seemed to walk upon the face of the Water, and the Bird-
and Fish-men carried the Fire-stone, lighted both in the Air, and above the
Waters.

Which sight, when her Countrymen perceived at a distance, their hearts began
to tremble; but coming something nearer, she left her Torches, and appeared
only in her Garments of Light, like an Angel, or some Deity, and all kneeled
down before her, and worshipped her with all submission and reverence: But the
Emperess would not come nearer then at such a distance where her voice might be
generally heard, by reason she would not have that of her Accoustrements any
thing else should be perceived, but the splendour thereof; and when she was come
so near that her voice could be heard and understood by all, she made this
following Speech;

Dear Countrymen, for so you are, although you know me not; I being a Native
of this Kingdom, and hearing that most part of this World had resolved to make
War against it, and sought to destroy it, at least to weaken its Naval Force
and Power; have made a Voyage out of another World, to lend you my assistance
against your Enemies. I come not to make bargains with you, or to regard my own
Interest, more then your safety; but I intend to make you the most powerful
Nation of this World; and therefore I have chosen rather to quit my own
Tranquillity, Riches and Pleasure, then suffer you to be ruined and destroyed.
All the Return I desire, is but your Grateful acknowledgment, and to declare my
Power, Love and Loyalty to my Native Country; for although I am now a great and
absolute Princess and Emperess of a whole World, yet I acknowledge that once I
was a Subject of this Kingdom, which is but a small part of this World; and
therefore I will have you undoubtedly believe, that I shall destroy all your
Enemies before this following Night, I mean those which trouble you by Sea; and
if you have any by Land, assure your self I shall also give you my Assistance
against them, and make you Triumph over all that seek your Ruin and
Destruction.

Upon this Declaration of the Emperess, when both the General, and all the
Commanders in their several Ships had returned their humble and hearty Thanks
to Her Majesty for so great a favor to them, she took her leave and departed
to her own Ships. But, Good Lord! what several Opinions and Judgments did this
produce in the minds of her Countrymen; some said she was an Angel; others,
she was a Sorceress; some believed her a Goddess; others said the Devil deluded
them in the shape of a fine Lady.

The morning after, when the Navies were to fight, the Emperess appeared upon
the face of the Waters, dressed in her Imperial Robes, which were all of
Diamonds and Carbuncles; in one hand she held a Buckler, made of one entire
Carbuncle, and in the other hand a Spear of one entire Diamond; on her head she
had a Cap of Diamonds, and just upon the top of the Crown, was a Star made of
the Star-stone, mentioned heretofore, and a Half Moon made of the same stone,
was placed on her forehead; all her other Garments were of several sorts of
precious Jewels; and having given her Fish-men directions how to destroy the
Enemies of her Native Country, she proceeded to effect her design. The Fish-men
were to carry the Fire-stones in cases of Diamonds (for the Diamonds in the
Blazing-world are in splendour so far beyond the Diamonds of this World, as
Peble-stones are to the best sort of this Worlds Diamonds) and to uncase or
uncover those Fire-stones no sooner but when they were just under the Enemies
Ships, or close at their sides, and then to wet them, and set their Ships on
fire; which was no sooner done, but all the Enemies Fleet was of a
Flaming-fire; and coming to the place where the Powder was, it straight blew
them up; so that all the several Navies of the Enemies, were destroyed in a
short time: which when her Countrymen did see, they all cried out with one
voice, that she was an Angel sent from God to deliver them out of the hands of
their Enemies: Neither would she return into the Blazing-world, until she had
forced all the rest of that World to submit to that same Nation.

In the mean time, the General of all their Naval Forces sent to their
Sovereign to acquaint him with their miraculous Delivery and Conquest, and with
the Emperess's design of making him the most powerful Monarch of all that
World. After a short time, the Emperess sent her self to the Sovereign of that
Nation to know in what she could be serviceable to him; who returning her many
thanks, both for her assistance against his Enemies, and her kind profer to do
him further service for the good and benefit of his Nations (for he was King
over several Kingdoms) sent her word, that although she did partly destroy his
Enemies by Sea, yet they were so powerful, that they did hinder the Trade and
Traffic of his Dominions. To which the Emperess returned this answer, That she
would burn and sink all those Ships that would not pay him Tribute; and
forthwith sent to all the Neighboring Nations, who had any Traffic by Sea,
desiring them to pay Tribute to the King and Sovereign of that Nation where she
was born; But they denied it with great scorn. Whereupon she imediately
commanded her Fish-men to destroy all strangers Ships that traffick'd on the
Seas; which they did according to the Emperess's Command; and when the
neighboring Nations and Kingdoms perceived her power, they were so discomposed
in their affairs and designs, that they knew not what to do: At last they sent
to the Emperess, and desired to treat with her, but could get no other
conditions then to submit and pay Tribute to the said King and Sovereign of her
Native Country, otherwise, she was resolved to ruin all their Trade and
Traffic by burning their Ships. Long was this Treat, but in fine, they could
obtain nothing, so that at last they were forced to submit; by which the King
of the mentioned Nations became absolute Master of the Seas, and consequently
of that World; by reason, as I mentioned heretofore, the several Nations of
that World could not well live without Traffic and Commerce, by Sea, as well
as by Land.

But after a short time, those Neighboring Nations finding themselves so much
inslaved, that they were hardly able to peep out of their own Dominions without
a chargeable Tribute, they all agreed to join again their Forces against the
King and Sovereign of the said Dominions; which when the Emperess received
notice of, she sent out her Fish-men to destroy, as they had done before, the
remainder of all their Naval Power, by which they were soon forced again to
submit, except some Nations which could live without Foreign Traffic, and
some whose Trade and Traffic was merely by Land; these would no ways be
Tributary to the mentioned King. The Emperess sent them word, That in case they
did not submit to him, she intended to fire all their Towns and Cities, and
reduce them by force, to what they would not yield with a good will. But they
rejected and scorned her Majesty's Message, which provoked her anger so much,
that she resolved to send her Bird- and Worm-men thither, with order to begin
first with their smaller Towns, and set them on fire (for she was loath to make
more spoil then she was forced to do) and if they remained still obstinate in
their resolutions, to destroy also their greater Cities. The only difficulty
was, how to convey the Worm-men conveniently to those places; but they desired
that her Majesty would but set them upon any part of the Earth of those
Nations, and they could travel within the Earth as easily, and as nimbly as men
upon the face of the Earth; which the Emperess did according to their desire.

But before both the Bird-and Worm-men began their Journey, the Emperess
commanded the Bearmen to view through their Telescopes what Towns and Cities
those were that would not submit; and having a full information thereof, she
instructed the Bird-and Bear-men what Towns they should begin withal; in the
mean while she sent to all the Princes and Sovereigns of those Nations, to let
them know that she would give them a proof of her Power, and check their
Obstinacies by burning some of their smaller Towns; and if they continued still
in their Obstinate Resolutions, that she would convert their smaller Loss into
a Total Ruin. She also commanded her Bird-men to make their flight at night,
lest they be perceived. At last when both the Bird-and Worm-men came to the
designed places, the Worm-men laid some Fire-stones under the Foundation of
every House, and the Bird-men placed some at the tops of them, so that both by
rain, and by some other moisture within the Earth, the stones could not fail of
burning. The Bird-men in the mean time having learned some few words of their
Language, told them, That the next time it did rain, their Towns would be all
on fire; at which they were amazed to hear men speak in the air; but withal
they laughed when they heard them say that rain should fire their Towns,
knowing that the effect of Water was to quench, not produce fire.

At last a rain came, and upon a sudden all their Houses appeared of a flaming
Fire, and the more Water there was poured on them, the more they did flame and
burn; which struck such a Fright and Terror into all the Neighboring Cities,
Nations and Kingdoms, that for fear the like should happen to them, they and
all the rest of the parts of that World granted the Emperess's desire, and
submitted to the Monarch and Sovereign of her Native Country, the King of
ESFI; save one, which having seldom or never any rain, but only dews, which
would soon be spent in a great fire, slighted her Power: The Emperess being
desirous to make it stoop, as well as the rest, knew that every year it was
watered by a flowing Tide, which lasted some weeks; and although their Houses
stood high from the ground, yet they were built upon Supporters which were fixed
into the ground. Wherefore she commanded both her Bird-and Worm-men to lay some
of the Fire-stones at the bottom of those Supporters, and when the Tide came
in, all their Houses were of a Fire, which did so rarifie the Water, that the
Tide was soon turned into Vapor, and this Vapor again into Air; which caused
not only a destruction of their Houses, but also a general barrenness over all
their Country that year, and forced them to submit as well as the rest of the
World had done.

Thus the Emperess did not only save her Native Country, but made it the
absolute Monarchy of all that World; and both the effects of her Power and her
Beauty did kindle a great desire in all the greatest Princes to see her; who
hearing that she was resolved to return into her own Blazing-World, they all
entreated the favor, that they might wait on her Majesty before she went. The
Emperess sent word, That she should be glad to grant their Requests; but having
no other place of reception for them, she desired that they would be pleased to
come into the open Seas with their Ships, and make a Circle of a pretty large
compass, and then her own Ships should meet them, and close up the Circle, and
she would present her self to the view of all these that came to see her: Which
Answer was joyfully received by all the mentioned Princes, who came, some
sooner, and some later, each according to the distance of his Country, and the
length of the voyage. And being all met in the form and manner aforesaid, the
Emperess appeared upon the face of the Water in her Imperial Robes; in some
part of her hair she had placed some of the Star-Stone, near her face, which
added such a luster and glory to it, that it caused a great admiration in all
that were present, who believed her to be some Celestial Creature, or rather an
uncreated Goddess, and they all had a desire to worship her; for surely, said
they, no mortal creature can have such a splendid and transcendent beauty, nor
can any have so great a power as she has, to walk upon the Waters, and to
destroy whatever she pleases, not only whole Nations, but a whole World.

The Emperess expressed to her own Countrymen, who were also her Interpreters
to the rest of the Princes that were present, that she would give them an
entertainment at the darkest time of night; which being come, the Fire-Stones
were lighted, which made both Air and Seas appear of a bright shining flame,
insomuch that they put all Spectators into an extreme fright, who verily
believed, they should all be destroyed; which the Emperess perceiving, caused
all the Lights of the Fire-Stones to be put out, and only showed her self in
her Garments of Light: The Bird-men carried her upon their backs into the Air,
and there she appeared as glorious as the Sun. Then she was set down upon the
Seas again, and presently there was heard the most melodious and sweetest
Consort of Voices, as ever was heard out of the Seas, which was made by the
Fishmen; this Consort was answered by another, made by the Bird-men in the Air,
so that it seemed as if Sea and Air had spoke and answered each other by way of
Singing Dialogues, or after the manner of those Plays that are acted by singing
Voices.

But when it was upon break of day, the Emperess ended her entertainment, and
at full day light all the Princes perceived that she went into the Ship wherein
the Prince and Monarch of her Native Country was, the King of ESFI with whom
she had several Conferences; and having assured him of the readiness of her
assistance whenever he required it, telling him withal, that she wanted no
Intelligence, she went forth again upon the Waters, and being in the midst of
the Circle made by those Ships that were present, she desired them to draw
somewhat nearer, that they might hear her speak; which being done, she declared
her self in this following manner:

Great, Heroic, and Famous Monarchs: I came hither to assist the King of ESFI
against his Enemies, he being unjustly assaulted by many several Nations, which
would fain take away his Hereditary Rights and Prerogatives of the Narrow Seas;
at which Injustice Heaven was much displeased; and for the Injuries he received
from his Enemies, rewarded him with an absolute Power, so that now he is become
the Head-Monarch of all this World; which Power, though you may envy, yet you
can no ways hinder him; for all those that endeavor to resist his Power, shall
only get loss for their labor, and no Victory for their profit. Wherefore my
advice to you all is, to pay him Tribute justly and truly, that you may live
Peaceably and Happily, and be rewarded with the Blessings of Heaven, which I
wish you from my Soul.

After the Emperess had thus finished her Speech to the Princes of the several
Nations of that World, she desired that their Ships might fall back, which
being done, her own Fleet came into the Circle, without any visible assistance
of Sails or Tide; and her self being entered into her own Ship, the whole Fleet
sunk imediately into the bottom of the Seas, and left all the Spectators in a
deep amazement; neither would she suffer any of her Ships to come above the
Waters until she arrived into the Blazing-world.

In time of the Voyage, both the Emperess's and Duchess's Soul were very gay
and merry, and sometimes they would converse very seriously with each other:
amongst the rest of their discourses, the Duchess said, she wondered much at
one thing, which was, that since her Majesty had found out a passage out of the
Blazing-world into the World she came from, she did not enrich that part of the
World where she was born, at least her own Family, when as yet she had enough
to enrich the whole World. The Emperess's Soul answered, that she loved her
Native Country and her own Family as well as any Creature could do, and that
this was the reason why she would not enrich them; for said she, not only
particular Families or Nations, imitated if I can possibly avoid it; yet rather
then imitate others, I should choose to be imitated by others; for my nature is
such, that I had rather appear worse in singularity, then better in the Mode.
If you were not a great Lady, replied the Emperess, you would never pass in the
World for a wise Lady; for the World would say your singularities are Vanities.
The Duchess's Soul answered, she did not at all regard the censure of this or
any other age concerning vanities; but, said she, neither this present, nor any
of the future ages can or will truly say that I am not Virtuous and Chaste; for
I am confident, all that were or are acquainted with me, and all the Servants
which ever I had, will or can upon their Oaths declare my actions no otherwise
then Virtuous; and certainly there is none, even of the meanest Degree, which
have not their Spies and Witnesses, much more those of the Nobler sort, which
seldom or never are without attendants, so that their faults (if they have any)
will easily be known, and as easily divulged: Wherefore happy are those Natures
that are Honest, Virtuous and Noble, not only happy to themselves, but happy
to their Families. But, said the Emperess, if you glory so much in your Honesty
and Virtue, how comes it that you plead for Dishonest and Wicked persons in
your Writings? The Duchess answered, it was only to show her Wit, not her
Nature.

At last the Emperess arrived into the Blazing World, and coming to her
Imperial Palace, you may sooner imagine than expect that I should express the
joy which the Emperor had at her safe return; for he loved her beyond his Soul;
and there was no love lost, for the Emperess equaled his Affection with no less
love to him. After the time of rejoicing with each other, the Duchess's Soul
begged leave to return to her Noble Lord; but the Emperor desired, That before
she departed, she would see how he had employed his time in the Emperess's
absence; for he had built Stables and Riding-Houses, and desired to have Horses
of Manage, such as, according to the Emperess's Relation, the Duke of Newcastle
had: The Emperor enquired of the Duchess, the Form and Structure of her Lord
and Husbands Stables and Riding-House. The Duchess answered his Majesty, That
they were but plain and ordinary; but said she, had my Lord Wealth, I am sure
he would not spare it, in rendering his Buildings as Noble as could be made.
Hereupon the Emperor showed the Duchess the Stables he had built, which were
most stately and magnificent; among the rest there was one double Stable that
held a hundred Horses on a side, the main Building was of Gold, lined with
several sorts of precious Materials; the roof was Arched with Agats, the sides
of the Walls were lined with Cornelian, the Floor was paved with Amber, the
Mangers were Mother of Pearl, the Pillars, as also the middle Isle or Walk of
the Stables, were of Crystal; the Front and Gate was of Turquois, most neatly
cut and carved. The riding-house was lined with Saphirs, Topases, and the like;
the Floor was all of Golden-sand, so finely sifted, that it was extremely soft,
and not in the least hurtful to the Horses feet, and the Door and Frontispiece
was of Emeralds, curiously carved.

After the view of these Glorious and Magnisicent Buildings, which the
Duchess's Soul was much delighted withal, she resolved to take her leave; but
the Emperor desired her to stay yet some short time more, for they both loved
her company so well, that they were unwilling to have her depart so soon:
Several Conferences and Discourses passed between them; amongst the rest the
Emperor desired her advice how to set up a Theater for Plays. The Duchess
confessed her Ignorance in this Art, telling his Majesty that she knew nothing
of erecting Theaters or Scenes, but what she had by an Immaterial Observation
when she was with the Emperess's Soul in the chief City of E. Entering into one
of their Theaters, whereof the Emperess could give as much account to His
Majesty as her self. But both the Emperor and Emperess told the Duchess, (...)
she could give directions how to make Plays. The Duchess answered, that she had
as little skill to form a Play after the Mode, as she had to paint or make a
Scene for show. But you have made Plays, replied the Emperess: Yes, answered
the Duchess, I intended them for Plays; but the Wits of these present times
condemned them as incapable of being represented or acted, because they were
not made up according to the Rules of Art; though I dare say, that the
Descriptions are as good as any they have writ. The Emperor asked, Whether the
Property of Plays were not to describe the several humors, actions and
fortunes of Mankind? It Is so, answered the Duchess: Why then, replied the
Emperor, the natural Humors, Actions and Fortunes of Mankind, are not done by
the Rules of Art: But said the Duchess, it is the Art and Method of our Wits to
despise all Descriptions of Wit, Humor, Actions and Fortunes that are without
such Artificial Rules. The Emperor asked, Are those good Plays that are made
so Methodically and Artificially? The Duchess answered, They were Good
according to the Judgment of the Age, or Mode of the Nation, but not according
to her Judgment; for truly, said she, in my Opinion, their Plays will prove a
Nursery of Whining Lovers, and not an Academy or School for Wife, Witty, Noble,
and well-behaved men. But I, replied the Emperor, desire such a Theater as may
make wise Men; and will have such Descriptions as are Natural, not Artificial.
If your Majesty be of that Opinion, said the Duchess's Soul, then my Plays may
be acted in your BlazingWorld, when they cannot be acted in the Blinking-World
of Wit; and the next time I come to visit your Majesty, I shall endeavor to
order your Majesty's Theater, to present such Plays as my Wit is capable to
make. Then the Emperess told the Duchess, That she loved a foolish Verse added
to a wise Play. The Duchess answered, That no World in Nature had fitter
Creatures for it then the Blazing-VVorld; for, said she, the Lowsemen, the
Bird-men, the Spider-and Fox-men, the Ape-men and Satyrs appear in a Verse
extraordinary pleasant.

Hereupon both the Emperor and Emperess entreated the Duchess's Soul to stay so
long with them, till she had ordered her Theater, and made Plays and Verses
fit for them; for they only wanted that sort of Recreation; but the Duchess's
Soul begged their Majesty's to give her leave to go into her Native World; for
she longed to be with her dear Lord and Husband, promising, that after a short
time she would return again. Which being granted, though with much difficulty,
she took her leave with all Civility and respect, and so departed from their
Majesty's.

After the Duchess's return into her own body, she entertained her Lord (when
he was pleased to hear such kind of Discourses) with Foreign Relations; but he
was never displeased to hear of the Emperess's kind Commendations, and of the
Characters she was pleased to give of him to the Emperor. Amongst other
Relations she told him all what had past between the Emperess, and the several
Monarchs of that World whither she went with the Emperess; and how she had
subdued them to pay Tribute and Homage to the Monarch of that Nation or Kingdom
to which she owed both her Birth and Education. She also related to her Lord
what Magnificent Stables and Riding-Houses the Emperor had built, and what fine
Horses were in the Blazing-World, of several shapes and sizes, and how exact
their shapes were in each sort, and of many various Colors, and fine Marks, as
if they had been painted by Art, with such Coats or Skins, that they had a far
greater gloss and smoothness than Satin; and were there but a passage out of
the BlazingWorld into this, said she, you should not only have some of those
Horses, but such Materials, as the Emperor has, to build your Stables and
Riding-houses withal; and so much Gold, that I should never repine at your
Noble and Generous Gifts. The Duke smilingly answered her, That he was sorry
there was no Passage between those two Worlds; but said he, I have always
found an Obstruction to my Good Fortunes.

One time the Duchess chanced to discourse with some of her acquaintance, of
the Emperess of the Blazing-world, who asked her what Pastimes and Recreations
Her Majesty did most delight in? The Duchess answered, that she spent most of
her time in the study of Natural Causes and Effects, which washer chief delight
and pastime, and that she loved to discourse sometimes with the most Learned
persons of that World; and to please the Emperor and his Nobles, who were all
of the Royal Race, she went often abroad to take the air, but seldom in the day
time, always at Night, if it might be called Night; for, said she, the Nights
there are as light as Days, by reason of the numerous Blazing-stars, which are
very splendorcus, only their Light is whiter then the Sun's Light; and as the
Suns Light is hot, so their Light is cool, not so cool as our twinkling
Starlight, nor is their Sun-light so hot as ours, but more temperate; And that
part of the Blazing-world where the Emperess resides, is always clear, and
never subject to any Storms, Tempests, Fogs or Mists, but has only refreshing
Dews that nourish the Earth; the Air of it is sweet and temperate, and, as I
said before, as much light in the Suns absence, as in its presence, which makes
that time we call Night, more pleasant there then the Day; and sometimes the
Emperess goes abroad by Water in Barges, sometimes by Land in Chariots, and
sometimes on Horseback; her Royal Chariots are very Glorious; the body is one
entire green Diamond; the four small Pillars that bear up the Top-cover, are
four white Diamonds, cut in the form thereof; the top or roof of the Chariot is
one entire blew Diamond, and at the four corners are great springs of Rubies;
the seat is made of Cloth of Gold, stuffed with Ambergris beaten small; the
Chariot is drawn by Twelve Unicorns, whose Trappings are all Chains of Pearl;
And as for her Barges, they are only of Gold. Her Guard for State (for she
needs none for security, there being no Rebels or Enemies) consists of Giants,
but they seldom wait on their Majesty's abroad, because their extraordinary
height and bigness does hinder their prospect. Her Entertainment when she is
upon the Water, is the Music of the Fish-and Bird-men, and by Land are
Horseand Foot-matches; for the Emperess takes much delight in making
Race-matches with the Emperor, and the Nobility; some Races are between the
Fox- and Ape-men, which sometimes the Satyrs strive to outrun, and some are
between the Spider-men and Licemen. Also there are several Flight-matches,
between the several sorts of Bird-men, and the several sorts of Hy-men; and
Swimming-matches, between the several sorts of Fish-men. The Emperor, Emperess,
and their Nobles, take also great delight to have Collations; for in the
Blazing-world, there are most delicious Fruits of all sorts, and some such as
in this World were never seen nor tasted; for there are most tempting sorts of
Fruit: After their Collations are ended, they Dance; and if they be upon the
Water, they dance upon the Water, there lying so many Fish-men close and thick
together, as they can dance very evenly and easily upon their backs, and need
not fear drowing. Their Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, is according to
their several places: Upon the Water it is of Water Instruments, as shells
filled with Water, and so moved by Art, which is a very sweet and delightful
harmony; and those Dances which they dance upon the Water, are, for the most
part such as we in this World call Swimming Dances, where they do not lift up
their feet high: In Lawns or upon Plains they have VVind-Instruments, but much
better then those in our World; And when they dance in the VVoods they have
Horn-Instruments, which although they are a sort of VVind-Instruments, yet they
are of another Fashion then the former; In their Houses they have such
Instruments as are somewhat like our Viols, Violins, Theorboes, Lutes,
Citherins, Gittars, Harpsichords, and the like, but yet so far beyond them,
that the difference cannot well be expressed; and as their places of Dancing and
their Music is different, so is their manner or way of Dancing. In these, and
the like Recreations, the Emperor, Emperess, and their Nobility pass their time.

THE EPILOGUE TO THE READER.
BY this Poetical Description, you may perceive, that my ambition is not only
to be Emperess, but Authoress of a whole World; and that the Worlds I have
made, both the Blazing- and the other Philosophical World, mentioned in the
latter part of this Description, are framed and composed of the most pure, that
is, the rationalparts of Matter, which are the parts of my Mind; which Creation
was more easily and suddenly effected, then the Conquests of the two famous
Monarchs of the World, Alexander and Caesar: Neither have I made such
disturbances, and caused so many dissolutions of particulars, otherwise named
deaths, as they did; for I have destroyed but some few men in a little Boat,
which died through the extremity of cold, and that by the hand of Justice,
which was necessitated to punish their crime of stealing away a young and
beauteous Lady. And in the formation of those Worlds, I take more delight and
glory, then ever Alexander or Caesar did in conquering this terrestrial world;
and though I have made my Blazing-world, a Peaceable World, allowing it but one

Religion, one Language, and one Government; yet could I make another World, as
full of Factions, Divisions, and Wars, as this is of Peace and Tranquillity; and
the rational figures of my Mind might express as much courage to fight, as
Hector and Achilles had; and be as wise as Nestor, as Eloquent as Ulysses, md
as beautiful as Helen. But I esteeming Peace before War, Wit before Policy,
Honesty before Beauty; instead of the figures of Alexander, Caesar, Hector,
Achilles, Nestor, Ulysses, Helen, etc. chose rather the figure of Honest
Margaret Newcastle, which now I would not change for all this terrestrivl
World; and if any should like the World I have made, and be willing to be my
Subjects, they may imagine themselves such, and they are such; I mean, in their
Minds, Fancies or Imaginations; but if they cannot endure to be subjects, they
may create Worlds of their own, and Govern themselves as they please: But yet
let them have a care, not to prove unjust Usurpers, and to rob me of mine; for
concerning the Philosophical World, I am Emperess of it my self; and as for the
Blazing- world, it having an Emperess already, who rules it with great wisdom
and conduct, which Emperess is my dear Platonic Friend; I shall never prove so
unjust, treacherous and unworthy to her, as to disturb her Government, much
less to depose her from her Imperial Throne, for the sake of any other; but
rather choose to create another World for another Friend.


