THE DOCTRINE OF THE FOURTH Commandment, Deformed by Popery; Reformed and
Restored to its Primitive purity.

Wherein is clearly proved by Scripture, Arguments, and Reasons, that the
Seventh day of the week, and not the first, viz. the day called Saturday [and
not the day called Sunday] is the true Christian Sabbath, the time Instituted
and commanded by God himself, for the day, or time, of his public worship, in
the time of the Gospel, as it was in the time of the Law.

Objections answered, and the truth cleared, by Gods unworthy Servant, J. O.

The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no
work, etc.

Exodus 20.10. Blessed is the man that does this, and the Son of man which
lays hold on it, and keeps the Sabbath from polluting of it,

Isa. 56.2 Be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.

Jam. 1.22. For not the hearers of the law are justified before God, but the
doers of the Law shall be justified,

Romans 2.13. London, Printed by G. Dawson, and are to be sold by John Hides in
Blew Anchre Alley near Paul's Alley. 1650.

The Author to his Book.
GO little Book perform thy work, thou may be blamed, but not shamed; thou will meet with Enemies, fear not, for there are more with us, then with them,
2 Kings 6.16.

I would not intrude thee into the world in an obscure, or doubtful Cause,
because of many inconveniences that might ensue.

But thou carriest with thee, the absolute truth of God, contained in his
written law, Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11. In which regard thou art assisted and
defended with the whole armor of righteousness, the undoubted truth of God,
revealed by Moses, and the Prophets, and by Jesus Christ, and his Apostles,
against all assaults of thy Enemies. If any reprove me because of thee, I
desire it may be in love, without racking my words, or perverting my meaning;
but answer as the matter lies, granting, or denying the particular assertions
herein contained, that the Impartial reader may profit thereby; and not with
scoffs, or reproachful terms: If any so do let it be a sign to all men,
that he maintains a bad Cause with an ill Conscience; and that the truth
stands with me and not with him. Go, go, and cause all men to know, that
the Law of God is perfect, Exodus 20. and that there is no unnecessary thing
required by any Expression therein contained. In which regard make known, I
say, that we, and all men, are as absolutely bound [in love] to the literal
Expression of the fourth Commandment, as we are to the literal Expression of
either the 1, 2, or 3. Commandments of that law, or to any other of the Six:
To the end that God may be duly honored, and our obedience to his holy law
enlarged. As also to the end that our nonconformity to the law of God in
working when we are to rest, and our resting when we are for to work, may not
be an obstruction to the Jews conversion, which is the thing I desire may be
performed by thee. Farewell.

Be prosperous, so be it, The blessing of Jehovah go with thee, Amen.

For the Lord is well pleased for his righteousness sake, that he may magnify
the Law, and exalt it, Isay 42.21.
To the discreet and sincere Reader, be Salvation in the way of Righteousness,
Amen.
OVT of a true Devotion to God, and sincere affection to thee; I have presented
to thy consideration, a Duty, which my Conscience tells me, thou ought to
perform to the Lord thy God, for the furtherance of his honor and thy
salvation. Namely, the duty of Observation, and Sanctification of the Lords
seventh day-Sabbath [the day called Saturday] commanded by the Lord himself,
Exodus 20.8. Which duty we and our Fathers have neglected near 1300. Years. Yea,
and rejected it as a ceremonial Element, or beggarly Rudiment. And therefore
we may well complain with the Prophet Jeremy, 3.25. We lie down in confusion,
for our shame covers us, for we have sinned against the Lord our God, we and
our Fathers from our youth unto this day and have not obeyed the voice of the
Lord our God.

The truth of this does clearly appear in this ensuing Subject; Therefore I
desire thee to read it with an honest and good Heart, without partiallity, and
consider what is said in it, before thou blamest it, or censurest me; least
thou speak good of evil, and evil of good, and bring woe upon thy self, Isay
5.20. For certain it is no man knows so much, but he may know more; and no
man so perfect, but that he may err. Therefore, ponder the path of thy feet,
and let all thy ways be ordered aright; turn not to the right hand, nor to
the left, but remove thy foot from evil, Prove. 4.26, 27.

Thy souls well-wishing friend. JAMES OCKFORD.

The Doctrine of the Fourth COMMANDMENT, Deformed by Popery; Reformed and
Restored to its Primitive PURITY.
CHAP I. The Decalogue is Moral and perpetual, nothing is to be added
thereto, nor diminished from it.
THe Law, whereof I Treat, of which the Fourth Commandment is a part, was
given of God on Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. and 20. Cap. And written with his own
Finger in Tables of Stone, Exodus 31.18. Deuteronomy. 5.22. The Effect of which
Heavenly Law was engraven in nature at man's Creation, which Divine Goodness
remains in the nature of man, and teaches him to do in some measure, that
which God by the Law of the Letter requires of him, Romans 2.14 and 15. Although
the custom of sinning, and the deceitfulness of man's heart, has blotted,
stained and darkened in him, that which we ought to discern, know, and do: But
such is the Mercy and Goodness of God unto us, that he has not left us
without a plain Demonstration of His holy Will by His holy Law, the Decalogue;
which Holy Law binds us to all Duties tending to life and Godliness. As this
Law bound the Jews to all duties commanded in the time of the Law, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Even so it binds us, and all men, to all duties commanded by the Gospel. The
reason is, because he that obeys not the Gospel, loves not the Lord his God
with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind; as the Law,
by the mouth of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, requires of us, Mat. 22.37.
Which Decalogue, or Moral Law, remains absolutely unchangeable, as it
appears by the words of the Prophet, Psalm. 111. verse. 7, 8, 9. where he
alluding to the Law written in Tables of Stone, (speaking of God) says, The
Work of His Hands are Verity and Judgment: All his Commandments are sure,
they stand fast for ever and ever, etc. A note of perpetual unchangeablenesse.
And in this regard, they are said to be Faithful, Psalm. 119. ver. 86. Yea,
Righteous, and very Faithful, verse. 138.

This Law, is Gods Covenant, Exodus 19.5. Deuteronomy. 4.13. which God has given to
man to be observed for ever, Deu. 4.9.10. 2 Kings 17.37. Deuteronomy. 29 29. without
adding to it, or diminishing ought from it, Deuteronomy 4.2. Chap. 12.23. Eccles.
3.14. Prove. 30.6. Gal. 3.15.

This Law, or Covenant, consists of Ten Precepts, Sentences, or Words, Exodus
20, Deuteronomy. 10.4. Heb. 12.19.

Which Precepts, Sentences, or Words, are unseparably joined together:
Comparatively, as a Chain of ten links; Or as a complete name, consisting of
ten Syllables, or Letters; So that if one Link be broken, the whole Chain is
broken; If one Syllable, or Letter, be removed, or changed, the whole name is
altered, changed, or broken.

Even so it stands with the Law of Gods Ten Commandments; for when one
Precept has been transgressed, or broken, (yea, of the Sabbath by name) God
has reproved the offenders for breaking of His Commandments, Exodus 16.28.
That one Act of Transgression, is the breach of Gods Law, or Covenant. See I
pray Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3. 1 Cor. 15.56. 1 John 3.4. This truth St. James knew well,
and would have us to know it also; and therefore he says, Chap. 2. verse. 10.
Whosoever keeps the whole Law, and fails in one point, is guilty of all.
And his Reason is, Because he that said, Thou shall not commit Adultery, said
also, Thou shall not kill. Now (says he) If thou commit not Adultery, yet if
thou Kill, thou art become a Transgressour of the Law, verse. 11.

Our Savior treating of this Law in Mat. 5.19. says: Whosoever therefore
shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be
called least in the Kingdom of Heaven. Note, I pray, these words of our
Savior are grounded upon a Twofold Reason: The one is, because in verse. 17.
He had made known to his Disciples, That he came not to destroy the Law or
Propets, but to fulfill them. The second Reason is, because in verse. 18. He had
ratified every jot and tittle of the Law, till all things be fulfilled; to wit,
to the end of the World.

Thus was Gods Law ratified for Instruction of obedience to Believers, in the
time of the Gospel, according to the Prophecy of old, Isa. 8.16.

Our Savior, to possess our minds of the truth of this in Luke 16.17. He
says, It is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass away, than one tittle of the
Law to fail. As if he should have said, deceive not your selves, nor let any
deceive you, and cause you to think my coming in the flesh does make any part
of my Fathers Law void; for I assure you, Heaven may sooner, or easier, cease
to be Heaven; or the Earth may sooner, or easier, cease to be Earth, than any
jot, or tittle of my Fathers Law cease to be of Force, in not requiring
obedience to my Father, according to the expressions therein contained.

This does clearly demonstrate, that Jesus Christ has not abrogated the
Decalogue, nor any part thereof, but ratified it to be a rule of Righteousness,
for performance of duties both toward God and man, while we live on Earth:
Therefore, what God has joined together, let no man separate, nor neglect any
obedience to any expression therein contained. For certainly, Jesus Christ has
not abrogated this Law, nor any part thereof, as touching obedience; but only
as touching the curse, Gal. 3.13. Chap. 4. verse. 4. And hence it is, that true
Believers are not held under the terror and condemnation thereof, 2 Cor.
3.6.7.9. because Jesus Christ has performed for them, that which God by the
strictness of the Law requires of them, Romans 8.3, 4. Ephesians. 2.16. 1 Cor. 1.30.
And in this sense, Jesus Christ is said to be the end of the Law, for
Righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.4. And in this sense,
Believers are said not to be under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.14. As
also, to be delivered from the Law, Chap. 7.6. And in this sense it is said,
The Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, Romans 3.21.22. This
grace wrought by Jesus Christ for Believers, is not for their obedience, either
to Law, or Gospel, nor without their obedience (in some measure) to both, but
by their Faith in Christ: Thus all those, which by Faith receive the Holy
Spirit, are not under the Law, Gal. 5.18. to wit, to condemn them, Romans 8.1,
2. Yet are they not without the Law as appertains to God, but in the Law
through Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. So that although Believers are quit, freed, or
delivered from the Curses or Terror of the Law, by Jesus Christ; yet has he
not discharged, or freed them from their obedience to it: For this, read Mat.
22.37.38.39. Romans 3.31. Chap. 13.9. 1 Cor. 7.19. Ephesians. 6.1.2.3. James
2.10.11.12. Therefore, if thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments,
Mat. 19.17. And they are Ten, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 10.4.

It being so, I do not see how it is possible, that the Decalogue, or any
Precept, Sentence, or Word of it, was abrogated by Jesus Christ. As was
Circumcision, the Passover, and Priesthood of Aaron, Sacrifices, Offerings,
and burnt Offerings, Monthly, and Yearly Festivals, which were shadows of good
things to come, Heb. 10.1. And served as a Schoolmaster to lead men to Christ,
Gal. 3.24. In whom it had its end, Colos. 2.11.14.15.16.17. Heb. 7.12.18.19.
Ephesians. 2.14.15. But the Decalogue, nor any part thereof, figured not out Jesus
Christ, either in Person, or Office; But being moral and perpetual, it
binds all men, in all ages, to the duties therein expressed, or contained,
both in body and Spirit: Gentiles as well as Jews; Believers, and Unbelievers,
Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5 Mat. 22.37.38.39. 1 Cor. 7.19. Romans 13.9. For God is not the
God of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also, Romans 3.29. Now, seeing God
requires obedience of all men unto it, it follows, Jesus Christ by his
fulfilling of it, has not delivered, or discharged us from our obedience to it.

I doubt not, but most men devoted to Godliness, will assent with me, as
touching the duties of the second Table of the Divine Law, that it is Moral,
and binds every man to the particular duties therein expressed. But few men
there are as yet, that does assent with me, that the Precepts of the first
Table have such authority over us, in binding us to every particular Expression
therein contained. For Papists do deny the second Commandment, against
worshipping of Images to be Moral, and appertain not to Christians, as Mr.
Brabourne says (on the Sabbath Page 519) out of Polanus Syntag. page 353.

Others there are, which deny the affirmative part of the third Commandment,
(in that they refuse to take an oath in any right cause) through a
mis-apprehension of our Saviors words, in Mat. 5.34, 35, 36. and the words of
St. James, Chap. 5.12. Yea, Papists, and all differing opinions among men,
professing Christ, by what name soever they are called, do deny the Morality of
the Fourth Commandment, or at least, part thereof, in practice, though not in
words; the error of which opinion I shall refute by Scripture, Arguments and
Reasons.

But first I will reason against them in that manner as the Apostle reasoned
against those Corinthians which denied the resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor.
13.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

CHAP. II. Manifests 12 Absurdities which do follow upon the Doctrine or
Assertion that the Fourth Commandment, or any part thereof is abrogated, which
are not suitable with Godliness, or with the holiness, truth, or integrity of
the Decalogue.
THe First Absurdity which does follow on the Doctrine that the Fourth
Commandment is abrogated, or part thereof, is to affirm (consequently) that
there are but 9 Commandments in the moral Law, which expressly speaks to us,
in requiring duties of us, contrary to Exodus, 20. Deuteronomy. 4.13.

Secondly, It is to affirm, that Gods Law of the ten Commandments, are not
perpetually moral, the fourth stands as a Cifer.

Thirdly, All the duties commanded in the decalogue appertains not to us.

Fourthly, God never intended that we should walk in the obedience thereof.

Fifthly, Jesus Christ nor his Apostles, never taught us so to do; nor never
ratified any such thing for us to observe, contrary to Mat. 5.18. Romans 3.31.

Sixthly, It is no rule of righteous walking for us.

Seventhly, It is not for us the way to walk in to obtain Justification by
Jesus Christ.

Eighthly, It has not a correspondency with the Gospel.

Ninthly, It taught the Jews to work six days, successively, from the
Creation, and to rest the seventh, after Gods example; which thing we ought not
to do contrary to Exodus 20.11.

Tenthly, He that follows the literal expression of the decalogue, or
morrall law, erreth.

Eleventhly, For any to say, we are not to observe the seventh day Sabbath,
because the duty thereof is abrogated; It is to affirm, that Gods law is
changed, contrary to Psalm. 111.7. and 8.

Twelfly, Those which affirm the seventh day-Sabbath, was to be kept before
our Saviors Death, and Resurrection, and is not to be observed since by
Christians: do thereby avouch, that Gods Testimonies, his Law, his Covenant,
is Yea, and Nay; contrary to the nature of Gods Law, and many texts of
Scripture. See Psalm. 119.138, 142, 152. Psalm. 89.2. Luke 16.17. 2 Cor. 1.20.

If these, and the like assertions, may not be admitted for truth, but rejected
for error, by all men professing Christianity and the fear of God; then all
men professing Christianity and the fear of God, are for ever to confess,
that the fourth Commandment, and every jot, and title thereof is moral, and
remains in force, and binds all men as unchangeably, to the observation of
the seventh day-Sabbaths, since our Saviors Ascension, as ever it did any men
before his Ascension.

In which regard I profess in the fear or God, I do not see but that it is
as great a sin to do contrary to the literal expression of the fourth
Commandment, as it is to do contrary to the literal expression of either the
first, second, or third Commandments of the divine Law, except necessity
hinder it: for sure it is, Whosoever keeps the whole Law, and fails in one
point, is guilty of all, James 2.10.

If this will not be assented unto, I desire to know of him that will oppose
me, whether our Savior in Mat. 5.18. did ratify the Decalogue, or Law of ten
Commandments, to remain till all things be fulfilled, yea, or nay? If nay,
what Law was it that he ratified? If yea, then he ratified the fourth
Commandment, to remain for Instructions to Godliness, in the literal
expressions thereof, as unchangeable as to any other expressions of that law;
If any will deny it, let him show how our Savior did ratify the whole Law,
yea, every jot and title of it, and did not ratify the fourth Commandment,
which is a tenth part of that law, which consists of more then 80. words. And
if our Savior ratified the fourth Commandment, I desire to know why it ought
not to be as conscionably observed, as any of the other nine Commandments; but
if any say, it was repealed again by Christ, let him show how he could do it,
and not diminish any thing from the moral Law: As also, when he did it, and
what are his words of repealing it, and then also, prove it was no part of the
Law which the Apostles established, Romans 3.31. As also that we may omit the
duty of the seventh day- Sabbath, and not fall under the transgression of the
Law, spoken of by Saint James, Chap. 2. v. 10.

CHAP. III. Contains 10. Reasons, demonstrating that the fourth Commandment
is moral, and not ceremonial. Secondly, Objections answered.
THe first Reason is, why the duty of the seventh days rest is moral, and not
ceremonial, is because it differs in its nature from a Ceremonial precept.

A Ceremonial precept, or precepts, was given of God, and used of men, to set
forth some good thing to be wrought, or brought by Jesus Christ, after man's
fall, and the promise of the Messiah, Heb. 9. chap. 10. But the seventh
day-Sabbath, was made by Christ, the Word of God, John 1.2, 3. before there was
any need, or use of any Ceremony, Gen, 1.2, 3. Ergo, the fourth Commandment
is moral.

Secondly, That the seventh days rest is moral, does appear from the Ground,
or Reason, wherefore God gave to man the holy Sabbath, expressed by Moses,
Ezod. 31.17. chap. 20.11. The grounds, or reasons being moral and perpetual,
whereon the duty was founded, it argues the perpetuity of the day it self.

Thirdly, That the duty of observing the seventh days rest, is moral, does
appear from a further use of the day, for Gods public worship, to be
performed on it, Levit. 23.3. Psalm. 92. Acts 13.14, 15, 42. Chap. 15.21. Luke
4.16, 31. Mark 6.2. Acts 16.13. The usefulness of pious duties, requires a
useful, and perpetual day, and no day so fit as that day, which God
instituted, blessed, and sanctified, for that end; Ergo, the seventh days rest
is moral.

Fourthly, That the duty of the seventh days rest is moral, does appear, by
that the wilful transgressors of it were to be put to death, by the hand of
the Magistrate, as those were which wilfully transgressed any of the other
three Precepts of the first Table, Exodus 31.15. Numb. 15.32, 35, 36. But the
transgressors of Ceremonial precepts, God himself punished them, Numb.
16.32, 35. 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. Ergo, the fourth Commandment is moral.

Fifthly, The fourth Commandment was given with the other nine Precepts, with
Power, Majesty, and Terror, Exodus 19. There was never a Ceremonial precept
given after that manner; Ergo, the fourth Commandment is moral.

Sixthly, The fourth Commandment was written in a table of stone, and put into
the Arc, Deuteronomy. 10.5. But there was no Ceremonial precept written in a table
of stone, nor put into the Arc, 1 King. 8.9. Ergo, the duty of the seventh
days rest is Moral, and not Ceremonial. The truth of this is also affirmed by
Dr. Bailey, in the practice of Piety, Page 159. and by Mr. Bisco, in his
glorious Mystery, page 60.

Seventhly, God himself kept the seventh day- Sabbath, Genesis 2.1. Exodus 20.11.
Can it be shown that ever God kept a Ceremonial Precept? O no! Ergo, it is an
Everlasting Duty.

Eighthly, The fourth Commandment (wherein the Seventh day-Sabbath is
commanded) is a tenth part of the Moral Law; the Law being Moral, the duty
of the seventh days rest must needs be Moral also.

Ninthly, Our Savior Christ would not that his Disciples should break the
Sabbath at the destruction of Jerusalem, Mat. 24.20. which was 38 years after
his Passion. Can it be shown, that ever his will was, that his Disciples
should keep a ceremonial Precept so long after his Passion? If any can, let
them do it, or else let them confess the duty of the seventh days rest is
Moral.

Tenthly, and lastly, If the duty of the seventh day- Sabbath is abrogated,
then it is not meet nor fit that it should stand in Parish Churches, or
public Assemblies with the other nine Commandments of the Moral Law; for as
it stands with, or amongst those Moral Precepts, it reaches, and commands
obedience to the duties of the seventh dayes-Sabbath, (the day called Saturday,
which men say is abrogated) as expressly, and as absolutely, as the First,
Second, or Third Commandments of that Law do teach the express duties
commanded in them, or any other of the 6 Commandments does teach that which is
expressed in them.

But indeed, and in truth, the duty of the seventh dayes-Sabbath, commanded in
the fourth Commandment, is Moral and Perpetual, as any of the other 9
Commandments, and therefore does as absolutely bind us, and all men, to the
due obedience thereof, as any of the other nine do to the duties expressed in
them: Therefore it is meet and fit it should stand with the other nine
Commandments, to teach men their duty to the seventh dayes-Sabbath, to wit,
the day called Saturday, for that indeed is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God,
whereon he has forbid thee to do any servile work, as has been shown; which
duty all men are enjoined unto until the end of the World, for till then the
Sabbath shall continue, Exodus 31.17. Isa. 66.23, 24. Ergo, its Moral and
Perpetual.

If the Fourth Commandment be an abrogated Ceremony, and therefore we are not
to walk in the obedience thereof; then we are as really discharged from working
6 days, as we are from resting the seventh: And if it be sin to observe the
seventh day-Sabbath, because the 4th Commandment is abrogated, which commanded
it; then it is sin also to work 6 days, because the fourth Commandment is
abrogated, which commanded it.

The reason is, because when any Ceremonial Precept, or Precepts, were
abrogated, every part or branch thereof, was abrogated also, Genesis 17.11, 12.
Exodus 12.3, 4. etc.

Again, if it be error to say, men's working six days is abrogated; then it
is error to say, men's resting the seventh day is abrogated, or done away.

Evident it is, by that which is already said, the Decalogue being Moral, the
fourth Commandment being part of the Decalogue, is Moral also. It being so,
let him that will oppose me, prove that it is our duty to do servile work on
the seventh day, called Saturday, if he can: But if he cannot show me any
Precept for it, then let him show me what dispensation there is vouchsafed to
men to do common work on the Lords seventh day-Sabbath, and who it was which
first granted the dispensation: This do, and fail not, or else cease from a
weekly profanation of the Lords seventh day- Sabbaths. Verily, for my part, I
believe the Moral Law makes known unto us the mind, or will of God,
concerning our duty, both toward Himself, and our Neighbor. And therefore, I
say with the Apostle, I had not known lust, if the Law had not said, Thou shall
not covet, Romans 7.7.

In like manner, I say, I had not known I should not have other Gods before
God, had not the Law so said, Exodus 20.3.

Neither had I known I should not make to my self any Graven Image, etc.

Nor that I should not bow down, nor worship them, had not the Law forbid it,
Exodus 20.5.

Neither had I known that it is my duty to keep holy the seventh day-Sabbath
(to wit, the day called Saturday) whereon no work is to be done, had not God by
his Law commanded the one, and forbid the other, Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11.

O know, and believe, the Precepts of the Moral Law speaks as well to thee,
as to me. Have thou endeavored to walk in the obedience of the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Commandments of Gods Law? and have thou wholly neglected thy
duty to the fourth Commandment, in not keeping holy the seventh day-Sabbath?
and have thou done servile work thereon, which thing God has foabidden thee?
If yea, surely thou art a transgressor of Gods Law. Be instructed therefore,
and repent of Sabbath-breaking, and for time to come, keep holy the Sabbath
day, the day called Saturday, and do no work thereon, thou, nor thy son, nor
thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, thy cattle, not the
stranger that is n within thy Gates, etc. for it is the Will of God that they
should rest as well as thou, Deuteronomy. 5.14

For, Whatsoever the Law says, it says to them that are under it, Romans 3.19.
Thou art under it, and not above it, therefore thou oughtst not to transgress
it, for the Law has domiion over a man as long as he lives, Romans 7.1.
Therefore, if thou will not be condemned by it, conform unto it: For, whosoever
commits sin, transgresses also the Law, 1 John 3.4. Yea, surely, the sting
of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15.56.

Therefore, deceive not thy self, nor let any deceive thee, or cause thee to
believe, that it was sin to do any thing contrary to the Moral Law, before
our Saviors Death and Resurrection, and that it is not so now, but that
Christian men may do something which God by His Divine Law does forbid, and
not sin.

Certainly, Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles, has not left Christians any such
dispensation. Error therefore it is for any to affirm, that they may do
servile work on the Lords seventh day-Sabbath, (where necessity is not)
contrary to his Holy Law, and not sin. Therefore, know, and believe, that as
the Moral Law was Holy, Righteous, Just, and Good, before our Savior came in
the Flesh, and taught men their duty toward God, and man, in an unerring way:
Even so, the Moral Law is Holy, Righteous, Just, and Good, ever since our
Savior came in the Flesh, and teaches us our duties toward God and man in a
right and unerring way, and so it shall for ever. Therefore, if thou will enter
into life, keep the Commandments, Matthew. 19.17. And they are ten, Deuteronomy. 10.4.

As I would not be mistaken in any thing, I desire I may not be mistaken in
this; viz. for any to think I mean men may obtain Righteousness to
justification by the works of the Law: Oh no, that I do not, that is
impossible, Gal. 2.16. Chap. 3.10.11. Romans 3.20. Error it is to the Jews, or
any else, that expect to receive Righteousness by, or for their obedience
thereto; But I press men to the obedience of it, because men cannot be saved
without obedience to it, in some measure, through faith, Matthew. 5.19. Chap.
19.17. 1 Cor. 7.19. But I do believe in my heart, and confess with my mouth,
that justification to salvation, is freely bestowed on the Believer wholly
undeserved. It is not of works, but by Grace through Faith, that men are
saved; and not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. 2 Timothy 1.9.

The Gospel, published by Jesus Christ, brought not a new way of Righteousness
and Salvation into the World, which was not spoken of, or taught before in the
Law and Prophets, John 5.46, 47. Acts 26.22.

See Beza in his Margent on Mat. 5.17.
But it is a fuller manifestation of that which was contained in the Law and
Prophets; so that our conformity to the Decalogue, is not destructive, or
prejudicial to our obedience to the Gospel, but highly advances it: For the
Law is not against the Promise of God, Gal. 3.21. Neither is the Gospel
contrary to the Law, for the preaching of faith does establish it, Romans 3.31.
Yea, such is the Union between the Law and the Gospel, that the same words
which Moses used to command obedience to God by the Law, in the time of the
Law, Deuteronomy. 6.5. the same words our Savior uses in the Gospel, to command
obedience to God, according to the Law, Mat. 22 37. Yea, such Union and
communion there is between the Law and the Gospel, that as Moses sends us to
be instructed by Christ, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts 3.22. Even so Jesus Christ sends
us to be instructed by Moses, John 5.39.46.47. Luke 16.29.31. Mat. 7.12.

It being so, it follows, that seeing by the Law me^ ^re commanded to keep a
holy rest, and to abstain from servile work on the seventh day; the Gospel
does not say nay. Thou shall keep a holy rest, and abstain from servile work
on the first day of the week: Oh no, there is no such word; therefore, sure it
is, the self same Law which commanded men to keep a holy rest on the seventh
day, in the time of the Law, the self same Law requires us to keep a holy
rest on the seventh day in the time of the Gospel. Therefore, Remember to keep
holy the Sabbath day, the day called Saturday, the seventh, and last day of the
week, for that is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, which he commands thee to
consecrate to his Service, in worshipping him on it, in spirit and truth, as
the Gospel requires of thee, and neglect it not.

As the Word of God does manifest the seventh and last day of the week to be
the Sabbath; So does both Ancient and Modern Writers confess it so to be.
Yea, Doctor Hylyn does affirm, in his History of the Sabbath, par. 2. chap. 2.
page 62. that when ever (for a thousand years and upward) we meet with
Sabbatum in any Writer, of what name soever, must be understood of no other day
then the Saturday. And Doctor White on the Sabbath, page 202. says, when the
Ancient Fathers distinguish, and give proper names to the particular days of
the week, they always style the Saturday, Sabbatum, to wit, the Sabbath, etc.

That the Saturday, the last day of the week is the Sabbath day; the truth
thereof is confessed by all Judicature Courts in England; for when they write
on the Saturday, the last day of the week, they style it, di^s Sabbathi; to
wit, the Sabbath day* At the end of which Sabbath, the first day of the week
begins, Mat. 28.1. Mark 16.1, 2, which is the day commonly called Sunday,
(which is highly extolled, although there is no word of God, which commands
the observation of it, as now it is.)

Sure it is, we know no [other] name in Scripture, for the seventh day, but the
Sabbath day; neither know we any other name for Sunday, but the first day of
the week; for this see Luke 24.1. John 20.1.

Object. If it be objected, that the seventh day-Sabbath, was given to the
Jews only, and not to the Gentiles, in that the Jews were charged with the
keeping of it, in remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypts bondage, Deuteronomy.
5.15. which the Gentiles were not. Ergo,

I answer, It is true, they were delivered out of Aegypts bondage [through the
great mercy of God unto them] and thereon were enjoined to keep the Sabbath, as
a motive to stir them up to a more devout observation thereof.

But was it so given to the Jews, that the obedience thereof does not
appertain to us, Oh no! there is no Scripture that so says; neither does it
follow, that we owe no obedience to it, because they were enjoined to keep it,
in remembrance of their deliverance (...) of Egypt; because then it would
follow, we are not enjoined to the obedience of the other nine Commandments
neither.

For on the same ground, or consideration, they were enjoined to keep the
seventh day-Sabbath, upon the same ground they were enjoined to keep the other
9 Commandments also, for this see Exodus 20.2, 3. etc. Deuteronomy. 5.6. chap. 7.8, 9,
10, 11. It being so, it follows, If we may not omit our duty to the 9.
Commandments of the moral Law, we ought not to the fourth Commandment
neither.

Again, If men will exempt themselves from the duty of the seventh day-Sabbath,
because it was given to the Jews, then on the same ground, they may exempt
themselves from all duties taught by our Savior on the Mount, Mat. 5. chap. 6,
chap. 7. and also from all duties taught in the Epistle to the Hebrews; and
also from all duties taught by by Saint James in his Epistle on the same ground.

Now if it be error to exempt our selves from these, and many other heavenly
Instructions, because they were given to the Jews, then it is error to exempt
our selves from the duty of the fourth Commandment, because it was given to
the Jews.

Object. If it be further objected, the duty of the seventh day-Sabbath,
belongs not to us, because our Savior has not commanded it to be observed
in the Gospel.

I answer, It is an ignorant Cavil, against the duty commanded in the fourth
Commandment, because our Savior does as absolutely require obedience of us,
to the duty of the seventh day-Sabbath, inclusively (in Mat. 22.37, 38.39.) as
he does to the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. Commandments of the moral
Law.

Again, If it be a sufficient plea, to exempt our selves from the duty of the
fourth Commandment, because it is not expressly repeated by our Savior in the
Gospel: then upon the same consideration, we may as well exempt our selves from
the duties taught by the 1, 2, and 3, Commandments of the same Law; for
neither of those precepts are in express words laid down by our Savior in the
Gospel: therefore, I say, If it be an error to exempt our selves from the
duties of the 1, 2, and 3. Commandments, because the express words are not
laid down by our Savior, in the Gospel; then error it is, for any to exempt
themselves from the duties of the fourth Commandment, although the duty of it
is not in express words laid down in the Gospel. Yea, a truth it is,
Whosoever keeps the whole Law, and fails in one point, is guilty of all.

CHAP. IV. Of the Antiquity and Morality, of the seventh day-Sabbath, which is
the day to be observed, and not a seventh day instead of it.
THe seventh day- Sabbath, whereof I treat, which was made for man, Mark 2.27,
and given to man [Exod. 16.29.] was blessed and sanctified, the first seventh
day of the worlds Creation, [Gen. 2.2, 3. Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11.] was obeyed,
and disobeyed, before the Law was given on Mount Sinai, Exodus 16.27, 28, 30.
Which Precept being repeated on the Mount, with the other nine Precepts; it had
a memorandum annexed it, in regard of a former neglect to it; as also the more
to incite the Jews, and us Gentiles, to a diligent observation thereof, for
time to come.

This seventh day God instituted, and commanded to be a selected, or peculiar
time, for his public worship, Leuit. 23.3. Acts 15.21.

This Sabbath our Savior unviolably kept, and spent in the administration of
the Word, Luke 4.16, 31. Mark 6.2. and in other holy exercises of piety and
charity, glorifying his Father by Miracles, Mat. 12.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. John
5.8, 9.

This Sabbath our Saviors Disciples observed after his death, to Gods honor
and their ever laudable memorial: For it is recorded of them, Luke 23.56. That
they rested the seventh day, according to the Commandment. Yea, it evidently
apeareth, that the Apostles and Disciples, Gentiles as well as Jews,
constantly spent the seventh day-Sabbaths, in holy and religious exercise. For
this see Acts 13.14, 15, 16. verse. 27, 42, 43, 44. chap 16.13, 14. chap. 17.2,
3. chap. 24.14. The like instance cannot be shown in the new Testament, that
either the Apostles, or Disciples did thus constantly assemble together on the
first day of the week.
Yea, some Christian Churches observed it, for more then the space 400. years
after Christ; of this Socrates informs us, lib. 6. chap. 8.

Yea, albeit the Church of Rome was one of the first Churches [or rather the
first] which discerted the seventh day-Sabbath; yet they kept it a certain
space of time, after the decease of the Apostles. For Justin Martyr living in
Rome, about the year 150. says [Apologie, second pro] The manner was on the
Sabbath day when the people were gathered together, to have the Scriptures read
in the public congregation in the time of public prayer, the space of a
whole hour; as Dr. Whitguift has it in his Book against Cartwright, page 578.

Yea, I find by Socrates, Eccle. hist. lib. 5. cap. 21. that for the space of
200. years, almost, all Christian Churches, throughout the whole world, did
keep every Sabbath Day after other, whereon they did administer the mysteries
of our Savior (or Sacraments) except Rome and Alexandria, who of an old
tradition did not use it, etc.

Which holy Sabbath ought to have been spent in holy exercise to this time;
yea, and for ever, Exodus 31.17. Isay 66.23.

That the seventh day-Sabbath ought to have been kept, and spent in the worship
and service of God. Several men of note, does confess the truth thereof;
although their practice answered not with it, no, nor their words at some times
neither: And therefore I look upon their Expressions, as justifying the truth
against themselves.

First, I will begin with Mr, Beza in his margent, on Deuteronomy. 5. verse. 13. who
says, Since God permits six days to our labors, that we ought willingly,
to dedicate the seventh, to serve him, wholly.

Secondly, Mr. Perkins on Gal. 4. verse. 10. says, Six days thou shall labor,
and the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God, is moral, and
contains a perpetual truth.

Thirdly, Doctor Whitguift [against Cartwright, page 553.] says, Six days
shall thou labor, etc. The meaning of which words is this, That seeing God
has admitted us six days to do our own work in, we ought the seventh day to
serve him, etc.

Fourthly, Muskulus [in his Book of common Places, fol. 60.] speaking of the
seventh day-Sabbath, says, Secondly, he apppointed the day, so that it should
not be at his peoples liberty: Six days (says he) thou shall do all thy
work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. So he does
especially note, the days to work, and he does express that day, in which
the Sabbath should be hallowed, etc. Six days are appointed thee, in which
thou may work all things, touching thy self and thy own affairs; but the
seventh day is not so: for that day is a great while ago determined, and
hallowed by God himself, unto rest; and therefore that day shall not serve for
thy works, but thou shall hallow him to the Lord thy God.

Fifthly, Dr. Willet on the fourth Commandment, [question 13 page 360.] says,
God is said to rest, both that his rest might be a monument of the Creation,
perfected; and that God, by his example, might induce us in like manner to rest
upon his Sabbaths.

Sixthly, Dod, and Clever, on the Commandments, speaking of the duty of the
seventh day-Sabbath, in page 118. says; The third reason is taken from Gods
Example, etc. As if he should have said, If thou will follow Example, then
follow the Example of the best. What Example can there be better, than God
himself, who, when he made the World, rested on the seventh day. Therefore,
from his Example, learn thou, that on the seventh day, thou give thy self to
the duties of sanctification, etc. See page 119.

Seventhly, Bailey (in Pract. Piety, page 255.) says, To sanctify the Sabbath
on the seventh day, is not a ceremonial Law abrogated, but the Moral and
Perpetual Law perfected; So that (says he) the same perpetual Commandment
which bound the Jews to keep the Sabbath on the seventh day, to celebrate the
Worlds Creation, binds Christians to solemnize the Sabbath on the seventh day.
And in page 257. Therefore God planted this Commandment in the midst of the
two Tables, because the keeping of it, is the best help in keeping all the
rest. The conscionable keeping of the Sabbath, is the Mother of all Religion,
etc. And in page 259. says, It is one of the Commandments which God spoke
with his own mouth, and twice wrote with his own fingers, in Tables of stone,
to signify their Authority, and perpetuity. All that God wrote, were Moral
and perpetual Commandments, and they are reckoned ten in number. If this were
now an abrogated Ceremony, then there were but nine Commandments. And, in page
287. thus, The Ceremonial Law was enjoined to the Jews only, and not to the
Gentiles: But this Commandment of the Holy Sabbath (as Matrimony) was
instituted of God in the state of innocence, when there was but one estate of
men; therefore enjoyneth the Gentiles, as well as the Jews: So that all
Magistrates, all House-holders, were commanded to constrain all strangers, (as
well as their own subjects and family) to observe the Holy Sabbath, etc.

I will forbear to produce further Testimony of men, the Word, or Law of God,
is sufficient to teach the godly minded their duty; therefore obey it, and keep
holy the Sabbath day, to wit, the seventh day, and not a seventh day, as many
men do think, that if they keep a seventh day, they perform that duty which
God requires of them by the Moral Law, although they keep not the 7th day
successively from the Creation, a great mistake: For surely, as God has not
given men liberty to worship in what they please; neither has God given them
liberty to omit their duty of the seventh days rest, and worship when they
please; but they are to do that when he has appointed, and commanded it,
which indeed is the seventh day, called Saturday, the last day of the week;
which day, God blessed and sanctified, for men to perform public worship on
it, as has been shown. Error therefore it is, to say, we obey Gods Law, if we
keep one day in seven, if it be not the seventh day, commanded in the Law.
Again, no man can account the first day of the week to be a seventh day,
unless men will presumptuously cross the order of Gods appointment, and
overslip the first day of the worlds Creation; and what warrant is there in
Gods Word, for mortal men so to do, let all rational men judge. Unless men
do so, they cannot by any account conclude, that the first day of the week,
is, or can be a seventh day; and therefore, in observing it for a Sabbath, they
stand not firm to their own Principle, by keeping one day in 7. seeing it is
the 8. day, in relation to the Creation, and therefore it cannot properly be
said to be one day in seven. If men will refuse to keep their Sabbath on the
seventh day, which day, God has appointed and commanded by his holy Law, and
will keep one day in seven, according to Gods placeing the days in the week,
and stand firm to their own Principle, then they are to keep the sixth day of
the week, called Friday, as Turks do, or else, some day or other before it,
if the day be left to their own choice.

The Error of this opinion may also thus appear: God commanded the Israelites
to Circumcise their male children on the eighth day, Gen 17.12. Had they obeyed
Gods Law, and performed their duty, had they overslipt the first day, and
circumcised the ninth, and accounted it for the eighth, (if necessity forced
them not thereto,) certainly they had not, neither could they properly have
said, they Circumcised one day in eight, nor the eighth day: Even so, it now
stands with men's observation of the first day of the week, for the seventh
day, which indeed in order from the Creation, is the eight; and therefore they
which observe it, keep one day after seven, and not one day in seven. The like
instance I will give, concerning the command of God, given to the Israelites,
for their Eating of the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first Month,
Exodus 12. Had they eaten it the fifteenth day, whether had they obeyed Gods
Law, where necessity hinders not, certainly they had not: Even so it stands
with men's observing the first day in stead of the seventh; or, Sunday, in stead
of Saturday. Let wise men take this into their consideration, for, indeed, men
do deceive themselves, to think they obey Gods Law, if they keep one day in
seven, accounting it the equity of the fourth Commandment, which thing
indeed, is not in observing the first day of the week, which, according to
godly order, is the eighth day, and therefore, men's practice in this
particular, has neither sound, nor sense, for to be the equity of the fourth
Commandment. If men will keep a Sabbath, or day of rest, according to the
Equity of the fourth Commandment; then they are to keep it on the seventh
day, which God commands, Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11. for, that indeed is the
equity of the fourth Commandment, and not keeping a day of rest, either
before, or after the seventh day; for men so to do, is mere will worship, a
thing forbidden by the Apostle, Colos. 2.20, 21, 22, 23.

Again, we shall never find in any of the Evangelists, or Apostles writings,
that ever the Law of the Sabbath was repealed; or, that ever it should be
transferred to the first day of the week; or, that ever the first day of the
week was a Sabbath, or should be observed in stead of the Sabbath by Christians.

Well says Dr. Prideaux in this point, in the Doctrine of the Sabbath, page
24. sec. 6. Our Savior (says he) often times disputed with the Pharisees of the
* Sabbath day; and many times explained the meaning of that Commandment: But
where is there any of the least suspicion of his abrogating it? Where any
mention that the Lords day was instituted in the place thereof. Well (says he)
Christ ascended up on high, and left behind him his Apostles, and what did
they? did they not keep the Jewish Sabbath without noise, or scruple, and
gladly teach the people congregated, on the Sabbath days. (* Mat. 12. Mark 2.
Luke 6. Joon 5.

Answerable unto this, Dr White, says, On the Sabbath, the Apostles, and
likewise many successions of the Apostles, for many ages, at least 300. years,
kept holy the Saturday of every week, in some Churches. Yea, Socrates lib. 6,
cap. 8. declares, That some Christians after 400 years, observed the Sabbath
weekly, with the first day of the week.

Mr Perkins says on Gal. 4.10. Some men both godly and learned, are of an
opinion, that the first day of the week, was appointed by the Apostles, for
order sake, etc. It seems, says he, a truth more probable, that every seventh
day of the week, must, be set a part, in holy rest, unto God, for this is the
substance of the fourth Commandment, etc.

That the seventh day-Sabbath is to be observed in the time of the Gospel, as
it was in the time of the Law; I will briefly give five Reasons.

The first is, because it was given to man, in his Innocence, Genesis 2.2, 3. and
therein to all the world; to wit, to the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews:
this truth is confessed by Mr. Ainsworth, in his Annotations, Exodus 31.17. As
also by Baily, in the Practice of Piety, page 258, 259. And also by Dod, on the
fourth Commandment, page 125, 127.

2. Because it is commanded by a divine and positive law, Exodus 20.

3. Because God rested on the seventh day, and blessed, and sanctified it, for
us to rest, after his example, Exodus 20.11. Ephesians. 5.1.

4. Our Savior kept the Sabbath, Luke 4.16, 31. Mark 6.2. and we are to
imitate him, John 12.26. 1 John 2.6.

5. The Apostle Paul kept it, and other Christians, Acts 13.14, 15, 16, 37, 42,
43, 44, chap. 16.13, 14. chap. 17.2. and we are to imitate them, 2 Cor. 11.1.
Phil. 3.17. Heb. 6.12. Blessed is the man that does this, and the son of man
which lays hold on it, and keeps the Sabbath, from polluting of it, Isay
56.3, 4, 5, 6.

CHAP. V. Several Authors produced, which affirm, the Church changed the
Sabbath; and why they did it. 2. Three Reasons given, to manifest when it was
done. 3. Answers given to several texts of Scripture, urged to prove the first
day of the week, to be of a divine Institution. 4. Four Reasons given, to
manifest, it is not of a divine Institution.
EVident it is, that in some tract of time, after the death of the Apostles,
the Romish Church laid aside the duty of the seventh day-Sabbath, and observed
the first day of the week, instead of it.

Of this Socrates gives us notice, lib. 5. chap. 21. Where speaking of
Customs, he says, Though in manner all Christian Churches throughout the
whole world, do celebrate and receive the holy mysteries, every Sabbath day
after other: Yet the people, inhabiting Alexandria, and Rome, of an old
tradition does not use it.

The Egyptians adjoining to Alexandria, together with the Inhabitants of
Thebaes, use to celebrate on the Sunday, etc.

2. Mr. Brabourn, in the defense of the Sabbath (against the ten Ministers,
page 481) declares out of the Centuries, Centure 4. chap. 6. page 477. lays
it down thus, There was no Ecclesiastical, or Church Assemblies at Rome, as
there was at other Churches, etc.

3. Justin Martyr [living in Rome, in the year 150.] Apol. 2. says, Upon the
Sunday, all of us, assemble in the Congregation, etc. See Dr. Hylyn on the
Sabbath, part. 2, chap. 2, sect, 6.

4. Athenasius says, The observation of the Lords day, was taken up by a
voluntary usage in the Church. as Dr. Hylyn in his history on the Sabbath,
declares, part 2. chap, 1. Sect. 3. page 8.

5. Mr. Perkins [on Gal, 4. verse 10. speaking of the superstition of the
popish Church, in observation of holy dayes] says, First, besides the Lords
day, they appointed many other Sabbaths, etc,

6. Mr. Calvin [in his Institutions, lib. 2. chap, 8. sect, 33.] says, The old
Fathers, not without choice of their own, put in place of the Sabbath, the day
we call Sunday, etc. And a little after exhorts us, to follow the order, by
the Church appointed; etc.

7. Bullenger [in his Book of godly Sermons, page 140.] says, They of the
Primitive Church did change the Sabbath day, least peradventure, they should
have seemed to imitate the Jews; and still to have retained their orders, and
ceremony, and made their assemblies and holy meetings, on the first day of
Sabbaths; (to wit) the first day of the week called Sunday.

8. John Frith [Declare* Bapt. page 96] says, Our Fathers which were in the
beginning of the Church, did abrogate the Sabbath, to the intent, that
Christians might have an example of Christian Liberty, and that they might
know, that neither the keeping of the Sabbath, nor any other day is necessary:
That a day should be reserved, in that the people might come together, to hear
the Word of God; they ordained instead of the Sabbath, which was Saturdy, the
next day following; and although they might have kept Saturday with the Jews,
as a thing indifferent; yet did they much better, to over set the day, to a
perpetual memory, that we are free and not bound to any day, but that we may
do any work to the pleasure of God, and the profit of our Neighbor, etc. See
Dr. White on the Sabbath, page 5.

9. Mr. Tindals answer to Dr. Moore, chap. 25. thus says, We be Lords over the
Sabbath, and may change it to monday, or any other day, as we see need; or may
make every tenth day, holy day, if we see cause why; we may make two every
week, if it were expedient, and one not enough to teach the people. Neither
was there any cause to change it from the Saturday, then to put difference
between us and the Jews; least we should become servants to the day, after
their superstition. As Dr. White has it, Ibid. page 5.

10. Vrsinus on the Catti. part. 3. page 989. says, The Apostolical Church,
to distinguish its self from the Jewish Synagogue, etc. Has, on good reason,
made choice of the first day, etc.

11. Dr. Willet [in his Comment. on Exodus chap. 20. page 360.] says, The
Apostolic Church changed the holy day of rest from the seventh day to the
first, which is the Lords day, in remembrance of our redemption by Christ.

12. Dr. White, on the Sabbath, page 109. thus says. Although the Sunday, or
Lords day, in the time of the Law, was an ordinary working-day; yet in the time
under the Gospel, the same is an holy day, by a perpetual Ordinance of the
Catholic Church. And in page 212, he says. It is apparent, that Christian
people made the Lords day of every week, an ordinary Holy Day, etc. See also
Dr. Prideaux on the Sabbath, page 24. Sect. 6.

I hasten, and shall take further occasion, to manifest by larger Testimonies,
that the first day of the week is not of a Divine Institution, but an
Ordinance of the Church: But first I will briefly describe the time when it was
done, as near as I can.

I confess, I have not met with any Author which has pointed out the time,
except Mr. Brabourne, who, in defense of the Sabbath, page 485. speaking of the
Counsel held at Laodicea, Anno 364. he says, now the Sabbath began to be
rejected, and the Lords day to be set up as the sole Sabbath, without any
other. Now (says he) the Lords day must forsooth be preferred above the
Sabbath, etc.

Mr. Perkins, in his Exposition on the Revelation, Chap. 1. verse. 10. moves a
question, to know who changed the Jewish Sabbath; and then his answer is thus.
It is commonly thought (says he) the Jewish Sabbath was changed into the Lords
day by Christian Emperors, long after the Ascension of Christ, etc.

I do not much dissent from these men's apprehensions, for there is much truth,
no doubt, in both their expressions; yet I am not fully, of of their opinions,
for, indeed I conceive it was first contrived, yea, and concluded on,
inclusively, though not expressed, in the first Nicen Counsel, Anno 326. or
thereabout, and my Reasons are three.

The first Reason is, because before that Counsel, there was not any Law,
which commanded Christians to keep the first day of the week, in performance of
Religious worship; neither before that time were Christians commanded to
forbear labor on the Lords day. But this was done by the Emperor Constantine
his Edict, after the Counsel was dissolved. Eusebius in the life of Constant.
Lib. 4. Chap. 18.19.

The second Reason is, because after that Counsel was dissolved, Constantine
sent an Edict to all Governors of Provinces in his Roman Empire, that they
should forthwith observe the Lords day, and honor Holy Days, consecrated to
the memorial of Martyrs, and solemnly observe the Feasts of the Church, At
this time, or a little before, is the time that Socrates speaks of lib. 5.
chap. 21. saying, some despised the commandments of God, and made them cannons
of their own; they set at naught, and made no account of the law, published by
the Apostles; so unadvisedly (says he) they put in practice decrees contrary
to the will of God himself.
Ibid. Chap. 23. Note, I do not say the first day of the week was not observed
till this time; for evident it is, it was observed by many Churches, in few
years after the decease of the Apostles. Yea, Dr. White on the Sabbath page
193. says. The Universal Church, before the decree of any General, or
National Counsel, made the Sunday, or Lords Day, a weekly Festival. But I
endeavor to denote, when it was that the Church rejected the Sabbath, and
observed the first day of the week in stead of it.

The third Reason why it is probable; the putting down of the Sabbath, and the
setting up of the first day of the week in stead of it, was contrived in the
Nicen Council, is, because Christians, before that Counsel, were not forbid to
observe the seventh day-Sabbath, nor threatened to be Excommunicated if they
did observe it; for that was not done till the Counsel held at Laodicea, Anno
364. which was about 38 years after the Nicen Council, where they made a Law,
that Christians should not Jewdize, and rest upon the Sabbath day, but rather
work upon it, and that they should prefer the Lords day above the Sabbath day;
and, if any were found observing the Jewish Sabbath, they should be
excommunicated, or accursed, as Mr. Brabourn has it in his forementioned Book,
page 482. Out of Hospine de Origin Fast. Chap. 9 page 27. about this time many
other Errors were set a foot; for, Mr. Brabourn in his forementioned Book,
page 482. says, you may read in Mr. Perkins his Demonstration of the Problem,
about the 300 and 400 years after Christ: Then began Images to creep into
Churches; the Cross to be adored; Invocation of Saints; prayers for the dead;
Pilgrimage; Purgatory; single life of Ministers; Monkery, and Monastical
profession, etc. Thus have I shown the time, or near about, when the Lords
holy seventh day-Sabbath was rejected, and the first day of the week instituted
in its stead, which causes me to say with the Prophet, Psalm. 119.126. It is
time for thee Lord to work, for they have made void thy Law. Yea, it appears
to me, to be a great cause of Gods Judgments on the World, Isa. 24.4, 5.

Lamentable it is, that the Learned of this Land, which profess themselves to
be guids to the blind, and lights of them which are in darkness, and teachers
of them which want knowledge, and to have the form of knowledge, and truth of
the Law, that they should teach men to observe the first day of the week in
stead of the seventh, contrary to the Law, upon a pretense that Jesus Christ
abrogated the Sabbath; and that he, and his Apostles instituted the first day
of the week in its stead, when there is not any Word of God that teaches
either the one, or the other.

I confess there are many weak reasons, produced by many men, to prove their
doctrine and practice; Note, I pray, if it be not according to the words of the
law and testimony, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20.
both for the abrogation of the Sabbath, as also for manifesting that the first
day of the week is of a divine institution, some principal places of Scripture
produced, and perverted by them: I will briefly weigh and examine, committing
it to wise men's consideration, and the Almighties blessing.

Anti-sabatharians say, Our Savior to manifest the change of the Sabbath day,
did plead for, and perform some things, that the Jews upon the Sabbath might
not do: and to prove it they urge two Scriptures, the one Mark 2.23, 24. Where
it is said, our Saviors Disciples, plucked the ears of Corn on the Sabbath
day, and the Pharisees urged at our Savior for that fact. Now say they, Our
Savior justified that fact, although it was a doing of that which the law of
the Sabbath forbids, Ergo, the Sabbath was to be changed. Answer,

Our Savior did not justify them in that act, as an unlawful fact, but
justified them in it as a lawful or justifiable fact, as the cause stood with
them, they being hungry, and that from a president in David, and those that
were with him, who in the like case did eat the show bread, etc. As also from
that, Of the Priests in the Temple, which brake the Sabbath and were
blameless, Mat. 12.4, 5. which words of our Savior do imply, that had there
not been a necessity, their action had not been lawful; but being a cause of
necessity (as David's, and the Priests was, the one having a relation to
Charity, and the other to Piety) they were blameless. And therefore in answer
to the necessity of his Disciples, our Savior said to his Adversaries, If you
had known what this meaned, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Math. 12 7. A
repulse to their cavil: And withal our Savior caused them to know, that the
son of man is Lord, also of the Sabbath. Which words of our Savior do
imply, he being Lord of the Sabbath, knew the extent of the Sabbath better then
they; for had they known the extent of the Sabbath, they would not have
condemned the innocent, Mat. 12.7. Let no man think, that our Savior, either
by his goodness, or greatness, did vouchsafe a dispensation to his Disciples,
to act that which was in its nature evil, for that he did not: neither does
those words of our Savior, in saying, he was Lord of the Sabbath, import, that
he had changed the Sabbath, or would do it. But those words are to be
understood far otherwise, and that very proper to.

Our Savior may be rightly said, to be Lord of the Sabbath, in a threefold
respect.

1. In that as he was God, John 1.1, 2, 3. In which sense, the Sabbath was made
by him.

2. In respect it was upheld by him, John 5 17. Col. 1.20.

3. He is rightly said, to be Lord of the Sabbath, in that he only holily kept
it, in his person, for the perfecting of the Saints imperfect obedience to it,
Romans 8.3, 4. chap, 10.4. Had our Savior abolished the law of the Sabbath, he
had diminished from the moral Law, which thing he did not, Mat. 5.17. For
being man, and circumcised, he was bound to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. In
which regard he was a subject to it, and so he acknowledged himself to be,
Mat. 4.7, 10. Yea, I say, It was impossible, that he could, or did diminish
from the moral Law, in regard, circumcised men were forbid so to do, Deuteronomy.
4.2. chap. 12 32. It being so, I affirm, that whosoever does teach, or
affirm, that Jesus Christ did diminish from the holy law, the decalogue, do
charge our Savior with sin, although they deserve it not. But to defend his
Innocence therein, I do affirm, our Savior Christ did not before his death,
nor at his death, nor by his resurrection, diminish any precept of that Law,
nor any part thereof: Therefore it follows, that we are as firmly, and as
unchangeably bound to the observation of the seventh day-Sabbath, as we are to
any duty commanded in that Law.

A second Scripture often urged by them is, John 5. where mention is made of our
Saviors curing the Impotent man, and bidding him, take up his Bed and walk,
verse 18. It being the Sabbath day: a thing fordidden by the Law [as they say]
therefore they infer, it manifested, that the Sabbath was, or should be changed.

Answer, Surely it is a very weak and slender ground to bear so weighty a
matter: yea, so weak it is, that they know not well, what to infer; something
they would have to prove their purpose, if they knew what; but surely there is
nothing of any force to be gathered from thence, to prove, that either the
Sabbath was, or should be abrogated; and therefore I pass over this Objection,
as not worth the answering.

3. Anti-sabatharians, to prove the change of the Sabbath, and to manifest the
first day of the week to be of a divine institution. They say, The Apostles
assembled on the first day of the week, the day of our Saviors Resurrection,
and our Savior honored them with his presence, Mark 16.19. Ergo, the Sabbath
was changed, etc.

Answer, The inference is not to be proved by Scripture; the premises proves
not the thing intended, and therefore I say, not any of this does prove the
change of the Sabbath; nor that the first day of the week, is of a divine
institution, not in the least. Neither did their assembling prove, that it was
for the celebration of that day, in remembrance of any Grace that was brought
to the Church, or World, by the resurrection of our Savior from the dead, as
some do surmise, and that for two Reasons.

The first is, because Saint John says [ chap. 20.19.] That they assembled
together for fear of the Jews; had it been for any other end, doubtless, he
would have made it known unto us.

2 Because when they assembled they knew not that he was risen from the dead:
no, neither did they believe the testimony of the Disciples which Reported it
to them after they were assembled. Mar. 16, 11. for which cause our Savior
reprehended them, v. 14.

4 Our Savior appearing to his disciples after eight days, Joh. 20.26. is often
urged to prove the change of the Sabbath, and that the first day of the week
to be of a Divine Institution, but this helps to prove their purpose as the
former; in regard, it was not upon the next first day as many do think: But it
was upon some one day, after the first day of the week; had it been on the
first day of the week that our Savior appeared to his Disciples, it had been
on the eighth day: But, St. John expressly says, it was after eight days,
therefore not on the first day, which was the eighth day: It being so, this
serves not in any wise, to prove the abrogating of the seventh day-Sabbath;
nor that the first day of the week is of a Divine Institution, for performance
of public Worship.

5. Another Scripture urged to prove the first day of the week to be a set time
for performance of public worship, is, Act. 20.7. where it is said, when the
disciples came together to break bread, upon the first day of the week, Paul
preached unto them, etc. This does not prove the first day of the week to be of
a Divine institution, nor that their breaking of bread, was the communion of
the Mysteries of the Lord in the Sacrament, seeing it was an usual thing for
the Disciples to assemble together, to break bread daily, Acts 2.46. Chap. 5.42.

6. Neither did the Apostles Ordination for Collection at Corinth and Galatia,
on the first day of the week, 1 Cor. 16.1. prove that the Churches then were to
assemble on the first day of the week, to perform public worship. Surely
there is no such word to be found in the Text, or elsewhere; but that which the
Apostle did appoint in Corinth, and at Galatia, was, that every one, on the
first day of the week, should lay a part by himself, as God had prospered him,
etc. Or this it may be read for our more proper understanding of the Apostles
meaning, upon one of the week days, let every one of you lay apart by
himself, etc. Note, not at Church, there is no such word; but at home: And so
does Mr. Tindall, and Tremelius Translate it: It being so, what does this serve
to prove, that all Christian Churches, then, and ever since, were to assemble,
for performance of public worship, on the first day of the week; or, that
those words of the Apostles, did either institute, or constitute it to be a
Sabbath. Surely, nothing at all; See Dr. Prideaux on the Sabbath, page 28. And
also, Dr. Hylyns History upon the Sabbath, Part. 2. Chapter 1. Sect. 10. Neither
did the Apostles, or Evangelists ever call the first day of the week, by name
of a Sabbath, in relation to a day of Rest; nor when ever they spoke of the
first day of the week, they never called it by the name of the Lords day, or
Sunday: Had these Titles appertained to it, doubtless they would not have been
slack to have bestowed them on it.

7. To prove the Sabbath abrogated, Anti-Sabbatharians do often urge the
Apostles words, Col. 2.16.17. Let no man condemn you in meat, or in drink, or
in respect of a Holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath days, etc.

Answ. The Apostle speaks not in this place of the seventh day-Sabbath, Exodus
20.8. which our Savior ratified, Mat. 5. It being a part of the Moral Law;
yea, and also commanded obedience to God by it inclusively, Mat. 22.37, 38. But
of the Ceremonial Sabbaths, forementioned; which were shadows of good things
to come, as Meats, Drinks, and New Moons were, which being abolished by Christ,
became beggarly Rudiments, Gal. 4.9. and frustrateth the work of Grace in the
observers thereof, v. 11. Chap. 5.4.

Evident it is, these things there mentioned by the Apostle, were not written
in Tables of stone, therefore, serves not to prove the duty of the seventh
day-Sabbath abrogated. Yea, I say, certain it is, there is no appearance in the
New Testament, that the seventh day-Sabbath was abrogated by Christ, or should
be, after his death: Or, that ever the first day of the week was instituted,
or commanded, by him, or his Apostles, to be observed, for performance of
public worship: Neither did God, or Christ, ever sanctify that day to that
end, as many do imagine; nor never instituted, nor commanded his Church to
observe it in stead of the Sabbath. Therefore, I say, seeing we are not to
presume above what is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. what reason is there, that the first
day of the week should be held more high, and holy, than the seventh
day-Sabbath, which God instituted, blessed, and sanctified, and commanded us,
and all men to observe, by the Moral Law: Yea, what reason is there, or, what
word of God is there to be produced, to prove, that it is our duty to abstain
from common work on the first day of the week, called Sunday? As also, that we
ought to do common work on the seventh day-Sabbath, called Saturday. Deceive
not thy self, nor let any man deceive thee, or cause thee to believe, that it
was the practice of Christian Churches, to assemhle every first day of the
week, to perform public worship, in the Apostles days, for that they did
not. Yea, I say, it is not to be proved by Scripture, that ever any one
Congregation, did three times assemble successively, to perform public
worship on the first day of the week, called Sunday: Yea, I suppose, that not
any Anti-Sabbatharian can prove, that ever any one Congregation did assemble
two first days successively, in the Apostles days; or, that ever it was by
them esteemed more holy, or more honorable, than any other of the 6 days.
Yet, I say, what if it could be proved, that any Congregation in the Apostles
days, did assemble 6 first days successively to perform worship on it; yet it
would not prove the seventh day-Sabbath abrogated; nor, that the first day of
the week was designed for public Worship, seeing Christians in those days,
did daily assemble, Acts 2.46. Chapter 5.42. Yea, I say, if such a thing could be
proved, (which none can do) it would bind us no more to the constant
performance of the former, than of the latter.

That the first day of the week is not of a Divine Institution, nor is to be
observed as a Sabbath, I will give 3. Reasons.

The first Reason is; Because if men keep the first day of the week for a
Sabbath, and the seventh day for a working day, it is to do expressly against a
Precept, both Affirmative, and Negative, Exodus, 20.8, 9, 10.

Secondly; It cannot be, that the first day of the week, is an Ordinance of the
Gospel; because then, the preaching of Faith, would make void the Law, contrary
to Romans 3.31.

Thirdly; The first day of the week cannot be of a Divine Institution, because
then the Law, which commands the seventh days rest, would cross the Gospels
Institution, contrary to Gal. 3.31.

I need not to insist to give more reasons, to prove that the first day of the
week is not of a Divine Institution, seeing the truth is plentifully confessed
by many wise, and learned men, whose understandings are not eclipsed with
error in this particular. Yea, I say, Papists themselves, do confess, the
observation of the Sunday is not to be proved by the written word of God; and
therefore, oftentimes in their writings, they urge at Protestants, because they
cry Scripture, Scripture, to be the Rule of their Faith, and Practice, in the
way of Religion, when they observe the first day of the week, which is called
Sunday, in stead of the Sabbath, called Saturday, when there is no Word of God
to prove, that so they ought to do.

Christians ought to make the Word of God the Rule of their Faith, and Life,
and not the Traditions of men, though never so ancient, or universally
received; no, nor the sayings of Men, though wise, grave, and learned, if they
speak not according to the Law of God, 1 John 4.1. Isa. 8.10. and therefore
good it is for every one which loves truth, and hates error, to follow the
Council of Gracehop (placed at the Beginning of the Bible, Printed Anno 1603.)
who says; Refuse all sense of Scripture, contrary to the First and Second
Tables of Gods Commandments. Embrace his Counsel, for it is good, it tends
to further men in the way of Godliness; for certainly, men's well meaning, or
acting in the way of Religion, will not stand them in stead, to bring them into
acceptance with God, except it be in the way that God requires of them, for
he will not accept of any worship, or service, which he has not appointed, or
commanded, Numb. 1. to 41. 2 Chronicles. 26.18.19. Isa. 66.3.4. Mark 7.6.7.9. Col.
2.20, 21, 22. And therefore, It is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the will of my Father,
says Christ, Mat. 7.21.

Had men that due respect to the Law of God, as is meet, there would not be any
need to use Scripture Arguments and Reasons to move them to the obedience
thereof; or to manifest, they are not to walk in a way contrary to it, as men
do, in observing the first day in stead of the seventh, out of a blind
Devotion, through a misapprehension, that it is a Gospel-Ordinance, when indeed
it is not, but a mere humane Invention, or Ecclesiastical Institution, or
Popish Tradition; and to manifest the truth thereof, I will produce the
testimony of several Authors, for an addition to the former, which affirm the
same.

13. Dr. Whitguift against Cartwright, page 553. cites the words of Saint
Agustine (ad Romana Janu) Thus, that the Passion of Christ and his Resurrection
[note, that is the first day of the weeke] and the day of the coming down of
the holy Ghost is (says he) not celebrated by any command written, but by the
determination of the Church.

14. In the Harmony of Confessions, I find mamany notable expressions of this
nature, in page 479. is said, We see, that in ancient Churches, there were not
only set hours for meetings, but that also, See the latter confession of
Helvetia.
even the Lords day, ever since the Apostles time, was consecrated to religious
exercise, etc We do celebrate and keep the Lords day, and not the Sabbath,
and that of a free observation.

15 Out of the Confession of Auspurge, page 493. in their fourth Article,
speaking of Traditions about holy days, says, Of which sort is, the Lords
day, the Nativity, Passover, and the rest, etc. And again, thus, because it was
necessary to appoint a certain day, that the people might know when to come
together: It seems that the Church for that purpose, did appoint the Lords
day, etc. Look the first observation on the Confession.

16. Dr. White on the Sabbath [page 242.] speaking of the Apostles, says,
Immediately after them, it is apparent, the Christian people made the Lords day
of every week, an ordinary Festival. See also page 217, and in page 218. he
says, Constantine, among many other religious constitutions, he ordained the
weekly Sabbath of the Lords day, etc.

17. The translator of Dr. Predeaux on the Sabbath, in his Preface, does
affirm, that Dr. Rivet one of the four Professors in Leyden, does affirm, that
the appointing of the Lords day for Gods public service, was neither done by
God himself, nor by his Apostles, but by the authority of the Church.

18. Dr. Hylyn says, The Emperor Constantine was the first that made any law
for the keeping of the Lords day: see his History on the Sabbath, part. 2.
chap. 3. sect. 1. And again, ibid. part. 2. chap. 1. sect. 3. speaking of
Christ and of the Sabbath, says, Neither did Christ, nor his Apostles, ordain
another Sabbath instead of this; as if they had intended, only to shift the
day, and to transfer this honor to another time; their doctrine and their
practice, are directly contrary to so new a fancy. It is true (says he) in
some tract of time, the Church; in honor, to his Resurrection, did set apart
that day, on which he rose, to holy exercise; but this on their own authority,
and without any warrant from above, that we hear of.

19. Muskulous in his Book of Common places, fol. 66. thus says, We Christian
men leaving the Jews Sabbath, do keep our holy rest upon the first day, etc.

20. Know also what the original Actors, or Authors, of changing the Lords
holy Sabbath to the first day of the week, in the Remish Annotations, on
Apocalips chap. 1. verse 10. says, If the Church had authority and inspiration
from God, to make Sunday (being a working day) an everlasting holy day; and the
Saturday, which was before a holy day, now a common working day: Why may not
the same Church prescribe and appoint the other Feasts. Easter, Whitsuntide,
Christmas and the rest, for the same warrant she had for the one, that she had
for the other etc.

I need not produce larger testimony, to demonstrate who it was, that abolished
the Lords seventh day-Sabbath, or who it was, that instituted the first day of
the week in its stead; but that which is already said, does sufficiently
declare, who were the original Authors of it, and of all other superstitious
holy days, to the dishonor of God, and the destruction of the world, without
Gods especial and abundant mercy. But blessed be God, we have yet time to fly
unto the Lord for mercy, and to conform our selves to the obedience of his
will, and let it be our comfort he is abundantly pardonfull, Isa. 55.6.7. James
1.21.

To be short, as it is well known, the Church changed the Sabbath to the first
day of the week, so also it is known and acknowledged, the Church has power
to change the day to some other day. For, Dr. Prideaux in his Book of the
Sabbath, page 34. affirms, that Calvin, Bullinger, Bucerius Brentius,
Chimnitius, Vrsinus, and others of the reformed Churches, still affirms, the
Church has power to change the Lords day to some other day. Yea, happy shall
the Church be, that worshippeth God according to his Law, and gives him his
due, by placing on the seventh day, the honor which God requires to be
performed on it, which has been taken from it this 1300. years: for greatly
has God been dishonored by men's consecrating the first day of the week, to be
a holy rest instead of the Sabbath, seeing God never instituted it, nor
commanded it to be: and therefore, I say, with Dr. Prideaux [on the Sabbath,
page 22, sect. 7.] The institution of the Lords day, out of the Scripture,
either expressly, or by necessary consequence, show me he that can.

As I have disavowed, That the honor due to God on the seventh day-Sabbath, to
be placed on the first day of the week, called Sunday, or Lords day, (or
Sabbath, as men's opinions leads them) So I do disavow the Title of the Lords
day, properly to belong to the first day of the week, and therefore I say, very
improperly are the words of St. John, Revel. 1.10. applied to it, for there is
no such thing there manifested in the Text, that the Apostle had any such
meaning. Yea, I say, there is no more reason that that Title should be given to
the first day of the week, the day of our Saviors Resurrection, than to the
day of his Birth, Death, or Ascension, unless because it was anciently given
to it; or else, because men will have something to credit that which they will
have Honorable.

Ignatius, calling it by the name of the Lords Day, proves not, that that Title
is due to it by a Divine institution, no more than his bringing in of Anthemes
into the Church, does prove that it was of a Divine institution, Socrat. Lib. 6
Chap. 8.

Yea, I say, there is more reason to be given, that St. John meant the seventh
day of the week, rather than the first, because it was known by name the Lords
day, Isa. 58.13. Exodus 20.11. But the first day of the week was never known by
that name: Yet, I do not say, that St. John spoke of that day neither; but of
the day of Christ, or time of his Reign in Power and Glory, or of the day, or
time of Judgment, 2 These. 2.2. 2 Pet. 2.9. 1 Cor: 5.5. who being in the Spirit,
saw it in his Vision, as if the day had been present.

What if the Roman Church has, and does observe the first day of the week, in
remembrance of our Saviors Resurrection, as they do the Wednesday, in
remembrance that he was betrayed; and the Friday, in remembrance of his
Passion: Ought we therefore to follow their vain Idolatrous custom and
tradition in these things? Oh no, we ought not; for certainly, God does not
require these things at our hands, neither by Law, nor Gospel.

If this, which has been said in this Subject, will not satisfy men, viz.
that it is our duty to rest the seventh day, to wit, Saturday; and worship God
on it, which is Gods Sabbath, Exodus 20.9, 10, 11. As also, that it is our duty
to work the first day of the week, called Sunday; let it be proved either by
Law, or Gospel, that it is our duty to work Saturday, and to rest Sunday. If
this, none can do, I affirm, to the honor of God, and the advancement of his
Holy Law; and for the beating off of all unrighteous, and ungodly intrenching
upon the Lords Holy Sabbaths; and for the awaking of all those out of error,
which would not willingly perish in it; and to reduce all that love Gods Law,
to the due obedience of it. I affirm, that it is as great a sin, to observe
the first day of the week, in stead of the seventh; as it is to worship an
Image, in stead of the true God: For, to do the one, is contrary to the Second
Commandment of Gods Law; and, to do the other, is contrary to the fourth
Commandment of the same Law: It being so, I desire my Brethren, my Friends,
yea, and all men, to consider of this, (which condemns Idolatry, and yet
justifies themselves in a weekly trangression of the Lords seventh
day-Sabbaths) that they may cease to do evil, and learn to do well, Isa.
1.16, 17. For, their obtaining of grace here, and glory hereafter: For, the
work of Righteousness is Peace, and the effect of Righteousness, is
quietness, and assurance for ever, Isa. 32.17. And so I conclude with the
saying of Solomon, Eccles. 12.13, 14.

Let us hear the conclusion of all, Fear God, and keep his Commandments; it
is the whole duty of man.

CHAP. VI. A refutation of the opinion of those, which affirm, there is no
Sabbath day, whereon Christians are to abstain from corporal labor. As also
their saying, that holy walking every day, is the keeping of the Christian
Sabbath.
I Shall not need to be large in this particular, by reason I have already
proved, that the seventh day, to wit, Saturday, is the Sabbath which Christians
ought to keep holy to the Lord, and to abstain from servill work on it:
therefore I shall be brief.

These men following the general notion, that the seventh day- Sabbath is
abrogated; and finding no other day instituted in the new Testament, in its
stead, for a day of public worship, they conclude all days are alike to those
that are in Christ, and no one day to be observed above another; apprehending
the Apostle affords them such a liberty, Romans 14.6. From whence they infer,
they are not obliged to the observation of the seventh days- Sabbath, but
that they have liberty to do common work thereon. Great is their error
herein, the Lord disclose it unto them; for, doubtless, the Apostles meaning
was far from theirs, for they shall never be able to prove, that ever the
Apostle gave Christians liberty to walk in disobedience to the moral law, the
docalogue. And therefore it cannot be, that where the Apostle says, he that
observes a day, observes it to the Lord, and he that observes not the day,
observes it not to the Lord: That he spoke of the seventh day-Sabbath, there
is not a word of any such thing, nor any sound of any such meaning, that the
Apostle had. And therefore it must be, that he spoke of observing a day, for
acting common, or indifferent things; and not in keeping the Sabbath, or not
keeping of it, and that for the avoiding of these absurdities.

If the seventh day-Sabbath be abrogated, and no other day of rest instituted
in its stead; then there is one holy day less then God in the beginning
instituted, and one working day more; a very absurd thing, for any so to
affirm. Yea, that which follows thereon is worse: viz. That God is less
merciful to man and beast, since our Savior suffered death, then he was
before: In that before he suffered death, he afforded man and beast, a day of
rest, to refresh their bodies after their wearisome and toylsome labor. And
since he came and suffered death, he has not afforded them any at all. These
things suiteth not with Gods ordering providence; therefore to say, there is no
day of rest, is an error.

These men do also apprehend, the seventh day-Sabbath figured out to us, faith
in Christ, Hebr. 4.3. because the Apostle says, We which have believed do
enter into rest. From whence they conclude, that when men believe, they have
that sanctification in Christ, of which the Sabbath was a sign. If it be
granted, or if it could be proved, that the seventh day-Sabbath, was a sign of
our sanctification in Christ. It will not therefore follow, that when men
believe, they are discharged from the duty of observing it, unless it can be
proved a ceremonial precept also; the reason is, because a sign properly, or
simply differs from a ceremony, and that shall thus appear.

Ceremonial Sabbaths spoken of, Levit. 23 and Col. 2.16, 17. which God gave to
the Isralites, to be a sign, that the Lord sanctified them, Exodus 31.13. Ezekiel.
20.12. being signs and ceremonies, was taken away by Christ, and nailed to his
Cross: of this kind of signs was Circumcision, Genesis 17.11. and the Passover,
Exodus 12.13. But signs which were not ceremonial, being given of God,
remains to the end of the world, Genesis 1.14. chap. 9.13. Mat. 24.29. And in
this sense, indeed, the seventh dayes-Sabbath is a sign, Exodus 31.17. But not
as a sign, in relation to a figurative ceremony.

Again, the seventh dayes-Sabbath, which was given to be a sign, that God made
Heaven and Earth in six days, etc. was wrought in Tables of stone. But the
Sabbath, which was given to be a sign, that the Lord sanctified them, was not.
Therefore, although these Sabbaths were abrogated, it is no argument to prove,
the other was abrogated also.

Secondly, These men which will have no Sabbath in that sense, which the fourth
Commandment requires; namely, to abstain from servile labor on the seventh
day, do apprehend, their ceasing from sin, and growing in grace every day,
is the true keeping of the Christian Sabbath, and not ceasing from labor any
one day, if it cannot with convenience be omitted.

Answ. I do very well approve of a holy walking every day, both for mortifying
of sin, and grouth in godliness; and do heartily desire, there may be a daily
progress therein by us all. But I must tell them, as the truth is, their holy
devotion in the way they intend, does not discharge them of any duty that God
requirerh of them by his Holy Law, the Decalogue, and willing I am that they
should know it to. And therefore I desire to know of them, whether Gods people,
before Christ suffered death, were not to walk holy every day as well as we?
If yea, as doubtless they did. But had they omitted the duty of the seventh
days rest, could they have been said to have walked holy every day? Oh no,
they could not. Even so it stands with men ever since our Savtours death;
for, the same Law which bound the Israelites to keep a holy rest on the seventh
day, binds Christians now, as has been shown, page 34. 35. Therefore, surely
men do deceive themselves, to think they walk holy every day, when they do
directly contrary to the Law of God on the seventh day. Yea, I say, albeit they
cannot find any of the ancient six working days instituted, nor commanded in
the Gospel to be a day for performance of public worship; yet they may find
Gods ancient Sabbath in the Law, where he commands them to keep the seventh
day holy unto the Lord, whereon they are not to do servile work, Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 5. It being so, I desire that we may employ it in his worship and
service, and not after our own wills, either for pleasure, or profit; but that
we call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it as glorious to the Lord, and
honor him, not doing our own ways, nor seeking our own wills, nor speaking
a vain word. This is the Sabbath to be observed, Isa. 58.13. And this let us
do; for, whosoever keeps the whole Law, and fails in one point, is guilty
of all, Jam. 2.10, 11. Mat. 5.19. Yea, certain it is, Whosoever turns away
his ear from hearing the Law, his Prayer shall be abominable. Prove. 28.9.

A Conclusion to the Work.
TO resist the duty of the seventh day-Sabbath, which God requires by the
fourth Commandment. Be not of those which say, the Law of Gods ten
Commandments is not given to the Gentiles: Nor of those which say, Jesus
Christ has abrogated the whole Law: Nor of those which confess, the morality
of the 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and denies the morality of the fourth: Nor
of those which say, every day is a Sabbath, and keep no Sabbath at all: Neither
say thou, what a stir is hear about the observation of a seventh day; as if
peace here, and glory hereafter, did consist in a corporal abstaining from
labor on the seventh day; and so put off a duty which highly concerns Gods
honor, and thy own salvation. Therefore know, the duty which thou owe to
God, is not only an abstaining from corporal labor on the seventh day; But
also an abstaining from all actions, contrary to the law of God: as also a holy
consecrating it to his service, by worshipping him on it, in spirit and truth,
as God by the Gospel requires of thee: Therefore be not hasty to reject the
duty of the seventh day-Sabbath, which God by his holy Law requires of thee:
Neither study to raise up objections against it, least thou be found a fighter
against God; and also become like unto the Scribes and Pharisees, spoken of Mat.
23.13. which shut up the Kingdom of Heaven before men, and refuse to go in
themselves, nor suffer them that would enter to come in: But be of those which
have respect to all Gods Commandments: and of those which have walked in all
the Commandments and Ordinances of God without reproof, Luke 1.6. see Mat.
5.48. Love Gods Law as the Prophet did, Psalm. 119.77, 97. and delight in it as
the Apostle did, Romans 7.22. and obtain blessedness, [ Psalm. 1.1, 2. Revel.
22.14.] to justification, Romans 3.13. through faith, chap. 3.33. Hebr. 11.6.

Finally, There are many men which think they know much of God in the Gospel;
and that they observing what Jesus Christ requires of them by it; they
perform what duties soever God requires of them by the Law; and indeed so
they did, if they did rightly understand the duties, which Jesus Christ by the
Law, requires of them; but in that they do not, verily, they come shot of
the duty of observation of the seventh dayes-Sabbatb, commanded in the first
Table of Gods Law: The duties of which Table, our Savior in Mat. 22.37.
compriseth into one Commandment, and in requiring obedience to God by it, he
does as strictly command obedience to the seventh day-Sabbath, the duty
commanded in the fourth Commandment, as he does require performances to the
duties commanded either in the 1, 2, or 3. commandments of that Law; see also
Mat. 5.18, 19. Chap 19.17. 1 Cor. 7.19. James 2.10. Therefore let no man think,
that by his love to Jesus Christ in the Gospel, he does fulfill the Law in that
way spoken of, Romans 13.10. Gal. 5.14.

If he refuse to perform that duty to God, which Jesus Christ in the Gospel
requires of him by the Law, (in some measure:) For, doubtless our obedience to
the Commandments of God, is the fruit of true love, John 14.15.21. compared
with Chapter 10.30. For thus says the Apostle; This is the love of God, that we
keep his Commandments, 1 Ioh. 5.3. which thing Jesus Christ did, Joh. 15.10.
Yea, and we are to imitate him therein, 1 John 2.6. Chap. 4.17. And he that so
does, in him dwells the love of God perfect indeed, 1 John 2.5. But he that
says he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, 1 John 1.10.
What union and communion there is between the Law and the Gospel, see page 20.
And he that walks in that union, dwells in God, and God in him; and such a
one brings forth the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. And where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. And against such there is no Law
to condemn him, Romans 8.1. For indeed it was not made to that end, 1 Timothy 1.9.
But yet they are not delivered from the obedience of it, but enjoined to it,
Mat, 19.17. Romans 13.9. Ephesians. 6.1.2.3.5. James 2.10, 11, 12. But indeed the Law
is made for the lawless, and disobedient; for the ungodly, and for sinners;
for unholy, and profane, etc. 1 Timothy 1.9, as namely, for Anti-nomians, and
Anti-Sabbatharians, and all Libertines, which will be above Ordinances, wh^^^
make their boast, they have nothing to do with the Law, nor the Law with them.
I say, (as the Scriptures teach) for such men the Law was made, and it has
dominion over them, although they will not believe it, yet surely they will
know it, if they repent not of setting themselves against it, and refuse to
conform to the obedience of it, as Jesus Christ in the Gospel requires of
them, Mat. 22.37. for their avoiding of wrath, and obtaining of mercy through
faith.

I am sorry for their delusions, and shall not cease to pray for their
conversion; That their sins may be blotted out, when the time of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord. That they may be made partakers of
that purchased felicity, by the merit of Jesus Christ, through faith; which
has life without death; peace without trouble, and joy without sorrow: which
unspeakable blessedness, I desire may be confirmed on all those which love
Jesus Christ in sincerity, Amen.

This also know, I am no Jew, nor inclined to any Jewish opinions; I seek not
righteousness by the Law, but by faith in the Son of God, according to the
Gospel. Those opinions are Jewish, which lead men to seek Justification by the
works of the Law, or, by observing abrogated precepts, or Jewish customs, or
traditions of their inventions; none of these I own, as being of God, or from
God. But, as for the fourth Commandment, by which God requires obedience to
the seventh day-Sabbath, being one of the ten moral precepes, is of God, and
from God, and to observe it, is no more Jewish, than to observe the duties
commanded by God, in the 1, 2, or 3. commandments of that Law
Yet, I know, I cannot obtain righteousness by the Gospel, if I walk contrary
to the express duties which God by his Law requires of me; the reason is,
because there is no way to blessedness, contrary to the way of righteousness,
Romans 9.31.32, Mat. 19.17. which is the Law of Gods Ten Commandments. But if
thou know a way to obtain salvation without it, or contrary to it, declare
it: But, if this thou can not do, then conform to all duties commanded by
it, and neglect it not, and have not any dis-respect to any truth in this
Subject declared by me, because of any personal failing which thou may
perceive in me: But this know, it is in me the manifestation of the words of
truth, made known by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.17. That God has chosen the foolish
things of this world, to confound the wise. etc. and the things that are not,
to bring to naught the things that are; for the foolishness of God is wiser
than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men, verse. 25. That no
flesh may glory in his presence, verse. 29.

All Praise to God.
The Authors cited in this TREATISE.
Justin Martyr. Athanasius. Eusebius Socrates Scholast. Augustine. Calvin.
Tremelius. Tindall. Bucer. Brentius. Chimnetius Muskulus. Beza. Bullenger. Mr.
Perkins. Centuries. The Confession of the Church of Helvetia. The Confession of
Auspurgh. Vrsinus. Mr. Frith. Dr. Whitgift. Mr. Gracehop. Mr. Ainsworth. Dod
and Clever. Dr. Bailey. Dr. Prideaux, Mr. Revert. Mr. Brabourne. Dr. Willet. Dr.
White Dr. Hyling. Mr. Bisco, The Rhemist Annotation.
A Table to find the principal points contained in this Treatise. Viz.
IN pages 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. is manifested, that (...) Decalogue is moral,
and binds Gentiles, (...) well as Jews, to the duties therein expressed.

In pages 8, 9, 10. are 12 absurdities, which (...) follow on the Assertion,
that the fourth commandment, or part thereof, is abrogated.

From the 12 page to the 35. is manifes^ed, that the observation of the 7th
day-Sabbat^ is moral, and we are enjoined to the duty of it.

In pages 36, 37, 38, 39. is manifested, that (...) Church changed the 7th
day-Sabbath to the fir^^ day of the week, and why they did it.

In pages 40, 41, 42, is manifested the time whe^^ the Church changed it, or
near about.

From page 43. to 52. is manifested, that our S^^viour Christ did not abrogate
the 7th day-Sa^bath: As also, that the first day of the week is (...) of a
divine institution.

Pages 59, 60, 61. manifests, that the Ti^^^ of the Lords day appertains
not to the first d^^ of the week.

Pages 63, 64. manifests, that every day is (...) a Sabbath.

FINIS.

