THE COMPLAINT OF LIBERTY and PROPERTY AGAINST Arbitrary Government: DEDICATED
To all True English Men, and Lovers OF Liberty, Laws, and Religion.



LONDON: Printed for Robert Steel, 1681.

The Complaint of Liberty, etc.
THere is no Nation under Heaven that enjoys a greater share of what all
Mankind covet, than the English; nor is there any thing of which they are more
Jealous, than the Liberty of their Persons, and the Property of their Estates;
And with good Reason: For there is but a Third, which is Health to Enjoy these,
which renders Human Life as happy as this World can afford; And for this Reason
our Ancestors have obtained all those admirable Laws, which stand as a
continual Guard about us Night and Day, to Protect our Freedom and our Estates.

There is a known Fable of the Dog, that coveting the Shadow lost the
Substance, and once already we of this Nation have been so stupid to turn the
Fable into Truth. We were frighted with the shadow of the Government, which we
were told had a black, and longer Reach, than did appear, and were Terrified
out of our Wits, Reason and Religion, into a most bloody and unnatural War, and
at last into that very Mischief, which we took up unlawful Arms to avoid.

To cry out against Arbitrary Government is of late become not only a Virtue
but a point of Religion, and has been set up as a Mark and Estimate of a True
Protestant: But to lay the Saddle upon the right Horse is accounted a Crime so
great, that whoever attempts it, is presently cried out upon, for a Papist. And
the Reason is evident, for they who make all this noise about it, are the most
Arbitrary principled persons in the World, and if I do not make it appear so, I
will be content to be esteemed the most infamous Liar under the Cope of Heaven:
But if I speak Truth, and such evident Truth as is perfect matter of Fact, and
too notorioufly known by. Thousands yet Living, to be denied. If I cannot
prevent the Mischiefs, which may follow these wild and groundless Clamors
against the Government, I shall however discharge my Conscience to my
Neighbor, and my Duty to God, and my King, and leave a Testimony against such
as pretend to be Religious, for speaking Evil of Dignities, and despising
Dominions, which will one day rise up in Judgment against them, and defeat
them of the Plea That they did it ignorantly.

I would only desire the honest Reader to Enquire who they were that first
cried out against Arbitrary Government, or the Designs of it in the Reign of
King Charles the First? It was the Protestant Dissenters, and principally those
then called Presbyterians. Let them deny it if they can or dare: For if they
do, I will show that they not only did it, but gloried in it; and were reputed
the most noble Patriots, and so styled for so doing.

Who was it that animated the People to take up Arms for Defense of Liberty,
and Property, against the King? The very same.

Who maintained, continued, and finished the War, and the Tragedy of the Kings
Murder? The same Men, though now they had gotten new Frocks and Vizards on,
and called themselves Iudependents, or, Congregational Churchmen; a Name that
comprehended all Sects, and Opinions. I love Truth, and will speak it, Many of
the Presbyterians deserted them, and declared boldly against their Proceedings:
But still the others went on, and called themselves the Godly Party, and the
Saints, and all the Thanks the poor Presbyters got for assisting them to get
into Power, was to be trampled upon themselves, and reviled as Antichristian
and Apostates.

Who were they that Banished His present Majesty, sought that Life which could
not have been preserved but by a Miracle? Who Composed and Commanded Olivers
standing Army? Who Commanded all the Garrisons, Forts, Castles and Ships? Who
Ruled according to Will, without and against Law? Even the very same Men, the
Godly Party of Congregational Protestant Dissenters.

Who are they that cry out now against the Government, and talk of the great
Danger of Anbitrary Power? Search the City, Examine the Country, Ransack the
Coffee Houses, Frequent the Clubs: If you hear any Person inveigh against the
Government, or Discourse of the Fear of Arbitrary Designs, you may pawn your
Life on it, you may find him in a Conventicle upon a Sunday, if he pretends to
any Religion, or Reading Hobs's Divinity, and Atheistical Principles at Home.

It is an Old Saying, He that Accuses another ought to be clear himself: For
shame, Let the Congregational-Men leave Clamouring about Persecution and
Arbitrary Government, of which they are so horribly guilty, and for which they
have so great an Account to make to God Almighty: For though the Law may have
forgiven them, yet without Repentance there is no Remission in Heaven; and it
is a very wild Repentance which brings no other Testimony than the Repetition
of the same Offenses, for which they ought to be Penitent.

And if this be a Demonstration, that they are the same Congregational-Men, and
only want Power, I will show you their Picture drawn by their own hand, and if
they look Black and Ugly, Persecuting and Arbitrary with a Superlative
Tincture, It Is their own handiwork, not one stroke of mine, more than hanging
the Picture in its proper Light, which will discover its native Colors.

At the Council at Whitehall, Wednesday, December. 21. 1653.
Present,
Mr. Lawrence Lord President, Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper, Mr. Strickland, Lord
Viscount Lisle, Sir Charles Wolseley, Coll. Jones, Major General Lambert, Major
General Skippon, Coll. Sydenham.
THat it be referred to Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper and Coll. Jones, to draw up,
and present to the Council a Bill for restraining and punishing of Sedition and
Treason, and to Advise therein with the Council Learned of the Commonwealth.

Observe this Treason was to Aid or Assist His present Majesty, (then in Exile)
to recover His Crowns Observe here is a Bill without a Parliament but you shall
presently see a Bill passed into a formal Law without either Consent of Lords
or Commons: And was not this excellent Freedom of Parliament, Liberty of the
Subject, and a Fence against Arbitrary Government.

Saturday, December 31. 1653.
Present,
His Highness the Lord Protector, Mr. Lawrence Lord President, Sir Anthony
Ashley-Cooper, Coll. Mountague, etc.
SIR Anthony Ashley-Cooper Reports an Ordinance for Continuing the Powers to
Commissioners for Compounding, etc. For Advance of Money, and Indemnity, which
was this day read, the first and second time, etc.

The Ordinance was Agreed.

Resolved, That this Ordinance be presented to His Highness the Lord Protector,
as the Advice of the Council.

The Lord President did accordingly present the same to His Highness, and being
read, the said Ordinance was by His Highness with the Advice and Consent of the
Council passed for a LAW, and was Ordered to be Printed and Published.

Observe here, After all the Blood and Treasure spent, and the Solemn Oaths
taken to Defend the Liberties, and Privileges of the Parliament, against
Arbitrary Power, how it is drawn into a Compendium of a Council of State! and
the Freeborn English Governed at the Will of His Highness and Officers! But
this is not all, we want only a standing Army and absolute Dominion over
Liberty and Estate to make up the complete Picture of Arbitrary Government, and
here it follows.

Tuesday, December. 4. 1655.
Present,
His Highness the Lord Protector, Lord President Lawrence, Lord Deputy of
Ireland, Sir Charles Woolseley, Coll. Sydenham, Mr. Strickland, Col. Jones,
Lord Lambert.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, That it be, and
hereby is referred to the Committee for the Army to send into the several
Counties of this Nation Printed Copies of the Order and Declaration of His
Highness, with the Advice of His Council, for an Assessment of Sixty Thousand
Pounds by the Month for the next Six Months Commencing from the 25th of
December, Instant, for and toward the maintaining the Army of this
Commonwealth, and to commend the same speedily to the Care of such Persons in
each County as they shall think fit, to distribute the same to the
Commissioners thereby appointed, or some of them, to the Intent the matters
therein contained, may be put in effectual Execution.

December 1. 1655.
Instructions of His Highness and Council to certain Commissi. oners for
securing the Peace of the Commonwealth.
I. If it appear, That any Person has actually engaged in any design, against
the Person of His Highness the Lord Protector, or in any Insurrection in
England or Wales, since Nov. 16. 1653. That all such Persons shall be secured,
by Imprisonment, or Banishment, and have their Estates Sequestered for the
Payment of the Forces newly raised, and other public Charges of the Nation,
Allowance for Wives and Children, not exceeding the third Part. II. That all
Person whatsoever, That shall appear by Words or Actions to adhere to the
Interest of the Late King, on of Charles Stuart His Son, and to be dangerous
Enemies to the Peace of the Commonwealth, to be secured by Imprisonment, or
sent beyond the Seas. III. That an extraordinary Tax be Levied upon the Estates
of every Person, whose Estate has been Sequestered for Delinquency in England
and Wales, or who has been in actual Arms for the King against the Parliament,
every one that has an Estate of 100 l. per Annum, and so proportionably for
all greater Estates: And whosoever has a Real, and Personal Estate to the
value of 1500 l. or more, the real Estate of every such Person, shall be
assessed at 10 l. or at the Rate of 100 l. pet Annum, to be paid half yearly:
The said Payment to be made December. 21. next ensuing: And the payment to be
made to such Persons as the Commissioners shall appoint, And if any will refuse
to make Payment, then the Real Estates of such Persons shall be Sequestered by
the Commissioners for the use of the Commonwealth, which Sequestration shall
continue, until such Persons shall have paid in their Tax, and given
sufficient security for the payment of all such Sums of Money as his real
Estate shall be Assessed, and Taxed at as aforesaid; And the same Rule to be
observed for all Personal Estates of those that stand in Contempt. Nevertheless
it any of the Persons, whose Estates are so charged as aforesaid, shall be
desirous to free their whole Estates from the Tax, and, if such Persons do set
over by sufficient Assurances in Law, Convey and Assure to the Protector, and
his Successors for the Use of the Commonwealth, Land free from Encumbrances of
the Yearly Value imposed on them, they shall then be free. IV. That all of the
said Party who are Persons of no Estates, and live loosely without Labor, be
Apprehended, and sent to Foreign Parts. V. That if any Persons shall be sent out
of the Commonwealth, and shall return without License, that their Estates
shall be Sequestered to the Public Use. VI. That any Three of the Commissioners
shall be empowered to Administer Oaths, send for Persons, Papers and Records, as
also to Imprison any Person for Contempt of their Order; for which the
Commissioners shall be saved harmless, and imdemnified.
Instructions for Commissioners of each County.
I. YOU are to find out all Persons comprised under the First Head, and to
cause them to be forthwith secured within your County, and you are also by good
ways and means to discover and find out, what Estates Real or Personal such
Persons, or any other entrusted for them, or to their use, and benefit have had
at, or on the first day of Sept. 1653. And to secure and sequester the same for
the Use of the Commonwealth; and to certify their Names together with the
Account of your Proceedings to His Highness. II. You are to use you utmost
Endeavors, to find out the Persons comprised under the second Head, and to
secure them. III. You are forthwith to inform your selves of the Names, and
places of Abode of all such Persons as are comprised under the third Head, and
their Estates, and who are entrusted for them, And as soon as you know their
Estates to proceed accordingly, and Tax the same.
Observe here, Dear Contrymen, Imprisonment, Fine, and Banishment Commanded,
and Practiced with the highest Arbitrary Power, and to maintain a standing Army.

Observe, It was by Clamouring against Arbitrary Government, that deluded the
People to Rebel, and Assist them with Power, which when they had got, you see
how the Congregational People used it.

Observe who are they that now make the outcry against Arbitrary Government,
Andrew Marvel, Oliver's Latin Secretary leads the Van, in a Libel, which wore
that Name, and I need not tell you who they are that prosecute the outcry.

If after all this you cannot by Comparing their past Actions, with their
present, see the snare they are laying for your Liberty and Property, you are
not so wise, as the Fowls of the Air, or the Beasts of the Field; for Solomon
tells you, In vain is the Snare laid in the sight of any Bird. I have done my
duty, I have told you the Truth, I have forewarned you of the danger. If you
suffer your selves to be imposed upon, you can blame only your own Folly and
Credulity.

I have but one thing to add, and that is, If you think, and find I have told
you a plain Truth, and pointed to you where the real danger of Arbitrary
Government lodges, That you would be as valiant for the Truth, as some ill
People are against it, That you would upon all occasions show your selves good
Subjects by vindicating His Majesty and the Government from the scandalous
Imputations, with which Virulent, and Seditious Tongues Blaspheme the Footsleps
of Gods Anointed, That you would Inform the Ignorant, confront the Impudent,
satisfy the Doubtful and Staggering, and unite the Loyal, which will be no
more than your own Duty, Interest, Safety, Liberty, and Property calls for at
your Hands; And for the Congregational Declaimers against Arbitrary Government,
Let them remember Adonibezek's Toes and Thumbs, and the Gracious Act of
Oblivion, and know that in Heavens Court of Judicature, forbearance is no part
of Payment. Let them repent of their former Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Usurpation, or else I fear and justly too, they will pull down swift
destruction upon themselves, while they are preparing a pit for others.

FINIS.

