FAREWELL MYTER OR, CANTERBURIES MEDITATIONS.

AND WRENN's Syllogismes.

ALSO, The Devils moan for the discontent of his Servants and Assistants, and
his Epitaphs upon each of their Burials.

Together with His Chronicles for their hereafter Memories, inserted the 12.
day of the month Tridemiter, according to the Infernal Collateration,
peccandi. An. Dom. MDCCCXCV.

Look in, and view,
Supposed yet true;
Composed for you.
By RICHARD NEWROBE.

Printed for William Larnar, in the Year, 1641.

CANTERBURIES Meditation.
THe Method of my griefs and sad aspect of all my present miseries would fill
a volume, I have studied long to bring the types thereof to a Compendium, but
cannot, in respect that every member in a Sympathy does bear a fellow feeling
and the heart that same most glorious contriver, and my intellect that
comprehensive compasser are both struck dumb as dim, with the too much
Sunshine of my former Fortunes, compared with these my intolerable and
insupportable distresses. The Air seems now infected, the Skies looks pale
me thinks as if the Green sickness had ascended from earth to those Sublymer
Creatures the wind blows and whispers nothing but the news of a chill and
cold guilt which like qualmes possess and overcome my vital parts, The
peoples curse and daily exclamations against me, nay the very senseless
creatures me thinks I hear them bleate and bellow forth my condemnatory
sentence; O what an agony am I in! what a fear possesses my soul, and what a
distraction do I suffer when I view and but peruse my former devises, the Plots
of my head, the thoughts of my heart, and the works of my hands, labors of my
feet using all diligence Manibus pedibusque, to subvert true Religion, and
plant that ruinating grub of Popish superstition, there is no member free no
part of the body incorrupt but has joined in the advancing these my impious
intentions only the neck faulty too for supporting so pernicious a head-peece,
then break neck or nothing for I am a cripple the first gradation that I ever
made showed the unfortunate progress of the future and ensuing wounds and
disgraces I have since received, my seeking divisions in the Church produced
this effect, that whatsoever was Ceremonious was then presently called
Canterburian Schisms what for outward ornament accusations in Church
Government, this the first a wound yea a great one to my good name, since when
I have received ten times as many in my body insomuch as I am almost become
leprous and a very mass of distemperature, my persuasions and attayning an
Army against SCOTLAND, where being too valiant, or rather too violent in
persuing so unjust and petnitious a War, I received the first ingredient to
my overthrow being shot with a Scotch Pistolett in the Ear: I never since
could hear good of my self and striving to overcome them it proved so far
contrary, They bruised my head whilst I scarce bruised their heels.

This my first Wound in so dangerous a place not well looked into festred and
so converted to an Imposthume.
FOr fearing least it should prove fatal in respect my best Physicians gave
Counsel to refrain disdiscourse least the organs of the ears being
penetrated would be offended thereby, there being a company of talkative
companions gathered together in a Parliament as near (as unnecessary to me)
that lay still babbling that I was forced to attend whether I would or not; who
so scrapt and exulcerated my wound that I resolved to break it up, which I
performed notwithstanding in the conflict I received a wound of a City dart in
the bosom, the head thereof being loose and a forker stayed behind to the
endangering of my whole body; For I never sneeze and say God help me half so
often as they the Devil take me, they make an Estridge of me ever since feeding
me with Iron that I fear in the conclusion will stick in my throat and choke
me, I have swallowed many pills since of their making which have wrought
wonderfully and had not my body been of a strong constitution I had purged my
self as lean as a rake since that they have forced me to be let blood of a
new Parliament contrary to my Physicians advice and their Surgions being
unskillful or else to skillful for me pricked not only the Vein but the Artery
insomuch that I am more distressed then a pumickled prisoner being not able to
stir hand or foot to help my self, I must nevertheles commend their care
for one thing for convaying me to so safe custody, for I fear me if I had
been left to the wild multitude in stead of being Coached I had been carted
and instead of being Canonized I had been Anatomized long since, O the grief
and sorrow that does attend me in these my distresses and the miserable pains
I endure in these my nominated wounds, My Physicians have now left me my
friends failed me I have but one hope of cure and but one means which is a
balsome from his holiness upon whom I am resolved to depend and settle my
whole expectation.

VVRENN'S SYLLOGISMES.
THe Chorus of my former Blisses, are
The only Comforts in my Lenten fare;
The Liberties I once enjoyed, proud Fate
Has turned to a Prison; dismal hate
Had nere such power on my decaying Soul;
That fills my heart with sorrow, mind with dole.
The Pope I honored once, when as the wheel
Of my unconstant Fortune 'gan to reek;
Fearing the turn, I made the Pope my friend,
That if it fell to him I might ascend
In such sublime an Honor, such a Bliss,
As I expected: Is all turned to this?
A prisoner now, poor WREN is in a cage;
Alas poor Bird, sing, act on every Stage:
Well since it is so, and twill no better be,
I Will singe, my Wings (though clipped) I cannot ^^ee:
The Friar was deceived the wench in the Well,
He nere sung out; nor I me out of Hell.
Hail holy Father I thee bless,
And still adore thy Holiness;
Never wanton Bird would fly
Unto thee willinger then I:
Thou grand POPE my chief delight,
Can not aid me in my flight.
Help there is none;
More's my moan.
Since it is so, I Will nere forsake
Thee till the Devil both us take;
The Heretics say I Am his due,
If he takes me, he will nere miss you:
We need not fear nor wind, nor weather,
If that we go to Hell together.
Help there is none;
More's my moan.
The DEVILS Moan, Or the discontent of his Servants and Assistants, and his
Epitaphs upon each of their Burials.
For CANTERBURY.
I Will CANTER- Masses at thy Burial;
LAVD all thy former Works; besides ^e shall
Whilst thou do lie on Earth, below in Hell
At thy departure tole thy Passing Bell:
All men shall say, here lies great PLUTO's Brother,
When he is gone nere look for such an other.
For WRENN.
Our dearest Bird who ne^^ desir to feed
On better food then on Division-seed;
We have provided for thee in our Cell,
Variety of Food, rare Fruits of Hell:
All men shall say This Marble Tomb does cover.
My Friend on Earth all godly Works Reprover.
I account these Honors not sufficient for you my dear Servants; but intend
likewise for your hereafter Memory to Chronologize the same amongst my Records
of Acheronta I have given order to Diaholicus my Secretary who has drawn it
up in this manner.

In the Year Schismaticus 1944 our two Vicegerents upon Earth laudable LAVD,
and pernicious WRENN showed themselves diligent for the advancing of Impiety,
bringing in of Schisms, animating Sects, loving of evil doing no good to our
Honor, whose Reward is as yet behind in our Eternity.

FINIS.

