THE FALL OF MAN BY SIN. Delivered in a SERMON PREACHED AT THE LATE SOLEMN
Fast, Aug. 28. 1644. WHEREIN THESE THREE Positions are briefly handled.

1 That all men are miserably fallen from God by sin, and are in a lost
condition. 2 That we must see our selves thus fallen, and utterly lost in our
selves, before we can convert and turn to God by repentance. 3 That forms of
Prayer may, in some cases be lawfully and warrantably used.
Published at the Request of that truly religious and virtuous Gentlewoman,
Mistress ELIZABETH BARNHAM, wife to the Worshipful ROBERT BARNHAM, Esquire

BY WILLIAM NEWPORT, Preacher of the Word at Boughton Monchelsey in Kent.

Imprimatur. JOHN DOWNAME.

LONDON, Printed by L. N. for Richard Wodenoth, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Star in Corne-hill. 1644.

THE FALL OF MAN BY SIN.
HOSE. 14.1, 2. 1. O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, thou have fallen by
thine iniquity.

2. Take with you words, and turn unto the Lord, say unto him take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously.


IN the three first verses of this Chapter, the Prophet exhorts the men of
Israel to repentance: First, Moving them to the duty, verse 1. Secondly,
Prescribing them the manner how they should perform it, verse 2, 3. In the
former we have, first the duty to be done, to turn to the Lord their God.
Secondly, an argument to move them to it, taken from their misery in continuing
in their sins, Thou have fallen by thine iniquity.

Of the duty something already. A few words now of the Argument to move them to
it, taken from their misery by sin, Thou have fallen by thine iniquity; here is
not a word that has any difficulty in it. The metaphor is taken from blind men
that walk in rough places, that stumble and fall, to the breaking of their
bones, yea, to the loss of their lives. The condition of these men is the
condition of us all, we have all stumbled by sin, and plunged our selves
into a bottomless gulf of misery and destruction. From hence we may conclude
two things:

1. That all men are miserably fallen from God by sin, and are in a lost
condition. 2. That we must see our selves thus fallen and utterly lost, before
we will convert and turn to God by repentance. For this cause the Prophet here
shows them their misery in this regard, when he moves them to this maine duty.
Concerning the former, that we are all fallen from God, and are in a lost
condition. There is a twofold fall: First, a corporal fall, such was that of
Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 4.4. and such was Abners fall by the hand of Joab, 2 Samuel
3.38. Secondly, there is a spiritual and metaphorical fall, and such was the
fall of those Israelites, and is the fall of us al as we are in nature. And this
fall is either into sin, A Bishop must not be a novice, lest being lifted up
with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. that is,
into that sin for which the devil was condemned. They that will be rich fall
into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. Or else, secondly, into
punishment and misery, by reason of sin. Prove. 24.16. A just man falls seven
times, and rises again, but the wicked shall fall into mischief. Into both
these we are all fallen, both into sin, and into misery by reason of sin. Into
sin, Romans 3.10. There is none righteous, no not one, there is none that
understands or seeks after God, they are all gone out of the way, they are
together become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. Verse
23. All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.

And as into sin, so into misery by reason of sin; we are all fallen, as we are
all by nature dead in sin, so we are all children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.1, 3.
The wages of sin is death, Romans 6. ult. Of death there are three sorts,
spiritual, temporal and eternal; all these we have contracted by our fall
into sin. And therefore this our fall is not like that of Mephibosheth, who
got only a lamenesse by his fall, nor like that of Eutichus, who though he fell
from the third loft, yet had his life in him, Act. 20.10. but like the fall of
Abner, who died in his fall, and like that of Jezebel, who being thrown out at
a window had her brains in her fall dashed out, and being sought, for burial,
had nothing found of her but her skull, and her feet, and the palms of her
hands, 2 King. 9.35.

1. By this fall we have contracted spiritual death, the death of our souls:
And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh has
he quickened, Coloss. 2.12. And it appears that we are al thus spiritually
dead, in that we are al by nature deprived of al spiritual sense. As first of
spiritual sight, Revel. 3.17. And know it not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind. The condition of him, Joh. 9. is the con^ition
of us al, we are al borne blind, 1 Cor. 2.14. True it is, some notions of a
deity and of right and wrong we have to maintain humane society and to leave
without excuse; but these are, as I conceive, Onmes natura surdi and coeci
donec aures and corda spiritu Dei aperiantur and perforentur. Pareus in loc.
no relics of Gods Image, but reimpressions, for by nature, the whole frame
of man's heart is only evil, Genesis 6.5. Secondly, Of hearing, we have no ears
spiritually to hear, that is, so as to learn and obey, unless God give them
us, Deuteronomy. 29.3. Matthew. 13.9.13. Who has ears to hear, let him hear:
Loquitur de auribus cordis non corporis, He speaks of the ears of the soul,
not of the body. Thirdly, Of Relish, for we have no more relish of divine
things then has a dead man of dainties, Romans 8.5. They that are after the
flesh, do savor or relish the things of the flesh; and they that are after the
spirit, the things of the spirit. We find no more savor in prayer, reading,
Sermons, then relish in the white of an egg, Job 6.6. or then a dead man in
his meat. Fourthly, Of Feeling, prick a living man but with the least pin and
he will start, but potch a dead man with knives, stab him with daggers, or lay
the weight of a mountain upon him, and he feels nothing; and so dead are we
naturally in our sins, that let them make never so deep gashes in our
souls, we feel them not; yea, though whole mountains of iniquity lay on us,
we are not sensible of them, we are by nature past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19.
(...).
have stone in our hearts, yea, our whole hearts of stone, and are not pained
with them, Ezekiel. 36.26.

2. Dead men are deprived of the faculty of speaking; so we cannot speak the
language of Canaan, Isa. 19.18. we cannot speak in a spiritual manner, either
in prayer to God, or by instruction or comfort to the edification of our
brethren.

3. Dead men have no faculty locomotive, they move no further then moved; no
more can we move spiritually in the work of God, we can do nothing that has
all the ingredients of a good work in it. Moral works may be done, and the
carkas of spiritual ones may be produced, as we may come to Church, hear
after a sort, and seem to join in prayer, but all this without heart, spirit
and life. Clockes and jackes move, but not from internal principles of life,
but only from external movers, weights and springs; and so may we, when in
nature, and therefore when our plummet is down, when our outward incentive is
removed, and we have our ends, we shall give over moving, (...). Seorsim a
me. Bez.
Without me, or severed from me (says our Savior) ye can do nothing, Joh.
15.5.

4. Dead carcasses rot and stincke, and so are loathsome to men's nostrils; we
naturally rot and stinck in the grave of our sins, so that we are hateful
to the nostrils of the Almighty; yea, our best works are loathsome and
abomination unto him, Isa. 1.13, 15.

2. As by sin we have fallen, so as to deprive our selves of spiritual life,
and bring death on our souls, so by it we deprive our selves of corporal life
too, and make our selves liable to bodily death, Romans 5.12. By one man's
disobedience sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all men, because all have sinned, Romans 8.10. If Christ be in you,
the body is dead because of sin, that is, liable to death through sin: Yea,
this our fall makes us liable to al these afflictions and miseries that we
endure, which are preambles to, and pieces of this death, and are called death
in some places Exodus 10.17. Take away from me this death only (says Pharaoh)
concerning the plague of the Locusts: And all the judgments of famine, sword,
pestilence, consumptions, and agues, are fruits of this our fall and sin,
Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.

3 By this our fall we have deprivid our selves of eternal life, and have made
our selves liable to everlasting death and destruction, and this stands of two
parts, the privative, and the positive, of the punishment of loss, and of the
punishment of sense.

The privative part of it, or the punishment of loss, is the want of the
beatificall vision, and happy fruition of the glorious Godhead for evermore,
which is thought by Divines to be greater then that of sense or feeling;
because this is the loss of an infinite good, whereas that is only the
tollerance of a finite evil. If the want of Absolons enjoyment of the society
of his earthly father for a time were so great a punishment, as to move him
rather to desire death then life on those terms, 2 Samuel 14.32. What then is
the want of the presence of our heavenly Father for evermore. Christ shall say
to all unregenerate ones at the last day, Depart from me, I never knew you,
Mat. 7.23. Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed.

The positive part or punishment of sense, are exquisite torments both of body
and soul, in all the faculties of the one, and members of the other. Which in
Scripture are sometimes called outer darkness, sometimes the worm that dies
not, Matthew. 25.30.
and sometimes the fire that shall never be quenched, Mark 9.46.
and by many other such fearful names, as are enough to strike terror and
amazement into the hearts of the most presumptuous sinners, if they had any
sense in them. What the miserable condition of those that suffer them, is, we
may partly see by the earnest request that the rich man in the place of these
torments made to Abraham, And he cried and said, Father Abraham have mercy on
me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool
my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame, Luke 16.24. The tip of his finger,
either to show that the torments of hell do make the damned speak foolishly,
for else why not a pale-full, as well as a drop, or else to show that they would
be glad of the least mitigation of there pain. Thus we see how we have fallen to
the loss of life spiritual, temporal, and eternal.





1. Imputed, for Adam and Eve were common persons, they sustained the person of
all their posterity, whiles they stood, we al stood with them, when they fell,
we al fell with them. As Levi paid tithes to Melchizedec in Abraham being in his
loins, Hebr. 7.9, 10. So we al sinned in Adam, being in his loins. Romans 5.18,
19. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men to the justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners; so by the obedience of one many shall be made righteous. Christ's
righteousness and obedience is ours by imputation: therefore, so is Adams sin
and disobedience. In this sin was the confluence of all sins. First, Infidelity
and unbelief. Secondly, unthankfulness for their happy estate. Thirdly,
Idolatry, in desiring to deifie themselves, to make themselves like God.
Fourthly, Contempt of God, and rebellion against him. Fifthly, Murder, yea,
Parricide, in killing themselves and all their posterity. Adam was Parricida
antequam parens. Sixthly, Intemperance and wantonness, in that all the fruits
besides would not serve their turn, but they must needs have that for their
lust. Seventhly, Theft, in seazing on that, which was none of their own,
without the owners leave. Eighthly, there was an assent to the false testimony
of the Devil. Ninthly, an ambitious desire of an higher dignity then God had
given them, yea, of the glory that belonged only to himself. And therefore
they err that think there was nothing but intemperance and pride in it. Now
al these sins of theirs folded up in one, are justly devolved upon us their
posterity, and imputed unto us.

2. Imparted, and thus we came by that original filth that pollutes both soul
and body, viz. by propagation from our first Parents, Behold I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, Psalm. 51.5. This original
sin the Apostle demonstrates a posteriori, from the death of those children
that never committed actual transgression, Romans 5.14. Nevertheless, death
reigned even from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam's transgression: They dyed; therefore they sinned, but they
sinned not actually, therefore they were guilty of original sin. Look, as
ignoble and leprous parents beget none but ignoble and leprous children, and as
of serpents can come nothing but serpents; so of polluted parents come only
polluted children, for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not
one, Job 14.4. And this original filth is called sometimes Lust, Romans 7.7.
sometimes the law in the members, verse. 23. the body of sin, verse. 24. and
the old man, Ephesians. 4.22. And this is the sourse and fountain of all our
actual sins, and cause of all our falls. Let no man say when he is tempted, I
am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he
any man. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and
entised. Then lust when it has conceived brings forth sin, and si^^ when
it is finished, brings forth death, James 1.13, 14, 15. Many put their
greatest miscarriages upon the devil; the devil owed them a shame, and now he
has paid them; when as the chief cause of all our falls lies in our own
hearts. The devil can but suggest and solicit, he cannot compel us to sin;
if he did not plow with our own heifer, work on our own corruption, he could
do us no hurt. And so long as this seed of all iniquity remains in men's
hearts, they would commit sin if there were no devil to tempt them to it.



1. Since we have fallen, and so fallen, as has been showed, by our sins, this
discovers to us our great misery, by reason of sin and iniquity. We have
fallen by it to our undoing, to our destruction* from God, from bliss to
misery; fallen not only to the breaking of our bones with David, but to the
breaking of our necks with Iezebel; fallen so as that we have lost life
spiritual, life eternal by our fall, and are in a lost, dead and undone
condition without infinite mercy. We have deprived our selves of all ability to
serve our God, and have made our selves slaves to the devil. We have made our
selves children of wrath, and fit for nothing but to fry in hell for all
eternity. We have plunged our selves from the top of our felicity to the gulf
of endless misery. We think them unhappy that fall from honor to contempt,
from wealth to beggary; O how unhappy are we that have fallen by our sins from
God to the devil, from the highest bliss to the lowest infelicity! And in this
case we are not able to help our selves, nor to desire help, nor to see our
selves to want help, unless God be pleased to give us eyes. Few men, though
they are thus fallen, and thus miserable, will be brought to believe it.

2. This shows against the patrons of Freewill and universal grace, that man
has no power to see light when presented to him, unless God give him eyes; no
power to believe in Christ and to embrace him, unless God give him an heart,
no power to do any spiritual work, unless God give life, strength and
ability. Romans 7.18. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good
thing. Hence David prays for the opening of his eyes, Psalm. 119.18. Lord open
thou mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law. And Saint Paul desires
light from God in the behalf of the Ephesians, That the eyes of your
understanding being enlightened, ye may know what is the hope of his calling,
and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.18.
And so for the Colossians, he prays That they might be filled with the
knowledge of Gods will in wisdom and spiritual understanding, Coloss. 1.9.
And he shows us that the act of believing is Gods gift, To you it is given not
only to believe, but likewise to suffer for his sake, Philip. 1.29. And that
the will to any good is wrought in us by God himself, It Is God that works in
you to will and to do of his good pleasure, Philip. 3.13. Not that God does
force the will, for then 'twere no will, but that he does sweetly incline it,
ex nolentibus volentes facit, of unwilling he makes us willing to repent,
believe and obey. The will is free from coaction or impulsion, but not from
servitude. Men in state of nature sin freely, that is to say, they are not
constrained to it, and yet they sin necessarily too, for they cannot do any
thing without sin.



or end. Neither can God be charged with injustice in punishing wicked men that
sin necessarily, because they have voluntarily lost their liberty, and drawn
this necessity of sinning upon themselves. God made us freemen; we made our
selves slaves, Eccles. 7.29.

O Israel return to the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.
Since thou have fallen from God by sin, therefore return to him again by
repentance. And this we are moved to on the same ground by the Apostle, Ephesians.
5.14. Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light. And Christ himself has the same inference in his Epistle to the
Church of Ephesus, Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, Revel. 2.5.



Psalm. 19.7. The Gospel preached is Gods mighty power to salvation, Romans 1.16.
Saint Paul was sent to the Gentiles, To turn them from darkness to light,
from the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26.18. And therefore we should settle
our selves under the means, and bring tractable hearts with us, willing to be
new formed, and new molded by this Word.

2. We should pray to Christ to enliven us by his Spirit, for all spiritual life
comes from him. Hence he is called the life, Joh. 14.6. the life causally,
because he breathes the breath of spiritual life into the souls of his at
their regeneration, as he did natural life into Adam at his creation. Verily I
say unto you the hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. For as the Father
has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself,
Joh. 5.25, 26. That is to say, spiritual life to conveigh to his members. And
the truth is, that there is nothing that can raise us thus dangerously fallen,
but the same power that raised Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And
therefore we must have recourse to to him by prayer, entreating him that he will
show his power in raising us thus fallen. And though it be true that
unregenerate men cannot make a prayer that God shall accept as a good work,
because they are bad and out of Christ, yet they may make such a prayer as he
will in his mercy hear; For he feeds the very young Ravens that call upon
him, Psalm. 147.9.

Thus of the former, I come now to the latter Position, viz.

That men must see themselves thus fallen, and in a lost and undone condition,
before they will turn to God by repentance. Hence it is that the Prophets
generally show men their sins, and the danger of them, before they exhort men
to that duty. Thus the Prophet Esaias showed the Jews first their deplorable
state by reason of their sins, before he exhorted them to purge themselves
from them. He told them that they were worse then the Ox or the Ass; Esaias
1.3.
that they were like a man leprous from the crown of the head to the sole of
the foot, that they were as corrupt as Sodom and Gomorrah before he exhorted
them to cleanse themselves by the tears of true repentance, verse. 16. And the
same Prophet would have those that followed after righteousness, that sought
the Lord, to look first to the Rock from whence they were hewn, and to the
hole of the pit from whence they were dug, that they might see their
original sin, the fountain and their actual transgression, Esa. 51.1, 2, 3.
the streams that issued from thence before he promises them any comfort and
consolation. And in another place calls only those that thrist, that is to
say, that are apprehensive of their want and misery by sin, To come unto the
waters, Esaias 55.1, 2.
etc. And our Savior calls none to him for ease but those that feel their
sin a burden, Matthew. 11.28. Men must first apprehend themselves sick, or at
least in danger, in regard of their health before, they will seek to the
Physician; so men must first find themselves sick of sin before they will
repair to the Physician of their souls. The whole need not a Physician, but
they that are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance, Matthew. 9.12. That is to say, not those that are puffed up with an
opinion of their own righteousness, as the Pharisees were, but those that see
their sins, and see themselves to be in great danger by reason of them, yea,
utterly undone by them.

The Reasons are two, whereof the one respects sinners to be converted; the
other God, to whom they are to convert and turn.

and to say, Father I have sinned etc. Luke 15.16, 17.

If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink, Joh. 7.37. And let him that
is a thirst, come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely,
Revel. 22.17.

Thou have fallen, etc. And therefore Take unto you words, and turn to the
Lord, and say unto him, Take away our iniquity, and receive us graciously. And
so does the Apostle Saint Paul, he tells us again and again, that in the Law
we can see nothing but our sins, and our woeful estate by reason of them: By
the Law (says he) comes the knowledge of sin; Romans 7.7.
and he shows that in the Law we may read our condemnation, written in such
fair characters, that he that runs may read it. For (faith he) Moses
describes the righteousness that is of the Law, that the man that does those
things shall live in them, Romans 10.5. and therefore he tells, us that the Law is
our schoolmasters to drive us unto Christ, Galath. 3.24. Without all question
it is necessary that we should see our sin and danger by reason of it, or else
we shall never come to Christ for remission and salvation.

2. This should teach every one that desires to convert and turn to God by
repentance, to labor to see how far he is fallen from God by sin, and in what
misery he is by reason hereof, and to this end he should view his heart and
life, not in the false glass of his own or others corrupt opinion or fancy,
but in the looking-glass of Gods Law that will not flatter him, that so he
may see the deformity and filth of the one, and the obliquities and wanderings
of the other, and the just reward of both, viz. eternal wrath and destruction.
Unless we all thus do (which Israel at the exhortation of the Prophet here)
we shall never turn to the Lord our God, we shall never seek him with
earuestnesse, as men undone without it, for grace and mercy, If thou Lord
should be extreme to mark iniquity, O Lord who shall stand, but there is
mercy with thee, that thou might be feared, Psalm. 130.3, 4. We must see our
selves utterly undone in rigor of justice, before we will appeal to the
Throne of Mercy.

Verse. 2, 3. Take with your words, etc.

HEre the Prophet shows them the manner how he would have them perform the
duty, he would not have them come to the Lord empty, but with these words,
Take away all iniquity, and etc. where he does endeavor to support their
infirmity, because a mind astonished knows not what to say, for Curae leves
loquuntur ingentes stupent; therefore he prescribes them a short, but a pithy
form, Turn to the Lord and say, Take away, etc. Where we have a kind of
Antithesis laid down between true and false repentance, as if he should have
said, Ye have hitherto sought the Lord with sheep and oxen, chap. 5.6. ye
have thought to please him with these sacrifices, which he loathes without
true repentance. But now (says he) Take unto you words, and shows them what
words they should use. And lest they should think that there was nothing else
but bare words required of them to be uttered like Parots, without
understanding, apprehension, or heart, as hypocrites do, who think they have
done enough when they have run over a form of confession and prayers, though
after never so heartlesse a manner; he shows that the thing signified by these
words likewise is necessarily required, viz. True conversion and turning to
God, that the mouth in prayer may speak from the heart, and the heart by the
mouth; and therefore he adds, Turn to the Lord and say, Take away all
iniquity, etc. (that is) say it not only with your mouths, but from your
hearts. And the form of words prescribed them stands of two parts: First, of a
petition for mercy: Secondly, a restipulation of duty; without the one we
cannot be saved, without the other we shall show our selves ungrateful
hypocrites; and therefore both are necessary to true conversion. The benefits
that he teaches them to ask of God are two: First, That he would remove all
their evils of faults, guilt, and punishment; Take away all iniquity, and they
say, All, because they acknowledge themselves guilty, not of one sin, or of a
few transgressions, but polluted with many: This is a petition for the
remission of sins. Secondly, They are taught to ask acceptance, regeneration
by the Spirit, and the continuance of outward benefits in these words, Receive
good, as it is in the original, that is, take it, as it were, in thine hand to
give it us: As Agar took a wife to Ismael her son, that is, gave him one:
Genesis 21.21.
And as Christ, when he ascended up on high, received gifts for men, Psalm.
68.18. that is to say, to bestow them upon them. The sum of the petition
therefore, is, pardon our sins, accept us in Christ, regenerate and guide us
by thy Spirit, remove our calamities, and afford us such temporals as are
necessary for us. In the restipulation we have a double promise; 1. That they
would celebrate the name of God with praise for his mercy, Ashur shall not
save, etc.
so will we render the calves of our lips. 2. That they would reform their
lives, and so; First, That they would renounce all their sins, especially
their confidence in creatures and idols. Secondly, That they would endeavor to
perform their duties, especially that which they had so much neglected, viz.
that they would henceforth depend upon their God, as a pupil or fatherless
child upon his guardian. So that in the manner of their repentance prescribed:
we have,

First, the prescription of a form of Prayer, Take with you words, return,
and say. Secondly, the substance of the form prescribed, which stands; First,
of a Petition: Secondly, Restipulation. The Petition stands, First, of
deprecation for the removal of evil, Take away all etc. Secondly,
Supplication for acceptance, and a supply with all benefits spiritual and
temporal. In the Restipulation they promise, First, praise for mercies:
Secondly, amendment of life. First, that they would abjure and renounce their
former evil courses: Secondly, that they would perform neglected duties.

I begin with his prescription of a form. In that to help their weakness, he
prescribes them one; we may learn, That forms of prayer in some cases may
lawfully and warrantably be used. As the people here by our Prophet, so the
Priests by the Prophet Joel are prescribed a form; Let the Priests, the
Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar, and say, Spare thy
people, etc. Joel 2.17. Moses, a Prophet of the Lord, who talked with him face
to face, used one form when the Arc set forward, and another when it rested;
Arise, O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let all that hate thee
flee before thee. And return, O Lerd, to the many thousands of Israel, Numb.
10.35, 36. And so the Priest used a form of prayer to bless the people
withal, Numb. 6.23, 24. The Lord bless thee and keep thee, etc. The Psalms
are some of them wholly prayers, and some prayers for the most part, and yet
all used by the Jews in the solemn worship of God, in the forms wherein they
are written. Our Savior taught his Disciples a form, saying in one place,
After this manner, Matthew. 6.9. and in another, When ye pray, say, Luke 11.2.
intimating thereby that it may be used as a prayer, so that it be done with
understanding and heart, and not used only as a copy to write by. Lastly, the
Apostle uses forms of benediction and malediction, Grace to you and peace,
etc. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And since he used short forms,
no doubt, but we in some cases may use long ones.



use of a form either written, or printed, or learnt by heart. As a man that
is lame may make use of his crutches, or a staff to help him to go; so may he
that is weak in knowledge and utterance, during the time of his weakness,
make use of a form to pray by. Howbeit, when it pleases God to give him more
strength, Perkins Cases.
no doubt he is to lay aside his forms (as a lame man recovered his crutches)
and to pray without them. For without question every man is to serve God with
his best abilities.

2. In case a man has occasion to ask again and again, or daily, the same
things, there is no question but a man may ask them in the same words,
(therefore) a man daily needs pardon of sin, strength of faith, fortitude and
patience, etc. There is no doubt but a man may ask these things daily in the
same words; to ask the same things in variety of words every time, does but
argue a quick apprehension, and nimble expression; etc. no doubt but he that
asks them the same may ask them with as much earnestness and as good an
affection as the other. Our Savior in his agony said, Father if it be possible
etc. and went again and again, and used the same words, Matthew. 26.49. Not that
he that was the eternal Word of the Father wanted variety of words to express
himself, but for our example, to show that we may even with zeal and
earnestness ask the same things again and again in the same words. Howbeit,
for a Christian to be absolutely word-bound, to be tied so to another form or
his own, that he has no liberty to vary in any expression, is a great bondage
and deading to his spirit, and may occasion a great deal of mere formality in
prayer.

But now when a Christian has need to ask some special mercy either in his
own behalf, or the behalf of his neighbor, or in the behalf of the whole
Church of God, or when he receives some new mercy? There is no question but he
is to ask the one, and to give thanks for the other in new expressions. This
therefore is that which I determine, viz. that weak Christians may use forms as
helps to their infirmity, until they gather more strength, and that then they
are to lay them aside as a lame man his crutches when he is recovered his
lamenesse. And as for those that are better able, they may ask those things
they daily need in the same words, and give thanks for those things they daily
receive in the same expressions, so that they look that they be not merely
formal in what they do; and that otherwise every grown Christian is to vary
as his occasions do vary. Harris in his Quaeries and cases touching theory and
practice of Prayer.
And this is the sentence of one of our Divines of that Assembly, that comes
behind none of them, as I suppose, for learning, natural abilities, or grace.



1. The Anabaptists, and those of the Separation, that condemn not only
corrupt forms, but all forms of prayer, holding the use of them to be a mere
superstitious will worship; for they say it is not to pray in the spirit, and
if the forms be composed by others, that it is to worship God by men's
inventions. Of whom I would know whether the godly Jews using this form
prescribed by the Prophet with a good heart, did pray in the spirit or no? I
hope they will not deny it. Next I would know by whose invention they worship
God, when they conceive a prayer? If they shall say that it is by the invention
of the Spirit of God; that is the opinion of the Entheusiasts, which look to
have the Spirit put words into their mouths, which is as much as ever it did
for the Prophets and Apostles; whereas the Spirit in ordinary times, such as
ours only, stirs up holy desires in the soul, the formation of these desires
into verbal petitions depends upon men's natural abilities, as we may see by
every days experience, Romans 8.2. The spirit helps our infirmities with sighs
and groans, not with words and phrases. There are that look for all those
gifts now, that the eminentest in the Apostles times had, viz. That their
sons and their daughters shall prophecy, that their old men shall dream
dreams, and that their young men shall see visions, Joel 2.28. I am confident
that many both old and young in this age dream more dreams, and divulge them
too, then tend to the glory of God, or the good of his Church. But why do not
these and their children undertake to foretell things to come too, as Agabus
and others did in the Apostles times? If they cannot do that, I Will never believe
they can speak by the spirit of prophecy. Besides, what do these men think of
all those forms of prayer mentioned before, used by Moses, Christ and his
Apostles.

therefore a man cannot do both at once, read a form and pray too.



2. Some formalists think that nothing can be done without forms, and
therefore when they are in any distress presently they mumble over the Lords
Prayer, or some other that they have learnt by rote, without any understanding
or heart at all. These are just like our foolish Papists that use their prayers
in all temptations and afflictions as charms and spells to remove the evils
from them. This is only to take the Lords Name in vain, to abuse his Titles and
his Word, and to provoke him to more wrath and indignation against them. Though
I like not the former, yet I like these, you must think, worse by many
degrees; the former have some good-wil to Religion, though misled; but these
are grossly ignorant, and dangerously hypocritical, for they draw near to
God with their lips, and honor him with their mouths, when their hearts are
not with him.

Let me exhort those that in regard of knowledge and utterance cannot pray
without the help of a form, to labor to get good and wholesome forms, and to
make use of them; we see that the use of them in this case is warranted. But
let such take these two cautions along with them:

1. Let them look that they be not merely formal in what they do in this kind.
And therefore they should get them such forms as they understand, and must
when they have them, look that they utter them with an apprehension and
feeling of their own wants in every petition, and with an earnest desire to
have them supplied, it is the understanding and the fervent prayer that
prevails with God, 1 Cor. 14.15, 16. James 5.16.

2. Let them not rest upon forms, thinking they do enough, because they make
use of them, and pray by them, but let them resolve to use them only as helps
to their dullness and incapacity for a time, with a purpose to lay them aside,
when they shall through Gods grace and their earnest endeavors get more
knowledge and better abilities. And therefore they, yea, all of us, should be
much employed in searching out our own wants, and in the study of the holy
Scriptures, that in the one we may find matter of Prayer, and in the other we
find out fit words and phrases to express our selves in that variety of
occasions that we shall meet withal, in the many turnings and windings of our
lives. He that takes this course, with a resolution through Gods assistance to
get ability in this kind, will find a great deal of comfort in it, and get
that ability to speak in prayer, pro re nata, as does almost as much excel
forms, as a living man does a dead cakasse.

FINIS.

