News from Morefields: Or, The Wanton Wag: Or, Ione go to it.
Her Name was Jone, and she would go to it she swore,
She Will exercise each part e're she would live poor;
She reckons up her Lovers one by one,
Now from the Park, she to Morefields is gone.
To the Tune of Stearing my coast one night. etc.




Now trading grows dead and i have nothing to do,
Some part of my Lovers i le reckon to you:
Who seldom came to me unless it were dark.
their aim it was good, for they never missed my Mark.
I first a young Girl did come up to the town,
Then I thought my self fine in a Paragon Gown;
A Service I got, and a good Master too,
For he was a joyner and taught me to do.
Then twenty weeks after my belly did swell,
And what I should do poor I could not tell:
He gave me some Money, and bid me be gone,
Thus I with my Maidenhead went all alone.
Then next did I meet with a hectoring Spark,
Who told me I had best get into the Park,
I took his advice and thither I went,
But of my great belly I did me repent.
But after the Midwife her Office had done
She told me I was Mother to a very fine son:
But quickly that died, and I was eas^d of my pain,
And now for a Maid I may pass for again.
It Was next a young Lawyer that did me espy,
He swore I was right by the cast of my eye:
He briskly makes at me I asked what he meant,
He gave me a Guinny, then told his intent.
His man partly guest what his master did do,
He longed for to taste of a little bit too:
On the Morrow he comes with a whole Quarters pay,
And proffers it all if with him I would play.
An Old Miser asks me if that I was willing,
To turn up my Scut he would give me a Shilling:
Then fumbling he came, but I put him quite by,
But he dropped me an Angel, then down I did lie.
The next was a barber who swore he would trim me
He had that would please if the devil wan't in me:
He with his Half-crown gave the Porter a fee,
The Gates straight flew open, then entered he.
The second part,
to the same tune
THen next comes a tailor with needle and thimble,
Whose hands at my Placket begun to be nimble
I bid him forbear, for unless he had coin,
He should not take measure of that Coney of mine.
From highest to lowest I know I had my part,
It Was their Money, not they, that rejoiced my heart:
The next that came to me was a Cobbler I tell ye,
Who for his half-crown would fain feel of my belly
Then in comes a Courtier who hustl'd Al-a-mode,
Whose hands to crack did know the right road:
Pish, pray sir forbear, then I softly did cry,
But a yellow broad piece made me quietly lie.
A blustering Captain came puffing in haste,
And eagerly clasps his strong arms round my waste
then backwards he ^hrows me, a pound was his price
But the rogue was so lusty that he swore he^d do it twice.
A Surgeon that newly was come out of Spain,
With his instruments would fain open a vein,
But to part with his Coin he could not endure,
But if e're I was Clapped he would give me the cure
Then next a stout Soldier to my Lodging did run,
He of me did beg to make use of my Gun:
I said if that bullets of silver he had store,
he might shoot till his heart ak'd and never give over.
A Merchant that newly was come from the Seas.
took a view of my body, which did very well please:
He seldom was from me, for he loved well the game,
And he gave me two pieces every time that he came.
A VVine-cooper treated me with the best Sack,
And all to pers^ade me to lie on my back,
Some Wine and some Money together did do,
Then he of my Firkin must needs take a view.
A Cook that had roasted himself in the fire,
To give me a joint it was his desire:
But I quickly perceived what it was he would be at,
He prayed me to lend him a bit for his Cat.
Too tedious t^ould be if all I should name,
That with me has frolickt since hither I came:
Of all sorts of tradesmen i have tried one or more,
Besides those brave Gallants i have reckoned before.
But since that the Park begins to be poor,
I Will fly to Morefields, there is Cullies good store:
and if that I thrive there, hereafter i will tell.
And so my dear Bullies and Cullies farewell.
FINIS.
Printed for J. Hose, over against Staples-Inn, in Houlbourn, near
Grays-Inn-Lane.


