THE POPE'S Farwell; OR, Queen Ann's Dream. Containing a true Prognostic of her
own Death, Together with the extirpation of Popery out of these Realms by King
Edward the 6 th. but especially by Queen Elizabeth, of ever-blessed memory;
Being Translated out of a Book Written in her Reign, and by her allowed to be
Printed. Written Originally in Latin Verse by Mr. Christopher Ockland, and
Printed in the Year 1582 Together with some few REMARQUES Upon the Late PLOT,
OR, Non-Con-Conspiracy.

ENTERED according to Order.

Printed by J. M. for T. W. a true lover of the Church of England, as now
Established by Law.

THE Pope's Farewell; Or, Queen Ann's Dream.
WHen Arcto's does the Northern Pole disclose, A Description of the Night.

When Men, and Dogs, and Mortals all repose,
Then The God of Sleep.
Morpheus in my Unkle's shape appears,
Who had been dead and buried several Years;
His Head was ball'd, his face o're-grown with Hair,
He calls to me (Dear Daughter) do not fear;
I am your Uncle, (though you be a Queen)
Who dwell in Regions never to be seen
By Mortal Eyes, where life is truly so,
Freed from all grief, debauch, and worldly woe;
To live at this rate, is indeed to live,
To live a Mortal I would little give:
Then haste, I pray you, come and be a Bride
To Our Savior Christ, Come all ye Saints beside,
Who lives in Heaven, and has Built the Skies,
There to bestow upon His Flock a Prize
Peace and true Ioys, with Rest for evermore,
Free from all Change; this is the Prize in store.
What profit honors here upon the Earth?
Or Princes Glory? is it not the Peoples Breath?
What profit Riches, or the best attire?
Since, whence they sprang, they all must turn to mire.
Can they give health, or can they change the mind?
Where Satan and men's lusts are both combined
To crush the Soul? or will pale Death be bribed,
By these, to stay? and lay its Darts aside?
Solomon.
All things are fading which from Earth do spring,
Look you to Heaven, there behold your King.
But why should I thus speak? Good Queen attend,
I only come to tell you as a Friend,
That Hellish envy lurks in Princes Courts,
'Midst all their Games, Divertizements and Sports;
And look where any's great, and does excel
In Virtue, those it always aims to quell;
It Is still contriving, never out of breath,
Still closely aiming at its Objects Death,
Henr^ 8.
Englands Great King having of late discry'd
The Sea of Rome, their projects, and their pride,
Commands forthwith that none shall it obey
In his Dominions, or the Pope bear sway;
Nor shall hereafter hither send his Writts of Excommunication.
Bulls,
To pick up Gain from ill-taught empty Sculls;
Now, though the Pope be Bannish'd hence, he sends
Such as by right or wrong may serve his ends;
These lurk in Court, nor can they be secure,
Whilst you are Queen, or put their Plots in ure;
Therefore they seek to take away your life
By right, or wrong, and so to end the strife;
But once within these Two Years, they shall find
That Popish Images will be Confined
To Fiery Flames, and all the Temples freed,
In Britains Isle, from such a noisome Weed.
Oh happy England who art not confined
To worship Stocks and Stones; thus did the blind.
Whilst Aegypts King had never known a God,
They worshipped Leeks, now this you will say was odd.
But you, Oh Q. Ann.
Queen, shall never live to see
This happy Change, this grand Catastrophe;
Yet still the Dregs of Romes foul superstition,
Shall not be fully purged out of this Nation;
Till pious Edw. 6.
Edward Rules in this Isle,
Then Rome Farewell, (farewell I say a while)
For seven Summers finish out his reign,
Then comes Queen Mary, Rome returns again;
Now he who dares the sacred The Bible
Writ to read
In his own Tongue, for that offense must Bleed;
Or he that dares to thwart the Sea of Rome,
Has forthwith Fire and Faggot for his Doom;
But by your Child Q. Eliz.
Eliza's bearing sway,
These wrongs shall cease, and Papists post away.
The Pope to A River in Italy.
Tybers shore will be Confined,
Not suffered here t'infatuate the Blind,
But there to vend his Knacks, and foolish toys,
To those h'as made more ignorant than Boys;
For Here his Power and all his Pride must end,
Believe Me as your Uncle, and your Friend.
Hence he will rage, and fret, and fume, and tare,
And seek t'imbroyl You in a Civil- War:
The Q. Eliz.
Virgin Queen, your Daughter, he will try
By secret Arts and Methods to Destroy;
But all in vain, for GOD will Her Defend
In Peace and Plenty to her utmost end;
Yet notwithstanding he will rage and fume,
Allotting Hell, not Heaven, for the Doom
Of all her loyal Subjects; Yet shall she
The only Glory of all Women be;
But Q. Ann.
You, my Offspring, never think to find
The Fates on earth so generous and Kind,
For Heavens Great Maker will e're long call You
From earthly pomp, to bid the world adieu,
Yet never regret this Change, for where You Will go,
There is no tears, no sorrow, pain, or woe;
The place is Heaven, where you will find such Ioys,
As if compared, will prove all other toys;
Then be Courageous, do not faint, my Dear,
Although my Message seem (perchance) severe;
For, gentle Queen, your Glass is almost Run,
Yet Thirty Days, and you will be Dead and gone:
But let this cheer you, Your Eliza shall
Credit her Father, You, her Self and All.
FINIS SOMNII.
THus ends this Hero's Dream, or Prophecy,
Which Ages since have found to be no Lie;
Nor ought it longer for to be concealed,
Since all things proved true as they was Revealed.
What then means fear of Popery in this Nation?
'Cause Faith with Atheists is quite out of fashion;
Neither will Non con, whatever Sect he be,
Credit Great Coesar or the DEITY;
He promises to Rule by Law, but they
( In spite of him) base Rebels, would bear sway;
He Pardons, pardons worse than Jews or Turks,
Like God, his Mercy's over all his Works;
O happy England! thou may gladly sing,
That ever Charles the Second was thy King;
A Prince so wise, so kind, so good and just,
As none but Infidels could him distrust,
Or in his God-like Monarchy plot Treason,
With any color, justice, sense, or reason.
Sure Men turn Bedlams in this Isle of late,
Whilst naught but Bloodshed can appease their hate.
K Char. 2.
Ah me! and therefore must the best of Kings,
D. of Y.
And's Brother Dye! who ever heard such things?
VVonder of wonders! all Sects did agree
To act this Heathenish, Hellish Tragedy.
But blessed be the immortal God on high,
Who from his Throne all Mischiefs does discry,
And has revealed to our Sovereign King below,
Now to distinguish 'twixt his Friend and Foe.
Then let all loyal Hearts such Mercies prize,
And laud and praise the Sovereign of the Skies,
Who has to our Gracious King in time revealed
That treason which base Rebels long concealed;
And let all pious souls, for this Great thing,
Pray from their Hearts, God save and bless the King
FINIS.

