Observations upon the Strange and Wonderful PROPHECIES OF Mr. John Gadbury,
now Prisoner in the Gate House for High Trason. WITH Astrological Predictions
For the YEAR, 1680.
SHOWING, From the Choicest Rules in the Sidereal Sciences, What Grand
Revolutions or Accidents are likely to happen in Every Month, respectively, in
many Parts of the World: Especially, ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND. AS ALSO,
The Death of the POPE Foretold, etc.
Multi multa sciunt, Sed nemo omnia.
Corruption optimi est pessima. As the Art of Astrology is in it self of Noble
Extraction, and a Nature sublime: So has no Secular Science been more grossly
abused, whilst Fools Idolize it, Half-witted-Coxcombs Contemn it, and Crafty
Knaves Use it, as a Politick-Engine to boulster up a Cheat, or color their
Mischievous Designs.

When the Famous Popish Gun-Powder-Plot was discovered, there was one Gresham,
(a Papist, and small Pretender to the Mathematics) was violently suspected to
have some Hand in it, because he wrote so near the Matter in his Almanac. Young
Nostredame, to fulfill a certain Prophecy of his, That in such a Year, such a
City should be burnt, set it on Fire himself; and for the same, received his
Just Reward.

I know not, whether we have any such Cunning-Men among'st us at this day: Yet
cannot but observe to the World, some notable Passages of a Notorious
Astrologician, Mr. J. G. in his Almanac for the approaching Year, 1680.

This Gentleman, having (by what Art, I determine not) obtained, it seems, some
Notions of certain Occurrences, that were designed to happen; was so full of
the Business, that at the first dash, he breaks Bulk, and presents us with
these presaging Lines in January.

-- Sly Hermes with Brisk Mavors Joins
In Aquary, [Which must not be forgot]
That Treacherous Human Sign can spawn a Plot.
A very pretty Predictive Him! And had not the Dragon's- Tail, in Conjunction
with the Meal-Tubb, hindered, it might in due time, have ripened into a
Prophecy.

In February, he uses this shrewd Expression:

-- All of a sudden, methinks, I hear of DREADFVL Treachery Northward. I trust,
this may not prove altogether Oraculous; and yet, that which is not Improbable,
to be sure, is not Impossible. There are People, that would gladly make a
Rebellion, if they cannot find it; nay, would purchase it at any Rate, to
blanch their own black Purposes. And certainly, that which follows in the same
Page, (if properly applied to the Be-Jesuited Bigots of the Bloody Romish
Synagogue) is true to an Hairs-bredth; viz.

A Fever of Religion, turns the soonest into a Frenzy, and makes each Wight an
Orestes. In the Month of March, he has these words:

-- I tell thee, O Clandestine Conspirator! be thou who thou will, in making it
thy Business to disturb either thy Governors, or Country, thou do therein
assuredly court thy own Destruction. This, in Defyance of Envy, and for the
Credit of Art, and that Well-Experienc'd Author, I will adventure to call a
Prophecy. And, as Providence has hitherto since the Writing thereof,
accomplished the same; so let it be our continual Prayers, That it may still be
verifyed for the Future: That so our Authors Menaces in June, may be defeated;
viz.

That Vice is like to be Rampant; and the Sons of Perfidiousness, and
Treachery, should be prevalent against Men of Worth and Integrity. I shall not
insist upon that Passage, in the Second Page of his Prog; because, it is
probable, himself did not enough regard it; viz.

That there is a Spirit of Fr^ud abroad, which animates Men to entrap, ensnare,
and betray one another: Yea, even their very Friends, and those of the same
Feather, and Party, with them; possibly, to the Ruin and Destruction of Many.
But in the Third Page following, there is a Villainous Squinting Prognostic;
that, perhaps, deserves a Severer Animadversion, than I can bestow. He is
speaking of an Eclipse of the Sun in Aries, happening the Twentyeth of March,
1680. Upon which, he drops these Insolent Words:

The Famous Cambden (I suppose, he means Cardan) has TRVLY minded us of the
Danger attending ENGLAND, from Eclipses in Aries. -- Si quando fuerit Eclipsis
in ant significat mortem Regis. In plain English thus, -- If there shall be an
Eclipse in Aries (as this is) or Leo, it signifies the Death of the KING.

And though he Translate it a little more generally thus, -- An Eclipse of Sol
in Aries or Leo, betokens the Death, or Downfall, of some great Emperor or
Prince: Yet even this his English amounts to the same thing. For in the Words
before, without any Occasion given by his Author, who speaks indefinitely, he
had appropriated this to England, by naming That particularly: And goes on to
Justify such his Impudent Judgment, saying,

-- The REASON THEREOF, IS NEAR AT HAND. Sol is, Rex Planetarum, as a Prince
amongst the Planets, etc. But we have a more sure Word of Prophecy. -- The Lord
frustrateth the Tokens of the Liars, and makes Diviners mad, turns Wisemen
back-wards, and makes their Knowledge foolish, Isa. 44.25.

However, the Consideration hereof, is modestly submitted to Authority; whilst
we only say: --

From such Star-gazing Vizards of State,
With their Popish Prognostics, Defend us:
What they seem to Foretell they Create;
And they cause all the Ills they pretend us.
And now, that we may Gratify the Reader's Curiosity, that would needs be
Pick-Locking the Closet of Fate; we shall present him with some Innocent
Predictions on each of the Twelve Months, of the ensuing Year, 1680. deduced
from as Authentic Grounds in Art, as any Well-willer to the Mathematics in
the Town can boast of. And first of --

January.
THE Year begins with Lofty Towering Winds; which, it is hoped, may blow all the
Jesuits into Lubber-Land. Toward the End of the Month, their Popish-Plot
begins to stink worse than his Holiness, when he was Roasted the other Evening
at Temple Bar, with a Catt in his Belly. Some New Discoveries are made, and
fresh Animosities and Accusations break forth: And not a few Conscious
Traitors, who thought themselves secure, are brought upon the Stage. Nor will
all their Interest, be able longer to screw them from Incensed Justice.

February.
MArs, and the Sun, meet in Consultation. It Is a Good Omen, when Authority, and
Power, are United. What great Martialist is he, that now receives a Check? or
languishing with the Tortures of a Guilty Conscience, Resigns his Breath? The
General Peace, which seemed hovering over Europe, is now upon the Wing; and
threatens once more, to leave Christendom to the Rage of Bellona; though diverse
prudent, moderate Statesmen, use all their Endeavors, to Court her longer
Stay. Good News arrives about the Twenty-Seventh Day, to our Merchants, from
the South-West; and curious seasonable Weather, concludes the Month.

March.
MArch comes in like a Lion: And Men's Actions are as rough and tempestuous, as
the Weather. There are Clouds gathering, which may possibly Eclipse the French
Grandeur. More petty Counter-Plots are Hatched, but vanish in Smoke. And the
devises of Mischief, are Entrapped in their own Pit-falls. Little March Dust is
to be expected. Lofty debate in Supreme Counsels; and preparations every where
making, for War; and yet every body pretends for Peace. The Swede Suffers:
Brandenburgh is Active: The Empire labors under the Male-effects of pernicious
Councels. How long, Oh ye Illustrious Princes of Europe, will you suffer your
selves to be Managed and abused by that pestilent Society, which seeks your
Ruin, and to enslave you, all to their Grand Ecclesiastical Idol?

April.
THis is generally a moist Month, and perhaps some may Weep Sanguine Tears.
What New Plot, or Stratagem is this, which is now turned up Trump? The Trade of
London increases, in spite of all her Popish Enemies, who have vowed her
Destruction. News Arrives from Ireland: Great Things are upon the Wheel:
Murders, and Casualties, more than ordinarily frequent

May.
SOl, and Jupiter, are in Conjunction; some prejudice happens to an Eminent
Judge. Fiat Justitia, ^ruat Mundus: What think you, if the Pope should about
this time, take a turn to Purgatory. It Is most probable, that Death, or at
least, Sickness, Seizes his Holy-ship. It Is generally, a Crazy Time; and Men
are neither well in their Bodies, nor well in their Wits. What foolish Rumor is
that, now buzzed abroad? Believe it not. It Is the Firstborn of the Father of
Lies.

June.
O London! London! God in Heaven Bless thee! The Popes Blessing, or Curse,
signifies not three leaps of a Louse: But the Mercies of Wicked, are Cruel. Be
Wise, and be Obedient; and, in this thy Day, know the Time of thy Visitation.
May the good Hand of providence, protect thee from Casualties. The High and
Mighty, are in a Strait; and the Flower de-Luces, are withered with the too
fervent Kisses of the Sun. If Old More be whetting his Hatchet to Cut down a
Tall Cedar or two in Europe, who can help it? Fiat voluntas Dei.

July.
FRequent Showers disturb the Hay-makers. A new Disease sweeps many into their
Grave: Fires are Threatened. Let our Metropolis be careful, to prevent them. Ah
Jockey! What Is the matter? Is it thy fault, or thy unfortune. Let Pragmatical,
or Traitorous Spirits, look to it. Raro Antecedentum. etc.

August.
ABout the Fourteenth Day, expect great Rains and Thunder. Nor are men's minds
more Calm, than the air; but agitated with the Hurricanes of violent Passions.
The Twentyeth Day, is of fatal Consequence to some affairs: And, I fear, a very
bad Harvest. Cheats, Robberies, Quarrels, Duels, and Treacherous wicked
Actions, make up too great a part of this Months Business.

September.
FIne pleasant Weather, and affairs generally tending to an hopeful Posture;
yet some Murmurings are heard. London, Remember Sixty Six, and the Cursed
Instruments of that Desolation Good News from Italy. But tell us, O Apollo!
What Tidings is brought about this Time, in a Packet from France?

October.
It Is now Fall of the Leaf; and all the Fig Leaves wherewith the Jesuit, and
Popish Emissaries, covered and adorned their Villainous Plots, are blown away,
and left them to the view of all the World, in their primitive. What mean all
Almanack-writers, to leave Justice Godfreys Martyrdom out of their Calenders?
He deserves it, far better than some of those Popish Ragamuffins, wherewith
they blot their Pages.

November.
THough our Author leave out the Gun-power-Plot; yet I positively predict, it
shall be Remembered. The Weather grows Cold, as the Charity of the Times. The
Season admits of little Action: but there are the Devil, and all the Council on
foot; but Malium Consilium Consultori pessimum.

December.
SHarp Frost, the most part of Month, Lies in a abundance, spread abroad. The
Stars are busy in mingling their Rays; whence Men should be Active too. Notable
Actions will shortly manifest themselves. An Eminent person is snatched away;
and the Year seems to end but untowardly.

FINIS.
London, Printed for J. H, 1680.


