Epicedium, OR, A FUNERAL ELEGY ON THE DEATH Of our Late Gracious Sovereign.

By S. O.

Tum vero exarsit juveni dolor Ossibus ingens,
Nec Lachrymis caruere Genae.
Virg. LONDON, Printed for John Everingham at the Sign of the Star, at the West
End of St. Paul's Churchyard, 1695.

Epicedium, OR, A FUNERAL ELEGY On the DEATH of our late Gracious Sovereign.
ALBION's hard Fate with equal Tears I mourn,
Ye Muses! Will ye to your Seats return?
Or kindlier will ye choose her summets, where
Unhappy Subjects call for all your Care?
Full high they are, and all the Seasons white;
Though now, sad Emblems of her past delight,
Eternal black shall all their Brows Adorn.
Ah Muse! to those far distant shades return,
No more --
But help the afflicted Suppliant to Mourn.
See! what a Prospect yield the Raging Seas?
Pindus and Athos too must yield to these.
What? though fair Flocks in Pastures more than Fair,
Rove, and enrich the faithful Shepherds there.
Turn from the Sea and here are fairer here.
No Mildews here with their malicious Blight,
Yet ever interrupted our delight.
No droughts diverted yet the Amorous Swain,
But all was lavishly supplied with Rain:
Till blessed Maria taught his Muse to Moan;
For Heaven finds little good now she is gone.
Attend, my Flocks, attend me to yon Bower,
Our more auspicious Covert heretofore;
When I in Numbers, kindly as the Shade,
Of Pans vast love eternal Lessons played.
The listening Rills like you attentive stood,
Forgot their Course, as you forgot your Food:
But now uncharm'd, they may for ever flow,
For naught but Melancholy pleases now.
Ye Swains! by long experience sadly taught,
At what expense Enjoyments dearly bought;
Tell me your griefs, when haggard Wolves break in:
But ah! compare them not at all with mine.
Mine like rough Torrents ruffle every Field;
Reason and Sense it self is forced to yield.
True Grief like Love, its source, the Bitt disdains;
Ruggid as Whirlwinds roling over the Plains.
Such too is mine. Ye wandering Goats revere,
And own my Passion, while the truth ye hear!
See if the Haughty Neatherds don't lament,
And own her Glories, now they find the want.
So the blind Wretch often by experience knows,
The Sun has Virtues which the Blind may lose.
Often with too God-like Candor them distressed,
She from her singular compassion blessed.
No Foe deserving, she would none allow,
And thence forgave, till't to presumption grew.
Less goodness Savages of old could tame,
The enraged assuage, and the provoked reclaim.
But, that my Love appear not to impose;
Attend, ye Groves, and she will command applause.
First then, for well the Gods the first require,
Let Emulous Souls her Piety admire:
Her Piety the Phosphor of our Day,
Which drove the gathering Foggs of Vice away.
No luscious Equivoqu'e e're gained her Ear,
Nor ought that would the least corruption bear.
Such pardon wanted, who in former Courts
Were false Wits Apes and mercenary Sports.
Ye Reverend Souls! who willingly did wait
To hear, and not to teach, Truths truly great,
Say if ye did not often her Palace choose,
And hardly erring offer up your Vows.
For in strict reason, 'twould a question bear,
Which most was Gods, or most the House of Prayer.
Fixed as the Morning, Evening and the Night,
By choice, not force or custom rendered sweet,
Fixed were her Prayers, and fixed her best delight.
What her Petition was, what e're her Prayer,
Kind Heaven alike officious seemed to hear.
Ah happy Swains! ye then the Blessings found,
Your Herds with Young, your Fields with plenty Crowned:
But with the Object all your Joys must cease,
Ah wretched Swains! deplore your sad distress.
Her prudence next: But can a Verse comprize:
The Strength and Admiration of the Wise?
Can things immense to humble Bonds submit?
Or finite Verse confine the Infinite?
View Her in every state as Queen or Wife,
Ye Powers! how wonderful was all her Life?
Those Fertile Medows were not half so fair,
And it surpast the Crystal Currents near.
Those Deeps bore some resemblance with her Mind,
But that it braved the efforts of every Wind.
No Gusts could ruffle, or efface her Charms,
Religion safe, and Pan within her Arms.
But ah! no more, the Hero now no more
Must with the Powers and Her divide His power.
Though then the Swains safe in their Grottos sat,
While Pan secured and she endeared their Fate:
While Pan for Forrigne Good forgot his Ease,
She teaching us the sacred Rights of Peace:
Tho with such Wisdom he could safely trust
His Crown, the sacred Wages of the Just:
Yet now Himself the pondrous Load must bear;
Lost as he has (O fatal News to hear)
The Partner of his Wisdom and his Care.
Go on my Muse: Next tell the fairer Train,
What Conquests Virtue over the World could gain.
By bravely grasping after things Divine,
Tell how she made even Crowns and Scepters shine.
Terrene Ambition never one Thought misled;
Or idle Hopes by idler Fancies bred.
If she was great, if she was Atlas high,
'Twas her own Merit and our Necessity,
That first obtained all-pitying Heavens Decree.
Grandeur she sought not, nor desired a Crown:
Those Mercies were, and bounteous Heaven's alone.
It knew our Wants, and daign'd its Jew'l to spare:
But ah! how transient our Enjoyments were?
Just when our Harvest looked maturely White,
Black Mildews blasted all our coy Delight.
Ah fatal Loss! which Time can never repair!
Ye Streams a while with human weakness bear!
I Will after so increase your ebbing Tide,
Your Sire the Sea shall own himself supplied.
Ah generous Thames! tho Milions cannot decrease
Thy Stores, nor Duty make thy Glories less.
Yet not thy bounty may with Hers compare,
Thy Millions more than trebled lived by her.
The Gods, the mighty Gods, that we adore,
Outpast Her Bounty only by their Power.
High as their Heavens, She did alike dispense
To humblest things her sacred Influence.
Never shone the Sun with like diffusive Rays,
Never to more generous labor did he press,
Or Nature with more geneal Beams caress.
The Poor were most her Friends, and most her care,
And Widows more than Husbands lost in Her.
No Orphan ever begged her smiles in vain:
Scarce she could sooner of her Heaven obtain.
Now mournful Thames on to thy duty go,
And tell the Sea the cause of all our Woe;
Or melting Rocks will force thy overflow.
For say, my Muse can thou that Task design,
Where Angels in our Admiration join?
For round their sacred Palaces above,
They found not kinder or sincerer Love.
One were their Souls, one e'ne in sympathy;
For never were they known to disagree.
One their Enjoyments, their Afflictions one,
One their Diversions, or in this alone
Their faithful passions somewhat different had:
Where his loved safety and her Sex forbad.
In all the rest, Heaven framed them so entire,
Like one they hate, they pity and admire.
Heat could not more Essential be to Fire.
O Salem's Sons! I here to you appeal,
The best believed, you best the Truth can tell.
Near the dejected Prince, as sad, ye stood
Divideing, yet not lessening his Load,
When the feared News from her Apartment fled,
The Queen, alas, the Queen, the Queen is Dead.
No second Summons blamed his tardy Soul,
'Twas straight on Wing to obey its Partner's call.
Scarce She, who first the nice discovery made,
Of our last welfare careful, could persuade
Its stay --
And first was discontentedly obeyed.
No more my Muse to things beyond thy Power,
With treacherous Insolence pretend no more.
First, tell the Sands that round the Ocean lie,
Or name the Fountains that compose the Sea.
Then I Will allow thee fit, and thee alone,
To sing what Maro had with trembling Sung.
To tell her Virtues, and the Nations loss:
Those best compared with that, and that with those.
FINIS.

