THE OBSERVATOR REPROVED, More especially in Relation to the Controversy
between that Eminently Pious, Charitable, and Worthy Divine Mr. SMITHYE, Curate
of Cripplegate, and himself.
THE Credit and Reputation of Mankind is of so Natural and high a concernment
to every one, that those Persons whose Business and Livelihood it is, per fa^
aut Nefas in their Public Pamphlets, to make Spoil or Inroad thereupon, ought
of all others to be most severely Punished, it being no less a Crime then
Privateering upon their Goods and Estates; In that, by this means, the Stock of
Credit, which perhaps an Honest Man has been all his Age a Toyling for, is in
an hour or two's Reading Plundered from him by a Free-booter. But especially
amongst all others, the Clergy ought to be kept Sacred in their Reputations,
for that, as they are at best but Men, and so of the same Spirit with others,
and no less Subject to Humane Frailties and Passions, but confined within the
Limits and Regularity of their Function, they cannot redress Injuries of this
kind, in respect of Decency, which others perhaps may take Liberty to do. But
withal, whoever sixes an Ill Report upon them, does in effect as much as in him
lies, Frustate the Effects of their Ministry: No Man being ready to embrace his
Doctrine, whose Life and Conversation he conceives Opposite thereunto: It being
expected, and not without good Reason, that their Opinions should be Defined by
their Manners: And therefore Men ought to be very Wary how they asperse them:
Their Failings being rather to be Winked at than Divulged to the Popularity,
who make at best, but a bad Interpretation of the least thereof: However, if
they fall Inadvertently thereinto, a Private Intimation thereof ought always to
forerun a Public Consure; that they may be heard before they are Condemned,
and that even by those that have a Right to take Notice thereof, least they
Incurr the Censure of Seneca.

Qui Statuit aliquid, (Part in auditae altera)
Equum licet Statuerit, haud equus est.
But how this falls within Mr. Observators Sphere, (for who has called him to
be a Judge) I am yet to Learn, unless as in all other things, he delights to
have an Oar in those Boats where he has no propriety. That this he has done,
and particularly in the case of Mr. Smithies, notwithstanding all his Shuffling
and Cutting upon the Point, is Notorious to all Men that have heard the
controversy, the very Words of his Sermon being all along pointed at, and
though Mr. Observator Ill-favouredly enough lays by the Cudgells, and
Equivocates to put off the Combat, yet his Passion too often out-runs his
Judgment, and instead of excusing himself, and finding fault with him only as a
Schismatic, he charges him downright as a Conspirator, Obser. Numb. 135.
where he says in Answer to Trimmer about the Dispute aforesaid. No, no, it is
the main cause it self, and the very Diana of the Conspiracy that is now at
Stake, The Replyer is only an Instrument of the Faction, the Club blows the
Bagpipes, and he Tweedles. And though in the next Words, he says, It is as
false as Hell that he Libelled his Sermon, yet Read onward and you will find him
at it, where he continues, That Pulpit Ambiguities, Generalities, and
Equivocations (from a Man of a doubted and suspected Loyalty) when they are
used without Salvo's or Explications to bring them off, are still sure to be
taken by the Popular handle, and as they are intended for the Service of the
Schism. That this is meant of Mr. Smithye, Explain the Text by the Context, in
his own Exposition of these Ambiguities, etc. Obser. Numb. 132. When they talk
of bringing over Dissenters to the Church, it is Compounding the Church with the
Schism, one thing to the Loyal and another to the Fastious part of the
Auditory, The Ministers and Congregation in this Case Preach and Hear in
Cipher, Burdens stand for Persecution, etc. which is the very thing he Carps
at in the Sermon; This being then a Truth that he has Calumniated Mr. Smithye,
I would a little descend into the Case, and Examine Mr. Observators way of
Answering; For which I humbly beg Mr. Smithies Pardon, who has so well
defended and vindicated himself from his Virulent Reflections that there is
little need of my imperfect endeavors to justify the same: Yet as it is not
singly his case, but that of all Men whom this pretended State Squinter has a
Mind to Calumniate, I hope I may have Liberty to descant thereupon. Wherein I
must confess as he has posted himself, he stands almost Shot-free, having so
In^^^ woven his Topics into the Juncture of the Times, and our Unhappy
Differences, that a man cannot Level Truth it self against him, but it returns
with hazard.

Those that are his Converts and Admirers, being most of them of his Opinion,
that it is dangerous Meddling with him. And he who undertakes to separate his
Designs from his Positions, does no less then hazard the State he Audaciously
pretends to be the only Argos of. Than which, nothing can be more false, it
being obvious in all his Writings, that he is not that Friend to the Government
which he would have the World believe, in that, wherever he Speaks one Word
for the Church of England, it is always Balanced, tho not in direct Terms, by
a side Wind, for the opposite Church beyond the Alps; The drift and intention
of his Pamphlets either Siding with them, as in due time and upon due
provocation may be made Manifest, or in Running down, and Exposing the better
half of their Enemies under false and Scandalous Imputations, not admitting
them to be quiet in their very Pulpits: So that he would do well, however he
denominates others, to Clear himself of that material and Significant Question
lately put to him, of being a Popish Trimmer.

But this I doubt me he will evade, and tell his Disciples it is a Scismatical,
Phanatical, Diabolical, and Damnable Question, contrived at the Clubb in
Ave-Mary-Lane (a place I Will assure him I was never at) by some Preacher,
Tubster, Songster, Sheriff, Alderman, (...), Parson, Vicar, Scribe, Pharisee,
Republican, Clerk, Councellor, I^dan or Julian an Apostate, whereinto none are
admitted, but such as have betrayed their Master, or given some remarkable Tes^
of the Latitude of their Religion, with a long Et caetera of his own
Qualifications: Obser. Numb. 134. And judge you if this be not an excellent and
compendious way of discharging a Man's self from a downright Accusation: Yet if
the same will not satisfy you, you will put his Observatorship into plain
Railing, and make him as in Observe. Numb. 133. Run himself out of Breath in
Passion, and perhaps conclude upon you as there he does in a great Fret: A
French Peasant would be a Prince compared with a Lay Englishman under such a
set of Ecclesiastics. But if this be the Nature of the Beast, who can help it,
if the Ass Brays, or the Whelp Barks, it is their property, and let them have
their way; for otherwise, I Will assure you, if neither of these will do, a
Hunted Hare has not more Shifts than himself: The ^^^lie Biass of his Tongue
which he charges others with, will be ^ine to turn upon you, and some or other
false Imputation shall be Scandalously laid at your Door, as in the Case before
us, where he accuses our Divine as an Interloper into other Men's Parishes,
drawing together a Select Number of Young People (Servants commonly) of both
Sexes, out of several Parishes, and these to meet once a Week in some Private
House to hear the Canonical Clergy, Pray, Read, Expound, and Catechize, at the
Rate of 6 d. 12 d. or 18 d. a Quarter, more or less; and these are called such
an ones People, which was only a kind of Smiting the Lords Children, to Wilmore
them away by the first passage to Heaven. Observe. Numb. 133.

Excellent Intelligence, and pity it is but the Informer should have his
Reward, but let him first Swear to it, or I Am afraid the Lame-Dogg will scarce
get over the Style. In good Truth Mr. Observator you are Gravelled, for I
perceive on Saturday last, you wave the Point, and go to business of more
Importance, where you tell us only of the Spite, Diligence and Industry of the
Faction, their Marks and Designs, their Practices of old, the Fraud of
Equivocal Expressions in Religion and State: as in your Title Page, which is as
old as your Pamphlets, and as Threadbare as Mr. Smithies Cassock, but not one
word of him, I perceive you would be glad to be rid of him, but Methinks after
so fair a fall, you should not be again so soon upon a Challenge, as in your
Second Paragraph of the same Day (which I have nothing to do with) but as Mr.
Bays has it of your Brother Draw-can-Sir in the Rehearsal.

You Husse, you Strut, Look bigg and Stare,
And all this you can do, because you dare.
But I Will assure you according to the Opinion of most Men, it would better have
beseemed you to have let the Divine alone, unless it were as Mr. Bays again
has it, Rehearsal pa. 3. That there were certain ties upon you, that you could
not be disengaged from; and you wrote for the sake of some Ingenious Persons,
and choice Female Spirits, that have a Value for you, otherwise you would see
them all Hanged before you would ever more set I'en to Paper. If I may advise
you, do so no more, let the Pulpits and Honest Clergy Men alone to their (...),
for as it is further said in the same Author, ( page 15.) I ver^ly (...) you
have Writ a whole Cart-load of things every whit as good as this, and the
Issolent Rascals (the Whiggs) turn them back on your hands. But you may do as
you please, for this is not your last fetch, as I perceive in that of yours,
Numb. 135. where you put it into Trimmers Month (whether ever it was in the
Intentions of others I cannot tell) That they are absolutely resolved to
Petition against you. A dangerous Crime indeed, and no less in your own sense,
then what Imports the overthrow of the Government, or worse, as you are pleased
to explain it; For you say, they must set forth, That whereas they find they
can do no good on it by violent Courses, they shall now content themselves to
try what may be done by the very same People, and to the very same Purposes, in
a Sober Moderate way, and pray that they may have Liberty every Man in his
Place and Casting, to proceed in a Peaceable manner, without either Pistol or
Blunderbus, to the Poisoning of the Kings Liege People (a new way to Poison by
Pistol or Blunderbus, found out by the Observator) with True Protestant
Principles and Doctrines and so bring his Majesty the nearest way to his
Journeys end, without Contradiction or Control. Yes, Questionless, and the
first step to it in Petitioning against the Observator, for a Common Scandaler
of the Church and Churchmen. But Pray Sir, do you think that this pretext will
pass for Current Coin by way of Answer to the Debt you owe to Truth and Mr
Smithies. I imagine it as far from the point in hand, as it is from the Hearts
of such you Accuse with it, or indeed, as your Accusation of Mr. Smithye for
his Poverty and Apparel, which is our next Head.

An Impudent Ill-bred Fellow, to disturb you in your Vocation, that walks about
with Knots in his Girdle and a Torn Cassock, Begging for the Poor Curate of
Cripplegate, (for such indeed are his unaccounted for Collections, as you are
falsely pleased to Term them) and shall he dare to confront the Rich Observator?
By no means, it is not to be Suffered: But Pray Sir, I hope you will give him
leave to tell you, as I think be has done, That were it not for God and your
Good Friends, you might have been as Poor as he, which you ought to be Thankful
for: Thankful for, alas not you, say such another Word, and for Six
Observators together, you shall hear of nothing but Faction, Sedition, Heresy,
Fire, Fire, a Powder Plot, or worse against the State, (for by the way, every
thing that aims at Roger, carries as much in the Belly of it) To Thanks he was
never bred, Gratitude is none of his Accomplishments. The Cambridge Offerings
and last New Years Gathering, were paid in Tempore quo non ^xta^^^ ^moria
hominis; Besides the private Rewards I dare not say from St. O -- s. It' Truth
he had the first, but what then? Has he had the Vallue of his Merits? In my
Conscience I think not, for why? He Rides not yet, (mistake not my meaning) in
his Coach and Six, as in days of Yore, but must Trudge on Ten-Toes or Hackney
it to Sams Coffee-House, to meet his News Factors, Informers, and Comerades:
And is not this a pity? Let People talk what they will of Searing one another
Burdens, or Preach such Sedition if they please, it shall be Schism and
Phanatischisme, or what else Mr. Observator thinks fit, unless they will be
pleased to hear his'n. Good Man, has he deserved so much, and attained so
little? Why, what is 1000 or 1500 l. with 8 or 10 Yellow Boys Weekly for the
Copies of his Pamphlets? just as good as nothing, for I remember in one of his
Observators, which I shall not be at the charge of Quoting, he is making up his
Accounts there, that at the rate of Ten Pound a Week (the Allowance of Oats
and Bedloe in former times) a Vastly greater Sum was Due to him for his
Writings and Discoveries: And Methinks I have seen a Picture that much
Resembles a Friend of the Observators hanging (tho not in the right place) on
many a Stall in Town, with a shrewd kind of Complaining Motto over the Head of
it: I suppose for want of these Arrears, The Words are VOS NON VOBIS, to
English which, I must tell the Reader an Old Story.

In the time of Augustus Caesar, there was a certain Poet, tho then unknown;
for the since Famed Virgil, that upon occasion of a Fair Morning, wherein
Caesar was to go a Hunting, after a Stormy Night, made two Verses, wherein he
divided the Empire of the Universe between Jove and Augustus, and wrote the
same upon the Palace Gate, which the Emperor was to pass, who espying the
same, and being mightily pleased therewith, ordered an Imperial Reward to the
Poet, but Virgil (being somewhat Modester than Nobbs) would not own himself the
Author, so that a Month being elapsed, and none coming in for the Reward, a
certain Rhimer of the Town Challenged the same, whereupon the Gratuity was paid
him, which afterward coming to the Ears of Virgil, he seemed Vexed that
another should Run away with his Honor and Reward, and makes use of our
Observators Motto, Sic Vos, Non Vobis, which he wrote four times over on the
Pallace-Gate aforesaid, which no Body understanding, (as most likewise mistake
the present Application of it) Caesar ordered the Poet who had the Gratuity
paid him, to make Sense thereof, which he Fruitlesly endeavoring, acknowledged
his Weakness, alleging the same was Impossible. Whereupon Virgil in the same
Secrecy as he wrote the former, finished the same in the following Words,
whereby he got his Reward, and discovered the Impostor,

Sic Vos, non Vobis, Nidificatis Aves.
Sic vos non vobis, Mellificatis Apes.
Sic vos non vobis, Veller a fertis Oves.
Sic vos non vobis, fertis Aratra Boves.
Which is no more in English then this, it is I that do the work, and others
have the Reward, or in Mr. Observators meaning, I have wrought at the Plow of
the Government, and others have had the Harvest of my pains; I am the same
Beast I was, your Laborious Observator and Humble Servant. Alas poor Man, and
who is this Impostor that has wronged thee? Thou have Earned, and who has got
the Reward? Thou art not only frustrated of the Enjoyment of thy Beauteous
Rachel, but scarce a Blear-eyed Leah left in her stead. Is this the Reward of
thy Seven, and Thrice Seven Years Service? What a pity it is? Complain to your
Superiors, or carry your Picture with that Labell in the Mouth of it, Vos non
Vobis; which is the same thing, and acquaint them into what place you should be
Admitted, and who is there, in your stead, get a Blank, and write your own
Demands, and who knows but your Arrears may be paid you, when God and Somebody
pleases; In the mean while, Write on, Rail abundantly, and Flatter extremely,
fling Dirt on all your Opposers, and be sure you bespatter the English Clergy,
to gain the better Reputation with the Foreign; Whether sometime or other you
may have occasion to Travel (as not long since) you will fare the better for it,
though perhaps you have no such aim, they Love such an Advocate with all their
Hearts; You strengthen their Interest, in Weakening their Enemies, and whilst
you set Whigg and Tory at variance, you play the Trimmer for them. But pray
Nobbs have a care, and let us step one Foot more onwards to your next way of
Answering, and that is when you come to be Home Hunted, like a Cunning Fox, you
Piss on your Tail, and fling it in the Eyes of your Pursuers; or in Plainer
English, to confound a Man's Principles of Loyalty to his present Majesty, whom
God Long preserve in Length of days, and all manner of Increase: You Transverse
1684 to 1648. and thereby tell him of what was done perhaps before he was Born,
or at least of Plots and Conspiracies since, wherein he had not least concern,
unless to Abominate the Contrivers and Contrivance, as all good Men ought to
do, Licking up all the Excrements that an Ill Tongue or as bad an Age and
Juncture of Times can furnish you with, which undigested, is Squirted from your
Quill to Sully the Clearest Reputation. But enough of such Dirt, I Will Wash my
Hands and be clear of you, Wishing you only when you next meddle with Mr.
Smithye, or through his Sides, with the whole Clergy (for by the same Authority
you wrong him, there is no Pulpit but you may Calumniate, or Honest Man but you
may Libell) to tell the World who it is that Impowers you, and then I doubt not
but we may see an Original Commission which Doctor Oats could never produce.

By Philo Pater.
Dated at London, Sept. the 22d. 1684.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Published by Langley Curtis, 1684.


