AN ODE, Occasioned by the DEATH OF Her Sacred Majesty.

By a Young LADY.

Licensed,

January 9th, 1694/5. D. Poplar.



LONDON: Printed for Richard Cumberland, at the Angel in S. Paul 's
Churchyard. MDCXCV.

An ODE, etc.
I.
PEnsive I stood on raised commodious Sands,
Where the pleased Eye blue Neptune best Commands.
The Question asked, I to my self resolved,
And in wild Fancy, mighty Acts revolved:
'Twas through this Path (said I) first Julius Sailed,
Whose Glory British Conquests swelled.
'Twas there -- that way the Spaniard was undone,
And there the Great Dutch Fight was won.
There 'twas our more Victorious Caesar Rode,
Circl'd in Honors, like a God;
When last the Royal Warrier through the briny Flood
Battle pursued and Fate,
In search of Conquests of a fresher Date;
Quitting fresh Streams, to break a threatening Cloud.
To show that Victory only with himself must last.
II.
The Conqueror in the Present Tense, as Conqueror in the Past,
Left a cool Shade (said I) for the hot Martial Field,
Where fiery Mouths demand, and the proud Vanquished
In Shrieks and dying Groans;
While Victory through the shril-voic'd Trumpet sounds. yield
Bounding on hoarser Drums;
Those Strains so grateful to a Soldier's Ear,
The Royal Victor Sighed to hear,
Until the Gale grew strong,
And pushed the loytring Vessel on.
The din of Generous War
Preferred by him
To the soft Music of a shaken String,
And all the Effeminate little tender things
Beneath a Mind so Great, fitting the Luxury of soster Kings.
III.
Most blessed of Isles (said I) what should thou fear,
Whom the best Sword protects, and sweetest Smiles do
Maria I would have said; but offering on,
The smooth word stumbl'd on my fault'ring Tongue cheer?
The ominous Sign I strait began to fear,
And Sighed, kind Heavens where may we be Secure!
If that be most Unsafe, we hold most Dear?
Then 'twas beneath a Common Ill she lay,
And those bright Eyes Eclipsed that made our day.
At the dread News, fixed and amazed we stood,
Faint Tremblings seized our Limbs, cold Horror chilled our Blood.
Now Hoped, then Prayed, yet hardly durst:
For Ah! so fain we'd not have thought the worst.
Thus the sad hour drew on -- but Oh! the rest
Were better told by those that love the least.
Those might speak fine that my Affection want;
I, could not here be Eloquent.
My Muse, (said I) now you are a trifling thing,
Is this a time -- Oh! it is no time to Sing.
I held even Verse it self Profane,
But found no words to suit the sacred Theme:
No word so soft as is Maria's Name.
Learning I thought a handsome formal thing,
But he worst Mourner still that best could Sing:
An untaught Groan, (said I) best Language is,
For such a Tragic Scene as this.
A Heart-dividing Sigh, a Natural Tear;
And Love, not Arts the better Poet here.
Assist me LOVE, I Will own no Muse but thee,
Though Love never writ neat Elegy.
Those that loved not, may be exactly Wise,
But when I write, let only Lovers Criticize.
Those that are wounded, cannot strive for Bays,
Own my Griefs just and great, be that my highest Praise.
IV.
But why -- (thus to my self I Groaned) but still
Why Pant l thus to vent an Ill,
Whose dire Conception was enough to Kill?
Strangle the unhappy Offspring in the Birth,
That must come forth with Death;
Oh direful Fate!
Too big to smother, cruel to Relate!
I cannot -- Oh, I cannot bear, ( l cried)
And sunk a while beneath the Load, and Died.
V.
When lo, methought anon
A Nymph appeared as lovely as Undone;
Fixed on the utmost Shore.
Her Breasts she beat, her untrust Garments tore,
Which by rude whiftling Winds aloft were bore:
Aloud she cried, in vain --
-- In vain it is for thee
Frail Earth, thus to contend with Destiny,
That lays the Monarch level with the Swain.
Ah where --
Where now do all those luckless sweets remain,
Once -- once thou loveliest Charmer of the Plain?
Now to what blessed Retreat shall I retire,
To gaze on those bright Rays I once did so admire?
I come, she cried, waving aloft her Hand;
One Foot the Water kissed as on she went
T embrace the flowing Element;
The other trembling on the latest Sand.
Madness (said I)
(Methought, and snatched her from her Destiny)
Pursue not so your helpless Mariner;
But she, with a disdainful Air,
And a Majestic Frown,
Half Anger, half Despair,
Replied, Bold ignorant wretch, no Mariner I mourn.
No, -- these sad Arms of mine have lost
What Earth no more can boast.
Ah! where -- where now are all those skipping Joys,
The Vigor of those lively Eyes;
Those radiant Beams that seemed to be
At such defiance with Mortality?
But now -- now can no more control
The dusky Chagrin of Britannia's Soul.
Where Is now become
That Mind, that was the Royal Seat
Of all that is Generous, Gay, or Sweet?
Enough, (said I) Undone!
This was the British Genius then I found,
And saw her Turret on the Ground.
But she big with the Grief, went on;
When ever a Virtue or a Frait,
(Continued she) would public be in State.
'Twas in that Face they met;
'Twas in that form Divine;
MARIA, the Queen of every Grace,
All that were Great, Good, Soft or Fine,
That Stately and Endearing was.
My awful Pleasures, pleasing Fears,
And now the worthiest Subject of my Tears.
VI.
Cruel Disease, insolent common Thing,
Could nothing satiate but a QUEEN?
The Queen of Beauty too and Love!
Oh! these are things methinks should Sacred prove!
Was It not sufficient to deface and tear?
Could not thy Impiety stop here?
Or, wast thou not enough Profane,
Til thou had quite destroyed the goodly Frame?
One would have thought only with Vulgar Dust,
Thou might have raged and done thy worst.
But here --
Had thou no awful, no restraining fear?
Could not Languages of that charming Tongue persuade,
That never Commanded, but was still Obeyed?
Beauty, Wit and Majesty,
Malicious thing, thou stol'st from me;
Things of small account with thee;
Therefore thou more wicked still,
That do it only to do ill.
To that degree thou wast Profane,
Thou would ee'ne her Mind have slain;
But that in a just Triumph sat,
Above the reach of thee and Fate,
And shall eternally remain.
VII.
Rich Philosophic Soul! thou wast so good,
As Greatness never yet understod.
Sweet was her Form, Majestic was her Mien,
Yet Just and Free;
Sh' had all befitting her Degree,
Only a Mind -- too brave to be a QUEEN.
Labor that meaner Spirits shun,
She sought, that knew the Labor of a Crown.
Our Nursing-Mother fed, not eat her Land,
The Ease she was, not burden of the State,
And still as if her own sh' had vowed to hate,
Employment chose before Command:
Not like those Princes that profess
A Life of Royal Idleness.
Leisure, rich Knowledge on her Mind bestowed,
And the World reaped what there she sowed.
Goodness she ever held her noblest Art,
And Lemuel's Lesson had so well by Heart,
She was what Lemuel's Mother wished her Son;
But no such Match was found for Solomon.
Could he with such a Queen have met,
(By his own Rule) he had been more renowned for Wisdom yet.
VIII.
Worthy she was alone,
To couch the Victor's Laurel on the Monarch's Crown:
To entertain
Her thrice Heroic and that Princely Train,
Whom often the Fate and business of the World convenes;
But many Foreign Solomon's might here
One Queen admire,
And bless their happier Eyes for what they would viewed,
More charming lovely, more surprising good!
She that now Chants eternal Lays,
Above out Wonder and our Praise.
Pardon blessed Soul continued she,
If it should here be thought
I cast neglect on that you so did Prize,
Whom always worthy Deeds such griefs now signalize.
And were he yet less dear to me,
Those glorious wonders could not be forgot,
Such as from far the Queen of Sheba brought.
Though now indeed much more familiar grown
In Britains than in Judah's Solomon,
Exposed so often, the wonder's almost none.
IX.
It Is true, I stand possessed of Royal Mary's better part,
That has her mind, and had her heart;
That wears her Crown below, while she sits Crowned above
With endless Glory, endless Love.
And did those dear remains but stand
Above sinister Fate,
I could my passions yet command,
And be again Sedate;
With thoughts like these becalm my Breast,
And even the sullen grief digest.
But lo! when thus my better Genius lies
Beneath the Load and dies,
What can I do but Sympathize?
But must she perish whom he came to save,
Britannia find in her Nassaw a Grave?
Rise, Royal Mourner, rise,
Ah foolish Maid, said she,
That still doat'st on Mortality!
Is grief the deadly thing thou fearst alone,
That have so many ways to be undone?
So many ways to lose
Thy highest wish, thy best remaining joys?
So Brave and Mortal what I prize!
It Is that brings all the watery deluge from off my Eyes.
X.
It Is that -- were he immortal, or not worth my care,
All my Anxities were finished here.
But as he is great, exposed, and good,
Shall I stand here defended by that Sacred Blood,
And for the Royal Stream drop a few beggarly Tears,
Or sigh my poorer fears?
No I Would his hazards, and his glory share:
Tell him, I Will for his sake no ill decline
That all his dangers must be mine.
(At that methought I raised my head and bowed.)
Britannia was of old renowned in War,
Yet at Bellona's Altar bows,
Pays old, and vainly makes new Vows
To be, alas, the Warlike Maid no more.
Ah happier Belgian shore!
A Cipher I, fixed on my native Sands
Idly complain and strike my useless hands.
XI.
But that no more I Will do,
No, I Will my stubborn martial man pursue.
And tell each sculking Nereid,
In thickened foam securely hid,
Whom it is so often frequents that Road;
Style him some stranger River God,
Lest those bold Rays too much surprise
Their female Deities;
Strangers to such fierce Gallantries,
That take the solid world, and stole
Willing Britannia's Soul.
Nymphs of the watery plain draw near,
He never fights with such as you,
Nor ever cost a Maid a tear;
But such as like Britannia hold him dear.
I charge you Nymphs, when he shall please,
On naked Shoulders rock him over these Seas,
Secure with Pomp and Ease;
Ah then Beware,
For then my single All Is your care.
Bear him from each proud wave, each ruining shelf,
Through Paths by none more traced than by my self;
Neptune's my Friend, nor need I tell you so,
Often through his liquid Plains I go,
And all the traces of the Ocean know.
XII.
From Griefs, from Sickness, and from Seas,
What boots it to be safe from these?
Seldom such Natural things,
Become the Tragedy of Kings.
And shall I still my Royal Lord expose
To Battle and degenerous Foes?
A thousand Treacheries to one Life to lose!
And may -- (ah cruel thought) without me die.
No though my safer arms he fly,
And seeks a foreign Clime,
I will even there his Buckler prove!
With him my latest Breath resign,
That shuns the tenderer Dictates of my love.
Tell him, sad Nymph (said she) and let him know,
Thou heardst Britannia speak it too;
For him my different Fortunes numerous lives
Successively I Will sacrifice:
Not darted flame I Would fear, nor pondrous flying Globe,
The weighty ill should in these bowels throb:
I dare to die -- and more could do;
I Have some small skill in Battle too,
But oh! he will do as he has ever done,
And will be doing all alone.
XIII.
Alone with his bold Arm stretched out,
Like Mars himself the Hero stood,
Knee deep in Blood,
While Battle sat in doubt,
That fatal day
When gallant Scomberg breathless lay,
And Mars looked wondering on the blushing flood.
His single Arm first stem'd the eager Tide,
Then turned the Victory on our feebler side.
Three times beware brave Prince I cried,
And sighed a thousand cautions more,
Until the Tragic Scene was over.
Methinks I see him yet careless and brave,
Pursuing Victory or a glorious Grave;
As through ranked Foes undauntedly he flung,
A purple Torrent from his Shoulder sprung;
The King, the King! undone we cried.
(I die to tell) and all our Courage died, --
But what for him's yet to be feared
That has Omnipotence for his Guard?
Yet beg him for my sake beware,
That was Maria's dying care
Heaven's he is, as he is mine
Further doubting were a Crime.
Here the Genius of the Isle
Clapped her fallen Turret on,
No more in tears, no more undone,
Odly vanished in a smile
And left me to my griefs alone.
FINIS.

