Nevves from foreign parts for the last two weeks past; very fitting for
this State to take notice of in this time of division and distraction.

Especially the great Council of the Kingdom, the PARLIAMENT.

In which you shall find matter enough to make use of, according to the old
Proverb, When your neighbors house is on fire, look to your own.

The particulars are,
1. The great Victory of the Swedes confirmed in upper Germany. 2. The great
good success of the Weymarish and Hessish Army in and about Collen. 3. The
fair complying of the Bishop of Ments concerning the restoring of the
Palatinate. 4. The preparation and proceeding of the French King for Catalonia.
5. The great preparation to entertain the Queen of England, and the Princess
Mary in Holland. With other remarkable things.
Printed at London for Nath: Butter, March 5. 1641.

Brunswick the 18. 18. of Ian.
YEsterday the Ambassadors of Augustus Duke of Brunswick went from hence
again to Goslar to carry thither the ratification of the treaty; the Duke of
Luneburg is said to be of the same opinion, but the Citizens at Hildesheim we
hear are exceeding much discontented, which have sent hither their
Commissioners, and are to go likewise from hence to Goslar, mean while
Archduke Leopold William has sent his Chancellor Doctor K^ldsmith to Vienna to
fetch from thence in like manner the Imperial ratification: The Ambassadors
of the Electour of Collen have preferred a firm protestation against the
Imperial Ambassadors, whether now the Bishop of Collen and the Duke of
Bavaria will obtain any thing against the conclusion of the Electorall Coledge
time will show. In these parts preparations are now made to send a Brunswicke
garrison into the City of Wolfenbuttle. Archduke Leopold William will be at
Halberstat either to day or to morrow. The Swedish General Major Coningsmarcke
has been with a strong party in the Bishopric of Magdeburg, pillaged many
places, driven away a great number of cattle, and brought great store of
provision into Wolffsburg.

Hamborough 18. 28 of Ian.
From Hanover they write, that the treaty betwixt the Imperial, Brunswicke and
Luneburgish Ambassadors at Goslar is now come to an end, where they have
agreed, that next week the Imperial governor of Wolffenbuttle is to depart
from thence with his garrison, and the said City to be delivered up again to
Augustus Duke of Brunswick, on the other side the Duke of Luneburg is to
restore again the new Bishopric, as namely the City of Hildesheim, Peina,
Manerberg and Steyerwaldten, together with all that belongs unto it, and all
things shall be performed this week, and be put again into the same state
and condition, as they have beeene in the year 1627.

Duringen 20. 30. of Ian.
The Imperialists have sent away from their Army all the sick and dismounted
soldiers, and the other day broke up with the maine Army from Querfurt, and
Franckenhausen, and took their way toward Eisleben and Quedlenburg, and from
thence toward Ashersleben, Groningen and Halberstat to advance against the
Swedes, with a full resolution either to fight with them, or to make them
retire over the Kiver of Elve, which lie now about Garleben and Saltzwedel in
the old Marquisate of Brandenburg in a moorish and advantageous place, and it
is certain, that General Major Coningsmarck is with a strong party of
horsemen in the Bishopric of Magdeburg and pilladged many places: But the
Crabats and some troops of the Dutch horsemen were presently commanded against
him, and made him retire again as far as Wolffsburg, the prisoners which the
Crabats took say unanimously, that the Swedes are resolved to expect the
coming of the Imperial Army: Some Imperial troops continue the siege before
the strong Castle of Mansfeld, which they begin now to undermine.

Coblentz 20. 30. of Ian.
In the Castle of Hermerstein happened a great mischance, for fifty hundred
weights of gunpowder standing in an upper room of the steeple by the
negligence of some soldiers happened on fire, whereby the upper part of the
steeple was blown up into the air.

Switzerland 22. of Ian. the 1. of Feb.
In these parts they continue still to take up fresh forces for the King of
France, only those of Lucerne and Freyburg will not permit it in their
dominions: The inhabitants about the Fort of Hohenwiel are commanded by their
Magistrate to depart from their habitations, and leave the Country bare, so
that the Swedes in it may get no provision more for the Country near adjoining
unto it.

Calbe Ian. 23. Feb. 2.
The other day Archduke Leopold William arrived with the Imperial army in and
about Egelen, upon the Castle there the said Archduke took his head quarter.
This day he broke up again from thence, and took his way toward Wantzleben
and Magdeburg, who intends to march directly against the Swedes, which are
likewise resolved to stand and fight. This wet and windy weather hinders the
Imperial army very much in the bringing forward of their Artillery.

Another from Duringen, Ian 24. Feb. 3.
In these parts we are at this time freed from billetting, against our hope and
expectation, because the whole Imperial and Bavarian Army is gone downwards
toward the Old Marquisate of Brandenburg, directly against the Swedes, yet for
our information they sent us word, that as soon as they had done with the
Swedes, they would then take up their quarters in these parts, and demand such
sums of moneys, the like whereof have not been demanded.

Vienna, Ian. 26 Feb 5.
The Palatine treaty we hope will take a good end, because the Duke of Bavaria
continues in his former resolution, to restore both the upper and lower
Palatin^te, but whether the Spanish Ambassador will agree herein with the Duke
of Bavaria, many doubt, and are of opinion that they do but put it off one
upon another.

Aaken, Ian 24. Feb. 3.
We live here in great danger because of the Weymarish Army, our Magistrates
will suffer no Cit^zens nor any of their goods to go away from hence, only the
Clergy and Jesuits have sent their goods and Church ornaments away, and this
day yet is such flying hither of the inhabitants, that it pitties a man to see
it, for no man by reason of the unrulines of the soldiers, dares stay at home,
because they do not spare neither Spiritual nor Temporal persons, insomuch
that it is to be feared, that they will ruinate the whole Country: Our
Magistrates are taking up 500. soldiers for the defense of this City, but this
will help but little, because there is no order, and the terror is too great:
Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld with his forces lies yet at Lintz, Hermerstein and other
places thereabouts; in Bonne lie 1800. men for a garrison: Bebert the Weymarish
have likewise taken, and put two regiments into it, Berchem, Caster and
Grevenbroeck they have likewise taken and put into every one of them a
regiment, they keep themselves close together lest they should be surprised:
Colonel Oheim who is the chiefest in the Counsel of war, lies in Neys with
1500. men, and has caused already new fortifications to be measured out about
the said City: Sons is likewise taken, wherein they have found a great store of
provision: Duyren is come to a composition and remains neutrall.

Wesel Ian. 24. Feb. 3.
The Hessish forces have taken the Castle of Oyt in the Country of Kempen, and
from thence they marched toward the Castle of Hulkenra^t being guarded by 300.
Imperialists: Ners, Dick, Oldkerck, Wickerudt, Milen and Dungen they have
l^kewise taken, and Iucken they have pillaged: Three days ago Colonel Rosa
surprised at Newdeck 600. Hatsfeldish horsemen being sent abroad for spies,
which he totally ruinated.

Leipzicke Ian. 26. Feb. 5.
From Magdeburg they write, that the Imperial Army was arived at Tangermund,
to morrow the Sipbridge that is made here is to follow the army, the
Imperialists will try on both sides of the River of Elve to force the Swedes to
a battle, which have set themselves in a posture near Saltzwedel.

From the Hessish Camp before Kempen under the command of the Count of
Eberstein, Ian. 27. Febr. 6.
We have now approached to the very Moat of the City; and yesterday we have
battered down from the walls one of the steeples, that the better we might get
in betwixt the two Moats, and as soon as the breach is shot into the wall we
intend to give a general assault, which by all appearance will be this day.
During the siege there has been such bad weather, that the soldiers with
much ado could work in the trenches, whereby many grew sick: mean while the
horsemen do what they please up and down in the Country, and ransacke the
whole Country. The Castle of Oyt is not guarded by us, but by the Weymarians.
We have intercepted Letters written by the Electour of Collen for the most part
in characters, wherein he gives notice, that the Lorraine troops are at hand,
and that the Bavarian troops are expected within few days, as also that the
Spanish forces lie likewise ready to assist him: all he feared was, that the
States of Holland would likewise not sleep, insomuch that by all appearance
we shall hear yet of great blows in these parts.

Emmericke the 26. of Ian. the 5 of Feb.
On Saturday last all the Colors and Standards which are taken from Lamboyes
army, about a 140. in number passed in a ship by this City to be brought to
Rotterdam, and from thence into France to present them to the King, seven
Colors and Standards were sent to Cassel to present them to the Princess of
Hessen. The dead about Huckelmey have lain now above this forthnight since the
battle was fought unburied. Yesterday we received news that the Weymarish
have surprised 900. Spanish foot with fire locks, which had a design in hand
against one of the Weymarish quarters, and totally ruinated them; and we hear
also that some 1000. Hessish soldiers more are coming from East-Uriesland
toward Wesell to join with the Weymarish army; insomuch that by all
appearance the seat of war will be removed into the Bishopric of Collen,
and the next neighboring Countries, and it is generally believed, that the
Imperialists will not so soon get them again out of those parts: The
inhabitants of Gentry on the other side of the River of Rhyne begin now
likewise to fly toward Dusseldorp, where a Cow is sold for a Rixdaller, and a
Sheep for a quarter of a Rixdaller, because so many cattells are daily brought
thither.

From the River of Rhyne Ian. 27. Feb 6.
The Commissioners of the Bishopric of Collen, which were sent to the
Weymarian army, are not yet come back again. Yesterday an Express came from
Kempen to the Electour of Collen relating that the besiged held out yet, yet if
so be that within few days they receive no succor, they would be forced to
come to a composition. Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld his forces do as much mischief
as the Weymarish forces, and ruinate all where they come.

Bremen Ian. 27. Febr. 6.
The Swedish General Torstensohn has surprised by night Ashersleben and
Hadersleben, and has ruinated in them three Imperial Regiments.

Wesel 31. of Ian. 10. of Feb.
The Hessish forces before Kempen have shot a breach, but being more forces
have got into the City for the reinforcing of the garrison, wherefore the
Hessish have joined with the Weymarish: This day a foot post came hither from
the camp, who relates, that the Hessish forces have taken the City and batter
now the Castle which will not be able to hold out long, the Count of Cronsfeld
commands in it, who is commanded by the Electour of Collen upon pain of the
highest disgrace to maintain the place to the last drop of blood: The
Weymarish forces have pillaged Glabeck and Dulken, and in Glabeck they have
found above 1500. horses that had been sheltred there.

Collen the 2. 12. of Feb.
The overthrow of the remainder of Lamboyes army by Colonel Rosa consisting of
2000. men is most certain: Colonel Rosa with his 2000. Weymarish horsemen
lies now at Binsfeld not far from Duyren, which City he has caused twice to
be summoned, against which for want of Canons and Infantery he can use no
force, he has summoned all Villages and Towns as far as the River of Mosel
to come unto him and agree with him about the contribution.

The Commissioners of the Bishopric of Collen are yet at Neys expecting there
the Weymarish Generals; yesterday our Citizens fetched again out of a ship 72.
barrels of gunpowder which should have been carried to Dusseldorp, and brought
it into this City again, which causes men to think strangely of it.

Frankford the 4. 14. of Feb.
The letters from Lion bring news that the King of France was arived there,
and that he leads an army of 25000. men toward Catalonia, and the old army that
is there yet is above 15000. strong, so that they will bring an army together
in Catalonia of 40000. men. The Duke of Parma is excommunicated by the Pope:
And the Princes of Savoy have now absolutely declared themselves for the King
of Spain, who allows them yearly fifty thousand Crowns

Rome the 20. 30 of Jan.
The Pope causes in all his Dominions, strong Forces to be leavied; and those
Forces which are in the field already, he causes to march toward Lombardie,
to besiege the City of Parma.

At Marsellies lie ready 22 Galleyes, and 12 Ships, with foot-Forces, which are
to go for Catalonia with the first good wind; where the Spanish Garrison at
Perpignano, has intercepted and taken 100 French soldiers, and two pieces of
Ordnance, which they intended to carry from Leucata, toward Elna.

Lower Saxony the 27 of Jan. the 6 of Feb.
The Swedish General Major Coningsmarck having lately been with some Regiments
as far as Magdeburg, and received intelligence of the coming of the
Imperialists toward the Swedish Army, upon order and command which he received
from General Torstensohn, set himself with 2 Regiments, on the passage near
Ficesfeld, but in the Moorasse and Woods there, called Tremlin, above 300
Boors, with their wives and children, and their best goods; gathered
themselves; from whence they do great mischief to the soldiers with their
fallying out, because no body can come at them: they misused also fearfully a
Swedish Drummer that was sent unto them to know whether they would be foes or
friends, and cut off his ears, nose, and fingers, and bid him to return again
to the army. As Soon as General Torstensohn had received intelligence of the
coming of the Imperial Army, he drew all his Forces together about Wolffsburg,
and marched toward Salzwedel, being a Moorish and advantageous place, where he
put himself in a posture, planted his Artillery upon the Gallows hill, took his
Head-quarter in the Cloister, and thereupon gave order, That at Bleckede all
Ships and other necessaries for a Ship bridge, should be brought together:
Being now both Armies lie so nigh one to another, we shall shortly hear of some
blows.

Hamborough the 29 of Jan. the 8 of Febr.
Whereas lately a fiery sword stood in the air, over the Swedish Camp, which
turned the point toward the Marpuisate of Brandenburg; and General
Torstensohn heard of it, he caused himself (being he was then very lame of the
Gout) to be carried into the street, and looked upon it. It is reported, That
Denmark, and the Dukedom of Holstein, has undertaken to maintain for the King
of Denmark, an Army of 14000 men, and 15 men of War; and at the last meeting at
Kiel, they granted 6000 men to be levied; and have paid down presently 150000
Rixdollers: whereupon the Kings Commission for levying of them, was presently
given out. Norway also has promised to set out 12 men of War. to what end
those preparations are made, is not known.

From the Bishopric of Collen the 31 of Jan. the 10 of Febr.
Whereas they have treated together for diverse times, That upon the request of
our Elector, a Coadjutor of this Archbishopric and Electorate of Collen might
be chosen; whereunto the Pope himself exhorted the Chapter of the Bishopric;
as also the Emperor himself showed weighty reasons: wherefore this day was made
the election; and his Highness Maximilian Henry, Duke of upper and lower
Bavaria, was chosen Coadjutor, and future Successor of the Electorall Dignity,
and Archbishopric of Collen.

The French, Weymarish, and Hessish Forces proceed yet according to their old
fashion in this Bishopric, and ruinate the whole Country. At this instant we
hear, That the City and Castle of Kempen is likewise surrendered unto them.

Wolffenbutle the 31 of Jan, the 10 of Feb.
The Swedish Army lies yet in the old Marquisate of Brandenburg, betwixt the
Moorasses; and General Torstensohn, who is yet very sick of the Gout, has his
Head-quarter at Saltzwedel; his Forces lie about Sea-hausen, as far as
Denneberg and Osterburg: by reason of the many passages an Moorish grounds, the
Imperialists can hardly come at them. Piccolomini has his Head-quarter at
Tangermunde, and General Whal, with the Bavarian Army at Stendal.

Norimberg the 4. 14 of Febr.
What the 1. 11 of this Month was written of General Piccolominies death, and
that Archduke Leopold William was shrewdly wounded, does not continue, but
what they write from Elisleben, is most certain, namely, That both Armies are
marching one against the other, and intend to try a pitched Battle very
shortly, as men of great note do for certain write from those parts. The
Swedish Army is complete strong, 8000 Foot, and 10000 Horse; and with the said
Army are General Torstensohn, General Wittenberg (both somewhat ill) Axel,
Lilly, Wrangel, Coningsmark, and others: what now betwixt both Armies will
pass, we shall shortly hear.

Leipzigk the 29 of Jan. the 30 of Febr.
Last week I certified you that I marched along with the Imperial Army, as far
as Eglen; on Sunday thereupon following, the whole Army broke up again, and
advanced further toward the enemies of the Empire, whom I followed as far as
Tangermunde; and as much as I could understand of General Piccolominies
Secretary, and of the prisoners that were taken, the Swedes have kept the same
day general randevouz about Saltzwedal, where General Torstensohn passed by
all the Regiments, using these words; All ye Officers and Soldiers, I admonish
you by the oath, whereby first of all ye are sworn unto God Almighty; then, for
the pure Evangelicall Word; and lastly, for your Captain General, of glorious
Memory, Gustavus Adolphus sake, that ye will stand jointly by me, as honest and
faithful soldiers becomes and ought to do, being it can be no otherwise, but
that we must at last fight with our enemy: Whereupon all high and under
Officers, as well as common soldiers, cried out jointly with one voice, Viva;
and so the 24 of Jan. the Army broke up, and stood over against our Army in
Battalia: whereupon General Sergeant Major Sperreutter with 4000 Imperial
choice Horse men, was commanded against them; who, as we hear for certain, was
averthrown by the Swedes, and his men totally routed and defeated himself
slain, and brought dead into Magdeburg: what now further will pass betwixt
both Armies, we shall hear in time. It is reported, That 8 Bavarian Regiments
shall be sent to succor Hatzfeld; but many believe, that they will hardly be
able to spare so many. Francis Albrecht, Duke of Saxon Sawenburg, with his
Slesian Troops, is to join with Piccolominies Army; which Army, according to
the List which I have seen, is already effective 16000 strong, both Horse and
Foot, yet most Horsemen, and few Foot amongst them: but the Swedish Army
confists of 9000 Horse, and 12 Brigards of Foot; unto which are come yet 1200
Horsemen of General Major Stollhons his Army, as also 1500 men more, which
they have drawn out of the Garrisons in the Marquisate of Brandenburg, but
General Major Stollhans himself, because he has ruinated so much the Army,
which he has under his command in Slesia, lies in arrest at Stetia. It is for
certain reported, That Archduke Leopold William, and General Piccolomini, are
to go into the Low-Countreyes, and that upon the urging request of the States
and Peers of the Empire, General Hatzfeld being a native German, shall command
the Imperial Army, and that hereafter not any outlandish General more, shall
command the said Army: and General Gleen is to command Hatzfelds Army: and
instead of the Count Shlick, the Count of Gallas shall be President of the the
Council of War.

Eyesleben the 2. 12. of Feb.
The Swedes lie at Luthen, and Oshersleben, and the Imperialists at Eglen: the
other day the Swedes surprised 8 of their Regiments betwixt Halberstat, and
Ashersleben, and totally ruinated 4 Regiments of Horse, as namely, the
Savellish, Soyish, Gonzagish, and another Regiment, being above a 1000 strong,
which has caused great terror and fear in the Imperial Camp.

Vienna the 2. 12 of Feb.
The Treaty betwixt the Emperor and the Dukes of Brunswick and Luneburg, which
was concluded at Goslar, the Emperor has likewise ratified; wherewith
Archduke Leopold Williams Chancellor, Doctor Kaltsmith is returned by post
again to Goslar.

Aaken the 5. 15 of Febr.
We live here in a continual great fear and danger because of the French,
Weymarish, and Hessish Forces, which have taken the City and Castle of Kempen,
and from thence are marched toward Duyren: as soon as they have taken the said
place, they threaten to fall upon this City, insomuch that our chiefest
Townsmen fly from hence to Mastricht; in one day went from hence above 300
Wagons and Carts, laden with people and goods. At this instant we receive
avisoes, that the Weymarish and Hessish Forces, after that they had taken the
City and Castle of Kempen, passed by Collen, and took their way toward Bonne,
where the Elector and Bishop of Collens Court now is: what success they will
have before it, we shall shortly hear.

Emmerick the 5. 15 of Febr.
It reported that a Spanish Army of 10000 Horse and Foot shall be drawn
together about Gulick, to hinder the Weymarish and Hessish Forces in their
progress; wherefore all the Cavallery of the Prince of Orange have order, as
soon as they begin to stir, to draw likewise together. The Imperial Garrison
at Glabach is chased from thence by the Weymarish and Hessish Forces, and for
their safety returned Dusseldorp. The Weymarish Colonel Oheim, together with
the young Duke of Wirtenberg, has been at Dusseldorp, where they conferred for
a long time, with the Duke of Newburg. At Neys the Lutherans preached in the
Town Hall, and the Reformed in S. Marks House. Both the City and Castle of
Kempen have yielded unto the Weymarish and Hessish Forces upon discretion, and
the Weymarish Forces lie now about Frechen, Breul, and other places threabouts,
within 4 Dutch miles from Bonne; it is reported that they will besiege Bonne.

Wesel the 5. 15 of Feb.
After that the City of Kempen was surrendered unto Weymarish and Hessish, the
Castle yielded in like manner the tenth of this month new styles; the Garrison
that lay in it, was forced to take pay under them, and when the Hessens had
possession already of the City, there came 300. Spanish foot, with Firelocks;
which being, they knew nothing of the surrendering of the said City, thought to
break thorough, and to relieve the City, but the Hessens feigning as if they
were Imperiallists, suffered half of them to come into the City, and then
locked the Gate upon them, and knocked all down; mean while, the rest thinking
to save themselves by flight, were intercepted by other troops, served in the
same manner, and put all to the sword, insomuch, that not one of the 300.
Spanish Soldiers escaped. Some of the Hessish forces lie now before the Castle
of Lin.

Collen the 5. 15. of Febr.
In Glebeck the Weymarish and Hessish forces have got 1500. horses, and
therewith mounted all those, that had a mind to serve; insomuch, that they are
now about 20000. strong: The Clergy and Townsmen in the said City, were forced
to pay a great sum of money. Toward Mastricht is such fleeing, that many
times a 1000. Carts and Wagons come in a day into the said City.

Collen the 6. 16. of Febr.
After that the City of Kempen, as heretofore was mentioned had yielded upon
discretion the 7. of this month new style, the Castle did the like within 3.
days after, the Garrison that lay in it, being 3. or 400. strong, was forced
to take pay under the Weymarish and Hessish, it is not to be expressed, what
store of all manner of provision they have found in it, a great deal more than
they found in Neys: it is said, That a part of the Army lies now before the
Castle of Lyn, and another part of the Army before Hulckerath, which is
reasonable strong: after the taking of those places, it is believed, they will
fall upon Duyren, Aaken, and Bonne, especially those of Bonne are already very
much afraid of a siege.

From Lower Hessen the 6. 16. of Febr.
The Imperial and Bavarian Army has laid a Shipbridge over the River of Elve,
at Tangermunde, and the Swedes another, as we hear at Lawenburg, and their main
Army lies as far as Bleckee. And it is certain, that a bloody encounter has
passed betwixt the Imperial General Major Sperreutter, and the Swedish
General Major Coningsmark; in which, Coningsmark had the better, totally
ruinated 4 Imperial Regiments, and put 3 others to flight, and obtained 10
Standards; some lay that Sperreutter himself was slain, and brought dead to
Magdeburg: notwithstanding we hear that the Imperialists are still resolved to
fight a pitched Battle; yet many believed, that they will be loath to hazard
all upon one Battle, unless they be forced to do it.

From Amsterdam they write, That at C^llis are embarked 6000 French soldiers,
which shall be transported into Holland, and then go by Land to the Weymarish
Army, to join with the same. In Holland great preparations are made for the
Queens entertainment. With the last Letters from Vienna they write, That since
the overthrow of Lamboy, the Emperor comes somewhat nearer in the Palatitine
Treaty* the Electors of Mentz and Collen urge the restitution of the Palatinate
very much, and tell the Emperor plainly, that no peace is to be looked for in
the Empire, unless the Palate. restored.

FINIS.

