THE Observator's Catechism
Question, What Is your Name?

Answer, Observator.

Quest. Who gave you that Name?

Ans. My Countryman.

Quest. Who Is your Countryman?

Ans. An honest poor Fellow that I bubble -- Lie with his Wife, eat up his
Victuals, and drink up his drink; cram his head full of Stratagem and
Politics, and drain his Barn to supply my Exchequer: Instead of Tilling and
Mannuring his Land to propogate the Increase of the Earth, I send him to prog
for Intelligence, and propogate Scandal; which, together with his being
naturally of a busy turbulent Spirit, may in time qualify him for my
Business* if the Aspect of his Affairs, the mean while does not make him turn
Wise, before I turn Honest; of which there is most probability.

Quest. How do you Title your self to the World?

Ans. A Gentleman.

Quest. And how does the World Title you?

Ans. A Blockhead.

Quest. Are you in any Condition in the World?

Ans. Yes, in a Shitten one, if the Government lays hold of me again: Nec non,
and five false Latin Counselors will not bring me off, with the Additional help
of a trusty Whig Friend in H -- t's Office -- But a pox of the Jest, it has
balked the Sale of my Paper since, though I put the laudable Name of John
Tutchin at the End on it -- Witness it is being thrown out of Fifty Coffee-Houses
in Town.

Quest. What did it is Merit consist in before?

Ans. Impudence.

Quest. And what has Eclyps'd it since?

Answ. Dullness -- a Consequence as Plain and Natural as the four first Rules
of Arithmetic, that when one leaves me, the other seizes me -- for when I am
abridg'd in my Latitude of Scandal, which is my principal Talent, I grow dull
as naturally, as I grow drunk with my Country Man's October: Nor has that Power
to inspire me with any Eloquence, unless I may join a little Impudence to help
it out. Railing is my Genius, and Scurrility and Reproaches, the natural
Product of my Brain: -- I turned Poet too, but having nothing but Scandal to
qualify my Muse, Apollo had like to have broke my head with my own Standish.

Quest. Who employed you to write against the Playhouse?

Ans My self.

Quest. And who paid you for it?

Ans. George P -- e, when he scoured me over Lambeth-Marsh, with an Execution
at my Heels; leaving the dearest Friends I had upon Earth in a praemunire --
Meaning my worldly Movables; and rubbing to the Mint, in as pitiful a
Condition, as when I left my Lodging in Southwark, and repaired to honest Will.
Fuller near the Fleet, with all my Furnitude and Apparel in a sheet of
Brown-Paper.

Quest. Why did not you take Satisfaction for this affront?

Ans. Even Sawney's Reason -- because I durst not, having but too lately
suffered under the violent Hands of a Sea Here, whom I had drenched in an Ocean
of Scandal.

Quest. Have you any Courage?

Ans. Yes, but there is no Body believes it but my Countryman. Who believes any
thing, I say -- and yet I have said as much in praise of my own Valor, as ever
was said of that clambring Hero Prince Eugene's -- Nay, I had the Courage
the other day in my Observator, to give a certain Person of Note the Lie, for
saying, I was an approved Coward; where I proved the Gentleman's Words true,
though it had not been done before -- For if I Would had the Courage of an angry Cat,
I had told him so to his Face, and not in Print -- But let others draw their
Swo ds -- I Will stab with my Pen, and when Scandal and Invectives fail me, I Will
appeal to my Oaken Towel, a Weapon, adapted more suitably to my unw^ildy Bulk
-- which I presume those, who gave me the Title of Labourer had been made
acquainted with, it being a Title as proper to my Person, as my celebrated
Impudence is to my popular Capacity.

Quest. What Religion are you of?

Ans. My Country-Man's.

Quest. And what Religion's your Countryman of?

Ans. None at all -- as how the Devil should he, when he has been so long at my
Devotion.

Quest. What are your Principles?

Ans. Very necessary and suitable to the Station into which t'has pleased John
How, and the Republican Whigs, to call me. The old Rebellious King-killing
Principles of Forty-Eight; Sedition and Levelling, under the specious Name of
Liberty and Property, and Power in the People: There Is Principles that fire me
with pious Rage! To be an Ostentatious Rogue among the Party, and fatten upon
popular Scandal; through which I resolve to stand by the Party to the last drop
of my Ink. I dare not say, my Blood, for fear Leslic should make Treason of it
-- In short -- My Principles are to rail immoderately at the High-Church Party,
to traduce the Government when it is not moved by those Precepts* I lay down,
and to throw the same dirt at the Crown, I do at the Mitre, to spare none, though
never so high in Station, and to stick at nothing within the Verge of my Ears,
to explode Immorality, and be caught in a B^wdy-House, to run in every Bodies
debt, and pay no Body; to ruin my Countryman, and as many of Mankind besides
as will be led by the Nose -- and finally -- to be a very Capricious positive
Coxcomb -- revengful without Courage, and conceited without Merit -- and now,
Sir, I have given you an exact, though brief Account, of my Principles.

Quest. Very well, Sir -- but pray, how came you to rail at King William?

Ans. First -- Because he bore that Regal Title; next, because he let the
Bishops sit in Council; and lastly, because I could not rail my self into a
better Office than a Tubber of pickled Beef upon Tower Hill -- Out of which,
notwithstanding, I was kicked for a troublesome vexatious Fellow.

Quest. In what Post were you in Ireland?

Ans. A Captain, if you will take my own word for it; but if you will believe other
People, I was but a Corporal, who adapt my Preferment more suitable to my
desert.

Quest. What were you in the West of England?

Ans. A busy turbulent Fellow, as I Have appeared ever since; where. Jefferies
not finding Law enough to hang me -- resolved upon Measures to make me hang my
self -- which I had done, had not King James pardoned me, though I deserved the
Halter I petitioned for, and which Providence, by her inscrutable Decrees, may
have reserved to a more convenient Season.

FINIS.

