LETTER OF ADVICE, Sent to the Lord Chancellors Lady, concerning his Lordships
being Taken at Rope and Anchor Ally in Wapping.
Madam,
I HAVE great Obligations to, and Honor for, my Lord Chancellor, and am
therefore concerned for him in his present Condition: For though he finished
his last Western Campagn with great Success, this seems to have the Face of
more Danger. His Enemies then being Encamped in strong Walls with Irons on their
Feet, but now in the Field with Iron in their Rebellious Hands. I understand
his Lordship's great Loyal Soul resolves to accompany His Majesty in the Camp,
and partake of his Hazards, and to that end his Lordship has Prudently provided
Two or Three Suits of stout Armor; but Madam these Rebels they say, are
Plaguey, Impudent, Fighting Fellows, and will not fall before his Lordship's
usual Shot of Rogues, Rascals, Villains etc: But will be apt to return
Bullets in Answer, that may put him into great Fright, if they don't destroy
him Some other provisions therefore will be necessary, which perhaps his
present Hurry may make him forget, and are proper for your Honor's Care. I
don't mean a Suit of Armor for his Conscience, for that I Believe, is so
feared and hardened, as to be proof as well against Bullets, as it is against
all Sense of Honor, Justice, Religion, and Humanity. But Madam, it will be
convenient for your Honor to provide him Five or Six Dozen of Double Clouts,
and Two or Three Dozen of Drawers to keep him sweet and clean; else he may
stink in His Majesty's Nostrils, as he does already in Gods, and the whole
Nations, and that you know Madam, will be unlike a Courtier, and may hazard the
loss of the Purse. The Infirmity he showed in the House of Commons when that
Seditious Rabble, took him to Task, made me think this Advice seasonable, that
if his Lordship should be taken by his Enemies, he might not be found Reeking
in his Pasteries, as his Lordship found the Young P --

I am, Madam, Your Ladyships Humble Servant, A.O.

Printed for VV. P. 1688.


