Nevvs from Ostend, Or the Soldiers loving Letter to his Sweetheart in London
With her kind Answer to the same.
With kind expressions he his Love does cheer
And bids her for to hope, and not to fear,
But he in time may cross the Ocean Main
And come to see his dearest love again.
To which she does an Answer kind return
That while he absent is, she will sigh and mourn.
Tune of, The Seamans adieu to his Dear, Or, i will go to the Captain, etc. With
Allowance.


MY Dearest this Letter unto thee I send
Hoping that in health 'twill thee find,
To let thee to know I Am got safe to Ostend
And to tell thee a piece of my mind.
The dangers o'th Ocean we all did escape
Although that the Billows did rore,
And waves high as ^ountai^s upon us did gape
Yet we safely are landed on shore
Our King and our Country to serve we are bent,
Whilst blood we have any to spend,
And therefore my dearest I pray be content
For I often unto thee will send.
Our foes wanted courage our welcome to give:
They were not for dealing of blows
Since we were as free for to dye as to live
As Mounsieur he very well knows.
Our Flags of defiance we now have displayed
To dare them to Battle to come,
It is not the French that can make us afraid
Whilst we March by the beat of the Drum.
And now my own dearest lay sorrow aside
Although that I from thee did part,
And in a strange Country a while must abide*
Yet thou only enjoyest my heart.
Thou know what I promised thee when I come over
It still does remain in my mind,
Which I will perform and a hundred times more
If I see thou art loving and kind.
Then let me engage thee most constant to prove
Whilst absent I from thee remain,
For be thou assured my own dearest Love
That I hope for to see thee again.
The love of a stranger do not entertain*
Remember thy promise to me,
And if I do live to come over the Main
Thou shall find me both loving and free.
The vows i will perform which I often did propound
If that the Lord lend me my life
That once I do land upon English ground
I will make thee my own wedded wife.
Then in the mean time my own dear do not gri^ve
Endeavor thy heart for to cheer
And for all thy sorrows i will bring a Reprieve
When I come to embrace my own dear.
This Token my Dearest I pray thee accept
Although that the value be small,
And so far thee well, and the Lord thee protect,
For I now must be ready at call.
The Maids Kind Answer.
Thy Letter my Love I received with joy
To hear of thy health and welfare,
For fear that the Tempests my dear should destroy
I was filled with sorrow and care.
But now it reviveth my heart for to hear
That there thou did safely arive,
And fairly escaped all dangers so clear
When the waves and the Billows did drive.
And now my own dearest I beg at thy hand
Remember my Love that is true.
And whilst thou art absent, and under Command
Let thy daily affections renew.
Be constant and faithful to me thy own choice,
That so thou may prosper and thrive,
And for my own part I shall freely rejoice
If I ever receive thee alive.
Let no fond delusions what ever they be
A means for to draw thee aside,
But still in thy mirth be thou mindful of me
And how much for thy Love I abide.
No Maidens heart ever was fuller of woe
For parting with so dear a friend,
Therefore let thy Love and thy pity be so
Much the more to remain to the end.
Mean time I with patience must strive to forbear
So sadly to grieve and to mourn,
In hopes that ere long I shall see my own dear
In health and in safety return.
And so for the present adieu my dear friend
I for thy good fortune will pray,
In hopes to enjoy thee my love in the end
When all sorrows shall vanish away.
London, Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, I. Wright, and I. Clark.


